1

Unified Theory of Bivacuum, Particles Duality, Time
& Fields

Bivacuum Mediated Interaction, as a Bridge between Normal and
Paranormal

Alex Kaivarainen

http://web.petrsu.ru/ ~alexk
H2o@karelia.ru

CONTENTS

SUMMARY
Abbreviations and Definitions, Introduced in Unified theory
Introduction
1. The Bivacuum Concept
2. The Dynamics of Bivacuum dipoles, exiting
Virtual Pressure (VPW) and Virtual Spin Waves (VirSWq
3. Virtual Bose condensation (VirBC), as a condition of Bivacuum
superfluid and nonlocal properties
4. Virtual Particles and Antiparticles
5. Three postulates and related conservation rules for
Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕as and Bivacuum bosons (BVBas
5.1. Three compensation principles, following from postulates I and II
5.2. The solution of Dirac Monopole problem, following from Unified theory
5.3. The rest mass origination without Higgs bosons
6. The relation between the internal parameters
of Bivacuum dipoles and their external velocity
6.1 The Hidden Harmony of Bivacuum dipoles, as a background of Golden Mean and the
rest mass and charge origination
6.2. The dynamic and geometrical conditions for sub-elementary fermions (muons and
tauons) origination
7. Fusion of triplets of elementary fermions from muons and tauons
7.1 The energy of fusion of the elementary fermions, like electrons and protons and their
antiparticles from muons and tauons
7.2 Correlation between our model of hadrons and conventional quark model of protons
and neutrons in Standard Model
7.3 Possible structure of mesons, W and Z0 bosons of electroweak interaction
7.5 New Scenario of the Big Bang
8. The dynamic mechanism of Corpuscle - Wave duality of elementary particles
8.1 The stages of Corpuscle → Wave transition of sub-elementary fermions in composition
of triplets (elementary fermions)
9. Dynamic model of the photon
9.1 Possible nature of neutrino and antineutrino
10. The jump-way mechanism of the elementary particles propagation in space
10.1 The possibility of appearance of particle in Corpuscular phase in any point of space
11. New interpretation of Shrödinger equation. General shape of wave function,
describing both the external and internal dynamics of elementary particle
12. The Principle of least action. Second and Third laws of Thermodynamics as
a consequence of Bivacuum interaction with elementary particles
12.1 Principle of least action
12.2 Bivacuum - mediated interaction as a background of 2nd and 3d laws of

2

i

 of Bivacuum in

thermodynamics
13 New approach to problem of Time, as a "Time of Action"
13.1 The application of new time concept for explanation of Fermat principle
13.2 The quantitative evidence in proof of new theory of time and elementary particles
fusion from Bivacuum dipoles
13.3 Shift of the period of elementary oscillations in gravitational field
13.4 The explanation of Hefele-Keating experiments
13.5 Interrelation between period of the Earth rotation, its radius, tangential velocity, and
free fall acceleration
14. Theory of Virtual Replica of material objects and its multiplication in space and
time
14.1 Superposition of the Internal and Surface Virtual Replicas of the object, as the ”Ether
Body"
14.2 The ”Astral” and ”Mental” bodies definitions, based on Unified theory
14.3 Virtual Guides in Bivacuum, providing remote macroscopic entanglement and
nonlocal interaction
14.4 The role of tuning force (FVPW  of virtual pressure waves VPWq
entanglement
14.5 The vortical filaments in superfluids, as the analogs of virtual guides of Bivacuum
14.6 Two stages of Virtual Guides of spin, momentum and energy (VirGS,M,E
 formation
between remote elementary particles
14.7 The mechanism of momentum and energy transmission between similar elementary
particles of Sender and Receiver via VirGSMES  Ri
14.8 The mechanism of spin exchange between tuned particles of Sender and Receiver via
VirGSME
14.9 Activation of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI) between Sender and Receiver
14.10 Stages of the Entanglement Channels formation between macroscopic objects
14.11 The interrelation between macroscopic entanglement and acts of consciousness
14.12 The examples of Bivacuum Mediated Interaction (BMI) between macroscopic objects,
realized via Entanglement channels
14.13 The effects of the Virtual Replica of asymmetric constructions, like pyramids, on the
matter-target properties
15. Unification of Actual and Virtual Self. The conjectures of the Soul, Global
Consciousness & Superconsciousness
15.1 Elementary act of Consciousness or “Cycle of Mind”, involving Distant and Nonlocal
Interaction
15.2 The entropy-driven information processing
15.3 Actual and Virtual Self. Definitions of Soul, Global Consciousness &
Superconsciousness
15.4 The Global Virtual Replica, Noosphere and Global Consciousness
15.5. Possible mechanism of remote IDEAS exchange via Bivacuum Mediated Interaction
15.6 Evolution of Superconsciousness
16.. The examples of Bivacuum mediated remote mental action of Psychic on different
physical targets and their explanation
16.1 The Biological and Biochemical effects of Bivacuum Mediated Interaction between
Sender and Receiver
17. The nature of electrostatic and magnetic interaction, based on Unified theory
17.1 Electromagnetic dipole radiation as a consequence of charge oscillation
17.2 The basis of energy conservation law
17.3 The electric field origination
17.4. The magnetic field origination
18. Unification of electric, magnetic and gravitational fields, as a consequence of
Corpuscle - Wave duality of particles
18.1 Interpretation of the Maxwell displacement current, based on Bivacuum model
18.2 New kind of "recoil current" in Bivacuum, increasing the displacement one. The
velocity of zero-point oscillation and physical sense of electric charge
18.3 The Link Between Maxwell’s Formalism and our model of photon
18.4 New approach to quantum gravity and antigravity, dark matter and inertia
18.5 The hydrodynamic mechanism of gravitational attraction and repulsion
19. The mechanisms, increasing the refraction index of Bivacuum

3

20. Application of angular momentum conservation law for evaluation of curvatures of
electric and magnetic potentials
21. Pauli principle: How it works ?
21.1 Spatial compatibility of sub-elementary fermions of the same charge and opposite
spins in triplets
21.2 The reversibility of fermion properties after double turn (23600 in magnetic field, as
a consequence of paired fermions spin state additivity
21.3. Bosons as a coherent system of sub-elementary elementary fermions and antifermions
forming Cooper pairs
22. The Mystery of Sri Yantra Diagram
23 The examples of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI) between macroscopic
objects
24. Experimental data, confirming Unified theory (UT)
24.1 Radiation of accelerating charges
24.2 Artificial generation of unstable groups of virtual particles and antiparticles
24.3 Michelson-Morley experiment, as a possible evidence of the Virtual Replica of the
Earth

SUMMARY

The concept of Bivacuum is introduced, as a dynamic matrix of the Universe, composed
from non-mixing subquantum particles and antiparticles, with dimensions below Planck
scale, representing vortical excitations with opposite direction of rotation, zero mass and
charge. These basic virtual excitations form Bivacuum dipoles, representing the pairs: donut
and anti-donut. Each pair of donuts is strongly correlated torus (V) and antitorus (V−) of
positive and negative energy, opposite charge and magnetic moments, separated by
quantized energetic gap. Two kinds of such dipoles are named: Bivacuum fermions BVF↑
and Bivacuum antifermions BVF↓ with (V) and (V−) both rotating clockwise or
counterclockwise, correspondingly. The third kind of dipoles are Bivacuum bosons BVB,
representing intermediate structures between BVF↑ and BVF↓ with opposite rotation
direction of torus and antitorus. The properties of tori (V) and antitori (V−) in symmetric
primordial Bivacuum compensate each other and make Bivacuum neutral with zero energy
and charge density. The radiuses of torus and antitorus in symmetric Bivacuum dipoles are
equal to each other. Their dimensions may have wide distribution values with most probable
Compton radiuses of the regular electron, muon and tauon, correspondingly.
The emission  absorption of positive and negative Virtual Clouds (VC and VC− by
torus and antitorus of each Bivacuum dipole as a result of in-phase quantum transition
between excited and ground states is accompanied by the in-phase oscillation of Bivacuum
gap, separating tori and antitori of this dipoles. Such kind of coherent Bivacuum dipoles
dynamics excite virtual pressure waves (VPW, representing the density of sub-quantum
particles oscillation.
The shift of equilibrium between population of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, for
example, in strong electric, magnetic or gravitational field, destroys part of virtual Cooper
pairs:

BVF↑ BVF↓ 
If the same fields shift also a symmetry between tori and antitori of unpaired BVF or BVB,
this shift change the equality of positive and negative energies of Virtual Pressure Waves
and make the difference between them nonzero:

ΔVPW  VPW− VPW−
This difference, induced by gravitational or magnetic field of the Earth, can be a source of
free and pure energy of Bivacuum, which can be used in overunity devices.

Virtual spin waves VirSWS1/2, with properties of massless collective Nambu-Goldstone
modes, like a real spin waves in condensed matter, are resulted from the oscillation of spin
orientation: S  1/2  S  −1/2 of individual Bivacuum fermions and antifermions in
Cooper pairs via "flip-flop" mechanism, accompanied by origination of intermediate states -

4

Bivacuum bosons BVB(VV−):

BVF↑V V−  BVBV V−  BVF↓V V−

The VirSWS1/2, like so-called torsion field, can serve as a carrier of the phase/spin
(angular momentum) and information - qubits, but not the energy. The transmission of
VirSW throw the volume of virtual BC domains, even with huge dimensions, can be instant
or nonlocal.
The Nonlocality in the volume of real or virtual Bose condensate (BC) has been proved
theoretically, using the Virial theorem. The Bivacuum, like liquid helium, contains two
components: the superfluid with nonlocal properties and normal one, representing fraction of
Bivacuum dipoles not involved in virtual BC.
In accordance to our model, the mass m  m0/ 1 − v/c2 of the actual torus has the
conventional Lorenz dependence on the external tangential or translational velocity (v). On
contrary, the mass m− of complementary torus has the reciprocal relativistic dependence. As
a consequence, the product of the actual and complementary relativistic masses is equal to
2 and the sum of positive and negative
the rest mass of muon or tauon squared: mm− m0
energies of asymmetric torus and antitorus is equal to doubled kinetic energy of
corresponding dipole:

EV  EV−  m− m−

c2 mv2

The 1st stage of elementary particles origination from Bivacuum dipoles is the formation of
sub-elementary fermions or antifermions pairs with shape of truncated cones and opposite
direction of the apexes. This is a result of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions symmetry
shifts towards positive or negative energy, correspondingly, as a result their Cooper pairs
BVF↑ BVF↓ rotation around common axis in absence of translational motion. Due to
different relativistic dependencies of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles: (V) and (V−)
mass on tangential velocity v of rotation around common axe of rotating Cooper pairs
BVF↑ BVF↓ , formed by Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, their symmetry shift is
accompanied by uncompensated rest mass and charge origination. It is important, that this
asymmetry occur at Golden mean condition when v/c2  0. 618
(http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207027). However, translational velocity on this stage of mass
and charge origination is zero. The energy and charge of asymmetric sub-elementary
fermions and antifermions in rotating Cooper pairs compensate each other.
The 2nd stage of elementary particles or antiparticles origination is a fusion of two triplets,
like electron and positron or proton and antiproton from three above mentioned Cooper pairs
of corresponding generation of sub-elementary fermions and antifermions. The unpaired
sub-elementary fermion or antifermion determines the mass and charge of the whole triplet,
as elementary fermion:

 F↑

  F↓


−x,y  F↕

e,p

z

These triplets are stabilized by three factors: a) the resonance exchange interaction of
Bivacuum virtual pressure waves (VPW) with pulsing sub-elementary fermions of
Compton frequency; b) the Coulomb attraction between sub-elementary fermions of the
opposite charges; c) the gluons (pairs of cumulative virtual clouds in terms of our theory)
exchange between sub-elementary fermions (quarks in the case of protons and neutrons).
The fusion of elementary fermions from sub-elementary ones can be accompanied by huge
energy release, determined by the value of mass defect, determined by mass difference
between sub-elementary fermions/antifermions and the triplets, formed by them as a result
of fusion.
New scenario of Big Bang from primordial Bivacuum is based on chain reaction energy of
elementary particles fusion The proposed model of elementary particles can be verified
experimentally, using 3-beams collider of muons and antimuons. Theory predicts, that the
colliding of 2 muons and 1 antimuon at Golden mean velocity: v  0. 618 c should be
followed by the electrons origination and kinetic energy outburst, i.e. temperature jump.

It is shown, that the corpuscleC  waveW duality of fermions is a result of
modulation of quantum zero-point frequency of beats between the asymmetric ’actual’
(torus) and ’complementary’ (antitorus) states of rotating around common axis with
tangential velocity v  0. 618 c sub-elementary fermions and antifermions of the triplets
 F↑
resulting energy of these two dynamic processes of quantum beats can be expressed as:

e,p by de Broglie wave frequency of these fermions. The

−x,y  F↕


  F↓

z

5

Etot

res  hCW

res

 0 rot

in  hB

ext  m00

2L0

in

2 rot



h2
2
 B
mV

ext is equal to the frequency

The external - empirical frequency of de Broglie wave B
ofC  W pulsations of the primary ’anchor’ Bivacuum dipole, next to rotating
sub-elementary fermion. The anchor dipole represents Bivacuum boson BVBV V−
with symmetry shift, provided by translational kinetic energy and momentum of triplets. The
C phase of each sub-elementary fermion of triplets exists as a mass, electric and magnetic
asymmetric dipoles. The total energy, mass, charge and spin of triplet, moving in space with
velocity v is determined by the unpaired sub-elementary fermion, since the paired ones in
triplets compensate each other.
The boson like photon can be a result of fusion/annihilation of two triplets: [electron 
positron], turning two asymmetric triplets to one or more pair of sub-elementary fermions.
More common way of photons origination is due to acceleration of elementary charges -
triplets, following by sufficient symmetry shift in pairs: BVF↑ BVF↑
head-to-tail principle in contrast to side-by-side in virtual Cooper pairs BVF↑ BVF↓.
The pair of sub-elementary fermions forming photon with additive spins determines its
integer value of spinS  1. In the case of bosons, like photons, propagating in space
with light velocity, the contribution of the rest mass to their energy is zero or very close to
zero due absence of tangential velocity in pairs BVF↑ BVF↑
Cooper pairs.
It is shown, that Principle of Least Action and 2nd and 3d laws of thermodynamics is a
consequence of forced combinational resonance of elementary particles with basic virtual
pressure waves (VPW) of Bivacuum.
It is shown, that the pace of time dt/t for any closed conservative system is determined by
the pace of its kinetic energy change −dT/Tkx,y,z, anisotropic in general case
(Kaivarainen, 2005; 2006):

, unlike in rotating fast

, interacting by

dt
t  d ln t  −

dTk
Tk

 − d ln Tk

x,y,z

Similar relation can be obtained from principle of uncertainty for free particle with kinetic
energy (Tk in coherent form: Tk t  .
By definition a conservative system is a system in which work done by a force is: 1.
Independent of path; 2. Completely reversible.
It is important to note, that in closed conservative mechanical or quantum system the total
energy is permanent:

Etot  V  Tk  const

or : ΔEtot  0 and ΔV  −ΔTk

and the time of action is always the external one.
The time in each closed conservative system, where Etot  const, are characterized by its
dimensionless pace of time and time itself:

t  −

v
dv/dt

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2

x,y,z

In contrast to formula for time from special relativity, our formula in addition to velocity
contains also acceleration. The correctness of our formula is confirmed on number of
examples.
A theory of Virtual Replica (VR) of macroscopic objects in Bivacuum and primary VR
multiplication in space VRM(r) is proposed. The primary Virtual replica of the object can be
subdivided on two kinds: the surface VRsur and the volume VRvol. Their superposition
contains the total information about any material object: VR  VRsur  VRvol. The volume
VRvol reflects the internal spatial and dynamic structures in the volume of macroscopic
object.
The surface VRsur, like the regular optical hologram, reflects a three-dimensional (3D)
shape of the object. It represents a 3D interference pattern of modulated by the surface
particles of the object Bivacuum virtual pressure waves VPWm
.
with basic reference virtual pressure waves of Bivacuum: VPW0
The volume VRvol is a result of 3D interference of modulated by the particles in the object’s
 , named the volume object waves with all pervading reference virtual waves
volume VPWm
of Bivacuum VPW0

. The regular optical holograms do not contain information about the

 (the surface object waves)

6

internal properties of the object, like the volume Virtual Replica VRvol.
The interference of primary Virtual Replica, located in the volume of the object, depending
on time, with Bivacuum reference waves - provides VRt multiplication in space and time
VRMr, t. To keep the energy, charge and spin conservation, it was assumed, that the
mass/energy symmetry shifts of Bivacuum dipoles, involved in VRsur and VRvol formation
and their multiplication (iteration), should compensate each other. This condition is satisfied
if virtual standing waves of multiplicated Virtual Replicas VRMr, t are formed by the
Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions with opposite mass and charge
symmetry shifts:

VRMr, tsur,vol  ∑ NBVF↑ BVF↓sur,vol

where N tends to infinity.

The absolute value of paired dipoles symmetry shift can vary from small to big, reflecting
the properties of the object. The Virtual Replica spatial Multiplication VRMr can be
named the Holoiteration (in Greece ’holo’ means the ’whole’ or ’total’).
The Virtual Replica Multiplication: VRMr can be a result of linear superposition of
primary VR of the object with corresponding amplitude of probability cn, like the
orthogonal eigen values of wave function of elementary particle:

VRMr  ∑cnVRn

The condition of orthogonality means that only one of the infinitive numbers of virtual
replicas can be displayed at the certain time, depending on the conditions of VR detection.
The stability of the most probable secondary Virtual Replica as a hierarchical system of
virtual standing waves could be responsible for so-called phantom or ghost effect of the
object after its destruction or replacing. For individual elementary particles the notion of
secondary virtual replica, as a result of primary VR multiplication, coincides with notion of
secondary ’anchor sites’, important for particle jump-way propagation in space
(http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207027).
The dynamic Virtual Replica Multiplication VRMr, t is a process, filling all the volume
around the object with secondary Virtual Replicas. Each selected region of this Holoiteration
interference pattern of VRMr, t contains information about the external - shape/surface
and the internal - volume properties of macroscopic object changing with time. The
possibility of feedback action of Virtual Replica, generated by the object, on physical
properties of this object or similar kinds of objects can be tested experimentally.

Abbreviations and Definitions, Introduced in Unified theory∗

- (V and (V− are correlated actual torus and complementary antitorus (pair of ’donuts’) of
Bivacuum of the opposite energy, charge and magnetic moment, formed by collective
excitations of non mixing subquantum particles and antiparticles of opposite angular
momentums;
- BVF↑  V  V− i and BVF↓  V  V−i are virtual dipoles of three opposite
poles: actual (inertial) and complementary (inertialess) mass, positive and negative charge,
positive and negative magnetic moments, separated by energetic gap, named Bivacuum
fermions and Bivacuum antifermions. The opposite half integer spin S   1
notated as (↑ and ↓, depends on direction of clockwise or counterclockwise in-phase
rotation of pairs of [torus (V  antitorus (V−], forming them. The index: i  e, ,  define
the energy and Compton radiuses of BVF↕ 
- BVB  V ↑↓ V− i are Bivacuum bosons, representing the intermediate transition state
between Bivacuum fermions of opposite spins: BVF↑  BVB  BVF↓;
- |mV
i
BVF↕j,k
- VCj,k
from subquantum particles and antiparticles, correspondingly. Virtual clouds and anticlouds
emission/absorption accompany the correlated transitions between different excitation
 i and antitori (Vj,k
energy states (j and k of tori (Vj,k
i
and BVB
BVF↕j,k

− |c2 are the energies of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles:

−i are virtual clouds and anticlouds, composed

i of three electron generations;

and BVB
−Vk

− i of Bivacuum dipoles:

j,k
i and VCj,k

2  of BVF↕ 

 |c2 and |−mV

 ~ Vj

− ~ Vj

−−Vk

i,

;

;

i

i

j,k

7

−



 −eV


m,c

  mV

 − mV

 and F↕

  VCq

−   m0 and [eV

− , by tori and antitori

−   e0 to the left or right,

  |VirP− VirP− |j,k.. ~ ||mV

  VirP  VirP− j,k ~ |mV

− |c2  0 is a total virtual pressure. It

are the positive and negative virtual pressure waves,

− ||c2 ≥ 0 is excessive virtual pressure, being

 . The polarizations of virtual pressure waves, excited by Bivacuum

− are sub-elementary fermions and antifermions of the opposite charge (/-) and

- the notion of positive and negative space is related to positive and negative Compton
radiuses of conjugated torus and antitorus with opposite mass and charge, forming
Bivacuum dipoles: L, 
- inter-space waves (ISW) is the oscillation of gap between positive and negative
mass/energy with opposite charges and magnetic moments, in-phase with
emissionabsorption of cumulative virtual clouds VCq
of Bivacuum dipoles.
 
- VirP is virtual pressure of subquantum particles, accompanied virtual clouds (VCj,k
emission and absorption in the process of torus and antitorus transitions between different j
and k states;
 | − |mV
- ΔVirPj,k
the consequence of Bivacuum dipoles asymmetry. It determines the kinetic energy of
Bivacuum dipoles, dependent on tangential or translational velocity;
- ∑ VirPj,k
determines the potential energy of Bivacuum;
and VPWq1,2..
- VPWq1,2..
representing VirPj,k
fermions and antifermions are opposite. In symmetric primordial Bivacuum the energy of
these oscillations compensate each other;
- F↕
energy. They emerge due to stable symmetry shift of the mass and charge between the
actual (V and complementary (V− torus of BVF↕ dipoles, providing the rest mass and
charge origination: [mV
correspondingly. Their stabilization and fusion to triplets, represented by electrons and
protons, is accompanied by big energy release, determined by mass defect, occur when the
velocity of rotation of Cooper pairs BVF↑  BVF↓  around the common axis corresponds
to Golden mean: (v/c)2  0. 618;
- Hidden Harmony condition means the equality of the internal and external group and phase
ext ≡ v. It is
velocities of Bivacuum fermions and Bivacuum bosons: vgr
proved that this condition is a physical background of Golden mean realization in natural
systems:   v2/c2 ext, in  0. 6180339887;
- 〈F↓
antifermions of  and  generations, representing the electron/positron or proton/antiproton.
In the latter case a sub-elementary fermions and antifermions corresponds to u and d quarks;
- CVC and CVC− are the cumulative virtual clouds of subquantum particles and
antiparticles, standing for [W] phase of sub-elementary fermions and antifermions,
correspondingly. Quantum beats C  W between asymmetric torus and antitorus of
sub-elementary fermions are accompanied by [emission  absorption] of CVC. The
stability of triplets is determined by resonant exchange interaction between sub-elementary
fermions and antifermions with CVC in the process of their [Corpuscle  Wave
pulsations. The virtual pairs CVC  CVC− e,p,n display the gluons (bosons) properties,
stabilizing the electrons, protons and neutrons;
- VirBC means virtual Bose condensation of Cooper - like pairs [BVF↑ BVF↓ and/or
[BVB with external translational momentum close to zero: p ≃ 0 and corresponding de
Broglie wave length close to infinity: B  h/p ≃ , providing the nonlocal properties of
huge Bivacuum domains;
- VirSW1/2 are the Virtual spin waves, excited as a consequence of angular momentums of
− F↓

cumulative virtual clouds (CVC) of sub-elementary particles in triplets 〈F↑
  F↕
due to angular momentum conservation law. The VirSW1/2 are highly anisotropic,
depending on orientation of triplets in space and their rotational/librational dynamics, being
the physical background of torsion field;
- VirGSME
microtubule), formed primarily by standing VirSWS
opposite spins and induced self-assembly of Bivacuum bosons BVBi or Cooper pairs of
[BVF↑  BVF↓i, representing quasi one-dimensional Bose condensate. The bundles of
virtual guides Nt, r  ∑ VirGSME S  Rx,y,z

e−,p are the coherent triplets of fused sub-elementary fermions and

is the nonlocal virtual spin-momentum-energy guide (quasi-1D virtual

BVB
 VirSWR
BVF↑BVF↓

connect the remote coherent triplets

in  vph

S−1/2 of

in  vgr

  F↑

−  F↕

ext; vph

S1/2

i

i

8



 and

  F↕

−  F↓

)i and Virtual Spin Waves (VirSWq1

e,p, representing elementary particles, like protons and electrons in free

〈F↑
state or in composition of atoms or their coherent groups, providing remote nonlocal
interaction - microscopic and macroscopic ones;
- (mBC means mesoscopic molecular Bose condensate in the volume of condensed matter
with dimensions, determined by the length of 3D standing de Broglie waves of molecules,
related to their librations and translations;
- VR means three-dimensional (3D) Virtual Replica of elementary, particles, atoms,
molecules and macroscopic objects, including living organisms. The primary VR of
macroscopic object is a consequence of complex system of excitations of Bivacuum dipoles.
It represents a superposition of Bivacuum virtual standing waves VPWm
1/2, modulated by C  W pulsation of elementary particles and translational and
VirSWm
librational de Broglie waves of molecules of macroscopic object. The VR can be subdivided
on the surface and volume virtual replicas;
- VRMir, t means the primary VR multiplication/iteration in space and time. The
infinitive multiplication of primary VRi in space in form of 3D packets of virtual standing
waves is a result of interference of all pervading external coherent basic reference waves -
1/2)i with
Bivacuum Virtual Pressure Waves (VPWq1
similar kinds of modulated standing waves, like that, forming the primary VR. The latter has
a properties of the object waves in terms of optical holography. Consequently, the VRM can
be named Holoiteration by analogy with hologram (in Greece ’holo’ means the ’whole’ or
’total’). The spatial VRM(r) may stand for remote vision of psychic. The ability of enough
complex system of VRM(t) to self-organization in nonequilibrium conditions, make it
possible multiplication of primary VR not only in space but as well, in time in both time
direction - positive (evolution) and negative (devolution). The feedback reaction between
most probable/stable VRM(t,r) and nerve system of psychic, including visual centers of
brain, can be responsible for clairvoyance;
- The entanglement − channels are virtual beams, representing multiple correlated bundles
of virtual guides Nt, r  ∑ VirGSME S  Rx,y,z
particles of the nerve cells of [S]- psychic and [R] - target in superimposed
VRMr, tS  VRMr, tR. This combination of Bivacuum mediated interactions (BMI),
providing the transmission of not only information, but as well the momentum and energy,
can be responsible for telekinesis and remote healing;
- BMI is a new fundamental Bivacuum Mediated Interaction, additional to electromagnetic,
gravitational, weak and strong ones. It is a result of superposition of Virtual replicas of
Sender S and Receiver R in nonequilibrium state, provided by VRM(r,t) and formation
of virtual guides bundles Nt, r  ∑ VirGSME S  Rx,y,z
between coherent atoms of
S and [R. Just BMI is responsible for remote ultraweak nonlocal interaction between
entangled systems and, so-called, paranormal phenomena, which turns to ’normal’ in the
framework of Unified theory.
**********************************************************************
∗The abbreviations are not in alphabetic, but in logical order to make this glossary more
useful for perception of new notions, introduced in Unified theory.

, connecting coherent elementary

i

i

9

Introduction

The Dirac’s approach to vacuum admits the existence of positive and negative energy
(Dirac, 1947). In Dirac’s vacuum its realm of negative energy is saturated with infinitive
number of electrons. However, it was assumed that these electrons, following Pauli
principle, have not any gravitational or viscosity effects. The positrons in his model
represent the ’holes’, originated in realm of negative energy, as a result of the electrons
jumps to realm of positive energy over the energetic gap between two realms: Δ  2m0c2.
Currently it becomes clear, that the Dirac type model of vacuum is not general enough

to explain all known experimental data of elementary particles, for example, the bosons
emergency.

The model of Bivacuum, described in this book and previous works of this author

(Kaivarainen, 1995; 2000; 2004; 2005, 2006, 2008), is more flexible and able to explain the
origination of all kind of elementary particles without Higgs bosons. One of the
consequences of our model is absence of Dirac’s monopole.

Our approach use the same starting point of equal probability of positive and negative

energy. However, in contrast to Dirac model, the positive and negative energies are
confined in each of Bivacuum elements, named Bivacuum dipoles.

Few modern models of vacuum have common features with our one. The brief
description of these models and comparison with Bivacuum concept is presented below.
Aspden (2003) introduced in his ether theory the basic unit, named Quon, as a pair of
virtual muons of opposite charges, i.e. [muon  antimuon]. This idea has some common
with our model of Bivacuum dipoles. Each Bivacuum dipole represents collective
excitations of sub-quantum particles and antiparticles, composing vortical pair: torus 
antitorus of opposite energy/mass, charge and magnetic moments with three Compton
radiuses, corresponding to two lepton generation: muon and tauon (Kaivarainen,
2004-2006).

Our notions of strongly correlated torus (V and antitorus (V− of Bivacuum dipoles

have also some similarity with ’phytons’, introduced by Akimov and Shipov for
explanation of torsion field action. After Akimov (1995): "In non polarized condition,
physical vacuum contains in each of its elements a phyton, which is a kind of circle,
rotating in opposite directions, corresponding to right and left spin. The spins of phytons
are compensated, as far the sum of their angular momentums is zero. This is a reason, why
the vacuum does not manifest nonzero angular momentum. But if the spinning object
appears in space, then the phytons, with axes of rotation, coinciding with that of the object,
will keep the same rotation, and phytons which’ rotational axes were originally in the
opposite direction, will be inverted partly under the influence of the spinning object. As a
result, so-called torsion field is exited.

However, this model do not consider the symmetry shift between circles, forming the

pairs, and failed to explain the mass and charge origination in contrast to our approach.

Three subclasses of Bivacuum dipoles where introduced: Bivacuum bosons (BVBS0

with torus and antitorus, rotating in opposite direction, Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ and
antifermions BVF↓ with [torus  antitorus] both rotating clockwise or counterclockwise,
correspondingly. The latter Bivacuum dipoles of opposite spins are tending to formation of
virtual Cooper pairs [BVF↑  BVF↓S0,1. The ability of Bivacuum dipoles to form
virtual Bose condensate from (BVBS0 and [BVF↑  BVF↓S0,1 is demonstrated in our
theory. The bundles of these self-assemblies of Bivacuum excitations, like vortical
structures in superfluid 4He and 3He, allow consider Bivacuum, as a two-component liquid
with superfluid and normal properties.

The superfluid model of vacuum, composed from pairs of fermions of opposite spins

10

and charge where discussed earlier by Sinha et. al., (1976; 1976a; 1978) and later by
Boldyreva and Sotina (1999).

In accordance with Planck aether hypothesis of Winterberg (2002), the vacuum is a

superfluid, made up of positive and negative Planck mass particles. The Planck mass
plasma model makes the following assumptions:

1. The ultimate building blocks are positive and negative Planck mass particles. The

interaction obeys the laws of Newtonian mechanics, which can be violated during the
collision between a positive and a negative Planck mass particle. These violation means
that during the collision between a positive and a negative Planck mass particle, the
momentum, not the energy, fluctuates.

2. Planck mass particles of the same sign - repel and those of opposite sign - attract each
/RP  c4/G

other, with the magnitude and range of the force equal to the Planck force MPc
and the Planck length RP h/MPc).

2

3. Space - vacuum is filled with an equal number of positive and negative Planck mass

particles whereby each Planck length volume is in the average occupied by one Planck
mass particle. The collision of positive and negative Planck mass particles is a source of
zitterbewegung in Winterberg model of vacuum.

In its ground state, the Planck aether is a two component positive-negative mass
superfluid with a phonon - roton energy spectrum for each component. Assuming that the
phonon - roton spectrum measured in superfluid helium is universal, this would mean that
in the Planck aether this spectrum has the same shape.

Rotons can be viewed as a small vortex rings with the ring radius of the same order as
the vortex core radius. A fluid with cavitons is in a state of negative pressure, and the same
is true for a fluid with vortex rings. In vortices the centrifugal force creates a vacuum in the
vortex core, making a vortex ring to behave like a caviton.

In Winterberg model, in contrast to ours, the positive and negative masses are not
considered as a unified mass dipoles with possibility of polarization and symmetry shift.
The mechanism of origination of mass, charge, magnetic moment and spin of elementary
particles, also where not considered.

Nonetheless of some common features with models of Aspden, Akimov - Shipov’s ’

and Winterberg, the developed by this author concept of Bivacuum and it elements:
Bivacuum bosons (BVB and fermions (BVF↕, is more advanced. Our approach explains
the origination of mass and charge of sub-elementary fermions, as a result of torus V and
antitorus V− of Bivacuum dipoles symmetry shift, the mechanism of corpuscle  wave
pulsation as a result of quantum beats between asymmetric V and V− and fusion of
elementary particles as a triplets of sub-elementary fermions and antifermions at Golden
mean conditions. In contrast with Standard Model our approach do not need the Higgs
bosons for explanation of mass origination.

The electric, magnetic and gravitational fields are shown to be a result of elastic recoil
 antirecoil effects in Bivacuum matrix, accompanied the corpuscle  wave pulsation of
elementary particles. So called zitterbewegung is a result of elementary particles vibrations,
accompanied their C  W pulsation.

In the framework of our approach all fundamental physical phenomena are

hierarchically interrelated and unified. This new approach to UNIFICATION in physics
includes also a new fundamental Bivacuum mediated interaction, filling a logical gap
between normal and paranormal phenomena by extending the limits of existing paradigm.

David Bohm was the first one, who made an attempt to explain the wholeness of the

Universe, without loosing the causality principle. Experimental discovery of
Aharonov-Bohm effect (1950), pointing that the electron is able to ”feel” the presence of a

11

magnetic field even in a regions where the probability of field is zero, was stimulating. For
explanation of nonlocality Bohm introduced in 1952 the notion of quantum potential,
which pervaded all of space. But unlike gravitational and electromagnetic fields, its
influence did not decrease with distance. All the particles are interrelated by very sensitive
to any perturbations quantum potential. This means that signal transmission between
particles may occur instantaneously. The idea of quantum potential or active information is
close to notion of pilot wave, proposed by de Broglie at the Solvay Congress in 1927. In
fact, Bohm develops the de Broglie idea of pilot wave, applying it for many-body system.
In 1957 Bohm published a book: Causality and Chance in Modern Physics. Later he
comes to conclusion, that Universe has a properties of giant, flowing hologram. Taking into
account its dynamic nature, he prefer to use term: holomovement. In his book: Wholeness
and the Implicate Order (1980) Bohm develops an idea that our explicated unfolded reality
is a product of enfolded (implicated) or hidden order of existence. He consider the
manifestation of all forms in the universe, as a result of enfolding and unfolding exchange
between two orders, determined by super quantum potential. This idea corresponds well to
our dynamic model of Corpuscle  Wave pulsation, accompanied by reversible emission
and absorption of Cumulative virtual clouds CVC and excitation of Virtual Pressure
Waves (VPW, propagating in space.

In book, written by D. Bohm and B. Hiley (1993): ”THE UNDIVIDED UNIVERSE.
An ontological interpretation of quantum theory” the electron is considered, as a particle
with well- defined position and momentum which are, however, under influence of special
wave (quantum potential). Elementary particle, in accordance with these authors, is a
sequence of incoming and outgoing waves, which are very close to each other. However,
particle itself does not have a wave nature. Interference pattern in double slit experiment
after Bohm is a result of periodically ”bunched” character of quantum potential.

After Bohm, the manifestation of corpuscle - wave duality of particle is dependent on
the way, which observer interacts with a system. He claims that both of this properties are
always enfolded in particle. It is a basic difference with our model, assuming that the wave
and corpuscle phase are realized alternatively with high frequency during two different
semiperiods of sub-elementary particles, forming particles of quantum beats between
sublevels of positive (actual) and negative (complementary) energy. This frequency is
amplitude and phase modulated by experimentally revealed de Broglie wave of particles,
determined by their external translational velocity and momentum.

The important point of Bohmian philosophy, coinciding with our concepts of

Bivacuum, elementary particles and Virtual Replica, is that everything in the Universe is a
part of dynamic continuum. Neurophysiologist Karl Pribram does made the next step in the
same direction as Bohm: ”The brain is a hologram enfolded in a holographic Universe”.

The good popular description of Bohm and Pribram ideas are presented in books: ”The
Bell’s theorem and the curious quest for quantum reality” (1990) by David Peat and ”The
Holographic Universe” (1992) by Michael Talbot. Such original concepts are interesting
and stimulating, indeed, but should be considered as a first attempts to transform intuitive
perception of duality and quantum wholeness into clear geometrical and mathematical
models.

Some common features with our model of duality has a Unitary Quantum Theory
(UQT), proposed by Sapogin (1982). In the UQT any elementary particle is not a point and
source of field like in the ordinary quantum mechanics, but represents a wave packet of a
certain unified field (Sapogin and Boichenko, 1991). The dispersion equation of such a
nonlinear field turned out to be such, that the wave packet (particle) during its movement
periodically appears and disappears, and the envelope of this process coincides with the de
Broglie wave. The periodic disappearance (spreading in the Universe) and repeated

12

appearance of numerous particles - represent vacuum fluctuations. The corresponding
transversal self-focusing of the wave packet is possible only in conditions if the refraction
index of space/vacuum is dependent of particle velocity. The square of wave packet
describes the oscillating charged particle mass and energy (Sapogin, et.al., 2002), following
the conventional Newton equations. The essential negative consequence of UQT is the
absence of the energy and the momentum conservation laws for single particles.

In 1950 John Wheeler and Charles Misner published Geometrodynamics, a new
description of space-time properties, based on topology. Topology is more general than
Euclidean geometry and deeper than non-Euclidean, used by Einstein in his General theory
of relativity. Topology does not deal with distances, angles and shapes. Drawn on a sheet of
stretching rubber, a circle, triangle and square are indistinguishable. A ball, pyramid and a
cube also can be transformed into the other. However, objects with holes in them can never
be transformed by stretching and deforming into objects without holes. For example black
hole can be described in terms of topology. It means that massive rotating body behave as a
space-time hole. Wheeler supposed that elementary particles and antiparticles, their spins,
positive and negative charges can be presented as interconnected black and white holes.
Positron  electron pair correspond to such model. The energy, directed to one of the hole,
goes throw the connecting particles and antiparticles tube -”handle” and reappears at the
other. The connecting tube exist in another space-time than holes itself. Such a tube is
undetectable in normal space and the process of energy transmission looks as
instantaneous. In conventional space-time two ends of tube, termed ’wormholes’ can be a
vast distant apart. This model gives one of possible explanations of quantum nonlocality.
The same is true for introduced in our theory nonlocal Virtual spin-momentum-energy
guides (VirGSME. The VirGSME, formed by virtual Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions,
may connect a Cooper pairs of real particles: electrons, protons and neutrons with opposite
spins and counterphase Corpuscle  Wave pulsation.

Sidharth (1998, 1999) considered elementary particle as a relativistic vortex of
2 . He

Compton radius, from which he recovered its mass and quantized spin s  1
pictured a particle as a fluid vortex steadily circulating with light velocity along a 2D ring
or spherical 3D shell with radius

L 


2mc

Inside such vortex the notions of negative energy, superluminal velocities and nonlocality
are acceptable without contradiction with conventional theory.

Bohm’s hydrodynamic formulation and substitution of wave function with

where R and S are real function of space r and time t, transforms the Schrödinger

equation to

  ReiS

∂
∂t
 2
2m

 ∇v  0
∇S2  V  2
2m

 ∂S
∂t
2m ∇S and Q  2

or :

∇2R/R ≡ Q

where:   R2; v  2
Sidharth comes to conclusion that the energy of nonlocal quantum potential (Q) is

2m ∇2R/R

determined by inertial mass (m) of particle:

    1

    2

    3

    4

13

Q ≡ − 2
2m

∇2R/R  mc2

    5

He treated also a charged Dirac fermions, as a Kerr-Newman black holes. Within the
region of Compton vortex the superluminal velocity and negative energy are possible after
Sidharth. If measurements are averaged over time t ~ mc2/ and over space L ~ /mc, the
imaginary part of particle’s position disappears and we are back in usual Physics (Sidharth,
1998).

Barut and Bracken (1981) considered zitterbewegung - rapidly oscillating imaginary
part of particle position, leading from Dirac theory (1947), as a harmonic oscillator in the
Compton wavelength region of particle.

The Einstein (1971, 1982) and Shrödinger (1930) also spoke about oscillation of the

electron with frequency:   m0c2/h and the amplitude: max /2mc. It was
demonstrated by Shrödinger, that position of free electron can be presented as: x  x  ,
where x characterize the average position of the free electron, and  its instant position,
related to its oscillations.

Hestness (1990) proposed, that zitterbewegung arises from self-interaction, resulting

from wave-particle duality.

This ideas are close to our explanation of elementary particles zero-point oscillations
and zitterbewegung, as a recoil  antirecoil vibrations, accompanied particles corpuscle 
wave pulsations. Corresponding oscillations of each particle’s kinetic energy, in accordance
to our theory of time (Kaivarainen, 2005, 2006), is related with oscillations of internal time
for this system. We came here to concept of space-time-energy discreet trinity, generated
by corpuscle − wave duality.

Serious attack on problem of quantum nonlocality was performed by Roger Penrose

(1989) with his twister theory of space-time. After Penrose, quantum phenomena can
generate space-time. The twisters, proposed by him, are lines of infinite extent, resembling
twisting light rays. Interception or conjunction of twisters lead to origination of particles. In
such a way the local and nonlocal properties and particle-wave duality are interrelated in
twisters geometry.

The analysis of main paradoxes in quantum mechanics was presented by Asher Peres

(1992) and Charles Bennett et. al., (1993).

In our Unified model, the local properties of sub-elementary particles are resulted from

their tori and antitori symmetry shift, accompanied by uncompensated mass and charge
origination.

The nonlocal interaction of two or more particles of the same kinds (photons, electrons,

protons, neutrons), providing the entanglement, can be mediated by virtual guides
(VirGSME of spin, momentum and energy, connecting these particles with close frequency
of counterphase [C  W pulsation (Kaivarainen, 2006 a,b).

The approach developed by Daniel Dubois (1999) using computational derivation of
quantum relativistic systems with forward-backward space-time shifts, led to some results,
similar to ours (Kaivarainen, 1995, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2006). For example, the group and
phase masses, introduced by Dubois, related to internal group and phase velocities, has
analogy with actual and complementary masses, introduced in our Unified theory (UT). In
both approaches, the product of these masses is equal to the particle’s rest mass squared.
The notion of discrete time interval, used in Dubois approach corresponds to period of
[C  W] pulsation of sub-elementary particles, determined by their rest mass. The positive
internal time interval, in accordance to our model, corresponds to forward
C → W transition, accompanied by the actual mass and kinetic energy decreasing and the

14

negative one to the backward W → C transition, i.e. increasing of particle mass and kinetic
energy.

Puthoff (2001) developed the idea of ’vacuum engineering’, using hypothesis of
polarizable vacuum (PV). The electric permittivity (0 and magnetic permeability (0 is
interrelated in ’primordial’ symmetric vacuum, as: 00 1/c2. It is shown that changing of
vacuum refraction index: n  c/v  1/2 , for example in gravitational or electric fields, is
accompanied by variation of lot of space-time parameters.

Fock (1964) and Puthoff (2001), explained the bending of light beam, induced by
gravitation near massive bodies also by vacuum refraction change, i.e. in another way, than
General theory of relativity. However, the mechanism of vacuum polarization and
corresponding refraction index changes in electric and gravitational fields remains obscure.
Our Unified theory of Bivacuum, matter and field propose such mechanism.

The transformation of neutron to proton and electron, in accordance to Electro - Weak

(EW) theory, developed by Glashov (1961), Weinberg (1967) and Salam (1968), is
mediated by negative massless W− boson. The reverse reaction in EW theory: proton →
neutron is mediated by positive massless W boson. Scattering of the electron on neutrino,
not accompanied by charge transferring, is mediated by third massless neutral boson Z0.

In (EW) theory the Higgs field was introduced for explanation of spontaneous

symmetry violation of intermediate vector bosons: charged W and neutral Z0 with spin 1,
accompanied by origination of big mass of these particles. The EW theory needs also the
quantum of Higgs field, named Higgs bosons with big mass, zero charge and integer spin.
The fusion of Higgs bosons with W and Z0 particles is accompanied by increasing of

their mass up to 90 mass of protons. The experimental discovery of heavy W and Z0
particles in 1983 after their separation, accompanied getting the system a big external
energy, was considered as a conformation of EW theory.

The spontaneous symmetry violation of vacuum, in accordance to Goldstone theorem,

turns two virtual particles with imaginary masses (im to one real particle with mass:
M1 2 m and one real particle with zero mass: M2 0. However, the Higgs field and
Higgs bosons are still not found.

"We have eliminated most of hunting area", confirms Neil Calder from CERN recently.

This author propose another explanation of mass and charge origination.

In conventional approach, described above, two parameters of W particles: charge and

mass are considered, as independent. In our new approach they are interrelated in certain
way.

Thomson, Heaviside and Searl supposed that mass is an electrical phenomena. In theory

of Haisch, Rueda and Puthoff (1994), Rueda and Haish (1998) it was proposed, that the
inertia is a reaction force, originating in a course of dynamic interaction between the
electromagnetic zero-point field (ZPF) of vacuum and charge of elementary particles.
However, it’s not clear in this approach, how the charge itself originates.

Our Unified theory is an attempt to unify mass and charge with magnetic moment, spin
and symmetry shift of sub-elementary fermions, induced by external translational-rotational
motion. This theory unifies the origination of elementary particles, their rest mass and
charge, electromagnetism and gravitation with particles corpuscle-wave duality, standing
also for their zero-point oscillations. In accordance to formalism of our theory, the rest
mass and charge of elementary fermions origination are both the result of Bivacuum
fermions (BVF) symmetry shift, corresponding to Golden mean conditions, i.e. equality of
the ratio of external tangential velocity of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and
antifermions rotation, or of translational velocity of Bivacuum bosons to light velocity
squared to: v/c2  0. 618  . At this condition the asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles turns

15

to sub-elementary fermions.

The electric, magnetic and gravitational fields are the result of huge number of
Bivacuum dipoles symmetry shift oscillation, excited by recoil antirecoil dynamics,
accompanied the corpuscle  wave pulsation of sub-elementary fermions and antifermions,
forming the elementary particles and rotation of elementary fermions (triplets) as a whole,
depending on direction of triplets propagation.

In our approach, the resistance of particle to acceleration (i.e. inertia force),

proportional to its mass (second Newton’s law) is a consequence of resistance of frequency
of particle’s C  W pulsation to change, keeping the equilibrium (tuned state) with
frequency of surrounding Bivacuum dipoles symmetry - energy oscillation. We named this
resistance to equilibrium shift between dynamics of particles and dynamics of Bivacuum -
"The generalized principle of Le Chatelier’s".

In contrast to nonlocal Mach’s principle, our theory of particle - Bivacuum interaction

explains the existence of inertial mass of even single particle in the empty Universe.
The main goals and achievements of our work can be formulated as follows:
1. Development of superfluid Bivacuum model, as the dynamic matrix of dipoles,

formed by pairs of virtual tori and antitori of the opposite energy/mass, charge and
magnetic moments, compensating each other. The explanation of fusion of the fermions,
like electrons, protons and neutrons from asymmetric Bivacuum sub-elementary
fermions/antifermions, representing muons/antimuons ( and tauons/antitauons. (. The
external properties of such elementary particles are still described by the existing
formalism of quantum mechanics and Maxwell equations, in contrast to new formalism for
internal properties of sub-elementary and elementary particles, proposed in our Unified
theory;

2. Finding the equations, unifying the internal (hidden) and external parameters of

sub-elementary particles. Derivation of the conditions of the rest mass and charge of
sub-elementary fermions and antifermions (muons and tauons) origination. Proving that it
happens at certain symmetry shift between torus and antitorus of corresponding generation
of Bivacuum fermions, determined by Golden mean conditions. Finding out the fusion
conditions of sub - elementary fermions and antifermions to the triplets - elementary
fermions. Understanding the mechanisms of triplets stabilization;
3. Explanation of the absence of Dirac monopole in Nature;
4. Development of the dynamic model of wave-corpuscle duality of sub-elementary

particles/antiparticles, forming elementary particles and antiparticles;

7. The mechanism of elementary particles jump-way propagation in space;
8. Unification of the Principle of least action, the time, the 2nd and 3d laws of

thermodynamics with Principle of least action and influence of Bivacuum virtual pressure
waves (VPW, on the dynamics of elementary particles and trajectory of their
propagation in space;

5. The mechanism of elementary particles jump-way propagation in space;
6. Unification of the Principle of least action, the time, the 2nd and 3d laws of

thermodynamics with Principle of least action and influence of Bivacuum virtual pressure
waves (VPW, on the dynamics of elementary particles and trajectory of their
propagation in space;

7. New theory of time for conservative systems, when total energy of system is

permanent and the absolute values of variations of kinetic and potential energies are equal
to each other. Derivation of formula for time, containing not only velocity, but also
acceleration;

8. The interrelation of zero-point oscillations and recoilantirecoil effects,

accompanied the Corpuscle  Wave pulsation of fermions, with electric, magnetic and

16

gravitational fields excitation. The electromagnetic field, as a consequence of photons, as a
pair of sub-elementary fermions with additive spins C  W pulsation;

9. Theory of Virtual Replica VR of any material object and its multiplication in space
and time: VRMr, t, as a consequence of superposition of the reference Bivacuum virtual
pressure waves (VPWq1
modulated by de Broglie waves of particles (nucleons), forming this object;

  with the object virtual waves (VPWm

  representing VPWq1

,



10. Working out the new mechanism of Bivacuum mediated nonlocal interaction

between remote coherent mesoscopic and macroscopic systems as a result of superposition
of their VRMr, t and via Virtual guides of spin, momentum and energy VirGS,M,E,
assembling to virtual bundles, connecting remote protons and neutrons with the same
frequency of Corpuscle  Wave pulsation;

11. Explanation of ’paranormal’ results of Kozyrev’s, Shnoll and Tiller experiments and

the mechanism of overunity devices action and other "paranormal" phenomena, extending
the limits of mainstream paradigm.

1. The Bivacuum Concept

Our Bivacuum concept, like Paul Dirac theory of vacuum, admit the equal probability

of positive and negative energy. The Unified theory (UT) represents the efforts of this
author to create the Hierarchical picture of the World, starting from postulated specific
Bivacuum superfluid matrix properties, providing the elementary particles origination and
their Corpuscle  Wave pulsation, exiting the fields.

The Bivacuum is introduced, as a dynamic matrix of the Universe, composed from non
mixing subquantum particles and antiparticles. The subquantum particles and antiparticles
are considered, as the minimum stable vortical structures of Bivacuum with dimensions less
than Planck length: 1. 61605  10−35 m, when the quantization and quantum mechanics do
not work anymore.

In accordance to our conjecture, the subquantum particles and antiparticles have zero

mass and charge and opposite directions of rotation - clockwise and counterclockwise.
Their spontaneous collective paired vortical excitations (self-organization) follows by
Bivacuum dipoles origination in form of strongly correlated pairs:
tori V  antitori V− , separated by energetic gap.

The 2-dimensional tori and antitori in primordial Bivacuum are characterized by the

opposite mass, charge and magnetic moments, compensating each other and making
Bivacuum neutral with zero energy and charge density. The 3-d dimension of the space is
provided by the axis of energetic gap between (V and (V−, normal to plane of tori and
antitori.

The most probable radiuses of tori and antitori of symmetric primordial Bivacuum
dipoles are equal to each other and determined by Compton radiuses of muons ( and
tauons (.

However, the distribution of radiuses of Bivacuum dipoles interrelated with separation

between tori and antitori can be very wide without violation of symmetry and energy
conservation. In special case the radiuses of correlated tori and antitori of pairs can be
much bigger, corresponding, for example, the Compton radius of regular electron or
positron.

Three kinds of Bivacuum dipoles are named Bivacuum fermions, antifermions and

Bivacuum bosons.

The infinitive number of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions: BVF↑ ≡ V  V−,,
BVF↓ ≡ V  V−, and Bivacuum bosons: BVB ≡ V ↑↓ V−,, as intermediate state
between BVF↑ and BVF↓ fill all ’empty’ space and free space in the atoms and molecules.

17

The virtual Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions:

BVF↑ ≡ V  V−,  BVF↓

≡ V  V−,

    1.1

may form huge superfluid domains of virtual Bose condensate with dimensions,
determined by translational de Broglie wave length of virtual pairs, which tends to
infinitive in primordial Bivacuum of the ideal symmetry and minimum translational
dynamics.

The Bivacuum boson BVB has two polarization, depending on direction of rotation of

its torus and antitorus as respect to direction of translational propagation in space or
external field gradient:

BVB  V ↑↓ V−,
BVB−  V ↓↑ V−,

The BVB is the short living intermediate state in the process of interconversions

between Bivacuum fermions and antifermions in virtual Cooper pairs:

V  V−,  BVB  V  V−,

At certain conditions BVB and BVB− can be assembled in ’virtual trains’ propagating

in opposite directions and carrying the momentum and energy (see Fig.1).

    1.2

    1.2a

    1.3

The positive and negative energies of torus and antitorus (EV of two lepton

generations i  , ), interrelated with their radiuses (LV
harmonic oscillators of opposite energies:
 n   0 1
2

n   m0c2 1
2

 ni

EV

n  0, 1, 2, 3. . .

n , are quantized as quantum

or : EV

n  c
n
LV

i

where :

n 

LV


m0c 1

2  n



L0
1
2  n

i

    1.4

    1.4a

where: L0  /m0c

e,, can be a Compton radii of the electron of corresponding lepton

. The
generation, i.e. regular electron, muon and tauon (i  e, ,  and L0
Bivacuum fermions BVF↕ , with smaller Compton radiuses can be located inside the
bigger ones BVF↕ 

e  L0

e.

  L0

The absolute values of increments of torus and antitorus energies (ΔEV

i , interrelated
i  in primordial Bivacuum (i.e. in the absence of matter

with increments of their radii (ΔLV
and field influence), resulting from in-phase symmetric fluctuations are equal:

ΔEV

i  −

c
i
L V

2 ΔLV

i  −EV

i

i ΔLV
i
LV

or :

− ΔLV

i 

2

i
 L V
c

ΔEV

i 

i
SBVF
2hc

ΔEV

i  LV

i

i ΔEV
i
EV

where: SBVF

i

i
  L V

2

is a square of the cross-section of torus and antitorus,

forming Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕ and Bivacuum bosons (BVB.

The virtual mass, charge and magnetic moments of torus and antitorus of BVF↕ and
BVB are opposite and in symmetric primordial Bivacuum compensate each other in their
basic n  0) and excited n  1, 2, 3. . . ) states.

The Bivacuum ’atoms’: BVF↕  V V−i and BVB  V↑↓ V−i represent dipoles

    1.5

    1.5a

18

of three different poles - the mass (mV
( and − dipoles.

  |mV

− |  m0i, electric (e and e− and magnetic

The torus and antitorus (V  V−i of Bivacuum fermions of opposite spins BVF↑ and

BVF↓ are both rotating in the same direction: clockwise or counterclockwise. This
determines the positive and negative spins (S  1/2 of Bivacuum fermions. Their
opposite spins may compensate each other, forming virtual Cooper pairs: [BVF↑  BVF↓
with neutral boson properties.

The energy gap between the torus and antitorus of symmetric BVF↕ 

i or BVB i is:

ABVF  EV − −EV−  01  2ni  m0

i c21  2n 

hc
i
[dVV−]n

    1.6

where the characteristic separation (distance) between torus (Vi and antitorus (V−i of

Bivacuum dipoles (gap dimension) is a quantized parameter:

[dVV−]n

i 

h
i c1  2n

m0

    1.7

From (1.6) and (1.2a) we can see, that at n → 0, the energy gap ABVF

0  m0

i c2 and the spatial separation between torus and antitorus [dVV−]n

is decreasing till
i is increasing.

i

On the contrary, the infinitive symmetric excitation of torus and antitorus is followed by
i → 0 at n → . This means that the

tending the spatial gap between them to zero: [dVV−]n
quantization of space and energy of Bivacuum dipoles are interrelated and discreet.

The ratio of separation between torus and antitorus to their to radius of dipoles in
primordial (symmetric) Bivacuum is a permanent value, independent on the amplitude of
gap oscillation:

dvV− n
n
LV

 

The gap and radius oscillations are accompanied by the emission and absorption of
virtual clouds (VC, providing exchange interaction between counterphase oscillating
Bivacuum fermions or excitation of Virtual Pressure Waves (VPW.

The frequency of gap oscillation is equal to frequency of Virtual Clouds exchange in

Cooper pairs or frequency of VPW if Bivacuum dipoles are independent - unpaired.

2. The Dynamics of Bivacuum dipoles, exiting
Virtual Pressure (VPW) and Virtual Spin Waves (VirSWq

The emission and absorption of Virtual clouds (VCj,k

 i and anti-clouds (VCj,k

− i by

Bivacuum dipoles are the result of correlated transitions between different excitation states
(n  j, k of tori (Vj,k
BVF↕, and BVB , :

− i, forming Bivacuum dipoles:

 i and antitori (Vj,k

VCq

VCq

 , ≡ Vj
− , ≡ Vj

 − Vk
− − Vk

 , − virtual cloud
− , − virtual anticloud

    1.8

    2.1

    2.1a

where: j  k are the integer quantum numbers of torus and antitorus excitation states;

q  j − k.

The virtual clouds: (VCq

, and (VCq

−, exist in form of collective excitations -

’drops’ of subquantum particles and antiparticles of opposite energies, correspondingly.

19

The process of emission of Virtual Cloud of positive and negative energy by Bivacuum

fermion in each Cooper pair is accompanied by simultaneous absorption of this cloud by
the antifermion and vice verse. Because of such local exchange interaction, stabilizing the
pairs, the external virtual pressure waves can not be excited. The emission  absorption of
positive and negative Virtual clouds by each Bivacuum dipole is accompanied by the
in-phase oscillation of Bivacuum gap, separating tori and antitori of this dipoles. So, the
Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, forming virtual Cooper pairs BVF↑ BVF↓ q, are
pulsing between excited and basic states in counterphase, like the gap between their tori
and antitori. However, these pulsation do not change the spin state of Bivacuum fermions.
The interaction between symmetric Bivacuum fermion: BVF↑  V ↑↑ V−  and
Bivacuum antifermion: BVF↓  V ↓↓ V− , by means of Virtual Clouds (VC and VC−
exchange, stabilizing Cooper pairs in symmetric primordial Bivacuum without spin
inversion is illustrated below:

EV↑↑V−  ΔEV A VC

 EV↓↓V− − ΔEV B
−VC

    2.2

Figure 1. The emission of Virtual Clouds (VC and VC− by the torus (V and antitorus
(V− in primordial symmetric Bivacuum antifermion BVF↓  V ↓↓ V−  is accompanied
by the absorption of these two clouds of opposite energy (ΔEV  by Bivacuum fermion
BVF↑  V ↑↑ V−  torus and antitorus and vice versa without spin change in the process of
reversible dynamic exchange equilibrium. This exchange do not violate the energy
conservation law, as far the oscillation of positive and negative energy increments
compensate each other and the resulting energy of Bivacuum dipoles remains permanent.

The virtual multilayer membrane, as a main structure of Bivacuum coherent domains, is

composed by Virtual bilayers of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions in
state of virtual Bose condensation. The transition between two states of virtual domain of
Bose condensate with opposite polarization of N Virtual Cooper pairs via the intermediate
Bivacuum bosons can be presented like:

N BVF↑ ≡ V  V−,  BVF↓
 2N  BVB
N BVF↓ ≡ V  V−,  BVF↑

≡ V  V−,

≡ V  V−,

    2.3

20

In state of virtual Bose condensation of Cooper pairs, all transition between ground and

, and (VCq

excited states of all Bivacuum dipoles should be coherent. In each virtual Cooper pair the
emission of Virtual Clouds (VCq
from excited to ground state, is accompanied by its absorption by second BVF↓. This
means that virtual Cooper pairs can not be a source of external Virtual Pressure Waves
(VPW. In domains of virtual Bose condensation, where Bivacuum dipoles can not be
distinguished, the BVB may be the mediator of spin state not only between the BVF↑ and
BVF↓ of the same Cooper pair but also between the remote pairs in the volume of this
coherent virtual domain.

−, by first BVF↑, as a result of its transition

In symmetrical primordial Bivacuum the in-phase oscillation of energy of torus (V
and antitorus (V− of each Bivacuum dipole compensate each other. However, when the
R  BVF↑  L  BVF↓ q equilibrium symmetry is shifted to the left or right R ≠ L, for
example by external magnetic, electric or gravitational field, the part of virtual Cooper pair
will be disassembled to single Bivacuum fermions or antifermions. This should be
accompanied by the origination of uncompensated virtual pressure waves of positive or
negative energy: VPW or VPW−, propagating in space with light velocity. Just these
waves participate in Virtual Replicas (VR) of material objects formation, which will be
described later.

The energies of positive and negative VPWq

 and VPWq

−, emitted  absorbed by

Bivacuum dipoles, as a result of their torus (V and antitorus (V− transitions between j
and k quantum states can be presented as:



i
EVPWq
i
EVPWq

−

 0

 −0

i j − kV m0
i j − kV−  −m0

i c2j − k

i c2j − k

The quantized fundamental Compton frequency of VPWq

 is:

q 0

i  q m0

i c2/

where: q  j − k  1, 2, 3. . is the quantization number of VPWj,k

 energy;

In symmetric primordial Bivacuum the total compensation of positive and negative

Virtual Pressure Waves takes a place:

i

qEVPWj,k



 −qEVPWj,k

−

i

i
 q 0

    2.4

    2.4a

    2.5

    2.6

This means that the coherent excitation of VPWj,k

 and VPWj,k

− do not violate the energy

conservation law.

The density oscillation of VCj,k

 and VCj,k

− , composed from subquantum particles,

represent positive and negative virtual pressure waves VPWj,k

 and VPWj,k

− .

If the applied fields also shift the equality of energies of tori and antitori of the unpaired

Bivacuum fermions or antifermions, this is followed by origination of inequality between
energies of positive and negative Virtual Pressure waves:

ΔVPW  |VPW − VPW− |,

    2.7

Corresponding excessive energy can be used, as a source of pure ’free’ energy and
designing the overunity devices, based on resonant mechanism of consuming this energy.

The examples of Virtual microtubules (microfilaments), formed by Bivacuum Cooper

pairs, assembled and disassembled presented below:

21

↑  BVF0

↓ i forming a double coherent Virtual microtubules (VirMTi). This

Figure 2. (a): three Cooper pairs of symmetric Bivacuum fermions in primordial Bivacuum:
3BVF0
symmetric structures do not rotate around the main common axis and their external
tangential and translational velocity is zero: v  0, like resulting mass and charge. Only the
internal rotation of torus (V and antitorus (V− of Bivacuum dipoles takes a place;
(b): the same structure as (a) in strong electric, magnetic or gravitational fields. The
symmetric Bivacuum fermions and antifermions pairs turns to asymmetric three Cooper
pairs of Bivacuum fermions, rotating around the common axis (X). The rotation and
translation of these charged virtual filaments should be accompanied by excitation of the
magnetic field.
(c)  (d) are the result of dissociation of double virtual microtubules VirMT
presented at (b):

i
BVF

↓ 
↑ BVF∓

,

3BVF

↑  BVF∓

↓ ,  3BVB ,  3BVB∓ ,

i

↓ 
↑ BVF∓

,
BVF

turns to translational kinetic energy of two single VirMT.

in strong electric or magnetic field, to single virtual microtubules VirMTBVB
of Bivacuum
bosons of opposite polarization. At this dissociation, the rotational kinetic energy of double
VirMT
If these two single virtual microtubules are formed by Bivacuum bosons with symmetry
shift, corresponding to Golden mean, they propagate in opposite direction with velocity
v   c, consuming the energy of resonant exchange interaction of asymmetric dipoles with
the excessive virtual pressure waves: ΔVPW  |VPW − VPW− |, of Bivacuum, excited
and absorbed by huge amount of elementary particles. The selective trapping of the energy
of such individual trains can be used as a source for free energy of Bivacuum.

2.1. Virtual multi - bilayers (membranes) formed by virtual Cooper pairs

The virtual multi-layer membranes (VirMem can be formally presented as a result of
association infinitive number of Bivacuum fermions Cooper pairs of opposite polarization:

VirMem 



∑ BVF↑  BVF↓
BVF↓  BVF↑

,

x,y

    2.8

where Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, rotating in the opposite direction are
interacting with each other side-by-side. Each of such Cooper pair BVF↑  BVF↓  has the
counterpart BVF↓  BVF↑ . These pairs are interacting with each other by ’head-to-tail’
principle, forming virtual microtubules (Fig.2 a) in symmetric unperturbed by fields
Bivacuum. Such systems may compose the virtual Bose condensation.

The oscillation of such two Cooper pairs between the symmetrically excited and the
ground states are counterphase. This means that the virtual gap oscillation between tori
and antitori of corresponding Bivacuum dipoles are also counterphase. This process may be
accompanied by the exchange of pairs of Virtual Clouds VCq

− , between

  VCq

virtual Cooper pairs.

22

The new notion of positive and negative space is related to positive and negative
Compton radiuses of conjugated torus and antitorus with opposite mass and charge,
forming Bivacuum dipoles: L, 
negative mass/energy, opposite charges and magnetic moments can be named as
inter-space waves (ISW), in-phase with VCq
Bivacuum dipoles.

− , emissionabsorption by

m,c . The oscillation of gap between positive and

  VCq



The virtual multilayer membranes in Bivacuum can be considered also, as the assembly

of huge number of virtual microtubules of Bivacuum side-by-side.

Each of the layer of virtual membranes, can pulse between the excited and ground state

in counterphase with the next one, interacting with each other via dynamic exchange by
pairs of Virtual Clouds VCq
VPW VPW− ,. This process occur without violation of the energy conservation law
because of positive and negative energy oscillation compensation. Such pulsations are
accompanied by nonlocal Bivacuum gap oscillation over the space of virtual Bose
condensation (BC) of Bivacuum dipoles.

− , or local virtual pressure waves

  VCq

2.2 Bivacuum Virtual Spin Waves Excitation

The virtual spin waves VirSWj,k

1/2, with properties of massless collective

Nambu-Goldstone modes, like a real spin waves, represent the oscillation of angular
momentum equilibrium of individual Bivacuum fermions or in composition of Cooper pairs
with opposite spins via "flip-flop" mechanism, accompanied by origination of intermediate
states - Bivacuum bosons BVB ≡ V ↑↓ V−,:

VirSWj,k

1/2 

BVF↑ ≡ V  V−,  BVB ≡ V ↑↓ V−,  BVF↓ ≡ V  V−,

The VirSWj,k

1/2, like so-called torsion field, can serve as a carrier of the phase/spin
(angular momentum) and information - qubits, but not the energy. The collective spin
inversion in coherent Bivacuum domains of coherent bivacuum dipoles in state of virtual
Bose condensate, is accompanied by collective and instant Virtual spin wave excitation.
This nonlocal collective process in domains may induce the opposite conversion in the
neighboring virtual domain. The corresponding chain reaction can be responsible for one of
the mechanism of macroscopic entanglement or nonlocality.

The Virtual Spin Waves (VirSW1/2 propagation in space, as a result of spin states
exchange between asymmetric Bivacuum fermion (BVF↑ and antifermion (BVF↓ forming
virtual Cooper pairs is illustrated below.

    2.9

    2.9a

23

Figure 3. The rotation of tori (V and antitori (V− in virtual Cooper pairs of the opposite
spins is also opposite. The propagation of virtual spin waves in big domains of virtual Bose
condensate in Bivacuum is not accompanied by the energy/momentum transmission and can
be instant. This means the possibility of nonlocal interaction between neighboring virtual
domains of Bivacuum.

3. Virtual Bose condensation (VirBC), as a condition of Bivacuum
superfluid and nonlocal properties
It follows from our model of Bivacuum, that the infinite number of Cooper pairs of

Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ BVF↓S0
(BVBi, as elements of Bivacuum, have zero or very small (in presence of fields and
matter) translational momentum: pBVF↑BVF↓
wave length tending to infinity: VirBC

and their intermediate states - Bivacuum bosons

i
 pBVB
i
 h/pBVF↑BVF↓, BVB

→ 0 and corresponding de Broglie

→ .

i

i

i

This condition leads to origination of 3D system of virtual double virtual microtubules

from Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ BVF↓S0, and single virtual
microtubules, formed by Bivacuum bosons (BVBS0, closed or open, connecting remote
coherent elementary particles.

The longitudinal momentum of Bivacuum dipoles forming virtual microfilaments and

their bundles/beams can be close to zero and corresponding de Broglie wave length:

 

h
− |c
−mV
|mV
−
 → mV
 →  at mV

    3.1

exceeding the distance between neighboring dipoles many times.

The 3D system of these double and single microtubules (see Fig. 50) represents Bose

condensate with superfluid properties.

The Bivacuum, like liquid helium, can be considered as a liquid, containing two
components: the described superfluid and normal, representing fraction of Bivacuum
dipoles not involved in domains of virtual Bose condensation and virtual guides (VirG).
The radii of VirG are determined by the Compton radii of the electrons, muons and tauons,
interconnecting similar remote particles with opposite spins.

Their length is limited by decoherence effects, related to Bivacuum symmetry shift. In

24

highly symmetric Bivacuum the length of Virtual Guides with nonlocal properties,
connecting remote coherent elementary particles, may have the order of stars and galactic
separation.

In some cases virtual microfilaments/microtubules (VirMT) may form a closed rotating
rings with perimeter, determined by resulting standing de Broglie wave length of Bivacuum
dipoles forming the rings. The life-time of such closed structures can be big, if they have a
properties of standing and non-dissipating systems of virtual de Broglie waves of
Bivacuum dipoles.

3.1 Virtual Bose condensation (VirBC), as a base of Bivacuum
superfluid properties and nonlocality
Nonlocality, as the independence of potential energy on the distance from energy
source in 3D net filaments of virtual (and real) Bose condensate, follows from application
of the Virial theorem to systems of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ BVF↓S0
and Bivacuum bosons BVB (Kaivarainen, 1995; 2004-2006).

The Virial theorem in general form is correct not only for classical, but also for

quantum systems. It relates the averaged kinetic T kv 

2/2 and potential Vr

∑ mivi
i

energies of particles, composing these systems:

2T kv  ∑

mivi

2  ∑

ri∂V/∂ri

i

i

If the potential energy Vr is a homogeneous n − order function like:

Vr  rn,

then n 

2Tk
Vr

For example, for a harmonic oscillator, when T k V, we have n  2. For Coulomb

interaction: n  −1 and T̄  −V̄ /2.

The important consequence of the Virial theorem is that, if the average kinetic energy

and momentum ( p  of particles in a certain volume of a Bose condensate (BC) tends to
zero:

T k  p 2/2m → 0

the interaction between particles in the volume of BC, characterized by the radius:
LBC  / p  → 0, becomes nonlocal, as independent on distance between them:

Vr  rn 1  const at

n  2T k/Vr  0

    3.2

    3.3

    3.4

    3.5

Consequently, it is shown, that nonlocality, as independence of potential on the distance

from potential source, is the inherent property of macroscopic Bose condensate. The
individual particles (real, virtual or subquantum) in a state of Bose condensation are
spatially indistinguishable due to the uncertainty principle. The Bivacuum dipoles
BVF↑ BVF↓S0 and (BVBS0 due to quasi one-dimensional Bose condensation are
tending to self-assembly by ’side-to-side’ or ’head-to-tail’ principle. They compose very
long virtual microtubules - Virtual Guides with wormhole properties. In special cases they
form a closed structures - rotating rings with radius, dependent on velocity of rotation. The
3D net of these two kind of Virtual Guides (double VirGBVF↑BVF↓ and mono VirGBVB)
bundles represent the nonlocal and superfluid fraction of Bivacuum..

4. Virtual Particles and Antiparticles

25

Generally accepted difference of virtual particles from the actual ones, is that the

former, in contrast to latter, does not follow the laws of relativistic mechanics:

m 

m0
1 − v/c2 1/2

For actual free particle with rest mass m0 and relativistic mass (m, the formula,

following from (4.1) is:

E2 − p 2c2  m0
where E2 mc22 is the total energy squared and

2c4

→
p  m

→
v is the momentum of

particle.

In accordance to our model of Bivacuum, virtual particles represent asymmetric
Bivacuum dipoles (BVF)as and (BVBas of three electron’s generation (i  e, ,  in
unstable state far from Golden mean conditions (see sections 5.3 and 6.1).

The virtual particles, like the real sub-elementary particles, may exist in two phase:

Corpuscular [C]- phase, representing correlated pairs of asymmetric torus (V and
antitorus (V− of two different energy states and Wave [W]- phase, resulting from quantum
beats between these states (see chapter 8). Corresponding transitions are accompanied by
emission  absorption of Cumulative Virtual Clouds (CVC or CVC−, formed by
subquantum particles and antiparticles.

Virtual particles differs from real sub-elementary ones by their low stability and
inability for fusion to triplets, as far their symmetry shift is not big enough to follow the
Golden Mean condition (see Chapter 7).

For virtual particles the equality (4.2) in [C]-phase is invalid in contrast to real ones.
For [W]-phase of particles, represented by Cumulative Virtual Clouds (CVC and
excited by them subquantum particles and antiparticles density oscillation in Bivacuum -
virtual pressure waves (VPWq
not valid also. Consequently, the causality principle also do not works in a system of
VPWq

. This is true for both: virtual and real particles.

−, the relativistic mechanics and equality (4.2) are

  VPWq

The [electron - proton] interaction is generally considered, as a result of virtual photons

exchange (cumulative virtual clouds CVC exchange in terms of our theory, when the
electron and proton total energies do not change. Only the directions of their momentums
are changed. In this case the energy of virtual photon in the equation (4.2) E  0 and:

E2 − p 2c2 −p 2c2  0

The measure of virtuality (Vir) after Dirac is a measure of deviation from 4.2:

Vir ∣ m0

2c4−E2−p 2c2 ∣≥ 0

In contrast to actual particles, the virtual ones have a more limited radius of action,
determined by dimension of CVC. The more is the virtuality (Vir), the lesser is the action
radius. Each of emitted virtual quantum (cumulative virtual cloud) must be absorbed by the
same particle or another in a course of their C  W pulsation.

A lot of process in quantum electrodynamics can be illustrated by Feynman diagrams
(Feynman, 1985). In these diagrams, actual particles are described as infinitive rays (lines)
and virtual particles as stretches connecting these lines (Fig. 4).

Each peak (or angle) in Feynman diagrams means emission or absorption of quanta or

particles. The energy of each process (electromagnetic, weak, strong) is described using
correspondent fine structure constants.

    4.1

    4.2

    4.3

    4.4

26

Fig. 4. Feynman diagrams describing electron-proton scattering (interaction), mediated by
virtual photons - (cumulative virtual clouds in our terminology): a) - annihilation of electron
and positron by means of virtual electron e−v and virtual positron ev with origination of
two and three actual photons  : diagrams b) and c) correspondingly.

The background of our Unified Theory is presented by three postulates, which has been

verified and confirmed in the course of this theory development.

5. Three postulates and related conservation rules for
Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕as and Bivacuum bosons (BVBas

Postulate I. The absolute values of the internal rotational kinetic energies of torus and

antitorus are permanent equal to each other and to the half of the rest mass energy of the
electrons of corresponding lepton generation, independently on the external rotational and
translational group velocity (v, turning the symmetric Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕ to
asymmetric ones:

I :

1
2

mV

vgr

in 2  1
2

|−mV

− |vph

in 2  1
2

m0c2  const

,

in

    5.1

where the positive mV

 and negative −mV

−  i2mV

− are the ’actual’ - inertial and

in are
’complementary’ - inertialess masses of torus (V and antitorus (V−; the vgr
the internal angular group and phase velocities of subquantum particles and antiparticles,
forming torus and antitorus, correspondingly. In symmetric conditions of primordial
Bivacuum and its virtual dipoles, when the influence of matter and fields is absent:
in  vph
vgr

in and vph

in  c.

It follows from my theory of time, described later, that the pace of time dt/t for any

closed conservative system is determined by the pace of its kinetic energy change
−dT/Tkx,y,z, anisotropic in general case (Kaivarainen, 2006, 2007):

dt
t  d ln t  −

dTk
Tk

 − d ln Tk

x,y,z

    5.2

Consequently, the Postulate I: Tk

in  const - means zero pace of time and the infinitive

life-time of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles BVF↕ and BVB, independently of
their symmetry shift.

The actual (inertial) mass has the regular relativistic dependence on the external

rotational and translational velocity v  vext of Bivacuum dipoles:

 mV

 

m0
 1 − v/c2

 m (inertial mass)

    5.3

while the complementary (inertialess) mass (∓mV
that of the actual one (mV
velocity:

, has the reciprocal relativistic dependence on external

− of antitorus V− with sign, opposite to

27

∓ mV

−  ∓m0 1 − v/c2

(inertialess mass)

    5.4

It is important result, that in the case of nonzero external velocity (tangential or

translational) of Bivacuum dipole v  0 its total energy,equal to sum of of its positive and
negative energies of actual torus and complementary antitorus is equal to doubled kinetic
energy of dipole, anisotropic in general case:

EBVF,BVB  mV

 − mV

−c2  mV

v2  mV

L22

 2Tk 

m0v2
1−v/c2

,

x,y,z

The ratio of absolute values of energies/mass of antitorus and torus (5.3) to (5.4) is:

− |
|−mV

mV



2
m0
 2  1 −
mV

2

v
c

Postulate II. The absolute internal magnetic moments of torus (V and antitorus (V−

of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions BVFas
BVFas

↓  V↓↓ V−] are permanent, equal to each other and to Bohr magneton (B:

↑  V↑↑ V− and antifermions:

| | ≡ 1

2 |e |

II :

 |− | ≡ 1

2 |−e− |

||
in
− | vph

|−mV



rot

,

||
in rot
 |vgr
|mV
 B ≡ 1

2 |e0 |


m0c  const

    5.5

    5.6

    5.7

The magnetic moments of torus and antitorus are independent on their internal vgr,ph
and external velocity v  0 and mass and charge symmetry shifts.

rot

The actual and complementary masses mV

in
− |, internal angular velocities (vgr
in  and electric charges |e | and |e− | of V and V− are dependent on the external and
and vph
internal velocities, however, in such a way, that their changes compensate each other and
magnetic moments of torus and antitorus remain invariant:

 and |−mV

in

| |  |− |  B  const

    5.7a

This postulate reflects the condition of the invariance of magnetic moments | | and

spin values (S   1
internal and external velocity, i.e. the absence of these parameters symmetry shifts.

2  of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles with respect to their

One may see also that Postulate II means in fact that the resulting spins of Bivacuum
fermion or antifermion, equal to that of torus and antitorus, correspondingly, are permanent
and equal to:

S   1
2

  const

This follows from known relation between the spin and Bohr magneton (B:

| |  |− |  B   1
2



m0c  S e0
e0
m0c

where: e0/m0c is gyromagnetic ratio of the electron.
We may conclude that in fact the Postulate II reflects the permanent half-integral value
2  of Bivacuum fermions, independent on their internal and external velocity.

of spin  1

    5.8

    5.9

28

Postulate III. The equality of Coulomb attraction force between torus and antitorus of
primordial Bivacuum dipoles: V  V− , of  and  kinds (muons and tauons), providing
uniform electric energy distribution in Bivacuum:

i
III : F0



2
e0
2
dVV−

n







2
e0
2
dVV−

n

where: [dVV−]n

h
,c12n
Bivacuum dipoles at the same state of excitation (n) and e0

m0

, 

is the separation between torus and antitorus of

2  |e | |e− | ,.

The important consequences of Postulate III are the following relations, unifying the

rest mass and charges of the tori and antitori of Bivacuum dipoles - the precursors of
sub-elementary fermions: muons and tauons with mass and charge of the regular electron
(m0 and e0)e:

e0m0 e  e0m0   e0m0 

or : e0m0 e,,  |ee− ||mV

− |
mV

e,,

 const

The other forms of dependence of the charges of tori and antitori (e0

, of Bivacuum

fermions on their mass (m0

, are:

  e0
e0

em0

e/m0

 

  e0
e0

em0

e/m0

 

e
e0
206, 7
e
e0
3487, 28

e is the charge of the regular electron.

where e0
It follows from Postulate III and eqs.(5.12 and 5.12a), that the tori and antitori of
symmetric V  V− , with bigger mass: m0
e and
smaller separation (gap) have correspondingly smaller charges, providing the uniform
charge density distribution in Bivacuum.

  3487, 28 m0

  206, 7 m0

e; m0

Just these conditions provide the same charge of muon and tauon, equal to that of

regular electron, notwithstanding of their different mass.

In other words, Postulate III explains why sub-elementary fermions: muons and tauons,

fusing the electron/positron and proton/antiproton have same by the absolute value of
electric charges, nonetheless of their big mass difference.

5.1. Three compensation principles, following from postulates I and II

[A]. The Mass Compensation Principle follows from different relativistic dependencies

of the actual and complementary mass of Bivacuum dipoles, reciprocal to each other (eqs
14 and 14a):

|mV

 | |∓mV

2
− |  m0

The important consequence of our approach is that the product of the absolute values of

the actual and complementary energies of Bivacuum dipoles is a permanent value,
independent on the external velocity of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions, forming fields and
matter:

E0

2  mV

c2  mV

−c2  m0

2c4  const

The famous Einstein relation: E  mc2 is equal to actual energy of tori of Bivacuum

    5.10

    5.11

    5.11a

    5.12

    5.12a

    5.13

    5.13a

29

  mV

dipoles: EV
Bivacuum dipoles are hidden and not revealed by this relation, being the part of more
general formula 5.13a.

c2  E. However, the complementary energy and mass of antitori of

We may see, that the Einstein’s energy/mass relation is a part of our Mass

Compensation Principle, determined by the invariant rest energy/mass of elementary
particle, squared (E0

2 .

[B]. The internal Group and Phase Velocities Compensation Principle for internal

dynamics of torus (vgr
(I) in form:

in  and antitorus (vph

in  of Bivacuum dipoles follows from the Postulate

in vph
vgr

in  c2

Similar relation is well known already for external group and phase velocities of

relativistic de Broglie waves:

ext vph
vgr

ext  c2

[C]. The Charge Compensation Principle has the same simple shape, as previous

compensation principles, is a consequence of Postulate II:

2
|e | |e− |  e0

5.2. The solution of Dirac Monopole problem, following from Unified theory

The Dirac theory, searching for elementary magnetic charges g− and g, symmetric to

electric ones e− and e, named monopoles, leads to the following relation between the
magnetic monopole and electric charge of the same signs:

c

ge  n
2

c
e  n
2
n  1, 2, 3 is the integer number

g  n
2

or:

e


    5.14

    5.15

    5.16

    5.17

where   e2/c ≃ 1/137 is the electromagnetic fine structure constant.
It follows from this definition, that minimal magnetic charge at n  1 is as big
as g ≅ 67. 7e. The mass of monopole should be huge  1016 GeV. All numerous and very
expensive attempts to reveal the Monopoles experimentally has failed.

From our the Postulate II it follows that the uncompensated magnetic charge

(monopole) simply is absent.

In contrast to electric and mass dipoles symmetry shifts of Bivacuum dipoles, providing

electric charge and mass origination of sub-elementary fermions, depending on their
velocity (tangential or translational), the symmetry shift between the internal actual | | and
complementary |− | magnetic charges of Bivacuum dipoles torus and antitorus is absent
and velocity independent.

This consequence follows from the Postulate II of our theory (eq.5.7):

Δ| |  | | − |− |  0

The magnetic charges of torus (V and antitorus (V− are permanent values, equal to

the Bohr magneton:

| |  |− |  B ≡ 1
2

|e0 | 

m0c  const

In accordance to Postulate II, the magnetic charges of torus and antitorus are independent

    5.18

    5.19

30

on the external velocity (v) of symmetric and asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles and
sub-elementary particles. The equality of the actual (torus) and complementary (antitorus)
magnetic moments of Bivacuum dipoles - independent on their external velocity and the
absence of symmetry shift, creating uncompensated moment, explains the absence of
magnetic monopoles in Nature.

5.3. The rest mass origination without Higgs bosons

Due to different relativistic dependencies of masses (mV

 and mV

− of torus and antitorus

(V) and (V−) of Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ and antifermions BVF↓, rotating around
common axis, on the external tangential velocity (v), the symmetry shift of Bivacuum
dipoles is accompanied by uncompensated mass and charge origination.

The process of symmetry shift is followed by turning of pair of symmetric Bivacuum

fermion and antifermion to Cooper pairs of fermions: muons ( and tauons ( with
antimuons and antitauons. of opposite spin, charge and energy. However, the resulting
energy, mass and charge in such pairs is equal to zero.

It is easy to find out from our formulas for actual and complementary masses: (mV
−, that the rest masses m0

, of asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles originate at their certain

(mV
symmetry shift, determined by Golden Mean condition (v/c)2    0. 618.

 and

The sum of the positive (actual) and negative (complementary) energies of torus and
antitorus of Bivacuum fermion or antifermion at Golden mean condition can be presented
as:


EBVF

 EV

  EV−

  mV

 − mV

−c2  m0

,c2

or :

m0
 1 − 

− m0  1 − 

c2  m0


 1 − 

c2  m0c2

From known quadratic Golden mean equation: 2    1 it follows that:


 1−

 1.

The described process of mass origination is beyond Standard Model, which use the
hypothesis of Higgs bosons (see Introduction). We have to stress, that nonetheless of big
efforts of laboratories over the world, involved in high energy physics, no experimental
indications to existing of Higgs bosons where revealed.

6. The relation between the internal parameters
of Bivacuum dipoles and their external velocity

The important relativistic formula, unifying a lot of internal and external parameters of

asymmetric Bivacuum fermions (BVFas

↕  was derived from the Postulates I and II:

c
in
vgr

2





1

1 − v2/c2 


mV
−
mV

1/2



ext

1/2
in
vph
in 
vgr

−
LV
 
LV

L0
 2 
LV

|e |
|e− |



2
e
2
e0

where the radiuses of torus (LV

−, as a basis of truncated cone, as a
  and antitorus (LV
shape of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions, have the following relativistic dependencies on
their external rotational or translational group velocity (v ≡ vgr):

    5.20

    5.21

    6.1

    6.1a

31

LV

  L01 − v2/c2 

ext

1/4

i

LV

− 

L0

1 − v2/c2 

ext

1/4

where: L0  LV

LV

− 1/2  /m0c

i

i

− Compton radius

The absolute external velocity of Bivacuum dipoles squared (v2 as respect to

primordial Bivacuum (absolute reference frame), can be expressed, using 26 and 26a, as a
criteria of asymmetry of these dipoles torus and antitorus, accompanied their external
motion:

v2  c2 1 −

−
mV

mV

 c2 1 −

2
e−
2
e

 c2 1 −

S
S−

x,y,z

where: S  LV

 2 and S−  LV

−2 are the squares of cross-sections of torus and

antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles as the truncated cones.

The existence of absolute velocity in our Unified theory (anisotropic in general case)
and the Universal reference frame of Primordial Bivacuum, pertinent for Ether concept, is
an important difference with Special relativity theory.

The relativistic dependences of the actual charge e and actual mass (mV

 on external

absolute velocity of Bivacuum dipole, following from (6.1) and (5.3) are:

e 

mV

 

e0
1 − v2/c2 1/4
m0
1 − v/c2

The ratio of the actual charge to the actual inertial mass from (4.5 and 4.5a) has also the

relativistic dependence:

e
mV

 

e0
m0

1 − v2/c2 1/4

The decreasing of this ratio with velocity increasing is weaker, than it follows from the

generally accepted statement, that charge has no relativistic dependence in contrast to the
actual mass mV
ratio on the external velocity (v) may confirm the validity of our formula (6.4b) following
from our approach.

. The direct experimental investigation of relativistic dependence of this

From eqs. (5.5) and (6.1) we find for mass and charge symmetry shift:

Δm  mV

 − mV

Δe  e − e− 


−  mV
2
e
e  e−

2

v
c

2

v
c

These mass and charge symmetry shifts determines the relativistic dependence of the

effective mass and charge of the fermions. In direct experiments only the actual mass (mV
− and charge
and charge (e can be registered. It means that the complementary mass (mV
are hidden for observation.

The ratio of charge shift to mass shifts (the uncompensated charge and mass ratio) is:

    6.2

    6.2a

    6.2b

    6.3

    6.4

    6.4a

    6.4b

    6.5

    6.5a

32

Δe
Δm



2
e
 e  e− 

mV

The mass symmetry shift can be expressed via the squared charges symmetry shift also

in the following manner:

Δm  mV

 − mV

−  mV

 e

2 − e−
2
2
e

or using (6.5) this formula turns to:

2
2 − e−
e
2
e

 v2
c2

The overall shape of asymmetric BVFas

is a truncated cone (Fig.2)
with plane, parallel to the base with radiuses of torus (L and antitorus (L−, defined by
eq. (4.3).

↕  V  V−

i

6.1 The Hidden Harmony of Bivacuum dipoles,
as a background of Golden Mean and the rest mass and charge origination

One of the multiple forms of general expression (6.1 and 6.1a) is formula, unifying the

internal and external group and phase velocities of asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles:

in
vgr
c

4

 1 −

2

ext
vgr
c

where: vgr

ext  ≡ v is the external translational-rotational group velocity of Bivacuum

dipole.

The conditions of ”Hidden Harmony" were introduced in our approach as:
a) the equality of the internal and external group velocities and
b) the equality of the internal and external phase velocities of asymmetric Bivacuum

dipoles:

vgr

vph

rot

in V
in V−

rot

≡ v

 vgr

ext 

 vph

ext 

tr

tr

and introducing the notation:

in
vgr
c

2



v
c

2

≡ 

formula (6.9) turns to a simple quadratic Golden mean equation:

2  − 1 0

which has a few modes :

or :

or :

− 1

  1

1 − 1/2  1
1





1 − 1/2  1

    6.6

    6.7

    6.8

    6.9

    6.10

    6.10a

    6.11

    6.12

    6.12a

    6.12b

The solution of the Golden mean equation is equal to Golden mean: v/c2    0. 618. It
is remarkable, that the Golden Mean, which plays so important role on different Hierarchic

33

levels of matter organization: from elementary particles to galactic and even in our
perception of beauty (i.e. our mentality), has so deep physical roots as Hidden Harmony
conditions (6.10 and 6.10a).

Our theory is the first one, elucidating these roots (Kaivarainen, 1995; 2000; 2005).
This important fact points, that we are on the right track searching the mechanism of mass
and charge origination from Bivacuum dipoles and elementary particles origination.

We can see, that the unified formula (6.1 and 6.1a) at Golden Mean conditions:

v/c2    0. 618 and using the Golden Mean equation in shape:

1

1−1/2  1



turns to:


mV
−
mV

1/2




mV
m0



in
vph
in  L−
vgr

L 

|e |
|e− |



e
e0



2

 1


where the actual (e and complementary (e− charges and corresponding mass at

Golden Mean conditions are:

  e0/1/2;
e
,/;
  m0
 ,

mV


e−
mV

 e01/2
− ,

  m0

, 

    6.13

    6.14

    6.14a

using (6.14a) it is easy to see, that the difference between the actual and complementary

mass of tori and antitori of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions of two generations
V  V− , at Golden Mean conditions is equal to the rest mass of corresponding
sub-elementary fermions: muon and tauon:

|ΔmV |  mV

 − mV

−  m01/ −   m0

,

    6.15

One of the form of Golden Mean equation 2 − 1  0 is: 1/ −   1
This is an important result, confirming our approach, that the Bivacuum fermions
symmetry shift, responsible for origination of the rest mass of unstable muons and tauons
before their fusion to the electrons and protons, correspondingly, is determined by the
universal for all hierarchical levels of Nature - Golden mean condition, based on Hidden
Harmony (eqs.6.5 and 6.5a).

The same is true for the charge origination. The Golden Mean symmetry shift between

actual and complementary charges of Bivacuum dipoles of two generations V  V− ,
stands for elementary charge of sub-elementary fermions or antifermions. From (6.14) we
get:

3/2e0  |Δe |  |e − e− | ≡ |e|
2 ,

|e ||e− |  e0

where:

e,,

    6.16

    6.16a

where the charges of tori and antitori in symmetric Bivacuum fermions

V  V− , are related to their mass like it follows from Postulate III of this theory eqs
(5.12 and 5.12a).

These conditions (5.12 and 5.12a) provide the same charge symmetry shift of
V  V− , of muon and tauon (sub-elementary fermions), equal to that of regular
electron.

This is a reason, why sub-elementary fermions: muons and tauons, creating the

electrons and protons, correspondingly, have the same absolute electric charges,
e.
  3487, 28 m0
nonetheless of their big mass difference: m0

  206, 7 m0

e and m0

34

6.2. The dynamic and geometrical conditions for sub-elementary fermions
(muons and tauons) origination

Let us analyze the dynamics and geometry of Bivacuum fermions conversion to muons

and tauons of rotating virtual Cooper pairs at Golden Mean (GM) conditions:

BVF↑  BVF↓GM

,  V  V−GM

,
,  V  V−GM

before their fusion to triplets of the electron or proton  F↑

  F↓

−x,y  F↕

 z

e,p .

This fusion converts the unstable muons and tauons to sub-elementary fermions in
composition of stable triplets (electrons and protons), with smaller mass (see next chapter).
The dynamic and spatial properties of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions of two
generation, turning them to muons or tauons, are the result of participation in two rotational
process simultaneously:

1) rotation of asymmetric F↕

 , around its own axis with spatial image of truncated

cone with resulting radius:


LBVFas




  mV

|mV

− |c




m01/  c




2. 236 m0c



L0
2. 236

where the total mass of Bivacuum fermion at Golden Mean condition is

|mV

  mV

− |  m01/    2. 236 m0

mV

L0  /m0c is the Compton radius of the rest mass of muon or tauon.
It was shown above (6.14a), that at Golden Mean conditions:
   m0/ and
2) rolling of truncated cones of each of two Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
around the axis, common for both of them, inside a larger vorticity with radius of Cooper
pair BVF↑  BVF↓GM

, , equal to Compton radius of muons or tauons:

−   m0 .

mV

L


BVFas

↑  BVFas



↓


 − mV

|mV

− |c

,

 

m0c  L0

with Golden mean angular frequency:

i
,


  c
rot
L0

 0 

m0c2


,

    6.17

    6.18

    6.19

    6.20

    6.21

The ratio of radius L


BVFas

↑  BVFas

of Cooper pair to the radius LBVFas



↓

of single

Bivacuum fermion is equal to the ratio of potential (V) to kinetic (Tk) energy of relativistic
de Broglie wave, as it follows from known formula for relativistic de Broglie wave

 2 vph

V
Tk

vgr − 1 at GM conditions:

L


↑  BVFas
BVFas

LBVFas

↓



|mV
|mV

  mV
 − mV

− |
− |  V

Tk



 2

vph
vgr



− 1  2. 236

    6.22



vph
vgr

c2
v2



 1



where:
From (6.22) we may see, that the internal rotational potential and kinetic energy of
asymmetric Bivacuum fermions are equal, correspondingly, to the sum and difference of
the absolute values of energies of torus and antitorus:

  1. 618

35

and

  1
Tk
2

|mV

 − mV

− |c2  1
2

mV

v2

    6.23

V  1
2

|mV

  mV

− |c2

This result is a good evidence in proof for our expression for the actual energy of torus

(V sub-elementary particle, as a sum of its internal potential and kinetic energies:
  1
2

−c2  1
2

c2  V  Tk

  mV

  mV

 − mV

−c2

mV

mV

EV

The complementary negative energy of antitorus (V− can be expressed in similar way

as:

EV

−  −mV

−c2  V  Tk

−  − 1
2

mV

  mV

−c2  1
2

mV

− − mV

c2

The total energy of asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles, including muons or tauons, is equal

to sum of EV

 and EV

− :

Etot  EV

  EV

−  |mV

 − mV

− |c2  mV

v2

In the absence of external motion of Bivacuum dipoles, when v  0, their resulting

total energy is zero: Etot  0 and symmetry shift of tori and antitori is absent:
mV

 c2 − mV

−c2.

7. Fusion of triplets of elementary fermions from muons and tauons

The next stage of elementary fermions (electrons, protons and neutrons) formation is a
fusion of triplets  F↑
from the above described Cooper pairs of pairs
of muons, tauons and their antiparticles of opposite spin and charge BVF  BVF− ,
with unpaired muon or tauon.

  F↓

−  F↕

 e,p,n



The corresponding reaction of fusion, following by origination of triplets of elementary

fermions and antifermions: electronpositron, protonsantiproton, neutronantineutron,
can be presented as a reaction of two Cooper pairs with one Cooper pair of Bivacuum
fermions with properties of muons and tauons:

2BVF  BVF− ,

  BVF  BVF− ,

 

〈F↓

  F↑

−  F↓

e−,p,n  〈F↓

  F↑

−  F↑

−e,p−,n

The fusion of elementary fermions and antifermions from sub-elementary ones can be

accompanied by huge energy release, determined by the value of mass defect.
Corresponding kinetic energy (high temperature) push the elementary particles and
antiparticles away from each other, preventing their annihilation just after origination. So,
the equilibrium 7.1 - 7.1a is strongly shifted to the right at Golden Mean conditions.

    6.24

    6.25

    6.26

    7.1

    7.1a

Just the unpaired sub-elementary fermions: F↓

 or F↑

− determines the mass, spin and

charge of the whole triplet, as elementary particle, as far as the properties of paired
sub-elementary fermions compensate each other.

Both of stages of elementary particles origination:
the 1st - symmetry shift of rotating Bivacuum fermions of  and  generation, turning

them to muons and tauons and

the 2nd - fusion of the muons and tauons and their antiparticles to the triplets of the

electrons, protons and neutrons, occur at Golden mean (GM) condition.

This condition is defined as a ratio of tangential velocity of Cooper pairs rotation

36

around common axis to light velocity, equal to GM: (v/c)2  0. 618  .

The triplets (elementary particles)  F↑

  F↓

−x,y  F↕

 e,p are stabilized by three

factors:

a) the resonance exchange interaction with Bivacuum virtual pressure waves

 e,p, and sub-elementary fermions pulsing with Compton angular frequency:

(VPWq1
q1

e,p  mq1

e,p c2/;

b) the Coulomb and magnetic attraction between sub-elementary fermions of the

opposite electric and magnetic charges;

c) the gluons (cumulative virtual clouds CVC and CVC− in our terminology)

exchange between unpaired sub-elementary fermion of the electron or proton F↕
of the paired of the same charge, but opposite spin and opposite phase of C → W and
W → C pulsation.

  and one

So, the electrons and positrons also have the triplet structure, as the protons and
neutrons, in our approach. The proposed model of the electrons, as the triplets can be
verified experimentally, using 3-beam collider of muons and antimuons. The simultaneous
scattering of 2 muons and 1 antimuon at the same space point with Golden mean velocity:
v   c  0. 786c should be followed by the electrons origination and energy outburst.
The colliding of two antimuons and one muon should be accompanied by the positron
fusion and micro-explosion.

Similar experiment should be managed with tauon - antitauon collider, following by the

protons and neutrons origination.

The model of the triplet of truncated cones (asymmetric sub-elementary fermions) of

the electron is presented at Figure below.

Figure 5. Model of the electron or positron, as a triplets  F↑
oscillating between two spin state. These elementary particles are the result of fusion of the
unpaired Bivacuum antifermion (muon) or antifermion (antimuon) with Cooper pair
BVF

, at Golden mean condition.

↑  BVF∓

−x,y  F↕


  F↓

↓ GM

e,p

z

Similar model, as for electron, is valid for proton and neutron. For explanation of
neutral charge of neutron we suppose, that the neutron is a complex of proton with virtual
electron with zero spin and negative charge. This complex is stable in stable atoms but is

unstable in free neutrons

37

The tangential velocity of rotating unpaired sub-elementary fermion F↓

− in triplet

around the same axis, as each of paired, is also the same v/c2    0. 618. This
provides the origination of similar rest mass m0 and charge |e |, as has each of the paired
−e,p after fusion to triplet  F↑
sub-elementary fermions F↑
−e,p totally compensate each other and the mass, charge
The properties of paired F↑
and spin of elementary particle (triplet) is determined only by the unpaired sub-elementary
fermion F↕
7.1 The energy of fusion of the elementary fermions, like electrons and protons and their
antiparticles from muons and tauons

  F↓
 and F↓

−x,y  F↕

  F↓

 e,p .

 e,p .

It follows from our approach, that the regular electrons and positrons are the result of

fusion of triplets from odd number of muons and antimuons in relation 2:1 and 1:2,
correspondingly. The protons and antiprotons are resulted from fusion of the same number
tauons and antitauons. in the same proportion. A single muons and tauons, as asymmetric
Bivacuum fermions, are existing also, however, they have very short life-time. The
experimental values of life-times of unstable muons and tauons with properties of
↕
Bivacuum fermions at Golden Mean (GM) conditions BVFas
2. 19  10−6s and 3. 4  10−13s, respectively. The stability of monomeric muons and tauons,
strongly increases, as a result of their fusion to triplets of the electrons, protons and
neutrons, since this process is accompanied by huge energy release, determined by their
mass decreasing (mass defect).

, are very small:

GM

,

Different superpositions of three sub-elementary fermions (former tauons) after fusion

to triplets, like different combinations of three interlacing Borromean rings (symbol,
popular in Medieval Italy) and their different dynamics, can be responsible for different
properties of the protons and neutrons.

The mass of tauon and antitauons. is: m  17823 MeV. For the other hand, the

mass of proton and neutron are: mp  938, 2803 MeV and mn  939,573 (3) MeV,
correspondingly. They are about two times less, than the mass of tauon or antitauon, equal,
in accordance to our model, to mass of one of the quark or antiquark after fusion to
triplets. This mass/energy difference between the tauon and one of quark, i.e. unpaired one,
is close to the energy of neutral massless gluons (exchange bosons), stabilizing the triplets
of protons and neutrons.

In the case of neutrons this difference is a bit less, providing, however, much shorter
life-time of isolated neutrons (918 sec.), than that of protons (1031 years). We suppose that
this huge difference in the life-span is determined by different dynamic structure of these
two triplets, providing the positive charge of proton and neutrality of the neutron.

One of possible explanation of neutrality, is the conjecture, that neutron is a metastable
complex of proton and virtual electron, which turns to real electron as a result of  −decay:

n → p  e−

  e

    7.2

where  e is the electron antineutrino.
The neutrino, in our approach can be a pair of Bivacuum bosons, rotating around
common axes clockwise or counterclockwise, depending on direction of propagation. The
energy of such neutrino is determined by velocity of rotation.

In contrast to standard model in our approach the charge of quark (sub-elementary

fermion in term of our approach) is supposed to be the integer number (e, not the
fractional one.

The additional mass defect of the paired tauons should be twice the same as one of the

38

unpaired. The total big difference between the mass of 3 independent sub-elementary
particles (tauons) and the mass of triplets (protons and neutrons), determines the sum of the
gluons energy and the excessive kinetic energy - thermal energy release, as a result of these
elementary particles fusion.

The mass of the regular electron is: me  0, 5110031 MeV and the mass of  −
electron (muon) is: m  105, 65952 MeV. The relative difference in these masses,
about 200, is much higher that for protons and tauons. This provides very strong stability of
the electron as a triplet. This is a reason, why it is generally accepted, that the electron is a
real elementary particle.

Like in the case of protons, the fusion of the electrons and positrons from muons and
antimuons should be accompanied by the release of huge amount of kinetic thermal energy.
Part of the fusion energy is used for electronic − gluons origination, similar to hadronic
gluons in protons and neutrons, is responsible for strong exchange interaction between
quarks of triplets.

The electronic gluons (e − gluons are responsible for the yet unknown electronic

strong interaction.

7.2 Correlation between our model of hadrons and
conventional quark model of protons and neutrons in Standard Model

We suppose that the proton (Z  1; S  1/2 is constructed by the same principle as

the electron (Fig.5). It is a result of fusion of pair of sub-elementary fermion and
p
S0
antifermion of  −generation F↑

and one unpaired sub-elementary fermion

−  F↓


F↕

, accompanied by huge energy release, corresponding to mass defect:
ΔE ~ m − mp c2. These three components of proton correspond to three quarks:


S1/2


F↕

−
~ q and antiquarks F↕

~ q−.
The difference with standard quark model is that we do not need to use the notion of

S1/2

S1/2

p

p

fractional charge in our model of proton with spin S  1/2:

−  F↓

p ≡  F↑

S0
or : p ~ q− qS0

x,y  F↑
 S1/2

x,y  q S1/2

z

z

    7.3

    7.3a

x,y

−  F↓

 compensate each other. The resulting properties of protons (p) are determined

The charges, spins and mass/energy of sub-elementary particles and antiparticles in pairs
F↑
by unpaired/uncompensated sub-elementary particle F↑
generation, including the recoil effects, responsible for charge effect of proton. The mutual
recoil and charge compensation effects of two paired sub-elementary fermions is possible,
if they are oriented opposite to each other and are pulsing in 2-dimensional plane (x,y) in
the the same phase.

  of heavy  −electrons

The absence of charge in the neutron (Z  0; S  1/2 can be explained in two ways:
1) as a result of complex of proton with oppositely charged sub-elementary fermion of e

- generation:

−  F↓

n ≡  F↑

S0
or : n ~ q  q− S0

  F↑

 F↓
e

−e S1/2

 

0
q↑
S1/2
   F↕
  ↑

−e 

or : n ~   − S0
e

0
where the neutral quark q↑

S1/2

is introduced, as a metastable complex of positive

    7.4

    7.4a

    7.4b

39


sub-elementary  −fermion F↕
sub-elementary fermion of opposite charge F↕

−e:

 with negative electron’s sub-elementary fermion F↑

− e

0
q↑

e

S1/2



  F↕
q↑

−e

    7.5

This means that the positive charge of unpaired heavy sub-elementary particle F↑
−e. In
 is not compensated (totally) by spin of F↓

neutron (n) is compensated by the charge of the light sub-elementary fermion F↓
−e
contrast to charge, the spin of unpaired F↑
in neutrons, because of strong mass and angular momentum difference in conditions of the
F↓

−e confinement.
The 2nd possible explanation of zero charge of the neutron is such relative 3D

 in

configuration of sub-elementary fermions, which provides the recoilless C  W pulsation
of all three sub-elementary fermions, like in Mössbauer effect (see section 8.10).

x

〈F↑

 

 F↓

− 

y

W  F↑

z

− C

n  〈F↑

 

x

 F↓

− 

y

C  F↑

z

− W

n

    7.5a

In this configuration all three sub-elementary fermions in [C] phase are oriented normal to
each other and the recoil and charge effects, accompanied C  W pulsation of all three
sub-elementary fermion totally compensate each other.

Different superpositions of three sub-elementary fermions, like different combinations

of three interlacing Borromean rings (symbol, popular in Medieval Italy) can be
responsible for different properties of the electrons, protons and neutrons.

The mass of - electron, equal to that of -positron is: m  17823 MeV, the mass of

the regular electron is: me  0, 5110031 MeV and the mass of  − electron is:
m  105, 65952 MeV.

For the other hand, the mass of proton and neutron are correspondingly:

mp  938, 2803 MeV and mn  939,573 (3) MeV. They are about two times less, than
the mass of - electron, equal, in accordance to our model, to mass of its unpaired
sub-elementary fermion F↑
gluons (exchange bosons), stabilizing the triplets of protons and neutrons. In the case of
−e, providing,
neutrons this difference is a bit less (taking into account the mass of F↕
however, much shorter life-time of isolated neutrons (918 sec.), than that of protons (1031
years).

. This difference characterize the energy of neutral massless

In accordance to our hadrons models, each of three quarks (sub-elementary fermions of

 − generation) in protons and neutrons can exist in 3 states (red, green and blue), but not
simultaneously:

1. The red state of quark/antiquark means that it is in corpuscular [C] phase;
2. The green state of quark/antiquark means that it is in wave [W] phase;
3. The blue state means that quark/antiquark F↕
The 8 different combinations of the above defined states of 3 quarks of protons and
neutrons correspond to 8 gluons colors, stabilizing the these hadrons. The triplets of quarks
are stabilized by the emission  absorption of cumulative virtual clouds (CVC in the
process of quarks C  W pulsation.

 is in the transition [C][W] state.

The known experimental values of life-times of  and  electrons, corresponding in our
↕
model, to monomeric asymmetric sub-elementary fermions BVFas
, are equal only to
2, 19  10−6s and 3, 4  10−13s, respectively. We assume here, that stability of monomeric
sub-elementary particles/antiparticles of e,  and  generations, strongly increases, as a
result of their fusion in triplets, possible at Golden mean conditions.

,

The well known example of weak interaction, like  − decay of the neutron to proton,

electron and e −antineutrino:

40

n → p  e−   e

or :

0
q  q −   q↑

e

S1/2

→ q  q −   q   e−   e

is in accordance with our model of elementary particles and theory of neutrino (section

8.4).

The sub-elementary fermion of  − generation in composition of proton or neutron can

be considered, as a quark and the sub-elementary antifermion, as antiquark:


F↕

~ q

and

−
F↕

~ q −

In the process of  −decay of neutron the unpaired negative sub-elementary fermion
−e in (5.11) forms a complex - triplet (electron) with complementary virtual Cooper pair
−  F↓

from the vicinal to neutron polarized Bivacuum:

e

F↕
F↑

S0

F↕

−e  F↑

−  F↓

e → e−

S0

If we accept the explanation of zero charge of neutron, as a result of total compensation

of recoil dynamics in the process of correlated C  W pulsation of three of its
sub-elementary fermions, then  −decay can be considered as conversion of such specific
configuration of neutron (5.11a) to another configuration, pertinent for proton:

〈F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

− n → p  e−   e

    7.6

    7.6a

    7.7

    7.8

    7.8a

where the configuration of proton is described by (7.3). This conversion is accompanied

e −  and its transition to the real pair [electron 

by excitation of vicinal virtual electron
antineutrino] e−   e.

The energy of 8 gluons, corresponding to different superposition of

[CVC  CVC−S0,1, emitted and absorbed with in-phase C  W pulsation of pair
[quark  antiquark] in triplets (5.9 - 5.9b):

F↑

  F↓

−S0,1


 q

q −S0,1

    7.9

is about 50% of energy/mass of quarks and antiquarks ( sub-elementary fermions and
antifermions).

These 8 gluons, responsible for strong interaction, can be presented as a following
combinations of transitions states of  − sub-elementary fermions (quarks q2 and q3) and
antifermion (antiquark q 1, corresponding to two spin states of proton (S  1/2  of
unpaired quark.

For its spin state: Sq3  1/2  we have following 4 transition combinations of triplets

transition states, corresponding to four types of gluons:

1

2

3

4

S1/2

C → Wq 1
W → Cq 1
C → Wq 1
W → Cq 1

S1/2  C → Wq2
S1/2  W → Cq2
S1/2  C → Wq2
S1/2  W → Cq2

S−1/2  C → Wq3
S−1/2  C → Wq3
S−1/2  W → Cq3
S−1/2  W → Cq3

S1/2

S1/2

S1/2

    7.10

    7.10a

    7.10b

    7.10c

and for the opposite spin state of unpaired quark: Sq3  −1/2  we have also 4 transition

states combinations, representing another four types of gluons:

41

5

6

7

8

C → Wq 1
W → Cq 1
C → Wq 1
W → Cq 1

S1/2  C → Wq2
S1/2  W → Cq2
S1/2  C → Wq2
S1/2  W → Cq2

S−1/2  C → Wq3
S−1/2  C → Wq3
S−1/2  W → Cq3
S−1/2  W → Cq3

S−1/2

S−1/2

S−1/2

S−1/2

    7.11

    7.11a

    7.11b

    7.11c

One of our versions of elementary particle fusion have some similarity with
thermonuclear fusion and can be as follows. The rest mass of isolated sub-elementary
fermion/antifermion before fusion of the electron or proton, is equal to the rest mass of
unstable muon or tauon, correspondingly. The 200 times decrease of muons mass is a result
of mass defect, equal to the binding energy of triplets: electrons or positrons. It is provided
by origination of electronic e-gluons and release of the huge amount of excessive kinetic
(thermal) energy, for example in form of high energy photons or e-neutrino beams.

In protons, as a result of fusion of three  −electrons/positrons, the contribution of
hadron h-gluon energy to mass defect is only about 50% of their mass. However, the
absolute hadron fusion energy yield is higher, than that of the electrons and positrons.

Our hypothesis of stable electron/positron and hadron fusion from short-living  and 

- electrons, as a precursor of electronic and hadronic quarks, correspondingly, can be
verified using special collider.

In accordance to our Unified Theory, there are two different mechanisms of

stabilization of the electron and proton structures in form of triplets of sub-elementary
fermions/antifermions of the reduced  and  generations, correspondingly, preventing
them from exploding under the action of self-charge:

1. Each of sub-elementary fermion/antifermion, representing asymmetric pair of torus

(V and antitorus (V−, as a charge, magnetic and mass dipole, is stabilized by the
Coulomb, magnetic and gravitational attraction between torus and antitorus;

2. The stability of triplet, as a whole, is provided by the exchange of Cumulative Virtual

Clouds (CVC and CVC− between three sub-elementary fermions/antifermions in the
process of their C  W pulsation. In the case of proton and neutron, the 8 transition
states corresponds to 8 h-gluons of hadrons, responsible for strong interaction. In the case
of the electron or positron, the stabilization of triplets is realized by 8 lighter e-gluons. The
e,p with unpaired sub-elementary
process of internal energy exchange of pairs F↑
fermion in triplets of hadrons is accompanied also by the energy exchange with external
Bivacuum medium. It is resulted in modulation of positive and negative virtual pressure
waves [VPW VPW− of Bivacuum, generating the Virtual Replica Multiplication of
nucleons (see chapter 13). The feedback reaction between Bivacuum and elementary
particles is also existing.

−  F↓

S0,1

7.3 Possible structure of mesons, W and Z0 bosons of electroweak interaction

By definition of Standard Model, the mesons are a family of subatomic particles (about

140) that participate in strong interactions and have masses intermediate between leptons
and baryons. When the mass of such particles, formed by quarks like baryons, exceeds the
mass of baryons (proton, neutron, lambda and omega), they named bosonic hadrons. It is
generally assumed, that they are composed of a quark and an antiquark. They are bosons
with spin, equal to zero or 1 and possible charge: 0, 1 and -1.

In our approach (see 5.15) the pairs of sub-elementary fermions of  or  generations
−  F↓

F↑
[quark  antiquark] pair with bosonic integer spin. However these sub-elementary fermions

(see 5.6 - 5.9a), have a properties of mesons, as a neutral

,  q−qS0,1

S0,1

,

42

−  F↓
are not symmetric necessarily, like F↑
pairs - from one to four pairs: n q  q− S0,1,2,3,4 can provide the experimentally
revealed integer spins of mesons - from zero to four.

, of triplets. The coherent cluster of such

S0,1

We assume also that some of experimentally revealed charged mesons, like pions (,

standing for nucleons interaction, may represent the intermediate bosonic state of spin
exchange process between sub-elementary fermion and antifermion of muon generation
z1:
BVBS0

F↑

−  F↓



S0,1

 F↑

−  BVBS0

z1  F↓

 

If pion with mass (0.140 GeV/c2, is the intermediate state between muon and
antimuon, indeed, this explains the decay of pion and antipion on muon (antimuon) and
muonic neutrino (antineutrino):

BVBS0

z1 → 



   

The negatively charged kaon (K− and antikaon (K with mass (0.494 GeV/c2 about 5

times bigger than that of muon (0.106 GeV/c2, can represent a small cluster of the odd
number of Bivacuum bosons of  − generation, like:

2BVB BVB−   BVB z1

The neutral heavy B-zero meson (B0 with mass (5.279 GeV/c2 and eta-c meson
(2.980 GeV/c2 can be a clusters of even number of Bivacuum bosons of  − generation of
opposite symmetry shift, compensating the opposite charges of each other in pairs.

The interrelation between muon and the electron follows from two decay reactions of

muon and antimuon:

− → e−   e  
 → e  e   

In terms of our Unified theory (UT), the neutrino and antineutrino are stable carriers of
the excessive Bivacuum dipoles mass/energy symmetry shifts - positive (e, or negative
(  e, see section 8.4.

The existence of heavy charged (W, W− and neutral (Z0 force carriers bosons with

integer spin 0, 1, 2... and mass: 80. 4; 80. 4 and 91. 187 GeV/c2, correspondingly,
introduced in electroweak theory is confirmed experimentally. These bosons complex
structure differs strongly from that of photons. This author suggest, that the charged bosons
W, W− are the ’rings’ constructed from the odd number of asymmetric Bivacuum bosons
of  − generation of opposite symmetry shift and charge and the neutral bosons (Z0 from
the even number of paired Bivacuum bosons (BVB  BVB−as
charges of each other. These heavy bosons belongs to class of very unstable particles,
named resonances, as far their decay/disassembly is related to strong interaction. Their life
times   /Γ interrelated with width of resonance (Γ are very short ~210−25 s.

 , compensating the

The rotating around common axes BVB and BVB− forming virtual microtubules has a

positive and negative charge and mass symmetry shift, corresponding to Golden mean
condition (v2/c2)    0. 618. These dipoles interact side-by-side in the same pairs and by
head-to-tail principle when forming doubled microtubules from adjacent pairs:
 n  V↑↓ V− i  V↓↑ V−i S0,1,..

n BVB  BVB−S0,1,..





    7.12

    7.13

    7.14

    7.15

    7.15a

    7.16

43

We suppose, that these pairs polymerize in ring structures, different from that of photon
and providing the uncompensated mass of such rotating virtual rings, equal to mass of W
and Z0 bosons. The positive and negative charges in each pair BVB  BVB−S0,1,..
compensate each other and the resulting charge of the ’ring’ is equal to charge (e of one
excessive unpaired BVBS0,1,..


or (BVB−S0,1,..

.





It is possible to evaluate the velocity of bosonic ’ring’ rotation, taking its mass, equal

to: MW  80. 4 GeV/c2 and the ring radius, equal to Compton radius of neutron:
Ln  /mnc, the region of electroweak interaction action. Then using the obtained earlier
formula (3.14) for de Broglie radius of Bivacuum dipoles circulation, we get the condition
W
for bosonic ’ring’ (LVir

:

W
LVir



c
MWv2 


mnc  Ln

where the mass of neutron mn  0. 940 GeV/c2.
From this formula we may get the velocity of ’ring’ rotation:

v  c 

1/2

mn
MW

 c  0. 1081

    7.17

    7.18

The corresponding velocity for Z0 boson is very close to that. We may see, that rotation
of these ring - shape bosons is nonrelativistic. However, it becomes equal to light velocity,
at the assumption, that radius of heavy bosons is determined by their Compton radius.

Otherwise, the heavy bosons and other resonances can be considered as the

intermediate - gluonic state, when the asymmetric Bivacuum boson and antiboson with zero
charge, but opposite polarization, exchange their cumulative virtual clouds, being
simultaneously in the wave [W] phase. In this case the equality (7.16) turns to:

n BVB  BVB−S0,1,..



C→W
 n CVC  CVC−S0,1,..



    7.19

The proposed approach to analysis of hadrons and mesons intrinsic features can be
developed further to explain the general roots of all know elementary particles, taking into
account their duality of sub-elementary fermions of all three generation and combination of
their different states. It looks that it is possible to do without strong contradictions with
Standard model. However our theory explains the origination of mass of elementary
particles without Higgs field and corresponding bosons, not detected experimentally.

7.5 New Scenario of the Big Bang

Our approach leads to new scenario of Big Bang, taking into account the experimental
data of acceleration of the Universe expansion. It can be anticipated, that after hundred of
billions years of such expansion, dying of stars and black holes evaporation, the mass and
energy density of the Universe will tend to zero and slightly asymmetric Bivacuum tends to
primordial, symmetric one.

The big collective symmetry fluctuations of vast number of Bivacuum dipoles toward
the positive and negative energy simultaneously in domains of virtual Bose condensation
without violation of energy conservation may happen. The spontaneous fusion of
elementary fermions - the triplets from asymmetric Bivacuum sub-elementary particles:
tauons, muons and their antiparticles, can be considered as a kind of coherent chain
reaction, accompanied by huge energy release.

Just this energy of the avalanche chain reaction of elementary fermions fusion from
sub-elementary ones, provided by of enormous mass defect, could be a driving energy of
Big Bang (Kaivarainen, 2006: http://arxiv.org/ftp/physics/papers/0207/0207027.pdf). The

44

still-remaining minor asymmetry of Bivacuum before Big Fluctuation (the trace of the dyed
Universe) may be responsible for small difference between probability of matter and
antimatter origination, providing the relict radiation after annihilation.

So we may conclude, that the huge outburst of energy and the Big Bang, following the

expansion of the Universe, is a result of correlated and opposite Bivacuum dipoles
symmetry fluctuation, following by elementary particles fusion from sub-elementary ones.

8. The dynamic mechanism of Corpuscle - Wave duality of elementary particles

The dynamic model of counterphase Corpuscle  Wave pulsation of paired and
unpaired sub-elementary fermions in composition of triplets (elementary fermions, like
electrons and protons), following from our approach, is presented below.

Figure. 6. Dynamic model of [C  W pulsation of triplets of sub-elementary
fermions/antifermions of the electrons or protons  F↑
the paired sub-elementary fermions F↑
sub-elementary fermion/antifermion F↕
− F↓
properties of triplet. The pair F↑
Bivacuum virtual pressure waves.

− F↓
 e,p . The unpaired F↕
e,p is responsible for interaction of triplet with

e,p is counterphase to pulsation of unpaired

 e,p determines the

  F↓

 e,p . The pulsation of

−  F↕

The rotation of triplets  F↑

 e,p around main axis with Golden mean
tangential velocity (vrot   c, provides the rest mass and charge origination of triplet.

  F↓

−  F↕

The propagation of triplets in space with translational velocity (vtr

ext ≡ v) determines its
external kinetic energy, momentum and the empirical de Broglie wave length. The absolute
values of energies, spins and charges of all three sub-elementary fermions of triplets are
interdependent and equal to each other. However the paired sub-elementary fermions
− compensate the properties of each other totally. They are responsible for
F↑
interaction of triplets with Bivacuum virtual pressure waves.

  F↓

Etot

 − mV

The total energy of each sub-elementary fermion or antifermion in the triplet:
− |resc2 can be presented as a sum of two contributions:
res  |mV
a) the internal rotational rest mass energy: m0c2  |mV
− |rot
b) the external doubled translational kinetic energy of the triplet:

 c2  m00

 − mV

2L0

in and

2 rot

45

mV

vtr

2  h2
 B
mV

2  |mV

 − mV

− |tr

extc2:

Etot

res  Erot
ext
in  Etr
res
or : Etot

 |mV

 − mV

or : Etot

res  hCW

res

− |resc2  mV
in

 m00

2L0

2 rot

vres

2  m0c2  mV

2
vext



h2
2
B
mV

where: L0  /m0c is the Compton radius of sub-elementary fermion;

B  h/mV
its external translational velocity and momentum.

ext  v/B is the empirical de Broglie wave length of the triplet, dependent on

vtr

The right parts of 8. 1 − 8. 1b contain also small contributions of electric, magnetic
and gravitational energies, which will be considered in chapter 17. They are not influence
the dynamic mechanism of duality, proposed in this book.

The resulting velocity squared (vres

2  of sub-elementary fermions in composition of

elementary fermion is related to external translational velocity squared vext

2 as:

The resulting energy of sub-elementary fermions in triplets Etot

res can be expressed via

2  c2  vext
2
vres

frequency of quantum beats:
 |mV

 − mV

res
CW

states, as a sum of angular frequency of rotation of triplet (0rot
origination, and empirical de Broglie wave frequency (B:

− |resc2/h between their actual (torus) and complementary (antitorus)
in , providing the rest mass

res
hCW

 0 rot

in  hB
ext

The internal rotational energy formula of elementary fermions, responsible for the rest

mass and charge origination has few shapes:

Erot

in  0 rot

in  m00

2L0

in

2 rot

 m0c2

The internal Golden mean angular frequency of rotation of sub-elementary fermions in

triplets is equal to Compton frequency of beats between their torus and antitorus:

0 rot

in 

− |c2

|mV

 − mV


e,p



in

m0c2 rot


The external translational energy of de Broglie wave can be introduced via its
ext, and contribution to resulting truncated cone asymmetry:

−ancc2  2Tk, determined by the external translational kinetic energy of the

frequency (B
 − mV
mV
triplet:

Etr

ext  Tk  V  hB

ext  |mV

 − mV

− |tr

extc2  mV

v2

    8.1

    8.1a

    8.1b

    8.2

    8.3

    8.4

    8.5

    8.6

At the harmonic oscillator or standing wave condition the averaged kinetic and potential

energies are equal: Tk  V  1

2 mV

v2.

It follows from our approach, that the fundamental phenomenon of corpuscle − wave

duality is a result of the modulation of the internal C  Win pulsation frequency 0
sub-elementary fermions by the frequency of the external empirical de Broglie wave of
triplet: B

ext :

in  of

46

ext 
B

v2
mV
h



h
2
B
mV

Beside the frequency B

ext and length B  h/mV

v the de Broglie wave should be

characterized by the amplitude (AB.

We introduce amplitude AB, equal to that of Cumulative virtual cloud (CVC, from

eq. 8.6 as:

AB 

h
 − mV

|mV

extc

− |tr



h
v
mV

c
v  B

c
v

    8.7

    8.7a

So, the amplitude of de Broglie wave in form of cumulative virtual cloud (CVC is

equal to its length only at v  c, i.e. for the photon.

For the fermions: v  c and AB  B. Consequently, the shape of CVC can be

approximated by the ellipsoid of rotation with axis AB and B. The amplitude AB
characterize separation between positive and negative charges of CVC, as a virtual dipole.
The expression (8.7a) coincides with dimension of the ’inerton cloud’ introduced by

Krasnoholovets (2008).

We may see that our formula for total energy of sub-elementary particle (8.1a and 8.1b)
differs strongly from the conventional formula for energy of relativistic particle, following
from Lorenz formula:

mV

  m 

m0
1 − v/c2

E  mc

2

 mV

c2   m0

2c4  m2v2c2

    8.8

    8.9

The latter expression is valid for the energy of actual (inertial) torus of sub-elementary

particle only.

8.1 The stages of Corpuscle → Wave transition of sub-elementary fermions in
composition of triplets (elementary fermions)

The 1st stage is a reversible dissociation of [C] phase of sub-elementary fermion F↕

 C

to:

- the Cumulative virtual cloud CVC0

S1/2 of subquantum particles with energy, spin and

charge, determined by the rest mass, rest charge and half - integer spin S  1/2 of
sub-elementary fermions with asymmetry, determined by Golden mean, and to:

- the remnant ’anchor’ Bivacuum boson BVBan

  which [C] phase can be considered,

as the additional truncated cone with asymmetry determined by tangential velocity and
translational energy of the triplet:

I:

F↕

 C

Recoil/Antirecoil

 CVC0

S1/2  BVBan


e,p

W

    8.10

The 2nd stage of C → W transition is a reversible dissociation of the anchor

 C

e,p  V  V−an

Bivacuum boson BVBan
corresponding anchor cumulative virtual cloud CVCS0
the empirical de Broglie wave of elementary fermion (triplet), carrying the energy (virtual
mass), charge and spin of BVBan

e,p to symmetric Bivacuum boson BVB and to

↕ , with linear dimension of

 BVFan

e,p

 C

47

II : BVBan

 C

e,p 

Recoil/Antirecoil

 BVB  CVCan

S0BVBan

e,p
 W

    8.11

This second stage of reaction of transition of [C] phase to [W] phase determines the
empirical parameters of de Broglie wave of elementary particle. The extra-asymmetry of
the truncated cone, is provided by the external translational velocity of the triplets -
elementary particles.

The empirical external de Broglie frequency is equal to frequency of the anchor
2 /h  h/mV

B. Relativistic contribution to properties
Bivacuum fermion beats (ext  mV
of particle is determined by its translational velocity (vtr, empirical de Broglie wave length
B  h/mV

vtr and amplitude (8.7a): AB  Bc/v.

vtr

The shape of CVCBVFan

↕ can be approximated by the ellipsoid with main axis AB,

normal to B and direction of particle propagation.

In regular nonrelativistic conditions, when the velocity of particle: v  c, the

frequency of the 1st stage is much higher than that of 2nd stage. However, sometime both
quantum transitions are in-phase, like at Fig.7d. The spatial jump to another corpuscular
phase Fig.7a, occur just in this general Wave state, when both cumulative virtual clouds are
superimposed:

CVC0

S1/2  CVCan
S0

or :

W0  Wan

Four intermediate configurations of sub-elementary fermion in the process of its
Corpuscle - Wave pulsation are presented below. The image (a) of totally Corpuscular
phase [C0  [Can is the superposition of two truncated cones of asymmetric Bivacuum
dipoles. The higher truncated cone is responsible for the rest mass (m0 and charge (e0
origination, determined by rotation of pairs of sub-elementary fermions around common
axes. The lower one is the ’anchor’ Bivacuum bosons [Can with asymmetry, determined by
translational kinetic energy of particle.

The image (d) of totally Wave phase [W0] [Wan of sub-elementary fermion is a

superposition of two cylinders (symmetric Bivacuum bosons BVB)  two cones
(cumulative virtual cloud CVC. For [W0] phase the cone is on the top of cylinder and for
[Wan on the bottom of down cylinder.

48

Figure 7. Possible stages of Corpuscle - Wave pulsation: (a) - the configuration of
sub-elementary fermion in pure Corpuscular phase, presented as the superposition of
rotational contribution (upper), responsible for the rest mass and energy [C0 (upper
truncated cone) and translational contribution [Can - the ’anchor’ asymmetric Bivacuum
  (down truncated cone); (b) - the intermediate stage, when the rest mass
boson (BVBan
contribution transforms to the wave phase: [C0 → W0, however the anchor contribution
is still in corpuscular [Can phase; (c) - possible intermediate stage, when the rotational
contribution is in [C0 phase and translational contribution is in the wave Wan phase; (d) -
final stage of C → W transition, when both: rotational and translational contributions to
sub-elementary fermion are in the wave phase W0  Wan.

The superposition of the wave phases [W0 and [Wan have the images of two cylinders
 with corresponding cones on the top and

 and BVBan
- symmetric Bivacuum bosons BVB0
bottom . The cones from dots (sub-quantum particles) mean cumulative virtual clouds
CVC0
the process of [Can → W0 transition. The formed virtual cloud CVC0
fermions spin S  1/2 and the latter CVCan

S1/2, emitted in the process of [C0 → W0 transition and and CVCan

S0 - is a carrier of bosonic zero spin S  0.

S0, emitted in
S1/2 is a carrier of

9. Dynamic model of the photon

The photon can be a result of fusion/annihilation of pair of triplets: electron  positron:

 F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

− e,p   F↑

  F↓

−  F↓

 e,p 

BVF↑  BVF↓S0 F↕
FW

−  F↕
  FC

S1  BVF↑  BVF↓S0
− S1
photon

The main consequence of the electron  positron fusion is origination of pair of
asymmetric sub-elementary fermions and antifermion of the same spin and opposite
charges, oscillating counterphase between Corpuscle and Wave state:

FW

  FC

− S1  FC

  FW

− S1

This process is accompanied also by conversion of two pairs of sub-elementary

particles antiparticles 2F↑
2BVF↑  BVF↓S0, as a regular element of Bivacuum, not participating directly in the
photon structure.

− to Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions

  F↓

    9.1

    9.1a

    9.1b

    9.2

Two tori and two antitori of pair of the photon F↕

−  F↕

S1

, conjugated by

"tail-to-tail" or "head-to-tail" principle, like at Fig.8, rotate in the same direction (clockwise
or counterclockwise). This provide the additivity of their half-integer spins and the integer
value of spin of photon: S   1
2   1. The average (resulting) charge of
the photon as a symmetric dipole is zero.

2    1

Our general formula for energy of sub-elementary fermions, as a parts of elementary

fermions, like electron, takes into account both - the rotational and translational
contributions:

Etot  mV

 − mV

−c2  Vtot  Tk  m00

in

2L0

2 rot



h2
2
B
mV

    9.3

where total potential and kinetic energy of sub-elementary fermion are:

49

    9.4

    9.4a

    9.5

    9.6

    9.6a

    9.7

Vtot  m00L0in  1
2

mV

2  m00L0in  1
2

mV

 − mV

−trc2

Tk  1
2

mV

B

2 B

2 

mV

vB

2  1
2

mV

 − mV

−trc2

2 B
B
2  1
2

h2
B
2mV

In the case of bosons, like photon, the rest mass contribution in energy is zero:

in

2L0

2 rot

 0 as a consequence of the absence of pairs rotation around common axis

m00
(the tangential velocity, angular frequency 0 and the rest mass m0 are zero). Such rotation
is possible only for Cooper pairs of asymmetric Bivacuum fermion and antifermion,
conjugated side-by-side, but not ’tail-to-tail’, like in photon (see Fig.8).

At such conditions, the external, translational only, velocity of the photon
  FC

− S1 is equal to the light velocity v  c. From 9.4 and 9.4a we can see that for

FW
the photon the kinetic and potential energy are equal to each other, like in the case of
harmonic oscillator or standing wave:

Vtot  Tk  1
2

mV

vB

2  1
2

mV

 − mV

−trc2

These conditions turn the energy of the photon to couple of simple shapes,

corresponding to Corpuscular and Wave phases of photon:

Eph C  Vtot  Tk  mV
Eph W  hph  hc
ph

 − |mV

− |trc2  mphc2

The effective mass/energy of photon is

 − |mV

− |tr  hph/c2  h
cph

mph  mV
is the frequency of photon, equal to frequency of beats between tori and antitori of
sub-elementary fermions, forming photon (Figure 8).

, where: ph c/ph is the photon wave length; ph

Since the phase (vph and group v velocities of the photon are equal to light velocity
(v  c), the amplitude of the photon cumulative virtual cloud (CVC is equal to its wave
length:

Aph  ph

c
v  ph

Figure 8. Dynamic model of the photon Corpuscle  Wave pulsation in the process of

50

propagation in space, exciting transversal electric and magnetic Bivacuum perturbations.
Four tori and antitori of conjugated sub-elementary fermion and antifermion of the photon
rotate clockwise S   or counter clockwise S  − direction, normal to direction of
photon propagation in space.

There are two possibilities of C  W pulsation of the photon, accompanied by electric

and magnetic properties of photon realization:

1. Both sub-elementary fermions and antifermions are pulsing in-phase;
2. They are pulsing counterphase, exchanging the energy of cumulative virtual clouds

CVC and CVC− in the process of their propagation in space, like presented at Fig.8
above.

In 1st case, the wave [W] phase Eph W is a result of simultaneous quantum transitions

- beats between four asymmetric tori and antitori of pair of Bivacuum fermions in
Corpuscular phase F↕
cloud with energy 2|CVC − CVC− |, where |CVC − CVC− | is the energy of one
sub-elementary fermion.

, accompanied by emission of unified cumulative virtual


−  F↕

S1

In [C] phase the photon may display its electric properties, because the electric dipole


−  F↕
properties of F↕
Bivacuum dipoles pairs.

S1

induce corresponding symmetry shift in surrounding

In [W] phase of photon, the rotating Cumulative virtual cloud CVC of sub-elementary

fermions in [W] phase with uncompensated energy 2|CVC − CVC− | and uncompensated
charge, shift the equilibrium between surrounding Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
BVF↑  BVB  BVF↓ to the left or right, generating in such a way the magnetic field.
In 2nd case, the above processes occur alternatively, when the positive and negative

asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles oscillate between [C] and [W] states counterphase,
generating the electric and magnetic properties simultaneously. The stability of the photon
structure and the permanent total energy are the consequence of dynamic exchange
interaction of CVC and CVC− between asymmetric Bivacuum fermion and antifermion
in the process of the photon propagation in space.

The 2nd model means that the corpuscular and wave properties of photon display
themselves simultaneously and half of photon wave length behave, as the wave and other
half as the corpuscle (Fig.8).This dynamic model of photon is more probable, that the 1st

one.

The most common way of photon origination is not the [electron  positron]
annihilation, but the acceleration of charged fermions - triplets, accompanied by their
relativistic mass/energy increasing and generation if multiplicated secondary ’anchor sites’
in Bivacuum.

The velocity jump (acceleration) of the elementary charges, following by the photons

origination, occur at:

- the non-uniform acceleration of the electrons in the undulators or
- acceleration of the electrons in the process of quantum transitions in the atoms and

molecules from the excited state to the ground one.

9.1 Possible nature of neutrino and antineutrino

Following our approach to elementary particles structure, the neutrino i and
antineutrino   i of three lepton generation i  e, ,  can be considered, as a stable
neutral pair of asymmetric charged Bivacuum fermion BVF−
antifermionBVF
correspondingly. The energy and charge of BVBi≡ V ↑↓ V−, compensate that of

S−1/2 ≡ V ↓↓ V− and asymmetric Bivacuum antiboson or boson,

S1/2 ≡ V ↑↑ V− or

51

S1/2 in each neutrino or antineutrino. Both asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles pulse
BVF
counterphase between [C] and [W] phase, providing stability of neutrino due to exchange
interaction:

i ~

↑
BVF∓

 BVB

W

C

  i ~

↑
BVF∓

BVB C

W

i

i





↑
BVF∓

↑
BVF∓

C

C

 BVB

W

BVB W

i

i

    9.8

    9.8a

These two Bivacuum dipoles are conjugated with each other by "tail-to-tail" principle,
like in the case of the photon (Fig.8), providing the rest mass and charge very close to zero
in the absence of rotation.

The frequency of beats between asymmetric and symmetric states of pairs

S1/2 BVBi, equal to neutrino frequency, is determined by slight difference in

S1/2i and sub-elementary antiboson (BVBi

BVF∓
the energy of sub-elementary fermion (BVF∓
in pairs:

BVF∓
i  CW
,


S1/2

BVB
− CW

i



i

EBVF∓

S1/2

i
− EBVB



The mass/energy of each of three generation of neutrino can be estimated as

(Kaivarainen 2006b):

i 
m,


i
,

c2

 imV


e,,

 1


i 3
m0
2
MPl

 1. 618

i 3
m0
2
MPl

where the dimensionless gravitational fine structure constant i is different for each

lepton generation, introduced in chapter 15:

i 

2

i
m0
MPl

mV


e,,

 m0

e,,/ are the actual mass of the electrons or positrons of three

generation at Golden mean conditions, participating in weak interaction, following by
corresponding neutrino and antineutrino emission; MPl

2  c/G is a Planck mass.

Corresponding mass evaluation fit the currently existing ones in form of inequalities,
i.e. mass of the electron neutrino is less than 1  10−8 Ge/c2, mass of muon neutrino is less
than 0. 0002Ge/c2 and mass of the tau neutrino - less, than 0. 02Ge/c2. These vales
correspond well to description of neutrino properties at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/neutrino.

    9.9

    9.10

    9.11

Neutrino oscillation between different lepton flavor (electron, muon, or tau) follows
from experimental data. For example, the solution of the solar neutrino problem, as a major
discrepancy between measurements of the neutrinos flowing through the Earth and
theoretical models of the solar interior needs the neutrino oscillation. The probability of
measuring a particular flavor for a neutrino varies periodically as it propagates. In
accordance to our model of neutrino these interconversions can be a result of simultaneous
↑  BVBe from it ground state with minimum
reversible excitation of pair i ~BVF∓
energy of torus and antitorus to their certain excited states, corresponding to muon and tau
neutrinos BVF∓
generations can be a result of absorbtion or emission by one type of neutrino the high
frequency pair of standing Bivacuum virtual pressure waves (8.18a) of corresponding
generation VPW VPW−q1

,. Consequently, the neutrino oscillation between different

, . These neutrino oscillations:

↑  BVB



52

e    

do not violate the energy conservation due to compensation of positive and negative
Bivacuum energies.

10. The jump-way mechanism of the elementary particles propagation in space

The propagation of elementary particles, like triplets-fermions (electrons, protons, etc.):

 F↑

  F↓

−W  F↕

 C e,p

jump
→  F↑

  F↓

−C  F↕

 W e,p

or doublets of Bivacuum fermions - bosons (photons):

FW

  FC

− S1

jump
→ FC

  FW

− S1

can be considered as a jumping process between multiple secondary anchor sites. The most
probable length and frequency of jumps in Wave [W] phase of particles are determined by
the empirical de Broglie wave length and frequency of propagating particles. The
conversion of [W] phase of paired sub-elementary particles to Corpuscular [C] phase:
−C occurs on secondary anchor sites.
F↑

  F↓
The energy and charge conservation law demands the resulting energy of all secondary

−W → F↑

  F↓

anchor sites should be zero. It is possible, if we assume that all secondary anchor sites
SAS(F) or SAS(B) are composed from one or more pairs of asymmetric Bivacuum bosons
BVB or Bivacuum fermions BVF
other:

↑↓ with energy, spin and charge compensating each

N

SASB

∑ BVB  BVBn

N

SASF

∑ BVF

↑  BVF∓

↓ n

    9.12

    10.1

    10.2

    10.3

    10.3a

The stage I of elementary fermion, like the electron or proton, propagation - the
excitation of multiple secondary anchor sites in Bivacuum by Virtual Pressure Waves
(VPWm
sub-elementary fermion of the triplet is in Corpuscular [C] phase.

 , modulated by paired sub-elementary particle in W −phase, when the the unpaired

The absolute values of asymmetry and energy of all sub-elementary fermions (paired

and unpaired) are the same in triplets. These values are dependent on external kinetic
energy, momentum and velocity of the triplet.

The asymmetry of paired sub-elementary fermions of elementary particles in [C] phase

and the asymmetry and energy of Virtual Pressure Waves VPW VPW−e,p, radiated
by their [W] -phase are directly interrelated.

So, the asymmetry of pairs of Bivacuum dipoles: BVB  BVBn or

↓ n forming SAS and their spatial multiplication, can be induced by the

↑  BVF∓

BVF
basic Bivacuum virtual pressure waves VPW0
AB  Bc/v of asymmetric primary anchor site F↑
fermion (fig. 7).

, modulated by de Broglie wave amplitude
e,p of propagating elementary

  F↓

−anc

The most probable separation between the excited secondary anchor sites is determined

by the empirical de Broglie wave length of the particle (B  h/p, equal to Cumulative
Virtual Clouds CVC length, emitted by unpaired sub-elementary fermion.

The stage II of the fermion propagation represents its jumps to one of most probable

secondary anchor site, turning this site to primary one. At this stage of jump, the

53

unpaired/uncompensated sub-elementary fermions are in the external Wave [W] phase and
paired in [C] phase. Immediately after such ’anchoring’ of particle the
unpaired/uncompensated sub-elementary fermions turn to [C] phase and paired to [W]
phase. This is last stage of one cycle of ’jump’ and the next cycle starts. This jumping
mechanism provides the particles propagation with average velocity of particle, equal to it
group velocity.

The most probable direction of jumping coincides with particle’s momentum vector in

its [C] phase. However the new location of particle, as only one of many possible
multiplicated secondary anchor sites, is not rigidly predetermined and the ’jumps’ can be
considered as the stochastic process. The described mechanism of elementary particles
propagation in space can be named "the kangaroo effect".

The propagation of photon in Bivacuum also represent a ’jumping’ from one secondary
anchor site to another SAS, separated from each other by the photon wave length and with
frequency, equal to frequency of its Corpuscle  Wave pulsation. The modulation of basic
 of Bivacuum by asymmetric Virtual Pressure Waves
symmetric VPW0
VPW VPW−ph
phase FW
secondary anchor site: BVB  BVBn is followed by their Bivacuum dipoles in pairs
− S1.
opposite symmetry shift and turning these Bivacuum pairs to the photon FW
10.1 The possibility of appearance of particle in Corpuscular phase in any point of space

− S1. The absorption of modulated virtual pressure waves VPWm

as excited by one of sub-elementary fermions of the photon being in [W]

  FC

  FC

 by

The principle of superposition in quantum mechanics has the same formal expression as

the waves superposition in classical mechanics:

r, t  c1r, t1  c2r, t2 . . . . cnr, tn

    10.4

where: cn are arbitrary complex numbers; r, tn is wave function, describing different

and alternative/orthogonal n states of quantum system. In accordance to our approach,
these quantum states correspond to multiple secondary anchor sites of moving in space
particle. It will be shown later in this work, that the notion of multiple anchor site of
elementary particles coincide with notion of their Virtual Replica multiplication in space.
However, in contrast to waves superposition in classical systems, any state of quantum
system is not a result of ’mixing’ of other states, but always the alternative or orthogonal.
This means that only one state of many spatially separate is allowed for quantum system at
given time moment. It is so-called collapsing of the wave function, describing this system.
Just this collapsing accompanies the jumping of elementary particle between multiple
secondary anchor sites on the way of its propagation. As was mentioned already, the most
probable length of jump is equal to de Broglie wave length of elementary particle.

11. New interpretation of Shrödinger equation. General shape of wave function,
describing both the external and internal dynamics of elementary particle

The stationary Shrödinger equation can be easily derived from universal for

homogeneous medium wave equation:

∇2r, t − 1
v2

∂r, t
∂t2

 0

    11.1

where r, t is the wave amplitude (scalar), depending distance from source (r) and
time (t) in the process of its propagation with permanent velocity (v). One of possible form
of time and space dependent wave function:

54

r, t  C exp i

x
LB

−Bt

 C exp i x
LB

exp−iBt

In the case of harmonic dependence of the wave amplitude on time with angle

frequency , it can be presented as:

Putting 11.3 to 11.1 we get the following equation:

r, t  r exp−it

∇2m,er  k2m,er  0

where k is a wave number (k  /v  2/vT  2/  1/L.
The conversion of (11.4) to form describing corpuscle-wave duality can be done using

de Broglie relations:

k  p/  2/LB;
LB  /p
k2 p2/2  2/LB 2  1/B
2

in stationary conditions, when the total energy of de Broglie wave, equal to sum of its
external kinetic (Tk and potential (V energies, is time-independent, like in standing
waves, for example:

E  Tk  V 

 V  const

p2
2m
 2mE − V

2

or : p

The de Broglie wave number squared from 11.5a and 11.6a is

k2  2m/E − V

Combining 11.7 with 11.4, we get the stationary Shrödinger equation:

∇2r  2m/E − Vr  0

    11.2

    11.3

    11.4

    11.5

    11.5a

    11.6

    11.6a

    11.7

    11.8

It has solutions for continuous wave function, existing as eigenfunctions only at certain

discreet eigenvalues of energy (En). It was shown by Shrödinger, that spectra of these
energies of the electron in potential electric field (V) describes correctly the absorption
spectra of hydrogen atoms.

The time-dependent form of Shrödinger equation includes the time and space dependent

wave function, like (11.2):

r, t  r exp−iEt/  C exp i x
LB

exp−iBt

The corresponding equation can be presented as:

− 
i

∂r, t
∂t

 − 
2m

∇2  V r, t

    11.9

    11.10

The inertial mass in 11.10 in accordance to our Unified theory, is equal to the actual
.
mass of unpaired/uncompensated sub-elementary fermion of elementary particle: m  mV
The properties of stationary wave function r and time-dependent r, t should be

the same, i.e. they are continuous, single-valued and finitesmall. The product of wave
function with its complex conjugate function, characterize the density of probability of

55

particle location in this point of space at certain time moment:

r, t ∗r, t  |r, t|2

    11.11

In solutions of Shrödinger equation the certain eigenvalues of energy (En corresponds

to eigenfunctions (n, describing anchor sites (primary and secondary) of elementary
particles in their corpuscular [C] phase (see 10.4).

It follows from our theory of wave-corpuscle duality, that de Broglie wave length
(B  2LB, its amplitude AB  Bc/v and frequency (B, as a crucial parameters of
wave function (11.9), are determined by properties of the anchor Bivacuum fermions of
uncompensated sub-elementary fermions of the electron or proton or bosons, like photon.

The external de Broglie wave frequency (B

ext and wave number (kB of particle can be

expressed via internal (0

in, total (CW frequencies and corresponding energies as:

 1
ext
mV
B

or : kB  1
LB

−anc
 c


 − mV

ext c2 tr  CW

res

− 0


mV

mV

 − mV

−1/2

where: mV

  m0/R; mV

−  R m0; R  1 − v/c2 is relativistic factor decreasing

with external translational group velocity (v) increasing.

At v → c, the, the rest mass contribution tends to zero, mV

  mV

− and B

ext → CW

and kB → mV

c/.

The mass and charge symmetry shifts of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions and

antifermions are interrelated (see Chapter 6):

ΔmV

  mV

 − mV

−  mV

Δe  e − e− 

2

 v
c
2
 e
ΔmV
e  e−

mV



v
c

2

2
e
e  e−

where the actual charge (e, in accordance to eqs. 6.1 and 6.1a, has the following

relativistic dependence on the external velocity of Bivacuum dipoles:

e 

e0
1 − v2/c21/4

The complementary charge (e−  e2/e can be calculated from the charge

2.
compensation principle (eq. 5.25): |ee− |  e0

Using the relations above, we may present the dimensionless coefficient of wave
function (C) in (11.9), as a maximum symmetry shift of the anchor Bivacuum fermion,
reduced to the rest mass (m0 and rest charge (e0):

Cm  ΔmV

/ 2 m0 

|mV

 − mV
− |
2 m0

Ce  Δe/ 2 e0 

|e − e− |
2 e0





v
c


mV
2 m0

2

v
c

2

2
e
2 e0e  e− 

    11.12

    11.13

    11.14

    11.15

    11.16

    11.17

    11.18a

We assume here, that as far the complementary mass and charge are undetectable

directly and we may consider them as imaginary ones: imV
11.12; 11.13 and 11.17, we may present the wave function (11.9) and its complex conjugate
in terms of Bivacuum dipoles symmetry shifts. This is important for understanding the

− and ie−. Consequently, using

mechanism of particle internal dynamics and its propagation in space:

56

mV

mV

r, t 

r, t 

r, t  C exp i x
LB
−
 − imV
2 m0
 − iR m0
2 m0
 exp −i 1

−
  imV
mV
2 m0
  iR m0
2 m0

mV

∗r, t 

∗r, t 

exp i x

exp i x


exp i x

exp i x


mV

 − iR m0c2 trt

exp−iBt;

∗r, t  C∗ exp −i x
LB

expiBt

    11.19


c mV

mV

 − imV

−1/2 exp −i 1


mV

 − imV

−c2 trt


c mV

mV

 − iR m01/2 



    11.20

    11.20a

    11.20b



    11.21


c mV

mV

  imV

−1/2 exp −i 1


mV

  imV

−c2 trt


c mV

mV

  iR m01/2 exp −i 1


mV

  iR m0c2 trt

    11.21a

From 11.20a and 11.21a it follows, that at v  c and R  0 these wave functions turn to

that, describing photons with effective mass mV

  /c2; and frequency   1

 mV

c2 tr.

r, t  ∗r, tph 


mV
2 m0

exp i x


mV

c exp −i 1


mV

c2 trt

    11.22

where: mV
The product of the conventional forms of complex conjugate wave functions (11.19)

c2  hph is the photon energy.

gives the space and time independent pre-exponential coefficient squared: |r, t|2 
C∗C  const.

From product of 11.20a and 11.21a, we get the new general formula for density of
probability of location of particle in Corpuscular [C] phase, dependent on space and time
|r, t|2:

|r, t|2  r, t∗r, t 
− 2
mV

 2  mV
2
2m0



exp i

2 x
LC

exp −i 2CWt

where the resulting frequency of C  W pulsation of uncompensated sub-elementary

fermions is CW  mV
elementary particle in [C] phase.

c2/ and LC  /mV

c is the characteristic dimension of

The resulting energy of this state is characterized by the length of hypotenuse of

triangle with adjacent cathetus squared:

Re s
EVV−


 mVV−

c2 mV

 2  mV

− 2 c2

It is important to point out, that in state of rest, when the external translational velocity

  mV

of elementary particle is zero (v  0), the real and complementary mass are equal to the
rest mass: mV
(B  2LB   and its frequency to zero (B  0, the wave function, described by
conventional expression (11.2) becomes equal to coefficient C. This coefficient itself, as a
mV

−  m0, the external de Broglie wave length tends to infinity

− 2

square root of pre-exponential factor C 

at these conditions is equal to

 2mV
2
2m0

C  1. The corresponding density of probability describing only the external properties of
particle C2  1 is a permanent value, independent on space and time.

    11.23

    11.24

57

However, the general expression of density of probability (11.23) of particle location in

selected point of space-time, when its external translational velocity is equal to zero
(vext 0), following from our theory, turns to:

|r, t|2  exp i 2 x
L0

exp−i20t

where the Compton wave length and frequency of particle are equal, correspondingly,

to:

L0  c
0




m0c

and 0 

m0c2


We can see, that the general expression of density probability of particle in [C] phase
location (7.45), in contrast to conventional, the permanent one, is oscillating due to internal
C  Win pulsation of sub-elementary fermions, rotating around common axes, as
presented in Fig.1 and Fig.3. At fixed coordinate (x), the probability of particle in [C]
phase location is dependent on time, i.e. phase of pulsation. At fixed time (t) this
probability is dependent on coordinate of particle in [C] phase.

Our notion of the ’anchor’ sites is in accordance with interpretation of wave function as

a cohomological measure of quantum vorticity by Kiehn (1989, 1998). An exact complex
mapping of the wave function has been found by him.

The wave function after separation into real and imaginary parts, transforms the

two-dimensional Schrödinger equation for a charged particle interacting with an
electromagnetic field into two differential systems.

The first partial differential system is exactly the evolutionary equation for the vorticity

of a compressible, viscous two dimensional Navie-Stokes fluid.

The second system is related to the Beltrami equation defining a minimal surface in

terms of the kinetic and potential energy.

The absolute square of the wave function is exactly the vorticity distribution in a fluid.
This distribution corresponds to distribution of secondary anchor sites in our model of

particle propagation. This interpretation of the wave function offers an alternative to the
Copenhagen dogma.

12. The Principle of least action. Second and Third laws of Thermodynamics as
a consequence of Bivacuum interaction with elementary particles

Let us analyze the formula of action in Maupertuis-Lagrange form:

12.1 Principle of least action

t1

Sext

 2Tk

ext dt

t0

The principle of Least action, responsible for choosing one of number of possible

particles trajectories from one configuration to another has a form:

ΔSext  0

This means, that the optimal trajectory of each particle corresponds to minimum

variations of its external kinetic energy and time.

The time interval: t  t1 − t2 ntB we take as a quantized period of the de Broglie

wave of particle (tB  1/B:

    11.25

    11.25a

    12.1

    12.2

58

t  t1 − t2 ntB  n/B
n  1, 2, 3. . . .

Using eqs.(12.1), we get for the action in Maupertuis-Lagrange form

Sext  2Tk

ext  t  mV

 v2  t  t |mV

 − mV

− |c2

mV

 v2  2Tk

ext is the doubled kinetic energy of particle. It can be expressed via

difference between resulting energy of particle:

Eres  CW

res

|mV

 −mV

− |c2  m0c2  mV

 v2

and the rest mass energy and via difference of corresponding frequencies:
res − 0e,p,n  S
t

 v2  Eres − m0c2  CW

ext  mV

2Tk

the forced resonance of Bivacuum Virtual Pressure Waves (VPWq

e,p,n at condition

e,p,n interacting with paired sub-elementary fermions of

 in the process of [C  W pulsation should decrease the kinetic energy

v  cwith basic frequency: 0
− F↑
triplets F↓
of elementary particles:

 F↓

− F↑

W  F↕

 C 

e,p,n

0
  F↓

− F↑

C  F↕

 W 

    12.3

    12.4

    12.5

    12.6

    12.7

We can see from 12.6, that minimization of action S →0 and ΔS → 0 during permanent
time range t  const, means minimization of kinetic energy of the protons and neutrons,
composing nuclear of the atoms of the objects, means minimization of kinetic energy of
particles Tk → 0. This process of tending of resulting frequency of of C  W pulsation to
the rest mass frequency CW
positive and negative energy: VPW  VPW− p,n with basic frequency: 0
corresponding to the rest mass energy of the protons and neutrons.

res → 0e,p,n can be stimulated by virtual pressure waves of

p,n  m0

p,nc2/,

We may conclude, that tending of Δ  CW − 0e,p,n to zero due to influence of

 at q  1 on triplets dynamics (forced resonance), minimizing translational

basic VPWq1
velocity and kinetic energy of elementary particles, provides realization of principle of
Least action.

12.2 Bivacuum - mediated interaction as a background of 2nd and 3d laws of
thermodynamics

At the velocity of triplets, like protons and neutrons (v  0, the interaction of their

pulsing paired sub-elementary fermions with basic q  1 virtual pressure waves of
Bivacuum VPW  VPW− p,n due to forced resonance should slow down atoms thermal
velocity v → 0.

The second law of thermodynamics, formulated as a spontaneous irreversible
transferring of the heat energy from the warm body to the cooler body or surrounding
medium, also means decreasing of kinetic energy of particles, composing this body.

Consequently, the 2nd law of thermodynamics, as well as Principle of Least Action, can

be a consequence of forced resonance of VPW  VPW− p,n with C  W pulsation of
paired sub-elementary fermions and antifermions, slowing down particles thermal
translational dynamics at pull-in-range synchronization conditions and minimization of
resulting frequency and energy of C  W pulsation C W

res

59

res
C W

v →0
→ 0

The third law of thermodynamics states, that the entropy of equilibrium system is

tending to zero at the absolute temperature close to zero. Again, this may be a consequence
of forced combinational resonance between basic VPW  VPW− p,n and paired
sub-elementary fermions C  W pulsation (12.7), when translational velocity of
particles v → 0 and C W → 0. At these conditions in accordance with Hierarchic theory
of condensed matter (Kaivarainen, 1995; 2001; 2001a) the de Broglie wave length of atoms
is tending to infinity and to state of macroscopic Bose condensation of ultimate coherence
and order, i.e. minimum entropy.

This result of our Unified theory could explain the energy conservation,

notwithstanding of the Universe cooling. Decreasing of thermal kinetic energy of particles
in the process of cooling is compensated by increasing of potential energy of particles
interaction, accompanied the increasing of particles de Broglie wave length and their Bose
condensation.

13 New approach to problem of Time, as a "Time of Action"

Using formula for action in Maupertuis-Lagrange form:

S  2Tk

ext  t  mV

 v2  t  min

it is easy to show, that the pace of time dt/t for any closed conservative system is
determined by the pace of its kinetic energy change −dT/Tkx,y,z, anisotropic in general
case (Kaivarainen, 2004; 2005):

dt
t  d ln t  −

dTk
Tk

 − d ln Tk

x,y,z

Similar relation can be obtained from principle of uncertainty for free particle with

kinetic energy (Tk in coherent form: Tk t  .

From formula (12.12) it is easy to derive a formula for "Time of Action" for

conservative mechanical systems.

It is important to note, that in closed conservative mechanical or quantum system the

total energy is permanent:

Etot  V  Tk  const

or : ΔEtot  0 and ΔV  −ΔTk

and the time of action is always the external one.

By definition a conservative system is a system in which work done by a force is:
1. Independent of path;
2. Completely reversible.

Using relations (13.2) and relativistic expression for kinetic energy of system or

mechanical object:

Tk  mV

v2/2 

m0v2
2 1 − v/c2

the pace of time and time of action for closed system can be presented via acceleration and
velocity of one or more parts, composing this system (Kaivarainen, 2004, 2005):

    12.11

    13.1

    13.2

    13.3

    13.4

    13.5

    13.6

    13.7

    13.7a

    13.8

60

t  d ln t  − dv
dt
v

2 − v/c2
1 − v/c2

x,y,z

We proceed from the fact, that the true inertial frames in our accelerating, rotating and

gravitating Universe and in all of its lower hierarchical levels and subsystems - are
nonexisting.

The dynamics and accelerations in each closed conservative system, where

Etot  const, are characterized by its dimensionless pace of time (13.5) and time itself:

t  − v
a

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2

x,y,z

where the acceleration in different kinds of motion can be expressed in different forms:

a  dv/dt  v2
or : a  G M
r2

r  2r

- free fall acceleration

The external reference frame for selected conservative system can be only the another

inertialess system/frame, including the former one as a part and with other relativistic
factor: R2 1 −v/c2 . In such approach the internal time tin of smaller system can be
analyzed as a part of external time of conservative system text :

tin 

text
1 − vext/c2

 −

1 − v/c2
v
a 2 − v/c2

The shape of this formula in conditions, when the external time (13.6) is invariant:

text  t const

is close to to conventional formula of special relativity (13.11) for time or clock, moving
with velocity v ≲ c relatively to the clock in rest (vc).

From our formula for time we can see, that the time for selected object (microscopic or
macroscopic) of conservative system is positive at velocity: 0  v  c, if its acceleration is
negative (dv/dt  0. On contrary, time is negative, if acceleration is positive
(dv/dt  0. For example, if temperature of conservative system and its kinetic energy are
decreasing, the time and its pace are positive.

Thermal oscillations of atoms and molecules in condensed matter, like pendulums
oscillation, are accompanied by alternation the sign of acceleration and, consequently, sign
of time (text and tin.

The Corpuscle → Wave transition of elementary particle, as it follows from Unified

theory, is accompanied by decreasing of mass and kinetic energy of unpaired
sub-elementary fermion and converting the kinetic energy of [C] phase to potential energy
of CVC of [W] phase. Consequently, this semiperiod of pulsation is characterized by
positive time t  0C→W. On contrary, the reverse W → C transition corresponds to
negative time t  0W→C.

In the absence of particles acceleration (a  dv/dt  0; dTk/Tk  0 and

c  v  0; , the time of action (t) is infinitive and its pace (dt/t) is zero:

61

t → 

and

dt
t

→ 0

    13.9

at

a  dv/dt → 0

and

v  const

The infinitive life-time of the system means its absolute stability. The postulated by this
author principle of conservation of internal kinetic energy of torus (V and antitorus (V−
↕
 (eq.2.1),
of symmetric and asymmetric Bivacuum fermions/antifermions: BVFas
independently on their external velocity, in fact reflects the condition of infinitive life-time
of Bivacuum dipoles in symmetric and asymmetric states. The latter means a stability of
sub-elementary fermions and elementary particles, formed by them.

≡ F↕



The permanent collective motion of the electrons in superconductors and atoms of 4He
in superfluid liquids with constant velocity (v  const and dv/dt  0 in the absence of
collisions and accelerations are good examples, confirming validity of our formula (12.14),
as far in these conditions t → .

When the external translational velocity and external accelerations of Bivacuum dipoles
(BVF and BVB are zero: v  0 and dv/dt  0, like in primordial Bivacuum, the notion
of time is uncertain: t  0/0.

Interesting, that similar uncertainty in time (12.14) corresponds to opposite limit
condition, pertinent for photon or neutrino in primordial Bivacuum, when v  c  const
and dv/dt  0. Just in such conditions when causality principle do not work the
anomalous time effects are possible.

In our approach, the velocity of light is the absolute value, determined by physical

properties of Bivacuum, like sound velocity in any medium is determined by elastic
properties of medium. The primordial Bivacuum superfluid matrix represents the Universal
Reference Frame (URF) in contrast to conventional Relative Reference Frame (RRF).
Consequently the Bivacuum has the Ether properties and Bivacuum dipoles - the properties
of ethons - elements of the Ether.

The positive acceleration of the Universe expansion (dv/dt  0 at c  v  0, in
accordance to (12.13 and 12.14), means negative pace of external time and time itself for
this highest Hierarchical level of Bivacuum organization. For the other hand, the process of
cooling of each regular star system, like our Solar system, following gradual cooling of
star, means slowing down the internal kinetic energy of thermal motion of atoms and
molecules in such system, i.e. negative acceleration (dv/dt  0 at c  v  0. It
corresponds to positive internal time and its pace in star systems. These opposite sign and
the ’arrow’ direction of time of action on different hierarchical levels of Universe
organization, possibly is a consequence of tending of the Universe to keep its total energy
permanent, following energy conservation law.

In accordance with Einstein relativistic theory (Landau and Lifshitz, 1988), the time of

clock in the rest state (text, which can be considered, as the external inertial frame is
interrelated with time (tin in other inertial frame, moving relatively to former with velocity
(v) as:

text  t2

tin 

′ ext  tin 1 − v/c2
′ − t1
text
1 − v/c2

    13.10

    13.11

where: text ≡ t2

′ − t1

′ ext is the characteristic time of clock in the external reference rest

frame; tin ≡ t2 − t1 in is the internal proper time of clock, moving with velocity: v ≲ c,

62

relatively to clock in the rest frame.

It is easy to see, that in relativistic conditions, when vin→ c, the proper time of moving

system/clock is tending to infinity: (T ~ tin → . This means that the moving clock is
slower, than similar clock in state of rest relatively to moving one. In contrast to our
formula for time, this equation do not contain acceleration.

If we consider the imaginary system, containing only two clock in empty space,
moving as respect to each other with permanent velocity, and use the 1st postulate of
Special Relativity, i.e. similar laws of physics in any inertial system, we should get the
similar time delay in both clocks, even if they move with different velocities in our
Universal Reference Frame (URF) - Bivacuum. In other words, both clocks should display
the same time delay, independently of difference of their velocities ratio to the light
velocity (v/c)2. This result of special relativity is a consequence of assumption of the
absence of Ether and absolute velocity. It sounds like a nonsense and has no experimental
confirmation. It follows from our Unified theory, that the interpretation, given by Einstein
to Michelson-Morley experiments, as the evidence of the Ether absence, was wrong in
contrast to explanation, provided by the authors of this experiment themselves.

Our formulas (13.5) and 13.6), describing the properties of time for conservative

systems, are more advanced, than Einstein’s (13.11), as far they are not limited by
inertialess frames and contain not only the relativistic factor, but also the velocity itself and
acceleration. It will be demonstrated below, that our time of action concept better describe
the dynamic processes on microscopic - quantum and macroscopic - cosmic scales.

Different closed conservative systems of particles/objects, rotating around common
center on stable orbits with radius r, like in Cooper pairs of sub-elementary fermions,
atoms, planetary systems, galactics, etc. are characterized by centripetal (acp and
centrifugal (acen acceleration, equal by absolute value:

acp  − dv
dt

 v 2
r

 2 r  −acen

where the tangential velocity of rotation is related to the radius r and angular

frequency of orbital rotation () as:

v  2 r     r

Consequently, we get for the ratio of tangential velocity of particle/object to its

centripetal acceleration:

−

v
dv/dt

 1

  r
v

    13.12

    13.13

    13.14

Putting (13.14 and 13.13) into 13. 6, we get the dependence of time of action for
Corpuscular phase of elementary particle, characterizing period of rotation of structure, like
Fig.6 (electron) or Fig.8 (photon) around internal main axes with radius of rotation (r) and
angular frequency (  v/ r :

t 

r
v

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2



W

1


1 −  r /L002
2 −  r /L002

C

    13.15

For sub-elementary fermion in [C] phase, when the translational energy of elementary

particle, pertinent for [W] phase, turns to rotational one, we have, using (13.12):

63

v/c2   r /L002
where : L0  /m0c and 0  m0c2/

From (13.15) we can see, that for nonrelativistic conditions of orbital rotation of
system/object, when its tangential velocity v  c and permanent angular frequency:
  v/r  const, we get the relation between characteristic time of this system and period
of orbital rotation (T):

ext ≃
tvc

1
2

 1
4

T

For relativistic conditions of the same system, when v ≃ c at angular velocity
  v/r  const, we see from 13. 15, that characteristic time and period of orbiting
elementary particle or macroscopic object is tending to zero, as far 1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2

v→c
→ 1:

v→c
→ 0 and

tv≲c → 0 and the period
and r → rmax as far   v
r

T  1/ → 0 at v → c

 const

For the case, under consideration, the increasing of radius of orbit (r) proportional to
increasing of tangential velocity of orbiting particle/object at permanent angular frequency
is a consequence of condition (13.18a).

Formula (13.14) shows, that at very low acceleration: a  dv/dt → 0, the ratio [v/a

should dominate on ratio:

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2  − v

a

Consequently, at condition (13.19) the time of action should increase with velocity of
rotating or pulsing object. The same qualitative result follows from special relativity
(13.11). Consequently, at these condition the time delay in moving system, following from
special relativity, is in accordance with our theory of time.

The formula for time (13.15), determined by internal rotational degrees of freedom of

stationary systems, like sub-elementary fermions in elementary particles, the electron
orbiting in atom of hydrogen or any planet, rotating around the star, can be transformed to:

t  1


mV

c2 1 − v/c2
2c2 − v2
mV

1 − v/c2




Etot
2V

where: Etot  mV

c2  const is a total actual energy of rotating with angular frequency

.
 sub-elementary particle with actual mass of its torus mV

In conservative system the doubled potential energy of unpaired sub-elementary

fermion of elementary fermion with actual and complementary mass of torus and antitorus:
mV

−:
 and mV


2V  2Etot − Tk   mV

2c2 − v2  mV

  mV

−c2

In the case of harmonic oscillation or standing wave, when Etot  V  Tk  2V and
V  Tk, the characteristic time of rotating with angular frequency   v/r particle is
dependent only on the ratio of its absolute velocity to the light one (v/c)2.

    13.16

    13.17

    13.18

    13.18a

    13.19

    13.20

    13.20a

64

13.1 The application of new time concept for explanation of Fermat principle

The Fermat principle states that light waves of a given frequency traverse the path
between two points which takes the least time. Its modern form is "A light ray, going
between two points, must follow optical path length which is stationary with respect to
variations of the path."

In this formulation, the paths may be maxima, minima, or saddle points.
The most obvious example of this is the passage of light through a homogeneous

medium in which the speed of light doesn’t change with position. In this case shortest time
is equivalent to the shortest distance between the points, which is a straight line. The
examples are existing that time of light passage, including reflected beam, can be minimum
or maximum like for light beams from source in the center of ellipsoid with mirror internal
surface. There can be a number of trajectories of light beams with the same time of passion.
For example, it is true for different beams from one focal point to another passing throw the
lens on different distance from lens center. The most important condition for realization of
Fermat principle is t  const. This principle explains the law of reflection, as the equality
of angles of incidence and angle of reflection: I  R and Snell’s law of refraction:
sin I  n sin R.

However, it is not yet clear why the Fermat principle is working. Let us analyze the
application of Fermat principle to light refraction, using our formula for time (13.6). In
accordance to Fermat principle the variation of action time for photons at:
Etot  V  Tk  ph  const (condition of conservative system) should be zero: Δt  0.
The ratio of velocity of light in vacuum/bivacuum to its velocity v ≲ c in gas, liquid

or transparent solid determines the refraction index of corresponding medium:
v/c2  1/n. Taking this into account, the variation of (13.6) in [W] and [C] phase of
photon can be presented as:

Δt  Δ − v
a

1 − 1/n
2 − 1/n W,C

 0

After differentiation (13.21), we get:

Δn
n − 1

− 2Δn
2n − 1

 Δa

a − Δv
v

At the conditions, when velocity of light in medium is close to this velocity in empty

space: n  c/v2 ≳ 1 we have

Δn

n−1  2Δn

2n−1 and 13. 22 turns to:

Δn ≅ n − 1

−

v2 − v1
v1

 Δa
a

W

    13.21

    13.22

    13.23

The relative change of acceleration Δa/a describes the jump of light velocity on the

interface between two different homogeneous medium.

It is easy to see from this formula, that if the light velocity in 2nd medium is lower, than

in 1st and v2 − v1  0, the refraction index will increase: Δn  0. This is in total
accordance with empirical data and explains why the Fermat principle is working in
geometrical optics.

Formula (13.23) describes the change of photon parameters it its Wave [W] phase.
The centripetal acceleration of photon in Corpuscular [C] phase can be expressed via

tangential velocity and rotation radius of photon (Fig.8) as: acp  − v 2

 −2r and

r

Δa
a 

2Δ
  Δr
r

C

    13.24

65

The relative jump of tangential velocity of photon (v   r  on the interphase between

two mediums is:

Δv
v 

  Δr
Δ
r

C

Consequently, the difference in relative increments for [C] phase of photon is:

Δa
a − Δv
v

 Δ

 C

C

    13.25

    13.26

Putting this expression to (13.23), we get the increment of refraction index for photon in

Corpuscular phase via relative jump of its angular frequency:

Δn ≅ n − 1 Δ

 C

    13.27

This angular frequency of photon rotation coincides with frequency of its C  W
pulsation only in symmetric primordial Bivacuum. In the volume of liquids or solids the
symmetry of Bivacuum dipoles and their dynamics are changed by elementary particles of
medium. From 13.27 we get, that this should be accompanied by increasing of rotational
frequency of photon in its [C] phase.

Our Unified theory, in contrast to relativistic one, considers the velocity of particles as

the absolute parameter, relative to primordial symmetric Bivacuum matrix (see eq. 6.3).
The light velocity (c) is also the absolute parameter, determined by properties of Bivacuum
(ether) and independent on velocity of source of photons.

13.2 The quantitative evidence in proof of new theory of time and elementary particles
fusion from Bivacuum dipoles

Using eq. (13.6 and 13.9a), it is possible to calculate the centrifugal acceleration (acf

  in

 W , when paired sub-elementary fermions are rotating in corpuscular

fast rotating Cooper pairs of sub-elementary fermions F↓
C  F↕
 F↓
[C] phase and unpaired F↕

− F↑

 W  is in the wave [W] phase.
Let us consider the condition of the rest state of the electron, when its external
translational velocity is equal to zero and internal tangential velocity of sub-elementary
fermion and antifermion F↓
mean condition:

C rotation in triplet around common axis follows Golden

− F↑

− F↑

C in triplets

v/c

2    0. 618
v  c 0. 6181/2  2. 358  107 m/s

In accordance to our theory of these conditions stand for the rest mass (m0 and charge (e0
C of
origination (see chapter 6). The life-time tC of Corpuscular phase of rotating F↓
the electron is equal to semiperiod of C  W pulsation of pair and triplet itself,
determined by Compton angular frequency 0

− F↑

:

e  CW
e
 
0

e  4. 02  10−21 s

e ≡ 1
tC
2

e
TCW



e
where : 0

 m0

1
e
2CW
ec2/

Putting 13.28 and 13.29 in 13.6, we get for internal centrifugal acceleration of each of

paired electronic sub-elementary fermions in [C] phase at Golden mean condition:

    13.28

    13.29

    13.29a

66

  dv/dt
acf

e

 v
e
tC

1 − 
2 − 

 1. 62  1028 m/s2

    13.30

For comparisons, the free fall acceleration in gravitational field of the Earth is only:

g  9. 81 m/s2.

The corresponding centrifugal force is equal to product of acceleration (13.30) on the

rest mass of rotating paired sub-elementary fermion:

  m0a  9. 1  10−31  0. 162  1029   1. 47  10−2 kg m/s2

Fcf

    13.31

From conventional expression for centrifugal force in such a system and Golden mean

conditions, we get:

 

Fcf

2m0 c2
L0



2

3. 83  10−13  9. 1093897  10−31  5. 56  1014 

    13.32

 0. 264  10−2 kg  m/s2

This value is about 5.5 times less, than obtained using our expression for time and

acceleration (13.30).

The condition of the electrons stability is that this centrifugal force is compensated by

the opposite centripetal force in rotating pairs F↓
provided by Coulomb and in much less extent by gravitational attraction between torus and
antitorus of paired sub-elementary fermion in triplets  F↓

 . This compensation can be

C  F↕

− F↑

− F↑

C

 W :


FCoul



ee−
L 

2 

2
e0
L0
2
0

 1. 98  10−2 kg m/s2

  G

FG

2  6. 67259  10−11 9. 1093897  10−31 2
2
m0
L0

3. 83  10−13 2

    13.33

 3. 76  10−46 kg m/s2

    13.33a

where: e− and e are the charges of F↓

− and F↑
to the rest charge e0  1. 602  10−13 C of the electron and positron, correspondingly, in
accordance to our model of elementary particles..

 at Golden mean (GM) conditions, equal

− F↑

The radius of rotation of this pair is equal to Compton radius at GM conditions:
L  L0  /m0c ≃3. 83  10−13 m. Assuming, that permittivity of Bivacuum between
charges in pair F↓
for Coulomb attraction force FCoul

 1. 98  10−2 kg m/s2.
The gravitational constant in (12.28a) G 6. 67259  10−11 m3 kg−1 s−2 and the rest mass
2  9. 1093897  10−31 kg 2. It is easy to see, that gravitational

C is close to that of vacuum:  ≃ 0  8. 85  10−12 F m−1, we get

of the electron squared: m0
attraction is negligible small as respect to Coulomb one.



The calculated Coulomb force (13.33) is close to the opposite centrifugal force (13.31),

providing stabilization of pairs F↓

− F↑

C

 in triplets of the electrons:


FCoul

Fcf

 1. 98  10−2

1. 47  10−2  1. 343

    13.34

A possible explanation of this small disbalance in Coulomb and centrifugal forces, can
be a bigger permittivity of Bivacuum in the internal space of this pairs, as respect to empty
2
Bivacuum/vacuum: /0  1. 343. The reason of bigger internal permittivity   1/0c
can be a bigger refraction index in space between two sub-elementary fermions in pairs

67

 .
C

F↓

− F↑
Like in the case of proton, stabilization of electronic triplet in its [W] phase can be

realized via electronic gluons, i.e. superposition of their Cumulative virtual clouds
[CVC CVC−e between paired sub-elementary fermions in [W] phase.

The close values of centrifugal and Coulomb interaction for the electrons and positrons,

calculated on the base of parameters of paired sub-elementary fermions in their
Corpuscular phase (angular frequency of [C  W pulsation and tangential velocity of
their rotation), following from our model of elementary particles, is important fact,
confirming our Unified theory of Bivacuum, the new model of stable elementary particles
and time.

For much less stable doublets, like muon  antimuon, the centrifugal force at Golden

mean conditions (13.31) exceeds many times the Coulomb attraction between its
sub-elementary fermion and antifermion:

 

Fcf

2m0 c2
L0

 2


m0

2 c3 

e2
0L0

2  FCoul

    13.35

This inequality is a result of the same charges of muon and electron at the mass of
former exceeding the mass of latter about 200 times. It is a reason of muon  antimuon
pairs much less stability and life-time, than that of sub-elementary fermion  antifermion
pairs of the electrons.

13.3 Shift of the period of elementary oscillations in gravitational field

The decreasing of the wavelength of photons (EM waves) and corresponding
decreasing of their period in a gravitational field, predicted by general relativity theory
(GRT), is dependent on mass (M) and distance (r) from center of mass to photons location
and detection as:



TG
T0

G
 1 − 2GM
c2r
0
or : TG ≃ T0 1 − GM
c2r

at

2GM
c2r

 1

A heuristic Newtonian derivation gives similar result as (13.36a):

TG
T0

 0
G



E0
EG

 G
G
 hc
hc
0
0
mGc2 − GMmG
mGc2



r



 1 − GM
c2r

    13.36

    13.36a

    13.37

    13.37a

where: TG, G and G are the shifted by G - field period, frequency and wave length of

elementary wave; h is Planck’s constant, c is the speed of light, E0 is the unperturbed
energy, EG is the shifted energy; mG is the effective mass of photon in field.

In the absence of gravitational field, when M  0 or r  , the period of oscillation is

maximum TG ≃ T0.

As far the Newtonian gravitational force can be expressed via gravitational acceleration

(aG  G M

r2  as:

68

FG  G

where :

 aGm

M m
r2
aG  G M

r2  g

Near surface of the Earth this acceleration is equal to free fall acceleration:

aG  g  9. 8 m/s2.

Using (13.37a), formula (13.36a) can be presented as:

TG ≃ T0 1 −

aGr
c2

 T0 1 − GM
c2r

In accordance to this formula, the period of oscillation (TG of test system, like photon

or electron C  W pulsation period, should increase with increasing of separation r
between the test system and center of gravitating body: TG → T0

The same result we get from our (13.6) in nonrelativistic conditions: v/c2  1.
For the other hand, from (13.36a) it follows that increasing of (r at permanent M
should increase the period of pulsation (TG and decrease its frequency - red Doppler shift.

The experiment for confirmation of described above consequences of General relativity
theory (GR) was set up by Pound and Rebka (1959) in the Harvard tower, using Mössbauer
effect. The Harvard tower is just 22.6 m, so the fractional gravitational red shift between
the frequency νbottom of  −quantum emitted at the bottom of tower and frequency νtop
absorbed at the top of tower predicted by GRT, similar to simple classical approach
(13.37), is given by the formula:

    13.38

    13.38a

    13.39

ΔE
E

 bottom − top
top

 Ttop − Tbottom
Ttop

 Gl

c2  2. 45  10−15

    13.40

where: G is the gravitational constant; l  r2 − r1  22. 6 m is the tower height and c is

the speed of light.

Pound and Rebka used the 14.4 keV gamma ray from the iron-57 isotope that has a high

enough resolution to detect such a small difference in energy and frequency:
ΔE  hbottom−top. In other set of experiments the source of  −quantum was placed at
the top of tower and detector at the bottom.

The predicted theoretically relative frequency shifts on the upward and downward paths
where opposite by sign, but the same by absolute values. Their sum: 4. 9  10−15 appears to
be very close to measured: 5. 1  10−15. Consequently, as it follows from our formula for
period of elementary pulsations (13.6), it is smaller in locations, where gravitational or
centrifugal accelerations are bigger.

The coincidence of quantitative experimental relative shifts values with theoretical
ones, following from GTR and simple classical Newton’s formalism (13.37a) is excellent.
However, it does not contain a strong evidence that GTR works better, than classical

Newtonian approach.

13.4 The explanation of Hefele-Keating experiments

The additional confirmation of validity of our formula for time (13.6) is its ability to
explain well known experiments of Hefele-Keating (1971) for verification of special and
general theories of relativity (SR and GR).

They flew four cesium atomic clocks around the Earth in jets, first eastbound, then

westbound. These experiments proved that atomic clocks period is dependent on the
direction, velocity and altitude of jet airplanes. The direction and velocity of the airplanes

69

where factors of the SR and the altitude was a factor of GR.

Compared to the time kept by control atomic clock fixed on the ground (USA), the
eastbound clocks on the jets where slower (period of oscillation bigger) and westbound
clocks - faster (period of oscillation shorter).

The velocity of eastbound clocks are the sum of tangential velocity of jet and tangential
east  vjet´  vat. For the other hand, the
velocity of atmosphere at the altitude of jet flight: vres
resulting velocity of westbound clock is a difference of these velocities: vwest  vjet´ − vat.
The correct position of reference clock (non rotating) should be at the axes of the earth
rotation (i.e. poles) of the earth. The velocity of the earth orbiting around the Sun and Sun
system velocity in the universe was not taken into account.

Webster Kehr (2002) in his book "The detection of Ether" point out, that in original
version of special relativity (1905) each of jets flying with permanent velocity should be
considered as the rest reference frames.

However, even in such approximate approach, where the local reference frames instead

Universal reference frame (URF) was used, Hafele and Keating found out, that the time
effects, calculated using relativity theory, coincide well with experimental ones.

We will show below, that these experiments can be explained also on the base of our
theory of time and simple Newtonian formula for gravitation and free fall acceleration, as a
part of Unified theory.

The free fall acceleration following from Newton formula (13.38a) is:

aG  dv/dtG  G M

r2  g

Formula (13.6) can be presented in form, interrelating characteristic time of object with
gravitational free fall acceleration (aG  g, velocity of object and the increments of these
parameters at permanent velocity:

Text
4

vc
≃ t

ext



v r2
GM

or :

1
4

ΔText

vconst

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2
vc
1
≃
2GM

2v rΔr  r2Δv

where: T  2/ is the period of elementary oscillation in external reference frame

(atomic clock in private case).

Formula (13.42) interrelate our concept of time with gravitation, however, in different

way, than general theory of relativity.

At permanent tangential velocity of jets respectively to the Earth surface: v  const,
Δv  0 for nonrelativistic case: v  c we get from (13.42a) the confirmation of (13.40),
that the external period is increasing and frequency decreasing with distance from the earth
center:

ΔT  −Δvconst

ext

vc
≃ 4

v rΔr
GM

 4 v
g

Δr
r

where: Δr  r2 − r1 in private case corresponds to l in eq.(12.33).
For the other case of permanent distance to the Earth center and surface: r  const;

Δr  0 and (13.42a) turns to:

ΔT  −Δrconst

vc

≃ 2 r2Δv
GM

 2 Δv
g

where: G 6. 67259  10−11 m3 kg−1 s−2; M 5. 9742  1024 kg is the earth mass;

    13.41

    13.42

    13.42a

    13.43

    13.44

70

r  6. 378164  106 m is the equatorial radius of the Earth; g  GM/r2  9. 8 m/s2 free
fall acceleration.

From this formula we can see, that as far velocity of eastbound clocks are the sum of
tangential velocity of jet and tangential velocity of atmosphere at the altitude of jet flight:
east  vjet´  vat, the period of atomic clock should increase - time is slowing down. For
vres
the westbound clock the decreasing of actual velocity of clock: vwest  vjet´ − vat should
decrease the period of atomic clock and they show ’faster’ time. These consequences are in
total accordance with experiment of Hafele-Keating (1971).

13.5 Interrelation between period of the Earth rotation, its radius, tangential velocity,
and free fall acceleration

If we take the local reference frame, as a center of Earth, where the tangential velocity
is zero (vtn  0; Δvtn  0, then the time and frequency increments should be also zero , as
it follows from both formulas (13.43 and 13.44): ΔT  −Δv0; r0  0
The tangential velocity of the point on the Earth surface rotation is:

tn
vEarth

 2r/TEarth 

6. 28  6. 378164  106 m
24  60  60 s



4. 0  107
0. 864  105  4. 63  102 m/s

    13.45

where: TEarth  24 h  8. 64  104s is the period of the Earth rotation.
We may assume, that the atmosphere of the Earth has the same tangential velocity, i.e.

rotate with Earth.

The velocity of jet as respect to this rotating atmosphere is about

vjet  700km/h  2  102 m/s.

Putting value (13.45) and others in (13.43) and assuming (Δr/r  1, we get for

corresponding increment of period, corresponding to change of the radius of rotation from
zero to the earth radius:

cal
TEarth

~ ΔTrconst  4 v
g

r  12. 56 4. 63  102
Δr

9. 8

 5. 93  103s

    13.46

This calculated value is about 15 times less, than real period of the Earth rotation:

cal
TEarth/TEarth

≃ 15. This discrepancy may be a result of following factors:

1) The opposite direction of rotation of the inner volumes of the earth, for example its

nuclear, as respect to its surface core, keeping the resulting angular momentum equal to
zero:

Mextvext rext  Minvin rin  0

    13.47

where Mext; vext; and Δrext are the averaged mass, velocity and effective radius of

corresponding regions of the earth, rotation in opposite direction.

This factor may strongly increase the effective tangential velocity of the earth surface

(v) as respect to axis of its rotation in (13.46).

2) nonlinear dependence of (g) on the distance from center of the Earth in the internal

region of planet, i.e. g  fΔr/r;

3) contribution to (v) in (13.46) the Earth velocity motion on the orbit around Sun

30  103 m/s) and Solar system in the Universe 370  103 m/s);

4) slowing down the frequency of the Earth rotation with time (billions of years) due to

different kind of energy dissipation, like interaction with moon, etc.

Formula 13. 43 points to qualitatively similar time effects, as general relativity and

our formula (13.44) to the same effects, as special relativity when v  c.

Consequently, our Unified theory, including new approach to time problem and

71

accepting simple Newtonian formula for gravitational force, can explain all most important
experiments, which where used for confirmation of special and general relativity.

The time in our approach is a characteristic parameter of any closed system (classical
and quantum) dynamics, involving not only velocity but also acceleration. In contrast to
time definition, following from special relativity (13.10), the time in our Unified theory is
infinitive and independent on velocity in any inertial system of particles, when dv/dt  0.
However, at any nonzero acceleration (dv/dt)  const  0 the time is dependent on
velocity of these objects in more complex manner, than it follows from special relativity. In
fact, there are no physical systems in our expanding with acceleration Universe, formed by
rotating galactics and stabilized by gravitational field, which can be considered, as perfectly
inertial, i.e. where the acceleration is absent totally. This means, that conventional
relativistic formula for time (13.10) is not applicable for real physical systems.

14. Theory of Virtual Replica of material objects and its multiplication in space and
time

The theory of Virtual Replica (VR) of macroscopic objects in Bivacuum and primary

VR multiplication in space and time VRMr, t is proposed.

The primary Virtual Replica of the object can be subdivided on two kinds: the surface
VRsur and the volume VRvol. Their superposition contains the total information about any
material object:

The surface VRsur, like the regular optical hologram, reflects a three-dimensional (3D)

VR  VRsur  VRvol

    14.1

shape of the object. It represents the interference pattern of modulated by the surface
particles of the object Bivacuum virtual pressure waves VPWm
with basic reference virtual pressure waves of Bivacuum: VPWq1

 (the surface object waves)

.



The volume VRvol reflects the internal properties: spatial and dynamic inhomogeneous

in the volume of macroscopic object. The volume VRvol is a result of 3D interference of
modulated by the particles in the object’s volume VPWm
with all pervading reference virtual waves of Bivacuum VPWq1
holograms do not contain information about the internal properties of the object, like the
volume Virtual Replica.

 , named the volume object waves

. The regular optical



The interference of primary Virtual Replica, located in the volume of the object, with
Bivacuum reference waves - provides VR multiplication in space VRMr. To keep the
energy, charge and spin conservation, it was assumed, that the mass/energy symmetry shifts
of Bivacuum dipoles, involved in VRsur and VRvol formation and their multiplication
(iteration), should compensate each other. This condition is satisfied by assumption, that
the nodes and antinodes of virtual standing waves of multiple Virtual Replicas are formed
by the Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions:

VRMr  ∑ NBVF↑

 BVF↓

    14.2

where N tends to infinity.
The absolute value of paired symmetry shifts can change from very small to very big,
reflecting the properties of the object. However, this do not violate the energy and charge
conservation of Bivacuum, since the mass-energy and charge symmetry shifts are equal but
opposite in Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, forming virtual Cooper pairs.

The Virtual Replica spatial Multiplication can be named the Holoiteration (in Greece
’holo’ means the ’whole’ or ’total’). If the properties of the object vary in time, its primary

72

VR and its spatial multiplication also will be dependent on time: VRMr, t.

If the object is changing with time, its primary VR(t) is also time-dependent. In this
case Virtual Replica Multiplication: VRMr, t can be formally described as a result of
linear superposition of primary VR of the object with corresponding amplitude of
probability cn, like the orthogonal eigen values of wave function of elementary particle:

VRMr, t  ∑cn[VRnr, t]

    14.3

The condition of orthogonality means that only one of the infinitive numbers of virtual
replicas can be displayed at the certain time, depending on the conditions of VR detection.
The stability of the most probable secondary Virtual Replica as a hierarchical system of

virtual standing waves could be responsible for so-called phantom or ghost effect of the
object after its destruction or replacing. For individual elementary particles the notion of
secondary virtual replica, as a result of primary VR multiplication, coincides with notion of
secondary ’anchor sites’, important for particle jump-way propagation in space, described
above and in http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207027.

The Virtual Replica Multiplication VRMr, t is a process, filling all the volume around

the object with secondary Virtual Replicas VRt.

The multiplication of VRt is a spatially isotropic process in Bivacuum, like excitation
of spherical waves, propagating with permanent velocity in all directions from the primary
VR tending to conditions of virtual standing waves formation.

Each selected region of this Holoiteration interference pattern of VRMr, t contains

information about the external - shape/surface and the internal - volume properties of
macroscopic object changing with time. The possibility of feedback action of Virtual
Replica, generated by the object, on physical properties of this object or similar kinds of
objects can be tested experimentally.

14.1 Superposition of the Internal and Surface Virtual Replicas of the object, as the ”Ether
Body"

The superposition of the time-dependent surface VRn1

sur t and volume VRm1

vol t

primary virtual replicas of macroscopic object, like human being, we define, as the "Ether
Body", known from the Eastern philosophy.

The overall shape of primary surface VRn1

sur t contain the information about shape of

the object, like do the optical hologram.

For the other hand, the primary volume VRm1
dynamic properties of the object’s internal components.

vol t should reflect also the structural and

The time-dependent ether body can be presented as a result of superposition of

microscopic virtual replicas of the atoms, forming the surface and the volume of
macroscopic object:

Ether Bodyt ≡ ∑ VRrest 

∑ VRn

surt 

Nsur

Mvol

∑ VRm

volt

    14.4

Stability of hierarchic system of virtual standing waves, forming Ether Body of
macroscopic object, like a hierarchical system of curls in superfluid 4He, could be
responsible for so-called ”phantom effect” of this object.

14.2 The ”Astral” and ”Mental” bodies definitions, based on Unified theory

It is assumed in our approach, that:
a) the Astral Body: VRMast

VPWr, t is produced by the iteration of time-dependent Ether

body ∑ VRt in space as a result of its interference with the reference virtual pressure

73

waves (VPW  VPW−;

b) the Mental Body: VRMmen

VirSWr, t is produced by the the iteration of the Ether body

in space as a result of its interference with the reference virtual spin waves (VirSW 
VirSW−.

The dielectric permittivity (0 and permeability (0 of Bivacuum in the volume of the
Astral bodies (astral phantoms) may differ from their averaged values in Bivacuum because
of small charge symmetry shift Δe  |e − e− |  0 in separated and virtual Cooper pairs of
Bivacuum fermions BVF↑ BVF↓ sur,vol, forming the Astral body: VRMast

VPWr, t.
Consequently, the probability of atoms and molecules excitation and ionization
(dependent on Coulomb interaction between electrons and nuclear), as a result of their
thermal collisions with excessive kinetic energy, may be higher in the volumes of the Astral
bodies, than outside of them.

This may explain a shining of some VRMast
phantoms (ghosts) and their photos and spectrograms.

VPWr, t in IR and visible range, representing

The sensitivity of Kirlian effect or Gas Discharge Visualization (GDV) to the certain
processes in human body can be explained by specific properties of the Ether and Astral
bodies, changing the probability of the air molecules excitation/ionization in the process of
gas discharge visualization (GDV).

The informational properties of the mental body: VRMast

VirSWr, t is a result of nonlocal

properties of Virtual Spin Waves (VirSW, acting in symmetric Bivacuum instantly
without light velocity limitation.

The Mental Body of human being is dependent on the neuronal activity of the brain and

nerve system. It follows from our theory of elementary act of consciousness, that the
librational dynamics of water clusters in microtubules in state of mesoscopic and
macroscopic Bose condensation (mBC) can contribute to the Ether, Astral and Mental
bodies properties.

The Hierarchical superposition of huge number of Astral and Mental Bodies of all

human population on the Earth can be responsible for Global Informational Field
origination, named Noosphere.

The Astral and Mental bodies are interrelated with the Ether body. This provide a
possibility of the exchange interaction and feedback reaction between all three virtual
bodies of macroscopic object: Ether, Astral and Mental.

14.2 Mind - Matter Interaction and Virtual Replicas Imprinting

The perturbation of the Ether body of the object - Receptor by the Astral or Mental
body of the other object - Sender can be imprinted in properties of physical properties of
Receptor as stable structural perturbations.

The stability of such kind of informational ’taping’ is determined by specific properties

of material of Receptor. These imprinting properties are dependent on the dimensions,
stability and interaction of coherent molecular clusters of this material in state of
mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC) with VR. The mBC are revealed and evaluated in
our Hierarchic theory of condensed matter (Kaivarainen, 1995, 2000, 2008). The VR is
composed from dynamic system of Bivacuum dipoles with small symmetry shift, providing
small uncompensated charge. Consequently, these all matter pervading tiny dipoles with
Compton radius of muon or tauon - may partly screen Coulomb interaction between
charged elementary particles, like electrons, protons and other ions of matter.

The ice, water and aqueous systems are very good for imprinting of virtual information
and energy via influence on strength of hydrogen bonds: [O− - H....O− - H], depending on
electric polarization of water molecules: H-O-H.

74

The introduced VRM(r,t) and Virtual Guides (see next section) can be responsible for

turning the mesoscopic Bose condensation to non-continuous macroscopic BC and
macroscopic entanglement.

The perturbations of ’sensitive’ to imprinting rigid materials, like ice or crystals

containing larger domains of mBC, stabilized by H-bonds, ion-dipole and ion-ion
interaction, should have much longer life-time or ’memory’ than liquids. This consequence
of our theory can be verified experimentally.

For example, the Ghost phenomena can be explained by reproducing of such imprinted

in walls, cells and floor information, realized via distant virtual replica multiplication
(VRMdis).

The reproduction of VR from imprinted in condensed matter VRMdis is a process,

similar to treatment of regular hologram by the reference waves.

In the case of ’Ghost’ the reference waves are presented by the basic VPWq1

and

1/2 propagating in Bivacuum. This reproduction - replay of imprinted VR in
VirSWq1
sensitive materials can be modulated by superposition of Virtual replicas of cosmic objects,
like Earth, Moon and Sun.



The Mental body formation in living organisms and humans in accordance to our

approach (Kaivarainen, 2006, 2008) is related to equilibrium shift of [assembly 
disassembly] of coherent water clusters in microtubules (MT) of the neurons (librational
effectons), accompanied the elementary acts (cycles) of consciousness in processes of
meditation, intention and braining.

The corresponding coherent alternations of kinetic energy and momentum of water
molecules in MT can be transmitted from Sender to remote Receiver via nonlocal virtual
spin-momentum-energy guides VirGSME S  R, described in next chapter.

In complex process of Psi phenomena, the important stages, starting by Sender

(psychic) are:

1) ’target searching’ by the [mental body] of psychic, then formation of

VirGSME S  Ri;

2) activation of psychic’s [astral body] by its [ether body].
The latter can be interrelated with specific processes of physical body of psychic, like

dynamics of water in microtubules of neurons ensembles, realizing elementary acts of
perception and consciousness, in accordance to our model (Kaivarainen, 2000; 2005).

The possible mechanism of entanglement between remote microscopic and macroscopic
objects, connected by the bundles of Virtual Guides of spin, momentum and energy will be
described below.

14.3 Virtual Guides in Bivacuum, providing remote macroscopic entanglement and
nonlocal interaction

The Virtual Guides of spin, momentum and energy, connecting pairs of remote
fermions of opposite spins defined as Sender S and Receiver R, represent virtual
filaments, formed by Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
N BVF↑ BVF↓ or pairs of Bivacuum bosons with opposite polarization
NBVB−  BVB interacting with each other side-by-side (:

 F↓
 F↓

  F↑
  F↑

−C  F↓
−W  F↓

− W 
− C 

S 

VPW− VPW

 
N BVF↑ BVF↓

or NBVB− BVB

 F↑
 F↑

− C  F↓
− W  F↓

−  F↑
−  F↑

W 
C 

R

The radiuses and gaps between tori and antitori of virtual Cooper pairs

(BVF↑ BVF↓, which assembly virtual guides VirG are self-adapted to Compton radius

of elementary particles, which they are connecting.

75

The longitudinal momentum of pairs BVF↑ BVF↓S0

s

along the main axe of virtual

filaments is close to zero p → 0 and corresponding de Broglie wave length tends to
infinity: B  h/p → , providing conditions for quasi - one - dimensional virtual Bose
condensate. The notion of time in such conditions, when external velocity is permanent and
equal to zero: v  0  const is absent or uncertain, as it follows from our time theory in
chapter 13:

t  − v
a

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2

 0
0

x,y,z

Two remote coherent triplets - elementary particles, like: [electron - electron], [proton -

proton], [neutron-neutron] or [photon-photon] of Sender and Receiver with similar
frequency of C  We,p pulsation and opposite phase (spins) can be connected by Virtual
guides: VirGSMES  R of spin (S), momentum (M) and energy (E).

The spin - information (qubits), momentum and kinetic energy instant exchange via
such Virtual Guide between [S] and [R] is possible, as a consequence of coherent pulsation
of the gap between torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles forming VirGSME
with the same frequency as that of C  We,p pulsation of the entangled elementary
particles.

S  R

i

 F↑

−  F↓

Fig. 9. The mechanism of nonlocal Bivacuum mediated exchange interaction
(entanglement) between two distant unpaired sub-elementary fermions of ’tuned’ elementary
 F↓
triplets (particles) of the opposite spins  F↑
− Receiver
i
 F↓
(i.e. de Broglie wave length B  h/mV
energy increments: Δ|mV
via Virtual spin-momentum-energy Guide VirGSME is accompanied by instantaneous
pulsation of the gap between tori and antitori (Δd, interrelated with simultaneous radius
   of Bivacuum dipoles, assembling VirGSME
pulsation: Δd/ΔLV
When the unpaired sub-elementary of fermion - Sender: F↑

, with close frequency of [C  W pulsation and momentum
 v of particles. The tunnelling of momentum and

 c2 | ~ Δ|VirP |  Δ|VirP− | from Sender to Receiver and vice-verse

.
− Sender

− Sender

−  F↑

and

i

i

i

is in the waves

76

[W] - phase and that Receiver: F↓
transmitted from [S] to [R]. In the opposite phase, when the Receiver is in the [W] phase
the momentum and energy is ’teleportated’ from [R] to [S].

in [C] phase, the momentum and energy is

− Receiver

i

The jump-way decreasing of the gap between tori (NV and antitori (NV− of

Bivacuum dipoles, composing VirG, in the process of teleportation, is stimulated by [W]
phase and virtual pressure jump: Δ|mV
alternatively.

 c2 | ~ Δ|VirP |  Δ|VirP− | of Sender or Receiver,

The nonlocal spin state exchange between [S] and [R] can be the consequence of the

violation of symmetry of positive and negative energy distribution in the process of
i
− , when C  W pulsation of Sender and
VirGSME
Receiver triplets are in-phase, i.e. in the same spin state.

dipoles pulsation: ΔLV

 ≠ ΔLV


14.4 The role of tuning force (FVPW of virtual pressure waves VPWq
of Bivacuum in entanglement

The tuning between two similar elementary particles: ’sender (S)’ and ’receiver (R)’ via

VirGSMES  Ri may be qualitatively described, using well known model of damped
  of
harmonic oscillators, interacting with all-pervading virtual pressure waves (VPWq1
Bivacuum with fundamental frequency 0  m0c2/. The criteria of tuning -
synchronization of [S] and [R] is the equality of the amplitude probability of resonant
energy exchange of Sender and Receiver with virtual pressure waves
(VPWq1
(S − 0 → 0 and R − 0  → 0:

, resulting from minimization of frequency difference

 : ACW

R
 ACW

S

S
ACW



R
ACW

x,y,z 

1
 S
mV

1
 R
mV

FVPW
2   Im S
FVPW
2   Im R

S

2 − 0

R

2 − 0

where the frequencies of C  W pulsation of particles of Sender (S) and Receiver

(R are:

R  C W  0

S  C W  0

in  B
in  B

ext R
ext S

 is a damping coefficient due to decoherence effects, generated by local fluctuations of

Bivacuum deteriorating the phase/spin transmission via VirGSME; mV
mass of (S) and (R); FVPW  is a tuning force of virtual pressure waves VPW of
Bivacuum with tuning energy EVPW  q m0c2 and wave length LVPW  /m0c

 S,R are the actual

FVPWq

 

EVPWq
LVPWq



q


m0

2c3

The most probable Tuning force has a minimum, corresponding to q  j − k  1.
The influence of virtual pressure force (FVPWq stimulates the synchronization of [S]
and [R] pulsations, i.e. R → S → 0. This fundamental frequency 0  m0c2/ is the
same in any space volume, including those of Sender and Receiver.

The VirGSME represent quasi 1D macroscopic virtual Bose condensate with a
configuration of single microtubules, formed by Bivacuum bosons (BVB or with
configuration of double microtubules, composed from Cooper pairs as described in

    14.5

    14.5a

    14.6

    14.6a

    14.7

77

previous section.

The effectiveness of entanglement between number of similar elementary particles of
Sender and Receiver - free or in composition of atoms and molecules via highly anisotropic
nonlocal virtual guide bundles

n

Nt, r 

∑ VirGSME S  R

i

x,y,z

    14.7a

is dependent on synchronization of C  W pulsation frequency of these particles.
In this expression n is a number of pairs of similar tuned elementary particles
(protons, neutrons and electrons) in atoms/molecules of S and R; Nt, r is a number of
coherent atoms/molecules in the coherent molecular clusters - mesoscopic BC
(Kaivarainen, 2001; 2004).

The ’tuning’ of particles phase and frequency pulsation occur under the forced

resonance exchange interaction between virtual pressure waves VPWq
particles.

; VPWq

− and pulsing

The mechanism proposed may explain the experimentally confirmed nonlocal

interaction between coherent elementary particles (Aspect and Gragier, 1983), atoms and
their remote coherent clusters.

Our theory predicts that the same mechanism, involving nonlocal bundles

, may provide the entanglement between macroscopic

Nt, r  ∑ VirGSME S  Rx,y,z
systems, including biological ones.

i

14.5 The vortical filaments in superfluids, as the analogs of virtual guides of Bivacuum

When the rotation velocity of a cylindrical vessel containing He II becomes high
enough, then the emergency of so-called vortex filaments becomes thermodynamically
favorable. The filament is formed by the superfluid component of He II in such a way that
their momentum of movement decreases the total energy of He II in a rotating vessel. The
shape of filaments in this case is like a straight rod and their thickness is of the order of
atom’s dimensions, increasing with lowering the temperature at T  T.

Vortex filaments are continuous. They may be closed or limited within the boundaries

of vessel.

The hydrodynamics of normal and superfluid components of He II in container of

radius (r), rotating with angular frequency  are characterized by two velocities,
correspondingly

vn   r
vsf  

m ∇  N 
m r

    14.8

    14.8a

where ∇ ~ ksf  1/Lsf is a phase of Bose condensate wave function:   s
is a density of superfluid component); N is a number of rectilinear vortex lines.

1/2  ei (s

The motion of superfluid component is potential, as far its velocity (vsf is determined

by eq. 14.8a and:

The values of velocity of circulation of filaments are determined (Landau, 1941) as

follows:

rot vsf  0

    14.8b

78

 vsfdl  2r vsf  2  

m Δ

where: Δ  n 2 is a phase change as a result of circulation, n  1, 2, 3… is the

integer number.

and

Increasing the radius of circulation (r) leads to decreased circulation velocity vsf.

Comparing (14.9a) and (14.9) gives:

vsf  /r

  n 
m

    14.9

    14.9a

    14.10

It has been shown that only vortical structures with n  1 are thermodynamically stable.
Taking this into account, we have from (14.9a) and (14.10):

r  n 
mvsf

    14.11

An increase in the angle frequency of rotation of the cylinder containing HeII results in

the increased density distribution of vortex filaments on the cross-section of the cylinder.
As a result of interaction between the filament and the normal component of HeII, the

filaments move in the rotating cylinder with normal liquid.

The flow of He II through the capillaries also can be accompanied by appearance of

vortex filaments.

In ring-shaped vessels the circulation of closed vortex filaments is stable. Stability is

related to the quantum pattern of circulation change (eqs. 14.9 and 14.10).

Let us consider now the phenomena of superfluidity in He II in the framework of our

hierarchic concept (Kaivarainen, 2001).

14.6 Two stages of Virtual Guides of spin, momentum and energy (VirGS,M,E

i

 formation

between remote elementary particles

The entanglement between two remote similar elementary particles (electrons, protons,
neutrons, photons) of opposite spins, named [Sender (S)] and [Receiver (R)], is revealed in
many experiments, starting from Aspect and Grangier (1983). The formal explanation of
entanglement between remote particles is their unification/description by the same wave
function. For example, this takes a place at superconductivity and superfluidity, i.e. in
conditions of macroscopic Bose condensation. However, the mediator and concrete
mechanism of entanglement is still obscure.

In accordance to our theory, the entanglement between similar elementary particles can

be realized via Virtual Guides of spin, momentum and energy (VirGS,M,E

i

.

We propose here two stages of Virtual Guides formation:
1. The tuning of the frequency and phase of C  W pulsation of remote elementary

particles, like photons electrons, protons, neutrons in isolated state or in composition of
atoms and molecules. The ’tuning’ occur under the action of the basic all-pervading

Bivacuum virtual pressure waves: VPWq1

and VPWq1

;

−

2. This stage stimulate self-assembly of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions

(BVF−  BVF to the VirGSME S  R filaments with properties of quasi
one-dimensional virtual Bose condensate.

14.7 The mechanism of momentum and energy transmission between

79

similar elementary particles of Sender and Receiver via VirGSMES  Ri

The increments or decrements of momentum Δp  ΔmV

vtr,lb and kinetic (ΔTktr,lb
energy transmission from [S] to [R] of coherent elementary particles is determined by the
translational and librational velocity variation (Δv of nucleons of Sender. This means, that
energy/momentum transition from [S] to [R] is possible, if they are in nonequilibrium state.

The variation of kinetic energy of atomic nuclei under external force application,
induces nonequilibrium in a system S  R and decoherence of C  W pulsation of
protons and neutrons of [S] and [R]. The nonlocal energy transmission from [S] to [R] is
possible, if the decoherence is not big enough for disassembly of the virtual microtubules
and their bundles. The bundles of atomic Virtual Guides are named the Entanglement
channels:

Entanglement channels  Nt, r 

∑ VirGSME S  R

n

i

x,y,z

    14.12

where: Nt, r is a number of virtual guides in the bundle, equal to number of coherent

atoms/molecules in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC) in volume of remote
Sender and Receiver; n - is a number of coherent elementary pairs of similar fermions (e,
p, n) of opposite spins in atom/molecules, composing distant clusters in state of mesoscopic
Bose condensation (mBC).

The instantaneous energy flux via each of (VirGSME)i is mediated by pulsation of
energy and radii of tori (V and antitori (V− of Bivacuum bosons: BVB V↑↓ V− in
single Virtual Guides or Bivacuum fermions of Cooper pairs BVF↑  BVF↓i in the case
of double Virtual Guides.

The corresponding energy increments of the actual torus and complementary antitorus
of BVB, forming (VirGSME)i, are directly related to increments of Sender particle external
velocity Δv:

ΔEV  ΔmV

c2  

ΔEV−  −ΔmV

−c2  −

where: p mV

v; p− mV

and LV−  /mV
VirGSME S  Ri.

 mV

 mV

−
F↓
F↑


p
R2 ΔvF↑
p−
R2 ΔvF↑
c
−v are the actual and complementary momenta; LV  /mV

c2 ΔdVV−
dVV−
−c2 ΔdVV−
dVV−

c2 ΔLV
LV
−c2 ΔLV−
LV−

−
F↓
F↑
−

 −mV

 −mV

actual

    14.

    14.

complementary

−c are the radii of torus and antitorus of BVB  V  V−, forming

The nonlocal energy exchange between [S] and [R] is accompanied by the instant
pulsation of radii of tori (V and antitori (V− of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and
BVB, accompanied by corresponding pulsation |ΔLV/LV | of the whole virtual
microtubule VirGSME (Fig.9).

The nonequilibrium state of similar elementary particles of [S] and [R] with similar rest

Sc2  m0

Rc2, connected by VirGS,M,E, means the difference in their external

mass (m0
energies and frequency of the empirical de Broglie waves and that of C  W pulsation.
The consequence of this difference are beats between states of [S] and [R], equal to
frequency of VirGSME radius pulsation. Using eqs. 14.13 and 14.13a, we get:

ΔVirG

S,R  CW

S

R
− CW

 1
h

h2
2 
B
mV

S −

h2
2 
B

mV

R

    14.14

The beats between the total frequencies of [S] and [R] states (electrons, protons or

80

neutrons), connected by VirGS,M,E and different excitation states j − k of
BVF↑  BVF↓j−k are accompanied by emission  absorption of positive and negative
virtual pressure waves: VPW and VPW−, generating positive and negative virtual
pressure: VirP and VirP−.

The difference between actual energies of elementary particles of Sender and Receiver

can be expressed via these virtual pressures, using eq.14.13 and 14.14, as:

Etot

S − Etot

R  hΔVirG

S,R  mV

 − mV

S,Rc2  mV

− − mV

−S,Rc2 ~

~ VirP  VirP S,R

    14.15a

    14.15.b

If the temperature or kinetic energy of [S] is higher, than that of [R]: TS TR, then
S,R  0 and the direction of momentum and energy flux, mediated by positive and
ΔVirG
negative virtual pressure of subquantum particles and antiparticles: ΔVirP and ΔVirP−, is
from [S] to [R].

The length of VirGSMES  R, connecting tuned elementary particles, also can vary

in the process of [S] and [R] interaction because of immediate self-assembly of Bivacuum
dipoles into virtual guides.

14.8 The mechanism of spin exchange between tuned particles
of Sender and Receiver via VirGSME

Most effectively the proposed mechanism of spin (information), momentum and energy

exchange can work between Sender and Receiver, containing coherent molecular clusters
with dimensions of 3D standing de Broglie waves of molecules in state of mesoscopic Bose
condensate (mBC) (Kaivarainen, 2001, 2008).

The nonlocal spin/qubit exchange between [S] and [R] via single or double

i

S  Ri does not need the radius pulsation, but only the instantaneous

VirGSME
polarization change of Bivacuum bosons BVB  BVB− i of single virtual guides or
instant spin state exchange of two Bivacuum fermions, forming virtual Cooper pairs via
intermediate stage BVB  BVB−i in virtual guide (Fig.9):

BVF↑  BVF↓i  BVB  BVB−i  BVF↓  BVF↑i

    14.16

The instantaneous spin state/information exchange frequency is determined by
frequency of spin change of fermion of Sender, accompanied by counterphase spin state
change of fermion of Receiver.

The described above mechanisms of nonlocal/instant transmission of spin/information,

momentum and energy between coherent clusters of elementary particles and atoms of
Sender and Receiver, connected by Virtual Guides, may describe a lot of unconventional
experimental results, like Kozyrev, Tiller ones and lot of Psi phenomena.

In virtual microtubules VirGSME

i

S  Ri the time and its ’pace’ are uncertain:

t  0/0, if the external translational or tangential velocities (v) and accelerations (dv/dt) of
Bivacuum dipoles, composing them, are zero.

14.9 Activation of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI) between Sender and Receiver

Theories of the surface and volume Virtual Replica (VRsur,vol) of material objects in

Bivacuum (ether body) and primary VR multiplication VRM(r,t) (astral and mental
bodies) in combination with theory of Virtual Guides (VirGSME are the background for
explanation of different kind of paranormal phenomena.

The primary VRsur,vol represents a result of interference of basic Bivacuum virtual
1/2, modulated by
waves (reference waves) with similar by nature VPWm
C  W pulsation of elementary particles and translational and librational de Broglie

 and VirSWm

81

waves of molecules of macroscopic object (object waves).

Such interference of the reference waves with the surface de Broglie waves gives the

surface VRsur. The interference of reference virtual waves with the volume de Broglie
waves gives the volume VRsur.

The infinitive multiplication of primary VRsur and VRvol in space and time: VRM(r,t)

in form of 3D packets of virtual standing waves, represents the self- iteration of primary
VRsur,vol, stimulated by its interference with all pervading reference waves - Bivacuum
Virtual Pressure Waves (VPWq1

) and Virtual Spin Waves (VirSWq1

1/2).



It is possible to name the VRM, as Holoiteration by analogy with regular optical

hologram.

Depending on the type modulation (section 13.2) the primary VR and its multiplication

VRM(r,t) can be subdivided on the:

a) frequency modulated;
b) amplitude modulated;
c) phase modulated;
d) polarization modulated.
Only their superposition contains all the information about positions and dynamics of

atoms/molecules, composing object’s volume and surface.

14.10 Stages of the Entanglement Channels formation between macroscopic objects

A possible mechanism of nonlocal exchange of the spin (qubits), momentum and
energy between macroscopic Sender [S] and Receiver [R] involves following three stages:

Stage 1. Superposition of nonlocal fractions of Virtual Replicas Multiplication
VRM(r,t), formed by standing Virtual spin waves of remote [Sender] and [Receiver]:

VRMS

VirSWr, t  VRMR

VirSWr, t

    14.17

In other terms, this stage represents the superposition of the mental bodies of Sender

and Receiver.

Stage 2. Superposition of fraction of Virtual Replicas Multiplication of [S] and [R],

formed by standing virtual pressure waves, modulated by [S] and [R]:

VRMr, tS

dis  VRMr, tR

dis  ∑VPWm

  VPWm

− S

i  VPWm

  VPWm

− R

i      14.18

In other words, this stage represents the superposition of the astral bodies of Sender and

Receiver.

The described above three stages of [S] and [R] Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI)

involves formation of Entanglement channel as a second stage. For activation of this
channel, the whole system: S  R should be in nonequilibrium state.

Stage 3. Formation of the Entanglement channels, as a number of bundles of nonlocal
S  R of spin, momentum and energy, connecting nucleons

Virtual guides VirGSME
and electrons of coherent atoms of [S] and [R] in state of correlated mesoscopic Bose
condensates:

i

Entanglement channel  Nt, r 

∑ VirGSME S  R

n

i

x,y,z

    14.18a

where: n is number of correlated pairs of similar elementary particles of Sender and

82

Receiver with opposite spins; Nt, r is a number of coherent atoms/molecules in the
coherent molecular clusters - mesoscopic BC (Kaivarainen, 2001; 2004).

VirGSME S  R is a quasi one-dimensional virtual Bose condensate, formed by
virtual Cooper pairs of [BVF↑  BVF↓i or Bivacuum bosons BVBi and BVB−i.
We put forward a conjecture, that even the exchange of macroscopic number of

coherent atoms between very remote regions of the Universe is possible via the
Entanglement channels.

If this consequence of Unified theory will be confirmed, we get a method for the instant
remote transportation of macroscopic objects (teleportation) in state of Bose condensation.

For special case, if Sender S is a psychic, the double highly ordered conducting
membranes of the coherent nerve cells (like in axons) may provide the cumulative Casimir
effect.

This coherent effect may increase the fraction of water in the internal nonpolar regions

of the membranes in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC), contributing Virtual
Replica of [S] and [R].

The quantum neurodynamics processes in Sender (Healer) may be accompanied by
radiation of electromagnetic waves or magnetic impulses, propagating in Bivacuum via
virtual guides: VirGSMES  R. Such kind of radiation from different regions of body
of Healer has been revealed experimentally.

The important role in Bivacuum mediated Mind-Matter and Mind-Mind interaction,

plays the coherent fraction of water in microtubules of neurons in state of mesoscopic
molecular Bose condensate (mBC) (Kaivarainen: http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0102086).

This fraction of mBC is a variable parameter, dependent on structural state of

microtubules and number of simultaneous elementary acts of consciousness (Kaivarainen,
2008 and http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0003045). It can be modulated not only by excitation
of nerve cells, but also by specific interaction with virtual replica of one or more
chromosomes (VRDNA of the same or other cells.

The change of frequency of selected kind of thermal fluctuations, like cavitational ones,
in the volume of receiver [R], including cytoplasm water of nerve cells, is accompanied by
reversible disassembly of microtubules and actin’ filaments, i.e. gel  sol transitions.
These reactions, responsible for elementary act of consciousness, are dependent on the
changes of corresponding activation barriers.

14.11 The interrelation between macroscopic entanglement and acts of consciousness

The mechanisms of macroscopic entanglement, proposed in our work, is responsible for
change of intermolecular Van der Waals interaction in the volume of [R] and probability of
selected thermal fluctuations (i.e. cavitational fluctuations), induced by [S]. In this case,
realization of certain series of elementary acts of consciousness of [S] will induce similar
series in nerve system of [R]. This means informational exchange between VRR and VRS of
two psychics via Virtual Guides: VirGSME
Entanglement channels (14.18a).

S  R, and their bundles, forming the

i

The specific character of telepathic signal transmission from [S] to [R] may be

S of microtubules by VRMDNA

provided by modulation of VRMMT
of DNA of Sender’s
chromosomes in neuron ensembles, responsible for subconsciousness, imagination and
consciousness. The resonance - the most effective remote informational/energy exchange
between two psychics is dependent on corresponding ’tuning’ of their nerve systems. As a
background of this tuning can be the described Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI)
between the crucial neurons components of [S] to [R]:

S

83

∑ 2 centrioles  chromosomes

S

BMI

 ∑ 2 centrioles  chromosomes

R

    14.19

In accordance to our theory of elementary cycle of consciousness and three stages of

entanglement channel formation, described above, the modulation of dynamics of
[assembly  disassembly] of microtubules by influence on probability of cavitational
fluctuations in the nerve cells and corresponding gel  sol transitions by directed mental
activity of [Sender] can provide telepathic contact and remote viewing between [Sender]
and [Receiver].

The mechanism of remote healing could be the same, but the local targets in the body of

patient [R] are not necessarily the MTs and chromosomes of the nerve cells, but centrioles
 chromosomes of the ill organs (heart, liver, etc.).

The telekinesis, as example of mind-matter interaction, should be accompanied by
significant nonequilibrium process in the nerve system of Sender, related to increasing of
kinetic energy of coherent molecules in neurons of Sender, like cumulative momentum of
water clusters, coherently melting in microtubules of centrioles and inducing their
disassembly. Corresponding momentum and kinetic energy are transmitted to ’receiver -
target’ via multiple correlated bundles of VirGSME in superimposed VRMS,R (Psi-
channels).

The specific magnetic potential exchange between [S] and [R] via Virtual tunnel can be

generated by the nerve impulse regular propagation along the axons and depolarization of
nerve cells membranes (i.e. electric current) in the ’tuned’ ensemble of neuron cells of
psychic - [Sender], accompanied by magnetic flux. These processes are accompanied by
BVF↑  BVB  BVF↓ equilibrium shift to the right or left, representing magnetic field
excitation.

The evidence are existing, that Virtual tunnel between [S] and [R] works better, if the

frequencies of geomagnetic Schumann waves - around 8 Hz (close to brain waves
frequency) are the same in location of [S] and [R]. However, the main coherence factor in
 ,
accordance to our theory, are all-pervading Bivacuum virtual pressure waves (VPWq1
with basic Compton frequency [0  m0c2/i, equal to carrying frequency of [Corpuscle
 Wave] pulsations of the electrons, protons, neurons, composing real matter and providing
entanglement. The macroscopic Bivacuum flicker fluctuation, activated by non-regular
changes/jumps in properties of complex Hierarchical Virtual replica of Solar system and
even galactic, related to sideral time, also may influence on quality of Entanglement
Channels between Sender and Receiver.

TABLE
The Entanglement Channel formation between Sender [S] and Receiver [R]:

Nt, r 

n
∑ VirGSME S  R

i

.

x,y,z

The role of paired and unpaired sub-elementary particles
of the electron’s [Corpuscle  Wave] pulsation and its rotation:
− C  〈F↑
in Bivacuum - mediated interaction between sender [S] and receiver [R]

−W  F↑

−C  F↑

  F↓

  F↓

− W

〈F↑

84

Pair of sub-elementary particle

and antiparticle pulsation and rotation:
−W  〈F↑

  F↓

  F↓

−C

F↑

1. Virtual Pressure Waves: VPW

 VPW−

2. Total Virtual Pressure energy increment,
equal to that of unpaired (ΔEF↑

:


ΔVirPF↑

−
F↓

 1

2 VirPF↑

  VirPF↓

−



−

F↑

−
F↓

3. Virtual Replica of the Object (VR VR
4. Virtual Replicas of [S] and [R]

in

VR

sur

)

and their Multiplication:
VRMS(r,t)  ∑ VRS  ∑ VRR  VRMR(r,t)

Unpaired sub-elementary

fermion pulsation and rotation:

F↑↓

 C

BvSO
 F↑↓

 W

CVC
 VirSW

1. Virtual Spin waves: VirSW

IS ≡ IVirSW1/2 ~ KBVF↑BVF↓t 
lb sinB

i t  B

KBVF↑BVF↓0 sin0

lbt

2. Electromagnetic potential:

EEM   |mV

 − mV

− |c2 ~
F↑

−
F↓

~ 1

−



−

 − VirPF↓

2  VirPF↑
3. Gravitational potential:
− |c2 ~
F↑

EG   mV

 − |mV

2  VirPF↑

 − VirPF↓

−



−

~ 1

−
F↓

4. Virtual Spin Waves (VirSW):

5. The Entanglement Channel formation

Nt, r 

n
∑ VirGSME S  R

i

x,y,z

between the remote [S] and [R]:
BVB
 VirSWR
BVF↑BVF↓

S1/2

VirSWS

S−1/2

Pauli attraction (Cooper pairs formation) or repulsion between BVF↕ of the opposite
or similar spins is provided by paired and unpaired sub-elementary fermions
————————————————————————————————————–
One of the result of the Entanglement Channel formation, as a superposition of VRMS,R and
ext
bundles of VirGSME
0  n0
matter, changing the probability of defects origination in solids and cavitational fluctuations
in liquids. The bidirectional change of pH of water via Virtual tunnel can be a consequence
of  ΔVP and Δ0 influence on cavitational fluctuations, accompanied by shift of
dynamic equilibrium: H2O  HO−H and assembly  disassembly of actin filaments in
the nerve cells and gel  sol

2  1/0c2. In turn, (Δ0 influence Van-der-Waals interactions in condensed

, is a change of permittivity 0 and permeability 0 of Bivacuum

transitions as a part of act of consciousness.

The coherency between signals of [S] and [R] can be provided by forced resonance of

basic Virtual Pressure Waves (VPW with elementary particles of [S] and [R].

The modulation of Bivacuum mediated interaction by the cosmic macroscopic

fluctuations, Shumann resonance and geophysical magnetic flicker noise also increase the
probability of macroscopic entanglement.

The [dissociation  association equilibrium oscillation of coherent water clusters in
state of molecular Bose condensate (mBC) in the microtubules of the nerve cells is a crucial
factor for realization of quantum Psi phenomena. This follows from our model of

85

elementary act of consciousness.

14.12 The examples of Bivacuum Mediated Interaction (BMI) between macroscopic
objects,
realized via Entanglement channels

In accordance to our approach, the remote interaction between macroscopic Sender [S]
and Receiver [R] can be realized, as a result of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI), like
superposition of distant and nonlocal components of their Virtual Replicas Multiplication
(VRMS   VRMR), described in previous sections.

Nonequilibrium processes in [Sender], accompanied by acceleration of particles, like
evaporation, heating, cooling, melting, boiling etc. may stimulate the nonelastic effects in
the volume of [Receiver] and increments of modulated virtual pressure and spin waves
(ΔVPWm
  F↓
F↑
representing electrons, protons and neutrons.

1/2, accompanied [C  W pulsation of triplets
 i , formed by sub-elementary fermions of different generation,

 and ΔVirSWm
−  F↕

The following unconventional kinds of effects of non-electromagnetic and

non-gravitational nature can be anticipated in the remote interaction between macroscopic
nonequilibrium [Sender] and sensitive detector [Receiver] via multiple Virtual spin and
energy guides VirGSME (Fig.9), if our theory of nonlocal spin, momentum and energy
exchange between [S] and [R], described above is correct:

I. Weak repulsion and attraction between ’tuned’ [S] and [R] and rotational momentum
in [R] induced by [S], as a result of transmission of momentum/kinetic energy and angular
momentum (spin) between elementary particles of [S] and [R]. The probability of such
’tuned’ interaction between [S] and [R] is dependent on dimensions of coherent clusters of
atoms and molecules of condensed matter in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC)
(Kaivarainen, 1995; 2001; 2003; 2004). The number of atoms in such clusters Nt, r is
related to number of VirGSME in the Entanglement channels connecting tuned mBC in [S]
and [R]:

Entanglement channel  Nt, r 

∑ VirGSME S  R

n

i

x,y,z

. The number of coherent pairs of atoms in Sender and Receiver Nt, r may be regulated
by temperature, ultrasound, etc.

The kinetic energy distant transmission from atoms of [S] to atoms of [R] may be

accompanied by the temperature variation and local pressure/sound effects in [R];
II. Increasing the probability of thermal fluctuations in the volume of [R] due to

decreasing of Van der Waals interactions, because of charges screening effects, induced by
overlapping of distant virtual replicas of [S] and [R] and increasing of dielectric
permittivity of Bivacuum.

In water the variation of probability of cavitational fluctuations should by accompanied

by the in-phase variation of pH and electric conductivity due to shifting the equilibrium:
H2O  H  HO− to the right or left;

III. Small changing of mass of Receptor in conditions, changing the probability of the

inelastic recoil effects in the volume of [R] under influence of [S];

IV. Registration of metastable virtual particles, as a result of Bivacuum symmetry

perturbations.

The first kind (I) of new class of listed above interactions between coherent fermions of

[S] and [R] is a result of huge number of correlated Entanglement channels formation

86

between coherent regions of Sender and Receiver.

These Entanglement channels can be responsible for:
a) the momentum and kinetic energy exchange between [Sender] and [Receiver]

providing attraction or repulsion between S and R;

b) regulation of Pauli attraction (spin-spin exchange) effects between fermions of [S]

and [R];

c) transmission of macroscopic rotational momentum from the clusters of coherent

atoms of [S] to [R], representing primary librational effectons (mesoscopic Bose
condensate).

The second kind (II) of phenomena: influence of [S] on probability of thermal
fluctuations in [R], - is a consequence of the additional symmetry shift in Bivacuum
fermions (BVF↕, induced by superposition of distant and nonlocal multiplicated Virtual
Replicas of [S] and [R]: VRMS VRMR, which is accompanied by increasing of
Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕  V  V− virtual charge: Δe  eV − eV−  e0 in the
volume of [R]. Corresponding increasing of Bivacuum permittivity (0 and decreasing
magnetic permeability (0 :
effects in volume of [R], induced by [S]. This weakens the electromagnetic Van der Waals
interaction between molecules of [R] and increases the probability of defects origination
and cavitational fluctuations in solid or liquid phase of Receiver.

0  1/0c2 is responsible for the charges screening

The third kind of phenomena (III): reversible decreasing of mass of rigid [R] can be a
result of reversible lost of energy of Corpuscular phase of particles, as a consequence of
inelastic recoil effects, following the in-phase C → W transition of Ncoh coherent
nucleons in the volume of [R].

The probability of recoil effects can be enhanced by heating the rigid object or by
striking it by another hard object. This effect can be registered directly - by the object mass
decreasing. In conditions, close to equilibrium, the Matter - Bivacuum energy exchange
relaxation time, following the process of coherent C  W pulsation of macroscopic
fraction of atoms is very short and corresponding mass defect effect is undetectable. Such
collective recoil effect of coherent particles could be big in superconducting or superfluid
systems of macroscopic Bose condensation or in crystals, with big domains of atoms in
state of Bose condensation.

Another possible explanation of the Receptor mass change is a shifting of [Corpuscle 

Wave] dynamic equilibrium to the massless Wave phase under the influence of Sender.

The fourth kind of the listed above phenomena - increasing the probability of virtual

particles and antiparticles origination can be a result of asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles
acceleration in conditions of forced resonance with high-frequency Bivacuum virtual
waves.

The listed above nontrivial consequences of Unified theory (I - IV) are consistent with

unusual data, obtained by groups of Kozyrev (1984; 1991) and Korotaev (1999; 2000).

It is important to note, that these experiments are incompatible with current paradigm. It

is timed out and should be replaced by the new one.

14.13 The effects of the Virtual Replica of asymmetric constructions, like pyramids, on the
matter-target properties

Our theory of Virtual Replica material objects and its interaction with sensitive targets

is confirmed by number of experiments with asymmetric inorganic constructions, like
pyramids, cones, etc.

In works of Adamenko, Levchook (1994), Narimanov (2001) and Miakin (2002) such
’pyramid effects’ has been demonstrated on examples of the following test-systems, placed

87

inside the pyramids:

- the cultures of microbes (dynamic behavior),
- water (pH, O2 concentration),
- polymers solution enable to thixotropic structures formation (optical density),
- benzene acid (UV absorption).

The Virtual Replicas of the pyramids or cones should be much more asymmetric, than
VR generated by cube or sphere. Consequently, the effects of corresponding virtual replicas
of hollow of filled structure on very sensitive test systems, like water or biosystems, can be
different also.

This consequence of our theory was confirmed experimentally by Narimanov (2001).

He keeps a flask with water under the pyramid with dimensions of tens of centimeters
during few days. This interaction makes pH of water lower, than in control flask, placed
under cube in the same room and temperature.

The ice, formed from the ’pyramid - treated water’ melts about 10% faster, than the
control ice. These results point to increasing the concentration of the defects in the pyramid
- treated ice structure.

The perturbation of the vacuum screening properties by the different shapes of cavities

is confirmed also by different Lamb shifts in atomic spectra of samples in such cavities.

It is known, that the Lamb shift is determined by screening of the electrons and nuclear
charges by the charged virtual particles and antiparticles - asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles in
our terminology, induced by Virtual Replica of asymmetric objects.

15. Unification of Actual and Virtual Self.
The Conjectures of the Soul, Global Consciousness & Superconsciousness

15.1 Elementary act of Consciousness or “Cycle of Mind”,
Involving Distant and Nonlocal Interaction

Each macroscopic process can be subdivided on the quantum and classical stages.
Particularly, the quantum stages of Cycle of Mind involves:
1) the stimulation of dynamic correlation between water clusters in the same and
remote microtubules (MTs) in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC) by phonons
(acoustic waves) and by librational IR photons (electromagnetic-EM waves) distant
exchange;

2) the transition from distant EM interaction between remote MTs to nonlocal quantum
interaction, induced by IR photons exchange between clusters, the clusters Virtual Replicas
multiplication (VRM) and virtual guides (VirG) formation between elementary particles of
remote coherent water molecules. This process represents transition from mesoscopic Bose
condensation to macroscopic nonuniform Bose condensation, oscillating between coherent
and decoherent states (Kaivarainen, 2006, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207027);

3) the collapsing of corresponding macroscopic wave function, as a result of the optical

bistability of the entangled water clusters and their disassembly to noncoherent molecules
due to librational photons pumping, shifting clusters to less stable state;

4) turning the clusterphilic interaction between water clusters in the open state of
cavities between alpha and beta tubulins to hydrophobic one and the in-phase shift of these
cavities to the closed state due to clusters disassembly (Kaivarainen,
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0102086).

The classical stages of our Hierarchic model of elementary act of “Cycle of Mind” are

following:

a) the nerve cells membrane depolarization;
b) the gel → sol transition induced by disconnection of microtubules (MTs) with

88

membranes and disassembly of the actin filaments;

c) the shape /volume pulsation of dendrites of big number of coherently interacting
nerve cells, accompanied by jump-way reorganization of synaptic contacts on the dendrites
surface;

d) the back sol → gel transition in corresponding cells ensembles, stabilizing

(memorizing) of new state by formation of new system of microtubules and MTs associated
proteins in the dendrites (MAPs).

The ’Period of Cycle of Mind’ is determined by the sum of the life-time of quantum
phase - macroscopic Bose condensation of the entangled water clusters in a big number of
microtubules, providing coherence and macroscopic entanglement and the life-time of
collapsed mesoscopic Bose condensation, induced by decoherence factors. The life-time of
entangled coherent phase can be many times shorter than classical phase. Consequently, the
coherence  decoherence dynamic equilibrium in macroscopic system of neurons is

strongly shifted to the right. However, even extremely short time of macroscopic
entanglement between microtubules is enough for nonlocal remote interaction. This is true
not only for systems under consideration, but for any kind of oscillating macroscopic
entanglement, possible even at physiological temperatures.

Our approach to elementary act of consciousness has some common features with
well-known Penrose - Hameroff model, interrelated act of consciousness with the wave
function of microtubules collapsing. So we start from description of this Orchestrated
objective reduction (Orch OR) model.

Two triggering mechanisms of elementary act of consciousness

In some cases, the excitation/depolarization of nerve cells by external factors (sound,

vision, smell, tactical feeling) are the triggering - primary events of consciousness and
[gel→sol] transitions in nerve cells are secondary events.

However, the opposite 2nd mechanism, when [gel → sol] transitions are the primary
events, for example, as a result of thinking/meditation and nerve cells depolarization are
secondary events, is possible also.

The 1st mechanism includes following stages of elementary act of consciousness:
a) simultaneous depolarization of big enough number of neurons, forming ensemble,
accompanied by opening the potential-dependent channels and increasing the concentration
of Ca2 in cytoplasm of neurons body;

b) collective disassembly of actin filaments, accompanied by [gel → sol] transition of
big group of depolarized neurons stimulated by Ca2 − activated proteins like gelsolin and
villin. Before depolarization the concentration of Ca2 outside of cell is about 10−3M and
inside about 10−7M. Such strong gradient provide fast increasing of these ions
concentration in cell till 10−5M after depolarization.

c) strong decreasing of cytoplasm viscosity and disjoining of the () ends of MTs from

membranes, making possible the spatial fluctuations of MTs orientations inducing
decoherence and switching off the entanglement between mBC;

d) volume/shape pulsation of neuron’s body and dendrites, inducing reorganization of

ionic channels activity and synaptic contacts in the excited neuron ensembles. These
volume/shape pulsations occur due to reversible decrease of the intra-cell water activity and
corresponding swallow of cell as a result of increasing of passive osmotic diffusion of
water from the external space into the cell.

In opposite, 2nd mechanism of elementary act of consciousness, the depolarization of
nerve membranes and axonal firing is a secondary event and gel → sol transition a primary
one, stimulated in turn by simultaneous disassembly of big number of correlated water

89

clusters to relatively independent molecules.

The electrical recording of human brain activity demonstrate a coherent (40 to 70 Hz)

firing among widely distributed and distant brain neurons (Singer, 1993). Such
synchronization in a big population of groups of cells points to possibility of not only the
regular axon-mediated interaction, but also to fields-mediated interaction and quantum
entanglement between water clusters in MTs of remote neurons bodies.

The comparison of Hierarchic model of consciousness with
Quantum brain dynamics model

Our approach to Quantum Mind problem has some common features with model of
Quantum Brain Dynamics (QBD ), proposed by L.Riccardi and H.Umezawa in 1967 and
developed by C.I.Stuart, Y.Takahashi, H.Umezava (1978, 1979), M.Jibu and K.Yasue
(1992, 1995).

In addition to traditional electrical and chemical factors in the nerve tissue function, this

group introduced two new types of quantum excitations (ingredients), responsible for the
overall control of electrical and chemical signal transfer: corticons and exchange bosons
(dipolar phonons).

The corticons has a definite spatial localization and can be described by Pauli spin
matrices. The exchange bosons, like phonons are delocalized and follow Bose-Einstein
statistics.

By absorbing and emitting bosons coherently, corticons manifest global collective

dynamics… , providing systematized brain functioning” (Jibu and Yasue,1993).

In other paper (1992) these authors gave more concrete definitions: ”Corticons are
nothing but quanta of the molecular vibrational field of biomolecules (quanta of electric
polarization, confined in protein filaments). Exchange bosons are nothing but quanta of the
vibrational field of water molecules… " .

It is easy to find analogy between spatially localized ”corticons” and our primary
effectons as well as between ”exchange bosons” and our primary - electromagnetic and
secondary - acoustic deformons.

However, Hierarchic theory considers 24 collective excitations in any condensed matter

(including water and biosystems) and can analyze each of them quantitatively.

Jibu, Yasue, Hagan and others (1994) discussed a possible role of quantum optical
coherence in microtubules for brain function. They considered MTs as a wave guides for
coherent superradiation. They also supposed that coherent photons, penetrating in MTs,
lead to ”self-induced transparency”. Both of these phenomena are well known in fiber and
quantum optics.

We also use these phenomena for explanation of transition from mesoscopic
entanglement of water clusters in MTs to macroscopic one, as a result of IR photons
exchange between coherent clusters (mBC). However, we have to note, that our mechanism
of transition of mBC to macroscopic BC in ’tuned’ MTs do not need self-induced
transparency.

It follows also from our approach that the mechanism of macroscopic, but

noncontineous Bose condensation of water clusters do not need the hypothesis of Frölich
that the proteins (tubulins of MTs) are pumped into coherent macroscopic quantum states
by biochemical energy.

We also do not use the idea of Jibu et al. that the MTs works like the photons wave -

guides without possibility of side radiation throw the walls of MTs. The latter in our
approach increases the probability of macroscopic entanglement between remote MTs and
cells of the organism.

The Properties of Microtubules and

90

Internal Water

Let us consider the properties of microtubules (MT) as one of the most important
component of cytoskeleton, responsible for spatial organization and dynamic behavior of
the cells.

The microtubules (MTs) are the nanostructures of cells, interconnecting the quantum

and classical stages of the Cycle of Mind.

The [assembly  disassembly] equilibrium of microtubules composed of  and 
tubulins is strongly dependent on internal and external water activity (a, concentration of
Ca2 and on the electric field gradient change due to MTs piezoelectric properties.

The  and  tubulins are globular proteins with equal molecular mass MM  55. 000,

usually forming  dimers with linear dimension 8 nm. Polymerization of microtubules
can be stimulated by NaCl, Mg2 and GTP (1:1 tubulin monomer) (Alberts et al., 1983).
The presence of heavy water (deuterium oxide) also stimulates polymerization of MTs.
In contrast to that the presence of ions of Ca2 even in micromolar concentrations,

action of colhicine and lowering the temperature till 40C induce disassembly of MT.
Due to multigenic composition,  and  tubulins have a number of isoforms. For

example, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis revealed 17 varieties of  tubulin in
mammalian brain (Lee et al., 1986). Tubulin structure may also be altered by enzymatic
modification: addition or removal of amino acids, glycosylation, etc.

Microtubules are hollow cylinders, filled with water. Their internal diameter about

din 140Å and external diameter dext  280Å Figure 2). These data, including the
dimensions of  dimers were obtained from x-ray crystallography (Amos and Klug,
1974). However we must keep in mind that under the conditions of crystallization the
multiglobular proteins and their assemblies tends to more compact structure than in
solutions due to lower water activity.

This means that in natural conditions the above dimensions could be a bit bigger.
The length of microtubules (MT) can vary in the interval:

lt  1 − 20  105Å

    19

The spacing between the tubulin monomers in MT is about 40 Å and that between 
dimers: 80 Å are the same in longitudinal and transversal directions of MT.

Microtubules sometimes can be as long as axons of nerve cells, i.e. tenth of centimeters

long. Microtubules (MT) in axons are usually parallel and are arranged in bundles.
Microtubules associated proteins (MAP) form a ”bridges”, linking MT and are responsible
for their interaction and cooperative system formation. Brain contains a big amount of
microtubules. Their most regular length of MTs is about 105Å, i.e. close to librational
photon wave length.

The viscosity of ordered water in such narrow microtubules seems to be too high for

transport of ions or metabolites at normal conditions.

All 24 types of quasi-particles, introduced in Hierarchic theory of condensed matter
(Kaivarainen, 2008), also can be pertinent for ordered water in the microtubules (MT).
However, the dynamic equilibrium between populations of different quasi-particles of
water in MT must be shifted towards primary librational effectons, comparing to bulk water
because of interfacial effects (Kaivarainen, 2000, 2008). The dimensions of internal
primary librational effectons have to be bigger than in bulk water as a consequence of
stabilization of MT walls the mobility of water molecules, decreasing their momentum and
increasing their most probable de Broglie wave length.

The interrelation must exist between properties of internal water in MT and structure

and dynamics of their walls, depending on  −  tubulins interaction. Especially

91

important can be a quantum transitions like convertons tr  lb. The convertons in are
accompanied by [dissociation/association] of primary librational effectons, i.e. flickering
of coherent water clusters, followed by the change of angle between  and  subunits in
tubulin dimers.

Figure 10. Construction of microtubule from  and  tubulins, globular proteins with
molecular mass 55 kD, existing in form of dimers . Each  dimer is a dipole with
negative charges, shifted towards  subunit (De Brabander, 1982). Consequently,
microtubules, as an oriented elongated structure of dipoles system, have the piezoelectric
properties (Athestaedt, 1974; Mascarennas, 1974).

The equilibrium of ”closed” (A) and ”open”(B) states of nonpolar cavities between 
and  tubulins in  dimers can be shifted to the (B) one under the change of external
electric field in a course of membrane depolarization. It is a consequence of piezoelectric
properties of MTs and stimulate the formation of coherent water clusters in the open
cavities of  dimers. The open cavities serve as a centers of water cluster formation and
molecular Bose condensation.

The parallel orientation of MT in different cells, optimal for maximum [MT-MT]
resonance exchange interaction could be achieved due to twisting of centrioles, changing
spatial orientation of MT. However, it looks that the normal orientation of MT as respect
to each other corresponds to the most stable condition, i.e. minimum of potential energy of
interaction (see Albreht-Buehner, 1990).

It is important to stress here that the orientation of two centrioles as a source of MT
bundles in each cell are always normal to each other, providing conditions for IR photons
(librational and translational) 3-D standing waves formation.

The linear dimensions of the primary librational effectons edge lef

lb in pure water at
physiological temperature 360C is about 11 Å and in the ice at 00C it is equal to 45 Å.

We assume that in the rigid internal core of MT, the linear dimension (edge length) of
lb  23Å.
librational effecton, approximated by cube is between 11Å and 45 Å i.e. about lef
It will be shown below, that this assumption fits the spatial and symmetry properties of MT
very well.

The most probable group velocity of water molecules forming primary lb effectons is:

The librational mobility of internal water molecules in MT, which determines vgr

lb  should

lb
lb  h/mH2O  lef
vgr

    20.

92

be about 2 times less than in bulk water at 370C, if we assume for water in microtubules:
lb  23Å.
lef

Results of our computer simulations for pure bulk water shows, that the distance
between centers of primary [lb] effectons, approximated by cube exceed their linear
dimension to about 3.5 times (Fig 11b). For our case it means that the average distance
between the effectons centers is about:

d  lef

lb  3. 5  23  3. 5  80Å

This result of our theory points to the equidistant (80 Å) localization of the primary lb
effectons in clefts between  and  tubulins of each  dimer in the internal core of MTs.
In the case, if the dimensions of librational effectons in MTs are quite the same as in

bulk water, i.e. 11 Å, the separation between them should be:
d  lef

lb  3. 5  11  3. 5  40 Å.

This result points that the coherent water clusters can naturally exist not only between 

and  subunits of each pair, but also between pairs of  dimers.

In the both cases the regular distribution of the internal flickering water clusters in MT

may serve as an important factor for realization of the signal propagation along the MT
(conformational wave), accompanied by correlated process of closing and opening the
clefts between neighboring  and  tubulins pairs.

This large-scale protein dynamics is regulated by dissociation  association of water

clusters in the clefts between  dimers of MT (Fig.10) due to lb/tr convertons
excitation and librational photons and phonons exchange between primary and secondary
effectons, correspondingly.

The dynamic equilibrium between tr and lb types of the intra MT water effectons must
to be very sensitive to  −  tubulins interactions, dependent on nerve cells excitation and
their membranes polarization.

Figure 11. Theoretical temperature dependencies of:
(a) - the space between centers of primary [lb] effectons (calculated in accordance to

eq.4.62 of http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0102086);

(b) - the ratio of space between primary [lb] effectons to their length (calculated, using

eq.4.63 of http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0102086);

(c) - the space between centers of primary [tr] effectons (in accordance to eq.4.62);

93

(d) - the ratio of space between primary [tr] effectons to their length (eq.4.63).
Two statements of our Hierarchic model of consciousness are important:
1. The ability of intra-MT primary water effectons (tr and lb) for superradiation of six

coherent IR librational photons from each of the effectons side, approximated by
parallelepiped:

two identical - ”longitudinal” IR photons, propagating along the core of microtubule,
forming the longitudinal standing waves inside it and two pairs of identical - ”transverse”
IR photons, responsible for remote exchange interaction between microtubules. In
accordance to superradiation mechanism the intensity of longitudinal radiation of MTs is
much bigger than that of transverse one;

2. The parameters of the water clusters radiation (frequency and intensity of librational
photons) are regulated by the interaction of the internal water with open and closed states
of cavities between  and  tubulins of MTs.

In normal cells, microtubules grow from pair of centriole in cell center to cell’s

periphery. In the center of cells of plants the centrioles are absent. Two centrioles in cells of
animals are always oriented at the right angle with respect to each other. The centrioles
represent a construction of 9 triplets of microtubules, i.e. two centriole contain
2  27  54 microtubules. The centriole length is about 3000 Å and its diameter is
1000 Å.

These dimensions mean that all 27 microtubules of each centrioles can be correlated in

the volume vd of one translational or librational electromagnetic deformon:

vd  9
4

p

3tr,lb

where: plb  105Å and ptr  3. 5  105Å

The transition from electromagnetic interaction between remote
water clusters (mBC) to macroscopic Bose condensation and nonlocal interaction

The role of Virtual Replica of clusters in state of mBC spatial multiplication VRM(r)

(see chapter 14) is to create the virtual connections between remote actual clusters. The
subsequent formation of Virtual Channels between pairs of coherent elementary particles
(electrons, protons and neutrons) of opposite spins, - turns the mesoscopic BC to
macroscopic one. This is a result of unification of remote clusters wave function to integer
linear superposition of its eigenvalues, described by macroscopic wave function.

Part of these eigenvalues of the integer wave function describe virtual replica of the

cluster and other eigenvalues - clusters themselves. Consequently, the corresponding
nonuniform macroscopic Bose condensate is partly virtual and partly actual.

The transition from distant EM interaction between remote MTs to nonlocal quantum
interaction is a result of entanglement between clusters - mBC, stimulated by librational IR
photons exchange and Virtual Replicas multiplication (VRM) of the clusters. This
transition is accompanied by nonuniform macroscopic virtual Bose condensation (VirBC).
The nonuniform VirBC become possible only at certain spatial orientation of coherent
water clusters as mesoscopic Bose condensate (mBC) in ’tuned’ microtubules.
The mechanism of this transition is based on our theories of Virtual Replica

multiplication in space - VRM(r), virtual Bose condensation (VirBC) and nonlocal virtual
guides (VirGS,M,E) of spin, momentum and energy (chapter 14).

The Virtual Guides have a shape of virtual microtubules with properties of

94

quasi-1-dimensional virtual Bose condensate (Fig.9). The VirG are constructed from
’side-to-side’ polymerized Bivacuum bosons BVB or Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions
BVF↑ BVF↓ . The bundles of VirGS,M,E, connecting coherent atoms of Sender (S) and
Receiver (S), named the Entanglement Channels, are responsible for macroscopic
entanglement, providing nonlocal interaction, telepathy, remote healing and telekinesis.
The poltergeist can be considered as a private case of telekinesis, realized via Entanglement
Channels, connecting coherent elementary particles of psychic and the object.

The quantum stage of Cycle Mind involves the collapsing of unified wave function. It

represents the reversible dissipative process.

The Hameroff - Penrose model considers only the coherent conformational transition of

cavities between big number of pairs of tubulins between open to closed states in remote
entangled MTs as the act of wave function collapsing.

In our model this transition is only the trigger, stimulating quantum transition of big

number of entangled water clusters in state of noncontineous macroscopic Bose
condensation to selected state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC).

Consequently, the Cycles of Mind can be considered as a reversible transitions of
certain part of brain between coherence and decoherence, involving quantum and classical
stages. The non-uniform coherent state of macroscopic Bose Condensation of water in
microtubules system differs from continuous macroscopic Bose Condensation, pertinent for
superfluidity and superconductivity.

The bistability is water clusters polarization change as a result of a  b equilibrium
shift between their optic (a) and acoustic (b) states to the right. This shift is a consequence
of librational IR photons pumping due to exchange between MTs by librational photons.
The related phenomena: self-induced transparency is a consequence of saturation of

b-state by primary librational effectons.

The pike regime - the light emission pulsation, after b −state saturation represents
super-radiation of big number of entangled water clusters in the process of their correlated
∑b → a transitions.

Such cycles of quantum mechanical and nonlinear classical events can be considered as

elementary acts of memory and consciousness realization. One act can be as long as 500
ms, i.e. half of second, like proposed in Hameroff-Penrose model.

The elementary act of consciousness include a stage of coherent electric firing in brain

(Singer, 1993) of distant neurons groups with period of about 1/40 sec.

The characteristic frequency of pike regime (Bates, 1978; Andreev et al.,1988) can be

correlated with frequency of [gel-sol] transitions of neuronal groups in the head brain.

95

increasing  decreasing of the entangled water mass in state of

Figure 12. The correlation between local, conformational and distant - electromagnetic
interactions between pairs of tubulins and microtubules (MT1 and MT2), connected by
MAP by mean of librational IR photons exchange.
The dynamics of
macroscopic BC in the process of elementary act of consciousness is a result of correlated
shift of dynamic equilibrium between open and closed cavities between alpha and beta
tubulins. As a result of these cavities transition from the open to closed state the primary
librational (lb) effectons (coherent water clusters in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation -
mBC) disassembly to small primary translational (tr) effectons (independent water
molecules), induced by transition of the open states of cavities to the closed one. The
nonuniform macroscopic entanglement between the remote water clusters in state of mBC is
stimulated by coherent IR photons exchange and vibro-gravitational interaction between
these clusters.

MAP– microtubules associated proteins stabilize the overall structure of MTs. They
prevent the disassembly of MTs in bundles of axons and cilia in a course of their coherent
bending. In neuron’s body the concentration of MAP and their role in stabilization of MTs
is much lower than in cilia (Kaivarainen, 1995, 2003).
The distant electromagnetic and vibro-gravitational interactions between different MT are
the consequence of IR photons and coherent vibro-gravitational waves exchange. The
corresponding two types of waves are excited as a result of correlated a  b transitions
of water primary librational effectons, localized in the open B- states of  clefts.
Frequency of a  b transitions and corresponding superradiated IR photons is about
2  1013 s−1. It is much higher, than frequency of transitions of clefts of  tubulin dimers
between open and closed states.

Max Tegmark (2000) made evaluation of decoherence time of neurons and

microtubules for analyzing the correctness of Hameroff-Penrose idea of wave function
collapsing as a trigger of neurons ensembles axonal firing.

The following three sources of decoherence for the ions in the act of transition of

neuron between ’resting’ and ’firing’ are most effective:

1. Collisions with other ions
2. Collisions with water molecules
3. Coulomb interactions with more distant ions.

The coherence time of such process, calculated from this simple model appears to very

short: about 10−20 s.

The electrical excitations in tubulins of microtubules, which Penrose and others have

96

suggested may be relevant to consciousness also where analyzed. Tegmark considered a
simple model of two separated but superimposed (entangled) positions of kink, travelling
along the MT with speed higher than 1 m/s , as it supposed in Hameroff-Penrose (H-P)
model. The life-time of such quantum state was evaluated as a result of long-range
electromagnetic interaction of nearest ion with kink.

His conclusion is that the role of quantum effects and wave function collapsing in
Hameroff-Penrose model is negligible because of very short time of coherence: 10−13 s for
microtubules.

Hagan, Hameroff and Tuszynski (2002) responded to this criticism, using the same
formalism and kink model. Using corrected parameters they get the increasing of life-time
of coherent superposition in H-P model for many orders, up to 10−4 s. This fits the model
much better.

Anyway the approach, used by Tegmark for evaluation of the time of coherence and

entanglement is not applicable to our model.

It follows from our approach that even very short life-time of oscillating semivirtual

macroscopic Bose condensation can be effective for realization of entanglement and
nonlocal interaction in the brain.

The additional experimental verification of the
Hierarchic Model of Consciousness "in vitro"
It is possible to suggest some experimental ways of verification of Elementary Act of

Consciousness using model systems. The important point of Elementary Act of
Consciousness is stabilization of highly ordered water clusters (primary librational
effectons) in the hollow core of microtubules. One can predict that in this case the IR
librational bands of water in the oscillatory spectra of model system, containing sufficiently
high concentration of MTs, must differ from IR spectra of bulk water as follows:

- the shape of librational band of water in the former case must contain 2 components:
the first one, big and broad, like in bulk water and the second one small and sharp, due to
increasing coherent fraction of librational effectons. The second peak should disappeared
after disassembly of MTs with specific reagents;

- the velocity of sound in the system of microtubules must be bigger, than that in

disassembled system of MTs and bulk pure water due to bigger fraction of ordered ice-like
water;

- all the above mentioned parameters must be dependent on the applied electric

potential, due to piezoelectric properties of MT;

- the irradiation of MTs system in vitro by ultrasonic or electromagnetic fields with
frequency of super-deformons excitation of the internal water of MTs at physiological
temperatures 25 − 400C :

s  2 − 4  104 Hz

have to lead to increasing the probability of disassembly of MTs, induced by

cavitational fluctuations. The corresponding effect of decreasing turbidity of
MT-containing system could be registered by light scattering method.

Another consequence of super-deformons stimulation by external fields could be the

increasing of intensity of radiation in visible and UV region due to emission of
corresponding ”biophotons” as a result of recombination reaction of water molecules:

HO−  H

h
 H2O

Cavitational fluctuations of water, representing in accordance to our theory

super-deformons excitations, are responsible for dissociation of water molecules, i.e.

97

elevation of protons and hydroxyls concentration. These processes are directly related to
sonoluminiscence phenomena.

The coherent transitions of ( dimers, composing MTs, between ”closed” (A) and
”open” (B) conformers with frequency (mc  107 s−1 are determined by frequency of
water macroconvertons (flickering clusters) excitation, localized in cavity between  and 
tubulins. If the charges of (A) and (B) conformers differ from each other, then the coherent
A  B transitions generate the vibro-gravitational and electromagnetic field with the
same radio-frequency. The latter component of biofield could be detected by
corresponding radio waves receiver.

15.2 The entropy-driven information processing

It follows from our Cycle of Mind, that changes of system of electromagnetic, acoustic

and vibro-gravitational 3D standing waves, stimulating interconversions between
mesoscopic and macroscopic Bose condensation of the internal water of MTs change the
informational content of this water.

This process induces redistribution of probabilities of different water excitations in
huge number of microtubules. It means corresponding change of informational entropy
 I , related to microtubules in accordance with known relations (Kaivarainen 2006;
2008; http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003107):

 I   ∑

Pi lg1/Pi  −∑

Pi lgPi

i

i

where: Pi is a probability of the (i) state (excitation) with energy Ei, defined as:

Pi 

exp− Ei
kT 
∑i exp− Ei
kT 

For the total system the well known relation between entropy (S) and information (I) is:

Se. u.   k lnW  k ln2I  2. 3  10−24I bit

where statistical weight of macrosystem:

W 

N!
N1!N2!… Ni!

the total number of internal water molecules in macrosystem of interacting MT is:
N  N1  N2 … Ni;

[i is number of non degenerated states of 24 quasiparticles of intra MT water.
The information amplitude of condensed matter [http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0003107

we introduce as a product of the number of molecules (Ni in each of [i collective
excitations:

Nm

i  Vi/vH2O  1/ni/V0/N0

and informational entropy (15.1):

 IA    I  Nm

i  −

N0

V0 ∑ Pi

ni

lg2Pi

i

    15.1

    15.2

    15.3

    15.4

    15.5

    15.6

98

where N0 and V0 are the Avogadro number and molar volume of water; Vi  1/ni is a

volume of excitation of (i)-type; ni is concentration of corresponding excitations.

The distant IR photons exchange between water in MT and oscillation between

mesoscopic and nonuniform macroscopic Bose condensation, accompanied by the change
of probability Pi of different excitations can be considered as an informational exchange
between nerve cells. It is accompanied by change of fractions of water excitations in system
of interacting MTs, providing conditions for macroscopic entanglement between coherent
water clusters.

15.3 Actual and Virtual Self.
Definitions of Soul, Global Consciousness & Superconsciousness

The individual actual consciousness can be considered as a result of dynamic exchange

interference between the Actual Self and Virtual Self.

The Actual Self can be defined as our complex [brain  nerve system  body] system.
The Virtual Self is a multiplicated Virtual Replicas (VR) of the Real Self, representing

superposition of the ether virtual replica (VReth or Ether body, the astral virtual replica
(VRast or Astral body and mental one (VRmen or Mental body, described earlier:

Virtual Self  VReth  VRast  VRmen

On molecular level the Actual Self can be characterized by the interrelated sub-systems

of DNA and microtubules of each cell of the whole organism, especially neurons:

∑DNA  MTs

    15.7

    15.8

The interaction of the Real Self (physical body) with Virtual Self can be modulated by

Virtual Replica (VR) of the Universe:

Virtual Replica of the Universe VRU 

∑ VRi of all objects of the Universe

    15.9

i

VRU is a superposition of virtual replicas of all material objects, including living
organisms, planets, stars, galactics with their black holes, as a powerful source of nonlocal
interaction. We suppose, that VRU works as a quantum supercomputer or
Superconsciousness or Universe Self (God). Schematically interaction between Real Self,
Virtual Self and the Universe Self can be presented as:

∑DNA  MTs
Real Self



VReth  VRast  VRmen
Virtual Self



VRU 

i
∑ VRi

Universe Self GOD

The notion of ’Soul or Spirit’ we introduce as a result of interference of Virtual Self

with virtual replica of the Universe (VRU) or Universe Self:

Soul 

VReth  VRast  VRmen
Virtual Self



VRU 

i
∑ VRi

Universe Self GOD

    15.10

    15.11

It follows from this definition of Soul, that it can be independent on Real Self and exist

even after death. Its living time can be as long as one of the Virtual Self, representing
complex superposition of standing virtual pressure waves (VPW, modulated by Real
Self.

The Virtual Self, modulated by Superconsciousness and global Virtual Replica of the

99

Earth, acts on elementary particles of

∑microtubules of centrioles  internal water clusters (mBC)

    15.12

of the nerve cells of Real Self via paired sub-elementary particles of triplets of the
electrons, protons and neutrons of coherent water clusters in MTs in the process of their
C  W pulsation:

〈F↑

  F↓

−W  F↑

− C  〈F↑

  F↓

−C  F↑

− We,p,n

    15.13

This back action of modulated Virtual Self may increase or decrease the probability of

superdeformons (cavitational fluctuations) in the internal water of microtubules. It shifts
the equilibrium of assembly  disassembly of microtubules in ’tuned’ ensemble of neurons
to the right or to the left, correspondingly.

This shift is accompanied by the in-phase gel→ sol transitions in cytoplasm of nerve

cells bodies and their shrinking or swelling, providing Cycle of Mind described above.

The mechanism proposed realize the interaction between Virtual and Actual Worlds.

15.4 The Global Virtual Replica, Noosphere and Global Consciousness

The Global Virtual Replica (GVR) of the Earth is a part of Superconsciousness. The
GVR is a result of superposition of all VR of the oceans, mountains, rocks and the internal
structure of the planet. The GVR includes all kind of biosystems: human beings, animals,
fishes, plants, microorganisms, etc. is a part of Superconsciousness. The sum of Virtual
Selves of humans creates the Noosphere, responsible for Global Consciousness as a part of
Global Virtual Replica.

The existence of Global Consciousness or Noosphere is confirmed by convincing
statistical data, obtained by Global Consciousness Project, headed by Roger Nelson in
Princeton (USA). In this very interesting and important project, the global net of Random
Event Generators (REG) is used.

Different kind of REG rely on quantum tunneling to produce an unpredictable,

broad-spectrum white noise in the form of low-amplitude voltage fluctuations in resistors.
The Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) laboratory use portable REG,
which was designed by John Bradish of the PEAR team. This device uses "thermal noise"
in resistors which is a quantum level phenomenon that produces broad-spectrum voltage
fluctuation.

On numerous examples it was confirmed, that the strong emotions of big population of

people, for example, at the Earthquakes, tsunami, hurricanes or dramatic events, like
September 11 and death of princess Diana - influence on the output of REG, mostly nearby
the region of event, but not necessarily, if such event is broadcasting widely by numerous
TV stations at same time.

There is no explanation for these amazing results in the framework of existing
paradigm. However, we may try to do it in the framework of our approach, using
introduced notion of the Global virtual replica (GVR) of the Earth and Noosphere, as a
part of it.

In accordance to our theory of Virtual Replica of any material object - from elementary

particle to the neuron, it represents a result of interference of modulated by de Broglie
waves of the object basic virtual pressure waves (VPW0
Like the regular optical hologram, this Virtual Replica (quantum hologram) is a systems of
standing waves. However, these special virtual standing waves are the result of correlated
transitions of Bivacuum dipoles with nonzero symmetry shift between one of the excited

.
m with non modulated VPW0

100

and ground states (see section ’Virtual pressure waves’). The reasons of minor symmetry
shift of Bivacuum dipoles of Global VR, different in remote location on the earth surface,
can be at least following:

a) induced by different gravitational and magnetic potentials of the Earth in these

locations, for example before and in the process of eruptions or earthquakes;

b) induced by specific excitations of neurons and microtubules  internal water clusters
in states of strong emotional stress, correlated in big population of humans. This population
have to experience simultaneously the different kind of emotional event, like in New York
at September 11 or at final game of World cup in football, translated in real time over lot of
countries;

c) the relative position of Sun, Moon, other planets and Earth also influence GVR;
d) under the influence of asymmetric structures like pyramids or cones.

In accordance to our theory of mass and charge origination without Higgs bosons, even

small symmetry shift in Bivacuum dipoles is accompanied by nonzero mass and charge
origination. These all-penetrating dipoles can screen the Coulomb interaction between the
electrons and ions in lattice of materials, including resistors as a sensitive part of REG. In
fact, this means increasing the permittivity of Bivacuum.

As a result, the random "thermal noise" in resistors, resulting voltage fluctuation in
range: 1000 - 30.000 Hz becomes less random. It can be a consequence of creation of
preferable direction of quantum tunneling under the influence of Bivacuum dipoles with
certain degree and selected direction of symmetry shift. In such a way the deviations of
normal statistical distribution registered by net of REGs, distributed over the planet, can be
explained.

To verify this conjecture of correlation between REG outcome and asymmetry of VR,
interacting with its resistor, this author propose to compare REG data inside and outside the
pyramids (asymmetric geometry and VR) and balls (symmetric geometry and VR) of
different dimensions, materials and walls dimensions. If our conjecture is correct a small
difference of these data should be revealed.

15.5. Possible mechanism of remote IDEAS exchange via
Bivacuum Mediated Interaction

The experimental data are existing, that the conscious evaluation of some event by one

brain tends to reduce the element of surprise for other brains, observing the same event.
These most interesting data can be explained in framework of our approach, as two stage
process, involving hierarchy of virtual replicas.

The 1st stage is represented by following scheme of modification of Star system virtual
replica (SVR), including and depending on the Earth virtual replica EVR and Sun system
Superconsciousness (SSC): SVR  fEVR → SVR∗ and SSC → SSC∗
, induced by
change of mental and internal-ether physical VR of human brain and nerve system, as a
result of ’leaning - getting the same new information’ by one or few human beings (j via
external astral and mental secondary VRM:

∑ VRMmentalVRether  Info →

∑ VRMmental

∗

∗
VRether

 →

j

j

    15.14

→

∑ VRMastral

∗

→ EVR∗ SVR∗ → SSC∗

j

The 2nd stage is related with action of modified Solar system Superconsciousness
(SSC∗ and the Earth virtual replica (EVR) on the individuals human consciousness via

101

their external astral VRMastral , mental (VRMmental and corresponding internal - ether
(VRether virtual replicas of another (k persons, accompanied by transmission of
Information:

SSC∗ EVR∗

Info
→

∑ VRMastral  Info →

∑ VRMastral
∗ →

∑ VRMmental

∗

∗
VRether

     15.15

k

k

k

The mental and ether virtual replicas: VRmental and VRether are the external and internal

reflections of quantum neurodynamics process in brain and the nerve system,
correspondingly. Each elementary act of consciousness, as a transition between discreet
neuron’s ensemble states, should be accompanied by corresponding transition between
mental and ether VR, following by emission or absorption of number N of quantum of
information (qubit − qB) quantum states:

VRMmental  VRetherj − VRMmental  VRetherk  N qB

    15.16

We may postulate, that NminqB is a minimum information (NminqB  min Info, which

can irreversibly change the mental and astral virtual replica:
VRMmental  VRMastral  NminqB → VMRastral
replica (EVR∗, then Solar virtual replica (SVR∗ and finally variation of
Superconsciousness (SC∗:

∗

and perturbation of the Earth virtual

EVR  SVR  SC

→ EVR  SVR∗ SC∗

    15.17

NminqB

If such a model is right, then we share with mankind all well formulated by individuals

IDEAS. The IDEA, as a coherent and stable superposition of NminqB :

IDEA 

∑ ckNminqBk

k

may influence on the Earth and Solar virtual replicas (EVR and SVR), then
Superconsciousness and then, via feedback reaction it affect the individual consciousness
of all the rest of human beings.

Our description of the Earth Virtual Replicas of the Universe, Solar system and Earth,
their interrelation with duality of matter and corresponding levels of Superconsciousness,
have some common features with One Mind Model of Mark Germine (2002) and Henry
Stapp (1982) hypothesis of interrelation between collapsing of superimposed mental states
and actual world.

15.6 Evolution of Superconsciousness

A complex Hierarchical system of Virtual Replicas Multiplication: ∑ VRMr, t of the

planets of Star systems, black holes, the galactics and their clusters may be considered as
the Hierarchical quantum Supercomputer or Superconsciousness, able to simulate all
probable situations of virtual future and past.

This becomes possible in conditions of time uncertainty: t  0/0, when the translational

velocity of Bivacuum bosons or Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions, composing Virtual
Replicas is zero (v  0 and the accelerations of these dipoles in the volume of
∑ VRMr, t are also zero dv/dt  0. This follows from our formula for time, including
not only the velocity, like in special relativity, but also acceleration:

102

t  −

v
dv/dt

1 − v/c2
2 − v/c2

    15.18

Our theory admits a possibility of feedback reaction between the iterated VRMr, t
and primary one VR and then between primary VR and the object itself. If this mechanism
works, then most probable events anticipation by sensitive physical detectors and human
beings (psychics) is possible.

This may explain the reproducible results of the unconsciousness response (by changes

of human skin conductance) of future events (presponse), obtained by Dick Bierman and
Dean Radin (2002).

However, in these experiments the possibility of influence of intention of participant on

random events generator (REG), choosing next photo (calm or emotional) also should be
taken into account. Corresponding weak influence of humans intention on REG was
demonstrated in long term studies of Danne and Jahn (2003).

In contrast to virtual time, the reversibility of real time looks impossible, as far it needs

the reversibility of all dynamic process in Universe due to interrelations between closed
systems of different levels of hierarchy. It is evident that such ’play back’ of the Universe
history needs the immense amount of energy.

All three described Virtual Replicas: Ether, Astral and Mental bodies are interrelated

with each other and physical body.

The experimental evidences are existing, that between properties of the Ether bodies
and corresponding physical bodies of living organisms or inorganic matter, the correlation
takes a place. It is confirmed by the Kirlian effect, reflecting the ionization/excitation
threshold of the air molecules in the volume of Ether and Astral bodies.

The primary virtual replica multiplications: distant VRMdis and nonlocal VRMnl
(see section 8) of human’s brain and nerve system provide the astral and mental memories,
interrelated with ether memory.

In turn, the combination of the individual astral and mental memories can be

incorporated into complex Virtual Replica Multiplication (VRM) of the whole
Earth/Planet: VRMplan .

It means that, the individual human’s VRMr, t, related to elementary act of

memorization and consciousness, can be incorporated in holographic structure of planetary
VRMplan.

Such a mechanism stands for a imprinting of the individual mental activity to planetary

VRMplanet, i.e. the NOOSPHERE formation.

A kind of filters and thresholds, preventing ’downloading’ to Earth VRM (Noosphere)
the information in form of standing VPW, of already existing or ’destructive’ info, should
exist. The principle of selection of ”valuable” new information/perturbation can be based,
for example, on criteria of Golden mean or Hidden harmony of primary VRM construction,
as a background principle of [Bivacuum Matter] dynamic and spatial self-organization.
The notion of ”Collective Informational Bank” in such approach means formation of
Virtual Replica of the Universe (VRU) from huge number of planets (VRMplan) and stars
(VRMstar) of the Universe.

The ability of processing of information may be a consequence of ability of the
Universe Virtual Replica: to self-organization, evolution, devolution and formation of
metastable states.

The feedback reaction between different components of Hierarchical UVR, can be

considered, as a Superconsciousness (SC) of the Universe”.

Taking into account a huge scale of the Universe, the effective interaction between

103

remote ’nerve centers’ of the universe can be realized only using the mechanism of
nonlocality.

The Superconsciousness (SC) have a properties of Quantum Supercomputer, able to
processing of information, memorizing and organizing it by certain principles. This can be
considered as the evolution of Superconsciousness.

TABLE

The Stages of Self-Organization and Evolution of the Universe,

Mediated by Virtual Pressure Waves (VPWq

—————————————————————————————————————————

(I) BIVACUUM

Bivacuum Symmetry Breach
  MATTER  FIELDS  ∑ VRM OF MATTER 

(II)

BIOSYSTEMS
(III) ∑ VRM OF MATTER  ∑ VRM of CO

Consciousness
 COMPLEX ORGANISMS CO  ∑ VRMr, t of CO 

self−organization of Bivac u um Matter
  (IV)

self−organization of UVR to Quant Supercomp
  SUPERCONSCIOUSNESS SC
(IV) UNIVERSE VR VRU
————————————————————————————————————————-
where: VRM(r,t) is virtual replicas multiplication in space and time; CO means complex
organisms; UVR means the Universe Virtual Replica, self-organizing to Superconsciousness
(SC) with properties of Quantum Supercomputer.

The important contribution to realization of Superconsciousness, as a self-organizing
quantum supercomputer, is related to superposition of nonlocal and temporal components
of hierarchical systems of Virtual Replicas Multiplications VRMr, t and Virtual Guides
(VirGSME formation, providing different kind of Bivacuum mediated interaction BMI.
The complex system of bundles of virtual microtubules, assembled from Bivacuum

dipoles, like the axons in humans body, exchanging the information, momentum and
energy between remote complex objects of the Universe, containing coherent regions, i.e.
neutron stars, black holes in centers of galactics, etc. is a crucial part of the Universe
Quantum Supercomputer or Superconsciousness.

The possibility of feedback reaction between Superconsciusness and Planet Noosphere,

following from our concept, means that at proper conditions of Universe Virtual Replica
(UVR) high instability (bifurcation point), even small perturbation of planet VRMplanet
may influence Superconsciousness.

The uncertainty of time is valid also in part of Universe Virtual Replica UVR,

presented by bundles of filaments of Virtual Guides: N(VirGSME, formed by polymerized
symmetric ∑BVB or Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions ∑[BVF↑  BVF↓, making it
possible simulation of past and future events by Quantum supercomputer, as a part of
Superconsciousness.

Variation of Bivacuum symmetry shift by physical fields (electrostatic, magnetic or
gravitational) may influence the value and even sign of pace of time of virtual replicas, i.e.
their future or past.

The time-dependent superposition of individual virtual replicas of inorganic matter and
living organisms (if any) of each star (solar) system forms the Star system Virtual Replica
SVR and a Star system consciousness SSC. In turn, superposition of all stars systems
virtual replica SVR and SSC, as a function F of SVR, of the Galactic can be responsible
for formation of Galactic Consciousness GC:

104

Galactical Consciousness t  FGVRt  ∑ SSCt
where: SSCt  FSVR  F ∑ VRMMt  VRMLt

    15.19

where: VRMMt and VRMLt are the selected/individual multiplicated virtual

replicas of material objects and living organisms, in the case of their existence in given star
system.

Due to virtuality of superposition of VRMM,L  VRMMt  VRMLt and

SVRt, they do not follow special theory of relativity, by definition, and consequently the
causality principle.

As a result of ability of star virtual replicas (SVR) to evolution/self-organization in
Bivacuum, as in active medium in each selected current moment of time t  tC, we have an
infinitive number of discreet projections of current SVR (most stable in this moment) and
states of star systems consciousness (SSC) on the Future time (tF :







SSCFuture F

∑ SVRFuturetF

 F

∑

∑ VRFuturetF

    15.20

In similar way we have the infinitive number of metastable ’memorized’ multiplicated
Virtual replicas VRMPt of the past time tP :







SSCPast F

∑ SVRPasttP

 F

∑

∑ VRMPasttP

    15.20

Each selected SSCtF, tP of the future and past time (evolution and devolution of
virtual hologram is dependent on the virtual future and past time quantization with current
time (tC, as a reference point:

q

tF  tC 

∑ Δtq

q1
q

tP  tC −

∑ Δtq

q1

    15.21

    15.21a

where Δtq is a quantum of time (minimum time interval) separating stable states of

standing virtual waves, forming instant Star system virtual replicas.

The quanta of information is emitted or absorbed in the process of quantum jump
between SVRq1 and SVRq by analogy with emission/absorption of quanta of energy
(photons), as a result of quantum transitions between different electronic states of atoms
and molecules.

In any kind of virtual systems, like VR and VRM(r,t), the simulation of past and future

events is possible by Quantum supercomputer or Superconsciousness (see Table 2),
because by definition, the relativistic mechanics do not work for them and the causality
principle is absent.

Shifting of Bivacuum dipoles symmetry by physical fields (electric or gravitational),
accompanied by their acceleration/deceleration and acquiring the external kinetic energy,
may influence the value and even sign of pace of time of virtual replicas, i.e. their future or
past.

The time-dependent superposition of individual virtual replicas multiplication of

105

inorganic objects VRMObt and living organisms VRMLt of each star (solar) system
forms the Star system Virtual Replica (SVR). In turn, superposition of all stars systems
virtual replica SVR of Galactic can be responsible for formation of Galactic Virtual
Replica.

We put forward a conjecture, that as a result of ability of complex virtual replica, like

human’s one or Galactic virtual replica GVRt with active medium properties to
evolution/self-organization and informational processing, this process can be considered as
virtual supercomputer or Galactic Virtual Consciousness GVC:

GVC t  FGVRt  ∑ SSCt
where: SVR  F ∑ VRMObt  VRMLt

    15.22

where: VRMObt and VRMLt are selected virtual replicas multiplication of

inorganic objects and living organisms, correspondingly, not only in space, but also in time.

It follows from our approach, that Superconsciousness of the Universe is a huge

hierarchical virtual supercomputer, resulting from nonlocal Bivacuum mediated interaction
(BMI) between Virtual Consciousness of individual planets (like Earth Noosphere), stars
and Galactic virtual consciousness, based on their ability to self-organization.

Our description of Virtual Replicas of the Earth, Solar system and Universe and their
feedback action on real systems - have some common features with Henry Stapp (1982)
hypothesis of interrelation between collapsing of superimposed mental states and actual
world.

In each selected current moment of time t  tC, as a result of Virtual consciousness
i tF of current VR0
(VC) activity, a big number of discreet time - evolution versions VRF
with different probability (Pi of realization appears. The most probable future system of
virtual replica multiplication VRFuture can be calculated as:

VRFuture 

∑ Pi VRMF

i tF

∑ Pi

    15.23

In similar way we have the most probable virtual replica of the past infinitive number of

possible metastable Virtual replicas VRMP
current VRM0 :

i tP of past, as a result of time - involution of

VCPast 

∑ PP

i VRMP
i
∑ PP

i tP

    15.24

Clairvoyance or anticipation is a result of ability of gifted psychic [Sender] to ’search’,
using specific ’key images’ at first stage - VRM0 at current time and then select from this
future or past set of secondary virtual replicas the most probable one. This complex process
includes very ’tuned’ interaction of the astral and mental bodies (distant VRM) and ether

∑ SVRFt. Similar mechanism works, in accordance

(local VR) bodies of [Sender] with
to our approach, in extra-perception by Sender - psychic of the past of some individual

∑ SVRPt.
The proposed in our work mechanism of interaction of human consciousness of

VRMPt, as a selected component of

Receptor and related virtual replica with virtual replicas of Sender consciousness,
corresponding to certain notions and images, means telepathy. Similar mechanism can be
responsible for possibility of sharing of well formulated by individuals new IDEAS with
certain population of mankind, sensitive enough for perception of specific VRM,

106

corresponding to certain mental state of this individuals, induced by such ideas or notions.
The ’phantom’ effects where revealed in a system of interacting ’charged’ by intention

vessel of water and few other distant vessels with aqueous solutions, surrounding the
’charged’ vessel (Tiller, Dibble and Kohane, 2001 and www.tiller.org). After replacing the
’charged’ vessel far out of system, the ’memory’ of its presence remains for a long time.
The presence and orientation of large quartz crystal strongly affected the amplitude of
’phantom’ effect. In experiment, described, screening of the target [R] from
electromagnetic fields by Faraday’s cage did not influence on the distant interaction
between [S] and [R] and the phantom effect.

Consequently, there are a lot of experimental evidence already, confirming the
existence of new fundamental remote Bivacuum Mediated Interaction (BMI) between
Sender and Receiver, following from our approach.

16. The examples of Bivacuum mediated remote mental action of Psychic
on different physical targets and their explanation

A big number of examples demonstrate how Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI),
generated by gifted psychic - ’Sender’ [S], can interfere with real physical fields and targets
[R] of non-biological (like water) and biological nature:

1. Speeding up and slowing down the rate of americium 241Am nuclear decay.
This points to quantum nature of Paranormal phenomena the influence of Entanglement
Channels between the nuclear of neurons of psychic and quarks and gluons of the target in
the process of quarks (sub-elementary fermions) C  W pulsation.
2. Rotation of the plane of polarization of laser beam by 7-300.
This effect points to perturbation of Bivacuum optical isotropic properties due to
opposite change of dynamic equilibrium between Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
density in different volumes of space:

BVF↑  BVB  BVF↓

    16.1

under the psychic influence, accompanied by magnetic field excitation in Bivacuum, like in
Faraday optical effect;

3. Induction of a pulse magnetic field (100 nT and up to 27x106 nT) by psychic,

accompanied by rotation of a compasses needle.

The explanation of this effect is similar to that, described in item 2.

4. Deviation of the electrical resistance of thermoresistor.
This can be explained by Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI) influence on resonance

exchange interaction of the electrons with Bivacuum, as a result of deviation of frequency
of VPWq
increasing or decreasing their kinetic energy and velocity.

, induced by psychic, from frequency of C  W pulsation of the electrons,

5. Induction of a periodic electrical signal from a piezoelectric sensor.
It can be the result of effect, like described above, combined with influence of BMI on

Van der Waals interaction between atoms/ions of lattice, changing it rigidness and
probability of thermal fluctuations, accompanied by defects origination in lattice, via
 and C  W pulsation of the electrons, protons and
resonance exchange of VPWq
neutrons.

6. Moving the plate of an encased precise analytical balance equivalent to 100 mg

force.

This can be a result of momentum and kinetic energy transmission from the nerve cells
of psychic to selected coherent atoms of the balance via Virtual Guides of spin, momentum

107

and energy (VirGSME, forming the Entanglement Channels.

7. Induction of a temporary peak in the Raman spectrum of tap water at 2200 cm−1.
This can be a consequence of mechanism described above, confirming the existence of

VirGSME, connecting atoms (protons) of water in microtubules of nerve cells of psychic
and in water - target (Receiver) and the ability of the Entanglement Channels (EntCh):

N

EntCh 

∑ VirGSMES  Rn

    16.2

influence the internal and external properties of water molecules;

8. Temporary changes in the microstructure of water as observed through scattering of

laser beam (  632.8 nm) at various angles.

The same mechanism, as described above.

9. Deviation of UV adsorption spectra of DNA - water solution in the area of 220- 280

nm.

The same mechanism as above;
10. Predetermined by operator deviation from randomness of various random number

generators has been revealed in Princeton group.

This can be a result of asymmetric influence of the Entanglement Channels, generated

by the operator on elementary particles of electronics, responsible for randomization of
results.

11. Increasing of the concentration of dislocations (missing atoms in microcrystalline

structure) in ”metal bending” experiments with local increase of surface hardness.

The same mechanism, as in the example 4 above, describing the BMI influence on

piezoelectric materials.

Marcel Vogel claimed that quartz crystals of certain shape could amplify the mental
intent action on water. He demonstrated that in water, circulating around an intent-charged
crystal, the following changes are revealed:

- decreasing in surface tension, increasing of conductivity;
- a significant drop in the freezing point (as low as -30 degrees);
- bidirectional alterations in the pH up to 3 points;
- the appearance of two new bands in the IR and UV absorption spectrum, etc.
These important experiments point to ability of certain materials (crystal in this case)
for taping the properties of multiplied Virtual Replica (i.e. secondary VR) of psychic. This
process and the following processing/reading of taped properties, have a similarity with
fixation and reproduction of regular holograms from photo-materials. The role of ’reference
waves’ in reproducing of taped Virtual Replica in crystal play basic Virtual pressure waves
(VPWq

 of Bivacuum.

Dean and Brame found that the water, treated by healer, demonstrated changes with
both IR spectrophotometry (indicating altered hydrogen bonding) and specific peaks in UV
spectra of water, meaning change of the electronic state of water molecules. The half-life
for these effects lasted from three days to three years.

It was demonstrated, that mental influence, as a carrier of information, cannot be
significantly blocked by any physical screening and that the effect does not depend on the
distance. This point to non-electromagnetic nature of mind-matter interaction. The nature of
Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI), provided by the Entanglement Channels satisfy this
condition.

The remote influence of psychic on the permanent magnetic field sensor (ferroprobe

108

magnetometer), screened from the external regular EM influence - was revealed by Ageev,
Dulnev, Kolmakov, etc. (2003).

The detector of alternating magnetic field did not revealed any significant changes,
induced by remote ’sender/psychic’. This in accordance with mechanism, described by
equilibrium shift between Bivacuum fermions and antifermions with opposite spins,
mentioned above to the left or right (eq. 16.1).

The active Psi-channel seems to be non-isotropic and strictly directed in space. The

same group revealed that good psychic (sender) is able selectively change the electric
potential of the electrodes in the aqueous solution of sodium chloride (100 ml of 0.9%
NaCl solution) in one of two vessels, separated from each other for 2 meters only. The
distance between psychic and vessels was about 500 kilometers.

Well registered phenomena of remote viewing (RV) and precognition by Hal Puthoff
and Rassel Targ at Stanford Research Institute (1996) are confirmed in other laboratories.
Our theory of BMI explains the RV phenomena as a result of superposition of Virtual
replicas multiplication of Sender (psychic) and Receiver (target):

VRMS  VRMR

    16.3

as a stage, necessary for Entanglement Channels formation, providing feedback

reaction between target and nerve system of the psychic, including visual centers.

Numerous studies have demonstrated (Targ & Katra, 1998) that size of the target (down

to 1 mm square) and distance between sender [S] and target (up to 10,000 miles) do not
appear to significantly impair signal perception. The electromagnetic shielding by Faraday
cage or sea water does not negatively impact remote viewing ability.

These data, pointing to anisotropic component of BMI, are in accordance with proposed

mechanism of nonlocal interaction via the Entanglement Channels (see eq.
16.2), connecting coherent elementary particles of Sender and Receiver.

We can see, that the proposed in this work new resonant Bivacuum mediated interaction

(BMI) between psychic and target can explain all the above described phenomena. The
existing currently paradigm, failed to do this.

16.1 The Biological and Biochemical effects of Bivacuum Mediated Interaction
between Sender and Receiver

There are two classes of remote healing (RH):
1) the healer (Sender S) find the target (Receiver R) on the basis of a name,
location, birth date, etc. (in remote viewing terms, this is ”coordinate”). This process
involves superposition of multiplicated Virtual Replica of S and R:

VRMS  VRMR

, necessary for recognition and targeting, following by formation of

Entanglement Channels 
atoms of S and R in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (Kaivarainen, 2008);

N
∑ VirGSMES  Rn, connecting coherent clusters of

2) other way for remote healing is using the adjunct object, previously treated by the

healer, such as: water, cloth, a crystal, etc., by the patient with or without the healer’s
knowledge. In this case the imprinting of VR of healer in adjunct object should take a
place. In this case the role of primary VR of the of the healer/sender is realized by
secondary VR, imprinted in the adjunct object.

In a 1991 Chien & al. report following biochemical effects, when studying influence of
a qigong master Psi-field on the culture of human fibroblasts: 1.8% increase in cell growth
rate in 24 hrs; 10-15% increase in DNA synthesis and 3-5% increase in cell protein

109

synthesis during 2 h period.

When the master radiate the ”inhibiting” biofield with corresponding intention, the cell

growth decreased by 6%, while DNA and protein synthesis decreased by 20-23%,
respectively 35-48%. Intent-modulated emission of biophotons from the hands of qigong
practitioners is a well-known phenomenon that has often been reported in the scientific
literature. Wallace reported measuring up to 100 time stronger emissions from the hands of
gifted persons compared to controls.

A study by Nakamura & al. (2000) reports an increase in subject’s hand biophotons
intensity associated with a drop in skin surface temperature during Qigong practice. The
significantly higher (up to 105nT) magnetic signals during Qi emission from hands of
qigong practitioners, as compared to the controls were revealed (Lin & Chen, 2001).

It was proposed by Oschman (2000) that under special conditions, resonant brainwaves
may entrain the body’s neural system to deliver healing frequencies to diseased tissues, or
become coupled to the Schumann resonance and thus transmit distant healing effects to the
target.

This author consider Schumann resonance as a non-dissipative factor enhancing

’tuning’ of the macroscopic entanglement between Sender and Receiver.

However, just electromagnetic mechanism of paranormal phenomena fail to explain

such effects, as influence of mental activity on internuclear and gravitational forces,
described above. Only multistage fundamental Bivacuum mediated interaction, introduced
in this work, may fill the gap between paranormal and normal.

17. The nature of electrostatic and magnetic interaction,
based on Unified theory

17.1 Electromagnetic dipole radiation as a consequence of
charge oscillation
The [emission  absorption of photons in a course of elementary fermions - triplets
 S1/2e, vibrations can be described by known mechanism of the
−  F↓

 F↑
electric dipole radiation (EH, induced by charge acceleration (a), following from Maxwell
equations (Berestetsky, et. al.,1989):

S0 F↑

3c3 a2
The resulting frequency of C  W pulsation of each of three sub-elementary fermions
in and the external frequency (B

in triplets is a sum of internal frequency contribution ( 0
of de Broglie wave from:

EH  2e2

CW  0

in  B i

    17.1

    17.2

The acceleration can be related only with external translational dynamics which
determines the empirical de Broglie wave parameters of particles. Acceleration is a result
of alternating change of the charge deviation from the position of equilibrium:
ΔBt  B
where LB  /mV
(B

t .
The acceleration of charge in the process of C  W pulsation of the anchor BVFanc

t −0  sin Bt with de Broglie wave frequency of triplets: B  /mV

v. It is accompanied by oscillation of the instant de Broglie wave length

LB

2 ,

↕

be expressed as:

a  B

2 ΔBt

can

    17.3

110

a  B

2 B

t −0  sin Bt

where: B

t  2LB

t is the instant de Broglie wave length of the particle and 0 h/m0c is

the Compton length of triplet of the electron, proton or neutron.

The intensity of dipole radiation of pulsing BVFanc

from 17.2 and 17.4 is:

↕

EM 

2
3c3 B

4 dE

t 2

    17.4

    14.5

where the oscillating electric dipole moment is: dE
Consequently, in accordance with our model of duality, the EM dipole radiation is due

t  eB

t −0 .

to modulation of the frequency of C  W pulsation of three sub-elementary fermions of
 ,
the electron or proton by C  Wanc frequency of anchor Bivacuum bosons BVBanc
related to thermal vibrations of elementary particles. These vibrations are are accompanied
by creation of secondary anchor sites (AS), described in chapter 10. When the accelerations
and final kinetic energy of elementary charges are big enough, one or number of AS
transform to photons.

The electromagnetic field, is a result of correlated Corpuscle - Wave pulsation of group

of photons with wavelength p  c/p, equal to their amplitude in ’empty’ space, when
c  v :

Ap  pc/v  p

The superposition of clockwise or counterclockwise direction of photon’s rotation as

respect to direction of their propagation, determines their polarization and integer spin.

17. 2 The basis of energy conservation law

The fundamental law of the actual energy conservation can be reformulated in terms of

our Unified theory. The additivity of different forms of the actual energy - means the
additivity of sub-elementary particles symmetry shift, responsible for local energy of
elementary particle and collective symmetry shift of infinitive number of Bivacuum dipoles
in particle environment, responsible for fields origination.

The condition of energy conservation in Bivacuum means, that the sum of local

− − mV

symmetry shifts of group of N similar sub-elementary and elementary particles:
N|mV
around these particles: ∑|mV
by sign:

 |loc should be equal to the sum of distant symmetry shifts of Bivacuum dipoles
 |dist, compensating local symmetry shifts, i.e. opposite

− − mV

N|mV

 − mV

− |rot

locc2  ∑|mV

 − mV

− |tr

distc2  0

or in another shape, representing extending formulas (8.1 - 8.1b):

N  m0L0

20

2 

h2
B
mV

2  EEl  EH  EG

loc





r
r ∑ |mV

− − mV

 |tr

distc2  0

where: 0  m0c2/ is the angular frequency of rotating triplet - fermion, providing its

rest mass and charge origination with Compton radius L0  /m0c; r is unitary
radius-vector; r is distance from the fermion.

EEl, EH and EG are contributions of electric, magnetic and gravitational energies in
total energy of the charged fermion, correspondingly, which will be considered in next
chapter;

    17.6

    17.7

111

In accordance to our theory of elementary particles (sections 5.3 and 6.1), symmetry
shift in sub-elementary particles, forming elementary fermions is a result of their rotation
with tangential velocity (v/c)2    0. 618 and translation, responsible for empirical de
Broglie wave length B:

B  h/p and

amplitude AB  Bc/v  h
p

c
v

    17.7a

Symmetry shift in surrounding Bivacuum dipoles can be result of two factors:
a) rotation of virtual Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
[BVF↑  BVF↓ around common axis in direction, opposite to that of rotation of
elementary particles - fermions, like free electrons, protons, neutrons, etc. for compensation
of the resulting angular momentum;

b) translational vibrations of Bivacuum dipoles (unpaired or paired), as a result of recoil

 antirecoil effects, induced in surrounding medium by emission  absorption of
cumulative virtual clouds CVC, accompanied Corpuscle  Wave pulsation of
sub-elementary fermions of elementary particles and assemblydisassembly of virtual
Cooper pairs of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, compensating each
other.

Such matter - fields energy interconversions in the Universe, following from our
Unified Theory, can be considered, as a background for the energy conservation law.

17.3 The electric field origination

In the process of [C  W] pulsation of sub-elementary particles in triplets
  F↓

 e,p , accompanied by recoil  antirecoil effects the reversibility of

−  F↕

 F↑

localinternal  distantexternal

symmetry compensation effects is in accordance with energy conservation law, described
in section 17.2.

The local symmetry effects are pertinent for corpuscular [C] phase of elementary

particles. They are confined in the volume of unpaired sub-elementary fermions or
antifermions and stabilized by the Coulomb, magnetic and gravitational attraction between
opposite charges and mass of asymmetric torus and antitorus of sub - elementary fermions.

The [C → W transitions of unpaired/uncompensated F↕

 e,p of elementary particles

are accompanied by the diverging effects - translational and rotational (angular),
accompanied by distant elastic deformation of Bivacuum matrix due to recoil, shifting the
corresponding symmetry (charge and energy equilibrium) of Bivacuum dipoles.

The reverse W → C transition represents the converging effect. It is accompanied by

getting back the energy and momentum, diverged in previous phase (antirecoil) and
restoration of the unpaired sub-elementary fermion local/enfolded asymmetric properties.
− of the triplets
The recoil  antirecoil effects of paired sub-elementary fermions F↑
compensate each other.

  F↓

The divergence  convergence of the energy, charge and spin equilibrium in

surrounding medium of Bivacuum dipoles in form of spherical elastic waves are opposite
for particles of opposite charges.

Corresponding charge symmetry shift between torus and antitorus of big number of
Bivacuum dipoles located in space between charges is dependent on separation R of
pulsing triplets, as ( r /R). The direction of symmetry shift, induced by positive and negative
charges is also opposite, i.e. positively charged sub-elementary fermion shift symmetry

112

toward the negative antitori and negatively charged sub-elementary fermion - toward the
positive tori.

This compensation effect is increasing with decreasing the separation between charges

R → 0 and provide increasing force of opposite charges attraction. The corresponding
self-assembly of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions of opposite
symmetry shift into virtual microfilaments, minimizing potential energy of the system:
[elementary fermions  Bivacuum] stands for electrostatic field and its force lines
origination.

The Coulomb repulsion between similar charges is the consequence of increasing the
resulting Bivacuum asymmetry of the same sign (positive or negative). The enhanced by
presence of similar charges the density of energy of Bivacuum dipoles population in space
between charges decreases with increasing the separation between charges R → .
Both - the electric attraction and repulsion force are dependent on the distance as

(1/r2.

The electrostatic field tension, produced by charged particles can be expressed via

gradients of charge symmetry shift of Bivacuum dipoles of surrounding medium, in
selected direction (x,y,z):

EE  −grad |e − e− |BVD  −grad |mV
e,p

F↕
Tk

  1
2

|mV

 − mV

− |c2

 − mV

2
− |cBVD

    17.8

    17.8a

The validity of 17.8a and physical sense of  will be presented in the next sections.

Possible mechanisms of Coulomb interaction can be determined by positive and
negative subquantum particles density oscillation, representing virtual pressure waves:
VPW and VPW−, excited by charged triplets - elementary fermions. The effect of
superposition of VPW and VPW− on attraction or repulsion of charges also can be
explained in terms of tending of system: Particles  Bivacuum to minimum of
asymmetry and energy density of Bivacuum dipoles in space between charges.

17.4. The magnetic field origination

The curled magnetic field around electric wire is a consequence of fast rotation of pairs

 e,p
of sub-elementary fermion and antifermion F↑
of opposite charges - clockwise or counterclockwise, reinforced by rotation of unpaired
F↕
wire, in accordance of right hand screw rule.

 . The direction of rotation is dependent on direction of triplets propagation in electric

− of triplets  F↑

  F↓

  F↓

−  F↕

The rotation of charged fermions induce spin equilibrium shift between populations of

Bivacuum fermions and antifermions BVF↑ BVB  BVF↓ to the left or right in
different space volumes. The sign of shift is dependent on direction of triplets propagation.
The shift of spin equilibrium of Bivacuum dipoles and their spatial separation is a
consequence of partial disassembly of virtual Cooper pairs, induced by electric current:

n↕BVF↑  BVF↓ → n↑BVF↑  n↓BVF↓

    17.9

In the absence of magnetic field the densities of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions in

each micro volume of space are equal to each other n↑  n↓ and all of them compensate
each other spins.

Let’s assume, that the increasing of BVF↑ density (n↑ and corresponding decreasing of

BVF↓ density (n↓ corresponds to the North (N) magnetic pole formation. The opposite to
that, Bivacuum dipoles densities shifts stands for South (S) pole formation, i.e. when n↓ is

113

increasing and n↑ decreasing in different volumes of space:

N pole: n↑  n↓

S pole: n↓  n↑

    17.10

The attraction between opposite poles N and S reflects the tendency of BVF↑ and BVF↓

to form stable Cooper pairs, equalizing the symmetry shift between densities of Bivacuum
dipoles of opposite spins:

attraction: n↑BVF↑ N  n↓BVF↓ S

    17.11

For the other hand, the repulsion between similar magnetic poles is a consequence of
Pauli principle of spatial incompatibility of two fermions (real or virtual) of the same spins
(see section ...............):

repulsion: n↑BVF↑ N  n↑BVF↑ N
repulsion: n↓BVF↓ S  n↓BVF↓ S

    17.12

    17.12a

The magnetic attraction and repulsion between unpaired Bivacuum fermion is
increasing with their densities n↑  n↓. Like in the case of Coulomb interaction, the
dependence of interaction force between magnetic poles on separation between them is
(1/r2.

Consequently, just the dynamic equilibrium shift between density of unpaired

Bivacuum fermions: BVF↑  BVF↓ because of dissemble of virtual Cooper pairs BVF↑ 
BVF↓ and polarization of their spatial separation. This process is dependent on direction of
electric current and rotation of charged fermions in wire. It stands for the poles and
intensity of curled magnetic field around the directed electric current.

The thermal motion of conducting electrons in metals or ions in plasma became more
ordered in electric current, increasing correspondingly the magnetic cumulative effect. This
is a result of increasing of probability and number of triplets, rotating in the same plane and
direction. The bigger is velocity and kinetic energy of triplets, the faster is their rotation,
the higher is the probability of spatial separation of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions
and bigger magnetic field tension, excited by this rotation:

H  grad BVF↑  BVF↓

BVF↑  BVF↓   r /RKunpairedpaired

where the equilibrium constant between independent Bivacuum dipoles and in

composition of Cooper pairs is:

Kunpaired  paired  BVF↑  BVF↓
BVF↑  BVF↓

18. Unification of electric, magnetic and gravitational fields,
as a consequence of Corpuscle - Wave duality of particles

The total energy of the fermions, equal to that of unpaired sub-elementary fermion:

Etot  |mV

 − mV

− |c2  mV

2
vres

where vres is resulting velocity of rotation and translation of the triplets.
We present Etot as a sum of all contributions, like in left part of 17.7, using extending

    17.13

    17.13a

    18.1

114

formulas (8.1 - 8.1b):

Etot  m0L0

20

2 

h2
B
mV

loc
2  EEl  EH  EG

    18.2

where: 0  m0c2/ is the angular frequency of rotating triplet - fermion, providing its

rest mass and charge origination with Compton radius L0  /m0c; B  h/mV
Broglie wave length, determined by value of external translational momentum.

 vtr is de

EEl, EH and EG are contributions of electric, magnetic and gravitational energies in

total energy of the charged fermion, correspondingly.

Reversible oscillation between local (Loc and distant (Dist contributions to the total

energy are responsible for electric EE, magnetic EH and gravitational EG fields. The
properties of paired sub-elementary fermion in triplets are responsible for these fields
origination. The recoil  antirecoil effects stimulated by C  W pulsation of paired
sub-elementary fermions of the triplets have the opposite energy and compensate each
other.

The eq. 18.2 can be presented as:

Etot  m0L0

20

2 

h2
B
mV

2 

|ee− |
AB

 KH

|− |
AB

 G

|mV

 mV
− |
AB

where:

AB 


 − mV

− c

mV

 LBc/v

    18.3

    18.4

is the amplitude of cumulative virtual cloud (CVC of de Broglie wave with length
B  2LB  h/mV

2 is a rest charge squared.

|ee− |  e0

 vtr;

The amplitude separates positive and negative charges of CVC as virtual dipole
In the process of C  W pulsation, fermion, like the electron or proton (Figure 8) all

three fields are excited:

EEl 

|ee− |
AT

W

Antirecoil
W→C

C→W
Recoil

e2
c

mV

 − mV

− c2

C

    18.5

Taking into account obtained earlier relation (6.7) between mass and charge symmetry

shifts

mV

 − mV

−  mV

 e

2 − e−
2
2
e

the Loc  Dist oscillations in (18.5), responsible for electric field EE excitation, can be
presented as:

EE 

Loc

|ee− |
AT

Recoil
C→W

W→C
Antirecoil

  mV

c2 e

2
2 − e−
2
e

Dist

tr

where well known dimensionless electromagnetic fine structure constant:

    18.6

    18.7

115

  e2/c

The right part of (18.6) characterizes the electric dipole moment of triplet, equal to that


of unpaired sub-elementary fermion F↕

.

The local internal Coulomb interaction between opposite and asymmetric charges of


torus and antitorus of unpaired sub-elementary fermions (antifermions) F↕
reversibly to the external electric field. This happens because of elastic

diverging  converging effects, induced by C  W pulsation of F↕
emission .absorption of CVC, exciting, in turn, positive and negative virtual pressure
waves: VPW and VPW−.

turns

and

S1/2

The oscillation of magnetic dipoles radiation in the process of [C  W pulsations

between local and distant modes is described by expression 18.9.

These oscillations do not accompanied by magnetic moments symmetry change, but

only by the oscillation of the amplitude AB of Cumulative Virtual Cloud
(CVC, separating  and − and rotational (torsion) energy of CVC,
emitted  absorbed in the process of [C  W pulsation of sub-elementary particles in

triplets (18.9a).

This contribution, responsible for magnetic field EH, can be described as:

i
EH  KH

|− |
AB

C→W

W→C

W

KH

2
i 0
c

mV

 − mV

− c2

i
or : KH

|− |
AB

Loc

C

C→W

W→C

KH

2
i 0
c

mV

 T

2
2 LT

C

Dis

W

where new notion of magnetic fine structure constant, introduced in our approach is:

2
0
c

 

The magnetic conversion coefficient KH we may find from the equality of the

electrostatic and magnetic energy contributions, determined by recoil  antirecoil effects:

EE  Trec  1
2

e2
c

mV

 − mV

− c2  1
2

 mV

 vres

2  1
2

KH

2
i 0
c

mV

 − mV

− c2  EH

This formula is a consequence of equal probability of energy distribution between
translational (electrostatic) and rotational (magnetic) independent degrees of freedom of an
unpaired sub-elementary fermion in triplets and its cumulative virtual cloud (CVC.

From the above condition it follows, that:

KH

2
0
c

 KH

2
e0
2c3 
4m0
2 is the Bohr magneton.

2
e0
c

2  |− |   1

where 0
The introduced magnetic conversion coefficient KH with dimension of wave number


m0c 

2 e0

squared, can be obtained from 18.11 as:

e,p 

KH

e,pc
m0
/2

2



2

2
e,p
L0

    18.8

    18.9

    18.9a

    18.10

    18.11

    18.12

116

e,p  /m0

e,pc is the Compton radius of the electron or proton.
where L0
In Golden mean conditions, corresponding just to rest mass and charge origination due
to tangential velocity of triplets rotation, when external translational motion of particles is
absent, the formula 18.10 gives:

EH  EE   mV

 vres

2  m0c2

Origination of magnetic field can be a result of dynamic equilibrium shift between
Bivacuum fermions and Bivacuum antifermions density to the left or right as described in
previous section.

The chaotic thermal velocity of the ’free’ conductivity electrons in metals and ions at

room temperature is very high even in the absence of current, and follows
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution:

vT  kT
mV

 ~107 cm/s

It proves, that not the velocity, but the ordering of the electrons translational and
rotational dynamics in space, provided by current, is a main reason of the curled magnetic
field excitation around the conductor.

18.1 Interpretation of the Maxwell displacement current,
based on Bivacuum model

The magnetic field origination in Bivacuum can be analyzed also on the base of more

conventional approach.

Let us analyze the 1st Maxwell equation, interrelating the circulation of vector of

magnetic field tension H along the contour L with the conduction current (j) and
displacement current jd  1
4

through the surface, limited by L :

∂EBVF
∂t

    18.13

    18.14



L

H dl  4

c 

S

j  1
4

∂EBVF
∂t

ds

    18.15

where (s is the element of surface, limited with contour (l.
The existence of the displacement current: jd  1
4

∂E
∂t

is in accordance with our

approach is a result of oscillating virtual charge - dipoles (BVF↕ and BVB of Bivacuum.
In condition of primordial Bivacuum of the ideal virtual dipoles symmetry (i.e. in the

absence of matter and fields) the charges of torus and antitorus totally compensate each
other. However, even in primordial symmetric Bivacuum the oscillations of distance
between opposite charges of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles, following by the
energy gap oscillation (chapter 1), are responsible for displacement current. This
alternating current generates corresponding displacement magnetic field:

Hd  4

c 

1
4

∂EBVF
∂t

S

ds

    18.16

Bivacuum dipoles zero-point oscillations are the consequence of the in-phase transitions

of V and V− between the excited and ground states, compensating each other. These
transitions are accompanied by spontaneous emission and absorption of positive and
negative virtual clouds VC and VC−, exiting in turn, virtual pressure waves: VPW and
VPW−. The stimulation of such transitions, for example, by pulsing electric field, should
influence on interaction of Bivacuum with elementary particles.

It follows also from our interpretation of displacement current, that the displacement

117

magnetic field can be enhanced by elementary particles, pulsing between Corpuscular and
Wave phase, even in the absence of translational motion.

18.2 New kind of "recoil current" in Bivacuum, increasing the displacement one.
The velocity of zero-point oscillation and physical sense of electric charge

This additional new current is a consequence of vibrations of BVF↕, induced by
recoil-antirecoil effects, accompanied [C  W transitions of unpaired sub-elementary
fermion of triplets  F↑

 S1/2e,p - fermions.

S0  F↑

−  F↓

The corresponding elastic symmetry oscillations of Bivacuum fermions

BVF↕ ≡ V  V− are followed by small charge-dipole symmetry oscillations with
amplitude, determined by the most probable resulting translational - rotational recoil
velocity (vrec.

At conditions e ≃ e− ≃ e0 and |e − e− |  e0, meaning small symmetry vibrations of

V and V−, we have for the charge shift oscillation eq.(6.8):

Δe  e − e−  1
2

e0

2
vrec
c2

The most probable recoil kinetic energy Trec and recoil velocity vrec, standing for

electromagnetism (18.10), can be defined as:

 − mV

− c2   mV

 vres

2  mV

2
 vrec

2Tk  mV
2   vres
2
vrec

    18.17

    18.18

    18.19

The relation between resulting velocity vres, the internal tangential

  c2, responsible for rest mass and charge origination and the external

velocity vin
translational velocity vext, standing for empirical de Broglie wave length, was introduced in
chapter 8 as:

Using interrelation between mass and charge symmetry shifts (6.7), formula (18.18) for

recoil kinetic energy can be presented as:

2
2  c2  vext
vres

Trec  1
2

 mV

 vres

2  1
2

 c2 e

 mV

2
2 − e−
2
e

In presence of matter and fields, when primordial Bivacuum turns to secondary one,
composed from Bivacuum dipoles of small asymmetry: e ≃ e− ≃ e0, we may assume,
that:

2 − e−
e

2  e  e− e − e−  ≃ 2e0e − e− 

and right part of (18.21) turns to formula, interrelating the recoil kinetic energy of

asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles with their charge symmetry shift:
 c2 e − e−
Trec  1
2

2  mV

 mV

 vres

e0

This new formula reflects the oscillation of Bivacuum dipoles charge symmetry shift
near particle, generated by recoil kinetic energy oscillation, accompanied C  W pulsation
of elementary particle.

The minimum value of recoil velocity, corresponding to zero external translational
velocity of triplets, like electrons, positrons and protons, can be evaluated from the internal

    18.20

    18.21

    18.22

    18.23

118

velocity of sub-elementary fermions, determined by Golden mean conditions
vrec/c2   0. 61803398.
At this conditions (mV

   m0/ and left part of 18.23 can be presented as:

Trec  1
2

 m0c2

    18.23a

The minimum recoil velocity can be considered as the velocity of zero-point oscillations

of elementary charge position, related to recoil  antirecoil effect, accompanied C  W
pulsation of the unpaired sub-elementary fermion of the triplets (electrons or protons) in the
absence of translational motion:

vrec

2 min ≡ v0

min   c2

2 H,E
2 min
vrec
c2

or :

 

where:   e2/c  0, 0072973506;  vrec

2 min/c2  4. 51  10−3 and

min  6.716  10−2 c
vrec

The physical sense of the electric charge follows from 17.38.
This formula can be presented as:

  e2
c

 1


2

min
vrec
c

or :

e  vrec

min 

1/2


c

    18.24

    18.24a

    18.25

    18.26

    18.27

Formula 18.27 means, that zero-point electric charge  F↑

−  F↓

S0 F↑

 S1/2e,p, as

a permanent source of energy, is a consequence of unpaired sub-elementary fermion
 S1/2e,p reversible Corpuscle  Wave pulsation with high frequency:
F↑
e,p  m0
0

e,pc2/h.

These pulsation, resulting from emissionabsorption of cumulative virtual clouds

(CVC by F↑
 S1/2e,p, are accompanied by recoilantirecoil vibrations of the triplet
and corresponding elastic vibrations of surrounding continuum of Bivacuum dipoles with
zero-point velocity (18.24).

We suppose that C  W pulsation of positive charges influence more on positively
charges tori (V and pulsation of negative charges - on negatively charged antitori (V− of
Bivacuum dipoles. So, if we have separated positive and negative charges, their influence
on symmetry of Bivacuum dipoles in space between them compensate each other. As a
consequence, the uncompensated energy of virtual pressure waves VPW and
VPW− outside charges is higher, than between them. This imitates the attraction effect
between pulsing charges.

On contrary, in system of two charges of the same sign, their C  W pulsation shift
symmetry of Bivacuum dipoles in the same direction - positive or negative. As a result, the
uncompensated energy of VPW and VPW− between charges is higher, than outside them,
and we get the repulsion force between charges.

The alternating recoil current (jrec

EH, additional to that of Maxwell displacement current

(jd,) existing in presence of charged particles even in the absence of conducting current
(j  0 is equal to product of (18.17) and square root of (18.24). At Golden mean

119

conditions (v/c)2   this new recoil current, following from our approach, is:

EH

 
jrec

 Δe vrec min  1
2

1/23/2 e0c

Consequently, the Maxwell equation (18.15) can be modified, taking into account the

electromagnetic (EH) recoil current, as



L

H dl  4

c 

j  1
4

∂E
∂t

S

 jrec

EH ds  Itot

    18.28

    18.29

where: Itot is the total current throw the surface (S.
We have to note, that jrec

EH is nonzero not only in the vicinity of particles, but as well in

any remote space regions of Bivacuum, perturbed by electric and magnetic potentials,
decreasing, however, with distance from particle as (1/r). This consequence of our theory
coincides with the extended electromagnetic theory of Bo Lehnert (2004, 2004a), also
considering current in vacuum, additional to displacement one.

In accordance with the known Helmholtz theorem, each kind of vector field (F),
tending to zero at infinity, can be presented, as a sum of the gradient of some scalar
potential ( and a rotor of vector potential (A):

F  grad   rot A

    18.30

To explain the ability of secondary (perturbed by fields) Bivacuum to keep the average

(macroscopic) mass and charge equal to zero, we have to postulate, that the mass and
charge symmetry shifts oscillations of Bivacuum fermions and antifermions, forming
virtual Cooper pairs:

BVF↑S1/2



≡ V ↑↑ V−  V ↓↓ V−∓ ≡ BVF↓S−1/2

∓

    18.31

are opposite by sign, but equal by the absolute value. Consequently, the polarized
secondary Bivacuum (i.e. perturbed by matter and field) can be considered, as a plasma of
the in-phase oscillating virtual dipoles (BVF) of opposite resulting charge and mass/energy.

18.3 The Link Between Maxwell’s Formalism and our model of photon
The quantization rule for energy of each of two sub-elementary fermions, forming

photons, can be expressed as:


Ep  n ECW  n CW   nV
−
− mV


  nmV

rot V

c2  
2

−
− V


 
−

− rot V



    18.32

    18.32a

where: mV

 and mV
 c2  V

complementary torus V
and antitorus V
photon in [C] phase;

− c2  V

−

− are the quantized energies of the actual and
of sub-elementary fermion or antifermion of the

The energy of photon is a result of quantum beats with frequency: CW  V
between the actual and complementary corpuscular states of two uncompensated
sub-elementary fermions with additive spins in composition of photons (Fig.8).

−
 − V

It is assumed, that all of subquantum particles and antiparticles, forming actual and
complementary vortical excitation of [C] phase of sub-elementary fermions, have the same
angle frequency: V

−, correspondingly.

 and V

We can express the divergency of Pointing vector: P  c/4EH via difference of
contributions, related to actual and complementary tori, using known relation of vector

120

analysis:

divEH  4

c div P  H rotE − E rotH

    18.33

where H and E are the magnetic and electric energy contributions of subquantum

particles, radiated and absorbed in a course of correlated [C  W pulsation of two
uncompensated sub-elementary fermions of photon.

The analogy between (18.32) and (18.32a), illustrating the dynamics of [torus 

antitorus] dipole, is evident, if we assume:

V

V

  H rotE ~ 
2
−  E rotH ~ 
2



 rot V

−

 rot V

Then, the divergence of Pointing vector will take a form:

4
c div P  
2

 rot V



−

− rot V

~ mV

−mV

−c2

    18.34

    18.34a

    18.35

We can see from 18.34 and 18.34a, that the properties of both: magnetic and electric

fields are implemented in each of our torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles.

We may apply also the Green theorems, interrelating the volume and surface integrals,

to our duality model. One of known Green theorems is:

 ∇2 − ∇2 dV 

 dS   ∇ −  ∇ dV

    18.36

V

S

If we define the scalar functions, as the instant energies of the actual and

complementary states of [C] phase of sub-elementary particles as   mV
  mV

−c2, then, taking into account that

c2 and

∇2  div grad   div grad mV
∇2  div grad   div grad mV

c2
−c2

formula (18.36) can be presented in form:

 mV

−c2∇2mV

c2 − mV

c2∇2mV

−c2 dV

V

 dS mV


−c2 ∇mV

c2 − mV

c2 ∇mV

−c2 dV

    18.37

    18.37a

    18.38

    18.38a

S

The upper part (18.38) represents the energy of sub-elementary fermion in [C] phase
and the lower part (18.38a) - the energy of cumulative virtual cloud (CVC), corresponding
to [W] phase of the same particle.

18.4 New approach to quantum gravity and antigravity, dark matter and inertia

The local internal gravitational interaction between the opposite mass poles of the


mass-dipoles of unpaired sub-elementary fermions (antifermions) F↕
in [C] phase
turns reversibly to the external interaction between mass poles of CVC in [W] phase (see

S1/2

121

eqs. 18.2 and 18.3).

The corresponding dynamic equilibrium between the diverging and converging flows of

gravitational energy, following C  W pulsation, can be described as:

EG  G

− e,p,n

mV

 mV
LA

Recoil
C→W

W→C
Antirecoil

W

 |mV

 − mV

− |c2

C

    18.39

where: LA  /mV

 − mV

vector to distance from particle; m0
proton or neutron squared.

− c is a characteristic radius of CVC; r
 mV

r is ratio of unitary
− e,p,n is a rest mass of the electron,

e,p,n 2  mV

The introduced dimensionless gravitational fine structure constant e,p,n (Kaivarainen,

2006; 2008) is a ratio of the rest mass of elementary particle squared (electron, proton,
neutron, etc.) to the Planck mass MPl

2  c/G, squared:

i 

2

e,p,n

m0
MPl

e
m0
For the electron e  1. 739  10−45 and e 
MPl
The effective recoil velocity of particle’s squared vG

2 eff, accompanied C  W
pulsations, characteristic for excitation of gravitational waves, can be introduced as

 0. 41  10−22.

EG  mV

 vG

2 eff   mV

 − mV

− c2

    18.40

    18.41

At the Golden mean conditions, when (v2/c2    0. 618, mV
  m0/ we get from (18.41) the reduced value of characteristic gravitational

mV
velocity of zero-point oscillation, of the electron in state of rest:

 − mV

−   m0 and

vGeff

  c   c 0. 41  10−22  0. 786  0. 322  10−22 c

    18.42

The energy of gravitational field (18.41) at Golden mean conditions for rest mass and

charge origination, in the absence of external translational motion turns to

EG

0 



m0


2 eff

vG

  2m0c2

    18.43

This is the gravitational energy of Bivacuum dipole of torus and antitorus, pulsing
in-phase between symmetric excited and ground symmetric states of opposite energy.
The excitation of spherical virtual pressure waves of positive and negative energy:

 and VPWq

VPWq
counterphase pulsation of unpaired F↕
F↑

− is a result of torus and antitorus beats, accompanied C  W
 e,p and paired sub-elementary fermions

S0 of triplets.

−  F↓
It is important to note, that the energy of introduced gravitational field does not depend

on charge of triplets, determined by unpaired sub-elementary fermion of triplets
 F↑

S1/2, in contrast to electrostatic and magnetic field.

S0 F↕

−  F↓



It follows from our approach, that the gravitational energy is existing even in ’empty’

secondary Bivacuum, when the influence of matter and fields on symmetry of Bivacuum
dipoles is small, however mV

 ≠ mV

− and

EG   mV

 − mV

− c2  0

    18.44

122

This condition can be responsible for attraction effect of ’cold dark matter’ of the

Universe.

The cold dark matter phenomena is a consequence of simultaneous transitions -beats
between asymmetric and symmetric ground states of huge number of Bivacuum dipoles,
slightly asymmetric in secondary Bivacuum, composing big virtual domains of nonlocality
in state of Bose condensation (see section 3.1).

These Bivacuum domains can’t be detected by any astronomical methods and behave,

as extended in space gravitating mass with huge resulting energy of gravitation.

From the proposed mechanism of gravitation and similar values of mV

  in the left and

right parts of eq. (18.41), it follows the equality of gravitational and inertial mass.

The inertia itself can be defined, as a resistance to additional symmetry shift between

the actual and complementary masses/energy of sub-elementary fermions (mV
elementary particles and surrounding Bivacuum dipoles, accompanied particles
acceleration.

 and mV

−  of

The generalized Le Chatelier’s Principle can be introduced, as a resistance of any
system, containing sub-elementary fermions of elementary fermions (triplets) in state of
equilibrium, to additional symmetry shift, accompanied particles acceleration, increasing its
actual mass and decreasing complementary one.

The antigravitation or dark energy phenomena can be a consequence of energy
conservation law in our formulation (section 17.2). This formulation means that shift of
mass-energy symmetry towards the positive energy in huge amount of Bivacuum dipoles
mV
other domains in state of BC: mV
gravitational energy changes from positive to negative and gravitation turns to
antigravitation:

−   0 in one domains should be compensated by the opposite symmetry shift in

−   0. It follows from 18.44, that sign of

 − mV

 − mV

    18.45

    18.46

EG  −EG   mV

 − mV

− c2  0

Such conversion of symmetry of Bivacuum dipoles can be induced even in "normal"
secondary Bivacuum - for example, by combination of strong magnetic and electric fields.

18.5 The hydrodynamic mechanism of gravitational attraction and repulsion

In accordance to our conjecture (Kaivarainen, 1995; 2000; 2006), the mechanism of
gravitation and antigravitation is similar to Bjerknes attraction/repulsion between pulsing
spheres in liquid medium of Bivacuum. The dependence of Bjerknes force on distance
between centers of pulsing objects is quadratic: FBj ~ 1/r2:

r2 GR1
where G is density of liquid, i.e. virtual density of secondary Bivacuum, dependent on

2R2

2v2 cos 

FG  FBj  1

Bivacuum dipoles symmetry shift; R1 and R2 radiuses of gravitating spheres, composed
from pulsing particles; v is velocity of spheres surface oscillation (i.e. velocity of virtual
pressure waves VPWq
be assumed to be equal to light velocity: v  c;  is a phase shift between pulsation of
spheres or system of coherent elementary particles.

, excited by C  W pulsation of elementary particles, which can

On the big enough distances the attraction may turn to repulsion, i.e. gravitation turns

to antigravitation. The latter effect is dependent on the phase shift of coherent C  W
pulsation of interacting remote triplets ( in separate macroscopic objects. This repulsion
effect can explain revealed experimentally acceleration of the Universe expansion.

The corresponding antigravitation energy or negative pressure energy (dark energy), is

123

about 70% of the total Universe energy.

The possibility of artificial phase shift of C  W pulsation of coherent elementary
particles of any object may (for example by magnetic field) may change its gravitational
attraction to repulsion and vice versa.

The volume and radius of pulsing spheres (R1 and R2 in such approach is determined
by sum of volume of hadrons, composing gravitating systems in solid, liquid, gas or plasma
state. The gravitational attraction or repulsion is a result of increasing or decreasing of
virtual pressure of subquantum particles between interacting systems as respect to its value
outside them. This model can serve as a background for new quantum gravity theory.
The effective radiuses of gravitating objects R1 and R2 can be calculated from the

effective volumes of the objects:

V1,2  4
3

R1,2

3  N1,2

4
3

3
Lp,n

where: N1,2  M1,2/mp,n is the number of protons and neutrons in gravitating bodies

with mass M1 and M2; mp,n is the mass of proton and neutron; Lp,n  /mp,nc is the
Compton radius of proton and neutron.

From (18.47) we get for effective radiuses:

R1,2 

M1,2
mp,n

1/3

Lp,n 

M1,2
mp,n

1/3


mp,nc

Putting this expression to (18.46) we get for gravitational force between two

macroscopic objects, each of them formed by atoms with coherently pulsing protons and
neutrons:

FG  1

r2 Bv

M1M2 2/3
4/3
mp,n


mp,n

4 1
c2

Equalizing this formula with Newton’s one: FG

N  1

r2 GM1M2 , we get the expression

for gravitational constant:

G  

G
3 M1M2

2/c2
16
3 mp,n

The condition of gravitational constant permanent value following from (18.50), is a
permanent ratio of virtual density G of asymmetric Bivacuum dipoles in gravitational field
to cube root of product of mass of gravitating bodies 3 M1M2 :

G  const,

if

G
3 M1M2

 const

19. The mechanisms, increasing the refraction index of Bivacuum

By definition, the torus is a figure, formed by rotation of a circle with radius LV
around the axis, shifted from the center of the circle at the distance ΔLE,H,G. The electric,
magnetic (E, H and gravitational (G vibrations of positions ΔLE,H,GV of the big
number of recoiled Bivacuum fermions BVFrec, induced by the elastic recoilantirecoil
deformations of Bivacuum matrix, are accompanied by vibrations of square and volume of
their torus (V and antitorus (V−.

,

i

    18.47

    18.48

    18.49

    18.50

    18.51

124

The electric, magnetic and gravitational increments of square (ΔSV
E,G of tori and antitori of BVFrec

↕ i, as a consequence of their center vibrations, can

E,G) and volume

(ΔVV
be presented as:

ΔSV
ΔVV

E,H,G  42|ΔLEH,G |V
E,H,G  42|ΔLEH,G |V

EH,G  LV
EH,G  LV
2

    19.1

    19.2

At conditions of zero-point oscillations, corresponding to Golden Mean (GM), when the
ratio (v0/c2  and external tangential or translational velocity of Bivacuum dipoles (v is
zero, the maximum shifts of center of secondary Bivacuum dipoles in vicinity of pulsing
elementary particles due to electromagnetic and gravitational recoil-antirecoil (zero-point)
vibrations are, correspondingly:

i
ΔLE,H

  CW
V




vEH

i



ΔLG

i V

  CW




vG

i




i c
m0

i c
m0

1/2  0, 067 LV
i 

i 
  3, 22  10−23 LV

    19.3

    19.4

where: the period of recoil  antirecoil oscillation, induced by C  W pulsation of

elementary particle with rest mass m0
recoilantirecoil most probable velocity of zero-point oscillations, as a background of
electric and magnetic fields (14.38) is: vE,H
1/2  0, 067;

  c1/2  0. 201330447  108 m s−1 where

 1/CW

 /m0

the

;

i is


CW



i

i c2

the corresponding zero-point velocity of the electron (18.42), which determines

gravitational field is:

vGeff

  c e  0. 322  10−22 c

where e

1/2  0. 48  10−22.

The dielectric permittivity of Bivacuum and corresponding refraction index, by analogy

with our theory of refraction index of matter (Kaivarainen, 2008), can be presented as a
ratio of free volume of Bivacuum fermions and bosons in symmetric primordial Bivacuum
(Vpr to their volume in secondary Bivacuum (i.e. Bivacuum in presence of matter and
fields): Vsec  VBVF − r/rΔVBVFrec
Bivacuum is optically more dense, than primary, if we assume that the volume, occupied by
Bivacuum fermions, as a pair of tori and antitori, is excluded for photons.

, perturbed by matter and fields. The secondary

E,G

The electric, magnetic and gravitational potentials and the related excluded volumes of

perturbed Bivacuum fermions/antifermions decline with distance (r as:


r /rΔVBVFrec

E,H



and


r /rΔVBVFrec

G



where: (r) is a distance from the charged and/or gravitating particle and


r is the unitary

radius vector. Taking all this into account, we get for permittivity of secondary Bivacuum
(see chapter 8 in book by Kaivarainen, 2008):

  n2 

c
vEH,G

2



N Vpr
N Vsec





VBVF
VBVF − r/rΔVBVFrec

EH,G



1
EH,G /VBVF

1−r/rΔVBVFrec

    19.5

125

1

1 − r/r 3|ΔL|V

EH,G  LV

n2 

    19.6

where: the velocity of light propagation in asymmetric secondary Bivacuum of higher

virtual density, than in primordial one, is notated as: vE,H,G  cE,H,G;
primordial Bivacuum fermion is VBVF  4/3LV
 ΔVV
Bivacuum: ΔVBVFrec

the volume of
3 and its increment in secondary

E,G (19.2);

E,G

r/r is a ratio of unitary radius-vector to distance between the source of C  W
pulsations (elementary particle) and point, perturbed by the electrostatic, magnetic and
gravitational potential BVFrec

E,H,G.

Putting (19.3) into formula (19.6) we get for refraction index of Bivacuum and

relativistic factor (RE,H in presence of charged elementary particle (electron, positron or
proton, antiproton) the following expression:

  n2 

2

c
cE,H



E,H

1

1 − r/r 31/2 ≲ 2. 71

    19.7

where: 1 ≲ n2 ≲ 2, 71 is tending to 1 at r → .
The relativistic factor, determined by contribution of electric and magnetic fields we

introduce as:

REH  1 −

cE,H 2
c2

 r/r 0, 631 ≲ r/r1/2 0. 794

    19.8

0 ≲ RE,H ≲ 0, 794 is tending to zero at r → .
In similar way, using (19.4) and (19.6), for the refraction index of Bivacuum and the
corresponding relativistic factor RG of gravitational vibrations of Bivacuum fermions
(BVF↕ in the vicinity of pulsing elementary particles at zero-point conditions, we get:

  n2 

2

cG
c



G

1

1 − r/r3e1/2  1

    19.9

where

e  0. 322  10−22 c

The gravitational relativistic factor:

RG  1 −

2

cG
c

 r/r 0, 322  10−22 ≲ r/r1/2 0, 567  10−11

    19.10

Like in previous case, the Bivacuum refraction index, increased by gravitational
potential, is tending to its minimum value: n2 → 1 at the increasing distance from the
source: r → .

The charge - induced refraction index nE,H in contrast to the mass - induced one, is

independent of lepton generations of Bivacuum dipoles (e, , .

The formulas (19.7) and (19.9) for Bivacuum dielectric permittivity and refraction
index in presence of charged elementary particles point that bending probability of photons
trajectory in presence of charged particles is much higher, than in presence of neutral
particles with similar mass.

We have to stress, that the light velocity in conditions:

2
nE,H,G

 c/vE,H,G  c/cE,H,G   1 is not longer a scalar, but a vector, determined by the

126

gradient of Bivacuum fermion symmetry shift:

grad c ~ grad Δ|mV

 − mV

− |E,H,G c2  grad ΔmV

v2 

    19.11

and corresponding gradient of torus and antitorus mass symmetry shift, characterized by the
expression: 1 − mV

  cE,H,G/v2:

−/mV

grad1 − mV

−/mV

  grad

cE,H,G
c

2

 grad 1
n2

    19.12

So, our approach explains bending of the light beams, under influence of strong

gravitational potential in another way, than general theory of relativity.

Similar to our idea of polarizable vacuum and its permittivity variations has been

developed by Dicke (1957), Fock (1964) and Puthoff (2001).

For spherically symmetric star or planet it was shown, using Dicke model (Dicke,
1957), that the dielectric constant K of polarizable vacuum is given by exponential form:

K  exp2GM/rc2

    19.13

where G is gravitational constant, M is mass, and r is the distance from the mass center.
The approximation of the formula above, given by Puthoff (2001):

K ≈ 1  2GM

rc2  1

2

2

2GM
rc2

    19.14

Our approach propose physical mechanism of Bivacuum optical density increasing near

charged and gravitating particles, inducing light beams bending.

The increasing of the excluded for photons volume of tori and antitori due to their
rotations and vibrations, enhance the refraction index of Bivacuum and decrease the light
velocity near gravitating and charged objects.

20. Application of angular momentum conservation law for evaluation
of curvatures of electric and magnetic potentials

From the formulas of recoil energy responsible for electric and magnetic fields (18.18
S1/2e,, we can find out the relations


and 18.23a) of the triplet  F↑
between the internal and external angular recoil momentums of CVC.

S0 F↕

−  F↓

Total longitudinal recoil momentum Mtot for electric and magnetic contributions is a

sum of the internal M0

in (zero-point) and external M

ext angular momentums:

MtotE, H  M0

inE, H  M

extE, H

From the law of angular momentum conservation it follows, that the angular

momentums of Cumulative virtual cloud (CVC) - right part of (20.2) and the recoil (rec)
momentum - left part of 20.2 m0cLE
sub-elementary fermions in triplets should be equal.

0 rec, accompanied C  W pulsation of

For internal electric and magnetic recoil momentums, related to the rest mass and

charge of elementary fermions origination, we get from (18.23a):

M0

inE, H  m0cLE

0 rec   m0c L0 − m0c L0 CVC

or : LE
or : LE

0  L0 −  L0
0  L01 − 

    20.1

    20.2

    20.2a

    20.2b

127

where the Compton radius of elementary particle (electron, for example) is L0  /m0c

and momentum is m0c.

For external contribution to recoil angular momentum, responsible for electric and

magnetic fields we get from (18.18):

M

ext  mV
or : LE

ext rec  mV

vLE
ext  LB −  LB

v LB − mV

v LB CVC

where the external momentum of particle pext  mV

v  h/B  
LB
to de Broglie wave length and external translational velocity of particle
B  2LB  h/mV

v,

The total momentum is a sum of the internal and external angular momentums:

is directly related

Mtot  m0cLE

0  mV

vLE

extrec 

 m0c L0  mV

v LB −  m0c L0  mV

v LBCVC

From 20.2b and 20.4 we can see, that the space curvature, related to electric and
magnetic interaction at zero-point condition (v  0), induced by C  W pulsation of
unpaired sub-elementary fermion in triplets (electrons or protons) is:

LE

0 

L0
 1 −   L0
  0. 0072973506 ≅ 1/137

1
 − 1  aB − L0  136, 036 L0

So, we find out, that the space curvature, characteristic for electromagnetic potential of
0  is very close to

the electron at Golden Mean - internal rotational zero-point conditions (LE
the radius of the 1st Bohr orbit aB in hydrogen atom:
aB  1

 L0  137, 036 L0  0. 5291  10−10 m

Let us consider now the curvature of electric magnetic potentials, determined by the

external dynamics of the charged particle and its de Broglie wave length from:
 − 1  136. 036 LB  136. 036 B
1
2

LB
 1 −  ≅ LB

ext 

LE

In most common nonrelativistic conditions the de Broglie wave length of elementary

particle is much bigger than it its Compton length (LB  B
consequently, the effective external radius of Coulomb potential action is much bigger,
0 .
ext  LE
than the minimum internal one: LE

h
mv  L0  

2  1

2

m0c  and,

21. Pauli principle: How it works ?
Let us consider the reasons why the Pauli principle ”works” for fermions and do not

work for bosons.

In accordance to our model of elementary particles, the numbers of sub-elementary
fermions and sub-elementary antifermions, forming bosons, like photons (Fig.8), are equal.
Each of sub-elementary fermion and sub-elementary antifermion in symmetric pairs
− of bosons can pulsate between their [C] and [W] states in-phase (S  1 or
 F↕

F↕
counterphase, providing integer or zero spin (S  0, correspondingly. In both cases the
energies of positive and negative subquantum particles of CVC and CVC− , emitted 
 F↕
absorbed by F↕
VPW− and compensate each other.

− excite positive and negative virtual pressure waves: VPW and

    20.3

    20.3a

    20.4

    20.5

    20.6

    20.7

128

For the other hand, the oscillating density of sub-quantum particles and antiparticles in
CVC and CVC−, emittedabsorbed by unpaired sub-elementary fermion or antifermion
 i with the same spin and phase of [C  W
of elementary fermions  F↑
pulsation are not equal to each other and do not compensated each other.

  F↓

−  F↕

In the framework of our model, Pauli repulsion effect between fermions with the same

spin states and energy, meaning the same phase and frequency of C  W pulsation, is
similar to the effect of excluded volume.

This effect is provided by spatial incompatibility of two cumulative virtual clouds:

 and CVC2

CVC1
same moment of time in the same volume.

 from sub-elementary particles or antiparticles of triplets, emitted in the

The effect of excluded volume works, if the distance between CVC1

 and CVC2
equal or less, than doubled de Broglie wave length of triplets: 2B  2CVC  2h/mV

 is
vext.

Let us analyze this situation in more detail.
The average external translational energy (E E,H

CW

 of fermions F↑

  F↓

−  F↕

 i is:

CW

E E,H

 EE,H

CW  EE,HC  EE,HW tr

    21.1

It involves opposite by sign oscillation of Coulomb potential interaction between

opposite electric poles of CVC in [W] phase
CVC ACVC of F↕
 − mV
mV
and magnetic field:

W
 i , transforming to kinetic recoil perturbation of Bivacuum matrix
− c2 C in [C] phase in the process of C  W pulsation, representing electric

separated by the amplitude of

|ee− |
LT

EE,H 

|ee− |
ACVC

W

CW

 mV

 − mV

− c2 C  mV

v2 Dis  EE,HW

Dist

where the amplitude of de Broglie wave of the charged fermion is:

ACVC 


 − mV

− c

mV

 
v
mV

c
v  LB

c
v

The electromagnetic energy of unpaired F↕

 i

is equal to longitudinal recoil energy:

EE,H  mV

 − mV

− c2 C  mV

v2 rec ~ C electric field energy

The total energy of CVC, equal to energy of empirical de Broglie wave, which is
responsible for Pauli repulsion (P, is determined by its external translational momentum:

h2
 B
mV

2  mV

v2 minus recoil energy:

EB 

h2
B
mV

2 − mV

v2   mV

v21 −  ~ P

    21.2

    21.2a

    21.3

    21.4

The Coulomb repulsion C between two similar elementary charge or attraction

between opposite ones, is determined by electric field energy (21.3). For the other hand, the
Pauli repulsion P between these charges, as a fermions, pulsing in the same phase and
frequency on the distance, equal or less than doubled de Broglie wave length: r
≤ 2B  h/mV

v is dependent on real energy of CVC (21.4).

The ratio between Pauli and Coulomb repulsion energies between two similar fermions

on the distances about or less, than de Broglie wave length of these charges (B is:

P
C

 1 − 


 1

 − 1 ≃ 136

    21.5

129

We can see, that it is close to reverse value of electromagnetic fine structure constant:

1/ ≃ 137.

This means, that on these distances, comparable with linear dimensions of CVC
usually much bigger than Compton length of charges: B  L0  /m0c, the Pauli
non-electromagnetic repulsion is more than hundred times bigger, than Coulomb
interaction.

Pauli repulsion is absent if C  W pulsations of two unpaired sub-elementary
−  have the same energy and frequency:

fermions of two electron  F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

 

mV

 − mV
h

−resc2

but opposite phase of pulsation.
The mechanism, proposed, explains the absence of the Pauli repulsion in systems of

bosons and Cooper pairs, making possible their Bose condensation.

21.1 Spatial compatibility of sub-elementary fermions
of the same charge and opposite spins in triplets
We postulate in our model, that [C  W] pulsation of paired sub-elementary fermion
−  of opposite spins and charges in composition of the electron
−  or proton are counterphase with pulsation of unpaired F↑

  F↓
− 1  F↑

 

and antifermion F↑
 2  F↓
 F↑
(see Fig. 5).

It follows from above explanation of Pauli principle, that in the case of counterphase [C
  1 and unpaired F↑

 W] pulsations of one of paired F↓
(energy) and opposite spins, with similar charges, localized in the same energy realm, they
are spatially compatible, as far their corpuscular [C] and wave [W] phase are realized
alternatively in different semi-periods. Consequently, the Pauli repulsion between
sub-elementary fermions of opposite spins in composition of elementary particles is absent.

  with the same frequency

21.2 The reversibility of fermion properties after double turn (23600 in magnetic field,
as a consequence of paired fermions spin state additivity

It is known fact, that the total rotating cycle for spin of the electrons or positrons is not

3600, but 7200, i.e. double turn by external magnetic field of special configuration, is
necessary to return elementary fermions to starting state (Davies, 1985). The correctness of
any new model of elementary particles should be testified by its ability to explain this
nontrivial fact.

We may propose three possible explanations, using our model of the electrons,

positrons, protons and antiprotons, as a triplets of sub-elementary fermions/antifermions.

Let us analyze them on example of the electron:

 F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

− e

1. We may assume, that the direction of external magnetic field rotation acts only on

unpaired sub-elementary fermion, as asymmetric pair [torus (V−  antitorus (V:

F↑

−  V−  Vas

if the resulting magnetic moment of pair F↑

− is zero and the pair do not interact
with external magnetic field at all. In such conditions the 1st 3600 turn of external H field
change the direction of rotation of one of two tori rotation to the opposite one:
V−  ↑ → V−  ↓,

transforming sub-elementary fermion to sub-elementary Bivacuum

  F↓

    21.6

    21.7

    21.8

130

boson (B−:

F↑

− ≡ V−  V

3600
 B− ≡ V− ↓↑ V

    21.9

One more 3600 turn of the external magnetic field converts this sub-elementary boson
−  of triplet can

and the triplet (21.9) to starting condition. The total cycle for unpaired F↑
be presented as:

I

F↑

−  ≡ V−  V

3600
 B− ≡ V− ↓↑ V

3600
 F↑

−  ≡ V−  V

    21.10

2. The second possible explanation of double 7200 turn may be a consequence of
following two stages, involving origination of pair of sub-elementary bosons B  B
from pair of sub-elementary fermions, as intermediate stage and two full turns (2  3600
of unpaired sub-elementary fermion:

    21.11

    21.12

    21.13

II

 F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

− 

3600
→  B  B∓  F↑

− 

3600
→  F↑

  F↓

−  F↑

− 

Both of these mechanisms are not very probable, because they involve the action of

external magnetic field on single or paired sub-elementary bosons with zero spin and,
consequently, zero magnetic moment.

3. The most probable third mechanism avoids such strong assumption. The external

rotating H field interact in two stage manner (2  3600 only with sub-elementary
fermions/antifermions, changing their spins. However this mechanism demands that the
angle of spin rotation of sub-elementary particle and antiparticles of neutral pairs
F↑
includes reorientation spins of each F↑
  F↓
turn of pair F↑

 and F↓
− resembles that of Mobius transformation.

− are the additive parameters. It means that turn of resulting spin of pair on 3600

− only on 1800. Consequently, the full spin

  F↓

The spin of unpaired sub-elementary fermion F↑

− , in contrast to paired ones, makes a

full turn each 3600, i.e. twice in 7200 cycle:

 F↑

 x  F↓

− y  F↑

− z 

3600
  F↓

 x

18001800


F↑

− y  F↑

− z  →

3600
  F↑

 x  F↓

− y  F↑

− z 

The difference between the intermediate - 2nd stage and the original one in (9.8) is in

opposite spin states of paired sub-elementary particle and antiparticle:

F↑

 x  F↓

− y

3600
 F↓

 x

18001800


F↑

− y

Because of Pauli repulsion (see previous section) between two sub-elementary fermions

of the same spin state F↑
corresponding triplet configuration has deformed - stretched configuration, different from
original and final ones.

− z , in intermediate state of (21.12), the

− y and F↑

In the latter - equilibrium configurations of triplet, the C  W pulsation of unpaired
− y is counterphase and spatially compatible

− z  and paired F↓

sub-elementary fermion F↑
due to the absence of Pauli repulsion.

One more known ”strange” experimental feature of the electron can be explained by its

triplet structure:

- the existence in triplets of paired, in-phase pulsating sub-elementary fermion and
antifermion (21.13) with opposite charges, representing double electric dipoles (i.e. double

131

 x  F↓

charge) F↑
generated by electron, as compared with those, generated by rotating sphere with single
charge |e− |.

− y, can be responsible for two times stronger magnetic field,

21.3. Bosons as a coherent system of sub-elementary and elementary fermions and
antifermions forming Cooper pairs

The spatial image of sub-elementary boson is a superposition of strongly correlated
sub-elementary fermions with opposite charges and spin states with properties of Cooper
pairs. In general case the elementary bosons are composed from the integer number of such
pairs.

Bosons have zero or integer spin in the  units, in contrast to the half integer spins of

fermions. In general case, bosons with S  0, 1 include: photons, gluons, mesons and
boson resonances, phonons, pairs of elementary fermions with opposite spins, atoms and
molecules.

We subdivide bosons into elementary and complex bosons:
1. Elementary bosons (like photons), composed from equal number of sub-elementary
fermions and antifermions, moving with light velocity in contrast to complex bosons, like
atoms;

2. Complex bosons, represent a coherent system of elementary fermions pairs: electrons

and nucleons with resulting integer spin, like in neutral atoms and molecules.

Formation of stable complex bosons from elementary fermions with different actual

1≠ mV

2 is possible due to their electromagnetic attraction, like in

masses: mV
proton  electron pairs in atoms. It may occur, if the length of their waves B are the same
and equal to distance between them. These conditions may be achieved by difference in
their external recoil velocities (see section 18.2), adjusting their momentums to the same
value:

L1 /mV
at :

v1 L2 /mV
1

n/mV

v1/vn mV

v2…  Ln /mV

vn

    21.14

The mentioned above conditions are the base for assembly of complex bosons, unified

in the volume of 3D standing waves of fermions of the opposite or same spins.

The hydrogen atom, composing from two fermions: electron and proton is a simplest

example of complex bosons. The heavier atoms also follow the same principle of
self-organization.

The elementary boson, such as photon, represents dynamic superposition of

sub-elementary fermions and antifermions, interacting via head-to-tail principle (Fig.8).
Such composition determines the resulting external charge of photon, equal to zero and the
value of photon’s spin: J   1, 0, − 1.

Stability of all types of elementary particles: bosons and fermions (electrons, positrons

etc.) is a result of superposition/exchange of cumulative virtual clouds [CVC CVC−]
with gluon properties, emitted and absorbed in the process of in-phase [C  W pulsations
of paired sub-elementary particles and sub-elementary antiparticles [F↑
presented on Fig. 6.

  F↓

−, like

22. The Mystery of Sri Yantra Diagram

In accordance to ancient archetypal ideas, geometry and numbers describe the

fundamental energies in course of their dance - dynamics, transitions. For more than ten
millenniums it was believed that the famous Tantric diagram-Sri Yantra contains in hidden
form the basic functions active in the Universe (Fig. 13).

132

Fig. 13. The Sri Yantra diagram is composed from nine triangles. Four of them are pointed
up and five down.
In another way this diagram can be considered as superposition of:
a) the set of pairs of cones of opposite apex, corresponding to torus and antitorus of
asymmetric Bivacuum fermions in [C] phase in different excitation states and
b) the set of diamonds, corresponding to [W] phase of corresponding excitation states of
Bivacuum fermions (dashed lines).
Author is grateful to Patrick Flanagan for submitting of Sri Yantra diagram with precise
coordinates of most important points, making possible its quantitative analysis.

Triangle is a symbol of a three-fold Nature. The Christian trinity, the symbol of God
may be represented by triangle. The symbol of trinity is coherent to our idea of triplets of
sub-elementary particles and antiparticles, as elementary particles. In Buddhism-Hindu
triangle with apex up is a symbol of God-male and that with apex down is a symbol of
God-female.

For millenniums it was believed, that Sri Yantra diagram represents geometric
language, containing encrypted information about the principles of matter formation.
Let us analyze this diagram, using notions of our theory of elementary particles
origination from Bivacuum dipoles and the mechanism of corpuscle - wave duality.
First of all, the ratio 5:4 between positive and negative triangles may reflect the

primordial asymmetry of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum dipoles, as a condition of matter
domination over antimatter.

We may see also, that Sri Yantra diagram contains the information about duality of
sub-elementary fermions, forming elementary particles, i.e. their discrete corpuscular [C]
and wave [W] phases. The diagram at Fig.13 can be considered as a superposition of:

a) the [C] phase is presented by set of pairs of cones of opposite apex, corresponding to

asymmetric torus and antitorus of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions in different excitation
states (see Fig. 11a, where the diameters of bases of pairs of cones correspond to diameters
of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum fermions) and

b) the [W] phase is described by set of diamonds, corresponding to of Bivacuum

fermions in different excitation states.

In accordance to our theory of sub-elementary fermion/antifermion origination, the
former set (a) describes their [C] phase with different diameters of opposite cones bases,
characterizing symmetry shift between torus (V and antitorus (V−, correspondingly. The
asymmetry of torus and antitorus is increasing with Bivacuum fermion excitation state,
accompanied by decreasing of spatial separation between them. From formula (1.4) for this

133

separation:

[dVV−]n

i 

h
i c1  2n

m0

    22.1

we can see, that the distance between torus and antitorus decreases with quantum number
(n) increasing, indeed.

It was astounding to find out, that at maximum excitation and maximum asymmetry of

Bivacuum dipole, corresponding to minimum diamond dimension (Fig.14b), the ratio of
down radius of cone/torus base to that of upper antitorus is L/L−  0. 6, i.e. practically
coincide with Golden mean (  0. 618).

Just this critical ratio of torus and antitorus radiuses is a condition of the rest mass and

charge origination, turning Bivacuum dipoles to muons and tauons, following by their
fusion to triplets of electrons, protons, neutrons.

Figure 14 a. Part of Sri Yantra diagram, representing set of pairs of cones of opposite apex,
corresponding to torus and antitorus of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions in [C] phase in
different excitation states. The diameters of bases of pairs of cones corresponds to diameters
of torus and antitorus of Bivacuum fermions.
Figure 14b. Superposition of [C] and [W] phase of asymmetric Bivacuum fermion,
corresponding to critical state of excitation and asymmetry, determined by Golden mean
condition. This state is characterized by origination of the rest mass and charge, turning
Bivacuum fermion to sub-elementary fermion. The next stage of matter origination from

134

Bivacuum is fusion of triplets of elementary fermions from sub-elementary fermions.

The diamonds of increasing as respect to Fig.15b dimensions, incorporated in Sri
Yantra diagram (Fig.14), reflects [W] phase of Bivacuum dipoles of different excitation
states in form of Cumulative Virtual Clouds CVC, emitted and absorbed in the process of
quantum beats between asymmetric states of torus and antitorus.

The probability of coincidental correlation of quantitative and qualitative features of Sri

Yantra diagram properties with key features of our theory of elementary particles is very
low. It is a mystery, indeed, that only 10 millenniums after famous Sri Yantra diagram
became known in mankind history, we start to understand its encrypted information about
fundamentals of quantum mechanics.

23 The examples of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI)
between macroscopic objects

In accordance to our approach, the remote interaction between macroscopic Sender [S]
and Receiver [R] can be realized, as a result of Bivacuum mediated interaction (BMI), like
superposition of distant and nonlocal components of their Virtual Replicas Multiplication
(VRMS   VRMR), described in previous sections.

Nonequilibrium processes in [Sender], accompanied by acceleration of particles, like
evaporation, heating, cooling, melting, boiling etc. may stimulate the nonelastic effects in
the volume of [Receiver] and increments of modulated virtual pressure and spin waves
(ΔVPWm
  F↓
F↑
representing electrons, protons and neutrons.

1/2, accompanied [C  W pulsation of triplets
 i , formed by sub-elementary fermions of different generation,

 and ΔVirSWm
−  F↕

The following unconventional kinds of effects of non electromagnetic and

non-gravitational nature can be anticipated in the remote interaction between macroscopic
nonequilibrium [Sender] and sensitive detector [Receiver] via multiple Virtual spin and
energy guides VirGSME (Fig.4), if our theory of nonlocal spin, momentum and energy
exchange between [S] and [R], described above is correct:

I. Weak repulsion and attraction between ’tuned’ [S] and [R] and rotational momentum

in [R] induced by [S], as a result of transmission of momentum/kinetic energy and angular
momentum (spin) between elementary particles of [S] and [R]. The probability of such
’tuned’ interaction between [S] and [R] is dependent on dimensions of coherent clusters of
atoms and molecules of condensed matter in state of mesoscopic Bose condensation (mBC)
(Kaivarainen, 1995; 2001; 2003; 2004). The number of atoms in such clusters Nt, r is

n
∑ VirGSME S  R

i

,

related to number of VirGSME in the bundles Nt, r 

x,y,z
connecting tuned mBC in [S] and [R]. The Nt, r may be regulated by temperature,
ultrasound, etc. The kinetic energy distant transmission from atoms of [S] to atoms of [R]
may be accompanied by the temperature and local pressure/sound effects in [R];

II. Increasing the probability of thermal fluctuations in the volume of [R] due to

decreasing of Van der Waals interactions, because of charges screening effects, induced by
overlapping of distant virtual replicas of [S] and [R] and increasing of dielectric
permittivity of Bivacuum. In water the variation of probability of cavitational fluctuations
should by accompanied by the in-phase variation of pH and electric conductivity due to
shifting the equilibrium: H2O  H  HO− to the right or left;

III. Small changing of mass of [R] in conditions, changing the probability of the

inelastic recoil effects in the volume of [R] under influence of [S];

IV. Registration of metastable virtual particles, as a result of Bivacuum symmetry

perturbations.

135

The first kind (I) of new class of interactions between coherent fermions of [S] and [R]

is a result of huge number (bundles) of correlated virtual spin-momentum-energy guides
VirGSME ≡ VirSWS

   VirSWR
These guides can be responsible for:
a) virtual signals (phase/spin), momentum and kinetic energy instant transmission

 formation by standing spin waves (VirSWS,R).

between [S] and [R], meaning the nonlocal information and energy exchange;

b) the regulation of Pauli repulsion effects between fermions of [S] and [R] with

parallel spins;

c) the transmission of macroscopic rotational momentum from [S] of [R]. This process

provided by the entanglement channels Nt, r 

n
∑ VirGSME S  R

i

, is

x,y,z

dependent on the difference between the external angular momentums of elementary
fermions of [S] and [R].

The second kind (II) of phenomena: influence of [S] on probability of thermal
fluctuations in [R], - is a consequence of the additional symmetry shift in Bivacuum
fermions (BVF↕, induced by superposition of distant and nonlocal multiplicated Virtual
Replicas of [S] and [R]: VRMS VRMR, which is accompanied by increasing of
Bivacuum fermions (BVF↕  V  V− virtual charge: Δe  eV − eV−  e0 in the
volume of [R]. Corresponding increasing of Bivacuum permittivity (0 and decreasing
magnetic permeability (0 :
effects in volume of [R], induced by [S]. This weakens the electromagnetic Van der Waals
interaction between molecules of [R] and increases the probability of defects origination
and cavitational fluctuations in solid or liquid phase of Receiver.

0  1/0c2 is responsible for the charges screening

The third kind of phenomena (III): reversible decreasing of mass of rigid [R] can be a
result of reversible lost of energy of Corpuscular phase of particles, as a consequence of
inelastic recoil effects, following the in-phase C → W transition of Ncoh coherent
nucleons in the volume of [R].

The probability of recoil effects can be enhanced by heating the rigid object or by
striking it by another hard object. This effect can be registered directly - by the object mass
decreasing. In conditions, close to equilibrium, the Matter - Bivacuum energy exchange
relaxation time, following the process of coherent C  W pulsation of macroscopic
fraction of atoms is very short and corresponding mass defect effect is undetectable. Such
collective recoil effect of coherent particles could be big in superconducting or superfluid
systems of macroscopic Bose condensation or in crystals, with big domains of atoms in
state of Bose condensation.

The fourth kind of the above listed phenomena - increasing the probability of virtual

particles and antiparticles origination in asymmetric Bivacuum in condition of forced
resonance with exciting Bivacuum virtual waves will be discussed in section 16.2.

It will demonstrated also in chapter 17, that the listed above nontrivial consequences of

Unified theory (I - IV) are consistent with unusual data, obtained by groups of Kozyrev
(1984; 1991) and Korotaev (1999; 2000). It is important to note, that these experiments are
incompatible with current paradigm. It means that it is timed out and should be replaced by
the new one.

23.1 The idea of nonlocal signals transmitter and detector construction and testing

Physical devices with function of [Sender] and [Receiver] for verification of nonlocal

mechanism of communication via Virtual Guides of spin/information, momentum and
energy, following from our Unified theory, were suggested (Kaivarainen, 2004a; 2004b).
They represent two or more identical and ’tuned’ to each other superconducting multi-coil

136

systems.

The pair: [S] and [R] can be presented by two identical systems, composed from the
same number of superconducting or superfluid coils of different radius - from few to tens of
centimeters. enclosed in each other.

The ”tuning” of Virtual Replicas of [S] and [R] constructions in state of macroscopic
Bose condensation (superconducting or superfluid) can be realized by keeping them nearby
with parallel orientation of two set of rings during few hours for equalizing of their
physical parameters, i.e. currents. After such tuning, they can be removed from each other,
keeping their superconducting or superfluid state on at the same temperature, pressure and
other conditions. The separation can be increased from hundreds of meters to hundreds of
kilometers and tested for signals transmission in each equipped for such experiments
laboratory.

The experiments for registration of nonlocal interactions could be performed, as
follows. At the precisely fixed time moment, the superfluid or superconducting properties
of one of rings of Sender [S], should be switched off by heating, ultrasound or magnetic
field action. At the same moment of time the superconducting parameters of all rings of
Receiver [R] should be registered. If the biggest changes will occur in the ring of
[R]-system with the same radius, as that in [S]-system and faster, than light velocity, it will
be a confirmation of possibility of nonlocal Bivacuum mediated information and
momentum exchange - macroscopic entanglement, following from our theory and based on
resonant principles. The corresponding remote signals exchange via proposed in our work
Virtual Guides (VirGSME, should not be shielded by any screen.

There are a number of laboratories over the World, capable to perform the proposed
experimental project. In the case of success, such Nonlocal Signals Detector/Transmitter
with variable parameters would be the invaluable tool for extraterrestrial civilizations
search in projects, like SETI and for distant cosmos exploration (NASA). On the Earth, the
Internet, radio and TV - nets also will get a strong challenge.

23.2 GeoNet of Detectors of Water Properties, as a Supersensor of
Terrestrial and Extraterrestrial Coherent Signals

Water is a sensitive detector for any kind of fields and virtual replicas of macroscopic

objects. The Sun, Moon and, perhaps, the black hole in center of our galactic are the
strongest sources of coherent oscillations of modulated virtual pressure waves of positive
and negative energy VPW and VPW−
, interacting with protons and electrons of water
molecules.

The induced by Bivacuum mediated interaction coherent changes of water physical
properties on the remote points of the Earth surface, registered by CAMP devices, can be
analyzed by the global - GeoNet system via the Internet.

The corresponding coherent variations of physical properties of standard aqueous
solutions in screened by Faraday cages from EM fields vessels at constant temperature and
pressure could be monitored by water properties detectors. Such aqueous samples detectors
of certain physical parameters variations, like sound velocity density, refraction index or
light scattering will be distributed over the surface of the Earth, forming a nodes of
GeoNet.

This author propose to use such GeoNet on the Earth surface, like giant Supersensor for

terrestrial and extraterrestrial coherent signals registration. For this end a hundreds of
standard water-filled cells with detectors over the planet surface should be under permanent
centralized monitoring, using satellites and the Internet.

The Fourier analysis of the terrestrial and extraterrestrial signals, accompanied by

registered water perturbations, makes it possible to select only coherent patterns of dynamic

137

changes of water properties in big number of water-filled cells over the Earth. These
patterns will be analyzed for getting the detailed information about the amplitude and
frequency of coherent signals.

Sensitivity of proposed global sensor system can be combined with existing currently

net of random events generators (REG), used in Global Consciousness project (Roger
Nelson, 2000 -2008), reinforcing the volume of outcome information.

The localization and forecast of the Earthquakes are a minimum results of such global

project realization. This forecasting compensate quickly all related to project of GeoNet
expenses.

The valuable knowledge about the influence of gravitational dynamics of Sun, Moon
and planets of Solar system on virtual pressure waves (VPW and VPW− of Bivacuum
and geophysical process on the Earth could be obtained via proposed GeoNet of aqueous
system detectors.

24. Experimental data, confirming Unified theory (UT)
24.1 Radiation of accelerating charges
It follows from our theory, that the charged particles, nonuniformly accelerating in

cyclotron, synchrotron or in undulators, could be a source of photons. It is a result of
excitation of secondary anchor sites of elementary particles (section 7.5) turning their
virtual photons properties to real ones.

The private case of undulator is a free electron laser (FEL):

(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_electron_laser. It generates tunable, coherent, high
power radiation, currently ranging in wavelength from millimeters to the visible. In FEL a
beam of electrons is accelerated to relativistic speeds. The beam passes through a periodic,
transverse magnetic field. This field is produced by arranging magnets with alternating
poles along the beam path. It forces the electrons in the beam to assume a sinusoidal path.
The acceleration of the electrons along this path results in the release of a photon.

The secondary anchor sites (see section 7.5) of the electron in alternating magnetic

field can be treated as a virtual photon (eq.7.46). The absorption of the electron’s
cumulative virtual cloud (CVC by these exited virtual photons creates an actual photon.
Adjusting either the speed/energy of the electrons or magnetic field strength tunes their de
Broglie wavelength and frequency with their secondary anchor sites asymmetry, generating
photons over a wide range of frequency. Similar mechanism may be responsible for EM
emission in terahertz range by ceramic superconducting films, excited by femtosecond
optical pulses (Tonouchi, et. al., 1997).

The energy of electromagnetic radiation ph  is dependent on the doubled kinetic

energy increment:

Δ2Tk  ΔmV

v2  Δ

h2
2
 B
mV

of alternately accelerated charged particles with undulator angular frequency (u  2u
and related inelastic recoil-antirecoil effects. These localnonlocal effects with energy
(mV
secondary anchor sites in Bivacuum matrix:

v2, accompanied [C  W pulsation of particles, are responsible for activation of

ph  ~ Δ2Tkt  h2
B
mV

2 sin ut)  mV

B

2 L2sin CWt)

where: B and B are the electron’s de Broglie wavelength and frequency;

    24.1

    24.2

138

B
mV
recoil effect.

2 L2 is the energy of the secondary anchor sites, determined by the energy of

We can see, that the alternation of kinetic energy of charged particle can be

accompanied by electromagnetic radiation. This effect occur, if the alternation of kinetic
energy: Δ2Tkt and corresponding inelastic recoil energy: ΔmV
exceeds the energetic threshold, necessary for photon
  F↓
−W  F↑
origination: 〈F↑
The uniform acceleration, in contrast to alternative one, do not provide the fulfilment of

− Cp,e  〈F↑

v2t  ΔmV

−C  F↑

− Wp,e,

  F↓

2 L2t

B

condition of overcoming of corresponding threshold activation and the EM radiation is
absent. Consequently, the real photon radiation by charged particles and other dissipation
inelastic process in Bivacuum matrix, are possible only in the conditions of nonuniform
particles acceleration.

Some similarity is existing between the mechanisms of inelastic phonons excitation in

solids, detected by  −resonance spectroscopy, and photons excitation in Bivacuum by
alternatively accelerated particle.

One more consequence of Unified Theory, coinciding with experiment, is that
synchrotron and undulator radiation should be strongly asymmetric and coincide with
direction of charged particle propagation in space.

Most of energy, emitted by relativistic particles is located in direction, close to their
beam instant velocity (v  vext → c in narrow angles range, determined by semi-empirical
expression (Ginsburg, 1987):

Δ ≃ 1 − v/c21/2

m0c2
E

→ 0

where: E  mc2  mV
Our theory leads to same result. Formulas (4.2 and 4.2a) for relativistic condition

c2 is a total relativistic energy of the charged particle.

(v → c, can be easily transformed to:

1 − v/c21/2

−
−mV

mV

1/2



m0c2
c2  L
mV

L0

≃ Δ

v→c
→ 0

where, the radius of the actual torus, taking into account (4.3), is:

LV

  /mV

vgr

in  → 0

at v → c

as far: mV

  m 

m0
1 − v/c2

→  at

v → c

and the Compton radius of sub-elementary particle is L0  /m0c  const

Their ratio determines the angle range of radiation of accelerating particle. As far, in
accordance to our approach, the actual energy of particle is determined by the inertial mass:
E  mV

c2 mc2, we can see that eq. 24.3 coincides with eq.24.4.

In the angle, defined by 24.4, the probability of excited secondary anchor sites is much

higher than outside of corresponding cone of action.

24.2 Artificial generation of unstable groups of virtual particles and antiparticles
Let us consider the possible results of correlated symmetry shift in groups of virtual

↑  BVF−

Cooper pairs BVF
antifermions (BVF↓ with opposite spins, acquiring the opposite uncompensated mass:
Δm  |mV
the local gravitational (G), electric (E), magnetic (H) and massless spin (S) fields. These

and charge: Δe  |e | − |e− | spontaneously or, most probable, in

as → F↑ F↓Vir of Bivacuum fermions (BVF↑ and

− |
 | − |mV

↓ S0

    24.3

    24.4

    24.5

139

virtual groups can be considered as a secondary anchor sites, activated by the electrons and
protons of the nearest material objects and their assembly and disassembly.

The first stage of virtual groups formation can be considered, as polymerization of

virtual Cooper pairs of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions and antifermions to Virtual
microtubules (chapter 14):

VirMT  Pr, t  F

↑ F−

↓ Vir

s
↓ S0

↑  BVF−

In primordial Bivacuum the symmetric Bivacuum dipoles of opposite polarization
, may rotate as respect to each other in opposite direction,
Pr, t  BVF
keeping their resulting orientation in space permanent with their external tangential or
translational velocity equal to zero v  0. However, even small symmetry shift between
properties of torus (V and antitorus (V−, caused by the external fields should be
accompanied by external circulation with velocity (v) around common axis v  0. It
follows from (3.11) that:

v2  c2 1 −

− |
|−mV

mV

 0,

if mV

− |
  |−mV

VirMT Pr, t  BVF
↓ Vir 3F

↑ F−

Fields

 2F

↑ BVF−

↑  F−

↓ S0
↓ Vir Pr, t  F

s ≡ Pr, t  V V−  V V−S0
↑  F−

↓ Vir

s

    24.6

    24.7

    24.8

    24.8a

where: Pr, t is a number of Cooper pairs of Bivacuum dipoles in VirMT, depending

on their length (r) and time (t).

The formation of VirMT in symmetric primordial Bivacuum is self-organization
process without consuming the external fields energy. However, the presence of fields,
turning primordial Bivacuum to secondary one, induce the symmetry shift in pairs
as and rotation of VirMT, formed by them around central main axes
BVF↑BVF↓S0
between BVF↑ and BVF↓. The energy of relative rotation of asymmetric pairs around
common axis in VirG is dependent on the energy of external field, inducing asymmetry.
The second stage - is a result of disassembly of the big coherent clusters (16.10a) to
smaller ones, accompanied by violation of equilibrium between densities of virtual particles
nBVF↑as ≡ nF↑
Vir and antiparticles n−(BVF−
consequently, the uncompensated charge and mass:

−Vir, (n ≠ n− acquiring,

↓ as ≡ n−F↓

nF↑

  n−F↓
n−  F↕

−Vir
− i

gradG, E, H

Vir ≶ n  F↕

Vir

 i

where: i  e, ,  are three electron’ generations and the total density of virtual

sub-elementary fermions and antifermions is:

n  n−  n
n− ≠ n

In strong electrostatic fields, like between condenser plates, the virtual Cooper like

pairs from Bivacuum fermions of similar symmetry shift, i.e. similar charge, but with
opposite direction of rotation (spin) may originate. The formation of corresponding
charged clusters and VirGSME
becomes possible in cases, when energy of spin-spin
exchange between them exceeds the energy of Coulomb repulsion between Bivacuum
fermions of opposite spins:



    24.9

    24.9a

    24.10

    24.10a

140

n−BVF−

↑ BVF−
↓ S0
or : nBVF

as ~ VirGSME
↓ S0
↑ BVF

−

as ~ VirGSME



The shift of equilibrium between densities of asymmetric Bivacuum fermions and

antifermions of opposite charges and mass-energy in strong anisotropic electric and
gravitational fields is accompanied by generation of non zero difference of positive and
negative virtual pressure of Bivacuum:

ΔVirP  nmV
or : ΔVirP  nmV

 − mV
v2  − n−mV

− c2 − n−mV
−v2  i

− − mV

 c2 i

    24.11

    24.11a

    24.12

    24.12a

The metastable virtual fermions may fuse to stable real fermions - triplets and photons,

if the value of BVF↕ 
mean condition under the influence of high frequency VPWq2,3

as symmetry shifts will increase to that, corresponding to Golden

(see section 12.2).



The dissociation of metastable neutral Virtual Guides or Bivacuum fermions clusters,

like secondary anchor sites of elementary particles to charged virtual fragments with
fermion properties is energetically much easier, than that of stable photons, and may occur
even in weak fields gradients.

Synchronization of C  W pulsation of such virtual unstable fermions, as a condition

of entanglement between them, provides their collective behavior even after big
VirGSME  Pr, t dissociation to coherent groups (n−e− and ne, where n  10) and
their spatial separation.

The results, confirming our scenario of coherent groups of metastable charged particles

origination from asymmetric VirMT, has been obtained in works of Keith Fredericks
(2002) and Sue Benford (2001). Fredericks analyzed the trucks on Kodak photo-emulsions,
placed in vicinity of human hands during 5-30 minutes. The plastic isolator was used
between the fingers and the photographic emulsion. The tracks in emulsions point to
existing of correlation in twisting of trajectories of big group of charged particles (about
20) in a weak magnetic field. The in-phase character of set of the irregular trajectories may
reflect the influence of geomagnetic flicker noise on groups of correlated charged particles.
In these experiments the Bivacuum symmetry shift, necessary for dissociation of virtual

Bivacuum dipoles clusters on charged virtual fermions, can be induced by the electric,
magnetic fields and nonlocal spin/torsion field. These fields can be excited by ’flickering’
water clusters in microtubules of the nerve cells bodies and axons of living organisms in the
process of nerve excitation (Kaivarainen, 2002; 2003; 2004).

The corresponding [dissociation  association] of coherent water cluster in state of
mesoscopic molecular Bose condensate (mBC) is accompanied by oscillation of the H20
dipoles angular momentum vibration with the same frequency about 107 s−1. If the
flickering of water clusters in MTs of the same cell or between ’tuned’ group of cells
occurs in-phase, then the cumulative effect of modulated VirSWm
generation by human’s finger near photoemulsion can be strong enough for stimulation of
dissociation of virtual vortices (16.11a) to virtual electrons and positrons, producing the
observed tracks in photoemulsion or photofilm.

1/2 and EM field

In work of Benford (2001) the special device - spin field generator was demonstrated to

produce a tracks on the dental film, placed on a distance of 2 cm from generator and
exposed to its action for 7 min. The spin field generator represents rotating hollow cylinder
or ring made of ferrite-magnetic material with the axis of rotation coinciding with the
cylinder’s main symmetry axis. Four permanent (wedge-like) magnets are inserted into the
cylinder. It rotates with velocity several thousand revolutions per minute.

141

The effect of this generator is decreasing with distance and becomes undetectable by
the dental films after the distance from the top of cylinder bigger than 8 cm. The dots and
tracks on dental X-ray films were reproduced over 200 trials. They are close to the regular
charged particle tracks on surface emulsions. However, the more exact identification of
particles failed. The uncommon features of these tracks may be a result of unusual
properties of short-living virtual electrons, positrons, protons and antiprotons and their
coherent clusters.

24.3 Michelson-Morley experiment, as a possible evidence
of the Virtual Replica of the Earth

The experiments, performed in 1887 by Michelson-Morley and similar later

experiments of higher precision, has been based on checking the difference of light velocity
in the direction of Earth orbiting around the Sun and in the direction normal or opposite to
this one. In the case of fixed ether with certain medium properties, independent of the Earth
motion, one may anticipate that the difference in these two light velocities should exist. The
absence of any difference was interpreted by Einstein, as the absence of the ether. This
conclusion was used in his Special Relativity (SR) theory for postulating of permanency of
light velocity, but different time in different inertial systems. The time of inertial system in
SR is dependent on system velocity as respect to the light velocity. The principle of
relativity of SR states that, regardless of an observer’s position or velocity in the universe,
all physical laws will appear constant. From this principle, it follows that an observer
cannot determine either his absolute velocity or direction of travel in space. This principle
includes statement of the absence of the absolute velocity.

In accordance to our approach to time problem, the time is a characteristic parameter of

conservative system, equal to infinity in the absence of acceleration at any permanent
kinetic energy of particles, forming such systems. So, in contrast to special relativity, the
time in our theory is infinitive and independent on velocity in any inertial system. For the
other hand at any nonzero acceleration, for example, centripetal in the case of orbital
rotation of particles/objects the time is dependent on tangential velocity of these objects.
There are no physical systems in Nature, which can be considered, as perfectly inertial, i.e.
where any acceleration is absent. However, the situations are possible where the opposite
accelerations and forces compensate each other and the resulting one is zero.

For example, this takes a place in free-fall or satellite systems, when centripetal, i.e.
gravitational: acp  GM/r2 and centrifugal (acf ) accelerations compensate each other:

ares  acp  acf  0

    24.13

It is so called equivalence principle, used in General Relativity (GR) theory. The kinetic

energy of such mechanical system/object can be permanent, however the potential energy
and force of stretching Fstr of object increases proportional to sum:

|acp |  |acf | ~ 2GM/r2

    24.14

and elastic deformation of the object. At certain big enough stretching energy, equal to
stress-energy, the object can be destroyed and the kinetic energy of such system will
increase also.

The statement of General Relativity, that condition 24.13 , true for geodesic motion,
is a condition of inertial motion of object, as defined by the 1st Newton law, is wrong. The
Newton law of inertia is strictly applicable for ideal conditions, where any kind of forces,
acting on material point/object’s external or internal dynamics (kinetic or potential energy)
are absent.

In General Relativity (GR), geodesics are the idealized world lines of a particle free

142

from all external force. In GR the gravity is not a force but a curved space-time geometry
where the source of curvature is the stress-energy tensor. This means, that gravitational
force do not act on particle itself, but on space curvature, changing correspondingly the
trajectory of particle. This principle of GR looks very artificial and nonrealistic. In all
known real examples of geodesic motion, the object/particle is not free from all external
force, but is a result of opposite forces compensation of each other.

The conjecture of virtual replica (VR) allows another interpretation of

Michelson-Morley experiments. The VR of the Earth or any other material object is a result
 with positive and negative Bivacuum virtual pressure waves
of interference of basic VPW0
(VPWm
properties of quantum hologram.

− , modulated by the object’s particles de Broglie waves. The VR has

 and VPWm

The Ether component of VR may have at least as big diameter, as the Earth atmosphere

and it moves in space together with planet. It is obvious, that in such ’virtual shell’ of the
Earth the light velocity could be the same in any directions.

This author propose the experiment, which may confirm the existence of both: the VR
and the Aether/Bivacuum, as a superfluid medium with certain mechanical properties, like
compressibility providing the VPW existing. For this end we assume that the properties of
VR on distance of about few hundred kilometers from the planet surface differs from that
on the surface.

If we perform one series of the Michelson-Morley like experiments on the satellite,
rotating with the same angular frequency and velocity as the Earth, i.e. fixed as respect to
the Earth surface and another series of experiments on the surface, the existence of
difference in results will confirm our Virtual Replica theory and the Bivacuum model with
Ether properties.

The absence of difference in light velocity in opposite direction as respect to Earth

trajectory in Michelson-Morley experiments can be explained in two different ways:

1. As a result of equality of light velocity in any directions, independently on direction
of Earth translational propagation in space (confirmation of the Einstein relativity principle
and the absence of the Ether);

2. As a result of correlation between magnetic and gravitational fields of the object, like
Earth, and Bivacuum dipoles symmetry shift in surrounding object Bivacuum (ether virtual
replica of the Earth), increasing the refraction index of Bivacuum and decreasing little bit
light velocity isotropically and independently on the direction of the Earth motion. This
explanation is compatible with the ether drug concept.

Consequently, the absence of difference in light velocity in Michelson-Morley like

experiments, in is not a strong evidence against Ether with Bivacuum properties.

References

Alberts B., Bray D., Lewis J., Ruff M., Roberts K. and Watson J.D. Molecular Biology of
Cell. Chapter 10. Garland Publishing, Inc.New York, London, 1983.
Albrecht-Buehler G. Surface extensions of 3T3 cells towards distant infrared light sources.
J.Cell Biol. 1991, 114, 493 − 502.
Albrecht-Buehler G. Rudimentary form of cellular ”vision”. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA
1992, 89, 8288 − 8292.
Amos L. A. and Klug A. Arrangements of subunits in flagellar microtubules. J. Cell Sci.
1974, 14 523-550.
Atema J. Microtubule theory of sensory transduction. J.Theor. Biol. 1973, 38, 181-190.
Athenstaedt H. Pyroelectric and piezoelectric properties of vertebrates. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
1974, 238, 68 − 93.
Aspect A., Dalibard J. and Roger G. (1982). Phys.Rev.Lett. , 49, 1804.

143

Aspect A. and Grangier P. (1983). Experiments on Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen type
correlations with pairs of visible photons. In: Quantum Theory and Measurement. Eds.
Wheeler J.A., Zurek W.H. Princeton University Press.
Barut A. O. and Bracken A.J., Phys. Rev. D. 23, (10), 1981.
Baurov A. Yu., Ogarkov B.M. (1994) Method of generating mechanical and embodiments
of a device for carrying outside method. The international application PCT/RU/94/00135
from 23.06.94.
Beck F. and Eccles J. C., Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci (USA), 1992, 89, 11357-61.
Crick F. and Koch C. Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness. Semin. Neurosci.
1990, 2, 263 − 275.
Bearden T.E. (2001). Extracting and using electromagnetic energy from the active vacuum.
In: Modern nonlinear optics, 2nd ed. M.W. Evans (ed), Wiley, vol. 2, p. 639-698.
Benford S. Probable Axion Detection via Consistent Radiographic Findings after Exposure
to a Shpilman Axion Generator. Journal of Theoretics Vol.4-1, 2001.
http://www.journaloftheoretics.com/Articles/4-1/Benford-axion.htm
Benor, D. (1992) Healing Research, Vol.1, Helix, UK, 366.
Bierman D.J. and Radin D.I. Anomalous anticipatory responce on random future conditions.
Perceptual and motor skills, v.84, 689-690, 1997.
Berestetski V., Lifshitz E., Pitaevskii L. (1989). Quantum electrodynamics. Nauka, Moscow
(in Russian).
Bohm D. (1987). Hidden variables and the implicate order. In: Quantum implications, ed
Basil J. Hiley and F.D.Peat, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bohm D. and Hiley B.J. (1993). The Undivided Universe. An ontological interpretation of
quantum theory. Routledge. London, New York.
Boldyreva L., Sotina N. (1999). A theory of light without special relativity. ISBN
5-93124-15-2, Moscow: Logos.
Campbell T. My Big Toe: A trilogy unifying philosophy, physics and metaphysics, 2003;
http://www.My-Big-TOE.com.
Cramer J. G. (1986), The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Morden
Physics, 58, 647-688, .
Cramer J.G. (2001). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. In: Computing
Anticipatory Systems, CASYS’2000, 4th International conference, ed by D.M. Dubois,
AIP, Conference Proceedings, v.573, pp. 132-138.
Dirac P. (1958). The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Claredon Press, Oxford.
Dicke R.H. Coherence in spontaneous radiation processes. Phys.Rev. 93, 99 (1954).
Dobyns Y.H. Overview of several theoretical models on PEAR data. JSE, 14, 2, 2000.
Dulnev G.N. Registration of phenomena of psychokinesis by means of magnetic devices.
In book: Physicist in parapsychology. Essays. ”Hatrol”, Moscow, 2002, p.48-51.
Dubois D. (1999). Computational derivation of quantum and relativistic systems with
forward-backward space-time shifts. In: Computing anticipatory systems. CASYS’98, 2nd
International conference, ed. by Dubois D, AIP, Woodbury, New York, Conference
Proceedings, pp.435-456; CASYS’99, 3d International conference, ed by D.M. Dubois,
AIP, Conference Proceedings, 2000.
Eberlein C. Sonoluminescence as quantum vacuum radiation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 3842 (1996).
Einstein A. (1965). Collection of works. Nauka, Moscow (in Russian).
Einstein A., Podolsky B. and Rosen N. (1935). Phys. Rev., 47, 777.
Evans M.W. (2002). The link between the Sachs and 0(3) theories of electrodynamics. ISBN
0-471-38931-5.
Evans M.W., Anastasovski P.K., Bearden T.E., et al., (2001). Explanation of the motionless
electromagnetic with the Sachs theory of electrodynamics. Foundations of physics letters,
14(4), 387-393.
Feynman R. (1985). QED - The strange theory of light and matter. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Fock V. (1964) book: The theory of space, time and gravitation. Pergamon Press, London.
S.L.Glashov, (1961), Nucl.Phys. B22, 579.
Fredericks K., The photographic detection of tachyons in human body radiation. Journal of
Nonlocality and Remote Mental Interaction, 2002.
Gariaev P.P., Vasiliev A.A., Berezin A.A. Holographic associative memory and information
transmission by solitary waves in biological systems. SPIE - The International Society for
Optical Engineering. CIS Selected Papers. Coherent Measuring and Data Processing

144

Methods and Devices. v.1978, pp.249-259 (1994).
Gariaev P., Birstein B., Iaroshenko A., Marcer P., Tertishny G., Leonova K., Kaempf U.
The DNA-wave biocomputer. International J. Computing Anticipatory Systems. Ed. by D.
Dubois, 2001, vol. 10, p.290-310.
Gariaev P.P., Tertishny G.G., Iarochenko A.M., Maximenko V.V., Leonova E.A. The
spectroscopy of biophotons in non-local genetic regulation. Journal of Nonlocality and
Remote Mental Interaction, v.I, Nr. 3, 2002; www.emergentmind.org/gariaevI3.htm;
http://twm.co.nz/DNAPhantom.htm
Glansdorf P., Prigogine I. Thermodynamic theory of structure, stability and fluctuations.
Wiley and Sons, N.Y., 1971.
Grawford F.S. Waves. Berkley Physics Course. Vol.3. McGraw- Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1973.
Gurvich A.G. Selected works. M. 1977, pp. 351.
Haake F. Quantum signatures of chaos. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
Haisch B., Rueda A. and Puthoff H.E. Physics of the zero-point field: Implications for
inertia, gravitation and mass. Speculations in science and technology, vol.20, pp. 99-114.
Haken H. Synergetics, computers and cognition. Springer, Berlin, 1990.
Hameroff S. Proceedings of 2nd Annual advanced water science symposium. Dallas, Texas,
USA 1996; www.consciousness.arizona.edu/hameroff
Hameroff S.R. and Penrose R. In: Toward a Science of Consciousness - Tucson I, S.
Hameroff, a. Kaszniak and A.Scott (eds.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 507 1996.
Hawking S.W. A brief history of time. Bantam Press, Toronto, N.Y., London, 1988.
Hestenes D. Found of Phys, 20(10), 1990.
Jin D.Z., Dubin D.H. E. (2000). Characteristics of two-dimensional turbulence that
self-organizes into vortex crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 84(7), 1443-1447.
Kaivarainen A. (1995). Hierarchic Concept of Matter and Field. Water, biosystems and
elementary particles. New York, NY, pp. 485, ISBN 0-9642557-0-7.
Kaivarainen A. (2001a). Bivacuum, sub-elementary particles and dynamic model of
corpuscle-wave duality. CASYS: Int. J. of Computing Anticipatory Systems, (ed. D.
Dubois) v.10, 121-142.
Kaivarainen A. (2001b). New Hierarchic theory of condensed matter and its computerized
application to water and ice. In the Archives of Los-Alamos:
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0102086.
Kaivarainen A. (2001c). Hierarchic theory of matter, general for liquids and solids: ice,
water and phase transitions. American Institute of Physics (AIP) Conference Proceedings
(ed. D.Dubois), vol. 573, 181-200.
Kaivarainen A. (2003). New Hierarchic Theory of Water and its Role in Biosystems. The
Quantum Psi Problem. Proceedings of the international conference: ”Energy and
Information Transfer in Biological Systems: How Physics Could Enrich Biological
Understanding”, F. Musumeci, L. S. Brizhik, M.W. Ho (editors), World Scientific (2003),
ISBN 981-238-419-7, pp. 82-147.
Kaivarainen A. (2004). New Hierarchic Theory of Water & its Application to Analysis of
Water Perturbations by Magnetic Field. Role of Water in Biosystems. Archives of
Los-Alamos: http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207114
Kaivarainen A. (2004). Unified Model of Matter - Fields duality & Bivacuum mediated
Electromagnetic and Gravitaional interactions. In book: Frontiers in Quantum Physics
Research, Eds. F. Columbus and V.Krasnoholvets, Nova Science Publ., Inc., pp.83-128.
Kaivarainen A. (2005). New approach to Entanglement and Quantum Psi phenomena, based
on Unified Theory of Bivacuum, Matter, Fields & Time. Archives of Los-Alamos:
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0103031.
Kaivarainen A. (2005a). Theory of Bivacuum, Particles Duality, Fields & Time. Free
energy, Overunity Devices and Cold Fusion. Archives of Los-Alamos:
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207027.
Kaivarainen A. and Bo Lehnert (2005b). Two Extended New Approaches to Vacuum,
Matter and Fields. Archives of Los-Alamos: http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0112027.
Kaznacheev V.P. The General Pathology: Consciousness and Physics. Novosibirsk, Russian
Academy of Medical Science (RAMS),Scientific Center of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Scientific Research Center of General Pathology and Human Ecology
NewPhysics|Russia (2000): http://www.callingstar.net/newphysics/doc/6.doc
Kiehn R.M. (1998). The Falaco Soliton: Cosmic strings in a swimming pool;
Coherent structures in fluids are deformable topological torsion defects. At:

145

IUTAM-SMFLO conf. at DTU, Denmark, May 25, 1997; URL: http://www.uh.edu/~rkiehn
Korotaev S.M., Serdyuk V.O., Sorokin M.O., Abramov J.M. Geophysical manifestation of
interaction of the processes through the active properties of time //Physics and Chemistry of
the Earth. A. 1999. v. 24. №8. p. 735-740.
Korotaev S.M., Serdyuk V.O. and Sorokin M.O. Experimental verification of Kozyrev’s
interaction of natural processes // Galilean Electrodynamics. 2000, v.11. S.I. 2. pp. 23-29.
Korotkov K.G., Registration of biofield influence on a gas-discharge detector. In book:
Physicist in parapsychology. Essays. ”Hatrol”, Moscow, 2002, pp. 44-47.
Kozyrev N.A. (1991). Selected Works. Leningrad (in Russian).
Krasnoholovets V. On the nature of spin, inertia and gravity of a moving canonical particle.
Indian journal of theoretical physics, 48, no.2, pp. 97-132, 2000.
Lamoreaux S.K. Demonstration of of the Casimir in the 0.6 to 6 m. Phys Rev. Lett. 78, 5,
(1997).
Leadbeater M., Winiecki T., Samuels D.C., Barenghi C.F and Adams C.S. Sound Emission
due to Superfluid Vortex Reconnections. vol 86, # 8 Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 Feb (2001).
Lehnert B. (2004) The electron, as a steady-state confinement system. Physica Scripta,
vol.T113,41-44,204.
Miakin S.V. The influence of the pyramid on the matter objects. Consciousness and physical
reality, 2002, N2, p. 45-53.
Levich A.P. A substantial interpretation of N.A. Kozyrev conception of time.
http://www.chronos.msu.ru/Public/levich_substan_inter.html
Miamoto S. ”Changes in mobility of synaptic vesicles with assembly and disassembly of
actin network”, Biochim. et Biophysical Acta. 1, 244, 85-91, 1995.
Mohideen U. and Roy A. Precision measurement of the Casimir force from 0.1 to 0.9 m.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4549, 1998.
Muallem S., Kwiatkowska K., Xu X, Yin HL. ”Actin filament disassembly is a sufficient
final trigger for exocytosis in nonexcitable cells”, J. of Cell Biology, 128, 589-598, 1995.
Nakamura, H., Kokubo, H., Parkhomtchouk, D., Chen, W., Tanaka, M., Zhang, T.,
Kokado, T., Yamamoto, M. and Fukuda, N. Biophoton and temperature changes of human
hand during Qigong. Journal of ISLIS 18(2) September (2000).
Narimanov A.A. On the pyramide effects. Biofizika (Russia), 46, no 5, pp. 951-957, 2001.
von Neuman J. (1955). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, chapter 4,
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Neuman J. (1955). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, chapter 4, Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Mizuno T., Enio M., Akimoto T. and K. Azumi Anomalous Heat Evolution from
SrCeO3-type proton conductors during absorption/desorbtion of deuterium in alternate
Electric Field. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Cold Fusion, December
6-9,
1993, Hawaii, vol.2, p.14., EPRI, Palo Alto, USA, 1994.
Naan G. (1964) Symmetrical Universe. Tartu Astronomical Obcervatory, vol XXXIV.
Naudin J–L. (2001) The Tom Bearden free energy collector principle. JLN Labs.
http://members.aol.com/jnaudin509/
Patrick S., Bearden T., Hayes J., Moore K., Kenny J. (March, 2002), US Patent 6,362,718:
Motionless Electromagnetic Generator MEG).
Notoya R., Noya Y., Ohnisi T. Fusion Technology. vol. 26, p. 179-183, 1993.
Oschman, J.L. The Electromagnetic Environment: Implications for Bodywork. Part I:
Environmental Energies. Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies 4 (1) 56 January
(2000).
Penrose R. Shadows of the Mind. Oxford University Press, London, 1994.
Peres A. Quantum theory: Concepts and Methods. Kluwer Acad. Publ. Dordrecht, 1993.
Popp F.A., 2000, Some features of biophotons and their interpretation in terms of coherent
states. Biophotons and coherent systems. Proc. 2nd A.Gurvich Conference and additional
contributions. Moscow University Press. Ed. L.Beloussov et al., 117-133.
Porter M. Topological quantum computational/error correction in microtubules:
www.u.arizona.edu/~mjporter
Prochorov A.M. Physics. Big Encyclopedic Dictionary. Moscow, 1999.
Puthoff H.E. (1989a). Gravity as a Zero-Point-Fluctuation Force. Phys.Rev.A., 39(5), 2333.
Puthoff H.E. (1989b). Source of vacuum electromagnetic zero-point energy.
Phys.Rev.A., 40(9), 4857.

146

Puthoff H. and Targ R. Direct Perception of Remote Geographical Locations. In The Iceland
Papers, A. Puharich, Editor, 1979. Republished by The Planetary Association for Clean
Energy, Ottawa, Canada, 17 1996).
Radin D. ’The conscious universe: the scientific truth of psychic phenomena’, HarperEdge,
1998, 362 pp, ISBN 0-06-251502-0.
Richter W., Richter M., Warren W.S., Merkle H., Andersen G., Adriany and Ugurbil K.
’Functional magnetic resonance imaging with intermolecular multiple-quantum coherence’,
Mag. Res. Imaging, 18, 489-494, 2000.
Richter W., Lee S., Warren W.S., He Q. ’Imaging with intermolecular quantum coherence in
solution magnetic resonance’, Science, 267, 654-657, 1995.
Rizi R.R., Ahn S., Alsop D.C., Garret-Rose S., Mesher M., Richter W., Schall M.D., Leigh
J.S. and Warren W.S. ’Intermolecular zero-quantum coherence imaging of the human brain’,
Magnetic resonance in medicine, 43, 627-632, 2000.
Rueda A., Haish B. (2001). A vacuum-generated inertia reaction force. In: Computing
Anticipatory Systems, CASYS’2000, 4th International conference, ed by D.M. Dubois,
AIP, Conference Proceedings, v.573, pp. 89-97.
Sapogin L.G., Boichenko V.A., "On Charge and Mass of Particles in Unitary
Quantum Theory," Nuovo Cimento, vol. 104A, No.10, p.1483, 1991.
Sapogin L.G., Ryabov Yu.A.,Graboshnikov V.V. , “New Source of Energy from the Point
of View of Unitary Quantum Theory”, Journal of New Energy Technologies, published by
Faraday Laboratories Ltd, issue #3(6), 2002.
Savva S. MISAHA Issue 24-27, February (2000).
Schecter D. A. and Dubin D. (1999). Vortex motion driven by background vorticity
gradient. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83 (11), 2191-2193.
Sidharth B.G. (1998). The Universe of Fluctuations:
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/9808031;
The Universe of Chaos and Quanta: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/9902028.
Sidorov, L. On the Possible Mechanism of Intent in Paranormal Phenomena. Journal of
Theoretics, July (2001); URL www.journaloftheoretics.com/Links/links-papers.htm (2001);
JNLRMI 1 (1) January 2002 (URL www.emergentmind.org/sidorov_I.htm )
Sidorov, L. The Imprinting and Transmission of Mentally-Directed Bioinformation.
JNLRMI 1(1) January 2002; URL: www.emergentmind.org/sidorov_II.htm (2002).
Sinha K.P. Sivaram C. and Sundurshan E.C.G. (1976). Found. of Physics, 6, 717.
Sinha K.P. Sivaram C. and Sundurshan E.C.G. (1976). Found. of Physics, 6, 65.
Sinha K.P. and Sundurshan E.C.G. (1978). Found. of Physics, 8, 823.
Shnoll S.E. The form of the macroscopic fluctuation spectra depends on the Earth rotation.
Biophysics, 1995, N 4, p. 865-874.
Shnoll S.E., Zenchenko T.A., Zenchenko K.I., Pozharskii V.A., Kolombet V.A., Kondradov
A.A. Regular variation of the fine structure of statistical distributions as a consequence of
cosmophysical agents. Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk, Russian Acad. Sci. 2000, v.43 (2), p.
205-209.
Stapp H.P. Mind, matter and quantum mechanics. New York: Springer-Verlag, (1982).
Smith T. Compton Radius Vortex in: http://www.innerx.net/personal/tsmith/TShome.html
Swartz M. Journal of New Energy vol.1, N.3, 1996.
Tiller W.A., Dibble W.E.,Jr. and Kohane M.J. Conscious Acts of Creation: The emergence
of a new physics. Pavior Publishing, Walnut Creek, CA, USA (2001).
Tiller W.A., Dibble W.E.,Jr. and Fandel J.G. Some science Adventures with real Magic.
Pavior Publishing, Walnut Creek, CA, USA, pp. 275, (2005).
Winter D. http://www.soulinvitation.com/indexdw.html
Wheeler J.A. Superspace and Quantum Geometrodynamics. In: Battle Recontres, ed. C.M.
De Witt and J.A. Wheeler, Benjamin, New York, 1968, 242-307.
Шипов Г.И. Теория физического вакуума. Мoscow, 1993.

