Dynamic Adjustment of the Motivation Degree in an  Action Selection Mechanism

Carlos Gershenson*, **, ***
**Fundación Arturo Rosenblueth
***Facultad de Filosofía y Letras/UNAM
carlos@jlagunez.iquimica.unam.mx

Abstract

This paper presents a model for dynamic adjustment
of  the  mo tivation  degree,  using  a  reinforcement
learning approach, in an action selection mechanism
previously developed by the authors. The learning
takes place in the modification of a parameter of the
model  of  combination  of  internal  and  external
stimuli.  Experiments 
the  claimed
properties  are  presented,  using  a  VR   simulation
developed  for  such  purposes.  The  importance  of
adaptation  by  learning  in  action  selection  is  also
discussed.

that  show 

1. Introduction

In  the  context  of  the  beh aviour-based  systems  (Bro oks,
1986; Bro oks , 1989 ; Maes, 1990 ; Maes, 1994 ), the action
selection  problem  refers  to  what  actio n  the  agent  (robot,
animat  or  artificial  creature)  must  select  every  mom ent  in
time;  whereas  an  action  selection  mechanism   (A SM )
specifies  how  these  actions  are  selected.  An  A SM   is  a
comp utational mechanism that must produce as an output a
selected  action,  when  different  external  and/or  internal
stimuli have been given as inputs.

The  great  majority of  the  ASM  p roposed  in  the  literature
(Tyrrell,  1993),  include  an  additive  mod el  for  stimuli
combination.  The  stimuli  ad dition  could  be  interpreted  in
many  ways,  but  the  essence  is  that  this  type  of  stimuli
combination  mod els  a  be haviour  with  a  more  reactive
tendency than a motivated one. This can be explained in the
following terms: for high values of the external inputs, the
additive  comb ination  could  surp ass  some  value  thresho ld
previously  established  and,  therefore,  trigger  a  certa in
external action, still for non significant values of the internal
inputs.

On  the  other  hand,  in  a  pure  model  of  multiplicative
combination  both  types  of  inputs  are  necessary  so  that  an
external consumm atory action o f the entity can be executed.
This  is,  if  we  con sidered  that  (cid:83) jSj  is  the  sum  of  all  the
associated external inputs to the internal state Ei, then (cid:83) jSj*E i

Pedro Pablo González*
*Instituto de Química/UNAM
Ciudad Universitaria, 04510
México, D. F. México
ppgp@servidor.unam.mx

(cid:133) 0 only if (cid:83) jS j (cid:133) 0 and Ei (cid:133) 0. Pu re multiplicative m ode ls
have a limit ratio to very sm all values of the ex ternal inp uts
and/or  of  the  internal inputs,  since  it  does  not  matter  how
great is the external input if the internal input is near zero
and vice versa.

An alternative to eliminate the undesired effects of the pure
additive  and  m ultiplicative   com binatio ns  is  to  co nsider  a
model that incorp orates the mo st valuab le elements of bo th
types of combination. This is achieved by the combination
model of an ASM  developed by us (Go nzález, 2000).

Adaptation  is  one  o f  the  desirable  characteristics  in  the
action selection of an auto nom ous agent. T he ad aptatio n in
an  ASM  can  b e  obtained  from  three  main  approaches:
preprogrammed  adaptive  behaviours,  learned  adaptive
behaviours  and  evolved  adaptive  behaviours  (Meyer  and
Guillot, 1990). Adap tation by learning is a proc ess by which
an  autonom ous  agent  is  able  to  a djust  its  behaviour  to
different  types of  environmental  changes.  An  autonomous
agent is adap tive by lea rning if it has skills, which allo w to
improve its performance in time (M cFarland, 1990).

In  this  paper  we  discuss  how  the  adapta tion  by  learning
improves the action selection in an autonomous agent, from
an  A SM   developed  by  the  authors  (González,  2000;
González et. al., 2000; G ershenson et. al., 2000). Two types
of  adaptatio n  by  learning  are  present  in  this  ASM:  (1)
classical conditioning, which allows that new behaviours and
emergents  properties  to  arise  in  the  action  selection,
increasing its adaptive level, and (2)  reinforcement learning
approach  (Humph rys,  1996),  which  allows  the  motivation
degree  in  the  action  selection  to  be  adjusted  dynam ically.
This  paper  discusses  the  second  type  of  adaptation  by
learning. This type of learning takes place over a parameter
belonging  to  the  model  for  combination  of  external  and
internal stimuli deve loped by us (Go nzález et. al., 2000) and
used  by  the  ASM.  T his  parameter  allows  to  regulate  the
dependence degree of the external behaviour executed by the
agent from its internal states, and its current value is learned
dynamically.

The paper is organized as follows: The next sec tion briefly
describes  the  ASM  developed  by  us,  the  Behavioural
Columns Architecture, doing special emp hasis in the basic

the 

structure  and 

functioning  of 

functional unit of the ASM, the internal behaviour. Section
3  presents 
the
intero/extero/drive congruence internal behaviour, where the
combination of external and  internal signals is carried out.
Section 4 discusses the mod el for co mbination o f external
and  internal stimuli  used  by  the  ASM,  and  the  role  of  the
parameter that allows to regulate the motivation  degree  in
this  combination.  In  section  5  we  present  and  discuss  the
learning  process  by  which  the  mo tivation  degree  in  the
action selection can be adjusted dynamically. Finally, section
6  presents  the  simulation  and  experim ents  de velop ed  to
verify  the  role  of  this  type  of  adaption   by  learning  in  the
action selection.

is 

integrated  by 

network  of  bla ckboard  nod es  developed  by  the  authors
(González and N egrete, 199 7; Negrete and Gonz ález, 1998).
A  blackboard  nod e 
the  following
comp onents: a set of independent modules called knowledge
sources, which have specific knowledge about the problem
domain;  the  blackboard,  a  shared  data  structure  through
which the kno wledge sources com munic ate to each other by
means  of 
the
blackboard; the communication mechanisms, which establish
the interface between the nodes and a node and the external
and  internal  mediums;  the  activation  state  registers of  the
knowledge  sources;  and  a  control  mechanism,  which
determines  the  ord er  in  that  the  know ledge   sources  will
operate on the blackboard.

the  creation  of  solution  elements  on 

2.

 Behavioural Columns Architecture

The  ASM   developed  by  us  has  been  structured  from  a

The  developed  action  selection  mechanism  was  named
Behavioural  Columns  Architecture  (BeCA),  which  is  an

Figure 1. Behavioural Columns Architecture

extension  of  the  Internal  Behaviour  Network  (IBeNet)
(González, 2000). As it can be appreciated in Figure 1, the
actual  architecture  of  the  AS M  exhibits  two  blackboard
nodes: the cognitive node and the motivational node.

The  basic  functional  unit  of  the  BeCA  is  the  “internal
behaviour”. The term “internal behaviour” has been  used to
describe  the  pro cesses  of  creation  and  modification  of
solution elements that occur on the blackboard of the node.
Structurally, an internal behaviour is a package of elemental
behavio urs, also known as production rules (if <condition>
then <action>). Elemental behaviours of different kinds are
organized  forming  “behavio ural  columns”  
that  cross
vertically different blackboard levels.

The  structure  of  an  elemental  behaviour  has  three  basic
elements: a parameters list, a condition part, and an action
part. The parameters list spec ifies whic h are the condition
elements,  the  action  elements,  and  the  coupling  strengths
related  with  the  elemental  behaviour.  The  condition  of  an
elementary beha viour describes the  configuration of solution
elements  on  the  blackboard  that  is  necessary,  so  that  the
elementary behaviour contributes to the solution processes
of the pro blem. The way in w hich an elemen tal  behaviour
contributes to the solution of the problem is specified in its
action, which can consist of the creation or modification of
solution elements in certain blackboard levels.

A  coupling  strength  is  represented by  a  vector  Fa  =  (Fai1,
Fai2,  ...,  Fain)  of  n  real  components,  where  each  o f  these
com ponents represent the efficacy with which the elemental
behaviour  i  can  satisfy  the  condition  j. Depend ing  on  the
nature  of  the  elemental  behaviour,  the  components  of  the
vector  Fa  may  have  fixed  or  modifiable  values.  The
existence  of  mo difiable  coupling  strengths  allows  the
incorporation  of  learning  processes  to  improve  the  action
selection,  making  it  more  adaptive.  The  vecto r  Fa  of
coupling strengths is to an elemental behaviour the same as
a weight vector to an artificial neuron.

The structure of a blackboard node in BeCA consists of five
basic elements: the internal behaviours, the blackboard, the
activity  state  registers  of  the  internal  behaviours,  the
interface/communication mechanisms, and the competition
mechanism.

The cognitive node blackboard is structured in six levels of
abstraction:  external  perce ptions,  perceptual  persistents,
consummatory  preferents,  drive/percep tion  congruents,
potential  actions,  and  actions.  For  the  cognitive  node,  the
following internal behaviours have been defined: perceptual
persistence,  attention  to  p references,  rea ctive  respon se
inhibition,  and  external  behaviours  selector.  The  defined
mechanisms  of  communication  for  this  node  are  the
exterocep tors  and actuators,  which  establish  the  interface

between the cognitive node  and external  medium; and the
receptor  and  transmitter  mechanisms,  which  establish
communication with the motivational node. The role of the
cognitive node  includes  the processes of  representation of
the  perceptual  signals,  integration  of  internal  and  external
signals, inhibition of reactive responses, and the selection of
the  external  behaviour  that  adjusts  better  to  the  actual
external cond itions and internal need s.

c o n g r u e n c e  

i n t e ro / e xt e r o /d r i v e  

The blackboard of the motivational node is structured in four
abstraction levels: internal perceptions, external percep tions,
intero/extero/drive  congruents,  and  drive.  The  internal
behaviours  that  operate  in  the  motivational  node  are  the
a n d
f o l l o w i n g : 
consu mm atory preferences selector. The communication of
this node is established from the interocep tors, which define
the interface between the node and the internal medium; and
the  receptor  and transmitter  mechanisms,  which  establish
the communication with the cognitive node. The role of the
motivational node includes the processes of representation
of  internal  signals,  combination  of  internal  and  external
signals  and 
the   more  app ropriate
consummatory preference. A full discussion of the model for
combination  of  external  and  internal  stimuli,  used  by  the
motivational node in BeC A, can be found in (Go nzález et.
al., 2000).

the  selection  of 

3. The intero/extero/drive congruence internal

behaviour

in 

the  external  perceptions  and 

At the level of the intero/extero/drive congruence internal
behaviour  of  the  motivational  node  is  carried  out  the
combination of external and internal signals to determine the
action that must be executed by the entity. These signals are
internal
registered 
perceptions  levels,  respectively,  of  the  motivational node.
The solution elements registered in the external perceptions
level  are  originated  by  unconditional  stimuli  (US),
conditional  stimuli  (CS),  or  both;  all  of  them  initially
projected  in  the  external  perceptions  level  and  later
recovered  from  the  perceptual  persistents  level  of  the
cognitive  node.  On   the  othe r  hand ,  the  solutio n  elements
the
registered 
motivational node represent the values of the internal states
that  are  able  to  satisfy  part  of  the  conditions  of  certain
intero/extero/drive congruence elementary behaviours that
ope rate on this level.

internal  perceptions 

level  of 

the 

in 

W henever  the  condition  of  an  eleme ntal  behaviour  is
satisfied, this executes its final action, creating the solution
C  in  the  intero/extero/drive
element  Ci  with  certainty  Ai
congruents level of the blackboard of the motivational node.
C  represents  the  activity  of  the
The  level  of  certainty  A i
elemental  behaviour  i.  Figure  2  shows  the  structure  of  an

elemental behaviour of this type.

Parameters:

condition solution elements: Ei, Sj, Di (j = 1, 2, ...)
action solution elements: Ci
coupling strengths: Faij
importance attributable to the internal state: (cid:97)i

S (j = 1, 2, ...)

Condition:

S) AND

E) AND

E (cid:185) 0 AND

((cid:97)i = 0 AND
 blackboard-level = Internal Perceptions AND
 cert(Ei, Oi
 Oi
 blackboard-level = External Perceptions AND
 cert(Si, Oi
 Oi
S (cid:185) 0) OR
((cid:97)(cid:32)(cid:185) 0 AND
 blackboard-level = Internal Perceptions AND
 cert(Ei, Oi
 Oi
 blackboard-level = External Perceptions AND
 cert(Si, Oi

E (cid:185) 0 AND

E) AND

S))

Action:

AND

calculate Ai
blackboard-level = Propio/Extero/Drive Congruents

E*((cid:97)i + (cid:83)jFaij

S) + Oi

D AND

C = Oi

S*Oj

create-solution-element (Ci, Ai

C) 

Figure 2. Structure of an intero/extero/drive congruence elementary
behaviour

4. The model for combination of internal and

external stimuli

The model for combination of internal and external stimuli
used by intero/extero/drive congruence internal behaviour is
the one given by expression (1).

   (1)

E its coup ling strength; O j

C is the  new activation level correspondent to  the
where Ai
intero/extero/drive  congruents  level  of  the  motivational
E is the signal from the internal perceptions level and
node; O i
S is the signal from the external
Fai
D is  the
perceptions level and Faij
D its  coupling strength;
signal from the drive level, and Fai
and (cid:34)i regulates the combination of the internal and external
signals.

S  its coup ling strength; O i

4.1. Case 1: (cid:34)i = 0

W hen (cid:97)i is equal to zero, the intero/extero/drive congruence
elemental beha viour will be ab le to activate on ly when  the
So  0)
internal  and  external  signals  (Oi
associated to these coincide. If the necessary internal state is
not present, then the external signal is not sufficient by itself
to evoke the motor action, since the attention to preferences
internal  beha viour  is  activated  only  when  their  external
signal (solution element in the perceptual persistent level of

Eo  0  and  (cid:83)  jFaij

S*O j

the cognitive node) and the drive signal (solution eleme nt in
the  consumm atory  p referents  level  of  the  cognitive  node)
coincides. On the other hand, although a very strong internal
signal  exists,  corresponding  to  an  urgent  necessity  of  the
entity,  if  the  usable  external  signal  is  not  present,  the
intero/extero/drive congruence elemental behaviour will not
activate. Then, when (cid:97)i = 0, b oth factors (external signal and
internal signal) are necessary so that the intero/extero/drive
congruence 
internal  b ehav iour  w ill  be  activated.
Physio logically this can be interpreted, when thinking that
the  inputs  that  come  from   the  internal  states  sensitize  this
internal  behaviour  with  the  signals  that  come  from  the
external medium.

4.1. Case 2: (cid:34)i (cid:133) 0

in 

inputs, 

W hen (cid:97)i is different of zero, more weight (o r impo rtance)  is
being granted to the internal state than to the external inputs.
the
total  absence  of  external 
So,  still 
intero/extero/drive congruence elemental behaviour could be
activated for a very strong value of the internal signals (when
the value of (cid:97)i is near o ne). T hus, when the internal ne ed is
extrem ely  high  and  external  signals  do  not  exist,  the
intero/extero/drive congruence elemental behaviour can be
activated, and therefore to cause a type of "preactivation" of
the  conditions  of  the  attention  to  preferences  elementary
behav iours  (in  particular,  only  one  of  these  elementary
behaviours  will  be  the  one  that  will  receive  greater
preactivation).  This  it  is  a  typical  example  of  an  internal
behaviour whose actions are d irected  to the internal medium.
This  mechanism  constitutes  the  underlying  base  of  the
exploratory behaviour oriented to a specific objective, which
is  another  of  the  distinguishing  properties  of  the  BeCA
W hen  there  is  a  total  satiety  of  the internal  necessity  that
caused the activation of the intero/extero/drive congruence
E = 0), then the level of activation of
elemental behaviour (O i
C  =  0),
this  elemental  behaviour  will  decrease  to  zero  (Ai
indep endently of the existence of usable external signals. For
activation levels of zero or very near to  zero the elementary
behaviour will not  be  activated. In this case, the observed
external behaviour always will be adaptive.

5. Dynamic  adjustment  of  the  motivation

degree in the action selection

The rule for the modification of the parameter (cid:97)i is given by
expressions (2), (3) and (4). T he learning mode l that controls
the dynamic adjustment of the motivation degree (parameter
(cid:97)i in expression 1 ) can be ex plained in the following term s:

W hen for a strong internal state, the external signal able to
satisfy  this  need  is  not  present,  then  the  parameter  (cid:97)i  is
reinforced in expression 1 , so that the action selection begins
to be more motivated. T herefo re, in later situations to  this
adjustment,  the  action  selection  will  begin  to  give  more

importance to the internal states. In this case, the exploratory
behaviour can be activated   for not so strong values of the
internal  need,  although   other  external  signals  have  been
perceived.  W hen  an  external  signal  is  perceived  and  the
value  of  the  associated  internal  state  to  this  signal  is
irrelevant,  then  the  parame ter  (cid:97)i  of  exp ression   1  is
decremented, so that the action selection begins to be lees
motivated. Therefore, in later situations to  this adjustment,
the action selection will begin to give more im portance to the
availab le external signals, although the associated internal
state  to  these  is  not  strong.  In  this  case,  the  exploratory
behaviour will need  stronger values of the interna l need in
order to be activated. In any other case the parameter (cid:97)i is
not modified. This cases are represented in expression (2):

   (2)

E is the value of the internal signal from the internal
where O i
S represents the value
perceptions blackboa rd leve l, (cid:51)jFaij
of all the external signals that are asso ciated to internal state
i, and (cid:50) is a threshold value.

SO j

The  increment  for  the  parameter  (cid:97)i  is  determined  by
expression (3). This increment can be seen as a hyperb olic
divergence from (cid:97)min, as shown in Figure 3. In expression
(3), (cid:42) determines the length of the d ivergence (how much
time  it  will  take  to  (cid:34)i  to  go  from  (cid:34)min  to  (cid:34)max),  and  (cid:68)
determines  the  speed  of  the  divergence.  This  smo oth
modification beha viour simulates an historic memory of the
environment (remembered scenario), so that the value of (cid:97)i
is  increased   only  after  severa l  iterations  in  a  certain
enviro nment.

Figure 3. Hyperbolical divergent increment given by expression 3

  (3)

The  decrement  of  the  parameter  (cid:97)i  is  determined  by
expression (4). T his is similar to the increment described by
expression  (3),  o nly  that  it  hyperbolically  diverges  from
(cid:34)max, as can be seen in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Hyperbolical divergent decrement given by expression 4.

    (4)

In Figure 5, we can appreciate an example of the behaviour
of the parameter (cid:97)i, as it is increased, decreased, or remains
constant, in dependence of the  perceived scenario and the
internal  need s.  No te  that  the  inc reme nt  is  faster  than  the
decreme nt, because the values of (cid:97)i are closer to (cid:34)max than
to (cid:34)min. The  graphics of this  section were taken from the
simulation described in the next section.

The type of learning described in this section can be seen as
a  particular  type  of  reinforcement  learning.  This  is,  the
reward or the p unishm ent will be applied to the motivation
degree  of  the  action  selection,  in  dependency  of  how
abundant  or  limited  are  the  signals  required  in  the
enviro nment, and how strong or weak are the internal states.

agent.

W e considered an initial state as shown in Figure 6. We had
two animats in separated environments: one with abundant
sources of food, and the other one with none. Other stimuli
were  created  in  both  environments.  Both  animats  were
initialized with the same param eters: very high hunger, and
no  other  internal  ne ed,  with  an  initial  value  of  (cid:34)  for  the
hunge r colum n of 0.7 .

Figure 6. Initial state of the experiment.

Figure 7 shows what occurred after some time of execution
of  the  simulation.  T he  anim at  in  the  scarce  environment
explored 
in  search  of  foo d,  but  found  none.  This
remembered scenario lead to the incremental adjustment of
his respective  (cid:34)i until it reached (cid:34)max. On the other hand,
the abundant environment allowed the animat in it to satisfy
his hunger quick ly. Once his hunger was satiated, the animat
wandered, while his respective (cid:34)i decreased.

Figure 5. Example of the behaviour of the parameter (cid:97)i

6. Simulation and Experiments

6.1. The simulation

In order to verify the role of  the reinfo rcem ent learning in
the action selection, a programme was written implementing
the  behavioural  columns  architecture,  being  this  used  by
anima ts (artificial anim als) simulated in virtual reality. The
anima ts  were  inspired  by  an  original  idea  developed  by
Negrete (Negrete and M artinez, 1996).

The graphical represe ntation o f the animat is a cone with a
semicircumscript  sphere.  He  has  p rimitive  motor  and
perceptual systems developed specially for this simulation.
The  animat  has  internal  states  to  satisfy,  such  as  hunger,
thirst and fatigue, and the qualities of stren gth and  lucidity;
which  are  affected  by  the  diverse  behaviours  that  he  can
execute. The implemented behaviours are: wander, explore,
approach a specific signal, avoid obstacles, rest, eat, drink,
and runaway from  a specific signal.

An  environment  was  also  simulated,  in  which  the  animat
develop s. In this environm ent, obstacles, sources of food and
water, grass, blobs (aversive stimuli), and spots of different
magnitudes can be created, which animat can use to satisfy
his internal necessities. This simulation can be ac cessed via
Internet in the address http://132.248.11.4/~carlos/asia/bvl

The simulation allows to  modify the different parameters of
the  animat,  for  example, 
the  speed  of
conditioning or reinforce ment.

to  regulate 

6.2. The experiments

Several experiments were developed to test the role of the
adaptation by learning in the action selection (Gershenson et.
al.,  200 0).  T he  exp eriments  discussed  here  were  the  ones
that we considered most relevant to show how the dyna mic
varying  of  the  motivation  degree  (a  type  of  reinforcement
learning)  improves  the  action  selection  in  an  autonomous

Figure 7. Behaviour patterns described by the animats in their
environments.

In  this  way,  we  obtained  one  animat  with  an  (cid:34)i  equa l  to
(cid:34)max, and another one with an (cid:34)i equal to (cid:34)min. Then, we
set them with the same degree of hunger, and the anim at with
an (cid:34)i equal to (cid:34)max, since he learned that food is scarce and

will be difficult to find, will begin to explore. Meanwhile,
the animat with an (cid:34)i equa l to (cid:34)min will wander, because he
learned that he will find abundant food with low effort, and
thus allows himself to wander, and w ill not exp lore un til his
hunger is higher. These behaviours can be seen in Figure 8.

Figure 8. Behaviour patterns of animats with different values of (cid:34)i for
hunger

W ith these experiments we could corroborate that with the
dynamic  adjustment  of  the  motivation  degree  in  the
combination of external and internal signals, an autonomous
agent  will  learn  certain  qualities  of  its  actual  dynamic
environment, making its behaviour more adaptive.

7. Conclusions

In this paper we have discussed and shown how the action
selection in an autonomou s agent has been imp roved with
adaptation by learning. The type of learning discussed here,
reinforcement learning, was used to dynamically adjust the
motivation  degree  in  a  model  for  combination  of  external
and  internal  stimuli  incorporated  in  an  ASM  previously
develop ed by us.

The dynam ic variation of p aram eter (cid:97)i in the combination
model  (expression  1)  does  the  action  selection  more
adaptive, allowing the autono mous  agen t  to develop  in an
environment from w hich he possesses certain knowledge. It
is impo rtant to note that the representation of this knowledge
lies  in  one  parameter,  not  in  symbolic  representation  of
knowledge.

8. References

Brooks, R. A. (198 6) A robust layered control system for a
mob ile  robot.  IEE E  Jo urnal  of  R obo tics  and  Automation.
RA-2, April, pp. 14-23.

Brooks ,  R.  A.  (1989)  A  rob ot  that  walks:  Emergent
behaviour  from  a  carefully  evolved  network.  Neural
Computation, 1, 253-262.

Gershenson,  C.,  González,  P .P.  and  N egrete ,  J.  (2000).
Action Selection Properties in a Software Simulated Agent.
Proceedings of the 1st Mexican International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (MICAI'2000), México.

González,  P.P.  and  J.  Neg rete  (1997 )  RE DS IEX :  A
cooperative  network  of  expert  systems  with  blackboard
architectures. Expert Systems, 14(4), 180-189.

Go nzález, P.P . (200 0). Redes de Conductas Internas como
Nodos Pizarrón: Selección de Acciones y Aprendizaje en un
Robot.  Ph.D.  Dissertation.  Instituto  de  Investigaciones
Biomédicas, UNAM , México.

González, P.P ., Negrete, J., Barreiro, A. and Gershenson, C.
(2000). A Model for Combination of external and Internal
Stimuli  in  the  Ac tion  Se lection  of  an  A utono mou s  Agent.
Proceedings of the 1st Mexican International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (MICAI'2000), México.

Humphrys,  M  (19 96)  Action  Selection  Methods  using
Reinforcement  Learning.  In  P .  Maes  et.  al.  (E ds),  From
Animals 
the  Fourth
International  Conference  on  Simulation  of  Adaptive
Behaviour MIT  Press/B radford Books.

to  Animats:  Proceedings  of 

Maes,  P.  (1990)  A  bottom-up  mechanism  for  behaviour
selection  in  an  artificial  creature.  In  J.A .  Meyer  and  S.W .
W ilson (Eds), From A nim als to Anim ats: Proceedings of the
First  International  Conference  on  Simulation  of  Adaptive
Behaviour MIT  Press/B radford Books.

Maes, P.  (1994) Modeling  Adaptive Autonomous  Agents.
Jou rnal of Artificia l Life, 1(1,2), M IT P ress.

McFarland, D. (1990). What is means for robot behaviour to
be  adaptive.  In  J.A .  Meyer  and  S.W .  Wilson  (Ed s),  From
Animals to Anim ats: Proceedings of the First International
Conference  on  S imulation  of  Adaptive  Behaviour  MIT
Press/B radford Books.

Meyer, J.A. and Guillot, A. (1990). Simulation of adaptive
behaviour in animats: Review and Prospect. In J.A. Meyer
and  S.W .  Wilson  (Eds),  From   Anim als  to  Animats:
Proceedings  of  the  First  International  Conference  on
Simulation  of  Adaptive  Behaviour  MIT   Press/Bradford
Books.

Negrete, J. and M. Martínez (1996) Robotic Simulation in
Ethology.  Proceedings  of 
the  IASTED  International
Conference:  Robotics  and   Ma nufa cturing,  Hono lulu,
Hawaii, USA, pp. 271-274.

Negrete,  J.  and  P.P.  Go nzález  (1998)  N et  of  multi-agent
expert systems with emergent contro l. Expert System s with
Applications, 14(1) 109-116.

Tyrrell, T. (1993) Computational Mechanisms for Action
Selection. PhD. D issertation. University of Edimburgh.

