5
0
0
2

v
o
N
8
1

1
v
4
7
5
1
1
5
0
/
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
:
v
i
X
r
a

Asociaci´on Argentina de Astronom´ıa
BAAA, Vol. 48, 2005
E.M. Arnal, A. Brunini, J.J. Clari´a, J.C. Forte, D.A. G´omez, D. Garc´ıa Lambas,
Z. L´opez Garc´ıa, Stella M. Malaroda, & G.E. Romero, eds.

COMUNICACI ´ON DE TRABAJO – CONTRIBUTED PAPER

Metallicity and colours in galaxy pairs in chemical
hydrodynamical simulations.

Josefa P´erez
Facultad de Ciencias Astron´omicas y Geof´ısicas, UNLP, Argentina,
jperez@fcaglp.unlp.edu.ar

Patricia Tissera
Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
patricia@iafe.uba.ar

Diego Garcia Lambas

Observatorio Astron´omico de la Universidad Nacional de C´ordoba,
Argentina, dgl@oac.uncor.edu

Cecilia Scannapieco

Instituto de Astronom´ıa y F´ısica del Espacio, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
cecilia@iafe.uba.ar

Abstract. Using chemical hydrodynamical simulations consistent with
a Λ-CDM model, we study the role played by mergers and interactions
in the regulation of the star formation activity, colours and the chemical
properties of galaxies in pairs. A statistical analysis of the orbital param-
eters in galaxy pairs (r < 100 kpc h−1) shows that the star formation
(SF) activity correlates strongly with the relative separation and weakly
with the relative velocity, indicating that close encounters (r < 30 kpc
h−1) can increase the SF activity to levels higher than that exhibit in
galaxies without a close companion. Analysing the internal properties
of interacting systems, we ﬁnd that their stability properties also play a
role in the regulation the SF activity (P´erez et al 2005a). Particularly,
we ﬁnd that the passive star forming galaxies in pairs are statistically
more stable with deeper potential wells and less leftover gas than active
star forming pairs.
In order to compare our results with observations,
we also build a projected catalog of galaxy pairs (2D-GP: rp < 100 kpc
h−1 and ∆V < 350 km s−1), constructed by projecting the 3D sam-
ple in diﬀerent random directions. In good agreement with observations
(Lambas et al 2003), our results indicate that galaxies with rp < 25 kpc
h−1 (close pairs) show an enhancement of the SF activity with respect
to galaxies without a close companion. All the properties studied for
galaxy pairs are analysed in the 2D and 3D simulated catalogs, allowing
us to assess the contamination level introduced by spurious pairs. Con-
sistently with observational estimations (Nikolic et al 2004), we ﬁnd that

1

 
 
 
 
2

J. P´erez, P. Tissera, D.G. Lambas & C. Scannapieco

the percentage of spurious pairs decreases with the relative separation,
representing almost a 30% for the 2D-GP and a 19% for close pairs. We
also analyse the environmental eﬀect on the star formation (SF) activity
for both, pairs and isolated galaxy samples, ﬁnding the expected SFR-
local density relation (Gomez et al 2003), with a signiﬁcantly stronger
dependence for close pairs. Finally, we analyse the colour and chemical
properties of galaxies in pairs in order to investigate the eﬀect of inter-
actions on the bimodal colour distribution observed in galaxies (Balogh
et al. 2004; Tissera et al. 2005) and the mass-metallicity relation for the
stellar population (Tremonti et al. 2004).

Resumen. Usando simulaciones qu´ımicas hidrodin´amicas consistentes
con un modelo Λ-CDM, estudiamos el rol de las interacciones y colisiones
de galaxias sobre la actividad de formaci´on estelar (SF), los colores y las
propiedades qu´ımicas de las mismas. El an´alisis estad´ıstico de los efectos
de las interacciones entre galaxias sobre la actividad de formaci´on este-
lar como funci´on de los par´ametros orbitales, muestra que los encuentros
cercanos (r < 30 kpc h−1) pueden inducir una actividad de formaci´on
estelar superior a la encontrada en sistemas aislados. Sin embargo, en-
contramos que la estabilidad de los sistemas gal´acticos tambi´en juega un
rol fundamental en la regulaci´on de este proceso (P´erez et al 2005). As´ı,
las galaxias en pares con baja actividad de SF tienden a ser m´as estables
(con pozos de potencial m´as profundos) que las galaxias en pares con alta
taza de formaci´on estelar. A ﬁn de comparar nuestros resultados con los
observacionales, construimos un cat´alogo proyectado de pares de galaxias
(2D-GP), siguiendo los criterios de selecci´on utilizados por Lambas et al
(2003): rp < 100 kpc h−1 and ∆V < 350 km s−1. Consistentemente con
las observaciones, encontramos que los pares cercanos (rp < 25 kpc h−1)
muestran niveles de SF superiores a aquellos correspondientes a galaxias
aisladas. Comparando los cat´alogos 2D-GP y 3D-GP, estimamos los posi-
bles efectos de proyecci´on sobre los resultados observacionales, analizando
la contribuci´on de los pares espurios en las simulaciones. De acuerdo
con estimaciones observacionales (Nikolic et al 2004), nuestros resultados
muestran que el porcentaje de pares espurios disminuye con la distan-
cia relativa, encontrando un 30% para 2D-GP y un 19% para los pares
cercanos. Por otro lado, analizamos los efectos ambientales sobre la ac-
tividad de formaci´on estelar, tanto para las galaxias en pares como para
aquellas sin un vecino cercano. Encotramos, en buen acuerdo con las
observaciones (Gomez et al 2003), que existe una relaci´on entre la SF y
la densidad local para ambas muestras con una mayor dependencia para
los pares cercanos. Finalmente, investigamos los efectos que producen las
interacciones de galaxias sobre el color y las propiedades qu´ımicas de las
mismas, con el ﬁn de evaluar su rol en la determinaci´on de la distribuci´on
bimodal de colores observada (Balogh et al. 2004; Tissera et al. 2005)
y la relaci´on masa-metalicidad de la poblaci´on estelar (Tremonti et al.
2004).

Metallicity and colours in galaxy pairs.

3

1.

Introduction

Observations show that mergers and interactions can induce star formation (SF)
activity in galaxies (e.g. Larson and Tinsley 1978). Barton et al. (2000) and
Lambas et al. (2003, LTAC03) analysed a sample of pair galaxies in the ﬁeld
ﬁnding a clear correlation between the proximity in projected distance and ra-
dial velocity of two galaxies and their SF activity. On the other hand, numerical
simulations of pre-prepared mergers showed that interactions between axisym-
metrical systems without bulges might induce gas inﬂows to the central region of
the systems, triggering starburst episodes (Mihos and Hernquist 1996). Results
from the study of the eﬀects of mergers in the SF history of galactic objects in
cosmological hydrodynamical simulations (Tissera et al. 2002), indicate that,
during some mergers events, gaseous disks could experience two starbursts de-
pending on the characteristic of the potential well.
Recently, observational results obtained by Balogh et al (2004) conﬁrm a bi-
modal colour distribution, which segregates galaxies into blue and red popula-
tions. They ﬁnd that this bimodality is well ﬁtted using two Gaussian distribu-
tions. Analysing this colour distributions for an important range of magnitudes
and densities, they ﬁnd that while the characteristics of the Gaussians depends
strongly with luminosity, seems not to change with the local density. According
to Balogh et al (2004) this invariability with the environment suggest that the
process of transforming blue into red galaxies has to be very eﬃcient and to
overcome the eﬀects of environment.
In this work, we will investigate how eﬀective interactions and mergers of galaxies
are in the regulation of SF activity and if they are responsible in determining
the other internal properties of galaxies like colours and chemical abundances.
If the Universe is consistent with a hierarchical scenario, then, interactions and
mergers are of utmost importance to understand the eﬀects and eﬃciency that
these physical processes have on the life of galaxies. Thus, we will focus on
a statistical analysis of galaxy pairs in a hierarchical scenario with the aim
at confronting this scenario with recent observational results of galaxy pairs.
Details can be found in P´erez et al. (2005a, 2005b).

2. Results

We have analysed a Λ-CDM simulation (Λ = 0.7, Ω = 0.3, H = 100h kms−1Mpc−1
with h = 0.7) run with the chemical cosmological GADGET-2 (Scannapieco et
al. 2005). From this simulation we constructed the 2D-GP and 3D-GP cata-
logs. In order to unveil the eﬀects of interactions, we also build the respective
galaxy control samples deﬁned by galaxies without a close companion within
the corresponding thresholds in relative separation and velocity used to deﬁne
each GP catalogs (P´erez et al 2005a). For each simulated galaxy, we estimated
the stellar birthrate parameter b, deﬁned as the present level of SF activity of
a galaxy normalized to its mean past SF rate and the absolute magnitudes in
diﬀerent wavelenghts (De Rossi et al 2005).
The analysis of the SF activity for galaxies in the 3D-GP catalog as a function
of their orbital parameters shows that close encounters (pairs with a relative
separation less 30 ± 10 kpc h−1) can enhance the SF activity at higher levels

4

J. P´erez, P. Tissera, D.G. Lambas & C. Scannapieco

than those measured for galactic systems without a close companion. On the
other hand, the SF activity seems to correlate more weakly with the relative
velocities. However, we also ﬁnd almost a 50% of passive star forming galaxies
in close pairs, suggesting that the internal properties of these systems are also
present in the SF process. Eﬀectively, we ﬁnd that the triggering of SF by tidal
interactions is also regulated by the stability of the systems and the gas reservoir.
The analysis of the passive SF close pairs show that part of these systems have
experienced recent star formation activity and the rest shows deeper potential
well and are less leftover gas than galaxies in pairs with strong SF activity.
When the projected catalog of pair is analysed, the same global trends detected
in the 3D-GP sample are found, although a shrinking in the enhancement thresh-
old in projected distance is observed. It value drops with respect to that found in
3D to ∼ 25 ± 5 kpc h−1 in good agreement with observational results (LTAG03).
This shrinking in the threshold is produced by both geometrical projection ef-
fects and spurious pairs. In order to separate these both eﬀects, we have removed
spurious pairs from the 2D-GP sample by checking their 3D relative separations.
Consistently with previous works (Alonso et al. 2004), we found that 30% of
the pairs in 2D-GP sample are spurious. This percentage reduces to 19% for 2D
close pairs (rp < 25 kpc h−1 and ∆cz < 100 km s−1).
Analysing the dependence of the SF on environment with the projected local
density parameter (deﬁned like in the observational analysis as Σ = 6/(πd2
6),
with d6 the projected distance to the 6th neighbor brighter than Mr = −20.5),
we detect the expected SFR-local density relation (Gomez et al 2003) for both
galaxies in pairs and without a near companion, with a stronger dependence
for close pairs. The important decrease in the SF activity and the signiﬁcant
increase of the fraction of passive SF members from low to high density regions
for galaxies in close pairs suggest that interactions might a relevant role in the
origin of the SF-density relation.
In order to infer the eﬀect of interactions on the colour distribution of galaxies,
we also evaluate the u−r colour for the simulated galaxies in pairs compared with
that found for galaxies without a near companion. According results obtained
by Balogh et al (2004), we adopt the value u − r = 1.8 to segregate red and
blue galaxies. We found that the mean colours of the blue and red peaks for
pairs are at < u − r >≈ 1.60 and < u − r >≈ 2.06, with similar values for the
control sample. However, while pairs exhibit a clear bimodal colour distribution
with a 58 per cent of galaxies in the blue peak, the control sample is more
consistent with an unimodal distribution with an excess of red systems (26 per
cent of galaxies in the blue peak). Comparing the simulated control sample with
observations (Balogh et al 2004), we also ﬁnd an excess of the fraction of red
galaxies. Part of this red excess might be produced by the high eﬃciency in
the transformation of gas into stars of our simulations which is not regulated
by supernova energy feedback. However, tidal torques generated by interactions
can compress the leftover gas in a short-time producing strarbursts which might
be the responsible of producing the bimodal distribution found for galaxies in
pairs. To gain insight in this analysis, we divide the galaxy pair catalog into
merging (r < 30 kpc h−1) and interacting (30 kpc h−1 < r < 25 kpc h−1)
pairs. Although the bimodal distribution is present in both subsamples, the
fraction of blue galaxies is higher than the red one for the merging systems,

Metallicity and colours in galaxy pairs.

5

with the opposite result for the interacting pairs. This results is consistent with
the present level of SF activity found for merging and interacting systems. The
former has a 36% of active SF galaxies (SF activity higher than for the control
sample), while the latter has only a 10% of active SF galaxies. The SF activity
in the recent past for the currently passive SF systems is also responsible for the
colour distribution of galaxies. As shown in P´erez et al (2005b), we ﬁnd that the
fraction of currently passive SF systems which have experienced strong activity
in the recent 0.5 Gyr (F∗) anticorrelates with the u − r colour. The contribution
to the blue colours comes from galaxies that independently of their current SF
activity, have experienced an strong SF activity in the recent last 0.5 Gyr.
Finally, we analyse the chemical properties of the interstellar medium (ISM) and
the stellar population (SP) of galaxies in pairs. While for SP exhibits a clear
excess of their chemical abundance respect to that found for galaxies without
a near companion, the ISM enriched by the new stars, has diﬀerent levels of
chemical contamination depending on the SF activity of the galaxy. Particularly,
if we segregate galaxies into active and passive according their current SF level,
we ﬁnd that SP of passive SF galaxies are more enriched than the active ones. On
the contrary, ISM of passive galaxies are less enriched than the ISM of the active
ones. Interesting, we also ﬁnd that the distribution of the chemical abundance
of the ISM of these systems has a similar behaviour with the relative separation
between the members of the pair than that found for the SF activity. In other
words that the ISM of currently passive SF pairs shows an enhancement of their
chemical enrichment respect to that measured in the control sample for very
close systems (rp < 25 kpc h−1). The analysis of the recently past SF activity
of these galaxy pairs shows that, although these systems are currently passive
SF ones, they have experienced strong SF activity in the recent past which has
contributed to enhance the chemical abundance in their ISM.

3. Conclusions

From the analysis of the 3D-simulated galaxy pair catalog, we conclude that close
galaxy interactions (r < 30 kpc h−1) can be correlated with an enhancement of
SF activity at higher levels than those measured for galactic systems without a
close companion. We also found that the internal dynamical stability of galactic
systems plays an important role as it can be deduced from the presence of an
anticorrelation signal between the deepness of the potential well and the star
formation activity.
The construction of a projected galaxy pair catalog allowed us, ﬁrstly, to make
a suitable comparison with observations and then, to analyse the contamination
eﬀects introduced by spurious pairs. In a good agreement with observational
results, we ﬁnd that all trends observed for the 3D-GP catalog are reproduced
in a similar way for the 2D-GP one. On the other hand, the analysis of the
spurious pairs shows that the contamination level increases with the relative
separation. Consistently with previous works (Alonso et al. 2004), we ﬁnd that
almost a 30% of the pairs in 2D-GP sample are spurious.
The environmental eﬀects on the interacting pairs were analysed, deﬁning the
local density using the projected distance to the 6th. We ﬁnd a dependence
of the SF on local density which is consistent with the observed SF-density

6

J. P´erez, P. Tissera, D.G. Lambas & C. Scannapieco

relation (Gomez et al 2003). It yields a decrease in the level of SF activity and
an increase in the fraction of passive SF systems with increasing local density.
Although, this relation is found for both pairs and control samples, we ﬁnd
that it is signiﬁcantly stronger for close pairs suggesting the fundamental role of
interaction in driving the SF-density relation.
The analysis of the colours and chemical properties of galaxies also seem to
be regulated by the interactions. We ﬁnd a clear bimodal colour distribution
for galaxies in pairs with a blue peak populated basically by galaxies with an
strong, currently or recently past SF activity. Finally, analysing the chemical
properties of galaxy pairs, we ﬁnd that while SP seems to store information
about the history of mergers and interactions, the chemical abundance of the
ISM seems to be contaminated by the new stars, reﬂecting in this way the eﬀects
of the present interactions. Our results are in very good agreement with recent
observational works. Regarding the bimodal colour distribution, we found that
although interactions and merger are able to explain the bimodal colour distri-
bution, supernova energy feedback seems to be required to prevent an excessive
transformation of gas into stars and to obtain the detail characteristics of this
distribution.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the Consejo Na-
cional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas and Fundaci´on Antorchas. Sim-
ulations were run on Ingeld PC Cluster funded by Fundaci´on Antorchas. We
thank the LOC of this meeting for their help made our participation possible.
Patricia B. Tissera thanks the Aspen Center for Astrophysics for the hospitality
during the Summer Workshop 2004.

References

Alonso, M. S., Tissera, P. B., Coldwell, G., Lambas D. G. 2004,MNRAS, 352,1081.
Balogh M. L., Eke V., Miller C., et al., 2004, MNRAS, 348, 1355.
Barton E. J., Geller M. J., Kenyon S. J., 2000, ApJ, 530, 660.
Lambas, D. G., Tissera, P. B., Alonso, M. S. Coldwell, G. 2003, MNRAS,

346,1189 (LTAG03).

Larson, R. B., Tinsley, B. M., 1978, ApJ, 219, 46.
Mihos, J. C., Hernquist, L., 1996,ApJ, 464, 641.
Navarro J.F. & White S.D.M., 1994, MNRAS 267, 401.
Nikolic B., Cullen H., Alexander P., 2004, MNRAS 355, 874.
P´erez, M.J., Tissera P.B., Lambas, D. G., Scannapieco, C. 2005, A&A accepted

(astro-ph/0510327)

P´erez, M.J., Tissera P.B., Lambas, D. G., Scannapieco, C. 2005,
Scannapieco C., Tissera P.B., White S.D.M. & Springel V., 2005, MNRAS ac-

cepted (astro-ph/0505440)

Tissera P.B, Dom´inguez-Teneiro R., Scannapieco C. & S´aiz A., 2002, MNRAS,

333, 327.

