ENS’06 Paris, France, 14-15 December 2006

DNA NANOROBOTICS

Mustapha Hamdi  and  Antoine Ferreira 

Laboratoire Vision et Robotique, ENSI Bourges - Université d’Orléans, 18000, Bourges, France.
{mustapha.hamdi, antoine.ferreira}@ensi-bourges.fr 

ABSTRACT

This  paper  presents  a  molecular  mechanics  study  of
nanorobotic  structures  using  molecular  dynamics  (MD)
simulations  coupled  to  virtual  reality  (VR)  techniques.
The  operator  can  design  and  characterize 
through
molecular  dynamics 
the  behavior  of
bionanorobotic  components  and  structures  through  3-D
visualization.  The  main  novelty  of 
the  proposed
simulations is based on the mechanical characterization of
passive/active  robotic  devices  based  on  double  stranded
DNA molecules. Their use as new DNA-based nanojoint
and nanotweezer are simulated and results are discussed.

simulation 

1. INTRODUCTION

joints  are 

the  specificity  behind 

There has been a great interest and many reports in the
use  of  DNA  specifically  to  actuate  and  assemble  micro-
and nano-sized systems.  In nano-electronics, DNA could
be used as molecular switchs for  molecular  memories  or
electronic  circuitry  to  assemble  future  nano-electronics
transistors  [1],[2].  In  nanorobotics  (Fig.1),  structural
elements  could  be  carbon  nanotubes  while 
the
passive/active 
formed  by  appropriately
designed DNA elements [3]. In such nanodevices, nature
assembles  nano-scene  components  using  molecular
recognition  [4].  In  the  case  of  DNA,  hydrogen  bonding
provides 
the  matching  of
complementay  pairs  of  single-stranded  (ss)  DNA  to
hybridize into a double strand (ds) of helical DNA. While
these tasks have been performed by nature efficiently and
perfectly, 
should  use
and 
prototyping  tools  for  a  CAD  design  process  of  future
bionanorobotic  systems.  To  achieve  these  long-term
goals,  prototyping  tools  based  on  molecular  dynamic
(MD)  simulators  should  be  developed    in  order  to
understand  the  molecular  mechanics  of  proteins  and
develop  dynamic  and  kinematic  models  to  study  their
performances and control aspects. The ability to visualize
the  atom-to-atom  interaction  in  real-time  and  see  the
results  in  a  fully  immersive  3-D  environment  is  an
additional feature of such simulations [5]. Virtual Reality
(VR) technology is applied here, which not only provides

roboticians 

engineers 

design, 

of  CAD-based 

immersive  visualization  but  also  gives  an  added
functionality 
simulation,
navigation  and  interactive  manipulation  of  molecular
graphical  objects.  Using  simulated  biological  nano-
enviroments    in  virtual  environments,  the  operator  can
design  and  characterize  through  physical  simulation  the
behavior  of  molecular  robots.  Adding  haptic  interaction,
the  operator  can  explore  and  prevent  the  problems  of
bionanorobots in their native environment.

Several  types  of  software  for  displaying  3D  models  of
bio-molecules  have  been  developed.  Most  of  these
programs  provide  haptic  manipulation 
and  3D
visualization  in  combination  with  molecular  dynamics
simulation  such  as  Visual  Molecular  Dynamics  (VMD)
[6],  that  can  be  connected  to  Molecular  Dynamics
Simulation  program 
Interactive
(NAMD) 
Molecular  Dynamics  Simulation  (IMD)  [8]  and  Virtual-
Reality  Peripheral  Network  (VRPN)  [9]  (the  reader  can
refer to [10] for a good introduction to the domain). 

[7]  via 

Graphite sheet

dsDNA

dsDNA

Linear DNA-based actuator

Fig.1:  Basic  DNA-based  molecular  components.  Passive  joints  (a)  1
d.o.f.  and  (b)  multidegree  of  freedom  elastic  spring.  Their  elastic
behavior  can  be  used  as  a  passive  control  element  or  as  the  restitution
force that will bring the mobile component back to its original position.
Active  joints  (c)  single  degree  of  freedom  parallel  platform.    The
platform is actuated by double stranded DNA-type  linear nanoactuator.

Based  on  VR  technology  and  MD  simulators,  our
long-term  goal  is  to  prototype  virtually  bionanorobotic
systems  and  optimize  mechanically 
their  design
considering  the  native  microenvironment.  In  this  work,

M.Hamdi, A.Ferreira
DNA Nanorobotics

we  consider  real-time  force-feedback  technology  for
improving  the  methodology  of  mechanical  molecular
studies of DNA molecules acting as passive and/or active
joints  in  bionanorobotic  systems,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.1.
Understanding the molecular mechanics behavior of such
DNA molecules is an important challenge for interfacing
DNA 
to  structural  (CNTs,  graphite)  or  biological
(biological nanotube, proteins) elements. 

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  First,  section  II
presents  the  developed  virtual  CAD  simulator  Then,
different  design  concepts  of  DNA-based  devices  are
proposed:  section  III  deals  with  DNA-based  springs  and
section IV introduces a novel DNA-based nanogripper. 

2.  CAD SYSTEM BIO-NANOROBOTIC
PROTOTYPING

system 

The application of advanced virtual reality techniques in
bio-nanotechnology  allowed  to  study,  simulate,  visualize
and 
interact  with  molecular  biology,  genomics,
proteomics,  structural  and  computational  biology.  As  far
we  know,  only  basic  molecular  elements  have  been
studied  until  now.  As  a  perspective  of 
these
developments,  VR-based  technology  could  be  used  for
the molecular robot design. Several types of software for
displaying  3D  models  of  bio-molecules  have  been
developed supporting VR devices such as stereo glasses,
3D  trackers,  and  force-feedback  (haptic)  devices.  Real-
time  exploration  is  what  attracts  researchers  to  develop
man-machine  interfaces  for  nanoscale  manipulation  that
technologies.  The  developed
use  haptic  display 
simulation 
permits
in  Fig.2 
presented 
manipulation  of  bionanorobotic  components  during
molecular dynamic (MD) simulations with real-time force
feedback  and  3D  graphical  display.  It  consists  of  three
primary  components:  a  haptic  device  controlled  by  a
computer  that  generates  the  force  environment,  a  MD
force
simulation 
application, and a visualization program for display of the
results.  Communication 
IMD
protocol  between 
the  visualization  program  Visual
Molecular Dynamics (VMD) and the molecular dynamics
program  (NAMD)  running  on  multiple  machines.  A
force-feedback  PHANToM  device  measures  a  user’s
hand  position  and  exerts  a  precisely  controlled  force  on
the  hand 
to  apply  different  mechanical
constraints,  force  and  energy  fields  on  the  virtual  model
in  order  to  prototype  bionanorobotic  components.  The
application of the mechanical constraints are applied by a
virtual  AFM  microlever  and  can  be  manipulated  with  a
mouse  or  a  haptic  interface  with  force-feedback.  The
principal idea of this application is to let the user drive le
molecule in the space of precomputed conformations and
transitions:

for  determining 

the  effects  of 

is  achieved 

in  order 

through 

Fig.2. Basic concept of virtual environment and haptics technology for
bionanorobot simulation.

•  The  user  steers  virtually  he  molecule  protein  with  a
cursor, which is a small spherical ball that is position
controlled  by 
the  stylus.  The  system  allows
application  of  stretching,  shearing  and  bending
mechanical constraints on the protein.

•  The  user  distinguish  possible  conformational  paths
the  energy  barriers  associated  with

and  feels 
particular paths.

3. DESIGN OF CONTROLLABLE DNA PASSIVE
SPRINGS

3.1. Mechanical Characteristics of dsDNA

in 

interest 

Chemically, DNA is a long polymer made up of a linear
series  of  subunits  known  as  nucleotides.  Structurally,
DNA is usually found as a double helix, with two strands
wrapped  around  one  another.  However,  DNA  can  adopt
other configurations and can also exist in single-stranded
forms.  Double-stranded  DNA  (ds-DNA)  has  sparked  the
the  force  versus  extension  of
renewed 
polymers for biomolecular springs. The DNA is solvated
in water with 30 Na+ ions added to neutralize the charge.
The water-DNA system was gradually heated over 7ps to
300K, and then equilibrated with a thermal bath at 300K
for  another  7ps.  The  dynamics  of  the  DNA  as  shown  in
Fig.5  were  performed  with 
the  double-stranded
terminations  stretched  and  the  other  end  fixed.  This
elastic  behavior  is  thus  purely  entropic.  For  very  low
tension    f  ≤1pN,  the  restoring  force  is  provided  by
"entropic elasticity".

FJC
Hooke’s law
WLC

F1
F2

M.Hamdi, A.Ferreira
DNA Nanorobotics

F2

F1

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

F2

F1

F1

I

II

II

I

II

III

I

Distance (nm)

I

II

III

Distance (nm)

(a)                                                               (b)                                                                    (c)

Fig.5:  Double-stranded    DNA  mechanical  simulations:  (a)  force-extension  curve  when  applying  a  stretching  force.  The  data  are  fit  to  a  WLC  model
solved numerically assuming A=43nm. The FJC curve assumes b=2P=106nm. (b) force-extension curve when applying an anti-parallel stretching  and
(c) force-extension curve when applying an anti-parallel shearing.

Sodium ions

Fig.4: Structure of water-DNA system ionized with 3O Na+ ions.

In the absence of any force applied to its ends, the DNA's
RMS  end-to-end  distance  (chain  length,  L)  is  small
compared  to  its  contour  length  defined  as  the  maximum
end-to-end distance  (maximum length, L0)  and the chain
large  degree  of  conformational  disorder.
enjoys  a 
Stretching DNA reduces its entropy and increases the free
energy. The corresponding  force  f  increases  linearly  as  a
Hooke’s  law with the extension L:  

f

≅

Tk
3
B
A

DNA

L
L

0

,

L

<<

L

0

(1) 

The  length  ADNA  is  known  as  the  "thermal  persistence
length"  of  DNA  and  is  of  the  order  50nm.  For  higher
forces (f ≥10pN), the end-to-end distance L is close to L0
and  the  elastic  restoring  force  is  due  to  distortion  of  the
internal  structure  of  DNA.  In  this  regime,  the  force
extension curve can be approximated by two models that
are often used to describe the entropic elasticity of DNA.
In  the  freely  jointed  chain  (FJC)  model,  the  molecule  is
made  up  of  rigid,  orientationally  independent  Kuhn
segments whose length, b, is a measure of chain stiffness.
The 
resulting  entropic  elastic  behavior  can  be
summarized in the force-extension relation :

/

B

tot

FJC

3=

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

z
L

bTk

⎞
−⎟⎟
⎠

= coth

Tk
B
bf

                      (2)

bf
Tk
B
defining  the  well-known  Langevin  function.  Expanding
Eq.(2)  gives  the  effective  spring  constant  for  the  FJC  as
. The terms Ltot represent the total length of
k
the  protein  and    f  the  stretching  force.  The  alignment  of
segments  by 
is  described  by  Boltzmann
distribution.  In  the  inextensible  worm-like  chain  model
(WLC)  model  [11],  the  molecule  is  treated  as  a  flexible
rod of length L that curves smoothly as a result of thermal
fluctuation.    The  WLC  model  of  entropic  elasticity
predicts the relationship between the relative extension of
a  polymer  (z/L)  and  the  entropic  restoring  force  (f)
through

tension 

)[
(
LzATk
B

/

/

+

1(4/1(

−

Lz
/

]4/1))
2 −

          (3)   

f

=

where  kB  is  the  Boltzmann  constant,  T  is  absolute
temperature,  A  is  the  persistence  length,  z  is  the  end-to-
end length, and L is the length. Results, shown in Fig.5a,
indicate that, even though the FJC model can describe the
behavior of ds-DNA in the limit of low and intermediate
forces,  it  fails  at  high  forces.  The  WLC  model,  on  the
other hand, provides an excellent description of molecular
elasticity  at  intermediate  and  high  forces.  Both  models
behave as a Hooke’s law for low stretching forces. In the
case  of  an  anti-parallel  stretching  (Fig.5b),  the  force-
extension curve is quite similar for the Parts I and II when
the  ds-DNA  is  unfolding.  When  it  is  totally  stretched,
lateral  mechanical    unzipping  of  the  hairpins  occurs
sequentially leading to an increase of the stretching force
(Part  III)  until  to  reach  its  point  of  rupture  (Part  IV).

               
         
 
 
M.Hamdi, A.Ferreira
DNA Nanorobotics

When  considering  an  anti-parallel  shearing  of  ds-DNA
(Fig.5c),  a  mechanical  longitudinal  unzipping  of  the  12
hairpin DNA occurs sequentially (Part I) after a phase of
extension of ds-DNA structure (Part II) before the rupture
point  (Part  III).  As  it  is  shown,  the  strand  unzipping
occurred abruptly at 500pN and displayed a reproductible
“saw-tooth”  force  variation  pattern  with  an  amplitude  of
+/-10pN along the DNA.

3.2. Passive DNA-SWNT  Elastic Joint

Considering  the  interesting  stretching  characteristics  of
ds-DNA  of  (Fig.5a),  we  designed  a  passive  DNA-based
elastic  joint  (see  Fig.6a)  composed  of  two  single  walled
carbon nanotubes (SWNT) as structural components. The
covalent linkage between DNA-SWNT are realized at the
terminations through atoms of carbon (Fig.6b). As shown
in Fig.7, the passive dsDNA-based joint is fully reversible
in  the  domain  of  linear  elasticity  of  the  DNA  molecule
(Part  I  and  II).  The  spring  constant  is  estimated  to  be  as
KDNA= 780 N/m with a thermal bath at 300K and constant
acidic pH=5. 

a)

Fig.6:  (a) Passive joint composed of a dsDNA protein attached at both
ends by carbon nanotubes (CNT). The water molecules are not shown.
(b) schematic illustration of chemical scheme for SWNT-DNA linkage.

the  strength  of 

The  modulation  of 
the  molecular
nanospring  has  been  considered.  Variations  of  the
medium environment have been controlled through three
parameters: (i) the temperature, (ii) the level of acidic pH
and  (iii)  the  electron  density  of  the  molecule.    In  this
regard,  a  molecular  variable  spring  can  be  envisaged.
Fig.  8a  shows  the  evolution  of  the  DNA  spring  constant
KDNA with respect to the temperature ranging from 273 K
to 500 K. The results shows clearly the linear decrease of
spring constant  with respect to the temperature (between
300K  to  450K).  The  adjustable  stiffness    could  be
adapted  between  780  N/m  to  720  N/m  in  relation  to  the
temperature control. However, for such high temperatures
the  DNA  becomes 
and
reversibility 
the  strong  hysteresis.
Practically,  the  DNA  molecule  is  able  to  perform
repeatable  motion  controlled  by  variation  of  pH  by
adding  protons  (termed  protonation).  It  is  proposed  to
isolate this domain from the DNA and trigger the stiffness
change  by  variation  of  pH.  The  drop  of  pH  changes  the

completely  denaturated 

is  alterated  by 

energetics  of  the  outer  (enveloppe  glycoprotein)  protein
of  the  DNA  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  a  distinct
stretching change in a part of it.

relaxation

stretching

stretching

DNA

Fig.7: Reversibility of  the DNA-based elastic joint during a stretching-
relaxation phase.

Fig.8b  shows  the  change  of  the  protein  stiffness  with
respect  to  the  pH  value.  For  a  neutral  acidic  pH  value
(pH=11),  the  DNA  protein  is  in  a  partially  α-helical
stranded coiled coil. The value of pH=5.5 corresponds to
the neutral state. An increase occurs at lower pH between
5.5  and  10  leading  to  a  stiffness  variation  ranging  from
670  N/m  to  780  N/m.  For  this  configuration,  it  is
necessary  to  protonate  the  amino  acid  side  chain  of  the
protein  by  adding  proton  inside  the  native  environment.
Finally,  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  electron  density
(namely,  the  electric  charge  Q  in  Coulombs)  has  been
investigated. The concept of using electrons as a medium
for  such  purposes  is  not  unreasonable  because  electron
density  will  readjust  along  the  molecular  backbone  in
response  to  an  inflow/outflow  of  electronic  charge.
Moreover,  using  electrons  as  a  mechanism  for  changing
the  shape  and  rigidity  of  molecular  systems  has
precedence  [12].  Fig.8c  shows  the  change  of  spring
stiffness  according  to  the  electron  charge  of  the  protein.
From  these  results  we  derive  that  the  force  stiffness
bracket  a  range  from  680  N/m  to  780  N/m  for  the  ds-
DNA  protein.  Experimentally  one  can  add  or  remove
electrons  with  a  potentiostat,  or  by  appending  suitably
placed  electron-donating  or  withdrawing  groups.  Single-
stranded  DNA  (ss-DNA)  and  double-stranded  DNA  (ds-
DNA)  proteins  have  interesting  characteristics  due  to
their elastic behavior and structural conformation [13]. As
example,  DNA  can  provide  three  independent  reversible
degrees  of  freedom:  stretching,  shearing  and  twisting.
They can be used to construct molecular building blocks
by virtue of their conformation pathways. Branched DNA
molecules  with  sticky  ends  are  promising  for  self-
assembling macromolecular periodic structures [14].

 
M.Hamdi, A.Ferreira
DNA Nanorobotics

a)

)

m
N

/

(

A
N
D
K

b)

)

m
N

/

(

A
N
D
K

c)

/
/

)
)
m
m
N
N
(
(
A
N
A
D
N
K
D
K

Temperature (K)

Level of pH

Net charge Q (eV)

Fig.8: Evolution of the spring stiffness of ds-DNA during stretching for
changing medium properties: (a) temperature, (b) level of acidic pH and
(c) level of electron charge Q.

4. CONTROLLABLE DNA-BASED NANOGRIPPER

to  change 

In  this  part,  we  study  the  molecular  properties  of
DNA  proteins 
their  3D  conformation
depending on the temperature level of the native medium.
Thus,  a  new    biomolecular  gripper  type  called  dsDNA-
SWNT  nanogripper    is  designed  (Fig.9).  It  is  composed
of  a  dsDNA  protein  with  two  SWNT  as  nano  end-
effectors.  The  structure  is  like  an  hairpin  composed  of
two coils, having each C-terminal connected to a SWNT
and  undergoing  a  conformational  change  induced  by
temperature  variation  (increase  or  decrease)  in  mildly
acidic  conditions  (i.e.,  pH  around  5.5).  With  the  change

of temperature, the N-terminals pop out of the inner side
and  the  peptide  acquires  a  straightened  position.  Two
known states are established, i.e., the native state and the
fugeonic  state  of  the  12-hairpin  peptide  of  DNA.  The
representative  “open”  structure  can  be  generated  by
forcing  the  structure  away  from  the  native  conformation
to  open  state  (conformation)  with  constrained  high-
temperature  molecular  dynamics  (molecular  dynamic
program NAMD with the CHARMM22 force field). Both
the  forward  (closed-to-open)  and  the  reverse  (open-to-
close)  transformations  are  carried  out  for  two  end-point
structures  of  7Å.  The  dsDNA  is  able  to  perform
repeatable motion controlled by variation of temperature.
As  example,  Fig.10  shows  the  front  view  trajectory  of
both  free  terminations  of  dsDNA  when  considering
temperature augmentation from 300K to 400K.

T=300°K

HEATING

T=400°K

Free

Fixed

Closed

COOLING

Open

Fig.9:  dsDNA-SWNT nanogripper. In the native state the  nanogripper
is  closed  (T=300K)  and  in  the  conformational  state  (T=400K)  the
nanogripper is open.

The  finger’s  motion  are  composed  of  a  linear  finger
opening  (y-z  plane)  connected  to  carbon  nanotubes  as
nano  end-effectors.  In  order  to  assess  the  interaction
forces  when  handling  a  nanoobject,  we  simulated  a
contact force by using two nonlinear spring K1 and K2 at
each  end-effector.  Fig.11  shows  the  evolution  of  the
gripping  force  during  the  opening  of  the  nanotweezers.
is  estimated  by  Fi=Ki∆xi,j  with
The  contact  force 
(i,j)=(1,2)  for  each  nanofinger.  It  should  be  noticed  that
when  the  nanofingers  are  in  closed  contact  with  the
nanoobject, the forces provided by the ds-DNA are quite
linear  with  the  opening  displacement  ∆x.  For  large
opening  displacements,  the  forces  are  dissimilar  due  the
small  parasitic  rotation  of  the  fingers.  Fig.12  shows  the
motion 
the  nanofingers  during  a
temperature cycle time (heating and  cooling)  from  300K
to  400K.  Although  the  overall  unfolding  pathway  is
independent  of  temperature  cycling,  differences  are
observed  from  trajectory-to-trajectory  during  the  cooling

reversibility  of 

 
 
 
 
M.Hamdi, A.Ferreira
DNA Nanorobotics

procedure.  The  reversibility  error  is  less  than  8%  in  the
worst case.

well  suited  to  the  development  of  active  joints  for  the
control of nanorobotic tasks such as nanotweezers. 

z

y

+

x

+

+

Finger 2

+

+

+

+

+

Finger 1

+

+

Fig.10:  Motion  of  the  nanofingers  during  elevation  of  the  temperature
from  native  state  (nanogripper  closed) 
to  conformational  state
(nanogripper open).  Influence of the ds-DNA configuration with single
walled carbon nanotubes.

K1∆x11

K1∆x21

K2∆x12

K2∆x22

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

Time (pSec)

Fig.11:  Simulation of gripping forces when handling a nanoobject. 

5.  CONCLUSION

This  paper  presents  a  computational  molecular
mechanics  study  carried  out  by  an  interactive  CAD
simulator  interface.  The  preliminary  mechanical  force
results  given  in  this  study  corroborates  the  force  results
when  stretching  double-helical  DNA  molecules  for
controllable  passive  elastic 
joints  such  as  shock
absorbers.  We  demonstrated  also  that  DNA  material  is

T=400K (Open state)

)

m
n
(

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
D

Cooling

Heating

T=300K (Closed state)

Time (pSec)

Fig.12:    Reversibility  of  the  nanotweezers  when  increasing  and
decreasing the temperature from T=300K to 400K.

IEEE 

REFERENCES
  [1]    M.  Hoummady,  Y.  Fujita,  “Micromachines  for  nanoscale  science
and technology”, Nanotechnology, vol.16, pp.29-33, 1999.
[2] S. Diez, et  al.,  “Stretching  and  Transporting  DNA  Molecules  using
Motor Proteins”, Nano Letters, vol.3, no.9, pp.1251-1254, 2003.
[3]  C.  Dwyer,  V.Johri,  M.Cheung,  J.Patwardhan,  A.Lebeck,  D.Sorin,
“Design  tools  for  a  DNA-guided  self-assembling  carbon  nanotube
technology”, Nanotechnology, 15, pp.1240-1245 (2004).
[4]  C.D.  Montegano,  G.D.  Bachand,  “Constructing  nanomechanical
devices powered by biomolecular motors”, Nanotechnology, 10, pp.225-
331 (1999).
[5]  Hamdi  M.,  Sharma  G.,    Ferreira  A.,  Mavroidis  D.  ‘’Molecular
Mechanics  Study  on  Bionanorobotic  Components  using  Force
Feedback’’ 
International  Conference  on  Robotics  and
Biomimetics, June30-July3, Hong-Kong , pp.105-110, 2005.
[6]  W.Humphrey,  A.Dalke,  K.Schulten,  “VMD:Visual  Molecular
Dynamics”, Journal of Molecular Graphics, vol.14, pp.33-38, 1996.
[7] M. Nelson, W. Humphrey, A. Gursoy, A. Dalke, L. Kale, R.D. Skeel,
and  K.  Schulten,  ”NAMD-A  Parallel  Object-Oriented  Molecular
Dynamics Program”,  Int. J. Supercomput. Appl.. 10, p.251, 1996.
[8]  J.E.  Stone,  J.  Gullingsrud,  K.  Schulten,  P.  Grayson,  A  System  for
Interactive  Molecular  Dynamics  Simulation,  In  2001  ACM  Symposium
on Interactive 3D Graphics, pp 191-194, New York, 2001.
[9]  R.M.  Taylor  II,  T.C.Hudson,  A.Seeger,  H.Weber,  J.Juliano,
A.T.Helser,  “VRPN:  A  Device-Indenpendent,  Network-Transparent  VR
Peripheral System”, VRST’01, November 15-17,Alberta, Canada, 2001.
[10]    G.Sharma,  C.Mavroidis,  A.Ferreira,  “Virtual  Reality  and  Haptics
in  Nano-  and  Bionanotechnology”,  Handbook  of  Theoretical  and
Computational  Nanotechnology,  Ed.  by  M.Rieth  and  W.Schommers,
American Scientific Publishers, Vol.40, 2005. 
[11] S. Park, F.Khalili-Araghi, E.Tajkhorshid, K.Schulten, “Free energy
calculation 
from  steered  molecular  dynamics  simulations  using
Jarzynski’s equality”, J. of Che. Phy, vol.119, n°6, pp.3559-3566, 2003.
[12]  J.  March,  “Advanced  Organic  Chemistry.  Reactions,  Mechanism
and Structure”, 4th edn, Wyley Interscience, New York, pp.57-59, 1995.
[13] C. Bustamante, S.B. Smith, J.Liphardt, D. Smith, “Single-molecule
of DNA mechanics”, Structural Biology,10, pp.279-285, 2000.
[14]  P.  He,  S.  Li,  L.  Dai,  “DNA-modified  carbon  nanotubes  for  self-
assembling and biosensing applications”, Synthetic Materials, Vol.154,
2005, pp.17-20.

