Astrophysical Bulletin, 2007, vol.62, accepted

7
0
0
2

g
u
A
9

]
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
8
1
2
1
.
8
0
7
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

The evolutionary stage of the semiregular variable
QY Sge = IRAS 20056+1834

V.G. Klochkova, V.E. Panchuk, E.L. Chentsov, M.V. Yushkin

Special Astrophysical Observatory RAS, Nizhnij Arkhyz, 369167 Russia

November 1, 2018

Abstract Repeated spectral observations made with the 6-m telescope of SAO RAS yielded new
data on the radial velocity variability of the peculiar yellow supergiant QY Sge. The strongest
and most peculiar feature in its spectrum is the complex proﬁle of Nai D lines, which con-
tains a narrow and a very wide emissions. The wide emission can be seen to extend from −170
to +120 km/s, and at its central part it is cut by an absorption feature, which, in turn, is
split into two subcomponents by a narrow (16 km/s at r=2.5) emission. An analysis of all the
Vr values leads us to adopt for the star a systemic velocity of Vr=−21.1 km/s, which corre-
sponds to the position of the narrow emission component of Nai. The locations of emission
features of Nai D lines are invariable, which point to their formation in regions that are ex-
ternal to the supergiant’s photosphere. Diﬀerential line shifts of about 10 km/s are revealed.
Emission in the Hα line is weaker than in Nai D lines, it ﬁlls the photospheric absorption
almost completely. The absorption lines in the spectrum of QY Sge have a substantial width
of F W HM ≈ 45 km/s. The method of model atmospheres is used to determine the follow-
ing parameters: the eﬀective temperature Tef f =6250±150 K, surface gravity lg g=2.0±0.2, and
microturbulence velocity ξt=4.5±0.5 km/s. The chemical composition of the atmosphere dif-
fers only slightly from the solar composition: the metallicity of the star is found to be some-
what higher than the solar metallicity with an average overabundance of iron-peak elements
of [M et/H]⊙=+0.20. The star is found to be slightly overabundant in carbon and nitrogen,
[C/F e]=+0.25, [N/F e]=+0.27. The α-process elements Mg, Si, and Ca are slightly overabun-
dant, on the average by [α/H]⊙=+0.12, and sulfur overabundance is higher, [S/α]=+0.29. The
strong overabundance of sodium, [N a/F e]=+0.75, is likely to be due to the dredge-up of the
matter processed in the NeNa cycle. Heavy elements of the s-process are underabundant relative
to the Sun. On the whole, the observed properties of QY Sge do not give grounds for including
this star into the group of R CrB or RV Tau-type objects.

1. Introduction

The General Catalog of Variable Stars [1] classiﬁes the yellow supergiant QY Sge (Sp=G0e) as a
semiregular variable. The QY Sge star, associated with the IR source IRAS 20056+1834, is located
outside the Galactic plane: b=−7.o46. J- and H-band polarimetric observations [2] that were per-
formed with UKIRT telescope revealed no extended structure or deviations from symmetry at the
′′
angular resolution of FWHM=0.67
. Polarization is constant throughout the entire image of the
object, but decreases substantially with wavelength: PJ =14%, PH =7%. Gledhill et al. [2] classiﬁed
IRAS 20056+1834 as a protoplanetary nebula (PPN) with a well-deﬁned core (a “core-dominated
object”) and a compact optically thick envelope. We so far lack a conclusive answer to the question

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

about the physical mechanism of polarization in QY Sge in the absence of an extended envelope,
however, submillimeter-wave observations with the 15-m James Clarke Maxwell Telescope (JCMT)
also conﬁrm the lack of such an envelope [3]. This led Gledhill et al. [3] to conclude that QY Sge
is at the initial stage of the formation of its envelope. This conclusion is consistent with the high
temperature (Te ≈ 600 K) of the interstellar dust [4].

The attention that spectroscopists devote to the supergiant QY Sge is due to its complex optical
spectrum, which includes photospheric and interstellar components, and, ﬁrst and foremost, to the
strong wide emission components of the D lines of Nai found even in the low-resolution spectra of
the star [4]. Kameswara Rao et al. [5] were the ﬁrst to study a high-resolution optical spectrum of
QY Sge. The above authors identiﬁed the main spectral components (the absorption spectrum of
the G-type supergiant combined with narrow low-excitation emission features and wide emission
Nai D lines) and determined the chemical abundances of the atmosphere of the supergiant. They
proposed a model of the system with a circumstellar torus and bipolar mass outﬂow. According
to this model, the central star is completely obscured from the observer and we see the radiation
reﬂected from the inner wall of the torus.

There is currently no consensus of opinion concerning the status of QY Sge (the proposed versions
are: a massive supergiant, RV Tau or R CrB-type star, or a spectroscopic binary), its distance (the
available estimates diﬀer by one order of magnitude), and understanding of all the peculiarities of
its optical spectrum. That is why we decided to spectroscopically monitor QY Sge with the 6-m
telescope of the Special Astrophysical Observatory of the Russian Academy of Sciences (SAO RAS)
and report the results of the ﬁrst six years of observations in this paper.

2. Observations and data reduction
QY Sge is a rather faint object (V =12.m37) for high resolution spectroscopy. We taken spectroscopic
data with the PFES and NES CCD–echelle spectrographs of the 6 m telescope of SAO RAS. The
spectrograph PFES [6] is mounted in the prime focus of the telescope and we used this spectrograph
in 1998 to take the spectrum of QY Sge with a resolution of R=17000 and a rather high signal-
to-noise ratio (S/N ≈ 100 ). We used the NES spectrograph in 1998, 2002, 2003, and 2004 to take
spectra with a resolution of R=60000, but with limited S/N (S/N≈40–50). See [7, 8, 9, 10] for the
description of the successive stages of the development and improvement of the NES spectrograph.
The spectrograph NES uses an image slicer at its entry to cut the image into three slices to provide
a more than double gain in ﬂux [9]. Local corrector [11] ensures the accurate centering of the star’s
image relative to these slices. Wavelength calibration is performed using the central component
of the echelle orders of the spectrum of the ThAr lamp and standard procedures of the echelle
context of midas system for the reduction of CCD images.

The upper rows of Table 1 give the observing dates and operating wavelength region. The data
obtained by Kameswara Rao et al. [5] complement fairly well the intensity and radial-velocity
measurements of spectral lines given in the next rows of the table: the above authors took their
spectra during the summer seasons of 1999, 2000, and 2001, which we missed, and have the same
spectral resolution (R=60000) as our observations.

We developed a dedicated code package [12] based on the ECHELLE context to modify the re-
duction of two-dimensional spectra taken with echelle spectrographs equipped with an image slicer.
We extract each portion of a spectral order separately and then coadd the extracted components
of the spectral order with the allowance for the wavelength shifts due to the design features of the
image slicer. We determine the shift of each satellite slice of echelle orders along the dispersion
of the echelle by cross-correlating with the emission spectrum of the hollow-cathode ThAr lamp
also taken with an image slicer. Note that the shifts of the slices of the echelle orders along the

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

3

dispersion of the echelle allows more eﬃcient removal of both cosmic-ray hits and CCD defects
(“hot” pixels, “traps”, zero-sensitivity columns), because the same spectral features are located on
diﬀerent pixels of the detectors in the diﬀerent components of spectral orders.

We use telluric lines to correct the dispersion curves. The residual systematic errors in radial
velocities do not exceed 2 km/s for the spectra taken with PFES, and are lower than 1 km/s for
other spectra. We estimated the measurement errors in pure form from the spectra taken with a
one-day interval, on July 27 and 28, 2002. The radial velocities Vr measured at these observing times
do not diﬀer systematically and the mean errors range from 0.5 km/s for the strongest (0.4< r <
0.55) to 1.0 km/s for the weakest (0.85< r <0.8) lines.

3. Peculiarities of the optical spectrum and radial velocities

Our observations conﬁrmed the presence of main features earlier found in the optical spectrum of
QY Sge: all our spectra show a very narrow, ∆λ = 16 km/s, and a wide, ∆λ ≈ 290 km/s, emission
components of Nai D lines. Metal absorptions are very wide: they are two-to-three times wider than
the narrow Nai emission feature and this fact indicates that the latter formed in the circumstellar
medium. We also point out the complex emission-and-absorption proﬁle of Hα (see Fig. 1). Note
that none of our spectra shows the narrow emission lines with low-excitation metal lines identiﬁed
by Kameswara Rao et al. [5].

3.1. Identiﬁcation and measurement of the parameters of spectral features

According to our estimates, which are close to those of [4] and [5], QY Sge has a spectrum of a
late F-type supergiant with more than half of its lines belonging to iron. This fact allowed us
to use the spectrum of the α Per (Sp=F 5 Ib) supergiant taken with the same instruments as the
spectrum of QY Sge for identifying the lines and selecting the least blended among them and to
adopt the laboratory wavelengths necessary for the determination of radial velocities mostly from
the solar-spectrum tables [13].

Table 2 lists the identiﬁcations of the main lines that we used to study the radial-velocity pattern.
The same table gives for all our spectra the central residual intensities “r” of the selected absorptions
and the radial velocities inferred from the lower parts of their proﬁles. Figure 2 gives examples of
dependencies Vr(r) between these two parameters. The scatter of data points on these relations
allows one to judge about the real errors of the inferred Vr, which include not only measurement
errors, but also uncertainties of the laboratory wavelengths, eﬀects of unaccounted blending and
local deformations of the dispersion curves employed. Variations of the scatter from one spectrum
to another are due not only to diﬀerent exposures, but also to the variations of the proﬁle shapes
with time. Figure 2 compares the Vr(r) dependencies obtained for the same spectral range from
the spectra taken on August 16 , 2003 (when the most symmetric and narrow metal absorptions
were observed) and August 28, 2004. The mean errors of the determination of Vr estimated from
these data based on a single line diﬀer and are equal to 0.6 and 2.0 km/s, respectively. In view of
the errors of the determination of Vr, we rounded the corresponding values in Tables 1 and 2 to
1 km/s.

Derivation of the mean velocities for individual dates requires the allowance for diﬀerential line
shifts, which, according to our data, are real and variable: they are barely visible in the spectrum
taken on August 16, 2003, but quite conspicuous in our other spectra. By their absolute magnitude
(about 10 km/s) the maximum mutual shifts are close to those pointed out by Kameswara Rao et
al. [5], but their behavior diﬀers: instead of the sharp rebound of Vr as inferred from resonance
lines and low-excitation absorptions, we observe monotonic increase of velocity with increasing
line intensity (the lower Vr(r) curve in Fig. 2). However, such dependences can also be found by

4

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

analyzing the data given by Kameswara Rao et al. [5]. Two circumstances corroborate this: (1) the
spectral resolution of [5] is at least as good as ours and their signal-to-noise ratio (judging from
Figs. 1, and 2 adopted from [5]) is even higher than our S/N, whereas the errors of the mean Vr
values reported by the above authors are close to our errors for a single line; (2) absorptions with
low potentials of excitation of the lower level are among the strongest ones.

The slope of the Vr(r) relation can be aﬀected by the line asymmetry, which is immediately
apparent in the proﬁles of Fei lines shown in Fig. 3. In the spectra taken on August 28, 2004 the
absorption cores are redshifted relative to the wings, and are more conspicuous compared to the
proﬁles of deeper lines. As a result, the velocity measured at half the central depth (the mean
velocity for the line as a whole) increases with depth to a lesser extent than the velocity measured
from the bottommost part of the proﬁle (the crosses and squares in Fig. 2, respectively).

The two rows of Table 1 give the r and Vr values (corresponding to the lower parts of the proﬁles of
photospheric absorptions) for the right-hand ends of the Vr(r) curves represented by the lines of the
15th Fei multiplet. Below, rows 4 and 5 of the same table give the same quantities for the weakest
lines (the left-hand ends of the Vr(r) curves). The table conﬁrms the conclusion about the radial-
velocity variability of QY Sge made by Kameswara Rao et al. [5]. Unfortunately, the above authors
did not analyze diﬀerential line shifts in the spectra of QY Sge and give only the mean velocities
(from −23 to −9 km/s) averaged for each season, which, however, agree well with our velocities. To
illustrate the variable asymmetry of the Fei (15) line, we give in row 3 of Table 1 the shifts of the
data points on the blue and red slopes of the line proﬁles relative to the line cores, measured at half
of their depth. To reduce noise, we averaged the proﬁles of several absorptions of similar intensity
and show the result in Fig. 3. As is evident from the ﬁgure, the proﬁles obtained in 2003 and 2004
are not just asymmetric, but appreciably deformed. On both the red slope of the former proﬁle
and the blue slope of the latter proﬁle averaging conﬁdently reveals depressions similar to those
observed in the spectra of SB2 binaries. However, these results do not conﬁrm the hypothesis about
the binary nature of the star: it assumes that both the primary and secondary components of the
proﬁle should shift in opposite directions. However, the 2003 proﬁle is redshifted entirely relative to
the 2004 proﬁle. A comparison of the spectra taken in 2002 and 2003 also shows that variations of
microturbulent velocity and/or radial gradient of velocity in the star’s atmosphere can be neither the
only nor even the main cause of the variations of absorption proﬁles. The increase of the line depth
in the ﬁrst spectrum is not accompanied by their broadening and intensiﬁcation. This is especially
apparent in absorptions of moderate and low intensity (r ≥ 0.7). Both the speciﬁc shape of the
proﬁles and the nature of its variations can be explained by the scattering of the star’s radiation
by the dust envelope with inhomogeneous density distribution. Scattering on dust grains is known
to cause the broadening and asymmetry of photospheric absorptions and their shift toward longer
wavelengths [14]. Such a redshift has been known since long, but it could be conﬁdently detected
only after the measurement of the systemic velocities of cool supergiants from the hydroxyl lines
in their spectra (see, e.g., [15]). The blue POSS-2 plate image (http://archive.stsci.edu/dss) of the
′′
), which suggests
area surrounding QY Sge shows a scattering dust nebular (with a size of up to 30
the presence of an expanding dust shell near the star.

3.2. Peculiar proﬁle of the Nai D lines

The emission lines (or components) of the sodium doublet can be seen in the spectra of a number
of well-studied post-AGB stars. For example, the spectrum of the high-latitude supergiant 89 Her
contains a weak emission feature, which is blended with what appears to be an interstellar absorp-
tion [16]. A complex emission-and-absorption proﬁle of Nai D lines can also be seen in the very
high-resolution (≈ 105) spectrum of HR 4049 taken by Bakker et al. [17] with the CES spectro-

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

5

graph attached to CAT telescope. Bakker et al. [17] suggested that the variability of part of the
Nai components is due to variable emission.

We use Nai D lines to analyze the structure of the circumstellar matter in the QY Sge system.
The local corrector of the star’s position can be tuned so as to make the portions of the image
located at diﬀerent distances from the center of the star’s image to be projected onto diﬀerent
sections of the image slicer (each with a size of 0.6×1.8 arcsec). In the case of about 1 arcsec seeing
and image-corrector errors no greater than 0.1 arcsec it is safe to say that the fractions the ﬂux
coming from the star and its neighborhood diﬀer for diﬀerent sections. Fig. 4 shows the proﬁles of
Nai D lines for three angular distances from the star’s center. We point out three important features
of this ﬁgure. First, the relative intensities of narrow emission features remain unchanged after the
normalization of each of the spectra to its own continuum level. The most simple explanation of
this phenomenon consists in the assumption that the size of the formation region of the narrow
lines of the sodium doublet is smaller than the angular resolution of the telescope. Second, the
intensity ratio of the lines of the doublet is close to unity, whereas in the absence of self absorption
the upper levels are populated proportionally to their statistical weights and the ratio in question
must be close to two. Equal intensities can be explained either by the high concentration of sodium
atoms when resonance scattering on lines levels out the intensity ratio of the emission components
(in this case the number of atoms along the line of sight must be no less than 1010 cm−2), or
by the mechanism of resonance ﬂuorescence, where the ratio of emission intensities is determined
by the ratio of the illuminating ﬂuxes (in the cores of the lines of the photospheric spectrum).
Fluorescence can be observed only in the case where the illuminating source (the star) cannot
be directly observed and its radiation does not exceed the weak ﬂuorescence. Third, it is evi-
dent from the wide (high-velocity) components of the lines of the doublet that the contribution of
blueshifted emission increases and that of redshifted emission decreases with increasing distance.
The enhancement of the blueshifted emission as we move from the star along the nebula indicates
that we observe the ever increasing relative contribution from the regions of the circumstellar shell
that move toward us, whereas the contribution of receding regions remains virtually unchanged.
This eﬀect can be explained assuming that the regions where the line-of-sight velocity of gas is
directed “toward” and “away from” observer are spatially separated (within a 1.8 arcsec square).
If we further assume that high-velocity motions are axisymmetric (as Kameswara Rao et al. [5]
adopt in their model), the data shown in Fig. 4 can be used to estimate the ratio of the opening
angle (α) of the cones in which the high-velocity motions are contained and the tilt angle (β) of
the cone axis to the sky plane: β + α/2 = 90o. And, ﬁnally, Fig. 4 leads us to conclude that proﬁles
of such a shape can be observed only in the cases where the radiation of the central star is strongly
absorbed, i.e., if the star is partially or totally hidden from direct observation. For example, R CrB-
type stars (UW Cen [18], S Aps [19] and R CrB itself [20]), and FG Sge [21] exhibit similar proﬁles
of the resonance sodium doublet during periods of light decline with the only exception that their
high-velocity components are much wider and overlap, and narrow emissions are also rather wide
(about 0.5 ˚A).

Let us consider the temporal variations of Nai D lines. Table 1 lists the parameters of the
emission-and-absorption proﬁle of the resonance Nai D2 line in the spectrum of QY Sge at all
our observing times and Fig. 5 shows its shape and temporal variations. The r values in Table 1
correspond to the peaks of the narrow emission feature and to the highest of the two wide emission
humps, and to the core of the deepest (redshifted) absorption component, whereas the Vr quantities
correspond to the upper part of the emission peak and lower parts of the wide emission and
absorption as a whole. The proﬁle agrees with that described by Kameswara Rao et al. [5] to the
last detail. It consists of a wide emission, which can be seen to extend from −170 to +120 km/s
and whose central part is cut by an absorption feature, which, in turn, is parted in two by a narrow

6

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

(16 km/s at r = 2.5) emission peak. The narrow emission and the base of the wide emission are
symmetric. The absorption is asymmetric: it is abruptly bound on the red side (the entire intensity
drop ﬁts inside the 0 < Vr <15 km/s interval), and the lower part of the blue wing is also abrupt,
but it has a bend at Vr ≈ −50 km/s, the wing becomes ﬂat and extends at least out to Vr ≈
−95 km/s.

We use the Vr values for the absorption as zero points for estimating the extent of its blue
wing. We give these estimates (∆Vr) in the same Table 1. It is evident from Fig. 3 in the paper by
Kameswara Rao et al. [5] that the long-wavelength component of the high-velocity proﬁle becomes
stronger in the spectrum taken in 2000 compared to the spectrum taken in 1999. Our subsequent
observations (Fig. 5) conﬁrm this variability of the spectral proﬁle ignored by the above authors.
On the whole, it is safe to say that we have found conclusive evidence for the temporal variability
of the intensity of the narrow emission and the ratio of the intensities of the humps of the wide
emission, although the positions of the main components of the proﬁle remain unchanged on the
radial-velocity scale.

The ﬁxed position of the Nai emission features implies that they form in the regions that are
external to the photosphere of the supergiant. The main problem for interpreting the Nai (1) proﬁle
is the narrow emission that overlaps the absorption core. With this feature ignored, the proﬁle
can be represented as a combination of the P Cyg-type wind proﬁle and interstellar absorption.
Photospheric absorption must also be present, however, it cannot contribute signiﬁcantly: it could
only slightly lower the central part of the wide emission – by no means to the continuum level
– and, as is evident from Table 1, the absorption component of the Nai line reproduces neither
the radial velocities of strong Fei photospheric lines nor their oscillations. As for the P Cyg-type
proﬁle, here we mean its type III variant according to Beals [22]: blueshifted absorption between
two emission humps with the blue hump signiﬁcantly higher than the red hump. In our case the
latter condition is not satisﬁed, because the red component is trimmed and weakened by interstellar
absorption. According to the available data ([23] et al.), the mean heliocentric radial velocity of the
interstellar medium in the solar neighborhood at the Galactic latitude of QY Sge (l = 58o) is equal
to about −15 km/s and lies in the 0 ÷ 10 km/s interval at greater distances. The red component of
absorptions, which is deeper in the Nai (1) proﬁle and dominates in the proﬁle of the Ki (1) 7699˚A
resonance line, falls just within this velocity interval.

3.3. The Hα proﬁle

Compared to Nai (1) lines, the Hα line in the spectrum of QY Sge is less pronounced, but the
resemblance of their proﬁles is evident. Unfortunately, Kameswara Rao et al. [5] do not report their
Hα proﬁle, but only point out that the Hα is comparable to the broad Nai (1) emission feature. Our
data too corroborate this result, as is evident from Fig. 1, which shows the proﬁles of both lines in
the spectrum taken in 2004 along with the Hα proﬁle in the spectrum of the comparison star α Per
F 5Ib. Hα is weaker than emission in Nai(1) lines, it almost ﬂoods the photospheric absorption,
resulting in a small intensity diﬀerence: 0.7< r <1.1. This line is totally indistinguishable in the
low-resolution spectra taken by Menzies and Whitelock [4]. Photospheric wings, especially the short-
wavelength one, are clearly visible, however, we bear in mind the problems associated with drawing
the continuum of the echelle spectrum and restrict our analysis to investigating the central, wind-
produced, part of the spectrum. The spectrum of QY Sge does not show the narrow emission in Hα
(see Fig. 1, it was also removed from the Nai proﬁle), and the positions and relative heights of broad
emission humps repeat themselves in the proﬁles of the Hα and Nai features. The same appears
to be true for the positions of the absorptions that separate the peaks, and small discrepancies
between the Vr values listed in Table 1 may be due to the interstellar component of the Nai feature.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

7

It is also possible that the wind-produced absorption in Hα also contributes (along with the Tiii
6560 ˚A line) to the depression at Vr ≈ −150 ÷ −200 km/s.

4. Determination of model parameters and chemical abundances

Absorption lines in the spectrum of QY Sge have a substantial width, F W HM ≈45 km/s. Such a
broadening of the proﬁles of photospheric absorption lines is observed in the spectra of a number
of post-AGB stars. For example, the widths of photospheric lines in the spectrum of AFGL 2688
may be as high as 40 km/s [24, 25]. The mechanisms of such a strong line broadening in the
spectra of supergiant stars are not yet entirely understood. Attempts have been made to explain
the broadening in the spectrum of AFGL 2688 by scattering on moving dust [25], when we see only
the radiation scattered by dust and the star is hidden by a dust torus.

Most of the lines in the spectrum of QY Sge are strongly blended because of their appreciable
width, thereby complicating the measurement of their equivalent widths. We measured most of the
equivalent widths Wλ of the lines in the highest signal-to-noise ratio spectrum taken with PFES;
in some cases we measured Wλ in higher-resolution spectra taken with the NES spectrograph. The
increased spectral resolution gives no advantages for identifying spectral features, but allows more
accurate separation of blends. In addition, high spectral resolution allows complex proﬁles with
narrow emissions to be resolved into individual components.

We apply the method of model atmospheres to numerous iron lines to determine the parameters
of the star’s atmosphere. As a ﬁrst approximation, we use the atmospheric parameters of QY Sge
obtained by Kameswara Rao et al. [5]. We determine the eﬀective temperature Tef f from the
condition that the iron abundance determined from individual Fei lines should be independent
of the excitation potential of the corresponding lines. We ﬁx surface gravity log g based on the
condition of ionization balance, i.e., that the iron abundance determined from Fei lines must be
equal to the iron abundance determined from the lines of Feii. We determine the microturbulence
velocity ξt from the condition that the iron abundance must be independent of the equivalent
width of the corresponding Fei lines. In our computations we use Kurucz’s [26] grid of models and
WIDTH9 program to determine the elemental abundances. We adopt the excitation potentials and
oscillator strengths for all lines, as well as broadening constants from VALD atomic line database
[27].

Like in the case of most of the supergiants, we could not ﬁnd a single microturbulence velocity
to ﬁt the full set of lines forming at diﬀerent depth in the atmosphere of QY Sge. Figure 6a shows
the iron abundance log ǫ(Fe) as a function of the equivalent width of individual Fei lines (circles) at
ξt=4.5 km/s. As is evident from the ﬁgure, with the adopted parameters of the model atmosphere
the iron abundances determined from weak lines with equivalent widths Wλ <240 m˚A (ﬁlled circles)
are independent of the line intensity. The dashed line shows the regression relation based on weak
lines. At the same time, strong lines with Wλ >240 m˚A (open circles) deviate signiﬁcantly toward
higher log ǫ(F e). The attempts to determine the microturbulence velocity from strong lines yield
ξt=15 km/s. This situation is often explained by the variation of the microturbulence velocity with
depth in the star’s atmosphere. Deviations from local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) in the
atmospheres of supergiant stars also play an important part: strong lines are usually more sensitive
to non-LTE eﬀects. The allowance for deviations from LTE for Fei lines makes the variation of
microturbulence velocity with depth somewhat more pronounced [28] and therefore the increase
of ξt for stronger lines cannot be explained by deviations from LTE in the atmosphere of QY Sge.
This conclusion is indirectly corroborated by a similar result obtained from Feii lines, although the
latter are less sensitive to non-LTE eﬀects. The triangles in Fig. 6 show the results obtained for Feii
lines: the ﬁlled and open triangles correspond to the lines with Wλ < 240 m˚A and Wλ >240 m˚A,

8

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

respectively. The microturbulence velocity ξt=4.5±0.5 km/s that we determined from weak lines
agrees with the results obtained by Kameswara Rao et al. [5].

Figure 6b shows the iron abundance, log ǫ(Fe), as a function of the excitation potential χL of the
lower level of the corresponding transition. The dashed line shows the result of linear regression for
Fei lines with Wλ <240 m˚A (ﬁlled circles). At Tef f = 6250±150 K the iron abundance inferred from
weak Fei lines does not correlate signiﬁcantly with excitation potential. Our excitation temperature
is somewhat higher than the temperature Tef f =5850±200 K determined by Kameswara Rao et al.
[5], however, the discrepancy is insigniﬁcant given the errors of temperature determination.

The iron abundances determined from Fei and Feii lines agree within the measurement errors at
the surface gravity value of log g = 2.0 ± 0.2. For the given parameters of the atmosphere of QY Sge
the group of 66 weak Fei lines yields an average iron abundance of log ǫ(Fe)=7.64, which is 0.14 dex
higher than the solar value. The group of eight weak Feii lines yield the same iron abundance,
log ǫ(Fe)=7.64. It is evident from Fig. 6a that for parameters Tef f = 6250 K, log g = 2.0, and
ξt = 4.5 km/s of the model atmosphere of QY Sge the iron abundances determined from Fei and
Feii lines agree throughout the entire range of equivalent widths. Our result for the surface gravity,
log g=2.0, diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the log g=0.7 obtained by Kameswara Rao et al. [5], and this
fact appears to indicate that the luminosity of the star is lower than it has been so far believed.

Figure 7 compares the observed spectrum of QY Sge in the neighborhood of the Hβ line and the
theoretical spectrum computed with our atmospheric parameters using SynthV program [29]. The
good agreement between the two spectra, ﬁrst, shows that we have correctly chosen the fundamental
parameters of the atmosphere of QY Sge, and, second, disproves the hypothesis that QY Sge might
belong to the class of R CrB-type variables characterized by the underabundance of hydrogen in
their atmospheres.

The list of lines with measured equivalent widths and elemental abundances computed from
individual lines is available at http://ales.sao.ru/ftp/pub/ QYSge-lines.html. When computing the
chemical composition of the star we use, like in the case of the determination of its atmospheric
parameters, spectral lines with equivalent widths Wλ <240 m˚A. Table 3 lists the computed abun-
dances for various chemical elements in the atmosphere of QY Sge averaged over the entire set of
the lines employed. The same table also gives the standard deviations σ of elemental abundances
and the number of lines, “n”, used in the analysis. The dispersion serves as a good indicator of the
accuracy of observational data for elements with suﬃciently large number of lines. As is evident
from the table, the standard deviation usually does not exceed σ <0.27 dex in the cases where the
number of lines n > 8÷10. The factors that contribute to the errors of observational data include,
besides the errors of observational data, the uncertainty of the parameters of the adopted model
atmosphere. Table 4 lists the errors due to the uncertainty of the main parameters of the star.
As is evident from the table, the large abundance errors arise from the uncertainty of the inferred
eﬀective temperature, especially for the lines of neutral atoms with low excitation potentials. In
the case of ion lines the uncertainty of surface gravity, log g, is the dominating source of error. The
uncertainty of microturbulence velocity contributes only slightly to the abundance error, because
we use suﬃciently weak lines with Wλ <240 m˚A. One must bear in mind the following two circum-
stances: ﬁrst, parameters of the model atmosphere are not mutually independent (e.g., a change in
temperature entails a change in surface gravity), and, second, the determination of relative abun-
dances (with respect to iron) reduces the error due to the uncertainty of the parameters of the
model atmosphere.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

9

5. Discussion of results

5.1. Elemental abundances

As we pointed out above, the iron abundance in the atmosphere of QY Sge, [F e/H]⊙=+0.14, is
somewhat higher than the solar iron abundance. The overabundance of iron-peak elements is even
higher and reaches its maximum for manganese, [M n/H]⊙=+0.35, whereas the zinc abundance is
almost at the solar level, [Zn/H]⊙=+0.04. The average overabundance of the iron-peak elements
V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn is equal to [M et/H]⊙=+0.20. The good agreement between the
V and Cr abundances determined from the lines of neutral atoms and ions conﬁrms the correctness
of our determination of surface gravity.

We calculate the abundances of two elements – carbon and nitrogen – of the CNO group. We
determine the nitrogen abundance from the easily identiﬁable λ 7468 ˚A line, whereas the other
neutral nitrogen lines available in the recorded wavelength region are blended. We ﬁnd carbon and
nitrogen to be overabundant and the C/N ratio in the atmosphere of QY Sge to be close to its solar
value. Such a C/N ratio is indicative of dredge-up. The carbon abundance decreases as a result
of the dredge-up of the matter processed in the CNO cycle as convection develops after the star
leaves the main sequence. At the same time, nitrogen abundance increases and therefore the C/N
decreases. During subsequent evolution of the star the carbon abundance increases and nitrogen is
processed into heavier elements via nuclear synthesis reactions involving α particles. The C/N ratio
again increases during the dredge-up of the matter that participated in helium burning reactions.
It is possible that in the case of QY Sge we observe in the star’s atmosphere the matter processed
both during hydrogen burning in CNO and NeNa cycles and during the α-process.

The abundances of elements of the group of light metals are also, on the average, higher than
the corresponding solar abundances. The α-process elements Mg, Si, and Ca are only slightly
overabundant: on the average, [α/H]⊙=+0.12, whereas sulfur is somewhat more overabundant,
[S/α]=+0.29. The scandium abundance is equal to its solar value within the measurement errors.
Titanium, on the other hand, is underabundant, and its abundance determined from Tiii lines is
much lower than the solar value. Tii lines in the spectrum of QY Sge are very weak and measurement
errors are comparable to the equivalent widths. We hence consider the result obtained from Tiii,
namely [T i/H]⊙=−0.42, to be more reliable.

Among the light metals sodium is most overabundant: [N a/H]⊙=+0.89. The sodium overabun-
dance is often explained by the high sensitivity of the lines of this element to non-LTE eﬀects.
In the spectra of supergiants Nai lines are usually strongly enhanced compared to the LTE case
and therefore non-LTE corrections to the sodium abundance determined from individual lines may
reach −0.75 for supergiant stars [31]. We compute the Na abundance in the atmosphere of QY Sge
using the weak subordinate lines 5682, 5688, and 6160 ˚A, which are less sensitive to non-LTE eﬀects.
If computed with the non-LTE corrections adopted from [31] for the parameters of the atmosphere
of QY Sge, the sodium abundance is equal to [N a/H]⊙=+0.83, which agrees with the abundance
determined in terms of LTE approximation within the quoted errors. Hence the sodium overabun-
dance of [N a/F e]=+0.75 observed in the atmosphere of QY Sge is mostly due to the dredge-up of
the matter processed during the NeNa cycle of hydrogen burning.

The abundances of s- and r-process heavy elements do not allow unambiguous interpretation.
The s-process element Ba is overabundant relative to iron, [Ba/F e]=+0.33, whereas another s-
process element, Nd, is slightly underabundant, [N d/F e] = −0.18. One must bear in mind that
Baii lines are very strong in the spectrum of QY Sge and even the weakest of these lines located
at 5853 ˚A – we use its intensity to determine the barium abundance – has the equivalent width of
W5853=260 m˚A. Other, even stronger, lines yield even higher barium overabundance. The r-process
element Eu is also slightly overabundant, [Eu/F e]=+0.26. Yttrium forms in the course of both s-

10

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

and r-processes, however, this element is substantially underabundant in the atmosphere of QY Sge,
[Y /F e]=−0.82.

It is interesting that the atmosphere of QY Sge exhibits strong underabundance of two elements
– Y and Ti – characterized by the highest condensation temperature, Tcond ≈ 1600 K. We could
follow Kameswara Rao et al. [5] and assume that in the case of the star considered we observe
only the eﬀects of condensation of refractory elements. Such eﬀects are often observed in RV Tau-
type stars. However, this hypothesis is inconsistent, ﬁrst, with the close to solar zinc-to-scandium
abundance ratio, [Zn/Sc]=+0.05, whereas the Tcond values for these two elements diﬀer by almost
one thousand degrees. The same is also true for the zinc–calcium pair, [Zn/Ca]=−0.03, with equally
large diﬀerence of Tcond. Second, the high iron abundance is also indicative of the low eﬃciency of
condensation process in QY Sge.

5.2. The radial velocity pattern

The pattern of radial velocities Vr in the spectra of RV Tau-type stars is rather complex: it includes
orbital motion with periods ranging from several months to several years along with other types of
motions. For example, the orbital period of AC Her – a typical and well-studied RV Tau-type star
– Porb ≈ 1200d [32] is complemented by the pulsation component with a characteristic period of
Ppuls ≥ 20d, and also by the likely precession of the circumstellar disk (torus). It is evident that
long-term homogeneous spectroscopic monitoring needs to be performed on the time scales of all
the instability types mentioned above.

Our radial-velocity measurements based on the absorption spectrum of QY Sge conﬁrm and
extend the conclusion of Kameswara Rao et al. [5] about the variations of Vr both with time
and from one line to another. The available observational data are still insuﬃcient for directly
testing the hypothesis that QY Sge is an RV Tau-type object and/or a binary. At the same time, we
gathered new evidence in favor of the model suggested by Menzies and Whitelock [4] and elaborated
by Kameswara Rao et al. [5]. According to this model, a substantial part of the star’s radiation
accessible for us (if not the entire radiation) originates from the inner parts of a toroidal dust shell.
The kinematic situation in the visible part of the torus determines the width and shift of the line
as a whole, whereas the hypothesis of inhomogeneous dust density distribution is to be invoked to
explain the discrete components of the “ragged” proﬁle of the line (see Fig. 3).

Although the IR colors of the object are similar to those observed in OH/IR stars, the radio
spectrum of QY Sge lacks the spectral features inherent to these objects [34, 33], which would
allow us to determine the systemic velocity. To a ﬁrst approximation, the systemic velocity can be
determined from the available data by the position of the narrow emission component of Nai. We
can assume that it forms in the peripheric regions of the envelope with low velocity gradients and is
therefore symmetric, free of wind-induced deformations, and stationary. However, in this case two
eﬀects are diﬃcult to explain: the variation of the intensity of the narrow emission component over
a one-year time scale (Fig. 5) and the decrease of this intensity with the distance from the center of
the star’s image proportionally to the decrease of continuum ﬂux (Fig. 4). Within the accuracy of
measurements the velocity inferred from this narrow emission is equal to Vr=−21.1 km/s. We adopt
this value as our ﬁrst approximation to systemic velocity Vsys. The conclusion that the wide Nai
emission is radiated by an extended envelope that spans far beyond the torus follows both from the
lower polarization in this emission compared to the neighboring continuum [42] and the constancy
of the radial velocity determined from the base of the proﬁle. The mean velocity Vr=−32.4 km/s
of the broad emission is also stable within the measurement errors. The assumption that both
Na D emission features form in the circumstellar envelope leads us to conclude that the envelope is
nonuniform.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

11

The model of Kameswara Rao et al. [5] leaves a number of questions unanswered that concern,
ﬁrst, the existence of emission features whose widths diﬀer by one order of magnitude and, second,
the mutual shift of the broad and narrow emission components of Na D.

Note that the model of the QY Sge proposed by Kameswara Rao et al. [5] is not the only one
possible. The peculiarities of the observed optical spectrum mentioned above can also be explained
in terms of a model of a binary system without a torus. A similar set of spectral features may
form in the extended and inhomogeneous atmosphere of a supergiant star outﬂowing via stellar
wind. Adopting the model of an optically thick torus makes it impossible to estimate the distance to
QY Sge via standard spectral-and-photometric method, however, it allows us to avoid the diﬃculties
associated with this method. We may limit the heliocentric distance to only several hundred parsecs
[5] instead of the 9–36 kpc, inferred using the method just described by Menzies and Whitelock [4].

5.3. Whether QY Sge is an RV Tau-type star

Kameswara Rao et al. [5] are inclined to believe, based on the inferred parameters Tef f and log g
and the detailed analysis of its chemical composition, that QY Sge is an RV Tau-type star. Maas
et al. [35], who analyzed the chemical composition of a sample of pulsating RV Tau-type stars,
later used the results of Kameswara Rao et al. [5] within the framework of the same criterion. The
chemical composition of QY Sge determined from the data obtained by Kameswara Rao et al. [5]
indeed resembles the elemental abundances in the atmospheres of pulsating long-period variables.
Such objects are usually only slightly metal underabundant. Given that the underabundance of
metals is partially due to selective condensation of metal nuclei onto dust grains, the metallicity of
RV Tau-type stars can be considered to be close to the metallicity of stars of the Galactic disk. It
follows from the compilation in Table 9 from [35], that for classic RV Tau-type stars the initial (i.e.,
corrected for the eﬀect of condensation) metallicity is equal, on the average, to [F e/H]⊙ ≈ −0.5.
The mean “corrected” metallicity, [F e/H]⊙ ≈ −0.2, determined by Maas et al. [35] for a sample
of stars with IR excess (including QY Sge) which in the diagram of IR colors are located in the
domain of RV Tau-type stars, is even closer to the solar value.

However, the chemical composition similar to that observed in RV Tau-type stars is not unique.
The same pattern of elemental abundances – weak metal underabundance, nonstandard abundances
of CNO and α-process elements, underabundance (in extremely rare cases, overabundance) of heavy
metals – can be found among the post-AGB supergiants studied, which do not belong to RV Tau-
type stars. Examples include the post-AGB stars HD 161796 and HD 331319 [36] or HD 133656
[37]. RV Tau-type stars display a wide variety of chemical-composition peculiarities, because they
are determined both by the subtype of the Galactic population they belong to and by the initial
mass and subsequent evolution of each particular star. Earlier, Wallerstein [38] also pointed out
that metallicity (and chemical-composition peculiarities as a whole) of RV Tau-type stars is not the
fundamental parameter that would allow a particular star to be attributed to this type. Hence the
metallicity parameter or chemical composition as a whole do not allow us to classify QY Sge as an
RV Tau-type star.

Shocks are known to propagate in the atmospheres of pulsating stars and the main indicators
of these shocks are the blueshifted emission in hydrogen lines and asymmetric (or split) metal
absorptions [39]. This can be illustrated by the spectrum of AC Her. However, the spectrum of
QY Sge does not exhibit such features even if taken with a resolution of R = 60000, and this fact
too casts doubt on the hypothesis that QY Sge may be an RV Tau-type star. The fact that the
spectra of RV Tau-type stars lack wide Nai and Ki D-line emissions provides yet another piece of
evidence that is inconsistent with QY Sge being an RV Tau-type star.

12

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

5.4. Whether QY Sge is an R CrB-type star

Wide emission components of the lines of the sodium doublet allows us to consider the possibility of
including QY Sge into the so far small group of stars with such a spectral peculiarity (R CrB-type
and selected post-AGB-type stars). A good example is provided by UW Cen, which is an R CrB-
type star whose spectrum at minimum light shows a Nai D line proﬁle with both a broad and
narrow emission components [18]. The broad Nai emission in the spectrum of UW Cen [18], like in
the spectrum of QY Sge, is blueshifted relative to the narrow component. There are other examples
as well: S Aps [19], V854 Cen [40], and Z UMi [41]. It is important that both these components show
up only when the star is at minimum light and are absent at maximum light. Note that emissions
in the spectrum of QY Sge have been observed at all observational epochs over six years, but no
deep minima have been recorded (the only light variability known is that with a low amplitude
and a period of about 50 days [4]). Hence, so far no evidence is available that would be indicative
of QY Sge to satisfy the main criterion of R CrB-type stars – sporadic dust ejections resulting in
a substantial decrease of the star’s apparent brightness. The second feature diﬀerent for QY Sge-
and R CrB-type stars is the Doppler widths of the high-velocity emission components of the Nai
doublet. These components in the spectra of R CrB-type stars are variable and so broad that they
mutually overlap [20], whereas no such behavior is observed in the spectrum of QY Sge.

Third, the pattern of polarization of the emission components also diﬀers in the two cases. It
follows from spectropolarimetric observations [42] made with a resolution no higher than R=1000,
the spectrum of QY Sge shows a decrease of the degree of linear polarization down to the interstellar
level (emission becomes absorption as one passes from the energy distribution to the distribution
of polarization degree). Such a reversal indicates that in the case of QY Sge the Nai emission
forms outside the medium that polarizes the radiation of the photosphere. R CrB shows a totally
diﬀerent pattern. We observed this object with the spectropolarimeter of the primary focus of
the 6-m telescope of SAO RAS [43] with a resolution of R=15000 when the star was in a state
close to minimum light. Figure 8 reproduces the ﬁgure from [43], implying that broad and narrow
components of the Nai resonance doublet in the spectrum of R CrB disappeared in the wavelength
dependence of the polarization degree, and polarization degree (1.5–2%) in the vicinity of the
doublet is the same as in other portions of the spectrum. Note that before our observations [43]
only the polarization characteristics of broad emissions were known, whereas narrow emissions were
not observed because of the insuﬃcient spectral resolution. Figure 8 leads us to conclude that the
polarizing factor is located between the observer and the formation regions of the spectra of E2+BL
(classiﬁcation of the spectra of stars of R CrB type according to Clayton [44]). Hence QY Sge diﬀers
from R CrB also in spectropolarimetric characteristics of the sodium resonance doublet. Moreover,
as we pointed out above, the Hβ line in the spectrum of QY Sge corresponds to normal hydrogen
abundance (see Fig. 7), and this fact also disproves the R CrB-type classiﬁcation of QY Sge.

5.5. Comparison with V510 Pup

Let us now compare the spectral peculiarities of QY Sge with the spectrum of the post-AGB
star V510 Pup (it is the optical component of the IR source IRAS 08005-2356), which was also
found to exhibit an emission feature in Na D [45]. Despite this similarity, the spectra of QY Sge
and V510 Pup diﬀer substantially and their diﬀerences, which are evidently due to the diﬀerences
between the structure and geometry of the two systems. As is evident from Figs. 4 and 5, the
Na D emission in the spectrum of QY Sge is extremely strong and exceeds the continuum level
by a factor of four to ﬁve. The intensity of the emission in the spectrum of V510 Pup does not
exceed 1.5 continuum intensities. This diﬀerence is of no fundamental importance, because it can
be explained by diﬀerent degree of shielding of the radiation of the central star. Unlike QY Sge,

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

13

spectropolarimetric observations of V510 Pup do not show the decrease of polarization in the Na D
lines, at least in low-resolution polarization spectra [42].

Trammel et al. [42] conclude that Balmer emissions in the spectrum of V510 Pup form in the
vicinity of the star before the scattering on the dust component. The velocities measured from Nai D
emissions and hydrogen lines for V510 Pup agree with each other [45], allowing us to preliminary
conclude that the Na D emission also forms near the star. The same conclusion can be made
for QY Sge: although the absorption proﬁle of Hα is almost completely ﬂooded by the emission,
spectropolarimetry does not reveal unpolarized Hα emission. Note also that the pattern of the
variation of the polarization degree over a wide wavelength region also diﬀers for these stars. In the
spectrum of V510 Pup the polarization degree decreases with increasing wavelength [42], and this
fact is interpreted as the domination of scattered radiation in the blue part of the spectrum and
partial transparency in the red emission of the disk (torus) that hides the star. In the spectrum of
QY Sge the polarization degree increases with wavelength, suggesting higher scattering multiplicity
at blue wavelengths and disk opaqueness at red wavelengths [42]. On the whole, the conclusions
based on the analysis of the polarization pattern are consistent with the results of the comparison
of the intensities of Na D: in the case of QY Sge we appear to observe the star only indirectly, and
the contribution of high-velocity components of the shell dominates. The absence of polarization
in Nai lines in the spectrum of V510 Pup can be interpreted as being due to the low contribution
of emission compared to the radiation of the photosphere. This contribution is undetectable by
low-resolution spectropolarimetry. Hence the formation regions of the Na D emission may have the
same geometry in QY Sge and V510 Pup, but the localization of the Balmer emission near the
V510 Pup star does not imply the same localization of the Na D emission.

However, one must admit that the emission feature in Na D cannot be viewed as indicative of the
object belonging to a certain type of stars or to a ﬁxed stage of evolution. Recall that a very strong
and variable emission component of Nai D lines is observed in the spectra of such diﬀerent stars as
the unique star FG Sge [46], which has lost virtually all its atmosphere in the process of evolution,
and the B[e] star CI Cam [47, 48], which is the optical component of an X-ray transient. Emission in
resonance line is rather indicative of the gas-and-dust circumstellar medium with a set of physical
parameters over a wide interval. However, if combined with spectropolarimetric observations, the
data on the high-velocity motions in the vicinity of the star as inferred from the Nai D resonance
doublet allows one to test the hypotheses concerning the geometry of the system.

6. Conclusions

The results of repeated spectroscopic observations (with the resolutions of R=15000 and 60000)
of the yellow supergiant QY Sge (the IR source IRAS 20056+1834) made with the 6-m telescope
of SAO RAS lead us to conclude that the radial velocities measured from lines forming in the
photosphere are variable. We revealed diﬀerential line shifts amounting to 10 km/s.

The complex emission-and-absorption proﬁle of Nai D lines invariably contains a very wide emis-
sion component (it extends from −170 to +120 km/s). The wide emission is cut at its central
part by an absorption feature, which, in turn, is parted into two by an overlapping (16 km/s at
r = 2.5) emission peak. The positions of Nai D emission features remain unchanged and this fact
indicates that they form in the regions that are external to the photosphere of the supergiant. The
Vr dataset allows setting the systemic radial velocity equal to Vr=−21.1 km/s, which corresponds
to the position of the narrow emission component of Nai D.

Emission in the Hα line ﬂoods the photospheric absorption almost completely.
The pattern of the variation of the proﬁles of emission and absorption lines and radial velocities
measured from diﬀerent details of the proﬁles is consistent with the model of a toroidal dust envelope

14

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

that hides the central source and bipolar cones ﬁlled with high-velocity gas. Both in the emission
and absorption features we revealed details indicative of the spatial and temporal inhomogeneities
in the dust and gaseous components of the object.

Absorption lines in the spectrum of QY Sge have a considerable width F W HM ≈ 45 km/s,
which complicates substantially the analysis of the chemical composition. We used the method of
model atmospheres to determine the following parameters: eﬀective temperature Tef f = 6250 ±
150 K, surface gravity log g=2.0±0.2, and microturbulence velocity ξt=4.5±0.5 km/s. The chemical
composition of the star’s atmosphere diﬀers insigniﬁcantly from the solar composition: we ﬁnd the
star’s metallicity to be somewhat higher than the solar value with the mean overabundance of
iron-peak elements V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn equal to [M et/H]⊙=+0.20. We also found
carbon and nitrogen to be slightly overabundant – [C/F e]=+0.25 and [N/F e]=+0.27 – with the
C/N ratio close to its solar value. The α-process elements Mg, Si, and Ca are slightly overabundant
and their average relative abundance is equal to [α/H]⊙=+0.12, while sulfur is more overabundant,
[S/α]=+0.29. We found strong sodium overabundance, [N a/H]⊙=+0.75, which appears to be due
to the dredge-up of the matter processed in the NeNa–cycle. The abundances of heavy s-process
elements are lower than the corresponding solar abundances.

On the whole, so far the observed properties of QY Sge do not give grounds to consider it as an
R CrB– or RV Tau–type star. We point out the following especially important aspects besides the
evident need for continuing the spectroscopy of QY Sge on a more regular basis:

– the S/N ratio must further be increased while maintaining the already achieved spectral resolution
in order to more conﬁdently outline the details of complex and variable proﬁles of absorption
lines;

– it is desirable to use high-resolution spectropolarimetry, which would, in particular, help to reﬁne
the locations of the formation regions of individual components of the emission-and-absorption
Nai D lines and other features;

– extremely valuable data on the geometry and kinematics of the system can be provided by (high
angular resolution) spectra of suﬃciently bright peripheric regions of the dust envelope, which
make it possible to “come close” to the object and see its central part at diﬀerent angles.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the program “Observed manifestations of the evolution of the
chemical composition of stars and of the Galaxy” funded by the Presidium of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, the program “Extended objects in the Universe” funded by the Division
of Physical Sciences of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and by the Civil Research and
Development Foundation (CRDF, project RUP1–2687–NA–05). The work is supported by the
Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 07-02-00247). Our research made use of
SIMBAD and VALD databases and ALADIN interactive sky atlas of the Strassbourgh CDS.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

15

References

1. P. N. Kholopov, N. N. Samus’, M. S. Frolov, et al., General Catalogue of Variable Stars, Edition 4.1, 1998.

http://www.sai.msu.su/groups/cluster/gcvs/gcvs.

2. T. M. Gledhill, A. Chrysostomou, J. H. Hough, and J. A. Yates. MNRAS, 322, 321, 2001.

3. T. M. Gledhill, I. Bains, and J. A. Yates. MNRAS, 332, L55, 2002.

4. J. W. Menzies and P. A. Whitelock. MNRAS, 233, 697, 1988.

5. N. Kameswara Rao, A. Goswami, and D. L. Lambert. MNRAS, 334, 129, 2002.

6. V. E. Panchuk, J. D. Najdenov, V. G. Klochkova, et al. Bull. Spec. Astrophys. Observ., 44, 127, 1998.

7. V. E. Panchuk, V. G. Klochkova, and I. D. Naidenov. Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 135, 1999.

8. V. G. Klochkova, S. V. Ermakov, V. E. Panchuk, et al., Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 137, 1999.

9. V. E. Panchuk, M. Y. Yushkin, and I. D. Naidenov. Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 179, 2003.

10. V. E. Panchuk, N. E. Piskunov, V. G. Klochkova, et al. Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 169, 2002.

11. A. A. Ivanov, V. E. Panchuk, and V. S. Shergin. Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 155 2001.

12. M. V. Yushkin and V. G. Klochkova. Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Observ., No. 206, 2005.

13. A. K. Pierce and J. B. Breckinridge, Contrib. Kitt Peak Obs. No. 559, 1973.

14. J. van Blerkom and D. van Blerkom, Astrophys. J. 225, 482, 1978.

15. G. Wallerstein, Astrophys. J. 211, 170, 1977.

16. L. B. F. M. Waters, C. Waelkens, M. Mayor, and N. R. Trams. A&A, 269, 242, 1993.

17. E. J. Bakker, F. L. A. van der Wolf, H. J. G. L. Lamers, et al., A&A, 306, 924, 1996.

18. N. Kameswara Rao, B. E. Reddy, and D. L. Lambert. MNRAS, 355, 855 (2004).

19. A. Goswami, N. Kameswara Rao, D. L. Lambert, and V. V. Smith. PASP, 109, 270, 1997.

20. N. Kameswara Rao, D. L. Lambert, and M. D. Shetrone. MNRAS, 370, 941, 2006.

21. T. Kipper and V. Klochkova, Inform. Bul. Var. Stars No. 4346, 1, 1996.

22. C. S. Beals, Pub. Dom. Astrophys. Obs. Victoria 9, 1, 1950.

23. J. Brand and L. Blitz, A&A, 275, 67, 1993.

24. V. G. Klochkova, R. Szczerba, and V. E. Panchuk. Astron. Lett. 26, 439, 2000.

25. V. G. Klochkova, V. E. Panchuk, M. V. Yushkin, and A. S. Miroshnichenko. Astron. Rep. 48, 288, 2004.

26. R. L. Kurucz, CD-ROM No. 23 Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, MA, 1993.

27. N. E. Piskunov, F. Kupka, and T. A. Ryabchikova. A&ASuppl, 112, 525, 1995.

28. L. S. Lyubimkov, Khimicheskij sostav zvezd: metody i rezultaty analiza, (Odessa, Astroprint, 1995).

29. D. Shulyak, V. Tsymbal, T. Ryabchikova, et al.,

30. N. Grevesse, A. Noels, and A. J. Sauval. ASP Conf. Ser 99, 117, 1996.

31. L. I. Mashonkina, V. V. Shimanskij, N. A. Sakhibullin. Astron. Rep. 44, 790, 2000.

32. H. van Winckel, C. Waelkens, L. B. F. M. Waters, B. F. M. Laurens, F. Molster, S. Udry, E. J. Bakker,

A&A, 336, L17, 1998.

33. A. M. Le Squeren, P. Sivagnanam, M. Dennefeld, and P. David. A&A, 254, 133, 1992.

34. B. M. Lewis, J. Eder, and Y. Terzian. AJ, 94, 1025, 1987.

35. T. Maas, H. van Winckel, and T. Lloyd Evans. A&A, 429, 297, 2005.

16

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

Table 1. Log of observations of QY Sge, residual intensities “r” and heliocentric radial velocities
for diﬀerent groups of lines. Uncertain values are printed in italics

Date
Spectrograph
∆λ, nm
FeI (15)
r
Vr
∆Vr
rmax
Vr
D2, Nai (1)
narrow emission
r
Vr
wide emission
r
Vr
absorption
r
Vr
∆Vr
Hα
absorption
r
Vr

10.07.98
PFES
400–770

14.07.98
NES
500–590

27-30.07.02
NES
480–670

16.08.03
NES
530–660

28.08.04
NES
530–660

−
0.52
–9
–8
− –27, +29
−
−

0.90
–21

0.53
–10
–27, +24
0.86
–14

0.61
–3
–23, +27
0.93
–3

0.56
–13
–34, +24
0.86
–25

3.2
–22

2.8
–33

1.6
–18
–

0.73
–23

5.7
–21

2.8
–31

0.4
–17
–70

−
−

4.9
–21

2.8
–33

0.1
–17
–80

5.0
–21

3.0
–32

0.1
–17
–75

0.75
–17

0.79
–13

5.9
–21

3.2
–33

0.1
–18
–80

0.89
–30

36. V. G. Klochkova, V. E. Panchuk, and N. S. Tavolzhanskaya. Astron. Lett. 28, 49 (2002).

37. H. van Winckel, R. D. Oudmaijer, and N. R. Trams, A&A, 312, 553, 1996.

38. G. Wallerstein. PASP, 114, 689, 2002.

39. D. Gillet, G. Burki, and A. Duguennoy. A&A, 237, 159, 1990.

40. N. Kameswara Rao and D. L. Lambert. AJ, 105, 1915, 1993.

41. A. Goswami, N. Kameswara Rao, and D. L. Lambert. The Observatory, 119, 22, 1999.

42. S. Trammell, H. L. Dinerstein, and R. W. Goodrich. AJ, 108, 984, 1994.

43. V. E. Panchuk, V. G. Kotova, N. S. Yushnkin, et al. 2001, Preprint Spec. Astrophys. Obs. No. 159, 2001.

44. G. C. Clayton. PASP 108, 225, 1996.

45. V. G. Klochkova and E. L. Chentsov. Astron. Rep. 48, 301, 2004.

46. T. Kipper, M. Kipper, and V. G. Klochkova. A&A, 297, L33, 1995.

47. A. S. Miroshnichenko, V. G. Klochkova, K. S. Bjorkman, and V. E. Panchuk. A&A, 390, 627, 2002.

48. R. I. Hynes, J. S. Clark, E. A. Barsukova, et al. A&A, 392, 991, 2002.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

17

r (Hα)

1.4

1.0

0.6

SiII
6555

TiII
6560

FeI
6569

r (NaI)

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

-500

0

500

Vr, km/s

Figure 1. From top to bottom: Nai 5890 ˚A and Hα line proﬁles in the spectrum of QY Sge taken
on August 28, 2004 and the proﬁle of the Hα line in the spectrum of α Per. Telluric absorptions
and the central Nai emission are removed and the proﬁles are smoothed. The r scales for the Hα
and Nai lines are shown on the left and right, respectively.

18

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

r

V

0

-10

-20

-30

0.9

0.8

0.7
r

0.6

0.5

Figure 2. Heliocentric radial velocity as a function of the central residual line intensity in the
spectra of QY Sge taken in 2003 (top) and 2004 (bottom, the crosses and squares show the Vr
values inferred from the entire lines and their cores, respectively).

r

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

Fe I (5371, 5405, 5429, 5434)

 27,28.07.02
 16.08.03
 28.08.04 

-80

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

Vr, km/s

Figure 3. Comparison of the averaged proﬁles of the Fei (15) group of lines in the spectra taken in
2002, 2003, and 2004.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

19

0.0"
0.6"
1.2"

(a)

(b)

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100
Vr , km/s

r (D1)

5

4

3

2

1

0
r (D2)

5

4

3

2

1

0

Figure 4. Proﬁles of the Nai D1 (top) and D2 (bottom) lines in the spectrum of QY Sge (observed
on August 16, 2003) at diﬀerent distances from the center of the star’s image.

20

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

r

5

4

3

2

1

0
-200

-100

0

100
Vr, km/s

Figure 5. Temporal variations of the proﬁle of the Nai D2 line in the spectrum of QY Sge. The
dotted, dashed, and solid lines show the data for 2002, 2003, and 2004, respectively. Telluric ab-
sorptions are removed and the proﬁles are smoothed.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

21

Teff = 6250K, lg g = 2.0, ξ

t = 4.5km/s

0

100

200

300

400

Fe I  ξ

t=4.5

Fe I  Wλ<240mÅ

Fe II

Fe II  Wλ<240mÅ

Wλ (mÅ)

Fe I ξ

t=4.5

Fe I  Wλ<240mÅ

Fe II

Fe II  Wλ<240mÅ

)
e
F
(

ε

)
e
F
(

ε

-3

-4

-5

-3

-4

-5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

χ
L (eV)

Figure 6. Iron abundances, log ǫ(F e), determined from Fei and Feii lines as a function of: (a)
equivalent line width Wλ and (b) excitation potential χL of the lower level.

 
 
 
 
 
 
22

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

rλ

1.0

0.5

0.0

I
e
F

I
e
F

I
I
r

C

I
I
i

T

I
I
e
F

I
I
r

C

I
e
F

I
I
r

C

β
H

I
I
r

C

I
I
i

T

I
i

N

I
o
C

I
I
e
F

I
e
F

I
e
F

I
I
i

T

I
I
r

C

I
e
F

4850

4860
Wavelength, Å

4870

Figure 7. Comparison of the observed (the solid line) spectrum of QY Sge in the region of Hβ
line and the theoretical spectrum computed with parameters Tef f = 6250 K, log g = 2.0, and
ξt = 4.5 km/s and metallicity [Fe/H]=0.

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

23

10000

8000

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

6000

4000

2000

%

,
p

0

8

6

4

2

0

a

b

5860

5880

5900

5920

Wavelength, Å

Figure 8. Observations of R CrB at minimum light 43: (a) the portion of the spectrum near NaiD,
(b) the polarization spectrum P, % in the same wavelength region.

 
24

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

Table 2. Identiﬁcation of the spectrum of QY Sge and measurements of the central residual inten-
sity r and heliocentric radial velocity Vr, km/s, based on diﬀerent spectral features. See text for
explanation. Uncertain values are listed in italics

Line
MnI(2)
MnI(2)
Hδ
TiII(105)
SrII(1)
FeI(152)
FeI(152)
CrI(1)
CrI(1)
CaI(5)
Hγ
FeI(41)
FeI(350)
FeI(68)
FeII(38)
FeII(37)
BaII(1)
FeII(38)
CrII(44)
TiII(50)
FeI(39)
FeII(37)
FeI(820)
MgI(11)
FeII(43)
FeI(38)
FeI(554)
MnI(16)
FeI(821)
TiII(92)
MnI(16)
TiII(92)
Hβ
FeI(318)
FeI(318)
FeII(42)
1

λ
4030.75
4034.48
4101.74
4163.65
4215.52
4222.21
4235.93
4254.33
4274.80
4318.65
4340.47
4404.75
4476.04
4494.57
4508.28
4520.22
4554.03
4576.33
4588.20
4589.95
4602.94
4629.33
4643.46
4702.99
4731.47
4733.59
4736.78
4754.04
4768.33
4779.98
4783.42
4805.09
4861.33
4878.20
4920.50
4923.92
2

1998

r

Vr
0.28 − 18
−13
0.43
−18
0.20
−12
0.62
−14
0.41
−10
0.64
−11
0.39
−5
0.59
−4
0 .50
−12
0.79
−12
0.23
−8
0.38
−13
0.74
−13
0.58
−9
0.67
−9
0.63
−4
0.55
−9
0.70
−11
0.71
−8
0.75
−11
0.72
−10
0.70
−9
0.86
−19
0.70
−11
0.67
−9
0.77
−10
0.68
−9
0.77
−10
0.81
−15
0.79
−7
0.78
−13
0.75
−9
0.35
−11
0.72
−12
0.63
−5
0.54
4
3

2002

r

Vr

2003
r Vr

2004
r Vr

0.30 −10
0.65 −14
−7
0.50
−9
0.39
6
5

7

8

9

10

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

25

2002

r

Vr

2003

r

Vr

2004

r

Vr

1998

r

Vr
0.84 −17
0.55 −13
0.83 −12
0.75 −17
0.88 −13
0.83 −13
0.83 −15
0.71 −12
0.56 −21
0.81 −14
0.70 −16
0.70 −14

−9
0.80
−9
0.50
−6
0.69
0.75 −14
−9
0 .5
−2
0 .5
0 .5 −14
0.55 −10
−2
0.52
−9
0.78

0.70 −13
0.61 −12
0.64 −10
0.74 −12
0.93 −17

0.43

−9

0.80 −13

0.74 −14
−5
0.56
0.36 −12

0.65 −11
0.70 −10

0.42 −10
−5
0.56

−9
0.49
−1
0.47
−9
0.35
−6
0.50
−3
0.44
0.69 −13
0.56 −10

0.55 −10
0.72 −12

Line
CI(13)
BaII(1)
FeI(687)
FeI(687)
FeI(984)
FeI(966)
NiI(112)
FeI(16)
FeII(42)
ScII(23)
FeI(114)
FeI(1)
FeI(383)
FeI(1094)
FeI(1)
FeI(16)
FeI(1089)
FeI(1)
MgI(2)
FeII(42)
MgI(2)
MgI(2)
FeI(66)
FeI(383)
FeII(49)
FeI(1)
FeII(49)
FeI(383)
FeI(929)
FeI(553)
CrII(24)
CrII(43)
FeII
FeI(553)
FeI(37)
FeI(1062)
FeII(48)
FeI(1146)
FeI(15)
FeI(15)
FeI(15)
CrII(23)
1

λ
4932.05
4934.08
4950.11
4966.09
4973.11
4978.60
4980.18
5012.07
5018.44
5031.02
5049.83
5060.08
5068.76
5074.75
5110.41
5127.36
5162.27
5166.28
5167.32
5169.03
5172.68
5183.61
5202.33
5232.94
5234.62
5247.06
5254.93
5281.79
5288.53
5302.30
5305.86
5313.58
5316.65
5324.18
5341.03
5353.38
5362.86
5367.47
5371.48
5397.12
5405.77
5420.93
2

0.84 −12

0.78 −16

−6
0.66
0.85 −10

−9
0.52
0.64 −13
0.61 −12

0.75 −16

0.59 −12

0.62 −12
−9
0.64
0.64 −10

−8
0.52
0.53 −10
−9
0.54

0.78 −4

0.76 −3
0.83 −3
0.81 −2
0.55 −3
0.69 −3
0.65 −5

0.65 −2
0.74 −4
0.60 −3
0.65 −4
0.61 −3

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.56 −17
0.55 −20

0.78 −19
0.58 −15

0.50 −15

0.53 −12
0.72 −25
10

9

26

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

Line
FeI(15)
FeI(15)
FeI(1144)
FeI(1163)
FeI(15)
FeI(15)
FeI(15)
CrII(50)
ScII(31)
MgI(9)
FeI(1183)
FeI(686)
FeI(686)
FeI(686)
FeI(1314)
SiI(10)
ScII(29)
ScII(29)
NaI(6)
FeI(1107)
SiI(17)
SiI(9)
CI(18)
FeI(982)
BaII(2)
NaI(1)

λ
5429.70
5434.53
5441.34
5445.05
5455.61
5497.51
5506.78
5508.62
5526.82
5528.40
5565.71
5572.84
5586.76
5615.65
5633.95
5645.61
5669.03
5684.19
5688.21
5763.00
5772.15
5793.07
5800.59
5809.22
5853.68
5889.95

NaI(1)

5895.92

SiI(16)
FeII(46)
CI
NiI(27)
FeI(1187)
FeI(1018)
FeI(1259)
FeI(207)
CaI(3)
BaII(2)
CaI(3)
FeI(62)
FeI(62)
1

5948.54
5991.37
6014.85
6016.64
6024.06
6027.05
6056.01
6065.49
6122.22
6141.72
6162.17
6173.34
6219.29
2

1998

2002

r
0.64
0.68

Vr
−8
−7

r
0.52

Vr
−9

0.76 −12

−9
0.57
0.68 −10

2004

r

Vr
0.54 −14
0.56 −17

0.74 −21

0.65 −19
0.67 −17

0.61 −14
0.82 −19

0.62 −22

0.76 −22

2003

Vr
r
−3
0.60
−2
0.64
0.93 −3

0.69

−2

0.82 −3
−2
0.74
−4
0.66

0.72 −2
−2
0.72
0.64 −3

0.64 −14

0.63 −11

0.86 −11

0.82 −12

0.87 −1

0.74 −11
0.81 −14

0.76 −4

0.91 −3

4.9 −21
0.2 −17
4.2 −21
0.3 −17

4.8 −21
0.2 −17
4.2 −21
0.4 −17

6.0 −21
0.2 −18
5.4 −21
0.3 −18

0.72 −12
0.89 −11
−9
0.74

0.89 −11
0.94 −15
0.87 −16

0.76 −15

0.92 −16

0.94 −15
0.92 −16
−9
0.79
3.3 −22
1.7 −18
3.0 −21
1.8 −18
0.86 −11
0.86 −16
0.95 −17

0.89 −16

0.81 −16
−7
0.70

0.86 −14
0.84 −13
0.73 −13
0.72 −12
−8
0.52

0.85 −16
4

3

5

6

−4
0.90
−3
0.86
0.90 −1

−1
0.83
−2
0.77
−3
0.61
−2
0.76
0.91 −2
0.84 −3
8

7

0.82 −24

0.75 −21
0.62 −14

9

10

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

27

1998

r
0.83

Vr
−20

2002

2003

2004

r

Vr

r

Vr

r

Vr

Line
FeI(207)
FeI(169)
FeI(111)
FeI(169)
FeI(62)
FeI(342)
FeI(169)
SiII(2)
FeII(40)
SiII(2)
FeI(168)
FeI(816)
FeI(816)
FeII(74)
FeI(111)
FeI(62)
FeII(40)
CaI(18)
CaI(19)
FeII(74)
CaI(18)
Hα

FeI(1253)
CI(22)
TiII(91)
FeI(206)
CI
FeI(268)
CaI(32)
CI
KI(1)
KI(1)
1

λ
6230.73
6252.56
6254.26
6256.37
6265.14
6270.23
6344.15
6347.10
6369.46
6371.36
6393.61
6400.01
6411.66
6416.92
6421.36
6430.85
6432.68
6439.08
6449.82
6456.38
6471.66
6562.81

6569.22
6587.61
6606.95
6609.12
6655.51
6677.99
6717.69
7115.19
7664.87
7698.97
2

0.88

−22

0.85

−15

0.80

−15

0.72

−11

0.86 −23
−18
0.87

0.78 −13
−11
0.76

0.87
0.86
0.84

−23
−17
−20

−12
0.79
0.75 −15
0.73 −11

0.76 −11
0.73 −13
−12
0.84
−13
0.67
−18
0.85
0.76 −180
−13
0.72
0.83 −12

0.77
0.88

−12
−12

0.84 −20
−20
0.75
−15
0.84
−15
0.74
−20
0.90
0.75 −165
−23
0.73

0.87 −28

0.92 −19
0.95 −14

0.90 −17
0.86 −26
−22
1.6
−25
1.6
4
3

0.82
0.81

−24
−26

0.83 −23
0.83 −27

0.75

−21

0.71

−25

0.78
0.72
0.82
0.67

−20
−21
−20
−21

0.75 −150
−26
0.81

0.85
0.82
0.86
0.87

0.93
0.72
0.85
0.80

0.80

0.82
0.79
0.77

0.70

−3
−3
−2
−1

−4
−6
−3
−6

−1

−3
−2
−2

−3

0.81 −95
0.74 −11
−3
0.87

0.93

−2

5

6

7

8

9

10

28

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

Table 3. Elemental abundances ǫ(X) in the atmosphere of QY Sge. Here σ is the dispersion of
abundances and n, the number of lines that were used in the computations. We adopt the elemental
abundances ǫ(X)⊙ in the solar atmosphere from [30]

X
Ci
Ni
Nai
Mgi
Sii
Si
Cai
Scii
Tii
Tiii
Vi
Vii
Cri
Crii
Mni
Fei
Feii
Coi
Nii
Cui
Zni
Yii
Baii
Ndii
Euii

4.00

8.55
7.97
6.33
7.58
7.55
7.21
6.36
3.17
5.02

ǫ(X)⊙ ǫ(X)
8.94
8.38
7.22
7.74
7.71
7.62
6.43
3.16
4.84
4.60
4.20
4.16
5.95
6.05
5.74
7.64
7.64
5.10
6.49
4.38
4.64
1.56
2.60
1.46
0.91

4.92
6.25
4.21
4.60
2.24
2.13
1.50
0.51

5.39
7.50

5.67

σ
0.09

0.09
0.03
0.23
0.09
0.12
0.22
0.10
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.24
0.19
0.05
0.18
0.26
0.06
0.19

0.12
0.03

0.28
0.04

n
9
1
3
2
21
4
8
5
3
4
2
3
5
9
3
66
8
2
12
1
2
3
1
3
2

[X/H]⊙ [X/F e]
+0.25
+0.27
+0.75
+0.00
+0.02
+0.27
−0.07
−0.15
−0.32
−0.56
+0.06
+0.02
+0.14
+0.24
+0.21
–
–
+0.04
+0.10
+0.03
−0.10
−0.82
+0.33
−0.18
+0.26

+0.39
+0.41
+0.89
+0.14
+0.16
+0.41
+0.07
−0.01
−0.18
−0.42
+0.20
+0.16
+0.28
+0.38
+0.35
+0.14
+0.14
+0.18
+0.24
+0.17
+0.04
−0.68
+0.47
−0.04
+0.40

Klochkova et al.: Evolutionary stage of QY Sge

29

Table 4. Errors of the computed abundances of various chemical elements in the atmosphere of
QY Sge ∆ log ǫ(X), due to the uncertainty of the determination of the atmospheric parameters of
the star

∆ log ǫ(X)

X

Ci
Ni
Nai
Mgi
Sii
Si
Cai
Scii
Tii
Tiii
Vi
Vii
Cri
Crii
Mni
Fei
Feii
Coi
Nii
Cui
Zni
Yii
Baii
Ndii
Euii

∆ Tef f ∆ lg g
−250 K

∆ ξt
−0.2 −0.5 km/s
+0.02
+0.03
+0.13
+0.10
+0.03
+0.04
+0.03
+0.12
+0.01
+0.08
+0.01
+0.01
+0.06
+0.11
+0.08
+0.07
+0.09
+0.01
+0.03
+0.06
+0.11
+0.02
+0.26
+0.01
+0.02

+0.10 −0.15
+0.18 −0.15
−0.12 −0.09
−0.13 −0.11
−0.11 −0.09
+0.05 −0.12
−0.16 −0.09
−0.08 −0.14
−0.20 −0.08
−0.07 −0.14
−0.22 −0.08
−0.05 −0.13
−0.20 −0.10
+0.01 −0.15
−0.18 −0.09
−0.18 −0.09
0.00 −0.14
−0.22 −0.09
−0.20 −0.09
−0.25 −0.10
−0.19 −0.13
−0.09 −0.13
−0.17 −0.11
−0.14 −0.13
−0.10 −0.11

