ENS’05 Paris, France, 14-16 December 2005

PROTOTYPING BIO-NANOROBOTS USING MOLECULAR DYNAMIC SIMULATION

Mustapha Hamdi 1, Gaurav Sharma 2, Antoine Ferreira 1, Constantinos Mavroidis 2

1Laboratoire Vision et Robotique, Université d’Orléans, 18000, Bourges, France.
2Computational BioNano Robotics Laboratory, Northeastern University, Boston, MA-02120, USA
 antoine.ferreira@ensi-bourges.fr , mavro@coe.neu.edu

ABSTRACT

This  paper  presents  a  molecular  mechanics  study
using a molecular dynamics software (NAMD) coupled to
virtual  reality  techniques  for  intuitive  bio-nanorobotic
prototyping.  Using  molecular  dynamic  simulations  the
operator  can  design,  characterize  and  prototype  the
behavior  of  bio-nanorobotic  components  and  structures.
The main novelty of the proposed simulations is based on
the  characterization  of  stiffness  performances  of  passive
joints-based  deca-alanine  protein  molecule  and  active
joints-based  viral  protein  motor  (VPL)  in  their  native
environment.  Their  use  as  elementary  bio-nanorobotic
components are also simulated and the results discussed.

1. INTRODUCTION

Bio-nanorobotics  is  an  emerging  area  of  scientific  and
technological  opportunity.  It  is  a  new  and  rapidly
growing  interdisciplinary  field  addressing  the  assembly,
construction  and  utilization  of  biomolecular  devices
based  on  nanoscale  principles  and/or  dimensions.
Research  and  product  development  at  the  interface  of
physical  sciences  and  biology  as  applied  to  this  area
require  multi-skilled  teams  and  often  novel  technical
approaches  for  material  synthesis,  characterization  and
applications.  In  this  way  proteins  and  DNA  could  act  as
motors,  mechanical  joints,  transmission  elements,  or
sensors.  If  all  of  these  different  components  were
assembled  together  they  can  form  bio-nanorobots  with
multiple degrees-of-freedom that are able to apply forces
and  manipulate  objects  in  the  nanoscale  world.  These
motors,  which  are  called  biomolecular  motors,  have
attracted  a  great  deal  of  attention  recently  because  they
have  high  efficiency,  they  could  be  self-replicating,  and
hence  cheaper  in  mass  usage,  and  they  are  readily
available in nature. A number of enzymes such as kinesin
[1],  RNA  polymerase  [2],  myosin  [3],  dynein  [4],
adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  synthase  [5],  viral  protein
linear  (VPL)  motor  [6]  and  DNA  can  function  as

nanoscale  linear,  oscillatory  or  rotary  biological  motors.
In addition, there are compliance devices such as spring-
like proteins called fibronectin [7] and vorticellids [8], as
well as synthetic contractile plant polymers [9] which can
act  as  compliant  joints  in  biomolecular  robotic  systems.
The idea is to use biomolecular motors as the actuators of
such  bio-nanorobots,  where  the  structural  elements  are
carbon  nanotubes,  while  the  joints  are  formed  by
appropriately designed DNA elements. Figure 1a  and  1b
show  a  schematic  of  VPL  motor  supporting  a  moving
platform. Precise manipulation could help scientists better
understand the principles of molecular

(a)                                                     (b)

Fig.  1:  Several  VPL  motors  placed  in  parallel  (left)  and  series
(right) to multiply force and displacement respectively.

requires 

experiments 

nanomanipulation 

motors,  at  the  origin  of  the  bio-nanorobot  actuation.
Going  beyond  a  knowledge  of  the  forces  derived  from
these 
a
contribution  from  molecular  dynamic  simulations  to  be
able to understand the bio-nanomechanics of proteins and
develop  dynamic  and  kinematic  models  to  study  their
performances.  The  ability  to  visualize  the  atom-to-atom
interaction  in  real-time  and  see  the  results  in  a  fully
immersive  3-D  environment  is  an  additional  feature  of
such  simulations  [14-18].  In  this  work,  we  consider  a
mechanical  molecular  study  of  unfolding  proteins  acting

 
M.Hamdi, G.Sharma, A.Ferreira, D.Mavroidis
Prototyping Bio-Nanorobots Using Molecular Dynamic Simulation

as passive or active joints in bio-nanorobotic systems. We
therefore  decided 
investigations  by
to  begin  our 
simulating  the  forces  involved  under  various  external
mechanical  stress  (stretching,  contraction,  shearing,
bending) to predict the type of force spectra, reversibility,
degrees  of  freedom  and  irreversible  work  that  may  be
expected  from  single-molecule  protein  manipulation
experiments. 

The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
mechanical  molecular  simulations  of  deca-alanine  and
viral  proteins  as  passive/active  links  before  to  make  a
discussion  about 
in  bio-
nanorobotics field in Section 3. 

the  current  developments 

2.  SIMULATION OF BIO-NANOROBOTIC
COMPONENTS

2.1. Simulation of Elementary Bionanorobotic Module

Figure  2  shows  a  schematic  of  an  elementary
bionanorobotic  module  composed  of  a  moving  platform
supported  by  the  VPL  motor  and  two  deca-alanine
proteins. The first image in Figure  4a  shows  the  VPL  in
its initial state and the second image shows it in the final
extended  state  due 
to  pH  activation.  For  detailed
information on the working of the VPL motor the reader
is  encouraged  to  read  reference  [6].  Two  deca-alanine
proteins  can  be  used  as  passive  spring  elements  to  join
two  platforms  and  form  a  single  d.o.f  parallel  platform
that  is  actuated  by  the  upward  stretching  of  the  VPL
actuator.

Viral protein motor

AFM TIP

k3

k2

k1

fixed

fixed

fixed

Deca-alanine
proteins

(a)                                                           (b)
Fig.  2:  One  degree  of  freedom  Bio-Nanorobotic  module  actuated  by  a
viral protein motor and two α-helix deca-alanine protein springs.

Their  elastic  behavior  can  be  used  as  a  passive  control
element  or  as  the  restitution  force  that  will  bring  the
platform  back  to  its  original  position.  The  proposed  MD
and  VR  system  allows 
to  simulate  proteins  and
theoretically evaluate the forces generated in biochemical
reactions,  and  even  to  exert  external  forces  to  alter  the
fate  of  these  reactions.  We  present  below  the  simulated
mechanical properties of different passive and active bio-

nanorobotic  components  of  Figure  2a  when  subjected  to
external  forces.  The  external  forces  (stretching,  shearing
or  bending)  are  applied  using  a  force  feedback  device
(shown as a virtual AFM tip in figures) in order to study
the  mechanical  properties  of  the  principal  architectural
elements  [19].  The  various  deformations  that  have  been
studied use an adiabatic energy mapping.

2.2. α−Helix  Deca-Alanine Protein as Passive Joint

We  applied  the  techniques  described  above  to  an
exemplary system, helix-coil transition of deca-alanine in
vacuum and in solvent.  The well-known deca-alanine is
an oligopeptide composed of ten alanine residues (Figure
5). In vacuum at room temperature (T=300°K), the stable
configuration of deca-alanine is a α-helix. Stretching the
molecule by an external force can induce its transition to
an extended (coiled) form.

AFM tip

Fs

k

Fixed point

Fig.  3:  Unfolding  of  helical  deca-alanine.  Left,  a  folded  configuration
(α-helix)  is  shown.  The  six  hydrogen  bonds  that  stabilize  the  helix  are
shown. Middle and right, extended configurations (coil) when stretching
the molecule by an external force (shown as a virtual AFM tip).

the 

freedom, 

This  helix-coil  transition  represents  a  simple  but  basic
folding  system  acting  as  a  passive  like-spring.  In  the
simulation,  we  fix  one  end  of  the  molecule  (the  main
chain nitrogen atom of the first residue) at the origin and
constrain the other end (the capping nitrogen atom of the
C-terminus)  to  move  only  along  the  z  axis,  thereby
removing 
i.e.,
irrelevant  degrees  of 
removing  the  overall  translation  and  rotation.  For  this,  a
guiding potential [20]
(
r

(
k
is  added  to  control  the  end-to-end  distance  ξ  which  is  a
function of the 3N-dimensional position r  of  the  system.
The  moving  guiding  potential  used  in  the  pulling
simulations is represented by a spring which is connected
to  the  C-terminus  and  pulled  with  a  constant  velocity  v.
The parameter λ is varied from 15 to 35 Å with a constant
speed  v  of  0.1  Å/ns.  A  force  constant  of  k=500  pN/Å  is
used  in  order  to  allow  end-to-end  distance  ξ  closely
follow the constraint center λ. The external work curve is
defined as:

                 (1)

]2
λ

[
)
ζ

( )
r

)
λ

2/

=

−

u

;

 
                            
M.Hamdi, G.Sharma, A.Ferreira, D.Mavroidis
Prototyping Bio-Nanorobots Using Molecular Dynamic Simulation

W

t
kv
∫−=
0

( )'
tfdt
'

                                            (2)

  Figure  4a-b  shows  the  maximal  force  and  energy
variation  (before  breaking)  as  a  function  of  stretching
distance.

Protein in solvent

Protein in vacuum

Kst

Kst

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

Stretching  distance (nm)

Figure 5: Force curve of α-Helix to ribbon done by forward stretching
with a reversible motion (Part I and II).

                        (a)                                                 (b)
Figure  4:    α-Helix  to  ribbon  stretching.  (a)  Force  curve  and  (b)  Work
done by forward pulling (stretching) and backward pulling (contracting)
with v=0.1 Å/sec. For the forward pulling, the position of the constraint
center ξ is varied from 15 to 35Å; for the backward pulling, from 35 to
15 Å. 

Depending  on  the  sign  of  v,  the  external  work  can  be
defined for either stretching or contracting motion of the
protein.  Fig.4a  shows 
two  distinct  conformational
transitions  that  provoke  the  conversion  of α-helix  to  an
extended  form  approaching  the  coil  conformation.  The
force  increases  rather  smoothly  to  almost  10pN  up  to  a
relative  length  of  the  protein.  Once  this  transition  is
completed,  the  hydrogen  bonds  start  to  break  and  the
structure  further  extends  toward  the  coil  conformation
(intrinsic elastic regime), as shown in Part II, of the force
curve  (~700pN).  At  the  lowest  forces,  the  molecule
behaves  as  a  Hookian  spring  and  its  extension  is
proportional  to  the  force  applied  at  the  end  with  a
reversible  motion.  A  useful  approximation  for  spring
constant kalan is given by the inextensible worm-like chain
(WLC) model [20]. Then, if the stretching force increases
gradually  until  to  reach  its  stretching  limit  (~3600pN)
with  an  irreversible  motion  in  Part  III.  Fig.4b  shows  the
work done by forward pulling (stretching) and backward
pulling at the same speed. As the protein environment has
an  important  influence  on  its  conformation,  we  studied
the  influence  of  the  dynamics  of  water  molecules  (as  a
solvent)  onto  the  protein-water  interactions.  Fig.5  shows
the  influence  of  the  water-protein  interactions  on  the
external  force  which  shows  that  a  greater  force  (and
work)  is  required  for  reversible  extension  of  the  deca-
alanine protein. The water solvent increases considerably
the Hookian spring kstr of the protein structure. However,
as  the  system  contains  solvent  molecules,  the  relaxation
time  increases  such  that  the  helix-coil  transition  can  be
induced in a reversible manner with a hysteresis behavior. 

In 

some 

under 

various 

structure 

component 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  use  of  protein  as  passive
joints  suppose  that  the  deca-alanine  protein  can  also  be
mechanically  dependent  of  temperature  versus  the  work
produced by the protein molecule stressed in an unnatural
unfolding pathway. The previous results showed that the
is  not  destroyed  under  normal
native 
unnatural
conditions. 
physiological 
conformations, 
lateral  shearing  and  bending  forces
applied on a protein molecule has been simulated: fixed-
free  boundary  conditions  and  fixed-fixed  boundary
conditions.  These  tests  simulate  disturbances  of  the  bio-
nanorobotic 
operating
conditions.  For  these  conformations,  Fig.6  presents  the
lateral  forces  obtained.  As  shown  in  Fig.6a,  the  lateral
Hookian  spring  kshear  has  high  stiff  spring  value  that  is
able  to  counteract  microenvironment  variations  and
mechanical disturbances of a bio-nanorobotic platform. In
this  case,  in  contrast  to  stretching    described  above,  the
force  variation  is  roughly  monotonic  with  different
plateau leading to different Hookian spring values. This is
explained by a successive rather than a concurrent rupture
of  the  hydrogen  bonds  joining  the  strands.  Shearing  is
largely  limited  to  breaking  hydrogen  bonds  as  there  is
little  conformational  change  in  the  extended  peptide
backbones. Conversely, Fig.6b shows a linear variation of
force  behavior  when 
considering  pure  bending
deformation of the protein.  It shows that for little length
deformation,  it  requires  low  constant  force.  After  a
threshold  value,  lateral  bending  must  break  the  van  der
Waals  interactions  of  the  entire  surface,  leading  to  high
forces  and  strong  length  dependence.  Finally,  these
results  indicate  that  it  may  be  possible  to  obtain
uncoupled mechanical spring behavior of the protein: stiff
in  lateral  and  compliant  in  Furthermore,  under  normal
operating  conditions,  deca-alanine  protein  shows  a
reversibility  of  displacement-force  characteristics  which
allows  its  use  as  spring-like  joint  in  bio-nanorobotic
platforms. longitudinal directions. 

                                      
                        
 
M.Hamdi, G.Sharma, A.Ferreira, D.Mavroidis
Prototyping Bio-Nanorobots Using Molecular Dynamic Simulation

kshear

Plateau 2

Plateau 1

Distance (nm)

(a)

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

kbend

Distance (nm)

(b)

Fig. 6: Force curve of  α-Helix deca-alannine protein when perturbed by
a (a) lateral shearing force Fshea  and (b) bending force Fbend.

2.3. Viral protein linear (VPL) motor as active joint

in 

[21], 

In  this  part,  we  study  the  molecular  properties  of  viral
proteins  to  change  their  3D  conformation  depending  on
the  pH  level  of  environment.  Thus,  a  new  linear
biomolecular  actuator  type  called  Viral  Protein  Linear
(VPL)  motor,  developed  originally 
is
characterized  as  an  active  linear  joint.  The  structure  is
like  a  hairpin  composed  of  three  coils,  having  one  C
terminal  (carboxy-end)  and  undergoes  a  conformational
change  induced  by  mildly  acidic  conditions  (i.e.,  pH
around  5).  With  the  change  in  pH,  the  N-terminals  pop
out  of  the  inner  side  and  the  peptide  acquires  a
straightened position. The VPL motor uses the Influenza
virus protein Hemagglutinin (HA). Two known states are
established, i.e., the native state and the fusogenic state of
the 36-residue peptide of HA. The structural data of these
states  are  obtained  from  the  Protein  Data  Bank  (PDB)
[22].  The 
representative  “open”  structure  can  be
generated  by  forcing  the  structure  away  from  the  native
conformation (Fig. 8a) to open state (conformation) (Fig.
8b)  with 
constrained  high-temperature  molecular
dynamics.  Both  the  forward  (closed  to  open)  and  the
reverse (open to close) transformations are carried out for
two  end-point  structures  of  9Å.  This  peptide  is  able  to
perform repeatable motion controlled by variation of pH.

In  order  to  study  the  mechanical  limits  of  the  reference
end-point states with a reversible motion,  simulations of
the  mechanical  stretching  through  a  guiding  potential  of
Eq.2 has been investigated. 

                             (a)                         (b)                                     

Fig.7: (a) loop 36 protein in the native state; (b) open-state conformation
of the VPL motor shown with van der Waals surface distribution.

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

kstret

(a)

Distance (nm)

Kshear

(b)

Distance (nm)

Kbend

Distance (nm)

(c)

Figure  8:  VPL  of  force-versus-distance  characteristics:  (a)  stretching,
(b) shearing and (c) bending for v=1Å/ns, k=500pN/Å and T=300°K.

Here,  we  stretch  the  viral  protein  in  an  irreversible
manner  and  examine  the  resulting  distribution  of  force.

     
                           
 
 
 
 
 
M.Hamdi, G.Sharma, A.Ferreira, D.Mavroidis
Prototyping Bio-Nanorobots Using Molecular Dynamic Simulation

The  spring  constant 
is  settled  at  k=500pN/Å  and
T=300°K.  The  molecule  is  stretched  by  changing  the
parameter  λ  from  15  to  40  Å  with  a  constant  speed.
Figure  8a  gives  the  results  of  displacement  and  force
stretching (Kstret= 625pN/nm) of the VPL motor. Fig.8b-c
shows  the  shearing  (Kshear=  312pN/nm)  and  bending
results  (Kbend=  714pN/nm)    when  v=1Å/ns,  k=500pN/Å
and  T=300°K.  A  more  realistic  environment  of  the  VPL
requires the inclusion of the effect of pH on  the  protein.
In order to take into account the real-time effect of pH on
the ionic stability of the protein, a current model will be
considered in a next phase. 

3. SIMULATION OF A BIO-NANOROBOTIC
PARALLEL PLATFORM

In order to prototype mechanical designs of  bio-robotic
structures,    we  simulated    the  parallel  nanorobotic
platform  of  Fig.9    of  four  passive  parallel  links  using
serially-linked    deca-alanine  proteins  connected  to  a
graphite platform at both ends. Each link is composed of
of    three  deca-alanine  proteins  serially  linked.  The
attachment  of  the  different  components  are  4  carbon
atoms (proteins/graphite interface) and 3 hydrogen atoms
the
(protein/protein 
ractangular graphite sheet are 14.8nm by 8.5nm  and  the
total length of the three proteins is 13.1nm.

interface).  The  dimensions  for 

Graphite platform

Carbon atoms

3 Proteins

Hydrogen atoms

Fig.9: Parallel nanorobotic platform composed of two graphite platforms
and four serially-linked passive linear links. The four parallel  links are
composed of three serial deca-alanine proteins.

that 

  Simulations  showed 

We  applied  stretching  forces  at  the  upper  graphite
the  parallel
platform. 
connection  of  serially-linked  deca-alanine  proteins
permits  to  augment  considerably  the  resulting  spring-
force  and  to  decrease  the  overall  displacement.  As
example, Fig.10 shows  the stretching force curve of two
parallel links composed of four serial spring-like proteins
(deca- 

Rupture
protein 1-1’ and protein 2-2 ’

1

2

3

4

1 ’

2 ’

3 ’

4 ’

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

Unfolding
 1-1 ’

Unfolding
  2-2 ’

Unfolding
 3-3 ’

Unfolding
 4-4 ’

Time (pS)

Fig.10:  Stretching  force  curve  of  two  parallel  links  composed  of  four
serial deca-alanine proteins acting as elastic and reversible springs.

)

N
p
(

k
n
i
l

h
c
a
e

t
a

e
c
r
o
F

Rupture region

Force 1
Force 2

Linear elastic
region

Force 3
Force 4
Force 5

Distance (nm)

Fig.11: Force at each  protein link of a four serial deca-alanine proteins
acting as elastic and reversible springs.

alanine)  for  v=1Å/ns,  k=500pN/Å  and  T=300°K.  The
spring  force  is  considerably  increased  symmetrically  for
both  parallel  links  until  to  reach  its  point  of  rupture.  As
expected  during  stretching  (serial/parallel  structure)  the
generated forces in parallel configuration is multiplied by
2  while  in  serial  configuration,  the  displacement  is
multiplied  roughly  by  4.    The  elongation  of  the  serial
configuration  is  mainly  dominated  by  unfolding  the  α-
helices  of  the  different  deca-alanine  proteins.  However,
the  rupture  point  is  not  due  to  the  rupture  of  the  protein
but  simply  by  the  rupture  of  the  attachment  between  the
proteins (1,1’) and (2,2’) as shown in Fig.10. We can see
in Fig.11 the linear behavior of the stretching force curve
at  each  protein/protein  joint  (joints  1,  2,  3  and  4).  It
should  be  noted  in  the  Fig.10  that  the  force  behavior  of
each  parallel  link  is  quite  similar.  As  a  result  of  our
simulations  (stretching,  bending  and  shearing) 
the
different  stiffnesses  differ  strongly  depending  of  the
external disturbances applied to the nanorobotic platform:

 
 
 
 
 
M.Hamdi, G.Sharma, A.Ferreira, D.Mavroidis
Prototyping Bio-Nanorobots Using Molecular Dynamic Simulation

- 

- 

stretching  stiffness  is  strongly  influenced  by  the
native  environment:  (kstret)air  ≅  400  pN/nm    and
(kstret)water ≅ 70 pN/nm 
lateral shearing (kshear ≅ 700 pN/nm) is much more
stiffer  than  lateral  bending  (kshear≅  30  pN/nm)
which  ensures  a  good  mechanical  stability  of  the
platform against external disturbances.

In  order  to  reduce  the  number  of  components,  the  serial
configuration of deca-alanine proteins have been replaced
by  ROP  proteins  (parallel  link).  The  repressor  of  primer
protein (ROP) is a small, dimeric molecule consisting of
two  identical  chains  of  63  amino  acids.  The  two
monomers pack together as a fully antiparallel four helix-
bundle.  The  bend 
region  of  Rop  has  attracted
considerable interest as a parallel molecular spring due to
the
its  stability  and  elasticity  properties  [23].  In 
simulation, we constrain both ends of two α-helices of the
molecule  to  move  only  along  the  z  axis  for  stretching
simulations  and  fix  the  short  turn  (Fig.12).  Compared  to
the elastic behavior of deca-alanine proteins (see Fig.4a),
we  can  see  the  same  reversible  elastic  behavior  with
greater  forces  due  to  its  parallel  structure.    Furthermore,
each  passive  link  behaves  as  a  perfect  reversible  linear
joint when it is relaxed from its stretched state. Due to its
native parallel structure, we need only four ROP proteins
connected to the graphite platform. 

)

N
p
(

e
c
r
o
F

)

m
)
n
m
(
n
e
(
c
e
n
c
a
n
t
s
a
i
t
D
s
i
D

relaxation

stretching

ROP

Time (pSec)

kstret

Distance (nm)

FIG.12:  Double  α-helix  to  ribbon  stretching.  (a)  Force  curve  and  (b)
hysteresis  curve  done  by  forward  stretching  (with  v=0.1  Å/sec)  and
relaxation of the structure when the stretching force is zero.

VI.  CONCLUSION

This  paper  presents  a  molecular  mechanics  study
carried  out  with  a  molecular  dynamics  computation.    It
allows simulating the force, position and energy feedback
of  spring-like  and  actuator-like  proteins  for  design
evaluation  of  future  bio-nanorobots.  The  preliminary
mechanical  force  results  given  in  this  study  corroborates
the  force  results  when  stretching  α-helix,  β-ribbon
proteins  and  double-helical  DNA  molecules.  Further
refinement  will  be  carried  out  in  order  to  integrate  the
VPL motor into the parallel platform for active actuation.

REFERENCES

[1] S.M. Block, “Kinesin what gives?”, Cell, 93, pp.5-8 (1998).
[2]  M.D.  Wang,  M.J.  Schnitzer,  H.Yin,  R.  Landrick,  J.  Gelles,  S.M.
Block,  “Force  and  velocity  measurement  for  single  molecules  of  RNA
polymerase”, Science, 282, pp.902-907 (1998).
[3]  K.  Kitamura,  M.  Tokunaga,  A.H.  Iwane,  Y.  Yanagida,  “A  single
myosin  head  moves  along  an  actin  filament  with  rectangular  steps  of
5.3nm”, Nature, 397, PP.129 (1999).
[4] C. Shingyoji, H. Higuchi, M. Yoshimura, E. Katayama, T. Yanagida,
“Dynein arms are oscillating force generators”, Nature, 393, pp.711-714.
[5]  C.D.  Montegano,  G.D.  Bachand,  “Constructing  nanomechanical
devices powered by biomolecular motors”, Nanotechnology, 10, pp.225-
331 (1999).
[6]  Dubey  A.,  Mavroidis  C.,  Thornton  A.,  Nikitczuk  K.P.,  Yarmush
M.L., Viral Protein Linear (VPL) Nano-Actuators, IEEE Int. Conference
on Nanotechnology, San Francisco, August 12-14, 2003.
[7] H.P. Erickson, “Streching single protein molecules: Titin os a wired
spring”, Science, 276, pp.1090-1092.
[8] L. Mahadevan, P. Matsudaira, “Mobility powered by supramolecular
springs and ratchets”, Science, 288, pp.95-99 (2000)
[9]  M.  Knoblauch,  G.A.  Naull,  T.  Muller,  D.  Prufer,  I.  Schneider-
Huther,  et  al.  “ATP-independent  contractile  proteins  from  plants”,
Nature Materials, 2, pp.600-603 (2003). 
[10] T.Yamamoto, O.Kurosawa, H.Kabata, N. Shimamoto, M. Washizu,
Molecular  surgery  of  DNA  Based  on  Electrostatic  micromanipulation,
IEEE  Trans.  on  Industry  Applications,  Vol.36,  No.4,  pp.1010-1017
(2000).
[11] S.Thalhammaer, R. Stark, S.Muller, J.Winberg, W.M., heckl, “The
Atomic  Force  Microscope  as  a  New  Microdissecting  Tool  for  the
Generation  of  Genetic  Probes”,  Journal  of  Structural  Biology,  119,
pp.232-237 (1997).
  [14]  H.  Haase,  J.  Strassner,  and  F.  Dai,  “VR  techniques  for  the
investigation  of  molecule  data”,  Computers  &  Graphics,  Special  Issue
on Virtual Reality, 20(2), pp. 207-217 (1996). Elsevier Science Ltd. 
[15]  R.  C.  Drees,  J.  Pleiss,  D.  Roller,  and  R.  D.  Schmid,  “Highly
Immersive  Molecular  Modeling  (HIMM):  an  architecture  for  the
integration  of  molecular  modeling  and  virtual  reality”,  in  Computer
Science  and  Biology,  Proceedings  of  the  German  Conference  on
Bioinformatics, (Leipzig, Germany), pp. 190-192, Sep-Oct 1996.
[16]  Collaborative  Visualization  and  Simulation  Environment
(COVISE),  http://www.hlrs.de/organization/vis/covise/    ,  last  updated
Mar 30, 2001
[17]  W.  Humphrey,  A.  Dalke,  K.  Schulten,  “VMD:Visual  Molecular
Dynamics”, Journal of Molecular Graphics, vol.14, pp.33-38, 1996.
[18]  Ferreira  A.,  Sharma  G.,  Mavroidis  D.,  ‘’New  trends  in  Bio-
Nanorobotics  using  Virtual  Reality  technologies’’  IEEE  International
Conference  on  Robotics  and  Biomimetics,  June30-July3,  Hong-Kong
(China), 2005, pp.89-94.
[19]  M.  Hamdi,  G.  Sharma,  A.  Ferreira,  C.  Mavroidis  ‘’Molecular
Mechanics  Study  on  Bionanorobotic  Components  using  Force
Feedback’’ 
International  Conference  on  Robotics  and
Biomimetics, June30-July3, Hong-Kong (China), 2005, pp.105-110.
[20] S. Park, F.Khalili-Araghi, E.Tajkhorshid, K.Schulten, “Free energy
calculation 
from  steered  molecular  dynamics  simulations  using
Jarzynski’s  equality”,  Journal  of  Chemical  Physics,  vol.119,  n°6,
pp.3559-3566, 2003.
[21]  A.Dubey,  G.Sharma,  C.Mavroidis,  S.M.Tomassone,  K.Nikitckuk,
L.Yarmush,  “Computational  Studies  of  Viral  Protein  Nano-Actuators”,
Jour. of Comp. and Theoretical Nanoscience, vol.1, n°.1, pp.1-11, 2004.
[22]  H.M.  Berman,  J.Westbrook,  Z.feng,  G.Gilliland,  T.N.  Bhat,
H.Weissig, I.N. Shindyalov, and P.E. Bourne, “The Protein Data Bank”,
Nucleic Acid Research, 28, pp.235-242, 2000.
[23]  H.P.  Kresse,  M.Czuayko,  G.Nyakatura,  G.Vriand,  C.  Sander,
H.Bloecker,  “Four-helix  bundle  topology  re-engineered:  monomeric
Rop  protein  variants  with  different  loop  arrangements”,  Protein
Engineering, Vol.14, N°11, pp.897-901, 2001.

IEEE 

 
 
 
