Magic Fairy Tales as Source for Interface Metaphors
Vladimir L. Averbukh
Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics UrB RAS 
Ekaterinburg Russia
averbukh@imm.uran.ru

ABSTRACT
The   work  is   devoted   to   a   problem   of  search   of  metaphors   for 
interactive   systems   and   systems   based   on  Virtual   Reality  (VR) 
environments.  The   analysis   of  magic   fairy  tales  as  a  source   of 
metaphors for interface and virtual reality is offered. Some results 
of design process based on “magic” metaphors are considered.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.m MISCELLANEOUS

General Terms
Human Factors

Keywords
Computer metaphor, interface

INTRODUCTION

1.
This  work  is  devoted   to  a  problem  of  search  of  metaphors   for 
interactive   systems  and   systems  based   on   Virtual   Reality  (VR) 
environments. Metaphors play a significant role while designing, 
and also help users to master interface opportunities with ease. 
Sometimes the success or failure of system depends on successful 
choice   of   metaphors.   However   researchers   have   started   to 
complain of rarity of interface metaphors already in early 90-s’ 
years   when   development   of   visual   interactive   systems   were 
anywise a novelty. (See [1].) In our opinion one may find a lot of 
sources of metaphors, but it is necessary to search these sources 
by some  criteria.  We suggest   to consider  magic  fairy  tales  and 
popular  fantasy novels  (using  a set  of  characters,  concepts  and 
situations similar to the magic fairy tales) as one  of sources of 
computer metaphors. Thus, we are interested with “magic” ideas 
i.e. ideas of miraculous actions, positions, things and events that 
are impossible in reality. These ideas are useful to create interface 
and visualization metaphors and to develop new techniques  for 
dealing in virtual environments. Note that VR may demand wide 
diversity  of magic  metaphors,  because  in  fact  it  is  a real  (“not 
magic”)   magic.   Even   superficial   analysis   shows   that   at   times 
magic in fairy tales extends possibilities and features of realistic 
objects   and   characters   and   at   other   times   fairy   tales   describe 
occurrences being in marked contrast to everyday routine. Both 
cases   are   interesting   in   connection   with   metaphors   searching. 
Moreover VR also at times augments user’s means, and  at other 
times transfers users to new worlds.

Magic ideas described in fantasy novels or in literary processed 
folklore fairy tales are the most worked and consequently the most 
useful for our purposes.

Interface   metaphor   is   considered   as   the   basic   idea   of   likening 
between interactive objects and model objects of the application 

domain. Its role is to promote the best understanding of semantics 
of interaction, and also to determine the visual representation of 
dialog   objects   and   a   set   of   user   manipulations   with   them.   A 
metaphor, considered as a basis of the sign system, underlies in a 
basis of a dialog language in its turn. User formulates the problem 
with the help of this language and achieves its solving from the 
computer. The metaphor helps to describe abstraction, structures 
understanding   of   new   applied   area,   but   also   assigns   dialog 
[visual] language objects.

We   understand   interface   metaphors   in   broadened   sense,   not 
subdividing   them   onto   metaphors,   analogies,   idioms   or 
metonymies.   These   divisions   are   important   for   the   metaphor 
theory,   but   are   not   necessary   for   our   consideration.   Interface 
metaphors   may   be   considered   as   a   special   case   of   scientific 
metaphor   used   for   generation   of   new   or   additional   senses   to 
understand new facts and phenomena. The understanding of an 
interface   metaphor   as   an   usage   only  everyday   and   well-known 
(often   technical)   realities   is   unsatisfactory  and   even   wrong   for 
several reasons [2], [3]. 

RELATED WORKS

2.
The  problems  of metaphor  design,  as well  as  formalizations  of 
their search and/or generations were repeatedly considered in the 
literature. The idea of automated creation of visual metaphors and 
corresponding visualization systems was proposed. 

Interest   to   “magic”   in   connection   with   HCI   and   interface 
metaphors   was   showed   in   early   90-s’   years.   The   significant 
attention   has   been   given   to   “Magic   Features”   conception.   This 
conception in the context of HCI was introduced for the first time 
by A. Kay. [4]. In the literature (also by A. Kay) some theoretical 
approaches to problems of HCI magic were considered and some 
examples were given (see [5-9]. “Magic Features” are considered 
as important for HCI. The authors of the works [6-8] emphasized 
especially that metaphors doesn’t preclude magic. Obviously, if to 
consider   metaphors   not   only   as   usage   everyday   things   and 
everyday entities then magic may be a part of interface metaphors. 
The word “magic” is very popular as a part of metaphoric names 
for   interface   techniques   –   for   example   “magic   lens”,   “magic 
mirror”,   “magic   lancet”,   etc.   In   [10]   a   number   of   specific 
examples   from   stage   magic   is   presented   and   application   of   its 
principles and techniques in human interface design is discussed. 
The article [11]  is devoted  to sources of metaphor for tangible 
user   interfaces.   Authors   suppose   magic   and   paranormal 
phenomena could be a fruitful place to look for new metaphors for 
tangible user interfaces. Also Voodoo magic is considered as an 
interesting idea for interfaces with virtual objects. In [12] Voodoo 
dolls technique is used as a two-handed interaction technique for 
manipulating   objects   at   a   distance   in   immersive   virtual 
environments.  

Ideas for interface metaphor design, linked with magic fairy tales, 
fantasy and science fiction novels, are described in a number of 
articles. In [5] for example the fantastic metaphor of flying carpet 
is mentioned,  but  in   [13]  the metaphor of the  magic carpet is 
realized for instant moving in the virtual reality environment. In 
[14 ] and [15] usages of “magic wand” are described. Magic wand 
is considered as a manipulation metaphor to form an interface in 
systems   with   elements   of   virtual   reality.  Interesting   ideas   of 
wonder objects (for example, magic mirror) were proposed (and 
realized   in   prototype   variants)   for   storytelling   in   the   modern 
museum   [16].  In   [3]   the   information   system   using   a   City 
Metaphor   is   described.   In   this   system   magic/fantastic 
opportunities   are   used   on   regular   basis.   Among   these 
opportunities there is the “Tunneling through space” presenting 
the   typical   adoption   from   Science   Fiction.   Also   rooms   with 
“magic windows” may be considered as a magic (science fiction) 
feature. “Magic window”  is an interesting expansion of a well-
known Information Wall metaphor.

On   our   opinion   the   metaphors   adopted   from  magic   fairy  tales, 
science fiction  and  fantasy  novels are  more  preferable  than the 
metaphors constructed on the basis of complex and gloomy magic 
rituals and Voodoo techniques.

Two   famous   book   of   Russian   scientist   Vladimir   Propp 
(Morphology of the Folk Tale and The Historical  Roots  of the 
Wonder Tale) are devoted to fairy tales. (See translation one of 
them   into   English   in   [17].)   In   this   work   the   sets   of   fantastic 
situations, characters (among them - the hero, the false hero, the 
assistant, the wrecker) and the structure of magic fairy tales are 
explored in detail, and also their connection with the basic ancient 
myths is shown. 

In fairy tales of different nations one can find very interesting sets 
of “magic features”. In the following sections we consider, what is 
behind   this   conception   and   how   magic   may   be   useful   when 
searching of metaphors for interactive systems and systems based 
on virtual reality environments.

MAGIC. WHAT IS THIS?

3.
Here   we   consider   fantastic   magic,   selecting   samples   that   are 
fruitful for interface and virtual reality metaphors.

Magic transport. In fairy tales and fantastic novels one can find: 
A.  Teleportation   -   instant   carry   by   means   of   verbal   influence 
(spell) or by means of manipulations with any objects or uses of 
such devices as teleports;
B.  Rather slow  moving  by  means  of  magic  transport.   A  magic 
transfer may take place both for subjects, and for (animated and 
inanimate) objects of magic. 

Magic navigation means - for example, the milestone with magic 
legend or the magic clew, following to which one may reach up 
Fairland. 

Magic communications means.  An example - the magic mirror 
tuned   on   the   interesting   character   for   his/her   protection   or 
observation. 

(additional

Wonderful 
opportunities   on 
manipulations  with   objects,   processes   and   even   natural 
phenomena.   In   some   variants   -   superforce,   invulnerability,   etc. 
Generally   speaking   one   can   use   the   term  “magic   power”   (or 

to   normal) 

“superpower”). These manipulations and power may be carried 
out   through   spells   and   objective   magic,   and   also   through   the 
universal manipulator - a magic wand. 

One can set off the general class of the magic objects as objects 
possessing   “magic   properties”.  Thus   it   is   possible   the   magic 
expansion of usual functionality (seven-league boots), as well as 
attributing to object of additional, unusual in reality functions (for 
example  Aladdin's Wonderful Lamp  used for a call, activization 
and   neutralization  of   magic   beings).   For   a   designation   of   the 
magic objects used as manipulators, transport and communication 
means one can use also the term “magic tools”.

Magic   transformations   of   objects.   As   an   example   one   can 
consider the construction of palaces by Jinnee in the Arabic fairy 
tale or transformation a pumpkin into the carriage for Cinderella.

Similarly to magic objects magic subjects may be set off, i.e. evil, 
good   or   neutral   (with   respect   to   heroes)   magicians   possessing 
superopportunities.   (As   a   variant   -   magic   anthropomorphic 
beings, for example, fairies, gnomes, trolls, jinn, etc.)

Magic   transformations   of   persons.   In   fairy   tales   such 
transformations   may   be   spontaneous,   unexpected   for   the 
characters,   or   transformations   may  be   results   of   magic   actions 
(some magic spells or manipulations). These transformations can 
be carried out in view of sympathetic magic (that is magic based 
on some similarity).

WHAT DOES PRACTICE SHOW?

4.
Our attention was involved with two “magic-fantastic” metaphors 
from the novels (and also the films) about Harry Potter. These are 
Speaking and Moving Portraits  and  the Map  on which  shifts of 
persons   under   observation   are   visible.   In   this   case   portraits   of 
dead persons  are  the active objects.  They  may address  to  alive 
characters of the novel without requests, and even pass from one 
portrait framework to another to do a visit to each other. The map 
continuously traces and shows the site of an observable person.

There   are   a   lot   of   active,   anthropomorphic   and   speaking 
characters   in   fairy   tales   and   in   science   fiction   novels   such   as 
Golem, robots of  K. Capek and I. Asimov, and so on.  Similarly 
there are various variants of magic/fantastic means of navigation 
and searching both in fairy tales, and in a fantasy.

In   these   magic   metaphors   visualness   is   not   so   important   then 
spontaneous  activity inherent  in generated  objects and  subjects. 
Spontaneous   activity   can   be   considered   as   means   to   imitate 
reasonable behavior. It is necessary also subjectness of characters 
(i.e. their existence  independently  of users) to imitate reasonable 
behavior.   In   the   fantastic   and  popular   scientific  literature   and 
films such active computer “subjects” have appeared some decade 
ago. In   modern computer  practice  agents  who   are  active  under 
own initiative, frequently cause irritation. We have been started 
our research of active intellectual agents to understand what, why 
and where have to do active intellectual agents.

The   idea   of   the   “active”   map   showing   a   real   landscape   and 
movings of objects on it was considered. “Activity” of a map can 
be connected to events, the same type, as well as in navigating 
systems - travel of this or that district, turn, crossing and so forth, 
but   “activity”   can   be   and   “spontaneous”,   connected   with   time 
events. The other idea may be possible – the development of the 

 
“active” scheme of a protected apartment or territory. In this case 
tracking   systems   and   the   “marked”   persons   may  be   necessary. 
Movings of all without exception persons may be shown on the 
scheme, and labels allow to identify them. In connection with the 
given ideas it is possible to note, that works in the given direction 
on the basis of systems such as GPS are actively carried out, and 
there are examples of the interactive maps which are performing 
roles of  guide-adviser. Also now it is easy to develop speaking 
anthropomorphic agents-avatars, and there are a lot of examples 
of such realizations. 

We have decided to connect the idea of active agents constructed 
on a metaphor of the speaking portrait, with the expert system. 
The point is that the active agent with its (possible) importunate 
activity is warranted almost only in case of learning systems. The 
logic of project development led us to the next idea the idea of 
“active textbook” [18]. This textbook have to be able to analyze 
the pupil behavior during textbook studying, for example, time of 
reading, manipulations with the text and so on. Basing on these 
analyses  “active   textbook”   may  detail   teaching  material,   search 
new data sources or  turn to other things. The analysis of a user 
behavior   may   be   realized   at   a   syntactic   level   (at   a   level   of 
operations with the mouse and the keyboard, eye tracking, etc.), 
and   on   semantic   one   (monitoring   of   opened   files   or   sites, 
applications   under   execution,   recording   of   events,   etc.)   Such 
analyses   and   elements   of   programming   by  demonstrations   will 
allow our system to learn to teach during the process of its using 
and to operate in the given direction “independently”. Also it is 
possible  to   supply  the   system  by  means  adviser  functions.   The 
system  will   be  like  clever human  being  – adviser and  will   not 
impose   the   opinion,   but   will   prepare  pieces   of  advice   and 
decisions.   The   human-like   behavior   may   be   provide   by 
psychologically caused braking of the system activity. 

In   the  visualization  systems  constructed  on   the  basis  of virtual 
reality   environments,   there   are   the   tasks   where   complex 
manipulations with objects are necessary, for example, to pull out 
something, to cut or to zoom. As a metaphor of the tool for such 
tasks, first of all the idea of a magic wand comes into designer’s 
on   mind.   But   a   magic   wand   has   not   differentiated   action   and 
hence  requires   means   to   change   modes   of   operating.   In   the 
specialized systems it is more natural to use specialized “magic 
tools”.   For   example,
 in   medical   information   system   as 
manipulator's   metaphor   the   idea   of   “magic   lancet”   is   offered. 
“Lancet” allows “to  dissects” this or that organism area for the 
profound   exploring.   During   any   human   organism   object 
“dissecting”, all physical changes are visualized, as if we did it in 
a reality. In case of a combination the “magic lancet” metaphor 
with three-dimensional model of human body, one may obtain the 
virtual   model   of   operations   and   the   prototype   system   of 
information   visualization   for   the   medical   purposes   is   under 
construction now. Systems based on this metaphor may be used 
for example for surgery learning [19].

CONCLUSIONS

5.
Our  preliminary  research   shows   the  applicability  of   “magic” 
metaphors for tasks in the interactive systems and systems basing 
on   virtual   reality   environments.   For   example,   the   search   of 
metaphors   of   moving   in   virtual   environments   may   be   needed 
magic transportation techniques, such as teleports and flights of 
various types (the flying carpet, the flying ship,  Roc, a winged 

horse). And metaphors  of intellectual  agents-informants  may be 
based on magic means of navigation.

In fairy tales and fantastic novels one can find a lot of the magic 
phenomena, such as  magic knowledge, war magic,  fulfillments 
of desires, telepathy and thought-reading, etc. But we yet don’t 
know  definitely,   whether   these   feature   useful   for   searching   of 
metaphors. Though for a choice of metaphors for manipulations 
with   objects   and   processes   in   virtual   environments   “the   war 
magic”   may  be   interesting.   The  war   magic  is   connected   with 
transferring   the   events   which   have   place   in   magic   space   into 
reality.   For   example,   any  variations   of  “a   magic   chess”,   where 
games   with  chess-men  are   transferred   into   land   battles,   or   the 
“naval” military magic where models of fight in a vat with water 
are   transferred   into   sea   battles.   These   ideas   (partly   close   to 
Voodoo magic) one may find in a number of folk and literary fairy 
tales.

Let's pay attention that folk fairy tales are governed by rigorous 
logic  of a plot  development  and a choice of characters. By the 
way, in literary fairy tales and fantasy novels, as a rule, this logic 
is observed. 

The analysis shows, that very exotic “magic” metaphors may be 
useful   to   form   any   interface   features.   However   realization   of 
interactive   systems   on   their   base   may   be   as   complex   as 
contradictory.   Magic   metaphors   are   frequently   transformed   to 
abstract   interface   opportunities,   not   keeping   the  appreciable 
connection with initial ideas. For  example, in case of Speaking 
Portrait metaphor the anthropomorphness of an agent  turned out 
not necessary. But there is necessary to endow it the function of 
the magic assistant, - conductor into the world of knowledge. Of 
course the transmuted abstractness of metaphors is an advantage, 
than a defect of their use. In the systems created for example for 
office automation or for end-user programming the  presence of 
magic   interface   manuals   may   appear   as   distracting   or   even 
irritating factor. However use such “magic features” as automatic 
returning electronic analogs of paper documents on its place after 
the ending of processing (see [20]) may be carried out without any 
special warnings  even for users -  non-specialists. Such  features 
are   well   conformed   to   common   sense   of   clerks   and   does   not 
demand   unnecessary  efforts   during   operations.   Infringement   of 
magic logic due to any absurd ideas or to farfetched subjective 
likeness   may   lead   to   serious   mistakes.   The   sharp   criticism   of 
interface   metaphors,   as   such,   is   connected   to   infringement   of 
magic logic in early variant Apple's interface (using the trash can 
metaphor to eject disks) [4].

6.
[1] Repenning A. 1993. Agensheets: A Tool for Building 

REFERENCES

Domain-Oriented, Dynamics, Visual Environment // Ph. D. 
Dissertation. University of Colorado at Boulder. Department 
of Computer Science. CU-CS-693-93. December 1993.

[2] Averbukh V.L. Visualization Metaphors. Programming and 
Computer Software. Vol. 27, No. 5, 2001 pp. 227-237.

[3] Dieberger   A.   1994.

 Navigation   in   Textual   Virtual 
Environments   using   a   City   Metaphor,   PhD   Thesis   at   the 
Vienna University of Technology. http://homepage.mac.com/
juggle5/WORK/publications/thesis/ThesisPDF.html

[4]

 Kay A. 1990. User interface: A personal view, In The Art of 
Human-Computer Interface Design, B. Laurel (ed.), 

[18] Averbukh V.L., Dernov G.S. 2008. Using of active 

information agents in learning environments (In Russian) - In 
Press.

[19] Averbukh V.L., Bakhterev M.O., Baydalin A.Yu., 

Gorbashevskiy D. Yu., Ismagilov D.R., Kazantsev A.Yu., 
Nebogatikova P.V., Popova A.V., Vasev P.A. 2008. 
Searching and Analysis of Interface and Visualization 
Metaphors // Human-Computer Interaction, New 
Developments. / Edited by Kikuo Asai. Chapter 3, Vienna, 
In-teh. ISBN 978-953-7619-14-5, pp. 49-84.

[20] Trushenkova, P. 2007. Local Application Metaphor: How to 

Create and Use. In  Electronic Proceedings of HCII 2007, 
Beijing, 2007.

Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1990, pp. 191-
207.

[5] Poupyrev I. 2001 3D interaction strategies and metaphors 

http://people.cs.vt.edu/~bowman/3dui.org/course_notes/siggr
aph2001/metaphors.pdf

[6] Kuhn, W. 1995. 7±2 Questions and Answers about 

Metaphors for GIS User Interfaces.  Cognitive Aspects of 
Human-Computer Interaction for Geographic Information  
Systems. (Nyerges, T.L., et al., eds.), Series D: Behavioural 
and Social Sciences, Vol. 83, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 113-122.

[7] Rohrer T (1995 Feelings Stuck in a GUI web: metaphors, 

image-schemas, and designing the human computer interface, 
or Metaphors we compute by: bringing magic into interface 
design. 1995. 

[8] Madsen K. H. 2000. Magic by Metaphors in Designing 

Augmented Reality Environments Proceedings of DARE  
2000 on Designing augmented reality environments  
Elsinore, Denmark , Pages: 167 – 169.

[9] Grosjean J., Coquillart S. 1999. The Magic Mirror: A 

Metaphor for Assisting the Exploration of Virtual Worlds. In 
Spring Conference on Computer Graphics, pp 125—129

[10] Tognazzini, 1999. B. Principles, Techniques, and Ethics of 
Stage Magic and Their Application to Human lnterface 
Design. Proceedings of the ACM INTERCHI’93 Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp 355-362, 
Amsterdam , 1999.

[11] Svanaes D., Verplank W. 2000. In Search of Metaphors for 

Tangible User Interfaces // Interfaces, DARE'2000, ACM, 
2000 http://www.idi.ntnu.no/~dags/papers/dare2000.pdf

[12] Pierce J.S., Stearns B.C., Pausch R. 1999. Voodoo Dolls: 

Seamless Interaction at Multiple Scales in Virtual 
Environments // Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics 
Proceedings of the 1999 symposium on Interactive 3D 
graphics Atlanta, Georgia, United States Pages: 141 – 145, 
1999. 

[13] Shumin Zhai, Kandogan E., Smith B.A, Selker T. 1999. In 

Search of the 'Magic Carpet': Design and Experimentation of 
a Bimanual 3D Navigation Interface Journal of Visual 
Languages and Computing (1999) 10, 3-17.

[14] Ciger J., Gutierrez M., Vexo F., Thalmann D. 2003. The 

Magic Wand // Spring Conference on Computer Graphics 
Proceedings of the 19th spring conference on Computer 
Graphics Budmerice, Slovakia SESSION: Virtual reality, 
Pages: 119 – 124, 2003.

[15] Kahn K. 1995. Metaphor Design. Case Study of an Animated 
Programming Environment // Proceedings of the 1995 
Computer Game Developer Conference April, 1995, Santa 
Clara, California

[16] Rawat T.J. 2005. WONDER OBJECTS Magic and 

Interactive Storytelling // Proceedings of ECHISE'05, held in 
Conjunction with PERVASIVE'05, May 11, 2005, Munich, 
Germany. Pp. 91-96.

[17] Propp V.  1958. Morphology of the Folk Tale // International 

Journal if American Linguistics, V. 24, N 4, pt 3. Oct. 1958.

