Exploring the Use of Virtual Worlds as a Scientific 
Research Platform: The Meta-Institute for 
Computational Astrophysics (MICA) 

S. G. Djorgovski

1, * 

 P. Hut

2,*

, S. McMillan
4,* 

3,*

, E. Vesperini

3,*

, 

*

R. Knop

, W. Farr

and M. J. Graham

1,* 

1 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
2 

The Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA 

3 

Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 

4 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 

{lead author email: george@astro.caltech.edu} 

Abstract.  We describe the Meta-Institute for Computational Astrophysics (MICA), 
the  first  professional  scientific  organization  based  exclusively  in  virtual  worlds 
(VWs). The goals of MICA are to explore the utility of the emerging VR and VWs 
technologies  for  scientific  and  scholarly  work  in  general,  and  to  facilitate  and 
accelerate  their  adoption  by  the  scientific  research  community.  MICA  itself  is  an 
experiment  in  academic  and  scientific  practices  enabled  by  the  immersive  VR 
technologies. We describe the current and planned activities and research directions 
of MICA, and offer some thoughts as to what the future developments in this arena 
may be.  

Keywords: Virtual Worlds; Astrophysics; Education; Scientific Collaboration and 
Communication; Data Visualization; Numerical Modeling. 

1   Introduction 

Immersive  virtual  reality  (VR),  currently  deployed  in  the  form  of  on-line  virtual 
worlds  (VWs)  is  a  rapidly  developing  set  of  technologies  which  may  become  the 
standard  interface  to  the  informational  universe  of  the  Web,  and  profoundly  change 
the way humans interact with information constructs and with each other.  Just as the 
Web and the browser technology have changed the world,  and almost every aspect of  

*  All  authors  are  also  associated  with  the  Meta-Institute  for  Computational  Astrophysics 

(MICA), http://mica-vw.org 
__________________________ 
To appear in the refereed proceedings of Facets of Virtual Environments (FaVE 2009), eds. F. 
Lehmann-Grube, J. Sablating, et al., ICST Lecture Notes Ser., Berlin: Springer Verlag (2009) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
modern society, including scientific research, education, and scholarship in general, a 
synthesis  of  the  VR  and  the  Web  promises  to  continue  this  evolutionary  process 
which intertwines humans and the world of information and knowledge they create. 

Yet,  the  scientific  community  at  large  seems  to  be  at  best  poorly  informed  (if 
aware at all) of this technological emergence,  let alone  engaged  in  spearheading  the 
developments of the new scientific, educational, and scholarly modalities enabled by 
these technologies, or even new ideas which may translate back into the better ways 
in  which  these  technologies  can  be  used  for  practical  and  commercial  applications 
outside  the  world  of  academia.    There  has  been  a  slowly  growing  interest  and 
engagement  of  the  academic  community  in  the  broad  area  of  humanities  and  social 
sciences in this arena (see, e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], and references therein), but the “hard 
sciences”  community  has  barely  touched  these  important  and  potentially  very 
powerful developments.  While a few relatively isolated individuals are exploring the 
potential uses of VWs as a scholarly platform, the scientific/academic community as a 
whole has yet to react to these opportunities in a meaningful way.  One reason for this 
negligence may be a lack of the real-life examples of the scientific utility of VWs.  It 
is important to engage the scientific community in serious uses and developments of 
immersive VR technologies.  

With  this  growing  set  of  needs  and  opportunities  in  mind,  following  some  initial 
explorations of the VWs as a scholarly interaction and communication platform [6, 7], 
we  formed  the  Meta-Institute  for  Computational  Astrophysics  (MICA)  [8]  in  the 
spring of 2008.  Here we describe the current status and activities of MICA, and its 
long-term goals. 

2   The Meta-Institute for Computational Astrophysics (MICA) 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  MICA  is  the  first  professional  scientific  organization 
based entirely in VWs.  It is intended to serve as an experimental platform for science 
and  scholarship  in  VWs,  and  it  will  be  the  organizing  framework  for  the  work 
proposed here.  MICA is currently based in Second Life (SL) [9] (it initially used the 
VW  of  Qwaq  [10]),  but  it  will  expand  and  migrate  to  other  VWs  and  venues  as 
appropriate.  The charter goals of MICA are: 

1.  Exploration,  development  and  promotion  of  VWs  and  VR  technologies  for 

professional research in astronomy and related fields. 

2.  To  provide  and  develop  novel  social  networking  venues  and  mechanisms  for 
scientific collaboration and communications, including professional meetings, 
effective telepresence, etc. 

3.  Use of VWs and VR technologies for education and public outreach. 
4.  To act as a forum for exchange of ideas and joint efforts with other scientific 
disciplines in promoting these goals for science and scholarship in general. 

To  this  effect,  MICA  conducts  weekly  professional  seminars,  bi-weekly  popular 
lectures, and many other regularly scheduled and occasional professional discussions 
and  public  outreach  events,  all  of  them  in  SL.    Professional  members  of  MICA 
include  scientists  (faculty,  staff  scientists,  postdocs,  and  graduate  students), 

technologists, and professional educators;  about  40  people as  of  this  writing  (March 
2009).  A broader group of MICA affiliates includes members of the general public 
interested in learning about astronomy and science in general; it currently consists of 
about  100  people  (also  as  of  March  2009).    The  membership  of  both  groups  is 
growing  steadily.    We  have  been  very  proactive  in  engaging  both  academic 
community  (in  real  life  and  in  SL)  and  general  public,  in  the  interests  of  our  stated 
goals.  Both our membership and activities are global in scope, with participants from 
all over the world, although a majority resides in the U.S. 

MICA is thus a testbed and a foothold for science and scholarship in VWs, and we 
hope to make it both a leadership institution and a center of excellence in this arena, 
as well as an effective portal to VWs for the scientific community at large.  While our 
focus is in astrophysics and related fields, where our professional expertise is, we see 
MICA  in  broader  terms,  and  plan  to  interact  with  scientists  and  educators  in  other 
disciplines as well.  We also plan to develop partnerships with the relevant industry 
laboratories,  and  conduct  joint  efforts  in  providing  innovation  in  this  emerging  and 
transformative technology. 

The practical goals of MICA are two-fold.  First, we wish to lead by example, and 
demonstrate  the  utility  of  VWs  and  immersive  VR  environments  generally  for 
scientific  research  in  fields  other  than  humanities  and  social  sciences  (where  we 
believe  the  case  is  already  strong).    In  that  process,  we  hope  to  define  the  “best 
practices” and optimal use of VR tools in research and education, including scholarly 
communications.    This  is  the  kind  of  activity  that  we  expect  will  engage  a  much 
broader  segment  of  the  academic  community  in  exploration  and  use  of  VR 
technologies.    Second,  we  hope  to  develop  new  research  tools  and  techniques,  and 
help lay the foundations of the informational environments for the next generation of 
VR-enabled Web.    Specifically, we are working in the following directions: 

2.1  Improving Scientific Collaboration and Communication 

Our  experience  is  that  an  immediate  benefit  of  VWs  is  as  an  effective  scientific 
communication  and  collaboration  platform.    This  includes  individual,  group,  or 
collaboration  meetings,  seminars,  and  even  full-scale  conferences.    You  can  interact 
with your colleagues as if they were in the same room, and yet they may be half way 
around  the  world.    This  is  a  technology  which  will  finally  make  telecommuting 
viable, as it provides a key element that was missing from the flat-Web paradigm: the 
human interaction.  We finally have a “virtual water cooler”, the collegial gathering 
work spaces to enhance and expand our cyber-workspaces. 

VWs are thus a very green technology: you can save your time, your money, and 
your planet by not traveling if you don't have to.   This works well enough already, at 
almost no cost, and it will get better as the interfaces improve, driven by the games 
and  entertainment  industry,  if  nothing  else.    This  shift  to  virtual  meetings  can 
potentially save millions of dollars of research funding, which could be used for more 
productive  purposes  than  travel  to  collaboration  or  committee  meetings,  or  to 
conferences of any kind.  

We have an active program of seminars, lectures, collaboration meetings, and free-

form scholarly discussions within the auspices of MICA, and we are proactive in  

informing  our  real-life  academic  community  about  these  possibilities.    We  offer 
coaching and mentoring for the novices, and share our experiences on how to best use 
immersive VR for scientific communication and collaboration with other researchers.  

Figure 1.  MICA members attending a regular weekly astrophysics seminar, in this case by Dr. 
M.  Trenti,  given  in  the  StellaNova  sim  in  SL.    Participants  in  these  meetings  are  distributed 
world-wide, but share a common virtual space in which they interact.  [Preprint with the full-
resolution color figures is available at http://www.mica-vw.org/wiki/index.php/Publications] 

In  addition,  starting  in  a  near  future,  we  plan  to  organize  a  series  of  topical 
workshops on various aspects of computational science (both general, and specific to 
astrophysics), as well as broader-base annual conferences on science and scholarship 
in  VWs,  including  researchers,  technologists,  and  educators  from  other  disciplines.  
These  meetings  will  be  either  entirely  based  in  VWs  (SL  to  start),  or  be  in  “mixed 
reality”,  with  both  real-life  and  virtual  environment  gatherings  simultaneously, 
connected by streaming media. 

Genuine  interdisciplinary  cross-fertilization  is  a  much-neglected  path  to  scientific 
progress.  Given that many of the most important challenges facing us (e.g., the global 
climate  change,  energy,  sustainability,  etc.)  are  fundamentally  interdisciplinary  in 
nature, and not reducible to any given scientific discipline (physics, biology, etc.), the 
lack  of  effective  and  pervasive  mechanisms  for  establishment  of  inter-,  multi-,  or 
cross-disciplinary interactions is a serious problem which affects us all.  One reason 
for  the  pervasive  academic  inertia  in  really  engaging  in  true  and  effective 
interdisciplinary  activities  is  the  lack  of  easy  communication  venues,  intellectual 
melting pots where such encounters can occur and flourish. 

VWs as scientific interaction environments offer a great new opportunity to foster 
interdisciplinary  meetings  of  the  minds.    They  are  easy,  free,  do  not  require  travel, 
and  the  social  barriers  are  very  low  and  easily  overcome  (the  ease  and  the  speed  of 
striking  conversations  and  friendships  is  one  of  the  more  striking  features  of  VWs).  
To  this  end,  we  will  establish  a  series  of  broad-based  scientific  gatherings,  from 
informal small group discussions, to full-size conferences.  We note that once a VR 

 
 
 
 
environment is established, e.g., in a “sim” in SL, the cost (in both time and money) 
of  organizing  conferences  is  almost  negligible,  and  the  easy  and  instant  worldwide 
access with no physical travel makes them easy to attend. 

Thus, we have developed a dedicated “MICA island” (sim), named StellaNova [11] 
within SL.  This is intended to be the Institute’s home location in VWs; it is currently 
in  SL  as  the  most  effective  and  convenient  venue,  but  we  will  likely  expand  and 
migrate to other VW venues when that becomes viable and desirable.  StellaNova is 
used  as  a  staging  area  for  most  of  our  activities,  including  meetings,  workshops, 
discussions, etc.    It is intended to be a friendly and welcoming virtual environment 
for scholarly collaborations and discussions, very much in the tradition of academe of 
the golden age Athens. 

A  part  of  our  exploration  of  VWs  as  scientific  communication  and  collaboration 
platforms  is  an  investigation  in  the  mixed  use  of  traditional  Web  (1.0,  2.0,  …  3.0?) 
and VR tools; we are interested in optimizing the uses of information technology for 
scientific  communications  generally,  and  not  just  exclusively  in  a  VR  context, 
although a VR component would always be present.  We plan to evaluate the relative 
merits  of  these  technologies  for  different  aspects  of  professional  scientific  and 
scholarly interaction and networking – while the Web mechanisms may be better for 
some things, VWs may be better for others. 

Finally, we intend to investigate the ways in which immersive VR can be used as a 
part  of  scientific  publishing,  either  as  an  equivalent  of  the  current  practice  of 
supplementing  traditional  papers  with  on-line  material  on  the  Web,  or  even  as  a 
primary publishing medium.  Just as the Web offers new possibilities and modalities 
for scholarly publishing which do not simply mimic the age-old printed-paper media 
publishing, so we may find qualitatively novel uses of VWs as a publishing venue in 
their own right.  After all, what is important is the content, and not the technical way 
in  which  the  information  is  encoded;  and  some  media  are  far  more  effective  than 
others in conveying particular types of scholarly content.  

2.2   A New Approach to Numerical Simulations 

Immersive VR environments open some intriguing novel possibilities in the ways in 
which  scientists  can  set  up,  perform,  modify,  and  examine  the  output  of  numerical 
simulations.  In MICA, we use as our primary science environment the gravitational 
N-body  problem,  since  that  is  where  our  professional  expertise  is  concentrated  [12, 
13, 14, 15, 16, 17], but we expect that most of the features we develop will find much 
broader  applicability  in  the  visualization  of  more  general  scientific  or  abstract  data 
sets.      Our  goal  is  to  create  virtual,  collaborative  visualization  tools  for  use  by 
computational scientists working in an  arbitrary VW environment, including SL [9], 
OpenSim  [18],  etc.     Here  we  address  interactive  and  immersive  visualization  in  the 
numerical  modeling  and  simulations  context;  we  address  the  more  general  issues  of 
data visualization below.  For an initial report, see [40]. 

We  started  our  development  of  in-world  visualization  tools  by  creating  scripts  to 
display a set of related gravitational N-body experiments.   The gravitational N-body 
problem is easy to state and hard to solve: given the masses, positions, and velocities 
of  a  collection  of  N  bodies  moving  under  the  influence  of  their  mutual  Newtonian 

gravitational  interactions,  according  to  the  laws  of  Newtonian  mechanics,  determine 
the bodies' positions and velocities at any subsequent time.  In most cases, the motion 
has  no  analytic  solution,  and  must  be  computed  numerically.   Both  the  character  of 
the motion and the applicable numerical techniques depend on the scale of the system. 
Most of the essential features of the few-body problem can be grasped from studies 
of the motion of 3-5 body systems, in bound or scattering configurations.  The physics 
and  basic  mathematics  are  elementary,  and 
is 
straightforward.   Yet,  despite  these  modest  foundations,  such  systems  yield  an 
extraordinarily  rich  spectrum  of  possible  outcomes. 
that  simple 
deterministic  systems  can  lead  to  complex,  chaotic  results  is  an  important  paradigm 
shift  in  many  students'  perception  of  physics.   Few-body  dynamics  is  also  critically 
important  in  the  determining  the  evolution  and  appearance  of  many  star  clusters,  as 
well as the stability of observed multiple stellar systems. 

the  required  programming 

 The 

idea 

These systems are small enough that the entire calculation could be done entirely 
within  VWs,  although  we  would  wish  to  preserve  the  option  of  also  importing  data 
from external sources.   This tests the basic capabilities of the visualization system  – 
updating  particles,  possibly  interpolating  their  motion,  stopping,  restarting,  running 
backwards, resetting to arbitrary times, zooming in and out, etc. 

The next level of simulation involves broadening the context of our calculations to 
study systems containing several tens of particles, which will allow us to see both the 
few-body dynamics and how they affect the parent system.  Specifically, the study of 
binary  interactions  and  heating,  and  the  response  of  the  larger  cluster,  will  illustrate 
the fundamental dynamical processes driving the evolution of most star clusters.  We 
will study the dynamics of systems containing binary systems, a possible spectrum of 
stellar masses, and real (if simplified) stellar properties.  These simulations are likely 
to lie at the high end of calculations that can be done entirely within the native VW 
environments,  and  much  of  the  data  may  have  to  be  imported.   The  capacity  to 
identify,  zoom  in  on,  and  follow  interesting  events,  and  to  change  the  displayed 
attributes of stars on the fly will be key to the visualization experience at this level. 

The evolution of very large systems, such as galaxies, is governed mainly by large-
scale gravitational forces rather than by small-scale individual interactions, so studies 
of galaxy interactions highlight different physics and entail quite different numerical 
algorithms from the previous examples.  It will not be feasible to do these calculations 
within  the  current  generation  of  VWs,  or  to  stream  in  data  fast  enough  to  allow  for 
animation,  so  the  goal  in  this  case  will  be  to  import,  render,  and  display  a  series  of 
static  3-D  frames,  which  will  nevertheless  be  “live”  in  the  sense  that  particles  of 
different sorts (stars, gas, dark matter, etc.) or with other user-defined properties can 
be identified and highlighted appropriately. 

The  choice  of  N  ~  50,000  is  small  compared  to  the  number  of  stars  in  an  actual 
galaxy,  and  it  is  more  typical  of  a  large  star  cluster.    However,  with  suitable 
algorithms, galaxies can be adequately modeled by simulations on this scale, and this 
choice  of  N  is  typical  of  low-resolution  calculations  of  galaxy  dynamics,  such  as 
galaxy  collisions  and  mergers,  that  are  often  used  for  pedagogical  purposes.    It  also 
represents  a  compromise  in  the  total  amount  of  data  that  can  be  transferred  into  the 
virtual  environment  in  a  reasonable  time.   The  intent  here  will  be  to  allow  users  to 
visualize the often complex 3D geometries of these systems, and to explore some of 
their  dynamical  properties.   This  visualization  effort  in  this  case  will  depend  on 

efficient  two-way  exchange  of  data  between  the  in-world  presentation  and  the 
external  engine  responsible  for  both  the  raw  data  and  the  computations  underlying 
many aspects of the display. 

Figure  2.  A  MICA  astrophysicist  immersed  in,  and  interacting  with,  a  gravitational  N-body 
simulation using the OpenSim environment. .  [Preprint with the full-resolution color figures is 
available at http://www.mica-vw.org/wiki/index.php/Publications] 

 
 
 
 
 
Our first goal is thus to explore the interactive visualization of simulations running 
within the VWs computational environments, thus offering better ways to understand 
the  physics  of  the  simulated  processes  –  essentially  the  qualitative  changes  in  the 
ways scientists would interact with their simulations.  Our second goal is to explore 
the transition regime where the computation is actually done externally, on a powerful 
or specialized machine, but the results are imported into a VW environment, while the 
user feedback and control are exported back, and determine the practical guidelines as 
to how and when such a transition should be deployed in a real-life numerical study of 
astrophysical  systems.    The  insights  gained  here  would  presumably  be  portable  to 
other  disciplines  (e.g.,  biology,  chemistry,  other  fields  of  physics,  etc.)  where 
numerical simulations are the only option of modeling of complex systems.  

2.3  Immersive Multi-Dimensional Data Visualization 

In  a  more  general  context,  VWs  offer  intriguing  new  possibilities  for  scientific 
visualization or “visual analytics” [19, 20].  As the size, and especially the complexity 
of  scientific  data  sets  increase,  effective  visualization  becomes  a  key  need  for  data 
analysis:  it  is  a  bridge  between  the  quantitative  information  contained  in  complex 
scientific  measurements,  and  the  human  intuition  which  is  necessary  for  a  true 
understanding of the phenomena in question. 

Most sciences are now drowning under the exponential growth of data sets, which 
are  becoming  increasingly  more  complex.    For  example,  in  astronomy  we  now  get 
most of our data from large digital sky surveys, which may detect billions of sources 
and measure hundreds of attributes for each; and then we perform data fusion across 
different  wavelengths,  times,  etc.,  increasing  the  data  complexity  even  further.  
Likewise, numerical simulations also generate huge, multi-dimensional output, which 
must be interpreted and matched to equally large and complex sets of measurements.  
Examples  include  structure  formation  in  the  universe,  modeling  of  supernova 
explosions, dense stellar systems, etc.  This is an even larger problem in biological or 
environmental  sciences,  among  others.    We  note  that  the  same  challenges  apply  to 
visualization of data from measurements, numerical simulations, or their combination. 
How  do  we  visualize  structures  (clusters,  multivariate  correlations,  patterns, 
anomalies...) present in our data, if they are intrinsically hyper-dimensional?  This is 
one of the key problems in data-driven science and discovery today.  And it is not just 
the  data,  but  also  complex  mathematical  or  organizational  structures  or  networks, 
which can be inherently and essentially multi-dimensional, with complex topologies, 
etc.  Effective visualization of such complex and highly-dimensional data and theory 
structures  is  a  fundamental  challenge  for  the  data-driven  science  of  the  21st  century, 
and these problems will grow ever sharper, as we move from Terascale to Petascale 
data sets of ever increasing complexity. 

VWs  provide  an  easy,  portable  venue  for  pseudo-3D  visualization,  with  various 
techniques  and  tricks  to  encode  more  parameter  space  dimensions,  with  an  added 
benefit  of  being  able  to  interact  with  the  data  and  with  your  collaborators.    While 
there are special facilities like “caves” for 3D data immersion, they usually require a 
room,  expensive  equipment,  special  goggles,  and  only  one  person  at  a  time  can 

 
benefit from the 3D view.  With an immersive VW on your laptop or a desktop, you 
can do it for free, and share the experience with as many of your collaborators as you 
can squeeze in the data space you are displaying, in a shared, interactive environment.  
These  are  significant  practical  and  conceptual  advantages  over  the  traditional 
graphics packages, and if VWs become the standard scientific interaction venue as we 
expect,  then  bringing  the  data  to  the  scientists  only  makes  sense.    Immersing 
ourselves in our data may help us think differently about them, and about the patterns 
we  see.    With  scientists  immersed  in  their  data  sets,  navigating  around  them,  and 
interacting with both the data and each other, new approaches to data presentation and 
understanding may emerge. 

Figure  3.  MICA  scientists  in  an  immersive  data  visualization  experiment,  developed  by  D. 
Enfield and S.G. Djorgovski. Data from a digital sky survey are represented in a 6-dimensional 
parameter space (XYZ coordinates, symbol sizes, shapes, and colors).  [Preprint with the full-
resolution color figures is available at http://www.mica-vw.org/wiki/index.php/Publications] 

We  have  conducted  some  preliminary  investigation  of  simple  multi-dimensional 
data  visualization  scripting  tools  within  SL.    We  find  that  we  can  encode  data 
parameter spaces with up to a dozen dimensions in an interactive, immersive pseudo-
3D display.   At this point we run into the ability of the human mind to easily grasp 
the  informational  content  thus  encoded.    A  critical  task  is  to  experiment  further  in 
finding  the  specific  encoding  modalities  that  maximize  our  ability  to  perceive 
multiple  data  dimensions  simultaneously,  or  selectively  (e.g.,  by  focusing  on  what 
may stand out as an anomalous pattern). 

One  technical  challenge  is  the  number  of  data  objects  that  can  be  displayed  in  a 
particular VW environment; SL is especially limiting in this regard.  Our next step is 
to  experiment  with  visualizations  in  custom  VW  environments,  e.g.,  using  OpenSim 
[18],  which  can  offer  scalable  solutions  needed  for  the  modern  large  data  sets.  
However, even an environment like SL can be used for experimentation with modest-
scale data sets (e.g., up to ~ 104 data objects), and used to develop the methods for an 

 
 
 
 
 
optimal  encoding  of  highly-dimensional  information  from  the  viewpoint  of  human 
perception and understanding. 

Additional  questions  requiring  further  research  include  studies  of  combined 
displays of data density fields, vector fields, and individual data point clouds, and the 
ways  in  which  they  can  be  used  in  the  most  effective  way.    This  is  a  matter  of 
optimizing  human  perception  of  visually  displayed  information,  a  problem  we  will 
tackle in a purely experimental fashion, using VWs as a platform. 

The  next  level  of  complexity  and  sophistication  comes  with  introduction  of  the 
time  element,  i.e.,  sequential  visualization  of  changing  data  spaces  (an  obvious 
example  is  the  output  of  numerical  simulations  of  gravitational  N-body  systems, 
discussed in the previous section).  We are all familiar with digital movies displaying 
such information in a 2-D format.  What we are talking about here is immersive 3-D 
data cinematography, a novel concept, and probably a key to a true virtualization of 
scientific research.  Learning how to explore dynamical data sets in this way may lead 
to some powerful new ways in which we extract knowledge and understanding from 
our data sets and simulations. 

Implementing  such  data  visualization  environment  poses  a  number  of  technical 
challenges.    We  plan  experiment  with  interfacing  of  the  existing  visualization  tools 
and packages with VW platforms: effectively, importing the pseudo-3D visualization 
signal into VWs, but with a goal of embedding the user avatar in the displayed space.  
We may be able to adopt some emergent solutions of this problem from the games or 
entertainment industry, should any come up.  Alternatively, we may attempt to encode 
a  modest-scale  prototype  system  within  the  VW  computational  environments 
themselves.  A hybrid approach may be also possible. 

2.4  Exploring the OpenGrid and OpenSim Technologies 

Most  of  the  currently  open  VWs  are  based  on  proprietary  software  architectures, 
formats, or languages, and do not interoperate with each other; they are closed worlds, 
and thus probably dead ends.  OpenSimulator (or OpenSim) [18] is a VW equivalent 
of  the  open  source  software  movement.    It  is  an  open-source  C#  program  which 
implements the SL VW server protocol, and which can be used to create a 3-D VW, 
and  includes  facilities  for  creating  custom  avatars,  chatting  with  others  in  the  VR 
environment, building 3-D content and creating complex 3-D applications in VW.  It 
can  also  be  extended  via  loadable  modules  or  Web  service  interfaces  to  build  more 
custom 3-D applications.  OpenSim is released under a BSD license, making it both 
open source, and commercially friendly to embed in products. 

in 

To  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  this  approach,  we  have  conducted  some 
preliminary  experiments 
the  uses  of  OpenSim  for  astrophysical  N-body 
simulations,  using  a  plugin,  MICAsim  [21,  22].    We  have  modified  the  standard 
OpenSim physics engine as a plugin, to run gravitational N-body experiments in this 
VW  environment.    We  found  that  it's  practical  to  run  about  30  bodies  in  a 
gravitational  cold-collapse  model  with  force  softening  to  avoid  hard  binary 
interactions in the simulator, where a few simulator seconds corresponds to a crossing 
time.   We  believe  that  we  could  get  another  factor  of  two  in  N  from  code 
optimizations in this setting. 

We  will  continue  to  explore  actively  the  use  of  OpenSim  for  our  work,  and  in 
particular  in  the  arena  or  numerical  simulations  and  visualization,  and  pay  a  close 
attention to the issues of avatar and inventory interoperability and portability.   A start 
along these lines is ScienceSim [23].  Having an immersive VR environment on one’s 
own machine can bypass many of the limitations of the commercial VW grids, such 
as SL, especially in the numbers of data points that can be rendered. 

It  is  likely  that  the  convergence  of  the  Web  and  immersive  VR  would  be  in  the 
form  whereby  one  runs  and  manages  their  own  VR  environment  in  a  way  which  is 
analogous  to  hosting  and  managing  one’s  own  website  today.    OpenSim  and  its 
successors,  along  with  a  suitable  standardization  for  interoperability,  may  provide  a 
practical way forward; see also [24]. 

2.5   Information Architectures for the Next Generation Web 

One plausible vision of the future is that there will be a synthesis of the Web, with its 
all-encompassing  informational  content,  and  the  immersive  VR  as  an  interface  to  it, 
since it is so well suited to the human sensory input mechanisms.   One can think of 
immersive  VR  as  the  next  generation  browser  technology,  which  will  be  as 
qualitatively  different  from  the  current,  flat  desktop  and  web  page  paradigm,  as  the 
current  browsers  were  different  from  the  older,  terminal  screen  and  file  directory 
paradigm for information display and access.  A question then naturally arises: what 
will  be  the  newly  enabled  ways  of  interacting  with  the  informational  content  of  the 
Web, and how should we structure and architect the information so that it is optimally 
displayed and searched under the new paradigm? 

To  this  effect,  what  we  plan  to  do  is  to  investigate  the  ways  in  which  large 
scientific  databases  and  connections  between  them  (e.g.,  in  federated  data  grid 
frameworks, such as the Virtual Observatory [25, 26, 27]) can be optimally rendered 
in an immersive VR environment.  This is of course a universal challenge, common to 
all sciences and indeed any informational holdings on the Web, beyond academia. 

Looking  further  ahead,  many  of  the  new  scientific  challenges  and  opportunities 
will be driven by the continuing exponential growth of data volumes, with the typical 
doubling  times  of  ~  1.5  years,  driven  by  the  Moore’s  law  which  characterizes  the 
technology  which  produces  the  data  [35,  36].    An  even  greater  set  of  challenges  is 
presented  by  the  growth  of  data  complexity,  especially  as  we  are  heading  into  the 
Petascale regime [37, 38, 39].   However, these issues are not limited to science: the 
growth of the Web constantly overwhelms the power of our search technologies, and 
brute-force approaches seldom work. 

Processing,  storing,  searching,  and  synthesizing  data  will  require  a  scalable 
environment  and  approach,  growing  from  the  current  “Cloud+Client”  paradigm.  
Only  by  merging  data  and  compute  systems  into  a  truly  global  or  Web-scale 
environment – virtualizing the virtual – will sufficient computational and data storage 
capacity be available.  A strong feature of such an environment will be high volume, 
frequent,  low  latency  services  built  on  message-oriented  architectures  as  opposed  to 
today’s  service-oriented  architectures.    There  will  be  a  heterogeneity  of  structured, 
semi-structured  and  unstructured  data  that  will  need  to  be  persisted  in  an  easily 

searchable manner.  Atop of that, we will likely see a strong growth in semantic web 
technologies. 

This changing landscape of data growth and intelligent data discovery poses a slew 
of  new  challenges:  we  will  need  some  qualitatively  new  and  different  ways  of 
visualizing  data  spaces,  data  structures,  and  search  results  (here  by  “data”  we  mean 
any  kind  of  informational  objects  –  numerical,  textual,  images,  video,  etc.).  
Immersive VR may become a critical technology to confront these issues. 

Scientists will have to be increasingly immersed into their data and simulations, as 
well  as  the  broader  informational  environment,  i.e.,  the  next  generation  Web, 
whatever  its  technological  implementations  are,  simply  for  the  sake  of  efficiency.  
However, the exponential growth of data volumes, diversity, and complexity already 
overwhelms the processing capacity of a single human mind, and it is inevitable that 
we will need some capable AI tools to aid us in exploring and understanding the data 
and the output of numerical models and simulations. 

Much of the data discovery and data analysis may be managed by intelligent agents 
residing  in  the  computing/data  environment,  that  have  been  programmed  with  our 
beliefs, desires and intents.  They will serve both as proxies for us reacting to results 
and  new  data  according  to  programmed  criteria  expressed  in  declarative  logic 
languages  and  also  as  our  interface  point  into  the  computing/data  environment  for 
activities  such  as  data  visualization.  Interacting  with  an  agent  will  be  a  fully 
immersive  experience  combining  elements  of  social  networking  with  advances  in 
virtual world software. 

Thus,  we  see  a  possible  diversification  of  the  concept  of  avatars  –  as  they  blend 
with intelligent software agents, possibly leading to new modalities of human and AI 
representation  in  virtual  environments.    Humans  create  technology,  and  technology 
changes us and our culture in unexpected ways; immersive VR represents an excellent 
example of an enabling cognitive technology [28, 29]. 

2.6   Education and Public Outreach 

VWs are becoming another empowering, world-flattening educational technology, 
very much like as the Web has already done.  Anyone from anywhere could attend a 
lecture in SL, whether they are a student or simply a science enthusiast.   What VWs 
provide,  extending  the  Web,  is  the  human  presence  and  interaction,  which  is  an 
essential component of an effective learning process.  That is what makes VWs such a 
powerful  platform  for  any  and  all  educational  activities  which  involve  direct  human 
interactions (e.g., lectures, discussions, tutoring, etc.).  In that, they complement and 
surpass  the  traditional  Web,  which  is  essentially  a  medium  to  convey  pre-recorded 
lectures, as text, video, slides, etc. 

Beyond the direct mappings of traditional lecture formats, VWs can really enable 
novel  collaborative  learning  and  educational  interactions.    Since  buildings,  scenery, 
and props are cheap and easy to create, VWs are a great environment for situational 
training,  exploration  of  scenarios,  and  such.    Medical  students  can  dissect  virtual 
cadavers,  and  architects  can  play  with  innovative  building  designs,  just  moving  the 
bits, without disturbing any atoms.  Likewise, physicists can construct virtual replicas 
of an experimental apparatus, which students can examine, assemble, or take apart. 

There is already a vibrant, active community of educators in SL [30, 31], and many 
excellent outreach efforts are concentrated in the SL SciLands virtual continent [32].  
MICA’s  own  efforts  include  a  well-attended  series  of  popular  talks,  “Dr.Knop  talks 
astronomy” [33], which includes guest lecturers, as well as informal weekly “Ask an 
Astronomer” gatherings.  We will continue with these efforts, and expand the range of 
our popular lectures. 

Under  the  auspices  of  MICA,  we  are  starting  to  experiment  with  regularly 
scheduled classes and/or class discussions in SL, and we will explore such activities 
in  other  VW  environments  as  well.    These  may  include  an  introductory  astronomy 
class,  or  an  advanced  topic  seminar  aimed  at  graduate  students.    We  will  also  try  a 
hybrid format, where the students would read the lecture materials on their own, and 
use the class time for an open discussion and explanations of difficult concepts in a 
VW setting.  We also plan to conduct a series of international “summer schools” on 
the topics of numerical stellar dynamics, computational science, and possibly others, 
in an immersive and interactive VW venue. 

3   Concluding Comments 

In MICA, we have started to build a new type of a scientific institution, dedicated to 
an exploration of immersive VR and VWs technologies for science, scholarship, and 
education,  aimed  primarily  at  academics  in  physical  and  other  natural  sciences.  
MICA itself is an experiment in the new ways of conducting scholarly work, as well 
as a testbed for new ideas and research modalities.  It is also intended to be a gateway 
for other scholars, new to VWs, to start to explore the potential and the practical uses 
of these technologies in an easy, welcoming, and collegial environment. 

MICA  represents  a  multi-faceted  effort  aimed  to  develop  new  modalities  of 
scientific research and communication using new technologies of immersive VR and 
VWs.    We  believe  that  they  will  enable  and  open  qualitatively  new  ways  in  which 
scientists  interact  among  themselves,  with  their  data,  and  with  their  numerical 
simulations,  and  thus  foster  some  genuine  new  “computational  thinking”  [34] 
approaches to science and scholarship. 

We use the VWs as a platform to conduct rigorous research activities in the fields 
of computational astrophysics and data-intensive astronomy, seeking to determine the 
potential of these new technologies, as well as to develop a new set of best practices 
for  scholarly  and  research  activities  enabled  by  them,  and  by  a  combination  of  the 
existing Web-based and the new VR technologies.  In that process, we may facilitate 
new  astrophysical  discoveries.    We  also  hope  to  generate  new  ideas  and  methods 
which  will  in  turn  stimulate  development  of  new  technological  capabilities  in 
immersive VR and VWs, both as research and communication tools, and in the true 
sense of human-centered computational engineering. 

The central idea here is that immersive VR and VWs are potentially transformative 
technologies  on  par  with  the  Web  itself,  which  can  and  should  be  used  for  serious 
purposes,  including  science  and  scholarship;  they  are  not  just  a  form  of  games.    By 
conveying  this  idea  to  professional  scientists  and  scholars,  and  by  leading  by 

example, we hope to engage a much broader segment of the academic community in 
utilizing, and developing further these technologies. 

This evolutionary process may have an impact well beyond the academia, as these 
technologies blend with the cyber-world of the Web, and change the ways we interact 
with each other and with the informational content of the next generation Web.  While 
at  a  minimum  we  expect  to  develop  a  set  of  “best  practices”  for  the  use  of  VR  and 
VWs  technologies  in  science  and  scholarship,  it  is  also  possible  that  practical  and 
commercial  applications  may  result  or  may  be  inspired  by  this  work.    If  indeed 
immersive VR becomes a major new component of the modern society, as a platform 
for commerce, entertainment, etc., the potential impact may be very significant.   

In our work, we are assisted by a large number of volunteers, including scientists, 
technologists, and educators, most of them professional members of MICA.  Some of 
them  are  actively  engaged  in  the  VWs  development  activities  under  the  auspices  of 
various  governmental  agencies,  e.g.,  NASA.    We  have  also  established  a  strong 
network  of  international  partnerships,  including  colleagues  and  institutions  in  the 
Netherlands, Italy, Japan, China, and Canada (a list which is bound to grow).  We are 
also  establishing  collaborative  partnerships  with  several  groups  in  the  IT  industry, 
most  notably  Microsoft  Research,  and  IBM,  and  we  expect  that  this  set  of 
collaborations will also grow in time.   This broad spectrum of professionally engaged 
parties showcases the growing interest in the area of scientific and scholarly uses of 
VWs, and their further developments for such purposes. 

Acknowledgments.    The  work  of  MICA  has  been  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S. 
National  Science  Foundation  grants  AST-0407448  and  HCC-0917814,  and  by  the 
Ajax  Foundation.  We  also  acknowledge  numerous  volunteers  who  have  contributed 
their time and talents to this organization, especially S. McPhee, S. Smith, K. Prowl, 
C.  Woodland,  D.  Enfield,  S.  Cianciulli,  T.  McConaghy,  W.  Scotti,  J.  Ames,  and  C. 
White, among many others. We also thank the conference organizers for their interest 
and  support.    SGD  also  acknowledges  the  creative  atmosphere  of  the  Aspen  Center 
for Physics, where this paper was completed. 

References 

1.  Bainbridge, W.S.: The Scientific Research Potential of Virtual Worlds.  Science, 317, 472– 

476 (2007) 

2.  Journal of Virtual Worlds Research, http://jvwresearch.org/ 
3.  TerraNova blog, various authors, http://terranova.blogs.com/ 
4.  Boellstorff,  T.:  Coming  of  Age  in  Second  Life:  An  Anthropologist  Explores  the  Virtually 

Human. Princeton University Press (2008) 

5.  Convergence of the Real and the Virtual, the first scientific conference held inside World of 

Warcraft, May 9-11, 2008, http://mysite.verizon.net/wsbainbridge/convergence.htm 

6.  Hut, P.: Virtual Laboratories.  Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl., 164, 38–53 (2006) 
7.  Hut,  P.:  Virtual  Laboratories  and  Virtual  Worlds.    In:  E.  Vesperini  et  al.  (eds.)  Proc.  IAU  
Symp.  246,  Dynamical  Evolution  of  Dense  Stellar  Systems,  pp.  447–456.    Cambridge 
University Press (2008) 

8.  The Meta-Institute for Computational Astrophysics (MICA), http://www.mica-vw.org/ 

 
 
9.  Second Life, http://secondlife.com/ 
10.  Qwaq Forums, http://www.qwaq.com/ 
11.  MICA SL island, StellaNova, http://slurl.com/secondlife/StellaNova/126/125/28 
12.  The Use of Supercomputers in Stellar Dynamics, 1986, eds. P. Hut & S. McMillan, New 

York: Springer Verlag 

13.  Hut, P., Makino, J., & McMillan, S.: Modelling the Evolution of Globular Star Clusters. 

Nature, 363, 31–35 (1988) 

14.  The Art of Computational Science, http://www.ArtCompSci.org 
15.  The Starlab Project, http://www.ids.ias.edu/~starlab 
16.  MUSE: a Multiscale Multiphysics Scientific Environment, http://muse.li 
17.  Hut, P., Mineshige, S., Heggie, D. & Makino, J.: Modeling Dense Stellar Systems.  Prog. 

Theor. Phys., 118, 187–209 (2007) 

18.  OpenSim project, http://opensimulator.org/  
19.  SL Data Visualization wiki, http://sldataviz.pbwiki.com/ 
20.    Bourke,  P.:  Evaluating  Second  Life  as  a  Tool  for  Collaborative  Scientific  Visualization.  
line  at 

In:  Computer  Games  and  Allied  Technology  2008  conf.,  available  on 
http://local.wasp.uwa.edu.au/~pbourke/papers/cgat08/ (2008) 

21.  Johnson,  A.,  Ames,  J.,  &  Farr,  W.:  The  MICASim  plugin.    Available  on  line  at 

http://code.google.com/p/micasim/ (2008) 

22.    Farr,  W.,  Hut,  P.,  Johnson,  A.,  &  Ames,  J.:  An  Experiment  in  Using  Virtual  Worlds  for 

Scientific Visualization, paper in prep. (2009) 
23.  ScienceSim project wiki, http://sciencesim.com/   
24.  Virtual World Interoperability wiki, http://vwinterop.wikidot.com/ 
25.  The U.S. National Virtual Observatory, http://www.us-vo.org/ 
24.  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance, http://www.ivoa.net/ 
27.   Djorgovski, S.G., & Williams, R.: Virtual Observatory: From Concept to Implementation.  

ASP Conf. Ser., 345, 517--530 (2005) 

28.  Converging  Technologies 

Improving  Human  Performance:  Nanotechnology, 
Biotechnology,  Information  Technology,  and  Cognitive  Science,  eds.  M.  Roco  &  W. 
Bainbridge, NSF report, Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation (2002) 

for 

29.    Managing  Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno  Innovations:  Converging  Technologies  in  Society,  eds. 
W. Bainbridge & M. Roco, NSF report, Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation (2005) 

30.  Second Life Education Wiki, http://simteach.com/ 
31. The Immersive Education Initiative, http://immersiveeducation.org/  
32.  SciLands Virtual Continent, http://www.scilands.org/ 
33.  MICA popular lectures series, http://mica-vw.org/wiki/index.php/Popular_Talks 
34.  Wing, J.: Computational Thinking. Comm. ACM, 49, 33–35 (2006) 
35. Szalay, A., & Gray, J.: The World-Wide Telescope. Science, 293, 2037–2040 (2001) 
36. Szalay, A., & Gray, J.: Science in an Exponential World. Nature, 440, 15–16 (2006) 
37.  Towards  2020  Science,  ed.  S.  Emmott,  Microsoft  Research  Publ.  (2006).  See  also  the 
website, http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/cambridge/projects/towards2020science/ 
38.  Djorgovski,  S.G.:  Virtual  Astronomy,  Information  Technology,  and  the  New  Scientific 
Methodology.  In Proc. CAMP05: Computer Architectures for Machine Perception, eds. V. 
Di Gesu & D. Tegolo, IEEE Conf. Proc., 125–132 (2005) 

39. G. Bell, T. Hey, & A. Szalay: Beyond the Data Deluge. Science, 232, 1297–1298 (2009) 
40.  W.  Farr,  P.  Hut,  J.  Ames,  &  A.  Johnson:  An  Experiment  in  Using  Virtual  Worlds  for 

Scientific Visualization of Self-Gravitating Systems.  JVWR, in press (2009) 

 
