9
0
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]
c
q
-
r
g
[

2
v
9
3
8
0
.
0
1
9
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Dialogue on the Nature of Gravity

T. Padmanabhan
IUCAA, Pune University Campus,
Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, INDIA.

Abstract

I describe the conceptual and mathematical basis of an approach which
describes gravity as an emergent phenomenon. Combining the principle
of equivalence and the principle of general covariance with known prop-
erties of local Rindler horizons, perceived by observers accelerated with
respect to local inertial frames, one can provide a thermodynamic re-
interpretation of the ﬁeld equations describing gravity in any diﬀeomor-
phism invariant theory. This fact, in turn, leads us to the possibility of
deriving the ﬁeld equations of gravity by maximising a suitably deﬁned en-
tropy functional, without using the metric tensor as a dynamical variable.
The approach synthesizes concepts from quantum theory, thermodynam-
ics and gravity leading to a fresh perspective on the nature of gravity. The
description is presented here in the form of a dialogue, thereby addressing
several frequently-asked-questions.

1 What is it all about?

Harold: 1 For quite sometime now, you have been talking about ‘gravity be-
ing an emergent phenomenon’ and a ‘thermodynamic perspective on gravity’.
This is quite diﬀerent from the conventional point of view in which gravity is a
fundamental interaction and spacetime thermodynamics of, say, black holes is
a particular result which can be derived in a speciﬁc context. Honestly, while
I ﬁnd your papers fascinating I am not clear about the broad picture you are
trying to convey. Maybe you could begin by clarifying what this is all about,
before we plunge into the details ? What is the roadmap, so to speak ?

Me: To begin with, I will show you that the equations motion describing gravity
in any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory can be given [2] a suggestive thermody-
namic re-interpretation (Sections 2, 3). Second, taking a cue from this, I can
formulate a variational principle for a suitably deﬁned entropy functional —
involving both gravity and matter — which will lead to the ﬁeld equations of
gravity [3, 4] without varying the metric tensor as a dynamical variable (Section
4).

1Harold was a very useful creation originally due to Julian Schwinger [1] and stands for
Hypothetically Alert Reader Of Limitless Dedication. In the present context, I think of Harold
as Hypothetically Alert Relativist Open to Logical Discussions.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Harold: Suppose I have an action for gravity plus matter (in D dimensions)

A =

Z

dDx√

g

−

L(Rab
(cid:2)

cd, gab) + Lmatt(gab, qA)
(cid:3)

(1)

where L is any scalar built from metric and curvature and Lmatt is the mat-
ter Lagrangian depending on the metric and some matter variables qA. (I will
assume L does not involve derivatives of curvature tensor, to simplify the dis-
cussion.) If I vary gab in the action I will get some equations of motion (see e.g.
Refs. [5, 6]), say, 2Eab = Tab where Eab is 2

1
2

2

c
∇

Eab = P cde

Lgab; P abcd

a Rbcde −

dPacdb −
∇
Now, you are telling me that (i) you can give a thermodynamic interpretation
to the equation 2Eab = Tab just because it comes from a scalar Lagrangian
and (ii) you can also derive it from an entropy maximisation principle. I admit
it is fascinating. But why should I take this approach as more fundamental,
conceptually, than the good old way of just varying the total Lagrangian L +
Lmatt and getting 2Eab = Tab ? Why is it more than a curiosity ?

(2)

≡

∂L
∂Rabcd

Me: That brings me to the third aspect of the formulation which I will discuss
towards the end (Section 5). In my approach, I can provide a natural expla-
nation to several puzzling aspects of gravity and horizon thermodynamics all
of which have to be thought of as mere algebraic accidents in the conventional
approach you mentioned. Let me give an analogy. In Newtonian gravity, the
fact that inertial mass is equal to the gravitational mass is an algebraic accident
without any fundamental explanation. But in a geometrical theory of gravity
based on principle of equivalence, this fact ﬁnds a natural explanation. Similarly,
I think we can make progress by identifying key facts which have no explanation
in the conventional approach and providing them a natural explanation from a
diﬀerent perspective. You will also see that this approach connects up several
pieces of conventional theory in an elegant manner.

Harold: Your ideas also seem to be quite diﬀerent from other works which de-
scribe gravity as an emergent phenomena [7]. Can you explain your motivation?

Me: Yes. The original inspiration for my work, as for many others, comes from
the old idea of Sakharov [8] which attempted to describe spacetime dynamics
as akin to the theory of elasticity. There are two crucial diﬀerences between my
approach and many other ones.

To begin with, I realized that the thermodynamic description transcends
Einstein’s general relativity and can incorporate a much wider class of theories
— this was ﬁrst pointed out in ref. [9] and elaborated in several of my papers
— while many other approaches concentrated on just Einstein’s theory. In fact,
many other approaches use techniques strongly linked to Einstein’s theory –
like for example, Raychaudhuri equation to study rate of change of horizon
area, which is diﬃcult to generalize to theories in which the horizon entropy is
not proportional to horizon area. I use more general techniques.

Second, I work at the level of action principle and its symmetries to a large
extent so I have a handle on the oﬀ-shell structure of the theory; in fact, much

2The signature is - + + + and Latin letters cover spacetime indices while Greek letters

run over space indices.

2

of the thermodynamic interpretation in my approach is closely linked to the
structure of action functional (like e.g., the existence of surface term in action,
holographic nature etc.) for gravitational theories. This link is central to me
while it is not taken into account in any other approach.

Harold: So essentially you are claiming that the thermodynamics of horizons is
more central than the dynamics of the gravitational ﬁeld while the conventional
view is probably the other way around. Why do you stress the thermal aspects
of horizons so much ? Can you give a motivation ?

Me: Because thermal phenomenon is a window to microstructure! Let me
explain. We know that the continuum description of a ﬂuid, say, in terms of
a set of dynamical variables like density ρ, velocity v, etc. has a life of its
own. At the same time, we also know that these dynamical variables and the
description have no validity at a fundamental level where the matter is discrete.
But one can actually guess the existence of microstructure without using any
experimental proof for the molecular nature of the ﬂuid, just from the fact
that the ﬂuid or a gas exhibits thermal phenomena involving temperature and
transfer of heat energy. If the ﬂuid is treated as a continuum and is described
by ρ(t, x), v(t, x) etc., all the way down, then it is not possible to explain
the thermal phenomena in a natural manner. As ﬁrst stressed by Boltzmann,
the heat content of a ﬂuid arises due to random motion of discrete microscopic
structures which must exist in the ﬂuid. These new degrees of freedom — which
we now know are related to the actual molecules — make the ﬂuid capable
of storing energy internally and exchanging it with surroundings. So, given
an apparently continuum phenomenon which exhibits temperature, Boltzmann
could infer the existence of underlying discrete degrees of freedom.

Harold: I agree. But what does it lead to in the present context?

Me: The paradigm is: If you can heat it, it has microstructure! And you can
heat up spacetimes by collapsing matter or even by just accelerating [10]. The
horizons which arise in general relativity are endowed with temperatures [11]
which shows that, at least in this context, some microscopic degrees of freedom
are coming into play. So a thermodynamic description that links the standard
description of gravity with the statistical mechanics of — as yet unknown —
microscopic degrees of freedom must exist. It is in this sense that I consider
gravity to be emergent.

Boltzmann’s insight about the thermal behaviour has two other attractive
features which are useful in our context. First, while the existence of the discrete
degrees of freedom is vital in such an approach, the exact nature of the degrees
of freedom is largely irrelevant. For example, whether we are dealing with argon
molecules or helium molecules is largely irrelevant in the formulation of gas laws
and such diﬀerences can be taken care of in terms of a few well-chosen numbers
(like, e.g., the speciﬁc heat). This suggests that such a description will have
certain amount of robustness and independence as regards the precise nature of
microscopic degrees of freedom.

Second, the entropy of the system arises due to our ignoring the microscopic
degrees of freedom. Turning this around, one can expect the form of entropy
functional to encode the essential aspects of microscopic degrees of freedom,
even if we do not know what they are. If we can arrive at the appropriate form
of entropy functional, in terms of some eﬀective degrees of freedom, then we can

3

expect it to provide the correct description.3

Harold: But most people working in quantum gravity will agree that there is
some fundamental microstructure to spacetime (“atoms of spacetime”) and the
description of spacetime by metric is an approximate long distance description.
So why are you making a big deal? I don’t see anything novel here.

Me: I will go farther than just saying there is microstructure and show you how
to actually use the thermodynamic concepts to provide an emergent description
of gravity — which no one else has attempted. If you think of the full theory
of quantum gravity as analogous to statistical mechanics then I will provide the
thermodynamic description of the same system.

As you know, thermodynamics was developed and used eﬀectively decades
before we knew anything about the molecular structure of matter or its statisti-
cal mechanics. Similarly, even without knowing the microstructure of spacetime
or the full quantum theory of gravity, we can make lot of progress with the ther-
modynamic description of spacetime. The horizon thermodynamics, I will claim,
provides [12] valuable insights about the nature of gravity totally independent
of what “the atoms of spacetime” may be. It is somewhat like being able to
describe or work with gases or steam engines without knowing anything about
the molecular structure of the gas or steam.

2 Local Rindler observers and Entropy ﬂow

Harold: All right. I hope all these will become clearer as we go along. Maybe
I can suggest we plunge head-long into how you would like to describe gravity.
Then I can raise the issues as we proceed.

Me: The overall structure of my approach is shown in Fig. 1. As you can see,
I begin with the principle of equivalence which allows you to draw three key
consequences. First, it tells you that — in the long wavelength limit — gravity
has [13] a geometrical description in terms of the metric tensor gab and the eﬀect
of gravity on matter can be understood by using the laws of special relativity
in the local inertial frames. Second, by writing Maxwell’s equations in curved
spacetime using minimal coupling, say, I can convince myself that the light cone
structure of the spacetime — and hence the causal structure — will, in general,
be aﬀected by the gravitational ﬁeld.

Harold: Well, that is one possible way of interpreting principle of equivalence
though people might have other views. But once you have told me what you are
assuming, viz., “gravity = geometry” and “light cones are aﬀected by gravity”,
we can proceed further.

Me: Yes. My aim here will be not to nitpick over deﬁnitions but develop
the physics in a consistent manner.
In that spirit, I would draw one more
conclusion from the fact that gravity can be described using a metric tensor.
In ﬂat spacetime, we can choose a special coordinate system with the global

3Incidentally, this is why thermodynamics needed no modiﬁcation due to either relativity
or quantum theory. An equation like T dS = dE + P dV will have universal applicability as
long as eﬀects of relativity or quantum theory are incorporated in the deﬁnition of S(E, V )
appropriately.

4

PRINCIPLE OF EQUIVALENCE

Democracy of
Observers

Lightcone structure is
affected by gravity

Gravity = Geometry

General covariance =
Diffeomorphism invariance
a

a

x

x

ξa

Existence of observers
with horizons

Second law of thermodynamics
must hold for all observers

Noether current

All horizons have entropy

Deformation of
spacetime solid

Microstructure of 
spacetime

Spacetime has an
entropy density

Entropy balance between
matter and geometry

Entropy is quadratic

in

ξ

b

a

FIELD EQUATIONS

Lanczos−Lovelock
field equations

Figure 1: The broad picture

metric being ηab; so if someone tells you that the metric is given by gab(t, x)
ηab) to the choice of non-inertial
then you can always attribute the part (gab −
coordinates. We cannot do this in a curved spacetime. So it no longer makes
sense to ask “how much of gab” is due to our using non-inertial coordinates and
“how much” is due to genuine gravity. Diﬀerent observers in diﬀerent states of
motion might use diﬀerent coordinates leading to diﬀerent sets of ten functions
for gab(t, x). Because we have no absolute reference metric it follows that no
coordinate system or observer is special. The laws of physics should not select
out any special class of observers.

Harold: This smacks of principle of general covariance but essentially you are
arguing [14] for democracy of all observers, which I grant you. Given all the
philosophical controversies as to what ‘general covariance’ means, I agree this
is a safer procedure. What next?

Me: Given the fact that all observers are equal and that light cones are aﬀected
by gravity, it follows that there will exist observers who do not have access to
part of the spacetime because of the existence of horizons they perceive. This is
a direct consequence of the fact that metric determines the paths of light rays
and hence the causal structure. The classic example is the Rindler horizon in
ﬂat spacetime which is as eﬀective in blocking information with respect to an
accelerated observer as the Schwarzschild horizon at r = 2M is for an observer
at r > 2M .

Harold: Not so fast; I have several problems here. First, the conventional view
is that black hole horizons are “real horizons” while Rindler horizons are sort of
fraudulent; you seem to club them together. Second, you seem to link horizons

5

to observers rather than treat them as well deﬁned, geometrical, causal features
of a spacetime.

Me: You are quite right. I treat all horizons at equal footing and claim that
— for my purpose — all horizons are observer dependent. This is because, the
key property of horizons which I am concentrating here is that it can block
information. In that sense, the Rindler horizon does not block information for
an inertial observer just as the Schwarzschild horizon does not block information
for someone plunging into the black hole. So, for my purpose, there is no need to
make artiﬁcial distinctions between a black hole horizon and a Rindler horizon.
The state of motion of the observer is crucial in deciding the physical eﬀects of
a horizon in all cases.

It is, of course, true that one can give a geometric interpretation to, say, the
black hole event horizon. I am not denying that. But that fact, as you will see,
is quite irrelevant to the development of my approach.

Harold: I see that you not only demand democracy of observers but also democ-
racy of horizons! You don’t think, for example, that black hole horizons are
anything special.

Me: Yes. I do believe in the democracy of horizons, as you put it. The attempts
to provide a quantum gravitational interpretation of black holes, their entropy
etc. using very special approaches which are incapable of handling other hori-
zons — like the issues in de Sitter [15], let alone Rindler — are interesting in a
limited sort of way but may not get us anywhere ultimately.

Harold: I have another problem. You really haven’t characterized what exactly
you mean by a horizon for an observer. Of course, you cannot use any on-shell
constructs since you are still developing your approach towards ﬁeld equations.
There are horizons and horizons in the literature — event, apparent, causal ....

Me: I will try to make clear what I need without again going into all sorts of
and introduce a local inertial frame (LIF)
deﬁnitions [2]. Choose any event
P
around it with Riemann normal coordinates X a = (T, X) such that
has the
coordinates X a = 0 in the LIF. Let ka be a future directed null vector at
P
and we align the coordinates of LIF such that it lies in the X
.
T plane at
P
Next transform from the LIF to a local Rindler frame (LRF) coordinates xa by
accelerating along the X-axis with an acceleration κ by the usual transformation.
The metric near the origin now reduces to the form

−

P

ds2 =

=

−

−

dT 2 + dX 2 + dx2
⊥

κ2x2dt2 + dx2 + dx2

⊥ =

2κl dt2 +

−

dl2
2κl

+ dx2
⊥

(3)

where T = x sinh(κt); X = x cosh(κt); l = (1/2)κx2 and (t, x, x⊥) or (t, l, x⊥)
are the coordinates of LRF (Both these forms are useful in our discussion).
Let ξa be the approximate Killing vector corresponding to translation in the
N 2 characterizes the location
Rindler time such that the vanishing of ξaξa ≡ −
of the local horizon
in LRF. As usual, we shall do all the computation on a
H
with N = constant, usually called a
timelike surface inﬁnitesimally away from
“stretched horizon”. (It can be deﬁned more formally using the orbits of ξa and
the plane orthogonal to the acceleration vector ai = ξb
∇bξi.) Let the timelike
unit normal to the stretched horizon be ra.

H

6

¯t

T

¯x

Arbitrary
Event

X

Local Rinder
observer

P

Null rays
through

P

P

xx

1
R
limit of validity of
local inertial frame

∼

Local Rinder
observer
κ−

1/2

−

1

≪ R

in the ¯t

Figure 2: The top frame illustrates schematically the light rays near an event
¯x plane of an arbitrary spacetime. The bottom frame shows the
P
−
same neighbourhood of
in Riemann normal
coordinates (T, X). The light rays now become 45 degree lines and the trajectory
of the local Rindler observer becomes a hyperbola very close to T =
X lines
which act as a local horizon to the Rindler observer.

in the locally inertial frame at

±

P

P

−1/2 (where

This LRF (with metric in Eq. (3)) and its local horizon

will exist within a
region of size L
is a typical component of curvature tensor of
−1/2. This condition can always
the background spacetime) as long as κ−1
be satisﬁed by taking a suﬃciently large κ. This procedure introduces a class
of uniformly accelerated observers who will perceive the null surface T =
X
as the local Rindler horizon

. This is shown in Fig. 2.

≪ R

≪ R

R

H

±

H

Harold: I am with you so far. Essentially you are using the fact that you
have two length scales in the problem at any event. First is the length scale
−1/2 associated with the curvature components of the background metric over
R
which you have no control; second is the length scale κ−1 associated with the
accelerated trajectory which you can choose as you please. So you can always
ensure that κ−1
−1/2. In fact, I can see this clearly in the Euclidean sector
in which the horizon maps to the origin (see Fig.3). The locally ﬂat frame in the

≪ R

7

xx

1
R
limit of validity of
local inertial frame

∼

TE

x

κtE

P

X

Local Rinder
observer
1
κ−

−

1/2

≪ R

P

Figure 3: The region around
shown in ﬁgure 1 is represented in the Euclidean
sector obtained by analytically continuing to imaginary values of T by TE = iT .
The horizons T =
X collapse to the origin and the hyperbolic trajectory of the
Rindler observer becomes a circle of radius κ−1 around the origin. The Rindler
coordinates (t, x) become — on analytic continuation to tE = it — the polar
coordinates (r = x, θ = κtE) near the origin.

±

−1/2 while the trajectory of
Euclidean sector will exist in a region of radius
a uniformly accelerated observer will be a circle of radius κ−1. You can always
keep the latter inside the former. The metric in Eq. (3) is just the metric of the
locally ﬂat region in polar coordinates.

R

In fact, I can choose a trajectory xi(τ ) such that its acceleration
Me: Yes.
∇iuj (where ui is the time-like four velocity) satisﬁes the condition
aj = ui
ajaj = κ2. In a suitably chosen LIF this trajectory will reduce to the standard
hyperbola of a uniformly accelerated observer. It is using these LRFs that I
deﬁne my horizons around any event. Further the local temperature on the
stretched horizon will be κ/2πN so that βloc = βN with β

κ/2π.

≡

Harold: Ha! The classical GR is ﬁne but your ‘horizon’ is just a patch of null
surface. Can you actually prove that local Rindler observers will perceive a
temperature proportional to acceleration ? The usual proofs of Unruh eﬀect are
[10] horribly global.
Me: Recall that everything we do is in a local region with κ−1
−1/2.
Now if you have an accelerated detector with time-dependent, variable ac-
celeration, say, then you will reproduce the standard Unruh eﬀect approxi-
mately to the necessary order of accuracy. This should be intuitively obvi-
ous but can be demonstrated [16]. Of course in the Euclidean sector the
Rindler observer’s trajectory is a circle of radius κ−1 which can be made ar-
bitrarily close to the origin. Suppose the observer’s trajectory has the usual
form X = κ−1 cosh κt; T = κ−1 sinh κt which is maintained for a time interval
2π/κ. Then, the trajectory will complete a full circle in the Euclidean sec-
T
tor irrespective of what happens later! When we work in the limit of κ
,
→ ∞
this becomes arbitrarily local in both space and time [17]. I am sure all these

≪ R

≈

8

can be made more rigorous but this is the essential reason behind the local ideas
working.

I also want to stress that once I ﬁnally reach my goal (of deriving the gravi-
tational ﬁeld equations from an entropy principle in Section 4) all these become
irrelevant; they are essentially part of ‘motivation’. So your possible misgivings
regarding some of these details will not aﬀect the ﬁnal result.

3 Thermodynamic re-interpretation of the ﬁeld

equations

Harold: OK, so you have local Rindler observers crawling all over the spacetime
with their local horizons. What next ?

Me: It is now easy to see that all horizons must have entropy vis-a-vis the
observers who perceive the horizons. If they do not, an observer can pour some
hot tea with entropy across the horizon `a la Wheeler [18], thereby violating the
second law of thermodynamics in the region accessible to her and her friends
who perceive the horizon
. Such a violation of second law of thermodynamics
can be avoided only if we demand that horizon should have an entropy which
should increase when energy ﬂows across it.
If energy dE ﬂows across a hot
horizon with temperature T then dE/T = dS should be the change in the
entropy of the horizon. We therefore conclude that all null surfaces which could
locally act as one-way membranes should have an (observer dependent) entropy
associated with them.

H

Harold: Hold on. I understand from the reference you cite [18] that such a
thought experiment might have had something to do with the initial realization
of a black hole entropy which is proportional to the area [19]. But I am not sure
how to interpret it precisely. For one thing, matter disappears into the horizon
only after inﬁnite time as perceived by the outside observer, even when you try
to pour real tea in to real black hole. So what is all this talk about “loss” of
entropy?

Me: I don’t think this is a real objection though one often comes across this
confusion. Note that, by the same argument, no black hole can ever form in
ﬁnite time anywhere in the universe and we should not be talking about any
black hole physics. I believe this issue is well settled in Chapter 33 of Ref. [13].
I recommend you read it!

If you really push me hard, I can wiggle out with the following argument. It
does not take much time (certainly not inﬁnite time!) for a cup of tea to reach
a radial distance a few Planck lengths away from the horizon r = 2M . We have
considerable evidence of very diﬀerent nature to suggest Planck length acts as
lower bound to the length scales that can be operationally deﬁned and that no
measurements can be ultra sharp at Planck scales [20]. So one cannot really
talk about the location of the event horizon ignoring ﬂuctuations of this order.
So, from the point of view of sensible physics, I only need to get the cup of tea
up to r = 2M + LP to talk about entropy loss.

Harold: You also seem to have quietly made entropy an observer dependent
quantity. This is pretty drastic and I need to understand it. Suppose, in a region

9

P

, there is some matter which is producing the curvature. I
around an event
would have normally thought that this matter — say some amount of hot ﬂuid
— has certain amount of entropy which is independent of who is measuring
it. But you are claiming that an inertial observer and a Rindler observer will
attribute diﬀerent amounts of entropy to this matter. Is that correct?

Me: That’s correct and may be I should write a paper explaining this [22] but
this really need not come as a surprise (also see ref.[23]). We know that an
inertial observer will attribute zero temperature and zero entropy to the inertial
vacuum. But a Rindler observer will attribute a ﬁnite temperature and non-zero
(formally divergent) entropy to the same vacuum state. So entropy is indeed
an observer dependent concept. When you do quantum ﬁeld theory in curved
spacetime, it is not only that particles become an observer dependent notion
so do the temperature and entropy. This notion can be made more precise as
follows:

Consider an excited state of a quantum ﬁeld with energy δE above the
ground state in an inertial spacetime. When you integrate out the unobservable
modes for the Rindler observer, you will get a density matrix ρ1 for this state
Tr (ρ1 ln ρ1). The inertial vacuum
and the corresponding entropy will be S1 =
state has the density matrix ρ0 and the entropy S0 =
Tr (ρ0 ln ρ0). The
S0 is ﬁnite and represents the entropy attributed to this
diﬀerence δS = S1 −
state by the Rindler observer. (This is ﬁnite though S1 and S0 can be divergent.)
In the limit of κ
, in which we are working, we can actually compute it
and show that

→ ∞

−

−

δS = βδE =

δE

2π
κ

−

To see this, note that if we write ρ1 = ρ0 + δρ, then in the limit of κ
can concentrate on states for which δρ/ρ0 ≪
δS = Tr (ρ1 ln ρ1)
= Tr (δρ(

Tr (δρ ln ρ0)
ρ0)HR)

1. Then we have

−
βHR)) =

Tr (ρ0 ln ρ0)

βTr ((ρ1 −
0 and ρ0 = Z −1 exp(

≡ −
where we have used the facts Tr δρ
βHR) where HR is
the Hamiltonian for the system in the Rindler frame. The last line deﬁnes the
δE in terms of the diﬀerence in the expectation values of the Hamiltonian in the
two states. (There are some subtleties in this derivation, especially regarding
1, but I will not get into it here [22].) This is the
the assumption δρ/ρ0 ≪
amount of entropy a Rindler observer would claim she has lost when the matter
disappears into the horizon.

βδE

(5)

−

−

≈

−

≃

Harold: That is very curious. I would have thought that the expression for
entropy of matter should consist of its energy δE and its own temperature
Tmatter rather than the horizon temperature.
It looks like that the matter
somehow equilibrates to the horizon temperature so that δS = δE/Thorizon
gives the relevant entropy.

Me: Yes. This can be explicitly proved, for example, for the one particle state
[21] and here is a possible interpretation. You should think of horizon as a system
with some internal degrees of freedom and temperature T as far as Rindler
observer is concerned. So when you add an energy δE to it, the entropy change
is δS = (δE/T ). All these are not new mysteries but only the manifestation
of the old mystery, viz., a Rindler observer attributes a non-zero temperature

10

(4)

we

→ ∞

to inertial vacuum. This temperature inﬂuences every other thermodynamic
variable. I will come back to this point later on because it is quite important.

Harold: OK. Let us proceed. I also see where your insistence of democracy of
observers comes in. You want to demand that the local Rindler observer has
a right to expect the standard laws of physics to hold as much as any other
observer, horizons notwithstanding.

Me: I am glad you brought this up. This was ﬁrst pointed out in Ref. [14]
in which we assert that all observers have a right to describe physics using an
eﬀective theory based only on the variables she can access. In the study of par-
ticle physics models, this concept forms the cornerstone of the renormalization
group theory. To describe particle interactions at 10 GeV in the lab, we usu-
ally do not need to know what happens at 1014 GeV in theories which have
predictive power. In the absence of such a principle, very high energy phenom-
ena (which are unknown from direct experiments in the lab) will aﬀect the low
energy phenomena which we are attempting to study.

In the context of a theory involving a nontrivial metric of spacetime, we need
a similar principle to handle the fact that diﬀerent observers will have access to
diﬀerent regions of a general spacetime. If a class of observers perceive a horizon,
they should still be able to do physics using only the variables accessible to them
without having to know what happens on the other side of the horizon.

This, in turn, implies that there should exist a mechanism which will encode
which is inaccessible to a particular observer
of that region. Keep this in mind because I will show you

the information in the region
at the boundary ∂
later where this ﬁts in with the holographic nature of action functionals.

V

V

Harold: Fine, we will get back to it. To get on with the story, you need to
formulate some kind of entropy balance when matter ﬂows across a local horizon.
How do you propose to do it ?

Me: Around any event in any spacetime we now have a local inertial frame
and — by boosting along one of the axes with an acceleration κ — we have
introduced a local Rindler observer who perceives a horizon with temperature
proportional to κ. She will attribute a loss of entropy δS = (2π/κ)δE when
matter with an amount of energy δE gets close to the horizon (within a few
Planck lengths, say). If ξa is the approximate, Killing vector corresponding to
translations in Rindler time, the appropriate energy-momentum density is T a
b ξb.
(It is the integral of T a
b ξbdΣa that gives the Rindler Hamiltonian HR, which
leads to evolution in Rindler time t and appears in the thermal density matrix
βHR.) The energy ﬂux through a patch of stretched horizon with
ρ = exp
−
normal ra will be Tabξarb and the associated entropy ﬂux will be βlocTabξarb
where β−1
loc = β−1/N is the local temperature with N being the standard lapse
function giving the redshift factor.
(In conformity with Eq. (4), I am using
the horizon temperature and not the matter temperature). This entropy ﬂux
manifests as the entropy change of the locally perceived horizon. For all these
to hold locally at every event there must exist a spacetime entropy current
βlocJ a, built out of metric and its derivatives, such that βloc(raJ a) gives the
corresponding gravitational entropy ﬂux. So we expect the relation

to hold at all events with some J a, once we introduce a local Killing vector ξa

βlocraJ a = βlocT abraξb

(6)

11

and a local temperature giving βloc. Further J a must be conserved since we do
not expect irreversible entropy production in the spacetime.

Harold: This sounds strange!. Why should there exists a conserved current J a,
built from geometrical variables, at every event in some arbitrary spacetime,
which will conveniently give you the entropy balance you require?

Me: It is actually not all that strange! Remember that we got into all these
because of the democracy of the observers which, in turn, implies general co-
variance. The mathematical content of general covariance is captured by the
diﬀeomorphism invariance of whatever theory which is going to ultimately deter-
mine the dynamics of the spacetime. Because the diﬀeomorphism invariance of
the theory forced us to treat all observers on equal footing, the diﬀeomorphism
invariance must also provide us with the conserved current J a. And indeed it
does, in the form of the Noether current [2]. Let me explain.

Consider a theory of gravity, obtained from a generally covariant action
principle involving a gravitational Lagrangian L(Ra
bcd, gab) which is a scalar
made from metric and curvature tensor. The total Lagrangian is the sum of L
and the matter Lagrangian Lm. The variation of the gravitational Lagrangian
density generically leads to a surface term and hence can be expressed in the
form,

.

g

−

−

δ(L√

g) = √

∇aδva

Eabδgab +
(cid:0)
Under suitable boundary conditions the theory will lead to the ﬁeld equation
2Eab = Tab where Eab is given by Eq. (2) and Tab is deﬁned through the usual re-
(δAm/δgab). We also know that, for any Lagrangian L,
lation (1/2)Tab√
the functional derivative Eab satisﬁes the generalized oﬀ-shell Bianchi identity:
∇aEab = 0.
xa

Consider now the variations in δgab which arise through the diﬀeomorphism
aξb +
∇aEab = 0, we obtain the

→
bξa). Substituting these in Eq. (7) and using

∇a(Lξa), with δgab = (
∇

xa + ξa. In this case, δ(L√

g) =

g =

(7)

√

−

−

−

g

(cid:1)

−
∇aJ a = 0, for the current,

−

∇
conservation law

J a

≡

2Eabξb + Lξa + δξva
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(8)

where δξva represents the boundary term which arises for the speciﬁc variation
of the metric in the form δgab = (
bξa). It is also convenient to introduce
aξb+
∇
the antisymmetric tensor J ab by J a =
∇bJ ab. Using the known expression for
δξva in Eq. (8), it is possible to write an explicit expression for the current J a
for any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory. For the general class of theories we are
considering, the J ab and J a can be expressed [6] in the form

∇

J ab = 2P abcd

4ξd

∇cξd −
∇cξd + 2P abcd

∇cP abcd
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
4ξd∇b∇cP abcd
∇b∇cξd −

−

P adbc + P acbd
(cid:0)
(∂L/∂Rabcd). These expressions simplify signiﬁcantly at any
where ξa behaves like an (approximate) Killing vector and satisﬁes the

(10)

(cid:1)

(9)

2

J a =
∇b
where Pabcd ≡
event
P
conditions

∇(aξb) = 0;

∇a∇bξc = Rcbadξd

(11)

(which a true Killing vector will satisfy everywhere). Then one can easily prove
that δξva = 0 at the event
; the expression for Noether current simpliﬁes

P

12

considerably and is given by

J a

≡

2Eabξb + Lξa
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

.

(12)

Harold: OK. So you now have a conserved current J a and entropy current of
matter. What do you do now ?

Me: Recall that I argued, on very general grounds, that the relation in Eq. (6)
must hold at all events. Remarkably enough, the gravitational ﬁeld equations
of any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory implies that this relation does hold! To
see this, let us now consider the form of J a(x) at any event
around which we
have introduced the notion of a local Rindler horizon with ξa being the approxi-
mate Killing vector associated with the Rindler time translation invariance that
. Let ra be the spacelike unit normal
satisﬁes two conditions in Eq. (11) at
P
to the stretched horizon Σ, pointing in the direction of increasing N . We know
0 and the stretched horizon approaches the local horizon and N ri
that as N
approaches ξi.

→

P

P

With this background, we compute J a for the ξa introduced above in the
. Since it is an approximate Killing vector, satisfying Eq. (11)
neighborhood of
it follows that δξv = 0 giving the current to be J a =
. The
product raJ a for the vector ra, which satisﬁes ξara = 0 on the stretched horizon,
(cid:1)
becomes quite simple: raJ a = 2Eabraξb. This equation is valid around the local
patch in which ξa is the approximate Killing vector. The quantity βlocraJ a (in
this limit) is what we interpret as the local entropy ﬂux density. On using the
ﬁeld equations 2Eab = Tab, we immediately get

2Eabξb + Lξa
(cid:0)

βlocraJ a = 2Eabraξb = βlocT abraξb

(13)

→

which is exactly Eq. (6). This tells you that the validity of ﬁeld equations
in any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory has a local, thermodynamic, interpret
0, this gives a ﬁnite result, βξaJ a = βT abξaξb as it
ion. In the limit of N
should. Further, in this limit, ξi goes to κλki where λ is the aﬃne parameter
associated with the null vector ka we started with and all the reference to LRF
goes away. It is clear that the properties of LRF are relevant conceptually to
deﬁne the intermediate notions (local Killing vector, horizon temperature ....)
but the essential result is independent of these notions. Just as we introduce
local inertial frame to decide how gravity couples to matter, we use local Rindler
frames to interpret the physical content of the ﬁeld equations.

Harold: That is cute! I also see why you can aﬀord to be a bit cavalier about
the LRF etc; ultimately, your interpretation is local at each event. The Noether
current you use, of course, is the same that appears in the deﬁnition of Wald
entropy [24]. But in the latter, it is used in an integral form while your approach
seems to be completely local.

Me: This is true and I think the local approach is crucial for proper interpre-
tation. Integrals over surfaces would require all sort of special assumptions for
everything to work out in an arbitrary spacetime. This is why I work in a local
region around an arbitrary event with LIF, LRF etc. with L in everything. Also
note that the original deﬁnition of Wald entropy is an on-shell construct and
requires you to evaluate an integral on a solution. The Noether current itself is
an oﬀ-shell construct and that is what I need.

13

Incidentally, the Noether current relation can also be used to provide an
alternative interpretation of the entropy balance along the following lines. A
local Rindler observer, moving along the orbits of the Killing vector ﬁeld ξa with
four velocity ua = ξa/N , will associate an energy δE = ua(Tabξb)dVprop with
a proper volume dVprop. If this energy gets transfered across the horizon, the
corresponding entropy transfer will be δSmatter = βlocδE where βloc = βN =
(2π/κ)N is the local (redshifted) temperature of the horizon and N is the lapse
function. Since βlocua = (βN )(ξa/N ) = βξa, we ﬁnd that

δSmatter = βξaξbTab dVprop

(14)

As for gravitational entropy, since J 0 is the Noether charge density, δS =
βlocuaJ adVprop can be interpreted as the entropy associated with a volume
dVprop as measured by an observer with four-velocity ua. For observers moving
on the orbits of the Killing vector ξa with ua = ξa/N we get

δSgrav = βN uaJ adVprop = β[ξj ξaT aj + L(ξjξj)] dVprop

(15)

As one approaches the horizon, ξaξa →
we get

0 making the second term vanish and

δSgrav = β(ξj ξaT aj) dVprop = δSm
(16)
In the same limit ξj will become proportional to the original null vector kj we
started with. So this equation can be again thought of as an entropy balance
condition.

Harold: So instead of thinking of ﬁeld equations of gravity as 2Eab = Tab, you
want us to think of them as

[2Eab

−

T ab]kakb = 0

(17)

T ab = λgab with some
for all null vectors ka. This is equivalent to 2Eab
∇aEab =
constant λ. (I see that the constancy of λ follows from the conditions
∇aT ab = 0.) Interpreting 2Eabkakb as some kind of gravitational entropy
0,
density and Tabkakb as matter entropy in the local Rindler frame, you are are
providing a purely thermodynamical interpretation of the ﬁeld equations of any
diﬀeomorphism invariant theory of gravity. Right ?

−

Me: Yes. But note that Eq. (17) is not quite the same as the standard equation
2Eab = T ab because Eq. (17) has an extra symmetry which standard gravita-
tional ﬁeld equations do not have: This equation is invariant under the shift
T ab + µgab with some constant µ. (This symmetry has important impli-
T ab
cations for cosmological constant problem which we will discuss later.) While the
properties of LRF are relevant conceptually to deﬁne the intermediate notions
(local Killing vector, horizon temperature ....), the essential result is indepen-
dent of these notions.

→

Harold: Fine. I like the fact that just as we introduce local inertial frames to
decide how gravity couples to matter, we use local Rindler frames to interpret
the physical content of the ﬁeld equations. But you only needed the part of J a
b ξb for your analysis, right ? The other two terms in Eq. (8) are
given by 2Ea
not needed at all. So may be you don’t have to use all of Noether current.

Me: This is quite true. In fact one can give 2Ea
b ξb an interesting interpretation.
Suppose there are some microscopic degrees of freedom in spacetime, just as

14

→

there are atoms in a solid. If you make the solid undergo an elastic deformation
xα
xα + ξα(x), the physics can be formulated in terms of the displacement
ﬁeld ξα(x) and one can ask how thermodynamic potentials like entropy change
under such displacement. Similarly, in the case of spacetime, we should think
of

δSgrav = βloc(2Ea

b )uaδxb

(18)

→

as the change in the gravitational entropy under the ‘deformation’ of the space-
time xa
xa + δxa as measured by the Rindler observer with velocity ua.
One can show that this interpretation is consistent with all that we know about
horizon thermodynamics. So the left hand side of gravitational ﬁeld equation
(2Ea
b ) actually gives the response of the spacetime entropy to the deformations.
Harold: It certainly matches with the previous results. Since βlocua = βξa,
you will get the entropy density to be proportional to 2Eabkakb on the horizon.
Does it make sense ?

Me: As I will show you soon, it makes lot of sense!

Harold: But can’t you now reverse the argument and claim that you can derive
the ﬁeld equations of the theory from the purely thermodynamic point of view
of the entropy balance?

Me: That would be lovely and very tempting but I don’t think so. Such a
‘reverse engineering’ faces some conceptual hurdles; the mathematics will go
through trivially but not the logic [2]. Let me clarify the issues involved.

The key point is the following: If we have a justiﬁcation for interpreting
the expression βloc(raJ a) as entropy current, independent of the ﬁeld equations,
then — and only then — can we invert the logic and obtain the ﬁeld equations
from the thermodynamic identity. However, in the absence of ﬁeld equations
J a is just a Noether current. It can be interpreted as entropy current if and
only if ﬁeld equations are assumed to hold; it is in this on-shell context that
Wald [24] showed that it is entropy. So we have no independent justiﬁcation for
demanding βlocraJ a should be equal to matter entropy ﬂux. Until we come up
with such a justiﬁcation — without using ﬁeld equations — we can prove that
“ﬁeld equations imply local entropy balance at local horizons” but not “local
entropy balance at local horizons imply ﬁeld equations”. The issue at stake is
not mathematics but logic. As a simple example, consider the Noether current
in Einstein’s theory for a Killing vector ξa, which is proportional to Ra
b ξb. No
one would have thought of this expression as entropy density independent of
ﬁeld equations. It is only by studying physical processes involving black holes,
say, and using ﬁeld equations that one can give such a meaning.

Harold: OK. I have one more worry. At this stage, you have not chosen any
speciﬁc theory of gravity at all, right? So this thermodynamic entropy balance
seems to be very general and some people might even say it is too general. What
is your take on this?

Me: It is true that at this stage I have not speciﬁed what kind of theory of
gravity we are dealing with. The ﬁeld equation — whatever the theory may be,
as long as it obeys principle of equivalence and diﬀeomorphism invariance —
always has an interpretation in terms of local entropy balance (The idea also
works when Lgrav depends on the derivatives of the curvature tensor but I will

15

not discuss this case, for the sake of simplicity.) Diﬀerent theories of gravity
are characterized by diﬀerent forms of entropy density just as diﬀerent physical
systems are characterized by diﬀerent forms of entropy functionals. I think this
is completely in harmony with the thermodynamic spirit. Thermodynamics
applies to any system; if you want to describe a particular system, you need to
specify its entropy functional or some other thermodynamic potential. So what
the development so far is telling us is that we need to put in some more extra
physical input into the theory to ﬁnd the ﬁeld equations describing the theory.

4 Field equations from a new variational princi-

ple

Harold: Fine. The above results imply that the ﬁeld equations arising from
any generally covariant action can be given a thermodynamic interpretation;
that is, you assumed the validity of the ﬁeld equations and derived the local
entropy balance. Your real aim, however, is to obtain the ﬁeld equations from a
dynamical principle rather than assume the ﬁeld equations. How do you propose
to do that ?

Me: To begin with, I want to paraphrase the above results in a slightly diﬀerent
manner which is probably more useful for the task we want to undertake.

Note that, instead of dropping matter across the horizon, I could have equally

well considered a virtual, inﬁnitesimal (Planck scale), displacement of the
H
normal to itself engulﬁng some matter. We only need to consider inﬁnitesimal
displacements because the entropy of the matter is not ‘lost’ until it crosses the
horizon; that is, until when the matter is at an inﬁnitesimal distance (a few
Planck lengths) from the horizon. All the relevant physical processes take place
at a region very close to the horizon and hence an inﬁnitesimal displacement
normal to itself will engulf some matter. Some entropy will be again lost
of
to the outside observers unless displacing a piece of local Rindler horizon costs
some entropy.

H

So we expect the entropy balance condition derived earlier to ensure this
and indeed it does. An inﬁnitesimal displacement of a local patch of the
stretched horizon in the direction of ra, by an inﬁnitesimal proper distance
ǫ, will change the proper volume by dVprop = ǫ√σdD−2x where σab is the
metric in the transverse space. The ﬂux of energy through the surface will
b ξbra and the corresponding entropy ﬂux can be obtained by multiplying
be T a
the energy ﬂux by βloc. Hence the ‘loss’ of matter entropy to the outside ob-
server when the virtual displacement of the horizon swallows some hot tea is
δSm = βlocδE = βlocT ajξarj dVprop. To ﬁnd the change in the gravitational
entropy, we again use the Noether current J a corresponding to the local Killing
vector ξa. Multiplying by ra and βloc = βN , we get

βlocraJ a = βlocξaraT ab + βN (raξa)L

As the stretched horizon approaches the true horizon, we know that N ra
and βξaξaL

0 making the last term vanish. So

→

δSgrav ≡

βξaJ adVprop = βT ajξaξjdVprop = δSm

16

(19)

ξa

→

(20)

showing again the validity of local entropy balance.

Harold: It appears to me that this is similar to switching from a passive point
of view to an active point of view. Instead of letting a cup of tea fall into the
horizon, you are making a virtual displacement of the horizon surface to engulf
the tea which is inﬁnitesimally close to the horizon. But in the process, you have
introduced the notion of virtual displacement of horizons and for the theory to
be consistent, this displacement of these surface degrees of freedom should cost
you some entropy. Right?

→

Me: Yes. If gravity is an emergent, long wavelength, phenomenon like elasticity
then the diﬀeomorphism xa
xa + ξa is analogous to the elastic deformations
of the “spacetime solid” [25]. It then makes sense to demand that the entropy
∇bξa. By constraining
density should be a functional of ξa and their derivatives
the functional form of this entropy density, we can choose the ﬁeld equations of
gravity. Recall that thermodynamics relies entirely on the form of the entropy
functional to make predictions.
If we constrain the form of the entropy, we
constrain the theory.

So the next step is to assume a suitable form of entropy functional for grav-
ity Sgrav in terms of the normal to the null surface. Then it seems natural
to demand that the dynamics should follow from the extremum prescription
δ[Sgrav + Smatter] = 0 for all null surfaces in the spacetime where Smatter is the
matter entropy.

Harold: What do we take for Sgrav and Smatter ?

Me: The form of Smatter is easy to ascertain from the previous discussion. If
4) dimensional
Tab is the matter energy-momentum tensor in a general D(
spacetime then an expression for matter entropy relevant for our purpose can
be taken to be

≥

Smatt =

dDx√

−

ZV

gTabnanb

(21)

where na is a null vector ﬁeld. From our Eq. (14) we see that the entropy
density associated with proper 3-volume is β(Tabξaξb)dVprop where — on the
horizon — the vector ξa becomes proportional to a null vector na. If we now
g = 1 and interpret the
use the Rindler coordinates in Eq. (3) in which √
factor β as arising from an integration of dt in the range (0, β) we ﬁnd that
the entropy density associated with a proper four volume is (Tabnanb). This
suggests treating Eq. (21) as the matter entropy. For example, if Tab is due to
an ideal ﬂuid at rest in the LIF then Tabnanb will contribute (ρ + P ), which —
by Gibbs-Duhem relation — is just Tlocals where s is the entropy density and
T −1
local = βN is the properly redshifted temperature with β = 2π/κ being the
periodicity of the Euclidean time coordinate. Then

−

dS =

Z

=

Z

Z
0

√hd3x s =

Z

√hd3xβloc(ρ + P ) =

Z

√hN d3xβ(ρ + P )

β

dt

Z

d3x√

−

g T abnanb

(22)

which matches with Eq. (21) in the appropriate limit.

Harold: Well, that may be all right for an ideal ﬂuid. But for a general
source, like say the electromagnetic ﬁeld (which will act as a source in Reissner-

17

Nordstrom metric) I don’t even know how to deﬁne entropy. But I am willing
to accept Eq. (21) as a deﬁnition.

Me: Actually, it is better than that. We do have the notion of energy ﬂux
across a surface with normal ra being Tabξbra which holds for any source T ab.
Given some energy ﬂux δE in the Rindler frame, there is an associated entropy
ﬂux loss δS = βhorδE as given by Eq. (4). You may think that an ordered
ﬁeld has no temperature or entropy but a Rindler observer will say something
diﬀerent. For any state, she will have a corresponding density matrix ρ and an
T r(ρ ln ρ); after all, she will attribute entropy even to vacuum state.
entropy
It is this entropy which is given by Eq. (14) and Eq. (21).

−

Harold: Interesting. There is also this time integration which you limit to the
range (0, β) in Eq. (22). This is ﬁne in Euclidean sector and may be you can
rotate back to Lorentzian sector but it makes me a little uncomfortable.

Me: Well, I again have to invoke local nature of the argument which, as we
discussed, is obvious in Euclidean sector but the concept of causality, loss of
information etc are obvious in the Lorentzian sector in which I have light cones
and null surfaces. So I do have to switch back and forth. May be there is a
better way of formulating this which I have not yet ﬁgured out; but for our
purpose you can even think of all integrals being done in Euclidean sector — if
you are happier with that.

Harold: Fine. What about Sgrav ?

Me: For this, I will ﬁrst describe the simplest possible choice and will then
consider a more general expression. The simplest choice is to postulate Sgrav
to be a quadratic expression [3] in the derivatives of the normal:

Sgrav =

4

−

ZV

dDx√

gP cd

ab ∇cna

∇dnb

−

(23)

where the explicit form of P cd
total entropy, now becomes:

ab

is ascertained below. The expression for the

S[na] =

− ZV

dDx√

g

−

ab ∇cna

4P cd
(cid:0)

∇dnb

−

Tabnanb

,

(24)

(cid:1)

If you want, you can forget everything we said so far and start with this expres-
sion as deﬁning our theory!

Harold: I suppose this is your variational principle and you will now extremise
S with respect to na.

Me: Yes, but I want to ﬁrst explain the crucial conceptual diﬀerence between
the extremum principle introduced here and the conventional one. Usually,
given a set of dynamical variables na and a functional S[na], the extremum
principle will give a set of equations for the dynamical variable na. Here the
situation is completely diﬀerent. We expect the variational principle to hold
for all null vectors na thereby leading to a condition on the background metric.
(Of course, one can specify any null vector na(x) by giving its components
f A(x)
b = δB
naeA
A
etc so that na = f Aea
A. So the class of all null vectors can be mapped to the
scalar functions f A with the condition fAf A = 0.) Obviously, the functional

a with respect to ﬁxed set of basis vectors eA

a with eb

AeB

≡

18

in Eq. (24) must be rather special to accomplish this and one needs to impose
restrictions on P cd
(and Tab though that condition turns out to be trivial) to
achieve this.

ab

It turns out — as we shall see below — that two conditions are suﬃcient to
ensure this. First, the tensor Pabcd should have the same algebraic symmetries
as the Riemann tensor Rabcd of the D-dimensional spacetime. This condition
can be ensured if we deﬁne P bcd

as

a

P bcd
a

=

∂L
∂Ra

bcd

(25)

where L = L(Ra

bcd, gik) is some scalar. Second, I will postulate the condition:

∇aP abcd = 0.

(26)

as well as
tensor.

∇aT ab = 0 which is anyway satisﬁed by any matter energy-momentum

Harold: Can you give some motivation for these conditions ?

Me: As regards Eq. (25), the motivation will become clearer later on. Basically,
I will show that this approach leads to the same ﬁeld equations as the one with
L as gravitational Lagrangian in the conventional approach (That is why I have
used the symbol L for this scalar!).

One possible motivation for Eq. (26) arises from fact that it will ensure
the ﬁeld equations do not contain any derivative higher than second order of
the metric. Another possible interpretation arises from the analogy introduced
earlier. If you think of na as analogous to deformation ﬁeld in elasticity, then, in
theory of elasticity [26] one usually postulates the form of the thermodynamic
potentials which are quadratic in ﬁrst derivatives of na. The coeﬃcients of this
term will be the elastic constants. Here the coeﬃcients are P abcd and you may
want to think of Eq. (26) as saying the ‘elastic constants of spacetime solid’ are
actually ‘constants’. But nothing depends on this picture. In fact, I will show
you later how this condition in Eq. (26) can be relaxed.

Harold: Interesting. You claim extremizing Eq. (24) in this context with re-
spect to all na leads to an equation constraining the background metric. If so,
this is a peculiar variational principle.

Me: Let me show you how this arises. Varying the normal vector ﬁeld na
after adding a Lagrange multiplier function λ(x) for imposing the condition
naδna = 0, we get

g

−

−

ZV

δS = 2

dDx√

ab ∇cna

∇dδnb
(cid:0)

4P cd
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
where we have used the symmetries of P cd
∇dP cd
and the condition
dDx√

ab = 0, leads to

δS = 2

ab

g

4P cd
ab

−

Tabnaδnb

−

−

λ(x)gabnaδnb

(27)

(cid:1)

and Tab. An integration by parts

ZV

+8

Z∂V

−
−
dD−1x√h

(cid:2)

−

∇d∇cna)
(
∇cna)
(cid:3)

(

kdP cd
ab
(cid:2)

δnb ,

(Tab + λgab)na

δnb

(cid:3)

(28)

19

where ka is the D-vector ﬁeld normal to the boundary ∂
and h is the deter-
V
minant of the intrinsic metric on ∂
. As usual, in order for the variational
principle to be well deﬁned, we require that the variation δna of the vector ﬁeld
should vanish on the boundary. The second term in Eq. (28) therefore vanishes,
and the condition that S[na] be an extremum for arbitrary variations of na then
becomes

V

(

2P cd
ab

∇c∇d − ∇d∇c) na
−
where we used the antisymmetry of P cd
in its upper two indices to write the
ab
ﬁrst term. The deﬁnition of the Riemann tensor in terms of the commutator of
covariant derivatives reduces the above expression to

(Tab + λgab)na = 0 ,

(29)

b Ra

2P ijk
(cid:16)

ijk −

T a

b + λδa
b

na = 0 ,

(cid:17)

(30)

and we see that the equations of motion do not contain derivatives with respect
to na which is, of course, the crucial point. This peculiar feature arose because
of the symmetry requirements we imposed on the tensor P cd
. We require that
the condition in Eq. (30) holds for arbitrary vector ﬁelds na. One can easily
show[3] that this requires

ab

16π

(cid:20)

P ijk
b Ra

ijk −

1
2

δa
b L

(cid:21)

= 8πT a

b + Λδa
b

(31)

Comparison with Eq. (2) shows that these are precisely the ﬁeld equations for
gravity (with a cosmological constant arising as an undetermined integration
constant; more about this later) in a theory with Lagrangian L when Eq. (24)
is satisﬁed. That is, we have 2Eab = Tab + λgab with

Eab = P cde

a Rbcde −

1
2

Lgab; P abcd

∂L
∂Rabcd

≡

(32)

The crucial diﬀerence between Eq. (2) and Eq. (32) is that, the Eab in Eq. (32)
contains no derivatives of the metric higher than second order thereby leading
to ﬁeld equations which are second order in the metric. In contrast, Eq. (2) can
contain up to fourth order derivatives of the metric.

Harold: Let me get this straight. Suppose I start with a total Lagrangian
L(Rabcd, gab) + Lmatt, deﬁne a P abcd by Eq. (25) ensuring it satisﬁes Eq. (26).
Then I get certain ﬁeld equations by varying the metric. You have just proved
that I will get the same ﬁeld equations (but with a cosmological constant) if
I start with the expression in Eq. (24), maximize it with respect to na and
demand that it holds for all na. The maths is clear but I have several doubts.
To begin with, why does the maths work out ?!

Me: I will let you into the secret by doing it diﬀerently. Note that, using the
constraints on P abcd I can prove the identity

4P cd

ab ∇cna

∇dnb = 4
= 4

= 4
= 4

∇c[P cd
∇c[P cd
∇c[P cd
∇c[P cd

ab na
ab na
ab na
ab na

20

ab ∇c∇dnb
ab ∇[c∇d]nb
icdni
ab Rb

−
−

∇dnb]
4naP cd
∇dnb]
2naP cd
∇dnb]
2naP cd
−
∇dnb] + 2naEaini

(33)

where the ﬁrst line uses Eq. (26), the second line uses the antisymmetry of
P cd
in c and d, the third line uses the standard identity for commutator of
ab
covariant derivatives and the last line is based on Eq. (2) when nana = 0 and
Eq. (26) hold. Using this in the expression for S in Eq. (24) and integrating the
four-divergence term, I can write

S[na] =

dD−1xkc√h(4P cd

ab na

− Z∂V

∇dnb)

− ZV

dDx√

g

−

(2Eab −
(cid:2)

Tab)nanb

(cid:3)(34)
So, when I consider variations ignoring the surface term I am eﬀectively varying
Tab)nanb with respect to na and demanding that it holds for all na. That
(2Eab−
should explain to you why it leads to (2Eab = Tab) except for a cosmological
constant.

Harold: Ha! I see it. Of course, there is an ambiguity of adding a term of the
form λ(x)gab in the integrand of the second term in Eq. (34) leading to the ﬁnal
∇aEab = 0 along with
equation (2Eab = Tab + λ(x)gab) but the Bianchi identity
∇aT ab = 0 will make λ(x) actually a constant.
Me: Yes. Remember that. We will discuss cosmological constant issue sepa-
rately in the end.

Harold: I see that it also connects up with your previous use of 2Eabnanb as
some kind of gravitational entropy density. Your expression for gravitational
entropy is actually

Sgrav[na] =

− ZV

−

dDx√

g4P cd

ab ∇cna
dD−1xkc√h(4P cd
ab na

∇dnb
∇dnb)

(35)

dDx√

−

− ZV

g(2Eabnanb)

=

− Z∂V

Written in this form you have bulk contribution (proportional to our old friend
2Eabnanb) and a surface contribution. When equations of motion hold, the bulk
also get a contribution from matter which cancels it out leaving the entropy of
.
a region

to reside in its boundary ∂

V

V

Me: Yes. I need to think more about this.

Harold: Also, arising out of your letting me into the trick, I realize that I can
now ﬁnd an S for any theory, even if Eq. (25) does not hold. You just have to
Tab)nanb as the entropy density and
reverse engineer it starting from (2Eab −
using the expression in Eq. (2) for Eab, right ? So why do you insist on Eq. (25)
?
Tab)nanb as the entropy
Me: You are right, of course. If you start with (2Eab −
density (see Eq. 14 of ﬁrst paper in Ref. [2]) and work backwards you will get
for Sgrav the expression:

Sgrav =

4

−

ZV

∇cna ∇dnb + (

∇dP abcd)nb∇cna

g

dDx √

P abcd
−
(cid:0)
∇c∇dP abcd)nanb

+(

(cid:1)

(36)

Varying this with respect to na will then lead to the correct equations of motion
and — incidentally — the same surface term.

21

While one could indeed work with this more general expression, there are
four reasons to prefer the imposition of the condition in Eq. (25). First, it is clear
from Eq. (2) that when L depends on the curvature tensor and the metric, Eab
can depend up to the fourth derivative of the metric if Eq. (25) is not satisﬁed.
But when we impose Eq. (25) then we are led to ﬁeld equations which have,
at most, second derivatives of the metric tensor – which is a desirable feature.
Second, as we shall see below, with that condition we can actually determine the
form of L; it turns out that in D = 4, it uniquely selects Einstein’s theory, which
is probably a nice feature. In higher dimensions, it picks out a very geometrical
extension of Einstein’s theory in the form of Lanczos-Lovelock theories. Third,
it is diﬃcult to imagine why the terms in Eq. (36) should occur with very speciﬁc
coeﬃcients. In fact, it is not clear why we cannot have derivatives of Rabcd in L,
if the derivatives of Pabcd can occur in the expression for entropy. Finally, if we
take the idea of elastic constants being constants, then one is led to Eq. (25).
None of these rigorously exclude the possibility in Eq. (36) and in fact this
model has been explored recently [27].

Harold: So far we have not ﬁxed P abcd so we have not ﬁxed the theory. How
does Eq. (25) allow you to do this?

Me: In a complete theory, the explicit form of P abcd will be determined by the
long wavelength limit of the microscopic theory just as the elastic constants can
— in principle — be determined from the microscopic theory of the lattice. In
the absence of such a theory, we need to determine P abcd by general considera-
tions. Essentially we need to determine scalar L built from curvature tensor and
the metric which satisﬁes the the constraint
∇a(∂L/∂Rabcd) = 0. This problem
can be completely solved the result is the Lagrangian of a Lanczos-Lovelock
theory. Such an L can be written as a sum of terms, each involving products of
curvature tensors with the m
th term being a product of m curvature tensors
leading to

−

K

L =

cmL(m) ; L(m) =

Xm=1

1
16π

2−mδa1a2...a2m

b1b2...b2m Rb1b2

a1a2 · · ·

Rb2m−1b2m

a2m−1a2m ,

(37)

ab ∝

cdRcd

where the cm are arbitrary constants and L(m) is the m-th order Lanczos-
Lovelock Lagrangian. The m = 1 term is proportional to δab
R and
leads to Einstein’s theory. It is conventional to take c1 = 1 so that the L(1),
reduces to R/16π. The normalizations for m > 1 are somewhat arbitrary for
individual L(m) since the cms are unspeciﬁed at this stage. The m = 2 term
gives rise to what is known as Gauss-Bonnet theory. Because of the determinant
tensor, it is obvious that in any given dimension D we can only have K terms
where 2K
D. It follows that, if D = 4, then only the m = 1, 2 are non-zero.
Of these, the Gauss-Bonnet term (corresponding to m = 2) gives, on variation
of the action, a vanishing bulk contribution in D = 4. (In dimensions D = 5
to 8, one can have both the Einstein-Hilbert term and the Gauss-Bonnet term
and so on.) Equivalently, the P abcd can be expressed as a series in the powers
of derivatives of the metric as:

≤

P abcd(gij, Rijkl) = c1

(1)
P abcd(gij) + c2

(2)
P abcd(gij, Rijkl) +

,

· · ·

(38)

where c1, c2,

· · ·

are coupling constants. The lowest order term depends only on

22

the metric with no derivatives. The next term depends (in addition to metric)
linearly on curvature tensor and the next one will be quadratic in curvature etc.
Let us take a closer look at the structure which is emerging. The lowest

order term in Eq. (38) (which leads to Einstein’s theory) is

(1)
P ab

cd =

1
16π

1
2

δab
cd =

1
32π

(δa

c δb

d −

d δb
δa

c) .

(39)

To the lowest order, when we use Eq. (39) for P ijk
Einstein’s equations. The corresponding gravitational entropy functional is:

, the Eq. (31) reduces to

b

SGR[na] =

dDx
8π

ZV

∇anb
(cid:0)

∇bna

∇cnc)2
(

−

(cid:1)

(40)

Interestingly, the integrand in SGR has the T r(K 2)
If
we think of the D = 4 spacetime being embedded in a suﬃciently large k-
dimensional ﬂat spacetime we can obtain the same structure using the Gauss-
Codazzi equations relating the (zero) curvature of k-dimensional space with the
curvature of spacetime. As mentioned earlier, one can express any vector ﬁeld
na in terms of a set of basis vector ﬁelds na
A. Therefore, one can equivalently
think of the functional SGR as given by

(T rK)2 structure.

−

dDx
8π

ZV

A] =

SGR[na

∇anb
(cid:0)
where P IJ is a suitable projection operator. It is not clear whether the embed-
ding approach leads to any better understanding of the formalism; in particular,
it does not seem to generalize in a natural fashion to Lanczos-Lovelock models.
The next order term (which arises from the Gauss-Bonnet Lagrangian) is:

J − ∇cnc

I∇ana

I ∇bna

P IJ

(41)

(cid:1)

J

(2)
P ab

cd =

1
16π

1
2

δab a3a4
cd b3 b4 Rb3b4

a3a4 =

1
8π

Rab
(cid:0)

cd −

Ga

c δb

d + Gb

cδa

d + Ra

dδb

c −

Rb

dδa
c

(42)

(cid:1)

and similarly for all the higher orders terms. None of them can contribute in
D = 4 so we get Einstein’s theory as the unique choice if we assume D = 4. If
we assume that P abcd is to be built only from the metric, then this choice is
unique in all D.

Harold: You originally gave a motivational argument as to why this S should
be thought of as entropy. As far as the variational principle is concerned, this
identiﬁcation does not seem to play a crucial role.

Me: It does rather indirectly. To see this, you only need to consider the form
of S when the equations of motion are satisﬁes. First of all, Eq. (34) shows that
when the equations of motion holds the total entropy of a bulk region is entirely
on its boundary, which is nice. Further if you evaluate this boundary term

S

|on−shell = 4

−

Z∂V

dD−1xka√h

P abcdnc∇bnd

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(43)

(where we have manipulated a few indices using the symmetries of P abcd) in
the case of a stationary horizon which can be locally approximated as Rindler
spacetime, one gets exactly the Wald entropy of the horizon [3]. This is one
clear reason as to why we can think of S as entropy.

23

Harold: Is this entropy positive deﬁnite? Do you worry about that?

Me: I don’t worry about that (yet!). In D = 4, I can prove that the on-shell
entropy is positive deﬁnite. But if one is dealing with a Lanczos-Lovelock model
with horizons attributed with Wald entropy, it is known that [29] even on-shell
entropy will not be positive deﬁnite for all range of parameters. May be this
will put additional restrictions on the kind of gravitational theories which are
physically reasonable. (This approach has uncovered several other issues related
to entropy, quasi-normal modes etc. and even a possibility of entropy being
quantized [30] but all that will take us far aﬁeld.) At present these questions
are open.

Harold: Usually in an action principle one varies all the degrees of freedom in
any order one chooses. But in your extremum principle, we are expected to vary
only na. How would I get equations of motion for matter in this approach?

Me: That is not a problem. At the classical level, the ﬁeld equations are
∇aT ab = 0 which I impose (with an intriguing
already contained in the condition
interpretation, which you may not want to buy, that this is the constancy of
elastic constants!) If you want to do quantum ﬁeld theory in a curved spacetime,
you can again use these ﬁeld equations in the Heisenberg picture. The only
question is when you insist that you need to do a path integral quantizations
of the matter ﬁelds. Then, you have to, of course, vary na ﬁrst and get the
classical equations for gravity because the expression in Eq. (24) is designed as
an entropy functional. But after you have done that and written down the ﬁeld
equations for gravity, you can do the usual variation of matter Lagrangian in a
given curved spacetime and get the standard equations [3].

5 Comparison with the conventional perspec-

tive and further comments

Harold: I also notice that while the vector ﬁeld na in LIF, to the lowest order,
has no bulk dynamics, if you consider the integral over the Lagrangian in a small
region in LIF, you will get a surface contribution. That seems strange, too.

Me: Not really. I am not surprised by S picking up just a surface contribu-
tion because — even in the conventional approach — Einstein-Hilbert action is
holographic in a speciﬁc sense of the word [31] and does exactly that.

Harold: May be this is good time to sort this out. You mentioned earlier that
the democracy of observers and their right to do physics in spite of the existence
of horizons has something to do with the holography of action. I have no idea
what you are talking about here!

Me: Let me elaborate. We said that there should exist a mechanism which
will encode the information in the region
which is inaccessible to a particular
observer at the boundary ∂
of that region[14]. One possible way of ensuring
this is to add a suitable boundary term to the action principle which will provide
additional information content for observers who perceive a horizon. Such a
procedure leads to three immediate consequences.

V

V

First, if the theory is generally covariant, so that observers with horizons

24

(like, for example, uniformly accelerated observers using a Rindler metric) need
to be accommodated in the theory, such a theory must have an action functional
that contains a surface term. The generally covariant action in Einstein’s theory
did contain a surface term. The present approach explains the logical necessity
for such a surface term in a generally covariant theory which was not evident in
the standard approach.

Harold: That’s interesting. You are now claiming that there is a connection
between the following three facts. (1) The theory for gravity is built from a
generally covariant Lagrangian. (2) In a geometrical theory of gravity, horizons
are inevitable but general covariance demands that all observers have an equal
right to describe physics.
(3) Observers whose information is blocked by a
horizon should still be able to somehow get around this fact with the information
encoded on the boundary. Therefore, the Lagrangian must have a boundary
term. Viewed this way, it appears natural that the only generally covariant
scalar Lagrangian proportional to R leads to a surface term in the action. But
how does the surface term know what it is going on in the bulk?

Me: That is the second point. If the surface term has to encode the information
which is blocked by the horizon, then there must exist a simple relation between
the bulk term and surface term in the action and hence you cannot choose just
any scalar. This is indeed the case for the Einstein-Hilbert action; there is a
peculiar (unexplained) relationship between Lbulk and Lsur:

gLsur =

√

−

∂a (cid:18)

gij

−

∂√

gLbulk
∂(∂agij) (cid:19)

−

(44)

This shows that the Einstein-Hilbert gravitational action is ‘holographic’ with
the same information being coded in both the bulk and surface terms.

In fact, in any local region around an event, it is the surface term which
contributes to the action at the lowest order. In the neighborhood of any event,
In the
the Riemann normal coordinates in which g
Γ2 and
gravitational Lagrangian √
∂P
Rab
≃
leading to

−
∂Γ, the Lbulk term vanishes in this neighborhood while ∂aPb ≃

η + R x2, Γ
R x.
gLbulk + ∂aP a with Lbulk ≃

gR

√

≡

≃

−

≃

d4xR√

−

g

≈ ZV

ZV

d4x∂aP a

≈ Z∂V

d3xnaP a

(45)

showing that in a small region around the event in the Riemann normal coor-
dinates, gravitational action can be reduced to a pure surface term.

Harold: So in this perspective, you also expect the surface term to be related
to the information content blocked by the horizon, right?

Me: Indeed. That is the third point. If the surface term encodes information
which is blocked by the horizon, then it should actually lead to the entropy of the
horizon. In other words, we should be able to compute the horizon entropy by
evaluating the surface term. This is indeed true and can be easily demonstrated
[31]. The surface term does give the horizon entropy for any metric for which
near-horizon geometry has the Rindler form.

This explains another deep mystery in the conventional approach. In the
usual approach, we ignore the surface term completely (or cancel it with a
counter-term) and obtain the ﬁeld equation from the bulk term in the action.

25

Any solution to the ﬁeld equation obtained by this procedure is logically inde-
pendent of the nature of the surface term. But we ﬁnd that when the surface
term (which was ignored) is evaluated at the horizon that arises in any given
solution, it does correctly give the entropy of the horizon! This is possible only
because there is a relationship, given by Eq. (44), between the surface term
and the bulk term which is again an unexplained feature in the conventional
approach to gravitational dynamics. Since the surface term has the thermody-
namic interpretation as the entropy of horizons, and is related holographically
to the bulk term, we are again led to an indirect connection between spacetime
dynamics and horizon thermodynamics.

Harold: I agree these results are extremely mysterious in the conventional
approach, now that you brought it up. I have not seen Eq. (44) mentioned, let
alone discussed in any work (other than yours, of course.) I presume this is one
of what you call ‘algebraic accidents’. But if your ideas about Lanczos-Lovelock
theory being the natural candidate in D dimensions then the same ‘algebraic
accident’ should occur in Lanczos-Lovelock theories as well, right?

Me: Yes.
In fact it does — which is gratifying — and acts as a nontrivial
consistency check on my alternative perspective. One can show that the surface
and bulk terms of all Lanczos-Lovelock theories satisfy an equation similar to
Eq. (44). Of course, since it wasn’t noticed for Hilbert action, nobody bothered
about Lanczos-Lovelock action till we [5] unearthed it.

One can provide a simple, yet very general, proof of the connection between
entropy and surface term in action in any static spacetime. Such a spacetime
will have a Killing vector ξa and a corresponding Noether current. Taking the
J 0 component of Eq. (12) and writing J 0 =

L =

1
√

−

g

∂α

√
(cid:0)

−

∇bJ 0b we obtain
2E0
0

g J 0α

−

(cid:1)

(46)

−

Only spatial derivatives contribute in the ﬁrst term on the right hand side
when the spacetime is static. This relation shows that the action obtained
g will generically have a surface term related to J ab (In
by integrating L√
Einstein gravity Eq. (46) will read as L = 2R0
0; our result generalises
the fact that R0
0 can be expressed as a total divergence in static spacetimes.)
This again illustrates, in a very general manner, why the surface terms in the
action functional lead to horizon entropy. In fact Eq. (46) can be integrated
to show that in any static spacetime with a bifurcation horizon, the action can
be interpreted as the free energy which generalises a result known in Einstein
gravity to Lanczos-Lovelock models.

2G0

0 −

Harold: What are the other key algebraic accidents in the conventional ap-
proach which your perspective throws light on ?

Me: There are several but let me describe one which is really striking (and was
ﬁrst discussed in ref. [32]). Consider a static, spherically symmetric horizon, in
a spacetime described by a metric:

ds2 =

−

f (r)c2dt2 + f −1(r)dr2 + r2dΩ2.

(47)

Let the location of the horizon be given by the simple zero of the function
f (r), say at r = a. The Taylor series expansion of f (r) near the horizon f (r)

≈

26

f ′(a)(r
a) shows that the metric reduces to the Rindler metric near the horizon
−
t plane with the surface gravity κ = (c2/2)f ′(a). Then, an analytic
in the r
continuation to imaginary time allows us to identify the temperature associated
with the horizon to be

−

kBT =

~cf ′(a)
4π

(48)

where we have introduced the normal units. The association of temperature in
Eq. (48) with the metric in Eq. (47) only requires the conditions f (a) = 0 and
f ′(a)
= 0. The discussion so far did not assume anything about the dynamics
of gravity or Einstein’s ﬁeld equations.

We shall now take the next step and write down the Einstein equation for
(8πG/c4)P r2
−
r is the radial pressure. When evaluated on the horizon r = a we

the metric in Eq. (47), which is given by (1
where P = T r
get the result:

rf ′(r) =

f )

−

−

c4
G (cid:20)

f ′(a)a

1
2

1
2 (cid:21)

−

= 4πP a2

(49)

If we now consider two solutions to the Einstein’s equations diﬀering inﬁnites-
imally in the parameters such that horizons occur at two diﬀerent radii a and
a + da, then multiplying the Eq. (49) by da, we get:

c4
2G

f ′(a)ada

c4
2G

−

da = P (4πa2da)

(50)

The right hand side is just P dV where V = (4π/3)a3 is what is called the areal
volume which is the relevant quantity when we consider the action of pressure on
a surface area. In the ﬁrst term, we note that f ′(a) is proportional to horizon
temperature in Eq. (48). Rearranging this term slightly and introducing a
~ factor by hand into an otherwise classical equation to bring in the horizon
temperature, we can rewrite Eq. (50) as

~cf ′(a)
4π

c3
G~ d

1
4

(cid:18)

4πa2

(cid:19)

−

1
2

c4da
G

= P d

4π
3

(cid:18)

a3

(cid:19)

(51)

kBT
| {z }

dS
{z

dE
{z

−

P dV
{z

|
}
The labels below the equation indicate a natural — and unique — interpretation
for each of the terms and the whole equation now becomes T dS = dE + P dV
allowing us to read oﬀ the expressions for entropy and energy:

|

|

}

}

S =

1
4L2
P

(4πa2) =

1
4

AH
L2
P

; E =

c4
2G

a =

c4
G (cid:18)

1/2

AH
16π (cid:19)

(52)

P = G~/c3. The result shows that Einstein’s
where AH is the horizon area and L2
equations can be re-interpreted as a thermodynamic identity for a virtual dis-
placement of the horizon by an amount da.

Harold: I suppose the uniqueness of the factor P (4πa2)da, where 4πa2 is the
proper area of a surface of radius a in spherically symmetric spacetimes, implies
that we cannot carry out the same exercise by multiplying Eq. (49) by some
other arbitrary factor F (a)da instead of just da in a natural fashion. This, in
turn, uniquely ﬁxes both dE and the combination T dS. The product T dS is
classical and is independent of ~ and hence we can determine T and S only

27

6
within a multiplicative factor. The only place you introduced ~ by hand is in
using the Euclidean extension of the metric to ﬁx the form of T and thus S.
Right ?

Me: Yes. With that I can remove the ambiguity in the overall multiplicative
factor. So, given the structure of the metric in Eq. (47) and Einstein’s equa-
1/~
tions, we can determine T, S and E uniquely. The fact that T
is analogous to the situation in classical thermodynamics in contrast with sta-
tistical mechanics. The T dS in thermodynamics is independent of Boltzmann’s
constant while statistical mechanics will lead to S

~ and S

kB and T

1/kB.

∝

∝

∝

∝

Harold: That is a bit mind-boggling. Usually, the rigorous way of obtaining
the temperature of a horizon — say, a black hole horizon — is by studying
a quantum ﬁeld in the externally speciﬁed metric. You never need to specify
whether the metric is a solution to Einstein’s equations. Now you are telling
me that the same result arises without any reference to an externally speciﬁed
quantum ﬁeld theory but on using Einstein’s equations on the horizons. How
does the Einstein equations know that there is a temperature, entropy etc ?

Me: Yes. That is the algebraic coincidence. More sharply stated, we have no
explanation as to why an equation like Eq. (51) should hold in classical gravity,
if we take the conventional route. This strongly suggests that the association
of entropy and temperature with a horizon is quite fundamental and is actually
connected with the dynamics (encoded in Einstein’s equations) of the gravita-
tional ﬁeld. The fact that quantum ﬁeld theory in a spacetime with horizon
exhibits thermal behaviour should then be thought of as a consequence of a
more fundamental principle.

Harold: If so the idea should also have a more general validity. Does it ?

Me: Yes. One can again show that the ﬁeld equations of more general theories
of gravity (like in Lanczos-Lovelock models) also reduce to the same thermody-
namic identity T dS = dE + P dV when evaluated on the horizon. This has now
been demonstrated [33] for an impressively wide class of models like (i) the sta-
tionary axisymmetric horizons and (ii) evolving spherically symmetric horizons
in Einstein gravity, (iii) static spherically symmetric horizons and (iv) dynami-
cal apparent horizons in Lovelock gravity, and (v) three dimensional BTZ black
hole horizons, (vi) FRW cosmological models in various gravity theories and
(vii) even [34] in the case Horava-Lifshitz Gravity.
It is not possible to un-
derstand, in the conventional approach, why the ﬁeld equations should encode
information about horizon thermodynamics.

Harold: This is a fairly strong argument in favour of a thermodynamic under-
pinning for the dynamics of gravity. But before I accept that in toto, I need to
convince myself that there is no simpler explanation for this result. I accept that
none is given in the literature but how about the standard ﬁrst law of black hole
thermodynamics? Your relation looks similar to it so I wonder whether there is
a connection.

Me: No. We are talking about very diﬀerent things.
In general, in spite of
the superﬁcial similarity, Eq. (51) is diﬀerent from the conventional ﬁrst law of
black hole thermodynamics due to the presence of P dV term. The diﬀerence is
easily seen, for example, in the case of Reissner-Nordstrom black hole for which

28

−

≡

M )]dM

T r
r = P is non-zero due to the presence of nonzero electromagnetic energy-
momentum tensor in the right hand side of Einstein’s equations. If a chargeless
particle of mass dM is dropped into a Reissner-Nordstrom black hole, then the
standard ﬁrst law of black hole thermodynamics will give T dS = dM . But in
a/2, changes by dE = (da/2) =
Eq. (51), the energy term, deﬁned as E
(1/2)[a/(a
= dM . It is easy to see, however, that for the Reissner-
Nordstrom black hole, the combination dE + P dV is precisely equal to dM
making sure T dS = dM . So we need the P dV term to get T dS = dM from
Eq. (51) when a chargeless particle is dropped into a Reissner-Nordstrom black
hole. More generally, if da arises due to changes dM and dQ, it is easy to show
that Eq. (51) gives T dS = dM
(Q/a)dQ where the second term arises from
the electrostatic contribution. This ensures that Eq. (51) is perfectly consistent
with the standard ﬁrst law of black hole dynamics in those contexts in which
both are applicable but dE
= dM in general. You would have also realized that
the way Eq. (51) was derived is completely local and quite diﬀerent from the
way one obtains ﬁrst law of black hole thermodynamics.

−

Harold: Yes, I see that. It appears that gravitational ﬁeld equations and their
solutions with horizons has a deeper connection with thermodynamics than is
apparent. In fact, I believe you would claim the thermodynamic perspective is
more fundamental than the ﬁeld equations describing gravity.

Me: Precisely. That is why I spent lot of time explaining the thermodynamic
motivation in Sections 2 and 3 while I could have derived the ﬁeld equations
just by extremizing the expression in Eq. (24). But in a way everything else is
just motivational if you are willing to accept the perspective based on Eq. (24)
as fundamental.

Harold: That brings up the question you promised a discussion on. What about
the cosmological constant [35]? In the conventional approach, one introduces
it as a term in the gravitational Lagrangian. You don’t have any such term
in Eq. (24) but nevertheless the cosmological constant appears in your ﬁnal
equations!

Me: Yes and I would claim that this is another very attractive feature of this
new perspective. In the standard approach, one starts with an action

Atot =

Z

dDx √

−

g (Lgrav + Lm)

(53)

and varies (i) the matter degrees of freedom to obtain the equations of motion
for matter and (ii) the metric gab to obtain the ﬁeld equations of gravity. The
equations of motion for matter remain invariant if one adds a constant, say,
ρ0
to the matter Lagrangian, which is equivalent to adding a constant ρ0 to the
Hamiltonian density of the matter sector. Physically, this symmetry reﬂects the
fact that the zero level of the energy is arbitrary in the matter sector and can be
set to any value without leading to observable consequences. However, gravity
breaks this symmetry which the matter sector has. A shift Lm →
ρ0 will
change the energy-momentum tensor T a
b which acts as the source of gravity by
a term proportional to ρ0δa
b . Therefore, having a nonzero baseline for energy
density of matter is equivalent to a theory with cosmological constant which —
in turn — will lead to observable consequences. If we interpret the evidence for
dark energy in the universe (see ref. [36]; for a critical look at data, see ref. [37]

Lm −

−

29

6
6
and references therein) as due to the cosmological constant, then its value has
to be ﬁne-tuned to enormous 4 accuracy to satisfy the observational constraints.
It is not clear why a particular parameter in the low energy matter sector has
to be ﬁne-tuned in such a manner.

Lm −
−

In the alternative perspective described here, the functional in Eq. (24)
ρ0 or equivalently, Tab →
is clearly invariant under the shift Lm →
ρ0nana = 0 for any null vec-
Tab + ρ0gab, since it only introduces a term
tor na. In other words, one cannot introduce the cosmological constant as a
low energy parameter in the action in this approach. We saw, however, that the
cosmological constant reappears an an integration constant when the equations
are solved. The integration constants which appear in a particular solution have
a completely diﬀerent conceptual status compared to the parameters which ap-
pear in the action describing the theory. It is much less troublesome to choose
a ﬁne-tuned value for a particular integration constant in the theory if obser-
vations require us to do so. From this point of view, the cosmological constant
problem is considerably less severe when we view gravity from the alternative
perspective.

Harold: I suppose you succeed in having the extra symmetry under the shift
Tab + ρ0gab because you are not treating metric as a dynamical variable,
Tab →
right?

Me: Right. In fact one can state a stronger result [38]. Consider any model
of gravity satisfying the following three conditions: (1) The metric is varied in
a local action to obtain the equations of motion. (2) We demand full general
covariance of the equations of motion. (3) The equations of motion for matter
sector is invariant under the addition of a constant to the matter Lagrangian.
Then, we can prove ‘no-go’ theorem that the cosmological constant problem
cannot be solved in such model [38]. The proof is elementary. Our demand (2) of
g.
general covariance requires the matter action to be an integral over
Lmatter√
−
Lmatter leading to
The demand (3) now allows us to add a constant Λ, say, to
a coupling Λ√
g between Λ and the metric gab. By our demand (1), when
we vary gab the theory will couple to Λ through a term proportional to Λgab
thereby introducing an arbitrary cosmological constant into the theory.

−

The power of the above ‘no-go theorem’ lies in its simplicity! It clearly shows
that we cannot solve cosmological constant problem unless we drop one of the
three demands listed in the above paragraph. Of these, we do not want to
sacriﬁce general covariance encoded in (2); neither do we have a handle on low
energy matter Lagrangian so we cannot avoid (3). So the only hope we have is to
introduce an approach in which gravitational ﬁeld equations are obtained from
varying some degrees of freedom other than gab in a maximization principle.
This suggests that the so called cosmological constant problem has its roots in
our misunderstanding of the nature of gravity.

4This is, of course, the party line. But it might help to get some perspective on how
enormous, the ‘enormous’ really is. To begin with note that, the sensible particle physics
convention considers ratios of length (or energy) scales and not their squares as cosmologists
are fond of doing. This leads to (LP /LΛ) ∼ 10−61 instead of the usual ΛL2
P ∼ 10−122. In
standard model of particle physics the ratio between Planck scale to neutrino mass scale is
1019GeV /10−2eV ∼ 1030 for which we have no theoretical explanation. So when we worry
about the ﬁne tuning of cosmological constant without expressing similar worries about stan-
dard model of particle physics, we are essentially assuming that 1030 is not a matter for
concern but 1061 is. This subjective view is defensible but needs to be clearly understood.

30

Harold: I thought that any spin-2 long range ﬁeld hab (arising, for example, in
the linear perturbation around ﬂat spacetime through gab = ηab + hab) obeying
principle of equivalence has to generically couple to Tab through a term in the
action T abhab. But in your model, this does not seem to happen.

Me: That’s correct. It is sometimes claimed that a spin-2 graviton in the linear
limit has to couple to Tab in a universal manner, in which case, one will have the
graviton coupling to the cosmological constant. In our approach, the linearized
ηab, in a suitable gauge,
ﬁeld equations for the spin-2 graviton ﬁeld hab = gab −
will be ((cid:3)hab −
Tab)nanb = 0 for all null vectors na. This equation is still
Tab + ρ0gab showing that the graviton does not couple to
invariant under Tab →
cosmological constant.

Harold: But can you predict the observed value of the cosmological constant
in your approach?

Me: Alas, no. But I claim providing a mechanism in which the bulk cosmological
constant decouples from gravity is a major step forward.
If the cosmological
constant was strictly zero, my perspective has a natural explanation for it —
which no one else had! It was always thought that this should arise from some
unknown symmetry and I have provided you with a model which has such
symmetry. I believe the small value of the observed cosmological constant arises
from non-perturbative quantum gravitational eﬀects at the next order, but I
don’t have a fully satisfactory model. (See, however, Ref. [39].)

6 Summary and outlook

Harold: We have covered a lot of ground some of which is purely technical while
the rest are conceptual or interpretational. In your mind the distinction may be
unimportant but others will react diﬀerently to results which can be rigorously
proved compared to interpretational aspects, however elegant the latter may be.
May be you would care to separate them out and provide a summary?

Me: Fine. From a purely algebraic point of view, without bringing in any
physical interpretation or motivation, we can prove the following mathematical
results:

•

•

Consider a functional of null vector ﬁelds na(x) in an arbitrary spacetime
given by Eq. (24) [or, more generally, by Eq. (36)]. Demanding that this
functional is an extremum for all null vectors na leads to the ﬁeld equations
Tab)nanb = 0 where Eab
for the background geometry given by (2Eab −
is given by Eq. (32) [or, more generally, by Eq. (2)]. Thus ﬁeld equations
in a wide class of theories of gravity can be obtained from an extremum
principle without varying the metric as a dynamical variable.

Tab +
These ﬁeld equations are invariant under the transformation Tab →
ρ0gab, which relates to the freedom of introducing a cosmological constant
as an integration constant in the theory. Further, this symmetry forbids
the inclusion of a cosmological constant term in the variational principle by
hand as a low energy parameter. That is, we have found a symmetry which
makes the bulk cosmological constant decouple from the gravity. When

31

linearized around ﬂat spacetime, the graviton inherits this symmetry and
does not couple to the cosmological constant.

•

On-shell, the functional in Eq. (24) [or, more generally, by Eq. (36)] con-
tributes only on the boundary of the region. When the boundary is a
horizon, this terms gives precisely the Wald entropy of the theory.

Harold: It is remarkable that you can derive not only Einstein’s theory uniquely
in D = 4 but even Lanczos-Lovelock theory in D > 4 from an extremum prin-
ciple involving the null normals without varying gab in an action functional!.
I also see from Eq. (33) that in the case of Einstein’s theory, you have an
Lagrangian na(
∇[a∇b])nb for a vector ﬁeld na which becomes vacuous in ﬂat
spacetime in which covariant derivatives become partial derivatives. There is
clearly no dynamics in na but they do play a crucial role. So I see that you
can get away without ever telling me what the null vectors na actually means
because they disappear from the scene after serving their purpose. While this
may be mathematically clever, it is very unsatisfactory physically. You may not
have a rigorous model for these degrees of freedom but what is your picture?

Me: My picture is made of the following ingredients, each of which seems rea-
sonable but far from having rigorous mathematical justiﬁcation at this stage.

•

•

•

•

Assume that the spacetime is endowed with certain microscopic degrees
of freedom capable of exhibiting thermal phenomena. This is just the
Boltzmann paradigm: If one can heat it, it must have microstructure! ;
and one can heat up a spacetime.

Whenever a class of observers perceive a horizon, they are “heating up
the spacetime” and the degrees of freedom close to a horizon participate
in a very observer dependent thermodynamics. Matter which ﬂows close
to the horizon (say, within a few Planck lengths of the horizon) transfers
energy to these microscopic, near-horizon, degrees of freedom as far as the
observer who sees the horizon is concerned. Just as entropy of a normal
system at temperature T will change by δE/T when we transfer to it
an energy δE, here also an entropy change will occur. (A freely falling
observer in the same neighbourhood, of course, will deny all these!)

We proved that when the ﬁeld equations of gravity hold, one can interpret
this entropy change in a purely geometrical manner involving the Noether
current. From this point of view, the normals na to local patches of
null surfaces are related to the (unknown) degrees of freedom that can
participate in the thermal phenomena involving the horizon.

Just as demanding the validity of special relativistic laws with respect to
all freely falling observers leads to the kinematics of gravity, demanding
the local entropy balance in terms of the thermodynamic variables as
perceived by local Rindler observers leads to the ﬁeld equations of gravity
in the form (2Eab −

Tab)nanb = 0.

Harold: It is an interesting picture but is totally observer dependent, right? A
local Rindler observer or an observer outside a black hole horizon might attribute
all kinds of thermodynamics and entropy changes to the horizons she perceives.

32

But an inertial observer or an observer falling through the Schwarzschild horizon
will see none of these phenomena.

Me: Exactly. I claim we need to accept the fact that a whole lot of thermo-
dynamic phenomena needs to be now thought of as observer dependent. For
example, if you throw some hot matter on to a Schwarzschild black hole, then
when it gets to a few Planck lengths away from the horizon and hovers around
it, I expect it to interact with the microscopic horizon degrees of freedom as
far as an outside observer is concerned. After all, such an observer would claim
that all matter stays arbitrarily close but outside the horizon for all eternity.
A freely falling observer through the horizon will have a completely diﬀerent
picture but we have learnt to live with this dichotomy as far as elementary kine-
matics goes. I think we need to do the same as regards thermodynamics and
quantum processes.

Harold: In a way, every key progress in physics involved realizing that some-
thing we thought as absolute is not absolute. With special relativity it was
the ﬂow of time and with general relativity it was the concept of global inertial
frames and when we brought in quantum ﬁelds in curved spacetime it was the
notion of particles.

Me: And the notion of temperature, don’t forget that. We now know that the
temperature attributed to even vacuum state depends on the observer. We need
to go further and integrate the entire thermodynamic machinery — involving
highly excited semi-classical states, say, cups of tea with (what we believe to be)
“real” temperature — with this notion of LRFs having their own temperature.
I don’t think this has been done in a satisfactory manner yet [22].

Harold: So, what next? What is the “to do list”?

Me: To name a few which comes to ones mind, I can list them as technical ones
and conceptual ones. On the technical side:

(i) It would be nice to make the notion of LRF and the horizon a bit more
rigorous. For example, the idea of an approximate Killing vector could be made
more precise and one might like to establish the connection between locality,
that is apparent in the Euclidean sector and the causality, which is apparent in
the Lorentzian section that has the light cones. By and large, one would like to
make rigorous the use of LRFs by, say, computing the next order corrections.

(ii) A lot more can be done to clarify the observer dependence of the en-
tropy. (The study of horizon thermodynamics makes one realize that one does
not really quite understand what entropy is!). It essentially involves exact com-
S0) where S1 and S0 are the entropies attributed to the excited
putation of (S1 −
and ground state by a Rindler observer. This should throw more light on the
expression for δS used in Eq. (4). In particular, it would be nice to have a de-
tailed model which shows why δS involves the combination of δE of matter and
T of the horizon. One would then use these insights to understand why Eq. (21)
actually represents the relevant entropy functional for matter for arbitrary Tab.
(iii) It will be nice to have a handle on the positivity or otherwise of the

entropy functional used in Eq. (24).

These technical issues, I believe can be tackled in more or less straightforward
manner, though the mathematics can be fairly involved. But as I said, they are
probably not crucial to the alternative perspective or its further progress. The

33

latter will depend on more serious conceptual issues, some of which are the
following:

(i) How come the microstructure of spacetime exhibits itself indirectly through
the horizon temperature even at scales much larger than Planck length? I be-
lieve this is because the event horizon works as some kind of magnifying glass
allowing us to probe trans-Planckian physics [40] but this notion needs to be
made more precise.

(ii) How does one obtain the expression for entropy in Eq. (24) from some
microscopic model? In particular, such an analysis — even with a toy model —
should throw more light on why normals to local patches of null surfaces play
such a crucial role as eﬀective degrees of freedom in the long wavelength limit.
Of course, such a model should also determine the expression for P abcd and
get the metric tensor and spacetime as derived concepts - a fairly tall order!.
(This is somewhat like obtaining theory of elasticity starting from a microscopic
model for a solid, which, incidentally, is not a simple task either.)

Harold: But what about the “deep questions” like, for example, the physics
near the singularities? Since you get the same ﬁeld equations as anybody else
does, you will have the same solutions, same singularities etc.

Me: I told you that I am not doing statistical mechanics (which would be
the full quantum theory) of spacetime but only thermodynamics. To answer
issues related to singularities etc., one actually needs to discover the statistical
mechanics underlying the thermodynamic description I have presented here.
We can have another chat, after I ﬁgure out the statistical mechanics of the
spacetime microstructure!

Acknowledgements

The questions of Harold mostly represent issues raised by several colleagues —
I
far too numerous to name individually — in my lectures, discussions etc.
thank all of them for helping me to sharpen the ideas. I also thank A.D. Patel,
K. Subramanian, Sudipta Sarkar, Aseem Paranjape, D. Kothawala and Sunu
Engineer for several rounds of discussions over the past many years.

References

[1] J. Schwinger, Particles, Sources and Fields, Volume I, (Perseus Books,

USA, 1998)

[2] T. Padmanabhan, Entropy density of spacetime and thermodynamic in-
terpretation of ﬁeld equations of gravity in any diﬀeomorphism invariant
theory, [arXiv:0903.1254]; T. Padmanabhan, Entropy density of Spacetime
and Gravity: A Conceptual Synthesis, to appear in IJMPD, (2009).

[3] T. Padmanabhan, Gen.Rel.Grav., 40, 529-564 (2008) [arXiv:0705.2533]; T.

Padmanabhan, A. Paranjape, Phys.Rev. D75 064004, (2007)

[4] T. Padmanabhan, Advanced

Science Letters,

2,

174

[arXiv:0807.2356]; T. Padmanabhan, Gravity - the Inside story,

(2009)
[First

34

Prize Essay, Gravity Research Foundation Essay Contest, 2008.] Gen. Rel.
Grav. 40 (2008), 2031.

[5] A. Mukhopadhyay, T. Padmanabhan, Phys.Rev., D 74, 124023 (2006)

[hep-th/0608120]

[6] Nathalie Deruelle, Joseph Katz and Sachiko Ogushi, Class. Quant. Grav.
21, (2004), 1971. [gr-qc/0310098]; G.L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, T. Mohaupt,
arXiv:hep-th/9904005v2; T. Padmanabhan, Gravitation: Foundations and
Frontiers, (Cambridge University Press, 2009), in press.

[7] For a sample of other approaches, see e.g., G. E. Volovik, The uni-
verse in a helium droplet, (Oxford University Press, 2003); T. Jacob-
son, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995), 1260, [gr-qc/9504004]; L. Sindoni et al.,
arXiv:0909.5391; B.L. Hu, arXiv:0903.0878; M. Visser, Mod.Phys.Lett. A17
(2002) 977 [gr-qc/0204062]; C. Barcelo et al., Int.J.Mod.Phys. D10 (2001)
799 [gr-qc/0106002]; Chao-Guang Huang, Jia-Rui Sun,gr-qc/0701078;
J.Makela, gr-qc/0701128.

[8] A. D. Sakharov, Sov. Phys. Dokl., 12, 1040 (1968).

[9] T. Padmanabhan, Dark Energy: Mystery of the Millennium, Albert Ein-
stein Century International Conference, Paris, 18-22 July 2005, AIP Con-
ference Proceedings 861, Pages 858-866, [astro-ph/0603114]

[10] P. C. W. Davies J. Phys. A 8, 609 (1975); W. G. Unruh, Phys. Rev. D 14,

870 (1976).

[11] S . W Hawkings , Commun Math. Phys. 43 , 199-220, (1975).

[12] T. Padmanabhan, Phys. Reports, 406, 49 (2005) [gr-qc/0311036]; AIP

Conference Proceedings, 989 114 (2007) [arXiv:0706.1654].

[13] C.W. Misner, K.S. Thorne, J.A. Wheeler, Gravitation, (W. H. Freeman,

1973) chapter 7.

[14] T. Padmanabhan , Apoorva Patel, Role of Horizons in Semiclassical
Gravity: Entropy and the Area Spectrum [gr-qc/0309053]; T. Padmanab-
han, Gen.Rel.Grav., 35, 2097-2103 (2003) [Fifth Prize essay; Gravity Re-
search Foundation Essay Contest, 2003]; Mod.Phys.Letts. A 17, 923 (2002)
[gr-qc/0202078].

[15] See e.g., T.Roy Choudhury, T. Padmanabhan, Gen.Rel.Grav., 39, 1789

(2007) [gr-qc/0404091].

[16] D.Kothawala and T.Padmanabhan (2009), Response of Unruh-DeWitt de-

tector with time-dependent acceleration, [arXiv:0911.1017].

[17] T. Padmanabhan, Mod. Phys. Letts A 18, 2903 (2003) [hep-th/0302068];

Mod.Phys.Letts. A 19, 2637-2643 (2004) [gr-qc/0405072]

[18] This is related to the famous question ﬁrst posed by Wheeler to Bekenstein:
What happens if you mix cold and hot tea and pour it down a horizon,
erasing all traces of “crime” in increasing the entropy of the world? This
is based on what Wheeler told me in 1985, from his recollection of events;

35

it is also mentioned in his book, J.A.Wheeler, A Journey into Gravity and
Spacetime, [Scientiﬁc American Library, NY, 1990] page 221. I have heard
somewhat diﬀerent versions from other sources.

[19] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333 (1973).

[20] H. S. Snyder Phys. Rev., 71, 38 (1947); B. S. DeWitt, Phys. Rev.
Lett., 13, 114 (1964); T. Yoneya Prog. Theor. Phys., 56, 1310 (1976);
T. Padmanabhan Ann. Phys. (N.Y.), 165, 38 (1985); Class. Quan-
tum Grav. 4, L107 (1987); T. Padmanabhan Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1854
(1997) [hep-th/9608182]; Phys. Rev. D 57, 6206 (1998); K.Srinivasan
et al., Phys. Rev. D 58 044009 (1998) [gr-qc/9710104]; X.Calmet et
al.,Phys.Rev.Lett.93:211101,(2004);hep-th/0505144; M. Fontanini et al.
Phys.Lett. B 633, 627 (2006) hep-th/0509090. For a review, see L.J. Garay,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A10, 145 (1995).

[21] S. Kolekar, D. Kothawala, T. Padmanabhan, work in progress (2009)b

[22] T.Padmanabhan, unpublished work in progress.

[23] D. Marolf, D. Minic, S. Ross, Phys.Rev. D69 (2004) 064006.

[24] R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993), 3427, [gr-qc/9307038]; V. Iyer and

R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D 52 (1995), 4430, [gr-qc/9503052].

[25] T. Padmanabhan,

2293-2298(2004)
[gr-qc/0408051]; Int.J.Mod.Phys., D14,2263-2270 (2005) [gr-qc/0510015].

Int.Jour.Mod.Phys., D 13,

[26] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity, Pergamon Press; 2

edition (1981).

[27] Shao-Feng Wu et.al., (2009), arXiv:0909.1367v2.

[28] C Lanczos, Z. Phys. 73, 147, (1932); Annals Math. 39, 842, (1938); D

Lovelock, J. Math. Phys., 12, 498 (1971).

[29] M Cvetic, et al., Nucl.Phys. B 628, 295, 2002, [hep-th/0112045]; S Nojiri, S
D Odintsov, Phys. Rev., D66, 044012,2002, [hep-th/0204112]; Tim Clunan,
et al., Class. Quant. Grav. 21, 3447 (2004). [gr-qc/0402044]

[30] Dawood Kothawala, T. Padmanabhan , Sudipta Sarkar, Phys. Rev.,
D78 , 104018 (2008) [arXiv:0807.1481]; T. Padmanabhan, Class. Quan.
Grav., 21, L1 (2004) [gr-qc/0310027]; Class.Quan.Grav., 21, 4485 (2004)
[gr-qc/0308070]; T.Roy Choudhury, T. Padmanabhan, Phys. Rev., D 69
064033 (2004) [gr-qc/0311064].

[31] T. Padmanabhan, Gen.Rel.Grav., 34 2029-2035 (2002) [gr-qc/0205090]
[Second Prize essay; Gravity Research Foundation Essay Contest, 2002]
[gr-qc/0209088]; Mod.Phys.Letts. A 17, 1147 (2002)[hep-th/0205278];
Brazilian Jour.Phys. (Special Issue) 35, 362 (2005) [gr-qc/0412068]; T. Pad-
manabhan, Gravity: A New Holographic Perspective (Lecture at the In-
ternational Conference on Einstein’s Legacy in the New Millennium, Dec,
2005) Int.J.Mod.Phys., D 15, 1659-1675 (2006) [gr-qc/0606061].

[32] T Padmanabhan,Class. Quan. Grav., 19, 5387, (2002) [gr-qc/0204019].

36

[33] For a small sample, see e.g., D. Kothawala et al., Phys. Lett. B 652,
338 (2007) [arXiv:gr-qc/0701002]; A. Paranjape et al., Phys. Rev. D 74,
104015 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0607240]; Dawood Kothawala, T. Padman-
abhan, Phys. Rev., D 79, 104020 (2009)[arXiv:0904.0215]; R. G. Cai,
et al., Phys. Rev. D 78, 124012 (2008) [arXiv:0810.2610]; Phys. Rev.
D 75, 084003 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0609128]; M. Akbar and R. G. Cai,
Phys. Lett. ,B 635, 7 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0602156]; Phys. Lett. B 648,
243 (2007) [arXiv:gr-qc/0612089]; Y. Gong and A. Wang,Phys. Rev. Lett.
99, 211301 (2007) [arXiv:0704.0793 [hep-th]]; S. F. Wu, G. H. Yang and
P. M. Zhang, [arXiv:0710.5394]; S. F. Wu, B. Wang and G. H. Yang, Nucl.
Phys. B 799, 330 (2008) [arXiv:0711.1209]; S. F. Wu, B. Wang, G. H. Yang
and P. M. Zhang, [arXiv:0801.2688]; J. Zhou et al.,arXiv:0705.1264; R-
G Cai, L-M Cao, [gr-qc/0611071]; M. Akbar, [hep-th/0702029]; Xian-Hui
Ge,hep-th/0703253; A. Sheykhi et al.,hep-th/0701198; G. Allemandi et
al.,gr-qc/0308019.

[34] R. G. Cai and N. Ohta, Horizon Thermodynamics and Gravitational Field

Equations in Horava-Lifshitz Gravity, [arXiv:0910.2307].

[35] For a review, see e.g., T. Padmanabhan, Physics Reports 380, 235-320

(2003) [hep-th/0212290].

[36] S.J. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. (1999) 517,565; A.G. Reiss et al., As-
tron. J. (1998), 116,1009; J. L. Tonry et al., ApJ, (2003), 594, 1; B. J. Bar-
ris, Astrophys.J., 602 (2004), 571; A. G.Reiss et al., Astrophys.J. 607,
(2004), 665.

[37] H.K.Jassal et al., Phys.Rev. D 72, 103503 (2005) [astro-ph/0506748];
[astro-ph/0601389]; T. Padmanabhan,T. Roy Choudhury, MNRAS 344,
823 (2003) [astro-ph/0212573]; T. Roy Choudhury, T. Padmanabhan,
Astron.Astrophys. 429, 807 (2005),
[astro-ph/0311622]; S. Nesseris,
L.Perivolaropoulos, JCAP 0702,025 (2007); Y. Wang, P. Mukherjee, Phys.
Rev. D 76, 103533 (2007).

[38] T. Padmanabhan, Gravity’s Immunity from Vacuum: The Holographic
Structure of Semiclassical Action,
[Third prize essay; Gravity research
Foundation Essay Contest, 2006] Gen.Rel.Grav., 38, 1547-1552 (2006);
T. Padmanabhan Current Science, 88,1057, (2005), [astro-ph/0411044];
Int.J.Mod.Phys., D 15, 2029 (2006) [gr-qc/0609012].

[39] T.

22,

Padmanabhan Class.Quan.Grav.,

(2005)
[hep-th/0406060]. For earlier attempts in similar spirit, see T. Pad-
manabhan, Class.Quan.Grav. 19, L167 (2002),
[gr-qc/0204020]; D.
Int.J.Theor.Phys. 36, 2759 (1997); for related work, see Volovik,
Sorkin,
G. E., gr-qc/0405012; J. V. Lindesay et al., astro-ph/0412477; Y. S.
Myung, hep-th/0412224; J.D.Barrow, gr-qc/0612128; E.Elizalde et al.,
hep-th/0502082.

L107-L110,

[40] See

e.g.,

(1998)[hep-th/9801015];
[hep-th/9801138] and references therein.

T.Padmanabhan,

Phys.
Phys. Rev. D.,

Rev.
59,

Letts.,81,4297
(1999)

124012

37

