0
1
0
2

r
p
A
3
1

]

R
T
.
n
i
f
-
q
[

2
v
4
0
8
1
.
4
0
0
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interacting Many-Investor Models, Opinion
Formation and Price Formation with
Non-extensive Statistics.

Fredrick Michael*
written 01/2001, revised 11/2008

June 30, 2021

Abstract

We seek to utilize the nonextensive statistics to the microscopic model-
ing of the interacting many-investor dynamics that drive the price changes
in a market. The statistics of price changes are known to be ﬁt well by
the Students-T and power-law distributions of the nonextensive statis-
tics. We therefore derive models of interacting investors that are based
on the nonextensive statistics and which describe the excess demand and
formation of price.

1

Introduction

As is known from economics, the price of a security (for example) can
be related to the law of supply and demand. That is to say, the excess
demand is proportional to the price such that we can write approximately

(1)

and here λ is the market depth [4, 5]. In the past decade or so, there
have been many models [4, 5] proposed that attempt to capture the dy-
namics and statistics of market participants. These range from minority
game models [11], multi-agent models, and lattice super-spin models that
encode the many degrees of freedom available to an interacting investor
as the degrees of freedom of the variables and spins of the models. These
models attempt to quantify the excess demand brought about by the mis-
match of supply and demand between interacting investors in a market.
The hallmark for the success of a model has been the ability of the model
in reproducing the stylized facts of real markets. These are the heavy tails
(power-law) of the distributions, anomalous (super) diﬀusion, and there-
fore statistical dependence (long-range correlations) of subsequent price
changes.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Recently we reported on an application of the C.Tsallis nonexten-
sive statistics to the S&P500 stock index [1, 3]. There we argued that
the statistics are applicable to a broad range of markets and exchanges
where anamolous (super) diﬀusion and ’heavy’ tails of the distribution are
present, as they are in the S&P500 [3]. In eﬀect we have characterized
the statistics of the price changes (the left hand side of Eq.(1) ) as being
well-modeled by the non-extensive statistics. We now seek to examine
the demand-side of the equation in light of our recent ﬁndings that the
non-extensive statistics models well the statistics of the price changes in
real markets. As such, we will seek to outline a method by which one can
obtain many-investor models within the context of the Tsallis nonexten-
sive statistics. We will derive our speciﬁc models utilizing the well-known
techniques of the maximum entropy approach [6, 8]. Let us brieﬂy review
the maximum entropy approach to be utilized here. The nonextensive,
least-biased probability distribution function (PDF) P (z, t) of an under-
lying observable z(t) is obtained by maximizing an incomplete information
theoretic measure equivalent to the Tsallis entropy Sq [1, 6, 8]

(2)

Here P (z, t) is the probability distribution function and will be shown to
be of a power-law form, and is the degree of non-extensivity or equiva-
lently the incompleteness of the information measure. The inverse of the
normalization is the partition function Z(t), and β(t) is a Lagrange mul-
tiplier associated with the constraint(s). In order to build our model(s),
we must specify the constraints to be utilized in our maximization pro-
cedure. These constraints will be the known (or assumed) observables of
interest, and that are presumed to capture the deterministic behavior of
our many-investor system. An interesting model for the investors is the
model of investor bias and demand developed by Cont and Bouchaud and
generalized to super-spins by Chowdhury [4, 5, 9]. This model assumes
that the generalized spins are representative of the magnitude and direc-
tion of demand (the bias) of the investors. We will adopt this model,
with suitable modiﬁcations, as a ﬁrst approximation for characterizing
the deterministic investor dynamics as observables from within the con-
text of the nonextensive statistics. Following the work of Chowdhury et.
al. let us deﬁne the demand function of a system of interacting investors
as a classical Hamiltonian-like function in physics. This Hamiltonian will
then be dependent on the magnitude of the demand, and the other de-
gree of freedom, the direction of the demand or the bias. The bias in
this model will be taken in this initial model to be discrete and will be
represented as a spin. Also, for simplicity, let us initially assume that the
magnitude is ﬁxed. The N-investor interaction potential in the Hamil-
tonian then is taken to be made of discrete terms with simple constant
ferromagnetic coupling strengths (Jij = J > 0) and an anti-ferromagnetic
coupling (Lij = L > 0) which we treat in the global mean ﬁeld sense of

2

the Bornholdt model [9, 10] such that

(3)
The ﬁrst potential term can be seen to be the usual form of a ferro-
magnetic spin-spin interaction with a coupling strength and models the
herd-like, or collective opinion formation of investors. The spins represent
discrete bias, though the generalization to a continuous degree of bias is
straightforward, and can take on the values

(4)

and therefore when two investors minimize their risk and both agree in
their bias σiσj = 1 the overall energy is minimized. Note that in this
simple model if one of two investors is neutral, the interaction term is
zero. The second potential term is anti-ferromagnetic (L > 0) and models
contrarian investor behavior as in the Bornholdt model. We can simplify
the interactions by assuming a mean ﬁeld approximation. Now let us
assume that the bias ﬂuctuates. This is a reasonable assumption, and
leads us to the necessity of describing the averages of the ﬂuctuations in
terms of the mean and the variance. These moments can be written for
the ith investor as q-parametrized averages [6, 8]

(5)

In order to obtain a tractable solution that retains the essential interac-
tion dynamics to lowest order, let us make a mean ﬁeld approximation to
our Hamiltonian. This will allow us to linearize the spin-spin interaction
and will allow us to derive a closed form solution which, it is supposed,
will allow us to qualify and approximately quantify the inherent behavior
of the system. The full solution to this model would perforce involve the
complicated spin-spin terms and will result in corrections to our solved
form mean ﬁeld solution. As stated then, the mean ﬁeld solution will
give us approximately the ﬁrst order response of the system, given the

3

interactions. We then have (Hmf is the mean ﬁeld Hamiltonian)

(6)

Here m is the average bias per investor and can be seen to be the analog to
the average magnetization per particle. Next let us build into this model
the open nature of a market. That is, the number of investors is not a
constant in a market, and we will account for this fact by the inclusion of
the number of investors as a further constraint (observable) in our model.
As such the observable (per investor) to be included in our maximization
procedure will be

(7)

(8)

and µ is a total investor number N constraint multiplier which from
the usual thermodynamic analogies goes as the ‘chemical potential’. We
therefore can write for the ith investor the following observables to be
included in our entropy maximization (and dropping the i sub- and su-
perscripts)

The maximum entropy approach then allows us to vary the entropy

given the constraints such that

(9)

and we obtain our least biased probability density function as a Tsallis
non- extensive statistics power-law form

(10)

(11)

4

and here the partition function is related to the normalization and is given
by Zq = (cid:80) σP (σ)

We now wish to examine the average bias in this model. Following
the usual magnetic systems argument, the average bias can be written as
(recall ↑= +1, ↓= −1)

The question then is how to obtain (N ↑, N ↓) given that N = N+ +

N0 + N−. We can write as before

(12)

(13)

This expression can then be related to the average price change by the
market depth and we obtain our desired result. That is, the Tsallis power-
law statistical distribution for the price and price changes, as reported
elsewhere [1] for stock market indices such as the S&P500 high frequency
price data, is obtained from the individual investor bias distributions with
a proportionality factor of market depth converting the excess demand to
price in currency. We make use of the market depth λ and write (x is the
price)

(14)

2

continuous spin model

We now wish to generalize beyond the limitations of the approximations
we have built into the pure spin model. To do this, let us assume that
the state vector for the system is of two dimensions, the magnitude and
the bias. We will then work with continuum spins as in the Kosterlitz-
Thouless Hamiltonian. Let us write down the observables for the inter-
acting investors in the two dimensions (y= magnitude,θ=bias ‘angle’) of
magnitude and bias as V . We then have

and here Vint is the Kosterlitz-Thouless interaction, relegated to the
role of the potential. This total Hamiltonian with the inclusion of the
previously discussed total number N of investors as a further observable
will comprise the constraints in the maximization of the entropy that we

(15)

5

will perform next. But ﬁrst, let us simplify the interaction term in the
potential again by averaging over the jth spins such that (π ≤ θ ≤ 0 here)

again we can maximize the non-extensive entropy (per-investor) given
the constraints of the potential and the ﬁrst two central moments of the
ﬂuctuating variables of individual magnitude and bias such that for the
ith investor we have

(16)

The maximum entropy method then states that we must maximize
the entropy given the observables as constraints. This yields the following
variation of the q-averaged observables

(17)

(18)
The least biased PDF will again be of the non-extensive form and can

be written as

(19)
where the partition function is again related to the normalization and is
now Zq = (cid:82)

πdθ

0

We wish to obtain the average bias and relate it to the price change.
We then write the regular statistical average as M and utilize the market

6

depth to obtain the correspondence

(20)

3

continuous model

We now wish to relax all of the approximations and the simpliﬁcations we
built into the previous spin based models. To do this let us assume that
the state vector for the system is comprised of two continuous degrees of
freedom, the magnitude and the bias. Without restating the problem, let
us write down the Hamiltonian for the investors in the two dimensions
(y=magnitude,θ=bias ‘angle’) of magnitude and bias as Ho (denotes the
non-interacting investor Hamiltonian). Also, let us propose some general
interaction potential V the form of which will be examined subsequently
. The important point here is that we are seeking to cast the problem
of building a model for many interacting-investors into the powerful lan-
guage of the many-particle physics as we feel this allows us to map some
questions of modeling ﬁnancial markets and investor behavior directly to
well known physics-based paradigms. We have already touched upon this
in our speciﬁc models discussed above, and now we wish to generalized
the application of the technique.

The model will consist of the free and interacting parts of the Hamilto-
nian. That is, the ith investor will have i(y(t), σ(t)) magnitude of demand
, with a bias of buy, sell or hold, at time t. The magnitude of demand
can be assumed to be the demand for number of shares of a stock, and
with the total number being considered ﬁxed as a long-term constant
n = (cid:82) max

y(t)dy. The direction of demand, is

discrete (−1, 0, +1) corresponding to buy, sell or hold. The Hamilto-

0

nian is

with the constraints of the moments

(21)

(22)

the maximization of the entropy then obtains the least biased distribution
and with the normalization, (cid:80) (cid:82) P (σi, t)dyσi = 1 to unity. The extrem-
ization yields the least biased probability distribution function, P (σi, t)

7

which upon taking the mean ﬁeld approximation (cid:80) < σj >= M gives

(23)
The expectation value for the demand is the expression < σ >=

(cid:80)

σ,i

(cid:82) σiP (yσi , σi, t)dyσi , which explicitly is

(24)
in terms of the number of shares demanded to be bought or sold or
held for the moment at time t, the expectation value of excess demand is

This excess demand is proportional to the price and with the market depth
λ as the proportionality factor we obtain the price and change in price if
the deﬁnition of the variables of excess demand is relative y = x − x(cid:48)

(25)

(26)

It is
This model is perhaps the most detailed of the three discussed .
also the most robust and points the way to the inclusion of interaction
terms that describe interactions observed factors in real world markets.
These could include the independent investor, institutional investor clus-
tering, ﬂoor trader and outside trader time lags, non-constant market
depths, more complex herding behavior etc. These can all be included
as observables multiplied by Lagrange multipliers as constraints in the
maximization, and the derived least biased distributions though perhaps
complicated can be solved numerically.

4

conclusion

The models presented here are of increasing complexity. However the
three models, discrete and continuous can be generalized further and can
easily be applied. The numbers of shares being bought, sold or held at
any moment determine the instantaneous excess demand. This in turn
is related to the instantaneous price or price change if relative variables

8

are used, by the market depth proportionality factor, here assumed con-
stant. The statistical distributions of price changes and price have been
shown to be well ﬁtted by the students-T distribution and more recently
the Tsallis nonex- tensive statistics distribution . The information theo-
retic approaches taken here assume the nonextensive entropy as a starting
point, and obtains not surprisingly a power-law distribution for the num-
bers of shares to bought, sold or held. These are then summed and the
time-dependent price change distributions obtained. A question to be an-
swered in subsequent work is , what form of nonlinear interaction causes
to arise a power-law distribution of price changes from a Gibbs-Boltzmann
form of extensive entropy or information measure. How do nonlinear in-
teractions modify the Gaussian distributions obtained from the extensive
entropy. Also, how does the numerical simulation of the model, by Monte
Carlo or stochastic trajectory methods, compare to actual market data
price changes. Previous numerical simulations of power-law distributions
have been shown by us to ﬁt very well the high frequency stochastic time
series data of price changes of the S&P500 and we have also applied the
power-law statistics to generalized Black-Scholes equations of prices for
options and derivatives secondary markets for the underlying stocks and
stocks indices etc. We expect the present models especially the power-law
distributed model to ﬁt accurately the market price data , and given the
parameters extracted from market data, the model can be a theory that
begins to describe the statistical uncertainties, and on the average the
microscopic interactions that occur between investors in a ﬁnancial mar-
ket and which then the theoretical model can subsequently be utilized for
minimization of risk and the design of investment strategies in economics
and ﬁnance. The author wishes to state that most of this manuscript was
written in 20 Nov 2001 with M.D. Johnson and John Evans at the Uni-
versity of central Florida Physics Department, Orlando, Florida. Recent
research of the author’s has refocused on this area of research, and the
publication follows.

9

References

[1] Fredrick Michael and M.D. Johnson. cond-mat/0204261. Published
in Physica A. arXiv:cond-mat/0108017 and published in physica
A. Fredrick Michael, M.D. Johnson and John Evans arXiv:cond-
mat/0207376.

[2] F. M. Ramos, C. Rodrigues Neto, R. R. Rosa. cond-mat/9907348.

Submit- ted to Europhysics Letters

[3] R. N. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge (2000).

[4] Rama Cont, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. cond-mat/9801279. European

Jour- nal of Physics B.

[5] Debashish Chowdhury, Dietrich Staufer. cond-mat/9810162. Euro-
pean Physical Journal B. Rama Cont, Jean-Philippe Bouchaud. cond-
mat/9712318 . cond-mat/9810162. European Physical Journal B

[6] C. Tsallis and D.J. Bukman. Phys. Rev. E, 2197 (1996). E. M. F.
Curado and C. Tsallis. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. vol.24 (1991) L69-
L72.

[7] D.H. Zanette. cond-mat/9905064 (1999).

[8] Q.A. Wang. cond-mat/0009343 (2000). S. Abe and A.K. Rajagopal.

quant- ph/0003145 (2000), and references therein.

[9] Stefan Bornholdt. cond-mat/0105224 (2001).

[10] K. Sznajd-Weron, R. Weron. cond-mat/0101001

[11] Dafang Zheng, P. M. Hui, N. F. Johnson. cond-mat/0105474. Dafang
Zheng, G.J. Rodgers, P.M. Hui, R. D’Hulst. cond-mat/0108399

10

