0
1
0
2
c
e
D
0
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
9
1
2
.
2
1
0
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Proceedings of ASME 2010 World Conference on Innovative Virtual Reality
WINVR2010
May 12-14, 2010, Ames, Iowa, USA

WINVR2010-3729

INTEGRATING DIGITAL HUMAN MODELING INTO VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT FOR
ERGONOMIC ORIENTED DESIGN

Liang MA∗, Damien CHABLAT, Fouad BENNIS
IRCCyN CNRS UMR 6597
Ecole centrale de Nantes
1 Rue de la No ¨e
44321 Nantes Cedex 3, France
Email: {liang.ma,damien.chablat,fouad.bennis}@irccyn.ec-nantes.fr

Bo HU, Wei ZHANG
Department of Industrial Engineering
Tsinghua University
100084, Beijing, CHINA
Email: hu-05@tsinghua.edu.cn
zhangwei@tsinghua.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

Virtual human simulation integrated into virtual reality ap-
plications is mainly used for virtual representation of the user in
virtual environment or for interactions between the user and the
virtual avatar for cognitive tasks. In this paper, in order to pre-
vent musculoskeletal disorders, the integration of virtual human
simulation and VR application is presented to facilitate physi-
cal ergonomic evaluation, especially for physical fatigue eval-
uation of a given population. Immersive working environments
are created to avoid expensive physical mock-up in conventional
evaluation methods. Peripheral motion capture systems are used
to capture natural movements and then to simulate the physical
operations in virtual human simulation. Physical aspects of hu-
man’s movement are then analyzed to determine the effort level
of each key joint using inverse kinematics. The physical fatigue
level of each joint is further analyzed by integrating a fatigue
and recovery model on the basis of physical task parameters. All
the process has been realized based on VRHIT platform and a
case study is presented to demonstrate the function of the phys-
ical fatigue for a given population and its usefulness for worker
selection.

1 Introduction

Although automation techniques have been used more and
more prevalent in industrialized countries, there are still large
requirements of manual handling operations, especially for as-

sembly and maintenance operations. For this reason, ergonomic
oriented design should be carried out to take account of human
capacities and limitations as early as possible. Therefore, work
design and evaluation is very important to avoid potential muscu-
loskeletal disorders (MSDs) and to determine appropriate work-
rest schedule.

In order to accelerate the ergonomic evaluation procedure,
digital human modeling (DHM) techniques have been developed
and integrated into computer aided design systems. In this way,
work evaluation can be carried out for the overall population us-
ing anthropometric database; the high cost of physical mock-
up can be avoided; the evaluation efﬁciency is much more im-
proved in comparison to conventional evaluation approaches in
workplace; potential ergonomic issues can be decreased. There
are several commercial tools available in the market, for exam-
ple, 3DSSPP [1], Jack [2], AnyBody [3], SantosTM [4], etc. In
these DHM tools, a simulated human is often used as a geo-
metric representation, visual appearance of the real human be-
ing in computer graphical simulation [5], and furthermore some
ergonomic and biomechanical analysis can be carried out using
those tools [6, 7]. However, as pointed out by [8], this approach
cannot provide a mimic motion due to its robotic background.
Sometimes, it requires to place the manikin in the simulation en-
vironment and to deﬁne all the motions manually, which is time
consuming as well.

With the development of computer graphic techniques and
human computer interaction techniques, virtual reality (VR)
techniques have been used widely in different application ﬁelds,

∗Address all correspondence to this author.

1

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

 
 
 
 
 
 
such as way ﬁnding and navigation techniques, object selection
and manipulation, education, training, etc. Integrating visual, au-
ditory and haptic systems, they are used to enable interactions be-
tween virtual world and the user [9,10,11]. Since 1990s, VR has
been used in product design and manufacturing to facilitate the
manufacturing procedure simulation, from the very initial con-
ceptual design via operations management to ﬁnal manufactur-
ing processes [12, 13]. Meanwhile, VR technique can also be
used crossing different levels of an enterprise, form physical op-
erations (e.g. virtual assembly [14, 15]) to human resource plan-
ning [16]. Due to its immersive simulation and advanced inter-
action peripherals, it is believed that VR system can be used for
ergonomic analysis [17]. However, there are still some limita-
tions for a VR system. Firstly, to create an immersive virtual en-
vironment with a high level of presence is very expensive. Also,
it is often very difﬁcult to obtain force interactions between the
user and the virtual environment (VE) with high ﬁdelity. Sec-
ondly, even using a VR system with high level of presence, it is
still not easy to carry out ergonomic analysis for a given popula-
tion, since different subjects might have different anthropometric
parameters and different biomechanical parameters. With the en-
gagement of only several subjects in VR applications, it cannot
reveal all the design ﬂaws.

Integrating virtual human techniques into VR applications
can beneﬁt the advantages from both sides [18]. Several studies
have been done in the ﬁeld of ergonomics [19], biomechanical
analysis [20], and other aspects [21]. Till now, most of the trials
focus on the visual representation of virtual human in VR [22],
where virtual human is used to increase the presence level of the
VR system. In our study, we are trying to use this approach for
physical fatigue analysis of static manual handling operations,
since it is believed that physical fatigue might be a very impor-
tant reason resulting in MSDs.
In this paper, the detailed re-
search effort in combining virtual reality techniques and digital
human simulation tools is described. In Section 2, a virtual real-
ity platform for all the research activities is introduced, including
its hardware structure and its peripheral systems; Section 3 de-
scribes brieﬂy the modeling procedure of a virtual human and its
work ﬂow for fatigue analysis; Section 4 refers to an application
case in EADS.

2 Virtual Reality Platform

The VR platform is established in the laboratory of Virtual
Reality & Human Interface Technology (VRHIT) in Tsinghua
University. The platform is developed for doing research on work
design in virtual working environment. The overall system struc-
ture is illustrated in Figure 1.

The virtual simulation system is equipped with simulation
computers, a wide screen projection, and 5DT HMD 800-26.
MultiGen Creator is used to create virtual objects, while Vega
is to employ MultiGen Creator to convert a CAD model into a

FIGURE 1.
form

Illustration of the hardware system for the VRHIT plat-

virtual reality model [23]. The virtual simulation system is able
to load VR models and display via either the projection system or
HMD. Stereo display is possible for some desktop applications.
Different peripherals attached to this system include mo-
tion tracking systems and data gloves. Two magnetic tracking
systems (Fastrakr and Potroitr of Polhemus co.) and a self-
developed optical motion tracking system are available for this
platform. A participant wearing the motion capture suit and per-
forming certain physical tasks is shown in Figure 2. The optical
capture system is equipped with eight CCD cameras around the
work space.
In our case, some operations with high physical
demands are under consideration, and in these operations, only
static operations or slow movements are involved or considered.
The overall capture system works at the frequency 25 Hz, which
satisﬁes the minimum requirement to provide sufﬁcient update
rate of the simulation image, especially for quasi-static postures,
and it provides sufﬁcient detailed analysis of the static human
body motion. Two data gloves, a 5DT Data Glove 5 Ultra and a
self-developed data glove with haptic feedback, are in our pos-
session to provide detailed gesture of the hands and feedback
information while manipulating virtual objects.

The objective of the VRHIT experiment platform is to en-
able interactions between human and the simulated manufactur-
ing environment and to realize interactive industrial work design
taking consideration of human factors and ergonomics. This plat-
form has been used in [24], [25], and [26], for verifying a control
panel design, assembly work design in heavy industry, and work
efﬁciency evaluation, respectively. In this paper, it is mainly used
to capture the static posture of a simulated drilling operation (see
Figure 3(a)). The posture is then analyzed by inverse dynamics
based on digital human modeling techniques.

2

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

FIGURE 2. Self-developped motion capture system and its simula-
tion system

(a) subject

(b) Virtual environment

FIGURE 3. Subject wearing HMD in virtual environment

FIGURE 4. Geometrical modeling and graphical modeling of the vir-
tual human

3 Digital human modeling

In this study, the human body is kinematically composed
of a series of revolute joints. The Modiﬁed Denavit-Hartenberg
(modiﬁed DH) notation system [27] is used to describe the move-
ment ﬂexibility of each joint and the linkage relation among the
joints. According to the joint function, one natural joint can be
decomposed into one, two, or three revolute joints. Each revolute
joint has its rotational joint coordinate, labeled as qi, with joint
limits: the upper limit qU
i . A general co-
ordinate q = [q1, q2, . . . , qn] is deﬁned to represent the kinematic
chain of the skeleton. Overall, a virtual human is geometrically
modeled by n = 28 (3 in shoulder, 2 in elbow, 3 in thigh, 1 in
knee, 1 in ankle, 2 in waist, 4 in spine, 2 in neck) revolute joints
to reproduce the mobility of all the key joints on the human body.
The skeleton system (in Figure 4) of the virtual human is graph-
ically modeled using OpenGL and controlled by direct kinemat-
ics, inverse kinematics, or loading motion capture data.

i and the lower limit qL

The dimension and dynamic parameters of each body part
can be obtained or calculated from anthropometry database, and
meanwhile biomechanical strengths of each joint can be obtained
In this
from the literature in Occupational Biomechanics [1].
way, the virtual human is modeled as a multi-rigid-body system,
and the forces and torques at each key joint can be determined
using inverse dynamics.

The work ﬂow for physical fatigue analysis of manual han-
In order to carry out work

dling tasks is shown in Figure 5.

analysis, it is necessary to collect human motion and interaction
between human and the environment. In our case, it is possi-
ble to obtain human motion from motion capture system, and
then the motion information is transferred in the form of gen-
eral coordinates q. Human motion can also be obtained via hu-
man simulation tools. Large modeling efforts have been done in
IOWA Santos and HUMOSIM [28] to predict realistic postures
and motions. Based on the techniques used in these two projects,
a multi-objective posture prediction method is used to predict re-
alistic postures with consideration of fatigue in [29]. Interaction
information is obtained either via haptic interface or via com-
puter simulation. In some cases, especially for cases with high
physical demand, the VR system is not able to provide precise
and accurate force feedback to the user, and the external load is
estimated or provided by real objects. In this way, inverse dy-
namics can be carried out to determine the force and the torque
at each joint. After determining the force and the torque load at
each joint, it is possible to carry out joint fatigue analysis. If it
goes further, it might be possible to determine the force of each
engaged individual muscle as well.

Physical fatigue is deﬁned as “any exercise-induced reduc-
tion in the capacity to generate force or power output” [30]. After
knowing the physical load at each joint and the joint’s strength,
the muscle fatigue model proposed in [31] is used to assess the
physical fatigue during manual handling operations. This model

3

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

strength under different conditions in the literature. However,
these models are not sufﬁcient enough to construct a complete
database for a given population, since there are lots of inﬂuencing
factors determining the joint strength. Thus, more effort should
be contributed to gathering all necessary data. Concerning the
fatigue resistance and recovery rate, experimental validation is
still under running to complete the validation of fatigue/recovery
model.

For each joint, after a manual handling operation, the fa-
tigue could be assessed using a fatigue index which indicates the
change of the maximum joint moment strength (Eq. 3).

f atigue =

G max − G cem
G max

(3)

4 Application
4.1 Drilling case in EADS

A drilling case in European Aeronautic Defence and Space
(EADS) is taken for the case study. The drilling operation is
graphically shown in Figure 6. The task is to assemble two fuse-
lage sections with rivets. One part of the job consists of drilling
holes all around the aircraft cross section. The number of the
holes could be up to 2,000 on an orbital fuselage junction of an
airplane. The drilling machine has a weight around 5 kg. The
drilling force applied to the drilling machine is around 49 N. In
general, it takes 30 seconds to drill a hole. There are several
ergonomic issues due to the high physical demands and vibra-
tion in drilling operations, and the physical fatigue caused by the
physical operation might be one limitation for the work schedule
design.

This drilling task is simpliﬁed to two study case. One case
is to assess the fatigue of a continuous drilling task with duration
180 seconds. The other case is to select suitable workers for a
drilling task with ﬁve work cycles (60 second drilling and 30
seconds rest).

4.2 Case 1: fatigue assessment

The ﬁrst case at ﬁrst carried out using the virtual reality plat-
form. A total of 40 male industrial workers participated in the
experiment. They were asked to maintain a simulated drilling
operation for 180 seconds. During this period, the subjects were
asked to keep the static posture as well as possible, while the
posture was captured by magnetic tracking devices and mapped
to virtual human for further theoretical fatigue analysis.

During the drilling operation, the load of the drilling ma-
chine was provided by a simulated drilling tool, which was made
of concrete with a weight around 2.5 kg to avoid magnetic dis-
tortion caused by ferrous material. Maximum output strengths
were measured by a force measurement device before and right

4

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

FIGURE 5. Work ﬂow for biomechanical analysis

can be described by a differential equation in Eq.1.

dG cem(t)
dt

= −k

G cem(t)
G max

load(t)

(1)

Where G max represents the maximum joint moment capacity;
G cem represents the current maximum joint moment capacity dur-
ing a static exertion; G
load is static joint moment load; k repre-
sents the joint speciﬁed fatigue rate and it could vary across in-
dividuals and joints. m = 1/k indicates the fatigue resistance of
a given joint. Using this model, the external task related parame-
ters can be taken into consideration to assess the fatigue of a joint
during a given manual handling operation.

Meanwhile, a muscle recovery model using the same param-
eters is used to describe the recovery process of the joint strength
during rest period. It is mathematically described using Eq. 2,
where R is the recovery rate. This model is extended from a re-
covery model in [32].

dG cem(t)
dt

= R(G max − G cem(t))

(2)

It should be mentioned that k and R are parameters to de-
scribe the fatigue properties of an individual or a population.
They have almost the same function as the height and weight.
However, they are very difﬁcult to be measured directly. For
the fatigue resistance, it has been mathematically analyzed in
[31, 33]. For shoulder joint, it could be regressed from several
existing maximum endurance time models (MET), and it has a
theoretical value 0.7562 (SD=0.4347).

In order to carry out the fatigue evaluation around a joint, it
is necessary to obtain the necessary strength data and endurance
data for a population. Currently, there are several biomechan-
ical models available after the measurement of maximum joint

G
TABLE 1. Normalized torque strength reduction for the population
with higher fatigue resistance. S and s : mean and SD of shoulder joint
moment strength; ¯m and s m: mean and SD of fatigue resistance

G max − G 180
G max

¯m
¯m + s m
¯m + 2s m

S − 2s

S − s

S

S + s

S + 2s

-

-

-

69.9% 62.5% 56.3%

63.2% 53.2% 46.4% 40.8%

64.9% 51.9% 43.0% 36.7% 31.9%

tigue resistance are two most important parameters for fatigue
analysis. The following subsection will show the effects of dif-
ferent factors.

FIGURE 6. Drilling operations in the case study

4.3 Case 2: worker selection

after the simulated drilling operations. Physical fatigue was char-
acterized by the reduction of the joint strength along time rela-
tive to the initial maximum joint strength (see Eq. 3).
It has
been found that three out of the 40 subjects could not sustain
the external load for 180 seconds, and 34 subjects had a shoul-
der joint fatigue resistance (Mean=1.32, SD=0.62). The physi-
cal strength has been measured in simulated job static strengths,
and the reduction in the operation varies from 32.0% to 71.1%
(Mean=53.7% and SD=9.1%) [33].

Meanwhile, the same drilling operation was also analyzed
in virtual human simulation. In order to simplify the simulation
process, the average posture (ﬂexion angles of elbow and shoul-
der) among the 40 subjects was used to determine the shoulder
joint strength according to Occupation Biomechanics [1]. The
fatigue resistance for calculating the fatigue theoretically was
obtained by comparing the theoretical fatigue model with other
models in the literature ( ¯m=0.7562, s =0.4347) [33].
It is be-
lieved industrial workers have a higher fatigue resistance due to
the training effect [34]. For this reason, the simulation was ex-
ecuted with fatigue resistances superior to the average fatigue
resistance, and the reduction of the shoulder joint strength was
given in Table 1 (Mean=51.7%, SD=12.1%). It has been found
that the simulated result was similar to the realistic measured
fatigue, which means the theoretical approach in virtual human
simulation might give an acceptable assessment for the speciﬁed
drilling operation of a given population.

In the simulation of this case, only different shoulder joint
strengths and different shoulder fatigue resistances were taken
into consideration. Some other inﬂuencing factors were ne-
glected, for example, different body weights, different heights,
and some others. In fact, although there are deﬁnitely other fac-
tors inﬂuencing the simulation result, joint strength and joint fa-

The second case was studied to verify the possible usability
of virtual human simulation for worker selection. Worker selec-
tion is often a practical problem during work design. In work
design, the task has often been predeﬁned, and there might be no
possibility to modify the task parameters due to strict constraints.
In this situation, designers have to choose suitable workers ﬁt-
ting the task. In ergonomics, generally, the anthropometric pa-
rameters (e.g., height, weight), motion range, and biomechanical
parameters (strength) are often used to create some criteria to se-
lect the worker [1]. For operations with high physical demands,
four parameters (height, weight, strength, and fatigue resistance)
might generate potential inﬂuences on the selection.

In the simulation,

A drilling case was simulated with the help of digital human
simulation to demonstrate effects of those parameters on physical
fatigue operations. The drilling operation is composed of ﬁve
work cycles. In each cycle, the worker has to perform the drilling
operations for 60 s continuously, and then takes a rest for 30 s.
The total working time is 450 s. The selection criteria would be
to ﬁnd the workers who might be able to complete the given task.
the variation among the population
is taken into consideration, since different heights, weights,
strengths, and fatigue rates might generate potential inﬂuences
on the evaluation results. A virtual human was created using dif-
ferent anthropometric data (height, weight) to cover 95% of the
population, while the average value and the standard deviation
of the strength and fatigue resistance were also taken into con-
sideration. For each factor, there are three levels: average level,
lower level, and higher level. For height, weight and strength, the
lower level and the higher level were ( ¯x − 2s ) and ( ¯x + 2s ), re-
spectively. ( ¯x − s ) and ( ¯x + s ) were used to represent the lower
level and the higher level of the shoulder fatigue resistance. Us-
ing these factors at three different levels, the worker could be
categorized into 81 different subgroups, and each subgroup has
its own properties accordingly.

5

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

The maximum endurance time was predicted using the fa-
tigue model and recovery model mentioned before, and it was de-
termined while the joint capacity falls down to the current torque
load. There are totally 81 endurance results for the drilling task,
and the endurance results of the shoulder joint are shown in Table
2.

Height and weight, both factors could generate slight inﬂu-
ences on the endurance time. It could be observed that smaller
people have longer endurance time in comparison to taller ones
with the same strength and the same fatigue resistance, since the
moment arm might be shorter. The moment load can also be
inﬂuenced by the weight. Heavier ones might generate larger
moment around joint and then shorten the endurance time. How-
ever, it should be noticed that the inﬂuence on the endurance
time caused by the height and weight are relatively slight, and
it can neglected. Therefore, these two factors are not signiﬁcant
parameters to choose suitable workers for a purely physical task.
Obviously, the endurance is greatly inﬂuenced by the joint
strength and the fatigue resistance. Larger joint capacity results
in much longer endurance time at the same fatigue resistance
level. Clearly, larger fatigue resistance enables us to maintain the
physical task for a longer time at the same strength level. This
observation conforms to our daily experience. Furthermore, if
a worker could be characterized using the fatigue resistance and
the joint strength, that means it might be promising to locate the
worker in the 81 categories. In this way, suitable worker could
be selected for a given physical task.

The validation of the second case is still under construction,
and the method and the difﬁculties will be discussed below. For
the validation, the fatigue resistance, the recovery rate, and the
joint moment strength of a subject should be measured. How-
ever, it is difﬁcult to determine the joint moment strength since it
depends on several factors, such as posture, movement velocity,
etc [35]. It would be even more difﬁcult to measure the fatigue
resistance and the recovery rate for an individual. Although a ex-
perimental method has been proposed and realized in [33], this
method is time-consuming. Furthermore, it would very expen-
sive to obtain the fatigue resistance distribution of a given pop-
ulation, since enormous measurements will be carried out. An
much more efﬁcient method has to be found before the valida-
tion. Regarding the recovery rate, a large dispersion has been
found in existing experimental models for determining work-rest
schedule [36]. How to characterize the recovery rate is a much
more challenging task for us. Therefore, only a simulation task
is provided for this case. All the related parameters were ob-
tained from the literature or by theoretical analysis. However, it
is believed that a guidance function could be provided.

5 Conclusions and perspectives

In this paper, an approach of integrating digital human sim-
ulation into virtual reality application was introduced. The vir-

TABLE 2. Endurance time evaluation of the drilling case. H: height;
W: Weight; S: Joint moment strength

Endurance time of the shoulder joint [second]

Fatigue resistance

H

W

S

Large Average

Small

Low

Light

Weak

414

328

219

Average > 450 > 450

Strong > 450 > 450

Average Weak

408

322

Average > 450 > 450

> 450

> 450

241

416

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Heavy

Weak

401

316

Average > 450 > 450

144

412

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Average

Light

Weak

409

324

Average > 450 > 450

216

417

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Average Weak

403

319

Average > 450 > 450

147

414

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Heavy

Weak

399

314

Average > 450 > 450

139

410

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Tall

Light

Weak

404

320

Average > 450 > 450

215

414

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Average Weak

400

316

Average > 450 > 450

219

411

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

Heavy

Weak

396

313

Average > 450 > 450

219

408

Strong > 450 > 450

> 450

6

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

tual human is modeled from geometrical level to graphical level,
to virtually represent a real human in the simulation system. It
does not only provide a virtual representation, but also a tool
for assessing different aspects of the task. In this study, inverse
dynamics and the muscle fatigue and recovery model are inte-
grated to predict the physical fatigue and endurance time at joint
level. A case study was given for assessing physical fatigue of
a drilling operation. Using virtual human simulation in VR sys-
tem, it is promising to predict the fatigue of a given population
under static cases in virtual environment. Furthermore, worker
selection can also be accomplished in VR systems, if personal
properties in physical fatigue could be well determined.

Assessing manual handling operation in virtual environment
is very useful for work design. The research mentioned in study
was limited by the biomechanical model of the virtual human,
because the fatigue resistance and the recovery rate for a given
population have not been measured. We have made some effort
and we will continue to do the research in order to ﬁnd an efﬁ-
cient method to determine the fatigue properties of an individual.
Once fatigue and recovery for an individual can be easily char-
acterized by the measured fatigue resistance and recovery rate,
a biomechanical database might be established for a given pop-
ulation, or different population groups (e.g., industrial workers,
nurses, etc.), and then physical assessment could be further per-
formed for different physical tasks involving different population
groups.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research is supported by the EADS and by the R´egion
des Pays de la Loire (France) in the context of collaboration be-
tween the Ecole Centrale de Nantes (Nantes, France) and Ts-
inghua University (Beijing, P.R.China). The lead author would
also like to thank ´Ecole Centrale de Nantes for the ﬁnancial sup-
port of the post-doctorate studies.

REFERENCES

[1] Chafﬁn, D. B., Andersson, G. B. J., and Martin, B. J., 1999.
Occupational biomechanics, 3rd ed. Wiley-Interscience.
[2] Badler, N. I., Phillips, G. B., and Webber, B. L., 1993. Sim-
ulating humans: computer graphics animation and control.
Oxford University Press, USA.

[3] Damsgaard, M., Rasmussen, J., Christensen, S., Surma, E.,
and de Zee, M., 2006. “Analysis of musculoskeletal sys-
tems in the AnyBody Modeling System”. Simulation Mod-
elling Practice and Theory, 14(8), pp. 1100–1111.

[4] Yang, J., Rahmatalla, S., Marler, T., Abdel-Malek, K., and
Harrison, C., 2007. “Validation of predicted posture for
the virtual human santosTM”. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 4561, pp. 500–510.

[5] Granieri, J., and Badler, N., 1995. “Simulating Humans in
VR”. Virtual Reality and its Applications. Academic Press,
London, UK.

[6] Witmer, B., and Singer, M., 1998. “Measuring presence in
virtual environments: A presence questionnaire”. Presence,
7(3), pp. 225–240.

[7] Honglun, H., Shouqian, S., and Yunhe, P., 2007. “Research
on virtual human in ergonomic simulation”. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 53(2), pp. 350–356.

[8] Chryssolouris, G., Mavrikios, D., Fragos, D., and Karabat-
sou, V., 2000. “A virtual reality-based experimentation en-
vironment for the veriﬁcation of human-related factors in
assembly processes”. Robotics and Computer Integrated
Manufacturing, 16(4), pp. 267–276.

[9] Stanney, K., Mollaghasemi, M., Reeves, L., Breaux, R.,
and Graeber, D., 2003.
“Usability engineering of vir-
tual environments (VEs): identifying multiple criteria that
drive effective VE system design”. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 58(4), pp. 447–481.

[10] Loomis, J., Blascovich, J., and Beall, A., 1999. “Immersive
virtual environment technology as a basic research tool in
psychology”. Behavior Research Methods Instruments and
Computers, 31(4), pp. 557–564.

[11] Magnenat-Thalmann, N., and Egges, A., 2006. “Interac-
tive virtual humans in real-time virtual environments”. The
International Journal of Virtual Reality, 5(2), pp. 15–24.

[12] Shukla, C., Vazquez, M., and Frank Chen, F., 1996. “Vir-
tual manufacturing: an overview”. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 31(1-2), pp. 79–82.

[13] Mujber, T., Szecsi, T., and Hashmi, M., 2004.

“Vir-
tual reality applications in manufacturing process simula-
tion”. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 155,
pp. 1834–1838.

[14] Jayaram, S., Connacher, H., and Lyons, K., 1997. “Vir-
tual assembly using virtual reality techniques”. Computer-
Aided Design, 29(8), pp. 575–584.

[15] Jayaram, S., Jayaram, U., Kim, Y., DeChenne, C., Lyons,
K., Palmer, C., and Mitsui, T., 2007. “Industry case studies
in the use of immersive virtual assembly”. Virtual Reality,
11(4), pp. 217–228.

[16] Duffy, V., and Salvendy, G., 2000. “Concurrent engineering
and virtual reality for human resource planning”. Comput-
ers in Industry, 42(2-3), pp. 109–125.

[17] Whitman, L., Jorgensen, M., Hathiyari, K., and Malzahn,
D., 2004. “Virtual reality:
its usefulness for ergonomic
analysis”. In Simulation Conference, 2004. Proceedings of
the 2004 Winter, Vol. 2.

[18] Zeltzer, D., 1992. “Human ﬁgure modeling for virtual envi-
ronment applications”. In Robot and Human Communica-
tion, 1992. Proceedings., IEEE International Workshop on,
pp. 117–122.

[19] Wilson, J., 1999. “Virtual environments applications and

7

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

[34] Hawley, J., Myburgh, K., Noakes, T., and Dennis, S., 1997.
“Training techniques to improve fatigue resistance and en-
hance endurance performance”. Journal of Sports Sciences,
15(3), pp. 325–333.

[35] Black, N., and Das, B., 2007. “A three-dimensional com-
puterized isometric strength measurement system”. Applied
Ergonomics, 38(3), pp. 285–292.

[36] El ahrache, K., and Imbeau, D., 2009. “Comparison of rest
allowance models for static muscular work”. International
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 39(1), pp. 73–80.

applied ergonomics”. Applied Ergonomics, 30(1), pp. 3–9.
[20] VSR Research Group, 2004. Technical report for project
virtual soldier research. Tech. rep., Center for Computer-
Aided Design, The University of IOWA.

[21] Gutierrez, M., Vexo, F., and Thalmann, D., 2004. “The
mobile animator: Interactive character animation in collab-
orative virtual environments”. IEEE Virtual Reality, 2004.
Proceedings, pp. 125–284.

[22] Ieronutti, L., and Chittaro, L., 2007. “Employing virtual
humans for education and training in X3D/VRML worlds”.
Computers & Education, 49(1), pp. 93–109.

[23] Ren, A., Wen, Y., Chen, C., and Shi, J., 2004. “Model-
ing of irregular structures for the construction simulation in
virtual reality environments based on web”. Automation in
Construction, 13(5), pp. 639–649.

[24] Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Bennis, F., and Chablat, D., 2006.
“An integrated simulation system for human factors study”.
In The Institute of Industrial Engineers Annual Conference,
pp. 20–24.

[25] Hu, B., Wang, Y., Wu, W., and Zhang, W., 2008. “De-
velopment of a human scale motion simulation system with
multimodal feedback for ergonomics evaluation”. Proceed-
ing of International Conference of Applied Human Factors
and Ergonomics.

[26] Ma, L., Zhang, W., Fu, H., Guo, Y., Chablat, D., and Ben-
nis, F., 2009. “A framework for interactive work design
based on motion tracking, simulation, and analysis”. Hu-
man Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing (in press).
[27] Khalil, W., and Dombre, E., 2002. Modelling, identiﬁcation
and control of robots. Hermes Science Publications.
[28] Zhou, W., Armstrong, T., Reed, M., Hoffman, S., and Weg-
ner, D., 2009. “Simulating Complex Automotive Assembly
Tasks using the HUMOSIM Framework”.

[29] Ma, L., Zhang, W., Chablat, D., Bennis, F., and Guillaume,
F., 2009. “Multi-objective optimisation method for posture
prediction and analysis with consideration of fatigue effect
and its application case”. Computers & Industrial Engi-
neering, 57(4), pp. 1235–1246.

[30] Vøllestad, N., 1997. “Measurement of human muscle fa-
tigue”. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 74(2), pp. 219–
227.

[31] Ma, L., Chablat, D., Bennis, F., and Zhang, W., 2009. “A
new simple dynamic muscle fatigue model and its vali-
dation”.
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics,
39(1), pp. 211–220.

[32] Wood, D., Fisher, D., and Andres, R., 1997. “Minimiz-
ing fatigue during repetitive jobs: optimal work-rest sched-
ules”. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society, 39(1), pp. 83–101.

[33] MA, L., 2009. “Contribution pour l’analyse ergonomique
de mannequins virtuels”. PhD thesis, ´Ecole Centrale de
Nantes.

8

Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 by ASME

