Work Integrated Learning (WIL) In Virtual Reality (VR) 

Waleed Al Shehri 

Department of Computing, Macquarie University 

 Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia 

waleed.alshehri@students.mq.edu.au 

Abstract 
The  ultimate  goal  of  industrialized,  developed  economies  is  to  increase  economic  growth  and  to  have  a  highly-skilled,  flexible  and 
responsive workforce in order to remain competitive in an increasingly global economic context. Therefore, there is increasing focus on 
exploring  the  various  options  for  optimizing  worker  training. Apprenticeships,  traineeships  and  internships  are  some  examples  of  the 
applications  of  Work  Integrated  Learning  (WIL)  with  various  aims  such  as  to  enhance  learner  skills,  provide  learners  with  real  life 
facilities to experience the work environment in which they have to perform in the near future and to enhance their capabilities to handle 
real time problems, even before they are exposed to them in the workplace. However, technology is increasingly replacing the concept of 
traditional learning, particularly through innovative IT approaches such as Virtual Reality (VR). Integrating both WIL and VR offers the 
opportunity to apply WIL in a virtual rather than real work environment as “Virtual Work Integrated Learning (VWIL)”. The focus of this 
report is to initially discuss the concepts WIL and VR, their main characteristics and current applications. Moreover, the pros and cons of 
VWIL  are  also  analyzed.  Finally,  the  report  presents  some  recommendation  including  further  researches  into  areas  where  VWIL  has 
potential to be successful in the future. 

Keywords: Work Integrated Learning, Virtual Reality, Technology, Industry, Education, Workforce, Stakeholders. 

. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 

It has been a long standing desire of modern industrialized societies to streamline education and training programs in order 
to  provide  well  trained,  responsive,  highly  skilled  and  experienced  workforces.  Key  to  that  objective  is  the  potential  for 
integrating academic learning with the practical work environment, in order to improve the learning / training process and 
increases its efficiency. Work Integrated Learning (WIL) has been introduced, as a modern, formal and structured approach 
for achieve this objective (Smith et al., 2010). At the core of WIL, the purpose is to follow an integrated two track approach, 
allowing the leaner to follow an academic curriculum while at the same time including exposure to and practice within an 
actual  work environment.  Meanwhile, Virtual Reality (VR), as computer-generated environments simulating real physical 
environments and physical situations, are  been increasingly suggested as highly complementary to WIL (Goold & Augar, 
2009).  

The concept of Work Integrated Learning has evolved significantly recently and it is now practiced in leading institutions 
around the world, aiming to provide learning opportunities coupled with real world experiences in one integrated package. 
Universities, for instance currently tend not only to teach their students pure theoretical knowledge, but also to equip them 
with relevant skills that can help them achieve success in practical situations (McIlveen et al., 2011).  

On the other hand, Virtual Reality is an IT technique used in vastly diverse contexts, ranging from engineering design, to 
medical applications and even highly sophisticated military operations. It relies on simulating the real environment in order 
to give impression that the user is in fact within that original environment (Macredie et al., 1996). The virtual environment 
is typically computer generated and controlled which provides various levels of interaction with the user. The use of work 
integrated  learning  and  virtual  reality  as  Bricken  (1990)  argues  is  capable  of  constructing  a  bridge  which  can  assist  the 
student to enhance their learning experience and ultimately achieving better results in their studies. 

This report will discuss the WIL approach and VR as a modern technology and then examine the synthesis of both WIL and 
VR  as  WILVR.  Furthermore,  the  characteristics  as  well  as  limitations  of  such  a  synthesis  will  be  discussed.  Finally,  the 
report concludes with recommendations including identify potential areas of research and applications, and suggestions for 
stakeholders. 

2. Work Integrated Learning 

WIL  has  been  in  existence  for  quite  some  time  in  one  form  or  another  such  as  apprenticeships,  traineeships  and  work 
experience programs. However, currently greater emphasize is been placed on the importance of student employability and 
higher education is increasingly asked to account for the success rates for graduates to gain employment (Eraut, 1994 cited 
in Orrell, 2004). These changing demands have created an expectation that the education sector will respond in innovative 
ways  to  meet  both  the  learning  needs  and  the  career  goals  of  all  its  students. Thus,  the  concept  of WIL  is  maturing  and 
gaining greater complexity and deeper dimensions. 

2.1 Definition 

The term Work Integrated Learning can be defined in several ways depending on the context, industry and scope of interest.  

Patrick  et  al.  (2008:9  cited  in  Smith  &  Raymond,  2010)  defines  WIL  quite  broadly  as  “an  umbrella  term  for  a  range  of 
approaches and strategies that integrate theory with practice of work within a purposefully designed curriculum”.  

Another  broad  definition  of  WIL  provided  by  Martin  &  Hughes  (2009)  is  that  WIL  represents  a  bridge  connecting  the 
student’s  academic  present  with  their  professional  future;  that  it  a  chance  to  practice  academic  theory  in  authentic 
workplaces, and to develop real professional skills in order to prepare for their future career. 

Meanwhile,  Campbell  (2011)  emphasizes  that  the  definition  of  WIL  must  be  more  inclusive  involving,  for  example, 
practical experiences undertaken by learners as part of their internships and academic courses as well as simulations,  real-
life case investigations and classroom projects. 

By  contrast,  Griffith  University  (2006  cited  in  McLennan  &  Keating,  2008)  outlines  more  specific  definition  of  WIL  as 
intentional, meaningful and structured educational activities which assimilate theory  with practical workplace application; 
and that the objectives of WIL must focused on teaching applied and transferable skills.  

Finally, Moreland (2005, p. 4 cited in McIlveen et al., 2011) stresses the personal aspect of WIL and defines the term as an 
empowering  approach  which  involves  students  learning  about  their  prospective  work  and  about  themselves  which  would 

help them succeed in their future professional and personal lives. Gaining practical experience and even the learning process 
itself are seen as valuable tools for self management in future work situations.  

Nonetheless, despite the variety of definitions, it is clear that WIL involves a combination of practical activities along with 
theoretical knowledge with the aim of preparing the learners for the real workplace and optimizing the chances of success in 
their careers. 

2.2 Principles of WIL 

The principles of Work Integrated Learning can be summarized as follows: 

1)  WIL is a three way relationship between the student, the academic institution and the workplace, requires all 

involved to perform specific tasks and accept certain responsibilities (Martin & Hughes, 2009).  

2)  WIL  must  be  based  on  collaboration  among  stakeholders,  negotiation  in  process  and  program  design  and 
transparency in objectives and methodology (Smith and Betts, 2000, p600-2 cited in Gibson et al., 2002). 
3)  Each  WIL  student  should  have  an  academic  advisor  and  an  industry  supervisor  for  ongoing  support  and 

mentoring (Jancauskas et al., 1999). 

4)  WIL  work  should  include  interesting  work  activities  and  learning  needs  to  be  intentional  and  proactive  to 

insure the high standards and desirable outcomes (Orrell, 2004). 

5)  WIL  works  best  if  there  is  equivalence  in  assessment.  This  means  Awarding  credit  for  WIL  study  units, 
equivalent to credit offered in pure academic units (Macquarie University, 2007 cited in McLennan & Keating, 
2008). 

6)  Self-evaluation and other reflective activities are an important part of WIL programs to encourage a proactive 

outlook for the learners (Macquarie University, 2007 cited in McLennan & Keating, 2008). 

7)  WIL must be based on appropriate academic standards in teaching and assessment, and workplace placements 

must be in suitable contexts (Macquarie University, 2007 cited in McLennan & Keating, 2008). 

2.3 Benefits of WIL to stakeholders 

There  are  various  stakeholders  of  Work  Integrated  Learning  ranging  from  the  social  community  to  certain  governmental 
departments. However the three main stakeholders are: 

1) 

Industry  

2)  Students / Learners 

3)  Academic institutions 

There are various benefits of Work Integrated Learning for the stakeholders:  

2.3.1 Benefits to industry: 

1)  Enhancing academic-industry relations by supplying relevant industries with qualified and highly-skilled workers 

(Downey, 1979 cited in Rittichainuwat et al., n d).  

2)  WIL  enlarges  the  scope  of  the  professional  educational  curriculum  and  informs  industry  about  new  ideas  and 

developments in education, as well as research advancements in the field (Martin & Hughes, 2009). 

3) 

 WIL  provides  employers  an  opportunity  to  scan  for  suitable  prospective  staff,  ad  to  actively  and  directly 
participate in the training of those prospective employees (Martin & Hughes, 2009). 

4)  Developing  a  workforce  capable  of  performing  results  oriented  tasks  with  minimal  need  for  extra  job  training 

(Marton, 1993 cited in Jackson, 2009).  

2.3.2 Benefits to students / learners: 

1)  Providing students with academic and career benefits as they learn to utilize their academic knowledge effectively, 
adapt to workplace environments and solve real problems. There are also career benefits such as decision-making 
skills,  improved  self-confidence,  career  clarification,  valuable  work  experience  as  well  as  developing  personal 

 
attributes to increase employability and success in the workplace (Jacob, 2005 cited in Bohloko & Mahlomaholo, 
2008). 

2)  WIL  can,  in  contexts  of  situated  learning,  help  indicate  the  degree  of  learner  suitability  or  readiness  for  their 

chosen field of study (Hayes, 2006).  

3)  Learner experience is enriched through safe but highly challenging program activities (Harris et al, 2008). 

4)  Students can gain experience by having contact with professionals on the job, and at the same time discover within 

themselves areas of strengths which they can further develop and weaknesses which they can improve.  

5)  WIL  programs  can  often  give  learners  exposures  to  variety  of  work  situations  rather  than  a  single  workplace  or 
particular organization, which helps develop well-adjusted learner views on the diversity of workplaces and help 
them appreciate the value of their future work (Crump, 2008). 

2.3.3 Benefits to academic institutions: 

1)  Successful  /  profitable  WIL  projects,  jointly  owned  between  industry  and  academic  institutions,  can  represent  a 
useful income stream for the university, for example, the Virtual Art Gallery on a Second Life Island (Rossignol, n 
d). 

2)  WIL can bring valuable resources, including financial support in the form of grants for projects, to universities and 

other academic institutions which are essential for growth and capacity building (Rossignol, n d). 

3)  WIL  helps  in  engaging  teaching  institutions  closely  in  work  realities  and  emerging  practice  norms  (Harris  et  al, 

2008). 

2.4 

Roles of stakeholders of WIL 

2.4.1  Academic Institutions 

The history of academic involvement in practical training is quite old, and Roodhouse (2007, cited in Gilbert, 2008) traces it 
to some of the oldest universities in Europe which had work-based learning programs. The role of academic institutions in 
WIL can be summarized as: 

1)  Academic institutions / universities represent the important venue where the teaching of the academic components 
of  WIL  programs  takes  place.  However,  universities  often  host  the  practical  component  of  the  training.  For 
example, In Siam University’s WIL in 1997, a training kitchen and restaurant were especially built for the project 
(Rittichainuwat et al., n d).   

2)  Universities must have flexibility in curriculum design and be responsive in tailoring WIL to suit individual project 

requirements (Brown, 2008).   

3)  Academic institutions are ideals for conducting formal assessment of WIL projects, as they have the resources and 

expertise for formal assessment (Jancauskas et al., 1999). 

4)  Universities can act as a significant bridge linking industry demands, student expectations and community needs. 
Davies  (2007)  explains  that  WIL  must  be  seen  to  take  place  between  “community  partners”  in  order  to  be 
successful. 

5)  WIL  projects  can  run  as  multi-disciplinary  or  even  across  many  faculties  within  a  university  which  means 

enhanced knowledge and understanding (Rossignol n d). 

6)  The  accumulation  of  WIL  outcomes  in  universities  represents  valuable  learning  tools  and  resources  widely 

available for students and the wider community (Rossignol, n d). 

7)  Universities are ideal for internationalizing learning contexts and WIL can help multidirectional flow of knowledge 
and  expertise  with  the  result  that  both  local  and  international  students  have  an  enriched  learning  experience 
(Davies, 2007). 

8)  Universities are not driven by the motive of maximizing profit as much as industry, so they can run not only WIL 
projects which benefit industry, but also society community focused projects, which would enhance students’ skills 
required to build their “social capital” (Huq & Gilbert, 2009).   

2.4.2 

Industry 

The role of industry and its various organizations is crucial for WIL and includes:  

1) 

Industry usually provides the necessary funding for WIL projects. 

2) 

It is the role of industry to specify the skills required in the market place (Reinhard, 2006). 

3) 

Industry can lead project design, and provide valuable input into what constitutes efficient designs of WIL project 
facilities (Reinhard, 2006). 

4)  Providing necessary technical expertise, as  well as state of the art technology is an important role of industry in 

WIL (Edwards, 2007). 

5)  Jointly  (alongside  academic  staff)  supervise  the  state  of  the  WIL  project  as  well  as  the  progress  of  students 

(Edwards, 2007).  

6)  Expose students to real working environments and providing an opportunity to face real life challenges. 

7)  Teach  students  practical  skills  e.g.  customer  relationship  management,  professional  ethics  &  successful 

communication skills (Martin & Hughes, 2009).  

2.4.3  WIL issues for students / learners 

Students are important stakeholders in WIL as they are the focus point around which the projects run. The issues of concern 
to students include: 

1)  WIL  must  have  reasonable  balance  between  theory  and  practice  and  be  student  focused  rather  than  to  serve  the 
need  of  a  specific  company  or  organization.  Getting  broad  skills  is  preferable  to  gaining  company-specific 
qualifications (Reinhard, 2006). 

2)  Students  can  be  concerned  that  their  ability  to  work  on  the  workplace  may  not  be  properly  valued  within 

assessment structures, which could affect students’ focus and attention (Smith, 2010). 

3)  Students often indicated the final assessment report is too general and that there needs to be greater flexibility and 

detail in assessment reports (Smith et al., 2010). 

4)  Many students emphasize the value of creating shared learning spaces to support reflection and dialogue, so they 

can consider their experiences in the light of their peers’ experiences (Smith et al., 2010). 

5)  The  scope  and  team  allocation  of  WIL  projects  need  to  be  appropriately  to  the  student’s  ability  and  needs.  If 

projects are large, or if the team is not cohesive, then success is difficult to achieve (Langworthy, 2003). 

6)  Suitable work placement is often difficult to achieve. For example, in a case study by O’Reilly et al. (2010), less 

than 24% of students managed to find their own placement. 

It is important to realize that in order to achieve success in WIL projects, all stakeholders must work collaboratively. They 
must share ideas, resources and expectations throughout the lifecycle of the project (Rittichainuwat et al., n d). 

2.5 Challenges for WIL 

Despite its widespread application and high popularity, WIL still faces some significant challenges:  

 
1)  WIL  can  present  some  issues  for  students  including  extra  travel  costs,  expense  involved  in  purchasing  practical 
workplace  equipment  dress  and  limited  opportunities  to  obtain  placement  in  the  learner’s  specific  study  area 
(Davies, 2007). 

2) 

Industry  professionals  can  face  difficulties  in  managing  students  on  WIL  programs,  giving  them  feedback  and 
allocating space for students placed in the company, in addition to the pressure of supervising the students in their 
busy professional schedule (Davies, 2007). 

3)  WIL  can  be  challenging  for  students  in  aspects  such  as  cross-cultural  communications,  ethnic  and  gender 

differences, personal development issues, and values within a diverse workplace context. 

4)  Some  WIL  programs  requires  the  students  to  prepare  a  resume,  contact  employers,  prepare  for  and  attend 
interviews,  be  short-listed  and  negotiate  contracts  regarding  areas  of  work  and  salary  and  find  accommodation 
often in a distant location. Such skills and competencies are sometimes not appropriately acknowledged as part of 
the assessment in WIL, and often there is little support, mentoring or guidance for those activities (Pitout, 2009).  

5)  WIL  programs  can  suffer  from  insufficient  monitoring  of  students  in  the  employment  situation  where  they  are 
placed. Orie (2007, cited in Pitout, 2009) notes that, as a minimum, supervisory visit to the workplace must occur 
within six weeks of student placement and four times a year after that.  

6)  Not  all  subjects  are  suitable  for  the WIL  model.  For  instance,  Khan  (2008)  points  to  the  difficulty  of  designing 
meaningful content, selecting appropriate delivery modes, and developing suitable assessment in highly theoretical 
subjects such as mathematics. 

7)  Skills  and  experience  of  academic  staff  is  not  always  suitable  for  WIL  programs  and  sometimes  such  skill  lags 

behind industry standards (McLennan & Keating 2008). 

8)  WIL can be resource intensive for universities without apparent immediate tangible results (McLennan & Keating 

2008). 

Thus,  it  can  be  seen  that,  despites  its  long  history  and  the  various  benefits  of  WIL,  it  still  faces  some  significant 
challenges. Those challenges are of concern to all stakeholders involved including students, academic institutions and 
industry,  and  the  issues  are  often  interlinked.  For  example,  the  challenge  of  cross-cultural  communications  facing 
students, is in fact an important issue for universities too, while the issue of cost in implementing WIL programs affect 
academic institutions as much as industry. 

3. Virtual Reality 

Just  like WIL, Virtual  Reality  (VR)  is  a  technology  that  has  been  gaining  increasingly  popularity,  research  attention  and 
application. However, it is a broad concept that is difficult to define. Since its inception, VR as cutting edge technology, has 
promised  much in the  various fields of  modern life;  some  of  which it has succeeded in delivering and some it has to yet 
fully accomplish. 

3.1 Definition / Key ideas of VR 

VR can have several close but separate definitions, depending on the application focus, research field or specialized interest 
of the context.  

As an early researcher in the field, Steuer (1992) noted that the term VR was first used in 1989 and that it came from the IT 
industry and not academic institutions. He pointed out that VR was being defined as a “medium” composed of a hardware 
collection, including computers, headphones, display units and sensory gloves, but he criticized that definition as being too 
restrictive and over focus on technology itself instead of on the user. Thus, he suggested that a preferable definition would 
be that VR represents a special kind of experience assisted by an IT framework. As part of highlighting the importance of 
the user, Steuer (1992) emphasized the concepts of “presence” and “telepresence” as major aspects of that definition.   

By  contrast,  other  researchers,  such  as  Brooks  (1999)  define  VR  more  broadly  as  any  experience  “in  which  the  user  is 
effectively  immersed  in  a  responsive  virtual  world”.  Nonetheless  most  definitions  of  VR,  including  the  two  mentioned 

 
above, agree that it is an environment which simulates reality to variable degrees and includes various interactions with the 
user such as visual, audio and haptic (sense of touch). 

3.2 Technologies (experiential / immersive) 

The experiential aspect of VR environments has become more specific and the term “immersive” is been used to indicate a 
high degree of interaction between the user and the VR system. Immersion refers to having a simulated VR environment 
where the user feels immersed in the experience of interacting with that environment. In many cases there is much interest 
in fully immersive systems whereas in others, it is seen as unnecessary or even undesirable. 

On the one hand, some like Wyld (2010) suggest that more immersive technologies are inevitable, that the popularity of the 
3d virtual website Second Life is proof of that trend and that if companies are to remain competitive, then they must adopt 
some  kind of interactive and immersive VR as a platform for marketing their products. Similarly,  Linebarger et al. (2005 
cited in Davis et al., 2009) found improved collaboration in virtual product design teams who operated in highly immersive 
VR environments.  

In contrast, some warn against excessive immersion in VR and point to its detrimental effects. Some have even warned that 
with increasing use of VR, the foreseeable future would mean technology-enhanced people living their lives within virtual 
immersive worlds that they can select and adjust individually (Donovan, 2010). 

There is of course also a middle position  which advocates  semi-immersion or a mixed reality environment.  For example, 
Cheng  &  Fan  (2010)  point  to  the  MMU  (Manned  Maneuvering  Unit)  project  for  training  astronauts  which  offers  a 
computer-simulated environment and provides a sense of partial immersion through head mounted displays and data-gloves, 
as a successful example of combining the physical and virtual environments. Another example is the virtual museum model 
based on a semi-immersive system due to cost issues as well as installation restrictions (Lepouras et al., 2003). 

3.3 Pedagogical relevance 

There are other applications of VR besides its well known uses in training such as for pilots in flight simulators. In fact there 
are many other fields utilizing or at least exploring the use of this technology as a valuable training platform: 

One of the pioneering fields to exploit the use of VR for professional training is medicine. Zajtchuk & Satava (1997) point 
out that areas in the medical field which utilize VR technology as integral components of their training programs include 
casualty  care  and  disaster  planning,  patient  rehabilitation  and  psychotherapy,  and  they  assert  that  medical  simulators  will 
become  standard  in  medical  training,  testing  and  certification  just  as  flight  simulators  are  in  the  aviation  industry  today. 
They predict that medical students will be able to see the effects of surgical instruments on body organs and even be able to 
feel the pressure forces in their fingers through improved future immersive technology.  

In addition, some VR projects are extending beyond their narrow scope or field of application and are helping in the wider 
educational  context.  For  instance,  Project  ScienceSpace,  which  is  a  joint  project  between  the  NSF  (National  Science 
Foundation)  and  George  Mason  University,  in  the  US,  is  providing  multisensory  environments  which  are  interactive  and 
highly immersive for physic and chemistry high school students (Sherman et l., 1997). 

Thus, there is a wide range of VR application in training programs in a diverse range of fields. 

3.4 Challenges for VR 

Despite all the promising potential of VR, it still faces some notable challenges: 

1)  One  significant  drawback  for  VR  systems  is  that  they  are  often  tied  to  a  proprietary  product  which  limits 
integration of components  with other systems. Schiavenato (2009) gives an example of the Program for Nursing 
Curriculum  Integration  which  necessitates  expensive  mannequins  whose  value  is  questionable  according  to  the 
author. 

2)  High financial cost is another serious challenge for many VR systems, especially for those which use the latest and 

newest technology, and return on investment is not always immediate (Dickey, 1999).  

3)  Some  VR  applications  do  not  provide  adequate  physical  feedback,  in  the  form  of  audio-visual  or  other  sensory 

signals, to the user, and so offer less interactivity (Steuer, 1992). 

4)  Gutierrez-Maldonado et al. (2010) criticizes the portrayal of “perfect” looking people in some VR representations, 
and the emphasize on “body image” as this creates unrealistic or even impossible expectations in young people’s 
minds about physical looks and body shapes. 

5)  Some studies question whether there is sufficient evidence of transfer of training skills from virtual reality to the 

real world, and that wide ranging studies are required to prove that transfer occurs (Cox et al., 2010). 

6)  Some researchers suggest that company managers should not assume that employees trained in a VR environment 

will behave in same way in the real world (Davis et al. 2009). 

7)  Design  faults  &  errors  (both  hardware  and  software)  as  well  as  oversights  by  designers  can  compromise  the 
experiential  quality  of  a  VR  system  and  lead  to  a  gap  between  the  expectations/promise  of  VR  and  what  is 
delivered (Hutchison, 2006). 

8)  There  are  situations  that  are  very  difficult  to  simulate  with  currently  available  technology,  such  as  authentic 

modeling of human tissue that is responsive to surgical operations (Seymour & Røtnes 2006). 

9)  Despite VR environments including audio, visual and haptic senses, they still lack other senses such as smell and 

no taste and therefore cannot provide complete “vividness” of experience (Steuer, 1992). 

4. Integrated VWIL 
VWIL is a new and promising area of interesting to many, including industry professionals, educators and community and 
government organizations.  

4.1 Strengths and positive characteristics 

The positive features and characteristics of VWIL include: 

A  –  Authentic  interactivity:  Due  to  the  promise  to  offer  a  new,  efficient  and  interactive  alternative  in  the  area  of 
professional adult training, it is possible for authentic WIL experiences, according to some academic studies, to be recreated 
in a virtual environment (Davies & Shirley, 2007). For example, a trainee mechanic assembling some virtual car parts can 
hear squeaks if a mistake is made or the parts can push back, or even guide the trainee’s hand to the correct assembly and 
offer audio feedback as a explanation (Bricken, 1990). 

B  –  Flexibility:  VWIL  is  flexible,  self-paced  and  can  be  more  easily  modified  to  suit  the  needs  of  individual  learner 
situations. It is seen as a successful platform for training and education. Many studies, including Bricken (1990) point out 
that  VWIL  can  engage  the  learner’s  attention  which  is  the  first  step  in  effective  education.  They  refer  to  VWIL  as 
personalized “programmable environments” which can accommodate user preferences.  Moreover, Jones & McCann (2005) 
state that VWIL is useful for managers who may be under stress or travel much, as it combines the flexibility of e-learning 
but with the added advantage of real-life simulation. 

C  –  Constructivism:  WVIL  systems  are  not  limited  to  only  viewing  and  the  learner  can  do  much  more. According  to 
Davies & Shirley (2007), the user can interact, control and manipulate the state of objects and use specialized tools to create 
new objects, modify existing ones, and to undergo simulated assessment tasks all within the VR environment.  

D – Wider availability: As VWIL widens the availability for training, a greater number of learners can take part, and there 
are even international Virtual Work Integrated Learning programs in many fields today. Davies & Shirley (2007) point to the 
Queensland  University  of  Technology’s  Law  Faculty’s  international  WIL  program,  The  International  Virtual  Placement, 
which utilizes a virtual platform. The program is international and is centered on the concept collaborative global education 
where  law  students  from  different  countries  learn  cooperatively  and  gain  valuable  international  experience.  The  authors 
report that the increasing spread of globalization may necessitate such an approach, e.g. lawyers in one country many need 
to learn the system legal in another, so VWIL is seen as an ideal approach especially with the use of online chatting, video 
conferencing,  discussion  forums,  blogs  and  wikis  as  some  of  the  communication  tools  linking  the  users  in  different 
countries.  Students in the program can apply  for  work placement  with a broad range of potential international employers 
including government, law firms, community and industry (Davies & Shirley, 2007). 

D – Equal opportunity platform: VWIL creates a level playing field where the learner’s age, gender, physical features or 
social status are not used to discriminate for or against them in the virtual world (Bricken, 1991). 

E – Safe customizable, low cost environments: In many industries, VWIL provides a controlled, simulated environment 
where the learner can accomplish tasks safely, and this is not just limited to pilot training on flight simulators. Van Wyk & 
de Villiers (2009) reports about how the South African mining industry is using VWIL and notes the following benefits: 

1)  Low cost alternative to creating a real-life full-scale model for worker training. 

2) 

Improved safety awareness within the workforce. 

3)  Multilingual systems can communicate with trainees in the native language. 

4)  Can design and implement a diverse range of scenarios, even those seldom encountered in the actual work. 

5)  Can safely simulate hazardous situations to users without exposing them to any real danger. 

6)  The  learner  can  review  and  evaluate  their  records,  compare  with  peer  results  and  asses  their  performance 

individually or as part of a team. 

7)  The VWIL instructors can easily identify problem areas for the learner and adjust the training program accordingly. 

Therefore, VWIL has the benefits of being flexible, customizable and interactive program as well as offering an authentic 
experience to the learner or trainee. 

4.2 Challenges for VWIL 

Despite all the promising potential, there is still issues and challenges facing VWIL: 

A  –  Assessment  validation:  It  is  important  to  investigate  whether  the  experience  gained  in  VR  training  transfers  to 
comparable  situations  in  other  VWIL  training  tasks.  More  importantly,  it  is  essential  to  verify  whether  that  experience 
transfers to similar situations in the real workplace, and to determine the degree of transfer (Bricken, 1990). 

B  –  Cost  Burden:  With  VWIL  systems,  cost  can  be  an  issue,  and  especially  the  question  of  who  should  pay,  industry, 
government or academic institutions, for initial system design and implementation. This becomes even more important as 
technology advances and systems become obsolete in relatively short time.  

C  – Usability limitations: It  is often difficult to translate system requirements  into applications  which truly simulate the 
real world. For example, with some data gloves, gesture actions are limited by the number of hand and fingers movement 
combinations  that  can  be  defined  as  distinct,  mutually  exclusive,  and  unique  in  the  system  and  that  are  comfortable  and 
natural for the user (Bricken, 1991). 

D  –  Fear  of  technology:  Some  people  are  technophobic  when  it  comes  to  using  a  computer,  let  alone  wearing  a  head 
mounted device, or an electronic glove. Studies suggest that this fear is often rooted in the fear of making a mistake, the fear 
of identity loss and the fear of confusion (Bricken, 1991). 

E  –  Pre-training  education  requirement:  It  is  important  to  insure  that  trainees  on  a  VWIL  program  are  prepared  and 
ready,  with  theoretical  training  and  expectations,  before  placing  them  in VR  environments.  For  example,  Gallagher  et  al. 
(2005)  notes  that  it  would  be  pointless  to  place  a junior  surgeon  in  a  fully  robotic  environment  and  stresses  that  training 
strategies in any VWIL field must insure that learners have a good idea of what to do, what not to do, where and when to do 
it, and why to do it.  

F  –  Virtual  community  issues:  In  professional  virtual  learning  communities  (VLC),  participants  often  have  issues  with 
time  management,  communication  difficulties  (e.g.  communicating  in  a  foreign  language  or  slow  typing  speed)  which 
highlights  the  asynchronous  nature  of  participation  in  such  communities.  Moreover,  access  to  ICT  facilities,  individual 
motivation,  balancing  work  and  life  commitments,  and  deciding  on  private/public  boundaries  are  also  important  factors 
which determine the success of such communities (Dickey, 1999). 

G  – Trainer  readiness: Some industry instructors and educational institutions are slow  to embrace the concept of VWIL 
because  of  a  variety  of  reasons  including  cost  and  complexity  especially  with  budget  limitations  in  public  education. 
Furthermore, some teachers/instructors do not have sufficient suitable IT skills to be involved in VWIL programs, and some 
may also be technophobic (Skylar, 2007). 

Thus, VWIL faces some notable challenges including the issue of limited delivery modes, cost of design and installation and 
the fear of technology which many people face. 

5. Discussion 

As already outlined, VWIL offers advantages but also faces some challenges. It is a  promising technology in many fields, 
especially  in  the  medical,  aviation  and  aerospace  and  military.  However,  it  is  not  limited  to  those  fields,  and  even  law 
students in some universities are taking part in VWIL programs and reporting positive results. Yet, at the same, VWIL poses 
challenges for its stakeholders. The question of cost is a legitimate question, and this relates to availability too. For instance, 
a VWIL program  which costs a  lot of  money to design and implement,  may be out of reach for  middle  or lower income 
learners because the fees may be too high for them. Moreover, such high costs may make government bodies, community 
organizations  or  even  the  industry,  reluctant  to  participate. Another  related  issue  which  needs  to  be  addressed  is  that  of 
value. It is difficult to quantify the value delivered by a VWIL program in simple numbers. The real value of such programs 
cannot be measured in terms of profitability or number of learners who can pass the exams. Furthermore, it is likely that the 
true value delivered by VWIL programs is long term rather than immediate and that it is of direct benefit to the individual 
learner, but also of benefit to the wider community. At the same time, the assessment methods employed in VWIL need to 
be detailed in outlining areas of strengths, achievements and specific experience and skills gained in such programs. There 
is no standardization of assessment in VWIL, and this makes it difficult to align qualifications to some common assessment 
scale or system. Another area of interest, not explored in current research, is the potentially positive impact of the increasing 
application of VWIL on the environment. VWIL is reusable and much more resource and energy efficient than creating real 
physical training environments in many situations. This makes VWIL a more sustainable and environment friendly approach 
to workplace training. Such issues are of great concern in the world today, especially to younger generations who are also 
more familiar with the use of IT in their daily lives.  

Thus, there are valid issues of concern regarding the costs involved, the value delivered by VWIL programs and the current 
assessment  approached  to  VWIL,  and  these  issues  must  be  clearly  analyzed  and  addressed  to  make  VWIL  a  more 
acceptable,  popular  and  successful  approach  in  the  future. At  the  same  time,  there  are  potentially  promising  features  of 
VWIL, such as to promote its environmentally friendly characteristics and its appeal for current generations.   

6. Recommendations 

1)  As a modern integrative technological approach, VWIL can be used in many fields, and the degree of its use can be 
varied, from complete fully immersive programs to assistive separate modules, depending on the situation and the 
training needs. 
It is important for VWIL program  managers to specify appropriate skill transfer assessment criteria and to follow 
up in the real workplace. 

2) 

3)  Learner training and preparation prior to placement in VWIL is important to insure a higher chance of success in 

the program. 

4) 

Involving the learner (end user) from the start of VWIL program design can help in making these programs more 
user friendly and hence more experiential and immersive. 

5)  Safety  of  learners  and  instructors  must  be  paramount  in  any  VWIL  program,  so  it  is  important  that  sensory 

communication (e.g. 3d vision) in such programs does not cause any harmful effects to the learner. 

6)  VWIL should be promoted as a distinct study field & specialized instructors can be trained in VWIL as a subject in 

its own right. 

7)  Greater  community  engagement  can  increase  awareness  and  reduce  misinformation  about  VWIL.  For  example, 
field trips for school students can present VWIL in a realistic way and help reduce technophobia as well as help 
students understand what VWIL is and what it is not. 

8)  Further research is recommended in some areas. For example, VWIL is likely suitable for many training situations 
where  hands  on  experience  is  valuable,  e.g.  TAFE  traineeships,  but  is  probably  not  quite  suitable  for  other 

 
 
 
 
 
 
professions where human to human interaction is the most important factor such as in sales, general office work , 
acting or team sport. 

9)  Future  research  can  also  be  carried  out  to  investigate  the  suitability  of WIL  for  people  with  learning  difficulties 
because  it  is  rich  in  hands  on  tasks  and  may  make  it  easier  for  those  learners  to  remain  focused  than  purely 
theoretical classes. 

7. Conclusion 

In  conclusion,  this  report  has  outlined  the  concepts  of  WIL,  VR  and  VWIL,  and  presented  some  of  their  main  aspects. 
VWIL  as  a  new  technological  approach  is  being  increasingly  used  in  many  fields  today,  ranging  from  aerospace  to 
medicine. There are several benefits offered by VWIL including flexibility, customizability and the provision of an authentic 
simulated  environment  in  which  the  learner  can  gain  valuable  practical  workplace  experience.  Nevertheless,  VWIL  also 
faces some challenging issues including usability limitations and cost, which must be properly analyzed and addressed.  

References 

[1]  Bohloko,  G.,  Mahlomaholo, S.,  2008,  "Work  Integrated  Learning  Quality  Partnerships: The  case  of  the  Central  University  of 

Technology, Free State", WACE/ACEN Asia Pacific Conference, E-Proceedings, pg.56, 2008. 

[2]  Bricken, M., 1991, "Virtual Reality Learning Environments: Potentials and Challenges", Computer Graphics, vol. 25, number 3, 

July 1991. 

[3]  Bricken, W.,  1990,  "Learning  in Virtual  Reality",  Human  Interface Technology  Laboratory,  University  of Washington,  FJ-15, 

Seattle, WA 98195. 

[4]  Brooks, F.P.Jr., 1999, "What's Real About Virtual Reality? IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,   November/December, 

1999. 

[5]  Brown,  N.,  2008,  "Putting  WIL  on  the  (round)  table:  Developing  policy  and  practice  at  UTAS",  WACE/ACEN Asia  Pacific 

Conference, E-Proceedings, 2008. 

[6]  Campbell, M., Zegwaard, K.E., 2011, "Ethical considerations and values development in work-integrated learning programs", 

New Zealand Association for Cooperative Education, Conference Proceedings, Napier, New Zealand, 18-19 April 2011. 

[7]  Cheng,  J.,  Fan,  X.,  2010,  "Dynamic  Model  of  an Astronaut  Equipped  with  a  Manned  Maneuvering  Unit  in Virtual  Reality", 

Journal of Aerospace Engineering ASCE, April, 2010. 

[8]  Cox, D.J., Davis M., Singh, H., Barbour B., Nidiffer, F.D., Trudel, T., Mourant, R., Moncrief, R., 2010, "Driving Rehabilitation 
for Military Personnel Recovering From Traumatic Brain Injury Using Virtual Reality Driving Simulation: A Feasibility Study", 
Military Medicine, vol. 175, no.6, pg. 411, 2010. 

[9]  Crump,  S.,  2008  ,  "Work,  education  and  knowledge:  a  case  study  of  educational  partnerships  and  pathways",  WACE/ACEN 

Asia Pacific Conference,  E-Proceedings, 2008. 

[10] Davies,  I.T.,  Shirley,  M.  J.,  2007,  "Internationalising  Work-Integrated  Learning  for  Law  Students",  Proceedings  15th  World 

Conference on Cooperative Education (WACE) 2007, Singapore. 

[11] Davies, I.T., Shirley, M.J., 2007, "Community Engagement through a model of Virtual Work-integrated Learning. In Van Ernst 
AM,  Barbara,  Eds.  Proceedings  2007 AUCEA  Inc  National  Conference,  pages  pp.  27-32,  Charles  Darwin  University, Alice 
Springs. 

[12] Davis,  A.,  Murphy,  J.,  Owens,  D.,  Khazanchi,  D.,  Zigurs,  I.,  2009,  "Avatars,  People,  and  Virtual  Worlds:  Foundations  for 
Research in Metaverses", Journal of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 10, issue 2, pg. 90-117, February, 2009. 

[13] Dickey, M.D., 1991, "3D virtual worlds and learning: an analysis of the impact of design affordances and limitations in active 
worlds, Blaxxun Interactive, and Onlive! Traveler; and a study of the implementation of active worlds for formal and informal 
education", PhD dissertation, Ohio State University. 

 
 
 
[14] Donovan, P., 2010, "Virtual reality and children's spirituality", Stimulus, vol. 18, no. 4, November 2010. 

[15] Edwards,  D.,  2007,  "Integrating  Work  Integrated  Learning",  International  Conference  on  Engineering  Education  -  ICEE, 

Coimbra, Portugal September 3 - 7, 2007. 

[16] Gibson, E., Brodie, S., Sharpe, S., Wong D.K.Y., Deane E., Fraser, S., 2002, "Towards the Development of a Work Integrated 
Learning Unit", Division of Environmental and Life Sciences and Centre for Professional Development, Macquarie University, 
Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia. 

[17] Gilbert, D., 2008, "Educating Student Entrepreneurs  - An Applied Learning Model", International Council for Small Business 

World Conference, June 22-25, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, 2008. 

[18] Goold, A., Augar, N., 2009, "Using virtual meeting spaces for work integrated learning", Proceedings ascilite, Auckland. 

[19] Gutierrez-Maldonado,  J.,  Ferrer-Garcia,  M  ,  Caqueo-Urizar,  A.,  Moreno,  E.,  2010,  "Body  Image  in  Eating  Disorders:  The 
Influence of Exposure to Virtual-Reality Environments", Cyberpsychology, Behaviour, and Social Networking, vol. 13, no. 5, 
2010. 

[20] Harris, L., Jones, M., Coutts, S., Grigg, S., 2008, "Building innovative partnerships for work integrated learning: observations 

from a community services initiative", WACE/ACEN Asia Pacific Conference, E-Proceedings, 2008. 

[21] Hayes,  E.R.,  2006,  "Situated  Learning  in  Virtual  Worlds:  The  Learning  Ecology  of  Second  Life",  Proceedings  of  the Adult 

Education Research Conference, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2006. 

[22] Huq,  A.,  Gilbert,  D.,  2009,  "Embedding  Work-Integrated  Learning  into  a  Traditionally  Theoretical  Course  of  Social 

Entrepreneurship towards Enhancing Graduate Employability", 2009, ICSB World Conference, Seoul, Korea. 

[23] Hutchison, A., 2006, "Where are my legs? Embodiment Gaps in Avatars" Joint International Conference on Cyber Games and 

Interactive Entertainment, Fremantle, Western Australia. 

[24] Jackson,  N.,  2009,  "From  'Work  Integrated'  to  'Life-Wide'  Learning:  Changing  a  University's  Conceptions  of  Curriculum",  
Surrey Centre for Excellence in Professional Training and Education (SCEPTrE), University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, 
England, available at http://lifewidecurriculum.pbworks.com 

[25] Jancauskas, E., Atchison, M., Murphy, G. A., Rose, P., 1997, "Unleashing the Potential of Work-Integrated-Learning Through 

Professionally Trained Academic and Industry Supervisors", Paper presented at the WACE, Cape Town. 

[26] Jones, S., McCann J., 2005, "Virtual learning environments for time-stressed and peripatetic managers", Journal of Workplace 

Learning, vol. 17, issue 5/6, p. 359, 2005. 

[27] Khan,  L.R.,  2008,  "challenges  of  incorporating  LIWC  (learning  in  the  workplace  and  community)  in  mathematics  units  of 

study", WACE/ACEN Asia Pacific Conference, E-Proceedings, 2008. 

[28] Langworthy, A.,  2003,  "Work  Integrated  Learning  - A  model  for  effective  learning  and  engagement"  University  of  Western 

Sydney National Forum: Bringing Knowledge to Life Learning and Community Engagement, July 2003. 

[29] Le Rossignol, K., "Archipelago Design - Virtualopolis and the interactive virtual team scenario", available at: http://www.inter-

disciplinary.net/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/rossignolepaper.pdf. 

[30] Lepouras, G., Katifori, C., Vassilakis A, Charitos D., 2004, "Real exhibitions in a virtual museum", Virtual Reality, vol.7, pg. 

120-128, 2004.  

[31] Macredie R., Taylor, S.J.E., Yu, X., Keeble, R., 1996, "Virtual Reality and simulation: An Overview", Proceedings  of the 1996 

Winter Simulation Conference. 

[32] Martin,  A.,  Hughes,  H.,  2009,  "How  to  Make  the  Most  of  Work  Integrated  Learning:  A  Guide  for  Students,  Lecturers  & 

Supervisors", Massey University, Private Bag 11222 Palmerston North 5301 New Zealand, 2009. 

[33] McIlveen, P., Brooks, S., Lichtenberg, A., Smith, M., Torjul, P., Tylere, J., "Career development learning frameworks for work-
integrated  learning",  In  S.  Billett  &  A.  Henderson  (Eds.),  Developing  learning  professionals:  Integrating  experiences  in 
university and practice settings (pp. 149-165), available at: www.springerlink.com. 

 
 
[34] McLennan,  B.,  Keating,  S.,  2008,  "Work-Integrated  Learning  (WIL)  in  Australian  Universities:  The  Challenges  of 

Mainstreaming WIL", ALTC NAGCAS National Symposium, June 2008, Melbourne. 

[35] O'Reilly, J., 2010, "Developing a Work Integrated Learning Unit for Employability and Technical Skills: One Size Does Not Fit 

All", Hong Kong WACE Conference on WIL, Feb., 2010. 

[36] Orrell, J., 2004, "Work-integrated Learning Programmes: Management and Educational Quality", Proceedings of the Australian 

Universities Quality Forum, AUQA Occasional Publication, 2004.  

[37] Pitout, B.R, 2009, "Transforming work-integrated learning : strengths, shortcomings and solutions" Journal for New Generation 

Sciences, Vol 7, Issue 1, Pages: 176-202, 2009. 

[38] Reinhard, K., 2006, "The German Berufsakademie Work-Integrated Learning Program: A Potential Higher Education Model for 

West and East", Asia-Pacific Journal of Cooperative Education, vol. 7, no.1, pg. 16-21, 2006. 

[39] Rittichainuwat, B.N., Worth, J., Hanson, R. Rattanapinanchai, S., "Enhancing Learning with Work Integrated Learning: A Case 

Study in Thailand"International Program in Hotel and Tourism Management, Siam University, Thailand. 

[40] Schiavenato,  M.,  2009,  "Reevaluating  Simulation  in  Nursing  Education:  Beyond  the  Human  Patient  Simulator",vJournal  of 

Nursing Education, vol. 48, no.7, July 2009. 

[41] Seymour  N.E.,  Røtnes,  J.S.,  2006,  "Challenges  to  the  development  of  complex  virtual  reality  surgical  simulations",  Surgical  

Endoscopy, vol. 20, 2006. 

[42] Sherman, W.R., Adams, N., Addison, R., Bowen Loftin, R., Britton, B., Cox, D., Patterson, R., 1997, "Experiences with Virtual 

Reality Applications", The National Center for Supercomputing Applications. 

[43] Skylar, A.A., 2007, "Assistive Technology", Journal of Special Education Technology, vol. 22, issue 2, 2007. 

[44] Smith,  J.E.,  Meijer,  G.,  Kielly-Coleman,  N., 2010,  "Assurance  of  learning  :  the  role  of  work  integrated  learning  and  industry 
partners,  In  Campbell,  M.Ed.,  Work  Integrated  Learning  :  Responding  to  Challenges,  Australian  Collaborative  Education 
Network (ACEN) Incorporated, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, WA, pp. 409-419. 

[45] Smith,  J.E.,  Smith,  R.,  2010,  "Work  integrated  learning  :  an  industry  partners'  perspective",  Proceedings  of  Australian 

Vocational Education and Training Research Association (AVETRA), AVETRA, Gold Coast, Qld. 

[46] Steuer, J., 1992, "Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining Telepresence", Journal of Communication, vol. 42,  no. 4, 

Autumn, 1992. 

[47] Van Wyk, E.,  De Villiers, R., 2009, "Virtual Reality Training Applications for the Mining Industry", Afrigraph, issue 04  - 06, 

February 2009, Pretoria, South Africa. 

[48] Wyld, D.C., 2010, "A Second Life for organizations?: managing in the new, virtual world" Management Research Review, vol. 

33 no. 6, 2010 pp. 529-562, Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 

[49] Zajtchuk,  R.,  Satava,  R.M.,  1997,  "Medical  Applications  of  Virtual  Reality",  Communications  of  the  ACM,  vol.  40,  no.  9, 

September 1997. 

Waleed Al Shehri received his bachelor degree in computer science from King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (2005), MSc 
degree in information technology form Macquarie university, Sydney, Australia (2011). His current research interests in databases and 
software engineering . Currently working in the Department of  IT in Royal Saudi Air Force ( RSAF ). 

 
