From: ref. proc. SLACTIONS 2012 International Research Conference on Virtual Worlds, 
eds. L. Morgado, Y. Sivan, A.M. Maia, et al., pp. 49-58 (2012).  Vila Real, PT: UTAD, 
ISBN 978-989-704-102-0, avail. at http://hdl.handle.net/10348/2305 

The MICA Experiment:  Astrophysics in Virtual Worlds 

S. G. Djorgovski 
California Institute of Technology, MS 249-17, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Email:  george@astro.caltech.edu. 

Piet Hut 
Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540.  Email: piet@ias.edu. 

Rob Knop 
Quest Univ. Canada, 3200 University Bvd., Squamish, BC, Canada V8B 0N8.  Email: rknop@pobox.com. 

Giuseppe Longo 
Dept. of Physical Sciences, Univ. Federico II, Via Cintia 9, 80126 Napoli, Italy.  Email: longo@na.infn.it. 

Steve McMillan 
Physics Dept., Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.  Email: steve@physics.drexel.edu. 

Enrico Vesperini 
Physics Dept., Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.  Email: vesperin@physics.drexel.edu. 

Ciro Donalek 
California Institute of Technology, MS 249-17, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Email:  donalek@astro.caltech.edu. 

Matthew Graham 
California Institute of Technology, MS 158-79, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Email:  mjg@cacr.caltech.edu. 

Asish Mahabal 
California Institute of Technology, MS 249-17, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Email:  aam@astro.caltech.edu. 

Franz Sauer 
California Institute of Technology, MS 249-17, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Email:  fsauer@caltech.edu. 

Charles White 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA.  Email: charles.p.white@jpl.nasa.gov. 

Crista Lopes 
Dept. of Informatics, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.  Email: lopes@ics.uci.edu. 

49 

 
 
 
 
this 

technology 

We  describe  the  work  of  the  Meta-Institute  for 
Computational  Astrophysics  (MICA),  the  first 
professional  scientific  organization  based 
in 
virtual  worlds.    MICA  was  an  experiment  in  the 
use  of 
for  science  and 
scholarship,  lasting  from  the  early  2008  to  June 
2012,  mainly  using  the  Second  LIfeTM    and 
OpenSimulator  as  platforms.    We  describe  its 
goals  and  activities,  and  our  future  plans.    We 
conducted  scientific  collaboration  meetings, 
professional  seminars,  a  workshop,  classroom 
instruction, public lectures, informal discussions 
and  gatherings,  and  experiments  in  immersive, 
interactive  visualization  of  high-dimensional 
scientific  data.    Perhaps  the  most  successful  of 
these  was  our  program  of  popular  science 
lectures, illustrating yet again the great potential 
of immersive VR as an educational and outreach 
platform.    While  the  members  of  our  research 
groups and some collaborators found the use of 
immersive  VR  as  a  professional  telepresence 
tool  to  be  very  effective,  we  did  not  convince  a 
broader  astrophysics  community  to  adopt  it  at 
this  time,  despite  some  efforts;  we  discuss 
some  possible  reasons  for  this  non-uptake.    On 
the whole, we conclude that immersive VR has a 
great  potential  as  a  scientific  and  educational 
platform,  as 
technology  matures  and 
becomes more broadly available and accepted.  

the 

Introduction 

Virtual  Worlds  (VWs)  and  immersive  Virtual  Reality 
(VR)  technologies  are  still  in  their  infancy,  and  yet  they 
hold  a  huge  transformative  potential.    They  may  presage 
the emerging “3D Web”, that may be as transformative as 
the WWW itself, if not more.  This includes their possible 
uses in science, scholarship, and education. 

We face a dual problem of engaging the broad academic 
community in their use and exploration for scientific and 
scholarly research in general, and at the same time taping 
into its innovation potential to help shape and develop the 
VWs and enhance their utility and functionality.  It would 
be healthy to have the intellectual leadership and rigor in 
this  arena  come  form  the  academia,  rather  than  from  the 
games  industry  alone.    Yet,  the  scientific  community  at 
large  seems  to  be  largely  unaware  of  this  technological 
emergence or its potential. 

While there has been a slowly growing interest in VWs 
and  engagement  of  the  academic  community  in  the  
humanities  and  social  sciences  (e.g.,  Bainbridge  2007, 
2010), with a few exceptions (e.g., Lang & Bradley 2009) 
the  “hard  sciences”  community  has  yet  to  engage 

meaningfully in these interesting, possibly transformative 
developments.  Aside from being insufficiently informed, 
and  the  natural  inertia  in  adopting  radically  new  things, 
one reason for this negligence may be a lack of the real-
life examples of the scientific utility of VWs. 

With  this  in  mind,  we  formed  the  Meta-Institute  for 
Computational Astrophysics (MICA; http://mica-vw.org), 
to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  the  first  professional 
scientific organization based exclusively in virtual worlds 
(VWs).    Our  goals  were  to  explore  the  utility  of  the 
emerging  VR  and  VWs  technologies  for  scientific  and 
scholarly work in general, and to facilitate and accelerate 
their adoption by the scientific research community.  

The charter goals of MICA were: 

•  Exploration, development and promotion of VWs and 
in 

for  professional 

technologies 

research 

VR 
astrophysics and related fields. 

•  To  provide  and  develop  novel  social  networking 
venues  and  mechanisms  for  scientific  collaboration 
and 
professional 
including 
meetings, effective telepresence, etc. 

communications, 

•  Use  of  VWs  and  VR  technologies  for  education  and 

public outreach. 

•  To  act  as  a  forum  for  exchange  of  ideas  and  joint 
efforts  with  other  scientific  disciplines  in  promoting 
these goals for science and scholarship in general. 

MICA was formed in the early 2008, following the early 
explorations  by  Hut  (2006,  2008),  and  lasted  until  June 
2012.    Its  work  continues  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Caltech  Astroinformatics  group.    Some  of  our  work  to 
date has been described in McMillan et al. (2009), Knop 
et  al.  (2010),  and  Djorgovski  et  al.  (2010a,b),  and  in  a 
number of other conference presentations. 

While our initial activities were conducted in the VW of 
Qwaq (renamed since to TelePlace), we quickly migrated 
to  Second  LIfeTM 
to 
OpenSimulator  (OpenSim)  platforms.  SL  provided  a 
convenient, well established virtual environment, and the 
ready audiences for our outreach activities. 

(SL)  and,  more 

recently, 

Astronomy has been at a leading edge of the e-Science 
and  Cyber-Infrastructure  developments,  e.g.,  with  the 
Virtual Observatory framework: a Web-based, distributed 
research  environment  for  astronomy  with  massive  and 
complex  data  sets  (see,  e.g.,  Brunner  et  al.  2001,  or 
Djorgovski  &  Williams  2005);  however  that  “virtual”  is 
not yet related in any way to the immersive VR or VWs, 
and  is  today  mainly  providing  a  global  data  grid  of 
astronomy, with some data services.  We also have many 
on-line  forums  for  research  collaborations,  such  as 
MODEST  (http://www.manybody.org/modest),  in  which 
a  number  of  the  founding  members  of  MICA  were 
engaged.    An  emerging  discipline  of  Astroinformatics 

50 

 
 
 
aims to develop deeper and broader connections between 
astronomy and applied computer science and information 
technology (see, e.g., http://astroinformatics2010.org). 

MICA  was  an  experiment  in  academic  and  scientific 
practices  enabled  by  the  immersive  VR  technologies,  an 
example of the e-Science, or the “Fourth Paradigm” (Hey 
et  al.  2009;  the  first  three  being  experiment,  analytical 
theory,  and  numerical  simulations)  –  a  segment  in  the 
evolving landscape of computationally enabled science in 
the 21st century. 

VWs as a Scientific/Scholarly Platform 

As  most  people  who  have  seriously  tried  them  know, 
VWs are clearly a powerful scientific communication and 
collaboration platform.  In addition to the traditional uses, 
such as the discussion, conference, or collaboration group 
discussion  venues,  there  is  another  important  aspect 
where VWs can play an essential facilitating role: 

change, 

sustainability, 

energy, 
interdisciplinary 

Genuine  interdisciplinary  cross-fertilization  is  a  much-
neglected path to scientific progress.  Given that many of 
the  most  important  challenges  facing  us  (e.g.,  the  global 
climate 
are 
in  nature,  and  not 
fundamentally 
reducible  to  any  given  scientific  discipline  (physics, 
biology,  etc.), 
lack  of  effective  and  pervasive 
mechanisms  for  establishment  of  inter-,  multi-,  or  cross-
disciplinary  interactions  is  a  serious  problem  which 
affects  us  all.  Engaging  in  effective  interdisciplinary 
activities  requires    easy  and  effective  communication 

etc.) 

the 

venues,  intellectual  melting  pots  where  such  encounters 
can  occur  and  flourish.    VWs  as  scientific  interaction 
environments  offer  a  great  new  opportunity  to  foster 
interdisciplinary  meetings  of  the  minds.    They  are  easy, 
free, do not require travel, and the social barriers are very 
low  and  easily  overcome  (the  ease  and  the  speed  of 
striking conversations and friendships is one of the more 
striking features of VWs).  

Another interesting question is how immersive VR can 
be used as a part of novel forms of scientific publishing, 
either  as  an  equivalent  of  the  current  practice  of 
supplementing traditional papers with on-line material on 
the  Web,  or  even  as  a  primary  publishing  medium.    Just 
as  the  Web  offers  new  possibilities  and  modalities  for 
scholarly publishing which do not simply mimic the age-
old  printed-paper  media  publishing,  so  we  may  find 
qualitatively novel uses of VWs as a publishing venue in 
their own right. 

Immersive  VR  environments  open  some  intriguing 
novel possibilities in the ways in which scientists can set 
up, perform, modify, and examine the output of numerical 
simulations.    In  MICA,  we  used  as  our  primary  science 
environment the gravitational N-body problem, since that 
is  where  our  professional  expertise  is  concentrated,  but 
we expect that most of the features we developed will find 
much  broader  applicability  in  the  visualization  of  more 
general  scientific  or  abstract  data  sets  in  arbitrary  VW 
environments. 

Figure 1: MICA members conducting scientific and collaborative discussions in an immersive environment in SL.  
Graphics (diagrams, slides, etc.) are imported as textures and displayed on suitable prims. 

51 

 
 
 
In  a  more  general  context,  VWs  offer  intriguing  new 
possibilities 
for  scientific  visualization  or  “visual 
analytics”.    As  the  size,  and  especially  the  complexity  of 
scientific  data  sets 
increase,  effective  visualization 
becomes  a  key  need  for  data  analysis:  it  is  a  bridge 
between 
in 
complex scientific measurements, and the human intuition 
which  is  necessary  for  a  true  understanding  of  the 
phenomena that are being studied. 

information  contained 

the  quantitative 

Moreover,  the  human  visual  perception  system  is 
naturally optimized for 3D: we are meant to interact with 
each  other,  with  objects,  and  with 
informational 
constructs  in  3D;  the  traditional  2D  paper  or  screen 
paradigm is simply a historical and technological artifact.  
Perhaps  this  is  the  main  reason  for  the  “unreasonable 
effectiveness”  of  VWs  (given  the  technology’s  nascent 
sta) in creating a subjective feeling of a real presence. 

VWs provide an easy, portable and inexpensive (or free) 
venue for a multi-dimensional data visualization, but with 
an  added  benefit  of  being  able  to  interact  with  the  data 
and  with  your  colleagues,  in  a  truly  explorative  and 
collaborative manner. 

One  increasingly  plausible  vision  of  the  future  is  that 
there  will  be  a  synthesis  of  the  Web,  with  its  all-
encompassing  informational  content,  and  the  immersive 
VR as an interface to it, since it is so well suited to the to 
the  human  sensory  input  mechanisms.      We  can  think  of 
immersive VR as the next generation browser technology, 
which  will  be  as  qualitatively  different  from  the  current, 

the  older, 

flat  desktop  and  web  page  paradigm,  as  it  was  different 
from 
terminal  screen  and  file  directory 
paradigm for information display and access.  A question 
then naturally arises: what will be the newly enabled ways 
of  interacting  with  the  informational  content  of  the  3D 
Web,  and  how  should  we  structure  and  architect  the 
information so that it is optimally displayed and searched 
under the new paradigm? 

Immersive VR as a Scientific Collaboration 
and Telepresence Platform 

We  have  been  using  SL  extensively  as  a  venue  for 
research  group  and  collaboration  discussions,  including 
collaborators worldwide (Fig. 1).  Many of us prefer this 
mode  of  interaction  to  Skype  or  telecon  meetings, 
including 
  Several 
the  standard  videoconferencing. 
research papers have been conceived at these meetings. 

Much of our early effort was focused on the visualization 
and exploration of numerical stellar dynamics simulations 
in  VWs.  Throughout  2009,  we  organized  weekly 
meetings in the MICA building, on our StellaNova island, 
in  order  to  discuss  the  use  of  N-body  simulations  in  SL 
and  in  OpenSim.   The  meetings  were  highly  successful, 
and  we  had  a  steady  audience  of 
twenty 
participants,  partly  professional  astrophysicists,  partly 
amateur  astronomers  and  others  interested  in  learning 
more  about  the  gravitational  N-body  problem  and  its 
applications  in  stellar  dynamics  simulations  of  star 
clusters and galaxies. 

ten 

to 

Figure 2:  Nobel laureate John Mather (now the Project Scientist for the James Webb Space Telescope) giving one of the 
MICA technical seminars.

52 

 
 
 
Throughout 2009, we organized weekly meetings in the 
MICA  building  on  our  StellaNova  island  in  SL,  in  order 
to  discuss  the  use  of  N-body  simulations  in  SL  and  in 
OpenSim.   The  meetings  were  highly  successful,  and  we 
had a steady audience of ten to twenty participants, partly 
professional  astrophysicists,  partly  amateur  astronomers 
and  others 
the 
gravitational  N-body  problem  and  its  applications  in 
stellar dynamics simulations of star clusters and galaxies. 

learning  more  about 

interested 

in 

In the first year, we used SL as a platform for our weekly 
professional seminar series, with a typical attendance of ~ 
30  avatars.    These  seminars  served  as  a  device  to 
introduce our colleagues to VWs: we invite them to give a 
talk as an introductory experience with this medium.  One 
of our speakers (both for a professional seminar, and for a 
public  lecture)  was  John  Mather,  a  Nobel  laureate  in 
physics,  and  currently  the  Project  Scientist  for  the  James 
Webb Space Telescope (Fig. 2).  This indicates the level 
of  seriousness  and  the  perceptions  of  at  least  some 
members of the professional astrophysics community. 

The great majority of those who accept our invitation to 
speak  at  the  MICA  seminars  in  SL  found  the  experience 
to be interesting and rewarding.  However, while some of 
the colleagues we attracted in this way remained active in 
exploring the scientific uses of VWs, the majority did not.  
We  have  thus  stopped  this  seminar  series,  and  had 
seminars on an ad hoc basis, when an appropriate speaker 
was available. 

The lesson learned from this experiment is that the great 
majority  of  our  colleagues  are  still  leery  and  reluctant  to 
embrace  VWs  as  a  scholarly  platform.    We  consider 
below  some  possible  reasons  for  this  slow  uptake  of  a 
highly promising technology. Unfortunately, this is not an 

unusual  situation  with  the  process  of  the  academic 
community  adoptions  of  any  new  technology,  especially 
in  the  internet  era,  and  given  the  endemic  inertia  of  the 
academic  institutions  in  adopting  new  ways  of  doing 
business.  Some persistence is needed, as well as tangible 
demonstrations of the utility of these technologies for the 
scholarly work. 

We  also  conducted  a  1-day  international  workshop  on 
the scientific uses of VWs within SL.  This confirmed our 
expectations  that  immersive  environments  represent  an 
effective,  easy,  inexpensive,  and  environment-friendly 
(due  to  the  absence  of  a  physical  travel)  venue  for 
professional meetings. This was of course already realized 
by many other groups in the business world and by some 
government  agencies,  but  it  has  not  yet  registered 
effectively in the academic community at large. 

By eliminating the necessity of a physical travel, virtual 
meetings  represent  a  very  “green”  technology.    While  in 
the early days of the internet there were high expectations 
for  telecommuting,  they  were  dashed  by  the  lack  of 
immediate  and  subjectively  personal  interactions  (the 
“watercooler  effect”).    VWs  solve  this  problem,  and  we 
expect  that  they  will  have  a  major  impact  in  this  arena, 
once this technology becomes more broadly accepted. 

Education and Public Outreach 
There  is  of  course  an  extensive  literature  on  the 
education  in  VWs,  the  review  of  which  is  beyond  the 
scope of this paper.  Gauthier (2007) describes some early 
astronomy outreach efforts in SL. 

We  have  experimented  with  a  normal  classroom 
instruction  in  a  VW  environment  (Fig.  3).    We  plan  a 
more  extensive  use  of  VWs  for  both  classroom-style 
lectures and informal student-faculty discussions. 

Figure 3: A lecture in an introductory physics class conducted in SL, while the instructor (Prof. G. Longo) was on one 
continent, and the students on another.  The students’ reaction to this novel approach was largely very favorable. 

53 

 
 
Figure 4.  One of the MICA popular lectures: Dr. Sean Carroll from Caltech is explaining the material from his book, 
From Eternity to Here. 

We have established a strong and successful program of 
public lectures (Fig. 4), initially on a bi-weekly, but then 
on  a  weekly  basis,  during  the  academic  terms.    These 
included external speakers, as well as the members of our 
team.  They were very popular, with a typical attendance 
of ~ 50 – 70 avatars.  The slides shown, and in most cases 
also  the  audio  and/or  video  (machinima)  recordings  are 
posted on the MICA website, and are freely available. 

During the first few months, we have also held weekly 
informal  “Ask  an  Astronomer”  sessions,  where  anyone 
could  ask  astronomy  or  general  science  questions  from 
one  of  our  professional  members.    These  sessions  were 
very popular with science enthusiasts. 

We  have  started  to  develop  a  virtual  educational 
laboratory  content,  starting  with  a  simple  physics 
experiment,  a  3-body  gravitational  interaction  (Fig.  5).  
Students can modify the initial condition and observe the 
changes  in  the  outcome,  computed  in  real  time.    We 
envision  such  virtual  teaching  laboratories  as  a  great 
potential  resource  for  the  schools  who  cannot  afford 
actual real-life laboratories.  Moreover, some experiments 
simply  cannot  be  done  in  a  real  lab  context –  dynamical 
evolution  of  stellar  systems  being  an  example.    We  can 
develop  a  virtual  lab  exercise  where  one  can  change  the 
actual  physics  (e.g.,  “what  if  the  gravitational  force  was 
inversely proportional to the cube of the distance?”), and 
see the difference in the outcomes. 

Figure 5.  A working demo of a gravitational 3-body problem, deployed at the MICA sim in SL, and developed by Prof. Rob 
Knop, one of our core team members.  This is an example of an interactive, hands-on experiment that a virtual teaching 
laboratory might contain.

54 

 
 
One  important  feature  of  VWs  is  that  they  lower  the 
social barriers in most human interactions, and education 
is no exception.  People who attended our popular lectures 
and informal discussions would generally not attempt (or 
not  even  have  an  opportunity)  to  make  comparable 
contacts  in  real  life.    This  leveling  of  an  educational 
playing field may have a huge, beneficial social impact. 

Scientific Data Visualization 

Immersive visualization of complex data spaces is now 
the  main  research  direction  we  are  pursuing.    VWs  offer 
intriguing  new  possibilities  for  scientific  visualization  or 
“visual  analytics”.    As  the  size,  and  especially  the 
complexity  of  scientific  data  sets  increase,  effective 
visualization becomes a key need for data analysis: it is a 
bridge  between  the  quantitative  information  contained  in 
complex scientific measurements, and the human intuition 
which  is  necessary  for  a  true  understanding  of  the 
phenomena  in  question.    The  advantages  of  VWs  in  this 
arena are that the visual exploration can be collaborative, 
as researchers interact with each other at the same time as 
they  interact  with  the  data.    It  is  also  a  low-cost,  highly 
portable  alternative  to  many  other  methods  of  3D  data 
visualization (e.g., caves, use of special theaters, helmets, 
or goggles, etc.).   

Our initial experiments with immersive visualization of 
stellar  dynamics  simulation  (Fig.  6)  have  been  described 
by  Farr  et  al.  (2009)  and  Nakasone  et  al.  (2009).    In 
addition to visualization of pre-made, stationary data sets, 
we think of visualizing output of numerical simulations or 

data  streams  in  real  time,  allowing  scientists  to  interact 
with their experiment itself as it is ongoing. 

Figure 6.  An early example of an immersive visualization 
of an output of a dynamical simulation of a star cluster, 
with the scientist interacting with the simulation from 
within the VW. 

Figure 7.  An example of an immersive, collaborative data visualization in SL.  The data represent properties of stars, 
galaxies and quasars from the SDSS sky survey.  The XYZ positions, point shapes, sizes, and colors encode different 
observed parameters. 

55 

 
 
 
Figure 8.  A Caltech student (F. Sauer) experimenting with data visualization scripts in an OpenSim world. 

In  collaboration  with  Desdemona  Enfield  (her  SL  nom 
de  pixel),  we  have  developed  universal  scripts  for 
immersive  visualization  of  highly  dimensional  data  sets.  
We  are  using  data  object  shapes,  textures,  orientations, 
transparency, 
to  encode 
rotation,  pulsation,  etc., 
additional  data  dimensions  beyond  the  obvious  spatial 
XYZ coordinates, color, and size of data objects (Fig. 7).  
This was expanded by us to include the transparency (the 
alpha  layer)  as  the  means  of  encoding  an  additional 
dimension.    We  can  add  additional  dimensions  through 
the  use  of  object  shapes,  orientations  (for  the  non-
spherical  data  points),  textures,  and  glyphs.    In  all,  we 
expect that about a dozen parameter space dimensions can 
be encoded in these immersive, peudo-3D displays. 

An  additional  functionality  we  added  is  the  ability  to 
link  data  objects  with  the  external  catalog  or  database 
information,  e.g.,  using  a  simple  point-and-click.    This 
information  can  be  displayed  using  a  Web  browser 
window, either external or internal to the VW browser. 

We  have  ported  these  scripts  into  the OpenSim  worlds, 
initially  Intel’s  ScienceSim,  and  now  the  Virtual  Caltech 
(vCaltech), where the experiments continue.  This enabled 
us to overcome a major obstacl, the limited prim quotas in 
SL.  In our OpenSim experiments, we can easily visualize 
~ 100,000 data points.  Beyond that, individual data point 
representations are better replaced by isodensity surfaces, 
at least for the majority of the data; outliers are still best 
represented as individual data points. 

We are now also developing data visualization using the 
Unity  3D  platform,  and  experimenting  with  Microsoft’s 
Kinect device as a haptic interface. 

Concluding Comments 

MICA was a new type of scientific institution, dedicated 
to an exploration of immersive VR and VWs technologies 

for science, scholarship, and education, aimed primarily at 
physical and other natural sciences.  It was an experiment 
in the new ways of conducting scholarly work, as well as 
a testbed for new ideas and research modalities.  

The central idea here is that immersive VR and VWs are 
potentially  transformative  technologies  on  a  par  with  the 
Web  itself,  which  can  and  should  be  used  for  serious 
purposes, including science and scholarship; they are not 
just a form of games, and that message has to be absorbed 
by the academic community at large. 

Our goal was to engage a much broader segment of the 
academic  community  in  utilizing,  and  developing  further 
these technologies.  This, in turn, would bring in the new 
creative potential of the community in developing further 
the VR and VW technologies themselves. 

MICA was intended to be a gateway for other scholars, 
new  to  VWs,  to  start  to  explore  their  potential  and  the 
practical  uses  in  an  easy,  welcoming,  and  collegial 
environment.  However, we did not succeed in engaging a 
broader  segment  of  the  astrophysics  community  in  the 
adoption  (let  alone  development)  of  these  technologies; 
the  same  applies  in  most  other  sciences  or  academic 
domains.    Why  are  academics  so  slow  to  recognize  the 
utility and the potential of VWs and immersive VR? 

We  have  polled  our  professional  members  (about  50) 
who  have  not  continued  to  use  VWs  beyond  their  initial 
visit as to why.  The majority answer was that they do fid 
the  technology  interesting,  but  simply  do  not  have  the 
time to invest in exploring it now. 

A  part  of  the  answer  is  that  many  people  (in  particular 
those  older  than  the  growing  generations  of  “digital 
natives”)  are  not  used  to  (and  some  are  simply  repelled 
by)  the  avatar  representations  of  themselves  and  their 
colleagues – it looks like a video game, and not a serious 

56 

 
 
professional  activity.    An  additional  factor  is  the  (well 
deserved)  iffy  reputation  of  VWs  such  as  SL  and  what 
goes on in them.  This stigma must be overcome, if we are 
to attract a broader community of academic professionals 
to these technologies, both as users and as developers. 

One  possible  approach  is  to  introduce  our  skeptical 
colleagues to VWs through dedicated academic VWs with 
controlled access.  OpenSim worlds are currently perhaps 
the best option in this regard.  The SL/OpenSim will most 
likely  not  be  the  architecture  of  the  future  “3D  Web”.   
However, it is a good interim platform to get used to the 
immersive VR experience and start developing the novel 
tools for science, scholarship, and education. 

Another factor in the slow uptake may be the quality of 
the user experience in VWs such as SL.  Pure commercial 
games, for example, have vastly better graphics, although 
they  are  more  rigid,  and  mostly  not  user-programmable.  
Yet there is no obvious alternative to SL and OpenSim at 
this time as scholarly VR experimentation platforms. 

We  are  currently  witnessing  a  dramatic  growth  in  3D 
display  technologies,  largely  driven  by  the  entertainment 
industry.    These  commercial  interests  are  funding  the 
technology  developments  in  a  way  that  the  academic 
community  could  not,  and  that  gives  us  a  powerful 
leverage – just as it happened in the past with computing 
and information technology. 

The lack of an effective uptake of VWs in the academic 
community  is  symptomatic  of  a  broader  problem:  while 
the  information  technology  evolves  on  a  Moore’s  law 
time scale (i.e., a couple of years at most), humans learn 
new skills and change their behavior on much longer time 
scales;  they  simply  cannot  keep  up  with  the  pace  of  the 
technology.    An  even  more  insidious  problem  is  that 
academia  as  an  institution  evolves  even  slower,  on  time 
scales of decades or centuries.  While the new generations 
of  digital  natives  may  find  these  technologies  to  be 
perfectly  natural  and  a  standard  part  of  their  lives,  both 
personal  and  professional,  we  have  to  accelerate  their 
adoption in the academic and research contexts. 

This  evolutionary  process  may  have  an  impact  well 
beyond  academia,  as  these  technologies  will  change  the 
ways  we  interact,  both  with  each  other  and  with  the 
informational  content  in  the  cyberspace.    Engaging  the 
academic  community  in  the  extensive  use  of  VR  and 
VWs  may  also  lead  to  novel  practical  and  commercial 
applications and development directions which we cannot 
even anticipate today.  If immersive VR becomes a major 
feature  of  modern  society,  in  commerce,  entertainment, 
etc., the potential impact will be very significant. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

MICA was supported by the NSF grant HCC-0917814.  
We are grateful to a number of colleagues and volunteers, 

and  in  particular:  Simon  Portegies  Zwart,  Will  Farr, 
Cassandra  Woodland,  Spike  MacPhee,  Desdemona 
Enfield,  Mic  Bowman,  David  Levine,  Jeff  Ames,  Adam 
Johnson,  Kat  Prawl,  Troy  McConaghy,  Stephanie  Smith, 
Elizabeth  Van  Horn,  Paul  Doherty,  Will  Scotti,  Shenlei 
Winkler, Alan Boyle, Leslie Maxfield, and many others. 

REFERENCES 
Bainbridge,  W.S.  (2010).    The  Warcraft  Civilization:  Social 
Science in a Virtual World.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Bainbridge,  W.S.  (2007).    The  Scientific  Research  Potential  of 

Virtual Worlds, Science, 317, 472-476. 

Djorgovski,  S.G.,  &  Williams,  R.  (2005).  Virtual  Observatory: 
From Concept to Implementation.  Astron. Soc. Pacific Conf. 
Ser., 345, 517-530. 

Djorgovski,  S.G.,  Hut,  P.,  McMillan,  S.,  Vesperini,  E.,  Knop, 
R.,  Farr,  W.,  &  Graham,  M.  (2010).  Exploring  the  Use  of 
Virtual  Worlds  as  a  Scientific  Research  Platform:  The  Meta-
Institute for Computational Astrophysics (MICA).  In: Facets 
of Virtual Environments, Proc. FaVE 2009, eds. F. Lehmann-
Grube  et  al.,  ICST  Lecture  Notes  Series,  33,  p.  27,  Berlin: 
Springer Verlag. 

Djorgovski,  S.G.,  Hut,  P.,  McMillan,  S.,  Knop,  R.,  Vesperini, 
E.,  Graham,  M.,  Portegies  Zwart,  S.,  Farr,  W.,  Mahabal,  A., 
Donalek, C., & Longo, G. (2010b).  Immersive Virtual Reality 
Technologies as a New Platform for Science, Scholarship, and 
Education.  Bull. Amer. Astron. Soc., 42, 565. 

Farr,  W.,  Hut,  P.,  Ames,  J.,  &  Johnson,  A.  (2009).  An 
Experiment 
for  Scientific 
in  Using  Virtual  Worlds 
Visualization of Self-Gravitating System.  J. Virt. Worlds Res., 
2, #3. 

Gauthier,  A.  (2007).    Astronomy  in  Second  Life:  A  User’s 

Perspective. Comm. Astron. to the Public, 1, 32-34. 

Hey,  T.,  Tansley,  S.,  &  Tolle,  K.  (eds.)  (2009).    The  Fourth 

Paradigm.  Redmond, WA: Microsoft Corp. 

Hut, P. (2006).  Virtual Laboratories.  Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl., 

164, 38-53. 

Hut, P. (2008).  Virtual Laboratories and Virtual Worlds.  Proc. 
IAU  Symposium  246,  Dynamical  Evolution  of  Dense  Stellar 
Systems, eds. E.Vesperini et al., pp. 447-456.   

Knop,  R.,  Ames,  J.,  Djorgovski,  S.G.,  Farr,  W.,  Hut,  P., 
Johnson,  A.,  McMillan,  S.,  Nakasone,  A.,  &  Vesperini,  E. 
(2010).  Visualization  of  N-body  Simulations  in  Virtual 
Worlds.  Bull. Amer. Astron. Soc., 42, 393. 

Lang,  A.,  &  Bradley,  J.-C.  (2009).    Chemistry  in  Second  Life.  

Chemistry Central Journal, 3:14. 

McMillan,  S.,  Djorgovski,  S.G.,  Hut,  P.,  Vesperini,  E.,  Knop, 
R., Portegies Zwart, S. (2009). MICA: The Meta Institute for 
Computational Astrophysics. Bull. Amr. Astron. Soc., 41, 667. 

Nakasone,  A.,  Prendinger,  H.,  Holland,  S.,  Hut,  P., 
  AstroSim: 
Makino,  J.,  &  Miura,  K. 
Collaborative  Visualization  of 
an  Astrophysics 
Simulation  in  Second  Life.  IEEE  Computer  Graphics 
and Applications, 29, #5, pp. 69. 

(2009). 

57 

 
 
