3
1
0
2

n
a
J

5
2

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
0
0
6
.
1
0
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Immersive VR Visualizations by VFIVE. Part 2: Applications

Akira Kageyama
Graduate School of System Informatics, Kobe University,
Kobe, 657-8501, Japan
kage@cs-kobe-u.ac.jp

Nobuaki Ohno
University of Hyogo,
Kobe, 650-0047, Japan

Shintaro Kawahara
Earth Simulator Center,
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology,
Yokohama, 236-0001, Japan

Kazuo Kashiyama
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chuo University,
Bunkyo-ku, 112-8551, Japan

Hiroaki Ohtani
National Institute for Fusion Science, Toki, 509-5292, Japan
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Toki, 509-5292, Japan

VFIVE is a scientiﬁc visualization application for CAVE-type immersive virtual reality systems.
The source codes are freely available. VFIVE is used as a research tool in various VR systems. It
also lays the groundwork for developments of new visualization software for CAVEs. In this paper,
we pick up ﬁve CAVE systems in four diﬀerent institutions in Japan. Applications of VFIVE in
each CAVE system are summarized. Special emphases will be placed on scientiﬁc and technical
achievements made possible by VFIVE.

I.

INTRODUCTION

VFIVE is a scientiﬁc visualization application for CAVE-type immersive virtual reality (VR) systems. Visualization

methods and user-interface implemented in this application are described in detail in our complemented paper[1].

We started developing visualization software for a CAVE in late 1990s, to visualize data of our own simulations[2].
The applications gradually attracted interests of other simulation researchers, and getting their feedbacks, we devel-
oped a general-purpose visualization application VFIVE[3, 4].

We have been improving VFIVE for more than a decade. It is brought up to be a practical tool for three-dimensional,

interactive visualization in CAVEs through the continued improvements.

VFIVE is coded with C++ language with OpenGL and CAVElib. Its source codes are freely distributed. The
purpose of this paper is to summarize its applications and, especially, achievements made possible by VFIVE, in
several CAVE systems in Japan.

II.

π-CAVE AT KOBE UNIV.

A. Hardware

π-CAVE is a CAVE system installed in 2011 at Integrated Research Center (IRC), Kobe University. It is named

after IRC’s location, Port Island (PI). An overview of the π-CAVE system is shown in Fig. 1.

π-CAVE has a rectangular parallelepiped conﬁguration with side lengths of 3m × 3m × 7.8m. To the authors’
knowledge, this is the largest CAVE system in Japan. Its wide width (7.8m) is one of the characteristic features of
this CAVE system. It enables several people to stand on the ﬂoor at the same time, without causing mutual occlusion
of the screen views in the room.

π-CAVE has four screens; three wall screens (front, right, and left) and a ﬂoor. Semi-transparent soft screens are
used for the walls. The images on them are rear-projected. Six sets of Digital Light Processing (DLP) projectors are
used; see Fig. 2a. The ﬂoor is a hard screen on which stereo image is projected from the ceiling. Two projectors are

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

FIG. 1: Overview of π-CAVE at Kobe Univ. A rectangular parallelepiped CAVE system with side lengths 3m × 3m × 7.8m.

FIG. 2: Overview of π-CAVE at Kobe Univ. A box-shaped CAVE system with side lengths 3m × 3m × 7.8m.

used to generate front wall images. The edge blending technique is applied on the interface between the projections.
Another pair of projectors is used for the ﬂoor screen. The resolution of the DLP projector (Christie WU12K-M) is
1920 × 1200 pixels. The brightness is 10,500 lumens.

An optical motion tracking system (Vicon) is used for the head and the wand tracking (Fig. 2b to e). Ten cameras
with 640 × 480 resolution are installed on the top of the wall screens. A commonly used commercial API (Trackd) is
used for the interface.

Two computer systems are used for the computation and the rendering. One is a Linux-PC (HP Z800) with 192GB
shared memory. Three sets of external GPU (NVIDIA QuadroPLEX) are used for the real time and stereoscopic
image generation for the six projectors. Another computer system is a Windows-PC cluster system. VFIVE runs on
both computer systems.

B. VFIVE Applications

One of the most actively applied ﬁelds of VFIVE in π-CAVE is visualization of MHD (magnetohydrodynamics)
simulations. Since an MHD simulation produces multiple vector ﬁelds such as magnetic ﬁeld and ﬂow ﬁeld, grasping
their mutual interaction is a demanding task for usual visualizations on PC monitors. VFIVE’s visualization methods
for vector ﬁelds play important roles in their analysis.

New visualization components are also developed at π-CAVE, on the groundwork of VFIVE. An example that has

recently been incorporated into VFIVE is “Tube Advector”.

Magnetic ﬁeld lines in an MHD ﬂuid such as liquid iron of the Earth’s outer core or hydrogen plasma in the solar
convection zone can be regarded as if they are “frozen” into the ﬂuid ﬂow when the electrical resistivity is negligibly
small[5]. This frozen-in nature of magnetic ﬁeld lines in MHD systems plays an important role in the magnetic ﬁeld
generation process in celestial bodies.

A magnetic ﬁeld generation can be regarded as an increase process of ﬁeld line density going through a unit area.
However, no magnetic ﬁeld line comes from nothing, because the magnetic ﬁeld is a divergence-free vector ﬁeld: A
magnetic ﬁeld line never has an open end. To increase the number density of magnetic ﬁeld lines, a ﬁeld line has to
be stretched, twisted, and folded.

To visualize the stretch-twist-fold process of frozen-in magnetic ﬁeld lines, a new VFIVE visualization method,
“Tube Advector”, was developed[6]. Sequential snapshots of a VFIVE visualization of geodynamo simulation data

3

FIG. 3: A new visualization component implemented in VFIVE at π-CAVE system. This method shows the stretch-twist-fold
process of a magnetic ﬁeld lines in a magnetohydrodynamic ﬂuid simulation.

using this “Tube Advector” are shown in Fig. 3. In this ﬁgure, the user speciﬁes an S-shaped curve of a magnetic ﬁeld
line with a short beam emitted from the portable controller wand (Fig. 3a and b). Reﬂecting the frozen-in nature,
this ﬁeld line is conveyed, or advected, by the ﬂow (c). The user can analyze the thee-dimensional advection motion,
observing its stretch-twist-fold process in detail (d).

Recently in Kobe University, a middleware called Multiverse for CAVE systems was developed[7, 8]. Multiverse is
a kind of application launcher or a “3-D Desktop” in the VR space. Multiple CAVE applications can be loaded into
Multiverse and 3-D icons with virtual touch screens depict them. By touching one of the icons ﬂoating in the air
with the wand, the corresponding application is launched. VFIVE is loaded into Multiverse in π-CAVE. The VFIVE
application shown in Fig. 2 is actually launched from the Multiverse environment.

III. PCAVE AT KOBE UNIV.

A. Hardware

pCAVE, which is shown in Fig. 4, is a one-screen VR system at Kobe Univ. with a rear stereo projector. The
screen size is W3260mm × H2500mm. A DLP projector (Christie Mirage S+4K) is used. The computer system is
SGI Asterism Deskside ADT08C with Quadcore AMD Opteron 2350 and 4GB memory. NVIDIA Quadro FX4600 is
used for the GPU.

FIG. 4: pCAVE system at Kobe University. One screen VR system with the head and hand tracking system.

The head and hand tracking system used in pCAVE is Intersense IS-900, which is an inertial and ultrasonic hybrid
system. CAVELib (ver. 3.2) and VR Juggler[9] are used as basic APIs for applications on pCAVE. The current version
of VFIVE on pCAVE uses only CAVElib.

B. VFIVE Applications

4

pCAVE system is mainly used as a workbench for CAVE application developers at Kobe University, before porting
to π-CAVE system described in section II. Development of a new visualization method, that is to be incorporated
into VFIVE in future, is ﬁrst developed and tested at pCAVE.

FIG. 5: A new visualization method of VFIVE under development at pCAVE system. This is a visualization method for vector
ﬁelds. Multiple ﬁeld lines are traced from a short virtual beam emitted from the wand.

An example of new VFIVE visualization that is under development at pCAVE is “Interactive Field Lines”, shown
in Fig. 5. In “Particle Tracer” method or “Field Line” method implemented in the original VFIVE, the seed points
of the line tracings are ﬁxed in space after the user’s speciﬁcation by the wand button pressing. In contrast to them,
the seed points of the “Interactive Field Lines” move in real time, following the user’s hand (or wand) motion. After
selecting this visualization method from VFIVE’s menu, a short beam appears from the wand’s tip. Several seed
points are located on the beam. As the user moves the wand, ﬁeld line integration with a 4-th order Runge-Kutta
method of selected vector ﬁeld is performed in real time. The user can intuitively grasp (possibly) complicated three-
dimensional structure of the vector ﬁeld, by moving his/her hand and observing not only the instantaneous shape of
the ﬁeld lines, but also their transformation process. Each ﬁeld line in this “Interactive Field Lines” is colored with a
stripe pattern. The pattern moves along the line and its drift direction and speed convey information of the direction
and the amplitude of the vector ﬁeld.

IV. HOLOSTAGE-MINI AT UNIV. HYOGO

A. Hardware

A CAVE system called Holostage-MINI, which is a commercial brand for a small-sized CAVE system, is installed at
Univ. Hyogo; Fig. 6. It has two screens; a wall and a ﬂoor, with the size of 3.2m × 2.0m for both of them. Two DLP
projectors (Christie Mirage WU3), 3000 ANSI lumens, are used. The images of the wall screen are projected from
the rear. Those of ﬂoor screen are from the ceiling. The image resolution is 1920×1200 pixels. An optical wireless
tracking system (Vicon) for the head and the hand is adopted. Four cameras are installed on the ceiling. Active
shutter liquid crystal shutter glasses are used for the parallax stereo view.

A Linux-based computer (SGI Asterism ID412) is used for computations and graphics, with 96 GB memory and

two sets of NVIDIA Quadro FX 5800 are used as GPU.

CAVElib (ver. 3.2) is used for the basic API in all applications. For the tracking system, Trackd is used.

B. Applications of VFIVE

At Univ. Hyogo, an important application, or its descendant, of VFIVE is under development. It is called Mobile-

VFIVE.

The purpose of Mobile-VFIVE is to make a common visualization environment between CAVE and PC. Since
Mobile-VFIVE is coded in JAVA with JOGL (Java Binding for OpenGL), in contrast that original VFIVE is coded
in C++[1], it runs on Mac, Linux, and Windows operating systems.

A problem for power users of VFIVE was that they could make same visualizations on their PC. Even if a user
has found an intriguing phenomenon in his/her simulation data in the CAVE by applying a couple of visualization
methods of VFIVE, he/she cannot examine it in detail later on his/her PC.

5

FIG. 6: A two-screens CAVE system installed at Univ. Hyogo. The size of the both screens is 3.2m × 2.0m.

FIG. 7: A snapshot of Mobile-VFIVE. Mobile-VFIVE is a multi-platform visualization application derived from VFIVE for
Mac, Linux, and Windows-PCs.

The purpose of Mobile-VFIVE is to emulate VFIVE in PC. Converting the source codes into JAVA, most visu-
alization methods in VFIVE are implemented. The input data format is the same as VFIVE. By adding a slight
modiﬁcation, one can save visualization states, such as applied visualization methods and their parameters, in the
VFIVE at Univ. Hyogo. Mobile-VFIVE realizes the visualization by reading the state ﬁle.

Due to the hardware diﬀerence, the user interface (UI) of Mobile-VFIVE on PC is very diﬀerent from that of
VFIVE in CAVE. The UI of Mobile-VFIVE is developed on the Swing. When the user has found an interesting
visualization in Mobile-VFIVE, he/she can save the sate into a ﬁle. The modiﬁed VFIVE can read the ﬁle and show
the visualization in the immersive environment of CAVE.

V. HOLOSTAGE AT CHUO UNIV.

A. Hardware

Holostage is a commercial brand name for rectangular-box-type CAVE systems. A Holostage is installed at Chuo
University. It is a three-screens system with two walls and a ﬂoor; see Fig.8. The size of the screens are W2.8m ×
D2.1m × H2.1m.

An optical tracking system (Vicon) is used for the head and hand tracking. Computer system is a Windows-based

PC cluster. CAVElib and Trackd are used as the basic APIs.

One of the most serious limitations of the original VFIVE is the input data format. An important improvement of

VFIVE is applied at Chuo Univ. to resolve this limitation.

B. Applications of VFIVE

6

FIG. 8: A snapshot of Holostage at Chuo University.

FIG. 9: A snapshot of a visualization application derived from VFIVE. It accepts unstructured cell data (UCD); in contrast
that original VFIVE accepts only rectilinear coordinate data.

The original VFIVE accepts only structured data, deﬁned on the so-called rectilinear coordinates x-y-z, in which
grid spacing in each direction of x, y, and z can be non-uniform. There was a version of VFIVE that accepted general
structured data on curved coordinates, such as the spherical polar coordinates[4]. The version is not maintained more.
Kashiyama et al. have developed a new visualization application that accepts unstructured cell data (UCD)[10].
All the basic visualization methods such as “Particle Tracers”, “Field Lines”, “Local Arrows” in the original VFIVE
were rewritten for the UCD data. A snapshot of this application is shown in Fig. 9.

Technical challenges in the development reside in the interpolation. Spatial interpolations are frequently called in
many visualization methods in VFIVE. Field data φ(x, y, z) at a position (x, y, z), that is speciﬁed by the wand, for
example, has to be interpolated from φ(xi, yi, zi) values where (xi, yi, zi), with i = 1, . . . , N , are N nearest grid points.
To realize the real time response with the head tracking in CAVE, high-speed interpolations are indispensable.
N
The interpolation itself is just a linear sum φ(x, y, z) = P
i wiφ(xi, yi, zi) with weights wi and it does not cost so
much. Delaying factor is in the search of the nearest neighbors (xi, yi, zi). In the rectilinear coordinates, the search is
completed in three searches of O(N ); in x, y, and z directions. On the contrary, the implementation of fast algorithm
of the grid search in unstructured cells is technically challenging. Kashiyama et al. have resolved this problem[10].

VI. BRAVE AT EARTH SIMULATOR CENTER

A. Hardware

7

BRAVE is a CAVE system installed at Earth Simulator Center. The conﬁguration is a cubic, as the original
CAVE system, surrounded by four screens (three wall screens and a ﬂoor screen). The side length is 3.0m. The DLP
projectors (Christie Digital Systems, MirageS+3K), 3000 ANSI lumens, are located behind the wall screens. Another
projector is placed on the ceiling for the ﬂoor. The image resolution is 1050×1050 in each screen. 14 sets of infrared
emitters are placed around the CAVE room for the image synchronization. An optical tracking system (Vicon MX)
is used for the head and the hand tracking. Four cameras are installed on the ceiling.

FIG. 10: BRAVE system installed at Earth Simulator Center.

A Linux-based computer (SGI Asterism Ultra AO532) with 256 GB memory and two sets of NVIDIA Quadro

PLEX 1000 Model IV is used. Two Quadro FX 5600 are installed in each Quadro PLEX.

CAVElib (ver. 3.2) is used for the basic API in all applications used in the BRAVE, including VFIVE. For the

tracking system, Trackd is used.

B. Applications of VFIVE

BRAVE system is used mainly for geoscientiﬁc data produced by large-scale computer simulation, such as typhoon,

geodynamo, mantle convection, magnetosphere simulations.

A lot of visualization methods and functions implemented in VFIVE were developed at BRAVE such as the volume

rendering, animation, VTK incorporation, and Region of Interest (ROI). See our paper[2] for details.

1. Geodynamo

One of the most actively applied visualizations of VFIVE in the BRAVE is for geodynamo simulations. The
purpose of this simulation is to understand the generation mechanism of the geomagnetic ﬁeld. Large-scale geodynamo
simulations[11, 12] are performed on Earth Simulator Supercomputer. Since the spatial resolution of this calculation
is the highest in this kind of simulations, the produced data size is enormous. For the geodynamo simulation, the
data loaded to VFIVE usually amounts to 17 GB in total (17 sets of 1 GB data).

The visualization of output data of geodynamo simulations is much more diﬃcult compared with a simple CFD
data with the same size. Three-dimensional variables that should be visualized in the geodynamo simulation are four
vector ﬁelds (ﬂow ﬁeld, vorticity ﬁeld, magnetic ﬁeld, and electrical current ﬁeld) and, at least, two ﬁelds (temperature
and pressure).

Through interactive visualizations with VFIVE, a new structure of the electric ﬁeld was found. When the “Field
Line” method of VFIVE was applied to ﬁelds, they found that the magnetic ﬁeld lines tend to be straight lines (this
was expected), and electric current ﬁeld lines tend to have coil-like structure (this was also expected). However, they
were surprised that some of the electric current coils exhibit a torus-shape in which a line covers a closed surface of

8

FIG. 11: An example of scientiﬁc discovery made possible by VFIVE. The lines of force of the electric ﬁeld current (blue curves
in the ﬁgure) in a geodynamo simulation data exhibit an expected structure of a closed torus-like structure.

a torus. The pink curves in Fig. 11 are magnetic ﬁeld lines, and the blue curves are electric current lines. The blue
object in near the center of the picture is the closed-torus of the electric current line found in CAVE. This would
probably be the most important discovery by VFIVE[11].

2. User Interface using Mobile Devices

FIG. 12: A mobile interface applied in VFIVE visualization. Visualization methods as well as parameters are automatically
recorded through a VFIVE visualization session. (a) The recorded data are shown on the device display. (b) The user speciﬁes
a visualization method in the list, then their internal parameters. (c) In this case, an isosurface level of a scalar ﬁeld (cloud
water density) was selected in the previous step (b) and the isosurface visualization method is re-applied with the that level
and shown. (d) In this snapshot, stream lines with a vortical structure (a typhoon) was selectively displayed by re-applying a
proper sets of visualization parameters, that are the releasing positions of the stream lines.

Recently, researchers at Earth Simulator Center[13] have developed a new user interface for CAVE systems. The
purpose of this interface is to control VFIVE with mobile devices such as iPad, iPhone, and Android devices. See
Fig. 12.

In this version of VFIVE, a user brings a mobile device while the VFIVE application is running in CAVE. A newly
developed web application runs on the device. A list of visualization methods is shown on the device display. It
tells visualization methods that have been used in the VFIVE session so far. The user can select one of the methods
though the usual touch-display interface of the mobile device. The display then shows a detailed list of visualization
parameters with radio buttons and check boxes. They are parameters that have been applied in the session.

When buttons or boxes are selected, the information is sent to the running VFIVE through the wireless network.

VFIVE re-apply the selected visualization operations with speciﬁed parameters.

It is common in VFIVE visualization that its user applies a lot of visualization methods with many diﬀerent
visualization parameters in each method.
In this improvement of VFIVE, a sequence of visualization operations
applied by the user is automatically stored. The user can make VFIVE “remember” the best visualizations from the
history through the mobile device.

9

VII. COMPLEXCOPE AT NIFS

A. Hardware

CompleXcope (Fig. 13) is a CAVE system installed at National Institute for Fusion Science (NIFS). The conﬁgu-

ration is a cube with three walls and ﬂoor. The side length is 3m.

FIG. 13: Overview of CompleXcope at National Institute for Fusion Science. A cubic CAVE with 3m sides. This CAVE system
is used for nuclear fusion science and plasma physics.

An optical system (ARTtrack) is used for the head and hand tracking. Five cameras are installed on the ceiling.
Three-dimensional sound system is also installed. Four DLT projectors (Christie Mirage S+3K) are used. The image
resolution is 1050 x 1050 for each screen.

Two sets of computer systems are connected. One is Linux-based system (SGI Asterism) with 32 GB memory and
Quadro FX 5800 GPU. Another is Windows-based PC cluster system. Two PCs (HP Z820) are connected. Each PC
has 64 GB memory and two sets of NVIDIA Quadro 5000. For the basic APIs, CAVElib (ver. 3.2.1) and Trackd are
used.

Several application programs, including VFIVE, are used in CompleXcope. Among them, an application program
was developed to visualize a high temperature plasma equilibrium state in LHD (Large Helical Device) of National
Institute for Fusion Science[14].

B. Applications of VFIVE

Magnetic reconnection[15] is one of the most important processes in plasma physics observed in laboratory exper-
iments, magnetospheric substorms, solar ﬂares, and so on. The magnetic energy is converted into plasma particle
kinetic energy through the magnetic reconnection. When two magnetic ﬁeld lines with an angle, a reconnection takes
place at so-called X-point. The plasma particles, which are composed of ions and electrons, exhibit highly complex
motions around the X-point. It is important to examine these particle trajectories.

A new function has been added on the VFIVE at CompleXcope. The purpose is to grasp the three-dimensional
complex orbits of the particles. Particle motions under electromagnetic ﬁelds are calculated in real time[16]. This
is a kind of test particle simulation incorporated into VR visualization. First, VFIVE reads a snapshot data of
electromagnetic ﬁelds obtained by a plasma simulation. As in other VFIVE applications, user can analyze the
electromagnetic ﬁelds through various kinds of visualization methods implemented in the standard VFIVE. After
selecting a newly added menu panel of VFIVE, the user speciﬁes an initial position of a test particle, an ion or

10

FIG. 14: Visualization of plasma particle simulation data with VFIVE.

electron, with the wand. This particle is released with an initial velocity vector, which is a function of position
calculated from the simulation data. The equation of motion of the particle is integrated in real time by a numerical
integrator with the electromagnetic forces of the loaded data. One can observe the test particle motion in 3D in the
CompleXcope’s VR space. Refer[16] for details of the implementation and scientiﬁc results with this new visualization
method.

In the above visualization, plasma particle motions are analyzed under ﬁxed electromagnetic ﬁelds, assuming no
temporal variations. Recently, Ohno and Ohtani[17] have improved this method for dynamic analysis with temporal
variations. A set of electromagnetic ﬁelds at tens of diﬀerent time steps, which were produced by a supercomputer
simulation, was transferred to the local HDD of CompleXcope. VFIVE reads the sequence of ﬁelds one after another.
The user can apply any visualization method implemented in VFIVE to a speciﬁed time step data. Selected visual-
ization method, for example the particle tracer, is applied not only to the start time step, but also every step after
that. This makes an animated visualization of particle tracer under time varying ﬁelds. After the ﬁrst cycle of this
method, calculated visualization objects, such as polygons for the particle obits, are stored. The stored data can be
replayed later, making it possible to review quickly the whole animated visualization.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have summarized both the developments and scientiﬁc achievements made possible by VFIVE in

several CAVE systems in Japan.

In contrast to commercially available visualization applications for CAVEs, our visualization application VFIVE
has only a basic set of visualization methods. The compactness of the application is a natural consequence of its
history. It was ﬁrst developed in late 1990s by simulation researchers who were eager to analyze their own simulation
data in a CAVE. Implemented visualization methods and user interface were, therefore, minimum. Since then, VFIVE
has been improved under constant feedbacks from a broader range of users where CAVE systems are installed. The
compactness of the program has helped the users and developers adding new functions.

Through continued developments and improvements, VFIVE has become a practical tool for scientiﬁc visualization

in CAVE systems and fruitful scientiﬁc results have been attained by this application.

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 19740346, 23340128 and Takahashi Industrial and
It was also performed with the support and under the auspices of the National

Economic Research Foundation.

Acknowledgement

Institute for Fusion Science (NIFS) Collaborative Research Program (NIFS09KDBN004).

11

[1] Akira Kageyama and Nobuaki Ohno. Immersive VR Visualizations by VFIVE: Development. International Journal of

Modeling, Simulation, and Scientiﬁc Computing, this issue.

[2] A Kageyama, T Hayashi, R Horiuchi, K Watanabe, and T Sato. Data Visualization by a Virtual Reality System. In 16th

International Conference on the Numerical Simulation of Plasmas, pages 138–142, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 1998.

[3] Akira Kageyama, Yuichi Tamura, and Tetsuya Sato. Scientiﬁc Visualization in Physics Research by CompleXcope CAVE

System. Trans. Viurtual Reality Soc. Japan, 4:717–722, 1999.

[4] Akira Kageyama, Yuichi Tamura, and Tetsuya Sato. Visualization of Vector Field by Virtual Reality. Progress of Theoretical

Physics, Supplement, 138:665–673, 2000.

[5] P. A. Davidson. An Introduction to Magnetohydrodynamics (Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics). Cambridge

University Press, 2001.

[6] Kaori Murata and Akira Kageyama. Virtual Reality Visualization of Frozen-in Vector Fields. Plasma and Fusion Research,

6:2406023–1–5, 2011.

[7] Akira Kageyama, Youhei Masada, Yuki Yamaura, Daisuke Meno, and Kouhei Yamada. Immersive Visualization in π-
CAVE. In International Conference on Modeling and Simulation Technology (JSST 2011), pages 286–290, Tokyo, 2011.
[8] Akira Kageyama, Youhei Masada, Yuki Yamaura, Daisuke Meno, and Kouhei Yamada. Immersive Visualization in π-
CAVE. In Yasuyuki Nagano, editor, International Symposium on Disaster Simulation & Structural Safety in the Next
Generation (DS’11), pages 287–289, Kobe, 2011.

[9] Daisuke Meno, Akira Kageyama, and Youhei Masada. Visualization Software with VR Juggler for Immersive Virtual

Reality Environment. In International Conference on Simulation Technology, pages 387–389, 2012.

[10] K. Kashiyama, T. Takada, T. Yamazaki, A. Kageyama, N. Ohno, and H. Miyachi. Application of VR Technique to Pre- and
Post-Processing for Wind Flow Simulation in Urban Area. In 9th International Conference on Construction Applications
of Virtual Reality, pages 1–6, University of Sydney, 2009.

[11] Akira Kageyama, Takehiro Miyagoshi, and Tetsuya Sato. Formation of current coils in geodynamo simulations. Nature,

454(7208):1106–9, August 2008.

[12] Takehiro Miyagoshi, Akira Kageyama, and Tetsuya Sato. Zonal ﬂow formation in the Earth’s core. Nature, 463(7282):793–

796, February 2010.

[13] Shintaro Kawahara and Fumiaki Araki. Eﬀective VR Visualization using Selectable Operation List.

In International

Conference on Simulation Technology, pages 422–424, 2012.

[14] Hiroaki Ohtani, Yasuhiro Suzuki, Akira Kageyama, Ryutaro Kanno, Seiji Ishiguro, and Mamoru Shoji. Plasma Physics
and Fusion Science by Virtual-Reality System. In International Conference on Simulation Technology, volume 254, pages
394–397, 2012.

[15] Dieter Biskamp. Magnetic Reconnection in Plasmas (Cambridge Monographs on Plasma Physics). Cambridge University

Press, 2005.

[16] Hiroaki Ohtani and Ritoku Horiuchi. Scientiﬁc Visualization of Magnetic Reconnection Simulation Data by the CAVE

Virtual Reality System. Plasma and Fusion Research, 3:054–054, 2008.

[17] Nobuaki Ohno, Hiroaki Ohtani, Daisuke Matsuoka, and Ritoku Horiuchi. Visualization of Particle Trajectories in Time-
Varying Electromagnetic Fields by CAVE-Type Virtual Reality System. Plasma and Fusion Research, 7:1401001–1401001,
2012.

