A Review into eHealth Services and Therapies: Potential for Virtual 
Therapeutic Communities - Supporting People with Severe 
Personality Disorder

Dr Alice Good
University of Portsmouth
UK

Arunasalam Sambhanthan
University of Portsmouth
UK

ABSTRACT
eHealth has expanded hugely over the last fifteen years and continues to 
evolve,  providing  greater  benefits  for  patients,  health  care  professionals 
and  providers  alike.  The  technologies  that  support  these  systems  have 
become increasingly more sophisticated and have progressed significantly 
from  standard  databases,  used  for  patient  records,  to  highly  advanced 
Virtual  Reality  (VR)  systems  for  the  treatment  of  complex  mental  health 
illnesses.  The  scope  of  this  paper  is  to  initially  explore  e-Health, 
particularly  in  relation  to  technologies  supporting  the  treatment  and 
management of wellbeing in mental health.   It then provides a case study 
of  how technology in e-Health  can  lend  itself  to  an application  that  could 
support and maintain the wellbeing of people with a severe mental illness.  
The  case study  uses  Borderline Personality Disorder  as  an  example, but 
could  be  applicable  in  many  other  areas,  including  depression,  anxiety, 
addiction  and PTSD.  This type  of application demonstrates how e-Health 
can  empower the  individuals  using  it but  also potentially  reducing  the 
impact upon health care providers and services.   

INTRODUCTION

ICT systems have pervaded our lives over the last couple of decades and 
the  health  care  system  is  no  exception.    A  relatively  new  buzz  word,  E-
health is essentially an umbrella term that directly correlates to health and 
computing.  Eysenbach (2001) explains it in the following manner:

     “e-health is an emerging field in the intersection of medical informatics, 
public  health  and  business,  referring  to  health  services  and  information 
delivered or enhanced through the Internet and related technologies. In a 
broader  sense,  the  term  characterizes  not  only  a  technical  development, 
but also a state-of-mind, a way of thinking, an attitude, and a commitment 
for  networked,  global  thinking,  to  improve  health  care  locally,  regionally, 
and  worldwide  by  using  information  and  communication  technology”. (p. 
20)

The  term  arose  in  the  late  90s  when  other  e-words, such  as  e-business 
and  e-commerce  etc  were  also  created  for  the  purpose  of  portraying  an 
increasing  growth  of  the  merging  of  computing  into  society.    The 
convergence  of  health  and  technology  has  led  to  the  development  of 

1

including:  electronic  health  records;  Health 
systems  and  services, 
Information Systems; telemedicine; communicative wearable and portable 
systems, diagnostic ICT systems, well being management and monitoring.

Health  Information  Systems  have  a  huge  impact  upon  patients,  health 
care professionals and health providers.  There is the potential for patients 
to be more empowered as they are provided with better quality information 
on  their  conditions.    They  are  then able  to  take  a  more  pro-active 
approach to taking responsibility for their own well being and management 
of  their  illnesses.    Health  care  staffs  are able  to  communicate  in  a  far 
superior way than previously, with the sharing  and access of information, 
and advanced methods in monitoring patients.  Health care providers can
run a more efficient and effective service by using technology to organize
resources to facilitate greater productivity.

E-health also  offers  considerable  benefits  to  rural  areas,  particularly  in 
developed countries.  For  example, telemedicine  can  be used  to  increase
the  accessibility of  healthcare facilities  to  rural  areas.  There  are  however 
examples  in  less  developed  countries  too.    The  issue  of  reaching  out  to 
rural communities, with the aim to provide specialized health care, has in 
recent years seen the development of a telemedicine system in Sri Lanka.  
The  system  is  known  as  Vidusuwa (Sudhagar  et  al.,  2009).  A study  was 
conducted as a case study for the implementation of e-clinics in Sri Lanka, 
and has since evolved  into  a  new  e-business  model  for  enhanced 
healthcare  delivery in  the  developing  nations.  This  model  provided an 
electronic  platform  through  which  specialized consultation  could  be 
facilitated and subsequent prognosis and treatment provided. This is also
an  e-Solution  that  makes  appropriate  use  of  Electronic  Medical  Records 
(EMR)  and  Telemedicine  technologies  which  enables  the  patient  to 
consult  a  Specialist  through  e-Consultation.  The  main  benefit  of  this 
solution  is then enabling specialized  healthcare  to  rural  areas. There  are 
many more  examples  worldwide,  indicating  the  importance  of  technology 
in the provision of a more effective and accessible health service.

E-HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND THEIR IMPACT UPON WELLBEING

E-Health lends itself  well to  a  whole  host of  applications that  support the 
wellbeing and management of mental illness, designed both from a patient 
and  healthcare  provider  perspective.  ICT  based  support  is  suggested  as 
being  an  effective  and  economically  viable  intervention,  particularly  for 
anxiety and mood disorders (Newman et al., 2011). The extent of support 
for people with psychiatric disorders enabled via ICTs continues to expand 
both in terms of development  and popularity.  Certainly, since the  advent 
of Web 2.0 technologies in 2004, there has been an increase in the use of 
ICTs  in  facilitating  support  for  people  with  mental  health  problems.   Web 
2.0 technologies  essentially facilitate interaction  between  users,  including 
social networking and collaboration. A particularly successful application of 
Web technologies includes 3D virtual worlds, such as Second Life (Gorini 
et al., 2008). 

Systems  such  as  emailing,  discussion  forums,  face  book,  Skype,  chat 
rooms, VR applications and Second Life are growing in their utilization as 
2

to 

traditional  methods  (Neal  & 
an  additional  support  mechanism 
McKenzie, 2010).  Research  shows that  both  social  networking  sites  and 
discussion forums  have decreased the sense of 'feeling alone’ for people 
with mental health problems (Neal & McKenzie, 2010).  Furthermore, it is 
proposed  that there  is  a  direct  correlation  between  mental  illness  and 
loneliness,  and  that  treatment  for  severe  mental  illness  does  not  often 
consider  the  potential  that  social  networking  can  have  in  reducing  the 
impact  of  loneliness  (Perese  &  Wolf,  2005).    Interestingly,  research  by 
Graffeo  &  La  Barbera  (2009)  compared  a  number  of  online  therapies, 
which  included  the  use  of  discussion  forums;  chat  rooms;  Skype;  Face 
Book; VR applications and Second life.  The findings suggested that both 
Second Life and Face book proved to be a more popular option. 

The economic benefits of ICTs used in treating and supporting people with 
mental illness are also an important consideration. Computer and Internet
assisted assessment methods and therapy programs have the potential to 
the  cost-effectiveness  of  standardized psychotherapeutic 
increase 
treatments  by  reducing  contact  time  with the  therapist,  increasing clients’ 
participation in therapeutic activities outside the standard clinical hour, and 
streamline 
their 
input  and  processing  of clients’  data  related 
participation in  therapeutic  activities (Taylor  & Luce 2003). In the  case of 
second life, this becomes quite practical and even financially feasible due 
to  the  free  availability  of  Second  Life  for  everyone  with access  to  the
Internet. 

to 

VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS SUPPORTING E-HEALTH THERAPY

An  example  of  ehealth  therapy  can  be  seen  in  VR applications.  VR  has 
developed  immensely  over  recent  years  and  we  have  seen  a  continuing 
development  in  the  application  of  VR  in  treating  medical  and  more 
recently,  psychiatric  conditions.  VR  has  been  used  to  treat  a  range  of 
psychiatric  conditions  including  Obsessive  Compulsive  Disorder  (OCD) 
(Kim  et al 2008), as  well as  phobias and Post  Traumatic  Stress Disorder 
(PTSD)  (Gorrindo  et  al.,  2009).  More specifically,  recent research  has 
shown  how  second  life  can  be  used  to  support  people  with  psychiatric 
disorders,  including  the  rehabilitation  of  people  suffering  with  PTSD.
(Anderson et al., 2009; Freeman, 2008). 

The application of VR as a therapeutic tool has been used in a number of 
mental  health  disorders  but  is  particularly  useful  in  exposure  therapy. 
Virtual  environments  enable  a  highly  visual,  immersive  presence  in  a 
simulated  virtual  world  and  therefore  are  effective  in  creating  visual  and 
auditory environments to treat phobias and PTSD.

VR Applications used to treat psychosis

VR  applications  have been  used  effectively  to  treat  patients  with 
schizophrenia  (Freeman,  2008;  Kim  et  al., 2007).  Understanding  and 
treating  schizophrenia  requires  consideration  of  patients’  interactions  in 
the social world. Withdrawal and avoidance of other people is frequent in 
schizophrenia,  leading  to  isolation  and  rumination,  and VR  interactive 
facilitating the 
immersive  computer  environments  offer  potential 

in 

3

tests  of  putative  causal  factors;

understanding  of  psychosis.  Freeman  (2008)  used  seven  applications  of 
virtual social environments to understand and treat schizophrenia namely: 
symptom assessment; identification of symptom markers; establishment of 
predictive  factors;
investigation  of  the 
differential prediction of symptoms; determination of toxic elements in the 
environment and development of treatment. An impairment is social skills 
is  a  recognized trait  in  schizophrenia  and  therefore  the  use  of  VR  to 
measure social skills and perception, and then to provide training in social 
skills (Kim et al., 2007)  has potential in increasing patients sense of well 
being  and  social  inclusion.  The  use  of  VR  with the  ascription  of 
personalities  and  mental  states  to  virtual  people  holds  great  promise  in 
furthering the understanding and treatment of psychosis.

VR Applications used to treat neurosis

Research  into  how  VR  can  be  used  to  treat  phobias  is  longstanding. 
Studies into using VR in treating a fear of flying were carried out as early 
as 1996 & 1998 (Rothbaum et al., 1996; Widerhold et al., 1998).   Recent 
research reports on the application of VR to treat patients with a number of 
phobias  including:  fear  of  flying;  fear  of  heights;  social  phobia/public 
speaking  anxiety;  spider  phobia;  agoraphobia;  body  image  disturbance 
and  obese  patients  (Kim  et  al.,  2008;  Lynsey  &  Nicholas,  2007).  One 
specific  example  is  that  of  Gorrindo  et  al. (2009) who  developed an 
exposure based therapy as an effective treatment method for patients with 
mental disorders such as social phobia, specific phobia and post traumatic 
stress disorder. This involved repeatedly presenting a patient with anxiety-
producing  stimuli  with  the  goal  of  desensitizing a  patient’s  anxious 
response.  With  the  use  of  VR goggles,  the  patient  is  presented  with 
realistic images of the specific issue. The therapist would have the control 
of  intensity  of  stimulus  given,  so  that  the  level  of  anxiety  needed  for  the 
patient could be desensitized without overwhelming the patient.   

A detailed example of VR applications being used to treat social phobia is 
portrayed  in  the  work  of  Anderson  et  al. (2005).  When  treating  social 
phobia, the patient is asked to read a speech in front of a virtual audience. 
Prior to the simulation, the therapist creates a fear-hierarchy consisting of 
increasingly  anxiety-provoking  simulations  which  are  customized to  each 
patients based on the degree of treatment needed. The patient is provided
with a hand mounted display through which a virtual lecture hall is created. 
The therapist then controls the number of audience with differing response 
types, such  as  interesting,  bored or even  walks out. The  above research 
conducted  Anderson  et  al. (2005)  shows  a  clear  therapeutic  means  for 
treating  anxiety  disorder.  The  treatment  consisted  of  eight  individual 
therapy sessions, including four sessions of anxiety management training 
and four sessions of exposure therapy using a virtual audience, according 
to  a  standardised  treatment  manual.  Participants  are  then  requested to 
complete  a  standardized  questionnaire  assessing  public  – speaking 
anxiety  at  pre-treatment,  post-treatment  and  3  months  follow  up.  Results 
showed  decreases on  all self-report  measures of  public-speaking  anxiety 
from  pre- to  post-treatment,  which  were  maintained  at  follow-up.  This 
study  provides  preliminary evidence  that  a  cognitive-behavioral  treatment 
using  VR for  exposure  to  public  speaking  may  reduce  public-speaking. 
4

The same therapy can be used to treat a fear of flying, where the patient 
would through  a  virtual  airport,  and  wait  for  a  boarding  call.    They  would
board an airplane and experience the take off, cruising and landing of the 
flight.  The  intensity  of  experience  would  be  controlled  by  the  therapist 
based on the degree of anxiety a patient has (Anderson et al., 2005).  . 

VR treating Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)

The use of VR applications in treating PTSD is particularly relevant given 
the reported co-occurrence of BPD and PTSD found in patients (Heffernan 
&  Cloitre 2000; Gunderson  &  Sabo, 1993).  Research  into combat-related 
PTSD  found  that  76%  of  them  also  presented  with  a  diagnosis  of  BPD 
(Southwick  et  al.,  1993).    VR is  well  utilised  in  the  treatment  of  PTSD 
(Riva,  2010;  Rizzo  et  al.,  2005).  The  event  which  is  known  to  trigger 
traumatic stress is created using virtual reality. One example of this type of 
application evaluated the effectiveness of VR therapy for a PTSD patient, 
who  was  also  a survivor  of  September  11th World  Trade  Centre  attack
(Difede  &  Hoffman,  2002).  The  therapy  was  designed to  replicate  the 
World  Trade  Centre attack through  VR.  This  featured: jets  that  crashed
with animated explosions and sound effects, virtual people jumping to their 
deaths from the burning buildings, towers collapsing, and dust clouds.  All 
contributing  factors to  bring  the  traumatic  event  live.  The  treatment was 
reported to be successful on reducing acute PTSD symptoms. Depression 
and PTSD symptoms as measured by the Beck Depression Inventory and 
the Clinician Administered PTSD Scale indicated  a large (83%) reduction 
in  depression,  and  large (90%)  reduction  in  PTSD  symptoms  after 
completing  VR  exposure  therapy.  The  results  from  the  research  suggest 
that  VR  exposure  therapy  shows  great  potential  in  treating  acute  PTSD
(Difede & Hoffman, 2002).

Another  example  of  treatment  of  PTSD  is  portrayed  in  a recent  study 
known  as Virtual  Iraq  (Geraldi  et  al.,  2008).   This is  a  VR  based  therapy 
environment  developed  for  treating  persons  from  the  armed  forces 
affected  by  anxiety  and  PTSD  due  to their  involvement  in  the Iraq  and 
Afghanistan  war.  The idea  is  that  a  high  stress environment  is  created. 
The  environment  features gunshots  and  other  realistic sound  effects  to 
create a replicated war scene in the virtual world so that the patient could 
be exposed a realistic simulation. The therapist would control the amount 
of  simulation  through  a  key  board.  Pilot  data  suggest  that  the simulation 
was  helpful  in  reducing  PTSD  symptoms  in  six  of  eight participants  after 
seven  sessions (Geraldi  et  al.,  2008).  This  could  also  be  a  possible 
therapeutic  method  which  could  be  launched  in  a  Second  Life  platform 
and utilised in a non lab setting.  Particularly, this kind of a therapy would 
be  economically  and  technologically  feasible  for  day  to  day  clinical 
practices, due to the fact  it requires just basic  computer applications with 
internet  connections.  An  important  consideration  is  that  any  VR  system
needs to  be designed  to be user friendly for  therapist who may  not  have 
technical expertise (Annett & Bischof, 2010).

5

An  Overview  of  Second  Life  in  treating  and  supporting  people  with 
mental illness

Whilst  VR  applications  are  certainly  developing  in  terms  of  variety  and 
numbers in the treatment of psychiatric conditions, we are also seeing an 
emergence  of  related  Second  Life  applications  used  particularly  as  a 
support tool.  With approximately fifteen million users reported at the end 
of  2008,  like  Facebook,  Second  Life  is  recognized as  an  important 
meeting place for interaction (K Zero Universe, 2009).

A  recent  survey  on  healthcare  related  activities  shows  that  patient 
education  and  awareness  building  as  the  major  health  related  activity 
undertaken  through Second  Life.    The second  largest  group of  sites  was
that  of  support  groups (Beard  et  al.,  2009).  Research  by  Norris  (2009) 
looked  at  the  growth  of  healthcare  support  groups  in  virtual  worlds  and 
reported  that  mental  health  groups  featured  the largest  number  of 
members at 32% of the total users of Second Life. In terms of categories 
of  groups,  15%  of  the  health  support  groups  in  Second  Life  were 
dedicated  to  mental  health.  Second  Life  as  a  social  networking medium 
then holds some potential in facilitating support and information sharing for 
people with BPD.  

In terms of treatment, there are some examples of Second Life facilitating 
therapy.  It  is  reported  that  virtual  worlds  can  be  effective  in  confronting 
phobias and addictions as well as offering potential in experimenting with 
new  behaviors  and  means  of  expression.    Research  shows  that Second 
Life has been a usual tool in facilitating exposure treatment for anxiety and 
behavioral activation for depression (Newman et al., 2011).

Personalized Therapy in Second Life

The  concept  of  personalized therapy  is  another  area  currently  being 
researched  using  3-D  virtual  worlds.    Second  life  has  been utilized to 
create  a  personalized-health  (p-health)  environment  through  which  a 
personalized therapy  could  be  provided  to  the  patient  regardless  of 
physical  and  time  constraints  (Gorini  et  al.,  2008).  The  authors  list  the 
three main focus areas of p-health as follows. 

 An extended sense of presence: P-health uses advanced simulations 
(3-D virtual  worlds) to transform health  guidelines and provisions into 
experience. In p-health, users do not receive abstract information but 
live meaningful experiences.

 An  extended sense  of  community  (social  presence): P-health  uses 
hybrid  social  interaction  and  dynamics  of  group  sessions  to  provide 
each  user  with  targeted—but  also  anonymous,  if  required—social 
support in both the physical and virtual world.

 Real-time feedback between the physical and virtual worlds: P-health 
uses  bio  and  activity  sensors  and  devices  (PDAs,  mobile  phones)  to 
6

track both the behaviour and the health status of the user in real time 
and  to  provide  targeted  suggestions  and  guidelines.  The  feedback 
activity  is  twofold:  (1)  behaviour  in  physical  world  influences  the 
experience in the virtual one (if I eat too much and I do not exercise, 
my  avatar  will  become  fatter),  and  (2)  behaviour  in  the  virtual  world 
influences the experience in the real one (if I participate in the virtual 
support  group,  I  can  exchange  SMS  messages  with  the  other 
participants during the day) (Gorini et al., 2008).

The review highlights a number of examples of VR applications that have 
been designed to provide therapy for people with mental health disorders. 
Exposure therapies using VR are well documented, particularly in cases of 
PTSD.  Second  Life  is  reported  as  being  heavily  utilized in  facilitating 
health support groups and providing health information, particularly in the 
area  of  mental health.  Then  there  is  the  concept  of personalized therapy 
and  p-health  environments,  which could  have  some  potential  for  the 
development  of  specifically  tailored  3-D  virtual  world  environments  for 
people  with  mental  illnesses. Finally,  the  economic  benefit  of  ICT  based 
support and therapy is also highlighted.

3-D  VIRTUAL  THERAPEUTIC  COMMUNITIES:  AN  E-HEALTH
APPLICATION FOR MANAGING MENTAL HEALTH

In  this  section,  the  paper  will  explore the  potential  for  utilizing  e-Health 
technologies in developing a 3-D virtual therapeutic community for people 
with mental  illness and  uses  Borderline  Personality  Disorder  as  an 
example.  A  case  study  is  provided  of  a  therapeutic  community  used  to 
treat  Borderline  Personality  Disorder.    The  case  study  explores  the 
potential  of  a  long  term  cost  effective  model  of  treatment,  which also 
empowers its users. 

Introducing Borderline Personality Disorder and support systems

Borderline  Personality  Disorder  (BPD)  is  a  contentious  subject,  not  least 
due to  the  lack  of  support available  to  patients  presenting  this  diagnosis. 
People with this disorder exhibit a range of debilitating and self destructive 
behaviors 
instable 
including:  depression,  poor  social  skills  and 
relationships; chemical dependency; eating disorders and suicide attempts 
(APA,  1994).  Furthermore,  approximately  60-70%  people  with  BPD  are 
reported  to  commit  suicide,  with  approximately  10%  actually  being 
successful (Oldham, 2006, cited in NICE, 2009). The economic impact is a 
significant consideration with people with BPD in the UK reported as more 
likely  to  seek  psychiatric  intervention  than  people  with  other  psychiatric 
disorders, and incurring primary care costs at almost twice the amount as 
patients with other mental illnesses (Rendu et al., 2002)

Research shows that therapeutic communities (TCs) have been shown to 
be  a  valid  contribution  into  the  significant  improvement  into  the  patients' 
ability to cope with their negative behavioral and emotional issues (Norton, 
&  Hinshelwood,  (1996); Campling,
(1999).  However,  the  significant 
economic cost of treating people BPD in relation to other mental illnesses 

7

poses difficulties in providing adequate treatment via TCs (NCCMH, 2009).  
In  addition,  people  with  BPD  often  require  high  levels  of  support,  which 
can  result  in  emergency  hospital  admissions  (NCCMH,  2009). The  over-
riding  issue  is  on  providing  adequate  support  for  people  with  BPD  and 
whether  there  is  potential  for  technology  enabled  support.    Whilst  the 
advent  of  social  networking  has  given  rise  to  online  support  groups  for 
people  with  BPD,  there  is  potential  scope  to  utilise  resources  such  as 
virtual, 3D environments in providing further support.  This could also have 
some impact  upon  reducing  emergency  hospital  admissions,  enabling  an 
increased  sense  of  well  being  for  the  individual  with  BPD,  as  well  as  a 
possibility for a decrease in the economic impact to the health services.

Therapeutic Community Model, a cost effective treatment

The  concept  of  therapeutic  communities  first  arose  from  the  treatment  of 
veterans  suffering  with  PTSD  from  the  Second  World War  (Main,  1946). 
The Henderson Hospital that emerged in 1947, and recently closed due to 
lack  of  funding,  is  an  example  of  a  TC  featuring  four  specific  themes: 
democratisation,  permissiveness,  reality  confrontation  and  communalism 
(Rapoport, 1960).  TCs essentially incorporate a democratic ethos and are 
run with less formal roles from the professionals, with both members and 
professionals  having  an  equal  say  in  the  organizations  and  management 
(Norton, K (1992).  Research into the effectiveness of TCs, show that they 
are  a  viable  and  productive  method  for  treating  BPD  (Dolan  et  al,  1992; 
Campling,  P.,  1999).  They  have  been  shown  to  be  more  effective  and 
accepted  than  traditional  hospitals,  due  to  the  lack  of  strict  treatment 
regimes (NICE, 2009). 

In  assessing  the  impact  of  TC  based  treatment  on  core  personality 
disorder symptoms, research shows that in using the Borderline Syndrome 
Index  (BSI),  there  was  a  significant  reduction  in  symptoms  one  year 
following  discharge  (Dolan  et  al,  1997).  Studies  by  Chiesa  et  al. (1996), 
Davies et  al. (1999)  and  Dolan  et  al. (1996),  cited  in  Davies  (2003),  and 
looked at the economic  benefits of TCs.  The results showed a reduction 
in primary care costs, one year following treatment as well as a decrease 
in the utilization of services (Davies, 2003). Furthermore, the actual cost of 
treating  people  with  BPD  within  a  TC  setting  could  be  recovered  by  the 
state  within two  years  (Dolan et  al.,  1996).  TCs  could then  be viewed  as 
an effective method for treating BPD as well as reducing economic impact 
in the reduction of services required following successful treatment.

User-led informal networks of care in therapeutic community 

In  terms  of  e-Health  technologies  that  facilitate  support  specifically  for 
people  with BPD,  there  are  a  number  of online resources including  'BPD 
Today' and various support groups facilitated by Yahoo Groups and Face 
book.  These  also  include  networks  that  exemplify  the  principles  of 
therapeutic  communities.  A  recent  work  of  Rigby  &  Ashman  (2008) 
proposed  service  user-led 
informal networks  of  care  in  therapeutic 
community  (TC)  practice  as  a  cost  effective  solution  for  BPD,  which  is 
focused  on  rural  communities.  The  network  features  a  well-established 

8

internet  messaging  and chat  room  facilities  uniquely  structured  and 
moderated  to  encompass therapeutic  community  principles  and  provide 
equality  of  access across  a  huge  mixed  urban  and  rural  catchment  area. 
Both  hardware and  software  are  inexpensive,  easily  transferable  to 
similar services  and  could  be  modified  to  suit  other  applications.    The 
system  has  developed to  provide  out-of-hours  support  and  to  extend  the 
work  of  a number  of  day  therapeutic  communities  for service  users 
with moderate to severe personality disorders.

TCs have been shown to be an effective method of treatment and already, 
we  are  seeing  ICT,  user-led  networks  of  patients  that  incorporate  TC 
principles, though this is limited to emails and discussion forums.  There is 
huge  potential  for  utilizing technologies  such  as  Second  Life in  hosting  a 
virtual  TC  specifically 
  The  review  earlier 
for  people  with  BPD. 
demonstrated  how  popular  Second  Life  is  for  enabling  social  interaction 
within  health  support  groups,  particularly  mental  health.    Second  Life 
would certainly enable an enhanced sense of immersion and presence as 
opposed to static methods of communication and interaction. 

DISCUSSION

is 

there 

further  potential 

Whilst the scope for a support group for people BPD in Second Life seems 
likely, 
that 
incorporated TC principles.  Furthermore, given the reported effectiveness 
of  VR  applications  in  treating  PTSD  and  other  mental  health  problems, 
there  could  be  potential  in  treating  some  of  the  traits  of  BPD,  including 
reality confrontation of debilitating behaviors. 

to  develop  an  environment 

Such  a  proposal  will  undoubtedly  require  the  collaboration  of  specialized
professionals  and  the  co-operation  of  outreach  services,  as  well  as  the 
input of end users. In terms of the design process, an end-user centered 
approach  would  be  applied  where  clients  presenting  a  diagnosis  of  BPD 
contribute to the viability of this work, along with professionals specializing 
in the treatment of this condition.  A triangulation approach will be applied 
in the requirements stage, using a focus group  and interviews to validate 
the results and to provide a deeper understanding.

A Model of User-Led Networks  

The technology-based  user-led network system  in supporting people with 
BPD  in rural communities (Rigby & Ashman, 2008) exemplifies principles 
of  effective  treatment  via  TCs.  The  proposal  of  a  therapeutic  community 
facilitated in Second Life would seek to draw on the principles advocated 
here:  


To  provide  greater  containment  of  anxiety  and 
total hospitalization.
To extend therapeutic community principles outside the working day 
real-life 
allowing  more  opportunities 
opportunities to take responsibility for self and others.
To  promote  attachment  to,  and  exchange within  a  group,  both to 
avoid  the  repetition  of  unhelpful  dynamics between  individuals and 
to practice appropriate help-seeking behaviors.

for  new learning  and 

to  avoid 





9



To  reduce 
beyond the therapeutic community (Rigby & Ashman, 2008).

the  burden  of  care  on 

the  professional network 

Specific Needs Pertaining to People with BPD

There are  also  the  inherent  needs  of  people  with  BPD  that  should  be 
addressed when considering the design of a Virtual TC.
 People  with  BPD  have  a  strong  need  to  feel  accepted,  heard  and 

understood.

 They  need  a  sense  of  safety;  for  instance  consistent  people  and 
places  where  they  can  become  attached  while  working  through 
their difficulties.

 People  with  BPD  often  require  an  instant response  when  in  crisis, 

whether it is in the day or at night (NICE, 2009).

Identified Benefits of a virtual TC  

An extended sense of presence as opposed to static discussion 

Anonymity through the use of avatars.
An extended sense of community and sharing experiences and 

A virtual  TC,  hosted  in  Second  Life  could  be  considered  to  be 
beneficial to people with BPD for the following reasons:

forums.


support.

TCs.





Reducing the sense of feeling alone.
Potential for exposure therapy in reality confrontation.
24/7 access to support.
Economic benefit to Primary Services.

A  sense  of  ownership,  in  accordance  with  ethos  of  traditional 

One of the challenges in treating people with BPD is that although they 
can  often  present  as  being  in  crisis,  it can  prove to  be  difficult  to 
engage them in any treatment (Winston, 2000). A virtual TC, because 
of  its  ease  of  access  and  potential  anonymity,  could then  be  a  viable 
system of treatment and support.

RECOMENDATIONS

The  development  of  a  3-D  virtual  therapeutic  community  would require 
further research in assessing the requirements of. A broad explanation of 
the requirements follows:

 An  evaluation  of  existing  methods  of  ICT  enabled  support  for 
people  with  BPD  to  inform  the  proposal  and  to  assess  how  to 
incorporate  elements  of  good  practice.  This  will  include  social 
networking sites and the virtual TC system developed by Rigby and 
Ashman (2008). 

10

 A  focus  group  of  professionals  working  with  people  with  BPD  will 
facilitated to assess how best to design and promote the proposed 
support system

 Qualitative  and  quantitative  data  derived 

from  surveys  and 
interviews  with  both  patients  diagnosed with  BPD  and  related 
professionals, in understanding their needs and requirements.

 Collaboration  with  two  consultant psychiatrists in  psychotherapy, 

specializing in the treatment BPD.

 A user centered approach to the design of a therapeutic community 
is  Second  Life  will  be  considered  mandatory.  Human  Computer 
Interaction  (HCI)  principles  will  be  applied  through  all  stages  of 
design. User involvement will feature from requirements through to 
testing.

Summary & Conclusions

The use of ICT based support and treatment of mental disorders continues 
to expand as increasingly more people are seeking virtual support and/or 
therapies.  The use of ICT based support specifically for people with BPD 
however, is limited predominantly to discussion forums, emails and social 
networking sites facilitated by Face Book. The review indicates that there 
are  several  interesting  VR  based therapies  in  place  to treat  patients  with 
mental  health  problems.  In  addition,  the  popularity  of  Second  Life  in 
facilitating  health 
is  also 
highlighted. There is however neither known VR therapies nor Second Life 
sites that are designed specifically for people with BPD.  

information  sharing  and  support  groups 

This paper has highlighted the significant contribution that TCs have in the 
treatment,  support  and  rehabilitation  of  people  with  BPD (Norton,  K.  & 
Hinshelwood,  R.  D.,  1996;  Campling,  P.,  1999).    It  also  portrays  the 
ongoing  work  of  Rigby  and  Ashman  (2008)  where  technology  is  used  to 
facilitate  TC  networks,  specifically 
in  rural 
communities.  The  paper  also highlights the  significant  economic  impact 
upon primary care resources that people with BPD place, in comparison to 
those exhibiting other mental health disorders.  

for  people  with  BPD, 

There is certainly great  potential  for  using  3-D VR environments  such  as 
Second  Life  to  host  a  TC  specifically  tailored  for  people  with  BPD. 
Examples  include:  reducing  the  sense  of  feeling  alone;  shared  support 
network;  containment;  resources  on  self  help  techniques  and  of  course 
empowering patients. In addition, there is scope for incorporating specific 
therapies too, with the input of professionals. Such a system could also be 
economically  viable,  particularly  in  comparison  with  traditional  primary 
costs, as  well as  reducing  the  burden  on health  services.  To  ensure that 
the  proposed  virtual  TC  is  well  utilised,  there  needs  to  be  a  clear  match 
between  the  users'  needs  and  the  design  of  such  a  system.    A  user 
centered approach  to  the  design,  which  involves  all  potential  groups  of 
users  will  help  to  ensure  that  a  virtual  TC  hosted  in  Second  Life  will  be 
usable and accepted. The recommendations in this paper will certainly go 
11

some way in assisting this process. Hence, the application of Second life 
based  therapeutic  communities  to  treat  BPD  patients  could  be  an 
innovative  area of  focus  in  providing    a  new  avenue  for  further  research 
development in the field of treating  and supporting people with BPD.

Further research is of course necessary to assess the likely acceptance of 
this  type of  support and how well it  will be  utilsed.   The fact  that Second 
Life  has  been  shown  to  be  a  very  popular  medium  in  hosting  support 
groups, particularly in the area of mental health (Norris, 2009) lend to the 
viability  of  such  a    proposal.  Furthermore,  it  is  a  very  low  cost  and 
accessible resource. 

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental health disorders (4th ed). Washington DC.

Anderson,  L.,  Zimand,  E.,  Hodges,  L.  &  Rothboam,  B.,  O.,  (2005), 
Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  for  public  speaking  anxiety  using  virtual 
reality for exposure, Depress Anxiety, vol. 22, pp. 156 – 158. 

Annett,  M.  K.  &  Bischof,  W.  F.  (2010),  Investigating  the  Application  of 
Virtual  Reality  Systems  to  Psychology  and  Cognitive  Neuroscience 
Research, Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 131-
141.

Beard,  L., Wilson, K.,  Morra,  D.  &  Keelan,  J.  (2009),  A  Survey  of  Health 
Related  Activities  on  Second  Life,  Journal  of  Medical  Internet  Research, 
vol. 11, pp. 17.

Davies,  S.,  (2003).  Therapeutic  community  treatment  of  personality 
disorder:  service  use  and  mortality  over  3  years'  follow-up.  The  British 
Journal of Psychiatry (2003) 182: s24-s27.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, (1995) 4th edition, 
Primary Care Version Washington, D.C., American Psychiatric Association
Difede,  D.  & Hoffman,  H.  G.  (2002),  Virtual  Reality  Exposure  for  World 
Trade  Centre  Post-traumatic  Stress  Disorder:  A  Case  Report,  Cyber 
Psychology & Behavior, December 2002, 5 (6), pp. 529 – 535.

Dolan  B,  Warren  F,  Norton  K.  Change  in  borderline  symptoms  one  year 
after therapeutic community treatment for severe personality disorder. The 
British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science 1997; 171:274-
279.

Dolan  BM,  Warren  FM,  Menzies D,  Norton  K.  Cost-offset  following 
specialist  treatment  of  severe  personality  disorders.  Psychiatric  Bulletin 
1996; 20(7):413-417.

12

Dolan,  BM,  Evans,  C  and  Wilson,  J  (1992)  TC  treatment  for  personality 
disordered  adults:  changes  in  neurotic  symptomatology at  follow-up.  Int. 
Journal of social psychiatry. Vol 38(4): 243-250.

Dolan,  B.  &  Norton,  K.  (1991) The  predicted  impact  of  the  NHS  White 
Paper  on  the  use  and  funding  of  a  specialist  service  for  personality 
disordered  patients:  a  survey of  clinicians' views.  Psychiatric Bulletin,  15, 
402-404.

Eysenbach G. 2001. What is e-Health? J Medical Internet Res 3(2):e20
Freeman,  D.  (2008),  Studying  and  Treating  Schizophrenia  Using  Virtual 
Reality: A New Paradigm, Schizophrenia Bulletin, vol. 34, issue. 4, pp. 605 
– 610.

Geraldi,  M.,Rothbaum,  B.,    Ressler,  K.,  Rizzo,  A.,  (2008)  Virtual  Reality 
Exposure Therapy Using a Virtual Iraq:Case Report, Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, Vol. 21, No. 2, April 2008, pp. 209–213.

Gorini, A., Gaggioli, A., Vigna, C. & Riva, G. (2008), A Second Life for e-
health: Prospects for the use of 3D Virtual Worlds in Clinical Psychology, 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 10, pp. 21.

Gorrindo,  T.  &  Groves,  J.E.  (2009),  Computer  Simulation  and  Virtual 
Reality in the Diagnosis and Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders, Academic 
Psychiatry, vol. 33, pp. 413 – 417.

Graffeo,  I.,  La  Barbera,  D.,    (2009),  Cybertherapy  meets  facebook, 
blogger,  and  second  life:  an  italian  experience.  Studies  in  health 
technology and informatics, Vol. 144 pp. 108-112.

Gunderson,  J.G.,  &  Sabo,  A.N.  (1993).  The  phenomenological  and 
conceptual  interface  between  borderline  personality  disorder  and  PTSD. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 19-27. 

K Zero Universe chart. (2009) Q1, KZERO.

Kim, K., Heffernan, K., & Cloitre, M. (2000). A comparison of posttraumatic 
stress  disorder  with  and  without  borderline  personality  disorder  among 
women  with  a  history  of  childhood  sexual  abuse:  Etiological  and  clinical 
characteristics.  The  Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease,  188,  589-
595. 

Kim,  C.H.,  Kim,  S.Y.,  Roh,  D.  &  Kim,  S.  (2008),  Virtual  Reality  for 
Obsessive  Compulsive  Disorder:  Past  and  Future,  Psychiatry 
Investigation, September 6 (3), pp. 115 - 121.

Kim, K., Kim, C.H., Kim, S.Y., Roh, D. & Kim, S.(2007) Characteristics of 
Social  Perception  Assessed  in  Schizophrenia  Using  Virtual  Reality.  
CyberPsychol Behav 10:215 -219 [PubMed].

13

Linehan,M.M., Schmidt,H., Dimeff,L.A., Craft,J.C., Kanter,J., Comtois,K.A. 
(1999). Dialectical behavior therapy for patients with borderline personality 
disorder and drug-dependence. American Journal on Addiction, 8(4), 279-
292.

Main T. (1946). "The Hospital as a Therapeutic Institution". Bulletin of the 
Menninger Clinic 10: 66–70.

Neal, D.M., & McKenzie, P.J. (2010) “I did not realize so many options are 
available”:  Cognitive  authority,  emerging  adults,  and  e- mental  health, 
Library & Information Science Research (2010).

Newman  G.M.,  Szkodny  E.L.,  Llera  J.S.  and  Przeworski  A. (2011),  A 
review  of technology-assisted  self-help  and  minimal  contact  therapies  for 
anxiety  and  depression:  Is  human  contact  necessary  for  therapeutic 
efficacy? Clinical Psychology Review. Volume 31, Issue 1, February 2011, 
Pages 89-103.

NICE  (2009)  Borderline  Personality  Disorder  – The  NICE  guideline  on 
treatment and management. NICE, Royal College of Psychiatrists and the 
British Psychological Society.

Norris, J., (2009). The Growth and Direction of Healthcare Support Groups 
in Virtual Worlds. 3D Virtual Worlds for Health and Healthcare. Volume 2, 
Number 2.

Norton, K. (1997). In the Prison of Severe Personality Disorder, Journal of 
Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, vol. 8, issue. 2, pp. 285 - 298.

Norton,  K  (1992). Personality  disordered  individuals:  the  Henderson 
Hospital model of treatment. Criminal behaviour and mental health, Vol 2: 
180-191Norton,  K.  &  Hinshelwood,  R.  D.  (1996) Severe  personality 
disorder:  treatment  issues  and  selection  for  in-patient  psychotherapy. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 723-731.

Perese, E., & Wolf, M. (2005). Combating loneliness among persons with 
severe  mental 
interventions'  characteristics, 
effectiveness,  and  applicability.  Issues  in  Mental  Health  Nursing,  26(6), 
591-609.

illness:  Social  network 

Rapoport, R (1960). Community as doctor'.  Tavistock: London.

Rigby,  M.  &  Ashman,  D.  (2008),  Service  Innovation:  A  Virtual  informal 
network  of  care  to  support  a  ‘lean’  therapeutic  community  in  a  new  rural 
personality disorder service, The Psychiatrist, vol. 32, pp. 64 - 67.

Riva, G., Raspelli, S., Algeri, D., Pallavicini, F., Gorini, A. Wiedrhold, K. & 
Gaggioli,  A  (2010),  Inter  reality  in  Practice:  Bridging  Virtual  and  Real 
Worlds  in  the  Treatment  of  Posttraumatic  Stress  Disorders,  Cyber 
Psychology & Behavior, vol. 13.

14

Rizzo,  A.  S.  &  Kim,  G.J.  (2005),  A  SWOT  Analysis  of  the  field  of  Virtual 
Reality Rehabilitation and Therapy, Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 
Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 119 -146.

Rothbaum,  B.  O., Hodges,  L.,  Smith,  S.,  Lee, J.  H. &  Price,  L.  (2000), A 
Controlled Study of Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy for the fear of flying, 
Journal  of  Consulting  &  Clinical  Psychology,  American  Psychological 
Association, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 1020 – 1026.

Rothbaum, B. O., Hodges, L., Watson, B. A., Kessler, G. D. & Opdyke, D. 
(1996), Virtual Reality Exposure therapy in the treatment of fear of flying,: 
A case repot, Behavioral Research & Therapy, vol. 34, no. 5/6, pp. 477 –
481.

Southwick, S.M., Yehuda, R., & Giller, E. (1993). Personality disorders in 
treatment  seeking  Vietnam  combat  veterans  with  post-traumatic  stress 
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 1020-1023.

Sudhagar,  S.,  Vatsalan,  D.,  Wijethilake,  D.,  Wickramasinghe,  Y., 
Arunathilake,  S.,  Chapman,  K,  Senaviratne,  G.  (2010),  Enhancing  Rural 
Healthcare  in  Emerging  Countries  through  an  e-Health  Solution,  2nd
International  Conference  on  e-health,  telemedicine  and  social  medicine, 
pp. 23-28.

Winston,  A.  P.  (2000),  Recent  Developments  in  Borderline  Personality 
Disorder, Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, vol. 6, pp. 211 – 217.

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
eHealth;  Second Life; Virtual Reality; ICTs; Therapeutic Communities.

eHealth: Transfer of Health by Electronic Means
Second Life: Forum for Online Interactive Virtual Worlds
Virtual Reality: 3D simulated interactive environment
ICTs: Information Communication Technologies
Therapeutic Communities: Participatory, Group Approach to Therapy

15

