Post-processing of Engineering Analysis Results for Visualization 
in VR System    

Stoyan Maleshkov1, Dimo Chotrov1  

 1 Virtual Reality Lab, Technical University Sofia, Sofia, 1000, Bulgaria 

is  beginning 

Abstract 
The  applicability  of  Virtual  Reality  for  evaluating 
engineering  analysis  results 
to  receive 
increased appreciation in the last years. The problem many 
engineers  are  still  facing  is  how  to  import  their  model 
together  with  the  analysis  results  in  a  virtual  reality 
environment for exploration and results validation. In  this 
paper  we  propose  an  algorithm  for  transforming  model 
data and results from finite element analysis (FEA) solving 
application  to  a  format  easily  interpretable  by  a  virtual 
reality  application.  The  algorithm  includes  also  steps  for 
reducing 
the  resulting  mesh  by 
eliminating  faces  from  the  inner  part  of  the  model  in  the 
cases when only the surfaces of the model is analyzed. We 
also  describe  a  possibility  for  simultaneously  assessing 
multiple  analysis  results  relying  on  multimodal  results 
presentation by stimulating different senses of the operator. 
Keywords:  Virtual  Reality,  Finite  Element  Analysis, 
Engineering  Analysis  Results  Validation,  CAD  to  VR  Export, 
Multimodal Presentation. 

the  face-count  of 

1. Introduction 

The benefits of using virtual reality (VR) for the evaluation 
and simulation of CAD models and their behavior  and  its 
application in the engineering field have been long realized. 
Some  such  applications  together  with  main  problems  and 
challenges  lying  before  integrating  CAD  and  VR  have 
been discussed in [3]. 

In  the  last  years  VR  has  moved  from  just  a  fancy 
visualization tool to an important means for improving and 
speeding  up  the  solution  of  engineering  tasks.  In  [4]  the 
authors  describe  their  software  system  VtCrash  which 
allows not only immersive observation of a pre-calculated 
crash  simulation  but  also  manipulation  of  the  observed 
crash. [1] discusses some application possibilities of VR in 
the  field  of  chemical  engineering  and  points  out  some 
advantages it gives for student education. The authors have 
developed  different  algorithms  allowing  for  faster  user 
interaction with complex scenes. An interesting method for 
combining  VR  and  CAD  by  incorporating  VR  techniques 

directly  in  a  CAD  application  is  described  in  [2].  The 
authors  use  the  development  application  programming 
interface  (API)  of  the  CAD  application  to  perform  the 
calculation  and  visualization  of  scene  illumination  in  the 
CAD  application  itself,  allowing  the  user  to  export  the 
scene and results to a VRML file. 
Although the applications of VR for engineering tasks are 
improving rapidly the possibilities  it  offers  are  far  from  a 
satisfactory realization and give space for a lot of research. 
Still 
is 
visualization  meaning  only  visual  presentation.  There  are 
still  few  scientific  researches  in  the  field  of  using  other 
human  senses  for  data  presentation.  One  such  example  is 
the  research  discussed  in  [7]  dealing  with  performing 
acoustic simulation for analyzing noise behavior. 

term  most  often  connected  with  VR 

the 

Based on our previous  research  experience  in  the  field  of 
multimodal presentation of object features described in [6] 
we  present  in  this  paper  an  algorithm  for  post  processing 
results  from  different  engineering  analyses  (focused  on 
(FEA)) 
finite  element  analysis 
their 
that  allows 
in  a  VR  environment  by 
simultaneous  presentation 
stimulating multiple senses of the user. 

2. Convert FEA results to a form suitable for 

VR presentation 

The Finite Element Analysis (FEA) is usually performed to 
simulate the behavior of some part or fluid under  specific 
conditions. The analysis often includes as an essential step 
importing  and  tessellating  a  CAD  model  to  perform  the 
necessary calculations. The results obtained from the FEA 
solver are for the new geometry after the tessellation. This 
makes the CAD model geometry unusable when one wants 
to present  the results  in  VR.  This  means  that  the  mesh  of 
the model used for the analysis has to be exported together 
with the calculated results so that they can be interactively 
and adequately presented in a VR environment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Finite element analysis background 

The  Finite  Element  Method  (FEM)  can  be  used  to  solve 
tasks  in  engineering  areas  like  structural  analysis,  heat 
transfer,  fluid  flow  and  electromagnetic  potential.  It  is 
applied when no analytical solution can be obtained or the 
solution  is  too  complex  to  be  calculated  for  an  examined 
geometrical  model.  The  FE  method  involves  representing 
the  geometry  as  a  system  of  smaller  and  simpler  bodies 
(finite  elements),  a  process  called  discretization  or 
tessellation (see Fig. 1). Then the equations are solved for 
each of the finite elements and the results are combined to 
receive an approximate solution [5]. 

coordinates in space. The format of the element list is more 
complicated: 

EL MAT TYP REL ESY SEC    NODES 
21   1 
22   1 
23   1 
24   1 

2        1   0       21       23      24      65      65 
2        1   0       22       22      23      60      60 
2        1   0       23       80      26      27      27 
2        1   0       24       64      22      60      60 

The important columns in the list are the NODES column – 
which nodes build the element, and the TYP column – the 
type  of  the  element  or  how  the  nodes  are  combined  to 
build the element, which may often have an irregular form 
(see Fig. 2).  

Fig. 1. The discretization process 

the  geometry  and 

The  discretization  of 
the  results 
calculation are usually performed with an application often 
called  solver.  Examples  for  such  applications  are  Ansys, 
Abaqus,  Nastran.  For  the  purposes  of  the  research  and 
experiments  described  in  this  article  we  have  used  the 
Ansys software package. 

2.2 Transforming the mesh 

The problem with the tessellation performed by the solver 
application  is  that  the  finite  mesh  and  the  calculation 
results are available during the analysis or can be saved in 
a  native  for  the  solver  application  format,  which  means 
they  cannot  be  exported  to  some  standard  intermediate 
format supported by another application. The only way of 
obtaining information about them in Ansys is by exporting 
lists  describing  the  nodes  and  elements  of  the  mesh  and 
their results values in text files. 

Fig. 2. Examples for element types in Ansys [9] 

To describe the geometry of the model two lists are needed 
– a list of the elements building the mesh and a list of the 
nodes building the elements. The format of the node list is 
simple – it contains a sequential number of the node and its 

Code 1. Class describing an Ansys element 

We transform the data from the nodes and elements lists to 
receive a new format which can easily be interpreted by a 
visualization  application  –  the  format  describes  vertices 
with  their  coordinates  in  space  and  triangles  (polygons), 
formed by the vertices, which compose the geometry of the 
model. The vertices are directly mapped from the nodes of 
the  finite  model  and  their  coordinates.  The  triangles  are 
formed  by  splitting 
is 
described  by  an  instance  of  a  special  class  AnsysElement 
(see  Code  1),  containing  a  list  with  the  node  numbers 
building  the  element,  the  type  of  the  element,  which 
determines  how  the  element  is  triangulated,  and  a  node 
map  used  for  an  optimization  step,  described  later  in  this 
chapter. 

the  elements.  Each  element 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Code 2. Element triangulation 

The  algorithm  passes  through  each  element  of  the  Ansys 
model and divides it into triangles depending on its type – 
see  Code  2.  The  type  of  the  element  is  crucial  because  it 
describes how the nodes of the element are interconnected 
and  hence  –  how  the  element  itself  can  be  divided  into 
triangles. After all elements have been processed the result 
is a list of triangles building the model. 

The  full  workflow  for  transforming  the  ANSYS  exported 
nodes and elements lists to a format easily interpretable by 
a VR application is shown on Fig. 3. 

For complex geometry models the high number of vertices 
and faces could lead to slower visualization and response-
time  by  the  VR  application.  To  reduce  this  impact  we 
include an option for optimizing the number of polygons of 
the model in the case when only  the surface of the model 
will  be  of  interest  during  the  VR  presentation.  The 
optimization reduces the number of nodes and triangles by 
excluding  element  nodes  lying  in  the  inner  part  of  the 
model  and  building  polygons  only  from  element  sides 
lying on the surface of the model. For the purpose two lists 
of  nodes  have  to  be  exported  from  the  solver  application 
and specified as input for the conversion process – one list 
containing all the nodes and a second one containing only 
nodes  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  model.  During  the 
conversion  process  a  node  map  is  generated  for  each 
element,  based  on  the  intersection  of  the  full  and  partial 
node list.  

Fig. 3. Ansys to VR data transformation 

The node map links a sequence of bits to each node: ‘1’-s 
for the element nodes that should be skipped and ‘0’-s for 
the nodes of the element that should remain. The resulting 
triangles in the output are built depending on the node map 
value. As some of the original nodes are excluded from the 
output  the  resulting  vertices  of  the  model  have  to  be 
renumbered. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Mesh optimization 

Fig.  4  shows  an  example  with  a  simple  parallelepiped 
element  which  lies  on  an  edge  of  a  model.  Nodes  with 
numbers 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 are lying on the surface, while 
nodes 1 and 4 are inner nodes (Fig. 4 – left). Respectively 
the node map for this element would be 00001001 giving a 
value  of  9  –  the  optimization  skips  nodes  1  and  4  and 
builds  triangles  only  from  the  remaining  surfaces  thus 
reducing  the  node  and  polygon  count  of  the  resulting 
model (Fig. 4 – right). 

The  result  lists  exported  from  Ansys  are  simply  node 
numbers  with  their  result  values  so  no  special  steps  are 
needed  for  the  result  file  transformation.  Only  if  some 
nodes  have  been  excluded,  their  results  have  also  to  be 
omitted  in the  results  file  generated  by  the  transformation 
process. 

3. Exploring and Evaluating Finite Element 

Analysis results in VR 

For the exploration of the model and  engineering analysis 
results  in  VR  environment  we  use  our  own  custom 
developed  VR  software  system,  described  in  [8].  The 
results from the engineering analysis are treated as implicit 
object properties that can be presented to the user through 
different modalities. 

3.1 Importing the mesh in the VR application 

After  the  finite  element  model  has  been  processed  as 
described earlier loading the mesh of the model in the VR 
application  is  quite  simple  –  read  the  vertices  and  their 
coordinates  from  the  file  and  create  the  polygons  of  the 
mesh  as  specified  by  the  triangles  description  in  the  file. 
After  that  for  each  polygon  its  normals  have  to  be 
calculated.  Fig.  5  shows  an  original  Ansys  finite  element 
model  (left)  and  its  equivalent  model  loaded  in  the  VR 
application. 

Fig. 5. Ansys model and the resulting VR model 

3.2 Assigning results data to the mesh vertices 

After the model has been imported in the VR application it 
has  to be associated with  the  results  from  the  engineering 
analysis that are going to  be presented  and  evaluated. For 
this  purpose  the  converted  results  files  exported  from 
Ansys are used. Each results file contains the values for the 
vertices of the model from a specific analysis that has been 
performed.  When  opening  a  results  file  for  the  current 
model each value is associated with its vertex. Each vertex 
can have several results values associated with it. 

Fig. 6. Specifying analysis results and type of effects for presentation 

Our approach allows the use of different sensorial stimuli, 
which  we  call  effects,  for  the  presentation  of  the  analysis 
results. The user has to specify how the analysis results are 
going  to  be  presented  –  visually,  through  audio  or  tactile 
stimulation. The use of  different modalities for the results 
presentation  allows  the  simultaneous  evaluation  of  results 
from  different  analyses.  Fig.  6  shows  the  assignment  of 
displacement analysis results to the  model of  a boiler that 
are  going  to  be  presented  to  the  user  through  the  audio 
channel.  The  surface  mesh  representing 
the  boiler 
geometry  has  already  been  assigned  temperature  analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results  which  are  being  displayed  visually  through  color 
codes. 

4. Conclusion 

3.3 Exploring and evaluating the model in VR 

After  the  results  from  all  analyses  that  are  going  to  be 
explored  and  evaluated  have  been  assigned  to  the  surface 
mesh  representing  the  object  in  the  VR  application  the 
model is  ready for presentation. The user  can observe the 
model  or  scene  in  stereo  and  receive  information  about 
analysis  results  depending  on  the  type  of  presentation 
effects that have been chosen. 

As  a  test  case  we  have  performed  temperature  and 
displacement  FE  analyses  of  a  boiler.  In  our  VR 
application  we  have  assigned  visual  effect  for 
the 
presentation  of  the  temperature  distribution  results  and 
audio  effect  for  the  displacement  distribution  results.  In 
temperature 
this  way  we  can  observe  directly 
distribution  for  the  model  based  on  its  coloring  and 
simultaneously 
the 
displacement at a specific place by pointing or clicking at 
the desired area of the object– see Fig. 7. 

feedback  about 

receive  audio 

the 

Fig. 7. Evaluating analysis results 

Our  solution  allows  the  presentation  of  engineering 
analysis,  specifically  finite  element  analysis,  results  in 
virtual reality environment. For the purpose we export the 
finite element model geometry and results from the solver 
application and convert it to a form easily interpretable by 
a  VR  application.  The  results  can  be  presented  not  only 
visually but also by stimulating other senses of the person 
evaluating the results. Our approach significantly improves 
user  perception  and  understanding  of  the  results  – 
especially  when  evaluating  multiple  analysis  results 
simultaneously.  This 
the  application  of 
multimodal presentation which allows for delivering more 
information  to  the  user  by  distributing  it  among  different 
information  by 
perception 
stimulating different senses leads to faster, better and more 
intuitive  evaluation  of  the  results  enhances  the  user 
interaction  with  the  system  and  increases  the  sense  of 
immersion. 

channels.  Transmitting 

is  due 

to 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish to thank  for the  support  of  the  National 
Science  Found  at  the  Bulgarian  Ministry  of  Education, 
Youth  and  Science  received  through  grant  DDBY02/67-
2010. 

References 
[1] J. T. Bell, H. S. Fogler, "The Application of Virtual Reality to 
Chemical  Engineering  and  Education",  VR  '04  Proceedings 
of the IEEE Virtual Reality 2004, pp 217- 218 

[2]  T.  M.  Buriol,  S.  Scheer,  E.  K.  Saldanha,  "Scientific 
Visualization  and  Virtual  Reality  Techniques  Integrated  to 
CAD/CAE Systems for Illumination Design", in International 
Conference  on  Information  Technology  in  Construction, 
2008 

[3]  S. Jayaram, J. Vance, R. Gadh, U. Jayaram, H. Srinivasan, " 
Assessment  of  VR  Technology  and  its  Applications  to 
Engineering  Problems", 
in  Journal  of  Computing  and 
Information Science in Engineering, Volume 1, Issue 1, 2001, 
pp. 72-83 

[4] S. Kuschfeldt, M. Schulz, T. Reuding, M. Holzner, T. Ertl, " 
Advanced  Visualization  of  Crashworthiness  Simulations 
using  Virtual  Reality  Techniques",  in  Proceedings  of  the 
Conference on High Performance Computing in Automotive 
Design, Engineering, and Manufacturing, Paris, 1996 

[5]  Daryl  L.  Logan,  "A  First  Course  in  the  Finite  Element 

Method", Cengage Learning, 2007 

[6]  S.  Maleshkov,  A.  Bachvarov,  D.  Chotrov,  J.  Ovtcharova,  J. 
Katicic, "Using implicit features for enhancing the immersive 
reality 
object 
environments",  in  Virtual  Environments  Human-Computer 
Interfaces and Measurement Systems (VECIMS), 2012 IEEE 
International Conference, 2012, pp. 91-96 

in  multimodal  virtual 

representation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[7]  X.  Yang,  B.  Hamann,  J.  C.  Aurich,  "Virtual  Reality 
supported  Visualization  and  Evaluation  of  Noise  Levels  in 
in  Virtual  Environments 
Manufacturing  Environments", 
Human-Computer  Interfaces  and  Measurement  Systems 
(VECIMS),  2012  IEEE  International  Conference,  2012,  pp. 
91-96 

[8]  S.  Maleshkov,  D.  Chotrov,  "Affordable  Virtual  Reality 
System  Architecture  for  Representation  of  Implicit  Object 
Properties", IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science 
Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 2, July 2012 

[9]  Ansys  Elements  Manual,  http://www.ansys.stuba.sk/html/e-

index.htm, last accessed on 06.03.2013 

Stoyan  Maleshkov  has  Eng.  degree  in  system  and  control 
engineering  (1975),  master  in  applied  mathematics  (1977)  and 
PhD  in  computer  aided  system  design  (1981),  all  received  from 
the Technical University (TU) of Sofia, Bulgaria. Fulbright  scholar  
(1989–1990)  at  Interactive  Modeling  Research  Lab,  Louisiana 
State  University,  Baton  Rouge,  USA.  Associate  Professor  of 
computer aided engineering and computer graphics  (1990)  at  TU 
Sofia.  Department  chair  (2000-2004)  and  vice  dean  (2004-2008), 
both  at  the  TU  Sofia.  Since  2008:  Head  of  the  Virtual  reality  lab, 
TU  Sofia.  Associate  professor  of  computer  graphics  at  the  New 
Bulgarian University Sofia, as a second job (2000). IEEE member. 

Dimo  Chotrov  has  received  BSc.  (2007)  and  MSc.  (2009) 
degrees in computer systems and technologies from the Technical 
University  of  Sofia.  Currently  he  is  PhD  student,  acting  at  the 
Virtual reality lab. Member of the IEEE. 

 
 
 
  
