3
1
0
2
c
e
D
6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
2
3
4
.
2
1
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Virtual Reality: A Deﬁnition History - A Personal Essay

Steve Bryson1,

ABSTRACT

This essay, written in 1998 by an active participant in both virtual reality
development and the virtual reality deﬁnition debate, discusses the deﬁnition of
the phrase “Virtual Reality” (VR). I start with history from a personal perspec-
tive, concentrating on the debate between the “Virtual Reality” and “Virtual
Environment” labels in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s. Deﬁnitions of VR based
on speciﬁc technologies are shown to be unsatisfactory. I propose the following
deﬁnition of VR, based on the striking eﬀects of a good VR system: “Virtual
Reality is the use of computer technology to create the eﬀect of an interactive
three-dimensional world in which the objects have a sense of spatial presence.”
The justiﬁcation for this deﬁnition is discussed in detail, and is favorably com-
pared with the dictionary deﬁnitions of “virtual” and “reality”. The implications
of this deﬁnition for virtual reality technology are brieﬂy examined.

Subject headings: Virtual Reality

1. Preface

I wrote the essay below in 1998 in response to a discussion of the deﬁnition of virtual
reality in a virtual reality interest group run by Linda Jacobsen. This essay found its way
into an online “Omnibus Lexicon Deﬁnition Supplement” on a now defunct website by the
Fourth Wave Group, under the title “Virtual Reality: A Deﬁnition History”. Because this
web site is no longer available, and there are at least 13 citations to this essay in the literature
according to Google Scholar, I am providing this essay here. This version is lightly edited
from the original for clarity and to remove discussions speciﬁc to the virtual reality interest
group. Major new comments are inserted in square brackets: [].

It is my opinion that the deﬁnition of virtual reality presented in this essay has stood

the test of time.

1NASA Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035; steve.bryson@nasa.gov

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

2. Virtual Reality: A Deﬁnition History (written in 1998)

I would like to add to the discussion on deﬁnitions in virtual reality (VR), as my position
on this has evolved through more than a decade of watching, and participating in, the “VR
deﬁnition wars”.

2.1. History

First I’d like to review some of the history. If I can be allowed a moment of nostalgia,
I fondly recall sometime in 1985 or ’86 talking to Jaron Lanier on the phone (I worked for
him at the time at VPL Research), and him telling me about the lunch he’d had that day
with Scott Fisher then of the NASA Ames Virtual Interactive Environment Workstation
(VIEW) lab.
[The VIEW lab was one of the ﬁrst multi-modal virtual reality implementa-
tions, incorporating wide-ﬁeld, head-tracked stereoscopic display, hand and gesture tracking
and three-dimensional sound rendering supported by 30 Hz three-dimensional rendering and
workstation-class computation.] They were talking about what to call what Scott was do-
ing in the VIEW lab when Jaron coined the term “virtual reality”. Jaron told me that he
thought it was an accurate description of what Scott was doing. Scott and others at, e.g.
the University of North Carolina, had already been calling it virtual environments (VE):
VIEW stands for Virtual Interactive Environment Workstation, and was the follow-on to
Michael McGreevey’s Virtual Visual Environment Display (VIVED) project at NASA Ames
(Fisher, et al. 1986).

I’m happy to say that I joined Scott’s VIEW lab in 1988.

For the next several years there was a battle between the “virtual reality” and the
“virtual environment” camps over appropriate nomenclature, with the academics tending
towards VE and the hacker/commercial/press sectors tending towards VR. [The VE side
generally expressed that the phrase “virtual reality” was too vague and somewhat oxy-
moronic. Though I tended to agree with this judgement at the time, as described in 2.2 I
have since decided that “virtual reality” is actually precise and not at all oxymoronic.] At
about this time the phrase “artiﬁcial reality” was popular in Japan. VR became generally
accepted in the 92-93 time frame, as signiﬁed by:

• the creation in 1992 of the National Academy of Sciences/National Research Coun-
cil Committee on Virtual Reality Research and Development (though the resulting
1995 NAS/NRC report (Durlach and Mayor, ed. 1995) was ambivalent on the VR/VE
issue),

– 3 –

• the creation of the Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium (VRAIS) con-
ference and the IEEE Symposium on Virtual Reality Research and Development in
1993,

• perhaps most importantly, Fred Brooks ﬁnally agreeing to the VR label.

I feel that VR won by sheer volume: every time we said “VE” we had to explain that we
meant “VR” as everyone had heard of VR even if they didn’t know what it meant. As
I’ll explain below I’ve completely come to peace with the VR label through the analysis of
deﬁnitions.

In the meantime there were very many attempts to deﬁne VR/VE. Agreement on deﬁni-
tion was elusive. We all knew that what we were doing was special, but expressing just what
was special proved surprisingly diﬃcult. Most of these attempts tried to deﬁne VR through
the technology used to achieve this unique eﬀect, but this approach tended to lead to debates
over whether this or that technology was “required” for VR. In the meantime it seemed that
the point was lost, and in any case such a deﬁnition is uninformative to those who have not
themselves experienced the technology in action. Simply saying “head tracking” does not
convey the power of a head-tracked display in action.

In the meantime VR was being used to describe everything from three-dimensional
photo-realistic rendering through non-graphical simulation to artiﬁcial intelligence. And
this does not even count what was happening in literary and artistic circles where “virtual
reality” was being used in very creative ways. It was clear that Jaron had picked a phrase
which ignited something in people, though it is not clear that Jaron intended the eﬀect to be
quite this broad. It became apparent that VR was in danger of being so broadly used as to
lose meaning entirely. This was one of the primary arguments against VR used by the VE
camp. So it became critical to many of us to come up with a good deﬁnition of VR. By this
time deﬁning it in terms of technology was completely untenable, because those who were
using the term more broadly could simply disagree.

2.2. A Deﬁnition of Virtual Reality

It was clear that we had to base our deﬁnition on the eﬀects of VR: after all it was
primarily the (promised) eﬀects, and only secondarily the technology which seemed to make
people most excited. Where I ended up was deﬁning VR in terms of its cognitive eﬀects:
creating a sense of spatial presence, possibly a sense of immersion, a sense of interaction with
objects. We then had to clarify the diﬀerence between VR and telepresence, where remotely

– 4 –

sensed objects are presented to our senses. Combining these observations I have settled on
the following deﬁnition:

Virtual Reality is the use of computer technology to create the eﬀect of an
interactive three-dimensional world in which the objects have a sense of spatial
presence.

I want to examine this deﬁnition piece by piece:

• “Computer technology” is required to distinguish VR from telepresence and other
remote sensing approaches. This requirement is driven by the ability to use computer
programs to create interesting and novel tailor-made environments, which is where I
think a lot of the popular interest in VR comes from.

• “Eﬀect” rather than “illusion” because I feel that it is a cognitive eﬀect that is achieved
(more on this later), rather than an illusion. Saying “eﬀect” rather than “illusion” also
undercuts the presumption of “fooling” the user.

• “Interactive” to distinguish VR from conventional animation. I also think that it is
the ability to interact with the virtual world which is behind much of the popular
excitement.

• “Three-dimensional world” to exclude text-based environments and to limit discussion
away from 1D and 2D programs (which would encompass essentially all of interactive
computer graphics).

• “Objects have a sense of spatial presence” means that the objects seem to have a
spatial location independent of both the user and the display technology. This is, I
feel, at the heart of what is special about VR.

I shorten this deﬁnition to the buzz phrase “interaction with things, not (possibly animated)
pictures of things.”

By now I’m sure you’ve noticed the absence of “immersion” in the deﬁnition. I take
“immersion” to mean “being surrounded”, and so a sense of immersion would require a
sense that I am surrounded by the environment: things can be behind me and if so I’ll see
them when I turn around. Initially my deﬁnition included immersion, but having worked
with such non-immersive displays such as the responsive workbench (Cutler, et al. 1997)
or the immersadesk (Czernuszenko, et al. 1997), it is clear to me that all the power of VR
can happen without any sense of immersion whatsoever. So I dropped “immersion” as a
requirement.

– 5 –

Also absent from this deﬁnition is a requirement that the virtual environment mimic the
real world either in terms of content or in terms of interface. I feel that such requirements
miss the point and tend to limit the creative development of eﬀective virtual environments.

This deﬁnition is tentative, but is the best I’ve been able to do to date.

In the meantime I was meditating on the phrase “virtual reality” itself. Most people
react to it as an oxymoron but I always had a sense that Jaron was exactly right in choosing
this phrase. So one day I went to several dictionaries and looked up “virtual” and reality”
There were several deﬁnitions of each, but the ones that stood out to me as appropriate to
our purposes were the following:

• Virtual: to have the eﬀect of being such without actually being such

and

• Reality: the property of being real

• Real: the property of having concrete existence.

Putting these together, “Virtual Reality” means “to have the eﬀect of having concrete exis-
tence without actually having concrete existence”. I think this is an impressively accurate
description of what is special about what we are doing in VR.

Now of course once you accept the above deﬁnition of virtual reality, it has real implica-
tions about the technology required. When your display is visual or auditory, head tracking
is clearly required to maintain a sense that objects have an independent spatial presence
as you move your head. The desired eﬀect is that the virtual object stays put (assuming
it’s not moving) as you move around. My catchphrase for this when using a visual or audi-
tory display is: “if you move your head and nothing happens it ain’t VR”. Whatever your
modality, “near-real-time” (or whatever you want to call it) performance is again required
for spatial presence. Also the relationship between the user and virtual objects is critical to
providing the eﬀect of spatial presence, so something about the user must be tracked in all
cases. Note that visual ﬁdelity is not required (for a visual display) in this deﬁnition: the
100x100 monochrome display in the 1988 VIEW lab had terrible ﬁdelity (not to mention Ivan
Sutherland’s original display from 1967), but it provided a strong sense of spatial presence
which deeply impressed those who tried it.

The above helps clarify the problem with deﬁnitions based on technology: I have yet to
see a technology requirement beyond “near-real-time” performance and user tracking which

– 6 –

must be in every system anyone can mention which clearly (intuitively) is a VR system. But
clearly not all fast systems which track the user are VR systems: the results of the tracking
can be used in a way that have nothing to do with spatial presence or immersion.

REFERENCES

Cutler, M., et al., 1997, Proceedings of the 1997 symposium on Interactive 3D graphics, pp.

107-114

Czernuszenko, M., et al., 1997, ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics, 31(2) pp. 46-49

Durlach, N. and Mayor, S., Editors, 1995, Virtual Reality:Scientiﬁc and Technological Chal-

lenges, The National Academies Press

Fisher, S., et al., 1986, ACM 1986 Workshop on 3D Interactive Graphics, pp. 77-87

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

