Inventions on using sound and speech 
in Graphic User Interface 
A TRIZ based analysis 

Umakant Mishra 
Bangalore, India 
http://umakantm.blogspot.in 

Contents 
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................1 
2. Inventions on speech enabled interface............................................................3 
2.1 Method and system for enabling a blind computer user to handle message 
boxes in a graphical user interface (5223828) ..................................................3 
2.2 Method and system for enabling a blind computer user to locate icons in a 
graphical user interface (5287102)....................................................................4 
2.3  Method  and  system  for  enabling  visually  impaired  computer  users  to 
graphically select displayed objects (5461399) .................................................5 
2.4  Internal  window  object  tree  method  for  representing  graphical  user 
interface applications for speech navigation (5864819) ....................................6 
2.5 Method and system for enabling blind or visually impaired computer users 
to graphically select displayed elements (6046722) ..........................................7 
2.6 Voice interaction method for a computer graphical user interface (6499015)
..........................................................................................................................8 
3. Summary ..........................................................................................................9 
Reference: ............................................................................................................9 

1. Introduction 

The personal computers are often equipped with a sound card that is capable of 
audio processing. This enables GUI applications to use sounds and synthesized 
speech,  such  as  warning  messages,  voice  alerts  and  guides  to  the  user.  Most 
sound cards also take input from a microphone, which are often used to pick-up 
user voice and digitize them through audio processing circuitry. 

Voice recognition system 
Voice  recognition  facilitates  a  human  interaction  with  the  machine.  VR  may  be 
used  to  replace  the  manual  task  of  pushing  buttons  on  a  wireless  telephone 
keypad. This is useful when the hands of the user are busy with other activities 
like driving a car. 

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voice  recognition  enables  the  user  to  enter  information  into  the  computer  by 
speaking  that  information.  For  example,  the  voice  recognition  software  can  be 
used to enter text into a word processor program instead of typing the text on a 
keyboard.  

Normally the voice recognition system needs to be trained before it can function 
optimally. The system should learn the speech patterns of a particular user. The 
digitized  audio  signals  are  stored  with  their  text  equivalents  and  compared  with 
the voice being spoken. 

In  specific  situations  the  voice  recognition  (VR)  device  should  be  capable  of 
continuous  speech  recognition  (CSR)  to  recognize  a  continuous  speech,  such 
as,  speaking/  recognizing  a  telephone  number  or  email  address,  which  are 
generally spoken without a pause.  

Need and Application of voice enabled system 

⇛  The computer users may like to use VRS when their hands are busy. For 
example, a person can enter text through dictation while driving a car. 

⇛  Voice  enabled  systems  are  useful for  users having  poor  or  partial vision. 

The voice commands supplement to the visual commands. 

⇛  The  VRS  can  be  effectively  used  in  maintaining  phone  books,  address 
books  etc.  The  user  can  dial  telephones  just  by  calling  a  telephone 
number or a name.  

⇛  Sound  is  used  in  various  applications  to  inform  “alert”,  “error”  or  “ok” 

conditions.  

⇛  The  multimedia  applications  and  gaming  applications  often  use  voice 
messages  to  say  “sorry”,  “that’s  right”,  “thank  you”  etc.  to  make  the 
session more interactive and attractive. 

Limitations of speech enabled system 

⇛  The VRS requires lot of training and customization to be effectively used 
by individual users as each individual falls into different voice patterns. 

⇛  The  voice  interface  is  complex  and  error  prone.  Calling  a  telephone 
number does not give you as much certainty as pressing a key (or keys) 
for a telephone number. 

⇛  Voice  commands  are  generally  associated  with  equivalent  keyboard  or 
mouse  actuated  control  functions.  They  cannot  operate  commands  on  a 
background window. 

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
⇛  Voice commands allow only a single command of a given control and not 

two or more commands of a given control. 

⇛  VRS  is  more  useful  for  visually  impaired  users,  but  there  is  less 

commercial viability in this market segment.  

2. Inventions on speech enabled interface 

There  are  many  inventions  on TTS,  VRS  and  pattern  matching  techniques. We 
will not get into the speech mechanism rather discuss only on voice-enabled user 
interfaces.  The following are six inventions selected from US patent database. 

2.1 Method  and  system  for  enabling  a  blind  computer  user  to  handle 
message boxes in a graphical user interface (US Patent 5223828)  

Background problem 
Conventionally the message boxes are displayed in a box with options as “yes”, 
“no”  etc. This method is  quite  convenient for  the  normal  user but  does not  help 
the  visually  impaired.  There  is  a  need  to  enable  the  visually  impaired  user  to 
interact with such message boxes.  

Solution provided by the invention 
McKiel Jr. invented a method of enabling blind users to handle message boxes 
(US  patent  5223828,  Assigned  by  IBM,  Jun  93).  As  per  the  invention,  initially 
when  the  message  box  first  appears,  the  text  contents  are  audibly  announced 
(using  TTS  or  so). Then  a  homing  signal  is  given  by  using  a  tone.  The  pitch of 
the  homing  sound  changes  according  to  the  distance  between  the  buttons  and 
the mouse pointer. When the mouse pointer moves closer to the options there is 
an increase in the pitch of the homing sound which gives a feedback to the user 
whether  the  pointer  is  moving  closer  to  or  going  away  from  the  option  buttons. 
When the pointer moves on to a push button, the caption of the push button is re-
announced.  Thus  the  user  moves  the  mouse  from  button  to  button  to  hear  the 
options and finally selects the one desired. 

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIZ based analysis 
The  invention  uses  sound  and  speech  to  compensate  the  weakness  of  visual 
interface (Principle-8: Counterweight). 

When the user moves the mouse pointer on to a push button the system audibly 
announces the caption of the button (Principle-23: Feedback).  

The  pitch  of  the  sound  increases  when  the  distance  of  the  mouse  pointer  and 
message box decreases and vice versa (Principle-35: Parameter change). 

2.2 Method and system for enabling a blind computer user to locate icons 
in a graphical user interface (US Patent 5287102)  

Background problem 
The previous invention although helps the blind user to handle a message box, it 
does  not  help  her  to  locate  other  icons  on  the  desktop.  There  is  a  need  a 
mechanism  to  enable  her  to  locate  different  icons  on  the  desktop  and  visualize 
their positions on the screen. 

Solution provided by the invention 
McKiel Jr. invented a method (US patent 5287102, assigned to IBM, Feb 94) of 
enabling a blind user to locate icons on a graphical user interface. According to 
the invention the system will provide audio information about the position of the 
pointer on the screen. When the pointer is located in the background, the system 
generates one type of sound and when the pointer is on an icon, it generates a 
different type of sound. When the pointer is positioned in the background it gives 
a  stereophonic  sound  to  inform  about  the  location  of  the  pointer  whether 
positioned towards the left or right side of the screen. Besides, when the pointer 
is  on  an  icon  positioned  in  the  left  side  there  will  be  more  sound  from  the  left 
speaker and when the pointer is on an icon positioned in the right side there will 
be more sound from the right speaker. This stereophonic effect helps the user to 
know the position of icons on the screen. 

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIZ based analysis 
The  invention  uses  sound  and  speech  to  compensate  the  weakness  of  visual 
interface (Principle-8: Counterweight). 

The invention uses different types of sounds to indicate the position of the cursor; 
e.g.,  one  type  of  sound  when  the  pointer  is  positioned  on  an  icon  and  different 
type of sound when on the background (Principle-35: Parameter change). 

The  method  uses  a  stereophonic  sound  to  inform  about  the  location  of  the 
pointer whether positioned more towards left (by producing more sound from left 
speaker)  or  more  towards  right  (by  producing  more  sound  from  right  speaker) 
side of the screen. (Principle-17: Another dimension). 

2.3 Method  and  system  for  enabling  visually  impaired  computer  users  to 
graphically select displayed objects (US Patent 5461399)  

Background problem 
In the previous invention the blind user knows about positions of different icons 
on the desktop. But in case of a GUI environment having multiple windows, the 
blind  user  cannot  know  whether  the  pointer  is  on  window-1  or  on  window-2,  or 
the  pointer  is  on  an  icon  in  window-1  or  is  on  an  icon  in  window-2.  There  is  a 
need  to  develop  a  method  for  the  blind  users  to  differentiate  the  icons  in  one 
window from another. 

Solution provided by the invention 
Brian  J.  Cragun  disclosed  a  method  of  solving  the  above  problem  (US  Patent 
5461399, Assigned to IBM, Oct 95) by using sound. According to the invention, 
two different sounds will be associated with each object on the screen. The first 
sound  is  common  among  all  objects  in  the  class  (i.e.,  same  for  all  icons  in  a 
window)  but  unique  among  other  classes  (i.e.,  different  for  icons  in  different 
windows).  The  second  sound  is  unique  to  the  object  in  the  class  (i.e.,  different 
sounds for each individual icon in the window).  

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By  listening  to  the  audio  signals  of  the  objects  the  visually  impaired  user  can 
identify  different  objects  inside  the  class  (i.e.,  within  same  window)  and 
distinguish them from the objects in other classes (i.e. within other windows). 

TRIZ based analysis 
The  invention  uses  sound  and  speech  to  compensate  the  weakness  of  visual 
interface (Principle-8: Counterweight). 

The  invention  uses  two  different  sounds,  one  indicating  the  window  and  other 
indicating the object inside the window. (Principle-35: Parameter change).  

Both  the  sounds  are  used  together  to  indicate  a  graphic  object  on  the  screen 
(Principle-5: Merging). 

2.4 Internal  window  object  tree  method  for  representing  graphical  user 
interface applications for speech navigation (US Patent 5864819) 

Background problem 
Voice  recognition  systems  respond  to  voice  commands  control  software  and 
allow user data to be entered through spoken words. These voice navigators are 
designed  to  associate  voice  commands  with  equivalent  keyboard  or  mouse 
actuated control functions. However, the prior art voice navigators were not able 
to operate commands on a background window. 

Solution provided by the invention 
Patent  5864819  (invented  by  De  Armas  et  al.,  assigned  by  IBM,  issued  Jan 
1999)  disclosed  a  voice  navigator  that  can  use  the  controls  in  a  background 
window.  

The  invention  enables  an  application  program  to  determine  a  plurality  of 
application states each defined as a set of window objects. The method internally 
maintains  a  window  hierarchy  by  representing  the  application  state  by  a  sub-
context tree comprised of various sub-context objects.  

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIZ based analysis 
The  invention  differentiates  a  foreground  state  from  a  background  state  and 
maintains each state of the application as sub-context objects in context data file 
(Principle-24: Intermediary). The spoken words are matched with the vocabulary 
of the context data file. 

2.5 Method  and  system  for  enabling  blind  or  visually  impaired  computer 
users to graphically select displayed elements (US Patent 6046722) 

Background problem 
In a graphical user interface the objects are presented in visual icons, which the 
user  operate  through  a  pointing  device  like  mouse.  Normally  the  sighted 
individuals find graphical user interfaces very useful and convenient. But they are 
of no use for the blind or visually impaired people.  

There are some methods to add sound and voice to the GUI so that they can be 
effectively  used  by  the  blind  and  visually  impaired  users.  The  audible  cursor 
positioning and pixel status identification mechanism helps a user to identify the 
desired line by noting the change in tone as the cursor moves.  

There  is  another  system  where  the  textual  names  of  GUI  contents  are 
announced  when  they  are  first  loaded.  The  blind  user  can  select  the  graphical 
icons  as  their  textual  names  are  announced  every  time  the  mouse  moves  over 
them.  

However these techniques do not help the user to select or deselect a displayed 
object.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  for  an  improved  method  for  a  blind  or  visually 
impaired user to graphically select the displayed elements within a graphical user 
interface.  

Solution provided by the invention 
Patent  6046722  (invented  by  Jr.  McKiel,  assigned  by  IBM  Corporation,  issued 
Apr  2000)  provides  a  system  for  permitting  blind  or  visually  impaired  users  to 
utilize a graphical user interface. 

According to the invention, a unique identifiable audible signal is associated with 
each  displayed  graphic  element.  A  composite  audible  signal  is  periodically 
generated in response to the position of the cursor. The composite audible signal 
includes the audible signals associated with the graphic objects located within a 
predetermined radius from the cursor.   

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIZ based analysis  
The  invention  intends  to  provide  a  sound  enabled  system  to  assist  the  blind 
users to use the graphical user interface (Principle-8: Counterweight). 

An audible signal is associated with each graphic element (Principle-38: Enrich). 

The  invention  detects  the  position  of  the  cursor  and  generates  a  composite 
audible signal that includes audible signals associated with the graphic elements 
within a predetermined radius (Principle-40: Composite). 

2.6 Voice  interaction  method  for  a  computer  graphical  user  interface  (US 
Patent 6499015) 

Background problem 
A typical GUI displays icons, words and other graphical elements on the screen 
of a video monitor. This method is an improved and efficient alternative to typing 
commands  through  a  keyboard.  But  this  makes  use  of  excessive  and  precise 
mouse  movements,  which  may  be  difficult  for  some  users.  A  voice  enabled 
graphical user interface overcomes that difficulty.  

Solution provided by the invention 
Patent 6499015 (invented by Brooks et al., assigned by IBM, issued Dec 2002) 
discloses  a  method  of  selecting  elements  of  a  GUI  by  speaking  commands 
through a microphone.  

According to the invention, the user speaks a voice command corresponding to 
the visual components such as menu items, command buttons etc. The computer 
then  associates  the  voice  command  to  the  corresponding  display  element  and 
does  the  necessary  operation  as  if  the  command  is  entered  through  a  mouse 
operation.  

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TRIZ based analysis 
The voice recognition system supplements human computer interaction when the 
hands  of  the  user  are  not  available  or  busy  with  other  activities  (Principle-8: 
Counterweight). 

When  a  voice  command  identifies an element  on  the  GUI display  the  computer 
displays a menu of voice commands associated with that element (Principle-23: 
Feedback). 

3. Summary  

The TTS and VRS are not so popularly used with graphical user interfaces as it 
was  expected  a  decade  ago.  This  is  mainly  because  the  system  is  yet  to  be 
matured.  The  common  user  did  not  prefer  such  interfaces  because  of  their 
complicacies.  The  application  of  TTS  and  VRS  remained  desirable  only  for 
specific segment of users. 

But  there  are  continuous  inventions  on  the  pattern  matching  and  voice 
recognition  mechanism.  There  will  be  more  voice-enabled  interfaces  when  the 
VRS mechanism will be more matured and fool proof. 

Reference: 

1.  US  Patent  5223828,  “Method  and  system  for  enabling  a  blind  computer  user  to  handle 
message boxes in a graphical user interface”, invented by McKiel Jr., Assigned to IBM, Jun 
93 

2.  US Patent 5287102, “Method and system for enabling a blind computer user to locate icons 

in a graphical user interface”, invented by McKiel Jr., assigned to IBM, Feb 94 

3.  US  Patent  5461399,  “Method  and  system  for  enabling  visually  impaired  computer  users  to 
graphically  select  displayed  objects”,  invented  by  Brian  J.  Cragun,  Assigned  to  IBM,  Oct 
1995.  

4.  US  Patent  5864819,  “Internal  window  object  tree  method  for  representing  graphical  user 
interface applications for speech navigation”, invented by De Armas et al., assigned by IBM, 
issued Jan 1999. 

5.  US  Patent  6046722,  “Method  and  system  for  enabling  blind  or  visually  impaired  computer 
users  to  graphically  select  displayed  elements”,  invented  by  Jr.  McKiel,  assigned  by  IBM 
Corporation, issued Apr 2000. 

6.  US  Patent  6499015,  “Voice  interaction  method  for  a  computer  graphical  user  interface”, 

invented by Brooks et al., assigned by IBM, issued Dec 2002. 

7.  US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) site, http://www.uspto.gov/ 

Inventions on speech enabled GUI  

by Umakant Mishra 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
