VR-Stepper: A Do-It-Yourself Game Interface  
For Locomotion In Virtual Environments 

Denys J.C. Matthies 
University of Munich (LMU) 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1 
80539 Munich, Germany 
matthies@cip.ifi.lmu.de 

Felix M. Manke 
University of Munich (LMU) 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1 
80539 Munich, Germany 
manke@cip.ifi.lmu.de 

Franz Müller 
University of Munich (LMU) 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1 
80539 Munich, Germany 
muellerfr@campus.lmu.de 

Charalampia Makri 
University of Munich (LMU) 
Geschwister-Scholl-Platz 1 
80539 Munich, Germany 
c.makri@campus.lmu.de 

Christoph Anthes 
Leibniz Supercomputing  
Center (LRZ) 
Boltzmannstr. 1 
85748 Garching, Germany 
christoph.anthes@lrz.de 

Dieter Kranzlmüller 
University of Munich (LMU) 
MNM-Team 
Oettingerstr. 67,  
80538 Munich, Germany 
kranzlmueller@ifi.lmu.de 

ABSTRACT 
Compared to real world tasks, completing tasks in a virtual 
environment  (VE)  seldom  involves  the  whole  spectrum  of 
skills  the  human  body  offers.  User  input  in  a  VE  is 
commonly  accomplished  through  simple  finger  gestures, 
such  as  walking  in  a  scene  by  simply  pressing  a  button, 
even if this kind of interaction is not very suitable. In order 
to  create  a  more  intuitive  and  natural  interaction,  diverse 
projects try to tackle the problem of locomotion in VE’s by 
trying to enable a natural walking movement, which is also 
supposed  to  increase  the  level  of  immersion.  Existing 
solutions  such  as  treadmills  are  still  expensive  and  need 
additional fixation of the body. In this paper, we describe a 
simple  and  inexpensive  way  to  build  a  useful  locomotion 
interface  using  a  conventional  sports  stepper  and  an 
Arduino.  This  device  enables  control  in  a  VE  by  walking-
in-place  and  without  the  need  for  any  additional  fixation 
gadgets. We conducted a user study with 10 participants to 
evaluate  the  impression  on  the  joy  and  ease  of  use, 
immersion and reliability in comparison to other interfaces 
used for locomotion, such as the Wii Balance Board and a 
Wand  Joystick.  We  found  out 
is 
experienced slightly better in terms of immersion and joy of 
use. Furthermore, found that pressing buttons on a Joystick 
was perceived to be more reliable. 

the  stepper 

that 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  part  or  all  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact 
the owner/author(s). 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
arXiv Human-Computer Interaction (cs.HC), July 15, 2014. 

Author Keywords 
Input device, physical interface, foot input, locomotion, 
interaction method, hands-free, VR. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User 
Interfaces—Input devices and strategies, Interaction styles. 

INTRODUCTION 
Technology  consistently  evolves,  thus  products  as  the 
Oculus  Rift1,  which  conceptually  came  from  the  research 
field of virtual reality (VR), finally reached a level of being 
socially  acceptable  and  available  to  the  consumer  market. 
Advertisements  for  such  products  and  especially  computer 
games show fascinating graphical 3D-environments, which 
promise  the  user  a  totally  new  experience  of  VR.  In 
scientific  contexts  this  capturing  of  senses,  diving  into  an 
unreal  world  and  feeling  a  real  depth  of  presence  is  also 
called  immersion  [9].  Nowadays,  games  and  hardware 
developers 
programming 
interfaces  (APIs)  or  whole  software  development  kits 
(SDKs) with their products, so users are enabled to modify 
and  design  their  own  experience.  Because  these  tools 
became much easier to use, building own 3D virtual worlds 
doesn’t  require  advanced  software  engineering  skills 
anymore.  Moreover  ideas  of  physical  devices  can  be  built 
more  easily.  Today,  special  materials,  which  used  to  be 
available  only  for  research  institutes  or  big  industry 
enterprises,  are  also  accessible  for  end  consumers.  Good 
examples  would  be  Sugru2,  a  highly  flexible  and  resistant 

application 

deliver 

often 

1 Oculus Rift HMD by Oculus VR 
http://www.oculusvr.com [last access: 03/12/2013] 
2 Sugru by FORMFORMFORM  
http://www.sugru.com [last access: 03/12/2013] 

 
 
                                                             
 
is 

that 

modeling  clay,  or  low-cost  3D  printers3  for  an  affordable 
manufacturing of own product series. Technology has never 
been  that  close  to  the  consumer  as  it  is  today.  Another 
the  Arduino4,  a  board  with  a 
example  for 
microcontroller  that  allows  bringing  objects  to  life.  It 
became very famous because of its simplicity in usage and 
its  large  variety  of  functions.  Additional  tools  such  as 
Fritzing5  enable  an  easy  learning  and  understanding  of 
electronics  and  circuits  for  not  tech-savvy  users  as  well. 
Beyond  this,  it  is  possible  to  exchange  ideas  and  related 
technical  solutions  on  the  basis  of  these  documentations. 
The Internet offers a big and growing pool of ideas, hacks 
and  tutorials  (e.g.  Instructables6,  Hack  a  Day7),  which  are 
designed by users for users. Hacking a device and building 
things  on  the  users  own  became  a  great  culture,  since 
everything  became  much  easier  through  the  accessible 
technology8.  Following  these  trends,  this  paper  also  wants 
to contribute a do-it-yourself (DIY) solution for a low-cost 
locomotion interface for virtual environments. 

RELATED WORK 

is  displayed.  Locomotion 

Virtual environments 
One  of  the  main  goals  of  a  virtual  environment  (VE)  is  to 
create an as high level of depth of presence as possible, also 
called immersion [8]. In 1992, Cruz-Neira et al. [3] built a 
so  called  CAVE  –  an  audio  visual  environment,  which  is 
basically a small room consisting of display walls, where a 
these 
virtual  3D  scene 
environments  is  mostly  performed  with  finger-interaction 
and  tracking  of  body  parts.  Physical  movement  such  as 
natural walking is hardly feasible since space is limited by 
walls.  Also  the  physical  rotation  of  the  user  is  often 
problematic since most CAVE-like installations do not have 
a back screen. Both discoveries have already been stated by 
Cirio  et  al.  [2].  Therefore,  another  approach  would  be  to 
have the display very close to the human eyes, which would 
mostly  be  attached  to  the  human  head  –  called  head 
mounted  display  (HMD).  As  mentioned,  the  Oculus  Rift 

in 

became one of the most popular HMD in recent history. So 
the  rotation  problem  has  been  overcome,  but  other 
problems  have  appeared,  for  instance  the  level  of  cyber 
sickness  has  become  an  even  greater  issue,  since  users  are 
often not able to see a reference point (e.g. their body parts 
such as their feet) when the display of the HMD surrounds 
the whole field of view (FOV). Other issues are latency, as 
stated  by  LaViola  [5].  When  being  blind  for  reality, 
locomotion through physical walking is limited to walking-
in-place  only.  For  this  kind  of  setup,  gadgets  are  often 
installed  to  hold  the  user  in  position,  as  for  the  Omni9:  a 
locomotion  interface  that  holds  the  user  in  ring  gadgetry 
above  a  slippery  bowl  to  enable  free  walking.  Functions 
include: walking/running, turning and  jumping. One of the 
main  disadvantages  is  that  the  user  has  to  learn  a  special 
kind  of  walking.  Otherwise,  he  will  be  exhausted  very 
quickly. Crouching and strafing are not supported yet.  

locomotion 

Use of Stepper in Research 
interface  for  VR 
Using  a  stepper  as  a 
applications  could  provide  a  solution,  which  was  also 
employed  by  Wiegand  and  Brooks  [9],  who  modified  a 
stepper  for  a  military  trainings  application.  Hamano  et  al. 
[4]  used  a  stepper  for  rehabilitation  support.  Still,  the 
technical  solutions  demonstrated  were  expensive  and  not 
sufficient. Inspired by works such as the ones from Pausch 
[7] or Basu et al. [1], we wanted to design a much cheaper 
and  more  technically  simple  solution,  which  is  also  usable 
for any 3D applications. 

VR-STEPPER 
The  VR-Stepper  is  a  sports  stepper  modified  with  an 
attached Arduino board to make it usable as an input device 
for a personal computer. We demonstrate two ways to turn 
it  into  an  interactive  device  connected  to  a  computer,  with 
different levels of difficulty for each way.  

3 About.com, List of 3D Printers Under $1000 - Ready To 
Use, http://3d.about.com/od/3d-Electronics/tp/List-Of-3d-
Printers-Under-1000-Ready-To-Use.htm [l.a.: 03/12/2013] 
4 Arduino originally by Smart Projects Electronics 
http://www.arduino.cc [last access: 03/12/2013] 
5 Fritzing originally by FH:-P, now: IXDS Berlin 
http://www.fritzing.org [last access: 03/12/2013] 
6 Instructables originally: MIT Media Lab, now: Squid Labs 
http://www.instructables.com [last access: 04/12/2013] 
7 Hack a Day originally by Jason Calacanis 
http://www.hackaday.com [last access: 04/12/2013] 
8 Wettach. R. (2009, November) TED Talk - TEDx Berlin 
http://www.tedxberlin.de/tedxberlin-2009-reto-wettach-
bodies-secrets [last access: 03/12/2013] 

Figure 1. Crouching User in a VE (Half-Life 2) with the VR-
Stepper, Razor Hydra and wearing Oculus Rift. 

9 Omni by Virtuix  
http://www.virtuix.com [last access: 03/12/2013] 

                                                             
 
                                                             
Features of the Stepper 
The  VR  Stepper  enables  its  user  to  move  in  the  VE’s.  A 
constant  motion  of  the  pedals  causes  a  straight  forward 
movement,  as  if  the  user  was  really  walking.  By  lowering 
one  pedal  until  it  touches  the  ground,  the  user  can  turn 
around or strafe laterally (based on the setup). Additionally, 
crouching on the stepper also results in crouching in a VE. 

Simple DIY Version 
Basic features of the device (walking straight and rotation) 
can be achieved with the simple DIY version that does not 
require  much  knowledge  in  electronics  and  no  soldering. 
This minimal version requires the following items:10 

(cid:1)  Sports Stepper (used: $5-10 new: $39) 

(cid:1)  Arduino (Uno: $18 / Nano: $10)  

(cid:1)  Potentiometer (slide or turn: $1-2) 

(cid:1)  Glue & Tape & Wires (4$) 

Lowering the left or right pedal to the ground is shifting or 
turning  the  knob  of  the  potentiometer,  which  should  result 
in  a  turn  or  strafe  in  the  VE.  Since  the  value  of  the 
potentiometer is being constantly written to the serial port, 
it  can  be  read  out  and  processed  by  Processing,  where  a 
key-press event can be triggered.  

Advanced Version 
To  enable  more  complex  features  of  the  VR-Stepper, 
namely crouching, a more advanced version has to be built. 
By  building  this  particular  version  of  the  VR-Stepper,  one 
can obtain a device that would be recognized as a keyboard 
by the computer, making it usable in many programs, such 
as  games  where  controls  are  operated  by  keyboard  events 
with  no  additional  software  required.  This  version  needs 
additional components: 

(cid:1)  IR Sensor (Sharp GP2Y0A02YK: $20) 

(cid:1)  USB-Keyboard (wired: 5$ wireless: $10) 

(cid:1)  4x Optocoupler ($1) 

(cid:1)  5x 1kOhm Resistor (<$1) 

(cid:1)  MOSFET (IRF640: <$2) 

(cid:1)  10uF Capacitor (<$1) 

(cid:1)  Universal PCB 

Keyboard Hack 
Unfortunately  key  events  coming  from  separate  software 
tools  are  often  not  suitable  for  every  game,  since  it  could 
also provide a possibility for cheating. A suitable solution is 
utilizing the circuit board of a keyboard for transmitting key 
presses to the computer. These circuits have up to 24 input 
pins,  which  create  a  key  press  event  when  connected  with 
each  other.  Consequently  the  first  thing  would  be  finding 
out  the  right  keys  to  utilize  (e.g.  A,  S,  D,  Directional 
Arrows,  Ctrl  key).    Because  the  connections  have  to  be 
shorten on an electronic way, the pins have to be attached to 
optocouplers, which have to be connected to the Arduino’s 
output pins. This way the sensor processing must be done at 
the microcontroller instead of executing a method. Now, the 
related pins connected to the optocouplers have to be set to 
HIGH  or  LOW.  Another  more  expensive  but  convenient 
way  would  be  using  an  Arduino  Leonardo  ($30),  which  is 
able to emulate key press events as well. 

Infrared Sensor 
Additional features as crouching (shown Figure 1) would be 
beneficial to the user as it enlarges the degrees of freedom. 
Crouching on the stepper is realized with an infrared sensor 
(Sharp  GP2Y0A02YK),  which  has  a  range  of  0-150  cm. 
This  kind  of  sensor  is  very  simple  to  interface  on  the 
Arduino since it has a behavior similar to a potentiometer: 
when the user is going down to a crouch position the human 
body will bend over the IR sensor, thus changing the sensor 
value  to  a  lower  one.  Therefore  using  a  threshold  is  once 
again a sufficient solution. 

Figure 2. Finding suitable positions for the potentiometer. A: 
attached to the rod below the pedal. B: turn potentiometer 
attached at a pivot to measure the changing angle.  

The  main  challenge  is  to  attach  the  potentiometer  to  a 
suitable position where the actual motion of the pedals can 
be measured. Figure 2 demonstrates two suitable positions: 
(A)  a  slide  potentiometer  attached  to  the  rod  below  the 
pedal - the knob is bumping against the frame and a rubber 
band  is  pulling  it  back  for  the  countermovement  or  (B)  a 
turn  potentiometer  attached  at  a  pivot  measures  the 
changing  angle  -  a  rod  is  utilized  to  fix  the  knob.  Arduino 
measures the value of the potentiometer and transmits it to 
the serial port where it is being read out by Processing11.  

10 Average prices checked on ebay.com [15/04/2014]. 
11 Processing originally by Ben Fry and Casey Reas (2001) 
http://processing.org [last access: 11/09/2013] 

 
                                                             
Power Supply 
The  keyboard  circuit  usually  gets  its  power  from  a  USB 
cable  (or  a  battery)  as  also  the  Arduino  needs  a  power 
supply. It occurs that the power delivered by only one USB 
port  is  not  sufficient  for  both  devices.  Thus  having  both 
devices  at  one  USB  port  a  power  transistor  to  amplify  the 
current  and  a  capacitor  to  smooth  the  voltage  fluctuations 
are required. 

USER STUDY 
To  get  some  first  impressions  on  the  performance  of  the 
prototype  we  conducted  a  user  study.  Furthermore  we 
wanted  to  find  out  what  kind  of  impact  this  low-cost 
locomotion interface has, when applied to a VE.  

Hypothesis 
The  first  hypothesis  (H1)  is:  moving  in  a  3D  scene  by 
performing 
increases 
leg  movements  on  a  Stepper 
immersion.  The  second  hypothesis  (H2)  would  be:  letting 
the  user  involving  their  whole  body  -  especially  the  leg 
movement  -  leads  to  a  greater  joy  compared  to  common 
devices such as a Wand Joystick. However, due to the faster 
and more precise actions possible with a Wand Joystick and 
having tactile feedback when pushing the button, the Wand 
Joystick  might  be  rated  higher  in  terms  of  perceived 
reliability (H3). 

Pretests 
At  first,  we  decided  to  use  the  Stepper  as  a  locomotion 
interface for playing Half-Life 212 with the Oculus Rift and 
the  Razer  Hydra13  (Figure  1).  However,  after 
two 
participants,  we  found  out  that  the  users  were  not  able  to 
keep their balance - they fell off the stepper - as soon as the 
3D  scene  was  displayed.  Therefore  the  decision  was  made 
to use a CAVE-like design, where the users would still have 
reference points, which should circumvent the problem. 

Study Setup 
The  user  study  was  conducted  in  a  stereoscopic  5-display-
wall CAVE-like installation (Figure 3). To gain knowledge 
on  the  performance  of  the  Stepper,  we  accomplished  a 
within  subject  study  with  the  3  following  conditions:  VR-
Stepper, Wii Balance Board14 and a Wand Joystick15 in two 

12 Half-Life 2 by Valve 
http://orange.half-life2.com [last access: 05/12/2013] 
13 Razer Hydra Gaming Controller by Razor 
http://www.razerzone.com/gaming-controllers/razer-hydra/ 
[last access: 05/12/2013] 
14 Wii Balance Board by Nintendo  
http://www.nintendo.com/consumer/downloads/wiiBalance
Board.pdf [last access: 06/12/2013] 
15 Flystick 2 by A.R.T.  
http://www.ar-tracking.com/products/interaction-
devices/flystick2/ [last access: 06/12/2013] 

self-build  3D  scenes.  The  first  users’  task  was  it  to  run  as 
fast  as  possible  through  a  racing  track,  which  had  several 
hinders,  the  users  had  to  dodge.  The  second  scene  was  a 
waste-land scenario, where the user was enabled  for a free 
walking without any task. Every subject had to go through 
both  scenes  by  using  each  interface  in  a  random  order. 
interface  a 
After  completing  all  scenes  with  every 
questionnaire  had  to  be  filled  out,  which  was  asking  the 
user to rate the following on a 5-point Likert scale: (1) Ease 
of  Use  (2)  Joy  of  Use  (3)  Feeling  of  Immersion  (4) 
Impression on Reliability.  

Figure 3. Experimental setup with the three devices: Stepper, 
Wii Balance Board & Wand Joystick 

Participants 
We evaluated the system with one group of 10 participants 
(8 male, 2 female), with an age between 15 and 55. 

Results 

Ease of Use 
A  one-way  ANOVA  on  the  device  factor  showed  a 
significant difference in terms of ease of use (F2,18 = 5.96 ; 
p=.01). A Tukey HSD Test suggests that the joystick (M= 
3.4) is significantly easier to use than the VR-Stepper (M= 
2.2 ; p < .01). No other differences yield. 

Joy of Use 
A  one-way  ANOVA  showed  no  significant  difference  (p 
>.05)  between  all  devices.  However,  the  VR-Stepper  (M= 
4) was deemed more joyful than the joystick (M= 3.3) and 
the Wii Balance Board (M= 3.5). 

                                                             
 
VR-Stepper

Wii Balance Board

Wand Joystick

5

4

3

2

1

Ease of use           Joy of use             Feeling of            Impression

                                                           Immersion          on Reliability
Figure 4. Quantitative results for each test criteria. 

Feeling of Immersion 
A one-way ANOVA did not yield any significant difference 
(p >.05) between devices that are averaging around 2.9-3.6. 

Impression on Reliability 
A one-way ANOVA found a significant difference in terms 
of reliability (F2,18 = 22.18; p <.0001). A Tukey HSD Test 
determined  that  the  joystick  (M=  3.4)  was  perceived  as 
more reliable than the VR-Stepper (M= 2.1; p <.01) and the 
Wii Balance Board (M= 2.0; p <.01). 

in 

Discussion 
Analyzing  the  data  (Figure  4)  showed  that  using  a  Wand 
Joystick  is  significantly  easier.  Confirming  the  hypothesis 
H3, the reliability was also significantly rated much higher. 
terms  of 
The  VR-Stepper  was  also  experienced, 
immersion  and  joy  slightly  better  than  the  other  tested 
interfaces,  as  expected.  Unfortunately,  the  difference  was 
not statistically significant, thus  hypothesis H1 and H2 did 
not confirm. Therefore this short study could not prove that 
a physical movement of legs results in a raise of immersion. 
However  a  broader  study  with  a  doubled  sample  size  and 
similar  feedback  would  deliver  a  statistically  significant 
difference.  For  future  studies  additionally  measuring  real 
quantitative data (e.g. task completion time) would also be 
interesting for a comparison of locomotion interfaces.  

in  a  CAVE-like 

When  being 
installation  and  using 
stationary  IR  tracking  systems,  the  additional  IR  sensor 
attached  to  the  Stepper  might  not  operate  due  to  the 
overshoot  of  great  IR  noise.  In  that  case,  crouching  has  to 
be  detected  by  the  local  tracking  system  in  a  CAVE.  The 
problem  of  losing  balance  also  sometimes  occurred  in  the 
CAVE, when the user was fully focusing on the game and 
“forgetting  about  being  on  a  stepper”  thus  P4  also  stated 
“it can be dangerous by falling from it”. Two users stated 
the stepper to be “exhausting but very funny”. P8 proposed 
to  create  a  skiing-application.  Except  from  one  outlier  we 
excluded (P11 - a female mid-age subject, who fall off the 
stepper and did not wish to complete the study) the overall 
feedback was quite good. Most users agreed that using the 
Wii Balance Board required an extra familiarization phase, 
which  is  not  needed  for  the  stepper.  Overall,  all  study 
participants really enjoyed the user test, as they said during 
and after the test. 

CONCLUSION 
This  paper  demonstrated  a  novel  approach  of  hacking  a 
stepper  as  a  low-cost  DIY  input  interface  for  virtual 
environments.  Furthermore  a  small  study  was  conducted, 
where  the  functionality  of  this  device  was  tested  in  a  self-
built  3D  scene.  Additionally  a  comparison  to  a  “Wii 
Balance  Board”  and  a  “Wand  Joystick”  is  accomplished, 
which gave valuable results such as: an instant / direct input 
action with a haptic feedback from the buttons by the Wand 
was  preferred  to  use.  Never  the  less,  the  VR-Stepper  was 
rated  better  in  terms  of  “joy  of  use”  and  “feeling  of 
immersion”, yet more tests need to be conducted in order to 
report  empirical  evidence.  Overall,  the  observation  of  our 
study  showed  that  very  fast  movements  or  lags  in  a  3D 
scene  dramatically  increase  cyber  sickness  and  lead  to  a 
loss  of  equilibrium,  as  we  agree  with  Pausch  [7]  who 
already  stated  the  importance  of  low  latency  HMD’s.  An 
advantage in VE’s could include exercise programs, which 
even would provide significantly more joy of use [10]. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Basu, A., Saupe, C., Refour, E., Raij, A., & Johnsen, K. 
(2012, March). Immersive 3dui on one dollar a day. In 
Proc. of 3D User Interfaces, 97-100. IEEE. 

2.  Cirio, G., Vangorp, P., Chapoulie, E., Marchal, M., 

Lécuyer, A., & Drettakis, G. (2012). Walking in a cube: 
Novel metaphors for safely navigating large virtual 
environments in restricted real workspaces. In Proc. of 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 546-554. IEEE. 

3.  Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., DeFanti, T. A., Kenyon, 
R. V., & Hart, J. C. (1992). The CAVE: audio visual 
experience automatic virtual environment. In 
Communications of the ACM, 35(6), 64-72. ACM. 

4.  Hamano, H., Furukawa, T., & Ohchi, M. (2003, 

August). Development of virtual walk system for 
rehabilitation support using stepper. In SICE 2003 
Annual Conference (Vol. 3), 2951-2956. IEEE. 

5.  LaViola Jr, J. J. (2000). A discussion of cybersickness in 
virtual environments. In SIGCHI Bulletin, 47-56. ACM. 

6.  Nenonen, V., Lindblad, A., Häkkinen, V., Laitinen, T., 
Jouhtio, M., & Hämäläinen, P. (2007, April). Using 
heart rate to control an interactive game. In Proc. of 
SIGCHI CHI’07, 853-856. ACM. 

7.  Pausch, R. (1991, March). Virtual reality on five dollars 
a day. In Proc. of SIGCHI CHI‘91, 265-270. ACM. 

8.  Slater, M., Usoh, M., & Steed, A. (1994). Depth of 

presence in virtual environments. In Presence, 130-144. 

9.  Wiegand, T.E.v., Brooks, A. (2001) FootStepper: an 
effort-based locomotion interface. In Presence-Lite. 

10. Xu, W., Jeong, J., & Mulligan, J. (2009). Augmenting 
exercise systems with virtual exercise environment. In 
Proceedings of Advances in Visual Computing, 490-
499). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

