International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 13 Number 4 – Jul  2014 

A Review Paper on Oculus Rift-A Virtual 
Reality Headset 

Parth  Rajesh Desai1 , Pooja Nikhil Desai 1 , Komal Deepak Ajmera1 , Khushbu Mehta1 ,  

1. U.G. student, Electronics and Telecommunication Department, DJSCOE, Vile-Parle (W), Mumbai – 400056,India. 

(VR) 

is  a 
Abstract:  Oculus  rift:  Virtual  reality 
burgeoning  field  that  has  the  inherent  potential  of 
manipulating  peoples  mind  with  a  superlative  3D 
experience.  Oculus  rift  is  one  such  application  that 
in  achieving  the  same.  With  the  fleeting 
assists 
enhancements  in  VR  it  now  seems  very  feasible  to 
provide  the  user  with  experiences  that  were  earlier 
thought to be merely a dream or a nightmare. 

Keywords:  gyroscope, 
immersion, sense of fusion.  

virtual 

reality,  panorama, 

visual 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Virtual  Reality  is  a  computer  simulated  environment  that 
gives  the  user  the  experience  of  being  present  in  that 
environment.  It  is  a  3-Dimensional  computer  generated 
the  effects  of  a  concrete 
environment.  VR  provides 
existence  without  actually  having  a  concrete  existence.  VR 
not  only  provides  immersions  of  vision  but  also  of  sound 
and tactile feedback. 

 Basically,  VR  is  a  theory  based  on  the  human  desire  to 
escape  the  real  world  boundaries  and  this  is  done  by 
embracing  the  cyber  world.  It  is  a  new  form  of  human 
machine interaction that is beyond keyboard, mouse or even 
touch screen for that matter. It is a means by which one can 
interact  with  full  visual  immersion.  Immersion  is  based  on 
two  main components: depth of information  and  breadth  of 
information.  Depth  of  information  includes  resolution, 
quality  and  effectiveness  of  audio  visuals  etc.  Breadth  of 
information is the number  of sensory  present at a time. VR 
is  implemented  by  using  interactive  devices  like  gloves 
headsets  or  helmets.  Oculus  Rift  is  a  VR  Ski-Masked 
Shaped  Goggle  device  that  works  along  with  computers  or 
mobiles.  Other  VR  headsets  have  problem  of  motion 
sickness  to  the  user  post  its  usage.  But  here  is  a  new 
technology  which  claims  to  have  solved  this  problem  of 
motion  sickness  and  dizziness  post  the  usage.  This  new 
technology is oculus rift. 

Fig. 1  The oculus rift headset 

II. 

DESCRIPTION 

 The Oculus Rift is a light weight headset that allows a user 
to step into the game and look in any direction.  The Oculus 
Rift  is  currently  present  in  developer  kits  versions.  Two 
developer kit versions have been released namely Developer 
Kit version 1 (DK1) and developer kit version 2 (DK2). The 
DK2  is  a  more  advanced  version  of  the  oculus  rift  as 
compared to DK1. 

A.  Oculus Rift DK1 Specs 

  Oculus Rift Price: $300 (INR 18000) 

  Display Resolution: 640  x 800 (1.25:1) [1280 x 800  split 

between each eye] 

  Display Technology: LED 

  Display Size (diagonal): 4.08″ 

  Field of View (degrees): H: 90° 

  Pixels Per Inch (PPI): 251 

  Total Pixels (per eye): 512,000 

  Weight (headset): 380g 

  Stereoscopic 3D capable: Yes 

  Audio: Bring Your Own Audio 

  Inputs: DVI, USB (power) 

ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 13 Number 4 – Jul  2014 

  Head Tracking: Yes 

  Positional Tracking: No 

B.  Oculus Rift DK2 Specs 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Oculus Rift DK2 Price: $350 (INR 21000) 

  Display Resolution: 960 x 1080 (1.13:1) [1920x                             

1080 split between each eye] 

Display Technology: OLED 

Field of View (degrees): H: 90° 

Pixels Per Inch (PPI): 441 

Total Pixels (per eye): 1,036,800 

Fig. 2 Difference of quality of display between DK1 and DK2,  Left side 
image is of DK1 and right side image of DK2. 

  Weight (headset): 440g 

III. 

INSIDE VIEW 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The inside view of the oculus rift goggles is as shown in the 
figure. 

Stereoscopic 3D capable: Yes 

Audio: Bring Your Own Audio 

Inputs: HDMI 1.4b, USB, IR Camera Sync Jack 

Head Tracking: Yes 

Positional Tracking: Yes 

Refresh Rate: 75 Hz, 72 Hz, 60 Hz 

Persistence: 2 ms, 3 ms, full 

Viewing Optics: 100º Field of View (nominal) 

Cable: 10’ (detachable) 

Input: HDMI 1.4b 

USB device: USB 2.0 

USB host: USB 2.0 (requires DC Power Adapter) 

Fig. 3 The internal structure of oculus rift headset 

Camera USB: USB 2.0 

    Sensors: Gyroscope ,Accelerometer, Magnetometer 

Update Rate: 1000 Hz 

Sensor: Near Infrared CMOS Sensor 

Update Rate: 60 Hz 

The  oculus rift kits come with three sets of lenses-A, B and 
C.  lens  pair  A  is  to  be  used  by  people  who  have  excellent 
long  sighted  eyesight  as  the  rift  is  focused  at  infinity.  The 
pairs B and C are to be used by people having problems with 
near  sightedness,  though  cannot  be  used  by  all,  especially 
people with major vision complications. 
Also precise care should be taken while changing the lenses. 
A tiny dust particle if  gets settled on the lens creates a dead 
pixel  view  in  the  VR.  To  worsen  it  further  one  can  expect 
dust particles in both the lenses at different locations. 
Furthermore glasses can also be worn along with the oculus 
rift goggles, provided that the glasses are not huge. 

ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 176 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 13 Number 4 – Jul  2014 

IV.  WORKING 

magnetic field. Combined, these allow for correction of drift 
in all three axes.  

       A.    Head tracking      

tracking  controller 

The  oculus  rift  head  tracking  lets  the  user  look  around  the 
virtual  world  just  in  the  manner  they  would  in  the  real 
world. The Oculus Rift head tracker constantly analyzes the 
player’s  head  movement  and  uses  it  to  control  the  view, 
instead of relying on a mouse or analogue stick to turn your 
view in the game. This makes for a completely natural way 
to  observe the world, which is a  major factor in immersion. 
The  headset  consists  of  a  Oculus  Tracker  v2  board 
consisting of chips controlling the head tracking device. The 
chips  are  STM  microelectronics  32F103C8  ARM  Cortex-
M3  Micro-controller  with  72MHz  CPU.  Invensense  .MPU-
6000  six-axis  motion 
.Honeywell 
HMC5983 three axis digital compasses used in conjunction 
with  the  accelerometer  to  correct  for  gyroscope  drift.  The 
Oculus  VR  sensor,  support  sampling  rates  up  to  1000  Hz, 
which  minimizes  the  time  between  the  player’s  head 
movement and the game engine receiving the sensor data to 
roughly  2  milliseconds.  The  increased  sampling  rates  also 
reduce  orientation  error  by  providing  a  denser  dataset  to 
integrate  over,  making  the  player’s  real-world  movements 
more in-sync with the game. The Oculus VR sensor includes 
a  gyroscope,  accelerometer,  and  magnetometer.  When  the 
data  from  these  devices  is  fused,  helps  in  determining  the 
orientation  of  the  player’s  head  in  the  real  world  and 
synchronize the player’s virtual perspective in real-time. The 
Rift’s orientation is  reported  as  a set  of rotations  in a right-
handed  coordinate  system  as  given 
the 
gyroscope,  which  reports  the  rate  of  rotation  (angular 
velocity)  around  X,  Y  and  Z  axes  in  radians/second, 
provides  the  most  valuable  data  for  head  orientation 
tracking.  By  constantly  accumulating  angular  velocity 
samples  over  time,  the  Oculus  SDK(system  development 
kit) can determine the direction of the Rift relative to where  
it  began.  Although  the  gyroscope  provides  orientation 
relative  to  the  starting  point,  it  creates  two  difficulties    it 
cannot  provide  the  original  orientation  of  the  headset  and 
it’s subject to a small amount of drift over time (imagine re-
orienting  your  head  back  to  perfect  center  but  in-game 
you’re now looking slightly left or right).These issues affect 
the  VR  game  with  a  fixed  reference  point  (a  game  with  a 
cockpit, where the players head’s orientation does not affect 
the position of car/plane being piloted) .The accelerometer is 
leveraged 
the 
magnetometer  measures  the  strength  and  direction  of  the 

the  “down”  vector  and 

in  figure(3) 

to  estimate 

Fig.4 Head tracking sensor 

Fig5 An illustration of the three axes. 

      B. Position tracking 

Oculus rift DK2 involves position tracking which allows the 
user to lean in for a closer look at an in-game objectg 
or  panel,  or  peek  around  a  wall  by  moving  their  head  and 
upper body, and seeing their physical actions translated into 
the  virtual  world.  The  added  positional  tracking  helps  with 
reducing the dizziness, the brain doesn't get confused by the 
missing degree of motion.  

C.  Control box 

Oculus  Rift  comes  with  its  own  power  supply  of  standard 
USB  voltage  of  5  V  DC  a.  The  power  supply  circuit  is 
within  the  control  box.  The  control  box  is  the  interface 
between headset and the computer. The basic control is done 
by  control  box.  There  are  five  control  buttons  on  it 
indicating  contrast,  brightness  and  power.  It  has  various 
ports  such  as  Digital  Video  Interactive  (DVI),  High 
Definition  Multi-media  Interface  (HDMI),  mini-USB  and 
DC power connection ports. 

ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 177 

 
 
International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 13 Number 4 – Jul  2014 

V. 

INTERFACING 

The  Oculus  SDK  currently  supports  MacOS,  Windows 
(Vista,  7,  8)  and  Linux.  There  are  no  speciﬁc  computer 
hardware  requirements  for  the  Oculus  SDK;  however,  a 
computer  with  a  modern  graphics  card  is  recommended.  A 
good benchmark is to try running Unreal Engine 3 and Unity  
at  60  frames  per  second(FPS)with  vertical  sync  and  stereo 
3D  enabled.  The  following  components  are  provided  as  a   
guideline:  

  MacOS: 10.6+ 
  Linux: Ubuntu 12.04 LTS 
 
2.0+ GHz processor 
 
2 GB system RAM 
  Direct3D10 or OpenGL 3 compatible video card 
  Windows: Vista, 7, or 8 

Although  many  lower  end  and  mobile  video  cards,  such  as 
the  Intel  HD  4000,  have  the  graphics  capabilities  to  run 
minimal  Rift  demos,  their  rendering  throughout  may  be 
inadequate for full-scene 60 FPS.  The System Development 
Kit  also  supports  gaming  controllers  which  include  Xbox 
360  wired  controllers  for  Xbox  and  the  Sony  play  station. 
DUAL shock3 controller for MacOS. To use the headset the 
control box is connected with the computer via the USB port 
using HDMI or DVI. The Oculus SDK is publicly available 
and it is an Open source 

VI. 

SCREEN DOOR EFFECT AND GHOSTING 

Screen door effect can be described as a black grid over the 
original  image.  This  occurs  because  of  empty  spaces  in 
between  the  pixels.  The  display  has  a  characteristic  known 
as the Pixel Fill Factor that is responsible for this effect. On 
any  LCD  display  every  pixel  is  made  of  three  sub  pixels, 
namely  red  green  and  blue.  Human  perception  of  different 
colors on the display is a result of the varying intensities of 
these  sub  pixels.  The  distance  between  these  sub  pixels  is 
called  as  the  pixel  pitch  which  ultimately  decides  the  pixel 
fill  factor.  Higher  the  pixel  pitch  higher  is  the  pixel  fill 
factor.  The  oculus  rift  has  a  fair  pixel  fill  factor  however 
since  it  is  worn  close  to  the  eyes  it  gives  rise  to  the  screen 
door effect. 
Ghosting  is  the  appearance  of  faded  trails  behind  any 
moving  object.  In oculus rift, the slow pixel switching time 
causes ghosting  i.e.  the pixels take a  fair amount of  time to 
change  intensities  as  compared  to  the  motion  of  the  head. 
Faster  the  movements  greater  the  ghosting,  since  the  pixel 
switching lags behind. Thus ghosting  persists until the head 
stops  moving.  This  causes  blurring  of  the  scene.  Ghosting 
can be avoided with a higher switching rate for the pixels. 

Fig.6 Pixel fill factor 

Fig.7 A block diagram illustrating the basic working of the oculus rift 

VII. 

RESULTS 

Oculus  Rift  has  an  wide  field  of  view,  high  resolution 
display. The Rift provides a truly immersive experience that 
allows you to step inside your favorite game. 

VIII. 

CONCLUSION 

Since few years computer animation seems to be more based 
on  dynamic  simulation  methods  and  physics.  With  the 
advent of VR, it feels like we are in 3-D computer generated 
environment. In future, real time complex animation system 
will  be  developed  taking  advantage  using  VR-devices  like 
oculus rift and various simulation techniques. Oculus Rift is 
a virtual reality (VR) headset designed specifically for video 

ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 178 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology (IJETT) – Volume 13 Number 4 – Jul  2014 

games  that  will  change  the  way  you  think  about  gaming 
forever.  

IX. 

FUTURE SCOPE 

Virtual reality is being used by pilots in the training process 
to help them overcome the fear of heights. With the help of 
VR  is  it  also  possible  for  scientists  to  comprehend  the 
chemical  reactions  in  a  much  better  way  and  help  them 
gather  the  minute  details  of  any  reaction.  Architects  can 
make an optimum use of VR by visualizing a building that is 
yet not into existence and to experience a virtual tour of the 
structure. Virtual reality also offers great deal of amusement 
with  the  museums  and  galleries.  It  is  possible  to  view  and 
experience  a  walk  around  in  a  museum  with  the  help  of 
oculus rift headsets and VR. For this  purpose the  museums 
should  be  recreated  online  which  can  then  be  accessed  by 
the user  for a real life experience. These could also be used 
by surgeons while in a surgery. 
Virtual reality glasses such as the Oculus Rift will probably 
become  cost  efficient  in  the  years  to  follow.  Thus  having 
them at the disposal of human benefit. 

X. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  

We  would  like  to  thank  the  respected  principal  Dr.  Hari 
Vasudevan  of  D.  J.  Sanghvi  College  of  Engineering  and 
Head of Department of Electronics and Telecommunication, 
Dr. Amit  Deshmukh for  giving us  facilities and providing  a 
propitious  environment  for  working  in  the  college.  We 
would  also  like  to  thank  S.V.K.M.  for  encouraging  us  in 
such co-curricular activities. 

REFRENCES 

[1]  Oculus  VR.  EVE:  Valkyrie,  Open  Source  Hardware,  and  the  Best 
2014) 
5, 
Practices 
http://www.oculusvr.com/blog/eve-valkyrie-open-source-hardware-
and-the-best-practices-guide/ 

Guide. 

2014. 

(Feb. 

Feb. 

11, 

[2]  Oculus VR. Oculus Rift. (Feb. 9, 2014) http://www.oculusvr.com/rift/ 
[3]  Oculus  VR.  Oculus  Rift  Development  Kit  Version  1.1.  (Feb.  9,  2014) 

http://static.oculusvr.com/sdk-
downloads/documents/Oculus_Rift_Development_Kit_Instruction_Man
ual.pdf 

[4]  Antonov,  Michael,  Nate  Mitchell,  Andrew  Reisse,  Lee  Cooper,  Steve 
LaValle, and  Max Katsev. Oculus VR - SDK  Overview - SDK  Version 
2014) 
0.2.5.  Oculus  VR.  Oct. 
http://static.oculusvr.com/sdk-
downloads/documents/Oculus_SDK_Overview.pdf 

2013. 

(Feb. 

9, 

9, 

ISSN: 2231-5381                    http://www.ijettjournal.org                               Page 179 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
