Cause-of-death estimates for the early and late neonatal periods for 194 countries 
from 2000-2013  

Shefali Ozaa; Joy E Lawna,b; Daniel R Hoganc, Colin Mathersc, Simon N Cousensa 

a.  MARCH, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, WC1N 

7HT, United Kingdom 

b.  Saving Newborn Lives, Save the Children  
c.  Department of Health Statistics and Information Systems, World Health Organization, 

Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland 

Corresponding author: 
Professor Simon Cousens 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
Keppel Street 
London, UK WC1N 7HT 
Email: simon.cousens@lshtm.ac.uk 

Word count:  approx 3900 

Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Abstract 

Objective 
Cause-of-death distributions are important for prioritising interventions. We estimated 
proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for programme-relevant causes of 
neonatal death for 194 countries for 2000-2013, differentiating between the early (days 0-6) 
and late (days 7-27) neonatal periods.  

Methods 
For 65 high-quality VR countries, we used the observed early and late neonatal proportional 
cause distributions. For the remaining 129 countries, we used multinomial logistic models to 
estimate the early and late proportional cause distributions.  We used separate models, with 
different inputs, for low and high neonatal mortality countries. We applied these cause-specific 
proportions to United Nations’ neonatal death estimates by country/year to estimate cause-
specific risks and numbers of deaths. 

Findings 
Of the 2.76 million neonatal deaths in 2013, 0.99 (uncertainty: 0.70-1.31) million (35.7%) were 
estimated to be from preterm complications, 0.64 (uncertainty: 0.46-0.84) million (23.4%) from 
intrapartum-related complications, and 0.43 (0.22-0.66) million (15.6%) from sepsis. Preterm 
(40.8%) and intrapartum-related (27.0%) complications accounted for the majority of early 
neonatal deaths while infections caused nearly half of late neonatal deaths.  In every region, 
preterm was the leading cause of neonatal death, with the highest risks in Southern Asia (11.9 
per 1000 livebirths) and Sub-Saharan Africa (9.5).  

Conclusion 
The neonatal cause-of-death distribution differs between the early and late periods, and varies 
with NMR level and over time. To reduce neonatal deaths, this knowledge must be incorporated 
into policy decisions. The Every Newborn Action Plan provides stimulus for countries to update 
national strategies and include high-impact interventions to address these causes.   

Words: 250 

Page 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Most of the 2.76 million neonatal (first month of life) deaths in 2013 occurred from preventable 
causes (1). While the global neonatal mortality rate (NMR) is decreasing, its rate of reduction 
has been substantially slower than the decreases in under-5 and maternal mortality (2, 3).  
Neonatal deaths now constitute 44% of all deaths in children under 5 years old (1).  Many 
countries are unlikely to meet the child mortality target of the 4th Millennium Development Goal 
(MDG) by 2015, at least partly because of inadequate neonatal mortality reductions (4).  The 
Every Newborn Action Plan, launched in June 2014 (5), provides a stimulus to accelerate 
progress by implementing effective cause-specific interventions that can rapidly reduce 
neonatal mortality.   

Understanding the neonatal cause-of-death (COD) distribution is important for identifying 
appropriate interventions and program priorities. Such a distribution should be as local as 
possible (national or even subnational in large countries), current, and distinguish 
programmatically relevant causes. Moreover, separate COD estimates are required for the early 
(days 0-6) and late (days 7-27) neonatal periods since both our understanding of pathology and 
empirical data suggest that the COD distribution differs substantially between these periods (6, 
7).  Around three-quarters of neonatal deaths occur during the early period (8), and most 
interventions to prevent these deaths need to be delivered within a very short window of time.  

For countries with high-quality vital registration (VR) data by cause and age at death, such data 
provide the information needed to determine policies and priorities. VR data quality is 
dependent on the completeness of reporting and the quality of cause-of-death coding (9, 10). 
Unfortunately, high-quality VR data are available for only about one-third of countries (11), 
which account for only about 4% of neonatal deaths.  Thus, statistical modeling remains 
necessary to estimate cause-of-death distributions in the majority of countries.   

Systematic estimates of neonatal deaths classified into programmatically relevant cause 
categories were first published in 2005, for the year 2000 (12), by the Child Health 
Epidemiology Research Group (CHERG). These estimates were developed using  data from high-
quality VR systems and from research studies in high mortality/low resource settings in which 
high-quality VR data were lacking. Updated neonatal cause-of-death estimates using this 
approach were subsequently published for 2008 (13) and 2010 (14).   

The current work goes beyond these previous exercises by estimating neonatal causes of death 
separately for the early and late neonatal periods, and by adding injuries as a distinct cause for 
low mortality countries.  The separation of early and late neonatal deaths is an important 
advance which will aid policy makers and programme managers.  The input data have also been 
updated and modifications made to the modelling strategy, particularly for the split of neonatal 
infections between pneumonia and sepsis.  

Here, we present global, regional, and national estimates (with uncertainty ranges) of 
proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths for key programmatically relevant neonatal causes of 
death by the early and late neonatal periods for 194 countries for 2000-2013.   

Methods 
Overview of cause-of-death estimation  
We divided 194 countries into three groups based on the quality of their VR data and their child 
mortality rates (appendix A).  Different methods were used to estimate the proportional cause-
of-death (COD) distributions for countries in each group (figure 1). For the 65 countries with 
high-quality VR data, the proportional cause distribution from 2000-2013 was obtained directly 
from the country’s VR data. For the 49 countries without high-quality VR but with low child 
mortality, this distribution was estimated using a multi-cause model (“low mortality model”) 

Page 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with input data from high-quality VR countries.  For the high-quality VR countries and low 
mortality model, we used seven cause categories: complications of preterm birth (“preterm”), 
intrapartum-related complications (“intrapartum”), congenital disorders, pneumonia, sepsis 
and other severe infections (“sepsis”), injuries, and other causes (panel 1).  For the 80 countries 
with inadequate VR and high child mortality, we used studies that identified neonatal COD in 
high mortality settings as input data in a separate multi-cause model (“high mortality model”).  
The eight cause categories for this model were preterm, intrapartum, congenital disorders, 
pneumonia, diarrhea, neonatal tetanus, sepsis, and other causes (panel 1).  In appendix B, we 
detail the methodological differences between this work and previous estimates.  

[appendix A: countries in the 3 models]   
[appendix B: key methodological differences between this work and previous estimates] 
[figure 1: flowchart of methods]  

Data inputs 
Cause-of-death data from vital registration 
For the 65 high-quality VR countries, we obtained publicly available VR cause-of-death data by 
the early and late neonatal periods from the World Health Organization (WHO) for years 2000 
and later.  We mapped the reported causes of death to our cause categories (appendix C).  We 
then generated a proportional cause distribution by dividing the number of deaths attributed to 
each cause by the total deaths across the seven causes.  To create a full time series, we imputed 
the cause-specific proportions for years with missing VR data (appendix D). The imputed 
proportions were only used as estimates for the high-quality VR countries; the low mortality 
model input dataset only included the non-imputed data.  

[appendix C: ICD 9/10 to CHERG conversion codes]   
[appendix D: table with information about the VR input data] 

Cause-of-death data from high mortality setting studies 
The high mortality model input data consisted of neonatal COD distribution data from studies in 
high mortality settings. We updated a previously developed database of neonatal COD studies 
(15) by conducting an extensive literature review for relevant research published from January 
2011 to May 2013 (appendix E).  For each study, we extracted COD data and, when necessary, 
re-categorized the causes into our cause categories.  While we included injuries as a separate 
category in the low mortality model, the study data lacked enough information on injuries for 
separate estimation in the high mortality model.  We recorded deaths separately by early or late 
neonatal period whenever possible. 

[appendix E: study data inclusion criteria]   
[appendix F: full study list with relevant info]   

Covariate data 
We chose for investigation covariates that we believed might partly predict variation in the COD 
distribution across countries.  We could only use covariates for which national time series are 
publically available.  The covariates were used in two ways: 1) as inputs into the multinomial 
models, and 2) as predictor variables to which the final model coefficients were applied to 
estimate the national proportional cause distributions.  We used national-level covariates as 
inputs to the low mortality model since the input COD data are national, and, whenever 
possible, local-level data extracted from the studies for the high mortality model.  When local-
level data were unavailable, we used subnational- or national-level covariate data instead.  For 
the predictions, we used national-level covariate data, with the exception of India for which we 
used state-level data to produce state-level estimates.  We applied the same rules for imputing 
missing covariate data as for the VR data (appendix D). For prediction purposes, we restricted 

Page 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covariate values to the input data ranges, and performed a sensitivity analysis without this 
restriction.   

Statistical modelling  
All statistical analyses were done using Stata (version 12).  For each model, a baseline cause was 
chosen; this cause was preterm for the low mortality model (the most common cause) and 
intrapartum for the high mortality model (reported in all studies).  Our overall estimation 
process had two stages.  First, we selected covariates.  Then, we estimated the log of the ratio of 
each of the other causes to the baseline cause (the “log-cause ratio”) as a function of the selected 
covariates using a multinomial logistic regression model.  For both the low and high mortality 
models, we ran separate models for the early and late neonatal periods. Since not all studies in 
the high mortality model reported deaths by period, we included the studies reporting only 
overall neonatal deaths in both the early and late high mortality models, and included a binary 
covariate for period in these models.   

Covariate selection for models 
For each of the four models, we used a previously developed jackknife procedure (14) to select 
the set of covariates that minimized the out-of-sample prediction error for each log-cause ratio 
separately.  First, we determined if the relationship between each covariate and log-cause ratio 
in the input data was best represented by a linear, quadratic, or restricted cubic spline 
relationship. We did this by choosing the covariate relationship which yielded the smallest chi-
squared statistic (sum of the squared differences between observed and expected deaths 
divided by expected deaths) for the given log-cause ratio.  We then selected the covariate with 
the smallest chi-squared statistic as the first covariate in the model. Finally, we added one 
covariate at a time, retaining it in the model only if the chi-squared statistic decreased and 
cycling through all the remaining covariates again.  In this way, we selected a set of covariates 
for each non-baseline cause in each model.  

Multi-cause models 
The multi-cause multinomial logistic regression models fit the data for all causes 
simultaneously. Each input observation received a weight inversely proportional to the square 
root of the total deaths contributed by that observation. This weighting is intermediate between 
giving equal weight to each death and equal weight to each study or country year in the input 
data.  We made assumptions about the cause category into which deaths from an unreported 
cause would have been assigned (appendix G). The coefficient values from the multinomial 
logistic regression models were applied to the country- and year-specific national level 
predictor covariates to estimate the proportional cause distribution for each modelled country 
from 2000-2013.  

[appendix G: assumptions about missing causes in the high mortality model input data] 

Estimation of cause-specific deaths and risks  
We applied our estimated cause fractions to the neonatal deaths and live births estimated for 
each country from 2000-2013 by the Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation (IGME) 
(1).  We split the overall neonatal deaths from IGME into early and late neonatal deaths.  For 
high-quality VR countries, we took this split directly from the data.  For the other countries, we 
assumed that 74% of neonatal deaths occurred during the early period and 26% in the late 
period based on previous work (8).  We also performed a sensitivity analysis in which we 
assumed the early proportion was 65% or 85% instead of 74% (appendix H).  To determine the 
number of deaths by cause, neonatal period, and year for each country, we applied the cause-
specific proportions derived from the VR data (for high-quality VR countries) or the relevant 
models to the period-specific neonatal deaths for each country and year. We then divided these 
by the relevant country-specific live births to obtain the risk (per 1,000 live births) for each 
cause by neonatal period and year.   

Page 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[appendix H: sensitivity analysis assuming 65% or 85% for proportion of early neonatal deathsl] 

Uncertainty estimation 
For the modelled estimates, we generated uncertainty estimates by drawing 1,000 bootstrap 
samples with replacement from the input data and re-running the multi-cause models to 
produce new proportional cause distributions. We took the 2.5th and 97.5th percentile values for 
each cause as the uncertainty bounds.  For the high-quality VR data, we developed uncertainty 
estimates by assuming a Poisson distribution for the number of deaths (i.e. the standard error 
equaled the square root of the reported number of deaths).   

Results 
Data inputs 
The high-quality VR input dataset, which was also used in the low mortality model, included 65 
countries with 1,267,404 neonatal deaths and 665 country-years for each neonatal period from 
2000-2013.  Of these deaths, 75.8% occurred in the early period. Preterm and congenital were 
the most common causes during both neonatal periods (figure 2a).  

The high mortality model input dataset included 112 data points consisting of 98,222 deaths 
from 36 countries (figure 1).  This includes the addition of nearly 4100 neonatal deaths from 15 
new studies, representing 10 countries across five MDG regions.  The overall dataset had 31 
observations for the early period, 18 for the late period, and 63 for the overall neonatal period.  
Seventy-eight observations had missing information on one or more cause, with pneumonia and 
diarrhoea being the causes most commonly unreported (appendix G). Preterm and intrapartum 
were the most common causes of death during the early period, while infections (sepsis and 
pneumonia) dominated during the late period (figure 2b).   

[figures 2a and 2b: box and whisker plots of the proportional cause distributions for the VR and 
high mortality model input data] 

While most covariate values were within the ranges of the input data, a few prediction 
covariates had values substantially outside the input data range, especially in the low mortality 
model (appendix I). Notable examples were Monaco with an average GNI about 3.5 times larger 
than the maximum input data and Egypt with female literacy and ANC coverage 15-20 
percentage points below the input ranges. While we capped the prediction covariate data to the 
input ranges in the analysis, a sensitivity analysis without these caps suggested that the decision 
to cap or not had minimal influence on the results (appendix J).    

[appendix I: comparison of the input and prediction datasets in the multinomial models] 
[appendix J: sensitivity analysis when prediction data is not restricted to ranges of the input data] 

Statistical modelling  
Covariate selection for models 
The model equations varied substantially in their performance, from 0% reduction in the chi-
squared statistic (injuries, low mortality model, late period) to 87% reduction (diarrhea, high 
mortality model, early period) (appendix K). Overall, equations in the high mortality model 
appeared to have better performance, with an average of 50% reduction in residuals across the 
equations compared to an average of 30% in the low mortality model equations.   

[appendix K: selected covariates and their performance for each cause equation]   

Multi-cause models 

Page 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model regression coefficients are in appendix L. 

[appendix L: Regression coefficients for the models] 

Cause-specific deaths and risks  
Globally, the leading causes of neonatal death in 2013 were preterm (35.7%), intrapartum 
(23.4%), and sepsis (15.6%), accounting for 2.1 (uncertainty range: 1.4-2.8) of the 2.8 million 
neonatal deaths (table 1). There is little difference in these numbers when the proportion of 
early deaths is assumed to be 65% or 85% instead of 74% for modelled countries (appendix H).   
The proportional cause distribution varied by both neonatal period and NMR level. In the early 
period, preterm (40.8%) and intrapartum (27.0%) accounted for the majority of deaths while in 
the late neonatal period nearly half of all deaths occurred from infectious causes (sepsis, 
pneumonia, tetanus, and diarrhoea) (table 1). The proportion of deaths from congenital 
disorders was relatively stable across the periods. Higher NMR and lower income were 
associated with a higher proportion of deaths attributable to intrapartum and infectious causes 
(appendix M). The variation between regions appears to largely reflect NMR differences 
between regions. In low mortality settings, injuries accounted for less than 1% of neonatal 
deaths, and this fraction increased slightly from the early to late period (appendix M). See 
appendix N for model-specific results and appendix O for country-specific results.  

[table 1: global cause-specific proportions and number of neonatal deaths]. 
[appendix M: results by NMR level and income category].   
[appendix N: proportions/risk by high-quality VR, low mortality model, and high mortality model].   
[appendix O: country-specific results of proportions, risk, and number of deaths] 

Globally, risks for all causes have been decreasing as the global NMR decreases over time. The 
risk of death from each cause is substantially higher in higher mortality settings, even for causes 
that dominate proportionally in low mortality settings (e.g. preterm and congenital disorders).  
The risks of death due to preterm, intrapartum, and sepsis are 10, 36, and 34 times greater in 
settings with NMR≥30 compared to NMR≤5.  In every MDG region, preterm is the leading cause 
of neonatal death, with the highest risks in Southern Asia (11.9 per 1000 live births) and Sub-
Saharan Africa (9.5) (figure 3). While the absolute risks of death due to intrapartum and 
preterm have been falling in the early period, they have decreased less in the late period.  Risk 
of tetanus has declined in both periods (figure 4).    

 [figure 3: stacked bars of risk by region for 2013] 
 [figure 4: global area chart of time trends from 2000-2013 by neonatal period] 

Discussion 
We developed systematic, globally comparable estimates of programmatically relevant neonatal 
causes of death. Our current estimates go beyond our previous estimates in providing separate 
decompositions for the early and late neonatal periods.  The proportional neonatal cause 
distribution varies with a number of factors, including the early versus late neonatal periods, 
NMR level, and over time. To reduce neonatal deaths, such variations must be understood, and 
this knowledge must be incorporated into decisions regarding the selection of appropriate 
interventions. With the launch of the Every Newborn Action Plan in June, this is a particularly 
opportune time for affecting such change within countries.  

The three leading categories of causes of neonatal death (preterm, intrapartum, and infections) 
are the same for the early and late neonatal periods, but their distribution is very different 
between the two periods.  Globally, in the early period, preterm and intrapartum account for 
nearly 68% of deaths while infections (pneumonia, sepsis, tetanus, and diarrhea) account for 
around 14%.  In the late period, around 34% of deaths are due to intrapartum or preterm while 
roughly 48% are from infections. Intrapartum-related complications are expected to occur in 

Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the minutes or hours after birth, and hence cause more deaths during the early period.  
Infections usually take some time to develop, and thus become more common during the late 
period.  

Even within each neonatal period, considerable differences exist in the proportional cause 
distribution by NMR level.  Generally, NMR is closely linked to the level of care available to 
neonates. Settings with very low NMR tend to have readily available intensive care for 
newborns, while areas with high NMRs often lack even simple interventions like clean delivery 
kits and resuscitation equipment.  In this analysis, low mortality countries had higher 
proportions of deaths from congenital disorders and lower proportions from intrapartum and 
infections, while the opposite was true in high mortality settings.  While infection deaths 
accounted for 51% of deaths in the late period in high mortality countries, they caused less than 
30% of late neonatal deaths in low mortality countries. This may be because of better access to 
and availability of treatment and infection control in low mortality countries.  

We used our model to predict trends in individual causes of death. Our model predicts that 
deaths due to intrapartum-related complications had the largest absolute risk reduction 
between 2000 and 2013, from 7.2 (4.8-9.5) to 4.7 (3.4-6.1) per 1000 live births, possibly 
because of increased coverage of skilled obstetric care.  The largest relative decrease in risk was 
predicted for neonatal tetanus, which dropped by 73% (from 1.1 [0.3-2.8] to 0.3 [0.1-0.9]) 
between 2000 and 2013. This may be due to increases in clean deliveries, facility birth, cord 
care, and tetanus toxoid vaccination (a predictor in the model), as well as contextual changes in 
maternal education and social norms. Additionally, a few countries in the low mortality model 
eliminated neonatal tetanus after 2000. Since tetanus is not estimated in the low mortality 
model, we may thus be underestimating the relative decline in risk.   

The smallest predicted relative decrease in risk was for congenital (13% drop; from 2.4 [1.4-
4.1] to 2.1 [1.3-3.3]). While the predicted risk of death due to preterm complications fell by 2.4 
per 1,000 live births between 2000 and 2013 (from 9.6 [6.7-12.8] to 7.2 [5.1-9.5]), this 
represented the second smallest relative decrease (25%), despite the existence of simple and 
cost-effective interventions such as antenatal corticosteroids and Kangaroo Mother Care (8, 16). 
In addition to prematurity, there is also evidence that babies that are small-for-gestational age 
(SGA) are at higher risk of death (17).   

Broadly, our results are similar to those from 2010 (14), with the exception that we estimate 
substantially fewer pneumonia deaths than before. This is likely due to improvements to the 
estimation approach, namely the inclusion of additional studies that split pneumonia from 
sepsis and the inclusion of pneumonia directly in the multinomial model (appendix B).   

We used the low mortality model to estimate the proportional cause distribution in China due to 
its low NMR (18.8 in 2000, 7.7 in 2013), obtaining around 14.4% of neonatal deaths attributable 
to intrapartum-related complications. Others have also estimated the neonatal COD distribution 
in China and their results differ somewhat from ours, most notably with higher proportions of 
intrapartum-related deaths (18, 19).  Our approach differs in three important ways: 1) we used 
multi-cause instead of single-cause models, 2) we estimated results for the early and late 
neonatal periods separately, and 3) we included input data from outside of China.  We believe 
the first two are advantages in our work, while using China-only data is an advantage of the 
other models.  The global COD distribution changes little when we apply the WHO COD 
proportions (20) for China instead of ours, with the biggest differences in 2013 being 
intrapartum-related and other deaths increasing by about 2 percentage points.  Alternative COD 
distributions for China are shown in Appendix P for comparison.   

[appendix P: Comparison of different China estimates] 

Page 8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the quantity and quality of data has improved in recent years, enormous data gaps still 
exist. We now have nearly 100,000 deaths and over 90 studies in the high mortality model 
compared to <14,000 deaths and <60 studies when we produced the estimates in 2005 (12).  
However, while we used the high mortality model for 80 countries, the inputs only included 
data from 36 countries. Many of these studies were relatively small, and few were nationally 
representative.  We could include data from only 13 Sub-Saharan African countries, the region 
with the highest risk of neonatal death. Excluding a large South African dataset, the studies from 
these countries contribute only 4,000 deaths to our database. It is an unfortunate reality that we 
know the least about the areas with the highest burdens.  

As with all such modeling exercises, our estimates should be viewed as an interim measure to 
help policymakers, particularly in settings with little or no data currently. It is important  to 
distinguish estimates from data and to recognize that not all estimates are “equal”. We used UN-
IGME estimates of the NMR and total number of neonatal deaths in each country. The UN-IGME 
estimates of all-cause mortality in each country are derived from data for that country and 
therefore can be said to “track” mortality in each country. For most countries, our cause-specific 
estimates are not based on data from that country, but from a model bringing together data 
from many countries. The model then predicts the cause-of-death distribution, and changes in 
the cause-of-death distribution, in individual countries based on covariate values for the 
individual country. Some countries contribute little or no input data to the modeling process. 
For example, only 24 deaths in our input data come from Nigeria, one of the most populous 
countries.  Our estimates should not therefore be interpreted as “tracking” changes in causes –
of-death for the majority of countries, but rather as predictions of what might be occurring in 
countries. To track changes in burden due to specific causes of death requires each country to 
collect representative and consistent data on cause of death on a continuing basis. We 
emphasise once again that our estimates are not a panacea for actual data collection and should 
not be an excuse for a failure to collect data. 

Fortunately, rapid but sensible improvements in data collection are possible.  Recent examples 
of countries like South Africa improving their data systems to the point where their VR data is 
considered high quality are encouraging. In table 2, we provide a set of proposals for improving 
the counting of births and neonatal deaths.  As data systems improve, regression-based models 
should be replaced by reliable local COD data.   

[table 2: recommendations for data improvements based on neonatal mortality level] 

The validity of our estimates relies on the quality of the input/prediction data, and our 
modelling techniques.  Quality is of particular concern for verbal autopsy studies, in which the 
reported cause distributions depend heavily on the case definitions and causal hierarchies used 
to attribute deaths (10). Accurate cause attribution using VA will always be problematic for 
causes that are difficult to distinguish, such as sepsis and pneumonia, or difficult to identify, 
such as internal congenital abnormalities. The potential lack of comparability between different 
VA studies can affect the ability of our model to predict variation between settings.  By following 
standardized methods when conducting VA studies, some of these problems can be partially 
alleviated (21). Additionally, regression-based models inherently depend on the relationship 
between outcome variables and covariates, which should ideally come from the same 
population and time period. While we sought to include as much local covariate information as 
possible for the input studies, 52% of the total covariate information came from national data 
instead of from local/regional data.   Finally, when re-categorizing reported VA causes of death 
(panel 1), we had to make choices, for example placing deaths reported as being due to “very 
low birth weight” into the preterm complication category. This may introduce a degree of 
misclassification as some “very low birth weight” deaths may be attributable to congenital 
abnormalities. We made those choices that we believed would introduce the least 
misclassification, but until VA methods improve, this will continue to be a challenge.  Similar 

Page 9 

 
 
 
 
 
issues exist in ICD coding, but are more common in VA studies because of the limited and lower 
quality information collected.   

Even high-quality VR data can have problems.  Unfortunately, ICD-10 codes are not ideal for 
neonatal causes, particularly because several programmatically relevant causes are relegated to 
the often-unused fourth digit in the codes.  Codes for the upcoming ICD-11 revision are 
currently being drafted, providing the opportunity to develop more appropriate, clinically 
relevant coding for neonatal causes.  Additionally, ICD coding practices can vary between and 
even within countries and over time (22, 23). Such variations reduce our model’s ability to 
predict true variation in causes of death. Other issues in VR coding include changes during the 
transition between ICD revisions, differences in relegating certain causes to non-specific/ill-
defined cause categories, and the assumption inherent in our exclusion of such codes that the 
deaths attributed to them are a random sample of all deaths.  Finally, the availability and quality 
of VR data in a country may change over time, especially in countries with newly emerging 
surveillance systems. Developing consistent time trend estimates given such changes remains a 
challenge.   

We used multinomial models because they naturally allow proportional cause distributions to 
sum to one, so that the sum of cause-specific deaths equals total deaths. Single-cause models 
require post-hoc adjustments to retain this property, but there may be limited information on 
which to base such adjustments. An important concern for both types of model, however, is the 
attribution of death to a single cause. This does not allow for co-morbidities, which are a 
frequent occurrence in neonatal deaths, and may thus underestimate the impact of a given 
cause.  

Given the considerable variations in health systems and contextual factors within individual 
countries, sub-national neonatal COD estimates are needed and should be a target for future 
estimation exercises and data collection.  National-level estimates like ours aim to ascertain the 
average causal distribution for a country, which can help guide national priorities, but may 
mask subnational variation.  Some countries are beginning to collect the necessary information 
for sub-national estimates.  For example, our national India estimates were produced by 
aggregating state-level estimates.  In the future, we also hope to further differentiate causes 
within the current broad categories like congenital disorders. However, such differentiation 
may only be possible for VR-based models, as VA-based data generally lack the detail needed to 
do this.  Finally, we strongly believe that the production of such estimates should be 
transparent. In accordance with this, the datasets and Stata code we used for this analysis are 
available on the WHO Global Health Observatory website. 

Neonates constitute an important component of the unfinished agenda of MDG-4, and reducing 
preventable neonatal deaths will be essential to achieve the “grand convergence” to which the 
global community now aspires (24). The Every Newborn Action Plan, which calls for all countries 
to reduce their NMRs to 10 or fewer deaths per 1000 live births by 2035, provides fresh 
impetus for ending preventable newborn deaths (5),  and a future in which every baby has an 
equal chance of survival. 

Conflicts of Interest 
We declare that we have no conflicts of interest. 

Acknowledgements 
We thank the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for funding through the Child Health 
Epidemiology Reference Group (CHERG) and Save the Children’s Saving Newborn Lives 
programme. We also thank those who have contributed to earlier rounds of this work, including 
Katarzyna Wilczynska-Ketende, Alma Adler, and Susana Scott.  The named authors alone are 

Page 10 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
responsible for the views expressed in this manuscript, which do not necessarily reflect the 
opinion of the World Health Organization, its Member States, or of sponsoring agencies.    

Role of the funding source 
The sponsors of this work had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data 
interpretation, or writing of the report. SO, SC, JEL, DH, and CM had full access to all of the data 
and final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.  

Every Newborn. Every newborn: An action plan to end preventable deaths. 2014 

UNICEF. Levels and Trends in Child Mortality - Report 2013. Estimates 

Lawn J, Blencowe H, Oza S, You D, Lee AC, Waiswa P, et al. Every Newborn: 

CDC Wonder. Linked Birth/Infant Death Records for 2007-2010 with ICD10 

Save the Children. Surviving the first day: State of the World's Mothers 2013. 

Oestergaard MZ, Inoue M, Yoshida S, Mahanani WR, Gore FM, Cousens S, et al. 

References 
1. 
Developed by the UN Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. UNICEF, 2013. 
Lawn JE, Kinney MV, Black RE, Pitt C, Cousens S, Kerber K, et al. Newborn 
2. 
survival: a multi-country analysis of a decade of change. Health Policy Plan. 2012;27 
Suppl 3:iii6-28. 
3. 
survival and beyond. Lancet. 2014;in press. 
4. 
Neonatal mortality levels for 193 countries in 2009 with trends since 1990: a 
systematic analysis of progress, projections, and priorities. PLoS Med. 
2011;8(8):e1001080. 
5. 
[cited 2014 March 30]; Available from: http://www.everynewborn.org. 
6. 
codes. 2013 [cited 2013 August 20]; Available from: http://wonder.cdc.gov/lbd.html. 
7. 
Chowdhury HR, Thompson S, Ali M, Alam N, Yunus M, Streatfield PK. Causes of 
neonatal deaths in a rural subdistrict of Bangladesh: implications for intervention. J 
Health Popul Nutr. 2010;28(4):375-82. 
8. 
2013. 
9. 
died from: an assessment of the global status of cause of death data. Bull World Health 
Organ. 2005;83(3):171-7. 
10. 
attribution of cause of death. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2008;22(5):410-6. 
11. 
Global Health Observatory of the WHO. Demographic and socioeconomic 
statistics: Census and civil registration coverage by country. 2013 [cited 2013 July 10]; 
Available from: http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.121. 
12. 
Where? Why? Lancet. 2005;365(9462):891-900. 
13. 
regional, and national causes of child mortality in 2008: a systematic analysis. Lancet. 
2010;375(9730):1969-87. 
14. 
national causes of child mortality: an updated systematic analysis for 2010 with time 
trends since 2000. Lancet. 2012;379(9832):2151-61. 
15. 
neonatal deaths in the year 2000. Int J Epidemiol. 2006;35(3):706-18. 
16. 
low resource settings--are we delivering? BJOG. 2009;116 Suppl 1:49-59. 

Liu L, Johnson HL, Cousens S, Perin J, Scott S, Lawn JE, et al. Global, regional, and 

Lawn JE, Wilczynska-Ketende K, Cousens SN. Estimating the causes of 4 million 

Black RE, Cousens S, Johnson HL, Lawn JE, Rudan I, Bassani DG, et al. Global, 

Lawn JE, Cousens S, Zupan J, Team LNSS. 4 million neonatal deaths: when? 

Lawn JE, Osrin D, Adler A, Cousens S. Four million neonatal deaths: counting and 

Mathers CD, Fat DM, Inoue M, Rao C, Lopez AD. Counting the dead and what they 

Lawn JE, Kerber K, Enweronu-Laryea C, Massee Bateman O. Newborn survival in 

Page 11 

 
 
 
Global Health Observatory of the WHO. The data repository. (to be published 

Feng XL, Guo S, Hipgrave D, Zhu J, Zhang L, Song L, et al. China's facility-based 

Janssen F, Kunst AE. ICD coding changes and discontinuities in trends in cause-

Katz J, Lee AC, Kozuki N, Lawn JE, Cousens S, Blencowe H, et al. Mortality risk in 

Rudan I, Chan KY, Zhang JS, Theodoratou E, Feng XL, Salomon JA, et al. Causes of 

Baiden F, Bawah A, Biai S, Binka F, Boerma T, Byass P, et al. Setting international 

17. 
preterm and small-for-gestational-age infants in low-income and middle-income 
countries: a pooled country analysis. Lancet. 2013;382(9890):417-25. 
18. 
birth strategy and neonatal mortality: a population-based epidemiological study. 
Lancet. 2011;378(9801):1493-500. 
19. 
deaths in children younger than 5 years in China in 2008. Lancet. 
2010;375(9720):1083-9. 
20. 
May 2014); Available from: http://www.who.int/gho/. 
21. 
standards for verbal autopsy. Bull World Health Organ. 2007;85(8):570-1. 
22. 
specific mortality in six European countries, 1950-99. Bull World Health Organ. 
2004;82(12):904-13. 
23.  Murray CJ, Kulkarni SC, Ezzati M. Understanding the coronary heart disease 
versus total cardiovascular mortality paradox: a method to enhance the comparability 
of cardiovascular death statistics in the United States. Circulation. 2006;113(17):2071-
81. 
24. 
Global health 2035: a world converging within a generation. Lancet. 
2013;382(9908):1898-955. 
25. 
and systematic country estimates with a focus on “birth asphyxia”: UCL (University 
College London); 2009. 
26.  Wigglesworth JS. Monitoring perinatal mortality. A pathophysiological approach. 
Lancet. 1980;2(8196):684-6. 
27.  Winbo IG, Serenius FH, Dahlquist GG, Källén BA. NICE, a new cause of death 
classification for stillbirths and neonatal deaths. Neonatal and Intrauterine Death 
Classification according to Etiology. Int J Epidemiol. 1998;27(3):499-504. 

Lawn JE. 4 million neonatal deaths: an analysis of available cause-of-death data 

Jamison DT, Summers LH, Alleyne G, Arrow KJ, Berkley S, Binagwaho A, et al. 

Page 12 

 
 
 
 
 
Panel 1: Definitions for the neonatal period and causes of death 

Neonatal period definitions 
Neonatal period: days 0-27, or first month after birth 
Early neonatal period: days 0-6, or first week after birth 
Late neonatal period: days 7-27, or weeks 2-4 after birth 

Neonatal causes of death  

Case definitions for neonatal causes of death 

Used in VR and sought in study data 

Accepted in study data 

Preterm 
complications 

Intrapartum-
related 
complications 

Congenital 
disorders 

Sepsis 

Pneumonia 

Neonatal 
tetanus 
Diarrhoea 
Injuries 

Other 

Neonatal deaths from one or more of the 
following: 
- specific complications of preterm birth like 
surfactant deficiency (Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome), intraventricular haemorrhage, 
necrotizing enterocolitis 
- immaturity (<34 weeks) at which level 
preterm specific complications occur for the 
majority of babies 
- neonatal death with birth weight < 2,000 g 
where gestational age is unknown 

Neonatal death due to: 
- neonatal encephalopathy with criteria 
suggestive of intrapartum events 
- early neonatal death in a term baby with no 
congenital malformations and a specific 
history of acute intrapartum insult or 
obstructed labor 

- Neonatal death due to major or lethal 
congenital abnormalities 
- Specific abnormality listed (e.g. neural tube 
defect, cardiac defect) 
Neonatal deaths due to sepsis/septicaemia, 
meningitis, or neonatal infection 
Neonatal deaths due to pneumonia or acute 
respiratory tract infection 

Neonatal deaths due to tetanus 

Neonatal deaths due to diarrhoea 
Neonatal deaths due to injuries 
Specific causes not included in the above-
listed causes, including:  
- neonatal jaundice 
- haemorrhagic disease of the newborn 
- term baby dying due to in-utero growth 
restriction 
- injuries (in study data only) 

- “Prematurity” 
- “Very low birth weight” 

- “Birth asphyxia” with 
Apgar-based definition but 
excluding preterm infants 
- Fits and/or coma in the 
first two days of life in a 
term baby 
- Acute intrapartum 
complications 

Congenital abnormality or 
malformation 

Neonatal infection 

Pneumonia 

Spasms and poor feeding 
after age of 3 days 

--- 
N/A 

Author grouping of “other” 
(not unknown) 

Notes: 1) This table is slightly modified from Lawn (25), which adapted it from Wigglesworth (26, 27) 
and NICE (27); 2) specific ICD codes for causes of death in the VR data are included in appendix C.   

Page 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Flowchart of modelling methods 

Page 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The proportional cause distribution of neonatal deaths by neonatal period for 
the input data in the a) low mortality model (one observation per country by averaging 
across years) and b) high mortality model.   
a) 

b)  

Page 15 

 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Cause-specific risk of neonatal death by MDG region in 2013 

Figure 4: Global cause-specific risks of death from 2000-2013 for the early and 
late neonatal periods 

Page 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Global cause-specific proportions, risk, and numbers of neonatal deaths 
(with uncertainty ranges) in 2013 

10.6 

% 

Early neonatal 
period 
# of deaths in 
thousands 
(uncertainty) 
834.8 
(608.1-1083.5) 
552.7  
(407.6-711.4) 
217.0 
(140.9-325.9) 
163.7 
(62.4-271.6) 
98.9 
(48.8-200.3) 
6.7  
(0-57.4) 
21.1 
(7.4-53.2) 
149.9 
(72.7-250.3) 

8.0 

4.8 

0.3 

1.0 

7.3 

Risk 

Late neonatal 
period 
# of deaths in 
thousands 
(uncertainty) 
152.1 
(91.0-229.0) 
92.1 
(54.8-133.4) 
72.8 
(42.5-124.5) 
266.7 
(156.5-393.2) 
37.6  
(21.5-58.7) 
10.0  
(3.2-25.6) 
27.1 
(8.1-67.2) 
57.9 
(26.3-117.2) 

% 

21.2 

12.9 

10.2 

37.2 

5.2 

1.4 

3.8 

8.1 

% 

35.7 

23.4 

10.5 

15.6 

4.9 

0.6 

1.7 

7.5 

Overall neonatal  
period 
# of deaths in 
thousands 
(uncertainty) 
986.9 
(699.1-1312.5) 
644.8 
(462.4-844.7) 
289.8 
(183.3-450.4) 
430.4 
(218.9-664.8) 
136.4 
(70.3-259.0) 
16.6 
(3.2-83.0) 
48.2 
(15.5-120.4) 
207.8 
(99.0-367.4) 

7.2 

4.7 

2.1 

3.1 

1.0 

0.1 

0.3 

1.5 

Preterm 

40.8 

Intrapartum  27.0 

Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumonia 

Diarrhoea 

Tetanus 

Other 

Notes: 1) diarrhoea and tetanus were estimated only for the 80 high mortality model countries; 2) injuries 
are included within the “other” category; 3) risk is per 1,000 live births.  

Page 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Recommendations for data improvements based on neonatal mortality level 
Neonatal mortality rate  
(per 1,000 live births) 

5 – <15 

< 5 

15 – <30 

≥30 

Main data collection 
platforms  

Counting all births  
Comparable definitions  
to count neonatal deaths 

Collecting more detailed 
data 

Comparable cause-of-
death categories  

Categorising small babies 
(weight and gestational 
age) 

1. Full coverage vital 
registration (VR) 
2. National perinatal and 
maternal mortality audit  
3. Strong Health Management 
Information Systems (HMIS) 

1. VR usually full coverage, 
quality may be lacking 
2. Audit may not be full 
coverage 
3. HMIS may be high coverage 
but inconsistent quality 

1. Limited to no VR  
2. Usually dependent on 5 yearly national surveys and HMIS 

Counting all births and neonatal deaths 

Consistent counting of all live birth and any birth over 500 g/22 weeks, noting if singleton or multiple birth 
Reporting all deaths in live born babies using perinatal death certificates where possible (no gestational age or weight cut off) 
Specify early neonatal (day 0, days 1–6) and late neonatal (days 7–27) deaths separately  

1. VR using specific neonatal death certificates with birth weight and 
gestational age 
2. Improved cause coding in ICD-11 with clinically-relevant codes  
3. Health facility surveillance with detailed dataset 
4. Crosslink VR and health facility databases to maximise capture  
5. Analysis to track and target disparities 
Consensus on a minimum dataset to be collected on all neonatal deaths, with a limited number of programmatically relevant, comparable cause 
categories distinguishable through verbal autopsy, but which can be further specified by clinical data in mid-mortality settings and linked to complex 
classification systems/ICD codes. Include both direct fetal/neonatal causes and maternal condition so can cross tabulate 
All babies to be weighed at birth and weight to be recorded on birth and death certificates 

1. Develop or enhance sentinel surveillance sites for pregnancy, child and 
other health outcomes (prospective), with a focus on enhancing national 
representativeness and coverage of the poorest 
2. Improve VR systems. Use specific neonatal death certificates 
3. Track urban/rural and other key disparities  

1. Gestational age to be assessed using routine high-quality early 
pregnancy ultrasound and recorded on birth and death certificates 
2. Track the % of births that are reported <28 weeks (noting that if <3% 
of preterm births are <28 weeks, the system may be under-recording 
preterm births) 

1. Gestational age to be assessed in all babies using simplified clinical 
examination or last menstrual period (LMP) where early pregnancy 
ultrasound is not available 
2. Improved technology and low-cost assessment tools are required to 
increase reliability 

Notes: 1) This table is adapted from the “Every Newborn: beyond survival” article published in the Lancet (3) 

Page 18 

 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY WEB MATERIAL 

Cause-of-death estimates for the early and late neonatal periods for 194 countries from 
2000-2013  

Shefali Oza, Joy Lawn, Daniel R Hogan, Colin Mathers, Simon Cousens 

Appendix A: Country groupings by estimatation method .................................................................. 2 

Appendix B: Key methodological differences between current and previous estimates ............. 3 

Appendix C:  Mapping from ICD codes to cause categories used in this work for VR data ...... 6 

Appendix D:  Details of the high-quality VR data used in the low mortality model .................... 7 

Appendix E:  Inclusion criteria for studies in the high mortality model input dataset................ 8 

Appendix F:  Details of the study data for the high mortality model input dataset...................... 9 

Appendix G: Assumptions about missing causes in the high mortality model input data ....... 11 

Appendix H:  Sensitivity analysis assuming 65% and 85% for early period proportion ......... 12 

Appendix I:  Comparison of input and prediction covariates in the multinomial models ....... 13 

Appendix J:  Sensitivity analysis – uncapped prediction covariate values .................................. 16 

Appendix K: Selected covariates in model equations and performance of the equations ........ 17 

Appendix L:  Regression coefficients for the low and high mortality models ............................. 18 

Appendix M:  Results by NMR level and World Bank income category ..................................... 20 

Appendix N:  Cause-specific results by estimation method ............................................................. 24 

Appendix O: Country-specific proportions, risks, and number of deaths for 2013................... 28 

Appendix P:  Comparison of different neonatal COD estimates for China ................................ 99 

References .................................................................................................................................................. 101 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Country groupings by estimatation method 
The 194 countries in this analysis were separated into 3 groups based on the quality if their vital registration 
(VR) data and under-5 mortality rates (U5MR).  U5MR was used instead of the neonatal mortality rate 
(NMR) in order to be consistent with researchers working in parallel to develop estimates for children 1-59 
months old.  We kept the same country groupings as the previous work (1), with the exception of a few 
countries (see “changes to country groupings” in Appendix B). 

As defined in the previous work (1), countries were considered to have high-quality VR data if they 1) had 
80% or higher coverage, 2) did not have excessive use of non-specific/ill-defined VR codes, and 3) provided 
sufficient details in the coding such that the deaths could be grouped in the programmatically-relevant 
categories used in this work.  Countries that lacked high-quality VR data were included in the low mortality 
model if their U5MR from 2000-2010 was ≤35 (per 1,000 live births) and in the high mortality model if it 
their U5MR was >35.   

High-quality VR – 65 countries 

Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macedonia (TFYR of), Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of 
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Trinadad and Tobago, United 
Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela 

Low mortality model – 49 countries 

Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Cabo Verde, 
China, Cook Islands, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Georgia, Hondorus, Jamaica, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Monaco, Nicaragua, Niue, Oman, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, 
Qatar, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seyechelles, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, 
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tongo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, 
Vanuatu, Vietnam 

High mortality model – 80 countries 

Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote d’Ivoir, 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican 
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Micronesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Papau New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, 
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Key methodological differences between current and previous estimates  
Some key methological changes since the last round of neonatal cause-of-death estimates are described 
below.  

Early/late neonatal period estimates 
We are now reporting the results by the early and late neonatal periods.  As described in the paper, we run 4 
separate models (early and late separately for both the low and high mortality models).   

Changes to country groupings 
Since the last iteration of this work, we have included Kuwait, Macedonia, Montenegro, Republic of Korea, 
and Saint Lucia in the high-quality VR countries instead of the low mortality model.  We made this change 
because VR time series data became avaible from the WHO for these countries recently.  Additionally, due 
to improved vital registration data collection in South Africa, we have now included South Africa in the 
group of high-quality VR countries instead of the high mortality model.   

Covariate selection  
Previously (1), we allowed the relationship between each covariate and the log of the cause/baseline cause 
ratio to be described either linearly or quadratically.  In this work, we also included the possibility of a 
restricted cubic spline relationship to include potentially more accurate non-linear relationships.  We also 
included more covariates to the low mortality model than were previously used.  

Additional cause categories within the multinomial 
In the low mortality model, we added injuries as a separate cause, while in the previous work injuries was 
included in the “other” category.  In the high mortality model, we included sepsis, pneumonia, and tetanus as 
separate cause categories.  In the previous work, the high mortality model included a broader “infections” 
category that included sepsis and pneumonia, and these were then split separately using the results from the 
multinomial.  Additionally, in the previous work tetanus was estimated using a single-cause, but now is a 
part of the multinomial itself.   

Indian estimates 
Similar to the 2010 estimates (1), we produced national Indian estimates by aggregating state-level estimates.  
For the 2010 estimates, we had developed a separate multinomial using only Indian studies/surveys for the 
input data.  This time, however, we estimated the state-level proportional cause distribution for each Indian 
state/year within the overall high mortality model.  We did this because there were not enough Indian studies 
that reported sepsis and pneumonia separately in order to estimate these causes in an India-only multinomial, 
and because the cause-of-death distribution between Indian studies and non-Indian studies appeared to be 
quite similar.    

Table S1 contains an overview of how the methods have changed since the first Child Health Epidemiology 
Research Group (CHERG) neonatal estimates were published in 2005 for the year 2000.   

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S1: Methodological differences between the current and previous estimates 
Publication 
year 
Estimation 
year(s) 

2000-2010 

2005 

2010 

2012 

2000 

2008 

Current 

2000-2013 

Goal of 
estimation 

Nonatal cause-of-death 
distribution for 193 
countries in 2000 

Neonatal cause-of-
death distribution for 
193 countries in 2008 

Countries in 
each model 

VR: 45 
Low mortality: 37 
High mortality: 111 

- High quality VR = 
>90% coverage 
- Low mort model = 
countries without high-
quality VR data and 
NMR<10 (or NMR<15 
in WHO 
EURO/AMRO regions) 
- High mort model = 
remaining countries 

High mortality model: 
13685 deaths 
Low mortality model: 
96,797 deaths 

-High mortality model: 
expert opinion on 
which covariates may 
be associated with 
outcomes 
-Low mortality model: 
forward stepwise with 
5% sig. level 

All causes in 
multinomial 

Thresholds 
for classifying 
countries into 
high-quality 
VR, low 
mortality 
model, or 
high 
mortality 
model 

Input data 

Covariate 
selection 

Multinomial 
model 

VR: 73 
Low mortality: 37 
Low/high averaged: 22 
High mortality: 61 
- High quality VR = 
>80% coverage 
- Low mort model = 
countries without high-
quality VR and 
NMR<15 
- averaged model = 
countries without high-
quality VR and NMR 
between 15-20: 
low/high mortality 
models averaged  
- High mort model = 
countries without high-
quality VR data and 
NMR>20 
High mortality model: 
23,220 deaths 
Low mortality model: 
1,005,478 deaths  

Same covariates used 
as previous round 

Infections in 
multinomial with 
sepsis/pneumonia split 
done after; tetanus as 
single-cause 

Preterm, Intrapartum, 
Congenital, Infection, 
Diarrhoea, Tetanus, 
Other 

Preterm, Intrapartum, 
Congenital, Sepsis, 
Pneumonia, Diarrhoea, 
Tetanus, Other 

Causes 

Neonatal cause-of-
death distribution for 
193 countries from 
2000-2010 

VR: 61 
Low mortality: 51 
High mortality: 81 

Neonatal cause-of-death 
distribution for 194 
countries from 2000-
2013 by early and late 
periods 
VR: 65 
Low mortality: 49 
High mortality: 80 

- High quality VR = 
>80% coverage + 
quality criteria (e.g. 
limited non-
specific/implausible 
codes) 
- Low mort model = 
countries without 
adequate VR and with 
U5MR≤35 from 
2000-2010. 
- High mort model = 
countries without 
adequate VR and with 
U5MR>35 from 
2000-2010. 
High mortality model: 
56,890 deaths 
Low mortality model: 
1,013,599 deaths 

-High and low 
mortality models: 
jackknife procedure to 
minimize out-of-
sample prediction 
error.   
- Allowed relationship 
between covariate and 
outcome to be linear 
or quadratic 
Infections in 
multinomial with 
sepsis/pneumonia 
split done after; 
tetanus as single-
cause 
Preterm, Intrapartum, 
Congenital, Sepsis, 
Pneumonia, 
Diarrhoea, Tetanus, 
Other 

- High quality VR = 
>80% coverage + 
quality criteria (e.g. 
limited non-
specific/implausible 
codes) 
- Low mort model = 
countries without 
adequate VR and with 
U5MR≤35 from 2000-
2013. 
- High mort model = 
countries without 
adequate VR and with 
U5MR>35 from 2000-
2013. 
High mortality model: 
98,222 deaths 
Low mortality 
model:1,267,404 deaths  

-High and low mortality 
models: jackknife 
procedure to minimize 
out-of-sample prediction 
error.   
- Allowed relationship 
between covariate and 
outcome to be linear, 
quadratic, or spline 

All causes included in 
multinomial 

Preterm, Intrapartum, 
Congenital, Sepsis, 
Pneumonia, Diarrhoea, 
Tetanus, Other (+  
injuries for VR and low 
mortality model 
countries) 
Bootstrap 

4 

Uncertainty 

Jackknife 

Jackknife 

Bootstrap 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Differences in global estimates between previous Child Health Epidemiology Reference Group 
(CHERG) estimates and this round are shown in table S2.  Since time trends are a recent addition, we 
have compared the data reported in the earlier studies with the relevant year from our current work.  
For example, the paper published in 2005 had estimates for 2000, so we have compared the 2000 
predictions from that paper and our work.   

Table S2: Comparison of estimated proportions between 
current and previous estimates 

Percentages from 
previous work (%) 

Percentages from 
current work (%) 

Preterm  
Intrapartum 
Infections 
Congenital 
Tetanus 
Diarrhoea 
Other 

Preterm  
Intrapartum 
Sepsis 
Pneumonia 
Congenital 
Tetanus 
Diarrhoea 
Other 

33.1 (23.1-44.0) 
24.8 (16.4-32.8) 
21.5 (10.5-35.9) 
8.3 (5.0-14.2) 
3.8 (1.0-9.7) 
0.9 (0.1-4.7) 
7.6 (3.8-13.2) 

34.6 (24.4-46.2) 
23.8 (16.8-31.5) 
16.0 (8.2-24.7) 
5.5 (2.8-10.4) 
9.6 (6.2-15.0) 
2.1 (0.6-5.5) 
0.7 (0.1-3.6) 
7.7 (3.7-13.2) 

2000 estimates (2) 
27.9 (0.19-0.35) 
22.8 (0.15-0.27) 
26.0 (0.17-0.31) 
7.4 (0.06-0.12) 
6.5 (0.05-0.20) 
2.8 (0.02-0.10) 
6.6 (0.05-0.16) 
2008 estimates (3) 
28.9 (20.1-34.0) 
22.8 (15.7-27.9) 
14.6 (10.0-20.6) 
10.8 (7.4-15.2) 
7.6 (5.7-10.7) 
1.7 (0.9-2.3) 
2.2 (1.6-5.9) 
11.4 (8.9-24.7) 
2010 estimates (1) 
30.2 (25.6-37.1) 
20.1 (17.1-24.5) 
11.0 (7.0-15.4) 
9.1 (5.8-13.1) 
7.6 (5.8-10.2) 
1.6 (0.6-7.7) 
1.4 (0.5-4.2) 
5.1 (3.2-7.9) 

Preterm  
Intrapartum 
Sepsis 
Pneumonia 
Congenital 
Tetanus 
Diarrhoea 
Other 
Notes: 1) Intrapartum-related conditions were previously referred to 
as “birth asphyxia”; 2) infections include sepsis and other severe 
infections as well as pneumonia, which in recent years have been 
estimated separately.  To compare with previous estimates, however, 
these are included in the aggregate infection category for estimates.   

35.0 (24.6-46.9) 
23.6 (16.8-31.0) 
16.0 (8.2-24.7) 
5.2 (2.7-10.0) 
10.1 (6.4-15.6) 
1.8 (0.5-4.8)  
0.6 (0.2-3.3) 
7.6 (3.7-13.2)   

Note that these estimates are not necessarily directly comparable.  One reason for this is that UN-IGME 
updates their NMR, U5MR, and IMR time series each year, and so the values estimated for 2008 in one year 
may be different from those from another year.  Since our model includes these as covariates, the covariate 
values for the same year may be different for these values, which could affect the proportions.  But as is seen 
in Table S2, the previous and current estimates generally fall within each other’s uncertainty bounds.   

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C:  Mapping from ICD codes to cause categories used in this work for VR data 

Here we have included the mapping from the 9th and 10th International Classification of Diseases (ICD-9 and 
ICD-10) to the 7 programatically relevant cause categories we used in our work for the VR data.   

Table S3: Mapping between ICD codes and cause categories used in this work 
ICD-10 codes 
P01.0-P01.1, P07, P22, P25-
P28, P52, P61.2, P77 

Complications of 
preterm birth 

Intrapartum-related 
complications 

Congenital disorders 

P01.7-P02.1, P02.4-P02.6, 
P03, P07, P10-P15, P20-P21, 
P24, P50, P90-P91 
D55-D68.9, E01-E07, E70-
E84, G10-G99, H, I, K, L, M, 
N, P35, P76, Q 

Sepsis and other 
severe infections 
Pneumonia 
Injuries 

Other 

A00-A35, A38-A99, B, G00-
G09, P36-P39 
A36-A37, J, P23 
S, V, W, X, Y 
C, D00-D54.9, D69-D99, 
E00, E08-E69, E85-E99, P00, 
P01.2-P01.6, P02.2-P02.3, 
P02.7-P02.9, P04-P06, P08, 
P29, P51, P53-P61.1, P61.3-
P74, P78, P80-P83, P93-P94 

ICD-9 codes 
434.9, 518.1-518.9, 761.0-761.1, 765, 
769-770.0, 770.2-770.9, 772.1, 774.2, 
776.6, 777.5-777.6, 786.3 
348.1-348.9, 437.1-437.9, 723.4, 
761.7-762.1, 762.4-762.6, 763, 767-
768, 770.1, 772.2, 779.0-779.2 
056, 240-243, 245-259, 272-277, 
279.3-286, 288.2, 303, 330-348.0, 349-
426, 429-434.0, 435-437.0, 438-451, 
520-723.0, 724-728, 731-759, 775.2, 
777.0, 795.2 
000-031, 034-055, 057-134, 136-139, 
320-326, 491, 730, 771, 780.6, 785.4 
032-033, 460-490, 492-518.0 
800-999 
135, 140-239, 244, 260-271, 278-
279.2, 287-288.1, 288.3-289, 427, 452-
459, 760, 761.2-761.6, 762.2-762.3, 
762.7-762.9, 764, 766, 772.0, 772.3-
774.1, 774.3-775.1, 775.3-776.5, 
776.7-776.9, 778.0, 779.5-779.6 

We excluded the following ICD codes as non-specific/ill-defined: 
1) ICD-10 – F, O, P92, P95-96, R 
2) ICD-9 – 295.4, 305.6, 205.9, 308.9, 311.0, 317.0, 319.0, 779.3, 779.8-799 (except for 780.6, 785.4, 786.3, 
and 795.2 as mentioned above) 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D:  Details of the high-quality VR data used in the low mortality model 
Below is a table describing the missing data years for the high-quality VR countries.  This data was used as 
is for the low mortality model input dataset (i.e. no imputation of missing data).  For the high-quality VR 
country estimates, we imputed data for the years with missing data.  For years with missing data that were 
between years with existing data, we used linear interpolation to impute the missing proportions.  For years 
that were before the earliest or after the latest available data year, we applied the proportions from the 
nearest year with available data to the missing data.  None of the 7 causes we modelled for low mortality 
countries were missing in these data. The full dataset can be found at the WHO Global Health Observatory 
(www.who.int/gho).   

Table S4: List of years with missing data for high-quality VR countries 
Country 
Country 

Country 

Years with  
missing data 
2010-2012 

Germany 

Years with  
missing data 
2012 

Antigua and 
Barbuda 
Argentina 
Australia 

2011-2012 
2005, 2012 

Greece 
Grenada 

Austria 

2012 

Guyana 

Bahamas 
Bahrain 

2009-2012 
2010-2012 

Hungary 
Iceland 

Barbados 

2009-2012 

Ireland 

Belgium 

Belize 

Brazil 
Bulgaria 
Chile 
Colombia 

2000-2002; 
2010-2012 
2008-2012 

Israel 

Italy 

2011-2012 
2012 
2010-2012 
2010-2012 

Japan 
Kuwait 
Latvia 
Lithuania 

Panama 

Poland 
Republic of Korea 

Republic of 
Moldova 
Romania 
Saint Kitts and 
Nevis 
Saint Lucia 

Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines 
Serbia 

Singapore 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
South Africa 

Spain 
Suriname 

Sweden 
Trinadad and 
Tobago 
United Kingdom 

Years with  
missing data 
2010-2012 

2012 
2012 

none 

2012 
2009-2012 

2000-2001, 
2007, 2009-2012 
2011-2012 

2012 

2012 
2011-2012 
2011-2012 
2000-2005, 
2008, 2010-2012 
2012 
2010-2012 

2011-2012 
2003, 2009-2012 

2011-2012 

2012 
2000, 2011-
2012 
2000, 2009-
2012 
2012 
2010-2012 

2000-2006, 
2011-2012 
2011-2012 

2004-2005, 
2011-2012 
2012 
2000, 2012 
2011-2012 
2011-2012 

2012 
2001-2004, 
2011-2012 
2012 
2012 

2000-2004, 
2010-2012 
2012 

Luxembourg 
Macedonia 
(TYFR of) 
Malta 
Mauritius 

Costa Rica 
Croatia 

2010-2012 
2012 

Cuba 
Czech 
Republic 
Denmark 

Dominica 

2011-2012 
2012 

2000, 2010-
2012 
2011-2012 

Mexico 

2011-2012 

Estonia 

2009, 2012 

Netherlands 

Uruguay 

Finland 
France 

2012 
2010-2012 

New Zealand 
Norway 

2010-2012 
2012 

Venezuela 

Montenegro 

United States 

2011-2012 

2002-2003, 
2005-2006, 
2010-2012 
2008-2012 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E:  Inclusion criteria for studies in the high mortality model input dataset  
For this work, we used the same criteria for selecting new studies to include in the input dataset as used in 
previous iterations of this work (4).  The criteria are as follows: 

  Publication in 1980 or later 
  Study set in one of nine (of a total of 14) subregions with no or few countries with >90% VR coverage 
  Community-based study or hospital based in populations with over 90% hospital delivery and defined 

catchment population 

  Case ascertainment: follow up of newly born infants from birth to at least 7 or 28 days 
  Number of deaths with known cause ≥ 20 
  Study duration ≥ 12 months 
  Included four or more of the eight selected programme relevant causes of neonatal death 
  Deaths of unknown cause ≤ 25% of total deaths 
  Cause attribution based on skilled clinical investigation, post mortem, or verbal autopsy 
  Case definitions specified and comparable with other studies 

Our search strategy involved doing a literature review in ten databases for articles published between 
January 2011 and May 2013.  Previous searches covered periods from 1980 to December 2010.  The 
databases we searched were Pubmed, Embase, Web of Knowledge, Medline, Global Health, Popline, and 
region-specific indices (LILACS, Africa-Wide Information, Western Pacific Region, Eastern Mediterranean, 
IndMed).   

Our search covered the following areas (including variations, alternatives, and MESH for these terms): 
Cause-specific (one or more of these): haemorrhage, jaundice, abnormality, malformation, neural tube 
defect, sudden infant daeath syndrome, congenital malformations, congenital abnormalities, necrotic, 
respiratory distress, prematurity, preterm birth, asphyxia, tetanus, sepsis, birth injury, intrapartum, birth, 
cause, fetal alcohol syndrome, rubella, diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, gastroenteritis, digestive tract infection, 
pneumonia, respiratory infections, bronchitis, croup, meningitis, encephalitis, meningococcal 
AND 
Age group (one or more of these): infant/newborn, neonatal, perinatal  
AND  
Mortality terms (one or more of these): death, mortality, fatality 
AND 
High mortality countries/regions: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Brasil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, French 
Guiana, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela, Mexico, Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Puerto Rico, Panama, West Indies, Antigua, Bahamas, Barbados, Cuba, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Haiti, Jamaica, Martinique, Antilles, Anguilla, Saint 
Kitts, St Kitts, Saint Lucia, St Lucia, Saint Vincent, St Vincent, Trinidad, Tobago, Virgin Islands, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Borneo, Brunei, Cambodia, East Timor, 
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Mekong Valley, Myanmar, Burma, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam, 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, China, Korea, Macao, Mongolia, Taiwan, 
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, 
United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Fiji, New Caledonia, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, Micronesia, Melanesia, 
Guam, Palau, Polynesia, Samoa, Tonga, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Albania, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Bosnia, Herzegovina, Serbia, Bulgaria, Belarus, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Macedonia, Moldova, 
Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Russia, Bashkiria, Dagestan, Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine, Cameroon, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, "Democratic Republic of the Congo", Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, 
Burundi, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Angola, 
Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Benin, 
Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia,  Mali, Mauritania, Niger, 
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo, Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, Comoros, Madagascar, 
Mauritius, Reunion, Seychelles, developing country, third world country, less developed, sub-Saharan, 
Caribbean, Pacific Islands, Mexico, Latin America, South America,  Indian Ocean Islands, Central America, 
Asia, Africa, Far East 
AND  
NOT “case reports”, editorial, comment, practice guideline 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix F:  Details of the study data for the high mortality model input dataset 
Below is a table describing the studies and surveys included in the high mortality model input dataset.  New 
studies have an asterisk (*) in front of the author name.  While most studies were included in the dataset as a 
single observation, those stratified by neonatal period or in other ways (e.g. setting location) were included 
as multiple observations.  The full dataset can be found at the WHO Global Health Observatory 
(www.who.int/gho).   

Table S5: Details of the high mortality model input dataset  
Additional 
First author 
strata 

Year 
published 

Country 

Median 
data year 

# of causes 
reported 

Adazu (5) 

Aguilar (6) 

*Akgun (7) 

Aleman (8) 

Anand (9) 
Asling-Monemi 
(10) 
Awasthi (11) 

Baiden (12) 

Balci (13) 

Bang (14) 

*Bapat (15) 

Baqui (16) 

Barros (17) 

Barros (18) 

Bassani (19) 

Bezzaoucha (20) 

Bhatia (21) 

Bhutta (22) 

Campbell (23) 

Chowdhury (24) 

Chowdhury (25) 

Chowdhury (26) 

Darmstadt (27) 

Darmstadt (27) 

Datta (28) 

Deribew (29) 

*DHS (30) 

*DHS (31) 

*DHS (32) 

*DHS (33) 

*DHS (34) 

Djaja (35) 

Dommisse (36) 

Edmond (37) 

Ekanem (38) 

2002 

1995 

2003 

1993 

1993 

1995 

1994 

1999 

2006 

1994 

2006 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

not given 

2005 

1998 

2012 

1998 

2000 

Kenya 

Bolivia 

Turkey 

Nicaragua 

India 

 2003 

Nicaragua 

India 

Ghana 

Turkey 

India 

India 

India 

Brazil 

Brazil 

India 

1982 

2004 

2002 

2003 

1982 

2001 

2000 

1983 

1992 

 2004 

2002 

2005 

not given 

2005 

2002 

2004 

2004 

2006 

2007 

2001 

1988 

2004 

1991 

Algeria 

early/late 

Bangladesh 

Pakistan 

Egypt 

Bangladesh 

Bangladesh 

early/late 

Bangladesh 

Bangladesh 

time periods 

Bangladesh 

time periods 

India 

Ethiopia 

Bangladesh 

Honduras 

Nepal 

Pakistan 

Mozambique 

Indonesia 

South Africa 

early/late 

Ghana 

Nigeria 

early/late 

1998 

2006 

2008 

1999 

2012 

2006 

1987 

2008 

2010 

2010 

1989 

- 

2004 

1996 

2005 

 2010 

2010 

2010 

1988 

2007 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2003 

1991 

2008 

1994 

5 

8 

4 

6 

8 

6 

7 

4 

5 

6 

5 

7 

7 

8 

7 

5 

7 

7 

7 

5 

5 

8 

7 

7 

8 

8 

8 

7 

8 

8 

5 

8 

7 

5 

7 

# of deaths 
used in 
analysis 
75 

79 

34 

72 

50 

56 

286 

1001 

68 

36 

102 

477 

113 

54 

10892 

2167 

513 

152 

103 

474 

43 

332 

56 

125 

163 

45 

302 

142 

220 

1484 

718 

178 

276 

582 

24 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S5: Details of the high mortality model input dataset  
Additional 
First author 
strata 

Year 
published 

Country 

Median 
data year 

# of causes 
reported 

El-Zibdeh (39) 

Fantahun (40) 

Fauveau (41) 

Fikree (42) 

Fonseka (43) 

Garenne (44) 

Garenne (44) 

*Gill (45) 

Gomes (46) 

Greenwood (47) 

Halder (48) 

Hinderaker (49) 

Jehan (50) 

Karabulut (51) 

Khalique (52) 

Khan (53) 

*Khanal (32) 
Khanjanasthiti 
(54) 
Kishan (55) 

*Krishnan (56) 

*Krishnan (56) 

Leach (57) 

Liu (58) 

Lucas (59) 
Manandhar 
(60) 
*Matendo (61) 

Matijasevich (62) 

Matijasevich (62) 

Matijasevich (62) 

Mendieta (63) 

Nandan (64) 

*Nga (65) 

Pattison (66) 

Perry (67) 

Perry (67) 

Phukan (68) 

Pison (69) 

Pratinidhi (70) 

Rahman (71) 

Rajindrajith (72) 

*RHS (31) 

1988 

1998 

1990 

2002 

1994 

2007 

2007 

2011 

1997 

1987 

2009 

2003 

2009 

2009 

1993 

1993 

2011 

1984 

1988 

2012 

2012 

1999 

1985 

1996 

2010 

2011 

2008 

2008 

2008 

2001 

2005 

2012 

2013 

2003 

2003 

1998 

1993 

1986 

1989 

2009 

1997 

Saudi Arabia 

Ethiopia 

Bangladesh 

Pakistan 

Sri Lanka 

Morocco 

time periods 

Morocco 

time periods 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

time periods 

time periods 

time periods 

time periods 

time periods 

Zambia 

Brazil 

Gambia 

Bangladesh 

Tanzania 

Pakistan 

Turkey 

India 

Pakistan 

Nepal 

Thailand 

Libya 

India 

India 

Gambia 

China 

Sri Lanka 

Nepal 

Congo 

Brazil 

Brazil 

Brazil 

Paraguay 

India 

Viet Nam 

South Africa 

Bangladesh 

Haiti 

India 

Senegal 

India 

Bangladesh 

early/late 

Sri Lanka 

Honduras 

1983 

1992 

1982 

1992 

1987 

1987 

1987 

2007 

1991 

1982 

2007 

1995 

2004 

2006 

1990 

1986 

2006 

not given 

1984 

1983 

2003 

1992 

1980 

1993 

2007 

2005 

1982 

1993 

2004 

1996 

2001 

2009 

2006 

1997 

1997 

1994 

1987 

1982 

1985 

1999 

1994 

7 

7 

8 

8 

7 

8 

8 

7 

6 

8 

8 

5 

5 

6 

8 

7 

5 

8 

6 

5 

5 

8 

7 

6 

5 

6 

4 

4 

4 

6 

8 

7 

7 

8 

8 

7 

6 

7 

7 

6 

7 

# of deaths 
used in 
analysis 
78 

47 

201 

497 

253 

109 

329 

58 

138 

32 

49 

71 

49 

178 

21 

80 

183 

22 

245 

154 

106 

130 

956 

120 

640 

56 

115 

88 

47 

3638 

299 

225 

45848 

102 

28 

101 

26 

135 

69 

17946 

121 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S5: Details of the high mortality model input dataset  
Additional 
First author 
strata 

Year 
published 

Country 

Median 
data year 

# of causes 
reported 

*RHS (31) 
Samms-Vaughan 
(73) 
Schumacher (74) 

Settel (75) 

Settel (75) 

Settel (75) 

Shah (76) 

Sharifzadeh (77) 

Shrivastava (78) 

Singhal (79) 
Sivagnanasundram 
(80) 
Tikmani (81) 

*Turnbull (82) 

Vaid (83) 

Waiswa (84) 

Walraven (85) 

Woods (86) 

Yassin (87) 

2002 

1990 

Honduras 

Jamaica 

2002 

2004 

2004 

2004 

2010 

2008 

2001 

1990 

1985 

2010 

2011 

2007 

2010 

2003 

2001 

2000 

Guinea 

Tanzania 

Tanzania 

Tanzania 

India 

Iran 

India 

India 

Sri Lanka 

Pakistan 

Zambia 

India 

Uganda 

Gambia 

South Africa 

Egypt 

location 

location 

location 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

early/late 

1999 

1986 

1998 

2000 

2000 

2000 

2006 

2005 

1995 

1984 

1982 

2005 

2008 

2000 

2007 

2000 

2001 

1994 

7 

7 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

7 

8 

7 

8 

7 

6 

8 

7 

6 

7 

8 

# of deaths 
used in 
analysis 
143 

885 

94 

75 

119 

124 

22 

87 

895 

50 

46 

41 

35 

102 

58 

70 

253 

39 

Appendix G: Assumptions about missing causes in the high mortality model input data  
Of the 112 observations in the high mortality model input data, 34 had no causes missing, 37 had one cause missing, 13 
had two causes missing, 23 had three causes missing, and 5 had four causes missing.  No observations were missing 
data for the “intrapartum” or “other” cause categories.  For the other causes, the assumptions we made about the cause 
category into which any deaths from an unreported cause would have been assigned are shown in table S6.   

Table S6: Assumptions about missing causes in the high 
mortality model input data 

# of observations with 
this cause missing 

Preterm 
Congenital 
Sepsis 
Pneumonia 
Diarrhoea 
Tetanus 
Notes: 1) observations with sepsis missing were also missing all 
other infection categories (diarrhea, pneumonia, tetatanus) 

If missing, 
assumed to be in… 
Other 
Other 
Other 
Sepsis 
Sepsis 
Sepsis 

1 
13 
3 
62 
42 
31 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix H:  Sensitivity analysis assuming 65% and 85% for early period proportion 
Based on previous work (88), we assumed that 74% and 26% of neonatal deaths occurred in the 
early and late periods, respectively, for countries without adequate VR data.  The three-
quarters/one-quarter split is quite consistent across countries, including ones with widely varying 
contexts (88).  However, to test how this affected our results, we estimated the global cause-of-
death distribution for the overall neonatal period if the proportion of early neonatal deaths was 65% 
or 85% instead of 74%.  The results are shown in table S7.   

Table S7: Global cause-specific proportions and numbers of neonatal deaths in 2013 
assuming different proportions of early neonatal deaths 

Assuming 74% deaths 
in early neonatal 
period (current 
method)* 

Assuming 65% deaths 
in early neonatal 
period* 

Assuming 85% deaths 
in early neonatal 
period* 

% 

Preterm 

35.7 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Diarrhoea 

Tetanus 

Other 

23.4 

10.5 

15.6 

4.9 

0.6 

1.7 

7.5 

# of deaths in 
thousands 
(uncertainty) 
986.9 
(699.1-1312.5) 
644.8 
(462.4-844.7) 
289.8 
(183.3-450.4) 
430.4 
(218.9-664.8) 
136.4 
(70.3-259.0) 
16.6 
(3.2-83.0) 
48.2 
(15.5-120.4) 
207.8 
(99.0-367.4) 

% 

34.0 

22.1 

10.4 

18.2 

5.0 

0.7 

2.0 

7.6 

# of deaths 
in 
thousands  

% 

# of deaths 
in thousands  

939.8 

610.4 

288.1 

501.5 

137.0 

19.3 

55.0 

209.8 

37.8 

24.9 

10.6 

12.4 

4.9 

0.5 

1.4 

7.4 

1044.4 

686.9 

291.8 

343.6 

135.8 

13.4 

39.8 

205.4 

* this split is only applied to countries for which modelled estimates are needed – the split for 
countries with high-quality VR data is taken from the data as is.  Additional notes: 1) diarrhoea 
and tetanus were estimated only for the 80 high mortality model countries; and 2) injuries are 
included within the “other” category.   

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix I:  Comparison of input and prediction covariates in the multinomial models 

Table S8a: Comparison of input and prediction covariates in the low and high 
mortality models  

Mean 
(SD) 

6.2 
(4.3) 
9.6 
(7.2) 
11.4 
(8.8) 
7.3 
(2.5) 
21026 
(13292
) 

0.055 
(0.018) 

37.6 
(9.7) 
96.7 
(4.3) 
94.2 
(5.6) 
93.0 
(4.7) 

33.0 
(15.9) 
62.1 
(30.0) 
88.6 
(45.8) 
18.9 
(11.3) 

0.127 
(0.043) 

67.5 
(26.5) 
67.9 
(24.6) 
78.8 
(23.9) 
63.3 

NMR 

IMR 

U5MR 

LBW 

GNI 

GFR 

GINI 

ANC 

DPT 

femlit 

NMR 

IMR 

U5MR 

LBW 

GFR 

ANC 

DPT 

BCG 

PAB 

Input data 
Median  
(IQR) 

Range  
(min-
max) 

Mean 
(SD) 

Prediction data 
Median 
(IQR) 

4.7  
(2.8-8.8) 
7.0  
(4.2-13.6) 
8.2  
(5.0-15.6) 
7.0  
(5.7-8.2) 
18130 
(11021- 
30090) 
0.050 
(0.040-
0.065) 
34.3 
(30.9-45.3) 
97.9 
(96.3-99.4) 
96.0 
(93.0-98.0) 
92.4 
(90.7-97.0) 

30.2 
(18.8-47.2) 
58.7 
(35.7-81.6) 
89.1 
(52.9-125.4) 
15.9 
(10.6-27.6) 
0.118 
(0.092-
0.158) 
73.9 
(50.0-92.0) 
73.5 
(60.5-83.5) 
87.0 
(73.0-93.0) 
68.0 

1.8-49.9 

1.1-24.4 

Low mortality model 
9.2  
(4.5) 
15.0  
(7.7) 
17.8  
(9.3) 
8.7  
(3.6) 

2.3-76.9 

3.8-23.2 

1490-
67970 

20450 
(38356) 

0.033-
0.119 

0.076 
(0.029) 

71.3-100 

62.0-99.0 

24.2-67.4 

70.3-99.8 

39.3 
(7.7) 
93.6 
(7.2) 
93.1 
(8.6) 
87.8 
(9.0) 
High mortality model 
30.2 
(10.2) 
60.3 
(24.9) 
89.2 
(45.1) 
14.2 
(6.7) 

14.7-142.0 

17.1-227.0 

10.5-70.1 

2.5-50.0 

0.057-
0.235 

0.140 
(0.046) 

5.0-98.3 

0.0-99.0 

0.0-100.0 

0.0-98.5 

78.6 
(18.5) 
76.3 
(18.5) 
85.1 
(14.2) 
76.0 

9.1  
(5.4-12.4) 
15.1  
(8.4-20.6) 
17.6 
(9.9-24.3) 
8.4  
(6.3-10.2) 
7302 
(4450-
19600) 
0.075 
(0.050-
0.096) 
39.4 
(32.6-42.1) 
96.3 
(90.3-98.9) 
96.0  
(92.0-98.0) 
90.1  
(81.9-93.5) 

29.7 
(21.8-37.3) 
57.2 
(40.0-76.5) 
83.0 
(52.0-116.7) 
12.8 
(10.2-16.7) 
0.145 
(0.101-
0.175) 
84.1 
(71.0-92.7) 
80.0 
(66.0-91.0) 
90.0 
(78.0-96.0) 
79.7 

Range 
(min-
max) 

1.1-22.5 

2.2-35.9 

3.0-44.8 

0.0-22.3 

1400-
327346 

0.032-
0.171 

25.6-69.2 

52.9-
100.0 

41.0-99.0 

50.6-99.7 

8.8-55.1 

14.4-
141.3 
16.3-
231.5 

4.2-35.6 

0.054-
0.246 

16.1-
100.0 

3.0-99.0 

24.0-99.0 

24.0-97.0 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
femlit 

SBA 

Region 

0.0-100.0 

4.0-94.0 

(51.4-83.5) 
48.7 
(34.6-77.3) 
45.3 
(18.9-83.7) 

(25.0) 
51.9 
(24.7) 
48.7 
(33.1) 
East Asia and Pacific: n = 4 
Europe and Central Asia: n = 5 
Latin America/Caribbean: n = 16 
Middle East and North Africa: n = 8 
South Asia: n = 52 
Sub-Saharan Africa: n = 26 
High income: n = 1 

(13.1) 
62.2 
(23.6) 
60.1 
(25.3) 

(68.2-85.0) 
61.8 
(43.9-83.6) 
60.2 
(42.0-82.0) 

9.4-100.0 

5.6-100.0 

East Asia and Pacific: n = 14 
Europe and Central Asia: n = 6 
Latin America/Caribbean: n = 4 
Middle East and North Africa: n = 6 
South Asia: n = 5 
Sub-Saharan Africa: n = 44 
High income: n = 0 

Notes: 1) bolded values are those outside the input data range; 2) these do not include Indian states (see table S8b 
for comparison of Indian state data); 3) SD = standard deviation, IQR = interquartile range; 4) region was only 
included as a covariate in the high mortality model; 5) covariate acronyms are as follows: NMR = neonatal mortality 
rate (per 1,000 live births); IMR = infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births); U5MR = under-5 mortality rate (per 
1,000 live births); LBW = low birth weight rate (%); GNI = gross national income; GFR = general fertility rate; GINI = 
gini coefficient; ANC = antenatal care (%); DPT = diphtheria/pertussis/tetanus vaccine (%); femlit = female literacy 
(%); BCG = Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine (%); PAB = Protected at birth (against neonatal tetanus) (%); SBA = 
skilled birth attendance (%).   

Table S8b table is similar the table above, but the prediction data is now for Indian states.  In the 
analysis, we predicted the proportional cause-of-death distribution at the state-level for India and 
aggregated the estimates to develop national estimates.   

Table S8b: Comparison of high mortality model input covariates and 
covariates for Indian states 

High mortality model input 
data 
Median  
(IQR) 

Mean 
(SD) 

Range  
(min-
max) 

Indian state-level prediction 
data 
Median 
(IQR) 

Mean 
(SD) 

Range 
(min-
max) 

NMR 

IMR 

U5M
R 

LBW 

GFR 

ANC 

DPT 

BCG 

PAB 

33.0 
(15.9) 
62.1 
(30.0) 

88.6 
(45.8) 

18.9 
(11.3) 

0.127 
(0.043) 

67.5 
(26.5) 
67.9 
(24.6) 
78.8 
(23.9) 
63.3 
(25.0) 

30.2 
(18.8-47.2) 
58.7 
(35.7-81.6) 
89.1 
(52.9-
125.4) 
15.9 
(10.6-27.6) 
0.118 
(0.092-
0.158) 
73.9 
(50.0-92.0) 
73.5 
(60.5-83.5) 
87.0 
(73.0-93.0) 
68.0 
(51.4-83.5) 

10.5-70.1 

14.7-
142.0 

17.1-
227.0 

2.5-50.0 

26.8 
(11.6) 
40.2 
(17.3) 

54.9 
(25.2) 

20.4 
(8.4) 

0.057-
0.235 

0.089 
(0.007) 

5.0-98.3 

0.0-99.0 

0.0-100.0 

0.0-98.5 

77.8 
(13.2) 
68.9 
(14.4) 
87.2 
(10.9) 
72.6 
(15.5) 

26.8 
(18.1-33.9) 
38.8 
(27.1-52.2) 

6.3-59.9 

9.2-95.5 

51.0 
(36.1-72.5) 

11.8-
122.0 

21.0  
(15.0-26.0) 
0.088 
(0.083-
0.096) 
75.2  
(70.1-88.8) 
70.6 
(61.2-78.1) 
89.7 
(85.0-96.1) 
76.9 
(60.6-85.4) 

0.0-43.0 

0.080-
0.103 

33.1-99.5 

30.2-96.9 

45.4-99.5 

31.3-97.1 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
femli
t 

SBA 

51.9 
(24.7) 
48.7 
(33.1) 

48.7 
(34.6-77.3) 
45.3 
(18.9-83.7) 

4.0-94.0 

0.0-100.0 

62.9 
(14.7) 
59.8 
(16.8) 

63.8 
(52.7-70.3) 
59.4 
(48.1-70.0) 

35.4-94.0 

25.5-99.6 

Notes: 1) bolded values are those outside the input data range; 2) the region covariate was “Southern 
Asia” for all states; 3) SD = standard deviation, IQR = interquartile range; 4) covariate acronyms are in the 
footnotes of table S5a.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix J:  Sensitivity analysis – uncapped prediction covariate values  
As noted in the paper, we capped the predication covariate values to the min/max of the input covariate 
values in both the low and high mortality models to avoid predicting on covariates outside fo the input data 
range.  Capping the prediction data will tend to “shrink” the predicted cause distribution towards that seen in 
the input data. Here, we present the results of a sensitivity analysis in which we ran the low and high 
mortality models without the caps on the covariate values.   

Low mortality model 
Table S9a: Low mortality model sensitivity analysis of uncapped prediction covariate 
values for 2013 

% of 
deaths 
(capped) 
43.0 
15.8 
21.8 
5.8 
2.9 
0.7 
10.1 

Early 
% of  
deaths 
(uncapped) 
44.2 
16.5 
19.1 
6.1 
3.0 
0.7 
10.4 

Difference   % of 
deaths 
(capped) 
27.9 
9.0 
27.6 
17.6 
9.9 
1.5 
6.7 

+1.2 
+0.7 
-2.7 
+0.3 
+0.1 
0 
+0.3 

Late 
% of  
deaths 
(uncapped) 
27.7 
9.2 
27.4 
17.9 
9.8 
1.5 
6.6 

Difference  

-0.2 
+0.2 
-0.2 
+0.3 
-0.1 
0 
-0.1 

Preterm 
Intrapartum 
Congenital 
Sepsis 
Pneumonia 
Injuries 
Other 

Notes: 1) the “capped” analysis is the main analysis presented in the paper; the “uncapped” is the sensitivity analysis.   

Excluding countries with few deaths (<50), the key differences (greater than 5 percentage point difference) 
in countries were:  

1) Egypt (both periods, 2000-2006) – intrapartum was 5-9 percentage points higher in the sensitivity 
     analysis 
2) Syria (xxx periods, 2012-2013) – sepsis was 9-11 percentage points higher and congenital was 6 
    percentage points lower in the sensitivity analysis 
3) Honduras (early period, 2000) – injuries was 8 percentage points higher in the sensitivity  
     analysis 
4) Jordan (early period, 2000) – injuries was 5 percentage points higher in the sensitivity analysis 

High mortality model 
Table S9b: High mortality model sensitivity analysis of uncapped prediction covariate 
values 

% of 
deaths 
(capped) 
40.6 
28.8 
9.0 
8.3 
5.2 
1.2 
0.4 
6.7 

Early 
% of  
deaths 
(uncapped) 
40.6 
28.7 
9.0 
8.3 
5.2 
1.2 
0.4 
6.7 

Difference   % of 
deaths 
(capped) 
20.3 
13.5 
7.6 
40.0 
4.7 
4.4 
1.6 
7.9 

0 
-0.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
  0 

Late 
% of  
deaths 
(uncapped) 
20.3 
13.5 
7.6 
40.1 
4.7 
4.3 
1.6 
7.9 

Preterm 
Intrapartum 
Congenital 
Sepsis 
Pneumonia 
Tetanus 
Diarrhoea 
Other 

Difference  

0 
0 
0 
+0.1 
0 
-0.1 
0 
0 

Notes: 1) the “capped” analysis is the main analysis presented in the paper; the “uncapped” is the sensitivity analysis.   

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the early period, both Niger (2000, “other”) and Kazhakstan (2013, “congenital”) were 2 percentage 
points higher in the sensitivity analysis.  No other countries had more than a one percentage point difference 
between the sensitivity versus main analysis.   

Appendix K: Selected covariates in model equations and performance of the equations 
The following table lists the covariates that were selected for each of the four models, as well as the 
performance of each equation in reducing the out-of-sample residuals.  The % reduction in residuals were 
calculated based on comparing the chi-squared statistic (sum of the squared differences between the 
observed and expected deaths divided by expected deaths) of the final equation compared to the null model 
with no covariates (see main paper for further methods).  While for some causes our models seemed to 
explain the majority of variation in the input data, for others the models performed less well. The 
poorer performance for some causes may be due to a number of factors, including the limited range of 
covariates available for inclusion, inaccurate measurement of included covariates, or the possibility 
that there is no pattern that can be predicted based on the input data.  

Table S10: Selected covariates in equations of the low and high mortality models and % 
reduction in residuals 

Early neonatal period 
Selected covariates1  % reduction 
in residuals 
Low mortality model 

Late neonatal period 
Selected covariates1  % reduction 
in residuals 

L: femlit 

16% 

S: femlit, DPT 

Intrapartum: 
Preterm 
Congenital: 
Preterm 

L: GINI, DPT, femlit 
S: IMR, U5MR, LBW 

Sepsis: 
Preterm 

L: GNI, GINI, ANC 
S: IMR, DPT 

Pneumonia: 
Preterm 
Injuries: 
Preterm 

Other: 
Preterm 

Preterm: 
Intrapartum 

Congenital: 
Intrapartum 

Sepsis: 
Intrapartum 

Pneumonia: 
Intrapartum 

Diarrhoea: 
Intrapartum 

L: GNI 

Q: GFR 

Q: GFR 

L: BCG, PAB, SBA, DPT 
S: LBW, GFR 
L: LBW 
Q: NMR, U5MR 
S: BCG 
B: period 
L: LBW 
Q: BCG 
B: period, reg_SA 
L: U5MR, LBW 
B: period 
L: DPT, GFR 
Q: NMR 
B: period, reg_SA, 
reg_SSA 

Tetanus: 
Intrapartum 

L: PAB, ANC, NMR 
B: period 

62% 

L: NMR, DPT 

66% 

25% 

L: femlit, GINI 
Q: IMR 
S: DPT 
L: GNI 
S: ANC 

17% 

none 

19% 

L: LBW 
Q: DPT 
S: NMR 

High mortality model 

47% 

77% 

81% 

S: LBW, PAB, GFR 
B: reg_SSA 

Q: SBA, U5MR 
B: period, reg_SSA 

Q: PAB 
S: LBW 
B: period 

16% 

Q: PAB 

87% 

86% 

L: DPT, BCG, GFR, 
femlit 
S: LBW 
B: reg_LAC 
L: NMR, IMR, U5MR, 
PAB 
B: period 

21% 

10% 

67% 

40% 

0% 

16% 

61% 

71% 

13% 

23% 

45% 

44% 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
Other: 
Intrapartum 

S: GFR 
B: reg_SSA 

6% 

S: GFR 
B: period, reg_SSA 

49% 

Notes: 1) L = linear; Q = quadratic; S = restricted cubic spline; B = binary; 2) reg_SSA = sub-Saharan Africa, reg_SA = 
South Asia, reg_LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; 3) see the “notes” at the end of table S7a for the other 
covariate acronym definitions. 

Appendix L:  Regression coefficients for the low and high mortality models 
The following table includes the regression coefficients from the multinomial regressions for the two models 
used in this work.   

Table S11: Regression coefficients for the low and high mortality models 

Early neonatal period 
Coveraites with regression 
coefficients 

Late neonatal period 
Covariate with regression 
coefficients 

Low mortality model 

Intrapartum: 
Preterm 

femlit (-0.018); const (0.572) 

GINI (-0.008); DPT (0.015); femlit 
(0.004); IMR_S1 (-1.669); IMR_S2 
(11.454); IMR_S3 (-13.670); 
U5MR_S1 (1.417); U5MR_S2 (-
9.443); U5MR_S3 (13.523); 
LBW_S1 (0.185); LBW_S2 (-1.133); 
LBW_S3 (2.726); const 
GNI (-2.6x10-5); GINI (0.025); ANC 
(0.029); IMR_S1 (-0.274); IMR_S2 
(2.647); IMR_S3 (-4.009); DPT_S1 
(-0.013); DPT_S2 (0.034); DPT_S3 
(-0.555); const (-3.267) 

GNI (-6.7x10-5); const (-2.078) 

femlit_S1 (-0.030); femlit_S2 (-
0.025); femlit_S3 (0.134); DPT_S1 
(0.002); DPT_S2 (0.006); DPT_S3 
(0.064); const (1.173) 

NMR (-0.039); DPT (0.007); const 
(-0.307) 

femlit (-0.009); GINI (0.031); 
DPT_S1 (-0.026); DPT_S2 (0.062); 
DPT_S3 (-1.125); IMR (0.049); 
IMR_Q (-0.001); const (0.643) 

GNI (-4.8x10-5); ANC_S1 (0.072); 
ANC_S2 (-0.205); ANC_S3 (2.250); 
const (-6.979) 

GFR (-104.414); GFR_Q (763.714); 
const (-0.903) 

const (-2.942) 

GFR (103.863); GFR_Q (-908.192); 
const (-4.231) 

LBW (0.029); NMR_S1 (-0.212); 
NMR_S2 (1.117); NMR_S3 (-
1.514); DPT (-0.090); DPT_Q 
(0.001); const (2.433) 

High mortality model 

BCG (0.007); PAB (-0.007); SBA 
(0.010); DPT (-0.004); LBW_S1 
(0.028); LBW_S2 (-0.006); GFR_S1 
(-11.980); GFR_S2 (14.787); const 
(0.602) 
LBW (0.009); NMR (-0.073); 
NMR_Q (0.001); U5MR (-0.022); 
U5MR_Q (0.000); BCG_S1 (0.004); 
BCG_S2 (0.003); early (0.223); 
const (0.364) 

LBW_S1 (0.038); LBW_S2 (-
0.054); PAB_S1 (-0.011); PAB_S2 
(0.000); GFR_S1 (-21.739); GFR_S2 
(19.502); reg_SSA (0.305); const 
(2.764) 

SBA (-0.021); SBA_Q (0.000); 
U5MR (-0.021); U5MR_Q (0.000); 
late (0.739); reg_SSA (-0.186); 
const (-0.070) 

18 

Congenital: 
Preterm 

Sepsis: 
Preterm 

Pneumonia: 
Preterm 

Injuries: 
Preterm 

Other: 
Preterm 

Preterm: 
Intrapartum 

Congenital: 
Intrapartum 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Sepsis: 
Intrapartum 

Pneumonia: 
Intrapartum 

Diarrhoea: 
Intrapartum 

Tetanus: 
Intrapartum 

Other: 
Intrapartum 

LBW (0.013); BCG (0.022); BCG_Q 
(0.000); early (-0.765); reg_SA 
(0.253); const (-2.303) 
U5MR (0.006); LBW (0.009); early 
(-0.674); const (-1.713) 
DPT (-0.005); GFR (12.725); NMR 
(0.282); NMR_Q (-0.003); early (-
1.725); reg_SA (-0.226); reg_SSA (-
1.491); const (-8.746) 
PAB (-0.011); ANC (-0.018); NMR 
(0.043); early (-0.985); const (-
1.642) 
GFR_S1 (-22.942); GFR_S2 
(33.572); reg_SSA (-0.746); const 
(0.824) 

PAB (0.019); PAB_Q (0.000); 
LBW_S1 (0.023); LBW_S2 (-
0.018); late (1.510); const (-1.708) 
PAB (-0.029); PAB_Q (0.000); 
const (-0.092) 
DPT (-0.003); BCG (-0.011); GFR (-
3.800); femlit (-0.022); LBW_S1 
(0.139); LBW_S2 (-0.192); const (-
1.332) 
NMR (0.038); IMR (-0.010); U5MR 
(0.011); PAB (-0.020); late 
(0.839); const (-2.186) 
GFR_S1 (-25.195); GFR_S2 
(25.625); late (0.474); reg_SSA 
(0.317); const (1.317) 

Notes: 1) reg_SSA = sub-Saharan Africa, reg_SA = South Asia, reg_LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; 2) see the 
“notes” at the end of table 1 for covariate acronym definitions; 3) while most regression coefficients have been 
rounded to the third decimal place in this table, GNI has been rounded to the 6th decimal place because the GNI 
values are on the order of thousands instead of the much smaller values of the other coefficients.   

19 

 
 
 
 
Appendix M:  Results by NMR level and World Bank income category 

Table S12a: Cause-specific proportions (median with IQR) and risk (with uncertainty) for 2013 by NMR level 

Median proportion (with IQR) by NMR level  

<5 

5 to <15 

15 to <30 

30+ 

Total risk (with uncertainty) by NMR level  
30+ 

15 to <30 

5 to <15 

<5 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

0.35 (0.29-
0.45) 
0.10 (0.07-
0.14) 
0.31 (0.24-
0.38) 
0.05 (0.02-
0.11) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.02) 

--- 

--- 
0.10 (0.06-
0.14) 

0.31 (0.26-
0.42) 
0.13 (0.09-
0.18) 
0.24 (0.20-
0.29) 
0.10 (0.06-
0.21) 
0.04 (0.02-
0.07) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.08 (0.06-
0.10) 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

0.42 (0.32-
0.50) 
0.14 (0.11-
0.17) 
0.26 (0.21-
0.31) 
0.03 (0.02-

0.42 (0.38-
0.46) 
0.18 (0.15-
0.22) 
0.22 (0.18-
0.25) 
0.07 (0.05-

 Early neonatal period 
0.25 (0.16-
0.37) 
0.22 (0.15-
0.34) 
0.05 (0.05-
0.07) 
0.23 (0.09-
0.45) 
0.05 (0.05-
0.07) 
0.03 (0.01-
0.06) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.06 (0.04-
0.07) 

0.27 (0.15-
0.35) 
0.18 (0.15-
0.32) 
0.11 (0.08-
0.14) 
0.11 (0.09-
0.43) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.06) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.02) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.07 (0.05-
0.09) 

--- 
Late neonatal period 
0.37 (0.33-
0.40) 
0.34 (0.33-
0.36) 
0.06 (0.05-
0.07) 
0.09 (0.07-

0.35 (0.33-
0.41) 
0.32 (0.26-
0.35) 
0.12 (0.09-
0.15) 
0.09 (0.08-

1.1 (1.0-
1.2) 
0.3 (0.2-
0.3) 
0.6 (0.5-
0.7) 
0.1 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 

--- 

--- 
0.3 (0.3-
0.4) 
2.4 (2.0-
2.7) 

0.2 (0.2-
0.3) 
0.1 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.3 (0.2-
0.3) 
0.1 (0.1-

--- 

--- 

--- 

2.9 (2.5-
3.4) 
1.3 (1.1-
1.6) 
1.5 (1.1-
1.9) 
0.5 (0.3-
0.6) 
0.2 (0.1-
0.3) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.7 (0.5-
0.9) 
7.1 (5.6-
8.7) 

0.6 (0.5-
0.8) 
0.2 (0.2-
0.3) 
0.6 (0.5-
0.7) 
0.6 (0.4-

8.4 (5.4-11.8) 

11.0 (8.6-
13.1) 

5.4 (3.7-7.5)  9.3 (7.3-10.9) 

1.9 (1.1-3.1) 

1.7 (1.1-2.7) 

1.7 (0.5-3.0) 

2.4 (0.9-3.8) 

0.9 (0.4-1.9) 

2.0 (1.1-3.7) 

0.2 (0.0-0.5) 

0.6 (0.2-1.3) 

0.0 (0.0-0.4) 

0.2 (0.0-1.7) 

1.4 (0.5-2.6) 
19.9 (11.6-
30.8) 

1.6 (0.9-2.8) 
28.8 (20.1-
40.0) 

1.6 (0.8-2.6) 

1.7 (1.1-2.4) 

0.9 (0.5-1.4) 

1.5 (1.0-2.1) 

0.6 (0.2-1.2) 
2.7 (1.5-4.3) 

0.5 (0.2-1.0) 
4.3 (2.7-5.8) 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

0.05) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.02) 

--- 

--- 
0.11 (0.06-
0.14) 

0.08) 
0.03 (0.02-
0.04) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.08 (0.05-
0.11) 

0.10) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.06) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.06 (0.04-
0.09) 

0.10) 
0.07 (0.06-
0.08) 
0.01 (0.01-
0.02) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.04 (0.03-
0.07) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.1) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 

--- 

--- 
0.1 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.8 (0.5-
0.9) 

0.32 (0.27-
0.40) 
0.07 (0.04-
0.09) 
0.36 (0.30-
0.39) 
0.10 (0.07-
0.13) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.03) 

--- 

--- 
0.10 (0.06-
0.13) 

0.27 (0.19-
0.30) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.11) 
0.27 (0.23-
0.32) 
0.21 (0.16-
0.28) 
0.06 (0.04-
0.09) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.10) 

1.3 (1.2-
1.4) 
0.3 (0.2-
0.4) 
0.8 (0.7-
1.0) 
0.2 (0.1-
0.2) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.1) 

--- 
Overall neonatal period   
0.16 (0.15-
0.18) 
0.15 (0.14-
0.16) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.06) 
0.45 (0.40-
0.46) 
0.05 (0.05-
0.05) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.09) 
0.01 (0.01-
0.02) 
0.06 (0.06-
0.07) 

0.15 (0.14-
0.18) 
0.15 (0.12-
0.16) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.13) 
0.43 (0.38-
0.47) 
0.05 (0.05-
0.06) 
0.02 (0.01-
0.03) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.07 (0.06-
0.09) 

--- 

--- 
0.4 (0.3-
0.4) 
3.0 (2.5-
3.5) 

0.8) 
0.2 (0.1-
0.3) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.2 (0.1-
0.3) 
2.4 (1.8-
3.2) 

3.5 (3.0-
4.1) 
1.6 (1.2-
2.0) 
2.1 (1.5-
2.7) 
1.1 (0.7-
1.4) 
0.4 (0.3-
0.6) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
1.0 (0.6-
1.3) 
9.7 (7.3-
12.1) 

0.3 (0.2-0.5) 

0.5 (0.3-0.8) 

0.2 (0.1-0.6) 

0.7 (0.2-1.6) 

0.1 (0.0-0.4) 

0.2 (0.1-0.3) 

0.6 (0.2-1.3) 

7.0 (3.5-12.3) 

0.7 (0.3-1.5) 
10.1 (5.9-
15.5) 

9.9 (6.2-14.4) 

6.3 (4.2-8.8) 

12.7 (9.6-
15.6) 
10.8 (8.3-
13.0) 

2.5 (1.3-4.2) 

2.1 (1.3-3.7) 

4.4 (2.0-7.3) 

6.7 (3.6-9.7) 

1.2 (0.5-2.5) 

2.5 (1.4-4.5) 

0.4 (0.1-1.1) 

1.3 (0.4-2.9) 

0.2 (0.0-0.8) 

0.3 (0.1-2.0) 

2.0 (0.7-3.9) 
26.9 (15.0-
43.0) 

2.3 (1.2-4.3) 
38.7 (25.9-
55.7) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

Notes: 1) no high mortality model countries had an NMR<5 so there were no tetanus/diarrhoea estimates for this NMR category; 2) injuries are included in the “other” category; 
3) risk uncertainty estimates assume no uncertainty in live birth estimates. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
Table S12b: Cause-specific proportions (median with IQR) and risk (with uncertainty) for 2012 by World Bank income level 

Median proportion (with IQR) by income level  
Low 

High 

Upper-
middle 

Lower-
middle 

Total risk (with uncertainty) by income level  
Low 

High 

Upper-
middle 

Lower-
middle 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

0.42 (0.31-
0.46) 
0.14 (0.11-
0.19) 
0.27 (0.22-
0.31) 
0.03 (0.02-
0.05) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.11 (0.06-
0.17) 

0.42 (0.38-
0.46) 
0.17 (0.14-
0.23) 
0.22 (0.14-
0.25) 
0.06 (0.05-
0.08) 
0.03 (0.02-
0.04) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.08 (0.05-
0.11) 

0.30 (0.23-
0.37) 
0.07 (0.04-
0.10) 
0.37 (0.32-
0.39) 
0.11 (0.08-
0.15) 

0.27 (0.21-
0.30) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.11) 
0.27 (0.22-
0.31) 
0.20 (0.15-
0.32) 

 Early neonatal period 
0.34 (0.31-
0.38) 
0.34 (0.31-
0.37) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.13) 
0.09 (0.08-
0.10) 
0.06 (0.05-
0.07) 
0.01 (0.01-
0.01) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.08) 

0.39 (0.34-
0.42) 
0.26 (0.19-
0.34) 
0.15 (0.09-
0.19) 
0.08 (0.07-
0.09) 
0.04 (0.04-
0.05) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.07 (0.04-
0.10) 

1.2 (1.1-
1.3) 
0.3 (0.3-
0.4) 
0.7 (0.6-
0.8) 
0.1 (0.1-
0.1) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.3 (0.3-
0.4) 
2.6 (2.4-
3.0) 

--- 
Late neonatal period 
0.15 (0.14-
0.18) 
0.15 (0.14-
0.16) 
0.06 (0.05-
0.08) 
0.45 (0.40-
0.47) 

0.3 (0.2-
0.3) 
0.1 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.3 (0.3-
0.3) 
0.1 (0.1-
0.2) 

0.18 (0.15-
0.27) 
0.13 (0.10-
0.15) 
0.14 (0.08-
0.23) 
0.38 (0.24-
0.46) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

2.9 (2.5-
3.3) 
1.4 (1.1-
1.7) 
1.4 (1.0-
1.8) 
0.5 (0.3-
0.7) 
0.3 (0.2-
0.4) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.7 (0.5-
0.9) 
7.2 (5.6-
9.0) 

8.8 (6.0-11.8) 

7.3 (5.5-9.3) 

5.2 (3.7-7.1) 

7.0 (5.4-8.4) 

1.8 (1.0-2.9) 

1.9 (1.3-2.9) 

1.6 (0.5-2.9) 

1.8 (0.6-2.8) 

0.9 (0.4-2.0) 

1.3 (0.6-2.4) 

0.2 (0.1-0.6) 

0.3 (0.1-0.7) 

0.1 (0.0-0.6) 

0.1 (0.0-0.8) 

1.4 (0.5-2.4) 
20.0 (12.2 
30.3) 

1.3 (0.6-2.5) 
21.0 (14.1-
29.8) 

0.6 (0.5-0.7)  1.6 (0.9-2.5) 

1.3 (0.7-1.9) 

0.2 (0.2-0.3)  0.9 (0.5-1.4) 

1.1 (0.7-1.5) 

0.6 (0.5-0.7)  0.6 (0.3-1.1) 

0.5 (0.2-1.1) 

0.6 (0.4-0.8)  2.7 (1.5-4.1) 

3.2 (1.9-4.5) 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Other 

Total 

0.01 (0.00-
0.02) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.10 (0.06-
0.14) 

0.05 (0.04-
0.08) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.09 (0.07-
0.10) 

0.05 (0.05-
0.07) 
0.01 (0.00-
0.03) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.08 (0.07-
0.09) 

0.05 (0.05-
0.05) 
0.03 (0.02-
0.05) 
0.01 (0.01-
0.02) 
0.07 (0.06-
0.07) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

0.33 (0.28-
0.45) 
0.10 (0.07-
0.15) 
0.31 (0.24-
0.38) 
0.06 (0.02-
0.12) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.02) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.10 (0.06-
0.14) 

0.34 (0.27-
0.43) 
0.13 (0.09-
0.17) 
0.24 (0.16-
0.28) 
0.09 (0.06-
0.20) 
0.04 (0.03-
0.05) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.00) 
0.08 (0.06-
0.11) 

--- 
Overall neonatal period  
0.25 (0.15-
0.34) 
0.19 (0.15-
0.34) 
0.07 (0.06-
0.11) 
0.19 (0.09-
0.45) 
0.05 (0.05-
0.06) 
0.02 (0.01-
0.03) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.06 (0.05-
0.07) 

0.30 (0.18-
0.39) 
0.16 (0.13-
0.26) 
0.15 (0.09-
0.22) 
0.11 (0.08-
0.38) 
0.05 (0.04-
0.06) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.00 (0.00-
0.01) 
0.07 (0.05-
0.09) 

0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.1 (0.1-
0.1) 
0.9 (0.7-
1.0) 

1.4 (1.3-
1.6) 
0.4 (0.3-
0.5) 
1.0 (0.8-
1.2) 
0.2 (0.1-
0.3) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.1) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.0 (0.0-
0.0) 
0.4 (0.3-
0.5) 
3.4 (2.8-
4.2) 

0.2 (0.1-0.3)  0.3 (0.2-0.5) 

0.4 (0.2-0.6) 

0.0 (0.0-0.1)  0.3 (0.1-0.7) 

0.3 (0.1-0.7) 

0.0 (0.0-0.0)  0.1 (0.0-0.3) 

0.1 (0.0-0.3) 

0.2 (0.1-0.3)  0.6 (0.2-1.2) 

0.5 (0.2-1.3) 

2.4 (1.8-3.2) 

3.5 (3.0-4.1) 

7.1 (3.7-
11.8) 

10.4 (6.9-
14.3) 

7.4 (4.0-11.9) 

8.5 (6.2-11.2) 

1.7 (1.3-2.0)  6.1 (4.2-8.5) 

8.1 (6.1-9.9) 

2.0 (1.5-2.5)  2.3 (1.3-4.0) 

2.4 (1.5-3.9) 

1.1 (0.8-1.5)  4.3 (2.0-7.0) 

5.0 (2.6-7.3) 

0.5 (0.3-0.7)  1.3 (0.6-2.6) 

1.6 (0.9-3.0) 

0.1 (0.0-0.2)  0.5 (0.2-1.3) 

0.6 (0.2-1.4) 

0.0 (0.0-0.1)  0.2 (0.0-0.9) 

0.2 (0.0-1.1) 

1.0 (0.6-1.3)  2.0 (0.8-3.6) 

9.9 (7.5-
12.4) 

27.1 (16.0-
42.2) 

1.9 (0.8-3.8) 
28.3 (18.3-
41.6) 

--- 

--- 

--- 

--- 

Notes: 1) injuries are included in the “other” category; 2) risk uncertainty estimates assume no uncertainty in live birth estimates. 

23 

 
 
 
Appendix N:  Cause-specific results by estimation method 
Here, we present the results by estimation method (i.e. high-quality VR data, low mortality model, and high 
mortality model).  Table S14 includes the cause-specific proprtions, risks, and numbers of deaths by 
estimation method, and Figures S1a-c show the 2000-2013 time trends in cause-specific risks by neonatal 
period for each estimation method. 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths 
(with uncertainty) in 2013 by estimation method  

Early period 
# of deaths in 
1000s 
(uncertainty) 

Risk  % 

Late period 
# of deaths in 
1000s 
(uncertainty) 

Risk 

High-quality VR countries 

35.9 (34.0-37.7) 

1.7 

13.9 (12.8-15.0) 

0.7 

17.5 (16.1-18.8) 

0.8 

25.
9 

7.5 
26.
4 
21.
3 

7.3 (6.4-8.2) 

0.3 

2.1 (1.7-2.6) 

7.5 (6.6-8.4) 

0.1 

0.4 

6.0 (5.4-6.7) 

0.3 

7.3 

6.3 (5.6-7.0) 

0.3 

2.2 

1.9 (1.5-2.2) 

0.4 (0.3-0.6) 

10.6 (9.7-11.5) 
86.4 

0.1 
<0.0
5 

0.5 
4.1 

6.8 

1.9 (1.6-2.3) 

1.6 
10.
5 
100 

0.4 (0.3-0.6) 

3.0 (2.5-3.5) 
28.2 

0.1 
<0.0
5 

0.1 
1.3 

Low mortality model countries 

80.8 (68.8-91.8) 

2.6 

29.7 (22.3-36.5) 

0.9 

41.0 (30.3-57.1) 

1.3 

5.8 

11.0 (7.0-14.5) 

0.4 

27.
9 

9.0 
27.
6 
17.
6 

18.4 (16.0-22.2) 

0.6 

5.9 (3.4-8.1) 

0.2 

18.2 (15.9-21.6) 

0.6 

11.6 (7.6-14.8) 

0.4 

2.9 

5.4 (3.5-8.3) 

1.2 (0.9-1.8) 

0.2 
<0.0
5 

9.9 

6.5 (4.1-9.7) 

1.5 

1.0 (0.8-1.3) 

19.0 (13.8-23.3) 
188.1 

0.6 
6.0 

6.7 
100 

4.4 (2.6-7.4) 
66.1 

High mortality model countries 
718.1 (505.3-
954.0) 
509.2 (372.6-
659.9) 

20.
3 
13.
5 

8.4 

6.0 

126.4 (68.6-
198.6) 
84.0 (49.7-
122.7) 

% 

41.
5 
16.
1 
20.
2 

0.5 
12.
3 
100 

43.
0 
15.
8 
21.
8 

0.7 
10.
1 
100 

40.
6 
28.
8 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenita
l 
Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Injuries 

Other 

Total 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 
Congenita
l 
Sepsis 

Pneumoni
a 
Injuries 

Other 

Total 

Preterm 

Intrapartu
m 

0.2 
<0.0
5 

0.1 
2.1 

1.5 

1.0 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
Congenita
l 
Sepsis 

9.0 

8.3 

Pneumoni
5.2 
a 
Tetanus 
1.2 
Diarrhoea  0.4 
Other 

Total 

6.7 
100 

158.6 (94.5-
250.0) 
146.5 (49.7-
250.2) 
91.5 (43.8-
189.7) 
21.1 (7.4-53.2) 
6.7 (0-57.4) 
118.6 (48.1-
213.1) 
1770.2 

Notes: 1) risk is per 1,000 live births 

1.9 

1.7 

1.1 
0.2 
0.1 

7.6  47.1 (20.0-94.6) 
40.
0 

249.0 (143.6-
371.7) 

4.7  29.2 (15.8-46.7) 
27.1 (8.1-67.2) 
4.4 
10.0 (3.2-25.6) 
1.6 
49.1 (20.2-
104.5) 
622.0 

1.4 
7.9 
20.8  100 

0.6 

2.9 

0.3 
0.3 
0.1 

0.6 
7.3 

Figure S1: Cause-specific risk from 2000-2013 by neonatal period for: a) high-quality VR countries, b) 
low mortality model countries, and c) high mortality model countries. Important note: the y-axes (risk) are 
different on the 3 graphs due to the very different mortality risks between these estimation categories.   

a) 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b)  

c)  

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix O: Country-specific proportions, risks, and number of deaths for 2013 

The following pages (pages 19-83) contain estimates of the proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths in 2013 for 194 countries.  The estimation technique (high-
quality VR, low mortality model, and high mortality model) is listed below the country name in the left-most column.  In the table, the low mortality model is called 
“low mort model” and the high mortality model is called “high mort model”.  The estimates are given by the early (days 0-6), late (days 7-27) and overall (days 0-27) 
neonatal periods.  As noted in the paper, injuries were only estimated for high-quality VR and low mortality model countries, while diarrhoea and tetanus were only 
estimated for high mortality model countries.    

28 

 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) in 2013 for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Afghanista
n 
(high mort 
model) 

Albania 
(low mort 
model) 

Algeria 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.33 
8.8 
89.3 
(67.7-117.4) 
0.15 
1.4 
14.2 
(8.1-24.2) 
0.29 
10.7 
110.6 
(82.8-149.3) 
0.39 
2.2 
0.9 
(0.8-1.2) 
0.3 
0.6 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.37 
2.9 
1.2 
(1.1-1.6) 
0.36 
3.7 
36 
(24.2-44.7) 
0.14 
0.5 
5 
(2.7-7.5) 
0.3 
4.3 
42.5 
(27.7-54.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.33 
8.9 
90.5 
(69.1-114.5) 
0.16 
1.5 
15 
(9.4-22.2) 
0.28 
10.4 
108.1 
(81.3-140.0) 
0.13 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.12 
0.9 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.25 
2.6 
25.1 
(16.9-30.9) 
0.12 
0.4 
4.4 
(2.5-6.0) 
0.22 
3.1 
30.6 
(20.0-37.9) 

Congenital 
0.06 
1.6 
16.3 
(11.7-27.2) 
0.05 
0.5 
5 
(2.7-10.6) 
0.06 
2.1 
21.4 
(14.4-38.1) 
0.28 
1.5 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.32 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.29 
2.2 
0.9 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.22 
2.2 
22.1 
(11.7-28.6) 
0.27 
1 
9.6 
(4.4-13.3) 
0.23 
3.2 
32.3 
(16.9-42.2) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
2.7 
26.9 
(8.7-45.3) 
0.46 
4.4 
44.4 
(27.5-65.8) 
0.19 
6.9 
71.9 
(35.9-108.5) 
0.06 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.14 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.07 
0.7 
6.7 
(2.1-10.3) 
0.32 
1.2 
11.5 
(5.4-16.6) 
0.13 
1.9 
18.8 
(7.9-27.4) 

Pneumonia 
0.07 
1.8 
18 
(9.7-34.3) 
0.05 
0.5 
5.1 
(2.9-8.1) 
0.06 
2.3 
24 
(13.2-43.9) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.03 
0.3 
2.8 
(1.1-5.9) 
0.04 
0.2 
1.6 
(0.9-2.4) 
0.03 
0.5 
4.6 
(2.0-8.9) 

Tetanus 
0.02 
0.6 
6.5 
(2.8-15.2) 
0.06 
0.6 
5.9 
(2.1-13.5) 
0.04 
1.4 
14.3 
(5.4-32.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.01 
0 
0.3 
(0.1-0.9) 
0 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.6) 

Diarrhoea 
0.01 
0.4 
4 
(0.0-39.2) 
0.02 
0.2 
1.6 
(0.5-3.4) 
0.02 
0.6 
5.9 
(0.5-42.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.0-0.5) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.08 
2 
20.6 
(10.1-31.0) 
0.05 
0.4 
4.5 
(1.8-13.7) 
0.07 
2.5 
25.7 
(12.2-45.9) 
0.11 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.08 
0.8 
8 
(3.3-10.4) 
0.08 
0.3 
3 
(1.5-4.6) 
0.08 
1.1 
11.4 
(4.9-15.8) 

Total 
1 
26.9 
272.1 

1 
9.4 
95.6 

1 
36.9 
381.9 

1 
5.5 
2.4 

1 
1.9 
0.8 

1 
7.7 
3.3 

1 
10.3 
101 

1 
3.6 
35.5 

1 
14.1 
141 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s).   

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Andorra 
(low mort 
model) 

Angola 
(high mort 
model) 

Antigua 
and 
Barbuda 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.38 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.3 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.36 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
11.5 
105.3 
(73.9-140.0) 
0.15 
1.9 
17 
(9.4-24.6) 
0.29 
13.9 
126.2 
(88.0-168.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
1.3 
0 

Intrapartum 
0.13 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.34 
11.6 
106.5 
(77.2-131.3) 
0.15 
1.8 
16.5 
(9.9-22.9) 
0.28 
13.4 
121.7 
(88.8-155.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.67 
2.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.5 
2.6 
0 

Congenital 
0.37 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.39 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
1.9 
17.7 
(9.4-30.2) 
0.04 
0.5 
4.2 
(1.6-9.1) 
0.05 
2.5 
22.7 
(10.9-42.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 

Sepsis 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
2.8 
25.7 
(9.9-41.9) 
0.42 
5.1 
46.4 
(27.0-67.3) 
0.17 
7.9 
71.7 
(36.4-108.7) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
3.3 
30.6 
(15.9-60.0) 
0.05 
0.6 
5.6 
(3.2-8.6) 
0.09 
4 
36.7 
(18.7-71.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.7 
6 
(2.0-15.8) 
0.11 
1.3 
12.3 
(2.2-32.4) 
0.05 
2.2 
20.3 
(4.5-53.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
2.2 
(0.0-21.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.2-2.6) 
0.01 
0.3 
3 
(0.2-22.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 

Other 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
2.3 
21.4 
(10.8-38.4) 
0.07 
0.9 
7.9 
(3.4-19.8) 
0.07 
3.2 
29 
(14.4-57.6) 
1 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
1.3 
0 

Total 
1 
1 
0 

1 
0.4 
0 

1 
1.5 
0 

1 
34.5 
315.4 

1 
12.1 
110.8 

1 
47.4 
431.4 

1 
1.3 
0 

1 
3.8 
0.1 

1 
5.2 
0.1 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Preterm 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s).   

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Argentina 
(high-
quality VR) 

Armenia 
(low mort 
model) 

Australia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.49 
2.5 
17.4 
(16.6-18.3) 
0.34 
0.7 
4.7 
(4.2-5.1) 
0.45 
3.3 
23 
(21.7-24.2) 
0.4 
2.8 
1.1 
(1.0-1.3) 
0.33 
0.8 
0.3 
(0.3-0.3) 
0.38 
3.8 
1.6 
(1.4-1.8) 
0.3 
0.6 
2 
(1.7-2.3) 
0.32 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.08 
0.4 
3 
(2.7-3.4) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.08 
0.6 
3.9 
(3.4-4.4) 
0.12 
0.9 
0.3 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.11 
1.1 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.2 
0.4 
1.3 
(1.1-1.5) 
0.08 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.27 
1.4 
9.5 
(8.9-10.1) 
0.3 
0.6 
4.2 
(3.8-4.6) 
0.28 
2 
14.2 
(13.2-15.2) 
0.26 
1.8 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.31 
0.8 
0.3 
(0.3-0.3) 
0.27 
2.7 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.27 
0.5 
1.8 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.37 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.4 
3 
(2.6-3.3) 
0.2 
0.4 
2.7 
(2.4-3.0) 
0.11 
0.8 
5.9 
(5.2-6.5) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.14 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.8 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.08 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.02 
0.1 
1.1 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.06 
0.3 
2.2 
(2.0-2.5) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.06 
0.5 
3.2 
(2.7-3.7) 
0.11 
0.8 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.1 
1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.21 
0.4 
1.3 
(1.1-1.6) 
0.12 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Total 
1 
5.1 
35.9 

1 
2 
13.7 

1 
7.3 
51.5 

1 
7 
2.7 

1 
2.5 
1 

1 
10 
4.2 

1 
2 
6.5 

1 
0.4 
1.2 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.31 
0.8 
2.4 
(2.0-2.9) 

Intrapartum 
0.18 
0.5 
1.4 
(1.2-1.7) 

Congenital 
0.29 
0.7 
2.3 
(1.9-2.7) 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s).  

 Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Austria 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Azerbaijan 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Bahamas 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.33 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.3 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.32 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.46 
5.4 
9.3 
(7.3-12.6) 
0.22 
0.9 
1.6 
(1.0-2.5) 
0.4 
6.6 
11.3 
(8.7-15.5) 
0.31 
1.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.18 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.2 
2.4 
4.1 
(3.1-5.5) 
0.1 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.18 
2.9 
4.9 
(3.7-6.8) 
0.21 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 

Congenital 
0.34 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.54 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.38 
0.9 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.14 
1.7 
2.9 
(2.0-3.9) 
0.22 
0.9 
1.6 
(0.8-2.4) 
0.16 
2.6 
4.4 
(2.7-6.3) 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.18 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.5-1.8) 
0.28 
1.2 
2 
(1.2-3.2) 
0.12 
1.9 
3.2 
(1.6-5.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.36 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.2-1.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.03 
0.5 
0.8 
(0.4-1.6) 
0.21 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.27 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 

Other 
0.19 
0.5 
1.5 
(1.2-1.8) 

Other 
0.13 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.11 
1.3 
2.3 
(0.5-4.1) 
0.13 
0.5 
0.9 
(0.3-1.7) 
0.12 
1.9 
3.3 
(0.9-5.8) 
0.17 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 

Total 
1 
2.5 
8 

Total 
1 
1.8 
1.5 

1 
0.5 
0.4 

1 
2.4 
2 

1 
11.8 
20.3 

1 
4.1 
7.1 

1 
16.4 
28.1 

1 
5 
0.3 

1 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.28 
2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
1.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
1.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Bahrain 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Banglades
h (high 
mort model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.38 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.25 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
0.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.34 
6.1 
192.2 
(155.1-
253.6) 
0.24 
1.5 
47 
(30.6-71.7) 
0.31 
7.9 
246.3 
(191.6-
331.7) 

Intrapartum 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.26 
4.7 
147.5 

(120.3-192.1) 
0.11 
0.7 
22.5 
(14.1-29.2) 
0.22 
5.6 
175.1 

Congenital 
0.5 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.42 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.14 
2.4 
77.4 

Sepsis 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
2 
61.9 

(47.3-102.9) 
0.07 
0.4 
14.1 
(5.7-25.4) 
0.11 
2.9 
88.9 

(19.4-96.8) 
0.4 
2.5 
80.2 
(48.3-117.7) 
0.19 
4.7 
145.9 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.7 
21.1 

(10.2-44.2) 
0.04 
0.3 
8.5 
(4.2-13.3) 
0.04 
1 
30.7 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
4 

(1.4-12.9) 
0.01 
0.1 
2.4 
(0.7-6.2) 
0.01 
0.2 
7 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.7 

(0.0-5.2) 
0.02 
0.1 
3.3 
(1.1-8.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
4.2 

Injuries 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Total 
1.9 
0.1 

1 
7.1 
0.4 

Total 
1 
1.4 
0.3 

1 
0.9 
0.2 

1 
2.5 
0.5 

1 
17.9 
567.7 

1 
6.3 
199.5 

1 
25.2 
785 

Other 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
2 
63 

(21.5-93.8) 
0.11 
0.7 
21.4 
(7.1-36.8) 
0.11 
2.8 
86.9 
(29.7-
133.5) 

33 

(137.9-227.6) 

(51.2-125.4) 

(71.0-221.0) 

(15.3-60.2) 

(2.2-20.1) 

(1.1-14.7) 

(0.0-0.0) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Barbados 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.29 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.17 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
1.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.29 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.25 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.27 
2.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.29 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.31 
2.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Sepsis 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Belarus 
(low mort 
model) 

Belgium 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Overall 

prop 

Preterm 
0.36 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.31 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.36 
0.9 
0.9 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.35 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.22 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.31 

Intrapartum 
0.11 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.07 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.17 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.11 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.15 

Congenital 
0.37 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.39 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.37 
0.9 
0.9 
(0.7-1.4) 
0.26 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.41 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.3 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 

Other 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.15 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.19 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.16 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.18 

Total 
1 
4.4 
0.2 

1 
3.7 
0.1 

1 
8.2 
0.3 

Total 
1 
1.7 
1.7 

1 
0.6 
0.6 

1 
2.4 
2.5 

1 
1.7 
2.2 

1 
0.6 
0.8 

1 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Belize  
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.7 
0.9 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.28 
1.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.27 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.28 
2.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Intrapartum 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.24 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.14 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.21 
1.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.7 
0.9 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.22 
1.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.09 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.18 
1.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.23 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Benin  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Bhutan 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.4 
8.1 
29.2 
(24.3-34.7) 
0.13 
0.9 
3.3 
(1.6-5.9) 
0.33 
9.1 
32.3 
(25.6-41.0) 
0.35 
4.7 
0.7 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.23 
1.1 

Intrapartum 
0.33 
6.6 
23.8 
(19.3-27.6) 
0.15 
1 
3.7 
(2.3-5.0) 
0.29 
7.9 
28.1 
(22.0-33.3) 
0.26 
3.5 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.13 
0.6 

Congenital 
0.08 
1.6 
5.7 
(4.3-8.2) 
0.09 
0.6 
2.2 
(0.8-5.1) 
0.08 
2.2 
7.8 
(4.9-13.2) 
0.16 
2.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.11 
0.5 

Sepsis 
0.09 
1.7 
6.2 
(2.6-9.7) 
0.47 
3.3 
12 
(7.6-17.0) 
0.19 
5.2 
18.5 
(10.5-27.4) 
0.09 
1.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.36 
1.7 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.2 
4.2 
(2.2-7.9) 
0.05 
0.4 
1.4 
(0.7-2.3) 
0.06 
1.6 
5.8 
(3.1-10.7) 
0.03 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.2 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.2-1.0) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.6 
(0.1-1.6) 
0.01 
0.3 
1.1 
(0.3-2.7) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-1.2) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.3-2.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 

Injuries 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.17 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
1.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Other 
0.03 
0.7 
2.4 
(1.3-5.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
1.5 
(0.6-3.8) 
0.04 
1.1 
4 
(2.0-9.7) 
0.1 
1.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.11 
0.5 

Total 
2.3 
3 

1 
5.3 
0.4 

1 
2.6 
0.2 

1 
8.1 
0.6 

Total 
1 
19.9 
72.1 

1 
7 
25.3 

1 
27.5 
98.2 

1 
13.4 
2 

1 
4.7 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Bolivia 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.31 
5.9 
0.9 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.32 
4.3 
11.5 
(9.5-14.5) 
0.15 
0.7 
1.9 
(1.4-2.8) 
0.28 
5.2 
13.7 
(11.0-17.4) 

Intrapartum 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.23 
4.3 
0.6 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.3 
4 
10.8 
(9.0-13.3) 
0.16 
0.7 
2 
(1.4-2.7) 
0.27 
4.9 
13 
(10.5-16.1) 

Congenital 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
2.6 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.18 
2.4 
6.4 
(4.5-8.9) 
0.14 
0.7 
1.8 
(1.0-2.8) 
0.16 
3 
7.9 
(5.3-11.5) 

Sepsis 
0.2 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.16 
3.1 
0.5 
(0.2-0.7) 
0.08 
1.1 
2.9 
(1.1-4.6) 
0.39 
1.8 
4.9 
(2.9-6.7) 
0.16 
3 
7.9 
(4.0-11.3) 

Pneumonia 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0.5 
1.3 
(0.6-3.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.04 
0.8 
2 
(1.1-4.2) 

Tetanus 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Bosnia and 
Herzegovin
a (low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Botswana 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.46 
1.5 
0.5 
(0.5-0.6) 
0.32 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.42 
2 
0.7 
(0.6-0.8) 
0.45 
8.3 
3.9 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.6 
0.2 
(0.2-0.2) 
0.27 
5 
2.4 

Congenital 
0.22 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.36 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.25 
1.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.12 
2.2 
1.1 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.08 
1.5 
0.7 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.7 
0.3 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 

Diarrhoea 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.07 
0.9 
2.5 
(1.5-3.5) 
0.08 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.6-1.7) 
0.07 
1.3 
3.5 
(2.0-5.2) 

Other 
0.09 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0.7 
0.3 

Total 
0.7 

1 
18.8 
2.8 

1 
13.2 
35.7 

1 
4.7 
12.5 

1 
18.4 
48.5 

Total 
1 
3.3 
1.2 

1 
1.1 
0.4 

1 
4.6 
1.5 

1 
18.4 
8.8 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Brazil  
(high-
quality VR) 

Preterm 
(3.1-5.1) 
0.21 
1.4 
0.6 
(0.3-1.3) 
0.39 
9.7 
4.7 
(3.4-6.5) 
0.36 
2.4 
71.2 
(69.6-72.9) 
0.2 
0.4 
11.7 
(11.1-12.4) 
0.33 
2.9 
83.6 
(81.3-85.9) 

Intrapartum 
(1.8-3.1) 
0.12 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.23 
5.8 
2.8 
(2.0-3.7) 
0.18 
1.2 
35.2 
(34.1-36.4) 
0.09 
0.2 
5.3 
(4.8-5.7) 
0.16 
1.4 
40.8 
(39.2-42.4) 

Congenital 
(0.6-1.6) 
0.15 
1 
0.5 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.13 
3.1 
1.5 
(0.7-2.6) 
0.18 
1.2 
34.8 
(33.7-36.0) 
0.24 
0.5 
13.6 
(12.9-14.4) 
0.19 
1.7 
48.8 
(46.9-50.7) 

Sepsis 
(0.2-1.2) 
0.36 
2.3 
1.1 
(0.6-1.9) 
0.15 
3.9 
1.9 
(0.9-3.0) 
0.1 
0.7 
19.9 
(19.0-20.7) 
0.28 
0.5 
16.2 
(15.5-17.0) 
0.14 
1.3 
36.4 
(34.7-38.1) 

Pneumonia 
(0.2-0.7) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
1 
0.5 
(0.2-1.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
2.8 
(2.5-3.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
2.2 
(1.9-2.4) 
0.02 
0.2 
5 
(4.4-5.6) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Brunei 
Darussala
m (low 
mort model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.46 
1.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.34 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.43 
2.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.23 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.37 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.27 
1.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.01 
0 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0 
0 
1.2 
(0.9-1.5) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(0.2-1.2) 
0.1 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.05 
1.4 
0.7 
(0.3-2.0) 
0.16 
1 
30.9 
(29.8-32.0) 
0.14 
0.3 
7.9 
(7.3-8.4) 
0.15 
1.4 
39.1 
(37.5-40.7) 

Other 
0.13 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Total 

1 
6.5 
3.1 

1 
25.1 
12.1 

1 
6.5 
195.4 

1 
1.9 
57.5 

1 
8.8 
254.8 

Total 
1 
3.9 
0.2 

1 
1.4 
0.1 

1 
5.2 
0.3 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Bulgaria 
(high-
quality VR) 

Burkina 
Faso  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.41 
1.9 
1.3 
(1.1-1.5) 
0.39 
0.7 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.4 
2.7 
1.8 
(1.5-2.2) 
0.39 
7.7 
51 
(41.4-63.8) 
0.14 
1 
6.6 
(3.8-10.2) 
0.32 
8.9 
58.3 
(45.5-74.6) 

Intrapartum 
0.23 
1.1 
0.7 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.19 
1.3 
0.9 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.33 
6.5 
43.1 
(35.4-52.8) 
0.15 
1 
7 
(4.4-9.5) 
0.28 
7.8 
51.1 
(40.3-62.6) 

Congenital 
0.25 
1.2 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.31 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.27 
1.7 
1.2 
(0.9-1.5) 
0.08 
1.5 
10.3 
(6.3-16.0) 
0.05 
0.4 
2.5 
(0.9-6.2) 
0.07 
1.9 
12.4 
(6.8-21.5) 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
1.9 
12.6 
(4.7-20.8) 
0.48 
3.4 
22.5 
(14.5-31.7) 
0.2 
5.4 
35.7 
(19.5-53.5) 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.06 
1.3 
8.3 
(4.6-16.3) 
0.05 
0.4 
2.5 
(1.4-4.0) 
0.06 
1.7 
11.3 
(6.3-20.7) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.3-1.7) 
0.03 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.3-3.6) 
0.01 
0.3 
2.1 
(0.6-5.9) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Burundi 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Overall 

prop 

Preterm 
0.35 
7.7 
33.4 
(24.8-45.1) 
0.14 
1.1 
4.7 
(2.7-7.5) 
0.3 

Intrapartum 
0.35 
7.7 
33.3 
(24.7-43.2) 
0.16 
1.3 
5.4 
(3.4-7.7) 
0.3 

Congenital 
0.08 
1.9 
8 
(4.8-13.8) 
0.06 
0.5 
2 
(0.7-5.3) 
0.08 

Sepsis 
0.09 
2.1 
9 
(3.3-14.5) 
0.47 
3.6 
15.8 
(9.6-23.3) 
0.19 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.3 
5.6 
(2.9-11.7) 
0.06 
0.4 
1.9 
(1.1-3.0) 
0.06 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 
0.03 
0.3 
1.1 
(0.3-2.8) 
0.01 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.3 
(0.0-2.8) 
0.03 
0.2 
1.2 
(0.4-3.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.5 
(0.4-6.5) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.0-3.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Other 
0.05 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.05 
0.9 
6 
(3.7-11.4) 
0.06 
0.5 
3 
(1.5-6.5) 
0.05 
1.4 
9.2 
(5.4-18.3) 

Other 
0.06 
1.2 
5.3 
(3.2-10.1) 
0.07 
0.6 
2.4 
(1.3-5.6) 
0.06 

Total 
1 
4.7 
3.2 

1 
1.7 
1.2 

1 
6.6 
4.6 

1 
19.9 
132.4 

1 
7 
46.5 

1 
27.7 
181.7 

Total 
1 
22.1 
95.6 

1 
7.7 
33.6 

1 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Cambodia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Cameroon 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
9.1 
38.5 
(27.3-54.0) 
0.34 
4.4 
16.4 
(13.9-19.4) 
0.16 
0.7 
2.8 
(1.7-4.1) 
0.29 
5.4 
19.4 
(15.6-23.7) 
0.33 
6.8 
54.5 
(43.4-75.0) 
0.14 
1 
8.2 
(4.6-14.3) 
0.28 
8 
63 
(48.9-88.4) 

Intrapartum 
9.1 
38.4 
(28.2-50.4) 
0.29 
3.8 
14.2 
(11.7-16.2) 
0.14 
0.6 
2.4 
(1.5-3.0) 
0.25 
4.5 
16.4 
(13.1-19.4) 
0.39 
8.1 
64.6 
(51.9-81.1) 
0.16 
1.2 
9.6 
(6.7-13.8) 
0.33 
9.4 
73.8 
(57.7-96.1) 

Congenital 
2.3 
9.8 
(5.2-19.0) 
0.17 
2.3 
8.4 
(5.9-10.6) 
0.13 
0.6 
2.2 
(1.1-3.5) 
0.16 
2.9 
10.6 
(6.7-14.3) 
0.08 
1.6 
12.8 
(9.9-23.2) 
0.06 
0.4 
3.4 
(1.3-9.1) 
0.07 
2 
15.6 
(10.7-31.4) 

Sepsis 
5.9 
25.1 
(13.1-38.7) 
0.08 
1 
3.8 
(1.5-5.7) 
0.42 
1.9 
7.2 
(4.4-9.9) 
0.17 
3.1 
11.2 
(5.8-15.9) 
0.09 
1.8 
14.7 
(6.2-24.9) 
0.47 
3.5 
27.7 
(18.0-41.3) 
0.19 
5.3 
42 
(24.0-65.0) 

Pneumonia 
1.8 
7.6 
(4.0-14.8) 
0.04 
0.5 
1.8 
(0.9-3.8) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.5-1.3) 
0.04 
0.7 
2.7 
(1.4-5.1) 
0.07 
1.5 
11.7 
(6.2-23.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
3.4 
(2.1-5.3) 
0.07 
1.9 
15.2 
(8.4-29.0) 

Tetanus 
0.4 
1.8 
(0.6-4.6) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.4 
(0.5-3.2) 
0.03 
0.2 
2 
(0.6-5.7) 
0.02 
0.4 
3.4 
(1.1-8.9) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Canada 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.46 
1.2 
4.7 
(4.2-5.2) 
0.32 
0.3 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
0.4 
1.6 
(1.3-1.8) 
0.08 
0.1 

Congenital 
0.23 
0.6 
2.3 
(1.9-3.1) 
0.38 
0.3 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.12 
0.1 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.1-4.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.0-3.7) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.1-1.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.2-4.9) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.02 
0 

Other 
1.8 
7.7 
(4.3-15.5) 
0.08 
1 
3.8 
(2.0-4.9) 
0.08 
0.4 
1.4 
(0.7-2.2) 
0.08 
1.4 
5.1 
(2.7-7.1) 
0.04 
0.9 
6.8 
(3.7-17.4) 
0.07 
0.5 
3.9 
(1.9-10.1) 
0.05 
1.4 
10.7 
(5.6-26.7) 

Other 
0.12 
0.3 
1.2 
(0.9-1.4) 
0.08 
0.1 

Total 
30.5 
129.5 

1 
13 
48.7 

1 
4.6 
17.1 

1 
18.2 
65.9 

1 
20.9 
166.8 

1 
7.3 
58.6 

1 
28.5 
224.6 

Total 
1 
2.5 
10.2 

1 
0.9 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Cabo 
Verde (low 
mort model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Central 
African 
Republic 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
1.1 
(1.0-1.3) 
0.43 
1.5 
5.9 
(5.2-6.5) 
0.41 
3.5 
0.4 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.27 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.37 
4.3 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.35 
11.1 
17.2 
(11.9-23.9) 
0.18 
2 
3.2 
(1.7-5.1) 
0.32 
13.9 
21 
(14.4-27.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.14 
0.5 
1.9 
(1.5-2.2) 
0.18 
1.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.1 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.16 
1.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.4 
12.6 
19.5 
(12.8-23.5) 
0.15 
1.6 
2.5 
(1.5-3.5) 
0.3 
13.1 
19.9 
(13.7-24.3) 

Congenital 
1.4 
(1.2-1.5) 
0.26 
0.9 
3.6 
(3.1-4.5) 
0.19 
1.6 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.23 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.2 
2.3 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.05 
1.5 
2.4 
(1.3-4.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.3-1.3) 
0.05 
2.1 
3.2 
(1.9-5.4) 

Sepsis 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.09 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.25 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.13 
1.6 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.05 
1.5 
2.3 
(0.6-3.7) 
0.4 
4.5 
6.9 
(3.8-9.6) 
0.16 
7 
10.6 
(5.3-15.4) 

Pneumonia 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
3.1 
4.8 
(2.4-8.0) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.9 
(0.5-1.3) 
0.08 
3.4 
5.2 
(2.7-8.8) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.8 
1.3 
(0.5-2.5) 
0.09 
1 
1.6 
(0.4-3.8) 
0.04 
1.8 
2.8 
(0.8-6.2) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.0-2.6) 
0.03 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 
0.01 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.1-2.7) 

Injuries 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.11 
0.4 
1.5 
(1.1-1.8) 
0.09 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.04 
1.1 
1.7 
(0.8-4.9) 
0.06 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.4-2.7) 
0.04 
1.7 
2.6 
(1.1-7.2) 

Total 
3.6 

1 
3.4 
13.7 

1 
8.4 
0.9 

1 
3 
0.3 

1 
11.6 
1.2 

1 
31.8 
49.3 

1 
11.2 
17.3 

1 
43.5 
65.8 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Chad 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.38 
11.3 
63.9 

Intrapartum 
0.31 
9.2 
52.2 

Congenital 
0.04 
1.3 
7.3 

Sepsis 
0.06 
1.8 
9.9 

Pneumonia 
0.08 
2.5 
14.1 

Tetanus 
0.03 
0.8 
4.7 

Diarrhoea 
0.01 
0.3 
1.6 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.08 
2.3 
12.9 

Total 
1 
29.5 
166.6 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Chile  
(high-
quality 
VR) 

China 
(low mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

num 

Preterm 
(48.3-87.3) 
0.21 
2.2 
12.4 
(7.1-19.5) 
0.35 
14.2 
79 
(56.5-109.6) 
0.44 
1.7 
4.2 
(3.8-4.6) 
0.31 
0.3 
0.8 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.41 
2.1 
5.1 
(4.5-5.6) 
0.42 
2.4 

Intrapartum 
(40.9-67.2) 
0.13 
1.4 
7.9 
(5.1-11.7) 
0.26 
10.4 
58 
(44.9-77.2) 
0.06 
0.2 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.15 
0.8 

Congenital 
(4.8-12.1) 
0.03 
0.3 
2 
(0.9-3.8) 
0.04 
1.6 
9 
(5.4-15.8) 
0.37 
1.4 
3.5 
(3.2-3.9) 
0.45 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.39 
1.9 
4.8 
(4.2-5.3) 
0.22 
1.3 

449.2 
(389.5-497.5) 
0.28 
0.6 
102.7 
(91.1-119.8) 
0.38 
3.2 

155.5 
(128.2-177.8) 
0.08 
0.2 
30.7 
(22.6-42.0) 
0.13 
1.1 

235.1 
(180.6-313.7) 
0.29 
0.6 
107.5 
(97.3-117.8) 
0.24 
1.9 

Sepsis 
(3.8-18.1) 
0.35 
3.6 
20.3 
(11.4-33.2) 
0.13 
5.1 
28.1 
(13.6-49.7) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.06 
0.3 

63.4 
(43.9-79.8) 
0.16 
0.3 
61 
(44.6-69.9) 
0.09 
0.7 

Pneumonia 
(8.1-26.7) 
0.05 
0.5 
2.9 
(1.6-4.7) 
0.08 
3.1 
17 
(9.8-30.8) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.03 
0.2 

30.3 
(20.3-44.3) 
0.12 
0.2 
43.2 
(28.4-61.5) 
0.05 
0.4 

583.6 

196.9 

360.4 

136.2 

77.9 

Tetanus 
(2.1-9.6) 
0.12 
1.2 
6.9 
(1.5-17.7) 
0.06 
2.4 
13.3 
(3.9-31.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 

0 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-16.5) 
0.04 
0.4 
2.1 
(0.9-4.6) 
0.02 
0.7 
3.7 
(0.8-20.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 

0 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

(510.9-650.7) 

(159.4-233.1) 

(290.4-455.1) 

(97.7-164.0) 

(51.5-112.5) 

(0.0-0.0) 

(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 

6.8 
(5.5-8.3) 
0.01 
0 
5.4 
(4.3-6.8) 
0.01 
0.1 

13 
(10.3-
16.0) 

Total 

1 
10.3 
58.5 

1 
40.4 
224.3 

1 
3.9 
9.5 

1 
1 
2.5 

1 
5 
12.3 

1 
5.7 
1060.
2 

1 
2 
372.5 

1 
8.2 
1518.
2 

Other 
(6.3-25.5) 
0.07 
0.7 
4 
(1.6-12.3) 
0.07 
2.9 
16.3 
(7.5-35.9) 
0.07 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.11 
0.6 

119.8 
(89.4-140.3) 
0.06 
0.1 
22 
(13.2-31.8) 
0.1 
0.8 

150.3 
(108.1-
183.8) 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 

Period 

Colombia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Comoros 
(high mort 
model) 

Congo  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 
Injuries 
Sepsis 
Stat* 
prop 
0.01 
0.09 
risk 
0.1 
0.7 
num 
0.6 
6 
(0.4-0.7) 
(5.5-6.5) 
0.01 
0.21 
0 
0.6 
0.2 
5.7 
(0.1-0.3) 
(5.2-6.1) 
0.01 
0.12 
0.1 
1.3 
0.8 
12.1 
(0.6-1.0) 
(11.1-13.0) 
--- 
0.09 
--- 
2 
--- 
0.5 
--- 
(0.2-0.8) 
--- 
0.5 
--- 
4 
--- 
1 
--- 
(0.6-1.3) 
0 
0.2 
0 
6.2 
0 
1.5 
(0.0-0.0) 
(0.8-2.1) 
--- 
0.08 
--- 
1.1 
--- 
1.8 
--- 
(0.7-2.9) 
--- 
0.42 
--- 
2.1 
--- 
3.5 
--- 
(2.1-5.3) 
0 
0.17 
0 
3.4 
0 
5.4 
(0.0-0.0) 
(3.0-8.3) 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
1.1 
9.7 
(9.1-10.3) 
0.07 
0.2 
1.9 
(1.6-2.1) 
0.12 
1.3 
11.9 
(11.0-12.8) 
0.34 
7.7 
1.9 
(1.3-2.1) 
0.14 
1.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.29 
9 
2.2 
(1.5-2.6) 
0.29 
4.2 
6.8 
(5.4-8.8) 
0.14 
0.7 
1.2 
(0.8-1.6) 
0.25 
5.1 
8.2 
(6.3-10.7) 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.2 
1.8 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
2 
(1.7-2.3) 
0.04 
0.4 
3.9 
(3.4-4.5) 
0.06 
1.4 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.06 
1.9 
0.5 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.04 
0.6 
0.9 
(0.5-2.0) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.04 
0.9 
1.4 
(0.7-2.8) 

Congenital 
0.22 
1.6 
14.8 
(14.1-15.6) 
0.27 
0.8 
7.4 
(6.9-8.0) 
0.24 
2.5 
23 
(21.7-24.3) 
0.08 
1.8 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.07 
2.3 
0.6 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.14 
2 
3.2 
(2.3-4.6) 
0.17 
0.8 
1.4 
(0.5-2.9) 
0.14 
2.8 
4.4 
(2.7-7.2) 

Preterm 
0.38 
2.8 
25.7 
(24.7-26.7) 
0.27 
0.8 
7.4 
(6.9-8.0) 
0.35 
3.7 
34.1 
(32.6-35.7) 
0.39 
8.9 
2.2 
(1.5-2.6) 
0.15 
1.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.33 
10.2 
2.6 
(1.6-3.1) 
0.42 
6 
9.7 
(7.8-12.8) 
0.13 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.6-1.8) 
0.35 
7 
11.2 
(8.7-15.2) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.4) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Other 
0.13 
0.9 
8.4 
(7.8-9.0) 
0.09 
0.3 
2.4 
(2.1-2.8) 
0.12 
1.2 
11.2 
(10.3-12.1) 
0.03 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.06 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.04 
1.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.03 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.4-1.8) 
0.06 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.2-1.2) 
0.04 
0.8 
1.2 
(0.6-3.1) 

Total 
1 
7.4 
67 

1 
3 
27.1 

1 
10.6 
96.9 

1 
22.8 
5.7 

1 
8 
2 

1 
31.4 
7.8 

1 
14.4 
23.3 

1 
5 
8.2 

1 
20.2 
32.2 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Cook 
Islands  
(low mort 
model) 

Costa Rica 
(high-
quality VR) 

Cote 
d'Ivoire 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.47 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.28 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.42 
2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
2.2 
1.6 
(1.4-1.9) 
0.22 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.37 
2.4 
1.7 
(1.4-2.0) 
0.35 
9.8 
73.2 
(58.1-87.3) 
0.16 
1.5 
11.3 
(6.2-17.7) 
0.31 
12 
85.6 

Intrapartum 
0.18 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.16 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.36 
10.1 
75.1 
(59.1-84.3) 
0.15 
1.5 
10.8 
(6.8-14.5) 
0.29 
11.3 
80.7 

Congenital 
0.25 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.27 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.41 
2.3 
1.7 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.47 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.41 
2.7 
1.9 
(1.6-2.3) 
0.07 
1.8 
13.8 
(9.7-20.7) 
0.05 
0.5 
3.4 
(1.3-8.3) 
0.06 
2.4 
17 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.16 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.09 
2.5 
18.9 
(7.9-30.1) 
0.47 
4.6 
34.4 
(21.8-45.0) 
0.2 
7.5 
53.6 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
2 
14.8 
(7.8-27.5) 
0.05 
0.5 
3.7 
(2.1-5.3) 
0.06 
2.5 
17.7 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.3 
2.4 
(0.8-5.6) 
0.04 
0.4 
3.2 
(1.0-7.3) 
0.02 
0.8 
5.7 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.0-8.0) 
0.02 
0.2 
1.4 
(0.5-3.1) 
0.01 
0.3 
2.1 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Other 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.07 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.04 
1 
7.6 
(3.8-18.4) 
0.06 
0.6 
4.4 
(2.0-10.6) 
0.04 
1.6 
11.4 

Total 
1 
3.4 
0 

1 
1.2 
0 

1 
4.8 
0 

1 
5.8 
4.3 

1 
0.6 
0.5 

1 
6.5 
4.7 

1 
27.7 
206.6 

1 
9.8 
72.6 

1 
38.4 
273.7 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Preterm 
(66.7-101.6) 

Intrapartum 
(62.9-93.0) 

Congenital 
(9.8-28.3) 

Sepsis 
(28.8-75.8) 

Pneumonia 
(9.6-30.9) 

Tetanus 
(1.8-13.2) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.5-10.4) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(5.6-27.7) 

Total 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Croatia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Cuba  
(high-
quality VR) 

Cyprus 
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.21 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.29 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.24 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.31 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.25 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.29 
0.9 
0.9 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.38 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.3 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.12 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.21 
0.4 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.16 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.12 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
0.21 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.36 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.26 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.13 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.31 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.19 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.34 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.39 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.14 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.16 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.41 
0.8 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.16 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.09 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
1.9 
0.8 

1 
0.9 
0.4 

1 
3 
1.4 

1 
1.9 
2 

1 
1 
1 

1 
3.1 
3.2 

1 
1.3 
0.2 

1 
0.5 
0.1 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.36 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
0.35 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.1 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Czech 
Republic 
(high-
quality VR) 

Democrati
c People's 
Republic 
of Korea  
(high mort 
model) 

Democrati
c Republic 
of the 
Congo 
(high mort 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.36 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.32 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.34 
0.8 
0.9 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.43 
4.7 
16.9 
(12.5-22.8) 
0.2 
0.8 
2.8 
(1.6-4.8) 
0.37 
5.7 
19.8 
(14.0-28.0) 
0.41 
11.6 
316.6 
(215.9-
380.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.16 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.15 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.21 
2.3 
8.1 
(5.9-11.5) 
0.1 
0.4 
1.4 
(0.8-2.1) 
0.18 
2.8 
9.7 
(7.0-13.5) 
0.33 
9.4 
256.6 

Congenital 
0.29 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.17 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.25 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.16 
1.8 
6.5 
(4.2-8.9) 
0.25 
1 
3.5 
(1.7-5.3) 
0.18 
2.8 
9.7 
(5.8-13.8) 
0.05 
1.4 
38.1 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.19 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.12 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.05 
0.6 
2.1 
(0.8-3.4) 
0.26 
1 
3.7 
(1.9-6.3) 
0.11 
1.7 
5.9 
(2.8-9.8) 
0.07 
2 
54.3 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.3 
0.9 
(0.4-2.2) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.03 
0.4 
1.5 
(0.7-3.1) 
0.07 
1.9 
53.1 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.01 
0.3 
8.6 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
4.9 

Injuries 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.14 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.11 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.13 
1.4 
5 
(1.1-9.5) 
0.14 
0.5 
2 
(0.5-3.7) 
0.13 
2 
7 
(1.7-13.3) 
0.05 
1.5 
41.8 

(169.8-288.1) 

(24.0-64.8) 

(18.8-79.6) 

(24.9-90.6) 

(2.6-19.2) 

(0.0-43.7) 

--- 

(22.2-67.4) 

Total 
1 
1.8 
0.2 

Total 
1 
1.4 
1.6 

1 
0.7 
0.8 

1 
2.2 
2.6 

1 
11 
39.6 

1 
3.9 
13.9 

1 
15.5 
53.7 

1 
28.3 
774.1 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
model) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.15 
1.5 
40.4 
(22.1-55.1) 
0.35 
13.6 
365.3 
(248.1-
439.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.16 
1.6 
43.8 
(26.6-57.4) 
0.28 
11 
296.5 

Congenital 
0.07 
0.7 
19 
(7.2-38.5) 
0.05 
2.1 
55.7 

Sepsis 
0.43 
4.2 
115.8 
(63.0-153.2) 
0.16 
6.1 
165.2 

Pneumonia 
0.05 
0.5 
14.8 
(8.1-21.0) 
0.07 
2.5 
68.2 

Tetanus 
0.06 
0.6 
16.4 
(4.3-40.2) 
0.03 
1 
28.2 

Diarrhoea 
0.01 
0.1 
2.1 
(0.5-4.0) 
0.01 
0.3 
7 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

(192.4-348.3) 

(29.7-100.2) 

(80.0-221.9) 

(31.6-115.5) 

(7.8-64.3) 

(0.5-41.7) 

(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
9.9 
272 

1 
38.9 
1047.1 

Other 
0.07 
0.7 
19.8 
(9.5-41.3) 
0.06 
2.3 
61 
(30.4-
108.4) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Denmark 
(high-
quality VR) 

Djibouti 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.61 
1 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.56 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.59 
1.5 
1 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.42 
9.7 
2.3 
(1.9-2.8) 
0.15 
1.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.35 
11.2 
2.6 
(2.2-3.3) 

Intrapartum 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.3 
7 
1.7 
(1.3-2.0) 
0.14 
1.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.26 
8.3 
2 
(1.5-2.4) 

Congenital 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.15 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.07 
1.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.15 
1.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.09 
3 
0.7 
(0.5-1.2) 

Sepsis 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
1.7 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.4 
3.2 
0.8 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.16 
5 
1.2 
(0.6-1.7) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
1.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.05 
1.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.7) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.4) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.17 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.11 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.15 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.07 
1.6 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.07 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
2.2 
0.5 
(0.3-0.8) 

Total 
1 
1.6 
1 

1 
0.8 
0.5 

1 
2.5 
1.6 

1 
23.1 
5.4 

1 
8.1 
1.9 

1 
31.8 
7.5 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Dominica 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.08 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.77 
5.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.63 
5.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.67 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s). 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Dominican 
Republic 
(high mort 
model) 

Ecuador 
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Overall 

prop 

Preterm 
0.42 
5.1 
10.8 
(9.3-13.2) 
0.17 
0.7 
1.5 
(1.0-2.4) 
0.36 
5.9 
12.7 
(10.5-15.9) 
0.45 
3.5 
11.4 
(10.2-14.4) 
0.27 
0.7 
2.4 
(2.1-3.3) 
0.4 

Intrapartum 
0.23 
2.7 
5.8 
(4.7-7.1) 
0.11 
0.5 
1 
(0.6-1.3) 
0.2 
3.2 
7 
(5.5-8.8) 
0.16 
1.2 
4 
(3.3-5.3) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.14 

Congenital 
0.18 
2.1 
4.5 
(2.8-6.0) 
0.25 
1.1 
2.3 
(1.1-3.4) 
0.19 
3.2 
6.9 
(4.0-9.6) 
0.22 
1.7 
5.5 
(4.8-7.5) 
0.25 
0.7 
2.3 
(2.0-3.0) 
0.22 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.8 
1.6 
(0.6-2.5) 
0.33 
1.4 
2.9 
(1.7-4.5) 
0.13 
2.2 
4.7 
(2.4-7.3) 
0.07 
0.5 
1.7 
(1.2-2.4) 
0.24 
0.6 
2.1 
(1.6-2.8) 
0.11 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.3-1.5) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.03 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.6-2.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.5-1.2) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.6 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.04 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 

Other 
0.08 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.08 
1 
2 
(0.9-2.9) 
0.09 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.4-1.3) 
0.08 
1.4 
2.9 
(1.3-4.3) 
0.08 
0.6 
1.9 
(1.6-2.6) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.08 

Total 
1 
6.6 
0.1 

1 
1.5 
0 

1 
8.3 
0.1 

Total 
1 
11.9 
25.5 

1 
4.2 
9 

1 
16.5 
35.4 

1 
7.8 
25.4 

1 
2.7 
8.9 

1 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Egypt  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
4.3 
14 
(12.3-17.9) 
0.45 
3.9 
74.2 
(59.5-89.2) 
0.28 
0.9 
16.4 
(13.6-21.7) 
0.41 
5 
95.7 
(77.2-115.8) 

Intrapartum 
1.5 
4.8 
(3.9-6.4) 
0.22 
2 
37.4 
(18.3-56.1) 
0.15 
0.5 
8.8 
(0.6-12.1) 
0.21 
2.5 
48.3 
(19.8-71.6) 

Congenital 
2.4 
7.7 
(6.7-10.5) 
0.21 
1.8 
34.7 
(19.0-56.6) 
0.25 
0.8 
14.4 
(11.9-18.8) 
0.21 
2.5 
49 
(30.7-74.7) 

Sepsis 
1.2 
3.8 
(2.8-5.2) 
0.03 
0.3 
5.6 
(2.6-10.0) 
0.18 
0.6 
10.5 
(5.2-19.0) 
0.06 
0.8 
14.6 
(7.5-27.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.4 
1.4 
(0.8-2.0) 
0.04 
0.3 
6 
(3.6-10.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
2.1 
(0.3-4.5) 
0.04 
0.4 
8.6 
(4.0-15.3) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

El 
Salvador 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Equatorial 
Guinea 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.42 
2 
2.7 
(2.3-3.0) 
0.26 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.5-0.7) 
0.38 
2.6 
3.5 
(3.0-3.9) 
0.42 
10.4 
2.7 
(1.7-4.2) 
0.16 
1.4 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
0.8 
1.1 
(0.7-1.4) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.15 
1 
1.4 
(0.9-1.7) 
0.34 
8.4 
2.1 
(1.3-2.9) 
0.16 
1.4 

Congenital 
0.19 
0.9 
1.2 
(1.0-1.6) 
0.27 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.5-0.7) 
0.21 
1.4 
1.9 
(1.6-2.5) 
0.06 
1.4 
0.4 
(0.2-0.7) 
0.06 
0.5 

Sepsis 
0.07 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.19 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.11 
0.7 
1 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.07 
1.7 
0.4 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.45 
3.9 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.12 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.8) 
0.06 
1.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.05 
0.5 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.4 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.1 

Injuries 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
1.3 
(0.8-2.4) 
0.01 
0 
0.9 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
2.3 
(1.5-3.8) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.8 
2.7 
(2.0-3.8) 
0.04 
0.4 
7.2 
(4.4-12.0) 
0.09 
0.3 
5.4 
(3.5-7.7) 
0.06 
0.7 
13 
(8.2-20.3) 

Other 
0.1 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.09 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.03 
0.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.06 
0.6 

Total 
10.7 
34.7 

1 
8.7 
166.3 

1 
3.1 
58.4 

1 
12 
231.5 

Total 
1 
4.8 
6.4 

1 
1.7 
2.2 

1 
6.7 
9.1 

1 
24.6 
6.3 

1 
8.6 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Eritrea 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.35 
11.7 
3 
(2.0-4.5) 
0.24 
3.1 
7.1 
(5.7-10.8) 
0.13 
0.6 
1.4 
(0.7-2.9) 
0.21 
3.9 
8.6 
(6.3-13.8) 

Intrapartum 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.3 
10.1 
2.6 
(1.7-3.4) 
0.37 
4.8 
10.9 
(9.4-15.8) 
0.15 
0.7 
1.6 
(1.0-2.5) 
0.31 
5.7 
12.7 
(10.5-18.1) 

Congenital 
0.1 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.06 
1.9 
0.5 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.19 
2.5 
5.8 
(4.2-8.8) 
0.07 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.2-2.2) 
0.16 
2.8 
6.3 
(4.2-10.5) 

Sepsis 
1 
(0.6-1.4) 
0.17 
5.7 
1.5 
(0.8-2.2) 
0.11 
1.4 
3.2 
(1.3-5.6) 
0.49 
2.3 
5.2 
(3.4-8.6) 
0.21 
3.8 
8.4 
(4.6-14.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.06 
2.1 
0.5 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.05 
0.7 
1.5 
(0.9-3.5) 
0.06 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.3-1.1) 
0.05 
1 
2.2 
(1.1-4.7) 

Tetanus 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.02 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-1.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Estonia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Ethiopia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.14 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.27 
5.5 
168.4 

Intrapartum 
0.29 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.41 
8.3 
253.5 

Congenital 
0.29 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.43 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.11 
2.2 
68.9 

Sepsis 
0.21 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.29 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
1.8 
55.6 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
1.3 
41.3 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.4 
12.7 

Diarrhoea 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.4) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
1.3 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.1 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.04 
1.4 
0.4 
(0.2-0.9) 
0.04 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.6-3.2) 
0.06 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.3-1.8) 
0.04 
0.8 
1.7 
(0.9-5.1) 

Other 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.8 
23.1 

Total 
2.2 

1 
33.8 
8.6 

1 
13.1 
29.7 

1 
4.6 
10.4 

1 
18.2 
40.3 

Total 
1 
1.1 
0.2 

1 
0.6 
0.1 

1 
1.8 
0.3 

1 
20.4 
624.8 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Intrapartum 

Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumonia 

Tetanus 

Diarrhoea 

Injuries 

Other 

Total 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Fiji  
(low mort 
model) 

Preterm 
(117.0-
199.9) 
0.18 
1.3 
38.9 
(21.7-59.5) 
0.26 
7.3 
221.2 
(146.7-
271.1) 
0.43 
3.3 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.28 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.39 
4.1 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 

(186.4-278.9) 
0.14 
1 
30.9 
(19.4-39.7) 
0.33 
9.3 
282.7 

(209.1-315.1) 
0.17 
1.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.15 
1.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 

(45.5-95.5) 
0.07 
0.5 
14.3 
(3.6-33.8) 
0.09 
2.7 
80.7 

(48.2-126.2) 
0.19 
1.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.27 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.21 
2.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 

(21.6-85.6) 
0.44 
3.2 
97.2 
(56.2-127.0) 
0.18 
5.1 
155.9 

(79.2-218.8) 
0.09 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.21 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.13 
1.3 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 

(19.9-71.5) 
0.05 
0.3 
10.4 
(5.8-14.3) 
0.06 
1.7 
52.3 

(26.1-88.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

(4.5-33.7) 
0.03 
0.2 
6.8 
(2.3-14.8) 
0.03 
0.7 
21.6 

(7.6-50.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Finland 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.31 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.37 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.32 
0.4 
0.3 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.2 
0.1 

Congenital 
0.37 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.32 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.36 
0.5 
0.3 

Sepsis 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

(0.0-11.3) 
0.04 
0.3 
8.3 
(3.2-17.3) 
0.01 
0.3 
9.6 

(3.5-28.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 

(10.3-62.8) 
0.06 
0.4 
12.7 
(4.9-30.8) 
0.04 
1.2 
35.8 

(15.6-92.2) 
0.07 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.08 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Other 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.21 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.2 
0.1 

1 
7.2 
219.5 

1 
28.4 
859.8 

1 
7.6 
1.4 

1 
2.7 
0.5 

1 
10.4 
1.9 

Total 
1 
1 
0.6 

1 
0.3 
0.2 

1 
1.4 
0.9 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

France 
(high-
quality VR) 

Gabon  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.27 
0.4 
3.4 
(3.0-3.8) 
0.2 
0.1 
1.2 
(0.9-1.4) 
0.25 
0.6 
4.5 
(4.0-5.1) 
0.4 
6.8 
3.6 
(2.9-4.5) 
0.15 
0.9 
0.5 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.36 
8.3 
4.3 
(3.2-5.5) 

Intrapartum 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.18 
0.3 
2.3 
(2.0-2.6) 
0.2 
0.1 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.19 
0.4 
3.4 
(2.9-3.9) 
0.31 
5.3 
2.8 
(2.1-3.4) 
0.14 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.26 
6 
3.1 
(2.4-3.9) 

Congenital 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.26 
0.4 
3.3 
(3.0-3.7) 
0.36 
0.3 
2 
(1.7-2.3) 
0.29 
0.7 
5.3 
(4.7-6.0) 
0.12 
2 
1.1 
(0.7-1.5) 
0.13 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.1-0.9) 
0.12 
2.8 
1.5 
(0.8-2.4) 

Sepsis 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.06 
0.1 
1.1 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.08 
1.4 
0.8 
(0.3-1.2) 
0.44 
2.6 
1.4 
(0.8-2.0) 
0.17 
4 
2.1 
(1.0-3.2) 

Pneumonia 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.05 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.05 
1.1 
0.5 
(0.3-1.0) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Gambia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.33 
6.9 
5.3 
(3.9-7.2) 
0.14 
1 
0.8 
(0.5-1.3) 

Intrapartum 
0.35 
7.4 
5.7 
(4.3-7.4) 
0.16 
1.2 
0.9 
(0.6-1.3) 

Congenital 
0.1 
2.1 
1.6 
(0.9-2.7) 
0.06 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.1-0.9) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
2 
1.6 
(0.6-2.7) 
0.46 
3.4 
2.6 
(1.5-3.7) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.2 
0.9 
(0.4-1.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.23 
0.4 
3 
(2.6-3.3) 
0.15 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.21 
0.5 
3.8 
(3.2-4.3) 
0.03 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.04 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.2-1.2) 

Other 
0.05 
1.1 
0.8 
(0.5-1.6) 
0.07 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.9) 

Total 

1 
1.6 
12.7 

1 
0.7 
5.6 

1 
2.3 
18.2 

1 
16.9 
8.9 

1 
5.9 
3.1 

1 
23.3 
12.1 

Total 
1 
20.8 
16 

1 
7.3 
5.6 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Georgia 
(low mort 
model) 

Germany 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.27 
7.7 
5.7 
(3.9-8.5) 
0.4 
2.9 
1.6 
(1.4-1.9) 
0.3 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.39 
4 
2.4 
(2.1-2.8) 
0.45 
0.8 
5.6 
(5.1-6.0) 
0.33 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.43 
1 
6.9 
(6.2-7.6) 

Intrapartum 
0.31 
9 
6.7 
(4.9-8.7) 
0.12 
0.9 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.11 
1.1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.11 
0.2 
1.3 
(1.1-1.6) 
0.07 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
0.2 
1.6 
(1.3-2.0) 

Congenital 
0.09 
2.5 
1.9 
(1.0-3.5) 
0.26 
1.8 
1 
(0.7-1.3) 
0.29 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.25 
2.6 
1.6 
(1.2-1.9) 
0.27 
0.5 
3.3 
(2.9-3.6) 
0.41 
0.2 
1.4 
(1.2-1.6) 
0.3 
0.7 
4.8 
(4.2-5.4) 

Sepsis 
0.2 
5.7 
4.3 
(2.2-6.5) 
0.07 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.18 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.09 
0.9 
0.6 
(0.5-0.7) 
0.02 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.09 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.7 
1.3 
(0.6-2.5) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.05 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Other 
0.06 
1.6 
1.2 
(0.7-2.5) 
0.11 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.1 
1.1 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.13 
0.2 
1.6 
(1.4-1.9) 
0.06 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.12 
0.3 
1.9 
(1.5-2.2) 

Total 
1 
28.7 
21.4 

1 
7.2 
4 

1 
2.5 
1.4 

1 
10.3 
6.3 

1 
1.7 
12.3 

1 
0.5 
3.4 

1 
2.3 
16.1 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Ghana  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.36 
7.8 
61.6 
(49.9-71.4) 
0.17 

Intrapartum 
0.35 
7.6 
59.6 
(48.7-68.7) 
0.15 

Congenital 
0.09 
2 
15.9 
(9.3-24.4) 
0.06 

Sepsis 
0.1 
2.2 
17.3 
(6.1-26.6) 
0.46 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.3 
10 
(5.2-19.3) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
(0.3-2.4) 
0.03 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.3 
(0.0-2.9) 
0.01 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.03 
0.7 
5.3 
(2.5-17.4) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
21.7 
171 

1 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Greece 
(high-
quality VR) 

Grenada 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
1.3 
10 
(4.6-18.2) 
0.31 
9.2 
72 
(54.6-90.0) 
0.55 
0.9 
1 
(0.8-1.2) 
0.45 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.51 
1.4 
1.6 
(1.3-2.0) 
0.33 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.29 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Intrapartum 
1.1 
8.9 
(5.6-11.8) 
0.3 
8.8 
69.5 
(54.3-80.8) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.33 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.29 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.5 
3.9 
(1.3-9.9) 
0.08 
2.5 
19.6 
(10.3-33.7) 
0.3 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.43 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.35 
1 
1.1 
(0.8-1.4) 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.5 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Sepsis 
3.5 
27.5 
(16.2-38.0) 
0.19 
5.8 
45.3 
(22.7-65.8) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.5 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.4 
3.2 
(1.8-4.6) 
0.06 
1.7 
13.5 
(7.1-24.5) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0.2 
1.6 
(0.5-3.9) 
0.01 
0.4 
2.8 
(0.9-6.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.2-4.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.5 
4.3 
(1.4-10.9) 
0.04 
1.2 
9.7 
(3.9-28.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.17 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
7.6 
60.1 

1 
29.7 
233.2 

1 
1.7 
1.8 

1 
1.1 
1.1 

1 
2.8 
3.2 

1 
5 
0.1 

1 
0.8 
0 

1 
6 
0.1 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
Guatemala 
(high mort 

Period 
Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.26 
2.8 

Intrapartum 
0.33 
3.6 

Congenital 
0.23 
2.5 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.9 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.4 

Tetanus 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.06 
0.7 

Total 
1 
11 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
model) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Guinea 
(high mort 
model) 

Guinea-
Bissau  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
13.4 
(10.8-16.6) 
0.12 
0.5 
2.2 
(1.3-3.4) 
0.22 
3.3 
15.5 
(11.8-20.6) 
0.31 
7.5 
31.6 
(24.7-39.0) 
0.15 
1.3 
5.4 
(3.1-8.0) 
0.27 
9 
37.4 
(28.1-47.5) 
0.31 
10 
6.1 
(4.5-7.9) 
0.15 
1.7 
1 
(0.6-1.7) 
0.26 
11.9 
7.1 
(5.1-9.6) 

Intrapartum 
16.9 
(14.1-19.4) 
0.16 
0.6 
2.9 
(1.9-3.9) 
0.28 
4.2 
19.8 
(16.2-23.5) 
0.41 
10 
41.9 
(31.1-47.2) 
0.16 
1.4 
5.7 
(3.7-7.4) 
0.35 
11.6 
48 
(36.1-55.3) 
0.38 
12.4 
7.6 
(5.6-9.7) 
0.16 
1.8 
1.1 
(0.7-1.6) 
0.32 
14.5 
8.7 
(6.3-11.3) 

Congenital 
12.1 
(7.8-16.5) 
0.12 
0.5 
2.3 
(0.9-4.1) 
0.21 
3.1 
14.6 
(9.0-19.9) 
0.07 
1.6 
6.7 
(5.0-11.6) 
0.04 
0.4 
1.6 
(0.6-3.9) 
0.06 
2 
8.1 
(5.4-15.8) 
0.07 
2.2 
1.3 
(0.8-2.3) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.06 
2.7 
1.6 
(0.9-2.8) 

Sepsis 
4.2 
(1.8-6.6) 
0.46 
1.8 
8.5 
(5.4-11.2) 
0.18 
2.8 
13.1 
(7.3-18.2) 
0.08 
1.8 
7.7 
(3.0-11.9) 
0.46 
3.9 
16.4 
(10.2-21.5) 
0.17 
5.9 
24.3 
(13.3-34.0) 
0.1 
3.3 
2 
(0.7-3.3) 
0.45 
5.1 
3.1 
(1.9-4.6) 
0.19 
8.6 
5.2 
(2.6-8.1) 

Pneumonia 
2.1 
(1.0-4.3) 
0.06 
0.2 
1 
(0.6-1.5) 
0.04 
0.7 
3.1 
(1.6-6.0) 
0.08 
1.9 
8 
(4.0-14.0) 
0.05 
0.5 
1.9 
(1.2-2.8) 
0.07 
2.5 
10.2 
(5.3-17.1) 
0.08 
2.7 
1.6 
(0.8-3.1) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.08 
3.4 
2.1 
(1.1-3.9) 

Tetanus 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-1.1) 
0.01 
0.3 
1.1 
(0.4-2.2) 
0.04 
0.4 
1.6 
(0.5-3.8) 
0.02 
0.7 
2.8 
(0.9-6.6) 
0.01 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.08 
0.9 
0.5 
(0.2-1.3) 
0.03 
1.4 
0.9 
(0.3-2.3) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.3) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.0-4.1) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.4-1.5) 
0.01 
0.3 
1.4 
(0.4-6.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.9) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.0-1.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
3.1 
(1.5-4.8) 
0.05 
0.2 
1 
(0.5-2.2) 
0.06 
0.9 
4.1 
(2.0-7.1) 
0.04 
1.1 
4.5 
(2.4-9.9) 
0.06 
0.6 
2.3 
(1.1-5.5) 
0.05 
1.7 
6.9 
(3.5-15.4) 
0.04 
1.3 
0.8 
(0.4-2.0) 
0.06 
0.7 
0.5 
(0.2-1.1) 
0.05 
2.1 
1.3 
(0.6-3.1) 

Total 
52 

1 
3.8 
18.3 

1 
15.2 
70.8 

1 
24.3 
101.8 

1 
8.5 
35.8 

1 
33.6 
139.1 

1 
32.6 
19.9 

1 
11.4 
7 

1 
44.9 
27 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 

Period 

Guyana 
(high-
quality VR) 

Haiti  
(high mort 
model) 

Honduras 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.4 
6.2 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
0.19 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.35 
7.2 
1.2 
(0.9-1.4) 
0.38 
7.1 
18.7 
(16.1-21.3) 
0.2 
1.3 
3.4 
(2.4-4.5) 
0.34 
8.5 
22.7 
(19.1-26.5) 
0.47 
4.1 
8.5 
(7.5-9.3) 
0.25 
0.8 
1.6 
(1.3-1.9) 
0.42 
5 
10.2 
(9.0-11.4) 

Intrapartum 
0.24 
3.7 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.16 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.22 
4.5 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.3 
5.6 
14.8 
(12.6-17.3) 
0.13 
0.9 
2.3 
(1.5-3.1) 
0.26 
6.6 
17.5 
(14.4-20.8) 
0.18 
1.6 
3.3 
(2.4-3.9) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.16 
1.9 
3.9 
(2.7-4.7) 

Congenital 
0.09 
1.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.13 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.09 
1.7 
4.4 
(3.3-6.3) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.5-1.7) 
0.08 
2 
5.3 
(3.7-8.0) 
0.16 
1.3 
2.8 
(2.4-3.7) 
0.21 
0.6 
1.3 
(1.1-1.6) 
0.17 
2 
4.2 
(3.6-5.3) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
1.6 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.19 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.12 
2.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.08 
1.5 
4.1 
(1.7-7.1) 
0.45 
2.9 
7.7 
(5.4-10.1) 
0.18 
4.5 
12.1 
(7.2-17.6) 
0.1 
0.9 
1.9 
(1.5-2.4) 
0.25 
0.7 
1.6 
(1.2-2.0) 
0.14 
1.7 
3.4 
(2.8-4.5) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.05 
1 
2.6 
(1.4-5.0) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.8 
(0.5-1.1) 
0.05 
1.3 
3.5 
(2.0-6.3) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.5-1.4) 
0.13 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.07 
0.8 
1.7 
(1.1-2.7) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.8 
(0.3-1.8) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.0-1.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.5 
(0.2-0.9) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.6 
(0.2-2.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.7) 

Other 
0.15 
2.4 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.26 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.18 
3.6 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.07 
1.4 
3.6 
(2.0-4.8) 
0.07 
0.4 
1.2 
(0.7-1.9) 
0.07 
1.9 
4.9 
(2.8-6.9) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-1.0) 
0.06 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.5-1.6) 

Total 
1 
15.6 
2.3 

1 
4.4 
0.7 

1 
20.4 
3.3 

1 
18.4 
48.8 

1 
6.5 
17.1 

1 
25.4 
67.4 

1 
8.6 
17.9 

1 
3 
6.3 

1 
11.9 
24.6 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Late 

Early 

Period 

Overall 

Country 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Hungary 
(high-
quality VR) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 
Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 

Intrapartum 
0.11 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.22 
4.7 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.8 

Congenital 
0.24 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.26 
1 
0.9 
(0.7-1.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
1.7 

Preterm 
0.56 
1.4 
1.4 
(1.2-1.6) 
0.44 
0.5 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.53 
2 
1.9 
(1.5-2.3) 
0.67 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.67 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.5 
10.7 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
1.7 

Iceland 
(high-
quality VR) 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 

Injuries 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

India  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

num 

prop 
risk 

num 

Late 

2742.2 
(1586.8-
4064.8) 
0.27 
2 

1210.3 

(676.5-1959.1) 
0.11 
0.9 

522.6 

222.5 

447.5 
(202.1-
806.2) 
0.08 
0.6 

159.1 

Overall 

prop 

(236.5-891.3) 
0.44 

(100.4-384.6) 
0.19 

(65.1-321.5) 
0.08 

435.2 
(107.6-
849.0) 
0.35 
2.6 

674.5 
(305.5-
1204.9) 
0.15 

198.1 

43.9 

15.8 

(66.6-510.3) 
0.04 
0.3 

(9.0-137.1) 
0.04 
0.3 

(0.0-120.7) 
0.02 
0.1 

77.9 

(33.3-145.4) 
0.04 

71.9 
(19.3-
200.0) 
0.02 

38.3 

(9.4-122.4) 
0.01 

--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 

--- 

--- 
0 

Other 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.33 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
1.7 

438.5 
(120.1-
800.5) 
0.09 
0.7 

176.8 

Total 
1 
2.5 
2.5 

1 
1.1 
1.1 

1 
3.7 
3.6 

1 
0.9 
0 

1 
0 
0 

1 
1 
0 

1 
21.6 
5531.
5 

1 
7.6 
1943.
5 

(57.8-366.3) 
0.08 

1 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 
Tetanus 
0.5 
121.7 

Intrapartum 
5.8 
1452.4 

Pneumonia 
1.1 
283.1 

Preterm 
13.2 
3323.7 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

Period 

Congenital 
2.4 
593.8 
(263.6-
1106.8) 

Sepsis 
4.5 
1127.2 
(414.8-
2094.7) 

(28.7-354.6) 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

(1833.8-5081.7) 

(777.7-2381.7) 

(100.9-673.8) 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Indonesia 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Iran  
(high mort 
model) 

Iraq  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.41 
4.4 
200.4 
(169.9-
255.2) 
0.23 
0.9 
38.9 
(28.6-56.6) 
0.37 
5.5 
264.7 
(220.1-
349.7) 
0.38 
2.9 
42.5 
(30.9-57.3) 
0.18 
0.5 
7.3 
(4.2-12.4) 
0.33 
3.5 
51.8 
(36.4-71.8) 
0.41 
5.6 
58.5 
(46.1-67.8) 
0.13 

Intrapartum 
0.22 
2.3 
106.9 

Congenital 
0.18 
1.9 
88.4 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.7 
30 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.3 
13 

(87.0-143.2) 
0.11 
0.4 
19.5 
(13.7-27.2) 
0.19 
2.9 
138 

(110.4-185.6) 
0.2 
1.5 
22.3 
(16.1-30.3) 
0.1 
0.3 
3.9 
(2.3-5.8) 
0.17 
1.8 
27.5 
(19.2-38.0) 
0.27 
3.7 
38.5 
(30.1-43.4) 
0.14 

(59.0-118.0) 
0.16 
0.6 
27.7 
(14.4-43.0) 
0.17 
2.5 
123 

(77.7-171.3) 
0.24 
1.9 
27.4 
(14.6-36.1) 
0.27 
0.7 
10.9 
(4.4-16.1) 
0.25 
2.6 
39.5 
(19.1-53.4) 
0.16 
2.2 
23.3 
(14.2-30.8) 
0.22 

(12.5-47.9) 
0.33 
1.2 
56.6 
(34.3-85.3) 
0.13 
2 
95.2 

(52.2-146.8) 
0.05 
0.4 
6 
(2.1-9.5) 
0.28 
0.7 
10.9 
(5.5-18.4) 
0.11 
1.2 
17.7 
(8.2-28.8) 
0.07 
1 
10.3 
(4.2-15.5) 
0.39 

(6.0-28.8) 
0.04 
0.1 
6.9 
(4.4-10.4) 
0.03 
0.5 
21.8 

(11.5-43.3) 
0.02 
0.2 
2.4 
(1.0-5.5) 
0.04 
0.1 
1.5 
(0.8-2.6) 
0.03 
0.3 
4.1 
(1.8-8.4) 
0.03 
0.5 
5 
(2.3-9.8) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
1.1 

(0.4-2.8) 
0.01 
0 
1.7 
(0.5-4.8) 
0 
0.1 
3.1 

(1.0-8.6) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.7) 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.1-1.2) 
0 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 
0.02 

Diarrhoea 
0.2 
55.2 

Injuries 
0 
0 

(9.3-251.4) 

(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.1 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 

(0.0-1.0) 
0 
0 
0.7 
(0.3-1.4) 
0 
0 
0.9 

(0.3-2.7) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.0-1.5) 
0.01 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
2.5 
623.8 
(178.3-
1194.0) 

Other 
0.1 
1 
47.2 

(16.1-75.1) 
0.11 
0.4 
19.3 
(7.8-34.4) 
0.1 
1.5 
72.7 
(26.3-
118.8) 
0.11 
0.8 
11.9 
(3.1-20.1) 
0.12 
0.3 
4.8 
(1.6-8.3) 
0.11 
1.2 
17.4 
(4.9-29.4) 
0.05 
0.7 
7.1 
(3.4-10.4) 
0.04 

Total 
30.1 
7580.9 

Total 
1 
10.7 
487.1 

1 
3.7 
171.2 

1 
14.9 
719.4 

1 
7.6 
112.7 

1 
2.7 
39.6 

1 
10.6 
158.4 

1 
13.8 
143.5 

1 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Period 

Country 

Intrapartum 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 
Tetanus 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.3-2.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
1.3 
(0.4-3.0) 

Congenital 
1.1 
11.3 
(5.8-16.7) 
0.18 
3.4 
34.7 
(19.9-47.1) 

Sepsis 
1.9 
19.8 
(12.2-26.6) 
0.16 
3.1 
32 
(17.4-44.8) 

Preterm 
0.6 
6.5 
(4.0-9.5) 
0.32 
6 
61.4 
(46.3-74.4) 

0.7 
6.9 
(4.4-8.8) 
0.24 
4.6 
47.2 
(36.2-54.2) 

0.2 
2.3 
(1.4-3.2) 
0.04 
0.7 
7.6 
(3.7-13.5) 

prop 
risk 
num 

Pneumonia 

Overall 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Ireland 
(high-
quality VR) 

Israel  
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Italy  
(high-

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.33 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.38 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.34 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.45 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.49 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.46 
1 
1.5 
(1.2-1.9) 
0.41 
0.6 

Intrapartum 
0.13 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.09 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.05 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.14 
0.2 

Congenital 
0.46 
0.9 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.38 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.45 
1 
0.8 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.33 
0.5 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.34 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.33 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.8-1.4) 
0.22 
0.3 

Sepsis 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.04 
0.1 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.5 
(0.2-0.8) 
0 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.2-2.5) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.2 
2.2 
(1.0-5.1) 
0.05 
0.9 
9.6 
(4.6-16.2) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 

Other 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.12 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.19 
0.3 

Total 
4.9 
50.4 

1 
19.1 
194.6 

Total 
1 
1.9 
1.4 

1 
0.4 
0.3 

1 
2.3 
1.7 

1 
1.6 
2.5 

1 
0.4 
0.7 

1 
2.1 
3.3 

1 
1.6 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
quality VR) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
3.6 
(3.2-4.0) 
0.4 
0.3 
1.5 
(1.2-1.7) 
0.41 
0.9 
5.1 
(4.4-5.7) 

Intrapartum 
1.2 
(1.0-1.4) 
0.07 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.12 
0.3 
1.5 
(1.1-1.8) 

Congenital 
2 
(1.7-2.2) 
0.24 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
0.23 
0.5 
2.8 
(2.4-3.3) 

Sepsis 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.11 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 

Pneumonia 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Jamaica 
(low mort 
model) 

Japan 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.42 
3.3 
1.7 
(1.4-2.5) 
0.3 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.38 
4.1 
2.2 
(1.8-3.3) 
0.24 
0.2 
1.9 
(1.7-2.2) 
0.1 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.21 
0.2 
2.5 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
1.1 
0.6 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.13 
1.4 
0.7 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.14 
0.1 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
0.1 
1.3 

Congenital 
0.21 
1.6 
0.8 
(0.6-1.3) 
0.27 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.22 
2.4 
1.3 
(1.0-2.0) 
0.43 
0.3 
3.4 
(3.0-3.7) 
0.52 
0.1 
1.5 
(1.3-1.8) 
0.45 
0.5 
5.4 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.19 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.12 
1.3 
0.7 
(0.5-1.1) 
0.03 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.14 
0 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.7 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.02 
0 
0.3 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Injuries 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.02 
0 
0.2 

Other 
1.7 
(1.4-2.0) 
0.15 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.18 
0.4 
2.3 
(1.9-2.7) 

Other 
0.11 
0.8 
0.4 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.1 
1.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.13 
0.1 
1 
(0.8-1.2) 
0.12 
0 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.13 
0.1 
1.5 

Total 
8.8 

1 
0.6 
3.7 

1 
2.2 
12.5 

Total 
1 
7.7 
4 

1 
2.7 
1.4 

1 
10.7 
5.8 

1 
0.7 
7.9 

1 
0.3 
3 

1 
1.1 
11.9 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Jordan  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
(2.1-2.8) 
0.45 
3.7 
7.4 
(6.6-8.2) 
0.3 
0.9 
1.7 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.41 
4.7 
9.5 
(8.4-10.7) 

Intrapartum 
(1.0-1.6) 
0.16 
1.3 
2.7 
(2.2-3.1) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.14 
1.7 
3.3 
(2.6-3.9) 

Congenital 
(4.8-6.0) 
0.24 
2 
4 
(3.0-4.9) 
0.27 
0.8 
1.6 
(1.4-1.8) 
0.24 
2.8 
5.6 
(4.5-6.8) 

Sepsis 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.08 
0.7 
1.3 
(0.9-1.8) 
0.17 
0.5 
1 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.11 
1.2 
2.4 
(1.6-3.2) 

Pneumonia 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.06 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.04 
0.5 
1 
(0.6-1.6) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Kazakhsta
n (high 
mort model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Kenya  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.36 
2.3 
7.7 
(6.7-11.5) 
0.15 
0.3 
1.1 
(0.8-2.1) 
0.31 
2.9 
10.1 
(8.2-14.6) 
0.32 
6.1 
92.5 
(73.7-120.9) 
0.16 
1.1 
16.1 
(9.2-26.4) 

Intrapartum 
0.22 
1.4 
4.7 
(4.0-7.1) 
0.11 
0.2 
0.8 
(0.6-1.4) 
0.19 
1.8 
6.3 
(4.9-9.2) 
0.4 
7.7 
116.3 
(91.9-140.8) 
0.17 
1.2 
17.8 
(12.2-25.1) 

Congenital 
0.26 
1.7 
5.5 
(3.5-8.4) 
0.32 
0.7 
2.4 
(1.2-4.0) 
0.27 
2.6 
8.9 
(5.2-13.2) 
0.1 
1.9 
28.6 
(21.9-47.9) 
0.07 
0.5 
7.1 
(2.5-19.2) 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.4 
1.2 
(0.5-2.1) 
0.28 
0.6 
2.1 
(1.2-3.9) 
0.11 
1.1 
3.8 
(1.9-6.3) 
0.08 
1.6 
24.4 
(10.5-39.5) 
0.43 
3 
44.5 
(26.7-62.3) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.2 
0.5 
(0.2-1.3) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.03 
0.3 
0.9 
(0.5-2.0) 
0.06 
1.2 
17.7 
(8.6-35.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
6 
(3.8-9.1) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.2 
2.3 
(0.8-5.5) 
0.04 
0.3 
3.8 
(1.3-9.4) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.5 
(0.0-4.9) 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.1-0.9) 

Injuries 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.7) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
(1.2-1.9) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.9) 
0.09 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.04 
0.5 
0.9 
(0.5-1.7) 

Other 
0.09 
0.6 
1.9 
(0.8-3.1) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.4-1.4) 
0.09 
0.9 
2.9 
(1.3-4.8) 
0.04 
0.7 
10.8 
(5.4-30.2) 
0.07 
0.5 
7.2 
(3.0-18.9) 

Total 

1 
8.3 
16.5 

1 
2.9 
5.8 

1 
11.5 
23 

Total 
1 
6.5 
21.4 

1 
2.3 
7.5 

1 
9.6 
33.1 

1 
19.5 
293 

1 
6.8 
102.9 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Kiribati 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.27 
7.3 
109.4 
(82.7-148.8) 
0.35 
5.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.16 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.31 
6.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.34 
9 
134.4 
(105.2-166.2) 
0.32 
5.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.15 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.27 
5.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.09 
2.4 
35.7 
(24.6-68.5) 
0.11 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
2.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0.18 
4.8 
71.2 
(38.5-105.7) 
0.07 
1.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.39 
2.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.16 
3.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.6 
24 
(12.8-46.2) 
0.04 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
0.02 
0.4 
6.3 
(2.3-15.1) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Kuwait 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Kyrgyzsta
n (high 
mort model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.45 
1.4 
1 
(0.8-1.1) 
0.39 
0.7 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.43 
2.2 
1.5 
(1.1-1.8) 
0.34 
3.3 
5 
(3.9-6.7) 
0.11 

Intrapartum 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.26 
2.6 
3.9 
(3.0-5.1) 
0.13 

Congenital 
0.51 
1.5 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.42 
0.7 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.48 
2.4 
1.6 
(1.3-2.0) 
0.24 
2.3 
3.6 
(2.2-4.9) 
0.31 

Sepsis 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.07 
0.7 
1 
(0.4-1.6) 
0.32 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-1.0) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.1-6.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.05 
1.2 
18.1 
(8.3-50.7) 
0.1 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
2.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.7 
1 
(0.5-1.4) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
26.8 
400.1 

1 
16 
0.4 

1 
5.6 
0.1 

1 
21.9 
0.5 

Total 
1 
3 
2.1 

1 
1.7 
1.2 

1 
5 
3.4 

1 
9.8 
15 

1 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Lao 
People's 
Democrati
c Republic 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.29 
4.1 
6.1 
(4.6-8.3) 
0.27 
5.9 
10.8 
(7.7-15.4) 
0.15 
1.2 
2.1 
(1.2-3.7) 
0.26 
7.8 
15.1 
(10.7-21.7) 

Intrapartum 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.23 
3.2 
4.9 
(3.7-6.4) 
0.38 
8.2 
15.2 
(11.3-20.5) 
0.16 
1.2 
2.2 
(1.3-3.2) 
0.32 
9.4 
18.3 
(13.3-25.0) 

Congenital 
1.1 
1.7 
(0.8-2.4) 
0.24 
3.5 
5.2 
(3.1-7.4) 
0.09 
2 
3.7 
(2.5-6.5) 
0.07 
0.5 
0.9 
(0.5-1.8) 
0.08 
2.4 
4.6 
(3.1-8.8) 

Sepsis 
1.1 
1.7 
(0.9-2.6) 
0.14 
1.9 
2.9 
(1.4-4.5) 
0.09 
1.9 
3.4 
(1.4-6.0) 
0.46 
3.5 
6.4 
(4.0-10.0) 
0.18 
5.2 
10.2 
(5.7-16.2) 

Pneumonia 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.03 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.3-1.5) 
0.06 
1.3 
2.4 
(1.2-4.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.4-1.3) 
0.06 
1.7 
3.3 
(1.7-6.6) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.02 
0.5 
1 
(0.3-2.4) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Latvia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Lebanon 
(low mort 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.13 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.15 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.46 
1.8 

Intrapartum 
0.65 
2.4 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.2 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.51 
2.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.17 
0.7 

Congenital 
0.13 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.4 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.21 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.18 
0.7 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.25 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0.2 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.0-2.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.1-2.8) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 

Other 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.07 
1 
1.4 
(0.8-2.1) 
0.09 
1.9 
3.5 
(1.9-5.2) 
0.07 
0.6 
1 
(0.6-2.1) 
0.08 
2.5 
4.8 
(2.6-7.7) 

Other 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.5 

Total 
3.5 
5.3 

1 
14.2 
21.4 

1 
21.5 
39.6 

1 
7.6 
13.9 

1 
29.8 
57.8 

Total 
1 
3.7 
0.8 

1 
1.5 
0.3 

1 
5.4 
1.2 

1 
3.8 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
model) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Lesotho 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
1.2 
(1.0-1.5) 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.41 
2.2 
1.3 
(1.2-1.7) 
0.34 
11.1 
6.4 
(4.3-7.5) 
0.19 
2.2 
1.3 
(0.6-2.1) 
0.3 
13.4 
7.7 
(4.9-9.7) 

Intrapartum 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.15 
0.8 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.37 
12.2 
7.1 
(4.7-7.8) 
0.15 
1.7 
1 
(0.5-1.2) 
0.32 
14 
8.1 
(5.2-9.1) 

Congenital 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.21 
1.1 
0.7 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.07 
2.3 
1.3 
(0.8-2.1) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.06 
2.8 
1.6 
(0.9-2.8) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.15 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.09 
3 
1.7 
(0.6-2.5) 
0.42 
4.8 
2.8 
(1.4-3.7) 
0.18 
7.8 
4.5 
(2.1-6.2) 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
2.2 
1.3 
(0.6-2.3) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.06 
2.9 
1.7 
(0.8-2.8) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.02 
1.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Liberia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.29 
5.5 
8.2 
(6.1-9.8) 
0.14 
0.9 
1.4 
(0.6-2.2) 
0.25 
6.6 
9.6 

Intrapartum 
0.39 
7.4 
10.9 
(8.2-11.9) 
0.16 
1 
1.6 
(0.9-2.0) 
0.33 
8.8 
12.9 

Congenital 
0.11 
2.1 
3.1 
(2.2-4.1) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.2-1.4) 
0.09 
2.4 
3.5 

Sepsis 
0.1 
1.9 
2.8 
(1.1-4.1) 
0.49 
3.3 
4.9 
(2.9-6.4) 
0.2 
5.3 
7.7 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.2 
1.8 
(0.8-3.2) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.06 
1.7 
2.4 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.5 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.6) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.7) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 

Injuries 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Other 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.04 
1.2 
0.7 
(0.3-2.1) 
0.09 
1 
0.6 
(0.1-1.3) 
0.05 
2.2 
1.3 
(0.5-3.4) 

Other 
0.04 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.5-2.6) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.3-1.5) 
0.05 
1.2 
1.8 

Total 
2.6 

1 
1.4 
0.9 

1 
5.4 
3.2 

1 
32.5 
18.9 

1 
11.4 
6.6 

1 
44.3 
25.6 

Total 
1 
18.9 
28.1 

1 
6.7 
9.9 

1 
26.3 
38.6 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Libya  
(low mort 
model) 

Lithuania 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
(6.6-12.6) 
0.42 
2.7 
3.4 
(2.8-3.8) 
0.28 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.7-1.0) 
0.38 
3.5 
4.5 
(3.7-5.1) 
0.28 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.17 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 

Intrapartum 
(9.4-14.5) 
0.17 
1.1 
1.4 
(0.9-1.7) 
0.11 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.15 
1.4 
1.8 
(1.1-2.2) 
0.21 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.16 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Congenital 
(2.3-5.4) 
0.27 
1.7 
2.2 
(1.6-2.8) 
0.28 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.7-0.9) 
0.27 
2.4 
3.2 
(2.4-4.0) 
0.3 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.45 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.35 
1 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 

Sepsis 
(4.1-10.7) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.18 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.08 
0.7 
0.9 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.19 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.21 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.2 
0.6 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Pneumonia 
(1.2-4.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
(0.1-1.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Luxembour
g (high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.5 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.13 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
1 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.13 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(0.8-4.3) 
0.09 
0.6 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.08 
0.8 
1 
(0.7-1.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.25 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 

1 
6.4 
8.1 

1 
2.3 
2.9 

1 
9.1 
11.7 

1 
1.7 
0.6 

1 
1 
0.3 

1 
2.9 
1 

Total 
1 
0.7 
0 

1 
0.2 
0 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Madagascar 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Malawi  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.4 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.31 
4.9 
38.5 
(31.3-46.0) 
0.17 
0.9 
7.3 
(4.3-12.0) 
0.28 
6.1 
46.8 
(36.9-58.0) 
0.37 
6.3 
38.1 
(31.0-47.3) 
0.14 
0.8 
4.9 
(2.7-7.8) 
0.3 
7.2 
44.1 
(33.9-58.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.37 
5.9 
46.7 
(36.6-52.3) 
0.15 
0.8 
6.7 
(4.4-8.9) 
0.32 
6.9 
53.4 
(41.8-61.2) 
0.33 
5.6 
34 
(28.1-40.3) 
0.16 
0.9 
5.7 
(3.7-7.7) 
0.28 
6.7 
41 
(32.9-50.1) 

Congenital 
0.2 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
2.1 
16.7 
(12.3-23.6) 
0.06 
0.4 
2.8 
(0.8-7.6) 
0.11 
2.4 
18.8 
(12.8-30.0) 
0.11 
1.9 
11.5 
(7.7-16.7) 
0.08 
0.5 
2.9 
(1.0-7.2) 
0.1 
2.4 
14.7 
(8.0-24.9) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
1.3 
10.5 
(4.4-16.6) 
0.46 
2.6 
20.3 
(12.6-26.9) 
0.18 
4 
31.1 
(17.3-44.3) 
0.09 
1.6 
9.5 
(3.6-15.0) 
0.48 
2.9 
17.3 
(10.9-24.1) 
0.19 
4.6 
28.1 
(15.1-41.4) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.9 
6.9 
(3.5-13.2) 
0.05 
0.3 
2.3 
(1.4-3.2) 
0.06 
1.2 
9.3 
(4.8-16.6) 
0.05 
0.9 
5.3 
(2.7-10.6) 
0.06 
0.3 
2.1 
(1.1-3.2) 
0.05 
1.2 
7.7 
(4.0-14.4) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.3-1.7) 
0.02 
0.1 
1 
(0.3-2.4) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.8 
(0.6-4.3) 
0 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.2-1.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.2-2.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.4-3.4) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.9) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.3-1.2) 
0 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.3-2.1) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.0-1.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-2.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.2 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.6 
4.3 
(2.2-11.8) 
0.06 
0.3 
2.7 
(1.1-7.0) 
0.04 
0.9 
7.1 
(3.3-18.9) 
0.05 
0.8 
4.8 
(3.0-8.9) 
0.07 
0.4 
2.5 
(1.3-5.4) 
0.05 
1.2 
7.5 
(4.4-14.9) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Malaysia 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.44 
1.4 
7.7 
(6.8-8.5) 
0.27 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
0.5 
2.7 
(2.3-3.0) 
0.08 

Congenital 
0.21 
0.7 
3.7 
(3.0-5.0) 
0.32 

Sepsis 
0.04 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.18 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.07 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 

Other 
0.12 
0.4 
2.2 
(1.5-2.6) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
1 
0.1 

1 
15.8 
124.6 

1 
5.6 
43.8 

1 
22 
169.2 

1 
17.2 
103.8 

1 
6 
36.5 

1 
23.5 
144.9 

Total 
1 
3.3 
17.5 

1 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Maldives 
(low mort 
model) 

Mali  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.3 
1.7 
(1.5-1.9) 
0.4 
1.8 
8.9 
(7.9-9.7) 
0.41 
1.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.29 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
2.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.4 
11.8 
81.4 
(59.7-102.2) 
0.15 
1.6 
10.8 
(5.8-16.0) 
0.33 
13.4 
89.7 
(62.6-115.6) 

Intrapartum 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.14 
0.6 
3 
(2.5-3.5) 
0.12 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.3 
9 
61.9 
(47.3-71.4) 
0.14 
1.5 
10.2 
(6.3-13.6) 
0.26 
10.8 
72.2 
(53.3-85.6) 

Congenital 
0.4 
1.9 
(1.8-2.2) 
0.23 
1 
5.2 
(4.4-6.4) 
0.29 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.33 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.3 
1.9 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.05 
1.5 
10.6 
(6.7-15.5) 
0.04 
0.4 
2.6 
(1.0-5.5) 
0.05 
1.9 
13 
(7.7-20.5) 

Sepsis 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.9-1.2) 
0.08 
0.4 
1.8 
(1.3-2.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
2.4 
16.7 
(6.3-26.9) 
0.47 
4.9 
33.8 
(20.9-45.9) 
0.18 
7.6 
50.8 
(26.6-73.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
2.1 
14.2 
(7.6-25.6) 
0.05 
0.5 
3.6 
(1.9-5.5) 
0.07 
2.7 
18.4 
(9.7-32.5) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.4 
2.8 
(1.0-6.3) 
0.05 
0.6 
3.8 
(1.0-9.7) 
0.02 
1 
6.5 
(1.8-16.5) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.3 
1.7 
(0.0-16.5) 
0.03 
0.3 
2 
(0.6-5.0) 
0.01 
0.6 
3.7 
(0.6-20.4) 

Injuries 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.11 
0.5 
2.4 
(1.6-3.1) 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
2.3 
15.8 
(6.8-29.1) 
0.07 
0.8 
5.3 
(1.9-15.8) 
0.08 
3.1 
21.1 
(8.8-45.2) 

Total 
1.1 
6.1 

1 
4.4 
22.1 

1 
4.4 
0.4 

1 
1.6 
0.1 

1 
6.5 
0.5 

1 
29.7 
205.2 

1 
10.5 
72.1 

1 
41.1 
275.4 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
Malta  
(high-

Period 
Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.32 
1 

Intrapartum 
0.11 
0.3 

Congenital 
0.47 
1.5 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.2 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 

Other 
0.05 
0.2 

Total 
1 
3.2 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
quality VR) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Marshall 
Islands 
(high mort 
model) 

Mauritania 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.8 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.42 
1.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.51 
5.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.17 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.39 
6.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.45 
11.7 
15.1 
(10.0-17.8) 
0.14 
1.3 
1.7 
(0.7-2.7) 
0.37 
13.2 
16.8 
(10.8-20.4) 

Intrapartum 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.2 
2.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
3.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.28 
7.2 
9.3 
(6.4-11.7) 
0.14 
1.3 
1.6 
(0.9-2.2) 
0.24 
8.6 
11 
(7.3-14.0) 

Congenital 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.2 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.42 
1.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.22 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.17 
2.8 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
1.8 
2.4 
(1.2-3.5) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.2-1.4) 
0.06 
2.3 
2.9 
(1.3-4.8) 

Sepsis 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.37 
1.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
2.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
2.6 
3.4 
(1.2-7.3) 
0.51 
4.6 
6 
(3.9-7.8) 
0.21 
7.4 
9.4 
(5.0-14.8) 

Pneumonia 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
1.5 
2 
(1.0-4.0) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.3-0.8) 
0.06 
2 
2.6 
(1.4-4.8) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.9) 
0.02 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.3-1.8) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.8) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.0-1.1) 

Injuries 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
1.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.4-2.5) 
0.06 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.3-1.7) 
0.03 
1.2 
1.5 
(0.6-4.3) 

Total 
0.1 

1 
0.8 
0 

1 
4.1 
0.2 

1 
11.8 
0.2 

1 
4.1 
0.1 

1 
16.2 
0.2 

1 
25.8 
33.3 

1 
9 
11.7 

1 
35.5 
45.2 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 

Period 

Mauritius 
(high-
quality VR) 

Mexico 
(high-
quality VR) 

Micronesia 
(Federated 
States of) 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.48 
2.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.32 
1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.42 
3.8 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.43 
2 
44.5 
(43.1-45.8) 
0.22 
0.4 
9.5 
(8.9-10.1) 
0.37 
2.6 
58.1 
(56.1-60.0) 
0.42 
5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.14 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.36 
5.9 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.12 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.15 
0.7 
15.4 
(14.7-16.2) 
0.09 
0.2 
3.6 
(3.2-4.0) 
0.13 
0.9 
20.5 
(19.3-21.7) 
0.26 
3.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.11 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.22 
3.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.29 
1.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.19 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.26 
2.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.23 
1.1 
24.2 
(23.2-25.2) 
0.26 
0.5 
11.2 
(10.5-11.8) 
0.24 
1.7 
38.1 
(36.4-39.7) 
0.15 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.17 
2.8 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.11 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.09 
0.4 
9.6 
(9.0-10.3) 
0.27 
0.5 
11.2 
(10.6-11.9) 
0.14 
1 
22.5 
(21.2-23.8) 
0.06 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
2.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
3.3 
(3.0-3.7) 
0.09 
0.2 
3.9 
(3.5-4.3) 
0.05 
0.3 
7.8 
(7.0-8.6) 
0.04 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0 
0 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.3 
6.1 
(5.6-6.6) 
0.06 
0.1 
2.6 
(2.3-2.9) 
0.06 
0.4 
9.4 
(8.6-10.2) 
0.07 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
5.7 
0.8 

1 
3.1 
0.4 

1 
9 
1.2 

1 
4.6 
103.6 

1 
1.9 
42.3 

1 
6.9 
157 

1 
11.8 
0.3 

1 
4.1 
0.1 

1 
16.3 
0.4 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Monaco  
(low mort 
model) 

Mongolia 
(high mort 
model) 

Montenegr
o (high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.42 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.3 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.39 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
3.7 
2.4 
(1.9-3.5) 
0.15 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.33 
4.4 
3 
(2.1-4.3) 
0.35 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.34 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
2.3 
1.5 
(1.1-2.2) 
0.12 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.21 
2.8 
1.9 
(1.4-2.7) 
0.46 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.5 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.47 
1.8 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.31 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.39 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.32 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
1.9 
1.2 
(0.8-1.8) 
0.27 
0.9 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.21 
2.8 
1.9 
(1.2-2.9) 
0.12 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.3 
1 
0.7 
(0.4-1.1) 
0.13 
1.7 
1.1 
(0.5-1.9) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.03 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.17 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.9 
0.6 
(0.2-0.9) 
0.1 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.1 
1.3 
0.9 
(0.4-1.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
1.5 
0 

1 
0.5 
0 

1 
2.1 
0 

1 
9.8 
6.4 

1 
3.4 
2.2 

1 
13.6 
9.1 

1 
2.8 
0.2 

1 
0.7 
0 

1 
3.8 
0.3 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Morocco 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Mozambiqu
e (high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Myanmar 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.39 
5.1 
41.3 
(32.4-50.7) 
0.21 
1 
7.9 
(5.1-11.4) 
0.34 
6.3 
47.2 
(35.9-59.9) 
0.37 
8.3 
79 
(66.0-91.0) 
0.15 
1.2 
11.5 
(6.8-17.3) 
0.31 
9.6 
90.3 
(73.0-107.7) 
0.42 
7.9 
72.9 
(55.1-93.0) 
0.27 
1.8 
16.2 
(10.4-22.7) 
0.36 
9.5 
88.6 

Intrapartum 
0.24 
3.2 
25.8 
(20.0-31.3) 
0.12 
0.5 
4.4 
(2.7-5.5) 
0.21 
3.9 
28.9 
(21.6-35.4) 
0.34 
7.7 
73.5 
(61.1-84.7) 
0.15 
1.2 
11.5 
(7.6-15.1) 
0.29 
9.1 
85.2 
(69.0-98.5) 
0.25 
4.7 
43.2 
(31.6-55.1) 
0.11 
0.8 
7 
(4.4-9.4) 
0.22 
5.8 
53.6 

Congenital 
0.18 
2.3 
18.9 
(10.9-24.4) 
0.13 
0.6 
4.9 
(2.1-7.4) 
0.16 
2.9 
22 
(12.0-29.5) 
0.08 
1.8 
17.2 
(11.4-24.8) 
0.05 
0.4 
3.8 
(1.3-9.7) 
0.07 
2.1 
20 
(12.5-33.3) 
0.09 
1.6 
14.9 
(9.8-23.7) 
0.09 
0.6 
5.4 
(2.9-8.7) 
0.09 
2.3 
21 

Sepsis 
0.07 
1 
7.7 
(2.8-12.1) 
0.38 
1.8 
14.2 
(8.2-20.2) 
0.15 
2.8 
21 
(10.6-31.0) 
0.1 
2.2 
20.7 
(8.4-31.9) 
0.48 
3.8 
36.2 
(23.3-48.1) 
0.19 
6 
56.3 
(31.3-79.9) 
0.06 
1.1 
10.1 
(3.9-15.4) 
0.32 
2.1 
19.3 
(10.7-28.4) 
0.13 
3.4 
31.7 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.4 
3.3 
(1.5-6.7) 
0.04 
0.2 
1.6 
(0.9-2.2) 
0.03 
0.6 
4.7 
(2.3-8.7) 
0.06 
1.4 
13.3 
(7.2-25.1) 
0.05 
0.4 
4 
(2.4-5.8) 
0.06 
1.9 
17.6 
(9.6-31.2) 
0.03 
0.6 
5.8 
(2.5-11.9) 
0.04 
0.3 
2.5 
(1.4-3.6) 
0.04 
1 
9.1 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.3-1.9) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.5 
(0.5-3.5) 
0.03 
0.3 
2.5 
(0.7-5.9) 
0.01 
0.4 
4.1 
(1.3-9.7) 
0 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.3-1.9) 
0.02 
0.1 
1 
(0.3-2.4) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.7 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.4) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 
0 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.9) 
0 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.0-6.6) 
0.02 
0.1 
1.3 
(0.6-2.5) 
0.01 
0.2 
2.1 
(0.6-9.7) 
0 
0 
0.3 
(0.0-2.6) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
0 
0.1 
0.5 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Other 
0.09 
1.2 
9.4 
(3.6-12.9) 
0.09 
0.4 
3.5 
(1.5-5.7) 
0.09 
1.7 
12.4 
(4.9-17.9) 
0.04 
1 
9.1 
(5.3-18.4) 
0.06 
0.5 
4.8 
(2.5-10.7) 
0.05 
1.5 
13.9 
(7.8-29.1) 
0.14 
2.7 
25.1 
(5.7-43.8) 
0.15 
1 
9.3 
(2.5-16.7) 
0.15 
3.9 
36.7 

Total 
1 
13.2 
106.8 

1 
4.7 
37.5 

1 
18.4 
137.5 

1 
22.5 
215 

1 
7.9 
75.5 

1 
30.9 
289.5 

1 
18.9 
173.1 

1 
6.6 
60.8 

1 
26.1 
243 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Preterm 
(65.3-116.7) 

Intrapartum 
(38.7-68.0) 

Congenital 
(13.1-34.0) 

Sepsis 
(15.8-48.1) 

Pneumonia 
(4.3-17.1) 

Tetanus 
(0.6-4.4) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.1-3.3) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(8.8-63.8) 

Total 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Namibia 
(high mort 
model) 

Nauru  
(high mort 
model) 

Nepal  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.43 
6.9 
4.1 
(3.5-4.6) 
0.23 
1.3 
0.8 
(0.4-1.3) 
0.38 
8.2 
4.9 
(3.9-5.9) 
0.42 
6.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.35 
7.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.34 
5.7 
32.2 
(26.5-40.3) 
0.24 
1.4 
8.1 
(5.6-11.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.29 
4.6 
2.7 
(2.2-3.1) 
0.12 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.25 
5.4 
3.2 
(2.5-3.7) 
0.25 
3.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.22 
4.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.27 
4.6 
26.2 
(21.4-32.5) 
0.12 
0.7 
4.1 
(2.6-5.3) 

Congenital 
0.13 
2.1 
1.2 
(0.8-1.6) 
0.1 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.12 
2.5 
1.5 
(0.9-2.3) 
0.15 
2.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.17 
3.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
2.4 
13.8 
(8.9-18.2) 
0.08 
0.5 
2.6 
(1.1-4.7) 

Sepsis 
0.08 
1.3 
0.8 
(0.3-1.2) 
0.39 
2.2 
1.3 
(0.8-1.9) 
0.16 
3.5 
2.1 
(1.0-3.1) 
0.07 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.34 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
2.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
1.8 
10.2 
(3.2-15.8) 
0.39 
2.3 
13.2 
(8.3-18.2) 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0.9 
0.5 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.03 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.6 
3.6 
(1.7-7.5) 
0.04 
0.3 
1.4 
(0.9-2.0) 

Tetanus 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.3-2.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.2-1.3) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.8) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.4) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.03 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-1.1) 
0.09 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.05 
1.1 
0.6 
(0.3-1.8) 
0.08 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
1.6 
9.3 
(3.9-12.9) 
0.09 
0.6 
3.2 
(1.4-5.2) 

Total 
1 
16.1 
9.6 

1 
5.7 
3.4 

1 
21.8 
12.9 

1 
14.9 
0 

1 
5.2 
0 

1 
20.4 
0 

1 
17 
96 

1 
6 
33.7 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.31 
7.4 
42.6 
(33.8-54.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.23 
5.6 
32 
(25.4-40.4) 

Congenital 
0.12 
2.9 
16.4 
(10.5-23.1) 

Sepsis 
0.18 
4.3 
24.6 
(12.0-35.8) 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.9 
5.3 
(2.7-9.9) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.2 
1.4 
(0.5-3.6) 

Diarrhoea 
0.01 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.2-2.4) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.1 
2.3 
13.2 
(5.6-19.1) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Netherland
s (high-
quality VR) 

New 
Zealand 
(high-quality 
VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Nicaragua 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.26 
0.5 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
0.23 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.25 
0.7 
1.2 
(0.9-1.5) 
0.4 
0.9 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.23 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.36 
1.1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.44 
3.7 
5.2 
(4.5-6.1) 
0.25 

Intrapartum 
0.19 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.16 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.18 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.12 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.17 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.19 
1.6 
2.3 
(1.4-3.1) 
0.11 

Congenital 
0.35 
0.7 
1.2 
(1.0-1.5) 
0.39 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.36 
1 
1.7 
(1.3-2.0) 
0.27 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.28 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.27 
0.8 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.19 
1.6 
2.2 
(1.6-3.3) 
0.23 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.19 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.07 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.2 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.12 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 

Other 
0.14 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.13 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.06 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
23.7 
136.2 

Total 
1 
2 
3.5 

1 
0.6 
1.1 

1 
2.7 
4.6 

1 
2.3 
1.4 

1 
0.7 
0.4 

1 
3.1 
2 

1 
8.5 
11.8 

1 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.8 
1 
(0.9-1.4) 
0.39 
4.6 
6.5 
(5.7-7.9) 

Intrapartum 
0.3 
0.5 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.17 
2 
2.9 
(1.5-4.0) 

Congenital 
0.7 
0.9 
(0.8-1.2) 
0.2 
2.3 
3.3 
(2.5-4.7) 

Sepsis 
0.6 
0.8 
(0.5-1.3) 
0.1 
1.2 
1.8 
(1.1-2.6) 

Pneumonia 
0.4 
0.5 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.06 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.7-1.8) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Niger  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Nigeria 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.37 
7.5 
64.8 
(43.5-109.7) 
0.15 
1.1 
9.3 
(4.5-16.4) 
0.34 
9.8 
80.6 
(54.8-128.0) 
0.38 
10.5 
731.1 

(601.4-854.5) 
0.19 
1.8 
126 

(80.0-173.9) 
0.34 
13.1 
893.8 
(644.4-
1199.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.32 
6.5 
55.8 
(41.0-82.3) 
0.14 
1 
8.3 
(5.4-13.0) 
0.23 
6.6 
54.3 
(41.2-80.8) 
0.34 
9.4 
660.5 
(544.9-
750.3) 
0.16 
1.5 
107.8 

(74.3-147.5) 
0.29 
11 
746.2 
(534.4-
904.7) 

Congenital 
0.06 
1.2 
10 
(6.3-17.9) 
0.04 
0.3 
2.2 
(0.9-5.7) 
0.06 
1.6 
13.1 
(6.3-23.8) 
0.05 
1.5 
102.1 

Sepsis 
0.05 
1.1 
9.4 
(3.4-18.9) 
0.48 
3.4 
29.4 
(19.2-45.4) 
0.19 
5.5 
45.6 
(26.0-80.1) 
0.08 
2.1 
147.7 

Pneumonia 
0.07 
1.4 
12.3 
(7.2-26.4) 
0.05 
0.3 
2.9 
(1.7-4.9) 
0.06 
1.6 
13.4 
(8.0-28.3) 
0.07 
2 
138.5 

(75.6-182.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
28 

(60.3-232.3) 
0.39 
3.8 
266.9 

(72.7-256.9) 
0.05 
0.5 
36.9 

(11.9-66.5) 
0.05 
1.8 
119.7 

(164.2-369.6) 
0.15 
5.8 
393.1 

(22.2-57.0) 
0.07 
2.6 
174.1 

(76.0-237.0) 

(210.7-569.8) 

(90.5-310.7) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.3 
2.4 
(0.8-7.5) 
0.03 
0.2 
2 
(0.5-5.5) 
0.02 
0.5 
4 
(1.2-12.1) 
0.02 
0.6 
44.1 

(19.6-90.2) 
0.09 
0.8 
58.8 
(18.9-
136.4) 
0.04 
1.5 
105.4 
(38.2-
232.1) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
(0.0-12.3) 
0.04 
0.3 
2.6 
(0.5-9.4) 
0.01 
0.3 
2.3 
(0.4-15.9) 
0.01 
0.2 
12.3 

(0.0-112.8) 
0.01 
0.1 
8 

(3.0-14.7) 
0.01 
0.4 
23.9 

Injuries 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

--- 
0 
0 
0 

(2.0-177.3) 

(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.06 
0.8 
1.1 
(0.8-1.5) 

Other 
0.11 
2.3 
19.4 
(6.3-48.2) 
0.08 
0.5 
4.7 
(1.5-19.9) 
0.09 
2.5 
20.7 
(6.8-60.8) 
0.05 
1.4 
99.2 
(61.9-
175.3) 
0.07 
0.7 
47.6 
(26.0-
104.8) 
0.06 
2.1 
143.1 
(83.5-
273.5) 

Total 
3 
4.2 

1 
11.8 
16.7 

Total 
1 
20.4 
174.9 

1 
7.1 
61.5 

1 
28.3 
233.9 

1 
27.7 
1935.5 

1 
9.7 
680 

1 
38.2 
2599.3 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Niue  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.45 
3.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.26 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.41 
4.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
1.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
0.21 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.21 
2.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.07 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Norway 
(high-
quality VR) 

Oman  
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Overall 

prop 

Preterm 
0.28 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.17 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.26 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.47 
2.3 
1.8 
(1.6-2.5) 
0.3 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.42 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.19 
1 
0.7 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.12 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.18 

Congenital 
0.3 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.52 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.35 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.25 
1.2 
1 
(0.7-1.5) 
0.32 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.27 

Sepsis 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.14 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.06 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 

Injuries 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 

Other 
0.05 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.27 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.17 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 

Total 
1 
8.6 
0 

1 
3 
0 

1 
11.9 
0 

Total 
1 
1.2 
0.8 

1 
0.4 
0.3 

1 
1.7 
1.1 

1 
4.9 
3.8 

1 
1.7 
1.3 

1 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Pakistan 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
2.8 
2.1 
(1.9-2.9) 
0.42 
13 
600.8 
(496.0-
677.6) 
0.18 
1.9 
89.8 
(60.3-114.1) 
0.36 
15.2 
730.6 
(590.8-
839.9) 

Intrapartum 
1.2 
0.9 
(0.6-1.3) 
0.27 
8.3 
383.2 

(320.0-468.0) 
0.13 
1.4 
66.4 
(39.9-91.2) 
0.23 
9.9 
475.7 

Congenital 
1.8 
1.3 
(1.1-2.0) 
0.06 
2 
90.8 

(61.5-136.2) 
0.05 
0.5 
24.6 
(14.2-45.4) 
0.06 
2.5 
120 

Sepsis 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.11 
3.3 
152.8 

(55.5-241.4) 
0.46 
5 
232.6 
(167.6-296.2) 
0.2 
8.5 
407.6 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
1.7 
78.4 

(45.2-160.3) 
0.04 
0.5 
22.4 
(13.8-32.3) 
0.05 
2.2 
107.8 

(380.3-588.8) 

(76.8-187.1) 

(237.6-571.9) 

(62.8-207.2) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.5 
25 

(9.7-61.6) 
0.05 
0.5 
23.8 
(9.3-48.6) 
0.03 
1.1 
53.3 
(20.7-
120.2) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Palau  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Panama 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.46 
3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.28 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.44 
3.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.4 
2.4 
1.8 
(1.6-2.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.16 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 

Congenital 
0.24 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.29 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
2.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
1.5 
1.1 
(0.9-1.4) 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.18 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.7 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
8.9 

(0.0-65.6) 
0.02 
0.2 
10.4 
(4.9-19.1) 
0.01 
0.4 
20.4 

Injuries 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 

--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

(5.2-90.3) 

(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.07 
2 
93.7 
(52.0-
125.4) 
0.07 
0.7 
33.7 
(19.9-53.8) 
0.07 
2.8 
134.8 
(75.0-
189.0) 

Other 
0.06 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 

Total 
6.6 
5 

1 
31.1 
1433.5 

1 
10.9 
503.7 

1 
42.7 
2050.3 

Total 
1 
6.4 
0 

1 
2.3 
0 

1 
9 
0 

1 
6 
4.5 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Papua New 
Guinea 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.16 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.33 
2.9 
2.2 
(1.8-2.6) 
0.34 
6 
12.5 
(9.3-14.2) 
0.17 
1 
2.2 
(1.4-2.9) 
0.29 
7 
14.6 
(10.7-17.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.34 
6.1 
12.7 
(9.8-14.1) 
0.17 
1 
2.2 
(1.4-2.8) 
0.3 
7.4 
15.4 
(11.5-17.3) 

Congenital 
0.32 
0.8 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.27 
2.4 
1.8 
(1.4-2.1) 
0.11 
2 
4.1 
(2.9-5.7) 
0.09 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.6-1.9) 
0.1 
2.4 
5.1 
(3.5-7.7) 

Sepsis 
0.27 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.16 
1.4 
1.1 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.08 
1.5 
3.1 
(1.2-4.5) 
0.42 
2.6 
5.4 
(3.2-7.0) 
0.17 
4.2 
8.8 
(4.5-11.8) 

Pneumonia 
0.09 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.05 
0.9 
1.9 
(0.9-3.6) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.4-1.1) 
0.05 
1.3 
2.7 
(1.3-4.8) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.5 
(0.1-1.1) 
0.01 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.2-1.7) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Paraguay 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Peru  

Early 

prop 

Preterm 
0.45 
4.1 
6.6 
(5.8-7.0) 
0.28 
0.9 
1.5 
(1.3-1.6) 
0.41 
5.2 
8.1 
(7.2-8.8) 
0.43 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
1.4 
2.2 
(1.8-2.5) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.13 
1.7 
2.6 
(2.1-3.0) 
0.17 

Congenital 
0.21 
1.9 
3.1 
(2.6-3.8) 
0.23 
0.7 
1.2 
(1.0-1.4) 
0.22 
2.8 
4.3 
(3.6-5.2) 
0.2 

Sepsis 
0.1 
0.9 
1.4 
(1.1-1.8) 
0.23 
0.7 
1.2 
(1.0-1.4) 
0.13 
1.7 
2.6 
(2.1-3.3) 
0.07 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.11 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.06 
0.7 
1.1 
(0.7-1.7) 
0.03 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-1.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-1.5) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 

Injuries 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 

Other 
0.08 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
0.6 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.07 
1.2 
2.4 
(1.2-3.3) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.4-1.6) 
0.07 
1.6 
3.4 
(1.6-5.1) 

Other 
0.04 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.05 
0.6 
0.9 
(0.6-1.5) 
0.09 

Total 
1 
2.4 
1.8 

1 
8.7 
6.5 

1 
17.8 
37 

1 
6.2 
13 

1 
24.4 
50.9 

Total 
1 
9.1 
14.6 

1 
3.2 
5.1 

1 
12.7 
19.9 

1 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Period 

Country 
(low mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Philippine
s (high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
2.6 
15.3 
(11.7-17.4) 
0.28 
0.6 
3.5 
(3.0-4.1) 
0.38 
3.2 
18.8 
(15.1-21.4) 
0.36 
3.6 
86 
(71.9-105.9) 
0.19 
0.7 
16 
(11.3-22.4) 
0.32 
4.5 
104 
(86.3-127.3) 

Intrapartum 
1 
6 
(4.0-7.3) 
0.09 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.6-1.4) 
0.15 
1.2 
7.2 
(4.7-8.7) 
0.26 
2.6 
62.4 
(51.0-73.7) 
0.13 
0.5 
11.1 
(7.3-14.5) 
0.22 
3.1 
72 
(57.2-85.8) 

Congenital 
1.2 
7.1 
(4.7-13.7) 
0.27 
0.6 
3.3 
(3.0-3.9) 
0.23 
1.9 
11.2 
(8.5-17.9) 
0.21 
2.1 
51.1 
(30.0-68.5) 
0.14 
0.5 
12 
(5.6-19.4) 
0.18 
2.6 
59.2 
(34.1-84.9) 

Sepsis 
0.4 
2.4 
(1.7-3.1) 
0.19 
0.4 
2.3 
(1.7-3.1) 
0.11 
0.9 
5.6 
(4.2-6.7) 
0.07 
0.7 
17.1 
(7.5-26.8) 
0.41 
1.4 
34.4 
(21.3-47.7) 
0.15 
2.1 
49.1 
(27.7-70.3) 

Pneumonia 
0.2 
1 
(0.6-1.4) 
0.1 
0.2 
1.2 
(0.9-1.7) 
0.04 
0.4 
2.2 
(1.5-3.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
7.9 
(3.8-16.4) 
0.04 
0.2 
3.8 
(2.4-5.4) 
0.04 
0.5 
11.5 
(6.0-21.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.8 
(0.3-2.1) 
0.01 
0 
1 
(0.3-2.7) 
0.01 
0.1 
2 
(0.6-5.2) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Poland 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.51 
1.2 
4.9 
(4.5-5.3) 
0.44 
0.3 
1.4 
(1.2-1.6) 
0.49 
1.6 

Intrapartum 
0.09 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.7-1.0) 
0.04 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.2 

Congenital 
0.3 
0.7 
2.9 
(2.5-3.2) 
0.38 
0.3 
1.2 
(1.0-1.4) 
0.32 
1 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.06 
0.2 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.6) 
0.01 
0 
0.5 
(0.1-1.3) 
0 
0 
0.7 
(0.2-1.8) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 

Other 
0.5 
3.2 
(2.4-4.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.08 
0.7 
4 
(3.0-4.9) 
0.07 
0.7 
16.3 
(8.8-21.7) 
0.07 
0.3 
6.1 
(3.6-10.2) 
0.07 
1 
21.9 
(12.0-30.8) 

Other 
0.05 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.04 
0.1 

Total 
5.9 
35.2 

1 
2.1 
12.4 

1 
8.3 
49.3 

1 
10.1 
241.7 

1 
3.6 
84.9 

1 
13.9 
320.4 

Total 
1 
2.3 
9.6 

1 
0.8 
3.2 

1 
3.2 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Portugal 
(low mort 
model) 

Qatar  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
6.7 
(6.0-7.4) 
0.42 
0.6 
0.6 
(0.5-0.7) 
0.29 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.39 
0.8 
0.7 
(0.6-0.8) 
0.47 
1.5 
0.4 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.31 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.45 
2 
0.4 
(0.4-0.5) 

Intrapartum 
1.1 
(0.8-1.3) 
0.14 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.2) 
0.08 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.15 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.08 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Congenital 
4.3 
(3.8-4.9) 
0.26 
0.4 
0.4 
(0.3-0.4) 
0.38 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.29 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.24 
0.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.36 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.26 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 

Sepsis 
0.8 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Republic 
of Korea  
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.57 
0.6 
3 
(2.7-3.4) 
0.46 
0.3 
1.3 

Intrapartum 
0.1 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.04 
0 
0.1 

Congenital 
0.15 
0.2 
0.8 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.3 
0.2 
0.9 

Sepsis 
0.04 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.3 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0 

Other 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.11 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.08 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Other 
0.11 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.08 
0 
0.2 

Total 
13.7 

1 
1.5 
1.3 

1 
0.5 
0.5 

1 
2 
1.8 

1 
3.2 
0.8 

1 
1.1 
0.3 

1 
4.4 
0.9 

Total 
1 
1 
5.3 

1 
0.6 
2.8 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Republic 
of Moldova 
(high-
quality VR) 

Romania 
(high-
quality VR) 

Preterm 
(1.1-1.5) 
0.53 
0.9 
4.6 
(4.0-5.2) 
0.3 
1.7 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
1.9 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.48 
2.3 
5.2 
(4.7-5.6) 
0.3 
0.7 
1.6 
(1.3-1.8) 
0.42 
3.1 
7 
(6.3-7.7) 

Intrapartum 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.08 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.1 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.9-1.3) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.08 
0.6 
1.3 
(1.0-1.6) 

Congenital 
(0.7-1.0) 
0.2 
0.3 
1.7 
(1.4-2.1) 
0.35 
2 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.57 
1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.4 
3.1 
1.4 
(1.1-1.7) 
0.27 
1.3 
2.9 
(2.5-3.2) 
0.33 
0.8 
1.7 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.29 
2.1 
4.8 
(4.2-5.4) 

Sepsis 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.07 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 

Pneumonia 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.16 
0.9 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
1.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.07 
0.3 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.25 
0.6 
1.3 
(1.1-1.5) 
0.13 
0.9 
2.1 
(1.7-2.5) 

Tetanus 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Russian 
Federation 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.42 
1.6 
27.2 
(25.4-32.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.12 
0.5 
8.1 
(6.8-10.8) 

Congenital 
0.3 
1.2 
19.4 
(16.4-24.1) 

Sepsis 
0.04 
0.1 
2.4 
(1.7-3.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 

Other 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.06 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.6-1.1) 

Other 
0.11 
0.4 
6.9 
(5.5-8.7) 

Total 

1 
1.7 
8.7 

1 
5.8 
2.3 

1 
1.8 
0.7 

1 
7.8 
3.5 

1 
4.8 
10.7 

1 
2.3 
5.3 

1 
7.3 
16.6 

Total 
1 
3.9 
65.2 

79 

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Rwanda 
(high mort 
model) 

Saint Kitts 
and Nevis 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.3 
0.4 
6.8 
(6.3-8.1) 
0.39 
2.2 
35.9 
(33.3-42.5) 
0.3 
4.5 
19 
(14.3-24.6) 
0.13 
0.7 
2.9 
(1.4-5.0) 
0.26 
5.4 
23.7 
(17.1-32.0) 
0.4 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
1.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.07 
0.1 
1.6 
(1.2-2.2) 
0.11 
0.6 
10.3 
(8.5-13.7) 
0.36 
5.3 
22.5 
(18.2-25.7) 
0.17 
0.9 
3.7 
(2.5-4.9) 
0.31 
6.4 
28.5 
(22.6-33.1) 
0.6 
2.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.38 
2.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.34 
0.5 
7.7 
(7.2-9.0) 
0.31 
1.7 
28.5 
(24.8-34.5) 
0.16 
2.4 
10.1 
(6.7-14.5) 
0.1 
0.5 
2.2 
(0.8-5.5) 
0.14 
2.9 
12.7 
(7.6-20.6) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.16 
0.2 
3.6 
(2.9-4.6) 
0.07 
0.4 
6.4 
(4.9-8.3) 
0.1 
1.4 
6.1 
(2.1-9.6) 
0.45 
2.3 
9.9 
(5.6-13.5) 
0.19 
3.9 
17.3 
(8.3-24.9) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
0.1 
1.4 
(0.8-2.3) 
0.02 
0.1 
2.3 
(1.4-3.6) 
0.05 
0.7 
3 
(1.4-6.5) 
0.06 
0.3 
1.3 
(0.8-1.9) 
0.05 
1.1 
4.8 
(2.4-9.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-1.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.8 
(0.3-2.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.3) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.06 
0.1 
1.5 
(1.1-2.0) 
0.09 
0.5 
8.8 
(7.0-11.3) 
0.03 
0.5 
2.1 
(1.0-6.1) 
0.07 
0.4 
1.5 
(0.6-3.9) 
0.04 
0.9 
3.9 
(1.7-10.7) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
1.4 
22.9 

1 
5.6 
93.1 

1 
14.9 
63.2 

1 
5.2 
22.2 

1 
20.7 
91.7 

1 
4.4 
0 

1 
2.6 
0 

1 
7.3 
0.1 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
Saint Lucia 

Period 
Early 

Stat* 
prop 

Preterm 
0 

Intrapartum 
0 

Congenital 
0.45 

Sepsis 
0 

Pneumonia 
0.14 

Tetanus 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 

Injuries 
0.09 

Other 
0.32 

Total 
1 

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Period 

Country 
(high-
quality VR) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Saint 
Vincent 
and the 
Grenadine
s (high-
quality VR) 

Samoa  
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.58 
5.6 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.67 
1.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.6 
7.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.46 
2.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.27 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.42 
3.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.21 
2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.17 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.2 
2.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.9 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
3.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.8 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.52 
4.7 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.13 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.17 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.28 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
1.8 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Sepsis 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.16 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.2 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
1.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
2.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.26 
2.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
7.2 
0.2 

1 
1.6 
0 

1 
9 
0.3 

1 
9.7 
0.2 

1 
2.4 
0 

1 
12.4 
0.2 

1 
5.5 
0.3 

1 
2 
0.1 

1 
7.6 
0.4 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

San 
Marino 
(low mort 
model) 

Sao Tome 
and 
Principe 
(high mort 
model) 

Saudi 
Arabia  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.52 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.32 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.44 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.32 
4.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.12 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.28 
5.5 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.45 
2.9 
16 
(12.8-20.4) 
0.3 
0.7 
3.7 
(3.1-5.0) 
0.41 
3.8 
21.4 
(17.1-27.3) 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.35 
5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.16 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.3 
5.9 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.19 
1.2 
6.6 
(4.3-9.3) 
0.12 
0.3 
1.5 
(0.5-2.0) 
0.17 
1.6 
8.8 
(5.3-12.1) 

Congenital 
0.14 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.35 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.16 
2.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.13 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.15 
2.9 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.24 
1.6 
8.6 
(5.9-12.4) 
0.3 
0.7 
3.7 
(3.1-4.8) 
0.26 
2.4 
13.2 
(9.4-18.5) 

Sepsis 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.13 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.44 
2.2 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.18 
3.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.04 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.8-2.0) 
0.16 
0.4 
2 
(1.2-3.0) 
0.07 
0.6 
3.6 
(2.1-5.5) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.4-1.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.02 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 

Other 
0.13 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.06 
0.4 
2.3 
(1.7-3.4) 
0.08 
0.2 
1 
(0.7-1.5) 
0.07 
0.6 
3.6 
(2.6-5.1) 

Total 
1 
0.8 
0 

1 
0.3 
0 

1 
1.1 
0 

1 
14.4 
0.9 

1 
5 
0.3 

1 
19.9 
1.3 

1 
6.5 
35.3 

1 
2.3 
12.4 

1 
9.2 
51.7 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Senegal 
(high mort 
model) 

Serbia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Seychelles 
(low mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.35 
6 
31.8 
(25.8-39.2) 
0.14 
0.8 
4.4 
(2.2-7.5) 
0.3 
7.2 
36.8 
(28.1-47.7) 
0.62 
2.1 
1.9 
(1.6-2.2) 
0.42 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.58 
2.6 
2.4 
(2.0-2.8) 
0.48 
3.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.24 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.42 
3.7 
0.1 

Intrapartum 
0.32 
5.5 
28.9 
(23.8-34.5) 
0.14 
0.9 
4.5 
(2.8-6.2) 
0.28 
6.6 
34 
(27.4-41.1) 
0.13 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.16 
1.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
1.2 
0 

Congenital 
0.14 
2.3 
12.2 
(7.6-17.0) 
0.08 
0.5 
2.4 
(0.8-6.0) 
0.11 
2.7 
14 
(7.9-22.4) 
0.14 
0.5 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.32 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.18 
0.8 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.22 
1.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.23 
2 
0 

Sepsis 
0.1 
1.7 
8.8 
(3.5-14.8) 
0.49 
2.9 
15.4 
(9.9-21.5) 
0.2 
4.8 
24.6 
(13.5-36.7) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.08 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.33 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.14 
1.3 
0 

Pneumonia 
0.05 
0.8 
4.4 
(2.3-8.8) 
0.05 
0.3 
1.7 
(0.9-2.7) 
0.05 
1.2 
6.2 
(3.4-11.8) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.2 
0 

Tetanus 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.1-1.3) 
0.01 
0.2 
1 
(0.3-2.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.8) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.2-1.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.2-2.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0 

Other 
0.03 
0.6 
2.9 
(1.6-7.6) 
0.06 
0.4 
1.8 
(0.8-4.6) 
0.04 
1 
4.9 
(2.4-12.2) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.04 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.2 
0 

Total 
1 
17 
89.5 

1 
6 
31.5 

1 
23.9 
122.2 

1 
3.4 
3.1 

1 
0.8 
0.7 

1 
4.4 
4.1 

1 
6.6 
0.1 

1 
2.3 
0 

1 
8.9 
0.1 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Preterm 
(0.0-0.1) 

Intrapartum 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Sierra 
Leone  
(high mort 
model) 

Singapore 
(high-
quality VR) 

Slovakia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.32 
10.5 
22.4 
(15.8-26.4) 
0.13 
1.5 
3.3 
(1.5-5.3) 
0.27 
12.2 
25.7 
(17.6-31.9) 
0.39 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.4 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.4 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.51 
1.4 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.5 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.36 
11.9 
25.2 
(18.2-28.6) 
0.16 
1.8 
3.9 
(2.3-5.1) 
0.31 
13.9 
29.2 
(20.6-33.9) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.11 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.07 
2.1 
4.6 
(2.0-7.4) 
0.05 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.4-2.4) 
0.06 
2.7 
5.8 
(2.3-9.9) 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.28 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.3 
0.8 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.38 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
3.3 
7.1 
(2.3-11.0) 
0.46 
5.2 
11.2 
(6.3-15.0) 
0.19 
8.7 
18.2 
(8.4-26.3) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.1 
3.2 
6.8 
(3.3-12.7) 
0.06 
0.6 
1.4 
(0.7-2.0) 
0.09 
4 
8.5 
(4.2-15.2) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.4 
0.9 
(0.3-2.4) 
0.07 
0.9 
1.8 
(0.3-5.6) 
0.03 
1.4 
2.9 
(0.6-8.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.0-2.6) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.1-3.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.04 
1.1 
2.4 
(1.1-6.2) 
0.06 
0.7 
1.6 
(0.6-4.0) 
0.04 
1.9 
4 
(1.8-10.0) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
32.8 
69.8 

1 
11.5 
24.5 

1 
45.1 
94.9 

1 
0.8 
0.5 

1 
0.3 
0.1 

1 
1.1 
0.6 

1 
2.8 
1.6 

1 
1.4 
0.8 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.51 
2.2 
1.3 
(1.0-1.6) 

Intrapartum 
0.08 
0.3 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Congenital 
0.33 
1.4 
0.8 
(0.6-1.1) 

Sepsis 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Other 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Slovenia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Solomon 
Islands 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Somalia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.67 
0.8 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.8 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.7 
1.2 
0.3 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.32 
3.2 
0.5 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.11 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.27 
3.6 
0.6 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.3 
10.3 
46.1 
(30.3-66.2) 
0.17 

Intrapartum 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.29 
2.9 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.14 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.26 
3.5 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.37 
12.8 
57.3 
(38.5-68.3) 
0.15 

Congenital 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.22 
2.1 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.21 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.21 
2.9 
0.5 
(0.3-0.8) 
0.05 
1.5 
6.9 
(3.6-11.7) 
0.04 

Sepsis 
0.13 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.07 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.42 
1.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.16 
2.2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.04 
1.3 
6.1 
(1.2-10.8) 
0.39 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.04 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.09 
3.2 
14.4 
(7.2-24.8) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
2.1 
9.4 
(3.1-24.0) 
0.12 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.4 
1.6 
(0.0-11.4) 
0.02 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.05 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
2.6 
11.7 
(5.9-19.8) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
4.3 
2.6 

Total 
1 
1.2 
0.3 

1 
0.4 
0.1 

1 
1.7 
0.4 

1 
9.8 
1.7 

1 
3.4 
0.6 

1 
13.5 
2.3 

1 
34.2 
153.6 

1 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
2.1 
9.4 
(5.2-13.1) 
0.27 
12.7 
56.6 
(38.1-78.1) 

Intrapartum 
1.8 
8 
(4.8-10.9) 
0.31 
14.5 
64.7 
(42.9-79.9) 

Congenital 
0.4 
1.9 
(0.8-3.7) 
0.04 
2 
9 
(4.7-15.6) 

Sepsis 
4.6 
20.8 
(11.8-29.1) 
0.13 
6.1 
27.3 
(13.2-40.5) 

Pneumonia 
0.6 
2.7 
(1.5-4.1) 
0.08 
3.9 
17.4 
(8.7-29.2) 

Tetanus 
1.5 
6.5 
(1.7-14.4) 
0.08 
3.7 
16.5 
(5.0-39.7) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

South 
Africa 
(high-
quality VR) 

South 
Sudan  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Spain  
(high-

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.37 
4.2 
44.9 
(43.6-46.2) 
0.22 
0.8 
8.1 
(7.5-8.6) 
0.34 
5 
55.5 
(53.6-57.5) 
0.38 
11.1 
44.1 
(33.6-53.9) 
0.21 
2.2 
8.6 
(4.5-13.5) 
0.34 
13.4 
51.9 
(36.3-65.9) 
0.31 
0.5 

Intrapartum 
0.29 
3.3 
35.2 
(34.1-36.4) 
0.06 
0.2 
2.3 
(2.0-2.6) 
0.24 
3.6 
39.3 
(37.8-40.8) 
0.34 
9.8 
39.3 
(31.5-48.3) 
0.14 
1.4 
5.7 
(3.7-8.1) 
0.28 
11.3 
43.7 
(34.4-55.1) 
0.2 
0.3 

Congenital 
0.07 
0.7 
7.8 
(7.3-8.4) 
0.06 
0.2 
2.3 
(2.0-2.6) 
0.06 
1 
10.7 
(9.8-11.5) 
0.06 
1.7 
6.7 
(4.4-9.9) 
0.04 
0.4 
1.7 
(0.6-4.0) 
0.05 
2.2 
8.3 
(5.3-13.9) 
0.24 
0.4 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.9 
10 
(9.4-10.6) 
0.27 
0.9 
9.9 
(9.3-10.5) 
0.13 
1.9 
20.8 
(19.5-22.1) 
0.06 
1.8 
7.3 
(2.6-14.4) 
0.37 
3.8 
15 
(9.8-22.2) 
0.15 
6 
23.2 
(12.9-38.8) 
0.08 
0.1 

Pneumonia 
0.05 
0.5 
5.5 
(5.0-5.9) 
0.17 
0.6 
6.2 
(5.7-6.7) 
0.07 
1.1 
12.2 
(11.2-13.2) 
0.08 
2.2 
8.7 
(5.1-16.3) 
0.05 
0.6 
2.2 
(1.3-3.7) 
0.07 
2.8 
10.8 
(6.6-20.1) 
0 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
1.1 
4.6 
(2.3-10.8) 
0.1 
1 
4.2 
(1.7-8.6) 
0.06 
2.3 
8.9 
(4.1-19.8) 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.2-2.2) 
0.01 
0.5 
2.4 
(0.2-13.4) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.0-5.3) 
0.02 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.2-1.6) 
0.01 
0.3 
1.1 
(0.2-6.2) 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.7-1.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.9 
(1.5-2.3) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 

Other 
0.9 
3.9 
(1.7-9.6) 
0.07 
3.5 
15.5 
(7.5-29.4) 

Other 
0.13 
1.5 
16 
(15.2-16.8) 
0.19 
0.7 
6.9 
(6.4-7.4) 
0.15 
2.2 
24 
(22.7-25.3) 
0.03 
1 
3.9 
(2.0-10.3) 
0.06 
0.6 
2.3 
(1.1-5.9) 
0.04 
1.6 
6.1 
(3.0-15.6) 
0.17 
0.3 

Total 
12 
54 

1 
47 
209.3 

Total 
1 
11.3 
120.3 

1 
3.5 
36.6 

1 
14.9 
164.4 

1 
28.9 
115.1 

1 
10.1 
40.4 

1 
39.9 
154 

1 
1.6 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
quality VR) 

Period 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
2.4 
(2.1-2.7) 
0.28 
0.3 
1.3 
(1.1-1.5) 
0.3 
0.8 
4 
(3.4-4.5) 

Intrapartum 
1.6 
(1.3-1.8) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.15 
0.4 
2.1 
(1.7-2.4) 

Congenital 
1.9 
(1.7-2.2) 
0.36 
0.3 
1.7 
(1.4-2.0) 
0.29 
0.8 
3.9 
(3.3-4.4) 

Sepsis 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 
0.17 
0.2 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.11 
0.3 
1.5 
(1.2-1.8) 

Pneumonia 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Sri Lanka 
(low mort 
model) 

Sudan  
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.41 
1.8 
6.9 
(5.8-8.1) 
0.29 
0.4 
1.7 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.38 
2.3 
8.8 
(7.5-10.4) 
0.34 
7.5 
93.3 
(65.8-115.5) 
0.16 
1.3 
15.7 
(8.2-25.7) 
0.29 
9 
110.1 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
0.6 
2.4 
(2.0-2.9) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.13 
0.8 
3.1 
(2.4-3.7) 
0.34 
7.4 
91.9 
(73.3-117.7) 
0.14 
1.1 
13.7 
(8.6-19.1) 
0.29 
8.7 
107 

Congenital 
0.25 
1.1 
4.1 
(2.3-5.6) 
0.33 
0.5 
1.9 
(1.7-2.2) 
0.27 
1.6 
6.3 
(4.1-8.0) 
0.1 
2.2 
27.2 
(16.1-39.3) 
0.05 
0.4 
4.8 
(1.5-13.0) 
0.08 
2.5 
31.2 

Sepsis 
0.05 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.5-1.3) 
0.14 
0.2 
0.8 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.08 
0.5 
1.8 
(1.2-2.3) 
0.11 
2.5 
31.2 
(12.9-61.8) 
0.49 
3.8 
47.4 
(33.5-63.5) 
0.21 
6.5 
79.1 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.5) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.9 
(0.5-1.5) 
0.06 
1.4 
17.7 
(10.1-37.3) 
0.05 
0.4 
4.6 
(2.9-6.8) 
0.06 
1.9 
22.8 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.3 
3.9 
(1.6-10.6) 
0.04 
0.3 
3.4 
(1.3-7.4) 
0.02 
0.6 
7.6 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.5 
(0.0-6.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
(0.3-2.3) 
0 
0.1 
1.6 

Injuries 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Other 
1.4 
(1.1-1.6) 
0.1 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.14 
0.4 
2 
(1.6-2.3) 

Other 
0.1 
0.4 
1.7 
(1.2-2.2) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.9) 
0.1 
0.6 
2.3 
(1.5-3.2) 
0.03 
0.7 
8.2 
(4.0-25.5) 
0.06 
0.5 
5.7 
(2.3-15.0) 
0.04 
1.1 
14.1 

Total 
8 

1 
1 
4.7 

1 
2.7 
13.5 

Total 
1 
4.4 
16.7 

1 
1.5 
5.9 

1 
6.1 
23.3 

1 
22.1 
274 

1 
7.8 
96.3 

1 
30.5 
373.5 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Suriname 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
(74.4-142.3) 
0.48 
4.3 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.26 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.42 
5.3 
0.5 
(0.3-0.7) 

Intrapartum 
(83.0-138.3) 
0.2 
1.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.08 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.16 
2.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Congenital 
(17.4-51.2) 
0.12 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.28 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.16 
2.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Sepsis 
(47.3-128.1) 
0.12 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.33 
1.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.18 
2.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 

Pneumonia 
(13.2-44.9) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
(3.0-18.6) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Swaziland 
(high mort 
model) 

Sweden 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.37 
8.1 
3 
(2.4-4.7) 
0.16 
1.3 
0.5 
(0.2-1.0) 
0.32 
9.4 
3.5 
(2.7-5.6) 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.26 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Intrapartum 
0.35 
7.7 
2.8 
(2.3-4.4) 
0.15 
1.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.7) 
0.3 
8.9 
3.3 
(2.6-5.2) 
0.19 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.1 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Congenital 
0.09 
1.9 
0.7 
(0.5-1.5) 
0.09 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.09 
2.6 
1 
(0.5-2.2) 
0.31 
0.4 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.36 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
2.1 
0.8 
(0.3-1.4) 
0.43 
3.3 
1.2 
(0.7-2.2) 
0.18 
5.4 
2 
(1.0-3.7) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.3 
0.5 
(0.3-1.1) 
0.05 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.06 
1.7 
0.6 
(0.3-1.3) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
(0.3-8.8) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
(6.4-41.1) 
0.09 
0.8 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.9 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 

Other 
0.03 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.1-1.0) 
0.08 
0.6 
0.2 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.04 
1.3 
0.5 
(0.2-1.7) 
0.23 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.14 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Total 

1 
8.9 
0.9 

1 
3.4 
0.3 

1 
12.6 
1.2 

Total 
1 
22.1 
8.1 

1 
7.7 
2.8 

1 
29.8 
11 

1 
1.2 
1.3 

1 
0.4 
0.5 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Switzerlan
d (low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.22 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.45 
1 
0.8 
(0.8-0.9) 
0.31 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.2-0.2) 
0.42 
1.2 
1 
(0.9-1.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.15 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
0.4 
0.3 
(0.3-0.4) 

Congenital 
0.32 
0.5 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.26 
0.6 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.39 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.29 
0.9 
0.7 
(0.6-0.9) 

Sepsis 
0.09 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Pneumonia 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Syrian 
Arab 
Republic 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Tajikistan 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.48 
2.8 
14.8 
(12.5-20.2) 
0.27 
0.5 
2.9 
(2.4-4.6) 
0.42 
3.4 
18.4 
(15.6-25.6) 
0.34 
5.5 
15.3 
(11.2-21.0) 
0.11 

Intrapartum 
0.22 
1.3 
6.6 
(4.1-10.1) 
0.1 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.2-2.0) 
0.19 
1.5 
8 
(4.6-13.0) 
0.32 
5.1 
14.1 
(10.8-18.8) 
0.15 

Congenital 
0.15 
0.9 
4.5 
(3.1-10.6) 
0.22 
0.4 
2.3 
(1.6-4.8) 
0.16 
1.3 
7.1 
(4.9-15.5) 
0.14 
2.3 
6.4 
(4.0-10.1) 
0.18 

Sepsis 
0.07 
0.4 
2.1 
(0.7-3.1) 
0.24 
0.5 
2.6 
(0.9-4.3) 
0.11 
0.9 
4.9 
(1.7-7.9) 
0.09 
1.4 
3.9 
(1.4-6.7) 
0.43 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.8-2.6) 
0.1 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.8-1.8) 
0.06 
0.5 
2.5 
(1.6-4.5) 
0.04 
0.7 
1.9 
(0.9-4.2) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0.02 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.9) 
0 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.7) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.3-0.9) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.21 
0.3 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.11 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.08 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.1 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.3) 

Other 
0.04 
0.2 
1.2 
(0.7-2.4) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.1-3.1) 
0.04 
0.4 
1.9 
(0.8-6.0) 
0.06 
1 
2.6 
(1.3-4.3) 
0.05 

Total 
1 
1.6 
1.8 

1 
2.2 
1.9 

1 
0.8 
0.7 

1 
3 
2.5 

Total 
1 
5.8 
30.8 

1 
2.1 
10.8 

1 
8.1 
43.4 

1 
16.2 
44.6 

1 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Thailand 
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.6 
1.7 
(0.9-2.9) 
0.28 
6.4 
17.2 
(12.6-24.5) 
0.4 
2.3 
16 
(13.8-19.4) 
0.3 
0.6 
4.3 
(3.6-5.2) 
0.37 
3 
21.1 
(18.0-25.7) 

Intrapartum 
0.9 
2.4 
(1.5-3.5) 
0.28 
6.2 
16.6 
(12.3-22.0) 
0.14 
0.8 
5.5 
(4.5-6.8) 
0.09 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.9-1.8) 
0.12 
1 
7.1 
(5.6-9.0) 

Congenital 
1 
2.9 
(1.6-4.7) 
0.15 
3.3 
8.9 
(5.5-14.2) 
0.28 
1.7 
11.4 
(9.1-14.0) 
0.31 
0.6 
4.4 
(3.8-5.3) 
0.29 
2.4 
16.5 
(13.4-20.1) 

Sepsis 
2.5 
6.8 
(4.1-10.5) 
0.18 
4 
10.7 
(5.5-16.7) 
0.06 
0.4 
2.5 
(1.7-3.4) 
0.17 
0.3 
2.3 
(1.7-2.9) 
0.09 
0.7 
5.1 
(3.6-6.6) 

Pneumonia 
0.3 
0.9 
(0.5-1.4) 
0.05 
1 
2.8 
(1.4-5.6) 
0.03 
0.2 
1.1 
(0.7-1.6) 
0.05 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-1.1) 
0.03 
0.3 
1.8 
(1.1-2.8) 

Tetanus 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.1-0.7) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.5 
(0.2-1.4) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

The 
former 
Yugoslav 
Republic 
of 
Macedonia 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Timor-
Leste  

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.79 
2.6 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.69 
0.7 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.76 
3.7 
0.8 
(0.6-1.1) 
0.25 
4.5 

Intrapartum 
0.12 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.5 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.37 
6.5 

Congenital 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.14 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.13 
2.2 

Sepsis 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.09 
1.5 

Pneumonia 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.05 
0.9 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.0-1.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.02 
0 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.5-0.8) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.3 
0.8 
(0.4-1.9) 
0.06 
1.3 
3.4 
(1.7-6.3) 
0.08 
0.5 
3.3 
(2.4-4.3) 
0.07 
0.1 
1 
(0.7-1.4) 
0.08 
0.6 
4.5 
(3.2-6.1) 

Other 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
1.7 

Total 
5.7 
15.7 

1 
22.4 
60.2 

1 
5.8 
40.3 

1 
2.1 
14.1 

1 
8.1 
56.6 

Total 
1 
3.3 
0.7 

1 
1.1 
0.2 

1 
4.9 
1.1 

1 
17.6 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Period 

Country 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Togo  
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
1.8 
(1.4-2.4) 
0.11 
0.7 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.21 
5.2 
2.2 
(1.6-3.2) 
0.34 
7.7 
18.7 
(14.3-22.8) 
0.16 
1.2 
3 
(1.7-5.0) 
0.29 
8.9 
21.3 
(15.4-27.2) 

Intrapartum 
2.7 
(2.3-3.2) 
0.17 
1 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.33 
8.1 
3.4 
(2.7-4.1) 
0.36 
8.1 
19.7 
(15.1-23.9) 
0.16 
1.3 
3.1 
(2.0-4.2) 
0.31 
9.7 
23 
(17.1-28.3) 

Congenital 
0.9 
(0.7-1.4) 
0.09 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.11 
2.6 
1.1 
(0.8-1.9) 
0.09 
1.9 
4.7 
(2.7-7.9) 
0.06 
0.5 
1.1 
(0.4-2.8) 
0.08 
2.4 
5.7 
(3.0-10.7) 

Sepsis 
0.6 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.49 
3 
1.2 
(0.8-1.7) 
0.18 
4.5 
1.9 
(1.1-2.8) 
0.1 
2.3 
5.5 
(1.9-8.5) 
0.45 
3.6 
8.6 
(5.1-11.9) 
0.19 
6 
14.3 
(7.1-21.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.4 
(0.2-0.8) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.06 
1.4 
0.6 
(0.3-1.1) 
0.06 
1.4 
3.4 
(1.7-6.8) 
0.05 
0.4 
1.1 
(0.6-1.5) 
0.06 
1.9 
4.5 
(2.4-8.4) 

Tetanus 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.3-1.4) 
0.04 
0.3 
0.8 
(0.3-1.9) 
0.02 
0.6 
1.4 
(0.5-3.2) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Tonga  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.46 
2.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.29 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.42 
2.8 
0.1 

Intrapartum 
0.14 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.12 
0.8 
0 

Congenital 
0.25 
1.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.33 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.26 
1.7 
0 

Sepsis 
0.08 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.1 
0.6 
0 

Pneumonia 
0.04 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.3 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Diarrhoea 
0.1 
(0.0-0.6) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.8) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-1.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.1-1.7) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 

Other 
0.7 
(0.3-1.0) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.09 
2.1 
0.9 
(0.4-1.6) 
0.03 
0.8 
1.9 
(0.9-5.1) 
0.07 
0.5 
1.3 
(0.5-3.1) 
0.04 
1.3 
3.1 
(1.4-8.2) 

Other 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.2 
0 

Total 
7.2 

1 
6.2 
2.5 

1 
24.4 
10.3 

1 
22.5 
54.6 

1 
7.9 
19.2 

1 
31 
73.7 

Total 
1 
4.7 
0.1 

1 
1.6 
0 

1 
6.5 
0.2 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Stat* 

Trinidad 
and 
Tobago 
(high-
quality VR) 

Tunisia 
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.45 
4.2 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.28 
1.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.38 
5.9 
1.2 
(0.9-1.5) 
0.38 
2.5 
4.8 
(3.7-5.8) 
0.26 
0.6 
1.2 
(1.0-1.5) 
0.35 
3.3 
6.3 
(4.9-7.8) 

Intrapartum 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.19 
1.8 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.13 
2 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.19 
1.3 
2.4 
(1.2-3.7) 
0.14 
0.3 
0.6 
(0.1-0.9) 
0.18 
1.7 
3.2 
(1.3-4.9) 

Congenital 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.18 
1.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.34 
2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.5) 
0.24 
3.7 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.24 
1.6 
3 
(1.7-4.9) 
0.26 
0.6 
1.1 
(1.0-1.5) 
0.24 
2.3 
4.3 
(2.8-6.5) 

Sepsis 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.3 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.11 
0.6 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.06 
0.9 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.06 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.5-1.0) 
0.17 
0.4 
0.8 
(0.4-1.3) 
0.09 
0.8 
1.6 
(0.9-2.5) 

Pneumonia 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.07 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.09 
0.2 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.04 
0.4 
0.7 
(0.5-1.1) 

Tetanus 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Turkey  
(low mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.43 
3.6 
45.9 
(40.1-51.8) 
0.28 
0.8 
10.5 
(9.2-12.8) 

Intrapartum 
0.17 
1.4 
17.7 
(13.1-21.6) 
0.1 
0.3 
3.7 
(2.2-4.5) 

Congenital 
0.21 
1.7 
22.2 
(17.4-28.5) 
0.25 
0.7 
9.5 
(8.3-11.3) 

Sepsis 
0.06 
0.5 
6.2 
(4.5-8.1) 
0.2 
0.6 
7.4 
(5.0-9.2) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
1.8 
(1.3-2.3) 
0.07 
0.2 
2.7 
(1.7-4.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.01 
0 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 

Other 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
1.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.12 
0.7 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.12 
1.8 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.11 
0.7 
1.3 
(0.9-1.7) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.09 
0.9 
1.7 
(1.1-2.2) 

Other 
0.12 
1 
12.6 
(8.9-15.3) 
0.09 
0.2 
3.2 
(2.2-4.3) 

Total 

1 
9.2 
1.8 

1 
5.9 
1.1 

1 
15.5 
3 

1 
6.7 
12.6 

1 
2.3 
4.4 

1 
9.4 
17.9 

Total 
1 
8.3 
106.9 

1 
2.9 
37.6 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Turkmenista
n (high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Tuvalu  
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.39 
4.6 
60 
(52.4-68.4) 
0.42 
7.3 
7.9 
(6.0-10.8) 
0.17 
1 
1.1 
(0.7-1.9) 
0.36 
8.6 
8.9 
(6.8-12.5) 
0.46 
4.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.3 
1.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.4 
5.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Intrapartum 
0.15 
1.7 
22.6 
(15.9-27.8) 
0.26 
4.5 
4.9 
(3.7-6.7) 
0.13 
0.8 
0.8 
(0.5-1.2) 
0.23 
5.4 
5.6 
(4.2-7.7) 
0.18 
1.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.15 
2.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Congenital 
0.21 
2.5 
32.5 
(26.5-41.0) 
0.1 
1.7 
1.8 
(1.2-3.2) 
0.21 
1.2 
1.3 
(0.8-2.4) 
0.12 
2.9 
3 
(1.8-5.4) 
0.2 
2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.24 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.21 
2.9 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Sepsis 
0.1 
1.1 
14.7 
(10.3-19.4) 
0.07 
1.2 
1.3 
(0.5-2.1) 
0.32 
1.9 
2.1 
(1.1-3.5) 
0.13 
3.2 
3.3 
(1.5-5.3) 
0.07 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.18 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.11 
1.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Pneumonia 
0.03 
0.4 
4.8 
(3.2-6.7) 
0.04 
0.6 
0.7 
(0.3-1.6) 
0.05 
0.3 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.04 
0.9 
0.9 
(0.5-2.0) 
0.04 
0.4 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.05 
0.7 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0.2 
0.2 
(0.1-0.5) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0.01 
0.1 
1.2 
(0.9-1.5) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.11 
1.3 
16.8 
(11.9-20.8) 
0.11 
1.8 
2 
(0.7-3.1) 
0.11 
0.7 
0.7 
(0.3-1.3) 
0.11 
2.6 
2.7 
(1.0-4.4) 
0.06 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.08 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.8 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Total 
1 
11.8 
152.6 

1 
17.2 
18.6 

1 
6 
6.5 

1 
23.7 
24.7 

1 
9.9 
0 

1 
3.5 
0 

1 
13.7 
0 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Uganda 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

Late 

prop 

Preterm 
0.37 
6.1 
95.6 
(79.0-128.1) 
0.15 

Intrapartum 
0.31 
5.1 
80.6 
(68.7-100.2) 
0.15 

Congenital 
0.11 
1.8 
28.1 
(20.6-40.8) 
0.06 

Sepsis 
0.09 
1.4 
22.1 
(8.9-35.8) 
0.47 

Pneumonia 
0.05 
0.8 
12.6 
(6.6-27.0) 
0.05 

Tetanus 
0 
0.1 
1.1 
(0.4-2.8) 
0.02 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.0-3.8) 
0.01 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 

Other 
0.06 
1 
15.6 
(9.0-28.1) 
0.07 

Total 
1 
16.4 
256.1 

1 

93 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Ukraine 
(low mort 
model) 

United 
Arab 
Emirates 
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.9 
13.4 
(8.0-20.3) 
0.32 
7.1 
108.7 
(87.8-147.9) 
0.46 
1.6 
7.7 
(6.6-8.9) 
0.34 
0.4 
2 
(1.6-2.4) 
0.43 
2.1 
11.3 
(9.6-13.1) 
0.43 
1.5 
2.2 
(1.8-2.6) 
0.33 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.5-0.7) 
0.4 
2 
2.9 
(2.5-3.5) 

Intrapartum 
0.9 
13.9 
(9.3-19.3) 
0.27 
6.2 
94.3 
(77.9-121.9) 
0.14 
0.5 
2.3 
(1.9-2.9) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.12 
0.6 
3.2 
(2.5-4.1) 
0.15 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.6-0.9) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.13 
0.7 
1 
(0.8-1.2) 

Congenital 
0.4 
5.8 
(2.0-15.2) 
0.09 
2.1 
32.4 
(21.3-54.9) 
0.21 
0.7 
3.5 
(2.5-5.1) 
0.34 
0.4 
2 
(1.6-2.6) 
0.24 
1.2 
6.4 
(4.8-9.0) 
0.29 
1 
1.4 
(1.2-1.8) 
0.37 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.6-0.8) 
0.32 
1.6 
2.3 
(1.9-2.8) 

Sepsis 
2.7 
42.7 
(28.8-62.6) 
0.19 
4.2 
64.6 
(37.1-97.8) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.7 
(0.4-1.1) 
0.11 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.4-1.0) 
0.06 
0.3 
1.7 
(0.9-2.4) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
0.1 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.04 
0.2 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 

Pneumonia 
0.3 
4.9 
(2.9-7.8) 
0.05 
1.2 
17.6 
(9.7-33.8) 
0.04 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.2-0.7) 
0.04 
0.2 
1.2 
(0.7-1.9) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Tetanus 
0.1 
2 
(0.6-5.5) 
0.01 
0.2 
3.2 
(1.1-8.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.8 
(0.2-1.8) 
0 
0.1 
1.2 
(0.2-6.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 

Other 
0.4 
6.6 
(3.2-17.0) 
0.06 
1.5 
22.2 
(12.4-45.4) 
0.11 
0.4 
1.8 
(1.4-2.2) 
0.06 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.09 
0.5 
2.5 
(1.9-3.2) 
0.11 
0.4 
0.6 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.1 
0.5 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 

Total 
5.7 
90 

1 
22.5 
344.2 

1 
3.5 
16.8 

1 
1.2 
5.9 

1 
5 
26.5 

1 
3.6 
5 

1 
1.2 
1.8 

1 
5 
7.2 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 
United 
Kingdom 

Period 
Early 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 

Preterm 
0.57 
1.3 

Intrapartum 
0.11 
0.2 

Congenital 
0.26 
0.6 

Sepsis 
0.01 
0 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 

Injuries 
0 
0 

Other 
0.03 
0.1 

Total 
1 
2.2 

94 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Period 

Country 
(high-
quality VR) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

United 
Republic 
of 
Tanzania 
(high mort 
model) 

United 
States of 
America 
(high-
quality VR) 

Stat* 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
9.7 
(9.1-10.3) 
0.44 
0.3 
1.9 
(1.7-2.2) 
0.54 
1.6 
12.7 
(11.8-13.7) 
0.28 
4.3 
81.1 
(62.1-104.5) 
0.13 
0.7 
12.8 
(6.6-20.4) 
0.24 
5.1 
94.9 
(69.3-124.6) 
0.5 
1.6 
67.2 
(65.6-68.8) 
0.29 
0.2 
9.4 
(8.8-10.0) 
0.46 
1.9 
77.5 
(75.3-79.7) 

Intrapartum 
1.9 
(1.6-2.2) 
0.06 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
0.3 
2.3 
(2.0-2.7) 
0.36 
5.5 
102.1 
(83.8-115.6) 
0.17 
0.9 
17 
(10.9-22.4) 
0.31 
6.5 
120.8 
(95.6-139.4) 
0.08 
0.2 
10.4 
(9.8-11.1) 
0.06 
0 
1.9 
(1.6-2.2) 
0.07 
0.3 
12.5 
(11.6-13.4) 

Congenital 
4.5 
(4.0-4.9) 
0.39 
0.2 
1.7 
(1.5-2.0) 
0.29 
0.8 
6.8 
(6.1-7.5) 
0.16 
2.4 
45.6 
(29.6-63.5) 
0.08 
0.4 
7.9 
(2.4-20.1) 
0.13 
2.8 
52 
(30.8-82.3) 
0.23 
0.8 
31.8 
(30.7-32.9) 
0.35 
0.3 
11.2 
(10.6-11.9) 
0.26 
1 
43.5 
(41.7-45.3) 

Sepsis 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.07 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.1 
1.5 
28.1 
(10.0-42.7) 
0.47 
2.5 
47 
(28.0-62.4) 
0.2 
4.1 
75.9 
(38.2-106.8) 
0.02 
0.1 
3 
(2.7-3.4) 
0.13 
0.1 
4.4 
(4.0-4.8) 
0.04 
0.2 
7.5 
(6.7-8.3) 

Pneumonia 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.02 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.02 
0 
0.4 
(0.2-0.6) 
0.05 
0.7 
13.9 
(6.6-29.4) 
0.06 
0.3 
6.1 
(3.5-9.0) 
0.05 
1.1 
20.4 
(10.2-39.4) 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.02 
0 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.01 
0 
0.9 
(0.7-1.2) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
1.4 
(0.5-3.4) 
0.02 
0.1 
2 
(0.6-5.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
3.5 
(1.1-8.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.3 
(0.0-2.5) 
0 
0 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
0 
0 
0.8 
(0.1-3.7) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.5 
(0.4-0.7) 
0.04 
0 
1.4 
(1.2-1.6) 
0.01 
0 
2 
(1.6-2.4) 

Other 
0.4 
(0.3-0.6) 
0.03 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.03 
0.1 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.05 
0.7 
13.3 
(7.7-26.2) 
0.07 
0.4 
7.2 
(3.6-16.4) 
0.05 
1.1 
20.8 
(11.3-42.4) 
0.16 
0.5 
22.2 
(21.3-23.1) 
0.11 
0.1 
3.6 
(3.3-4.0) 
0.15 
0.6 
26.1 
(24.8-27.5) 

Total 
17 

1 
0.6 
4.5 

1 
2.9 
23.5 

1 
15.3 
285.7 

1 
5.4 
100.4 

1 
21.1 
389.2 

1 
3.2 
135.6 

1 
0.8 
32.5 

1 
4.1 
170 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 

Period 

Uruguay 
(high-
quality VR) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Uzbekistan 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Vanuatu 
(low mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.42 
1.7 
0.8 
(0.7-1.0) 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.32 
2 
1 
(0.7-1.2) 
0.4 
4.1 
25.4 
(18.9-31.3) 
0.16 
0.6 
3.7 
(2.1-5.5) 
0.34 
4.9 
31 
(22.6-38.7) 
0.49 
3.1 
0.2 
(0.2-0.3) 
0.27 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.44 
3.8 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 

Intrapartum 
0.09 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.08 
0.5 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0.25 
2.6 
15.9 
(11.7-19.4) 
0.12 
0.4 
2.8 
(1.7-3.8) 
0.22 
3.1 
19.7 
(14.0-24.5) 
0.21 
1.3 
0.1 
(0.1-0.1) 
0.09 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.18 
1.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

Congenital 
0.24 
1 
0.5 
(0.4-0.6) 
0.43 
0.7 
0.4 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.3 
1.8 
0.9 
(0.6-1.2) 
0.16 
1.7 
10.3 
(6.7-14.0) 
0.24 
0.9 
5.4 
(3.1-8.3) 
0.18 
2.5 
16.1 
(10.1-23.1) 
0.15 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.23 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.17 
1.5 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Sepsis 
0.13 
0.5 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.36 
0.6 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.2 
1.2 
0.6 
(0.4-0.8) 
0.07 
0.7 
4.2 
(1.5-6.3) 
0.31 
1.1 
7 
(3.5-10.4) 
0.13 
1.9 
11.8 
(5.0-17.8) 
0.07 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.25 
0.6 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.12 
1 
0.1 
(0.0-0.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.03 
0.2 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
0.03 
0.3 
2 
(0.8-4.3) 
0.04 
0.2 
1 
(0.6-1.5) 
0.03 
0.5 
3.1 
(1.5-6.1) 
0.05 
0.3 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.09 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.5 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.6) 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-1.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0 
0 
0.1 
(0.0-0.2) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.02 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.09 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.02 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.07 
0.4 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.1 
1 
6.1 
(2.2-9.0) 
0.1 
0.4 
2.4 
(1.1-3.7) 
0.1 
1.4 
9 
(3.5-13.3) 
0.01 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.06 
0.1 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.03 
0.2 
0 
(0.0-0.1) 

Total 
1 
4.1 
2 

1 
1.7 
0.8 

1 
6.1 
3 

1 
10.4 
63.9 

1 
3.7 
22.5 

1 
14.4 
91.1 

1 
6.3 
0.4 

1 
2.2 
0.1 

1 
8.7 
0.6 

96 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Early 

Venezuela 
(high-
quality VR) 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Viet Nam 
(low mort 
model) 

Yemen 
(high mort 
model) 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.46 
3 
17.9 
(17.1-18.7) 
0.25 
0.5 
2.7 
(2.4-3.0) 
0.41 
3.5 
21.1 
(19.9-22.3) 
0.44 
4.2 
57.5 
(43.4-63.0) 
0.27 
0.9 
12.5 
(9.2-15.4) 
0.37 
4.8 
68.2 
(52.5-76.0) 
0.34 
6.2 
45.6 
(30.8-59.0) 
0.14 
0.9 
6.5 
(4.3-8.9) 
0.3 
7.4 
53.9 
(36.5-69.1) 

Intrapartum 
0.18 
1.2 
6.9 
(6.4-7.4) 
0.07 
0.1 
0.8 
(0.6-1.0) 
0.15 
1.3 
7.9 
(7.2-8.6) 
0.15 
1.4 
20 
(14.3-22.8) 
0.07 
0.2 
3.1 
(1.3-4.4) 
0.12 
1.6 
22.9 
(15.9-26.4) 
0.32 
5.8 
42.8 
(33.7-53.9) 
0.15 
0.9 
6.8 
(4.2-9.6) 
0.28 
7 
50.9 
(39.0-65.4) 

Congenital 
0.14 
0.9 
5.4 
(4.9-5.8) 
0.23 
0.4 
2.5 
(2.2-2.8) 
0.16 
1.4 
8.1 
(7.3-8.9) 
0.15 
1.4 
19.9 
(11.7-34.0) 
0.18 
0.6 
8.4 
(4.4-14.8) 
0.23 
3 
43 
(29.5-55.0) 
0.12 
2.2 
16.5 
(9.3-26.0) 
0.08 
0.5 
3.7 
(1.8-6.7) 
0.1 
2.6 
19 
(10.7-30.9) 

Sepsis 
0.12 
0.8 
4.5 
(4.1-5.0) 
0.32 
0.6 
3.4 
(3.1-3.8) 
0.16 
1.4 
8.2 
(7.4-8.9) 
0.08 
0.8 
10.8 
(3.4-14.0) 
0.24 
0.8 
11.2 
(3.2-14.3) 
0.09 
1.2 
17.2 
(10.2-23.4) 
0.08 
1.5 
10.9 
(4.6-22.3) 
0.49 
3.1 
23.1 
(17.0-30.3) 
0.18 
4.5 
32.9 
(20.8-50.1) 

Pneumonia 
0.05 
0.3 
1.8 
(1.6-2.1) 
0.09 
0.2 
1 
(0.8-1.2) 
0.06 
0.5 
2.9 
(2.4-3.3) 
0.04 
0.4 
5.7 
(3.2-9.6) 
0.15 
0.5 
6.9 
(4.0-10.9) 
0.07 
0.9 
12.8 
(7.5-19.1) 
0.05 
1 
7.1 
(3.7-15.3) 
0.05 
0.3 
2.3 
(1.4-3.4) 
0.05 
1.3 
9.7 
(5.4-19.0) 

Tetanus 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.8 
(0.7-5.0) 
0.03 
0.2 
1.3 
(0.5-2.9) 
0.02 
0.5 
3.4 
(1.3-8.6) 

Diarrhoea 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
0 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.0-4.6) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.3-2.2) 
0.01 
0.2 
1.6 
(0.4-7.7) 

Injuries 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.3) 
0.01 
0 
0.1 
(0.1-0.2) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.3 
(0.2-0.5) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.7 
(0.5-0.9) 
0.01 
0 
0.7 
(0.4-0.9) 
0.01 
0.1 
1.4 
(1.0-1.8) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.05 
0.4 
2.1 
(1.8-2.4) 
0.03 
0 
0.3 
(0.2-0.4) 
0.05 
0.4 
2.5 
(2.1-2.8) 
0.12 
1.2 
16.2 
(10.4-19.3) 
0.07 
0.2 
3.3 
(0.3-13.1) 
0.1 
1.4 
19.3 
(12.4-23.1) 
0.06 
1.1 
7.9 
(4.0-12.3) 
0.05 
0.3 
2.2 
(1.2-4.9) 
0.06 
1.4 
10.4 
(5.3-17.5) 

Total 
1 
6.5 
38.8 

1 
1.8 
10.8 

1 
8.5 
50.9 

1 
9.5 
131 

1 
3.3 
46 

1 
13.1 
184.7 

1 
18 
133.1 

1 
6.3 
46.8 

1 
25.1 
181.8 

97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

Table S14: Cause-specific proportions, risks, and numbers of deaths (with uncertainty) for 194 countries by neonatal period 

Country 

Period 

Zambia 
(high mort 
model) 

Early 

Late 

Overall 

Early 

Zimbabwe 
(high mort 
model) 

Late 

Overall 

Stat* 
prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

prop 
risk 
num 

Preterm 
0.33 
7.1 
43.1 
(34.3-55.6) 
0.15 
1.1 
6.9 
(4.3-10.1) 
0.28 
8.3 
48.6 
(37.3-63.0) 
0.37 
10.6 
47 
(36.9-55.1) 
0.19 
2 
8.7 
(4.9-14.1) 
0.32 
12.5 
54.8 
(41.1-67.4) 

Intrapartum 
0.37 
8.1 
49.1 
(39.5-57.5) 
0.16 
1.2 
7.6 
(5.1-10.5) 
0.32 
9.4 
54.5 
(42.9-65.5) 
0.35 
10.3 
45.3 
(36.7-51.3) 
0.15 
1.6 
7 
(4.6-9.3) 
0.3 
11.6 
50.6 
(40.7-59.2) 

Congenital 
0.08 
1.7 
10.1 
(7.6-17.1) 
0.05 
0.4 
2.3 
(0.8-6.1) 
0.07 
2 
11.8 
(8.0-22.1) 
0.07 
2.2 
9.6 
(5.7-16.4) 
0.06 
0.6 
2.7 
(1.0-6.7) 
0.07 
2.8 
12.2 
(6.2-23.2) 

Sepsis 
0.09 
1.8 
11.2 
(4.5-17.8) 
0.46 
3.5 
21.4 
(13.7-29.6) 
0.18 
5.4 
31.6 
(17.4-46.0) 
0.1 
2.8 
12.3 
(4.7-18.8) 
0.4 
4 
17.9 
(10.2-23.9) 
0.18 
6.8 
29.8 
(14.3-42.5) 

Pneumonia 
0.06 
1.4 
8.5 
(4.4-16.1) 
0.06 
0.4 
2.6 
(1.6-3.9) 
0.06 
1.9 
10.8 
(5.9-19.7) 
0.06 
1.8 
7.9 
(4.1-15.4) 
0.05 
0.5 
2.3 
(1.4-3.5) 
0.06 
2.3 
9.9 
(5.3-18.3) 

Tetanus 
0.01 
0.2 
1 
(0.3-2.3) 
0.04 
0.3 
1.7 
(0.5-4.3) 
0.02 
0.4 
2.6 
(0.8-6.6) 
0.01 
0.4 
1.7 
(0.6-4.3) 
0.07 
0.7 
3.2 
(1.2-6.7) 
0.03 
1.1 
4.7 
(1.7-10.5) 

Diarrhoea 
0 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.0-4.9) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.1-0.8) 
0.01 
0.1 
0.9 
(0.1-5.6) 
0 
0.1 
0.4 
(0.0-4.0) 
0 
0 
0.2 
(0.1-0.4) 
0 
0.1 
0.5 
(0.1-4.2) 

Injuries 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
0 
0 
0 
(0.0-0.0) 

Other 
0.06 
1.3 
8 
(4.9-13.9) 
0.07 
0.6 
3.4 
(1.8-7.7) 
0.06 
1.9 
11 
(6.2-20.7) 
0.03 
0.9 
4 
(1.9-12.7) 
0.07 
0.7 
3.1 
(1.1-7.7) 
0.04 
1.6 
6.9 
(2.9-20.0) 

Total 
1 
21.7 
131.6 

1 
7.6 
46.2 

1 
29.5 
171.8 

1 
29 
128.1 

1 
10.2 
45 

1 
38.7 
169.3 

* prop = proportion; num = number of deaths (in 100s) 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix P:  Comparison of different neonatal COD estimates for China 
As noted in the main text of the paper, we estimated the neonatal COD distribution for China 
using the low mortality model due to China’s relatlively low NMR (table S15a). While we 
have chosen to retain the low mortality model results for China, we have included two 
different estimates here for comparison.  The first are the most recent WHO estimates for 
China (table S15b) (89), based on single-cause models for the overall neonatal period, and 
the second are estimates for China using the high mortality model instead of low mortality 
model in our analysis (table S15c).  Note that the low and high mortality models have 
different cause categories, so some of the causes in table S15c are different from those in 
S15a and S15b.   

S15a: Proportional cause distribution estimated for China using the low 
mortality model 

Intrapartum  Preterm  Congenital 

Sepsis  Pneumonia 

Injuries  Other 

2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 

15.1 
14.9 
14.8 
14.8 
14.4 
14.2 
13.8 
13.5 
13.1 
13.0 
12.9 
12.9 
13.0 
13.0 

41.5 
41.4 
41.6 
41.8 
41.3 
40.9 
39.9 
39.6 
38.4 
38.2 
38.2 
38.3 
38.4 
38.5 

15.2 
15.3 
15.3 
15.6 
16.8 
17.7 
19.6 
20.4 
21.4 
22.6 
23.1 
23.4 
23.7 
23.9 

8.3 
8.7 
9.2 
9.3 
9.3 
9.3 
9.6 
9.6 
10.6 
9.8 
9.7 
9.3 
9.0 
8.7 

7.4 
7.5 
7.4 
7.0 
6.9 
6.8 
6.3 
6.3 
5.8 
5.8 
5.5 
5.3 
5.1 
5.1 

1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 

0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 
0.9 

11.5 
11.1 
10.7 
10.6 
10.3 
10.1 
9.9 
9.8 
9.7 
9.8 
9.8 
9.8 
9.9 
9.9 

S15b: Proportional cause distribution estimated for China by the WHO 

Intrapartum  Preterm  Congenital 

Sepsis 

Pneumonia 

Injuries  Diarrhoea 

Tetanus  Other 

2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 

0.35 
0.34 
0.33 
0.32 
0.31 
0.3 
0.29 
0.28 
0.28 
0.27 
0.26 
0.25 

0.25 
0.24 
0.24 
0.24 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 

0.08 
0.09 
0.09 
0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
0.11 
0.12 
0.12 
0.13 
0.14 
0.14 

0.07 
0.06 
0.06 
0.06 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 

0.09 
0.09 
0.09 
0.09 
0.08 
0.08 
0.08 
0.07 
0.07 
0.07 
0.07 
0.07 

0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 

0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 

0.01 
0 
0 
0.01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0.09 
0.11 
0.13 
0.14 
0.15 
0.17 
0.18 
0.18 
0.19 
0.2 
0.2 
0.21 

99 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2012 
2013 

0.25 
0.25 

0.23 
0.23 

0.15 
0.15 

0.04 
0.04 

0.07 
0.07 

0.04 
0.04 

0.02 
0.02 

0 
0 

0.21 
0.21 

S15c: Proportional cause distribution estimated for China using the high mortality model 

Intrapartum  Preterm  Congenital 

Sepsis  Pneumonia  Tetanus  Diarrhoea  Other 

2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 

0.18 
0.18 
0.19 
0.19 
0.19 
0.19 
0.18 
0.18 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 
0.17 

0.42 
0.41 
0.4 
0.39 
0.37 
0.36 
0.35 
0.35 
0.34 
0.33 
0.33 
0.33 
0.33 
0.32 

0.13 
0.14 
0.15 
0.16 
0.18 
0.19 
0.21 
0.22 
0.24 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 
0.25 

0.09 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 

0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.03 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 
0.02 

0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0.13 
0.13 
0.14 
0.14 
0.14 
0.13 
0.13 
0.13 
0.13 
0.12 
0.12 
0.13 
0.13 
0.13 

100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lawn JE, Cousens S, Zupan J, Team LNSS. 4 million neonatal deaths: when? 

Black RE, Cousens S, Johnson HL, Lawn JE, Rudan I, Bassani DG, et al. Global, 

Aleman J, Brännström I, Liljestrand J, Peña R, Persson LA, Steidinger J. Saving 

Akgün S, Colak M, Bakar C. Identifying and verifying causes of death in Turkey: 

Adazu K, Lindblade KA, Rosen DH, Odhiambo F, Ofware P, Kwach J, et al. Health 

Lawn JE, Wilczynska-Ketende K, Cousens SN. Estimating the causes of 4 million 

Liu L, Johnson HL, Cousens S, Perin J, Scott S, Lawn JE, et al. Global, regional, and 

References 
1. 
national causes of child mortality: an updated systematic analysis for 2010 with time 
trends since 2000. Lancet. 2012;379(9832):2151-61. 
2. 
where? why? Lancet. 2005;365(9462):891-900. 
3. 
regional, and national causes of child mortality in 2008: a systematic analysis. Lancet. 
2010;375(9730):1969-87. 
4. 
neonatal deaths in the year 2000. Int J Epidemiol. 2006;35(3):706-18. 
5. 
and demographic surveillance in rural western Kenya: a platform for evaluating 
interventions to reduce morbidity and mortality from infectious diseases. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg. 2005;73(6):1151-8. 
6. 
Aguilar A, Alvarado R, Cordero D, Kelly P, Zamora A, Salgado R. Mortality Survey 
in Bolivia: The Final Report. Investigating and Identifying Causes of Death for Children 
Under Five. Arlington, VA.: Published for the USAID by the Basic Support for 
Institutionalizing Child Survival (BASICS) Project., 1998. 
7. 
National verbal autopsy survey. Public Health. 2012;126(2):150-8. 
8. 
more neonates in hospital: an intervention towards a sustainable reduction in neonatal 
mortality in a Nicaraguan hospital. Trop Doct. 1998;28(2):88-92. 
9. 
infant mortality rate in India: experience from the Ballabgarh project. J Epidemiol 
Community Health. 2000;54(4):247-53. 
10. 
increases the risk of infant and child mortality: a case-referent study in Nicaragua. Bull 
World Health Organ. 2003;81(1):10-6. 
11. 
of Lucknow, north India. J Trop Pediatr. 1998;44(6):358-61. 
Baiden F, Hodgson A, Adjuik M, Adongo P, Ayaga B, Binka F. Trend and causes of 
12. 
neonatal mortality in the Kassena-Nankana district of northern Ghana, 1995-2002. Trop 
Med Int Health. 2006;11(4):532-9. 
13. 
Balci E, Kucuk E, Gun I, Gulgun M, Kilic B, Cetinkara K. Neonatal deaths at 
Melikgazi at Kayseri in 2006. Fırat University Medical Journal of Health Sciences. 
2008 22(6):323-6. 
14. 
neonatal care and management of sepsis on neonatal mortality: field trial in rural India. 
Lancet. 1999;354(9194):1955-61. 
15. 
deaths in slum settlements in Mumbai, India: a prospective verbal autopsy study. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2012;12:39. 
16. 
timing and causes of neonatal deaths in rural India: implications for neonatal health 
programmes. Bull World Health Organ. 2006;84(9):706-13. 

Baqui AH, Darmstadt GL, Williams EK, Kumar V, Kiran TU, Panwar D, et al. Rates, 

Awasthi S, Pande VK. Cause-specific mortality in under fives in the urban slums 

Anand K, Kant S, Kumar G, Kapoor SK. "Development" is not essential to reduce 

Bang AT, Bang RA, Baitule SB, Reddy MH, Deshmukh MD. Effect of home-based 

Asling-Monemi K, Peña R, Ellsberg MC, Persson LA. Violence against women 

Bapat U, Alcock G, More NS, Das S, Joshi W, Osrin D. Stillbirths and newborn 

101 

 
 
Z. B. Hala Community-Based Trial. Report of Baseline Analysis. Pakistan: Aga 

Bhatia S. Patterns and causes of neonatal and postneonatal mortality in rural 

Campbell O, Gipson R, el-Mohandes A, Issa AH, Matta N, Mansour E, et al. The 

Bezzaoucha A, El Kebboub A, Aliche A. [Evolution of neonatal mortality at the 

Chowdhury HR, Thompson S, Ali M, Alam N, Yunus M, Streatfield PK. Causes of 

Chowdhury A, Aziz K, de Francisco A, Khan M. Differences in neonatal mortality 

Chowdhury ME, Akhter HH, Chongsuvivatwong V, Geater AF. Neonatal mortality 

Barros FC, Victora CG, Vaughan JP, Estanislau HJ. Perinatal mortality in southern 

Barros AJ, Matijasevich A, Santos IS, Albernaz EP, Victora CG. Neonatal mortality: 

17. 
Brazil: a population-based study of 7392 births. Bull World Health Organ. 
1987;65(1):95-104. 
18. 
description and effect of hospital of birth after risk adjustment. Rev Saude Publica. 
2008;42(1):1-9. 
19. 
Bassani DG, Kumar R, Awasthi S, Morris SK, Paul VK, Shet A, et al. Causes of 
neonatal and child mortality in India: a nationally representative mortality survey. 
Lancet. 2010;376(9755):1853-60. 
20. 
Blida University Teaching Hospital (Algeria) between 1999 and 2006]. Bull Soc Pathol 
Exot. 2010;103(1):29-36. 
21. 
Bangladesh. Stud Fam Plann. 1989;20(3):136-46. 
22. 
Khan University, 2003. 
23. 
Egypt National Perinatal/Neonatal Mortality Study 2000. J Perinatol. 2004;24(5):284-9. 
24. 
by religious and socioeconomic covariates in rural Bangladesh. The Journal of Family 
Welfare. 1996;42(2):31-40. 
25. 
in rural Bangladesh: an exploratory study. J Health Popul Nutr. 2005;23(1):16-24. 
26. 
neonatal deaths in a rural subdistrict of Bangladesh: implications for intervention. J 
Health Popul Nutr. 2010;28(4):375-82. 
27. 
Darmstadt GL, Choi Y, Arifeen SE, Bari S, Rahman SM, Mannan I, et al. Evaluation 
of a cluster-randomized controlled trial of a package of community-based maternal and 
newborn interventions in Mirzapur, Bangladesh. PLoS One. 2010;5(3):e9696. 
28. 
by verbal autopsy. Indian J Pediatr. 1988;55(4):599-604. 
29. 
Gibe Field Research Center, Southwest Ethiopia. Ethiopian Journal of Health 
Development. 2007;21(2):117-24. 
30. 
Research NIoP, Training, Associates Ma, Demographic MIIfRD, Surveys H. 
Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey: National Institute of Population Research 
and Training (NIPORT); 2005. 
31. 
ENDESA 2005-2006: Instituto Nacional de Estadística; 2006. 
Khanal S, Gc VS, Dawson P, Houston R. Verbal autopsy to ascertain causes of 
32. 
neonatal deaths in a community setting: a study from Morang, Nepal. JNMA J Nepal Med 
Assoc. 2011;51(181):21-7. 
33. 
Pakistan: National Institute of Population Studies and Macro International Inc. 2008. 
34. 
Health. MMo, Mozambique. U, Medicine. LSoHaT. Mozambique - National Child 
Mortality Study 2009 - Summary. Maputo, Mozambique Ministry of Health: 2009. 
35. 
system in Indonesia: mortality study of household health survey, 2001. Jakarta: National 
of Health Research and Development, Ministry of Health Indonesia. 2003. 

Datta N, Mand M, Kumar V. Validation of causes of infant death in the community 

Djaja S, Soemantri S. The cause of neonatal death and the attributed health care 

Estadística INd, MEASURE/DHS+ MI. Encuesta nacional de demografía y salud: 

Deribew A, Tessema F, Girma B. Determinants of under-five mortality in Gilgel 

Pakistan N. Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2006-07 Islamabad. 

102 

 
 
Fauveau V, Wojtyniak B, Mostafa G, Sarder AM, Chakraborty J. Perinatal mortality 

Edmond KM, Quigley MA, Zandoh C, Danso S, Hurt C, Owusu Agyei S, et al. 

el-Zibdeh MY, Al-Suleiman SA, Al-Sibai MH. Perinatal mortality at King Fahd 

Ekanem EE, Asindi AA, Okoi OU. Community-based surveillance of paediatric 

Fantahun M. Patterns of childhood mortality in three districts of north Gondar 

Dommisse J. The causes of perinatal deaths in the greater Cape Town area. A 12-

Garenne M, Darkaoui N, Braikat M, Azelmat M. Changing cause of death profile in 

36. 
month survey. S Afr Med J. 1991;80(6):270-5. 
37. 
Aetiology of stillbirths and neonatal deaths in rural Ghana: implications for health 
programming in developing countries. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2008;22(5):430-7. 
38. 
deaths in Cross River State, Nigeria. Trop Geogr Med. 1994;46(5):305-8. 
39. 
Hospital of the University Al-Khobar, Saudi Arabia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
1988;26(3):399-407. 
40. 
Administrative Zone. A community based study using the verbal autopsy method. 
Ethiop Med J. 1998;36(2):71-81. 
41. 
in Matlab, Bangladesh: a community-based study. Int J Epidemiol. 1990;19(3):606-12. 
42. 
Fikree FF, Azam SI, Berendes HW. Time to focus child survival programmes on 
the newborn: assessment of levels and causes of infant mortality in rural Pakistan. Bull 
World Health Organ. 2002;80(4):271-6. 
Fonseka P, Wijewardene K, Harendra de Silva DG, Goonaratna C, Wijeyasiri WA. 
43. 
Neonatal and post-neonatal mortality in the Galle district. Ceylon Med J. 1994;39(2):82-
5. 
44. 
Morocco: the impact of child-survival programmes. J Health Popul Nutr. 
2007;25(2):212-20. 
45. 
Effect of training traditional birth attendants on neonatal mortality (Lufwanyama 
Neonatal Survival Project): randomised controlled study. BMJ. 2011;342:d346. 
46. 
Paulista, Brasil, 1990 a 1992. Rev Saúde Pública. 1997;31(4):330-41. 
47. 
et al. A prospective survey of the outcome of pregnancy in a rural area of the Gambia. 
Bull World Health Organ. 1987;65(5):635-43. 
48. 
early childhood deaths in urban Dhaka, Bangladesh. PLoS One. 2009;4(12):e8145. 
49. 
Hinderaker SG, Olsen BE, Bergsjø PB, Gasheka P, Lie RT, Havnen J, et al. 
Avoidable stillbirths and neonatal deaths in rural Tanzania. BJOG. 2003;110(6):616-23. 
50. 
Jehan I, Harris H, Salat S, Zeb A, Mobeen N, Pasha O, et al. Neonatal mortality, risk 
factors and causes: a prospective population-based cohort study in urban Pakistan. Bull 
World Health Organ. 2009;87(2):130-8. 
51. 
and maternal mortality in Denizli. Journal of the Turkish-German Gynecological 
Association. 2009;10:95-8. 
52. 
J R Soc Health. 1993;113(5):247-9. 
53. 
Pakistan: X. Mortality. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1993;82 Suppl 390:109-17. 
54. 
Perinatal problems in rural Thailand. J Trop Pediatr. 1984;30(2):72-8. 

Khalique N, Sinha SN, Yunus M, Malik A. Early childhood mortality--a rural study. 

Gomes JdO, Santo AH. Mortalidade infantil em município da região Centro-Oeste 

Greenwood AM, Greenwood BM, Bradley AK, Williams K, Shenton FC, Tulloch S, 

Karabulut A, İstanbullu B, Karahan T, Özdemir K. Two year evaluation of infant 

Khan SR, Jalil F, Zaman S, Lindblad BS, Karlberg J. Early child health in Lahore, 

Khanjanasthiti P, Benchakarn V, Saksawad A, Khantanaphar S, Posayanond P. 

Gill CJ, Phiri-Mazala G, Guerina NG, Kasimba J, Mulenga C, MacLeod WB, et al. 

Halder AK, Gurley ES, Naheed A, Saha SK, Brooks WA, El Arifeen S, et al. Causes of 

103 

 
 
Kishan J, Soni AL, Elzouki AY, Mir NA, Magoub MR. Perinatal outcome at Benghazi 

Lucas GN, Ediriweera RC. Perinatal deaths at the Castle Street Hospital for 

Nandan D, Misra S, Jain M, Singh D, Verma M, Stevens W, et al. Social audits for 

Krishnan A, Ng N, Kapoor SK, Pandav CS, Byass P. Temporal trends and gender 

Liu BL, Zhang DZ, Tao HQ, Huang P. Perinatal mortality rate in 11 Jiangsu cities. 

55. 
and implications for perinatal care in developing countries. Indian J Pediatr. 
1988;55(4):611-5. 
56. 
differentials in causes of childhood deaths at Ballabgarh, India - need for revisiting child 
survival strategies. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:555. 
57. 
Leach A, McArdle TF, Banya WA, Krubally O, Greenwood AM, Rands C, et al. 
Neonatal mortality in a rural area of The Gambia. Ann Trop Paediatr. 1999;19(1):33-43. 
58. 
Chin Med J (Engl). 1985;98(3):157-60. 
59. 
Women in 1993. Ceylon Med J. 1996;41(1):10-2. 
60.  Manandhar SR, Ojha A, Manandhar DS, Shrestha B, Shrestha D, Saville N, et al. 
Causes of stillbirths and neonatal deaths in Dhanusha district, Nepal: a verbal autopsy 
study. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2010;8(29):62-72. 
61.  Matendo RM, Engmann CM, Ditekemena JD, Gado J, Tshefu A, McClure EM, et al. 
Challenge of reducing perinatal mortality in rural Congo: findings of a prospective, 
population-based study. J Health Popul Nutr. 2011;29(5):532-40. 
62.  Matijasevich A, Santos IS, Barros AJ, Menezes AM, Albernaz EP, Barros FC, et al. 
Perinatal mortality in three population-based cohorts from Southern Brazil: trends and 
differences. Cad Saude Publica. 2008;24 Suppl 3:S399-408. 
63.  Mendieta E, Battaglia V, Villalba B. Mortalidad neonatal en el Paraguay: análisis 
de los indicadores. Pediatría (Asunción). 2001;28(1):12-8. 
64. 
community action: a tool to initiate community action for reducing child mortality. 
Indian Journal of Community Medicine. 2005;30(3):5. 
65. 
results from NeoKIP community-based trial in Quang Ninh province, Vietnam. Acta 
Paediatr. 2012;101(4):368-73. 
66. 
South Africa2013. 
67. 
H. P. Causes of Neonatal Mortality in Urban Bangladesh and Rural Haiti. 2003. 
Phukan RK, Mahanta J. A study of neonatal deaths in the tea gardens of 
68. 
Dibrugarh district of upper Assam. J Indian Med Assoc. 1998;96(11):333-4, 7. 
69. 
area of Senegal. Int J Epidemiol. 1993;22(1):72-80. 
70. 
care. Bull World Health Organ. 1986;64(2):291-7. 
71. 
Pediatr. 1989;35(4):199-202. 
72. 
Neonatal mortality in Sri Lanka: timing, causes and distribution. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med. 2009;22(9):791-6. 
73. 
mortality determinants in Jamaica. J Trop Pediatr. 1990;36(4):171-5. 
74. 
Investigating the causes of death in children under 5. 2002. 
75. 
Health; 2004. 

Samms-Vaughan ME, McCaw-Binns AM, Ashley DC, Foster-Williams K. Neonatal 

Pattinson R. Perinatal Problem Identification Programme data for South Africa. 

Pison G, Trape JF, Lefebvre M, Enel C. Rapid decline in child mortality in a rural 

Pratinidhi A, Shah U, Shrotri A, Bodhani N. Risk-approach strategy in neonatal 

Rajindrajith S, Mettananda S, Adihetti D, Goonawardana R, Devanarayana NM. 

Schumacher R, Swedberg E, Diallo M, Keita D, Kalter H. Mortality study in Guinea. 

Rahman S, Nessa F. Neo-natal mortality patterns in rural Bangladesh. J Trop 

P. S, D. W, Y. H. Adult Mortality and Morbidity Project. Tanzania: Ministry of 

Nga NT, Hoa DT, Målqvist M, Persson L, Ewald U. Causes of neonatal death: 

104 

 
 
Sharifzadeh GR. An Epidemiological Study on Infant Mortality and Factors 

Shah M, Khalique N, Khan Z, Amir A. Verbal autopsy to determine causes of 

Tikmani SS, Warraich HJ, Abbasi F, Rizvi A, Darmstadt GL, Zaidi AK. Incidence of 

Singhal PK, Mathur GP, Mathur S, Singh YD. Neonatal morbidity and mortality in 

Sivagnanasundram C, Sivarajah N, Wijayaratnam A. Infant deaths in a health unit 

76. 
deaths among under-five children. Current Pediatric Research. 2010;14(1). 
77. 
Affecting it in Rural Areas of Birjand, Iran. Iranian Journal of Pediatrics. 2008;18(4). 
78. 
Shrivastava SP, Kumar A, Kumar Ojha A. Verbal autopsy determined causes of 
neonatal deaths. Indian Pediatr. 2001;38(9):1022-5. 
79. 
ICDS urban slums. Indian Pediatr. 1990;27(5):485-8. 
80. 
area of Northern Sri Lanka. J Trop Med Hyg. 1985;88(6):401-6. 
81. 
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia: a population-based prospective study in Pakistan. Trop 
Med Int Health. 2010;15(5):502-7. 
82. 
Turnbull E, Lembalemba MK, Guffey MB, Bolton-Moore C, Mubiana-Mbewe M, 
Chintu N, et al. Causes of stillbirth, neonatal death and early childhood death in rural 
Zambia by verbal autopsy assessments. Trop Med Int Health. 2011;16(7):894-901. 
83. 
J Pediatr. 2007;74(5):449-53. 
84.  Waiswa P, Kallander K, Peterson S, Tomson G, Pariyo GW. Using the three delays 
model to understand why newborn babies die in eastern Uganda. Trop Med Int Health. 
2010;15(8):964-72. 
85. 
86. 
Metropolitan Area, South Africa2001. 
87. 
in rural Upper Egypt. Soc Sci Med. 2000;51(2):185-97. 
88. 
Save the Children; 2013. 
89. 
May 2014); Available from: http://www.who.int/gho/. 

GE. W. Farafenni Neonatal Deaths. Gambia: MRC; 2003. 
D. W. Perinatal Audit System Database, 1 January-31 December 2001. Cape Town 

Vaid A, Mammen A, Primrose B, Kang G. Infant mortality in an urban slum. Indian 

Yassin KM. Indices and sociodemographic determinants of childhood mortality 

Save the Children. Surviving the first day: State of the World's Mothers 2013: 

Global Health Observatory of the WHO. The data repository. (to be published 

105 

 
 
 
 
