5
1
0
2
c
e
D
7
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
4
5
0
.
2
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Breaking the Barriers to True Augmented Reality
Christian Sandor†, Martin Fuchs(cid:63), Alvaro Cassinelli†, Hao Li◦, Richard Newcombe×, Goshiro
Yamamoto†, Steven Feiner∧
†Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Graduate School of Information Science, Japan
(cid:63)Universität Stuttgart, Visualization Research Center, Germany
◦University of Southern California, Department of Computer Science, USA
×University of Washington, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, USA
∧Columbia University, Department of Computer Science, USA

December 18, 2015

In recent years, Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Re-
ality (VR) have gained considerable commercial traction, with
Facebook acquiring Oculus VR for $2 billion, Magic Leap attracting
more than $500 million of funding, and Microsoft announcing their
HoloLens head-worn computer. Where is humanity headed: a brave
new dystopia—or a paradise come true?

1 Nara Institute of Science and Technol-
ogy. Symposium Web Page: Making
Augmented Reality Real. Last ac-
cessed on 14 December 2015, 2014.
http://imd.naist.jp/~sandor/marr/

In this article, we present discussions, which started at the sym-
posium “Making Augmented Reality Real”, held at Nara Institute of
Science and Technology in August 2014. Ten scientists were invited
to this three-day event, which started with a full day of public pre-
sentations and panel discussions (video recordings are available at
the event web page
addressing the future of AR and VR.

), followed by two days of roundtable discussions

1

Both AR and VR facilitate experiences that can go far beyond
what we encounter in our everyday lives. VR completely immerses
users; for example, we could feel as if we were walking on the moon.
On the other hand, AR embeds content directly into the user’s real
environment; for example, we could preview a piece of furniture in
our actual living room before we buy it. We believe that the current
rapid convergence of enabling technologies will lead to AR and VR
experiences that are barely distinguishable from reality.

From a technical perspective, AR is clearly more challenging. We
not only have to create highly responsive and realistic virtual media,
but we have to additionally fuse them coherently with the user’s real
environment. In this article, we focus on AR, as any AR system can
be trivially turned into a VR system—we just need to block the user’s
experience of the real world. To distinguish our vision of indistin-
guishably real AR from currently available AR systems, we call the
former True AR.

In the remainder of this article, we ﬁrst discuss high-level aspects

 
 
 
 
 
 
breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

2

of True AR: Why is it desirable (Section 1)? What exactly do we mean
by True AR? Is it possible to deﬁne a clear-cut test for it (Section 2)?
What are the approaches to realizing True AR (Section 3)? Then, we
discuss challenges in more detail: technical (Section 4) and ethical
(Section 5) and draw overall conclusions (Section 6).

1 True AR: Why?

After our needs for survival are fulfilled, we are driven
by the desire for experiences. Actual reality, however, confronts us
with limitations. These limitations can be physical (we will never
move faster than light), biological (humans cannot breathe on their
own under water), ethical (we should not infringe on the freedom
of others in pursuing our own), or simply practical—while humans
have walked on the moon before, the sheer difﬁculty and expense of
doing that will keep this actual experience from most of us forever.
Our imagination is not subject to these limitations, and we can
overcome any boundary. For a long time, humankind has supported
imagination through the creation and consumption of media, starting
with stories told around campﬁres and ending with the ubiquitous
presence of television today. Still, conventional media deliver only a
subset of the stimuli possible within actual reality.

With the advent of VR technology, we can create media experi-
ences far beyond the passive consumption of a prerecorded television
show or movie. Within digitally simulated environments, we can
interact with a responsive virtual world. AR even surpasses VR in
interactivity: it not only reacts to the observer, but can also incorpo-
rate the observers’ surroundings. While AR is technically a proper
superset of VR, its utility begins with much lower demands on per-
ceived realism than VR. For example, a heads-up display in a car
that reliably highlights pedestrians at night as silhouettes needs no
photorealistic simulation of how light interacts with the world to be
useful.

As technology continues to evolve, the boundaries between tradi-

tional media (e.g., phone calls vs. interactive video, or newspapers
vs. interactive web pages) become diffuse. Similarly, the boundary
between passive media and interactive VR and AR begin to blur,
with the ﬁrst interactive movies being developed for VR headsets.
Therefore, we believe that increasing demand will drive True AR
development to the point that we will experience it in our lifetimes.
But, are there clear criteria by which we can judge the achievement of
True AR?

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

3

2 True AR: What?

2 Michael D. McGuigan. Graphics
Turing Test. The Computing Research
Repository, arxiv:cs/0603132v1, 2006
3 Qi Shan, Riley Adams, Brian Curless,
Yasutaka Furukawa, and Steven M.
Seitz. The Visual Turing Test for Scene
Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on 3D Vision,
pages 25–32, 2013

In 1950, Alan Turing introduced the Turing Test, an es-
sential concept in the philosophy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). He
proposed an “imitation game” to test the sophistication of AI soft-
ware. At its core is a precise test protocol through which human
participants are to determine whether a conversation partner is an
actual human or an AI simulation. Similar tests have been suggested
for ﬁelds including Computer Graphics
. In
this section, we discuss an application of this idea of perfection as
indistinguishability, to yield an AR Turing Test.

and Visual Computing

2

3

A charm of the original Turing Test is that it restricts possible user

interaction with the simulation so that the most essential qualities
of the simulation are tested (cognition, not the graphical rendering
of a human being, which in the 1950s would have been far beyond
the capabilities of any existing computer). Similarly, we believe that
it makes little sense to deﬁne a single true-for-all-time test protocol,
as the applications of AR vary too widely. Instead, we focus on the
dimensions along which the interactions in a useful test scenario
can be restricted. Informally speaking, we deﬁne True AR to be a
modiﬁcation of the user’s perception of their surroundings that can-
not be detected by the user. The most obvious parameter of the test
protocol then should be which senses can be used: even the most so-
phisticated visual display will immediately fail a test in which users
can use their hands to touch objects in order to tell the real from the
virtual.

A second dimension comprises the consistency of the simulated
world with actual reality: Can users use a (potentially) virtual micro-
scope to examine a surface? How about a CT scanner? Can they cook
a meal and eat it? Or, spend sufﬁcient time to see whether the change
of seasons is consistent with their expectations?

Third, how is the transition between actual and augmented reality

handled, if special devices need to be worn? One possibility would
be the simultaneous exposure to virtual and actual reality to be com-
pared: have the subject put on all necessary displays, then remove a
box that occluded the view. Which of the two apples the subject sees
is real, which a simulation?

3 True AR: How?

In the past, several potential approaches for True AR have
been discussed. Two of these approaches are presented in early work
by Ivan Sutherland in the 1960s. Describing a hypothetical “Ultimate

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

4

Display”, he wrote

4

:

The ultimate display would, of course, be a room within which the
computer can control the existence of matter. A chair displayed in such
a room would be good enough to sit in. Handcuffs displayed in such a
room would be conﬁning, and a bullet displayed in such a room would
be fatal.

Here, he deﬁned the ultimate vision of True AR: creating, manip-
ulating, and destroying atoms, in the spirit of the Star Trek Holodeck
and earlier science ﬁction stories.

However, there are huge technical challenges involved with rapidly

altering atoms, as would be required to implement this scenario.
Sutherland tackled a subset of this problem three years later
. He
developed a stereoscopic head-worn display, whose 3D position and
orientation were tracked. This allowed him to display objects that
appeared to exist within the user’s physical environment. Instead of
manipulating the atoms surrounding the user, the user’s perception
of the environment is carefully measured and an illusion of those
manipulated atoms is displayed.

5

In the remainder of this section, we present the four main ap-
proaches for achieving True AR, sorted in decreasing order of physi-
cality: from “manipulating atoms” to “manipulating perception”:

• Controlled Matter
• Surround AR
• Personalized AR
• Implanted AR

Controlled Matter. As Sutherland suggests, manipulating atoms
is in some sense the ideal way to implement True AR. Creating phys-
ical objects by rapidly reconﬁguring atoms would create physical
objects consistent over all interaction modalities and all users. How-
ever, there are huge technical hurdles for this, including energy and
safety requirements. Although there is no general-purpose display in
sight, several displays for special cases have been developed.

For example, displays that use magnetic ﬁelds to rapidly create

6

shapes out of ferromagnetic ﬂuid have been developed
. A limitation
of this approach is that the resulting shapes are not solid and cannot
be touched due to the safety concerns when interacting with strong
magnetic ﬁelds. The solidity limitation is addressed by another class
7
of displays that levitate solid objects in a ﬁeld of overlaid ultrasonic
or magnetic waves
; again, scaling these up raises safety because of
the required strength of overlaid ﬁelds. Another popular approach is
to use tabletop pin-arrays
ever, actuated pins severely limit the kinds of shapes that can be

that are solid and can be touched. How-

8

9

4 Ivan E. Sutherland. The Ultimate
Display. In Proceedings of the Congress of
the International Federation of Information
Processing (IFIP), volume 2, pages
506–508, 1965

5 Ivan E. Sutherland. A Head-Mounted
Three Dimensional Display. In Proceed-
ings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference,
volume 1, pages 757–764, 1968

6 Sachiko Kodama. Dynamic Ferroﬂuid
Sculpture: Organic Shape-Changing Art
Forms. Communications of the ACM, 51
(6):79–81, 2008
7 Yoichi Ochiai, Takayuki Hoshi, and
Jun Rekimoto. Pixie Dust: Graphics
Generated by Levitated and Animated
Objects in Computational Acoustic-
Potential Field. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 33(4):85:1–85:13, 2014
8 Jinha Lee, Rehmi Post, and Hiroshi
Ishii. Zeron: Mid-air tangible interac-
tion enabled by computer controlled
magnetic levitation. In Proceedings of
the ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, pages 327–336,
2011
9 Yasushi Ikei, Mariko Yamada, and
Shuichi Fukuda. A New Design
of Haptic Texture Display—Texture
Display2—and its Preliminary Evalua-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual
Reality Conference, pages 21–28, 2001

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

5

displayed to a height ﬁeld, which precludes overhangs and multiple
layers.

Surround AR. The next best thing to manipulating atoms is manip-
ulating photons that reach the user. Although the user cannot touch
objects created like this, they can be potentially made visually indis-
tinguishable from physical reality; since the majority of our percep-
tual bandwidth is allocated to the visual sense, visual augmentations
are extremely important.

For maximum visual ﬁdelity, the user could be surrounded with
displays that recreate the wave front of photons that would be emit-
ted from the environment to be presented—or, at least, a distribution
of light that has the same visual effect on a human observer. Such
light ﬁeld displays would provide several advantages: no tracking of
users would be required; hence, they would automatically support
multiple users in the same space. Even before the digital revolution,
approached this effect by means of lenslet ar-
integral photography
rays afﬁxed to photographic plates. Holography
stores wave fronts
as interference patterns. The practical limits on achievable resolu-
tion and the immense amount of data required for large, dynamic
displays have kept this approach back so far, though, and the next
approach has been used more widely. For haptics, a promising direc-
tion could be stimulating the user’s skin through ultrasound waves,
as demonstrated by Long and colleagues

10

12

11

.

Personalized AR. Instead of displaying the full environment
around the user, we could display the subset that the user is currently
observing. Such a targeted manipulation of the user’s perception is
much more feasible. Sutherland’s head-worn display is the ﬁrst em-
bodiment of this approach. The downside of this approach is that
we need to track the user’s viewpoint at a sufﬁciently high update
rate and low latency. In addition, if multiple users are involved, the
effort is multiplied and their displays must be synchronized; recent
examples include Meta, HoloLens, and Lumus.

Implanted AR. In our progression of virtualization of displays,
the extreme is not to send any photons towards the user; instead,
we directly manipulate the user’s perceptual system. This approach
has a long history of being depicted in science ﬁction, including
movies such as The Matrix and Total Recall. Futurists have pre-
dicted that this is the ultimate way to change our realities; for ex-
ample
:“nanotechnology will augment our bodies . . . as humans
connect to computers via direct neural interfaces or live full-time in
virtual reality.” Recently, this approach has gained increasing atten-

13

10 Gabriel Lippmann. Épreuves
Réversibles Donnant la Sensation du
Relief. Journal of Physics, 7(4):821–825,
1908
11 Dennis Gabor. A New Microscopic
Principle. Nature, 161:777–778, 1948

12 Benjamin Long, Sue Ann Seah, Tom
Carter, and Sriram Subramanian.
Rendering Volumetric Haptic Shapes
in Mid-Air using Ultrasound. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 33(6):181:1–
181:10, 2014

13 Ray Kurzweil. The Age of Spiritual
Machines: When Computers Exceed
Human Intelligence. Penguin, 2000

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

6

tion, based on the success stories around the bionic eye. By directly
stimulating the retina or the visual cortex with electricity, blind per-
sons can regain vision. For example, the Argus system has been ap-
proved by the European Union for commercial use in 2011 and by the
FDA in 2013. So far, this approach has not been applied to augment a
healthy person’s reality.

In summary, we think that the most promising approach in the

short term is Personalized AR. Although the other approaches
are promising in the long term, signiﬁcant challenges remain to be
solved.

4 Facing Reality: Technical Barriers

In exploring the limits to True AR, we can now turn our attention
to technical challenges. As the visual channel has the highest band-
width, it has historically received most of our attention—most univer-
sities feature visual computing in one aspect or another as part of a
regular computer science curriculum, few address acoustics, for ex-
ample. Other modalities are even less developed (touch, smell, taste).
In following this tradition, we will focus on visual interaction as well,
but consider it as exemplary for the challenges posed by the other
modalities.

A prerequisite for achieving True AR is the ability to photorealisti-
cally capture reality and display it to the user, possibly after altering
it. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss display (Section 4.1); we argue that
the only way to achieve True AR is to implement a light ﬁeld dis-
play. Next, we discuss capture, with a special focus on capturing light
ﬁelds (Section 4.2).

4.1 The Case for Light Field Displays

For the visual channel, technological progress has been somewhat
uneven. Color reproduction is, while not a completely solved prob-
lem, already rather satisfactory, and the available solution space is
rather well understood.

Also, the spatial resolution of modern displays approximates what

the human eye can reasonably discern; so called retina displays are
an example, and in the pixels-per-inch (ppi), race some manufac-
turers even exceed it. One important aspect is missing, however:
expressing human visual system (HVS) capabilities via ppi are rela-
tive to a ﬂat device. In interacting with the world, we need something
better. And indeed, the HVS can be better modeled with discernable-
resolution-per-angle-seen, and ppi-at-distance can be derived from
that; however, if we only recreate that, we treat the eye as a pinhole

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

7

camera, which is a fundamentally incomplete model.

The eye is a complex optical system; speciﬁcally, it contains a
lens of variable refractive power and a variable aperture. This sys-
tem adapts, and in addition to the image we see, it gives us uncon-
scious feedback on its optical state. Additionally, the optics in the
eye change as we pass them over the scene in order to achieve ver-
gence and accommodation, and this generates visual impressions that
we expect and miss in ﬂat images (for instance, changing bokeh or
out-of-focus blur). In order to achieve True AR, we need to present
each eye with a light distribution equivalent to the light leaving a real
scene.

14

The distribution of light in space is exhaustively modeled with the
plenoptic function
. It is at least six-dimensional: three dimensions
for the observer’s viewpoint, two for the viewing direction, and one
for the wave length; its dense sampling and reconstruction is expen-
sive. One assumption that makes either task easier is that the envi-
ronment is observed—or rendered—from the outside, thus keeping
spectral radiance the same along straight lines and effectively remov-
ing one dimension from the viewpoint, reducing the representation
to a light ﬁeld

15

.

Stereo 3D cinematography addresses a small part of this issue:
humans have two eyes and each provides visual information from
its respective point of view. Stereo imagery therefore provides two
different views, providing the disparity cue, but, as the human eye
is not a pinhole device, the missing visual cues need to be approxi-
mated, creating restrictions for the imagery that can be displayed and
problems for the audience ranging from discomfort up to headaches.
Ultimately, we will need plenoptic displays to achieve True AR,
and here, technology is in its infancy, although current research pro-
provide limited accommodation cues for single users, they
totypes
fall short in other domains, mainly resolution, and there is still a lot
of ground to cover before they scale up to multiple users.

16

There are two fundamental ways to embed light ﬁelds of virtual

objects into reality. First, we can inject these light ﬁelds into the
user’s direct view. Second, we can capture the light ﬁeld of the user’s
environment, fuse it with the light ﬁeld that we want to embed, and
display this combination to the user. Each approach has its advan-
tages and disadvantages. The second approach is technically much
more difﬁcult, but has inherent advantages, including the correct
handling of occlusions between real and virtual objects. In the next
section, we discuss light ﬁeld capture in more detail.

14 Edward H. Adelson and James R.
Bergen. The Plenoptic Function and the
Elements of Early Vision. In Computa-
tional Models of Visual Processing, pages
3–20. MIT Press, 1991

15 Marc Levoy and Pat Hanrahan. Light
Field Rendering. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH, pages 31–42, 1996

16 Douglas Lanman and David Luebke.
Near-Eye Light Field Displays. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 32(6):220:1–
220:10, 2013

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

8

4.2 Capturing Light Fields

Just as a projector is the dual of a camera, in the sense that their geo-
metrical conﬁgurations are the same and that the former emits light
that the other captures, plenoptic sensors and displays also have
much in common. However, dense light ﬁeld recording and display
is still a high-dimensional, difﬁcult problem, and thus approaches
need to be employed that are built around asymmetric assumptions.
As we will argue in this section, capture is actually easier to imple-
ment than display.

A plenoptic sensing device is usually constructed with simplifying

assumptions in mind regarding the environment structure, such as
restricting the scene to Lambertian surfaces (ones that look equally
bright from every viewing conﬁguration) or assuming occlusion-free
scene geometry. In those cases, the scene around the viewer has an
underlying model with fewer dimensions (possibly, merely a colored
depth map from a certain point of view), and powerful 3D recon-
struction algorithms may be able to generate a sufﬁciently complete
scene description from only two input views. In the sense of sam-
pling theory, this corresponds to observing the plenoptic function
with point sampling from two possibly widely spaced points.

Again in the sense of sampling theory, a display device recon-
structs a continuous light ﬁeld to be observed by a human observer.
Even if a renderable representation is known with arbitrary precision,
a display needs to reconstruct a full, continuous function to be ob-
served by the HVS. An advantage of display technology is that the
HVS is forgiving in some ways, and generating a visually equivalent
light ﬁeld signal—one the HVS could not distinguish from the per-
fect signal—is sufﬁcient. Color perception, for instance, can be fully
achieved with few primary colors in narrow spectral bands; even
three primaries in red, green, and blue go a long way towards cover-
ing a visually complete color gamut. However, this is only possible
because the spectral sensitivity of the HVS contains wide low-pass
preﬁlter kernels in the sampling sense.

For spatial signal variations—different view directions—dense
sampling usually solves the problem; retina displays and 4K televi-
sions come increasingly close to the resolution limits of the HVS. The
extended aperture pupil of the human eye also acts in the fashion
of a low-pass ﬁlter on the incident light distribution—however, with
varying pupil diameter and varying refractive power in the lenses, a
coarsely sampled input is insufﬁcient, and, as many samples (images
for different viewpoints) have to be generated for each pupil in order
to achieve visually convincing impressions after ﬁltering with the
aperture, a light ﬁeld display needs orders of magnitude more indi-

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

9

vidually controllable basis elements for reconstruction than a light
ﬁeld sensor would need for sampling.

Hence—the unpredictability of technical progress notwithstanding—

we would expect that light ﬁeld sensors would stay ahead of light
ﬁeld displays for the foreseeable future.

5 Facing Ethics: Non-Technical Barriers

What are the ethical and societal implications of True AR? Since True
AR is a new technology, the question of power, in the Marxist sense,
is inevitable: who will control its deployment, who will ultimately
be in control of its augmented content, and for what purposes will it
be used? Will individuals be freed, or, on the contrary, be locked into
purely commerce-driven experiences?

These questions, of course, address the heart of any technology

representing and manipulating information, from books and the
Gutenberg revolution up until the recent scandals around NSA mass
surveillance of electronic communications. However, we believe that
True AR, by purposefully fusing information with the real world
and dissolving any remain of discriminatory doubt, will be the most
powerful medium that humanity ever had at its disposal. We will
no longer observe the shadows in Plato’s Cave, out of which only
philosophers can glance a sight of reality; but, a ubiquitously inter-
woven stream of shadows and reality. Based on purposefully manip-
ulated illusions, we will be incapable of telling what is there from
that which others, Artiﬁcial Intelligences or humans, may want us to
believe is there.

Equally interesting, and equally worrisome, is the direct impact
that True AR will have on everyday life at the level of the individual:
Will it enhance quality of life and human-to-human communication
by promoting a deeper understanding of the true reality by letting us
see past the world of illusion and deceit; for example, by informing
us of the origin of a product or the way it was manufactured? Or,
will it be the very instrument that will isolate and project us into a
world of delusion? For Buddhists, reality is a dream and the Samsara
is ﬁlled with stimuli that prevent us from awakening, because we
do not pause to meditate, but we react to them. Reacting, instead
of being in control, is one of the worst consequences of misused
information technology; for example, several studies have shown
how the continuous use of social media has been decreasing attention
spans among teenagers
the illusion, or can, on the contrary, help us to see through them and
ﬁlter the unimportant from the transcendent.

. In this sense, True AR may add layers to

17

Let’s get back to our ﬁrst question, the question of power, which

Figure 1: Used with permission of
Horacio Cassinelli.

17 Eyal Ophir, Clifford Nass, and An-
thony D. Wagner. Cognitive Control in
Media Multitaskers. In Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, volume 106 (37), pages
15583–15587, 2009

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

10

18 Frank La Rue. Report of the Special
Rapporteur on the Promotion and
Protection of the Right to Freedom of
Opinion and Expression. Human Rights
Council, 17th Session Agenda Item 3,
United Nations General Assembly, 2011

18

is inherent to any medium. Free access to information and public
schooling is a good measure of social equality. Similarly, a 2011 re-
port for the United Nations Human Right Council
led the media to
suggest that Internet access is a fundamental human right. However,
True AR presents a peculiar characteristic: it has the power to pro-
duce a radical divide of humanity into those who will live in an aug-
mented world and others who will dwell in a world much less rich in
information. This divide will affect the opportunities of individuals
more profoundly than any previous technology, as it can continu-
ously affect the perception of our immediate physical environment.
A precursor of the upcoming debates was the discussion around
Google Glass users in the San Francisco area, sometimes referred
to as “Glassholes.” Socially minded individuals raised questions
about the powerful discriminating effect that such a public display of
this early form of transhumanism has. We could observe a visceral,
democratic reaction to an early form of the upcoming debates that
ensue about True AR users in the future.

Our second question relates to the possible misdirection of users.

Let us now ignore the bias that the establishment, the market, or
whatever other social force inevitably introduces into any experience.
The question could then be rephrased as follows: what will happen
when True AR will confer inﬁnite depth of perception into our ev-
eryday life? Indeed, one has to consider that this technology will not
only be capable of deceiving our senses with perfectly physically
co-located “virtual” objects, but will also augment our cognitive ca-
pabilities by prompting us with more abstract, but no less relevant
data in real time. This will lead to an augmented self-awareness and
ultimately a powerful meta-perception. While interacting with oth-
ers, we will be able to see through them, possibly into their personal
and professional secrets; and, returning to our ﬁrst question, if others
cannot see us in the same way, a decent symmetry is being violated,
resembling the asymmetry in surveillance practices that led Steve
. For example, using
Mann to coin the concept of Sousveillance
AR to see through walls has already been demonstrated
modeling using Google’s Project Tango could make this capability be-
come a ubiquitous reality. AR Firewalls could address this problem;
another way would be to always enforce symmetric AR; or, we could
use the very same AR technologies to signal the presence of another
AR user and invisible layers to one another. The question of power
is closely related to the symmetry of AR, both form the technological
point of view, as well as the ethical point of view.

; rapid 3D

19

20

Will True AR become a democratic, symmetric technology? And
if so, how far into the future will it take us? Finally, if this happens,
how will this total information transparency affect our everyday

19 Steve Mann. Sousveillance: Inverse
Surveillance in Multimedia Imaging.
In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, pages 620–627,
2004
20 Christian Sandor, Andrew Cunning-
ham, Arindam Dey, and Ville-Veikko
Mattila. An Augmented Reality X-Ray
System Based on Visual Saliency. In
Proceedings of IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Mixed and Augmented Reality,
pages 27–36, 2010

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

11

relations? Information, including affective information, works as a
currency between human beings. Whether it is natural or artiﬁcial, its
scarcity makes it valuable and helps us trade in the world of personal
relations. Not being able to hide anything may have the effect of
devaluing interpersonal relations, but also erasing differences and
avoiding the abuse of power.

6 Conclusions

As our discussions at the symposium and in this article turn to an
end, we are left with two main observations. On the one hand, we
face the insight that the realization of True AR has to be built on si-
multaneous achievements that transcend the boundaries between
disciplines traditionally thought not to be related to AR at all: in ad-
dition to optics, computer graphics, and computer vision; later on, we
will require input from disciplines including ethics, art, philosophy,
and the social sciences to guide its applications.

On the other hand, the continuing technological progress that
drives us ever closer to True AR requires us to deﬁne our goal posts
more clearly. One possible approach for this could be an AR Turing
Test, as a protocol to objectively determine whether True AR has
been achieved. Therefore, we strongly believe that the development
of an AR Turing Test must be added to the AR research agenda.
As our discussions have shown, it is not straightforward to deﬁne
such a test. Nevertheless, it is crucial, in order to have a measureable
goal for the attempts of others and ourselves to erase the boundary
between real and virtual.

Acknowledgements

We thank the Mirai-Kaitaku Colloquium of Nara Institute of Science
and Technology (NAIST) for funding the symposium that led to this
article. We are grateful to Hirokazu Kato and Goshiro Yamamoto
(both NAIST) for their support in arranging this symposium. Last,
but not least, we would like to thank all participants at the sympo-
sium.

References

Edward H. Adelson and James R. Bergen. The Plenoptic Function

and the Elements of Early Vision. In Computational Models of Visual
Processing, pages 3–20. MIT Press, 1991.

Figure 2: Group photo of symposium
speakers from left to right then back to
front: Tomokazu Sato (NAIST), Richard
Newcombe (University of Washington),
Martin Fuchs (Universität Stuttgart),
Hao Li (University of Southern Cali-
fornia), Masayuki Kanbara (NAIST),
Alvaro Cassinelli (University of Tokyo),
Mai Otsuki (Tsukuba University),
Goshiro Yamamoto (NAIST), Takeo
Igarashi (University of Tokyo), Christian
Sandor (NAIST), and Masahiko Inami
(Keio University).

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

12

Dennis Gabor. A New Microscopic Principle. Nature, 161:777–778,

1948.

Yasushi Ikei, Mariko Yamada, and Shuichi Fukuda. A New Design
of Haptic Texture Display—Texture Display2—and its Preliminary
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality Conference,
pages 21–28, 2001.

Sachiko Kodama. Dynamic Ferroﬂuid Sculpture: Organic Shape-
Changing Art Forms. Communications of the ACM, 51(6):79–81,
2008.

Ray Kurzweil. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed

Human Intelligence. Penguin, 2000.

Douglas Lanman and David Luebke. Near-Eye Light Field Displays.

ACM Transactions on Graphics, 32(6):220:1–220:10, 2013.

Jinha Lee, Rehmi Post, and Hiroshi Ishii. Zeron: Mid-air tangible
interaction enabled by computer controlled magnetic levitation.
In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, pages 327–336, 2011.

Marc Levoy and Pat Hanrahan. Light Field Rendering. In Proceedings

of ACM SIGGRAPH, pages 31–42, 1996.

Gabriel Lippmann. Épreuves Réversibles Donnant la Sensation du

Relief. Journal of Physics, 7(4):821–825, 1908.

Benjamin Long, Sue Ann Seah, Tom Carter, and Sriram Subramanian.
Rendering Volumetric Haptic Shapes in Mid-Air using Ultrasound.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, 33(6):181:1–181:10, 2014.

Steve Mann. Sousveillance: Inverse Surveillance in Multimedia Imag-
ing. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
pages 620–627, 2004.

Michael D. McGuigan. Graphics Turing Test. The Computing Research

Repository, arxiv:cs/0603132v1, 2006.

Nara Institute of Science and Technology. Symposium Web Page:
Making Augmented Reality Real. Last accessed on 14 December
2015, 2014. http://imd.naist.jp/~sandor/marr/.

Yoichi Ochiai, Takayuki Hoshi, and Jun Rekimoto. Pixie Dust: Graph-

ics Generated by Levitated and Animated Objects in Computa-
tional Acoustic-Potential Field. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 33(4):
85:1–85:13, 2014.

breaking the barriers to true augmented reality

13

Eyal Ophir, Clifford Nass, and Anthony D. Wagner. Cognitive Con-
trol in Media Multitaskers. In Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, volume 106 (37), pages
15583–15587, 2009.

Frank La Rue. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion

and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression.
Human Rights Council, 17th Session Agenda Item 3, United Nations
General Assembly, 2011.

Christian Sandor, Andrew Cunningham, Arindam Dey, and Ville-
Veikko Mattila. An Augmented Reality X-Ray System Based on
Visual Saliency. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 27–36, 2010.

Qi Shan, Riley Adams, Brian Curless, Yasutaka Furukawa, and

Steven M. Seitz. The Visual Turing Test for Scene Reconstruc-
tion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 3D Vision, pages
25–32, 2013.

Ivan E. Sutherland. The Ultimate Display.

In Proceedings of the

Congress of the International Federation of Information Processing (IFIP),
volume 2, pages 506–508, 1965.

Ivan E. Sutherland. A Head-Mounted Three Dimensional Display.

In Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference, volume 1, pages
757–764, 1968.

