Development of a Wheelchair Simulator for Children with Multiple 
Disabilities 

LIRMM (Laboratoire de Informatique, Robotique et Microéléctronique de Montpellier)  

Nancy Rodriguez* 

ABSTRACT 

Virtual  reality  allows 
to  create  situations  which  can  be 
experimented  under  the  control  of  the  user,  without  risks,  in  a 
very  flexible  way.  This  allows  to  develop  skills  and  to  have 
confidence to work in real conditions with real equipment. VR is 
then  widely  used  as  a  training  and  learning  tool.  More  recently, 
VR  has  also  showed  its  potential  in  rehabilitation  and  therapy 
fields  because  it  provides  users  with  the  ability  of  repeat  their 
actions  several  times  and  to  progress  at  their  own  pace.  In  this 
communication,  we  present  our  work  in  the  development  of  a 
wheelchair  simulator  designed  to  allow  children  with  multiple 
disabilities to familiarize themselves with the wheelchair. 

Keywords:  virtual 
simulator,  disability,  multiple 
disabilities,  wheelchair,  learning,  augmented  and  alternative 
communication, interaction devices 

reality, 

Index Terms:	  I.3.1 [Computer Graphics]: Hardware Architecture 
—  Input  devices;  I.3.7  [Computer  Graphics]:  Three-Dimensional 
Graphics  and  Realism  –  Virtual  reality;  H.5.1  [Information 
Interfaces And Presentation]: Multimedia Information Systems — 
Artificial,  augmented,  and  virtual  realities  H.5.2  [Information 
Interfaces And Presentation]: User Interfaces — Input devices and 
strategies 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Training  is  an  application  area  perfectly  suited  to  virtual  reality. 
VR  allows  the  development  of  specific  skills  and  to  evolve 
independently VR simulation create a safe learning environment, 
user  can  test  the  consequences  of  his  actions  without  risk  in  the 
real world. With a simulation, it is possible to expand the range of 
to  different  users, 
possible  situations  and 
to  adapt 
capabilities  and  knowledge[1][2]. 
the  virtual 
environment  allows  to  easy  and  quantitatively  assessing  the 
progress of the user and his weaknesses [3]. 

them 
In  addition, 

The objective of the current work we present in this article is the 
realization  of  an  electric  wheelchair  simulator  for  children  with 
multiple  disabilities,  aged  between  13  and  16  years.  This 
simulator will prepare children to wheelchair driving, taking into 
account motor and cognitive aspects. The first stage of this work 
concerns  the  development  of  a  demonstrator  to  assess  children's 
interest  in  the  IT  tool,  which  will  then  be  integrated  into  their 
learning project.  

* nancy.rodriguez@lirmm.fr 

“Multiples  disabilities”  is  a  serious  handicap  associating  motor 
impairment  and  severe  mental  retardation,  resulting  in  a  extreme 
restriction of autonomy and possibilities of perception, expression 
and  relationship  [4].  In  fact,  drive  autonomously  a  wheelchair 
provides  better  mental  and  motor  development  by  initiating  new 
movements and by increasing socialization. But learning to drive 
a  wheelchair  in  real  conditions  can  be  dangerous  and  tiresome 
sometimes  even  scary  for  patients,  which  can  lead  to  slow  this 
crucial  stage  in  their  development.  The  use  of  a  virtual 
environment can help in this learning process and also allow them 
to  use  an  electric  wheelchair  earlier,  once  children  habituate  and 
control the emotions provoked by driving.  
In  addition,  the  handling  of  the  vehicle  is  not  intuitive  and 
requires  practice,  especially  for  patients  with  severe  motor 
dysfunction  preventing  them  from  using  conventional  devices 
such as the joystick. A simulator may help find which devices are 
suitable  for  the  individual  and  teach  him  how  to  use  it  without 
taking any risk.  
This  project  is  carried  out  in  collaboration  between  the  Institute 
for  Children  and  Adolescents  with  multiple  disabilities  Coste 
Rousse  located  in  Prades-le-Lez  (Hérault,  France)  and  the 
Laboratory  of  Informatics,  Robotics  and  Microelectronics  of 
Montpellier  (LIRMM)  in  Montpellier.  We  work  closely  with  the 
multidisciplinary  team  (educators,  orthoptist,  physiotherapist)  of 
the center to make the simulator accessible from this conception. 

2  RELATED WORK 

Several  wheelchair  simulators  are  available;  some  designed  to 
learn  to  drive  or  to  evaluate  the  wheelchair  and  others  to 
understand  the  difficulties  of  using  a  wheelchair  and  evaluate 
constructions  accessibility.  But  there  is  not,  to  our  knowledge,  a 
simulator  designed  or  adaptable  for  children  with  multiple 
disabilities.  Marchal-Crespo  presents 
[5]  a  wheelchair 
prototype  to  facilitate  the  learning  to  drive,  especially  for  the 
mentally  handicapped.  The  system  provides  a  chair  with  force 
feedback  joystick  and  sensors  to  detect  collisions.  The  prototype 
is able to avoid the walls and other obstacles to help movement. 

in 

In  the  work  of  Steyn[6],  the  simulator  uses  a  immersive  virtual 
reality  interface  displayed  on  4  screens  and  a  physical  platform 
with a force feedback chair. ACCESSIM [7] uses a very realistic 
representation  of  urban  areas  to  educate  architects  and  decision 
makers  on  the  difficulties  faced  by  wheelchair  users.  The 
simulator VIEW  [8]has a virtual reality interface and virtual chair 
is  directed  using  a  conventional  joystick  electric  wheelchair 
(Figure 1). It is possible to visualize the virtual environment using 
a conventional screen or a helmet with track head movements.  
Wheelsim[9]  is  a  simulator  constructed  on  the  basis  of  a 
conventional  racing  game.  Several  courses  (levels)  are  available. 
The duration of each course is recorded and the time spent outside 
the planned route. Note that a very important work was carried out 
on the sound environment in order to amplify immersion.  

All  these  systems  have  realistic  sets  with  many  details  and 
animations.  This  type  of  scene  is  not  suitable  for  children 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suffering  from  cognitive  disorders.  Indeed,  the  details  used  to 
increase  the  realism  and  immersion  of  the  user  will  cause 
difficulties in perception and understanding of the environment.  

At present, concerning sound feedback, there is a sound when the 
wheelchair starts to move and a sound (applause) associated with 
the  fireworks  at  the  end  of  the  level.  There  is  no  yet  haptic 
feedback in our system.  

Interaction devices 

3.2 
A long-term goal of our project is the development of a software 
component to quickly integrate various interaction devices. This is 
a challenging task, since there is no standard for the input/output 
of of-the-shelf interaction devices, forcing to work on a  case-by-
case basis. 

Figure 1:  VIEW, a simulator for learning to drive 

3  DESIGN 

intuitive 

interface.  Unity  offers 

The  simulator  is  developed  under  Unity3D,  a  game  engine 
allowing  to  create  and  manage  interactive  virtual  environments. 
The  application  provides  many  pre-programmed  features  and  an 
ergonomic  and 
several 
functionalities  such  as  a  physics  engine,  a  tool  for  build 
animations and the possibility to integrate many input and output 
devices. Concerning the design and development of our prototype, 
all  choices  regarding  look  and  sound,  the  different  levels, 
gamification (positive reinforcement) and tests were carried out in 
consultation  with  the  Coste  Rousse  team  in  a  collaborative  and 
iterative approach. 
Central to the simulation is the virtual chair. It is the only object 
manipulated by the user and the goal is that its behaviour is fairly 
close to the behaviour of a real chair.  
For rapid prototyping, we use a predefined model of a car wheels 
simulation.  This  simulation  tool  has  four  independent  wheels, 
allowing  simulating  the  behaviour  of  the  wheels  of  various 
models  of  real  wheelchairs.  Of  course,  we  also  tested  the 
behaviour  of  a  wheelchair  by  using  it,  in  order  to  better 
understand  the  feelings  caused  by  its  use.  We  then  set  the 
correspondence  between  the  different  movements  of  the  wheels 
and  the  values  of  the  joystick  in  order  to  better  reproduce  in  the 
simulator the real behaviour of the wheelchair. 

Figure 2:  Visual feedback 

We focused on the integration of a joystick, the default device on 
electric  wheelchairs.  After  trying  several  joystick  models,  we 
decided to “build” our own joystick combining an unused joystick 
of a wheelchair (Figure 3) and a circuit board of a game joystick 
for translating data from analogic to digital format. This “hybrid” 
solution (a joystick from real wheelchair with a USB connexion) 
has  enabled  children  to  successfully  control  the  virtual  chair 
without being distracted by the interaction device.  

3.1  Visual aspects 
Given  the  cognitive  and  perceptive  troubles  of  children,  it  is 
essential to build a tool visually adapted. It is therefore necessary 
to  identify  the  elements  and  codes  that  will  allow  conveying 
important information of the simulation. As we have stated above, 
the  environments  are  usually  very  realistic  with  rich  details  for 
amplifying  the  immersion  of  the  user.  In  our  case,  this  approach 
does  not  make  sense.  Indeed,  the  accumulation  of  elements  in  a 
scene  will  tend  to  interfere  with  the  user  and  prevent  it  from 
properly  analyse  the  significant  elements  of  the  scene.  We  have 
therefore  chosen  to  work  on  very  refined  environments  by 
keeping  only  the  necessary  items.  The  colours  have  also  been 
adapted  to  be  sufficiently  contrasted  and  then  highlight  the 
important  objects  and  increase  their  visibility  [10].  As  a  part  of 
positive reinforcement, we decided to reward the player when he 
is  on  the  right  track  with  a  discreet  symbol  (the  Coste  Rousse 
smiley)  and  colourful  fireworks  at  the  end  of  each  level.  Even  if 
this  effect  is  more  intrusive,  once  the  level  is  completed,  the 
child's distraction is no longer a concern (see Figure 2). 

Figure 3:  Joystick build for our simulator 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4  DISCUSSION 

We  have  evaluated  the  prototype  with  four  children  of  the  Coste 
Rousse  center,  who  know  already  drive  a  wheelchair,  and  have 
some computer skills. During various test sessions we observed a 
lot  of  curiosity  about  the  simulator,  and  different  ways  of 
approaching  it.  Two  children  were  focused  on  the  screen  and 
joystick  while  others  tend  to  be  more  easily  distracted.  We  did 
manage to get feedback on the recognition of objects in the virtual 
environment when the vehicle is stationary. However, recognition 
is  more  difficult  in  motion.  The  children  managed  to  run  the 
simulator  for  a  while  (2-3  minutes).  But  after  a  few  minutes,  we 
found difficulties in the use of devices and users wanted to stop. 
Indeed, the use of the joystick in a long time is difficult because of 
their  mobility  impairment  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  in  the 
future to work with alternative devices. 

In  this  project,  the  target  users  have  extreme  difficulties  in 
communication;  the  level  of  verbal  expression  and  even  body 
language is very low. But studies and experiences in educational 
centers like Coste Rousse, show that children are able to express 
themselves  and  learn  when  you  provide  the  right  tools.  Working 
with  the  team  Coste  Rousse  and  a  small  group  of  children,  we 
managed to get ways to improve our work and offer a tool used by 
children with multiple disabilities. It is important to note that our 
system  can  only  be  tested  with  children  in  a  advanced  state  of 
development.  Indeed,  application  bugs  of  an  early  prototype 
usually  provoke  frustration  and  even  rejection  to  use  the 
simulator.  For  these  reasons  the  phases  of  development  and 
evaluation of our system are distant. 

5  CONCLUSION 

We  have  developed  an  electric  wheelchair  simulator  suitable  for 
children  with  multiple  disabilities.  We  were  able  to  experiment 
with a group of children and observed that it is an interest to add 
virtual reality in their learning project. 

[5]  L.  Marchal-Crespo.  A  simulator  and  assist-as-needed  control 
strategy  for  learning  to  drive  a  power  wheelchair.  PhD  thesis, 
University of California, Irvine, 2006.  

[6]  N.  Steyn.  Virtual  Reality  Platform  Modelling  and  Design  for 
Versatile  Electric  Wheelchair  Simulation 
an  Enabled 
Environment.  PhD  thesis,  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering, 
Tshwane University of Technology, 2014.  

in 

[7]  A. 

Schmid 

and 

C.  Dumas.  Accessim, 

2008-2013, 

http://www.accessim.ceremh.org/index.html  

[8]  Y.  Morère.  VIEW 

:  Virtual 

electric  wheelchair,  2012, 

http://www.lasc.univ-metz.fr/spip.php?article41 
[9]  LifeTool. Wheelsim. http://www. lifetool-solutions.at 
[10]  A.  Arditi.  Designing  for  people  with  partial  sight  and  color 
2005.  

deficiencies, 
http://www.lighthouse.org/accessibility/design/accessible-print-
design/effective-color-contrast/ 

[11]  C.K.  Olson.  Children’s  Motivations  for  Video  Game  Play  in  the 
Context  of  Normal  Development.  Review  of  General  Psychology, 
2010 

[12]  C.  Pinheiro  Jr,  E.  Naves,  P.  Pino,  E.  Losson,  A.  Andrade  and  G. 
Bourhis. Alternative communication systems for people with severe 
motor disabilities: a survey. BioMedical Engineering OnLine, 2011 

[13]  D. Stredney ,W. Carlson, J. Edward Swan II andvBeth Blostein. The 
Determination of Environmental Accessibility and ADA Compliance 
Through Virtual Wheelchair Simulation. PRESENCE: Teleoperators 
and Virtual Environments; First Special Issue on The Application of 
Virtual Environments to Architecture, Building, and Large Structure 
Design, Volume 4, Number 3, pages 297–305, 1995 

skills  and  express 

This  ongoing  work  has  allowed  us  to  highlight  the  potential  of 
virtual  reality  and  challenges  of  such  an  approach  in  the  field  of 
health,  to  enable  children  with  disabilities  to  grow  in  better 
conditions,  develop  new 
themselves. 
The  keyword  of  our 
"formalization". 
We  now  need  to  study  various  models  of  user  centered  design, 
interaction  and  evaluation  in  a  context  where  users  cannot 
communicate their needs and expectations. This will allow us, in 
collaboration  with  the  multidisciplinary  team  in  charge  of 
children, to define an experiment enabling to evaluate the benefits 
of virtual reality for learning when users are experiencing multiple 
disabilities. 

future  work 

is 

REFERENCES 

[1]  D.  Mellet-d'Huart 

  and  G.  Michel.  Les  environnements 
Informatiques  pour  l’Apprentissage  Humain.  Hermes,  2006,  ch.  11, 
"Réalité virtuelle et apprentissage".  

[2]  D.  Le  Gall  and  P.  Allain.  Applications  des  tech-  niques  de  réalité 
virtuelle  à  la  neuropsychologie  clinique.  Champ  psychosomatique, 
no 22, p. 25-38 (2001).  

[3]  M.  Sahnoun.  Conception  et  Simulation  d’une  Commande  à  Retour 
d’Effort pour Fauteuil Roulant Electrique. PhD thesis, Université de 
Metz, France, 2007.  

[4]  M.  Arpaillance  and  A.  Debrill  :  Évaluer  la  communication  de  la 
personne polyhandicapée. Master’s thesis, Université de Lille, Droit 
et Santé, 2013.  

 
 
 
 
 
