6
1
0
2

v
o
N
9

]

D
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
8
0
3
0
.
1
1
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

VR 'SPACE OPERA': MIMETIC SPECTRALISM IN AN
IMMERSIVE STARLIGHT AUDIFICATION SYSTEM

B. Carey
Hochschule f¨ur Musik und Theater Hamburg

benedict.carey@hfmt-hamburg.de

B. Ula¸s
˙Izmir Turk College Planetarium
bulash@gmail.com

April 22, 2022

Abstract

This paper describes a system designed as part of an interactive VR opera, which immerses a real-time
composer and an audience (via a network) in the historical location of G¨obeklitepe, in southern Turkey
during an imaginary scenario set in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic period (8500-5500 BCE), viewed by some to
be the earliest example of a temple, or observatory. In this scene music is generated, where the harmonic
material is determined based on observations of light variation from pulsating stars, that would have
theoretically been overhead on the 1st of October 8000 BC at 23:00 and animal calls based on the reliefs in
the temple. Based on the observations of the stars V465 Per, HD 217860, 16 Lac, BG CVn and KIC 6382916,
frequency collections were derived and applied to the generation of musical sound and notation sequences
within a custom VR environment using a novel method incorporating spectralist techniques. Parameters
controlling this resynthesis can be manipulated by the performer using a Leap Motion controller and Oculus
Rift HMD, yielding both sonic and visual results in the environment. The ﬁnal opera is to be viewed via
Google Cardboard and delivered over the Internet. This entire process aims to pose questions about real-
time composition through time distortion and invoke a sense of wonder and meaningfulness through a
ritualistic experience.

1

Introduction

The system we have developed forms the basis for
the forthcoming opera Motherese. It immerses a real-
time composer and an audience (via a network) in the
historical location of G¨obeklitepe, in southern Turkey
during an imaginary scenario set in the Pre-Pottery
Neolithic period (8500-5500 BCE). A description of
the networking features of this package is beyond the
scope of this paper, instead we will concentrate on
the virtual staging, sound resynthesis and soniﬁcation
aspects of out system.

Rather surprisingly so, FFT analysis, which is
so commonly employed in the composition of spec-
tral music, originates from a formula designed for
rapidly calculating the elliptical orbits of planetary
bodies. This early version of the DFT is a develop-
ment attributed to Alexis- Claude Clairaut in 1754
[1] but one could look even further back to ancient
Babylonian mathematics if the term 'spectral anal-
ysis', which is often used to describe the method
by which spectralist composers derive musical mate-
rial for their compositions, and is sometimes a stand
in for 'harmonic analysis' [2]. Of course since the

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
term harmonic analysis already connoted something
entirely diﬀerent amongst musicologists by the time
the French Spectralist tradition began in the 1970's,
this linguistic evolution makes sense, despite being
a slightly confusing side eﬀect both of the diﬃcul-
ties of categorization and the interdisciplinary nature
of Spectralism. Mostly the term spectral analysis is
used in an even more narrow sense when speaking
in the context of spectral music however, to refer
to DFT or FFT analysis of audio signals contain-
ing content from within the audible frequency range
(20 Hz and 20.000 Hz) to yield a collection of frequen-
cies (pitches) and their amplitude (dynamic) variance
over time for a composition. Indeed the stipulation
that spectral analysis produces musical results is a
creative leap of faith that supports the co-option of
this process into the composer's repertoire of com-
positional techniques, and for good reason. Why
shouldnt one look to mathematics to help build a
stronger understanding of music via recognition of
the structural underpinnings of sound, the very con-
crete from which this art form emerges?

Yet at the same time why stop at the analysis of
sound to produce frequency collections from which to
derive new harmonies and timbres? FFT analysis is
a tried and tested tool for modelling a musical repre-
sentation of a subject, using the program Macaque1
in combination with a SDIF ﬁle for example, one can
easily track the movement of a sound spectrum over
time such as was done by G´erard Grisey through
a similar method for his seminal work Partiels [3],
whose methods we will focus on here. If FFT anal-
ysis translates its usefulness so well from the realm
of the cosmos into such a diverse array of phenom-
ena such as audio signal processing, medical imaging,
image processing, pattern recognition, computational
chemistry, error correcting codes, and spectral meth-
ods for PDEs [4], it is perhaps no more worthy a
candidate for the source of frequency based musical
inspiration than any other similar method of observ-
ing the natural world's many oscillations.

So is the practice of using other algorithmic meth-
ods to interpret natural phenomena any less valid or
useful to the composer? The process of soniﬁcation,

1http//georghajdu.de/6-2/macaque/

or audiﬁcation as it is more commonly known to as-
tronomers, is fairly widespread due to the pragmatic
consequence, of speeding up time-consuming man-
ual data analysis. When approaching spectral music
composition in real-time scenarios as is the case in the
project presented in this paper, the speed at which
abstractions of these forms can be realised as sound
is paramount to their success as music of course, but
perhaps the most important aspect is the representa-
tion of the entity in music, an entity which itself does
not transmit any sound through the great vacuum
of space, over distances of multiple light years. It is
therefore fairly reasonable to assume that the useful-
ness of spectral compositional methods remains, even
if FFT analysis or some tonal system built around
the 'natural harmonic series'is removed from this lin-
ear process, and replaced with another algorithm de-
signed to derive a similar kind of 'tonal reservoir'[2]
for our purposes.

The use of starlight audiﬁcation to create musical
textures has precedent [5] but has so far not been in-
corporated into a real-time spectral composition sys-
tem. Of primary relevance to this particular research
project is the clear, discernable embodiment of extra-
musical objects inside of a musical context known as
'Mimetic Spectralism'[6]. It may therefore prove no
more relevant to us to base a composition on sound
itself, once it is abstracted to the point of mathemat-
ical analysis, than on any other method of analysis
of a physical phenomenon, which we consider a form
of embodiment. The apotheosis of sound as a kind
of 'living object with a birth, lifetime and death'[11]
as Grisey put it, is not the focus here. Certainly in
the light of careful review by a skilled composer (or
just one with the right software tools), any collection
of frequencies can be stretched through a wide array
of aesthetic extremes, as the practice of spectralism
is after all an impressionistic exercise [7].

2 Spectralism and Belief

It has been observed that the use of FFT analysis
in music composition may imply an extra-musical
dimension to the piece concerned [8]. The asser-
tion that what the composer produces using spec-
tral techniques is music often comes along with cer-

2

tain presumptions and philosophies about the na-
ture of sound and music perception. Inevitably, this
extra-musical motivation pushes this music into the
territory of referential expressionism [9]. One ten-
dency among proponents of spectralism is to justify
their use of spectral technique by referencing its links
to the sciences. Many proponents of the movement
claim that forms extracted from within sonic events
represent a natural and fundamental order of music
as evidenced by the micro-structure of sound. De-
spite the scientiﬁc origins of the techniques used in
spectral composition, they are of course not by them-
selves scientiﬁc proofs of 'musical truths'.
Instead,
it has instead been suggested that when 'new art'is
generated from the analysis of 'natural'objects, this
indicates naturalism as the philosophical basis for the
art piece concerned [8]. Extra-musical representation
in spectral music is not always the intention of the
composer, but sometimes it is unavoidable. G´erard
Grisey exhibits a kind of devotional respect for sound
that is almost animistic. Grisey proposed that spec-
tral music reminds the listener that sound is in fact
living. ”Spectralism is not a system. Its not a system
like serial music or even tonal music. It’s an attitude.
It considers sounds, not as dead objects that you can
easily and arbitrarily permutate in all directions, but
as being like living objects with a birth, lifetime and
death.” (Grisey, 1996) With this anthropomorphic
approach to sound Grisey displays this reverence to-
wards the source of his compositions and his muse,
sound itself. In the same interview he mentions that
while his music represents a 'state of sound'it is simul-
taneously a discourse: I would tend to divide music
very roughly into two categories. One is music that
involves declamation, rhetoric, language. A music of
discourse... The second is music which is more a state
of sound than a discourse... And I belong to that also.
I would put myself in this group. Maybe I am both,
I don’t know. But I never think of music in terms
of declamation and rhetoric and language. (Grisey,
1996) With this impetus we created a system that
explores animism and discourse through re-synthesis
in a ritualistic setting. We set out to create a music of
discourse, which embodies starlight and animal calls
in the music, which is generated via commonly used
spectralist techniques such as Orchestral resynthesis

and spectra as reservoir among others. Here we will
detail our approach to Mimetic Spectralism.

3 Theoretical Framework for Starlight

Audiﬁcation

Pulsating stars simply expand and shrink within their
radius periodically, because of the interior mecha-
nisms related with their opacity. The observation of
this type of star gives us valuable information about
the inner parts of these stars. The increased opacity
inside a pulsating star helps to produce heat energy
that forces the star to expand. This expansion causes
a decrement in the opacity, which results in a shrink-
age. The recurrence of this cycle makes the pulsating
stars a fascinating candidate for astronomical obser-
vation. The observations of the light variation from
a pulsating star results in a wave shaped variation of
light over time (Fig. 1).

1:

The

curve
Figure
star
in comparison with its
http//www.spaceexploratorium. com)

light

of
radius

a pulsating
(Credit:

In the case of multiperiodic pulsating stars this
wave shape takes a very complicated form and it
can only be decomposed to several sine like varia-
tions with certain frequencies (f ), amplitudes (A)
and phase shifts (φ) by applying frequency analysis.
The similarity between observed -wave shaped- light
from pulsating stars and a superposed simple sound
wave is used in converting the stellar oscillations to
audible sounds in our study.

In order to audify the detected oscillation frequen-
cies of a pulsating star, we used the method de-
scribed by [5]. The author deﬁned three dimension-
less parameters based on the pulsation characteristic
of a star: the ﬁrst parameter is Relative Frequency,
f (cid:48) = fi
, which is the ratio of a given frequency to
fmin

3

Table 1: The parameters for Sct type pulsating star V465 Per. The pulsation parameters f , A, φ are taken
from [10]. Note that fmin = 13.721 Amax = 3.5 mmag and φmin = 0.14. The frequency value of C4 , 261.630
Hz, is taken from [11].

f (c/d) A(mmag)
14.040
17.208
33.259
13.721

3.5
2.3
1.7
1.1

φ
-0.14
2.05
1.93
3.55

f (cid:48)
1.023
1.254
2.424
1.000

L
1.000
0.657
0.488
0.314

p
0.00
2.19
2.07
3.69

f (cid:48) × C4(Hz)
267.647
328.084
634.191
261.630

the minimum frequency in detected group. The sec-
ond parameter is the Loudness Parameter, L = Ai
Amax
, which is the ratio of the amplitude value for a given
frequency to the maximum amplitude value among
the frequency group. The last parameter, p = φi
φmin
,is the Starting Parameter of the signal.
It gives
us the diﬀerence between the phase shift of a wave
and the minimum phase shift value of the group.
A light variation proﬁle obtained from the star can
be converted to a sound wave by moving the mini-
mum frequency value to a desired frequency in the
audible range and by keeping the relation between
frequencies, amplitudes and phase shifts. We used
ﬁve pulsating stars (V465 Per [10], HD 217860 [14],
16 Lac [15], BG CVn [16], KIC 6382916 [17]) to pro-
duce sounds from the analysis of their observational
data. As an example, we give the pulsation parame-
ters f , A, φ, related dimensionless parameters f (cid:48), L,
p and the result of the multiplication with C4 for one
of our stars, V465 Per Table 1.

For the generation of sound waves from these di-
mensionless parameters AUDACITY was used. The
calculated relative frequencies for a star was multi-
plied by the frequency value of fourth octave C (see
Table 1). The loudness and the starting times are
also arranged according to appropriate values. For in-
stance, when converting one observed frequency, say
14.040 d-1, of the star V465 Per to audible range
we follow these steps: (i) we multiplied the dimen-
sionless relative frequency by the frequency value of
C4, then we entered the new frequency value (i.e.
267.647 Hz) as the frequency of a sound wave.(ii) the
Loudness parameter (1.000) was entered directly to
the program as the normalized amplitude value. (iii)
The starting time parameter (0.00) was set as the

starting time of the sound in AUDACITY. Since we
have 4 observed frequencies for this star we repeated
the process for each of the 4 frequencies listed in Ta-
ble 1, therefore, we obtained 4 diﬀerent superposed
sound waves characterised by the calculated param-
eters given in the table. Finally these sound waves
were recorded to a digital sound ﬁle. We hope to ex-
pand on this method with orchestral resynthesis once
our system as expanded beyond the early prototyp-
ing stages. Below we detail an initial implementation
utilizing the audio ﬁles we created as described here.

4 Opera Realisation

The bulk of the project is realized using the Unity-3d
engine and standard assets, with some additions from
the Unity app store, most notably the Leap Motion
Project Orion Beta, which vastly improves the qual-
ity of tracking possible with the Leap Motion cam-
era in comparison the previous assets. The standard
character controller included with the Oculus Rift as-
sets was not appropriate due to our intention to port
the system to Google Cardboard2, after the initial de-
velopment done with the Oculus Rift DK23 and Leap
Motion4 camera. Initially there were some problems
stemming from the loss of Oculus Rift DK2 Mac OS
X support, these had to be overcome by porting the
project to a Windows 10 development environment.
An important element is the InstantVR Free asset
from Passer VR5, which made it possible to port be-
tween diﬀerent VR setups and platforms relatively

2https//www.google.com/get/cardboard/
3https//www.oculus.com/en-us/dk2/
4https//www.leapmotion.com/
5http://serrarens.nl/passervr/

4

easy.

Set design was made easier through importing
freely available photo-scanned models of historical ar-
tifacts or with standard assets as well, saving time on
3d modelling (Fig. 4.). The majority of the set is ac-
tually a 360-degree photograph taken in one of the
temples; this was processed into a skybox using the
Panorama to Skybox asset after being edited into a
night-like scene in Photoshop. Some stitching lines
are still visible, but they are mostly obscured with
particle systems ranging from fog to ﬁre and light.
The actual characters in the scene are animated by
pre-recorded animations, which are triggered based
on the selections made by the real-time composer.

Figure 2: The stage from the real-time composers
perspective, 3 stars at diﬀerent levels of luminosity,
in the foreground a fog particle system.

Figure 3: A user manipulates the interface with the
HMD mounted Leap Motion Controller.

sine waves related to that star. In the case of V465,
the user controls the volumes of 4 sine waves with
the degree of extension of their pinky, ring, middle
and index ﬁngers (Fig 3). Using gesture recognition
the user can also open a HUD, populated by some
of the pictograms found throughout the G¨obeklitepe
site. Selecting one of these pictograms loads a sound
ﬁle related to the particular animal represented i.e.
bison, wild boar, crocodile etc. These sounds can be
used with the SpectraScore6 Max/MSP abstraction
to generate spectral music, including scores. Vari-
ous audio eﬀects allow the user to modify the source
sounds in realtime with their movements.

5 The User Interface

6 Conclusion

The real-time composer controls the playback of ma-
terial by selecting single stars with their hand move-
ments (pinch gesture). Once a particular star is se-
lected, its partials can be used to manipulate the
audio of animal calls related to the pictograms fea-
tured on reliefs at the G¨obeklitepe site. The user
is able to manipulate these sound ﬁles from within
the VR environment through the Leap Motion con-
troller and the Unity audio SDK. Visually the stars
themselves increase and decrease in luminosity in ac-
cordance with the relative loudness of each group
(Fig. 2). For example, the real-time composer ori-
ents their hand along the axis of a particular star
and their ﬁnger positions aﬀect the amplitude of the

As this project is in its early stages there is much
room for improvement in terms of the interface and
software in general. Mainly though, the level of la-
tency experienced between the real-time composers
actions and sounding results needs to be improved
to create a smoother 'soundbonding' [12] eﬀect. In
order to achieve this, a new system may have to be
created relying on playback of samples from the au-
diences HMDs to reduce network strain. This would
hopefully be done with samples of acoustic instru-
ments such as is currently done with SpectraScore
via MIDI or OSC. Spatialisation would then become

6https://github.com/benedictcarey/SpectraScorebeta-0.4

5

a further layer of complexity, due to the strain of
performing DSP in a smartphone headset.

All in all our success at bringing together tech-
niques of spectral music composition methods and
starlight audiﬁcation points at the relative ease
through which new algorithms can be imported into
existing algorithmic music composition frameworks.
Since this project was realised in VR, the exploratory
nature of real-time composition was brought into fo-
cus through the use of 'source objects', that is, 'ma-
terial objects'(Culverwell7) that have been analysed
and re-represented in a musical form as spectral mor-
phemes (representing the physical forms from which
they were derived). This referential expressionist
form of Spectralism creates new possibilities for a
kind of ﬁgurative interaction between 'Gestalten'that
are otherwise incomparable. Thanks also to an ex-
tensive array of virtualised real-world objects avail-
able in online collections and stores (i.e Sketchfab,
Turbosquid, Unity Asset Store), and the ever in-
creasing documentation surround the mapping of the
sky above the Earth, the possibilities for soniﬁcation
with the techniques described here will continue to
grow and increase in relevance for proponents of the
Gesamtkunstwerk.

Figure 4: A user manipulates the interface with the
HMD mounted Leap Motion Controller.

References

[1] Zayed, Ahmed I., 1996, Handbook of function and
generalized function transformations. CRC press,

Pp. 582.

[2] Fineberg, J. N., 1999, 'Sculpting sound: an in-
troduction to the spectral movement - its ideas,
techniques and music'. PhD thesis, Columbia Uni-
versity.

[3] F´eron, F.-X., 2010, ”G´erard Grisey: premi´ere
section de Partiels (1975).”Genesis”. Manuscrit-
sRechercheInvention 31: 77-97.

[4] The FFT - An algorithm the whole family can
use, Computing in Science & Engineering, Jan-
uary/February 2000, 2, Number 1, pp. 60–64.

[5] Ula¸s, B., 2015, arXiv:1507.0730.

[6] Teodorescu-Ciocanea, L., 2003, Timbre versus
spectralism. Contemporary Music Review, 22(1-2),
87-104.

[7] Malherbe, C., Fineberg, J., & Hayward, B., 2000,
Seeing Light as Color; Hearing Sound as Timbre.
Contemporary Music Review, 19(3), 15-27.

[8] Moscovich, V., 1997, ”French spectral music:An

introduction.” Tempo : 21-27.

[9] Meyer, L. B., 2008, Emotion and meaning in mu-

sic, University of Chicago Press.

[10] Kim, S.-L. and Lee, S.-W., 1998, Astronomy and

Astrophysics Supplement, v.128, p.111-116.

[11] Suits,

B.

H.,

1998,

http//www.phy.mtu.edu/ suits/notefreqs.html

[12] Smalley, D., 1997, ”Spectromorphology:

ex-
plaining sound-shapes.” Organised sound 2(02):
107-126.

[13] Bundler, D., 1996, ”Interview with Gerard

Grisey.” 20th Century Music.

[14] Fr´emat, Y. et al., 2007, Astronomy & Astro-

physics, 471, 675.

7http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/english/material-

object

6

[15] Chapellier, E. et al., 1995, Astronomy & Astro-

physics, 304, 406.

[16] Papar´o, M. et al., 2013, Monthly Notices of the

Royal Astronomical Society , 432, 598.

[17] Ulusoy, C. et al., 2013, Monthly Notices of the

Royal Astronomical Society, 433, 394.

7

