Zhenyi He
Future Reality Lab, New York
University
zh719@nyu.edu

Robotic Haptic Proxies for Collaborative Virtual Reality
Fengyuan Zhu
Future Reality Lab, New York
University
fz567@nyu.edu
Ken Perlin
Future Reality Lab, New York
University
ken.perlin@gmail.com

Aaron Gaudette
Future Reality Lab, New York
University
ag4678@nyu.edu

7
1
0
2

n
a
J

1
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
7
8
8
0
.
1
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
We propose a new approach for interaction in Virtual Reality
(VR) using mobile robots as proxies for haptic feedback. This
approach allows VR users to have the experience of sharing
and manipulating tangible physical objects with remote col-
laborators. Because participants do not directly observe the
robotic proxies, the mapping between them and the virtual
objects is not required to be direct. In this paper, we describe
our implementation, various scenarios for interaction, and a
preliminary user study.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.1. Multimedia Information Systems: Artiﬁcial, aug-
mented, and virtual realities; H.5.2 User Interfaces: Interaction
styles

Author Keywords
Tangible User Interface; Physical presence; Virtual Reality;
Remote collaboration; Haptics;

INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, virtual reality (VR) has reached a greater
level of popularity and familiarity than ever before. VR is
gaining traction in the consumer market, and integrating phys-
ical and virtual environments seamlessly is a well-recognized
challenge. Haptic feedback can be a powerful component of
immersion and can be used to improve user experience in VR
to great effect.

In this paper, we present a generic, extensible system for
providing haptic feedback to multiple users in virtual reality by
intelligently directing one or more mobile robots. These robots
act as proxies for real, physical objects or forces, assisting the
environment by providing a deeper level of immersion at a
lower cost. Using the Holojam Software Development Kit
(SDK) along with OptiTrack tracking technology, we are able
to determine the absolute position and rotation of various

real objects in the environment, such as a user’s wrists or a
workstation/table. With this knowledge of global state, we
utilize an outside-in approach to control lightweight robots
(proxies) in realtime with a high degree of accuracy. The
system is physically concise and simple to set up.

We implemented multiple prototype applications that address
some of the many possibilities this technology enables. Be-
cause the Holojam SDK primarily supports multi-user VR
experiences, we chose to focus on collaborative, shared experi-
ences. We implemented prototypes involving users in the same
room (shared-space) as well as prototypes involving users in
different physical locations (remote-space), with support for
varying spatial conﬁgurations.

We deﬁned three possible mappings between the representa-
tion of physical proxies, which are "invisible" when wearing
a VR headset, and virtual objects: one-to-one, many-to-one,
and one-to-many. Multiple virtual objects may be represented
physically by a single robot, or vice versa, depending on the
number and distribution of the robots in the scene, as well as
user proximity (shared-space versus remote-space).

In remote-space, our system allows multiple users to "share"
touch on the same virtual object, enabling new forms of col-
laboration for remote teamwork. In shared-space, one proxy
or several distributed proxies can be synthesized via gesture
recognition and prediction to facilitate swift haptic response
for a large number of virtual objects, as well as "command-
ing" of physical objects to move without touching them. We
executed all of these ideas as prototype applications.

Our main contributions:

• Remote synchronizable robotic proxies for VR. Based on
robotic assistants, people could do physical collaboration
remotely.

• Mappings between virtual objects and invisible physical
robots. We extend the possibility via implementing different
mapping styles. Therefore, we could control one virtual
object by multiple robots, or control multiple virtual objects
by only one robot.

• Augment the experience by combination of physical feed-

back and virtual scene.

 
 
 
 
 
 
RELATED WORK
Several methods have been advanced that simulate the sense
of touch. However, many are either not as mobile or not as
lightweight as our system.

control distant objects without feedback. Also with shared
workspaces that can capture and remotely render the shapes
of people and objects, users can experience haptic feedback
based on shaped displays [13].

Haptic Interfaces
Recently more and more research has arisen focused on the
intersection between haptic feedback and collaboration. In-
Form [6] proposed utilizing shape displays in multiple ways
to manipulate by actuating physical objects. Tangible Bits was
proposed to empower collaboration by manipulating physical
objects at 1997[9], and the idea was extended in 2008[8]. PSy-
Bench, a physical shared workspace, presents a new approach
to enhance remote collaboration and communication, based
on the idea of Tangible Interfaces at 1998[3]. The concept
of synchronized distributed physical objects was mentioned
in PSyBench[3], which demonstrated the potential of phys-
ical remote collaboration. One contribution in this paper is
to show how people can experience consistent physical feed-
back over distance, regardless of the physical conﬁguration
of the corresponding remote space. PSyBench[15] only had
1-to-1 mapping while we extended the mapping style and kind
of scenarios. Also objects could not be lifted and displayed
the same movement without VR support. InForm[6] did not
support collaboration and the materials are ﬁxed on the table,
while we offer a more lightweight approach. SnakeCharmer[1]
had similar ideas about one-to-many mapping. However, we
support collaboration and wireless.

Haptic Feedback
Haptic feedback has been mentioned frequently in VR training,
especially in the medical ﬁeld. The sense of touch is the
earliest developed in human embryology and is believed to
be essential for practice [5, 4]. Robot-assisted minimally
invasive surgery (RMIS) holds great promise for improving the
accuracy and dexterity of a surgeon [14]. Haptic feedback has
potential beneﬁts not only in training, but in other interactions
as well. Reality based interaction was proposed for post-
WIMP interfaces [11]. Tangible interactions are observable
with both visual and haptic modalities that could help people
utilize basic knowledge about the behavior of our physical
world [18].

Haptic Re-Targeting
Manipulating multiple virtual objects is always a challenge, in
that precisely-located haptic proxy objects are required. [2]
proposed multiple approaches to align physical and virtual
objects. Redirected touching [12] considered the inﬂexibility
of passive haptic displays and introduced a deliberate incon-
sistency between real hands and virtual hands. In redirected
touching, a single real object could provide haptic feedback
for virtual objects of various shapes to enrich the mapping
between virtual objects and physical proxies.

Telepresence
C-Slate presented a new vision-based system, which combined
bimanual and tangible interaction and the sharing of remote
gestures and physical objects as a new approach to remote
[7] tried an augmented reality way to
collaboration [10].

MOBILE PHYSICAL PROXIES
To support the illusion of physical sharing between collabo-
rators, our system requires one or more mobile robots, which
must be intelligently controlled in a manner that respects the
constraints of the robots and the environment. We accomplish
this with an outside-in approach, managing global state and
sending robot control messages from a single server machine.

Using the ad-hoc server model in the Holojam SDK, we ﬁrst
ascertain global state by reading realtime tracking data from
the OptiTrack system, then calculate the target positions for
any robots that are currently active in the environment, based
on the application requirements. Our ad-hoc server maintains
as many rooms as is necessary for remote-space applications
(all of the examples in this paper use either one or two rooms)
and commands the connected robots to move when needed.
Because both the robots and optitrack cameras are small, and
the ad-hoc server can run on a midrange computer, the entire
setup is fairly lightweight and portable.

Figure 1. Robots with tracked conﬁguration

Robot Design
Beginning with several m3pi robots, we attached a conﬁgu-
ration of tracked markers to each one in order to determine
its absolute position and orientation via the OptiTrack sys-
tem. We created a cylinder-shaped acrylic cover for the robots
(Figure 1) in order to facilitate easy gripping. This grip was
standardized across all the robots, with a minimalist, scale-
matched virtual representation available for when interaction
was necessary.

Mappings Between Physical and Virtual Space
One challenge of physically representing a virtual environment
is the method used to map virtual objects to their physical coun-
terparts (or vice versa). Conventionally, virtual objects have no
physical representation and can only be controlled indirectly
or through the use of a standard input device (such as a game
controller). Also, the set of physically controlled objects that
are visually represented in VR have been traditionally lim-
ited to the input devices themselves. In contrast, our system
provides three different mapping mechanisms to augment the
relationship between physical and virtual representation.

• One-to-One Mapping

This is the standard and most straightforward option. When

users interact with a virtual object in the scene, they si-
multaneously interact with a physical proxy at the same
location.

• Many-to-One Mapping

When multiple proxies represent one virtual object, we
deﬁne the mapping as "many-to-one." This is useful for
remote-space applications: a virtual object could exist in
the shared environment, which could then be manipulated
by multiple users via their local proxies.

• One-to-Many Mapping

Various constraints including cost and space limit the capa-
bility of maintaining a physical counterpart for every one
of a large number of virtual objects. When less proxies
are available than virtual objects, one of the total available
proxies could represent a given virtual object when required.
For example, a user with a disordered desk in VR may want
to reorganize all of their virtual items. In each instance of
the user reaching to interact with a virtual item, the single
(or nearest, if there are multiple) proxy would relocate to
the position of the target item, standing by for pickup or
additional interactions. The virtual experience is seamless,
while physically a small number of proxies is constantly in
motion.

Localization of User Environments
Our system enables teams to collaborate with each other in
remote-space. Here we assume the environment is a worksta-
tion for the sake of example. One issue is that not all users
may share the same spatial conﬁguration. To address this, we
built a generic model for synchronizing proxies on a table.

Figure 2. Simulated remote-space setup with both VR views

In a demonstration, we assigned two participants to seats ar-
ranged perpendicular to each other, with tables unequal in
size (Figure 2). In VR, each participant observed the other
as directly opposite themselves, with a consistent table rep-
resentation. This design allows users to experience a natural
viewpoint regardless of physical setup. The robotic proxies,
meanwhile, adjust themselves to operate within the minimum
boundary, relative to each user’s individual view.

We also chose to introduce latency for synchronizing user ac-
tions in remote-space. Movements involving the proxy are
delayed by a speciﬁed time interval (we use a delay of one sec-
ond for the demonstration above), to give the robot sufﬁcient
time to catch up with each user’s actions. This smooths the
haptic operations considerably.

We added "artiﬁcial" latency to improve the user experience.
Based on the robot we chose and the size of workstation, our

Figure 3. "Clinking Drinks" Scenario

latency test concluded ranges from 1-1.5 seconds. Therefore
we "faked" the scene that user supposed to see in order to
eliminate the feeling of true latency.

In the experiment section we test users on their perception of
this latency, with positive results. For shared-space applica-
tions, we forego latency and instead render a "loading" sprite
to signify to the user that the proxy has not yet arrived at its
ﬁnal destination.

PROTOTYPE APPLICATIONS

Pass the Mug
In this scenario, we demonstrate a novel method to extend
the capability of human interaction with physical and virtual
objects. We employ a custom gesture recognition technique
alongside our physical proxies, enabling users to command
the position of a mug using hand motions. Utilizing a simple
conﬁguration of tracked markers that reports each user’s wrist
position and orientation via the OptiTrack system, users can
push a proximate mug across the table via a pushing gesture,
pull a distant mug towards them with a pulling gesture, or
motion in another direction to slide the mug towards another
part of the table. Users must ﬁrst select a target by aiming their
palm at an object–the object will shake to indicate it is being
targeted–afterwards the object will glow to indicate it is under
gesture mode. Users can still pick up objects and interact with
them normally when they are close enough to reach.

Clinking Drinks
This scenario utilizes a one-to-one mapping, simulating the ef-
fect of two users striking their mugs together while in separate
physical locations (see in Figure 3). In each local environment,
the user’s mug’s position is governed by a non-robotic tracked
physical object, and the force of the strike is simulated via a
synchronized moving proxy.

Tic-Tac-Toe
Here we recreated the classic board game, Tic-Tac-Toe, in VR,
but for users in remote locations. We utilize a "controller"
object, allowing players to select a tile for each game step (see

the transparent cylinder holding by user in Figure 4). This
application implements many-to-one mapping: two proxies
are synchronized all the time, with a single virtual controller
synchronized across both spaces so that a player can reach
for it on their turn and experience haptic feedback. When
one player is holding the controller and considering their next
move, the other player can observe this movement in their view
as well. Each game step, a player’s selected tile displays either
an "O" or an "X" shape. Turns are processed sequentially. The
techniques used in this prototype could easily be expanded to
other tabletop games.

Figure 4. "Tic-Tac-Toe" Scenario

City Builder
The City Builder demo visualizes a virtual 3D miniature of a
city on a ﬂat surface, where users are able to pick up any build-
ing and move it to somewhere else on the map. Each user’s
wrist is tracked in the same manner as in the "Pass the Mug"
demo, and a proxy is ﬁtted behind-the-scenes to the virtual
building which is visually nearest to a given user’s hand – an
example of one-to-many mapping. In this implementation, the
movement and position of the robots is completely invisible
to the user.

EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
We designed two tests for our user study, modiﬁed from our
prototype applications. The ﬁrst, a duplicate of our "Tic-Tac-
Toe" application, demonstrates many-to-one mapping. We
included a version of Tic-Tac-Toe that was purely virtual (no
haptics) for comparison. The second experiment, "Telekine-
sis", was loosely based on our "Pass the Drinking Mug" ap-
plication, demonstrating one-to-one mapping, and measuring
users’ ability to learn the gesture system and to command a
target at various locations.

Following each test, users ﬁlled out a survey of their expe-
rience. Of the twelve questions on the survey, three were
general, six regarded the Tic-Tac-Toe test, and three regarded
the Telekinesis test.

Hardware and Software
Participants wore Samsung GearVR headsets with OptiTrack
tracked markers, as per the current speciﬁcations of the Holo-
jam SDK. Holojam[16] is an untethered virtual reality headset
system that enables people have shared-space VR experience.
Holojam has been demoed in SIGGRAPH 2015 performance
session. Brieﬂy: each participant needs to put on a lightweight
wireless motion-tracked GearVR headset as well as strap-on
glove markers, tracked by OptiTrack. These devices allow

them to see everyone else as an avatar, walk around the physi-
cal world, and interact with real physical objects. You can see
the headset and paired glove in Figure 2.

We can calculate the head’s position based on marker infor-
mation. The users are tracked all the time. In the framework
of Holojam, we have a server to receive data from outside
like OptiTrack and send customized message to all clients
(phones). That is why users wearing headset could see real-
time scene. The markers we used are only ﬁxed on headsets
and hand-made glove. Users could only feel the glove itself
instead of the markers, see Figure 2. Actually it is just a band
around the palm. From the feedback, no users complained on
the simpliﬁed glove.

In our design, we need a lightweight physical object, which is
both tracked and movable. The m3pi robot[17] is a complete,
high-performance mobile platform with an m3pi expansion
board as its second level. You can see the combination of the
m3pi robots and markers in Figure 1.

For both experiments, the participants’ wrists were tracked
by hand straps containing tracked markers, and two tables of
different sizes were also tracked.

Participants
Sixteen participants invited to join our study, three female.
Ages ranged from twenty-two to ﬁfty-two, and the median age
was twenty-six years old. All participants were right-handed.
Seventy-ﬁve percent had experienced VR prior to the study.

Tic-Tac-Toe
In this experiment, the participant experienced a multiplayer
(two-person) playthrough of both our prototype application
version of Tic-Tac-Toe and a purely virtual version, where
their tracked hand was used for tile selections instead of the
controller.

The time elapsed for each game was recorded, as well as the
participant’s responses to the following questions:

• Did you feel like you and your testmate were sitting at

different tables?

• Did you feel like your opponent was moving naturally?

• Were you more comfortable with the physical or the virtual

version of the game?

On a scale from one to ﬁve:

• How much delay did you experience between your actions
and their expected outcomes? (Not much – unendurable)

• How well did you feel you could manipulate objects in the

virtual environment? (Not well – very well)

• Did you understand the game? (No – enjoyable)

Telekinesis
In this experiment, we split the virtual table into nine parts, se-
quentially placing a target in each one of the subsections. Par-
ticipants were ﬁrst given up to two minutes to learn the gesture

Table 1. Amount for the decision on directly grabbing
2

position on the table

3

5

1

7

4

6

amount of grabbing

3

1

1

4

5

0

6

8

5

9

4

system, then we observed their command choice (including
non-gestural physical interaction) for each target position.

The time elapsed for each choice was recorded, as well as the
participant’s responses to the following questions on a scale
from 1 to 5:

• How natural did the mechanism for controlling movement
through the environment feel? (Not natural – very natural)

• How compelling was your sense of objects moving through

space? (Not compelling – very compelling)

Following this, the participant’s accuracy was tested on one
ﬁnal command, given a target direction. We recorded the
participant’s response to the following question:

• Which direction matched your expectation of the com-
mand’s result the best? (Forward / Backward / Left / Right /
None)

Analysis
The average length of a Tic-Tac-Toe game was one minute
and forty seconds for the version using our physical controller,
and one minute and ﬁve seconds for the purely virtual ver-
sion. Although the physical version took longer on average,
twenty-ﬁve percent of all the participants played faster with
the physical controller than without it. From this data we
concluded that the version using our physical controller was
comparable in accessibility to the purely virtual version–that
is to say, we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference between the
two play-styles. We would postulate that participants were
more focused on how to win rather than the method of input.
Ideally, our physical controllers are so seamlessly integrated
that they are unnoticeable.

Table 2. Tic-Tac-Toe Survey

Questions

...different tables?
...opponent moving naturally?
...comfortable with the physical version?
...experienced delay?
...feel you could manipulate objects?
...understand the game?

Table 3. Telekinesis Survey

Questions

...felt natural for controlling movement?
...compelling sense of objects moving?

Results

2 / 16
16 / 16
11 / 16
2.31 / 5
4.02 / 5
4.38 / 5

Results

3.5 / 5
4.0 / 5

way for tiles four, ﬁve, and six (at a medium distance from the
player), 39 out of 48 (81.3%) were moved using gestures. And
for the close tiles–seven, eight, and nine–33 out of 48 (68.8%)
were moved using gestures.

The average time elapsed when physically moving the objects
was 1.5 seconds (ranging from 0.2 seconds to 5 seconds),
whereas the average time elapsed when using gestures was
1.97 seconds (ranging from 0.5 seconds to 3.2 seconds).

From this data, we determined that directly picking up an
object is easier than gesturing, especially at close distances,
but gesturing is faster if optimized, and is more stable over
distance.

While most participants preferred to use gestures for distant
targets and physical interaction for proximate targets, one par-
ticipant mentioned that they preferred gestures over physical
interaction because the gestures were more fun. Two other
users both chose to use gestures to push proximate targets
away before pulling them back again. We concluded from this
that the interaction we designed is not only meaningful and
useful, but enjoyable as well.

Survey

Figure 5. Overview of table tiles with player position

Table 1 needed to be explained with Figure 5, which showed
the distribution of tiles. Each tile represents the area where
the target would be directed. In the ﬁrst row of table 1, the
number representing positions on the table meant the same
thing in Figure 5. The second row showed how many times
they chose to grab instead of use gestures to control the target.

For tiles one, two, and three (far from the player) in Figure 5,
the amount of grabbing is sum of 3,1 and 1, which if 5. We
calculated that 5 out of 48 (10.4%) were moved by grabbing
and 43 out of 48 (89.6%) were moved using gestures. Same

Figure 6. Preference of direction for telekinesis

Figure 6 shows the preference of direction for telekinesis.
After the tests, participants were asked to chose the easiest
direction for them to move. 37.5 percents chose forward
because the gesture is easy and the effect is impressive. 31.3
percents chose right rather than left probably because they
are all right-handed. We concluded "picking is easier than
gesturing for closer" based on the time consumed and their
choices.

Sense of Reality
Via Table 2, only two participants (12.5%) felt isolated during
the experiment. All users agreed that their opponent moved
naturally. From this we conclude that our remote-space repre-
sentation was acceptable.

3. Scott Brave, Hiroshi Ishii, and Andrew Dahley. 1998.

Tangible interfaces for remote collaboration and
communication. In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work.
ACM, 169–178.

Preference
Via Table 2, eleven of the sixteen participants (68.8%) chose
the physical controller over no controller at all for the "Tic-
Tac-Toe" test. Although the value was not as high as we would
have liked, we concluded that our physical controller was
acceptable.

Feasibility
For the question "How well did you feel you could manipulate
objects in the virtual environment" in Table 2, eleven graded a
4, four graded a 5, and one graded a 3 (average 4.02). From
this data, we concluded that a robot proxy is acceptable for
remote interaction.

In Table 3, for the question, "How natural did the mechanism
for controlling movement through the environment feel?", 81%
(average 3.5) of participants felt it was natural enough (≥ 3)
to control the objects using gestures without actually touching
the objects. In addition, the average score for the question,
"How compelling was your sense of objects moving through
the space?" was 4, with 87.5% grading compelling (≥ 4).

Feeling
For the question "How much delay did you experience between
your actions and their expected outcomes?" in Table 2, more
than 75% felt it was endurable (≤ 2). The average value was
2.31, lower values being better (less perceived latency).

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a new approach for interaction in
virtual reality via robotic haptic proxies, speciﬁcally targeted
towards collaborative experiences, both remote and local. We
presented several prototypes utilizing our three mapping deﬁ-
nitions, demonstrating that – using our system – several virtual
objects can be represented physically by one or more robotic
proxies, and multiple users can share touch on the same virtual
object, or use gestures to command objects without touching
them. Our preliminary experiments returned positive results.
In the future we plan to undertake a more comprehensive study
focusing on deeper application interactions and expanded hard-
ware capability.

REFERENCES
1. Bruno Araujo, Ricardo Jota, Varun Perumal, Jia Xian Yao,
Karan Singh, and Daniel Wigdor. 2016. Snake Charmer:
Physically Enabling Virtual Objects. In Proceedings of
the TEI’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. ACM, 218–226.

2. Mahdi Azmandian, Mark Hancock, Hrvoje Benko, Eyal
Ofek, and Andrew D Wilson. 2016. Haptic Retargeting:
Dynamic Repurposing of Passive Haptics for Enhanced
Virtual Reality Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 1968–1979.

4. Brian Dunkin, GL Adrales, K Apelgren, and JD

Mellinger. 2007. Surgical simulation: a current review.
Surgical endoscopy 21, 3 (2007), 357–366.

5. P-J Fager and Per von Wowern. 2004. The use of haptics
in medical applications. The International Journal of
Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery 1, 1
(2004), 36–42.

6. Sean Follmer, Daniel Leithinger, Alex Olwal, Akimitsu
Hogge, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2013. inFORM: dynamic
physical affordances and constraints through shape and
object actuation.. In UIST, Vol. 13. 417–426.

7. Zhenyi He and Xubo Yang. 2014. Hand-based interaction
for object manipulation with augmented reality glasses.
In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGGRAPH
International Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum
and its Applications in Industry. ACM, 227–230.

8. Hiroshi Ishii. 2008. Tangible bits: beyond pixels. In
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
Tangible and embedded interaction. ACM, xv–xxv.

9. Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer. 1997. Tangible bits:
towards seamless interfaces between people, bits and
atoms. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference
on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 234–241.

10. Shahram Izadi, Ankur Agarwal, Antonio Criminisi, John
Winn, Andrew Blake, and Andrew Fitzgibbon. 2007.
C-Slate: a multi-touch and object recognition system for
remote collaboration using horizontal surfaces. In
Horizontal Interactive Human-Computer Systems, 2007.
TABLETOP’07. Second Annual IEEE International
Workshop on. IEEE, 3–10.

11. Robert JK Jacob, Audrey Girouard, Leanne M Hirshﬁeld,
Michael S Horn, Orit Shaer, Erin Treacy Solovey, and
Jamie Zigelbaum. 2008. Reality-based interaction: a
framework for post-WIMP interfaces. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 201–210.

12. Luv Kohli. 2010. Redirected touching: Warping space to
remap passive haptics. In 3D User Interfaces (3DUI),
2010 IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, 129–130.

13. Daniel Leithinger, Sean Follmer, Alex Olwal, and

Hiroshi Ishii. 2014. Physical telepresence: shape capture
and display for embodied, computer-mediated remote
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 461–470.

14. Allison M Okamura. 2009. Haptic feedback in

robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery. Current
opinion in urology 19, 1 (2009), 102.

15. Esben Warming Pedersen and Kasper Hornbæk. 2011.
Tangible bots: interaction with active tangibles in
tabletop interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2975–2984.

16. Ken Perlin. 2016. Future Reality: How emerging

technologies will change language itself. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 36, 3 (2016), 84–89.

17. Pololu. 2016. Pololu m3pi Robot with mbed Socket.

https://www.pololu.com/product/2151/resources. (2016).
Accessed: 2017-01-30.

18. Brygg Ullmer, Hiroshi Ishii, and Robert JK Jacob. 2005.

Token+ constraint systems for tangible interaction with
digital information. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 1 (2005),
81–118.

