Emotional Qualities of VR Space 

Asma Naz1 

 Regis Kopper2 

Ryan P. McMahan3 

Mihai Nadin4 

University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

Duke University, USA 

University of Texas at Dallas, USA       University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

ABSTRACT 

The  emotional  response  a  person  has  to  a  living  space  is 
predominantly affected by light, color and texture as space-making 
elements.  In  order  to  verify  whether  this  phenomenon  could  be 
replicated in a simulated environment, we conducted a user study 
in a six-sided projected immersive display that utilized equivalent 
design attributes of brightness, color and texture in order to assess 
to which extent the emotional response in a simulated environment 
is  affected  by  the  same  parameters  affecting  real  environments. 
Since emotional response depends upon the context, we evaluated 
the emotional responses of two groups of users: inactive (passive) 
and  active  (performing  a  typical  daily  activity).  The  results  from 
the perceptual study generated data from which design principles 
for  a  virtual  living  space  are  articulated.  Such  a  space,  as  an 
alternative to expensive built dwellings, could potentially support 
new, minimalist lifestyles of occupants, defined as the neo-nomads, 
aligned with their work experience in the digital domain through 
the generation of emotional experiences of spaces. Data from the 
experiments confirmed the hypothesis that perceivable emotional 
aspects  of  real-world  spaces  could  be  successfully  generated 
through  simulation  of  design  attributes  in  the  virtual  space.  The 
subjective  response  to  the  virtual  space  was  consistent  with 
corresponding  responses  from  real-world  color  and  brightness 
emotional perception. Our data could serve the virtual reality (VR) 
community  in  its  attempt  to  conceive  of  further  applications  of 
virtual spaces for well-defined activities. 

Keywords:  Architectural  design,  affective  space,  neo-nomads, 
aesthetics.  

Index  Terms:  I.3.7  [Computer  Graphics]:  Three-Dimensional 
Graphics and Realism—Virtual Reality 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

This  paper  reports  on  an  experimental  study  of  virtual 
environments (VEs) explored as an architectural tool to evaluate a 
new design concept of a real-world dwelling for information-age 
professionals,  also  known  as  neo-nomads.  The  severe  housing 
crisis  of  the  Silicon Valley  in  recent  years  has  led  architects  and 
interior designers to search for new concepts of compact living to 
accommodate  the  transitional  lifestyles  of  these  technology-
dependent, mobile professionals [19]. The dwelling envisioned in 
this  paper  consists  of  a  single  living  space  with  variable  design 
parameters  of  color,  light  and  texture  used  to  generate  multiple 
emotional experiences of spaces that could potentially support daily 
living  of  occupants.  In  a  user  study,  a  six-sided  immersive  Cave 
Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE)-type display was used to 
simulate the living space that adapted equivalent design parameters 

1 asma.naz@utdallas.edu 
2 regis.kopper@duke.edu 
3 rymcmaha@utdallas.edu 
4 nadin@utdallas.edu 

of  color,  brightness  and  texture  to  create  a  set  of  emotional 
experiences  of  spaces.  The  study  measured  perceived  emotional 
dimensions of virtual spaces in nine categories: warmth, coolness, 
excitement, calmness, intimacy, spaciousness and comfort, as well 
as  spatial  preferences  for  two  activities:  work  and  rest.  Since 
emotional responses to space depend on context, the influence of 
activity  on  perception  was  also  assessed  by  evaluating  responses 
from two groups of users: an active group that performed a typical 
daily activity and an inactive (passive) group.   
The  study  presented  a  hypothesis 

real-world 
phenomenon of affective space creation of traditional architecture 
could  be  replicated 
through 
modification of design parameters of color, brightness and texture. 
The study goal was to assess the extent to which design parameters 
influenced  emotional  responses  to  virtual  spaces.  Subjective 
responses  in  the  VE  were  analyzed  to  find  correlation  with 
corresponding  normative  real-world  emotional  space  perception 
related to color, brightness and texture.  

in  a  simulated  environment 

that 

the 

lifestyles 

The  outcome  of  the  study  is  in  the  form  of  data  relevant  for 
design  of  a  real-world  dwelling  that  has  the  capacity  to  generate 
variable  spaces  with  affective  dimensions  in  order  to  support 
minimalist 
for  young  professionals.  The  major 
contribution of this study lies in its definition of virtual reality (VR) 
as  a  viable  evaluation  platform  for  new  architectural  concepts 
where  variable  design  parameters  can  be  adapted  to  create 
experiential  spaces  with  emotional  or  psychophysiological 
qualities. Such data could have real-world implications in decision-
making  processes  for  architects,  builders,  interior  designers  and 
clients, as well as facilitate better communication in terms of time 
and resources. 

2.  RELATED WORK 

In this section, we review prior literature on VR in the context of 
architecture  and  affective  dimensions,  and  also  provide  an 
overview of affective design parameters for living spaces. 

2.1  VR as Architectural Design Evaluation Tool 
Virtual Reality technology has been used as an evaluation tool in 
architecture,  mainly  to  assist  in  decision-making  during  design 
process to explore unbuilt concepts and difficult-to-realize projects, 
as well as communal, educational or recreational designs that need 
participatory inputs from architects, designers, clients and users in 
a collaborative setting [7]. Research on architectural applications 
of VR was initially envisioned by Sutherland [24] as virtual reality 
consisting of realistic living spaces. The first head-mounted display 
(HMD), designed by Sutherland, had an architectural space as one 
of the first immersive VEs [24] followed later by the first room-
sized VR—CAVE [23], with four 10-foot projection screens and 
interactive user interfaces. In CAVE, a prototyping system called 
CALVIN introduced multiple perspectives for architectural design 
at both ground and global (above-ground) levels [16].   

In VR architectural studies, walk-throughs allow users to travel 
freely  in  the  VE,  and  prototyping  systems  provide  user-centric 
designs during early development phases [7].  Two design studies 
during the mid-1990s conducted walk-through studies to evaluate 
architectural  spaces  for  unnecessary  design  elements  [17].  In 
another study conducted at the University of Washington, working 

 
 
 
and  testing  design  methods  in  VR  improved  design  quality  of 
students  [17].  In  the  late  1990s,  Fröst  and  Warren  used  a  more 
sophisticated, immersive CAVE system with multiple participants 
and  real-time  image  generation  to  compare  traditional  paper  and 
pencil  design  sessions  with  VR  technology  for  the  initial 
conceptual  and  schematic  design  process  in  architecture  [12]. 
Results showed that VR proved to be a better tool to conceptualize, 
analyze, test and construct architectural designs. Over the years, the 
benefits of VR have been acknowledged in the architectural design 
process as an engaging, interactive system  with  a high degree of 
realism [17].   

2.2  VR Studies in Measuring Affective Dimensions  
Assessment  of  spatial  quality  of  architecture  in  VR  has involved 
the  measurement  of  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  factors  of 
architectural  space  design.  Quantitative  measures  are  mostly 
related to size, proportions, scale and distance perceptions, whereas 
qualitative factors are affective and environmental aspects of space. 
To quantify emotional and environmental preferences, some basic 
models were established in environmental psychology [9].   These 
models used semantic differential scales (non-numerical scales) for 
affective appraisals of space constructed with pairs of oppositional 
adjectives  as  descriptors  of  environmental  aspects  of  mood  [14]. 
The  adjectives  are  part  of  everyday  language  that  convey  both 
emotional  and  physical  meanings  to  characterize  perceived 
architectural  space  dimensions.  These  adjectives  relate  to  size, 
openings, temperature, color brightness, style, form and structural 
details  of  architectural  spaces,  such  as:  pleasant  and  unpleasant, 
bright and dull, arousing and calm, narrow and spacious, dark and 
bright, open and enclosed, and warm and cold [10].  

Some studies conducted in VR have compared qualitative virtual 
perception to corresponding real-world perception in order to find 
out how  similar  these  spaces  feel  [15].  These  studies  established 
quantitative relationships between perceived emotional aspects and 
simulated volume of space: scale, lighting, architectural details and 
other artifacts [15].   

Attempts  have  been  made  to  incorporate  VR  as  part  of 
architectural  design  curricula  for  design  scheming,  development, 
testing and review phases. One such example was the College of 
Architecture and Planning (CAP) at Ball State University, which 
used HMD-based VR to assist students understand spaces in terms 
of  everyday  semantics  with  affective  dimensions  and  manipulate 
space-making features to create spaces with meaning [7].  Students 
reproduced real-world functional spaces in the VE to compare how 
they are similar in negative or positive appreciations [7]. Certain 
studies  show  that,  similar  to  generic  pictorial  features,  spatial 
features also elicit emotional responses [9]. Previous studies have 
used semantic scales to quantify and establish correlations between 
everyday  language  that  describes  perceived  experiential  qualities 
and  certain  spatial  features  of  interior  rooms:  size,  shape, 
dimension, color and saturation [11]. Another VR-based perceptual 
study with the Elumens Vision Station used a series of still images 
of  interiors  to  establish  relationship  between  physical  openness 
(window, room size) and affective qualities of space [9]. 

As far as we could find in the literature, very few studies and 3D 
design tools have focused on the qualitative factors of architectural 
spaces.  Not  enough  research  has  been  conducted  on  sensory  and 
psychological dimensions of space perception. Architectural design 
is inherently spatial, and space perception is a sensory experience 
that  carries  meanings  with  emotional  dimensions.  Affective 
architecture articulates color, light, materiality, form and texture to 
create sensory perceptive, visually engaging spatial experiences to 
elicit emotional responses from the occupant [19].   

The  use  of  VR  technology  is  yet  to  be  explored  in  the 
psychological  and  metaphysical  dimensions  of  natural  light, 
materiality,  color  and  texture  that  bring  subjective  meanings, 
essences and sensuousness into space-making as an essential part 
of the architectural design process.  

This paper explores the direct emotional response to the space 
design  parameters—a  phenomenon  that  we  believe  has  not  been 
explored  in  any  previous  VE  studies  related  to  affective 
architecture. The human-scale immersive CAVE is appropriate for 
this  study  for 
large-scale  simulations,  high  resolution, 
photorealistic real-time projections on all six screens, ability to use 
mixed reality elements, and 360-degree fully immersive view for 
an enhanced sense of presence for the viewer.    

its 

2.3  Affective Space Design Parameters 
The visual space perceptual process depends on the properties of 
architectural  elements—color,  light,  material,  texture,  size  and 
shape—as well as their interrelationships [5]. Standard architecture 
and interior design practices use certain design principles to create 
affective dimensions of space. The affective aspects of spaces are 
psychophysiological  dimensions  of  perceived  spatial  experience 
that elicit or influence an occupant’s moods and emotions, feelings, 
preferences and attitudes. Subjective expression and interpretation 
of  spatial  expression  are  driven  by  context:  culture,  imagination, 
memory,  thoughts  or  previous  emotional  states.  Mood  and 
experienced spatial environment are interdependent [10].   

2.3.1  Color 
Warm and cool are sensorial emotions related to hue [13]. Warm 
colors are at the red end of the color spectrum, consisting of red, 
orange,  yellow  and  their  combinations.  Cool  colors  are  at  the 
opposite end of the spectrum, consisting of blue, green, purple and 
their combinations. Artists, architects, interior designers, scientists, 
physicians  and  psychologists  have  worked  with  the  science  of 
color—i.e.,  its  impact  on  the  human  physiology,  psyche  and 
behavior,  its  natural  and  cultural  associations,  and  interactions 
between  colors.  Color  acts  as  an  emotional,  physical  and 
physiological stimulant. Its perception is contextual. Studies have 
acknowledged  certain  affirmations  regarding  affective  aspects  of 
color that are related to arousal and dominance [11]. Warm colors 
feel arousing or exciting, while cool colors feel calming [11]. The 
causes behind emotional and physiological responses to a color are 
manifold  and  complex,  yet  interrelated.  Perception  of  red,  as  a 
symbol  of  romance,  passion,  power,  criticism,  anger,  warning  or 
violence may stem from its natural or biological associations with 
health, blood, stamina, vigor, heat or flame [2]. Similarly, blue may 
soothe and calm as the color of the sky. (On the other hand, the idea 
of “feeling blue” as an expression of sadness may have biological 
roots  with  emotional  and  cultural  associations.)  Cultural 
connotations of a color can have strong impact on human attitude 
and  behavior.  Experiments  have  demonstrated  that  student 
engagement in class could be improved by avoiding the use of red 
in grading papers, and male aggression in jail cells could be reduced 
by painting interior walls pink, a color that is culturally recognized 
as feminine [2].     

Color has an impact on perception of spatial depth as well [26]. 
Warm  colors  are  known  as  “advancing  colors”  that  appear  to  be 
closer, and cool colors are known as “receding colors” that appear 
to be farther away [13]. Artists and architects from the Bauhaus and 
De  Stijl  movements  explored  perception  of  pure  colors,  their 
complex interactions with geometric shapes and forms, and spatial 
experiences related to color [8]. Architect Le Corbusier conceived 
spaces  with  planar  surfaces  of  pure  and  vibrant  colors  and 
examined  their  interactions  with  exposed  materials  to  elicit 
emotional responses [6]. 

3.2  The Virtual Environment 

3.2.1  Space Layout and Apparatus 
A  single,  square  living  space  (3.35  m  x  3.35  m  x  3.35  m)  was 
simulated in the Duke immersive Virtual Environment (DiVE), a 
projection-based, 6-sided CAVE-type display at Duke University. 
Screen resolution was 1920x1920. The living space was extended 
beyond the actual size of display (2.9m x 2.9m x 2.9m) to stimulate 
depth perception due to binocular disparity. The living space was 
enclosed by four walls, a ceiling and a floor. It consisted of a mixed 
reality  (MR)  setup,  where  both  real  and  virtual  furniture  were 
rendered to provide a sense of scale and enhance presence. A study 
table  and  a  small  bed  were  simulated  and  placed  abutting  two 
opposing  walls  (figure  1).  A  real  chair  and  a  round  table  were 
placed  inside  the  virtual  room  flanked  with  the  simulated  study 
table on its left and the bed on its right. A real laundry basket full 
of unfolded clothes was placed on the ground in front of the chair 
(figure 2). 

2.3.2  Light 
Light and color are inseparable. Perception of color in an interior 
space depends on direct and indirect illumination, type of light and 
interactions  between  color  and  light  [13].  Light  can  still  appear 
“warm” or “cool” based on the feeling it evokes when perceived 
with  color  and  space  as  a  whole  [13].  Additionally,  light  can 
provide materials with a sense of depth. Cool and light colors feel 
more spacious than warm and dark colors [11].    

2.3.3  Texture 
Texture is the feel, appearance and consistency of a surface [25]. In 
this  paper,  texture  refers  to  the  surface  property  of  rendered 
materials  that  construct  perceived  space.  Visual  perception  of 
spatial  texture  is  informed  by  past  tactile  experience  of  material 
weight, shape and resistance [20]. The distinct character of spatial 
texture of a perceived space derives from the texture of each and all 
surrounding  surfaces  perceived  as  a  whole  [21].  Roughness  and 
smoothness  of  texture  are  characteristics  of  texture  graininess, 
varying in density, size, orientation and depth of grain.  Affective 
qualities  of  perceived  texture  are  inherited  from  material  quality 
and 
inherent  permanence  or 
impermanence, origin and construction process. A rough texture of 
a  brick  or  stone  may  appear  richer  in  character,  exciting  and 
“honest” in its origin, while smooth texture, such as plaster, may 
appear comparatively dull or boring [21]. Depending on material 
quality,  darker  or  lighter  color  tone,  the  perceived  character  of 
texture  may  be  hard  or  soft,  heavy  or  light,  warm  or  cool  [21]. 
Depending on visual weight and tactility of material and its texture, 
a space may feel spacious or intimate, warm or cool.  

age,  origin, 

temporality: 

Figure 1: Simulated furniture in VE. 

3  USER STUDY 

We  performed  a  user  study  to  assess  affective  responses  to 
perceived  spatial  experiences.  Participants  were  invited  to  a  test 
session  inside  a  simulated  living  space  rendered  in  a  6-sided 
CAVE-type  system.  Each  participant  was  shown  a  set  of  virtual 
spaces and was asked to rate them quantitatively through a set of 
questions.  Half  of  the  participants  performed  an  activity  during 
experiment, while the other half remained inactive.  

3.1  Method 
The study used a mixed design with three within-subject factors—
color, brightness and texture—and one between-subjects factor— 
idling/performing an activity. The within-subject design was used 
to  establish  quantitative  correlations  between  variable  design 
parameters  (independent  variables)  and  emotional  responses  to 
spaces. The design parameters each had two levels: color (orange 
and  blue),  brightness  (dark  and  light)  and  texture  (rough  and 
smooth). The dependent variables were the quantitative user ratings 
of affective dimensions of spaces. The between-subjects factor was 
used to assess the impact of activity on perception.  

Participants  were  randomly  distributed  over  two  experimental 
groups:  one  which  required  participants  to  perform  an  activity 
(active) and one where participants remained idle (inactive). Table 1 
summarizes  the  participant  pool  and  distribution  over  the 
experimental  groups.  In  the  active  condition,  sixteen  users 
performed  a  minimal-effort  daily  activity  of  folding  real  clothes 
from  a  laundry  basket  and  piling  them  up  on  a  real  table.  In  the 
inactive condition, the users remained still. 

Table 1. Between-subjects design of the user study 

Figure 2: Real furniture and props placed inside virtual environment. 

Experimental  
Condition 
Active 
Inactive 

Activity 
Yes 
No 

Participants   
16     
16 

Male/Female 
Ratio 
9/7 
8/8 

The chair was placed at a distance of approximately 210 cm from 
the facing wall. The door to the CAVE-type display was behind it. 
A  calibrating  gridline  on  the  floor  of  the  display  was  used  to 
provide reference lines and mark the location of the real furniture 
and  props  for  each  test  session.  While  the  user  was  seated,  eye 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
height  was  approximately  1.25-m  above  the  floor.  No  travel  or 
other interaction was involved in the test, except for natural head 
movement  while  seated.  Participants  wore  active  stereo  shutter 
glasses  and  sat  on  a  chair  throughout  the  testing  session.  An 
Intersense  IS-900  ultrasonic  tracker  (head)  was  used  to  measure 
location  and  orientation  of  participants  for  proper  computer 
simulation. This spatial setting, including size of space,  furniture 
layout,  configuration  and  the  activity  props  remained  constant 
across the two experimental conditions. 

The  concept  of  a  multi-functional  single  space  draws  its 
inspiration from the efficiency or studio apartments, and “micro-
apartments” of overcrowded, high-density big cities, such as San 
Francisco and New York [22]. Many tiny apartments rented by the 
digital age population have single, multi-functional living areas as 
small  as  9.3  m2  (100  sqft)  [27].  These  spaces  accommodate 
overlapping  activities  with  multipurpose,  compact  furniture  and 
storage for minimalist belongings of neo-nomads [4]. 

3.2.2  Space Layout and Apparatus 
Three  types  of  texture  maps  were  used  for  the  simulated  virtual 
surfaces of the living space in order to represent three commonly 
used  materials.  These  were  stone,  drywall  and  carpet  (fabric).  A 
stone texture map was applied only on one wall (facing the user) 
that  acted  as  the  main  accent  wall  of  the  room.  The  surrounding 
three walls and ceiling were rendered with drywall texture. A carpet 
texture was applied on the floor. All texture maps represented the 
actual  scale  of  real  materials  (figure  3).  The  texture  maps  of  the 
simulated furniture had a predominantly neutral shade to avoid any 
color conflict or interaction with simulated surface colors. 

tones  represented  bright  and  dark  brightness  levels.  The  hue 
remained the same (figure 4).  

c)  Texture—Image-based  texture  maps  of  each  material  were 
modified  to  create  two  types  of  texture  graininess  for  each 
material—rough and smooth (figure 5). Roughness in texture 
meant  increased  depth  and  sharpness  of  texture  grains  of  a 
material.  High  resolution,  photorealistic  images  of  materials 
were manipulated in contrast, highlight and sharpness to create 
texture  grains  that  closely  represented  rough  and  smooth 
characteristics of real surface properties of materials. Random 
variations  for  tiling,  light  and  shadow  were  made  for  a  more 
natural and realistic look. 

Figure 4: Color tones of orange and blue were darkened to represent 
two levels of brightness—bright (left) and dark (right).  

Figure  5:  Image-based  texture  maps  of  stone,  drywall  and  fabric 
(carpet) were modified to create two texture gradients—rough (top 
row) and smooth (bottom row).  

3.2.4  Generating Virtual Test Spaces 
Eight unique test spaces were created with two types of three design 
parameters,  as  shown  in  Table  2.  Each  space  shared  a  unique 
combination  of  each  design  parameter  (color,  brightness  and 
texture). The depiction of all test spaces is shown in figure 6. 

Table 2: Each of the eight test spaces is composed of one 
characteristic of each design parameter. 

Design Parameters 
Color 
Type 
Orange  Dark 

Brightness 
Levels 

Light 

Blue 

Dark 

Light 

Texture 
Gradients 
Rough 
Smooth 
Rough 
Smooth 
Rough 
Smooth 
Rough 
Smooth 

    Virtual Test Spaces 

Orange – Dark – Rough 
Orange – Dark – Smooth 
Orange – Light – Rough 
Orange – Light – Smooth 
Blue – Dark – Rough 
Blue – Dark – Smooth 
Blue – Light – Rough 
Blue – Light – Smooth 

Figure 3: Texture mapping of simulated space—stone, drywall and 
fabric (carpet). 

3.2.3  Simulating Design Parameters 
The  real-world  color,  light  and  texture  (surface  property  of 
materials)  of  an  interior  space  were  represented  by  the  color, 
brightness and texture gradient of texture maps of all six enclosing 
surfaces of the virtual living space:  
a)  Color—Orange (HSB 18,58,84) and blue (HSB 200, 48, 55); 
two  complimentary  hues  were  selected  from  the  opposite 
spectrum of the color wheel.  

b)  Brightness—Two levels of brightness were created—bright and 
dark. Color tones of texture maps were used to represent real-
world 
lowering 
illumination.  Increasing  Saturation  and 
Brightness from the HSB (Hue, Saturation, Brightness) values 
of  each  color  darkened  the  color  tones.  Light  and  dark  color 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  eight  living  space  configurations  were  randomized  and 
presented to users in the virtual environment for assessment. The 
order  of  display  for  the  test  spaces  was  randomized  to  minimize 
biases  that  could  arise  from  tedium  or  familiarity.    In  each 
experimental group, each of the sixteen participants was allocated 
a unique randomized sequence. The randomization sequences were 
paired between groups.  

  (a) Blue–Light–Smooth  

(b) Orange–Light–Smooth 

(c) Blue–Dark–Smooth  

(d) Orange–Dark–Smooth 

  (e) Blue–Light–Rough  

(f) Orange–Light–Rough 

(g) Blue–Dark–Rough  

(h) Orange–Dark–Rough 

Figure 6: Screenshots of each of the eight test spaces composed of 
one characteristic of each design attribute. 

3.2.5  Participants 
A total of 32 participants were recruited for the study. Respondents 
were  undergraduate,  graduate  and  post-graduate  students  from 
various  disciplines,  as  well  as  professionals  (faculty  and  staff)  at 
Duke  University.  Recruitment  was  done  via  email  and  poster 
announcements  on  the  university  campus.  Participation  was 
voluntary.  Twenty-nine  participants  (91%)  ranged  in  age  from 
18—40 (Mean =27, SD=4.8). Three participants (9%) were in the 

age range of 50—76. There were twenty-seven (84%) students and 
five (16%) professionals. Among the 27 students, five participants 
(16%) were in undergraduate level, thirteen (40%) were in master’s 
level and fourteen (44%) were in doctoral or postdoctoral level.  

3.2.6  Procedure 
The  whole  experiment  took  approximately  half  an  hour  for  each 
participant  to  complete.  Participants  were  required  to  sign  an 
informed  consent  form  and  fill  out  a  demographic  questionnaire 
before the test session commenced.  

Participants were seated inside the virtual environment. Each of 
the eight test spaces were displayed in a pre-defined random order 
for  each  participant.  Each  space  was  displayed  for  20  seconds 
before  a  set  of  questions  was  asked  regarding  that  space.  While 
inactive  participants  were  allowed  to  stare  at  each  space,  active 
participants  were  asked  to  perform  their  task  of  folding  clothes 
during  those  20  seconds.  They  were  asked  to  stop  once  the 
questions were asked. Their verbal responses were recorded. 

3.2.7  Questionnaire 
Participants were asked a set of questions verbally for each virtual 
test space displayed. The questions consisted of three categories of 
spatial  dimensions  used  to  measure  the  capacity  of  perceived 
spatial experience to influence moods or emotions, in terms of size, 
temperature and arousal level. 

Participants  were  asked  to  rate  each  space  in  terms  of  specific 
psychophysiological aspects of space on a scale of 1 to 10. Here, 1 
indicated the most negative or lowest rating and 10 indicating the 
most  positive  or  highest  rating.  The  aspects  were:  warm,  cool, 
spacious, intimate, exciting, calm and comforting. They were also 
asked to rate each space for two activities: rest and work. 

It  was  important  to  ensure  that  participants  understood  the 
semantics  or  contextual  meaning  of  the  spatial  terms  used  in  the 
questionnaire without being primed. Prior to the virtual session, the 
context  of  these  psychophysiological  aspects  of  spaces  was 
explained  to  them  in  terms  of  pairs  of  oppositional  adjectives: 
spacious  and  intimate,  warm  and  cool,  and  exciting  and  calm. 
Participants  were  instructed  to  understand  exciting  spaces  as  the 
opposite of spaces that are calming. Intimate spaces were explained 
as the opposite of spacious spaces. Cool was described as a term 
opposite  of  warm  to  be  understood  in  the  context  of  eliciting  a 
feeling of a warm or a cool temperature in the spaces.  

4  RESULT 

Data  analysis  was  performed  in  IBM  SPSS  24.  A  mixed-design 
factorial  ANOVA  with  three  repeated-measures  factors  and  one 
between-subjects  factor  was  performed.  Data  was  visually 
inspected and verified to approach normality. Data is reported as 
statistically 
significant 
significant  at  p<.050.  Statistically 
differences are denoted by an asterisk (*) in figures 7-12. 

4.1  Main Effects  
Figure 7 shows a summary of the main effects of color. Statistically 
significant  main  effects  of  color  were  found  on  perceptions  of 
warmth,  coolness,  excitement,  calmness,  intimacy,  comfort,  and 
environments  for  working  and  resting.  Orange  was  found 
significantly  more  warm  (F(1,30)=153.162,  η2=.836),  exciting 
(F(1,30)=22.087,  η2=.424)  and  comfortable  (F(1,30)=31.772, 
η2=.514)  than  blue  at  p<.001  for  all  measures.  Orange  was  also 
found  significantly  more  intimate  than  blue  (F(1,30)=4.960, 
p<.050,  η2=.142),  and  significantly  preferable 
for  resting 
(F(1,30)=10.732, η 2=.263) and working (F(1,30)=10.247, η2=.255) 
than blue both at p<.005. Blue was found to be significantly more 
cool (F(1,30)= 97.117, p<.001, η2=.764), and calm (F(1,30)=4.918, 
p<.050, η2=.141) than orange.       

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bright  environment  (figure  9).  On  the  contrary,  blue  felt 
significantly more exciting in bright environments, but significantly 
calmer in dark spaces. Orange felt significantly more intimate than 
blue only in dark spaces.  

Figure 7: Main effects of color. Error bars represent standard errors.  

A  significant  main  effect  of  brightness  was  observed  only  on 
perception of spaciousness. As shown in Figure 8, bright space was 
found  more  spacious  than  dark  space  (F(1,30)=5.615,  p<.050, 
η2=.158). Also, a near-significant trend points in the direction that 
dark  spaces  were  preferred  over  bright  spaces  for  resting 
(F(1,30)=4.169, p=.050, η2=.263).   

Figure  9:  Interactions:  Color  and  brightness.  Error  bars  represent 
standard errors.  

There was a significant interaction effect between brightness and 
texture on a participant’s perception of environment preferable for 
working (F(1,30)=4.815, p<.050, η2=.138). Pairwise comparisons 
show  that  in  dark  environments, smooth  texture  was  found  more 
preferable for working than rough texture, whereas no significant 
differences were found in bright spaces (figure 10).  

Figure 8: Brightness effects. Error bars represent standard errors.  

No significant main effects of texture and activity were found on 
users’  perceptions  of  emotional  spaces.  Although  a  strong  trend 
towards significance (p=.061) was found that suggested that active 
inactive 
participants  perceived  spaces  more 
participants did. 

intimate 

than 

4.2  Interaction Effects 
We  found  significant  interaction  effects  between  color  and 
brightness  on  perceptions  of  warmth  (F(1,30)=11.262,  p<.005, 
η2=.273);  coolness  (F(1,30)=9.060,  p<.050,  η2=.232);  excitement 
(F(1,30)=7.922,  p<.05,  η2=.209),  and  intimacy  (F(1,30)=6.753, 
p<.050, η2=.184).   

Pairwise  comparisons  show  that  for  orange  spaces,  changing 
brightness made  a significant difference to perception in specific 
situations. Orange felt significantly warmer and more intimate in 
dark  environments,  whereas  orange  felt  significantly  cooler  in  a 

Figure  10:  Interactions: Brightness  and  texture  on  environment for 
working. Error bars represent standard errors.  

A  significant  interaction  effect  between  color  and  activity  was 
also  found  on  the  perception  of  intimate  spaces  (F(1,30)=  5.221, 
p<.050, η2=.148). For inactive participants, changes in color made 
a significant difference in the perception of intimacy of space, while 
no  differences  were  observed  for  active  participants.  Inactive 
participants  found  orange  significantly  more  intimate  than  blue, 
whereas  no  such  significant  difference  was  observed  for  active 
participants.  Active  participants  found  blue  significantly  more 
intimate than inactive participants did, while the same effect was 
not observed with orange spaces (figure 11).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significant impact on the perception of intimate spaces, it did not 
have any significant impact on perception of spaciousness. In fact, 
brightness  was  found  to  have  a  significant  effect  on  perceived 
spaciousness of space. From this data, it can be concluded that the 
participants chose to consider a different or broader semantic for 
the word intimate in their understanding of space. It is possible that 
they did not perceive the  term intimate as a directly oppositional 
adjective for the term spaciousness of spatial experience.  

The  study  was  able  to  replicate  certain  real-world  perceptions 
related to color and brightness in the virtual environment. In real-
world  color  perception,  warm  colors  are  generally  found  more 
exciting  than  cool  colors,  whereas  cool  colors  are  found  more 
calming than warm colors. Also, in real-world perception of space, 
warm colors appear to be closer in distance than cool colors. The 
data gathered in this virtual test revealed that orange was perceived 
warmer, more exciting and intimate than blue. On the other hand, 
blue was perceived more calm and cool than orange. This correlated 
with real-world color experience. Additionally, the user study could 
also  replicate  the  real-world  phenomenon  of  brightness  having  a 
significant impact on perception of spaciousness. 

6  FORMULATING DESIGN PRINCIPLES 

The role of VR in the aesthetic practice of space design is the use 
of “sensory substitution methods” to replicate the  multi-sensorial 
real  world  by  understanding  how  to  override  real-world  sensory 
perceptions  and  in  that  process,  provide  affordance  for  a  new 
aesthetics that conforms to the medium [18]. In this study, the real-
world  spatial  experiences  that  are  essentially  multi-sensory  and 
three-dimensional  are 
technological 
constraints  of  VR  as  visually  perceptible  experiences  with 
equivalent  graphical  methods.  The  study  quantifies  the  aesthetic 
parameters  of  architectural  space-making  that  are  pertinent  to 
design.  The  underlying  aesthetics  of  a  medium  influences  its 
capacity  and  efficiency  [18].  This  fundamental  aesthetics  affects 
VR’s  effectiveness  in  allowing  compelling  space  creation  that 
triggers  human  emotional  response  and  potential  activeness 
through perception of sensorial spatial elements. 

simulated  within 

the 

Figure 11: Interactions: Color and Activity on intimacy of space. Error 
bars represent standard errors.  

Significant interaction effect of brightness and activity was found 
only  on  the  perception  of  warmth  (F(1,30)=4.395,  p<.050, 
η2=.128).  For  active  participants,  changes  in  level  of  brightness 
made  significant  difference  in  the  perception  of  warmth.  Active 
participants rated dark spaces  more  warm than bright spaces. No 
such significant difference  was observed for inactive participants 
(figure 12).  

Figure 12: Interactions: Brightness and activity on warmth of space. 
Error bars represent standard errors.  

Finally we found a significant four-way interaction effect among 
color, texture, brightness and activity on perception of intimacy of 
space (F(1,30)= 4.651, p<.050, η2=.134).   

5  DISCUSSION 

Comparisons  were  drawn  between  pairs  of  oppositional 
adjectives—warm  and  cool,  exciting  and  calm,  spacious  and 
intimate—to find out if perceptions of spatial aspects represented 
by  oppositional  adjectives  elicit  contrasting  emotional  responses. 
Data revealed that orange was found significantly more warm and 
exciting than blue, whereas blue was found significantly more cool 
and calming than orange, regardless of level of brightness. It can be 
deduced  from  this  data  that  spatial  qualities  represented  by 
oppositional  adjectives  evoked  contrasting  emotional  responses. 
This data provides evidence that the VE can generate spatial aspects 
of  warmth,  coolness,  and  excitement  and  calmness  that  were 
perceivable  to  participants.    Thus,  the  hypothesis  posed  at  the 
beginning of this paper as a basis for this study can be confirmed.   
However, comparisons of data between oppositional adjectives 
spacious and intimate reveal a different result. While color had a 

A set of design guidelines has been developed as the underlying 
aesthetics for space design in which one or more parameters can be 
modified 
to  create  desired  spatial  qualities  with  affective 
dimensions. These principles can be used by architects and interior 
designers as a foundation for living space design for neo-nomadic 
minimalist lifestyles.  

For  design  principles,  the  user  study  findings  of  established 
correlations  between  design  parameters  and  perceptions  of 
psychophysiological  spatial  aspects  are  used  as  a  basis.  Three 
categories  of  psychophysiological  spatial  aspects  have  been 
selected,  each  with  a  pair  of  oppositional  affective  dimensions: 
temperature (warm and cool), size (spacious and intimate) and level 
of arousal (excitement and calmness). As it was found in the study 
that spatial qualities represented by oppositional adjectives evoked 
contrasting  emotional  responses,  inferences  could  be  drawn  to 
compare each pair to establish the design principles. For example, 
data for cool and calm spaces could be inferred from relevant data 
found for warm and exciting spaces respectively. Relevant data for 
intimate  spaces  can  also  be  inferred  from  data  on  spaciousness. 
Here, the term intimate is considered as an exact opposite adjective 
of the term spaciousness.  

For surface color modifications of space, a color spectrum or a 
traditional  color  wheel  is  used  to  identify  ranges  of  warmer  or 
cooler shades of any given color [1]. Here, pure red is considered 
the  warmest  color  and  pure  blue  is  considered  the  coolest  color. 
Although the study presented only two colors—orange and blue—
the design guidelines are formed with the assumption that orange 
represents warm colors within the range of red, orange and yellow 
on the warmer side of the color spectrum, and blue represents cool 

 
 
 
 
colors within the range of green, blue and purple on the cooler side 
of the color spectrum.  

Table 3 shows the design principles formulated for an occupant’s 
desired  affective  spatial  qualities.  Statistically  significant 
correlations formed guidelines mainly for two design parameters—
color  and  brightness.  Rules  are  also  formulated  for  active 
occupants.  Color  is  the  primary  design  parameter  that  can  be 
modified  to  create  feelings  of  warmth,  coolness,  excitement  and 
calmness. For warmer or more exciting spaces, a warmer shade of 
warm colors can be used. For any given color, its warmer shades 
are  its  adjacent  colors  that  are  located  closer  to  red  in  the  color 
wheel.  For  example,  yellowish-orange  is  a  warmer  color  than 
yellow.  On  the  other  hand,  for  cooler  and  calmer  spaces,  cooler 
shades of cool colors can be used. For example, greenish-blue is a 
cooler color than green.  

In addition to color, brightness levels can also be modified as the 
secondary  design  parameter  to  further  manipulate  these  feelings. 
For a space that has warm colors, decreasing brightness level can 
make it feel warmer, and increasing it can make it feel cooler. On 
the other hand, for a space that has cool colors, brightness level can 
be increased to make it feel more exciting, and decreased to make 
it feel calmer.   

As a primary design parameter, brightness levels can be modified 
to increase or decrease feeling of spaciousness, and by inference, 
the feeling of intimacy. 

Table 3: Correlations between user’s desired spatial qualities and 
corresponding design principles 

Desired 
Affective 
Aspects  
Warm 

Design 
Parameters 
to modify  
Color  
Brightness  

Cool 

Color  
Brightness  

Design Principles 

•  Use  warm  colors—variations  of 

red, orange or yellow 

•  Use  warmer  shades  of  warm 

colors 

•  If existing color of space is warm, 
decrease  brightness  to  make  it 
warmer  

•  For  active  occupants,  decrease 

brightness  

blue, green or purple 

•  Use cooler shades of cool colors  
•  If  occupant  prefers  warm  colors, 
increase  brightness  to  make  it 
cooler 

•  For  active  occupants,  increase 

brightness  

Spacious   Brightness  
Intimate   Brightness  
Exciting   Color 

•  Increase brightness  
•  Decrease brightness  
•  Use  warm  colors—variations  of 

Brightness  

red, orange or yellow 

•  Use  warmer  shades  of  warm  

Calm  

Color 
Brightness  

colors 

•  If  occupant  prefers  cool  colors, 

increase brightness     

•  Use  cool  colors—variations  of 

blue, green or purple 

•  Use cooler shades of cool colors  
•  If  room  already  has  cool  colors, 

decrease brightness 

7  CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 

The  outcome  of  the  study  assisted  in  formulating  aesthetic 
guidelines  for  affective  living  spaces  pertaining  to  sensory 
engagement.  One  major  focus  of  future  work  is  to  explore 
architectural design elements that can potentially evoke feelings of 
spaciousness  in  a  tiny,  shared  living  space  intended  for  young 
professionals. It includes virtually simulated sunlight and openings 
their  affective 
(windows)  as  design  elements 
dimensions. Perception of interior surfaces can extend beyond the 
traditional  wall  and  reflect  abstract  representations  of  external 
views,  weather  conditions,  and  real-time  diurnal  and  seasonal 
changes with the use of simulated color, light and texture. 

to  examine 

This  research  can  be  taken  further  into  the  domain  of  sensor-
driven interactive living spaces. Interactive architecture is defined 
as the ability to provide variable characteristics of living, working 
and  leisure  spaces.  While  VR  can  serve  as  an  architectural 
evaluation  tool  to  test,  replicate  and  evaluate  real-world  spatial 
situations, its  interactive  capacity  can be utilized  to  explore  real-
time  space-making  as  an  aesthetic  medium.  The  use  of  VEs  can 
provide  a  highly  effective  aesthetic  tool  that  allows  changing  of 
spaces  to  trigger  human  emotional  responses  in  order  to  support 
human activities through interaction. The immersive human-scale 
CAVE-type  display  can  work  as  an  architectural  design  tool  to 
create  a  variety  of  spaces  for  testing  and  applying  in  real-world 
interactive living spaces. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Experiments at the Duke University DiVE were made possible by 
a  Dissertation  Research  Award  from  the  University  of  Texas  at 
Dallas  and  by  Duke  University.  Dr.  Timothy  J.  Senior 
(Neuroscience,  Oxford  University)  suggested  DiVE  as  an 
immersive  environment  for  experimental  evidence  of  design 
choices. Hypotheses informing the experiments were presented at 
the  international  conference  “Anticipation  Across  Disciplines” 
(September  2014).  The  presentation  was  made  possible  through 
funding  from  the  Hanse  Institute  for  Advanced  Study  (Hanse 
Wissenschaftskolleg,  Germany)  and  the  antÉ  –  Institute  for 
Research in Anticipatory Systems. The inter-institutional IRB is the 
result  of  cooperation  between  the  University  of  Texas  and  Duke 
University. 

[1]  G.  Agoston.  Color  Theory  and  Its  Application  in  Art and  Design. 

Springer-Verlag. 1986. 

[2]  A. Alter. Drunk Tank Pink. The Penguin Press, New York, 2012. 
[3]  A.  Angulo.  Rediscovering  Virtual  Reality  in  the  Education  of 
immersive  simulation  of  spatial 
Architectural  Design:  The 
experiences,  Ambiances: 
International  Journal  of  Sensory 
Environment,  Architecture  and  Urban  Space,  September  8,  2015. 
http://ambiances.revues.org/594 

[4]  N.  Bowles.  The  Real  Teens  of  Silicon Valley:  Inside  the  almost-
adult lives of the industry’s newest recruits. The California Sunday 
Magazine.  [Online].  https://stories.californiasunday.com/2015-06-
07/real-teenagers-silicon-valley. Accessed May 2015. 

[5]  F.  D.  K.  Ching.  Architecture:  Form,  Space,  and  Order.  Wiley, 

[6] 

Hoboken, 2007. 
J.  de  Heer.  The  Architectonic  Colour:  Polychromy  in  the  Purist 
Architecture of Le Corbusier. 010 Publishers, Rotterdam, 2009. 
[7]  G.  Drettakis,  M.  Roussou,  A.  Reche,  and  N.  Tsingos.  Design  and 
Evaluation  of  a  Real-World  Virtual  Environment  for  Architecture 
and  Urban  Planning.  Presence:  Teleoperators  and  Virtual 
Environments, 16(3), 2007.       

[8]  K. Frampton. Modern Architecture: A Critical History. Thames & 

Hudson, 1980. 

•  Use  cool  colors—variations  of 

REFERENCES   

 
 
[9]  G.  Franz,  M.  von  der  Heyde,  and  H.  H.  Bülthoff.  An  empirical 
approach to the experience of architectural space in virtual reality—
exploring  relations  between  features  and  affective  appraisals  of 
rectangular indoor spaces. Automation in Construction, volume 14, 
pages 165-172, Germany, 2005.   

[10]  G. Franz. An Empirical Approach to the Experience of Architectural 
Space. PhD thesis, Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 
Tübingen and the Bauhaus University, Weimar, 2005. 

[11]  G.  Franz.    Space,  color,  and  perceived  qualities  of  indoor 
Sustainable 
In  Environment,  Health 

environments. 
Development (IAPS 19), Seattle, 2006, pp. 1-8.  

and 

[12]  P.  Fröst  and  P.  Warren.  Virtual  reality  used  in  a  collaborative 
architectural  design  process.  In:  Proceedings  of  IV2000  IEEE 
International  Conference  on  Information  Visualization.  IEEE 
Computer Society, Brussels, 2000. 

[13]  M. Hårleman. Daylight Influence on Colour Design: Empirical study 
on Perceived Colour and Colour Experience  Indoors.  PhD thesis, 
Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden. 2007 

[14]  R.  G.  Hershberger  and  R.  C.  Cass.  Predicting  user  responses  to 
buildings.  In  Jack  L.  Nasar,  editor,  Environmental  Aesthetics: 
Theory,  research,  and  applications,  Cambridge  University  Press 
Cambridge, 1988, pp. 195–211. 

[15]  D. Henry. Spatial Perception in Virtual Environments: Evaluating 
and  Architectural  Application.  Master’s  thesis,  University  of 
Washington, 1992. 

[16]  J.  Leigh  and  A.  E.  Johnson,  "CALVIN:  an  immersimedia  design 
environment  utilizing  heterogeneous  perspectives," Proceedings of 
the Third IEEE International Conference on Multimedia Computing 
and Systems, Hiroshima, 1996, pp. 20-23.  

[17]  M. P. Mobach. Do virtual worlds create better real worlds? Virtual 

Reality, 12(3), September 2008. pp. 163-179. 

[18]  M.  Nadin.  Negotiating  the  World  of  Make-believe:  The  Aesthetic 
Compass. Real-Time Imaging. 1(3), August 1995, pp. 173-190. 
[19]  A.  Naz.  Interactive  Living  Space  Design  for  Neo-Nomads: 
Anticipation Through Spatial Articulation. In Mihai Nadin, editor, 
Anticipation  Across  Disciplines,  Springer  International  Publishing 
Switzerland, 2016, pp. 393–403. 

[20]  J. Pallasmaa. The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses. John 

Wiley & Sons, 2012 

[21]  S. E. Rasmussen. Experiencing Architecture. MIT Press, 2000. 
[22]  N. J. Riley. S.F. supervisors back micro-apartments. SFGate. Nov 
20, 2012. [Online]. http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/SFsuper 
visorsbackmicroapartments4055493.php 

[23]  J. Ryu, N. Hashimoto, M. Sato, M. Soeda, and R. Ohno. Application 
of  Human-scale  Immersive  VR  System  for  Environmental  Design 
Assessment  -  A  Proposal  for  an  Architectural  Design  Evaluation 
Tool.  Journal  of  Asian  Architecture  and  Building  Engineering 
(JAABE), 6(1), May 2007 

[24]  I. E. Sutherland. The Ultimate Display. Proc. IFIP 65(2), 1965, pp. 

506-508, 582-583. 

[25]  M. Wiberg. Interactive Textures for Architecture and Landscaping. 

IGI Global, Hershey, 2011. 

[26]  D. Yorgancioglu. Steven Holl: A Translation of Phenomenological 
Philosophy  in  the  realm  of  Architecture.  PhD  thesis,  Middle  East 
Technical University, September, 2004. 

[27]  What is the Tiny House Movement? (n.d.). The Tiny Life. [Online]. 
http://thetinylife.com/what-is-the-tiny-house-movement/.  Accessed 
June 14, 2016. 

