Beamforming and Scheduling for mmWave
Downlink Sparse Virtual Channels With
Non-Orthogonal and Orthogonal Multiple Access

Alessandro Brighente and Stefano Tomasin
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova
via Gradenigo 6/B, 35131 Padova, Italy.
Email: brighent@dei.unipd.it, tomasin@dei.unipd.it

7
1
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
4
7
8
0
.
6
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We consider the problem of scheduling and power
allocation for the downlink of a 5G cellular system operating
in the millimeter wave (mmWave) band and serving two sets of
users: ﬁx-rate (FR) users typically seen in device-to-device (D2D)
communications, and variable-rate (VR) users, or high data rate
services. The scheduling objective is the weighted sum-rate of
both FR and VR users, and the constraints ensure that active FR
users get the required rate. The weights of the objective function
provide a trade-off between the number of served FR users
and the resources allocated to VR users. For mmWave channels
the virtual channel matrix obtained by applying ﬁxed discrete-
Fourier transform (DFT) beamformers at both the transmitter
and the receiver is sparse. This results into a sparsity of the
resulting multiple access channel, which is exploited to simplify
scheduling, ﬁrst establishing an interference graph among users
and then grouping users according to their orthogonality. The
original scheduling problem is solved using a graph-coloring
algorithm on the interference graph in order to select sub-sets of
orthogonal VR users. Two options are considered for FR users:
either they are chosen orthogonal to VR users or non-orthogonal.
A waterﬁlling algorithm is then used to allocate power to the FR
users.

Index Terms—5G; Beamforming; mmWave; Non-orthogonal

Multiple Access; Scheduling.

I. INTRODUCTION

MmWave transmission systems operating with multiple
users will pose many design challenges, related to the need
of precise beamforming to overcome the strong attenuation at
GHz frequencies [6]. On the other hand, the use of mmWave
has been advocated for ﬁfth-generation (5G) systems in order
to satisfy on ten-fold achievable data rate with respect to the
previous mobile communication generation: in this scenario
the use of extremely high-frequency bands becomes even
more problematic due to the presence of multiple users and
the need to design suitable multiple access schemes. From a
paradigm based on orthogonality among users to maximize the
sum rate – mainly pursued in 4G systems – the 5G trend is
now shifting back to non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA)
schemes, better suited to heterogeneous devices envisioned in
the 5G network, e.g., sensors and actuators of the Internet of
Things (IoT) [7]. All these problems are further complicated
by the use of a huge number of antennas, the massive multiple
input multiple output (MIMO) regime, again proposed for 5G

This work has been supported in part by Huawei Technologies, Milan, Italy.

systems in order to propel data rate and cell user density.
In this context, a radical review of both beam-forming and
scheduling is needed, taking into account also the need of
keeping both the signaling exchange on air at the minimum
(for a higher data-rate) and the signal processing complexity
under control, especially on the terminal side.

Focusing on a downlink scenario where a base station (BS)
equipped with many antennas aims at serving multiple mobile
terminals (MTs) on the mmWave band, many solutions are
available in the literature for beam-forming and scheduling.
For example, orthogonal user transmission can be considered
in order to maximize the rate, thus (regularized) zero-forcing
beamforming can be used at the BS, together with water-ﬁlling
power allocation and scheduling [9], [10]. Similar approaches
include diagonalization and block-diagonalization of the chan-
nel [8]. Indeed, it has been shown that in a massive MIMO
regime, eigenbeamforming and matched ﬁlter precoders are
optimal, and the transmit power can be made arbitrarily small
[11]. However, these results leverage orthogonality among
users and have as target the maximization of the sum rate.
These assumptions must be revised in 5G systems used also
for device-to-device (D2D) communication in the IoT context,
typically having ﬁx-rate (FR) requirements: for these services
the target becomes serving the largest number of users,
providing them the required ﬁxed data rate. In the NOMA
context, two approaches have been proposed in the literature:
superposition coding and successive interference cancellation.
With the ﬁrst approach users suffer from the interference but
can still decode the intended signal as long as the signal to
noise plus interference ratio (SNIR) is above a given threshold;
is decoded
with the latter approach the interfering signal
and then canceled before the useful signal is decoded. For
superposition coding a large literature is available, for the
maximization of the weighted sum-rate and energy-efﬁcient
solutions (see [12], [15] for surveys). In [14] beamforming
and power allocation have been designed using as metrics the
sum rate and outage probability of MIMO-NOMA systems.
In [13] optimal beamforming and power allocation solutions
have been derived for the weighted sum-rate maximization
under a total power constraint and a max-min balancing of
user rate under a total power constraint: in this work however
no FR user is present. A simple approach has been proposed in

 
 
 
 
 
 
[16], [17], where FR and variable-rate (VR) users are allocated
orthogonal resources, then using further orthogonal resources
for the VR users and non-orthogonal resources for the FR
users. In [18] an scheduling considering also the pilot overhead
needed for channel estimation, adapted to the user channels
characteristics has been considered.

In this report we focus on the problem of scheduling and
power allocation for the mixed user characteristics of [16]:
ﬁrst, we formulate the problem of maximizing the weighted
sum-rate of both FR and VR users, with constraints ensuring
that active FR users get the required rate. This turns out to
be a mixed integer programming problem, where the integer
variables dictate which FR users are active, and continuous
variables provide the power allocation for all users. The
weights of the objective function provide a trade-off between
the number of served FR users and the resources allocated
to variable users. We then exploit the peculiarity of mmWave
channels which can be suitably represented as a sparse matrix
in a dual domain [4]. The sparse channel is obtained by
applying ﬁxed discrete Fourier transform (DFT) beamformers
at both the transmitter and the receiver, thus providing a low-
complexity implementation. On the other hand, the sparsity of
the resulting multiple access channel is exploited to simplify
scheduling, ﬁrst establishing an interference graph among
users and then grouping users according to their orthogonality.
In particular, the original scheduling problem is solved using
a graph-coloring algorithm on the interference graph in order
to select sub-sets of orthogonal VR users. Two options are
considered for FR users: either they are chosen orthogonal
to VR users or they are allowed to interfere with the other
set. A waterﬁlling algorithm is then used to allocate power
to the FR users, while the power needed to achieve the
required rate is allocated to FR users. The rest of the report is
organized as follows. Firstly we derive the system model for
the described scenario and give a mathematical description
of the power allocation and scheduling problem. Secondly
we propose three solutions: the direct power allocation and
scheduling, a solution based on graph coloring (GC), where
both VR and FR users are clustered in different sets in order to
eliminate interference, and a partial GC (PGC) solution where
only VR users are clustered to eliminate interference. Lastly
we analyse the performance of the proposed solutions in terms
of achievable sum-rate when the optimization target moves
from VR users to FR users and show how the number of
antennas at the BS impacts on the proposed solutions.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider a massive MIMO downlink transmission from
a BS with a large number Na of antennas organized in a
uniform planar array (UPA) to a set of Nu single-antenna
users, with Nu << Na. Assuming an additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) ﬂat-fading channel model among each antenna
couple, the resulting Nu × Na channel matrix is denoted as
H. For a transmission in the mmWave band, each BS-user
link is described by L paths, with L typically being small.
Moreover, considering the UPA conﬁguration at the BS and

the single antenna MT, as derived in [1] the row channel vector
hk of user k can be transformed into a virtual channel vector
hv,k by the transformation

hk = hv,kU ∗
t ,

(1)

where Ut is the Na × Na unitary DFT matrix. By stacking
the rows hv,k into the matrix Hv we can write the channel
matrix as

H = HvU ∗
t .

(2)

When the number of antennas at the BS tends to inﬁnity,
the virtual channel matrix Hv becomes sparse, asymptotically
having L · Nu non-zero entries associated to the L paths of
each one of the Nu users. Also, when angles of departures
are aligned with DFT direction [4] again Hv becomes sparse
with L ·Nu non-zero complex entries, with probability density
function

p[Hv ]j,k (a) = (1 − η)δ(a) +

η
πσ2
L

exp

−

(cid:18)

|a|2
σ2
L (cid:19)

,

(3)

where η = L/Na is the probability that a virtual channel
matrix entry is different from zero, δ(·) is the delta function
and σ2

L is the average channel gain.

Received signal is affected by complex AWGN, independent

at each user, with zero mean and variance σ2.
We consider two different types of users:
• K VR users having as target the maximization of their

achievable sum-rate (ASR);

• N FR users aiming at being active, i.e., transmitting with
a ﬁxed data rate Rﬁx, corresponding to ﬁxed signal to
interference plus noise ratio (SINR) γﬁx with

Rﬁx = log2(1 + γﬁx) .

(4)

The total number of users is K +N = Nu. A FR user assumes
only two possible states: transmission with a FR imposed by
the SINR requirement or turn off. In particular, the ﬁrst K
users are the VR users, while next N users are the FR users.
We denote by pj, j = 1, . . . , Nu the power assigned to
user j. We also collect into the Nu column vector p all user
powers. We consider a total power constraint, i.e.,

pk ≥ 0,

Nu

Xk=1

pk ≤ 1 .

(5)

According to the beamformer adopted by the BS, as de-
scribed in the following section, the resulting SINR for user
k = 1, . . . , Nu is denoted as γk(p), depending on the power
allocation. For the beamforming and scheduling problem we
aim at maximizing the weighted ASR

R(p) =

K

Xk=1

wk log2(1 + γk(p)) +

K+N

Xk=K+1

ρkxkRﬁx ,

(6)

where ρ is the weight of FR users ASR, wk is the weight of the
ASR of VR user k and xk is a binary variable which assumes
value 1 if the considered FR user is active and 0 otherwise.

III. BEAMFORMING AND SCHEDULING

A. Direct solution

Considering the properties of the virtual channel, and that
it can be obtained by the inverse discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) matrix applied at the BS, we consider as BS transmit
beamformer matrix Ut, therefore the equivalent channel seen
by the users is the sparse virtual channel Hv having Na virtual
transmit antennas and Nu virtual receive antennas. We will use
one transmit virtual antenna per user, and in particular for user
k we select in hv,k the entry with largest gain, i.e.,

In order to solve the mixed-integer programming problem
we divide it into two problems: the problem of ﬁnding the
set of active users (thus solving on x) and the problem of
allocating the power (thus solving on p). In particular we
exhaustively consider all possible sets of active FR users, and
for each set we solve the power allocation problem (if feasible)
maximizing the weighted ASR. For each set of active FR users
x the resulting power allocation problem is hence

ℓk = argmaxi|[hv,k]i|2 ,

and we indicate with

Gk,k = |[hv,k]ℓk |2

(7)

(8)

the corresponding gain. With this choice, user k will suffer
from the the interference of all other user signals, based on his
virtual channel hv,k, i.e. the gain of the interference channel
from user j to user k is

Gj,k = |[hv,k]ℓj |2 ,

(9)

corresponding to the use of virtual antenna ℓk by user j
through the channel of user k. Therefore Nu × Nu matrix
G having entries Gj,k deﬁnes the useful gain and interference
gain for all users. With this choice, user k experiences a SINR

γk(p) =

Gk,kpk
j6=k Gj,kpj + σ2 .

(10)

P

Let us consider the weighted ASR maximization problem
with variables pk and xk. Our aim is to select a subset of
FR users and to allocate power to both VR users and active
FR users in order to maximize the weighted ASR. Let x =
[x1, . . . , xK+N ]. The problem can be modeled as

max
p,x

K

Xk=1

wk log2 (cid:18)

1 +

Gk,kpk

K+N
j=1,j6=k Gj,kpjxj + σ2 (cid:19)
K+N

P

+

(11a)

+

ρkRﬁxxk

Xk=K+1

≥ γﬁx k = K + 1, ..., K + N

s.t. (5) and

Gk,kpk
K+N
j=1,j6=k Gj,kpjxj + σ2

P

xk = 1 k = 1, ..., K

xk ∈ {0, 1} k = K + 1, ..., K + N

(11b)
(11c)

(11d)

This problem of joint power allocation and scheduling is
modelled as a mixed-integer optimization problem, which
belongs to the NP-hard class of problems. We will hence ﬁrst
analyse the solution and then discuss two different methods
that can reduce the computational complexity of the solution
while ensuring the same weighted ASR value.

max
p

K

Xk=1

wk log2 (cid:18)

1 +

Gk,kpk

K+N
j=1,j6=k Gj,kpjxj + σ2 (cid:19)
K+N

P

+

(12)

+

ρkRﬁxxk

Xk=K+1

s.t. (5), (13c) and (11d).

We notice that the resulting optimization problem is non-
convex due to the argument of the the log function of (12)
and we approximate the target function to make it convex.
In particular, we consider a high SINR regime and perform
the change of variables qk = log2 pk, obtaining the convex
maximization problem

max
p

K

Xk=1

wk log2 (cid:18)

Gk,keqk

K+N
j=1,j6=k Gj,keqj xj + σ2 (cid:19)

+

P
K+N

Xk=K+1

ρkRﬁxxk

(13a)

s.t.

eqk ≥ 0,

K+N

Xk=1

eqk ≤ 1

(13b)

Gk,keqk
K+N
j=1,j6=k Gj,keqj xj + σ2

≥ γﬁx

k = K + 1, ..., K + N.

P

(13c)
The resulting maximization problem is hence convex and can
be solved with standard optimization solutions. We then pick
the set of active users for which the problem is feasible and
provides that maximum weighted ASR.

B. GC solution

The second solution aims at reducing the computational
complexity of the optimization problem by clustering the users
in different groups, in which users transmit without interfer-
ence. Then we transmit only to one set of non-interfering users,
allocating powers in order to maximize the weighted ASR. The
set of active users is the one that maximizes the weighted ASR
among all sets.

In order to perform the clustering operation we use the
interference matrix G. We notice that, since the mmWave
virtual channel results sparse, the resulting interference matrix
computed over the matrix of the gains of the virtual channel
G will have mostly small or zero off-diagonal entries. In
particular, as the ratio Na/Nu of transmit and receive antennas
tends to inﬁnity, the interference matrix itself will become

U7

U4

rithm

G5,7

G7,2

G2,5

U5

G1,5

G1,3

U1

U2

U3

G3,6

U6

Fig. 1.
interference matrix G.

Interference graph obtained from a particular realization of the

sparse. Indeed, in sparse massive-MIMO channels the channel
vectors associated to different users become orthogonal as the
number of antennas goes to inﬁnity [5]. Our system behaves
in a similar manner. Considering the virtual channel model
with L non-zero paths and a growing number of antennas at
the BS, we have that, asymptotically, users do not interfere.
Therefore the interference matrix becomes a diagonal matrix
and the graph colouring leads to all users labelled with the
same colour.

From the interference matrix we build the interference
graph, i.e. a directed graph composed by a node for each
user and with edges connecting interfering users: edges are
directed from the interfering user toward the user suffering
the interference. No edge between nodes k and n is present
if and only if Gk,n = 0. Nodes are then clustered into groups
of non-interfering users: this corresponds to color the graph,
where each color represents a group and nodes with the same
colors must not be connected by edges. We aim at ﬁnding the
minimum number of colors needed for the graph, and we resort
to the solution proposed in [3]. Fig. 1 shows an example of
interference graph obtained for a particular realization of the
interference matrix, where, after graph colouring, each node
(corresponding to user Uk) has been assigned a colour red
or green. Since users having the same color do not interfere,
assuming to transmit only to users of the same color the SINR
of user k can be written as

γk =

Gk,kpk
σ2

,

(14)

which coincides with the signal to noise ratio (SNR).

Let C the set of colors, Fc be the set of indices of FR users
with color c ∈ C, and let Vc the set of VR users with color c.
To select the subset of active FR users (with the same color)
we resort to the exhaustive search approach, thus computing
the weighted ASR corresponding to each active set. For the
FR users the allocated power is

pk = γﬁx

σ2
Gk,k

xk ,

k ∈ Fc

(15)

For VR users since no interference is present, the optimal
power allocation strategy is provided by the waterﬁlling algo-

max

{pk,k∈Vc} Xk∈Vc

wk log2 (cid:18)

1 +

Gk,kpk

σ2 (cid:19)

(16a)

s.t. pk ≥ 0,

pk ≤ 1 −

xkpk .

(16b)

Xk∈Vc

Xk∈Fc

The graph-coloring solution is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: GC Power allocation and Scheduling Algo-
rithm
Data: G,σ2, color set C, indices sets Vc and Fc, c ∈ C.
Result: p, x
1 for c ∈ C do
2

for all possible sets of FR users x do

∀k ∈ Fk compute pk|(11b) is satisﬁed
for k ∈ Fc do

compute water-ﬁlling level λ such that

+

σ2
Gk,k (cid:19)

λ −

(cid:18)

Xk∈Vc

= 1 −

xkpk (17)

Xk∈Fc

Rc(x) = weighted ASR for x

end

3

4

5

6

7

end
xc = argmaxxRc(x)

8
9 end
10 c∗ = argmaxcRc
11 p = pc∗
12 x = xc∗

C. PGC solution

The third solution applies grouping (i.e., GC) only on VR
users, while the FR users are allowed to interfere with the
VR users and among themselves. This allows a more ﬂexible
allocation of FR users, while at the same time due to their
low-rate request we expect that the resulting interference on
the VR users is reduced.

Therefore,

in this case we apply the GC only on the
interference graph of the VR users, while we must perform
the exhaustive search of the the active FR users among all
FR users. Therefore, for each color c ∈ C we must solve the
optimal scheduling and power allocation problem for the set
of VR users Vc and for all FR users. With respect to the global
direct approach we have reduced the set of VR users, but on
the other hand we must run the optimization algorithm for
each color.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

We present now numerical results obtained with the dif-
ferent solutions described in previous sections. We consider
Nu = 7 users where K = 4 are VR users and N = 3 are
FR users. We assume that the virtual channel matrix Hv is
composed by L = 100 non-zero entries and that they are

distributed as in (3) and the SINR requirement for FR users
is 5 dB while AWGN leads to an average SNR of 17 dB.

We start verifying the assumption that

the interference
matrix is sparse, due to the large number of BS antennas.
Let us consider matrix D, deﬁned as the matrix containing
off-diagonal elements of G, i.e., D = G − diag(G). Fig. 2
shows the average number of non-zero entries of D vs the
number of antennas at the BS. We observe that the average
number of non-zero entries sharply decreases as the number of
antennas increases, and at Na = 200 we have on average about
3 non-zero off-diagonal entries. In the following we consider
Na = 200.

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

D
n

i

s
e
i
r
t

n
e
o
r
e
z
-
n
o
n

f

o

r
e
b
m
u
n
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

500

1000

1500

2000

Number of BS antennas

Fig. 2. Average number of non-zero entries in D vs. number of antennas at
the BS.

We now consider the scheduling and power allocation
algorithms described in the paper. The weight wk has been
chosen to be equal to 1 − ρ for each VR user, i.e. wk =
1 − ρ ∀k = {1, ..., K} and ρ ∈ {0, 1}. With this choice
we do not distinguish among the users in the two sets, but
only use ρ to balance the resources uses for VR and FR
users. In particular, when ρ ≈ 0, we maximize the ASR
of VR users, whereas for ρ ≈ 1 we maximize the ASR of
FR users. Therefore we consider as performance metric the
average ASR for both VR and FR users. Fig. 3 shows the
average (over various channel realizations) ASR vs. ρ, for the
different scheduling and power allocation solutions. The direct
algorithm is denoted as direct, and then we have the GC
and PGC algorithms. As we expect, with increasing values of
ρ, VR users ASR decreases while FR users ASR increases.
Note also that even if ρ = 1 we still have a non-zero ASR for
VR users, since all FR are served and the remaining power is
allocated to VR users.
We notice that

the direct solution to power allocation
and scheduling is well approximated by both GC and PGC
solutions for VR users, whereas, for FR users,
the PGC
solution is the best performing. Worse ASR performance for
FR users in GC solution are due to the fact that VR users

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

]
z
H
/
s
/
t
i

b

[

R
S
A
W
s
r
e
s
u
R
F

0

0

Direct
GC
PGC

1

2

3

4

5

VR users WASR [bit/s/Hz]

Fig. 3. FR vs. VR users ASR for different ρ values.

could be labelled with different colours and hence can not
transmit together. Notice that the GC solution for VR users
outperforms the direct solution. This is due to the fact that
even if the maximization problem is focused on FR users ASR,
they could be labelled with different colours and hence in GC
solution they can not transmit all together, resulting in a power
allocation for VR users with higher values than direct solution.
This results in higher ASR values for VR users when ρ tends
to 1.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this work we considered a mmWave massive MIMO
system and we solved the problem of power allocation and
users scheduling when two different sets of users transmit:
VR users and FR users with a required SINR level for
transmission. We analysed the direct solution and proposed
two algorithms, GC and PGC, that present similar ASR per-
formance for both VR users and FR users while reducing the
computational complexity. Then we analysed the performance
of all the proposed solutions in terms of ASR when the weight
ρ (and hence wk) assigned to VR users changes and showed
that the proposed algorithms present the same performance
obtained with the direct solution. We also showed that with
an increasing number of antennas at the BS the interference
matrix becomes diagonal and hence that the low-complexity
GC solution achieves optimal results.

REFERENCES

[1] A. M. Sayeed, "Deconstructing multiantenna fading channels," IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2563-2579, Oct
2002.

[2] J. Papandriopoulos and J. S. Evans, "Low-Complexity Distributed Algo-
rithms for Spectrum Balancing in Multi-User DSL Networks", in Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol.7, pp. 3270-
3275, June 2006.

[3] P. S. Segundo "A new DSATUR-based algorithm for exact vertex
coloring", Computers and Operations Reasearch, no.39, pp. 1724-1733,
2012.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[4] J. Mo, P. Schniter, N. G. Prelcic and R. W. Heath Jr. "Channel Estimation
in Millimiter Wave MIMO Systems with One-Bit Quantization", in Proc.
48th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, pp. 957-
961, Nov. 2014.

[5] Z. Gao, L. Dai, C. Yuen, Z. Wang, "Asymptotic Orthogonality Analysis
of Time-Domain Sparse Massive MIMO Channels", IEEE Communica-
tions Letters, vol. 19, no. 10, Oct. 2015

[6] S. Rangan, T. S. Rappaport and E. Erkip, "Millimeter-Wave Cellular
Wireless Networks: Potentials and Challenges," Proceedings of
the
IEEE, vol. 102, no. 3, pp. 366-385, Mar. 2014.

[7] A. Gupta and R. K. Jha, "A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and
Emerging Technologies," IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1206-1232, 2015.
[8] K. K. Wong, R. D. Murch, and K. B. Letaief, "A joint-channel diago-
nalization for multiuser MIMO antenna system," IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 2, pp. 773-786, Jul. 2003.

[9] Q. H. Spencer, A. L. Swindlehurst, and M. Haardt, "Zero-forcing meth-
ods for downlink spatial multiplexing in multiuser MIMO channels,"
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 461-471, Feb. 2004.

[10] H. Yang and T. L. Marzetta, "Performance of Conjugate and Zero-
Forcing Beamforming in Large-Scale Antenna Systems," IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 172-179, Feb.
2013.

[11] J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink and M. Debbah, "Massive MIMO in the UL/DL
of Cellular Networks: How Many Antennas Do We Need?," IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 160-
171, Feb. 2013.

[12] F. Fang, H. Zhang, J. Cheng and V. C. M. Leung, "Energy-Efﬁcient
Resource Allocation for Downlink Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
Network," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 9,
pp. 3722-3732, Sept. 2016.

[13] S. Shi, M. Schubert and H. Boche, "Rate Optimization for Multiuser
MIMO Systems With Linear Processing," IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4020-4030, Aug. 2008.

[14] Z. Ding, F. Adachi, and H. V. Poor, "The application of MIMO to non-
orthogonal multiple access,"IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no.
1, pp. 537-552, Jan. 2016.

[15] Wei Zhiqiang, Yuan Jinhong, Derrick Wing Kwan Ng, Maged Elkashlan,
and Ding Zhiguo, "A Survey of Downlink Non-Orthogonal Multiple Ac-
cess for 5G Wireless Communication Networks", ZTE Communications,
Vol.14 No. 4, Oct. 2016.

[16] N. Ksairi, S. Tomasin and M. Debbah, "A Multi-Service Oriented
in Future LTE," IEEE

Multiple Access Scheme for M2M Support
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 218-224, Jan. 2017.
[17] N. Ksairi, S. Tomasin and M. Debbah, "A multi-service oriented
multiple-access scheme for next-generation mobile networks," in Proc.
2016 European Conference on Networks and Communications (EuCNC),
Athens, 2016, pp. 355-359.

[18] N. Ksairi, S. Tomasin, and B. Tomasi, "Systems and Methods for
Scheduling of Resources and Pilot Patterns to User Terminals in a Multi-
User Wireless Network," Patent PCT/EP2016/052202, Filed on February
2, 2016.

