7
1
0
2

n
u
J

5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
5
8
3
0
.
6
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Google Cardboard Dates Augmented Reality : Issues,
Challenges and Future Opportunities

Ramakrishna Perla and Ramya Hebbalaguppe

TCS Research, New Delhi, India

E-mail: r.perla@tcs.com, ramya.hebbalaguppe@tcs.com

Abstract

The Google’s frugal Cardboard solution for immersive Virtual Reality (VR)

experiences has come a long way in the VR market. The Google Cardboard

VR applications will support us in the ﬁelds such as education, virtual tourism,

entertainment, gaming, design etc. Recently, Qualcomm’s Vuforia SDK has

introduced support for developing mixed reality applications for Google Card-

board which can combine Virtual and Augmented Reality (AR) to develop

exciting and immersive experiences. In this work, we present a comprehen-

sive review of Google Cardboard for AR and also highlight its technical and

subjective limitations by conducting a feasibility study through the inspection

of a Desktop computer use-case. Additionally, we recommend the future av-

enues for the Google Cardboard in AR. This work also serves as a guide for

Android/iOS developers as there are no published scholarly articles or well

documented studies exclusively on Google Cardboard with both user and de-

veloper’s experience captured at one place.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

Recent advances in hardware and software mobile technology have enabled ways for develop-

ments in mobile VR/AR applications. Google Cardboard is a VR and AR platform developed

by Google for the use with head-mount for a smartphone 27. To date, the current widespread

Cardboard VR applications have shown what Google Cardboard is today. Google announced

that in the platform’s ﬁrst 19 months, over 5 million Cardboard viewers had shipped, over 1,000

compatible applications had been published, and over 25 million application installs had been

made3.

Google Cardboard is launched at Google I/O 2014 developers conference to encourage de-

velopment of VR and AR Android applications, with a release to iOS at the following year’s

event 27. Many high cost sophisticated VR headsets exist in the market but Google’s intent

was to bring VR to mass-market through frugal Cardboard design. Figure 1 shows the factors

making Google cardboard’s reach viable for VR and AR.

Design of Google Cardboard and its evolution: A Cardboard is designed using simple stiff

cardboard and anyone can either construct their own headset using simple materials such as

velcro, tape adhesive, two 45mm focal length lenses, two magnets and most importantly, simple

stiff cardboard using the speciﬁcations published by Google or purchase a assembled kit from

any online vendors. A smartphone can be inserted into the headset to experience the Google

Cardboard compatible applications.

There are two versions of Google Cardboard design speciﬁcations, the initial design sup-

ports phones with screens up to 5.7 inches (140 mm). The magnetic button located on one side

of Cardboard is used as a trigger to create a touch event in the Cardboard application (see Figure

2). Most of the low-end smartphones without compass would not be able to utilize the magnetic

button to trigger. We also observed that due to the lack of magnetic strength and smaller range

2

Figure 1: The parameters fueling the growth of Google Cardboard based VR and AR applica-
tions.

of movement within the slot, the magnetic switch could not always be used as a trigger while

conducting experiments. The second version of Cardboard design supports screens up to 6

inches (150 mm) and most importantly, the magnetic button which was found troublesome on

the ﬁrst ofﬁcial template is taken off. This is replaced by a conductive lever button (see Figure

2) which triggers a lever inside the headset that comes down and presses the screen to register

this touch as an event to perform any application speciﬁc pre-deﬁned task 9. The Cardboard

compatible applications partition the smartphone display into two parts, while also applying

barrel distortion, resulting in a stereoscopic (3D) vision with a wide ﬁeld of view 12.

Google also encourages other manufactures in designing VR viewers by allowing them to

generate their own Viewer Proﬁle (include ﬁelds such as Screen-to-Lens distance, Inter-Lens

distance, Distortion coefﬁcients and Field-of-View angles) to make sure that their viewer will

work seamlessly with Google Cardboard applications 15. This avoids the problems relating to

stereoscopic vision such as double images or blurry picture observed when the viewer speciﬁ-

cations deviate or slightly vary from Cardboard viewer speciﬁcations. We infer from 14 that (a)

Google Cardboard is the most economical gear for VR/AR applications, (b) Cardboard allows

developments in AR through aperture in front-pad enabling the video-see-through mode, (c)

3

Figure 2: Version 1 of the Cardboard sports a magnetic trigger while version 2 of Cardboard uti-
lizes a conductive lever for click event. Refer Introduction for problems pertaining to magnetic
trigger.

Supports all the screen sizes upto 6 inches, and (d) Low weight among all the VR/AR head-

sets. This motivated the use of Google Cardboard different AR/VR applications. The recent

work by Perla et al. 18 has discussed an industrial inspection framework using multiple AR

devices where extension of Google Cardboard, which was initially envisioned for VR, was also

extended to AR. Further, Hegde et al. 19 proposed simple hand swipe gestures using GMM

based hand modeling of skin pixels data in egocentric view to navigate options on wearable de-

vice. This work is extended to recognize more robust hand swipe gestures in 20, and the results

are compared against existing methods. In 21, Gupta et al. presented the idea of highlighting

the ROI for frugal AR headsets.

We summarise the key contributions of our paper:

1 We provide a comprehensive review of Google Cardboard focusing on its design and

evolution for AR (Refer Introduction 1).

2 A sample AR application using Google Cardboard has been developed for inspection

assistance of a Desktop computer. Using this as a platform, a feasibility study was con-

4

ducted to explore Cardboard for AR. We captured set of subjective metrics in addition

to the suggestions on technical/hardware limitations of developing AR applications for

Cardboard (Refer Sections 2 and 3).

3 We also suggest future research directions and opportunities for developing AR applica-

tions on Google Cardboard in various domains (Refer Section 4 and 5). There has been

no existing scholarly articles addressing this.

Figure 3: This shows the Technical and Subjective limitations of using Cardboard for AR.

2 Limitations of Google Cardboard for AR

The technological demands for AR are much higher than for VR, which is why the ﬁeld of

AR took longer to mature than that of VR 13. However, the key components, namely displays,

trackers, graphics computers, and software needed to build an AR system have remained the

same since Ivan Sutherland’s pioneering work of the 1960s 10. As the smartphone technology

is growing at a rapid rate, there is an increasing possibility of producing accurate and efﬁcient

key components of AR using just a smartphone. This motivates developers to design intuitive

interfaces, and researchers to work on user-friendly interactions for Google Cardboard.

5

To test the feasibility of Google Cardboard for AR, we developed a sample AR application

for the use with Google Cardboard for the inspection of a Desktop computer. The sample

inspection process consisted of following steps:

1 Reading part speciﬁc inspection data from the ﬁles stored on remote server,

2 Questions are loaded into the application and sequentially overlaid on to the device screen

contextually,

3 Google’s speech-to-text is integrated with the application; this service continuously lis-

tens for the speech input,

4 Once the particular inspection item is addressed (users are instructed to say either "YES"

or "NO" or "SKIP"), the data is stored in a ﬁle and sent to the server upon the completion

of inspection.

The feasibility study through post-inspection questionnaire is performed by considering 20

subjects and results are reported in Section 3.

Despite the opportunities to develop AR applications using Google Cardboard, there are

few commercial mobile AR use-cases which cannot be implemented for the use with Google

Cardboard. This is due to its limitations in both technical and non-technical aspects from devel-

oper and user perspectives. Figure 3 highlights some key limitations and challenges of Google

Cardboard for AR:

2.1 Technical Limitations and Challenges

2.1.1 Field of View

Google Cardboard offers limited FoV (≈ 90◦), which is very constrained especially when de-

veloping applications for AR where user has to work outdoors; the user can never make an eye

6

contact with the people surrounding the user and may not be aware of their presence. This could

prove to be dangerous in industrial inspection when we deal with hot electronic and mechanical

parts and also when the parts are in motion, this may cause damage to the inspector.

2.1.2 User Interaction

The user interaction using Cardboard with smartphone can be in two ways:

• Head Rotation: Head rotation can be used for user interaction by placing the UI controls

in the user FoV. It requires continuously updating the UI controls location in the current

FoV for the applications allowing movement of the user. If the controls are placed out of

current FoV, by ﬁxing them in one speciﬁc direction based on device compass readings,

users will often need to wait, sense confusion, and have to look around for the controls

5. But for the applications such as inspection requiring user input at every step and

continuous movement of the user head in 360◦, using head rotation based interaction

shifts the focus from the object being inspected and hence cannot be used in equipment

inspections that need focus and attention for extended period of time.

• Speech-to-Text based: Triggering an event is done by displaying relevant speech key-

words to be spoken by the user at each instance or by asking the user to go through the

list of keywords at the launch of application. A voice based interaction on Android de-

vices is achieved through the Google speech recognition API service 1. Speech based

interaction can perform better for the use of quiet indoor applications as it is difﬁcult for

the recognizer to detect speech keywords in a noisy environment.

2.1.3 Smartphone Battery Drain

Another important consideration when developing applications on mobile platforms is battery

life of smartphone. As the Cardboard AR applications require continuous camera feed in the

7

background to view the physical world, it consume signiﬁcant amount of the device battery. If

the application uses speech based user interaction, the device microphone is in continuous listen

mode for user speech input; this drains the device battery rapidly. Phone might heat up causing

uneasiness to the user as the phone radiates the heat around the user’s face.

2.1.4 Camera Quality

Since Google Cardboard is a video-see-through device, camera quality of the device is very

important to view the physical world. A low end device with poor image acquisition will have

a problem; Poor picture quality in low lighting condition poses problems to the users under

limited illumination scenarios. If there exists digital/electronic display in the user FoV, camera

reﬂections impair the visibility.

2.1.5 Limited API and SDK Support

Applications need SDK or API support to implement tasks such as lens distortion correction,

3D calibration, side-by-side rendering, and stereo geometry conﬁguration. While Google and

Qualcomm have SDK’s providing support for Cardboard, only Qualcomm SDK supports AR

through Vuforia SDK 16. Cardboard SDK 4 is developed for VR, and it uses Open GL graphics

API in the background. Since there are no speciﬁc API’s to achieve AR experience using

Cardboard SDK, we overcome this by drawing camera into Open GL texture and display it

using Cardboard-view stereorenderer methods.

2.1.6 Other Hardware Limitations

Other hardware limitations include low processing power and internal memory, outdated pro-

cessors, low-quality displays, poor camera quality and sensor imperfections are some of the

issues 11. The device requires an implementation of Open GL graphics pipeline provided by

the device manufacturer 6; low-end devices may not be capable of handling graphics render-

8

ing. There are number of mobile resources which are required to be used in parallel for AR

application such as:

• Camera feed is always ON in order to show the physical world which is to be augmented;

this consumes signiﬁcant amount of battery when used for longer durations,

• Microphone always listening to voice input and sometimes noise and keeps comparing

with pre-deﬁned set of keywords drains battery. Use of head rotation based user interac-

tion may be helpful for certain applications requiring less user movement and input,

• Depends on internet connectivity as speech data is always being sent to Google servers.

Usage of ofﬂine speech recognition library such as Pocketsphinx may not be a good

solution as the speech-to-text ﬁdelity is no where comparable to the Google speech engine

which is trained over huge corpus,

• Sending live camera stream or sensors data to remote server to understand the envi-

ronment for accurate overlay of virtual data. This may be required as there is limited

API/library support for running computer vision, machine learning, or deep learning al-

gorithms on smartphone,

• Displaying virtual graphic overlays (3D graphics rendering).

Given these requirements, application runs smartphone CPU and GPU both at maximum, thereby

heating up the device quickly.

2.2 Subjective Limitations

There are some important physiological considerations in designing applications for Google

Cardboard that can restrict the user if not handled well 5.

9

2.2.1 Simulation Sickness

Simulation sickness is the result of a disparity between a perceived experience and what one ac-

tually experiences 5. This is a big challenge for VR/AR Cardboard applications. Manufacturers

are working on designing headsets with better optics and advanced head tracking technology

that could solve this problem in the future to enable users to comfortably use the headsets for

longer duration 11.

2.2.2 Rendering text in Stereoscopic view

For VR applications, rendering text or any other graphics can be done by binding it to a pre-

deﬁned location on the virtual scene containing some different colored area (as it helps user in

easy reading) and tracking the head rotation to avoid nausea 5. But for AR applications having

no reference from physical world co-ordinate system to camera co-ordinate system, overlaying

the text at a ﬁxed location on the screen display for longer duration may cause discomfort/eye-

strain. The reason being that the overlaid-text is independent of the background physical world

scene which is continuously changing according to the user movement.

2.2.3 Brightness of Virtual Content

Change in brightness of the virtual content overlaid is an issue given the limited screen size and

limited FoV; the immediate transition from the dark scene to a bright scene causes eye strain

and restricts the user for longer duration tasks 5. This is similar to what a normal person feels

just after stepping out of a dark room on a sunny day.

2.2.4 Other Issues

Apart from above mentioned limitations, there are some other subjective issues with Google

Cardboard such as (a) user discomfort as it pokes on nose, (b) Subjects with spectacles (eye

correction) can’t wear Google Cardboard, (c) Eye strain when used for longer duration, (d)

10

Claustrophobic, and (e) sometimes causes dizzy feeling if the overlaid virtual content acceler-

ates or decelerates inside the application.

3 Experiments and Results

The experiments were carried out to ﬁnd out the feasibility of Google Cardboard for AR. 20

engineers and research staff from an industry research lab were selected as participants, com-

prising 10 male and 10 female, and the ages spanned from 22 to 35 with average 26 years. Their

proﬁciency level was novice with respect to usage of Google Cardboard. Subjects were tasked

with conducting an inspection of a Desktop computer using Google Cardboard application in

two different settings: (i) quiet reading room, and (ii) work place: (not too quiet and not too

loud). The inspection consisted 20 questions related to desktop computer; and the questions

are displayed in a sequential manner where the user has to answer them by giving speech input

(basically say, either YES or NO or SKIP) once the inspection of particular part mentioned in

the question is completed1.

A set of subjective metrics were obtained that measure both usability and user experience.

These indicators measure human performance and user satisfaction. Users ratings were col-

lected using a ﬁve-point Likert scale 8 ranging from 1 to 5 (1 - Very Poor, 2 - Poor, 3 - Fair, 4 -

Good, 5 - Very Good). The Likert scale is commonly used in surveys as it allows the subjects

to quantify opinion based items 8.

Figure 4 depicts user ratings of 5 subjective metrics. Most important one being, the use-

fulness of the method when used for (i) complex inspection process involving huge number

of check-lists, and (ii) maintenance or assembly where user manuals have to be referred many

times by the novice users performing tasks. The ease referred to the user comfort and user-

1Google Cardboard VR SDK for Android is used for developing Android based application for inspection.
Google’s Speech Recognizer API is integrated for speech-to-text based interaction. Nexus 5 mobile is used in
conducting experiments

11

Figure 4: Mean Likert ratings of the subjective metrics, namely, (1) Ease, (2) Smooth Display,
(3) Speech interface accuracy, (4) Latency and (5) Usefulness over 20 novice subjects for the
inspection of Desktop computer. We report two sets of results in a quiet-reading-room and
work-place cases

friendly interaction that reduced the stress and mental load while carrying out an inspection

process. The results obtained conform to the requirements of statistical signiﬁcance of data

obtained by subjective metrics.

The 5 subjective metrics are as follows:

1 Ease: How easy was it to perform inspection? Rate the trouble experienced wearing/using

the device?

2 Smooth Display: Was there a lag in display of Virtual content?

3 Speech Accuracy: Was there trouble with speech interaction input method ?

12

4 Latency: Was the system responsiveness for speech inputs user-friendly ?

5 Usefulness: Rate the usefulness of application for similar AR maintenance/assembly tasks

?

From the Figure 4, it is evident that for quiet-reading-room inspection scenario, we can

notice high ﬁdelity of speech-to-text as there is no surrounding noise in reading room setting.

For the case of work-place, speech-to-text ﬁdelity is relatively poor as there is higher chance

of recognizer picking the noise and matching the text output with the pre-deﬁned set of speech

keywords. This resulted in higher ratings for ease and usefulness of the application for quiet-

reading-room inspection case.

4 Discussion

If the limitations are overcome, vision of Cardboard’s wider footprint in AR market in next

few years is hoped to come true. With the present state of Cardboard design and ability of

smartphone, Cardboard can be a good solution for VR applications and few other short duration

indoor AR applications. As the speech based user interaction can not perform well in noisy

environments and head rotation is not a convenient user interaction to be used when developing

applications for manufacturing industries, we discourage Cardboard for outdoor activity appli-

cations with the current state. Choice of optical-see-through AR devices (Google Glass, Vuzix

Glass, Daqri Smart Helmet, Microsoft Hololens etc.) will always be preferable for outdoor in-

dustry application developments because of their efﬁcient hardware setup with multiple sensors

and sophisticated user interaction technologies.

For aforementioned reasons despite of being an economically viable solution, it posed dif-

ﬁculties to the developers to make decision whether or not to choose Google Cardboard for

particular application. Developers are suggested to make an application that works both in (i)

13

stereoscopic view for the use with Cardboard, and (ii) monocular view with additional overlay

of on-screen selection buttons for the hand-held or tablet based use. It is always better to pro-

vide an option to the user to choose which mode suits. Tablet or smartphone hand-held mode

can be preferable in few use cases for the following reasons: (a) solves many non-technical

problems related to Google Cardboard as user is always free to interact with objects without

relying completely on on-screen camera feed, (b) camera feed is necessary only when there is

a need for virtual objects integration with physical world objects, and (c) speech recognition

overhead will not be there as it uses overlay of on-screen selection buttons for user interaction

saving the battery power. The only disadvantage using hand-held mode is that it is difﬁcult to

use for maintenance tasks where user has to work with both hands.

5 Future Opportunities

Google Cardboard design requires more attention for addressing the fundamental issues before

it becomes widely accepted in AR market. And also, smartphones should get more powerful

with better displays, camera, and processors; and manufacturers working on designing headsets

similar to Cardboard should provide better mechanism with additional modiﬁcations such as

(a) taking off side ﬂaps to widen FoV, (b) placing cushion for nose, and (c) slide mechanism to

adjust the inter lens distance and distance between lens and smartphone.

With the current state of smartphone technology, Google Cardboard based AR applications

can be effectively used in areas such as travel, e-commerce, 3D gaming and education. Qual-

comm, with its pioneering work in mobile AR, encourages AR applications for Cardboard tho-

rugh Vuforia SDK providing side-by-side camera feed with 3D calibration and lens distortion

correction 16. Vuforia overlays VR content by detecting and tracking a Image Target. Common

uses of Image Targets include recognizing and augmenting printed media and product packag-

ing for marketing campaigns, gaming and visualizing products in the environment where the

14

product was intended to be used 17. Vuforia’s markerless recognition is limited; this helps

in applications such as augmenting 3D content on toys or instructional manuals overlaid on

consumer products.

Cardboard based AR can be essential guide in providing educational resources to re-create

historical events, activate conventional books into 3D graphics by recognizing Image Targets.

It can also serve as a visual aid for training novice users in manufacture industry in constrained

environment.

6 Conclusion

Google Cardboard has drawn tremendous attention as its economically viable facilitating wider

reach among both developers and users. In this paper, we provided a comprehensive overview

of Google Cardboard design and its evolution for VR and AR applications. We also discussed

stereo rendering video-see-through based AR applications development for Google Cardboard

by highlighting the technical limitations and subjective considerations from users. Our study

is a guide for Android/iOS developers as there are no published scholarly articles or well doc-

umented studies with user/developer’s experience. If technical and non-technical limitations

are overcome, vision of Cardboard’s wider footprint in AR market in next few years is hoped

to come true. With the current state of smartphone technology and existing design of Google

Cardboard, we suggested impactful future opportunities for Google Cardboard based AR appli-

cations.

7 References

1. ANDROID SPEECH API. Android Speech Recognizer API. URL: http://developer.android.com/reference/android/speech/

SpeechRecognizer.html. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

15

2. BRANSTETTER , B. Cardboard is everything Google Glass never was. URL: http://kernelmag.dailydot.com/issue-sections/

staff-editorials/13490/google-cardboard-review-plus. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

3. CARDBOARD JOURNEY. Google Ofﬁcial Blog. URL: https://googleblog.blogspot.in/2016

/01/unfolding-virtual-journey-cardboard.html. Accessed: 2016-06-29.

4. CARDBOARD SDK. Google Cardboard SDK Overview. URL: https://developers.google.com

/cardboard/overview. Accessed: 2016- 04-22.

5. CARDBOARD SDK. Physiological Consideration in Designing for Google Cardboard.

URL: https://www.google.com/design/spec-vr/ designing-for-google-cardboard/physiologi

cal-considerations. html#. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

6. OPENGL API. Open GL Graphics API for Android. URL: http:// developer.android.com/gu

ide/topics/graphics/opengl.html. Ac- cessed: 2016-04-22.

7. PIERCE , D. Google Cardboard Is VR’s Gateway Drug. URL: http: //www.wired.com/

2015/05/try-google-cardboard/. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

8. ROBBINS , N. B., AND HEIBERGER , R. M. 2011. Plotting likert and other rating

scales. In Proceedings of the 2011 Joint Statistical Meeting, 1058-1066.

9. SHANKLIN , W. Google Cardboard 2: Hands-on. URL: http://www. gizmag.com/google-

cardboard-2-review-initial/37777/. Ac- cessed: 2016-04-22.

10. SUTHERLAND , I. E. 1968. A head-mounted three dimensional display. In Proceedings

of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I, ACM, 757-764.

11. TECHNAVIO. The Pros and Cons of Google Cardboard. URL: http://www.technavio.com/blog/

the-pros-and-cons-of-google-cardboard#sthash.o2YVHp0h. dpuf. Accessed: 2016-04-

22.

16

12. UNITY SDK. Unity SDK Reference for Google Cardboard. URL: https:

//develop-

ers.google.com/cardboard/unity/reference. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

13. VAN KREVELEN , D., AND POELMAN , R. 2010. A survey of augmented reality

technologies, applications and limitations. In- ternational Journal of Virtual Reality 9, 2,

1.

14. VR HEADSETS. Hypergrid Business: Virtual Reality Headsets. URL: http://www.hypergridbusiness.com/faq/

best-virtual-reality-headsets/. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

15. VR PROFILE GENERATOR. Google Viewer Proﬁle Generator. URL: http://www.google.com/get/cardboard/

viewerproﬁlegenerator/. Accessed: 2016-04-22.

16. VUFORIA SDK. Qualcomm’s Vuforia SDK: Developing for Google Cardboard. URL:

https://developer.vuforia.com/library/ articles/Solution/Developing-for-Google-Cardboard.

Accessed: 2016-04-22.

17. VUFORIA SDK. Qualcomm’s Vuforia SDK: Image Target based Recognition. URL:

https://developer.vuforia.com/library/articles/ Training/Image-Target-Guide. Accessed: 2016-

04-22.

18. R Perla, R Hebbalaguppe, G Gupta, G Sharma, E Hassan, M Sharma, L Vig, and G Shroff.

2016. An AR Inspection Framework: Feasibility Study with Multiple AR Devices. In

International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality. IEEE, 2016.

19. S Hegde, R Perla, R Hebbalaguppe, and E Hassan. 2016. GestAR: Real Time Gesture

Interaction for AR with Egocentric View.

In International Symposium on Mixed and

Augmented Reality. IEEE, 2016.

17

20. S. Mohatta, R. Perla, G. Gupta, E. Hassan, and R. Hebbalaguppe. Robust hand gestural

interaction for smartphone based ar/vr applications. In Winter Applications on Computer

Vision. IEEE, 2017.

21. A Gupta, S Mohatta, J Mourya, R Perla, E Hassan, R Hebbalaguppe. Hand Gesture

based Region Marking for Tele-support using Wearables. In Embedded Vision workshop,

CVPR, IEEE, 2017.

18

This figure "tcs_logo.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/1706.03851v1

