7
1
0
2

l
u
J

5

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
4
5
1
0
.
7
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A controlled study of stereoscopic virtual reality in freshman electrostatics

J. R. Smith,1 A. Byrum,1 T. M. McCormick,1 N. Young,1 C. Orban,1 and C. D. Porter1
1Physics Department, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus, Ohio, 43210

Virtual reality (VR) has long promised to revolutionize education, but with little follow-through. Part of the
reason for this is the prohibitive cost of immersive VR headsets or caves. This has changed with the advent
of smartphone-based VR (along the lines of Google cardboard) which allows students to use smartphones and
inexpensive plastic or cardboard viewers to enjoy stereoscopic VR simulations. We have completed the largest-
ever such study on 627 students enrolled in calculus-based freshman physics at The Ohio State University. This
initial study focused on student understanding of electric ﬁelds. Students were split into three treatments groups:
VR, video, and static 2D images. Students were asked questions before, during, and after treatment. Here we
present a preliminary analysis including overall post-pre improvement among the treatment groups, dependence
of improvement on gender, and previous video game experience. Results on select questions are discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Student success in STEM curricula often hinges on the
ability of an instructor to portray physical phenomena and
mathematical representations to a classroom [1]. Particularly
in STEM disciplines, students are faced with a variety of con-
cepts and systems that are inherently three-dimensional (3D)
in nature and involve either microscopic or invisible phenom-
ena. The need for useful visualizations is clear and has been
met with a variety of innovative projects such as PhET inter-
actives, videos and simulations. However, all of these visu-
alization methods have one thing in common: they visualize
the 3D world using 2D media.

Virtual reality (VR) technology has advanced rapidly in re-
cent years, and the past year has seen a proliferation of VR
in consumer products, education, professional training, and
public outreach [2]. Meanwhile, smartphone technology has
reached the point where 3D animations can be rendered in
real time on most devices. Realizing that smartphone tech-
nology can provide an inexpensive method for producing VR,
in 2014 two Google engineers created a small headset called
“Google Cardboard” to do precisely this [3]. With an invest-
ment of a few dollars for cardboard headsets, this enables in-
structors to regularly incorporate VR into the classroom en-
vironment as a sustained learning tool. This technology can
make complex 3D systems easier to visualize, and can pro-
vide a much more immersive visualization experience than
3D animated videos. It also lifts certain constraints on what
questions can conveniently be asked by instructors; assess-
ments are no longer limited to systems with convenient 2D
projections.

Although it is beyond the scope of this work to compre-
hensively review the literature, there have been dozens of
investigations into the use of VR in the classroom. Exam-
ples include work on virtual environments using a 2D com-
puter screen [4], VR headsets [5], and immersive stereoscopic
views in VR “caves” [6]. Although there are exceptions this
rule, many prior studies have not had control groups and have
had low numbers of participants, due in part to sharing of
a single, expensive VR device.
In order to investigate the
utility of this technology in introductory physics, smartphone

apps were written by the investigators to illustrate several 3D
systems and concepts from ﬁrst-year electrostatics. This pa-
per provides a preliminary report on efforts related to electric
ﬁelds around charged particles, especially dipole ﬁelds. This
discussion will include a description of the apps and the en-
gine used to produce them, the questions asked of students to
assess their learning and attitudes, and salient ﬁndings about
the utility of VR over alternatives (in this case, video and
static 2D images).

II. METHODS

Throughout the spring semester of 2017, assessments were
given to students in the second semester of OSU’s calculus-
based introductory physics course. All interaction with stu-
dents occurred after initial instruction on electric ﬁelds in lec-
ture, recitation and lab had concluded. Students were asked
a series of computer-based multiple-choice questions related
to electric ﬁelds around charged particles. These questions
were split into two parts: one before any treatment and one
after a treatment. Students were given points equivalent to
one homework assignment for completing the entire exercise;
their points were not dependent on the correctness of their
answers. Students were given the opportunity to opt out of
research participation and the data from those who did opt
out have been removed. 89% of the 707 students contacted at
the beginning of the semester participated in some part of the
VR study. Of these, 301 were assigned to the electric ﬁeld
portion, which is relevant to this paper. 210 of these students
reported their sex as male, 66 as female, and 25 declined to
provide a sex.

A. Questions

Students were asked basic questions about the direction of
the electric ﬁeld at various points in space around one or more
charged particles. Representative examples of the questions
asked are shown in Fig. 1. As indicated in the ﬁgure, some
question stems included 2D (xy) axes, and others included

 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 1. Students were always asked to select from multiple choice
options, the direction of the electric ﬁeld at a point labeled P or P1,
etc. Here are four examples of system diagrams and labeled points.

3D (xyz) axes. This was done with the intent of determin-
ing whether gains from any treatment type were robust to
presentation style or against the priming of the axes given.
Questions on the pre- and post-test portions were very sim-
ilar, but were identical in only a few cases. A typical ex-
ample of this minor difference between pre-post questions is
shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), which both ask students about
the electric ﬁeld along the axis of the dipole, but not between
the two charges. For more on the types of questions asked,
see Sec. III. Students were asked 33 questions about electric
ﬁeld directions, 3 attitudinal questions (whether they enjoyed
the treatment, found it helpful, and would recommend it to
a friend), and 2 questions on the frequency with which they
currently play video games and the frequency they played as
adolescents.

B. Treatments

Students were scheduled to take the assessments in groups.
As students entered, they were randomly assigned to one
of three treatment types (virtual reality, video, and static
images). The assessments were identical for all students,
only the type of training between the pre- and post-test
portions differed. All treatment types involved visualiza-
tions of electric dipoles and the ﬁelds surrounding them.
Post-hoc analysis showed that students’ ﬁnal scores in their
physics course were comparable between treatment groups
(VR: 78%, Video: 75%, Images: 76%).

Virtual reality: VR visualizations were created as appli-
cations for Android smartphones. The apps were written us-
ing Unity, a cross-platform game engine developed by Unity
Technologies [7], primarily used in development of video
games and simulations for gaming consoles, computers and
mobile devices, and the Google VR SDK for Unity. For

FIG. 2. An electric dipole with electric ﬁeld vectors generated at se-
lect points around the charges. This image is indicative of the style
and detail seen by all treatment groups. Several electric ﬁeld visual-
izations, including a version of the dipole visualization shown above,
are publicly available on Google Play go.osu.edu/BuckeyeVR.

the application used in this portion of the VR study, two
oppositely-charged particles were modeled as point charges
and visually represented as spheres as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The electric ﬁeld was represented as an array of vectors gen-
erated in Unity, where the direction and magnitude of each
vector was determined by the distance from charges in the
system. The application was then built as an Android ap-
plication package (APK ﬁle), and installed on two Nexus-5
smartphones.1

The app splits the phone into two screens, one for each eye.
The phone is then placed in a $2.50 cardboard viewer. The
students can now view the electric dipole depicted in Fig. 2 in
stereoscopic 3D. The app utilizes the smartphone’s sensors so
that when the students turn their heads, the dipole to rotates so
that they can see it from any orientation. Students were given
instructions to “look around” and study the electric ﬁeld vec-
tors from many angles before returning to the assessments.
The VR sequence consisted of ﬁve instruction-visualization
pairs, where the screen displayed instructions for 15-seconds
and then allowed students to control the visualization for 25-
seconds, for a total of a 3-minute, 20-second treatment time.
Videos: A 2-minute, 50-second video was generated from
the application described above. The screen was not split.
Students in the “video” treatment group watched the video,
which has intermittent instructions on what details students
should be noting. Students in this treatment group saw all the
same details as those in the VR group; the only difference
being that those in the VR group saw it in stereoscopic 3D
and were in control of their viewing of the system.

1 The APK ﬁle used in this study is available by request. Several electric
ﬁeld visualizations, including a version of the dipole visualization used
here, are publicly available on Google Play go.osu.edu/BuckeyeVR.

TABLE I. A brief description of question types that were separately
considered is included in the ﬁrst column. Mean post-pre gains are
shown as a percent of possible points in that question type. The far
right column shows the p values for the hypothesis that the mean
gains between treatment types are different. In all cases this hypoth-
esis is rejected.

Question type

Post-pre gains (%) t-test
VR Video Image
6.5

p
0.18

6.6

10.6 12.4

10.6 0.92

P on the axis of the dipole, E (cid:54)= 0 10.4

P on some axis, but not along
the dipole axis, E (cid:54)= 0.
P off axis, but in xy, yz, or xz
planes, E (cid:54)= 0.

-1.9
1.9
P off axis, out of plane and E (cid:54)= 0. -6.7
0.2
1.0
1.0
15.9 11.3
-9.2 -3.9
3.8
3.0

E = 0.
2D axes
3D axes
More than one charged particle

-0.5
0.10
-4.9
0.72
0.64
2.4
12.3 0.19
0.17
-6.7
0.74
3.3

Images: Students in the “images” treatment group were
shown static 2D images of dipoles and the electric ﬁelds
around them. Students were shown a static screenshot from
the video/VR like the one shown in Fig. 2. Since these stu-
dents were shown only the type of visualization found in their
textbooks and shown to them in class, this "treatment” serves
as a control group.

III. RESULTS

Table I presents average gains between the pre- and post-
test on question pairs (with the post-test question only slightly
altered, if not repeated exactly). For eight different question
pairs there were no signiﬁcant (> 0.05) differences between
the three treatment types. This was surprising to us as we had
expected the VR treatment to signiﬁcantly outperform the two
other treatments.

There were signiﬁcant differences among students’ atti-
tudes to the different treatments. Student data on their degree
of enjoyment are detailed in Fig. 3. The mean “enjoyable”
rankings (with “highly unenjoyable” = -2 and “highly en-
joyable” = +2) were signiﬁcantly different for those students
given the VR treatment (mean = 1.1) and for those given other
treatments (mean = 0.68), according to a χ2 test (χ2 = 153,
p < 0.01). Using a similar scale, students reported on how
helpful they perceived the treatments to be. Here also the VR
treatment (mean = 1.06) scored signiﬁcantly higher than the
others (mean = 0.70), with p < 0.01.

Researchers have found gender differences in spatial abil-
ities across cultures [8]. As shown in Table II, there were
signiﬁcant differences between pre-post gains for men com-
pared to women in the case of the VR treatment, but not for
the video or image treatment, with men’s gains being larger
than women’s gains in the VR treatment group. Some authors
propose video game training as a means to ameliorate gender
gaps in spatial reasoning skills [9]. With this in mind, our

FIG. 3. A histogram of students’ reported enjoyment of the visual-
izations in each treatment group. The error bars describe standard
error.

TABLE II. Correlation coefﬁcients and p values showing the rela-
tionship between video game play, gains between pre- and post-test
score, and gender. A positive correlation indicates larger values for
men.

VR

Video
p

Image
p

C.C.

C.C.

p
Gains vs. gender 0.25 0.01 -0.02 >0.8 -0.15 0.14
Curr. video game
vs. gender
Prior video game
vs. gender

0.48 <0.01 0.60 <0.01 0.56 <0.01

0.49 <0.01 0.45 <0.01 0.56 <0.01

C.C.

study asked participants about the frequency of their video
game play both current and prior. Frequent video game play
is deﬁned as at least once per week. Table II shows those
results for each treatment group.
In all cases, men’s self-
reported video game play is higher than women’s.

In the next analysis we performed, the data were separated
according to self-reported prior video game play (regardless
of gender). It was hypothesized that those students report-
ing greater video game play might be less distracted or over-
whelmed by the 3D rotations and might get more out of the
VR simulation. Of all questions asked on the assessments,
there were 7 pairs that were repeated on the pre- and post-
tests, and these 7 pairs were related to the electric dipole,
such as images (a) and (b) of Fig. 1. Let SV R
pre,oft be the aver-
age score on a pre-treatment (pre) question by students who
reported playing video games often (oft, deﬁned as more than
once per week) and received the VR treatment (VR). Score
Svid
post,rare is the average score on a post-test question, for stu-
dents who reported playing video games rarely (rare, deﬁned
as once per week or fewer), and received the video (vid) treat-
ment, and so on. We report not simply the pre-post gains, but
the difference between pre-post gains for those who report
video game play often, and the pre-post gains for those who
report video game play as rare. That is,

∆G = (Spost,oft − Spre,oft) − (Spost,rare − Spre,rare).

that successful use of VR is dependent on the student having
some experience with video games (which we use as a proxy
for 3D visuospatial rotations familiarity). The authors note
here that since many correlations have been sought in these
data, the chances of ﬁnding false positives at the 0.05 level
are non-negligible. We intend to follow up our preliminary
ﬁndings in future work.

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In conclusion, we ﬁnd evidence that the VR treatment can
be more effective for students with a video-gaming back-
In samples of students with or without a video-
ground.
gaming background, there does appear to be a slight gender
bias against women for the effectiveness of VR treatments,
and this could be due to the disparity between men’s and
women’s self-reported experience with video games in our
study. Students show signiﬁcant preference for VR over other
treatments in terms of perceived helpfulness, enjoyment, and
recommendations they would make to friends.

In future work a natural question is whether repeated ex-
posure to VR can improve scores and ameliorate gender dif-
ferences for students who do not report frequent video game
use.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The development of VR visualizations has been supported
by the OSU STEAM Factory, OSU’s Marion campus, and the
Ofﬁce for Distance Education and eLearning (ODEE).

ity: An example. Themes in Science and Technology Education,
2:117–130, 2009.

[6] Peter E. Johnson, Jeffrey D. Will, and Christopher R. Graunke.
Virtual reality for 3D visualization in a statics course. Proceed-
ings of the 2005 American Society for Engineering Education
Annual Conference & Exposition, 2005.

[7] Unity website. http://www.unity3d.com. [Online. accessed 28-

October-2016].

[8] Irwin Silverman, Jean Choi, and Michael Peters. The hunter-
gatherer theory of sex differences in spatial abilities: Data from
40 countries. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36(2):261–268, Apr
2007.

[9] I. Spence J. Feng and J. Pratt. Playing an action video game
reduces gender difference in spatial cognition. Psychological
Science, pages 850–855, 2007.

FIG. 4. The difference ∆G between post-pre gains for those report-
ing playing video games often and those reporting doing so rarely.
This difference is shown for seven pairs of pre-post questions related
to dipole electric ﬁelds. For example, pair 3 refers to the setups dis-
played in Fig. 1 (a) and (b). The error bars describe standard error.

In all cases, the gains for students in the VR treatment group
depend signiﬁcantly on whether or not they report regular
video game play. More speciﬁcally, among all students re-
porting regular video game play, those who received the VR
treatment had signiﬁcantly higher gains on these seven paired
questions than did those who received the video treatment (t-
test, t = 1.7, p = 0.04, d = 0.30), and those who received the
image treatment (t-test, t = 2.4, p < 0.01, d = 0.42). Among
those students who reported rarely playing video games, stu-
dents given the VR treatment had lower gains than either of
the other treatments, but these differences were not signiﬁ-
cant to the 0.05 level. These results support the hypothesis

[1] National Research Council. Discipline-Based Education Re-
search: Understanding and Improving Learning in Undergradu-
ate Science and Engineering. National Academies Press, Wash-
ington, D.C., August 2012.

[2] Kelly Hodgkins.

NASA combines ﬂight

real-world ﬂying in crazy new ’Fused Reality’
http://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/nasa-fused-reality/,
2015. [Online; accessed 2-November-2015].

[3] Wikipedia. Google Cardboard. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Google_Cardboard, 2015. [Online; accessed 28-October-2016].
[4] D. Demaree, S. Stonebraker, W. Zhao, and L. Bao. Virtual real-
ity in introductory physics laboratories. In J. Marx, P. Heron, and
S. Franklin, editors, 2004 Physics Education Research Confer-
ence, volume 790 of American Institute of Physics Conference
Series, pages 93–96, September 2005.

[5] H. Kaufmann and B. Meyer. Physics education in virtual real-

sims with
tests.

