Towards a Social Virtual Reality Learning
Environment in High Fidelity

Chiara Zizza∗, Adam Starr†, Devin Hudson‡, Sai Shreya Nuguri§, Prasad Calyam§, and Zhihai He§
∗Grinnell College, Email: zizzachi@grinnell.edu
†Pomona College, Email: acs12014@mymail.pomona.edu
‡Truman State University, Email: dnh3158@truman.edu
§University of Missouri, Email: snd45@mail.missouri.edu, calyamp@missouri.edu, hezhi@missouri.edu

7
1
0
2

l
u
J

1
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
5
8
5
0
.
7
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs) are spaces
designed to educate students remotely via online platforms.
Although traditional VLEs such as iSocial have shown promise
in educating students, they offer limited immersion that di-
minishes learning effectiveness. This paper outlines a virtual
reality learning environment (VRLE) over a high-speed net-
work, which promotes educational effectiveness and efﬁciency
via our creation of ﬂexible content and infrastructure which
meet established VLE standards with improved immersion. This
paper further describes our implementation of multiple learning
modules developed in High Fidelity, a “social VR” platform. Our
experiment results show that the VR mode of content delivery
better stimulates the generalization of lessons to the real world
than non-VR lessons and provides improved immersion when
compared to an equivalent desktop version.

Index Terms—Virtual Reality, Virtual Learning Environment,

High Fidelity, Multi-user Network Application.

I. INTRODUCTION

Past work with Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs)
have proven effective in teaching students remotely. One
example is iSocial [1], a desktop application which trains
students with Autism Spectrum Disorder to improve their
social competencies by enabling social interaction in a virtual
world. Virtual reality (VR) has also shown promise in teaching
generalizable skills through immersive settings. In this paper,
we describe our activities that aim to transform VLEs into
“social VR” platforms, where multiple, distant users may
inhabit the same virtual area and engage in lessons and games
around common tasks, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Our prototype
platform is a cloud-based and high-speed network-enabled, im-
mersive Virtual Reality Learning Environment (VRLE) where
multiple students from across the world may meet with remote
instructors.

Our VRLE is built in High Fidelity, an open source client-
server software for creating shared VR environments. High
Fidelity supports both Desktop and VR modes [2]. The Desk-
top mode uses the keyboard and mouse, while the VR mode
utilizes a headset and two hand controllers and is supported by
multiple head-mounted display devices such as the HTC Vive
and Oculus Rift. The server runs on a Global Environment for
Network Innovations (GENI) cloud rack, which is a distributed
computing resource with open access for “transformative, at-
scale experiments in network science, services, and security”
[3]. This VRLE will also include real-time analysis of network
performance while up to 150 users interact simultaneously
within the same High Fidelity environment.

Figure 1. Architecture of a VRLE to implement ‘social VR’ across high-speed
networks for online instructor-driven lessons and games using High Fidelity.

While this project

implements iSocial as a VRLE,

the
structure is generalizable to other contexts with one or more
instructor and groups of students. Many VLEs are effective
teaching tools, but they often lack a near-realistic learning
environment. Our VRLE is designed to provide a more immer-
sive environment, allowing students to more easily connect the
lessons and games from the VRLE to real world situations.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II discusses prior works related to VLEs. Section III lists the
problems with VLEs, and describes our solution. Section IV
describes our VRLE implementation. Section V details testbed
experiment results. Section VI concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORKS

[4] deﬁnes 3D VLEs as “computer-generated,

three-
dimensional simulated environments that are coupled with
well-deﬁned learning objectives.” Students enter these environ-
ments as avatars via a networked computer and interact with
each other with text chat, voice chat, and the manipulation
of shared objects. Adding VR to VLEs can offer efﬁcient
generalization of skills from a virtual environment to the real
world, since the environment mimics real world imagery and
context as noted by [5]. [6] presents a review and investigation
into VRLE’s and the reported beneﬁts these pedagogic systems
provide to the students, as well as how they impact students’
learning journeys within the program of study. The authors
conclude that a correctly implemented VLE improves student
performance and is correlated with improved engagement.

 
 
 
 
 
 
[7] presents a comprehensive review of virtual reality-based
instruction research and concludes that VR environments are
effective for teaching K-12 and higher education. These results
are used by instructional designers to design VRLEs.

Most existing VLEs have been developed as demonstrations,
supplements, or assistants for speciﬁc training tasks or teacher-
led activities, and none of them leverage high-speed network-
ing and cloud computing technologies. In contrast, our VRLE
represents an emerging distance education paradigm.

Fidelity to streamline the process of avatar customization
and transferring them into the VRLE environment. Morph
3D allows students to quickly customize avatars with many
features such as body mass, facial dimensions, and hair color.
These avatars can be directly imported into High Fidelity,
which gives students a sense of individuality without requiring
knowledge of 3D rendering software. Morph 3D allows easy
avatar creation with a greater capacity for personalization than
is available in iSocial and other VLEs.

III. VLE TRANSFORMATION TO A VRLE
Research, such as [5], indicates that a near-realistic learn-
ing environment is important for students to generalize and
transfer the knowledge and skills learned in the virtual space
to the real world. However, traditional VLEs lack the capacity
for a near-realistic experience. As traditional VLEs (and even
some VRLEs such as the one used in [5]) utilize a mouse
and keyboard,
is limited.
For example, iSocial uses highly-structured environments to
direct students towards lessons presented as slides or games.
While iSocial has some personalization of avatars, it can only
represent limited features of the user. iSocial’s rigid back-end
limits the capacity of instructors to make quick changes to
lesson plans. Our VRLE aims to improve the aforementioned
limitations and allow for a more effective learning tool.

the realism of the environment

A. VRLE System Architecture

Our VRLE application prototype architecture is consistent
with Fig. 1 and is designed according to iSocial’s standards for
virtual learning modules [1]. The standards provide guidance
such as: environments built with reduced distractions, realistic
avatars, guiding indicators to direct movement, and locking
pods to help keep the students in place while viewing a
lesson. On the client side, we can support up to 150 users
(owing to High Fidelity capabilities and assuming sufﬁcient
server-side resources) over different geographical regions, each
wearing a VRLE client device. The client device consists
of a wearable VR headset, and a local computer. We are
adapting the existing iSocial Social Competence Intervention
(SCI) training curriculum, as an exemplar learning module, to
our new VRLE application. The SCI curriculum is executed
in a 3D environment and is globally rendered at the central
VRLE cloud server. The rendered content is delivered over
high-speed networks to the clients for presentation. The local
computers perform on-the-ﬂy content rendering based on
the instantaneous user head position and body movement to
achieve low-delay, smooth presentation of content on the VR
headset. Lesson slides are hosted on a web server and are
able to be modiﬁed by the instructors themselves. Many of
the training lessons are implemented on virtual websites that
instructors can control through a consolidated, administrator
control panel. The instructor can manipulate course content
remotely, allowing students to split into smaller groups for
discussion at great enough distances that individual groups
cannot hear other conversations.

B. Avatars

As individualized avatars are a necessary to promote im-
mersion, we utilize Morph 3D’s [8] compatibility with High

C. Web Apps

Additionally, we have created a web platform that hosts
instructional web pages. Browsers located in teaching areas
create convenient and intuitive classrooms. The platform al-
lows for lessons to be easily added and changed by instructors
more efﬁciently than iSocial. The browsers access different
web pages depending on the intended activity. For example,
if an instructor wants to present a slide-show, they may select
the slide viewer web site from the homepage. Whereas, if the
instructor wants to play a speciﬁc game to test the students’
recently acquired knowledge, they can navigate to that site.

The websites are conﬁgured to allow only administrators
to change the state. This restriction is necessary in contexts
where students may be disruptive or may accidentally press
buttons in the environment.

Figure 2. Left: Architecture of the web pages for instruction content. This
diagram shows the path of a state change action. The action is sent from one
client and broadcast to all other clients. Right: example web page of the Face
Off game.

The web pages for the instructional content are built with the
React framework, and the state is maintained across browser
instances by the VRLE node server with a combination of
Redux and Socket.io as shown in Fig. 2. An action in one client
is then sent to the VRLE node server and broadcast to all other
clients. Clients only update their states if the action is relevant
to their current display. Slide-show presentations are managed
by a React-Router program to easily select presentations to
display in in the VLE.

As every user in High Fidelity sees a different instance of a
web page, all instances must be synced using Socket.io. This
implementation via React, Redux, and Socket.io is general
enough to be easily adapted for many contexts. By replacing
the images or adjusting a few lines of code, the same program
may work in many different contexts allowing the reuse of a
substantial amount of code. In this way, the VRLE permits the
easy inclusion of additional activities and lessons.

and allows small group activities where students may discuss
privatively before returning for a full-group debrief.

E. Orientation for Virtual Reality

As students in our VRLE may not have experience in VR,
the ﬁrst lesson is an orientation. In the ﬁrst part of the VRLE’s
orientation program, students create personalized avatars for
teaches the students how to
themselves. The second part
operate the VR controllers and navigate the VRLE in a fun,
hands-on way. Once done with the tutorial, the students move
onto the lesson modules.

IV. VRLE IMPLEMENTATION
Fig. 4 shows the major components of our proposed VRLE
client device and the set up. For the immersible VR access,
we are currently using the latest HTC Vive system [9], which
has a VR headset, two hand-held controllers, and two base sta-
tions for accurate localization and tracking of the controllers.
The headset has a wired connection to a computer, which
communicates with the VRLE cloud server on GENI through
high-speed networks. The headset tracks head pose, displays
interactive and immersive course content, and responds to
head motion in real-time. Users interact with the environment,
instructors, and peers using their virtual hands (controllers) and
voices. The HTC Vive provides adequate tracking accuracy,
ﬂexibility, resolution, system stability, cost-effectiveness, and
user comfort for our ﬁeld experimentation.

Figure 4. Major components of the experimental testbed setup for the usability
study with HTC Vive and VRLE cloud server.

V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Qualitative tests were conducted with an expert and architect
of iSocial to obtain preliminary evaluations of our VRLE
application prototype. The expert was shown the VRLE with
one remote instructor and two students equally distant from
the instructor connected over a high-speed network. The expert
concluded that: the VRLE is more immersive than iSocial,
layout is more engaging while not distracting, and the web
app architecture is reusable for many of the original iSocial
lessons.

Subjective tests for quantitative assessment were conducted
with seven typically developing college-age subjects, com-
paring mouse and keyboard movement with VR hand-held
controller movement. Subjects were randomly assigned a
condition of testing desktop or VR ﬁrst. Each subject was
led around the VRLE and engaged in activities such as a slide
show and the Face Off game. A survey was taken after each
test (twice per subject).

When operating on the desktop, subjects expressed frus-
tration with mouse and keyboard movement, as they found

Figure 3. Overlook of a iSocial standards compliant VRLE module demon-
stration with slide show and avatars of an instructor and three students.

The administrator controls are implemented as a virtual
’tablet application’ in High Fidelity. In High Fidelity, users
may pull up a virtual tablet to change settings or use installed
applications, such as the VRLE administrator controls. This
application is only available to the instructors and connects
to the VRLE server through Socket.io. The application sends
Redux actions to the various games and sideshows. This tablet
approach limits the potential for accidental or malicious state
changes.

Not only is this web framework convenient

to display
content, it is necessary to reference common web pages as
High Fidelity renders a unique site instance for each user in
the environment. Our web app framework syncs all instances
to maintain a common state.

D. Virtual Reality Environment

Fig. 3 provides an outlook of one lesson of our VRLE,
which is compliant with iSocial standards. The fundamental
idea for the VRLE’s layouts is to have open areas in which
the students’ freedom to move and interact is maintained, with
natural foliage and rocks acting as clear boundaries. Each
lesson of our VRLE has a unique, designated area with the
theme typically reﬂecting the topic being taught. For example,
a lesson might have the students determine individual roles
on a deserted island (e.g. water collector, lookout) to practice
cooperation and teamwork. Each lesson also has a central area
with an interactive web page, which the instructor controls,
as a way of directing the students towards a common focus.
Clear pathways, outlined with fences, connect different lesson
parts. Teleportation portals connect related lessons and provide
a quick, convenient way of traveling distances in the VRLE.
Each lesson also has a unique name to facilitate direct access
via teleportation.

A key component to our VRLE is that the environment is
tangible and reacts to the student. When applicable, students
are able to interact with various objects in the world and ma-
nipulate certain components. High Fidelity also allows users
in an environment to speak with one another. The adjustable
attenuation coefﬁcients allow control of how audio levels
diminish over distance, which gives the realistic effect of the
speaker sounding quieter, the farther they are from the listener.
This feature aids in keeping the students by the instructor

Responses to “I feel present in [the VRLE]”

s
t
c
e
j
b
u
S

f
o

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

1

0.5

0

0.29
0.29

0.43

0.29

0

Desktop

1
1

0
0
0

VR

Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree

Figure 5. Responses to “I feel present in [the VRLE]” for Desktop and VR
tests indicate unanimous sense of presence in VR i.e., we observed increased
engagement in the VRLE module from Desktop to VR.

Responses to “I enjoyed my time in [the VRLE]”

s
t
c
e
j
b
u
S

f
o

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

1

0.5

0

0.86
0.86

0.86

0.14
0
0

Desktop

0.14
0
0
0

VR

Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree

Figure 6. Responses to “I enjoyed my time in [the VRLE]” for Desktop and
VR tests show strong enjoyment in both Desktop and VR with a unanimous
increase in enjoyment in VR i.e., we veriﬁed minimal distraction in the VRLE
module with greater immersion in VR.

movement slow and tedious. When transitioning to VR in
our VRLE, the subjects found the teleportation mechanism
preferable. Additionally, subjects indicated that VR movement
was more immersive and ﬂuid: head movement directed the
avatar’s orientation and hand movements were reﬂected on
the avatar as one typically expected. Responses indicate that
the subjects feel more present in VR. In fact, every subject
indicated that they felt present in the VRLE in the VR mode
(see Fig. 5), compared to engagement in the desktop being less
than half that amount. Every subject enjoyed VR more than
desktop as show in Fig. V, indicating the greater immersion of
the VRLE, and when asked, subjects unanimously stated that
they preferred VR. The VR mode is not perfect; for example,
about a third of the subjects felt dizzy in VR at times. Likely,
this sensation was due to the subject moving their avatar with
thumb-pad movement as the discomfort was corrected with
use of teleportation.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we overcome shortcomings in traditional
VLEs with an early prototype implementation of an immersive
VRLE in High Fidelity with the following capabilities: users
can talk with each other, split into groups to discuss privately
as teams, and share educational resources such as slide shows

and games. The instructor can control course content from a
central administrator application. Preliminary qualitative tests
with an iSocial VLE expert showed that our VRLE is more
immersive than iSocial VLE, while not being distracting. The
expert concurred that that our web architecture allows many
activities to be implemented with relative ease. Preliminary
subjective tests conﬁrm that the VRLE is more immersive
and enjoyable compared to VLEs controlled by mouse and
keyboard. Users also felt ‘present’ in the VRLE and expe-
rienced minimal distractions, owing to our compliance with
established VLE lesson design standards in iSocial.

To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to
detail a VRLE architecture in a social VR paradigm that is
supported by platforms such as High Fidelity. Our work also
builds a foundation upon which our VRLE lessons can now be
enhanced for social VR and used in realistic lesson delivery
with actual users who are geographically distributed. Our
upcoming plans to extend this work include: (i) optimizing net-
work performance, (ii) analyzing student engagement via elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) headbands, (iii) tracking progress
across lessons and performance across sessions on a custom
social network web App, (iv) utilizing the capabilities of the
Microsoft Kinect [10] to track body movements, and (v) using
face-tracking VR headsets, such as Veeso [11], to track facial
expressions to help instructor assessment of student learning.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Award Numbers: CNS-1647213 and
CNS-1659134. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
National Science Foundation.

REFERENCES

[1] J. P. Stichter, J. Laffey, K. Galyen, and M. Herzog, “iSocial: Delivering
the social competence intervention for adolescents (SCI-a) in a 3d virtual
learning environment for youth with high functioning autism,” vol. 44,
no. 2, pp. 417–430.

[2] “High ﬁdelity,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://highﬁdelity.com/
[3] M. Berman, J. S. Chase, L. Landweber, A. Nakao, M. Ott, D. Raychaud-
huri, R. Ricci, and I. Seskar, “GENI: A federated testbed for innovative
network experiments,” vol. 61, pp. 5–23.
[4] M. Schmidt and D. Jonassen, Social

Inﬂuence in a 3D Virtual
Learning Environment for Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders.
University of Missouri–Columbia, 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//books.google.com/books?id=SvROnQAACAAJ

[5] N. Didehbani, T. Allen, M. Kandalaft, D. Krawczyk, and S. Chapman,
“Virtual reality social cognition training for children with high function-
ing autism,” vol. 62, pp. 703–711.

[6] R. Austin, M. Sharma, P. Moore, and D. Newell, “Situated computing
and virtual learning environments: e-learning and the beneﬁts to the
students learning.”

IEEE, pp. 523–528.

[7] Z. Merchant, E. T. Goetz, L. Cifuentes, W. Keeney-Kennicutt, and T. J.
Davis, “Effectiveness of virtual reality-based instruction on students’
learning outcomes in k-12 and higher education: A meta-analysis,”
vol. 70, pp. 29–40.

[8] “Morph 3d,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.morph3d.com/
[9] “Vive,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.vive.com/us/
[10] “Kinect

for xbox one.” [Online]. Available: http://www.xbox.com/

en-US/xbox-one/accessories/kinect

[11] “Veeso,” 2016. [Online]. Available: http://veeso.org/

