Virtual Reality: Blessings and Risk Assessment 

Ayush Sharma1, Piyush Bajpai1, Sukhdev Singh1,2 and Kiran Khatter1,2 
ayush300897@gmail.com, bajpaipiyush23@gmail.com, sukhdev200@gmail.com, and kirankhatter@gmail.com 

1Department of Computer Science and Technology 
Manav Rachna University, Faridabad-121004, India 
2Accendere Knowledge Management Services Pvt. Ltd., India 

Abstract 

Objectives:  This  paper  presents  an  up-to-date  overview  of  research  performed  in  the  Virtual  Reality 
(VR)  environment  ranging  from  definitions,  its  presence  in  the  various  fields,  and  existing  market 
players and their projects in the VR technology. Further an attempt is made to gain an insight on the 
psychological mechanism underlying experience in using VR device. Methods: Our literature survey is 
based  on  the  research  articles,  analysis  of  the  projects  of  various  companies  and  their  findings  for 
different  areas of interest.  Findings:  In our literature survey we observed  that the recent  advances  in 
virtual  reality  enabling  technologies  have  led  to  variety  of  virtual  devices  that  facilitate  people  to 
interact with the digital world. In fact in the past two decades researchers have tried to integrate reality 
and VR in the form of intuitive computer interface. Improvements: This has led to variety of potential 
benefits of VR in many applications such as News, Healthcare, Entertainment, Tourism, Military and 
Defence etc. However despite the extensive research efforts in creating virtual system environments it 
is yet to become apparent in normal daily life. 

Keywords: VR, VR tools, VR platforms, VR market players, risk   

1.  Introduction 

The term Virtual in Virtual Reality is defined as “being is essence of effect, but not in fact” and Reality 
as  “something  that  exists  independently  in  a  real  state  or  quality”  in  the  Webster’s  New  Universal 
Unabridged Dictionary (1989). In general, Virtual Reality means the replication of a real environment 
and simulation of user’s physical presence in this environment using software and hardware [1]. In fact 
there  are  different  definitions  reported  by  various  researchers  in  the  literature.  In  the  book  entitled 
“Understanding  Virtual  Reality:  Interface,  Application  and  design”  2  VR  is  defined  as  a  medium 
brought  about  by  technological  advances  to  find  practical  applications  and  more  effective  ways  for 
communication.  In  book  entitled  “Virtual  Reality  Systems”  3  VR  is  described  as  the  illusion  of 
participation  in  a  synthetic  environment  rather  than  the  external  observation  of  such  environment 
which  has  immersive  and  multi-sensory  experience.  4  defined  VR  in  terms  of  functionality  as  a  real 
time interactive simulation in which computer graphics is used to create a realistic-looking world and 
the  synthetic  world  is  not  static  and  responds  to  the  user’s  input.  However  5  made  an  argument  that 
Virtual  reality  is  not  related  to  only  technological  devices;  in  fact  it  is  experiencing  the  physical 
environment  by  both  automatic  and  controlled  mental  processes.  Author  stated  that  most  of  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definitions are device oriented which is not technologically acceptable all the time and addressed this 
by defining it in a different manner in reference to software developers, media and consumers. 

       Virtual Reality technology changed the way mathematical simulations and data visualization was 
perceived. It has also evolved to provide a new level of sophistication in using various sensors such as 
Visual, Kinesthetic, Auditory etc. It lets the user to sense the presence of the world through computer 
generated  scene  by  combining  various  human  computer  interfaces  and  sensors.  This  led  the  virtual 
reality  as  an  ideal  platform  for  simulation  and  decision  making  that  requires  frequent  and  natural 
interaction  with  the  environment.  In  fact  in  the  late  1960  and  1970,  the  panel-mounted  display 
technology  was  used  in  the  tele-robotic  and  tele-operations  simulations.  In  his  work,  Sutherland  6,7 
introduced different immersion concepts in simulated environment which are the basis of the current 
virtual  reality  technology.    Later  the  research  in  1980’s  by  8,  VIVED  (Virtual  Visual  Environment 
Display)  project  by  NASA  in  1984,  and  then  VIEW  project  (Virtual  Interactive  Environment 
Workstation) were the beginning days of the VR technology.  The term “Virtual Reality” was actually 
first introduced by Jaron Lanier, the founder of VPL Research, a company that was involved together 
with  Autodesk  Company  in  NASA’s  projects  9. Both  the  companies  first  presented  the  devices  with 
head-mounted displays (HMDs) for interacting with virtual worlds. The HMDs are displays which can 
be  wraparound  headset.  These  displays  don’t  allow  light  or  images  from  the  real  world  to  interfere 
with the virtual one. With the inception of HMDs, VR started capturing the public imagination. One 
may  further  refer  to  10  and  11  to  gain  an  insight  on  virtual  environments  and  the  objectives  of  the 
NASA’s  projects,  and  12  for  VR  technological  requirements,  characteristics  and  solutions  of  some 
more projects using VR in the late 1990.   

     In  literature  survey  we  observed  that  a  number  of  companies  have  launched  HMDs  for  VR 
applications. For an instance the HTC Vive (HTC in partnership with Valve Corporation) has recently 
gain much popularity through the American Express campaign at the 2015 U.S. Open advertising the 
VR experience "You vs. Sharapova". The VR experience allows visitors to have virtual experience to 
play  against  the  famous  athlete  Maria  Sharapova  for  four  minutes  by  the  use  of  HTC  Vive  headset 
with integrated headphones and a special wireless controller used to simulate the tennis swing. Sony’s 
VR headset for the Playstation 4 (Project Morpheus) and Oculus Rift that was acquired by Facebook in 
2015  are  some  other  recent  examples.    Virtual  Reality  has  garnered  the  attention  of  researchers  and 
tech  enthusiastic,  and  spanned  in  almost  every  field  such  as  Healthcare,  Education,  Entertainment, 
Gaming,  Tourism,  E-commerce  etc.  In  this  paper  we  present  the  past  ground  breaking  discoveries, 
present  projects  and  future  visions  for  VR.  The  second  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  give  a  brief 
description of all the projects of the leading companies in the VR and mention the risks related to VR 
technologies. Next section discusses the technology behind VR applications. 

2.  VR Platforms and Toolkits 

Looking at the popularity and usage of virtual reality, the need for a user-friendly and cost  effective 
platforms and tools was felt. The aim was to let the users and developers in prototyping, development, 
testing and debugging of VR applications and immersive systems. This section describes the design of 
various  VR  Platforms  and  Toolkits,  and  discusses  how  these  help  in  the  creation  and  execution  of 
immersive applications. 

2.1 VR Platforms 

 
 
Distributed Interactive Virtual Environment (DIVE): It is a heterogeneous Virtual reality platform 
works  on  UNIX  and  Internet  Networking  Protocols  13,  which  provides  the  VR  environment  where 
different users and applications can enter the platform and leave anytime. DIVE hierarchical database 
consists of entities to describe its data and behaviour. To reduce the latency, some part of database is 
replicated so that applications can access the DIVE database directly from memory. It uses peer to peer 
communication and multicast protocol to increase the scalability thus allowing multiple applications in 
the DIVE world. DIVE system is scalable with respect to number of applications and to the distance 
between applications on heterogeneous network.  

MASSIVE:    MASSIVE  is  the  “Model,  Architecture  and  System  for  Spatial  Interaction  in  Virtual 
Environments”,  a  distributed  virtual  reality  system  to  support  interaction  among  several  concurrent 
users  through  graphics,  audio  and  text  interfaces.  It  is  based  on  the  spatial  model  of  interaction  to 
facilitate scalability and control the spatial interaction between objects. Each object in a virtual world 
has an aura to define the extent to which interaction can happen with other objects. When aura of two 
objects collides, objects become aware of each other and interaction becomes possible by establishing 
peer  to  peer  connection.  Thus  scalability  depends  on  the  object’s  aura  which  limits  the  number  of 
interactions in the virtual world. However, number of interactions can be increased at the edges of the 
population. The interaction is controlled by defining the accessibility/awareness level of objects using 
the concept of nimbus and focus. Focus refers to the extent to which observed object is visible to the 
observer object, and nimbus describes the observed object’s manifestation.  Nimbus refers to the space 
in  which an object  declares which particular  areas of  it will be available  to  others where as object’s 
focus describes its allocation of attention 14.   

SPLINE: The Scalable Platform for Large Interactive Network Environments (SPLINE) uses peer to 
peer communication and follows hybrid client-server and multicast approach to support users with low 
speed link. Spline’s world model is an object oriented database to specify the object’s behaviour how it 
will  look  like  and  what  sound  it  will  make.  The  lifetime  of  an  object  is  limited  to  the  application  it 
owns  and  it  exits  as  long  as  the  application  is  running.  However  to  make  the  objects  persistent, 
applications  can  implement  the  persistent  process  to  store  infrequently  visited  Spline  objects.  Spilne 
breaks  the  world  model  into  small  locales  to  establish  communication  among  users  depending  upon 
their proximity to the locale they are interested in. Thus it is scalable on the basis on number of users 
in one locale rather than on the number of users in the Spline world 15. 

NPSNET:   It  is  a 3D visual  simulation  system developed by  researchers  of the Graphics and Video 
Laboratory  of  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  at  the  Naval  Postgraduate  School  (NPS)  in 
Monterey,  California.  Earlier  versions  (I  and  II)  of  NPSNET  implemented  Ethernet  and  ASCII-
encoded  application  level  protocol  for  setting  the  simulation  environment.  In  these  versions, 
interaction  was  possible  over  local  network.  Then  another  version  “NPSStealth”  of  NPSNET  came 
into existence which enabled the interaction possible for local and long-haul networks by incorporating 
SIMNET protocol.  With this version, NPSNET  touched distributed simulations then later on efforts 
geared towards large scale simulations. This led to the development of NPSNET-IV which can be used 
as a simulator for air, ground, nautical (surface or submersible), virtual vehicle, or human 16.  

2.2 VR Toolkits 

 
 
 
 
 
 
VR  Juggler:  It  is  an  open  source  Virtual  Reality  toolkit  developed  by  17  at  Iowa  State  University's 
Virtual Reality Applications Centre. It was released under GNU LGPL and has produced community-
oriented virtual reality application development framework. Since its inception, VR Juggler has been 
designed  to  be  dynamic  system  to  facilitate  run-time  re-configurability.  The  system  evolved  with 
numerous  changes  to  facilitate  the  addition  of  new  functionality  and  modification  in  the  existing 
services  without  affecting  the  entire  system.  The  subsystem  “microkernel”  manages  all  the  run-time 
activities within the system  and supports all the services needed for input, configuration and display 
settings for developing the VR application. Microkernel is a modular architecture that allows loading 
of  those  modules  which  are  required  by  currently  running  application,  and  also  supports  addition, 
removal  and  reconfiguration  of  internal  and  external  managers  at  run-time.  Another  subsystem  of 
VRJuggler  “Virtual  Platform”  which  supports  “write  once,  run  anywhere”  slogan.  This  means 
VRJuggler application can be created on local VR system and can run on any other VR system. This 
platform is independent of underlying hardware, architecture and operating system.  

Avocado:  Avocado  presents  the  flexible  programming  framework  for  larger-scale  collaboration  in 
virtual  environments.  It  is  an  object  oriented  programming  framework  for  the  development  of 
distributed applications which free the programmers from setting the infrastructure needed to make a 
VR  application  distributed.  Since  the  concept  of  distribution  is  an  integral  part  of  Avocado,  the 
application programmer can focus on the representation of geometry objects and interaction of these 
objects with the real world by using Nodes and Sensors classes respectively. Avocado uses C++ API to 
define  these  objects  and  Scheme  API  to  create  high-level  Avocado  objects.  Use  of  Scheme  scripts 
allow the testing and debugging during the run time of applications thus provides an environment of 
rapid prototyping of applications 18.  

GetReal3D: getReal3D for Unity is a software plug-in launched by Mechdyne Corporation that brings 
3D and viewer‐based perception to various immersive 3D displays. This plug-in makes the Unity game 
engine  compatible  with  other  immersive  3D  environments  such  as  CAVE  (Cave  Automatic  Virtual 
Environments), Multi-screen and Motion Tracking System. There are four components of getReal3D 
toolkit: configuration file, daemon, launcher, and plugin. The configuration file configures the settings 
for  display  system,  hardware  and  input  devices.  The  getReal3D  daemon  runs  in  the  background  to 
support the game in running mode. The launcher allows the user to run and deploy Unity games, and 
plugin  component  provides  the  run-time  VR  behaviors.   It  allows  the  users  to  move  through  a 
three‐dimensional object through a wide variety of situational simulations. It also helps to control the 
window creation and corresponding representation from within Unity- 3D. One may further refer to 19 
for the detailed study. 

MiddleVR: MiddleVR, developed in C++, is a graphical configuration tool to setup the virtual reality 
systems independent of specific software. After compilation of MiddleVR-enabled Unity application, 
it can run on any VR system supported by MiddleVR. The virtual reality systems it supports are, Head 
mounted  displays,  Immersive  cubes,  Holostages,  Holobenches,  Powerwalls  and  3DTVs.  This  tool 
handles  the  synchronization  of  computer  clusters,  S3D  stereoscopic  displays  and  menu  structure.  It 
also supports the dynamic adaptation of one application from one VR system to another VR system.  
Various  interaction  devices  such  as  Kinect,  Leap  Motion,  Oculus  Rift,  SpaceMouse,  Razer  Hydra, 
TrackIR  etc.  can  be  managed  with  the  help  of  Middleware.  The  motivation  behind  this  tool  was  to 
create a platform where user can experience the 3D immersive environment without the extensive VR-
specific expertise 20.  

 
 
RUIS: Reality-based User Interface System (RUIS) is an open source toolkit to create an immersive 
VR application with spatial interaction and stero3D Graphics while interacting with the Unity Scene 
by incorporating Kinect, PSMove, Razer Hydra and Oculus Rift. It also allows the simultaneous use of 
these  devices  in  a  shared  coordinate  system.  Novice  developers  can  also  use  this  tool  to  create 
VR applications with relatively little effort. Once the application is created in RUIS, it can be easily 
exported on a different computer. This tool comes in two variants: RUIS for processing and RUIS for 
Unity. Former provides the code templates to help the developers to create their VR applications. But 
it doesn’t provide a thorough 3D programming library to support real-time 3D graphics. Moreover, it 
was  very  slow  in  representing  the  3D  Graphics.  Later,  RUIS  for  Unity  came  into  picture  aimed  at 
building  more  immersive  3D  interfaces  and  virtual  systems  by  porting  RUIS  to  Unity  3D,  which  is 
very fast at rendering graphics 21. 

VITAKI:  VITAKI  is  a  vibrotactile  prototyping  toolkit  for  virtual  reality  and  video  games.  It  was 
designed  to  facilitate  the  haptic  feedback  demands  of  the  user  to  enhance  the  immersion  of  the  VR 
environment. Apart from the standard hearing and viewing of a VR environment, VITAKI offers the 
consumer  with  features  of  touch,  feel  and  manipulation  of  objects  present  inside  it  to  fulfil  the 
objective  of  virtual  immersion.  It  has  an  adaptable  hepatic  display  which  can  be  used  in  different 
scenarios 22. 

    All the VR platforms and toolkits aim to bring a level of realism by providing sensory fidelity which 
led  to  the  adoption  of  VR  technologies  in  various  fields  such  as  Healthcare,  Education,  Tourism, 
Entertainment etc. which is discussed in detailed in the next section. 

3.  Applications of VR 

In this section we discuss the applications of the VR technology in  various fields.  We present  some 
ground breaking discoveries, recent work and future vision in all the fields. 

3.1 Healthcare 

Virtual Reality was introduced in the Healthcare industry soon after its blooming days. In their work 23 
discussed the use of VR to treat the phobia of spiders. Authors found that the results were satisfactory 
with almost 83% patients showing significant improvement with decreased anxiety and fear just after 
going  through  an  average  of  four  1-hr  sessions  only.  This  technology  can  also  help  to  train  the 
physicians  for  emergency  medicine  as  the  traditional  training  involves  practicing  diagnostic  and 
procedural skills on live patients, see 24. According to 25, the health sector changes in every 6-8 years 
with  new medical  procedures emerging every day. Authors suggested that  VR could be  a promising 
area with a high potential of enhancing the training of healthcare professionals citing the fact that the 
average physician practices 30 years and the average nurse 40 years.  Therefore the technology can be 
used for telesurgical applications to create interactive simulations of the human body. Other interesting 
applications  include  the  development  of  immersive  3D  environments  for  the  treatment  of  mental 
disorders  to  support  psychiatrists  and  psychologists.  26  also  discussed  that  VR  is  more  likely  to  be 
successful if it is systematically integrated into an education and training program  which objectively 
assesses technical skills  improvement and increases learning experience. Authors also suggested that 
the  training  session  should  contain  of  regular  intervals  rather  than  a  single  and  short  period  of 
extensive  practice.  In  their  work  27  used  VR  to  treat  patients  with  anxiety  disorders,  and  the  results 
generated a positive sense of mind among the treated persons.  Authors also guided therapists at each 

 
step of the process.  28 suggests the use of VR to address the impairments, disabilities, and handicaps 
associated with brain damage rehabilitation. In the field of laparoscopy, VR simulator training can help 
to gain the skills to treat the patients. In their work  29 discussed the VR implementation procedure to 
train  novice  in  short  time  for  the  surgical  operations.  Experiment  results  suggest  that  the  medical 
procedure benefitted the scene by increasing  the performance level of novice.   In fact the simulator-
trained  group  reached  results  which  were  equivalent  to  the  experience  gained  by  performing  20-50 
actual  laparoscopic  procedures.  30  suggested  that  VRWii  gaming  technology  instead  of  using  the 
traditional methods of stroke rehabilitation by making them play Bingo and Jenga cards.  The VRWii 
is  a  technology  where  Virtual  Reality  was  coped  up  with  Nintendo  Wii,  and  it  represents  a  safe, 
feasible,  and  potentially  effective  alternative  to  facilitate  rehabilitation  therapy  and  promote  motor 
recovery  after  stroke.  Authors  experiment  shows  a  significant  improvement  in  the  mean  motor 
functions  of  the  stroke  patients  by  7  seconds,  and  the  average  treatment  time  was  reduced  by  24 
minutes.  In  fact  VR  is  providing  physicians  with  a  risk  free  environment  for  practicing  surgical 
operations 31. It has benefited the practitioners with an in-depth description rather than the theoretical 
studies.  A recent  report  also  describes the use of VR in  the field  of healthcare  majorly in  four  areas 
such  as:  Relief  of  the  sensation  of  pain,  exposure  therapy,  a  tool  to  conquer  phobias  and  Virtual 
Robotic Surgery 32.  

3.2 Education 

In  their  work  33  stated  that  teaching  students  in  a  simulated  environment  style  will  result  in  a  good 
academic result, and the use of VR in the field of programming using virtual programming will help 
students to learn and understand the codes more easily than the traditional learning. In the present days 
the use of VR in education has been increased due to its rich experience providing and offering a better 
human-computer  interaction  for  the  students.  34  designed  a  virtual  reality  platform  called  the 
Immersive  Touch  to  stimulate  tasks  related  to  neurosurgical  operations  and  reduced  the  supervised 
training time of novices for such a  tough skill set.  35 also described the use of Second Life which is 
used  for  research  purposes  in  the  Coventry  Universities.  One  may  further  refer  to  36  for  a  rigorous 
review from January 2000 to October 2012. Authors suggested that the success of technology design, 
instructional approach, and learning experiences would be more when AR (Augmented Reality) along 
with  VR is implemented in the  classrooms.  The AR-based mobile games allow learners to  organize, 
search  and  evaluate  data  and  information.  Authors  have  mentioned  the  negative  effects  of  the 
technology  in  the  classrooms  as  teachers  would  have  manipulative  powers  and  hence  more  control 
over the content  in  the system.  37 suggest  that VR has  a very  high potential  in  education by making 
learning more motivating and engaging as it is based on three basic concepts: Immersion, Interaction, 
and User involvement. The reason is that all these concepts allow a physical exploration of objects that 
are  not  accessible  in  reality,  for  example  the  planets  in  the  Solar  System,  helping  the  learners  to 
understand  and  memorize  them  better.  The  decreases  in  cost  of  VR  devices  are  also  helping  the 
educational  VR  to  more  affordable.    In  2015  Google  started  a  project  called  “Expeditions”  for  their 
Google  Cardboard  38.  The  project’s  aim  was  to  provide  VR  headsets  to  schools  on  loan  so  that  the 
student’s can experience virtual tours of over more than 100 destinations. It comes with a software the 
teachers  could  utilize  using  a  tablet.  No  student  would  be  charged  for  these  virtual  trips  and  hence 
compensating  for  the  expensive  field  trips.  Now  these  days  VR  technology  is  being  used  in 
engineering to build models in which students get to know about prototyping and iteration in which an 
object is designed and altered. 

 
 
 
3.3 Tourism 

Virtual  Reality  would  be  significantly  impacting  the  tourism  marketing  sector  in  the  near  future.  In 
their work  39 studied the behaviour of persons who were planning an island trip and virtually visiting 
the different places of their interest. The results proved that the persons not only had a better decision 
making  due  to  the  richer  information  the  VR  technology  provided  but  also  had  more  realistic 
experience  of  their  future  journeys.  40  believed  in  a  possibility  where  one  could  create  new  touristic 
areas  (in  a  virtual  environment)  incorporated  in  the  online  communities  and  websites  to  help  in  the 
travel  planning  process,  and  also  in  consequence  create  future  tourism  destinations.  The  VR 
technology  has  increased  the  satisfactory  rates  and  consumer  trust  of  the  public  providing  more 
tourism rate growth in almost every tourist destination; see 41 and 42. In fact the use of VR technology 
to have a virtual experience of the place that is still not visited by the tourists has a great potential from 
the  business  prospective  as  well.  43  found  that  incorporating  virtual  tours  and  panoramic  photos 
provided psychological relief to people suffering from travel anxiety or sickness. The Louvre Museum 
in France showed that when people are made to experience a virtual environment of a museum, that 
virtual  tour  also  increased  the  tourist  interest  in  visiting  that  place  physically  44.  In  our  society  we 
always have people who have their last desires to visit a pilgrimage site but are unable to do so due to 
disability and other diseases. So the VR technology can come to the rescue by providing an immersive 
experience of these holy places using a simulation to compensate for their inabilities. 45 also mentioned 
about  the  concept  of  replacing  the  act  of  physical  travelling  with  a  virtual  environment.  46  have  the 
view that the use of VR technology will be more cost effective, and can further help the travel agents 
and  travel  groups  in  better  understanding  of  the  requirements  of  a  tourist.  The  fact  is  that  a  tourist 
service cannot be tested in advance; but the VR technology would help in providing additional sensory 
and visual information than the use of traditional brochures and pamphlets.   

3.4 Entertainment 

As  of  now  the  world  has  already  made  a  wide  acceptance  for  the  3D  viewing  of  movies  and 
documentaries,  Virtual  Reality  has  to  be  the  next  step  in  revolutionizing  this  field.  In  their  work  47 
illustrated  how  implementing  serious  games  using  VR  technology  could  help  in  developing  a  new 
depiction  of  cultural  heritage  and  improve  the  visual  definition  of  information,  interactivity  and 
entertainment.  In the recent talk in a TED conference  48 Author spoke about how the viewers can be 
more involved in the storyline of a video and sympathize more as well. He collaborated with Arcade 
Fire to develop a website called “The Wilderness Downtown” where a person could enter his address, 
and then a boy appears who starts running down the road and stops at a place where your home is/was. 
People  who  do  not  live  at  that  place  now  or  have  taken  refuge  somewhere  else  could  virtually 
experience about the place where they used to grow up. According to 49, IMAX will open six physical 
venues (theatres) for VR content worldwide. They are planning to open the first theatre in Los Angeles 
and the second in China. In the theatres VR headsets created a star breeze to provide 210 degrees view 
of  the  film.  The  CEO  of  IMAX  also  told  that  the  VR  content  would  be  tied  to  existing  movies. 
According to a report 50, Anand Gandhi, who is leading filmmaker in Indian film industry and director 
of Ship of Theseus (National Award Winner), said that virtual reality is profound and virtual reality is 
reality; indeed it is life itself. In fact VR movie watching is a 360-degree immersive experience where 
the viewer is at the centre of the action. The first virtual reality movie, a Jesus Christ’s biopic, made its 
worldwide  debut  at  the  Venice  Film  Festival.    According  to  a  report  “Virtual  reality  and  the  silver 
screen: A match made in heaven” 51, Oculus has built its own video watching program as well named 

 
Oculus Cinema. In which viewer can experience it from a perfect middle seat. The movie is played on 
a  simulated  screen  with  the  light  bouncing  off  the  seats  in  the  audience,  just  as  it  would  in  reality. 
According to 52, not everyone play games, but majority goes to the cinema and watch TV.  Therefore 
to  reach mass adoption VR  can be used in  the form  of entertainment rather than just gaming. Major 
studios, have experimented with the form through tie-ins to established franchises, from Interstellar to 
Game  of  Thrones.    According  to  another  report  mentioned  in  53,  Oculus  has  decided  to  get  into VR 
film-making by launching the Oculus Story Studio which was announced at Sundance Film Festival. 54 
Published a report in 2017 of the music maestro A.R. Rahman’s iconic patriotic track “Vande Matram” 
which was launched in a VR format offering 360 degree immersive view in NDFC Film Bazaar, Goa. 
Rahman also said that he used to attend VR workshops in Los Angeles and in India before launching 
the track for the virtual environment. Rahman also showcased a VR film in UN General Assembly hall 
on August 2016 showcasing the future project of his team. 

3.5 News 

Virtual Reality has spread its legs in the future of news delivering as well. In their work  55 discussed 
the idea of immersive journalism which meant to create a first person experience while viewing news. 
Authors also discussed about the demonstration they had conducted in which they gave participants the 
experience of being present inside an interrogation room. Recently 56 showed that people can develop a 
whole  new  level  of  empathy  when  they  experience  news  in  an  alternate  perspective  rather  than  just 
watching it. Author shared her conclusions in a TED event from an experiment she conducted which 
considered  of  a  man  who  suffered  from  a  seizure  and  collapsed  on  a  footpath.  This  incident  was 
depicted to the public using the VR technology where people expressed an astonishing set of emotions, 
and were trying to console and help someone who was not actually present there.  In fact VR has that 
power which the viewers can experience by just learning to be in it and also attracts the young viewers 
to watch the news 57.  The BBC news described the usage of VR as a tool for their reporters in the near 
future, and believes that it will be helpful to channels in increasing their viewership and deliver news 
to a greater audience 58. BBC along with Aardhman Digital further stated their implementation of VR 
for  depicting  a  dramatic  movie  based  on  migrants  from  Turkey  to  Greece.  Their  R&D  department’s 
executive producer, Zillah Watson, also talked about how the storytelling, picture quality and direction 
are being shaped with new dimensions through the VR technology. BBC has also launched a VR talk 
show:  No  Small  Talk  produced  by  VR  City  and  Lyristic  59.  The  show  is  based  on  a  conversation 
between two inspiring women Cherry Healey and Emma Gannon. According to the producer, VR can 
enhance a conversation and invites users more to be a part of the discussion. BBC also highlighted an 
important  issue  of  Human  Trafficking  with  the  help  of  VR  60.  They  have  launched  a  7  minute  long 
video with 360 video productions as it explores virtual reality as a way of connecting with audiences. 
61 also discussed how the VR technique works in the audiovisual pieces and changes the viewer level 
of implication. The trend in journalism changes with the new technologies in the market. According to 
authors even Innovation Laboratories want to apply VR technology to their audiovisual pieces to make 
the information more understandable to the viewer. In a recent study,  Media giant CNN is making a 
great  effort  by  launching  CNNVR  which  will  provide  the  users  with  360-degree  videos  natively 
viewable in CNN’s iOS and Android app, making it the third largest VR compatible app 62. Despite its 
availability  for  Smartphone’s,  desktop  users  will  also  be  able  to  check  out  the  content  on  their  360-
compatible  browsers.  In  an  article  published  by  63,  Shubhangi  Swarup,  Executive  Editor  of  ElseVR, 
told that VR is one of those technologies that gives 360 degree view of any report and brings a lot of 

 
questions  inside  the  viewer's  mind  which  can  be  answered  with  the  help  of  text  mentioned  on  their 
website. Thus VR is the medium in journalism where you cannot hide anything. 

3.6 Design and Assembly 

The  application  of  VR  has  also  been  in  extensive  use  in  the  field  of  designing.  In  their  work  64 
designed a Virtual Design Assembly System (VDAS) which allows engineers to design, modify  and 
assemble mechanical products. As a prototype, the system has a knowledge-based library of standard 
mechanical  fastening  parts  and  hence  reducing  a  great  amount  of  time  and  work  at  the  stage  of 
modelling itself. The VDAS also has a user-friendly interface feature where the product models can be 
directly inserted or modified in an interactive VR environment. It tells about the geometric information 
of  the  product  model,  the  variation  information,  the  assembly  match  information  and  function  of 
assembly  planning.  VR  has  also  been  applied  for  Virtual  prototyping  to  verify  assembly  and 
maintenance  processes  65.    Authors  discussed  the  CAD-VR  data  integration  to  identify  the 
requirements  for  designing  in  Virtual  Prototyping  and  assembling.  66  discussed  how  Virtual  Reality 
can  be  used  in  place  of  traditional  designing  as  conventional  methods  lack  the  depth  and  sense  of 
realism, and require a lot of imagination. Authors further mentioned that VR technology would help 
the  designer  and  client  together,  and  also  proposed  a  test  arrangement  system  which  can  reduce  the 
problem  of  realism.  This  directly  affected  the  strategies  and  business  benefits  of  designing  and 
assembling  in  the  future.  The  use  of  VR  in  the  field  of  architecture  and  designing  with  the  help  of 
multiple  case  studies  has  also  been  discussed  67.  Those  organizations  which  used  virtual  reality  for 
architectural design and construction of the physical built environment were at large different from the 
models  created  for  professional  use  within  the  project  team  and  supply  chain.  68  stated  that  an 
Assembly Process  requires various of factors such as optimum assembly  time and sequence, tooling 
and fixture requirements, ergonomics, operator safety, and accessibility, among others. As VR has the 
potential to integrate human motions into computer aided assembly planning environment, it will result 
in  reduced  time  and  cost  effectiveness.    According  to  69,  a  construction  company,  DIRTT  has  been 
using Oculus VR to show their clients how their office, home would look after construction. They have 
designed a wireless set-up that has a backpack and ‘Polhemus’ technology included. This technology 
uses  an  alternating  current  (AC)  magnetic  field  to  track  the  movement  of  the  user.  Recently  70 
developed a software called the “Virtual Reality Architecture Walkthrough” where a person can view 
how  the  building  or  the  structure  would  appear  in  the  future  from  both  inside  and  outside.  This  not 
only increased the customer trust but also helped the constructors finding faults and making variations 
accordingly quite easily. The usage of VR in the field of engineering and construction, with the aim to 
create  a  remarkable  evolution  by  giving  a  whole  new  experience  to  a  person  in  visualizing  a  3D 
simulated  structure  has  been  discussed  by  71.  Earlier  it  was  very  expensive  to  viewing  a  particular 
complex  than  the  current  economical  feature  of  the  VR  technology.  The  technology  can  be  used  in 
showing  the  different  stages  of  construction  which  denotes  a  great  potential  for  the  Architecture, 
Engineering and Construction industry, and hence a person can experience realistic situations without 
having to care about injuries.  

3.7 Military and Defence 

 
 
 
 
In  their  work  72  suggested  ways  to  implement  VR  technology  through  remote  sensors,  intelligent 
systems and surgical simulations to prepare a combat casualty care for the 21st century. In fact the use 
of VR technology provides a logical extension of the video camera/television monitor to provide the 
airplane  cockpit’s entire  field  of view. The technology can also  be used to  train  soldiers in  a virtual 
environment by using simulation machines. The major application is in the situations when the area is 
inaccessible and the operations are required to be conducted. In such cases, the drone or UAV is being 
viewed  with  the  help  of  a  VR  device  and  perform  the  required  operations.  Other  uses  consist  of 
battlefield simulations and virtual boot camps where the soldiers experienced the consequences and the 
aftermath of a war.  73 illustrated the use of Virtual Reality Exposure therapy (VRE) in treating active 
duty  soldiers  for  a  variety  of  anxiety  disorders  and  also  posttraumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD).  An 
immersive simulation of a military convoy in Iraq was conducted for six sessions, and the results had 
reduced the psychological stress and symptoms of PTSD. 74 motivated their research towards assessing 
the  cognitive  functions  of  the  military  personnel  and  train  them  with  stress  resilience  prior  to 
deployment. 75 evaluated the validity of Virtual Reality Stroop Task (VRST) by making cognitive and 
neuropsychological  assessments  to  show  the  impact  of  environmental  stimuli  on  the  performance  of 
military personnel. A recent report by 76 mentioned that the use of VR has been increasing extensively 
in the form of submarine simulation (simulators mounted onto the hydraulic arms which pitch and roll 
as a real submarine would, it helps in using the actions of a submarine) and ship simulation. The report 
also  states  that  Australian  Navy  is  investing  multi-million  dollars  on  virtual  warships  for  training 
purposes.  The  Naval  Trainee  has  to  deal  with  different  situations  in  that  virtual  environment  for 
passing the training session. Another blog by 77 reported that VR simulation enables the training of the 
soldiers  without  the  risk  of  death  or  an  injury.  Other  uses  include  combat  visualization  to  create  a 
depth  of  illusion  and  an  ideal  environment  which  offers  trainee  soldiers  to  experience  a  particular 
situation within a controlled area. This heavily utilizes the time and cost spent in military training. An 
article by  78 mentioned that VR Flight Simulators are taking place of teaching real time flying skills. 
They have the same structure as that of the real plane which has been mounted on hydraulic lift. The 
VR  simulator  tilts,  move,  twist  to  change  the  movements  and  the  system  even  responds  to  the  user. 
Thus such procedure also directly affects the cost of the training process and nullifies the damages.   

3.8 e-Commerce 

As we step forward each day in the field of Virtual Reality, another milestone which this technology is 
about  to  achieve  in  the  near  future  is  its  introduction  in  the  e-Commerce.  It  would  provide  the 
customers with a better visualization and decidability for the products they want to buy rather than the 
conventional use of just 2D pictures. In their work 79 presented and discussed the ADVIRT which is a 
first prototype of an adaptive VR store. Introducing VR in e-Commerce websites promises to create a 
better e-shopping experience which is more natural, attractive, and fun for customers. In another paper 
80 discussed the potential advantages of such interfaces and stressed on the need for a better approach 
to  their  design  and  build  more  usable  and  effective  VR  stores.  Further  81  attempted  to  attract  the 
consumer’s  attention by  using VR in  Web Stores to  enable consumers with  a realistic experience  of 
products present over the internet, and thereby tackling the problems associated with consumer’s lack 
of physical contact with products. The study also investigates the circumstances in which VR would 
enhance  a  consumer’s  learning  about  a  product.  82  had  shown  the  use  of  virtual  reality  for  online 
shopping environments to offer an advanced customer experience compared to the  conventional web 
stores  and  further  improve  the  customer  trust.  The  paper  presents  a  prototype  of  a  virtual  shopping 
mall  environment,  with  the  proof  of  an  empirical  study  explaining  that  a  virtual  reality  shopping 

 
environment would be preferred by customers over a conventional web store. Such application would 
also  facilitate the assessment of the e-vendor’s trustworthiness.  83 disclosed an  online merchandising 
and  promotion  system  that  closely  simulated  an  interior  space  of  an  actual  place  of  business.  The 
consumers used avatars to explore the simulated space; they become simultaneously familiar with both 
the simulated and actual places of business, and thereafter can shop at both locations with equal ease. 
According to 84 customers still prefer to buy from retail stores because they can feel from all of the five 
senses  for  what  they  are  buying  instead  of  using  e-Commerce  sites  because  they  cannot  feel  the 
commodity  they  are  buying.    Thus  the  e-Commerce  giants  are  taking  all  the  steps  to  increase  their 
customer's trust and satisfaction by integrating virtual reality in a better way. Shopify, a market leader 
in  this  field,  showcased  some  of  its  prototype  virtual  reality  technologies  in  the  yearly  Unite 
Conference. They launched a VR application compatible with most devices and browsers to set a new 
benchmark  for  product  visualization  85.  A  blog  published  by  86,  shares  that  different  companies  are 
continuously taking risks  to  make a progress  in their customer experience development.  Recently an 
Australian  retailer, Myer,  has partnered with  e-Commerce  giant eBay in  launching a VR department 
store 87. This gives the customer an opportunity to feel the product before buying or adding to cart and 
improves retailing and browsing experiences. 

3.9 Sports 

Introducing Virtual Reality in sports is also one of the main focuses of VR technology, and is already 
being successfully done by companies like Virtually Live. VR technology can be used to influence the 
exercise regimes of people, see  88. Authors used a HMD and showed the subject computer-generated 
images  while  the  person  exerted  his  force  on  the  machine.   As  the  user  exerts  forces  against  the 
machine,  their  perception  is  that  as  if  they  are  exerting  forces  against  the  objects  represented  in  the 
images.   89 developed a sports training system with the help of VR to analyze and assess the quality, 
stress  levels  and  the  reactions  by  the  athletes  in  different  situations.  90  applied  the  VR  science  in 
developing the skill set of a handball goalkeeper. The goalkeeper was presented a virtual scenery like 
of a real game to study his motor behaviour and natural gestures when facing a thrower.  91 provided a 
better view model for the in-depth analysis of the sports players. Video playback doesn’t permit such 
analytical  perspective  and  therefore  introducing  VR  technology  for  such  would  provide  a  better 
understanding  of  an  athlete’s  performance.  They  conducted  case  studies  to  showcase  how  to  use 
information from visual displays to analyze a player's future course of action.  92 in a TED conference 
discussed how AR and VR can be linked with National Football League (NFL). He explained that if 
some smart-glasses, just like the Google glass, can be used for their ubiquitous computing feature by 
installing it on the helmets of the players in the field. Further the viewers can use their VR devices to 
connect  with  these  glasses,  and  what  they  view  from  their  glasses  can  be  streamed  for  the  audience 
who can use their VR devices and connect to this live stream and watch the game according to their 
desired  player’s  perspective.  He  believes  that  this  concept  would  not  only  create  a  new  viewer 
experience  in  the  field  of  sports  but  also  develop  empathy  among  people  as  they  would  be  able  to 
realize  how  difficult  it  was  or  not  for  the  player  on  the  field  in  making  certain  moves.  It  will  also 
reduce  the  risk  of  match-fixing  as  the  coach  and  people  present  in  the  stadium  can  watch  what  the 
player is actually watching. Recently 93 provided a complete 360 live view of the Rio Olympics held in 
August 2016 which the users can watch using their VR devices or cardboards. This was a step forward 
in the usage of virtual reality as a medium of sharing sports events and journalism.  

3.10 

Gaming 

 
During  the  dawn  of  virtual  reality,  the  technology  was  already  being  remarked  as  something  that 
would bring a significant change in the field of gaming and set up a higher level to 3D which people 
used  to  experience  before.  94  discussed  how  the  visual  simulation  and  virtual  reality  communities 
provide not only a delivery system for organizational video game instruction and training but also has 
the potential to affect a greater audience. The feeling of presence in an alternate environment provides 
better  simulation  and  an  interactive  perspective  of  the  storyline  of  the  game.  NVIDIA  technologies 
such  as  VR  SLI  enables  us  to  assign  the  rendering  for  each  eye  to  different  GPUs  and  Multi-Res 
Shading feature renders every part of an image at a resolution that better matches the pixel density of 
the warped image needed for VR  95. Traditional games were mostly running at 60 frames per second 
but since VR has made its benchmark in this field, companies are now developing games which could 
run over 90 frames per second to meet the immense graphical demands of public. Niantic in July 2016 
released  a  world  record  breaking  game  called  the  Pokémon  GO  for  the  Android  and  iOS  devices 
grossing more than $10 billion. The game was based on the simple basics of AR (Augmented Reality) 
technology where the user can travel in the physical environment and using their phone’s camera and 
GPS  can  catch  creatures  of  the  virtual  environment  96.    The  game  became  very  popular  around  the 
globe  as it was the first  multiplayer  game which is  played outdoors. Now Niantic’s next  target  is to 
introduce  virtual  reality  in  their  massive  success  to  engulf  the  players  in  an  interactive  virtual 
environment of the Pokémon world. eSports is a field which has grown faster than any other sport in 
the current generations and to meet the audience’s interest, Sliver.tv (2016) founded by Mitch Liu in 
2015 has developed a platform to record, view, and stream top eSports games in fully immersive, 360° 
cinematic VR videos which are compatible with every headset 97. The new cutting edge technology has 
opened a large amount of viewing of player perspectives for the user. More projects and Players in the 
gaming  industry  are  discussed  in  the  next  section.  PlayStation  VR  and  AMD  Sulon  are  some  other 
recent examples which define the advancement in the field of gaming 98. VR has been adopted fastest 
and most comfortably in this application than any other field till now. 

      Success of all these applications depends on how well they meet the requirements in the respective 
field,  simulate  the  real-world  experience  and  provide  the  immersive  virtual  environment  to  the  user. 
Attention  around  VR  seems  to  be  reaching  very  high  which  is  evident  by  the  involvement  of  major 
players in the virtual reality market, discussed in the next section. 

4.  Major companies involved in VR 

The objective of this section is to provide the insight on the projects of various companies working on 
VR. Table 1 list all the key players, their products, investors and the fields in which they are involved. 
From the Table it can be seen that most of VR player belong to US. In 2015 a survey was conducted 
by  MarketsandMarkets.com  99  for  the  purpose  of  defining,  describing,  and  forecasting  the  global 
virtual  reality  market  between  2016  and  2022.  The  findings  of  the  survey  suggest  that  the  virtual 
reality market is estimated to grow from USD 1.37 Billion to USD 33.90 Billion by 2022, at a CAGR 
of 57.8% between 2016 and 2022. The VR market for software components is also expected to grow at 
the highest  rate due to  the increasing adoption of VR software platforms and applications across the 
globe.  However  the  VR  market  is  growing  rapidly  but  still  there  are  many  risks  involved  in  this 
technology which are discussed in next section. 

5.  Risks involved with VR 

 
  
         
5.1 Physical risks 

Virtual Reality, since its introduction in the industry, has been questioned for its physical impact on a 
person’s health and mental state of mind. Many devices have not perfected their head-tracking systems 
yet and such discrepancies could lead to motion sickness or nausea 100. The U.S. Army has categorized 
the usage of the Oculus Rift risky as they do not want to introduce a thing which is not perfect yet for 
the soldiers. Oculus has also warned its users in its terms and policies quoting “Some individuals may 
also  experience  severe  dizziness,  epileptic  seizures  or  blackouts  when  exposed  to  certain  flashing 
lights  or  patterns”  101.  Although  VR  exposure  therapy  is  in  wide  use  by  the  society  but  the  sudden 
confrontation of fear by the patient who is not ready yet may also lead to a severe shock. Samsung has 
also released an official statement that such devices must not be used more than 5-6 hours a day and 
there must be a break of at least 10 minutes after every 30 minutes of VR exposure 102. Such measures 
are required to reduce the cases of reduced coordination and headaches. 103 in March 2016 reported the 
dangers  of  virtual  reality  through  the  malfunction  of  camera  sensors  in  HTC  Vive  devices  which 
almost lead to people colliding with an obstacle or wall. 

5.2. Privacy risks 

Information  and  data  security  is  yet  another  hurdle  the  VR  technology  faces  in  its  path  to  success. 
Most  of  the  platforms  are  Open  Source  and  this  allows  VR  developers  from  around  the  world  to 
publish  and  share  their  content.  ProtoSphere  (developed  in  November  2012)  is  one  of  these  open 
source  platforms  which  has  been  highly  integrated  with  Microsoft’s  communication  system  104.  All 
types of communications including voice, speech/gesture, presence and instant messages pass through 
the Microsoft’s Lync server and hence giving rise to the risk of information leakage. Julie LeMoine, 
the  CEO  of  HorizonIR  also  stated  risks  with  less  level  of  occurrence  where  a  user  can  make 
modifications in  their avatar or the virtual  environment present  around him leading to  people seeing 
what  the  product  wasn’t  meant  to  show  105.  Therefore,  according  to  her,  the  companies  must  set 
limitations to the customization of an avatar and what all changes a person can or cannot make when 
present inside a virtual environment. According to 106, Facebook terms and policies allow them to keep 
and  share  a  lot  of  information  about  a  person  107.  When  Facebook  acquired  Oculus  VR,  a  gaming 
startup, it highlighted yet another risk of privacy as Facebook could manipulate the conditions of the 
policy.  It  could  track  almost  every  behavior  of  the  person  and  change  the  elements  of  virtual 
environment as well. Therefore, a company must not alter a customer’s privacy guidelines. 

5.3. Behavioural risks 

Studies  have  shown  that  Virtual  Reality  may  also  affect  the  behaviour  of  a  person  to  some  extent. 
Telis, a Canadian telecommunications company, uses the AvayaLive Engage for recruiting employees 
and board meetings, see 108. According to Paul McDonagh-Smith, who is a learning practice leader of 
Avaya,  “It  is  almost  like  a  mask  they  can  sit  behind”.  109  contradicted  the  above  statement  in  their 
article “Real  Risks of Virtual Reality” by mentioning that people could  also  have  a dark side which 
their  avatars  would  not  reveal.  The  avatars  in  the  virtual  environment  do  not  express  facial 
expressions, body language, eye contact, etc. in detail. Therefore, a virtual environment could abstract 
a user’s behaviour as the interaction may seem real and personal but it also offers the same potential 
for rudeness, dominance and harassment just like in any other means of communication. 

5.4. Investment risks 

 
 
As the Virtual Reality technology is still in its early stages, gaining funds from the investors is one of 
the most major problems  faced. Even if the product  or project  is capable of giving a  good outcome, 
one  can  never  predict  the  level  of  public  acceptance  it  will  get  and  therefore  unlike  Facebook,  who 
invested $2 Billion in this industry 110, other companies such as IMAX, Audi and Pepsi seem to make 
cautious  steps  since  Virtual  Reality’s  downfall  from  2014.  Anders  Gronstedt,  President  of  the 
Gronstedt Group, Inc. quoted that “The VR accessories are more suited for gaming than of business. 
There are a lot of issues that need to be worked out”, see 111. Reports by SuperData Research show that 
Facebook  sold  nearly  355,000  VR  headsets  while  the  threshold  expected  by  their  CEO  Mark 
Zuckerberg was between 50 million to 100 million VR headsets. Facebook has also slashed the costs 
of  their  VR  headsets  due  to  Sony  PlayStation  VR  and  HTC  Vive  taking  the  lead  in  the  market  112. 
According to the article published by The New York Times, Facebook has decided to invest $3 billion 
more  over  the  next  decade  on  virtual  reality  projects  113.  Although  Steam  has  also  made  large 
investments, Valve’s founder Gabe Newell has stated that he is “pretty comfortable with the idea that 
it  will  turn  out  to  be  a  complete  failure”,  see  114.    Nate  Mitchell,  the  founder  of  Oculus,  has  been 
advocating Facebook and attracting investors by saying “We have always tried to set the expectation 
that VR is a very, very long-term play” in an interview with 115. 116 shared the news that the AvayaLive 
Engage which was one the three major enterprise-based Virtual Environment platforms has been shut 
down because the required plugins were no more supported by the browser and it was cost prohibitive 
as well. Microsoft’s HoloLens  is also expected to meet the same fate and result in a failure just like 
Google  Glass,  in  reference  to  a  report  published  by  117.  Such  cases  make  an  investor  question  the 
future scope of investment in the virtual reality industry. 

5.  Conclusion 

 Virtual  reality  is  a  growing  industry  that  not  only  serves  as  a  profit  but  also  as  a  future  technology 
which would be helping the human kind. The technology has led to VR devices being improved to a 
large extent in consideration of the user’s health and has set guidelines for its optimal use.  The main 
risk now  being that  humanity  might  lose the  human  connection  we have  in  between because of such 
virtual means of communication.  With VR we are entering a new era of a nascent stage technology, and 
it is hard to predict rather we would make the jump or fall into an abyss but as we all say, “Without risk, 
there is no reward”. VR is like a child with a little knowledge who loves taking risks, has downfalls but 
as a parent (users and developers of VR) we are the ones who have to encourage it to get back up again 
and therefore make it successful when it turns an adult.  

Acknowledgement 
Authors  express  their  sincere  gratitude  to  the  Research  Mentors  of  Accendere  Knowledge 
Management  Services  Pvt.  Ltd.  Although  any  errors  are  our  own,  and  it  should  not  tarnish  the 
reputations of these esteemed persons. 

References 

1. Virtual Reality. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_reality. Date accessed: 27/12/2016 

2. Sherman W R, Craig A B. Understanding virtual reality: Interface, application, and design. Morgan 

Kaufmann Publishers: USA, 2002. 

 
 
 
3.  Gigante  M  A.  Virtual  Reality  Systems,  In:  Virtual  reality:  definitions,  history  and  applications.  

Academic Press Limited: London, 1993. 

4. Burdea G C,  Coiffet P. Virtual reality technology (Vol. 1). 2nd edn. John Wiley & Sons Publication: 

New Jersey, 2003. 

5.  Steuer  J.  Defining  virtual  reality:  Dimensions  determining  telepresence. Journal  of 

Communication. 1992, 42(4), pp. 73-93. 

6. Sutherland I E. The ultimate display. Proceedings of IFIPS Congress, New York City, 1965 May, 

vol. 2, pp. 506–508. 

7. Sutherland I E. A head-mounted three dimensional display. Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer 

Conference, 1968, pp. 757–764. 

8. Schmandt C. Interactive three-dimensional computer space. In 26th Annual Technical Symposium, 

International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1983 April, pp. 155-159.  

9.  For  Artificial  Reality,  Wear  A  Computer.  http://www.nytimes.com/1989/04/10/business/for-

artificial-reality-wear-a-computer.html?pagewanted=all. Date accessed: 01/05/2017 

10. Fisher S S, McGreevy M, Humphries J, & Robinett W. Virtual environment display system. 
Proceedings of the 1986 workshop on Interactive 3D graphics, ACM, 1987 January, pp. 77-87. 
11. Ellis S R.  What are virtual  environments?.  IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 1994, 

14(1), pp. 17-22. 

12. Gobbetti E, Scateni R. Virtual reality: Past, present, and future. Virtual environments in clinical 
psychology and neuroscience: Methods and techniques in advanced patient-therapist interaction, 
1998. 

13.  Carlsson  C,  Hagsand  O.  DIVE  A  multi-user  virtual  reality  system.  In  Virtual  Reality  Annual 

International Symposium, September 1993, 1993 IEEE (pp. 394-400). IEEE. 

14. Greenhalgh C, Benford S. MASSIVE: a distributed virtual reality system incorporating spatial 
trading. Distributed Computing Systems, 1995., Proceedings of the 15th International Conference 
of IEEE, 1995 May, pp. 27-34. 

15. Waters R C, Anderson D B, Barrus J W, Brogan D C, Casey M A, McKeown S G, Yerazunis W S. 
Diamond park and spline: Social virtual reality with 3d animation, spoken interaction, and 
runtime extendability. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1997, 6(4), pp. 461-
481. 

16. Macedonia M R, Zyda M J, Pratt D R, Barham P T, Zeswitz S. NPSNET: a network software 
largescale  virtual  environments. Presence:  Teleoperators  &  Virtual 

for 

architecture 
Environments, 1994, 3(4), pp. 265-287. 

 17. Cruz-Neira C, Bierbaum A, Hartling P, Just C, Meinert K. VR Juggler-An Open Source platform 
for virtual reality applications. In 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, 2002, p. 754. 
18.  Tramberend  H.  Avocado:  A  distributed  virtual  reality  framework.  In  Virtual  Reality,  1999. 

Proceedings., 1999 March, IEEE (pp. 14-21). IEEE. 

19.  Ritter  III  K  A,  Borst  C  W,  Chambers  T  L.  Overview  and  Assessment  of  Unity  Toolkits  for 
Rapid Development of an Educational VR Application. Int. J. Innov. Educ. Res, 2015, 3, pp. 1-
19. 

20. Troya Moreno J.  VR plugin: a Virtual Reality plugin for unity applications (Doctoral dissertation, 

ETSI_Informatica, 2017). 

21.  Takala  T  M.  RUIS:  A  toolkit  for  developing  virtual  reality  applications  with  spatial  interaction. 
In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM symposium on Spatial user interaction, 2014 October, pp. 94-103. 
ACM. 

22.  Martínez  J,  García  A  S,  Oliver  M,  Molina  J  P,  González  P.  Vitaki:  a  vibrotactile  prototyping 
toolkit  for  virtual  reality  and  video  games. International  Journal  of  Human-Computer 
Interaction. 2014, 30(11), pp. 855-871. 

23.  Carlin  A  S,  Hoffman  H  G,  Weghorst  S.  Virtual  reality  and  tactile  augmentation  in  the 
treatment  of  spider  phobia:  a  case  report.  Behaviour  research  and  therapy.  1997,  35(2),  pp. 
153-158. 

24.  Beolchi  L,  Riva  G.  Virtual  reality  for  health  care.  Information  Technologies  in  Medicine. 

Toronto: John Wiley & Sons, 2001, 39-83. 

25.  Mantovani  F,  Castelnuovo  G,  Gaggioli  A,  Riva  G.Virtual  reality  training  for  health-care 

professionals. CyberPsychology & Behavior. 2003, 6(4), pp. 389-395. 

26. Gallagher A G, Ritter E M, Champion H, Higgins G, Fried M P, Moses G,  Satava R M. Virtual 
reality simulation for the operating room: proficiency-based training as a paradigm shift in 
surgical skills training. Annals of surgery. 2005, 241(2), pp. 364-372. 

27. Wiederhold B K, Wiederhold M D. Virtual reality therapy for anxiety disorders: Advances in 

evaluation and treatment. American Psychological Association, 2005. 

28.  Rose  F  D,  Brooks  B  M,  Rizzo  A  A.  Virtual  reality  in  brain  damage  rehabilitation:  review. 

Cyberpsychology & Behaviour. 2005, 8(3), pp. 241-262. 

29. Larsen C R, Soerensen J L, Grantcharov T P, Dalsgaard T, Schouenborg L, Ottosen C, Ottesen B 
S.  Effect  of  virtual  reality  training  on  laparoscopic  surgery:  randomised  controlled  trial. 
Bmj. 2009, 338, b1802. 

30. Saposnik G, Teasell R, Mamdani M, Hall J, McIlroy W, Cheung D, Bayley M. Effectiveness of 
virtual reality using Wii gaming technology in stroke rehabilitation. Stroke. 2010, 41(7), pp. 
1477-1484. 

31. Dhakal A. Virtual Reality in Healthcare. Idaho Conference on Undergraduate Research, 2017. 
32. 

Healthcare 

Change 

Reality 

Virtual 

How 

Will 

The 

Industry?. 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2017/02/06/how-will-virtual-reality-change-the-healthcare-
industry/#63edcf31429e. Date accessed: 06/02/2017 

33.  Byrne  C,  Furness  T  A.  Virtual  reality  and  education.  In Exploring  a  new  partnership:  Children, 

Teachers and Technology, 1994 January, pp. 181-189. 

34.  Lemole  Jr  G  M,  Banerjee  P  P,  Luciano  C,  Neckrysh  S,  Charbel  F  T.  Virtual  Reality  in 
Neurosurgical Education: Part‐Task Ventriculostomy Simulation With Dynamic Visual and 
Haptic Feedback. Neurosurgery. 2007, 61(1), pp. 142-149. 

35. Warburton S. Second Life in higher education: Assessing the potential for and the barriers to 
deploying virtual worlds in learning and teaching. British Journal of Educational Technology. 
2009, 40(3), pp. 414-426. 

36. Wu H K, Lee S W Y, Chang H Y, Liang J C.  Current status, opportunities and challenges of 

augmented reality in education. Computers & Education. 2013, 62, pp. 41-49. 

37. Ott  M, FREINA  L.  A literature review on immersive virtual  reality  in  education:  state of the art 
and  perspectives.  Proceedings  of  eLearning  and  Software  for  Education  «(eLSE)  Universitatea 
Nationala de Aparare Carol I, 2015, No. 01, pp. 133-141. 

38.  Google  opens  its  VR  field  trips  for  all,  debuts  new  app  and  services  for  teachers. 
https://techcrunch.com/2016/06/27/google-opens-up-its-virtual-reality-field-trips-for-all-debuts-
new-apps-and-services-for-teachers. Date accessed: 27/06/2016. 

39. Cheong R. The virtual threat to travel and tourism. Tourism Management.1995, 16(6), pp. 417-

422. 

40. Sussmann S, Vanhegan H J. Virtual reality and the tourism product: substitution or complement. 
Publication by Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration, Vienna, 2000. 

41.  Williams  P,  Hobson J  P.  Virtual  reality  and  tourism:  fact  or  fantasy?. Tourism  Management. 

1995, 16(6), pp. 423-427. 

42. Berger H, Dittenbach M, Merkl D, Bogdanovych A, Simoff S, Sierra C. Opening new dimensions 

for e-Tourism. Virtual Reality. 2007, 11(2-3), pp. 75-87. 

43.  Lee  O,  Oh  J  E.  The  impact  of  virtual  reality  functions  of  a  hotel  website  on  travel 

anxiety. Cyberpsychology & Behavior. 2007, 10(4), pp. 584-586. 

44. 7 museums that offer virtual  tours.  http://www.abcactionnews.com/simplemost/7-museums-offer-

virtual-tours. Date accessed: 03/03/2017. 

45.  Guttentag  D  A.  Virtual  reality:  Applications  and  implications  for  tourism. Tourism 

Management. 2010, 31(5), pp. 637-651. 

46.  Disztinger  P,  Schlögl  S,  Groth  A.  Technology  Acceptance  of  Virtual  Reality  for  Travel 
Planning. Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism, Springer, Cham. 2017, pp. 
255-268.  

47. Anderson E F, McLoughlin L, Liarokapis F, Peters C, Petridis P, De Freitas S. Developing serious 
games  for  cultural  heritage:  a  state-of-the-art  review. Virtual  Reality.  2010, 14(4),  pp.  255-
275. 

48. 

Virtual 

Reality 

human. 
https://www.ted.com/talks/chris_milk_how_virtual_reality_can_create_the_ultimate_empathy_ma
chine. Date accessed: 08/03/2015 

machine 

makes 

more 

that 

us 

is 

a 

49.  IMAX  Plans  Foray  Into  Virtual  Reality.  https://www.wsj.com/articles/imax-plans-foray-into-

virtual-reality-1463706003. Date accessed: 19/05/2016. 

50. 

Will 

Indian 

Cinema 

Embrace 

Virtual 

Reality?. 

http://tech.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/mobile/behind-the-scenes-of-virtual-reality-film-
making/55353785. Date accessed: 14/11/2016. 

51. Virtual reality and the silver screen: A match made in heaven. https://www.cnet.com/news/virtual-

reality-and-the-silver-screen-a-match-made-in-heaven. Date accessed: 13/10/2016. 

52.  Virtual  reality  will  transform  cinema  in  2016.  http://www.wired.co.uk/article/virtual-reality-

breaks-fourth-wall. Date accessed: 27/01/2016. 

53.  With 

Story 

Studio,  Oculus  VR 

embarks 

on 

its  Hollywood 

54. 

https://www.engadget.com/2015/01/26/story-studio-oculus-vr-sundance. 
26/01/2015. 
Rahman's 

goes 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/hindi/bollywood/news/Rahmans-Vande-
Mataram-goes-virtual-at-NFDC-Film-Bazaar/articleshow/55525937.cms. 
29/01/2017. 

Vande  Mataram 

NFDC 

virtual 

Film 

Date 

Date 

at 

takeover. 
accessed: 

Bazaar. 

accessed: 

55.  Peña  N,  Weil  P,  Llobera  J,  Giannopoulos  E,  Pomés  A,  Spanlang  B,  Slater  M.  Immersive 

journalism: immersive virtual reality for the first-person experience of news, 2010. 

56. 

The 

Future 

of 

News? 

It 

is 

Virtual 

Reality.                                        

https://www.ted.com/talks/nonny_de_la_pena_the_future_of_news_virtual_reality. Date accessed: 
15/05/2017. 

57. Kent T. An ethical reality check for virtual reality journalism. Retrieved September 6, 2015. 
58.  BBC 

show 
news.net/news/2016/nov/18/bbc-launches-360-talk-show-younger-women. 
18/11/2016 

http://www.virtualreality-
accessed: 

younger  women. 

launches 

Date 

360 

talk 

for 

59.  BBC's  new  360  experience  looks  at  human  trafficking.  http://www.bbc.com/news/world-

38093431. Date accessed: 24/11/2016. 

60. 

The 

Future 

of 

Journalism 

and  Media 

lies 

in 

Virtual 

Reality. 

http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20160729-virtual-reality-the-hype-the-problems-and-the-
promise. Date accessed: 29/07/2016. 

61. Seijo S P.  Immersive Journalism: From Audience to First-Person Experience of News. In Media 

and Metamedia Management, Springer International Publishing. 2017, pp. 113-119.  

62.  CNN  launches  dedicated  virtual  reality  journalism  unit.  https://techcrunch.com/2017/03/07/cnn-

launches-dedicated-virtual-reality-journalism-unit. Date accessed: 07/03/2017. 

63.  Virtual 

reality 

adds 

transparency 

to 

narrative 

journalism. 

http://www.business-

standard.com/article/news-ians/virtual-reality-adds-transparency-to-narrative-journalism-
117020700992_1.html. Date accessed: 07/02/2017.    

64.  Jayaram  S,  Connacher  H  I,  Lyons  K  W.  Virtual  assembly  using  virtual  reality  techniques. 

Computer-Aided Design. 1997, 29(8), pp. 575-584. 

65.  De  Sa  A  G,  Zachmann  G.  Virtual  reality  as  a  tool  for  verification  of  assembly  and 

maintenance processes. Computers & Graphics. 1999, 23(3), pp. 389-403. 

66.  Korpipää  T,  Minami  K,  Kuroda  T,  Manabe  Y,  Chihara  K.  Shared  virtual  reality  interior  design 

system. Proceedings of ICAT2000, 2000, pp.124-131 

67. Whyte J. Industrial applications of virtual reality in architecture and construction. Journal of 

Information Technology in Construction (ITcon). 2003, 8(4), pp. 43-50. 

68.  Seth  A,  Vance  J  M, Oliver  J  H.  Virtual  reality  for  assembly  methods  prototyping:  a  review. 

Virtual reality. 2011, 15(1), pp. 5-20. 

69. 

This 

virtual 
http://fortune.com/2015/09/02/virtual-reality-interior-design. Date accessed: 02/09/2015 

redesigning 

company 

works 

with 

how 

is 

it 

reality. 

70.  Virtual  Reality  Architecture  Walkthrough 

for  Oculus  Rift 

/  Gear  VR.  

https://wn.com/avrst__virtual_reality_architecture_walkthrough_for_oculus_rift_#/_Gear_VR. 
Date accessed: 08/08/2016. 

71.  Hilfert  T,  König  M.  Low-cost  virtual  reality  environment  for  engineering  and  construction. 

Visualization in Engineering. 2016, 4(1), 2. 

72. Satava R M. Virtual reality and telepresence for military medicine. Computers in biology and 

medicine. 1995, 25(2), pp. 229-236. 

73. Reger G M,  Gahm  G  A. Virtual reality exposure therapy for active duty soldiers. Journal  of 

Clinical Psychology. 2008, 64(8), pp. 940-946. 

74. Rizzo A, Parsons T D, Lange B, Kenny P, Buckwalter J G, Rothbaum B, Reger G. Virtual reality 
goes to war: A brief review of the future of military behavioral healthcare. Journal of clinical 
psychology in medical settings. 2011, 18(2), pp. 176-187. 

75. Armstrong C M, Reger G M, Edwards J, Rizzo A A, Courtney C G, Parsons T D. Validity of the 
Virtual  Reality  Stroop  Task  (VRST)  in  active  duty  military.  Journal  of  Clinical  and 
Experimental Neuropsychology. 2013, 35(2), pp. 113-123. 

76.  Virtual  Reality  in  the  Military.  https://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality-military.  Date  accessed: 

18/04/2016. 

77.  Virtual  reality  and  the  Navy.  https://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality-military/navy.html.  Date 

accessed: 19/04/2016. 

78.  Virtual  reality  and  the  Air  force.  https://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality-military/air-force.html. 

Date accessed: 20/04/2016. 

79.  Chittaro  L,  Ration  R.  Adding  adaptive  features  to  virtual  reality  interfaces  for  e-commerce. 
International  Conference  on  Adaptive  Hypermedia  and  Adaptive  Web-based  Systems,  Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 2000 August, pp. 86-97. 

80.  Chittaro  L,  Ranon  R.  New  directions  for  the  design  of  virtual  reality  interfaces  to  e-commerce 
sites. Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced  Visual Interfaces, ACM, 2002 May, 
pp. 308-315.  

81.  Suh  K  S,  Lee  Y  E.  The  effects  of  virtual  reality  on  consumer  learning:  an  empirical 

investigation. Mis Quarterly, 2005, pp. 673-697. 

82. Papadopoulou P. Applying virtual reality for trust-building e-commerce environments. Virtual 

Reality. 2007, 11(2-3), pp. 107-127. 

83. Ciptawilangga Y. U.S. Patent Application No. 12/474,202. 2010. 
84. 

Utilizing 

eCommerce  Market. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/haroldstark/2016/11/23/utilizing-virtual-reality-to-revolutionize-the-
ecommerce-market/#2f1be9c96b6a. Date accessed: 23/11/2016. 

Revolutionize 

Reality 

Virtual 

The 

To 

85.  How  We’re  Thinking  About  Commerce 

and  VR  with  Our 

First  App. 

https://engineering.shopify.com/226750852-how-were-thinking-about-commerce-and-vr-with-
our-first-vr-app-thread-studio. Date accessed: 29/09/2016.  
Virtual 
the 

Welcome 

Future: 

Reality 

in 

to 

eCommerce. 

86. 

https://www.sweettoothrewards.com/blog/welcome-to-the-future-virtual-reality-in-ecommerce. 
Date accessed: 12/07/2016. 

87. eBay launches a world-first virtual reality department store. http://mashable.com/2016/05/18/ebay-

virtual-reality-shopping/#2Vzy3NOE.EqV. Date accessed: 18/05/2016. 

88. Jarvik R. U.S. Patent No. 5,577,981. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 1996. 
89. Ji Q, Pan Z, Li X. Overview of the application of virtual reality in sports -simulation. J Comput 

Aided Des Comput Graph. 2003, 24, pp.11-14. 

90. Bideau B, Kulpa R, Ménardais S, Fradet  L, Multon F, Delamarche P, Arnaldi B. Real handball 
goalkeeper  vs.  virtual  handball  thrower.  Presence:  teleoperators  and  virtual  environments. 
2003, 12(4), pp. 411-421. 

91.  Bideau  B,  Kulpa  R,  Vignais  N,  Brault  S,  Multon  F,  Craig  C.  (2010).  Using  virtual  reality  to 
analyze sports performance. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications. 2010, 30(2), pp. 14-21. 
sports. 

along  with  VR  will 

future  of 

92.  How 

augmented 

change 

reality 

the 

93. 

BBC 

https://www.ted.com/talks/chris_kluwe_how_augmented_reality_will_change_sports_and_build_
empathy. Date accessed: 12/03/2014. 
launches 

Oculus 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/we-wait. Date accessed: 14/12/2016. 
94. Zyda M. From visual simulation to virtual reality to games. Computer. 2005, 38(9), pp. 25-32. 
95.  SLI  technology  by  Nvidia  VRWorks.  https://developer.nvidia.com/vrworks.  Date  accessed: 

production 

content 

Store. 

first 

the 

for 

12/12/2016. 

96. Pokémon GO released officially. http://pokemongo.nianticlabs.com/en. Date accessed: 20/07/2016. 

97. Sliver.tv is a VR twitch for your favorite eSport’s titles. https://techcrunch.com/2016/08/24/sliver-

tv-is-a-vr-twitch-for-your-favorite-esports-titles/. Date accessed: 24/08/2016. 
the  PlayStation  VR 

launch  with 

hyped 

this 

for 

98.  Get 

official 

unboxing. 

http://www.theverge.com/circuitbreaker/2016/10/5/13171702/playstation-vr-unboxing-release-
date. Date accessed: 05/10/2016.  

99.  Virtual  Reality  Market  by  Component  (Hardware  and  Software),  Technology  (Non-Immersive, 
Semi-  &  Fully  Immersive),  Device  Type  (Head-Mounted  Display,  Gesture  Control  Device), 
Application 
2022. 
http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/reality-applications-market-458.html.  Date 
accessed: 15/01/2017. 

Geography 

Forecast 

Global 

and 

to 

- 

100.  Virtual  Reality  Sickness.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_reality_sickness.  Date  accessed: 

08/02/2017. 

101.  Oculus  Terms  Of  Service.  https://www.oculus.com/legal/terms-of-service/.  Date  accessed: 

28/03/2016.  

102.  Samsung  Rules 

and 

regulations 

for 

the 

usage 

of  Samsung  Gear  VR. 

https://promos.samsungpromotions.com/gearvr/en-US/Rules. Date Accessed: 19/03/2016.  

103. The Dangers of Virtual Reality. https://www.cnet.com/news/the-dangers-of-virtual-reality/. Date 

accessed: 29/03/2016. 

104. 

Environment”. 
http://www.telepresenceoptions.com/2012/11/protosphere_virtual_environment/.  Date  accessed: 
24/12/2016.  

ProtoSphere’s 

Virtual 

105.  3  Major  Security  and  Privacy  concerns  over  Virtual  Reality.  http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/3-

major-security-privacy-concerns-virtual-reality/. Date accessed: 12/04/2016.  

106.  The  Real  Risks  of  Virtual  Reality.  http://www.rmmagazine.com/2014/10/01/the-real-risks-of-

virtual-reality/. Date accessed: 11/10/2016. 

107.  Facebook:  All  the  policies  you  need  at  one  place.  https://www.facebook.com/policies.  Date 

accessed: 20/01/2017.  
AvayaLive 

108. 

BusinessCraft. 
http://www.telepresenceoptions.com/2012/07/avayalive_engage_world_of_busi/.  Date  accessed: 
05/09/2016. 

Engage: 

World 

of 

109.  The  Real  Risks  of  Virtual  Reality.  http://www.rmmagazine.com/2014/10/01/the-real-risks-of-

virtual-reality/. Date accessed: 12/10/2016. 
virtual 

buys  Oculus, 

Facebook 

110. 

reality 

gaming 

startup, 

for 

$2  Billion. 

https://www.forbes.com/sites/briansolomon/2014/03/25/facebook-buys-oculus-virtual-reality-
gaming-startup-for-2-billion/#42fc93ab2498. Date accessed: 14/02/2017. 

111. Anders Gronstedt. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anders_Gronstedt. Date accessed: 15/03/2017.  
112.  Facebook 

its  VR  headset  as  competition  heats  up. 

the  price  of 

slashing 

is 

113.  Facebook  plans 

http://www.businessinsider.in/facebook-is-slashing-the-price-of-its-vr-headset-as-competition-
heats-up/articleshow/57418592.cms. Date accessed: 01/03/2017.   
invest  more 

the  next  decade. 
https://techcrunch.com/2017/01/17/facebook-plans-to-invest-more-than-3-billion-in-vr-over-the-next-decade/.  Date 
accessed: 27/01/2017.  

than  $3  billion 

in  VR  over 

to 

114.  Gabe  Newell  isn’t  actually  here.  http://www.polygon.com/features/2017/2/15/14616192/gabe-

newell-interview-vr/. Date accessed: 15/02/2017. 

Fields involved 

Sports, 

Gaming, 
Entertainment, 
Healthcare, 
Videography, 
Tourism, Google Earth 
Gaming, 
Tourism, 
News,  Entertainment, 
Military,  Architecture, 
Art 

115.  We 

the 

real 

first 

look 

just  got 

into  how  well  virtual 

is 
https://www.businessinsider.com.au/sony-discloses-playstation-vr-headset-sales-2017-2. 
accessed: 28/02/2017.  
AvayaLive 

the 
http://www.hypergridbusiness.com/2016/05/avayalive-engage-to-close-by-end-of-year/. 
accessed: 29/05/2016.  

Engage 

reality 

close 

end 

by 

of 

to 

116. 

selling. 
Date 

year. 
Date 

117. Will Microsoft’s HoloLens End up like the failed Google Glass. https://www.tractica.com/user-
Date 

interface-technologies/will-microsofts-hololens-end-up-like-the-failed-google-glass/. 
accessed: 11/01/2016. 

Table 1: Details of the companies in VR 

Name of the Company  
and Website 
Google (vr.google.com) 

Founded By  Headquarters 

Projects/Products 

Leading 
Investors 

Larry  Page, 
Sergey Brin 

Googleplex, 
California, U.S. 

Daydream, 
cardboard 
Google Glass 

and 

Facebook/Oculus 
(oculus.com/rift) 
(facebook360.fb.com) 

WorldViz 
(worldviz.com) 

Bricks and Goggles  
(bricksandgoggles.com) 

Marxent Labs  
(marxentlabs.com) 

Unity Technologies 
(unity3d.com) 

Microsoft  
(microsoft.com/microsoft-
hololens) 
Magic Leap 
(magicleap.com) 

Vuzix 
(vuzix.com) 

castAR 
(castar.com) 

Sixense 
(sixense.com) 
Retinad Analytics 
(retinad.io) 

Palmer 
Luckey,  Nate 
Mitchell 
(Oculus) 
Mark 
Zuckerberg  
Andrew 
Beall,  Peter 
Schlueer 
Ingmar 
Vroege, 
Gertjan 
Leemans 
Barry 
Besecker, 
Beck 
Besecker 
Nicholas 
Francis, 
Joachim Ante 

Gates, 

Bill 
Paul Allen 

Rony 
Abovitz,  Sam 
Miller 
Paul Travers 

Jeri 
Ellsworth, 
Rick Johnson 
Amir Rubin 

Kevin 
Ouellet, 
Samuel 

Menlo 
California, U.S. 

Park, 

Oculus 
Facebook 360 

Rift, 

Spark 

Samsung, 
Capital, 
Andreessen 
Horowitz 

Santa  Barbara, 
California, U.S. 

Vizard  VR  Toolkit, 
PPT 

Intel Capital 

Building  Architecure, 
Design and Assembly 

Nieuwendijk, 
The Netherlands 

Luxury  Apartment 
by Bricks&Goggles 

Home 
decoration, 
Building  Architecture, 
Design and Assembly 

Dayton,  Ohio, 
U.S. 

VisualCommerce 

Techstars,  Detroit 
Venture Partners 

Online 
eCommerce 

shopping,    

San 
Francisco, 
California, U.S.  

UnityVR 

China  Investment 
Corporation, 
iGlobe 
Thrive Capital 

Partners, 

Web 

Gaming, 
Engines, 
Entertainment 

Redmond, 
Washington, 
U.S. 
Plantation, 
Florida, U.S. 

HoloLens 

Magic Leap One 

Rochester,  New 
York, U.S. 

M100  and  M300 
smart-glasses 

Google, 
Qualcomm,  
Alibaba Group 
Intel 
Lenovo 

Capital, 

Mountain  View, 
California, U.S. 

CastAR 

Playground 
Capital 

Gatos, 

Los 
California, U.S. 
Ontario, Canada 

STEM System 

Kickstarter 

Analytics  Platform 
for 360VR media 

PasswordBox, 
Zynga, 
VRFund 

Colopl 

Entertainment, 
Education, News 

Almost in all the fields 
discussed 
the 
in 
previous section 
Entertainment, 
Communication, 
Gaming 
Gaming, 
Entertainment 

Gaming, 
Entertainment 
e-Commerce, Business 
Analytics 

 
 
 
Virtually Live 
(virtuallylive.com) 

Vega 
(vega25.com) 
byondVR 
(byondvr.com) 
Sulon Technologies 
(sulon.com) 

HTC and Valve 
 (htcvr.com) 

Nvidia 
(nvidia.com) 

El-
Jesus 

Poirier 
Jamid 
Imad, 
Hormigo 
Tejhaswi 
Bharadwaj 
Noam Levavi, 
Eran Galil 
Dhan 
Balachand 

Cher  Wang, 
Peter  Chou 
(HTC) 
Gabe  Newell, 
Mike 
Harrington 
(Valve) 
Jen-Hsun 
Huang 

Samsung Electronics 
(samsung.com) 

Lee-Byung 
Chul 

Sony  
(sony.com) 

Masaru 
Ibaku,  Akio 
Morita 

Francisco, 

San 
California, U.S. 

Jose, 

San 
California, U.S. 
New York, U.S. 

Markham, 
Ontario, Canada 

Taoyuan, Taiwan 
(HTC) 
Bellevue, 
Washington, 
U.S. (Valve) 

VirtuallyLive App 

Tectus  Group,  W 
Investment 

Sports, Entertainment 

Zenie App 

Publisher 

VR 
Toolkit 
Cortex, Sulon Q 

AMD 

HTC 
SteamVR 

Vive, 

Aurora 
AR, 
VRChat,  WEVR, 
Beats Electronics 

Decoration, 
Home 
Design and Assembly 
Sports,  Entertainment, 
Tourism, eCommerce 
Gaming, 
Entertainment, 
Tourism,  
Gaming, 
Entertainment 

Santa 
California, U.S. 

Clara, 

VRWorks 

Suwon, 
Ch'ungch'ong-
namdo, 
Korea 
Sony 
Minato, Tokyo 

South 

City, 

Samsung Gear VR 

Project  Morpheus 
(PlayStation VR) 

DARPA, 
TriplePoint 
Capital 
Facebook,  HTC, 
Oculus 

Gaming, 
Entertainment 

Gaming, 
Entertainment, 
Tourism 

Gaming, 
Entertainment 

 
 
 
 
