7
1
0
2

g
u
A
1
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
2
5
3
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

39

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting
Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging
technologies

Emanuele Bellini, University of Florence
Paolo Ceravolo, University of Milan
Paolo Nesi, University of Florence

This work aims at investigating and quantifying the Urban Transport System (UTS) resilience enhancement
enabled by the adoption of emerging technology such as Internet of Everything (IoE) and the new trend of the
Connected Community (CC). A conceptual extension of Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM) and
its formalization have been proposed and used to model UTS complexity. The scope is to identify the system
functions and their interdependencies with a particular focus on those that have a relation and impact on
people and communities. Network analysis techniques have been applied to the FRAM model to identify and
estimate the most critical community-related functions. The notion of Variability Rate (VR) has been deﬁned
as the amount of output variability generated by an upstream function that can be tolerated/absorbed by
a downstream function, without signiﬁcantly increasing of its subsequent output variability. A fuzzy based
quantiﬁcation of the VR on expert judgment has been developed when quantitative data are not available.
Our approach has been applied to a critical scenario (water bomb/ﬂash ﬂooding) considering two cases: when
UTS has CC and IoE implemented or not. The results show a remarkable VR enhancement if CC and IoE
are deployed.

CCS Concepts:
(cid:114)
Networks → Network reliability;

(cid:114)
Computer systems organization → Embedded systems; Redundancy; Robotics;

ACM Reference Format:
TBD ACM Trans. Internet Technol. 9, 4, Article 39 (May 2017), 38 pages.
DOI: 0000001.0000001

1. INTRODUCTION
The effectiveness of the current risk and efﬁciency-based approaches in complex
socio-technical systems safety and security management is affected by their weakness
in addressing the so-called “unknown unknowns” [Park et al. 2013]. This is caused
by the continuous increment of the complexity of the systems and the emergent and
unpredictable conditions such as climate change or man-made sabotages. According to
[Field 2012], the climatic extremes may intensify or become more frequent in regions
that are not used to cope with such events. Moreover, so far no scientiﬁc method
is available to precisely predict the long-term evolution and spatial distribution of
critical events, nor the impacts on society’s critical infrastructures.

Complex socio-technical systems cannot be managed under the assumption that ac-
cidents are produced by an uncontrolled and undesired release or transfer of energy
between technical components [Leveson 2004] and the large number of human/social,
organisational and technical aspects, together with their fast pace changing behavior,
imposes serious limitations on the ability to fully understand and monitor system oper-

This work is supported by the H2020-RESOLUTE project
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned
by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or repub-
lish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
c(cid:13) 2017 ACM. 1533-5399/2017/05-ART39 $15.00
DOI: 0000001.0000001

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

 
 
 
 
 
 
39:2

Bellini et al.

ations. Therefore, complex socio-technical systems are today underspeciﬁed by nature
[Wilson 2006] and a certain level of epistemic and aleatory uncertainty must be taken
into account as a contribution to the critical events.

As [Owens and Leveson 2006] pointed out, accidents within complex environments
tend to be the result of unpredicted interactions, rather than single failures of hu-
man or technical components. This produces unexpected cascade effects, which could
rapidly reach unacceptable proportions. In order to face these unknown elements,
building resilience becomes the best decision for socio-technical systems as the Urban
Transport Systems (UTS)[Linkov et al. 2014]. There are many deﬁnitions and inter-
pretations about resilience1. In the context of RESOLUTE2, it refers to the capability
of a system of continuously adapting to its operational environment in the pursuit of
its intentions/purposes. Thus resilience can be deﬁned as the ability of a system to
sustain required operations in both expected and unexpected conditions by adjusting
its functioning prior to, during, or following changes. According to the resilience engi-
neering ﬁeld, the potential for resilience to emerge from system performance may be
assessed based on the four resilience cornerstones [Hollnagel 2011], [Hollnagel 2015]:

a) Knowing what to do - corresponds to the ability to respond to disruptions by adjust-

ing system performance to changing conditions.

b) Knowing what to look for - corresponds to the ability to monitor both the system

and the environment.

c) Knowing what to expect - corresponds to the ability to anticipate opportunities for
changes in the system and identify sources of disruption and pressure and their
consequences for system operation.

d) Knowing what has happened - corresponds to the ability to learn from past experi-

ences of both successes and failures.

In other words, the essence of resilience is the ability of the system to recognize
when variability in its performance is unanticipated and fall beyond the usual range,
and to dampen such variability through continuos adaptation. In order to cope with
such a variability and to respond to different and possibly conﬂicting local operational
needs, the limited resources of the system (humans, technologies and organization)
should be managed and exploited effectively to achieve the right system synchroniza-
tion and coordination level needed to ensure successful operation. However, it is clear
that the variability and uncertainty need to be considered as intrinsic characteristics
of complex socio-technical systems [Hollnagel 2008].

According to this perspective, the new global trend of Internet of Everything (IoE)
in general and the Connected Community (CC) in particular, can be exploited as re-
sources of the socio-technical system to enhance its adaptive capacity and thus the
resilience of the UTS dampening unwanted variability. The IoE can be considered a
natural development of the IoT concept. In fact, while ”Things” are related to connect
physical-ﬁrst objects, IoE extends this view comprising the following four key elements
including all sorts of possible connections:

a) People: Considered as end-nodes connected across the Internet to share knowledge,

information, opinions, decisions, behaviors and activities.

b) Things: Physical sensors, devices, actuators and other items generating data or re-

ceiving information from other sources.

c) Data: Raw data analyzed and processed into useful information to enable intelligent

decisions and control mechanisms (e.g., Human behaviors on the ground).

1RESOLUTE D2.2 Sate of the art
2RESOLUTE is an EC funded research project - http://www.resolute-eu.org

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:3

d) Processes: Leveraging connectivity among data, things and people to add value.

Thus IoE establishes an end-to-end ecosystem of connectivity where people with their
relationships, social collaborations and grouping dynamics represent an integral part.
In particular, according to [Russell and Barros 2014], Connected Communities are
characterised, among the others, by weak ties that can symbolise a range of poten-
tial relationships among community members. These relations range from tight, long-
lasting and static to temporary, real-time and dynamic relationships of different du-
rations to location-speciﬁc connections. In fact, communities can be established on the
base of same interests, skills or because of being at the same place and time in rela-
tion to some adverse event. Such a CC characteristics can be exploited to shift from a
public awareness approach to one of community-individual safety altering the tradi-
tional top-down “command and control” relationships with the population. In fact, in
RESOLUTE, the community is seen as an active participant to build the system re-
silience, rather than a passive recipient of services. Hence, the IoE and CC, if properly
exploited, can be considered as means to achieve resilience in UTS because they could:

a) enhance the monitoring and control capability, improving the granularity and
breadth of knowledge and awareness about the system status and dynamics contin-
uously collecting Big Data from heterogeneous data sources/streams and sensors as
people GPS position, concentration, behaviors and sentiment through smart devices
and social networks (User Generated Data), Open Data, data from environmental
sensors (e.g., trafﬁc ﬂows, hydrometry, air pollution, underpasses water level), mo-
bile cell data, wiﬁ access points, and real-time reports such as weather forecast, and
so forth [P. Bellini 2016];

b) enhance the responding capability by providing detailed and timely information to
authorities on one side, and to delivering personalised, real-time, context-aware,
and ubiquitous advice to the community exploiting technologies such as IoE, Fast
Wireless Connections (free wiﬁ, 3G/4G), LoRaWAN, Smart Mobile Devices, Big
Data Analytics, Semantic Computing, etc., that are crucial for augmenting situa-
tion awareness and enhancing decision making;

c) enhance the learning capability applying advanced analysis on Big Data (e.g., deep
learning, data analysis and prediction, sentiment analysis) to extract knowledge;
d) enhance then anticipation capability continuously supporting the assessment of
vulnerability and identifying when the system operates nearer to safety boundaries,
predict behaviors and event dynamics, support evidence-based decisions at strate-
gic, tactic and operation level moving ahead respect the current practices based on
pre-simulated emergency scenarios [Woltjer 2006].

Unfortunately, even if several initiatives are ongoing at international levels such as
the political UNISDR Sendai Framework3, cities and local communities are slow in
becoming smart and resilient because of several factors such as budget restriction,
cultural gaps, and by the difﬁculties to quantify the beneﬁts for the community (e.g.
Social Return Of Investment). In fact, because of resource scarcity, a priority rank
for infrastructure improvement actions tends to be based on political opportunity or
heuristics instead of a quantitative evaluation of the beneﬁt of the system as a whole.

To this end, the present article aims at demonstrating and quantifying the enhance-
ment of UTS resilience obtained with the exploitation of IoE and CC as enabling tech-
nologies capable of signiﬁcantly increasing the variability dampening capacity of those
functions in UTS related to the human/social aspects.

3UNISDR - http://www.unisdr.org/we/coordinate/sendai-framework

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:4

Bellini et al.

Deﬁning a method for variability quantiﬁcation enables also the development of the so-
called Big KID–driven Decision Support System4. A Decision Support System (DSS)
[Dorasamy et al. 2013], [Tsekourakis et al. 2012], [Suarez et al. 2013], [Bartolozzi et al.
2015] is a computer-based information system that supports organizational decision-
making activities. The objective of a DSS is to provide evidence for making decisions
for a problem by compounding experts’ experiences and data and analyzing them in an
intelligent and fast way a human cannot do in reasonable time.

Hence to achieve research intent, the work has been organised in the following 3

steps:

a) The complex socio-technical system (e.g., the UTS) and the role of the CC in daily
operations has been analysed through the Functional Resonance Analysis Method
[Hollnagel 2008] perspective. The FRAM is a method to analyse how the activities
daily take places daily in the complex system and introduces powerful concepts as
functional variability, dampening, adaptive capacity, functional resonance, etc.as
well as a speciﬁc notation to model the systems that is described in section 3. How-
ever the lack of an effective formalization of FRAM prevents to carry out the quanti-
tative assessment of the impact of the IoE and Connected Communities in the UTS
resilience building.

b) A new formalization and a method to quantify the FRAM functional variability and

the dampening capacity has been deﬁned

c) The new method to quantify FRAM has been tested in a case study comparing
the potential variability in UTS with or without IoE and Connected Community
exploitation. The beneﬁt in terms of dampening capacity has been quantiﬁed.

This article is organised as follow: in Section 2, the role of people in the context of
UTS is presented; in Section 3, we introduce the background work about the FRAM
based Critical Infrastructure Reference Model published in the RESOLUTE European
Resilience Management Guidelines; in Section 4, a new methodology to quantify the
variability in FRAM is proposed; in Section 5, an example of the application of the
methods to govern CC behavior during emergency exploiting IoE technologies is rep-
resented; in Section 6, conclusions and next steps are discussed.

2. URBAN TRANSPORT SYSTEM AND PEOPLE
In the UTS, operations have developed a prominent safety and business critical nature,
in view of which current practices have shown the evidence of important limitations
in terms of resilience management. Hence, enhancing resilience in UTS is considered
imperative for two main reasons:

a) such systems provide essential support to every socio-economic activity and rescue,

and

b) the paths that convey people, goods and information, are the same through which

risks are propagated and resource are provided [Bellini et al. 2016].

Unfortunately, even if the UTS plays a critical role in the society, there is a general
tendency to leave out from resilience strategy implementation, crucial aspects such as
the coordination and synchronisation amongst several system functions and elements
as the community preparedness and behavior and the need to account for a wide
range of unknown scenarios and context dependent factors. In fact, humans do not
have the time, the mental resources or the capability to be aware of every problem
at the same time. They devote their energy to problems that involve them and for

4KID stays for knowledge, information, data.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:5

which they can make a difference - J. E. Grunig quoted in Lefﬂer [Lefﬂer 1998]. Thus
the community members need to be enabled and engaged as an active participant in
his/her own safety developing a self-resilience attitude. For instance, in a situation
where the number of options to escape from a hazard are limited or absent because of
the presence of constraints as bridges or tunnels, CC members can help each other or
receive valuable information from the ﬁrst responders to adopt speciﬁc behaviors to
mitigate the impact of the event. This requires new technologies, new skills and new
approaches to enable users in being connected anytime and everywhere to provide and
receive lifesaver information and adapt their behavior accordingly. In particular, every
aspect of the human factor (behavior, attitude, belief, sentiment, skill, heuristics,
etc.) needs to be considered in a critical infrastructure like UTS, as key elements for
resilience building, going beyond the engineering and operational approaches that
tend to be focused on technologies and procedures. Moreover, the different nature of
UTS users (i.e. cars, motorcycles bicycles, pedestrians, among others) and the wide
diversity of purposes encompassed within urban transport, tend to generate highly
dynamic interdependencies, both within the private transport system and with public
transport. It is clear that, governing/directing CC behaviors during the UTS usage, is
the basis of solutions towards enhanced resilience discussed in this article.

Beyond the aspects of system complexity, the global scenario of resource scarcity
and changes is also put forward as a cause for many of the serious safety and secu-
rity threats currently faced by societies. In [Boin 2010], such threats are distinguished
from routine emergencies such as ﬁres and trafﬁc accidents, and characterise them
as low-chance, high-impact events that can compromise life sustaining systems and
require governmental intervention under high uncertainty conditions. Both are the
circumstances in which resilience is highlighted as a possible solution for the sustain-
ability, reliability and safety of systems [Boin 2010] and [Jackson 2010]. In fact, in
resilience engineering ﬁeld, there is not a difference between routine and big events,
what change is the amplitude of the functional variability and thus the possibility of
emerging resonance effect among the system functions.

Such an IoE enabled data-driven approach provides the means to assess the levels
of criticality at evidence/quantitative level, while seeking to enable the capabilities
of the complex system to take the appropriate decision at strategic, tactical and
operational levels [Bellini et al. 2014].

3. UNDERSTANDING UTS BEHAVIOR THROUGH FRAM
The system analysis is based on the Critical Infrastructure reference model deﬁned in
the European Resilience Management Guidelines5 where the human aspect and the
community management is included in the system description. The FRAM [Hollnagel
2008] was used to support system analysis, aiming to identify interdependencies and
system emergent behaviors potentially relevant for resilience. The FRAM approach
is essentially a system-modelling tool that focuses on system interdependencies, their
dynamics and complexity. It is grounded on Resilience Engineering principles and pro-
vides a fundamental support to such ends by supporting systems understanding. In
particular, a system is considered a set of coupled or mutually dependent functions.
FRAM is particularly relevant in describing nonlinear systems and the overall rule is
to try achieving a description of the normal activities performed by the socio-technical
system involving stakeholders in its deﬁnition. A FRAM model is illustrated in Figure

5E. Bellini, P. Ferreira, and E. Gaitanidou. 2016a. European Resilience Management Guidelines (h2020
RESOLUTE project ed.)

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:6

Bellini et al.

1 were a function F is composed by a label (usually a verb) representing the action of
the function and by six aspects A.

Fig. 1. Functional unit of FRAM (adapted from Hollnagel, 2008).

Hollnagel in [Hollnagel 2008] deﬁnes the six aspects in the following terms:

(1) Input: that which the function processes or transforms or that which starts the

function.

(2) Preconditions: that must exist before a function can be executed.
(3) Resources: that which the function needs or consumes to produce the output.
(4) Time: as temporal constraints affecting the function (with regard to starting time,

ﬁnishing time, or duration).

(5) Control: how the function is monitored or controlled.
(6) Output: is the result of the function, either a speciﬁc output or product or a state

change.

It is important to notice that the ﬁrst ﬁve aspects (Input, Preconditions, Resources,
Time, Control) are acting as inputs while the function outputs are represented only by
the Output aspect. The characterisation of the functions, in terms of the six aspects,
contains the potential couplings among functions. In fact, the input aspects of a
downstream function can receive a qualiﬁed output from upstream functions. Such
qualiﬁed output is a relationship R labeled with a textual deﬁnition and representing
the tangible or intangible outcome of the function of origin towards the function of
destination. In fact, each output can be the input of another function.

On the basis of FRAM approach, Figure 2 reports the desired functions and interde-
pendencies that a UTS needs to implements to be resilient6. In Appendix Table V lists
the functions composing the model with their relationships.

6E. Bellini, P. Ferreira, and E. Gaitanidou. 2016a. European Resilience Management Guidelines (h2020
reso- lute project ed.).

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:7

Fig. 2. RESOLUTE UTS Model from European Resilience Management Guidelines7

According to the ERMG, the human/social components of the socio-technical system
are addressed, at least, by the following functions: Use of the service, Manage aware-
ness and user behavior, Monitor user generated feedback which is deﬁned as follow:

— Use of the service: This function represents the actual usage of the service like driv-
ing a car, goods movement and delivery, taking taxi, bus or metro, walking etc. in the
UTS.

— Manage awareness & user behavior: as providers of fundamental public services,
critical infrastructures tend to be signiﬁcantly exposed to individual and collective
behaviors, in many cases, not just the service end-users, but also of the wider public.
Recent technological developments, in particular in relation to ICTs, offer a great
potential for the enhancement of interactions with the public and the use of this
potential towards an increased effectiveness in managing and deploying operational
adjustments to various relevant events and circumstances.

— Monitor user-generated feedback: monitor feedbacks about service usage on a wide
range of parameters and produce fundamental support to the deployment of opera-
tional adjustments. This function deals with the need for an integrated approach to

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:8

Bellini et al.

the assessment of user generated feedback, mainly by placing this data and informa-
tion in the context of operational monitoring.

3.1. Extending performance variability concept
The FRAM approach is based on the principle of equivalence of successes and failures
and the principle of approximate adjustments thus performance is therefore in practice
always variable. As thoroughly explained by Hollnagel [Hollnagel 2008] performance
variability, i.e., the range of result in a function or an overall system’s performance, is
highly dependent on the variability of the conditions under which the system/function
is performing.

Starting from the generic six main sources of human and organisational perfor-
mance variability deﬁned in [Hollnagel 2008], it is possible to identify the following
in the UTS domain:

— Fundamental human physiological and/or psychological characteristics as driving fa-

tigue, vigilance, attention, risk perception of UTS users, etc.

— Pervasive higher level psychological phenomena like adaptability as taking decisions

within UTS knowledge uncertainty.

— Organisational conditions and requirements, as the need to meet external demands,

stretching resources, substituting goals, etc.

— Social or team psychological factors, such as meeting expectations of oneself or of

colleagues, complying with group working standards, etc.

— Context variability: roads conditions are too hot, too noisy, too crowded, etc.
— Environment variability induced by the unpredictability of the domain, e.g., weather

conditions, technical problems, etc.

According to FRAM, performance variability is assessed through the eleven Common
Performance Conditions (CPC), verifying if their performances are stable or variable
but adequate, stable or variable but inadequate, or unpredictable [Hollnagel 2012].
The variability about the way a function is carried out may show itself by the variabil-
ity of its output. Since the results generated in output by a function can affect other
aspects, namely input, precondition, resource, time, or control, of one or more down-
stream functions. Note that, the range of behaviors and effects captured by the output
element is very broad and includes any exchange of matter, energy, or information.
The output can be seen as representing a change of state in the system or in one or
more aspects of downstream functions. But the output can also represent a decision
or a signal that starts a downstream function. Moreover, in complex and non-linear
systems predicting the speciﬁc outcomes of a function can be hard or unmeaning. For
this reason, the literature concentrated on characterizing function variability in term
of performances. The following dimensions, that are a combination of what proposed
in the FRAM Glossary8, are considered relevant in UTS:

— Timing: too early, on time, too late, not at all.
— Duration: too little, too much, right duration.
— Distance: too close, too far, right distance.
— Magnitude: too strong, too weak, right magnitude.
— Speed: too fast, too slow, right speed.
— Force/power/pressure: too high, too low, right force.
— Precision: precise, imprecise, right precision.
— Volume: too much, too little, right volume.
— Costs: cost effective, costly, too much expensive.

8FRAM Glossary - http://functionalresonance.com/a-fram-glossary.html

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:9

In this work, we refer to the performance variability of a single function as Function
Performance Variability (FPV). We also underline that the FPV of upstream functions
may affect the FPV of downstream functions, and thereby lead to non-linear effects
called functional resonance. A resonance phenomenon in physics usually results in a
signiﬁcant increase in the amplitude of the oscillations, which corresponds to a consid-
erable buildup of energy within the stressed system. Similarly, functional resonance
in the system emerges when the variability is spread through the interdependencies
of the system functions causing the ampliﬁcation of the effects until the system loses
its capability to manage variability safely.

Even if the variability in function execution performance can be derived by the vari-
ability of its output, the impact of such a variability over the system cannot be deter-
mined by observing the variability of output values only. In particular, we argue that
it also depends on the variability acceptance supported by the function receiving in-
puts. In fact, the functional resonance effect is triggered by the rest of the variability of
the upstream function output that is not absorbed by the downstream function. More-
over, the impact of variability is then intrinsically associated to relationships coupling
outputs and inputs and can be expressed by the matching between output variabil-
ity and input dumping capacity. This approach extends the current conceptualization
of the FRAM providing a new concept useful for its formalization as discussed in the
subsequent sections.

4. FORMALISING FRAM
In order to develop analytics over a FRAM representation, it is necessary to formalize
the description of the target system. A similar attempt has been done by Cambrensis9
where FRAM has been formalised with a dependency model based on Bayesian Be-
lief Network to quantify functional variability. Such approach presents several advan-
tages. It allows a rigorous formalization and the automatic update of all the relevant
interdependencies among the FRAM functions, iteratively. Even if the variability prop-
agation can be modeled weighting the arcs in the BBN, the basic assumption behind
this approach is that the entire variability of the upstream function output affects the
downstream function performance. This means that any kind of adaptation capable of
dampening input variability exhibited by a function, is not taken into account.

For instance, the human resources usually engaged by a function could be incre-
mented to absorb the arrival delay (variability) of an input in order to produce the
expected output in due time

The instantiation of a FRAM is usually depicted as a directed graph where nodes
represent the functions with their six aspects, taking the shape of a hexagon, and
edges represent qualiﬁed relationships among functions by interconnecting two as-
pects. This representation is essentially oriented to human readability and does not
offer any support to quantitative analysis. In order to improve the current state of the
art in executing quantitative analysis over a FRAM representation we are facing 4
objectives:

— O1. Representing dependencies among functions as well as qualiﬁed relationships.
— O2. Representing the matching between performance variability and damping ca-

pacity intrinsic to relationships.

— O3. Integrating quantitative and perception-based observations.

9http://www.cambrensis.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Systemic-Interdependency-Modelling-GENSIM-
0.1-docx.pdf

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:10

Bellini et al.

— O4. Test our method with a contingency plan by comparing a scenario with IoE and

CC deployed in UTS and a scenario without such technologies.

4.1. Dependability analysis
A typical analysis to be carried out on a FRAM model is related to the identiﬁcation of
the dependencies among functions. The aim is to look at the couplings among functions
in order to identify whether they will lead to unwanted outcomes that may compromise
the process.

In Systems Engineering and Risk Management [Thalmann et al. 2014] Dependabil-
ity is typically estimated by the number of originated errors, using metrics such as
Mean Time To Failure [DeLong et al. 2005]. However, this approach imposes onerous
observations and tests in a posteriori analysis and subjective observations in a priori
analysis. For this reason, we propose to implement a quantitative analysis of the de-
pendencies by representing the connections among functions and relationships using
graph metrics [Hern ´andez and Van Mieghem 2011]. As stated in O1 we do not want to
limit our attention to functions. Several relationships may be originated from a single
function, thus to distinguish them and to measure their position in the graph we need
to include them in the set of nodes considered by our analysis.

The most proper way to represent relationships r ∈ R in a FRAM model is to use
a quadruple r = {o, d, a, qn}, where o ∈ F is the origin or upstream function, d ∈ F
the destination or downstream function, a ∈ A speciﬁes the FRAM aspects involved
in the relationship, while qn ∈ QN ames is a qualiﬁed name for the relationship10.
Note that the triple {o, d, a} does not represent a sufﬁcient condition for identifying
a relationship as multiple links may interconnect two functions along the same as-
pect. In fact, the set of origin functions is included in the set of functions with re-
lationships along the output aspect, or more formally: O ∈ F × A|a = output. Sim-
ilarly, the set of destination functions is included in the set of functions having in-
put, precondition, resource, control or time as aspects, more formally: D ∈ F × A|a ∈
{input, precondition, resource, control, time}.

These notions can be exploited to inspect, with an analytical perspective, the depen-
dencies characterizing a FRAM, using a matrix to encode the graph structure resulting
by the uniﬁcation of the connections between functions and relationships. The simplest
approach is to generate an adjacency matrix of a bipartite graph, i.e., a matrix M that
records the connections between two classes of objects, in our case F and R, such as its
element mi,j ∈ (0, 1), is 1 if i and j are related and 0 if they are not. The properties of
the matrix M can be speciﬁed by stating that

,

(cid:19)

M =

(cid:18) 0f,f B
BT 0r,r
where B is an F ∪ R × F ∪ R matrix, BT is its transpose, and 0f,f and 0r,r represent
the F × F and R × R zero matrices. Moreover, not all possible connections in B and
in BT are allowed because F is the union of two disjoint sets O and D; where, by
deﬁnition, all mi,j with i ∈ D and j ∈ R or i ∈ R and j ∈ O are equal to 0. For
example, if we know that the output of function F 13 gives input to function F 14 with
a relationship named User Behavior, we can express the following by encoding two
connections: F13 → F13:UserBehavior:F14:Input and F13:UserBehavior:F14:Input →
F14. The resulting network has been weighted according to the importance of the
relationship in the system. The weights assignment task has been conducted within
the RESOLUTE project translating workshops and stakeholders interviews with Civil

10For a deﬁnition of QN ames we refer the reader to [Weik 2000]

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:11

Protection and City Council managers, ﬁreﬁghters and citizens.

The union of these connections provides us with a graph. A broad variety of
measures to characterise graphs are exploited in several scientiﬁc domains [Scott
2012]. The ratio between the number of vertices and edges reveals the Sparsity of
a graph. The Clustering Coefﬁcient is a measure of the degree to which nodes tend
to cluster together. Node Centrality gives a measure of how central in the overall
graph a node is. The method we adopted to quantify dependability of FRAM model
is the Degree Prestige (DP) index [Freeman 1979], a metric accounting the number
of inward connections entering in a node. We claim this is the right choice, because
in FRAM a) the number of connections (explicit), b) the importance of connections
(implicit), c) the direction of the relations (explicit) are critical elements characterizing
the functions identiﬁed. Thus using a weighted and directed graph DP is the sum of
weights of all connections ending at a given node, where nodes with higher DP are
considered more prominent among others because they receive more inbound “heavy”
connections. The largest the index is, the more prestigious/important the node is.
Clearly, other approaches can be followed. For instance, Closeness Centrality measures
node centrality by considering the geodesic distances a node has with all the other
nodes of the graph; the Betweenness Centrality is calculated based on the number
of shortest paths that pass through a node [Brandes 2001]. However, as stated in
[Borgatti 2005], the importance of a node in a network cannot be determined without
reference to how trafﬁc or information ﬂows through the network. For example, in a
package delivery process, the essence of closeness is time-until-arrival, in contrast,
the essence of betweenness is frequency of arrival. These interpretations do not seem
to be able to represent the FRAM characteristics properly, where peripheral nodes
may also result critical.
Figure 3 shows the graph obtained by encoding the FRAM speciﬁed in Table V and
Table VI available in the Appendix and ordering nodes in concentric range based on
their DP value. In Tables VII and VIII, node values are listed in decreasing order
and we can observe that the functions exposing the highest values are F2:Coordinate
service delivery, F16: Manage awareness and human behavior, F1: Delivery service,
F24:Collect event information and F6: Coordinate emergency action.

It is worth to notice that function F 16, that is devoted to managing community
behavior and awareness is considered one of the most critical in the network. Such a
result is not unexpected and conﬁrms and formalizes what the stakeholder thoughts
and the FRAM model are able to expresses only implicitly. Moreover, the DP centrality
approach is able to represent the FRAM background functions11 assigning 0 to the DP
index.
Regarding the relations affecting connected communities let us focus our attention
on: R106 (F13:User Behavior:F14:Input), R107 (F13:User Feedback:F14:Input), R108
(F14:User Behavior data:F16:Resources), R109 (F14:User generated critical event
detection:F2:Input), R110 (F14:User generated critical event detection:F6:Input),
R108 (F14:User generated service improvement suggestions:F24:Input); the analysis
revels that R106, R107, R107 belong to the most important group, characterised by
a DP equal to 0,64935; while the nodes R109 and R110 belongs to the second most
important group, with DP equal to 0,58442, as reported in Table VIII.

This analysis reveals that people-community related issues represent a critical
aspect of the UTS resilience management. In fact, if the variability of the outputs of

11FRAM Glossary - http://functionalresonance.com/a-fram-glossary.html

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:12

Bellini et al.

Fig. 3. A graph Gf,r,m ordering nodes in concentric ranges based on their DP value.

those functions are exceeding the dampen capacity of the downstream functions, such
variability surplus is propagated in the system exhibiting a resonance behavior that
can be preparatory for a disaster. It is then clear that exploiting the IoE technologies
enhances the capacity of such functions of damping the performance variability that
can be generated by information delivery delay, misunderstandings, etc. The IoE
adoption may speed up the co-production and the dissemination of information within
the CCs (e.g. created during an emergency) and between these CCs and the ﬁrst
responders.

To reduce the size and complexity of the graph, one may also consider aggregating
connections insisting on the same dimension, for instance, all the connections with the
same origin function and destination function insisting on the same FRAM parame-
ter. To manage size reduction consistently, standard approaches for multidimensional
data such as OLAP Cubes [Ciferri et al. 2013] may be implemented, but ad hoc projec-

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:13

tion operators accounting data aggregation with a domain speciﬁc approach are also
possible [Markines et al. 2009].

5. QUANTIFY FUNCTIONAL VARIABILITY
As previously discussed, in FRAM several dimensions with qualitative degrees are
characterizing the FPV. However, even considering invariant the FPV of an origin
function, the impact of this variability on the resonance vary based on the dampening
capacity of the destination function. As stated in O2, quantify such an impact is
crucial. The current approaches do not offer any method to compare FPV over the
capacity of the downstream functions of continuing to operate within normal vari-
ability in the face of varied inputs. Thus, we deﬁne the function dampening capacity
(FDC) of a function F as the capability of F , in a certain context, of absorbing the
variability of the incoming input I (changing conditions) maintaining its output O
within acceptable/expected variability.
We also argue that the factors composing the FDC index are the four properties con-
sidered for resilience assessment at system level (buffer capacity, ﬂexibility, margin
and tolerance) and introduced in [Woltjer 2006]. Hence, the FDC in a certain instant t
for a speciﬁc input i is given by its function buffer capacities (FBC), function ﬂexibility
(FF), function margin (FM) and function tolerance (FT). However, in which degree
those functions contribute to the FDC require further analysis and will be matter of
next researches.

The formalisation we are proposing in this paper is aimed at quantifying the amount
of FPV in upstream exceeding the FDC of a downstream function. In particular, we
call this matching the Variability Rate (VR). The VR expresses the amount of input
variability dampened or absorbed by the downstream function avoiding effects on its
subsequent outputs.

5.1. Variability Rate
A naif solution to quantitatively measure FDC is to interpret it as the inverse of a cor-
relation. We compare the distribution of the performances of two connected functions
along with a speciﬁc dimension. If we observe a correlation this can be considered a
clue for an ampliﬁcation effect on the downstream function, generated by the upstream
function. Thus we have to consider that the downstream function has poor FDC. For
example, in Table I we list the performances of the output of functions F15, F2, and
F6, measured on the timing dimension, using delay, expressed in hours, as value. Note
that F 15 is the upstream function of both F 2 and F 6. The Pearson correlation coefﬁ-
cient for F 15 and F 2 is 0.905 while for F 15 and F 6 is −0.153. Thus we could conclude
that F 6 has a good FDC while F 2 has not.

Function Performances

F15: Manage ﬁnan-
cial affaire

F2: Coordinate ser-
vice delivery

F6: Coordinate emer-
gency action

0

0

1

24

36

168 24

24

24

36

72

1

1

24

96

2

1

0

3

1

1

2

1

3

1

2

2

0

2

2

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:14

Bellini et al.

Table I: Performances of functions F15, F2, and F6 using delay
in hours as value.

This approach is, however, too much inﬂuenced by the internal variability of a func-
tion. As a matter of fact, our purpose is not accounting the variability in general but
the variability generated by those performances that bring the function outside a mar-
gin of regular operation. This means we are not interested in accounting those perfor-
mances that are within the margin.

The approach we are proposing is centred around the idea of computing how much
a speciﬁc performance is differing form an expected value and comparing this value
to the margin that delimits regular performances. Formally this can be deﬁned as in
Equation 1, where dev is the deviation, x the observed performance, e is the expected or
more representative performance value and m the margin of regular operation. When
this fraction ranges in the interval [−1, 1] the difference between the observed and the
expected value is within the margin. Note that e and m could be deﬁned as constant
values or as the result of a function, for example, in a pawer low distribution, m cloud
be obtained by a function of e.

dev =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(x − e)
m

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(1)

If we use the mean value as e and the standard deviation as m, our dev is equivalent
to the z-score. Clearly, the assumption of normal distribution required by the z-score
is too restrictive for complex systems such as the UTS. In Table II we computed the
deviations of F15, F2 and F6 using two different approaches. In deva we use the median
value as e and the median absolute deviation12 as m, because the median is more robust
than the mean to bias in skewed distributions. While in devb we use ad-hoc thresholds:
in particular, 0 as e and 24 as m for F 15 or 1 as m for F 2 and F 6. For example, when
the delay of F 2 is 24 hours, because the median value of the series of observations is 2
and the median absolute deviation is 1, deva = (24−2)

1 = 22.

deva

F15: Manage ﬁnan-
cial affaire

F2: Coordinate ser-
vice delivery

F6: Coordinate emer-
gency action

devb

F15: Manage ﬁnan-
cial affaire

F2: Coordinate ser-
vice delivery

2

2

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

12

22

94

1

0

1.5 7

24

96

0

2

2

1

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

2

1

1

0

4

0

1

1.5 3

3

2

2

0

1

0

2

12The median absolute deviation of a series of observations is the median value of all the absolute de-
viations of each observation from the median value of the series. Formally this can be expressed as
mad = median((cid:83)n

|Xi − median(X)|).

i

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:15

F6: Coordinate emer-
gency action

1

1

2

1

3

1

1

1

2

2

Table II: Performances deviation for F15, F2, and F6, using
deva and devb.

Using performance deviations we can now compute the FPV of an upstream function
and the FDC of a downstream function, we can then quantify a matching between them
to measure the VR.

Since the variability of a function is exhibited in its output variability, the evaluation
of the FDC of a downstream function can be performed by evaluating the variability of
its output in relation to the variability of the input received.

In particular, if the function has received inputs with a certain level of variabil-
ity and the output of the function exhibits the same or increased level of variability,
this means that the current FDC of the function was not enough to dampen incoming
variability. The result is the variability propagation effect in the system that is called
functional resonance in FRAM. Formally, we compute FPV as in Equation 2, where
[1, ..., n] is the set of observations considered, i.e. distinct executions of the process.
While FDC is given by summing the differences between deviations of the upstream
and downstream functions for the same observation, referred as origin function (O)
and destination function (D) in Equation 3. The percentage of VR on a pair upstream,
downstream function is then calculated as the ratio deﬁned in Equation 4.

F P V (F ) =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

devi | devi ≥ 1.

F DC(D|O : q) =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

devO,i − devD,i | devO,i ≥ 1.

%V RO,D =

F DC(D|O)
F P V (O)

· 100.

(2)

(3)

(4)

For example, as the F P Vdeva (F 15) is 22 and the F DCdeva (F 2|F 15) is −76, then
the V Rdeva (F 15, F 2) we observe is −345%, indicating that the dumping capacity
is negative, or, in other words, we have an ampliﬁcation. On the contrary, the
F DCdeva (F 6|F 15) is 18, then the V Rdeva (F 15, F 6) we observe is 81%, indicating that
F 6 can operate regularly even in presence of delays on F 15. Note that these re-
sults are very much inﬂuenced by the margin of regular operation chosen, the e
and m values in Equation 1. For example, we have V Rdevb (F 15, F 2) = −658% and
V Rdevb (F 15, F 6) = 41%. However, it is also clear that the same orientation, in terms
of positive or negative dumping capacity, is returned with different speciﬁcation of
Equation 1.

In order to visually represent the V R as a ratio between F DC and F P V , we propose
to exploit an adjacency matrix, i.e. a square matrix such that its element mi,j is repre-
senting a relationship among two objects of the same class P ; having the same set of
objects encoded in both the rows and the columns of the matrix. This implies that the
relationships encoded in an element mi,j are directed from the object pi to the object
pj, while the inverse relationship, directed from pj to pi, is encoded in the element mj,i.
Let us, for example, encode in a square matrix the relationships in O ∪ D, i.e., the
set of origin and destination functions. Using a Chord Diagram [Holten 2006], we can

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:16

Bellini et al.

Fig. 4. A Chord Diagram illustrating the VR characterising each relationships in O ∪ D.

display the relationships encoded in the matrix drawing arcs connecting the objects in
O ∪ D arranged radially around a circle. This approach is particularly appreciated by
the end user as the radial order allows to estimate the global inter-connection density
of the system as well as to explore each single relationship within a compact space.

Figure 4 illustrates the Chord Diagram that describes the FRAM speciﬁed in Table
V and Table VI. Note that this diagram allows interactive selection of relationships, to
visualize their VR ratio, as illustrated in Figure 5.

5.2. Encoding FRAM Variability Observations with fuzzy logic
It is worth to notice that the FPV of a function is the result of multiple observations,
possibly generated from different sources, where different encoding procedures may
be applied. In many situations, it is naive to believe deriving the VR based on pure
quantitative measurements. Hence, we propose to integrate the method described in
Section 5.1 with subjective reviews, using perception based deﬁnitions, as requested
by O3. The idea is that: when a quantitative value is not available, this value may be
determined through the collection of a set of perception based valuations from domain

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:17

Fig. 5.

Interacting with the Chord Diagram to observe the VR characterising a speciﬁc relationship.

experts. The imprecise nature of this kind of information is mitigated by focusing on
the most representative opinion.

Many models are available for representing uncertain knowledge [Damiani et al.
2009]. In order to clarify the notion of uncertainty, it is important to distinguish be-
tween degrees of truth and degrees of uncertainty in the information. A degree of truth
can be deﬁned as the degree of compatibility between a statement and a fact. The un-
certainty of a statement arises when there is no sufﬁcient information to decide if a
statement is true or false. In our study, the problem we want to resolve is related to
the identiﬁcation of a representative majority, the strength of this majority and the
valuation reﬂecting the judgment of the majority [Ceravolo et al. 2007]. The typical
approach is to compute a value which synthesizes the opinion of the experts involved
in the evaluation, but because different majorities are possible, we prefer to consider
all of them, weighting their relevance based on how close they are to our idea of a full
majority. In other words, we need to express degrees of truth. A formal method to deal
with it is offered by Fuzzy Logic [Klir and Yuan 1995], which has been largely exploited
for aggregating opinions [Herrera-Viedma et al. 2014], votes [Ceravolo et al. 2005] or
imprecise information [Herrera and Herrera-Viedma 1997], in general. In classical set
theory, the characteristic function of a set E ⊆ D is a function assigning 1 or 0 to each
element of the domain D, depending on whether the element is in the subset E or not.
In Fuzzy Logic, the characteristic function of a set µE returns for each element in the
domain D a value ω in the interval [0, 1], which represents the grade of membership
of this element in E. Fuzzy sets can be used to partition the distribution of a variable
in ranges corresponding to perception-based quantiﬁers, for instance Very low, Low,
Average, High, Very High. These concepts, usually referred as linguistic variables, are

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:18

Bellini et al.

exploited during reasoning to transform perception based observations into member-
ship degrees.

To provide a formal framework to address this problem we adapted the approach
followed in [Pasi and Yager 2003]. The general idea is to interpret the representative
majority no longer as a single value, but as a fuzzy set. This fuzzy set includes all the
possible subsets representatives of a majority within the collection of values expressing
all the valuations. This require for the identiﬁcation of both the strength of a majority
and the synthesized value expressed by this majority.

Once multiple observations from experts are gathers in a bag of valuations E =
{e1, ..., en}, we are requested to deﬁne a characteristic function for identifying similar
values. For example, asking that two values ei and ej are similar if their difference
δ is not too far from a point of realisation (cid:15). Let us call S the characteristic function
implementing this idea. The input of this function is δ
(cid:15) , this value is accounted as
the intensity of the similarity, in the interval [0, 1], except for values > γ, an upper
bound, that are accounted as 0, as illustrated in Figure 6. Note that S is not a proper
similarity as it is symmetric but not transitive, nevertheless this approach offers a
very simple test condition. Another requirement is we deﬁne a characteristic function
M for identifying a majority. This function evaluates the cardinality of a subset Xi ⊆ E
to deﬁne how intensively it can be considered a majority. M has a lower bound ζ that
deﬁnes subsets we cannot consider a majority, moreover, it deﬁnes the intensity of a
majority by computing |X|
|E| , as illustrated in Figure 6. Now we can identify a majority
if Xi contains elements that are similar and its cardinality satisﬁes our idea of being
a majority. Let us formalise this notion by stating that a subset Xi ⊆ E is a majority
with degree deﬁned by a function M aj(Xi), where:

(5)
M aj(Xi) = min(M(Xi), S(Xi)), with S(Xi) = M inei,ej ∈Xi[S(ei, ej)].
To consider all subsets of E we have to generate the power set of E, i.e. we have
to consider 2|E| subsets. The intrinsic complexity of this approach may seem exces-
sive, however note that the characteristic functions S and M act as ﬁlters for several
subsets that are discarded. Let us, for example, consider the following bag of opinions
where values are drawn from a scale from 0 to 10:

(6)
E = {1, 4, 4, 5, 6}.
We have 25 = 32 subsets. Nevertheless, taking as M the characteristic function
illustrated in Figure 6 all subsets with two elements are discarded because |X|
|E| < 0.4.
Moreover, shaping S as illustrated in Figure 6, any subset having any of its elements
with a difference ≥ 3 is also discarded13.

Thus the following are the only subsets for which M aj(Xi) (cid:54)= 0 : X1 = {4, 4, 5}, X2 =
{4, 4, 6}, X3 = {4, 5, 6}, X4 = {4, 5, 6}, X5 = {4, 4, 5, 6}. As illustrated in Table III, we
can now compute M ajop(Xi), i.e. the intensity of a majority, for each of them. The next
step is computing the opinion expressed by each majority that we deﬁne as Op(Xi) =
AV Gj(xj ∈ Xi), i.e. the value averaging the opinions expressed in a majority. Based
on M aj(Xi) we can weights Op(Xi). We deﬁne the weight of each majority as W (Xi),
which is computed as:

W (Xi) =

M aj(Xi)
Xj ⊆E M aj(Xj)

(cid:80)

.

(7)

13When the distance equals to 3 or more, δ

(cid:15) is over γ.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:19

Where (cid:80)

W (Xi) = 1. Now, the most representative value for E can be computed
as a weighted mean of the values expressed by each majority in Xi ⊆ E. For example,

Xi

M ajop(E) =

(cid:88)

Xi

W (Xi) × Op(Xi)

(8)

Then, following our example, the proposed methodology determines the most repre-
sentative value in E as 4.75, formally this is written as: M ajOp(E) = 4.75. The method
we presented can be applied to any value that is relevant for evaluating the FRAM. In
Section 6 we are using this method to evaluate the Z-score characterising the FDC of
the relationships analysed in the scenario we investigated.

Xi
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
M ajOp(E)

S(Xi)
0.99

0.66

0.66

0.66

0.66

4.75

M(Xi)
0.66

0.66

0.66

0.66

1

Maj(Xi)
0.66

0.66

0.66

0.66

0.66

Op(Xi)
4.33

4.66

5

5

4.75

W(Xi)
0.22

0.22

0.22

0.22

0.22

Table III: Main steps required to compute M ajOp(E)

Fig. 6. The characteristic functions M(X) and S(X).

6. CASE STUDY
In emergency it is very important to manage CC behaviors effectively in order to re-
duce the impact generated also by wrong decisions. To this end the UTS needs to prop-
erly address the community related system functions as: F16: Manage awareness and
user behavior .

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:20

Bellini et al.

In this scenario, it is necessary to support community members in taking right de-
cisions for their safety while addressing their mobility goals. The methodology consid-
ered in RESOLUTE is inspired by Bungay’s Directed Opportunism approach [Bungay
2010] since it represents the main shift of the strategy, from centralised “command and
Control” to “Mission Control” and it can be considered more appropriate to support the
community self-resilience. The Bungay’s approach is a control loop composed by Out-
come (e.g. reduction of the car presence in the affected area through redirection of the
trafﬁc ﬂow towards other part of the road network), Plans (e.g. application of rerouting
strategy), Actions (e.g. sets of trafﬁc lights cycle, close streets, send recommendation
message to city panels) steps. The objective of the approach is to left people free to
take opportunistic decisions exploiting their local knowledge that is considered more
accurate respect to the centralised one. However, to guarantee that such decisions are
actually appropriate to the actual condition, the following gaps need to be crossed:

(1) Knowledge Gap: the delta between what we would like to know and what we

actually know.

(2) Alignment Gap: the difference between what we want people to do and what they

actually do.

(3) Effects Gap: the difference between the expected and the actual results of our

actions.

When these gaps are encountered, the intuitive response is to seek increasing the
control on these areas by gathering more detailed information, providing more detailed
instruction, and installing tighter controls. These intuitive responses typically have
the opposite effect of their intent, creating greater confusion and entropy. In fact, in
order to reduce these gaps it is necessary to apply the following actions:

(1) Do not command more than is necessary or plan beyond the circumstances you can

foresee (Knowledge gap).

(2) Communicate to every one as much of the higher intent as is necessary to achieve

the purpose (Alignment gap).

(3) Being sure everyone is empowered to make decisions within bounds (Effects gap).

The data used for the analysis are directly derived by the 1st RESOLUTE stake-
holder workshops held in Florence in December 2015, where several scenarios were
analyzed (water bomb/ﬂash ﬂooding, large yard, river ﬂooding, car accidents, etc.).
For use case addressed in the present work, we take into account the ﬂash ﬂooding
extreme event. This kind of event is charactersied by sudden, unpredictable and lo-
calised (radius of few kilometers) extreme heavy rain that is capable to badly affect
UTS operations (cars speed reduction/ blocked, car accidents for reduced visibility or
roads grip, fall trees, trafﬁc lights out of order, underpasses ﬂooded, etc.) in a speciﬁc
part of a city.

This scenario is assessed considering cases in which: a) an UTS where the IoE and
Connected Community are integrated in the system, and b) an UTS where such fa-
cilities are not exploited. In particular, as we explained, the IoE and Connected Com-
munity emerging concepts consider the people part of the system (e.g., Smart City). In
this system, the people can be considered as always connected through their personal
devices to informal, ﬂuid and/or thematic communities exploiting different communi-
cation infrastructures (e.g. city free wiﬁ or 4G/LTE).

This assumption is justiﬁed by the existence of WAN communication infrastructures
with several overlaps (e.g., LoRaWAN) that are able to guarantee connectivity also in
case of disaster. On the other hand, it is evident that in case of extreme disruption
where all the communication and electrical infrastructures are damaged, the IoE and
CC facilities cannot be exploited until such infrastructures have been restored.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:21

The people want to access tailored and context aware data and services and stay in
contact with the other community members every time everywhere to exchange infor-
mation, suggestions, to share their opportunistic decisions, etc.. During the emergency
such connections can be exploited to alert ﬁrst responders about the position of the dis-
aster, or can be used by the authorities to send personalized messages according to the
4R approach (right person at right time, in the right place, through the right channel)
or generic messages for the entire community to speed up the dissemination of critical
information. In the following tables, two scenarios mapped to the UTS FRAM function
relations affected, are reported.

Gap

Knowledge,
Effects
Gap

Relations

Standard Scenario

CC Scenario

F13:User
Behav-
ior:F14:input

User as a sensor concept
peo-
allow
real-time
ple movement
tracking
through 3/4G, Public Wiﬁ,
bluetooth, etc. Positions,
trajectories
velocities,
can be calculated and
predicted in close to real-
time. Such information
can be shared with multi
decision makers through
Providing
dashboards.
personalised
real-time
and contextualised infor-
mation and suggestions,
allows people to take a
decisions in due time (e.g.
avoiding trafﬁc jam if the
driver is arriving in the
[C. Badii
affected area)
2017].

signals
User behaviors
basically
captured
are
by
security/surveillance
video systems with limits
in view extensions, mass
people
quantiﬁcation,
and direction,
velocity
processing,
information
sharing capability,
etc.
During a water bomb peo-
ple tends to reduce the
speed up to block the local
variability. Such event
is very difﬁcult
to be
propagated to the other
drivers that are reach-
ing the same area, thus
they will be surprised
by the event even if they
after.
arrive minutes
In order to escape from
the trafﬁc jam, people
tends to broke roads rules
reverse
with U turns,
gear, double parking, etc.
People tends
to apply
heuristics combined with
local knowledge and risk
perception to continue of
addressing their move-
ment objectives (e.g., go
back home from work).

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Bellini et al.

Effect

Knowledge,
Align-
ment

People can post pictures
and videos of a critical
events on social networks
in real-time with a im-
pressive
dissemination
capability. Applications
like WhatsApp,
Tele-
gram or XMPP allow
instant multimedia mes-
saging with groups and
communities.

IoE and CC allow the pos-
sibility to deliver maps
of people behaviors in-
tegrating different chan-
nels from social networks
(georeferenced Tweets of
pictures in Flickr), GPS
signals from always con-
nected smart devices, etc.

39:22

F13:User feed-
back:F14:input

F14:User
behavior
data:F16:input

People communicate with
authorities or UTS opera-
tors through call centres,
email or directly with the
transport employees (e.g.
bus drivers). Such chan-
nels are basically used for
caring.

Data about people behav-
ior and movement are
usually derived from slow
dynamic data like sea-
sonality of touristic vis-
its, daily trafﬁc pressure
for work entrance/exit,
etc. Such data are indi-
cators that are useful for
risk assessment while for
real-time emergency deci-
sions (e.g. directing ﬁrst
responders in a speciﬁc
area) more dynamic and
fresh information are nec-
essary.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:23

Knowledge

The possibility of
tak-
ing and sharing pictures,
videos, voice and text
messages in real-time im-
prove the quality of the
information and the event
understanding.

F14:User gen-
erated critical
event
detec-
tion:F6:input
F14:User gen-
erated critical
event
detec-
tion:F2:input

alert ﬁrst

emergency
During the
people
re-
sponders about a critical
event basically through
telephone call, but mis-
understandings,
partial
descriptions of the sce-
nario, wrong perception
given by stressful situa-
tion, language gaps, etc.
impact on the precision
of
the description and
thus on the effectiveness
of the emergency action.
Moreover, in Italy there
emergency
are
numbers
(113- Police,
115
Ambulance,
118
Fire brigades, etc.) that
people can call
for an
emergency. This fragmen-
tation determine multiple
calls for the same event
increasing the noise.

several

F14:User
generated
service
im-
provement sug-
gestions:F24

Improvements are basi-
cally driven by post-event
accident analysis and it is
carried out by experts in
the ﬁeld without any par-
ticipatory approach.

Knowledge

Opening a direct digital
channel towards the user-
s/citizens to collect their
suggestions improve the
understandability of the
system usage and percep-
tion. Sentiment, cluster-
ing and statistical anal-
ysis on such a database
can extract unexpected
knowledge.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Bellini et al.

the right

The capability of exploit-
ing smart devices as a
personal end point
to
communicate the right
message to the right per-
son at
time
through the right chan-
nel - The 4R approach -
represents a relevant im-
provement offered by IoE
to enhance UTS resilience
addressing the human-
social side.

39:24

F16:User
generated
service
im-
provement sug-
gestions:F13

Authorities
and UTS
have a very partial idea
in which place and what
the people are doing when
a critical event happen.
Information is spread in
broadcast using massive
and pre registered tele-
phone calls (if the people
is registered to alerting
service),
megaphone,
Tv and radio channels,
variable message panels,
etc.. The messages are
usually synthetic with
very few information and
reach the intent
is to
reach more people as pos-
sible without any ﬁlter.
Generally, people that are
not prepared to cope with
they
emergency,
tend to react according to
their heuristics, emotion,
past
local
experience,
knowledge, etc. with an
high level of uncertainty
(e.g. people that try to
save the car in the box
during the ﬂooding).

thus

Table IV: Relationships under investigation in the RESOLUTE
case study.

6.1. Quantitative development of the case study
To develop a quantitative evaluation about the impact of migrating a system into a
CC scenario we applied the methodology described in Section 5.2.

The ﬁrst step foresees the collection of the VR assessment provided by the experts.
In fact, the FRAM is basically a qualitative method, the VR can be evaluated
looking at the expert judgment in input about the variability of function F and the
expert judgment about the variability of its subsequent output. Since, such linguistic
variables express a variability range, the estimation of VR provided by the experts
for each relations, can vary from one function to another even if the input and output
variability judgments are similar. For instance, if the timing variability in input of a
function F is evaluated as “too late” and the variability of F output is evaluated as “in
time”, this does not mean that the VR estimated by the expert for F , should be equal to
another function G that has the same input and output variability judgments. In fact,
VR estimation of a function F should take into account its function buffer capacities
(FBC), function ﬂexibility (FF), function margin (FM) and function tolerance (FT).

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:25

This means that, even if F output is judged “in time”, the VR estimation is inﬂuenced
by the assessment of the function aspects status at the instant t considered. The VR
estimation provided by 8 local experts (that has been selected carefully of the bases
of their experience and decision level), against the ﬂash ﬂooding analysis in Florence
is a number from 0 to 10 representing the VR percentage (for instance 1= 10%).
The M ajOp(E) value is calculated based on the membership functions illustrated in
Figure 6.

F13:User Behavior:F14:input

Standard Scenario: E = {1, 0, 2, 2, 4, 5, 2, 2}; M ajOp(E) = 1.15; V R = 11.5%
CC Scenario: ECC = {9, 8, 9, 7, 9, 8, 7, 7}; M ajOp(ECC) = 8; V R = 80%

F13:User feedback):F14:input

Standard Scenario: E = {1, 0, 2, 2, 1, 0, 4, 2}; M ajOp(E) = 1.15; V R = 11.5%
CC Scenario: ECC = {9, 6, 6, 9, 8, 5, 6, 7}; M ajOp(ECC) = 6.4; V R = 64%

F14:User behavior data:F16:resources

Standard Scenario: E = {1, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 2, 2}; M ajOp(E) = 0.87; V R = 8.7%
CC Scenario: ECC = {10, 10, 10, 9, 10, 9, 9, 10}; M ajOp(ECC) = 9.62; V R = 96.2%

F14:User generated critical event detection:F6:input

F14:User generated critical event detection):F2:input

Standard Scenario: E = {5, 4, 6, 2, 4, 5, 3, 6}; M ajOp(E) = 4.82; V R = 48.2%
CC Scenario: ECC = {10, 10, 9, 9, 8, 10, 10, 6}; M ajOp(ECC) = 9; V R = 90%

F14:User generated service improvement suggestions:F24:input

Standard Scenario: E = {2, 0, 2, 0, 1, 2, 1, 2}; M ajOp(E) = 1.25; V R = 12.5%
CC Scenario: ECC = {6, 6, 7, 8, 6, 5, 7, 7}; M ajOp(ECC) = 6.5; V R = 65%

F16:Warnings -Alerts:F13:resources

Standard Scenario: E = {1, 0, 2, 2, 4, 5, 2, 2}; M ajOp(E) = 1.65; V R = 16.5%
CC Scenario: ECC = {10, 10, 10, 9, 10, 10, 9, 10}; M ajOp(ECC) = 9.75; V R = 97.5%

F16:Advice - Recommendation Alert:F13:resources

Standard Scenario: E = {1, 1, 3, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1}; M ajOp(E) = 0.99; V R = 9.9%
CC Scenario: ECC = {10, 10, 10, 9, 10, 9, 9, 10}; M ajOp(ECC) = 9.62; V R = 96.2%

The results show that, according the expert judgments, the percentage of the vari-
ability that can be potentially absorbed by the functions with the CC and IoE tech-
nologies, is signiﬁcantly higher respect to the same functions that operate without
such facilities (standard scenario). This means that thanks to the introduction of such
new technologies the capacity to manage people and community during the emergency
is inherently enhanced and the propagation of variability in the system is prevented
or mitigated. In fact, VR is inﬂuenced by the FDC as well as the Output variability
distribution. The VR score may result high also when the Output variability of the up-

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:26

Bellini et al.

stream is signiﬁcantly reduced given the FDC of the downstream function. This could
happen for instance when the communication processes managed by F16 becomes per-
vasive, ubiquitous and personalized thanks to the IoE and CC technologies. Thus the
contribution of the CC and IoE is twofold: a) on FDC enhancement and b) on Output
variability reduction. In this perspective, the evidence shows that introducing IoE and
CC to enhance resilience in UTS represents an option whose beneﬁts value from 6 to
8 times the VR increment.

7. CONCLUSIONS
Connected Communities and the related enabling technologies (Personal Smart De-
vices, multiple communication networks as WiFi, Bluetooth, LTE, Smart Sensors, etc.)
set the scene of a new class of emergency and decision support systems based on knowl-
edge, real-time situational awareness and personalised communication. In the present
article, the Connected Community concept has been applied to the UTS resilience sce-
nario to demonstrate the capability of such a concept in addressing the human-social
side of the emergency in a more effective way, enhancing the resilience of the sys-
tem as a whole. To this end, we started from the RESOLUTE Resilience Management
Guidelines, where a Critical Infrastructure reference model based on FRAM has been
proposed. Then we have developed a new method to analyse and quantify function’s
variability as a method to move towards resilience quantiﬁcation. The application of a
network science approach to the FRAM model, has revealed what are the most critical
functions in the system, while a method based on deviation score, was used to deﬁne
the general principle for variability quantiﬁcation. Since in FRAM the assessment is
based on qualitative judgment, a fuzzy logic based method was proposed to translate
perception based observations into a quantiﬁcation of the VR. In particular, a fuzzy
notion of majority was adopted to guarantee a representative value. A scenario from
those explored in RESOLUTE project, the water bomb, offered us the opportunity to
compare and quantify the variability of those functions devoted to manage community
aspects in UTS, considering two different contexts: where CC and IoE are deployed
and where they are not (standard situation).
The outcomes obtained from the expert judgments on VR estimation reveal a remark-
able differences between the two cases. This result shows that a technological upgrade
of the UTS community-related functions towards the IoE and CC, would have an im-
pact on the system resilience as a whole. In fact, such a VR enhancement in a speciﬁc
connection between two functions, may act as an adaptive levee through the reduc-
tion of output variability of the upstream function or the enhancement of the damping
capacity of the downstream function. Thus, the propagation of the variability in the
system through function interdependencies that may trigger the resonance effect is
prevented or mitigated within a threshold of acceptance.

We can conclude that the introduction of IoE and CC in UTS domain allows for the
implementation of the next generation decision support systems, able to gather any
kind of data generated by smart cities. The possibility of knowing where people are
situated in a speciﬁc moment, their direction, velocity, and concentration, as well as,
the possibility to reach them collectively or personally, in every time, everywhere, with
tailored information, enhances the effectiveness of respond and recovery actions dur-
ing emergencies. Nevertheless, the assessment of the global properties of a system,
such as resilience, asks for the consistent integration of quantitative and perception
based evaluations. Future researches will focus on these aspects by investigating al-
ternative formalizations of the FDC, the quantiﬁcation of the effects of mechanisms
to simulate the variability propagation within the system, the development of a deci-
sion support system able to predict and provide recommendations on optimal resource
allocation and technology upgrade to enhance VR in critical interdependencies.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:27

Acknowledgement
This work has been supported by the RESOLUTE project (www.RESOLUTE-eu.org)
and has been funded within the European Commission H2020 Programme under con-
tract number 653460. This paper expresses the opinions of the authors and not neces-
sarily those of the European Commission. The European Commission is not liable for
any use that may be made of the information contained in this paper.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:28

References

Bellini et al.

Marco Bartolozzi, Pierfrancesco Bellini, Paolo Nesi, Gianni Pantaleo, and Luca Santi. 2015. A Smart De-
cision Support System for Smart City. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Smart City/Social-
Com/SustainCom (SmartCity). IEEE, 117–122.

E. Bellini, P. Nesi, P. Ferreira, A. Simoes, and E. Candelieri, A.and Gaitanidou. 2016. Towards resilience
operationalization in Urban Transport System: the RESOLUTE project approach. ESREL.. In European
Safety and Reliability Conference ESREL.

Pierfrancesco Bellini, Monica Benigni, Riccardo Billero, Paolo Nesi, and Nadia Rauch. 2014. Km4city on-
tology building vs data harvesting and cleaning for smart-city services. Journal of Visual Languages &
Computing 25, 6 (2014), 827–839.

Comfort L. Demchak C. Boin, A. 2010. The rise of resilience. In Designing Resilience: Preparing for Extreme

Events. The University of Pittsburgh Press.

Stephen P Borgatti. 2005. Centrality and network ﬂow. Social networks 27, 1 (2005), 55–71.
Ulrik Brandes. 2001. A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality*. Journal of mathematical sociology 25,

2 (2001), 163–177.

S. Bungay. 2010. The Art of Action: How Leaders close the gaps between Plans, Actions and Results. Nicolas

Brealey Publising.

D. Cenni A. Diﬁno P. Nesi M. Paolucci C. Badii, P. Bellini. 2017. Analysis and Assessment of a Knowledge
Based Smart City Architecture Providing Service APIs. Future Generation Computer Systems - (2017).
Paolo Ceravolo, Ernesto Damiani, and Marco Viviani. 2005. Adding a peer-to-peer trust layer to metadata
generators. In OTM Confederated International Conferences” On the Move to Meaningful Internet Sys-
tems. Springer, 809–815.

Paolo Ceravolo, Ernesto Damiani, and Marco Viviani. 2007. Bottom-up extraction and trust-based reﬁne-
ment of ontology metadata. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19, 2 (2007).
Cristina Ciferri, Ricardo Ciferri, Leticia G´omez, Markus Schneider, Alejandro Vaisman, and Esteban
Zim ´anyi. 2013. Cube algebra: a generic user-centric model and query language for OLAP cubes. In-
ternational Journal of Data Warehousing and Mining (IJDWM) 9, 2 (2013), 39–65.

Ernesto Damiani, Paolo Ceravolo, and Marcello Leida. 2009. A toward framework for generic uncertainty
management. In Proceedings of the International Fuzzy Systems Association World Congress and Euro-
pean Society for Fuzzy Logic and Technology Conference, IFSA-EUSFLAT. International Fuzzy Systems
Association, 1169–1176.

Todd A. DeLong, D. Todd Smith, and Barry W. Johnson. 2005. Dependability metrics to assess safety-critical

systems. Reliability, IEEE Transactions on 54, 3 (2005), 498–505.

Magiswary Dorasamy, Murali Raman, and Maniam Kaliannan. 2013. Knowledge management systems in
support of disasters management: A two decade review. Technological Forecasting and Social Change
80, 9 (2013), 1834–1853.

Christopher B Field. 2012. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change
adaptation: special report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University
Press.

L. C. Freeman. 1979. Centrality in Social Networks: Conceptual clariﬁcation. In Social Networks, Vol. 1.

215–239.

Javier Martın Hern ´andez and Piet Van Mieghem. 2011. Classiﬁcation of graph metrics. (2011).
Francisco Herrera and Enrique Herrera-Viedma. 1997. Aggregation operators for linguistic weighted in-
formation. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans 27, 5
(1997), 646–656.

Enrique Herrera-Viedma, Francisco Javier Cabrerizo, Janusz Kacprzyk, and Witold Pedrycz. 2014. A review

of soft consensus models in a fuzzy environment. Information Fusion 17 (2014), 4–13.

E Hollnagel. 2008. From FRAM (Functional Resonance Accident Model) to FRAM (Functional Resonance
Analysis Method). Presentation at the 2nd FRAM Workshop, Mines ParisTech, Sophia Antipolis.

E. Hollnagel. 2011. Resilience Engineering in Practice: A Guidebook. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
E. Hollnagel. 2012. FRAM: The functional Resonance Analysis Method. (2012).
E Hollnagel. 2015. Disaster management, control and resilience. In Disaster management: enabling re-

silience (Lecture notes in social networks). Springer.

Danny Holten. 2006. Hierarchical edge bundles: Visualization of adjacency relations in hierarchical data.

Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 12, 5 (2006), 741–748.

S. Jackson. 2010. Architecting resilient systems: Accident avoidance and survival and recovery from disrup-

tions. John Wiley & Sons.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:29

George Klir and Bo Yuan. 1995. Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic. Vol. 4. Prentice hall New Jersey.
Merrill Lefﬂer. 1998. Affecting Public Attitudes about the Environment. Maryland Marine Notes 16, 6

(1998).

N. Leveson. 2004. A new accident model for engineering safer systems. Safety Science 42 (2004), 237–270.
Igor Linkov, Todd Bridges, Felix Creutzig, Jennifer Decker, Cate Fox-Lent, Wolfgang Kroger, James H. Lam-
bert, Anders Levermann, Benoit Montreuil, Jatin Nathwani, Raymond Nyer, Ortwin Renn, Benjamin
Scharte, Alexander Schefﬂer, Miranda Schreurs, and Thomas Thiel-Clemen. 2014. Changing the re-
silience paradigm. Nature Clim. Change 4, 6 (06 2014), 407–409. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2227
Benjamin Markines, Ciro Cattuto, Filippo Menczer, Dominik Benz, Andreas Hotho, and Gerd Stumme.
2009. Evaluating similarity measures for emergent semantics of social tagging. In Proceedings of the
18th international conference on World wide web. ACM, 641–650.

B. Owens and N. Leveson. 2006. A Comparative Look at MBU Hazard Analysis Techniques. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th Annual Military and Aerospace. Programmable Logic Devices International Conference
(MAPLD).

P. Nesi P. Bellini, D. Cenni. 2016. AP Positioning for Estimating People Flow as Origin Destination Matrix
for Smart Cities. In The 22nd International Conference on Distributed Multimedia Systems, DMS.
J. Park, T. P. Seager, P. S. C. Rao, M. Convertino, and I. Linkov. 2013. Integrating risk and resilience ap-
proaches to catastrophe management in engineering systems. Risk Analysis 33, 3 (2013), 356–367.
Gabriella Pasi and Ronald R Yager. 2003. Modeling the concept of fuzzy majority opinion. In International

Fuzzy Systems Association World Congress. Springer, 143–150.

Nick Russell and Alistair Barros. 2014. Business Processes in Connected Communities. In Business Process
Management Workshops (Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing), Fabiana Fournie and Jan
Mendling (Eds.). Springer, 446–451.

John Scott. 2012. Social network analysis. Sage.
David Suarez, Alvaro Monares, Sergio F Ochoa, Jos´e A Pino, and Manuel J Ibarra. 2013. Improving the
support to decision making in medium-sized urban emergencies. In Computer Supported Cooperative
Work in Design (CSCWD), 2013 IEEE 17th International Conference on. IEEE, 251–256.

Stefan Thalmann, Markus Manhart, Paolo Ceravolo, and Antonia Azzini. 2014. An integrated risk manage-
ment framework: measuring the success of organizational knowledge protection. International Journal
of Knowledge Management (IJKM) 10, 2 (2014), 28–42.

Iraklis Tsekourakis, Christos Orlis, Dimosthenis Ioannidis, and Dimitrios Tzovaras. 2012. A decision sup-
port system for real-time evacuation management and rescue team planning during hazardous events
in public infrastructures. In Telematics in the Transport Environment. Springer, 1–9.

Martin Weik. 2000. Computer science and communications dictionary. Springer Science & Business Media.
Ryan B. Schocks A.B. Ferreira P. Smith S. Pitsopoulos J Wilson, J.R. 2006. Understanding safety and pro-

duction risks in rail engineering planning and protection. Ergonomics (2006).

R. Woltjer. 2006. Resilience Assessment Based on Models of Functional Resonance. In In Proceedings of the

3rd Symposium on Resilience Engineering.

A. APPENDICES

A.1. The RESOLUTE FRAM Model

ID

F1

F2

F3

F4

F5

F6

F7

F8

Function

Deliver service

Coordinate service delivery

Manage human resources

Training staff

Supply resources

Coordinate emergency action

Repair/restore operations

Maintain physical/cyber infrastructure

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:30

Bellini et al.

F9

F10

F11

F12

F13

F14

F15

F16

F17

F18

F19

F20

F21

F22

F23

F24

F25

Manage ICT resources

Monitor safety and security

Regulate domain and operation

Deﬁne procedures

Use of the service

Monitor user generated feedback

Manage ﬁnancial affaire

Manage awareness and user behaviour

Develop strategic plan

Provide adaptation and improvement insight

Monitor operation

Supply ﬁnancial resources

Perform risk assessment

Monitor resource availability

Provide risk warning

Collet event information

Fight the emergency

Table V: List of functions included in the FRAM

ID

R26

R27

R28

R29

R30

R31

R32

R33

R34

R35

R36

R37

R38

R39

Origin
Function

Qualiﬁed Name

Destination
Function

Aspect

F1

F1

F1

F1

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

F2

Infrastructure performance

Service

Service performance

F 14

F13

F19

Service Safety Security performanceF 10

Operation HR plan

Operation plan

Operation plan

Operation plan

Operation plan

Operation Restore service request

Service delivery plan

Service delivery plan

Service delivery plan

Service improvement plan

F3

F16

F16

F12

F22

F7

F1

F13

F16

F8

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Input

Input

Control

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Resources

Resources

Input

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:31

R40

R41

R42

R43

R44

R45

R46

R47

R48

R49

R50

R51

R52

R53

R54

R55

R56

R57

R58

R59

R60

R61

R62

R63

R64

R65

R66

R67

R68

R69

R70

F2

F3

F3

F3

F4

F4

F4

F4

F4

F5

F5

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F6

F7

F7

F7

F7

F7

F7

F7

F7

F8

Training staff requirements

human resources availability

human resources availability

human resources availability

Staff trained

Staff trained

Staff trained

Staff trained

Training performance data

Supply resources

Supply status

Emergency HR request

Emergency response command

Emergency response data

Emergency response data

Emergency response plan

Emergency response plan

Emergency response status

Emergency response status

Emergency response status

Emergency response status

Emergency response status

Operation Restore service plan

Operation Restore service plan

Operation restore/repair perfor-
mance data

Operation restore/repair status

Operation restore/repair status

Operation restored/repaired

Operation restored/repaired

Operation restored/repaired

F4

F1

F6

F7

F1

F19

F19

F6

F24

F1

F2

F3

F25

F10

F24

F2

F10

F2

F16

F10

F19

F1

F2

F16

F24

F2

F16

F1

F2

F19

Infrastructure
tained

installed main-

F1

Input

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Precondition

Precondition

Input

Resources

Resources

Input

Input

Resources

Input

Resources

Input

Resources

Input

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Input

Input

Resources

Input

Precondition

Input

Precondition

Precondition

R71

F8

Infrastructure resotore/repair per-
formance data

F24

Input

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:32

R72

F8

R73

F8

R74

R75

R76

R77

R78

R79

R80

R81

R82

R83

R84

R85

R86

R87

R88

R89

R90

R91

R92

R93

R94

R95

R96

R97

R98

R99

F8

F8

F8

F9

F9

F9

F9

F9

F9

F9

F9

F9

F10

F10

F10

F10

F10

F11

F11

F11

F11

F11

F11

F11

F11

F11

R100 F11

R101 F11

R102 F11

R103 F11

R104 F12

Infrastructure
plan

resotore/repair

F2

Resources

Bellini et al.

Infrastructure restored repaired
status

Infrastructure restored/repaired

Infrastructure restored/repaired

Infrastructure restored/repaired

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT infrastructures

ICT resource performance

Safety Security control

Safety Security control

Safety Security control

Safety Security critical event de-
tection

F2

F1

F2

F2

F1

F2

F16

F10

F19

F22

F14

F6

F22

F1

F13

F19

F6

Safety Security performance data

F24

Law

Law

Law

Law

Law

Safety regulation

Safety regulation

Safety regulation

Safety regulation

Standards

Standards

Standards

Standards

Procedure

F1

F15

F2

F19

F7

F21

F4

F12

F10

F1

F2

F19

F7

F1

Resources

Precondition

Input

Resources

Precondition

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Resources

Input

Control

Control

Control

Input

Input

Control

Control

Control

Control

Control

Resources

Input

Resources

Control

Control

Control

Control

Control

Control

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:33

R105 F13

R106 F13

R107 F13

R108 F14

R109 F14

R110 F14

R111 F14

R112 F15

R113 F15

R114 F15

R115 F15

R116 F16

R117 F16

R118 F17

R119 F17

R120 F17

R121 F17

R122 F17

R123 F17

R124 F18

R125 F18

R126 F18

R127 F18

R128 F19

R129 F19

R130 F19

R131 F19

R132 F19

R133 F19

Revenues

User Behaviour

User feedback

User behaviour data

User generated critical event de-
tection

User generated critical event de-
tection

User generated service improve-
ment suggestions

Budget

SLA(Service Level Agreement)

SLA(Service Level Agreement)

SLA(Service Level Agreement)

Early warnings

Service status

Develop strategic plan

Strategic plan

Strategic plan

Strategic plan

Strategic plan

Strategic plan

Event analysis insights

Knowledge base

Service sustained adaptability im-
provement insights

System Sustained adaptability in-
sights

Install Maintenance requirement

Install Maintenance requirement

F15

F14

F14

F16

F2

F6

F24

F2

F2

F22

F6

F13

F13

F15

F2

F16

F8

F18

F24

F21

F24

F2

F17

F8

F2

Operation Critical event detection F16

Operation Critical event detection F6

Operation performance monitor-
ing data

Operation performance monitor-
ing data

F16

F24

F2

Resources

Input

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Input

Resources

Control

Resources

Control

Resources

Resources

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Input

Control

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Input

Input

Input

Input

Resources

Input

Input

R134 F19

Operation requirements

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:34

R135 F20

R136 F21

R137 F21

R138 F21

R139 F21

R140 F22

R141 F22

R142 F22

R143 F23

R144 F24

R145 F2

R146 F5

Funds

Risk assessment report

Risk assessment report

Risk assessment report

Risk assessment report

Energy supply report

Resource supplied Critical event
detection

Resource supplied Critical event
detection

Ofﬁcial risk warning

Knowledge base

Operation Plan

Supply Resources

F15

F4

F2

F12

F10

F2

F2

F6

F2

F18

F9

F9

Table VI: List of relations included in the FRAM

Bellini et al.

Resources

Input

Resources

Input

Input

Input

Input

Input

Input

Resources

Input

Resources

A.2. Analytics on the FRAM Model

Function ID Degree Prestige Centrality

F2

F16

F1

F24

F6

F19

F10

F13

F14

F22

F15

F8

F7

F3

F12

F4

F21

10,13

5,3896

5,3247

4,2208

3,5714

3,3117

2,8571

2,7922

2,4675

1,6883

1,2338

1,1039

1,039

0,97403

0,84416

0,77922

0,71429

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:35

F9

F25

F18

F17

F5

F11

F20

F23

0,64935

0,64935

0,58442

0,45455

0

0

0

0

Table VII: Functions ordered by Degree Prestige Centrality

Relationship ID

Degree Prestige Centrality

R26

R27

R28

R29

R49

R52

R68

R71

R74

R75

R76

R77

R89

R106

R107

R108

R116

R117

R133

R67

R69

R70

R72

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,64935

0,58442

0,58442

0,58442

0,58442

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:36

Bellini et al.

R73

R109

R110

R130

R131

R31

R51

R54

R57

R59

R64

R66

R78

R79

R80

R81

R82

R83

R84

R85

R111

R132

R141

R142

R30

R33

R35

R36

R53

R55

R58

R60

R61

R62

R65

0,58442

0,58442

0,58442

0,58442

0,58442

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,51948

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

Quantify resilience enhancement of UTS through exploiting Connected Community and Internet of Everything emerging technologies39:37

R86

R87

R88

R90

R124

R125

R126

R127

R128

R129

R134

R34

R37

R38

R112

R118

R140

R32

R39

R40

R41

R42

R43

R50

R105

R120

R121

R122

R135

R146

R48

R114

R119

R143

R144

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,45455

0,38961

0,38961

0,38961

0,38961

0,38961

0,38961

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,32468

0,25974

0,25974

0,25974

0,25974

0,25974

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

39:38

Bellini et al.

R145

R44

R45

R46

R47

R104

R113

R115

R123

R91

R92

R93

R94

R95

R96

R97

R98

R99

R136

R137

R138

R139

R56

R63

R100

R101

R102

R103

0,25974

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,19481

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,12987

0,064935

0,064935

0,064935

0,064935

0,064935

0,064935

Table VIII: Reletionships ordered by Degree Prestige Central-
ity

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, Vol. 9, No. 4, Article 39, Publication date: May 2017.

