Rotation Blurring: Use of Artiﬁcial Blurring to Reduce Cybersickness in
Virtual Reality First Person Shooters

Pulkit Budhiraja∗

Mark Roman Miller†

Abhishek K Modi‡

David Forsyth§

7
1
0
2

t
c
O
6

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
9
5
2
0
.
0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Users of Virtual Reality (VR) systems often experience vection, the
perception of self-motion in the absence of any physical movement.
While vection helps to improve presence in VR, it often leads to a
form of motion sickness called cybersickness. Cybersickness is a
major deterrent to large scale adoption of VR.

Prior work has discovered that changing vection (changing the
perceived speed or moving direction) causes more severe cyber-
sickness than steady vection (walking at a constant speed or in a
constant direction). Based on this idea, we try to reduce the cyber-
sickness caused by character movements in a First Person Shooter
(FPS) game in VR. We propose Rotation Blurring (RB), uniformly
blurring the screen during rotational movements to reduce cyber-
sickness. We performed a user study to evaluate the impact of RB
in reducing cybersickness. We found that the blurring technique
led to an overall reduction in sickness levels of the participants and
delayed its onset. Participants who experienced acute levels of cy-
bersickness beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from this technique.

Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Multimedia Information Systems—Artiﬁcial, augmented, and vir-
tual realities;

1 INTRODUCTION
Low cost Virtual Reality (VR) Head Mounted Displays (HMDs) are
now easily available. The stereoscopic display in HMDs creates 3D
Virtual Environment (VE) with large ﬁeld of view and an enhanced
sense of presence. But users often experience vection while explor-
ing these VEs. Vection is the perception of self-motion caused by
viewing a moving visual stimulus while not actually moving (eg the
illusion of motion obtained in a stationary train watching an adja-
cent train move). Moving through in a virtual environment adds to
the sense of presence in that environment [21], but often leads to a
form of motion sickness called cybersickness, which often accom-
panies vection. Symptoms include dizziness, fatigue, cold sweat,
oculomotor disturbances, disorientation, nausea and (rarely) vomit-
ing. Oculomotor disturbances and disorientation are more common
with cybersickness than motion sickness [16]. Long exposures to
VR exacerbates cybersickness, while repeated exposures to VR re-
duces the severity and incidence of cybersickness [13].

Our objective in this work was to reduce cybersickness experi-
enced in VR gaming to improve comfort and enjoyability in a way
that required no additional effort from game developers. We there-
fore set the constraint on our solution to be that it should have in-
signiﬁcant computational load and work solely with the rendering
pipeline.

Prior work has found that vection that changes (through changes
in perceived speed or direction) induces more severe Simulator
Sickness (SS) than steady vection (walking at a constant speed or in

∗e-mail:budhirj2@uiuc.edu
†e-mail:mrmillr3@uiuc.edu
‡e-mail:akmodi2@uiuc.edu
§e-mail:daf@uiuc.edu

a constant direction) [3]. Although minor differences exist between
cybersickness and SS [23], they are closely related. Work by Tru-
toiu et al. [24] suggests that among all forms of movement, rotation
causes the maximum amount of SS, and so we focused our atten-
tion on reducing cybersickness during rotations. Riecke et al. [22]
show that photorealistic looking virtual environments enhance the
amount of vection users experience when compared to an abstract
version of the same virtual environment.

In this paper, we describe a novel navigation technique for VR
games called Rotation Blurring (RB) which can help to reduce cy-
bersickness. Our technique blurs the rotational movements trig-
gered by an external controller in the virtual world. We hypothesize
that blurring the rotations will make the parts that cause the most cy-
bersickness look less photorealistic, thereby suppressing the overall
level of cybersickness induced by those movements. We conducted
a user study to evaluate this hypothesis and found that the tech-
nique helped users who are sensitive to cybersickness. For the user
study, we chose to test our technique in a First Person Shooter (FPS)
game. The high action gameplay of the FPS requiring continuous
navigation makes it an ideal environment to test our technique.

2 RELATED WORK

One of the ﬁrst works to explore the impact of vection on SS by
Hettinger et al. [9] exposed users to a ﬁxed-based ﬂight simulator
and measured SS and vection levels. One theory for cybersickness
induced by vection is the mismatch of motion information from the
visual system and the vestibular system during vection leading to
cybersickness [19]. Another theory posits that changes in stability
of the human balance mechanism causes cybersickness [20]. Ke-
shavarz et al. [14] provide an in-depth review of works in this area.
Cybersickness is a major deterrent to large scale adoption of VR
devices and researchers have explored different ways to reduce it.
Dorado and Figueroa propose that ramps induce less cybersickness
than stairs in VR [6]. Domeyer et al. studied the effects of breaks
between consecutive driving simulator sessions on reducing SS for
older drivers [5]. Jeng-Weei Lin et al. discovered that providing
motion prediction cues in driving simulators helps to reduce SS
while not affecting presence [10]. Adding a virtual guiding avatar
that provides motion cues helps to reduce SS in driving simula-
tors [18]; the avatar also enhances a user’s sense of presence in the
virtual environment. Carnegie et al. [4] try to reduce visual dis-
comfort by adding depth of ﬁeld blur to the virtual scene. Leroy et
al. [17] describe an algorithm for implementing a real-time adaptive
blur to remove irritating high frequency content in high horizon-
tal disparity zones of stereoscopic display, so reducing eye strain
caused by stereoscopic displays. Jung et al. [11] describe a selec-
tive depth of focus blur technique that is applied only to regions that
induce high visual discomfort but are less important visually. Blum
et al. investigated the effectiveness of adding artiﬁcial out of focus
blur on visual discomfort to increase fusion limits of double vision
occurring in stereoscopic displays [1]. In contrast to these works
that use blur to reduce cybersickness, our approach uses blurring
to minimize cybersickness arising particularly due to locomotion in
VR. Furthermore we blur the whole screen as opposed to selectively
blurring parts of the virtual environment.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Screenshots of 2 versions of the game during rotational movement. One with Rotation Blurring disabled (NRB) and one with Rotation
Blurring enabled (RB).

3 BLURRING TECHNIQUE DESCRIPTION

Rotation Blurring (RB) is implemented using shaders in Unity3D,
a popular game engine that supports VR headsets. Since most FPS
games use mouse controller to rotate the game character, we use
the movement of the mouse as primary input signal to trigger and
control RB. Our technique applies a uniform Gaussian blur to the
screen whenever the mouse is used to rotate the game character.
The amount of blur (standard deviation of the Gaussian function) is
directly proportional to the magnitude of acceleration of the mouse
movement. This proportionality ensures a smooth transition from
a non-blurred to a blurred screen (and vice versa) as opposed to
discrete jarring jumps between non-blurred and blurred screen.

RB is applied such that it only activates for rotations when nav-
igating the game environment and not during other small move-
ments like aiming the gun or dodging enemy ﬁre. This is ensured
by a combination of two rules. First, the blurring only activates
when the magnitude of acceleration of the mouse is over a certain
minimum threshold value. Second, the blurring would only happen
if a continuous mouse motion is detected for a time threshold of 5
frames.

For this research, we used an Oculus Rift DK2 HMD which
tracks the orientation and position of the user’s head. Our tech-
nique aims to reduce cybersickness occuring from vection during
rotational movements. Since cybersickness from vection only trig-
gers in the absence of actual physical movements, any changes in
the view point caused by user’s real world head movements were
not blurred.

4 USER STUDY

In order to understand the effects of RB on cybersickness, we con-
ducted a within-subjects user study where participants played a VR
FPS game which was modiﬁed to enable RB. For comparison, par-
ticipants also played another version of the game with RB disabled.
We hypothesized that adding RB to the game will signiﬁcantly re-
duce cybersickness experienced by the participants.

For this study, we used an Oculus Rift DK2 HMD connected to
a Windows PC. To gauge the sickness levels of participants, we
used the standard 16 question Simulator Sickness Questionnaire
(SSQ) [12] where each question could be answered on a Likert scale
of 0-3. Responses of the SSQ were used to derive Total Sickness
(TS) levels of the participants in the study.

4.1 Virtual Scene Description

We created the FPS shooter game using an open source Unity3D
project called AngryBots. The game is set in an industrial setting
and features many enemy bots spread across the arena. Participants
used keyboard and mouse to control the character (using standard
FPS controller layout). We created two versions of the game - with

and without RB. We refer to these as RB and NRB respectively
(Figure 1).

In the game, the view vector of the character was coupled with
the aim vector of the gun. Participants controlled the aim vector of
the gun using the mouse. The coupling ensured that users did not
have to move their head in conjunction with the mouse movement
in order to see the gun’s pointer. However, user’s head movements
could still independently control the viewing vector of the character.
Doing this ensured that users did not have to move their head in the
game all the time and suffer from the resulting neck sprain.

In order to reduce cybersickness from other types of movements
except rotation, some modiﬁcations were made to the character
controls. Rotational movements with the mouse were only re-
stricted in the horizontal plane. This was done since past research
claims that frequent rotations with two degrees of freedom cause
signiﬁcantly more SS than rotations with one degree of freedom [2].
The aim vector was ﬁxed to be parallel to the ground and the game
was modiﬁed to ensure all the enemy bots could be destroyed with-
out any vertical rotations.Work by Trutoiu et al. [24] suggests that
straﬁng (linear movement in left/right direction) is the most uncon-
vincing form of movement in VR and also the second most SS caus-
ing form of movement after rotation. Hence, straﬁng movements in
the game were disabled. In order to minimize cybersickness from
linear walking, the character moved at a constant speed [3].

4.2 Procedure

The study was conducted over two sessions on consecutive days.
During each session, participants were tasked to play either the RB
version or the NRB version of the game. The ordering of the tasks
was determined randomly. We avoided performing both tasks on
the same day to avoid the cumulative nature of nausea from bias-
ing the amount of cybersickness experienced by participants in the
latter task. Before each task, participants were pre-screened for
good health by measuring their TS levels determined from a SSQ
ﬁlled before each session. Any user with a TS levels of over 7.48
was rejected for the study as recommended in [15]. This ensured
that participants were in an equally healthy mental state before both
sessions. All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Any participant who used glasses were given the option to use them
inside the headset.

In each session, users played the game for 10 minutes with the
objective of destroying most number of bots. During the game, after
every 2 minutes, participants were shown a sickness scale from 0-
6 and were asked to verbally report their level of motion sickness
symptoms. We used the motion sickness rating scale used in [8]
(which is a minor modiﬁcation of the scale from [7]). We advise
readers to refer to ﬁgure 4 for a detailed description of each rating
level.

At the end of the task, users were asked to ﬁll the SSQ to gauge

NRBRBtheir post-task sickness levels. This was followed by a post study
questionnaire and an interview.

We received 18 responses from interested individuals for the
study (14 males, 4 females) from an age group of 18 to 26 years.
Users were required to have some past experience of playing FPS
games. 1 user was rejected during pre-screening process as his/her
pre-study TS levels was higher than acceptable limit. 2 other users
got very sick within ﬁrst 2 minutes of the study and could not con-
tinue.
In the end, we had 15 participants (12 males, 3 females)
successfully complete the study.

4.3 Results

Participants were asked to ﬁll a SSQ before and after each task.
The pre-task SSQ response was used for pre-screening participants
for good health before the start of a task. Participants’ post task
questionnaire responses were used to derive their TS levels for the
task.

Figure 3 shows a histogram of difference in TS levels when RB
is enabled (∆TS = TSRB - TSNRB). Out of 15 participants, 8 saw a
decline in TS on enabling RB while 3 saw no change and 4 partici-
pants saw an increase in TS. Group of participants whose TS levels
decreased beneﬁted from RB while the other group did not. For
sake of convenience, we’ll refer to these groups as G1 and G2 re-
spectively. It is interesting to observe the trends for the two groups.
While a majority of participants in G2 saw no change or mild in-
crease in TS levels (µ G2
∆T S = 12.82), the majority in G1 saw a signif-
icant drop in their TS levels (µ G1
∆T S = −28.51) suggesting that the
ones who found RB to be beneﬁcial beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from it.
Further evaluation of the data reveals that the participants of G1
were more sensitive to cybersickness than those of G2 (TS levels
without RB (NRB) - µ G2
T S = 31.52 vs µ G1
T S = 68.72). The results in-
dicate that users who are sensitive to cybersickness are more likely
to beneﬁt from RB.

The subjective opinions of participants recorded during the inter-
view about RB shows the similar bipolar trend. Most participants
found blurring to be helpful and it did not bother them. One partici-
pant said “I think blur helped. It was jarring at ﬁrst but I got used to
it. I do think it helped”. Another participant responded “Movement
being blurred made it much easier. My eyes didn’t get dizzy this
time. I was scared last time to make quick turns (NRB). I feel I could
go on for 2 more hours!”. Some users disliked blurring. One par-
ticipant commented “blurring distracted me from gameplay”. An-
other participant said “Blurring made it harder to connect. Caused
discomfort”.

T S = 51.36, meanRB

Boxplot of Total Sickness levels obtained from SSQ.
T S =

T S = 42.14, medianNRB

T S = 48.62, medianRB

Figure 2:
meanNRB
33.66.

Figure 2 shows the aggregated TS results for the NRB (µ =
51.36, σ = 34.67) and RB (µ = 42.14, σ = 27.61) conditions. The
mean TS response on enabling RB went down from 51.36 to 42.14
and the median values went down from 48.62 to 33.66. We per-
formed a Wilcoxon signed-rank test to test the statistical signiﬁ-
cance of decrease in TS and found it to be not statistically signif-
icant (p = 0.19). Observations from ﬁgure 3 give an insight for
this.

Figure 3: Histogram of ∆TS. On enabling RB, 8 participants expe-
rienced a decline, 3 experienced no change and 4 experienced an
increase in cybersickness. The decline was substantial for 6 out of 8
participants.

Figure 4: Plot of mean motion sickness levels vs time on a scale
of 0-6. 0 - no symptoms, 1 - any unpleasant symptoms, 2 - mild
unpleasant symptoms, 3 - mild nausea, 4 - mild to moderate nausea,
5 - moderate nausea but can continue and 6 - moderate nausea,
want to stop

Participants were instructed to report their level of motion sick-
ness symptoms on a scale of 0-6 after every 2 mins of gameplay.
Figure 4 shows a plot of mean motion sickness levels at 2 minute
intervals for NRB and RB versions of the game. Fig 4 indicates
that blurring helped delay the onset of cybersickness.

Participants ﬁlled out a post study questionnaire to rate aware-
ness of RB, distraction caused from RB and presence in VR, with
and without RB, on a 5 point Likert scale. Figure 5 shows a sum-
mary of those responses. As the ﬁgure indicates, participants were
highly aware of RB and did not ﬁnd RB very distracting. RB did
not signiﬁcantly decrease their level of presence in VR.

5 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The results from the user study show that RB helped in decreasing
the overall cybersickness experienced by the participants. While it
did not help some of the participants, it signiﬁcantly helped those
who experienced acute level of cybersickness. Post study interview
comments about preference for RB also show this trend. The results
show the positive impact of RB on delaying the onset of nausea. All

TOTAL SICKNESS020406080100NRBRB-50-40-30-20-101020304050001234Difference in Total Sickness (∆TS = TSRB - TSNRB)Number of UsersTime (in minutes)Motion Sickness LevelNRBRB0221445366810[2] F. Bonato, A. Bubka, and S. Palmisano. Combined pitch and roll and
cybersickness in a virtual environment. Aviation, space, and environ-
mental medicine, 80(11):941–945, 2009.

[3] F. Bonato, A. Bubka, S. Palmisano, D. Phillip, and G. Moreno. Vec-
tion Change Exacerbates Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments
Vection change exacerbates simulator sickness in virtual environ-
ments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 17(3):283–
292, 2008.

[4] K. Carnegie and T. Rhee. Reducing visual discomfort with hmds using
dynamic depth of ﬁeld. Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE,
35(5):34–41, 2015.

[5] J. E. Domeyer, N. D. Cassavaugh, and R. W. Backs. The use of adap-
tation to reduce simulator sickness in driving assessment and research.
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 53:127–132, 2013.

[6] J. Dorado and P. Figueroa. Ramps are better than stairs to reduce cy-
bersickness in applications based on a hmd and a gamepad. In 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), 2014 IEEE Symposium on, pages 47–50, March
2014.

[7] J. F. Golding and M. Kerguelen. A comparison of the nauseogenic
potential of low-frequency vertical versus horizontal linear oscillation.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 1992.

[8] M. J. Grifﬁn and M. M. Newman. Visual ﬁeld effects on motion sick-
ness in cars. Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 75(9):739–
748, 2004.

[9] L. J. Hettinger, K. S. Berbaum, R. S. Kennedy, W. P. Dunlap, and
M. D. Nolan. Vection and simulator sickness. Military Psychology,
2(3):171, 1990.

[10] J. Jeng-Weei Lin, D. Parker, M. Lahav, and T. Furness. Unobtrusive
vehicle motion prediction cues reduced simulator sickness during pas-
sive travel in a driving simulator. Ergonomics, 48(6):608–624, 2005.
[11] Y. J. Jung, H. Sohn, S.-i. Lee, F. Speranza, and Y. M. Ro. Visual
importance-and discomfort region-selective low-pass ﬁltering for re-
ducing visual discomfort in stereoscopic displays. Circuits and Sys-
tems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on, 23(8):1408–1421,
2013.

[12] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilienthal. Sim-
ulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation psychology,
3(3):203–220, 1993.

[13] R. S. Kennedy, K. M. Stanney, and W. P. Dunlap. Duration and expo-
sure to virtual environments: Sickness curves during and across ses-
sions. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 9(5):463–
472, 2000.

[14] B. Keshavarz, B. E. Riecke, L. J. Hettinger, and J. L. Campos. Vec-
tion and visually induced motion sickness : how are they related ?
Frontiers in Psychology, 6:472, 2015.

[15] B. D. Lawson. Motion sickness scaling. In Handbook of virtual envi-
ronments: Design, implementation, and applications, pages 601–626.
2014.

[16] B. D. Lawson. Motion sickness symptomatology and origins.

In
Handbook of virtual environments: Design, implementation, and ap-
plications, pages 531–599. 2014.

[17] L. Leroy, P. Fuchs, and G. Moreau. Real-time adaptive blur for reduc-
ing eye strain in stereoscopic displays. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP), 9(2):9, 2012.

[18] J. J. Lin, H. Abi-Rached, and M. Lahav. Virtual guiding avatar: An
effective procedure to reduce simulator sickness in virtual environ-
ments. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pages 719–726. ACM, 2004.

[19] C. M. Oman. Motion sickness: a synthesis and evaluation of the sen-
sory conﬂict theory. Canadian journal of physiology and pharmacol-
ogy, 68(2):294–303, 1990.

[20] G. E. Riccio and T. A. Stoffregen. An ecological theory of motion
sickness and postural instability. Ecological psychology, 3(3):195–
240, 1991.

[21] B. E. Riecke. Compelling Self-Motion Through Virtual Environments
Without Actual Self-Motion-Using Self-Motion Illusions (’Vection’) to
Improve VR User Experience. INTECH Open Access Publisher, 2010.
[22] B. E. Riecke, J. Schulte-Pelkum, M. N. Avraamides, M. V. D. Heyde,
and H. H. Bulthoff. Cognitive factors can inﬂuence self-motion per-

Figure 5: Post Study Questionnaire Responses

participants saw a gentler growth in nausea level over time when RB
was enabled.

These results open up the opportunity to conduct further research
in exploring other ways of applying blur to cybersickness inducing
movements in VR. Since users are more perceptive to motion in the
peripheral regions of the eye, future work can explore the effect of
applying only peripheral blur during rotations to reduce cybersick-
ness. Other image effects like mosaic effects, edge segmentation
and grayscale coloring that reduce the photorealism of the scene
can be explored to understand their impact on reducing cybersick-
ness.

Since some participants found the blurring to be ineffective and
disruptive, future Just-Noticeable Differences (JND) studies can
ﬁnd the optimal response curve of blurring relative to movement in
the game and the optimal amount of blur to add to the game which
minimizes cybersickness while minimizing discomfort.

Preliminary results indicate minimal impact on presence by RB.
While these results look promising, future work needs to explore
this in an in-depth manner using the presence questionnaire to get a
better understanding of the impact of RB on presence in VR.

Our technique requires getting input from external controllers
and applying image effects shaders, both of which can be done
without access to the game level code. Being independent from
the game, RB can be implemented by HMD developers at the SDK
level as an optional setting to existing games without requiring orig-
inal game developers to make any changes. Users who beneﬁt from
RB can enable it in games and have a better VR gaming experience
while others can keep it off.

6 CONCLUSION

The results of the user study indicate that the Rotation Blurring
(RB) technique helped to reduce mean cybersickness levels of the
sample space. The results are not statistically signiﬁcant since a set
of participants did not beneﬁt from the technique or got affected
negatively. However, the set of users who experienced acute levels
of cybersickness saw sharp falls in their levels of cybersickness on
enabling RB and can largely beneﬁt from this technique. Results
also indicate that RB helped delay onset of cybersickness that can
lead to longer gameplay periods in VR.

These results open up the opportunity to explore the impact of
RB on a bigger sample set of users who are prone to cybersickness.

REFERENCES

[1] T. Blum, M. Wieczorek, A. Aichert, R. Tibrewal, and N. Navab. The
effect of out-of-focus blur on visual discomfort when using stereo dis-
plays. In Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2010 9th IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on, pages 13–17, Oct 2010.

NRBPresenceRBPresenceRBDistractionRBAwarenessCompletely DisconnectedNot distractingat allNot aware at allVery awareCompletely ConnectedVery distracting01234567891011ception (vection) in virtual reality. ACM Transactions on Applied Per-
ception (TAP), 3(3):194–216, 2006.

[23] K. M. Stanney, R. S. Kennedy, and J. M. Drexler. Cybersickness is
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
not simulator sickness.
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, volume 41, pages 1138–1142.
SAGE Publications, 1997.

[24] L. C. Trutoiu, B. J. Mohler, J. Schulte-Pelkum, and H. H. Blthoff.
Circular, linear, and curvilinear vection in a large-screen virtual envi-
ronment with ﬂoor projection. Computers & Graphics, 33(1):47 – 58,
2009.

