Light Virtual Reality Systems for the Training of Conditionally Automated
Vehicle Drivers

Daniele Sportillo *
PSA Group
MINES ParisTech, PSL
Centre for robotics

Alexis Paljic†
MINES ParisTech, PSL
Centre for robotics

Luciano Ojeda‡
PSA Group

Philippe Fuchs§
MINES ParisTech, PSL
Centre for robotics

Vincent Roussarie¶
PSA Group

8
1
0
2

r
a

M
3
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
6
9
4
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

In conditionally automated vehicles, drivers can engage in secondary
activities while traveling to their destination. However, drivers are
required to appropriately respond, in a limited amount of time, to
a take-over request when the system reaches its functional bound-
aries. In this context, Virtual Reality systems represent a promising
training and learning tool to properly familiarize drivers with the au-
tomated vehicle and allow them to interact with the novel equipment
involved. In this study, the effectiveness of an Head-Mounted dis-
play (HMD)-based training program for acquiring interaction skills
in automated cars was compared to a user manual and a ﬁxed-base
simulator. Results show that the training system affects the take-over
performances evaluated in a test drive in a high-end driving simula-
tor. Moreover, self-reported measures indicate that the HMD-based
training is preferred with respect to the other systems.

1 INTRODUCTION

Conditionally automated vehicles do not require drivers to constantly
monitor their driving environment; drivers can, therefore, engage in
secondary activities such as reading, writing emails and watching
videos. However, when the automated system encounters unex-
pected situations, it will assume that drivers will adequately respond
to a Take-Over Request (TOR).

In this context, Virtual Reality (VR) constitutes a potentially valu-
able learning and skill assessment tool because it would allow drivers
to familiarize themselves with the automated vehicle and interact
with the novel equipment involved in a free-risk environment.

The objective of this research is to explore the potential of light
Virtual Reality systems, in particular, their role for the acquisition of
skills for the Transfer of Control (ToC) in highly automated cars. By
using the adjective light, we want to mark the difference between VR
systems that are portable and/or easy to set up and systems that are
cumbersome and require dedicated space to operate. The idea is that
thanks to the portability and the cost-effectiveness, light VR systems
could be easily deployed in car dealerships to train a large amount
of people in a safe and reliable environment. This paper aims to
compare the effectiveness of a training program based on a head-
mounted display with a user manual and with a ﬁxed-base driving
simulator. To validate the light VR system, user performances are
evaluated during a test drive in a high-end driving simulator and
self-reported measures are collected via questionnaires.

1.1 Related Work

Although most of the studies in Driving Simulation (DS) uses static
screens as the display system, recent studies prove that HMD-based

*e-mail: daniele.sportillo@{mpsa.com,mines-paristech.fr}
†e-mail: alexis.paljic@mines-paristech.fr
‡e-mail: luciano.ojeda@mpsa.com
§e-mail: philippe.fuchs@mines-paristech.fr
¶e-mail: vincent.roussarie@mpsa.com
2018 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR) ©2018 IEEE

DS leads to similar physiological response and lane change perfor-
mance when compared to stereoscopic 3D or 2D screens [7] [6].
Even if the steering wheel is the most used driving interface, novel
HMD systems usually come with wireless 6-DoF controllers which
can be used to control a virtual car [5]. DS, in fact, provides the
opportunity to implement critical scenarios and hazardous situations
which are ethically not possible to evaluate on real roads [2]. For
this reason and to overcome the limited availability of physical pro-
totypes for research purposes, DS is extensively used for studies on
automated vehicles to design future automotive Human-Machine
Interface (HMI) [3] for TORs and to investigate the behavioral re-
sponses during the transition from automated to manual control [4].
Assessing the quality of the take-over performance remains an open
problem. Usually reaction times (such as gaze reaction time, hands
on wheel time, and intervention time), time to collision, lateral ac-
celerations and minimum clearance are objective metrics analyzed
in obstacle avoidance scenarios [1].

The intense scientiﬁc production in recent years suggests that the
transition of control in automated cars is a valuable research topic
worth investigating from the design stage to the ﬁnal implementation
of the new systems. Moreover, the compelling need and interest
of the car industry to train a large amount of people in a reliable
and cost-effective way, without compromising security, make light
virtual reality system tools a promising solution for this purpose.

2 METHODS
This study contained two parts: training and test drive. The aim of
the training was to introduce the principles of the Level 3 Automated
Driving System (ADS)-equipped vehicle, present the novel human-
machine interfaces, and describe the actions to perform in order
to appropriately respond to unplanned requests to intervene. A
between-subject study with 60 participants was designed in order to
compare a light Virtual Reality systems to a user manual and a ﬁxed-
base driving simulator in terms of training effectiveness evaluated
through a test drive which required the application of knowledge
and skills acquired during the training.

2.1 The Training
The aim of the training was to teach drivers how to interact with
automated cars in three situations: the manual mode, automated
mode and the take-over request. To do so, the training introduced
the participants to the HMI for each situation, the actions they were
free to perform during the automated driving and the best practice to
respond to a take-over request. For all the participants, the training
program started with an introductory video that brieﬂy presented the
main functionalities of a Level 3 ADS-equipped car.

In the study three different training systems were compared. The
ﬁrst one was a user manual (UM) consisting of a slide presentation
displayed on a 13.3" screen of a laptop computer. The participants
were asked to carefully read each of the 8 slides and to proceed when
they felt ready, without a time limit. The slides used text and images
to present the actions to be performed during the manual driving,
the automated driving and the take-over requests.

The second system was a ﬁxed-base simulator (FB) consisting
of an actual car cockpit including a driving seat, a dashboard, a

 
 
 
 
 
 
The quality of the take-over was evaluated in terms of reaction
time (rt), the elapsed time from the TOR until the driver takes back
control. A signiﬁcant difference between the user manual group
(rt = 5.15s) and the other two systems was observed. However, no
differences were observed comparing the ﬁxed-base simulator (rt
= 3.17s) and the HMD (rt = 3.16s). Self-reported measures were
collected through set of questions at the beginning of the test, after
the training and after the test drive. To evaluate the favorability of the
training, the participants ﬁlled out a 10 questions survey containing
questions about perceived usefulness, easiness, pleasantness and
realism. In summary, according to the objective metrics measured
during the test drive, the group of participants trained with the
Virtual Learning Environment (ﬁxed-base driving simulator and
light VR system) were able to respond to the take-over request in
less time than the group of participants trained with the user manual.
Furthermore, self-reported measures showed responses in favor of
the light VR training system.

4 CONCLUSION
The results of this research persuade us that Light Virtual Reality
systems represent a valuable tool for the acquisition of driving skills
in conditionally automated vehicles. The proposed training system,
composed of an HMD and a game racing wheel, is a portable and
cost-effective device that provides an adequate level of immersion
for teaching drivers how to respond to a take-over request in a safe
environment. Therefore, this system could be employed for the
training of future customers of automated cars before their ﬁrst ride.
A direct outcome of these results is the acknowledgment of VR
as key player in the deﬁnition of the set of metrics for proﬁling
driver interaction in automated vehicles. In future work, the training
will be implemented in the form of a serious game in which the
level of instruction adapts to the users’ needs in order to assess
the acquisition of skill during the training itself. Furthermore, test
drives with the real vehicles are considered of primary importance
to validate current results.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the French Foundation of Technolog-
ical Research under grant CIFRE 2015/1392 for the doctoral work
of D. Sportillo at PSA Group.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Happee, C. Gold, J. Radlmayr, S. Hergeth, and K. Bengler. Take-over
performance in evasive manoeuvres. Accident Analysis & Prevention,
106:211–222, 2017.

[2] Q. C. Ihemedu-Steinke, R. Erbach, P. Halady, G. Meixner, and M. Weber.
Virtual reality driving simulator based on head-mounted displays. In
Automotive User Interfaces, pp. 401–428. Springer, 2017.

[3] V. Melcher, S. Rauh, F. Diederichs, H. Widlroither, and W. Bauer. Take-
over requests for automated driving. Procedia Manufacturing, 3:2867–
2873, 2015.

[4] N. Merat, A. H. Jamson, F. C. Lai, M. Daly, and O. M. Carsten. Transi-
tion to manual: Driver behaviour when resuming control from a highly
automated vehicle. Transportation research part F: trafﬁc psychology
and behaviour, 27:274–282, 2014.

[5] D. Sportillo, A. Paljic, M. Boukhris, P. Fuchs, L. Ojeda, and V. Rous-
sarie. An immersive virtual reality system for semi-autonomous driving
simulation: a comparison between realistic and 6-dof controller-based
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
interaction.
Computer and Automation Engineering, pp. 6–10. ACM, 2017.

[6] S. M. Taheri, K. Matsushita, and M. Sasaki. Development of a Driving
Simulator with Analyzing Driver’s Characteristics Based on a Virtual
Reality Head Mounted Display. Journal of Transportation Technologies,
7(03):351, 2017.

[7] F. Weidner, A. Hoesch, S. Poeschl, and W. Broll. Comparing VR and
non-VR driving simulations: An experimental user study. In Virtual
Reality (VR), 2017 IEEE, pp. 281–282. IEEE, 2017.

Figure 1: Illustration of a user with HMD immersed in the Virtual Leaning Environment

force-feedback steering wheel and a set of pedals. A 9.7" tablet used
by the driver to perform the secondary activity was placed in the
center console. To display the virtual environment a 65" plasma
screen was positioned behind the cockpit at 1.5m from the driver.

The third system was a Light Virtual Reality (LVR) system in-
cluding an HMD as a display system, and a racing wheel as driving
system. Spatial sound was presented via headphones. To have a
spatial correspondence between the real steering wheel and the vir-
tual one, the steering wheel inside the virtual car was a 3D model
of the real racing wheel with which the participants were interact-
ing. Moreover, the position and the movements of the virtual model
corresponded to the real one, allowing for co-located manipulation.

2.1.1 The Virtual Learning Environment

For the training using the LVR system and the ﬁxed-base driving
simulator, a step-by-step tutorial was developed in the form of a
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) (Fig. 1). The task of the partic-
ipants consisted of interactions with the car following the instruction
of a virtual vocal assistant. The messages announced by the assistant
were also displayed on a yellow panel in front of the trainee. The
driving scenario was a straight 2-lane road delimited by guardrails
with no trafﬁc. Before the driving scenario, an acclimatization virtual
environment was proposed to the participants to help them locate
and identify the controls of the car. This training also included a sec-
ondary activity (a video) that required the use of a tablet to distract
the human driver from the driving task during the automated driving.
The participants were asked, but not forced, to look at the tablet.
The video was automatically played when the automated system was
enabled and paused during the manual driving and the TORs.

2.2 Test Drive

After the training, the participant performed a test drive designed
to evaluate their performance in a more realistic driving scenario.
The system used for this purpose was a high-end driving simulator
consisting of the front part of a real car surrounded by a panoramic
display. Data including position, speed and acceleration of the car,
and current driving mode were recorded. Inside the car, a 10.8 inch
tablet which provided 9 different secondary activities was placed in
the center console. During the test drive 3 TORs were issued during
the test drive: (A) a 10-second TOR caused by a road narrowing
provoked by a stationary car on the right lane; (B) a 10-second TOR
caused by a loss of ground marking; (C) a 5-second TOR caused by
a sensor failure. During the autonomous driving, participants were
asked to engage in one of the secondary activities proposed by the
tablet.

3 RESULTS

To evaluate the training systems and the learning environment, ob-
jective and self-reported measures were collected anonymously and
treated conﬁdentially. A ﬁrst outcome of the study is that the training
allowed all the participants to respond to the TORs.

