Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Can Autism be Catered with Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Assisted
Intervention Technology? A Comprehensive Survey

Muhammad Shoaib Jaliawala α ζ,Rizwan Ahmed
Khanα β

9
1
0
2

n
a
J

9
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

5
v
1
8
1
5
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract This article presents an extensive literature review of technology based intervention
methodologies for individuals facing Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Reviewed methodologies
include: contemporary Computer Aided Systems (CAS), Computer Vision Assisted Technologies
(CVAT) and Virtual Reality (VR) or Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)-Assisted interventions. The re-
search over the past decade has provided enough demonstrations that individuals with ASD have
a strong interest in technology based interventions, which are useful in both, clinical settings as
well as at home and classrooms.

Despite showing great promise, research in developing an advanced technology based interven-
tion that is clinically quantitative for ASD is minimal. Moreover, the clinicians are generally not
convinced about the potential of the technology based interventions due to non-empirical nature
of published results. A major reason behind this lack of acceptability is that a vast majority of
studies on distinct intervention methodologies do not follow any speciﬁc standard or research
design. We conclude from our ﬁndings that there remains a gap between the research community
of computer science, psychology and neuroscience to develop an AI assisted intervention technol-
ogy for individuals suﬀering from ASD. Following the development of a standardized AI based
intervention technology, a database needs to be developed, to devise eﬀective AI algorithms.

Keywords Computer Aided Systems (CAS) · Computer Vision Assisted Technologies (CVAT) ·
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) · facial expression recognition · Artiﬁcial Intelligence · Virtual
reality

1 Introduction

Facial expressions play a vital role in our daily lives and our day to day social settings. Facial
expressions are an eﬀective form of non verbal communication and provides a cue about emotional
states, mindsets and intentions (Khan et al. 2012a). Facial expressions along with verbal cues
typically let us understand what an individual really means. Human beings follow a similar
pattern of development in terms of physical and mental abilities and also during the development
of basic facial expressions (De Haan et al. 2004) (Frank et al. 2009) (Herba and Phillips 2004).
Normally developing individuals decode daily life expressions of others with whom they interact,
and then behave accordingly (Gross 2004). Deﬁcits in facial expressions can limit an individual’s
ability to network with others and impact negatively on health and quality of life(Eisenberger
and Cole 2012) (House et al. 1988). Deﬁcits under certain medical conditions like ASD can also
impact social skills, interactions with others as well as the perception of expressions. Similar is
the case with individuals facing autism (McPartland et al. 2004).

Neurodevelopmental disorders such as ASD are linked with abridged ability to produce (McIn-
tosh et al. 2006) and perceive (Adolphs et al. 2001) facial expressions (Rump et al. 2009). Deﬁning

αFaculty of IT, Barrett Hodgson University, Karachi, Pakistan
ζ Faculty of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Hamdard University, Karachi, Pakistan
β LIRIS, Universite Claude Bernard Lyon1, France.

 
 
 
 
 
 
criteria for autistic disorder, as set by the diagnostic handbooks, and accepted worldwide such as
ICD-10 WHO (World Health Organization 1992) (Organization 1993) & DSM-IV APA (Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association) (Association 2000) are: abnormalities in social interaction, verbal
and non-verbal communication impairments and a limited range of interests and activities. Verbal
social impairments include deﬁcit in social interactions such as dealing with everyday conﬂicting
scenarios (Bernard-Opitz et al. 2001), communicating with people (Bernard-Opitz et al. 2001),
dealing with people in the society, language and reading skills, spontaneous greetings to peers.
While non-verbal communication impairments include deﬁcit in facial expressions, physiological
changes (Rossignol and Frye 2012), maintaining eye contact and decision making. To cater these
deﬁcits and disruptions of recognition of facial expressions, computer scientists are trying to en-
hance the skills and perception of these individuals facing ASD, by technology, such as Computer
Aided Systems (CAS) and Computer Vision Assisted Technology (CVAT) utilized in making se-
rious games (Tanaka et al. 2010) (Tsai and Lin 2011) (Jain et al. 2012) (Cockburn et al. 2008)
and making diﬀerent skill set batteries (Tanaka et al. 2010) (Baron-Cohen et al. 2004) (Silver and
Oakes 2001) (Whalen et al. 2010) (Strickland et al. 2013). For discussion on diﬀerent pervasive
developmental disorders (PDD) including autism, refer Section 2.

According to the British Machine Vision Association (BMVA), computer vision is the science
that aims to give machines their eyes and brains to see and visualize the world. It is concerned with
the automatic analysis, extraction and understanding of information from the data in the form
of biometrics(Lim et al. 2001), character recognition (Govindan and Shivaprasad 1990), forensics
(Johnson and Farid 2005), image restoration (Khan et al. 2013), medical image analysis (McIner-
ney and Terzopoulos 1996) as well as facial expression recognition (Khan et al. 2012b). It involves
the development of a theoretical and algorithmic basis to get automatic visual understanding.

Researchers studied and utilized automatic expression recognition algorithms to aid individu-
als having ASD by intervening in social skills, expression recognition and production of expressions
e.g by serious games (Jain et al. 2012) (Cockburn et al. 2008) (Silver and Oakes 2001) (Beau-
mont and Sofronoﬀ 2008). It has been theorized that technology is independent from inclination
towards someone depicting maladaptive behaviors and is just, whoever is using it. While humans
(therapists) tend to reinforce maladaptive behaviors unintentionally (Plienis and Romanczyk
1985) causing the results to be not concrete or not exactly true to make conclusions. Maladaptive
behaviors are behaviors that are commonly and most frequently used to reduce an individual’s
anxiety, but the results are dysfunctional and non-productive. For instance, avoiding some sce-
narios because you have unrealistic fears may for the time being reduce your anxiety, but it is
non-productive in alleviating the actual problem in the long term.

Up until now there is no universally accepted treatment, intervention or cure for ASD (Rogers
1998) (Cohen et al. 2006). But there have been numerous cases reported where intensive behavioral
and educational intervention programs signiﬁcantly improve outcomes for individuals in the long
run (Rogers 1998) (Cohen et al. 2006). To the best of our knowledge, no empirical generalized
results have been concretely reported yet, although there are studies which demonstrate positive
and convincing outcomes in post intervention results (Grynszpan et al. 2014). There is an urgent
need for intensive treatment methods for individuals facing autism. But appropriate interventions,
resources and therapeutic treatments are diﬃcult to access or are just too expensive (Tarkan
2002). For this reason, CAS are being utilized to create automated and easily accessible systems
to cater the needs of the individuals having ASD.

Some previously done research surveys on ASD (Aresti-Bartolome and Garcia-Zapirain 2014),
(Ramdoss et al. 2011) give evidence that CAS treatments are more robust on those individuals
that do not face severe mental abnormalities, like HFA (High Functioning Autism) and AS (As-
perger’s Syndrome). Refer to Table 1 to read about HFA, AS and other related developmental
disorder sub-categories.

In this survey, we present a consolidated literature related to the assistance of individuals
with ASD having impairments in facial expressions (perception, production, enhancement and
encouragement). Besides discussing the work, we also discuss CAS / CVAT developed to enhance
the capabilities of individuals having ASD. The term ASD (in this survey) is used for all the indi-
viduals on the autistic spectrum. Most of the currently available literature and research ﬁndings
are based on individuals with HFA or AS, except few on LFA (Low Functioning Autism) (Hill

2

and Frith 2003). Also, the term Emotions is used to refer to only the facial expressions produced
e.g.( happiness, sadness , surprise, etc) in response of some emotional state.

The rest of the article is organized as follows: details related to autism are deﬁned in Section
2. Literature related to the distinctive CAS / CVAT / Virtual Reality (VR) based interventions
is presented in Section 3. Section 4 discusses a summary of the literature in tabular form followed
by the conclusion and future directions.

2 Brief Description of Persuasive Developmental Disorders (PDD)

Autism is deﬁned using behavioral criteria, since so far no genetic markers are known. The char-
acteristics vary considerably in severity as well as in combination, within and across individuals,
as well as with time (Association 2000). Apart from AS or HFA; the subgroups of autism are
the terminologies used to describe the higher functioning end of the autism spectrum. AS corre-
spondingly with HFA is a newer term as it was recognized later on, in early 1994 (Association
2000) (Ozonoﬀ et al. 2000). Currently, all the terms have been merged under a single umbrella
called Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Since we have classiﬁed and surveyed all the research
since 1973 all the terms are mentioned categorically according to the DSM-IV criterion and the
Autism Society of America. For a clearer understanding of diﬀerent sub-categories of develop-
mental disorders refer to Table 1.

Due to above mentioned associations and the extension in spectrum, the criteria has led to a
dramatic increase in the diagnosis of ASD. Thus, autism is not anymore a rare disorder (Hill and
Frith 2003). AS includes individuals who have ﬂuent language and better academic skills along
with obsessions and narrow interests, though they have limited facial expressions and damaged
recognition as well as interpretation of emotional perceptions (Fitzgerald 2004). Children having
ASD face problems associated with communication and usually misinterpret by depending on
literal, rather than the contextual meaning of words (Grynszpan et al. 2008). Such children also
face other problems such as tantrums and self-injurious associations (Bernard-Opitz et al. 2001)
(Ploog 2010). All these criteria has been agreed upon around the world by researchers & clinical
practitioners.

Population statistics depict that autism is a rapidly emerging developmental disability in the
United States, with an estimated annual expense for diagnosis, and treatment of 90 billion USD
(Autism Society of America) which rose up to 236-262 billion US dollars in 2014 (Buescher et al.
2014). Statistics also reveal that about 1% of the world’s total population has Autism Spectrum
Disorder, as reported by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (Rice 2009). The
total population ratio of Male:Female is 3:1 (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 2001) (Baird et al. 2000).
This proves that autism majorly and mostly occurs in males. It has also been stated that mental
abnormality, which means IQ less than 70 is strongly associated with autism and is in between
25% to 40% cases of ASD (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 2001) (Baird et al. 2000). Comparably,
Aspergers Syndrome(AS) is estimated to aﬀect at an even higher Male:Female ratio, ranging from
4:1 to 10:1 (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 2001) (Baird et al. 2000).

The use of CAS / CVAT is being utilized by researchers and is comparatively an inexpen-
sive alternative for people and therapists. The utilization of computer science in collaboration
with psychology in the treatment and studying of autism for research purposes was recognized
early on (Colby 1973) (Matson 1989). However, only since the last decade researchers have been
investigating the application of CAS mapped with Autism(Werry et al. 2001) more rigorously.

3 Distinct CAS / CVAT Based Interventions

A question from the researchers that is being handled quite critically, is whether CAS actually is
more eﬀective than traditional teaching methodologies or not. Researchers have reported positive
outcomes but only in terms of statistical inferences (Grynszpan et al. 2014). Some notable studies
have speciﬁcally addressed the subject of the eﬃcacy of CAS over traditional approaches (Ospina
et al. 2008) with individuals facing ASD (Whalen et al. 2010)(Pennington 2010).

Regardless of whether CAS is better than traditional approaches in terms of eﬃciency or not,
CAS can be given preference over traditional methods just because it could be more easier with

3

Autistic Disorder

Asperger’s
(AS)

Syndrome

Pervasive Develop-
mental
Disorders
(PDD)

Rett’s Disorder

Childhood Disintegra-
tive Disorder

Pervasive Developmen-
tal Disorder Not Oth-
erwise Speciﬁed (PDD-
NOS)

Qualitative impairment in social interaction, com-
munication (delay or lack of development of spo-
ken language) and restricted, repetitive and stereo-
typed patterns of behavior, interests, and activities
categorized by substantial diﬃculties in social in-
teraction, non-verbal communication skills

High Functioning Autism (HFA) is a term applied
to people with autistic disorder who are deemed to
be cognitively “higher functioning” (with an IQ of
70 or greater) than other people with autism. Indi-
viduals with HFA may exhibit deﬁcits in areas of
communication, emotion recognition and expres-
sion, and social interaction.

Low Functioning Autism (LFA) refers to autis-
tic people with cognitive impairments. Symptoms
may include impaired social communications or in-
teractions, bizarre behavior, and lack of social or
emotional reciprocity. Sleep problems, aggressive-
ness, and self-injurious behavior are also possible
frequent occurrences

Qualitative impairment in social interaction, re-
stricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of be-
havior, interests, and activities; no clinically signif-
icant general delay in language or cognitive devel-
opment. Generally have higher IQ levels but lack
in facial actions and social communication.

Development of multiple speciﬁc deﬁcits following
a period of normal functioning after birth. Decel-
eration of head growth, loss of previously acquired
purposeful hand skills, loss of social engagement
early in the course of life.
Appearance of poorly coordinated gait or trunk
movements. Severely impaired expressive and re-
ceptive language development with severe psycho-
motor retardation.

Marked regression in multiple areas of functioning
following a period of at least two years of appar-
ently normal development. Expressive or receptive
language; social skills or adaptive behavior; bowel
or bladder control; or play or motor skills
Severe and pervasive impairment in the develop-
ment of reciprocal social interaction or verbal and
non-verbal communication skills and stereotyped
behaviors, interests, and activities.The criteria for
autistic disorder are not met because of late age
onset; atypical and/or sub-threshold symptomo-
tology are present.

Table 1 Sub-categories of Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDD). This table is inspired by literature presented
in the DSM-IV and studies reported by Autism Society of America (ASA).

CAS to devise treatments with unlimited repeats, greater precision and lesser variability thus,
ensuring higher treatment ﬁdelity. This would also make it possible to reach-out remote areas
at a larger scale by saving cost, due to automation. Along with reduced requirement for highly
qualiﬁed and trained, expensive, service providing professionals, this also paves way for larger
rate of diﬀusion of treatment, training, and education. We can also discern that CAS compared
to human interventions is more eﬀective because the helper or the attendant in human instructed
sessions can induce maladaptive behaviors unintentionally while giving individual more attention.

4

In the facial expression based interventions we have sub divided the categories into interven-

tions that target

– Non-Verbal Communication Skills (refer to Section 3.1) i.e. facial expressions, emotion recog-

nition, aﬀect recognition, maintaining eye contact, decision making, etc.

– Verbal Social Skills (refer to Section 3.2) i.e. social interaction such as dealing with everyday
conﬂicting scenarios, communicating with people, dealing with people in the society, language
and reading skills, spontaneous greetings to peers, etc.

– Virtual Reality / Augmented Reality (refer to Section 3.3) i.e. technology inculcating both
verbal social skills & non-verbal communication skills in an Augmented Reality based CAS /
CVAT intervention.

3.1 Non-Verbal Skills

Communication with people is much more than what a person has to say or the messages given by
physiological changes and facial expressions. This includes implicit messages whether intention-
ally or unintentionally which are expressed through non-verbal cues. Non-verbal communication
includes facial expressions, the tone and pitch of the voice, gestures, body language (kinesics) and
distance between the communicators (proxemics) but the main focus lies with the expressions of
the face.

Plienis et al. (Plienis and Romanczyk 1985) reported seventeen individuals (aged 4-14 years
with mean age 8 years 2 months) out of which 6 individuals had ASD. Individuals were involved in
both human and computer instructed sessions in an alternating treatment design which consisted
of judgmental tasks. The displaying video was faced by a two key plexiglass response panel
that seperated the screen down the vertical midline.The apparatus was situated in a medium
sized sound diminished room illuminated by ﬂorescent bulbs (2x 15W). Plienis et al. (Plienis
and Romanczyk 1985) theorized that CAS sessions are equally eﬃcacious to human instructed
methods which was contrary to the previous studies (Richmond 1983) (Russo et al. 1978) but
according to the claims of the authors the reason for this eﬃcacy was high quality of the speech
synthesizer, developed / programmed to produce verbal instructions for the individuals.

Chen et al. (Chen and Bernard-Opitz 1993) compared computer and human-instructed tasks
with four individuals age ranging between 4-7 years with ASD, to understand independently
selected tasks. They developed an enthusiasm scale to assess whether CAS was more amusing
than traditional human instructed mechanism. Moreover assessing whether CAS resulted in a
better task performance comparatively. Like Plienis et al. (Plienis and Romanczyk 1985), Chen
et al. (Chen and Bernard-Opitz 1993) theorized enhanced motivation in individuals using CAS.
Kodak et al. (Kodak et al. 2011) performed experiment with only one female individual (age 7
years) which showed positive results in showcasing the supremacy of CAS over human instructions.
There were several limitations in the experiment performed by Kodak et al. (Kodak et al. 2011),
for example inclusion of a therapist to move the CAS to the next trial. Secondly, the CAS was
not designed to assess generalization of the targets in a natural environment.

Whalen et al. (Whalen et al. 2006) introduced “TeachTown” a self-paced lessons and reward
game, which incorporated principles of Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) for correct responses.
The lessons focused on domains like cognitive skills, social & life skills as well as receptive language
skills. Whalen et al. (Whalen et al. 2010) studied individuals with ASD speciﬁcally to measure
the eﬃcacy of TeachTown: Basics- an educational CAS that included computer lessons and day
to day environmental activities that involve principles of ABA. The individuals were trained in
a distinct trial format with a reinforcement on correct responses in an (timed) animated game
followed by verbal praise and graphics, alongside human instructed approach. Individuals received
daily sessions on the CAS for twenty minutes approximately and a same physical activity session
as part of the TeachTown CAS protocol. Total 47 childhood individuals with ASD aged 3-6 years
were involved. The study reported improvements in receptive language and social skills after 8
weeks of training with “TeachTown”-CAS. Several limitations were reported as some instructors
did not follow the proper curriculum, data was not collected from a certain period of time as it
was not auto logged, and very minimal time was spent on the CAS.

5

Researchers in the early millennium (Silver and Oakes 2001) worked on improvement and
comprehension of emotions in individuals with ASD and AS with the “Emotion Trainer” CAS.
A single group comprising of 11 individuals (children) received CAS training while the other
group (control group) attended as a non-CAS (i.e. did not got the intervention) comprising of
11 individuals (children). The CAS can be easily understood by compartmentalizing it into 5
sections: the ﬁrst section is to identify emotions (e.g. sad, happy, angry) from a facial expression;
described and displayed in Howlin et al. (Howlin et al. 1999). The second section showed cartoon
characters with a label describing a scenario. The scenario would prompt an emotional expression
e.g (a rabbit’s image, labeled “Mary’s pet rabbit died”) and prompted whether the scenario would
make Mary happy, sad or afraid. The third section displayed an image of what a person desires
and what expressions would there be if they don’t get what they desire or what if they receive
something else apart from what they desire e.g. “Josh wants a pizza, but gets a sandwich.” Now
whether that made Josh happy or sad. The fourth section is similar to the second section but
addressed mental states rather than the physical events. Section 5 displayed an incident and asked
whether it was liked or disliked. Throughout the sections, accurate responses were awarded by
compliments ”well done” displayed on the screen. (Silver and Oakes 2001) reported signiﬁcant
statistical improvement in section 2 and section 4 of the CAS. Though no signiﬁcant improvements
for facial expressions were reported.

B¨olte et al. (B¨olte et al. 2002) designed and evaluated a CAS named FEFA to train basic
facial expression recognition skills to individuals with ASD. Study utilized an experiment of 10
(male) individuals with HFA/AS, aged 16-40 years. The participants were randomly divided into
2 groups, N = 5 to a group that would take the CAS intervention. While the other control
group, N=5 were assessed without intervention. 1000 photographs of properly distinguishable
facial expressions of females and males were collected from people of diﬀerent cultures. These
included the pictures of facial aﬀect from (Ekman et al. 1972). The images were cropped down
just to show the eyes rather than the complete face for recognition of expression for a particular
modality. For rating the photographs, cross-cultural concept of universal basic emotions (Ekman
and Friesen 1971) was chosen as reference. Two tests were designed, ﬁrst in which a complete
face with an expression representation with options of what is the person feeling at the moment.
While the other showed a cropped image of the eyes with the same options of how was the person
feeling. For correct answer, a feedback was achieved with smiles next to the correct answer. If
a wrong answer was given, a feedback sign would be displayed. If the individual selected the
wrong answer, the right answer will be displayed along with the explanation. The comics used
were from “Teaching children with autism how to mindread” (Howlin et al. 1999). However, the
engagement of CAS with individuals having ASD may need to be taught speciﬁcally (Kagohara
2011). (B¨olte et al. 2002) believe that the training module have not signiﬁcantly contributed
towards the intended behavior modiﬁcation in everyday life as expected by the authors.

B¨olte et al. (B¨olte et al. 2006) also reported that the eﬀect of CAS is to instill facial aﬀect
recognition while observing neurological structures by functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) of individuals with ASD. 10 participants were included in the study out of which 5 were
control group and the other 5 were in the intervention group (mean age 29.4 years). The fMRI
scans were made before and after the experimental group had gone through the CAS interven-
tion phase. FEFA CAS (B¨olte et al. 2002) was used to train and assess the recognition of facial
expressions (basic emotions). No signiﬁcant activation changes in the fusiform gyrus (part of
the temporal lobe and occipital lobe - brain) was observed via fMRI. Though trained partici-
pants showed behavioral improvements while considerable improvement in the basic detection
of emotional skills was also reported. As limited individuals were present for the study so no
generalization could be made and this was reported as a limitation as well. Moreover there was
no empirical data to show the clinical signiﬁcance and generalization of these eﬀects.

Moore et al. (Moore et al. 2005) developed a CAS as visual representations of facial expressions
with an “avatar”. The CAS allowed representation of facial expressions and animated sequences
conveying emotional scenarios. The avatar displayed four exclusive expressions: happy, angry, sad
and fear. The study was conducted in three diﬀerent stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the individuals were
asked to recognize expression of the avatar, by choosing the corresponding reply-representation.
In stage two, the individuals predicted the expression in diﬀerent scenarios. While in stage three,
individuals were shown an avatar in a scenario expressing an emotional expression and were

6

asked to choose which event(s) caused the expression. Analysis of the data was done by relatively
comparing the total observed responses to the total responses expected if they were selected by
chance. The author reported that 90% of the individuals who participated, were able to recognize,
predict and interpret the avatar’s emotional expressions. Moreover, they concluded that this CAS
methodology allowed the children to eﬀectively communicate with others.

Golan et al. (Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006) did two experiments in which individuals were
trained with the “Cambridge MindReading” CAS to recognize expressions in other human faces.
The core idea of the CAS, was facial expression recognition and audio expression recognition
after showing or playing a facial expression video of 3-5 seconds or auditory clip of an emotional
intonation in words. After watching the facial expression clip or the audio, the participants would
be given 4 adjectives and asked to “choose the word that best describes how the person is feeling”.
To ensure that the concepts were selected from the adult emotional range, they were selected from
the higher levels of the taxonomy; six from level four (concepts which were understood easily by a
typical 15-16 years of age group), thirteen from level ﬁve (concepts which were understood easily
by a typical 17-18 years of age group) and one from level six (concepts which were understood
easily by less than 75% of typical 17-18 years of age group). The model also comprised of 412
unique concepts, which were clustered into 24 mutually exclusive clusters such as angry group,
happy, sorry group, etc. While using these taxonomies along with visuals and auditory enhance-
ments, Baron et al. created a database of actors of both sexes of diﬀerent age and ethnicities. The
“MindReading” CAS addresses to assess the wide range of emotional expressions and to thor-
oughly measure both facial and auditory modalities. A more detailed information can be obtained
from (Baron-Cohen et al. 2004). In Golan et al. (Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006) experiment, a
total of 65 individuals participated. Out of 65 individuals / participants, 41 participants (mean
age of 30.5 years) were facing HFA / AS & having a verbal IQ & performance IQ of 108.3 and
112 respectively. 24 experiment participants (mean age of 25.3 years) were typically developing
individuals having verbal IQ 115.8 and performance IQ of 112.5. In the ﬁrst experiment HFA /
AS individuals were randomly divided into two groups. 19 individuals along with the 24 typically
developing individuals went through the CAS intervention at home for 10-15 weeks. While the
other 22 individuals were assessed without any intervention i.e. a control group. Experiment 2
repeated the same structure / procedure but with added weekly support of a tutor along with the
CAS intervention. The comparison between intervention and non-intervention of “MindReading”
CAS was conducted along with the comparison of AS / HFA individuals across 3 generalization
levels. close generalization, feature-based distant generalization and holistic distant generalization
(Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006). Participants showed no signiﬁcant improvements in the scores of
the CAS at Time1 (T1) i.e. pre CAS intervention, apart from the typically developing individuals
that performed better than the AS / HFA individuals at all recognition tasks across the Holm’s
sequential rejective Bonferroni procedure (Holm 1979) (Zhang et al. 1997).

Lacava et al. (Lacava et al. 2007) also used “MindReading” CAS to teach eight individuals
(children aged between 8-11 years) with Aspergers Syndrome(AS). Out of eight children, six were
males and two were females. Lacava et al. reported signiﬁcant improvements in children’s ability
to identify basic to complex emotions. Another positive aspect reported was, the individuals
participating in the experiment found the CAS more enjoyable and entertaining rather than the
traditional and conventional methods. Individuals showed improvement in operating the CAS. In
an another experiment, Lacava et al. (Lacava et al. 2010) used “MindReading” CAS to teach four
individuals with HFA to identify the basic to complex emotions resulting in positive outcomes
i.e. improvements in the recognition but no concrete conclusions were made. The constraint of
(Lacava et al. 2007)(Lacava et al. 2010) was the limited and small sample set / size of individuals
taking part in experiment thus generalizations on the results cannot be made.

Faja et al. (Faja et al. 2007) found that CAS based face training can aﬀect processing of
faces. Faja et al. observed that 7-10 hours of CAS based facial training results in sensitivity to
holistic face processing. In Faja’s experiment ﬁve young adult males with HFA-ASD having mean
age of 19.0 years and a full scale IQ of 99.0; were given training to identify faces according to
sex, chronological age and identity. After 3 weeks of training, post-intervention results revealed
that the trained group demonstrated more sensitivity to conﬁgurable information i.e. distance
in between the eyes relatively to the untrained lot. This depicted that identity recognition skills
can be improved through practice in recognition of the face. However, this approach had several

7

limitations like small sample size, diverse age range and inclusion of only individuals with HFA.
We conclude that generalizations cannot be made for treatment of face processing from (Faja
et al. 2007) as suﬃcient information is not available.

Beaumont & Sofronoﬀ (Beaumont and Sofronoﬀ 2008) compared a treatment group and a
control group measured on facial expressions, social competence and understanding of emotional
management strategies. Beaumont et al. developed a CAS called the “junior detective training”
which comprised of three levels. First level taught participants to decipher facial expressions along
with body postures, as well as prosody of speech of a CAS managed human like character. The
second level worked with individuals to decode the emotions of cartoonic characters in variety of
scenarios using non-verbal cues. The third level provided the individuals to use those learned social
skills to be utilized in a Virtual Reality (VR) environment e.g. dealing with a bully. Post treatment
results depicted statistical improvements comparatively from the control group. Two statistical
measuring reports were concluded: parent’s report and an instructor’s report. The reports were
questionable because it could not be assessed whether they proved clinical perspective.

Tanaka et al. (Tanaka et al. 2010) assessed facial expression processing with a curriculum-
based, experimental measure called the “Let’s Face It!” (LFI) CAS (Wolf et al. 2008). The
proposed measure was composed of seven sub-tests (game modes) that were based on the per-
ception of facial identity over a wide range of face processing tasks deﬁned by (Wolf et al. 2008).
The seven modes were: parts matching to complete faces; distinguish between changes in face
dimensions; recalling / memorizing faces; face matching with masked features; face matching of
same individual with diﬀerent expressions; distinguish between changes in dimensions of a house
and recalling / memorizing cars. A total of 117 individuals / participants facing ASD, from which
79 children, adolescents and young adults were included in the study, and were randomly divided
into two groups, active treatment and a wait-list group. The active treatment group consisted of
42 participants (34 males and 8 females) were analyzed out of 65 with a mean age of 10.5 and a
mean full scale IQ of 93.6 while the wait-list group had 52 participants out of which 37 (28 males
and 9 females) were analyzed with a mean age of 11.4 years and a mean full scale IQ of 95.9 .
The most signiﬁcant sub-test reported was to be parts / Whole identity i.e. parts matching to
complete faces based upon the “Lets Face It!” CAS (Wolf et al. 2008). Participants outcomes for
treatment diﬀered signiﬁcantly only on the test for matching parts to whole faces. For further
study, review (Wolf et al. 2008).

Cockburn et al. (Cockburn et al. 2008) developed “SmileMaze”, an expression production
recognition CVAT to enhance skills of children dynamically, and made engaging by a game format.
The Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox (CERT) (Bartlett et al. 2008) is the backbone
framework used for the “SmileMaze”. It is similiar to a Pacman game (Khenissi et al. 2013) (look
wise) while the rules are diﬀerent from a Pacman game. The user or player is a pacman (sprite)
which is navigated by the keyboard navigation keys while other, expression imposed sprites, that
act as barriers in the pathways of the maze are removed by mimicking the expression imposed
on the barrier sprites (i.e. happy / smiling). No interaction, study or testing whatsoever of the
system with individuals of ASD was reported. Cockburn et al. also compared their CVAT with
“lets face it!” (LFI) CAS (Wolf et al. 2008). But no meaningful comparison was done as the LFI
only provides recognition and not the production of facial expressions.

Golan et al. (Golan et al. 2009) developed an animated series named “The Transporters” to
enhance the facial expressions as well as emotional vocabulary. The Transporters is based on
eight characters who are vehicles that move by a rule based approach. While on the vehicles were
real human faces of actors showing diﬀerent facial expressions which were super imposed. These
vehicles were then utilized in a thematic short storyline scenario e.g “Charlie is feeling happy
with a vehicle having a face of a human showing happiness, after that showing other vehicles
having faces, to select who else is feeling happy ?”. Golan et al. based their study onto the
Empathizing-Systemizing (E-S) theory (Baron-Cohen 2009).

Hopkins et al. (Hopkins et al. 2011) tested their intervention named “FaceSay” CAS. “Face-
Say” contains three distinct modalities with avatars designed to teach social skills to individuals
having ASD. The avatars were animated photos of real persons while the motto of the games
was to promote eye gaze, facial expressions recognition and face recognition. The ﬁrst modality
was to attend to eye gaze. The avatar was surrounded by diﬀerent objects. The player was asked
to touch the object where the avatar is gazing towards. Correct responses display appreciation.

8

While the second modality was designed to teach face recognition. The player was asked to select
the proper ﬁt for that distortion present on the avatar’s face. While the third modality was to
teach to perceive the eye movements. The study was carried out with a group of HFA and LFA.
49 Individuals (24 HFA & 25 LFA) having IQ of 91.9 and 55.1 respectively were involved in “face-
Say” CAS intervention that targeted eye gaze and facial expressions and emotions. Individuals
with HFA demonstrated successful emotional recognition and social interaction. The LFA group
didn’t show promising or signiﬁcant improvements holistically.

Tsai et al. (Tsai and Lin 2011) used CVAT named “FaceFlower” to aid ASD individuals to
improve non-verbal (facial expressions) by using a ﬂower to grow by the user’s (individuals with
ASD) facial expressions. The motive was to aid individuals to pronounce their facial expressions
and practice their expressions and facial muscles to a particular expression in order to see the
plant grow. The CVAT was controlled through the facial expressions of the individual. The fa-
cial expression detection tracking and feature extraction was done using eMotion software that
classiﬁes the expressions based on facial emotions deﬁned by FACS (Ekman and Friesen 1978).
eMotion is a tool for creating interactive motions of objects for visual performances. However
there wasn’t any experiment done on any sample size through which results could be concluded.
The Facial Action Coding System (FACS) (Ekman and Friesen 1978) is a detailed structurally
based arrangement for measuring all visually apparent facial movements. FACS deﬁnes all visually
unique facial activity based on 44 unique Action Units (AUs) along with multiple classiﬁcations
of head and eye placements and movements. FACS procedures also allow for the coding of the
intensities of each facial action on a scale of 1 to 5 point intensity. For a detailed list of all AUs
and procedures review (Ekman and Rosenberg 1997).

Faja et al. (Faja et al. 2012) studied the expertise in eﬀect of training faces in adults facing
ASD and those showed initial impairments in face recognition. The authors reported the results
of study in which the individuals who participated were randomly grouped into two. First group
was to take computer training involving faces and recognizing the attributes about that face such
as gender. The other group was shown houses and asked to describe the shape of the house. The
authors evaluated that participants in face recognition and participants in house recognition, both
showed improvements on measures of memorization of the faces and houses.

Jain et al. (Jain et al. 2012) proposed a CVAT for ASD which incorporates domains of
computer-vision and computer graphics. The CVAT tracks facial features and utilizes those fea-
tures in the recognition of facial expressions of individuals. The system was built to recognize six
basic / universal expressions (Ekman and Oster 1979) i.e. anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness and
surprise. These tracked features were also used to animate an avatar which eventually mimics
individual’s expressions. This was accomplished by locating and tracking facial features, approach
detailed in (Jain et al. 2011) .

3.2 Verbal Social Skills

Verbal social skills are deﬁned as there is a high cohesion of verbal intonation and non verbal
facial expressions while communicating. For instance, when a person is fearful, his voice trembles
and the fear can be seen by their facial expressions as well as their voice. Though the CAS that
was designed speciﬁcally for audio or voice training or teaching communication are not part of
this review. But the facial expression CAS training or analysis that has voice training and also
caters to the verbal social skills are included and discussed.

Social skills are the skills we utilize regularly to interact and speak with others. Social skills are
essential in empowering a person to have and keep up smooth interactions. A considerable lot of
these abilities are critical in making and maintaining relations and fellowships. Social interactions
don’t always run smoothly but an individual’s needs to execute appropriate strategies, such as
settling clashes when problems in interaction come up. It is likewise imperative for people to have
“empathy” (i.e. having the capacity to place yourself into another person’s shoes and perceive
their sentiments) as it enables them to react in an understanding and minding approach to how
others are feeling.

Simpson et al. (Simpson et al. 2004) designed a CAS to instill social skills to fourth grade-
schoolers aged 5-6 years. All individuals had deﬁciency of social skills and were facing mild to

9

severe, language and speech impairment. (Simpson et al. 2004) designed a CAS consisting of
video-clips of typically developing individuals depicting some instances of target behavior like
sharing, following instructions of a teacher and social greetings. The authors also assessed the
grade-schoolers on the contrary in vivo generalization sessions. In these sessions, the individuals
typically interacted with control developing children. The post intervention gave improvements in
the targeted social skills though speciﬁc component analysis was not possible as they employed a
multi-probe design across all the behaviors. Thus, authors cannot assess which particular aspect
of treatment was responsible for the improvements.

Whalen et al. (Whalen et al. 2006) introduced “TeachTown” a self-paced lessons and reward
game, which incorporates principles of applied behavior analysis for correct responses. The lessons
focused on domains like cognitive skills, social & life skills as well as receptive language skills.
Nikopoulos et al.(Nikopoulos and Keenan 2007) used video modeling in two experiments as CAS
involving a couple of baseline designs. Four individuals with Autism were taught social sequences
incorporating social initiation reciprocal play, imitative responses, and object engagement. Video-
tapes were shown to individuals with respect to the social skills acting as a marker for each target
behavior. Every individual watched all the video-clips and were free to go in a place where indi-
viduals were confronted by a group of people for social interactions. The authors reported positive
results evidencing video modeling to be fruitful and successfully helped individuals with ASD.

Lacava et al.(Lacava et al. 2007) used “mindreading” CAS to teach eight individuals (children)
with AS having age 8-11 years (6 males and 2 females) to identify the basic to complex emotions.
The authors concluded signiﬁcant improvements in verbal social skills and non-verbal social skills.
Another beneﬁcial eﬀect that was reported was, the individuals participating found the CAS or
computer intervention more fun and entertaining rather than the traditional and conventional
ones and showed improved skills in operating the Systems.

Beaumont & Sofronoﬀ (Beaumont and Sofronoﬀ 2008) designed a CAS named “Junior Detec-
tive Training Program” which included a detective themed storyline along with goals and rewards
at the succession of a task which accumulate at the end. They increased levels of diﬃculty as
individual move ahead in the CAS. Individuals were asked to identify emotional responses and
then label correct responses for the characters in multiple settings. Twenty four adolescents with
ASD were included in the study while the intervention group demonstrated an increase in pre-
assessment to post-assessment results.

Sansosti et al. (Sansosti and Powell-Smith 2008) used spatio-temporal evolution of images as
(Simpson et al. 2004) (Nikopoulos and Keenan 2007) CAS in which social skills were taught to
the individuals like joining in, greetings and sharing. The CAS involved video modeled social
stories to illustrate correct social behaviors. Three individuals with HFA were included in the
study. The authors reported CAS combined with spatio-temporal evolution of images to increased
frequency of the targeted behaviors. Two week intervention was applied to the individuals within
an educational environment and the follow up after showed that each individual was able to
maintain the learned targeted behavior / communication skill.

Spatio-temporal evolution of image or video modeling isn’t actually CAS / CVAT but an
essential part of it, which is why it is included in this review to represent it as an initial step
towards development of an eﬃcient CAS / CVAT. Video modeling has been utilized to expand
recurrence and diversity of social practices, and in a perfect world a signiﬁcant part of a child’s
social repertoire should comprise of non-single social play, i.e. play including no less than one
individual other than self. Most of these examinations show proof that video modeling can build
or train a person of some target social skills. Target practices for treatment will be chosen as,
for the person’s shortages, including marking of feelings, free play, unconstrained welcome, talked
dialects appreciation, conversational discourse, co-agent play, day-by-day living aptitudes and
social play.

Grynszpan et al. (Grynszpan et al. 2008) developed a CAS in a pre-post evaluation design.
The ﬁrst modality of the pre-design phase of the CAS called “What to Choose?” prompted the
player to choose one of the three assertions about a dialogue scenario from which one assertion
would be true e.g. Carole had an exam today and the teacher is away. A friend told Carole
that the exam is canceled. How would Carole feel about this? A facial expression of a human like
character is also put up with the dialogue so as to make it easier to determine how Carole is feeling
regarding the scenario / dialogue. The characters were based on Ekman’s rules (Ekman 2003)

10

designed with Poser. The second modality of the CAS called “Cartoon Characters”. Cartoon
characters was similar to the previous one but the human like characters were replaced with
cartoonic characters in this modality to prove which one would be considered or favored. Though
it did not seem to produce any diﬀerences in the performance. While the third module named
“Faces” was also developed which was to solely recognize the facial expressions. A facial expression
image was displayed along with 6 possible choices i.e. ( Happy, Sad, Surprised, Angry, Frightened,
and without emotion) and the player had to choose one of the six emotional expressions stated.
On the other hand, post-design CAS presented a similar pattern, and called it “intruder”, but
with diﬀerent content. The post-evaluation assessed participants capabilities of learning transfer
and the acquired skills via training to a more complex task, including similar cognitive skills.
As emphasized by Loveland (Loveland 2005), the power to associate perceived emotions with a
non-still social context is considered impaired in autism.

The training lasted for a period of three months, consisting of thirteen sessions. Two groups
were made which were matched by age and academic level. A clinical group which included ten
teenage boys with HFA and having an average chronological age of 12.10 years. A control group
which comprised of normal typically developing individuals served as a reference base for the
clinical group. The average IQ of HFA individuals with the WISC [87] (Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children) was 80.5 . Results after evaluation of participants with autism theorized that
their learning transfer was not so simple compared to a simple and a rich interface. Whereas
the post assessment results demonstrated that the clinical group improved only with the simple
interface. Thus, the rich interface must have hampered learning transfer for the clinical group.

Lacava et al. (Lacava et al. 2010) taught four children with HFA to identify the basic to
complex emotions and to measure their social behavioral skills resulting in positive outcomes i.e.
improvements in the recognition but without any quantitative conclusions. Whalen et al. (Whalen
et al. 2010) conducted a large scale study on 47 individuals with ASD aged 3-6 years. The study
reported improvements in receptive language (object recognition) and social skills (expression
recognition and perception) after eight weeks of training with “TeachTown”- CAS. In order to
measure potential of CAS for learned social skills, Hopkins et al. (Hopkins et al. 2011) tested
their intervention named “FaceSay” CAS with a group of HFA and LFA. Forty-nine individuals
(24 HFA & 25 LFA) having IQ of 91.9 and 55.1 respectively were involved in “FaceSay” CAS
intervention that targeted social skills. Individuals with ASD aged 6-15 completed twelve sessions
over the period of six weeks with the CAS. Corresponding to the control group the intervention
group showed improved social interactions and behaviors with peers which was observed while
they interacted with each other in a playground.

3.3 Virtual Reality / Augmented Reality

Virtual Reality (VR) provides a framework to simulate real world scenarios using computer vision
and computer graphics. Thus, VR technology allows instructors and therapists to oﬀer a safe,
repeatable and diversiﬁable environment during learning for individuals facing ASD (Parsons
et al. 2004). Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) inculcates human-like senses and provides realism alongside
stimulus or environmental control, which facilitates scenario creation required for learning in ASD
intervention / therapy. VR advances have demonstrated potential for learning and evaluation of
kids, young people, and grown-ups with a mental imbalance.

In the last decade, Moore et al. (Moore et al. 2005) used VR as a CVAT changing the techno-
logical medium of CAS for ASD. (Moore et al. 2005) used emotional facial expression recognition
with an anthropological ’avatar’ for individuals of ASD. The CVAT allowed representation of fa-
cial expressions and animated sequences conveying emotional scenarios. The avatar displayed four
exclusive expressions happy, angry, sad and afraid. The study was conducted in modular fashion.
In the ﬁrst module, individuals were asked to recognize expression of computer generated avatar.
Second module was expression prediction. While, third module was designed to test / enhance in-
dividuals skill in predicting event that causes diﬀerent expressions. Analysis of the data was done
by relatively comparing the total observed responses to the total responses expected if they were
selected by chance. The author reported that 90% of the individuals who participated, were able

11

to recognize, predict and interpret the avatar’s emotional expressions. Moreover, they concluded
that this CAS methodology allowed the children to eﬀectively communicate with others.

Parsons et al. (Parsons et al. 2006) measured the behavior of two individuals (adolescent)
with ASD, with the help of diﬀerent VR settings, a cafe and a bus. In the study, Parsons et al.
veriﬁed that adolescents considerably interpreted the scenes and appreciated the opportunities
to keep up a dialogue. They also answered properly, although they indicated repetitive behavior
and interpreted the things virtually. Mitchell et al. (Mitchell et al. 2007) followed a similar mode
of analysis, by developing a virtual cafe. Half a dozen adolescents with ASD aged 14-16 having a
mean Verbal IQ (VIQ) of 81.9, Performance IQ (PIQ) of 87.1, and full scale IQ (FSIQ) of 83.1
(measured by WASI (Wechsler 1999)), were shown set of videos of real life scenarios going down
in a bus or cafe in a virtual environment. The participants had to give explanation of wherever
they had set to sit down and why e.g.by pointing towards a seat in a bus and as to why that
seat? The virtual environment was developed with Superscape Virtual Reality Toolkit (Zendler
1998). It was executed on a laptop using visualizer software presented in (Parsons et al. 2004).
To observe the VR environment, a joystick or a mouse was used. While to select object or person
if one needed to communicate with a person in the VR environment was done using a click of the
mouse. All the sessions were recorded for later analysis and evaluation. The training lasted for
over six weeks. The researchers theorized that there have been cases that judged improvements,
associated with time spent within the VR setting once deciding and explaining wherever they
selected to sit on the bus.

Fabri et al. (Fabri et al. 2007) based their study on how individuals with ASD interact with
characters (avatars) which are capable of showing facial expressions like (happiness, sadness,
anger and fear). Within the ﬁrst stage of the experiment, the participants, who were thirty-four
youngsters with ASD, having mean-age of 9.96 had to choose the expression which was displayed
by the avatar. In the second stage, individuals had to interpret what emotion the scene induced
while the avatar mimicked it. In the third step, the individuals needed to choose what it was that
caused the expression the avatar was expressing. The authors veriﬁed that thirty participants
ﬁgured out the emotions of the character and utilized them suitably. While the remaining four
participants, had severe autism.

While Ke & Im (Ke and Im 2013), worked with virtual reality environments involving individ-
uals with ASD in social scenarios. The primary task was to recognize the visual communication
and facial expressions of characters present. The second was to interact with them in a college
canteen. Lastly, interact with them at a party. (Ke and Im 2013) allotted associative analysis
based on perception of the individuals and the questionnaires. They obtained positive results
because the kids demonstrated that communication and interaction throughout the intervention
had redoubled as did their communicative abilities after performing the tasks.

Strickland et al. (Strickland et al. 2013) devised a CVAT known as “JobTIPS” that made it
attainable to show employment especially interview related skills for adult individuals suﬀering
from mild ASD or HFA. They used visual aids, guides, videos on the theory of mind (Baron-Cohen
et al. 1997) and virtual world (Strickland et al. 2013). Twenty-two youngsters were engaged in
the experiment to assess the eﬃciency of the CVAT. Half of the individuals completed sessions
whereas the other half made up the control group. The control group didn’t use the CVAT. Post-
intervention, the participants who used the CVAT showed considerably higher verbal skills during
the interview than the control individuals.

Kandalaft et al. (Kandalaft et al. 2013) designed a VR intervention to improve social cognitive
skills of adults with ASD. There were eight participants with mean age of 21.25 and full scale IQ
(FSIQ) of 111.88. The individuals practiced scripted role-playing scenarios during an interaction
virtually with an online multi-player entertainment game along with two facilitators (clinicians)
to help, if needed. The CVAT was designed by using Second Life v2.1 (Linden Lab 2003), a 3D
virtual environment software available for public use. The CVAT included locations like oﬃce
building, pool hall, a fast food chain, a tech store an apartment and so on. While the training
scenarios or skills targeted were social interaction with a friend, initiating a conversation in
a room, meeting strangers, negotiating in a store, giving a job interview, consoling a friend,
blind dates, etc. majorly targeting verbal and non-verbal skills. The avatars representing the
users in the VR world were modeled to resemble the participants and were driven by standard
QWERTY keyboard. All participants were trained with 10 sessions of VR training and showed

12

slight improvements but improvements were observed in all the targeted skill sets and most of
the scenarios.

Serret et al. (Serret et al. 2014) designed a slightly diﬀerent CAS called “JeStimule” which
targeted facial expression and gesture recognition through visual non-verbal codes which were
presented in the form of colors and symbols. Each basic emotion was associated with a color from
Plutchik’s emotional wheel (Plutchik 2001) (happiness = yellow, anger = red, disgust = purple,
fear = green, sadness = light blue, surprise = dark blue), while pain and neutral were associated
with black and white respectively, based on a multi-senory virtual reality environment. The CAS
was particularly designed for individuals facing LFA as there is no verbal text that needs to be read
and only controlled via color codes that are associated with emotions for example red for anger.
There were three levels of recognition that exist: recognizing the emotion expressed by a virtual
character due to a speciﬁc event (e.g. a child falls down), the same task but the face of the virtual
character is not revealed, recognizing the emotion conveyed by the non-verbal communicative
behavior of a character speaking with another character in which the verbal exchange is also
inaudible. No conclusion and inferences from the statistical studies were concluded that showed
positive results or improvements generically.

Cassidy et al. (Cassidy et al. 2015) worked to model ASD individuals (adults) perception of
emotional expressions. Authors experimented with seventeen adults and adolescents (two females
and ﬁfteen males, aged 14-21 years having VIQ of 89.6, PIQ of 97.0 and FSIQ of 92.2). Individuals
were assessed using two conditions, i.e. dynamic and static. The CVAT included twenty-one
video-clips of people showing facial expressions while receiving a present (a box of chocolates,
monopoly money, etc). While the static stimuli were gained by a single frame taken from each
dynamic stimuli were shown on the Tobii 1750 eye tracker. Tobii studio was used to record eye
movements. Complete details of the study can be obtained from (Cassidy et al. 2014). Results
showed improvements in individuals with ASD in static conditions while not so signiﬁcant in
dynamics as the stimuli is fast paced and individuals were facing diﬃculty answering correctly.

4 Summary

This section presents most inﬂuential / innovative reviewed studies in tabular form (Table 2). The
resulting 31 studies (graphically presented in Figure 1) include a total of 610 participants from
which 550 individuals had ASD, while the remaining 60 participants were typically developing
individuals. The reviewed 31 studies presented diﬀerent intervention skills which are categorized
into Non-Verbal Communication Skills (NVCS) and Verbal Social Skills (VSS) as described above,
refer Section 3.

Fig. 1 Graphical representation of number of reviewed studies for distinct intervention techniques. NVCS depicts
number of studies that target non-verbal communication skills, VSS depicts number of studies that target verbal
social skills, while VR represents number of studies in NVCS and VSS that utilizes virtual reality technology.

The review for non-verbal communication skills included 18 studies (Tanaka et al. 2010) (Tsai
and Lin 2011) (Cockburn et al. 2008) (Silver and Oakes 2001) (Grynszpan et al. 2008) (B¨olte

13

et al. 2002) (Moore et al. 2005) (Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006) (Lacava et al. 2007) (Lacava et al.
2010) (Faja et al. 2007) (Golan et al. 2009) (Hopkins et al. 2011) (Faja et al. 2012) (Kandalaft
et al. 2013) (Serret et al. 2014) (Cassidy et al. 2015) (Grynszpan et al. 2007) from which 4 studies
(Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006) (Lacava et al. 2007) (Lacava et al. 2010) (Kandalaft et al. 2013)
were a combination of both non-verbal and verbal social skills (NVCS + VSS).

While verbal social skills included 13 studies (Bernard-Opitz et al. 2001) (Whalen et al.
2010) (Strickland et al. 2013) (Beaumont and Sofronoﬀ 2008) (Colby 1973) (Whalen et al. 2006)
(Golan and Baron-Cohen 2006) (Lacava et al. 2007) (Lacava et al. 2010) (Simpson et al. 2004)
(Parsons et al. 2006) (Mitchell et al. 2007) (Ke and Im 2013) (Kandalaft et al. 2013) i.e. some
are combination of non-verbal communication which is deﬁned in table 2. Moreover, a total of 09
studies from which 5 studies (Strickland et al. 2013) (Parsons et al. 2006) (Mitchell et al. 2007)
(Ke and Im 2013) (Kandalaft et al. 2013) are the inculcation of VR / AR into CAS / CVAT with
respect to verbal social skills while 4 others (Grynszpan et al. 2008) (Moore et al. 2005) (Serret
et al. 2014) (Cassidy et al. 2014) are the inculcation of VR / AR into CAS/ CVAT with respect
to non-verbal social skills.

Table 2 deﬁned below has the ﬁelds described as:

– Author(s) / Year published.
– Mean Age of participants with (SD) standard deviation.
– Average IQ of individuals [SD].
– Participant’s characteristics.
– Skills that were intervened by the CAS.
– Type of Computer Aided System (CAS) used for the intervention.

The abbreviations that are used in the summarized Table 2 are:

TYP = Typically Developing individuals; N/A = Not Available; ASD = Autism Spectrum
Disorder; SD = Standard Deviation; Avg = Average; HFA = High Functioning Autism; LFA
= Low Functioning Autism; AS = Aspergers Syndrome; PDD-NOS = Pervasive Developmental
Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed; NS = Not Speciﬁed; NR = Not Reported; N = No.of individuals

14

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
i
c
o
s

n
i

h
c
e
e
p
s

y
r
a
t
n
u
l
o
v

n
i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

.
k
r
o
w
g
n
i
r
e
e
n
o
i
P

.
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

l
a
i
c
o
s

r
o
f

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

3
1

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

h
c
e
e
p
s

y
r
a
t
n
u

l
o
v

d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
-
d
r
a
o
b
y
e
K

.
t
u
p
t
u
o

l
a
u
s
i
v
-
o
i
d
u
a

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
G

)
g
n
i
k
a
e
p
s

n
o
n
(
D
S
A

R
N

.

R
N

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

D
S
A
h
t
i
w

7
1

y
b
l
o
C
(

y
b
l
o
C

)
3
7
9
1

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

r
e
t
u
p
m
o
C

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
o
h
t
u
A

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

r
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
C

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

t
h
g
u
a
t

r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
i

d
n
a

.
e
l
a
c
s

m
s
a
i
s
u
h
t
n
e

n
a

n
o

s
e
u
s
s
i

r
o
i
v
a
h
e
b

r
e
s
s
e
l

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
R

n
i

n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
m
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

d
n
a

t
o
n

s
a
w
y
t
i
l
e
d
ﬁ

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

.
S
A
C
g
n
i
s
u

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

.
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

.
5
9

s
w
o
d
n
i
w
h
t
i
w

S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

0
1

:
e
m
T

i

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

D
S
A
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
o
t

d

l
i

m

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i

d
n

i

t
h
g
i
E

g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
G

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
u

l
o
s

.
g
n
i
t
c
i

ﬂ
n
o
c

l
a
c
i

p
y
t

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

6

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m
e
f

2
(

t
h
g
i
E

.
)
s
e
l
a
m

.
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m
e
f

3
(

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

.
)
s
e
l
a
m
5

0
9

s
r
a
e
y

4
P
Y
T

)
1
.
1
(
s
r
a
e
y

7
D
S
A

;

8

,

P
Y
T
8
(

6
1

)
D
S
A

z
t
i
p
O
-
d
r
a
n
r
e
B

.
l
a

t
e

z
t
i
p
O
-
d
r
a
n
r
e
B
(

)
1
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

1
0
0
2

15

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
C
/

l
o
o
h
c
S

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

0
3

f
o

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
S

0
1

:
e
m
T

i

.
s
k
e
e
w
3
-
2

r
o
f

s
e
t
u
n
i
m

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

n
i

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
a
i
c
a
f

f
o

g
n
i
y
a
l
p
s
i
d

s
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

c
i
n
o
o
t
r
a
c

.
s
e
d
o
m
y
r
o
t
s

n
i

d
n
a

s
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

e
v
i
t
s
e
g
g
u
S

o
w
T

.
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
a
w
y
t
i
l
e
d
ﬁ

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
e
e
r
h
t

f
o

t
u
o

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.
r
e
n
i
a
r
T
n
o
i
t
o
m
E

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

m
o
r
f

s
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

,
s
e
g
a
m

i

l
a
i
c
a
f

n
o
o
t
r
a
c

d
e
t
a
m
n
a

i

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

s
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

g
n
i
t
c
i
p
e
d

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i

d
n

i

n
e
v
e
l
E

h
t
i
w
d
e
n

i
a
r
t

e
r
e
w

n
e
v
e
l
e

e
l
i

h
w
S
A
C

n

i

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

o
n
(
p
u
o
r
g

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

.
)
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

A
/
N

s
r
a
e
y

8
1
-
0
1

S
A
/
D
S
A
2
2

s
e
k
a
O
&
r
e
v
l
i
S

)
1
0
0
2

s
e
k
a
O

d
n
a

r
e
v
l
i
S
(

1
0
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

16

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t

r
u
o
h

2

:
e
m
T

i

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
s
k
e
e
w
5

r
o
f

k
e
e
w
r
e
p

e
l
b
i
s
s
o
p

t
o
n

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
s
u
l
c
n
o
c

.
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
i

g
n
i
s
s
i

m
o
t

e
u
d

l
a
i
t
n
e
u
q
e
s
n
o
c

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S

d
n
u
o
f

e
r
e
w
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
c
e
p
s
E

.
s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

d
n
i
m
e
h
t

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

f
o

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

d
n
a

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

n
i

y
l
e
v
i
t
a
r
a
p
m
o
c

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

d
n
a

s
e
y
e

e
h
t

n
i

.
e
c
a
f

e
h
t

n
i

d
n
i
m

t
c
e
ﬀ
a

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

s
r
e
h
t
o

e
l
i

h
w
S
A
C
h
t
i
w

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
r
e
w
5
=
N

.
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

t
u
o
h
t
i
w
d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

e
r
e
w

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

h
c
i
h
w
m
o
r
f

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

e
l
a
M
A
F
H
/
S
A
0
1

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

2
.
4
0
1

]
1
.
7
1
[

s
r
a
e
y

2
.
7
2

A
F
H
/
S
A

)
0
.
7
(

A
F
H
/
S
A
0
1

.
l
a

t
e

e
t
l
o
B

.
l
a

t
e

e
t
l
¨o
B
(

2
0
0
2

)
2
0
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

17

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.
0
0
3
5

c
a
M

r
e
w
o
P

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

2
.
3

o
i
d
u
t
S
r
e
p
y
H

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
c
A

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

r
e
p

s
e
t
u
n
i
m
5
4
(

s
y
a
d

4
2

:
e
m
T

i

)
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

o
n

h
g
u
o
h
t

l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

e
d
a
m

s
a
w
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
m

s
a
w
y
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
h
c
i
h
w
w
o
h
s

o
t

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
I

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

d
e
t
e
g
r
a
t

e
h
t

n
i

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

.
e
v
i
t
c
e
ﬀ
e

e
r
o
m

%
0
9

d
e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

e
h
t

e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

o
t

e
l
b
a

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

e
h
t

f
o

d
e
t
a
e
p
e
r

f
o

e
s
u
a
c
e
b

r
a
t
a
v
a

.
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e
R
V
e
h
t

n
i

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
i
c
o
s

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

e
m
o
H

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

S
N

:
e
m
T

i

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

.
s
r
e
e
p

o
t

s
g
n

i
t
e
e
r
g

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

s
u
o
e
n
a
t
n
o
p
s

D
S
A
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
o
t

d

l
i

m

o
w
t

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m
o
w
t
(

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

4

.
)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

A
/
N

s
r
a
e
y

5
.
5

)
0
.
1
(

D
S
A
4

.
l
a

t
e

n
o
s
p
m
i
S
(

.
l
a

t
e

n
o
s
p
m
i
S

4
0
0
2

)
4
0
0
2

g
n
i
y
f
i
t
n
e
d

i

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
a
i
c
a
f

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

&
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
n
i

g
n

i
k
a
m

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

9
2

e
r
e
w
d
e
t
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

.
s
l
r
i
g

5

d
n
a

s
y
o
b

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

S
N

s
r
a
e
y

6
1
-
7

)
6
9
.
9
(

D
S
A
4
3

.
l
a

t
e

e
r
o
o
M

.
l
a

t
e

e
r
o
o
M

(

5
0
0
2

)
5
0
0
2

18

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

d
n
i
M

e
g
d
i
r
b
m
a
C

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
p
o
t
p
a
L
M
B
I

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

2
(

s
k
e
e
w
5
1

o
t

0
1

:
e
m
T

i

.
e
m
o
H

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
g
n
i
d
a
e
r

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

g
n
i
c
n
i
v
n
o
c

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

e
v
i
s
u
l
c
n
o
c

o
N

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

.
)
k
e
e
w
/
s
r
u
o
h

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

e
h
t

n
i

d
n
i
m
e
h
t

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

)
a
(

r
o
f

n
i

d
n
i
m
e
h
t

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

)
b
(

;
s
e
y
e

d
n
i
m
e
h
t

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

)
c
(

;
s
e
c
i
o
v

e
h
t

.
s

m
l
ﬁ

e
h
t

n
i

)
k
e
e
w
/
s
r
u
o
h

2
(

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

:
e
m
T

i

.
p
o
t
p
a
L
M
B
I

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
e
m
o
h

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

d
n
i
M

e
g
d
i
r
b
m
a
C

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
g
n
i
d
a
e
r

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

g
n
i
c
n
i
v
n
o
c

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
c
i
o
V
)
b
(

;
t
s
e
t
-
b
u
s

e
c
a
F

)
a
(

r
o
f

d
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

s
t
p
e
c
n
o
c

)
c
(

;
t
s
e
t
-
b
u
s

.
t
s
e
t
-
b
u
s

n
i

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
o
t
u
t

y
l
k
e
e
w
+

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

e
v
i
s
u
l
c
n
o
c

o
N

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

.
s
p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

h
c
i
h
w
m
o
r
f

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

N

f
o

e
d
a
m

s
p
u
o
r
g

o
w
t

A
F
H
/
S
A
6
2

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

o
s
l
a

e
r
e
w

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

M
A
C
h
t
i
w

h
c
i
h
w
m
o
r
f

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

N

f
o

e
d
a
m

s
p
u
o
r
g

o
w
t

A
F
H
/
S
A
1
4

=
N
d
n
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i
;
)
0
.
2
1
1
(
Q

I
.
P

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

t
u
o
h
t
i
w
)
8
.
5
1
1
(
Q

I
.

V

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

P
Y
T
4
2

)
5
.
2
1
1
(
Q

I
.
P

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

e
r
e
w
2
2

:

P
Y
T

M
A
C
e
h
t

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

)
3
.
8
0
1
(
Q

I
.

V

t
n
e
w
t
a
h
t

9
1
=

:

S
A
/
A
F
H

;
)
3
.
0
1
(
s
r
a
e
y

3
.
5
2
P
Y
T

)
1
.
9
(
s
r
a
e
y

S
A
/
A
F
H

5
.
0
3

,

D
S
A
1
4
(

5
6

)
P
Y
T
4
2

o
s
l
a

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

M
A
C
h
t
i
w
d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

=
N
d
n
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i
;
)
9
.
3
0
1
(
Q

I
.
P

,

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

t
u
o
h
t
i
w
,
)
2
.
9
0
1
(
Q

I
.

V

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

e
r
e
w
3
1

:

P
Y
T

M
A
C
e
h
t

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

)
7
.
5
0
1
(
Q

I
.

V

t
n
e
w
t
a
h
t

3
1
=

:

S
A
/
A
F
H

P
Y
T
3
1

e
l
i

h
w

)
3
.
6
0
1
(
Q

I
.
P

S
A
/
A
F
H

5
.
5
2

;
)
3
.
9
(
s
r
a
e
y

P
Y
T

)
0
.
9
(
s
r
a
e
y
5
2

,

D
S
A
1
4
(

5
6

)
P
Y
T
4
2

n
e
h
o
C
n
o
r
a
B

d
n
a

n
a
l
o
G

(

n
e
h
o
C
-
n
o
r
a
B

d
n
a

n
a
l
o
G

-

)
6
0
0
2

1

t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
E

6
0
0
2

n
e
h
o
C
n
o
r
a
B

d
n
a

n
a
l
o
G

(

n
e
h
o
C
-
n
o
r
a
B

d
n
a

n
a
l
o
G

-

)
6
0
0
2

2

t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
E

6
0
0
2

19

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

e
p
a
c
s
r
e
p
u
S
(

5
.
5
v

e
p
a
c
s
r
e
p
u
S

h
t
i
w
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

)
r
e
z
i
l
a
u
s
i
v

4
6
/
z
H
M
0
5
6

p
o
t
p
a
L
:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
8
9

s
w
o
d
n
i
W

/
M
A
R
B
M

e
m
o
c
t
u
o

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

.
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l
a
u
Q

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

e
v
i
t
s
e
g
g
u
S

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

/

S
A
C
h
t
i
w
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
g
n
e

r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
e

o
N

.

T
A
V
C

.
d
e
d
u
l
c
n
o
c

e
r
e
w

.
s
k
e
e
w
4

:
e
m
T

i

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

Q
I
P

I

;
1
9
Q
V
e
k
i
M

.
0
0
1
Q
I
S
F

;
7
0
1

;
0
7
Q
V

I

;
3
8
Q
I
P

3
7
Q
I
S
F

n
h
o
J

d
n
a

s
r
a
e
y

7
.
7
1

:
e
k
i
M

4
1

:

n
h
o
J

s
r
a
e
y

n
h
o
J
(
D
S
A
2

)
e
k
i
M
d
n
a

.
l
a

t
e

s
n
o
s
r
a
P

.
l
a

t
e

s
n
o
s
r
a
P
(

6
0
0
2

)
6
0
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

20

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

p
o
h
s
o
t
o
h
P
e
b
o
d
A
&
t
n
i
o
P
r
e
w
o
P

S
M

,
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
s

l
a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

0
.
1

e
m

i
r
P
E

-

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

t
a

n
o
i
t
u
l
o
s
e
r

p
o
t
p
a
l

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

2
7

t
a

n
o
i
t
u
l
o
s
e
r

e
g
a
m

i

8
6
7
x
4
2
0
1

.
s
e
g
a
m

i

g
n
i
t
i
d
e

r
o
f

r
u
o
h

1

o
t

s
e
t
u
n
i
m
0
3

g
n
i
t
s
a
l

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t

8

:
e
m
T

i

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
I
P
P

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

d
n
a

e
t
a
i
d
e
m
m

i

l
a
i
c
a
f

d
e
y
a
l
e
d

,
y
r
o
m
e
m

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

,
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

d
n
o
c
e
s

o
t

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
S

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

,
e
g
a

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

s
e
c
a
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.
y
t
i
t
n
e
d
i

l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

y
l
n
o

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

r
e
d
r
o

d
n
a

p
u
o
r
g

.
d
o
i
r
e
p

k
e
e
w
-
3

a

g
n
i
r
u
d

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

A
F
H
h
t
i
w
s
e
l
a
m
0
1

.
e
g
a

f
o

s
r
a
e
y

2
3
-
2
1

]
9
.
3
1
[

4
.
9
9

s
r
a
e
y

6
.
9
1

)
4
.
7
(

A
F
H
0
1

)
7
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

a
j
a
F
(

.
l
a

t
e

a
j
a
F

7
0
0
2

21

t
s
o
p

o
t

e
r
p

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

e
r
e
w
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

-

S
A
C
M
A
C
n
i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

.
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

.

S
A
h
t
i
w

f
o

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

r
e
h
t
o

x
i
s

n
o

t
o
n

t
u
b

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
T

.
g
n
i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

e
c
a
f

.
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
a
w
y
t
i
l
e
d
ﬁ

.
r
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

f
o

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v
(

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

:
e
m
T

i

.
l
o
o
h
c
s

d
n
a

e
m
o
H

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

d
n
i
m
e
g
d
i
r
b
m
a
C

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
g
n
i
d
a
e
r

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

6
(

e
g
a

f
o

s
r
a
e
y

1
1
-
8

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

2

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m

A
/
N

s
r
a
e
y

3
.
0
1

)
2
.
1
(

S
A
8

.
l
a

t
e

a
v
a
c
a
L

.
l
a

t
e

a
v
a
c
a
L
(

7
0
0
2

)
7
0
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

h
t
i
w
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

y
t
i
l
a
e
R

l
a
u
t
r
i
V
e
p
a
c
s
r
e
p
u
S

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
s
k
e
e
w
6

:
e
m
T

i

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

t
i
k
l
o
o
T

t
n
e
m
g
d
u
j

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

e
r
p

.
s
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
d

g
n
i
n
o
s
a
e
r

d
n
a

f
o

s
n
g
i
s

e
l
t
t
i
l

d
e
t
a
r
t
s
n
o
m
e
d

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

R
V
t
s
o
p

.
s
n
i
a
g

e
v
i
t
c
e
t
e
D
r
o
i
n
u
J

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

y
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
L

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
s
k
e
e
w
7

:
e
m
T

i

S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

r
e
h
t
O

.
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
h

f
o

n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

d
e
l
i
a
t
e
d

o
n

h
g
u
o
h
t

e
v
a
h

y
a
m

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
d
o
m

.
d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

.
d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

e
r
e
w
s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
n

.
y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

s
e
l
a
m

r
u
o
f
(

S
A
/
D
S
A

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

e
e
r
h
t

d
n
a

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

7

;
1
.
7
8
Q
I
P

;
9
.
1
8
Q
V

I

Q
I
S
F

1
.
3
8

s
r
a
e
y

6
1
-
4
1

S
A
/
D
S
A
7

.
l
a

t
e

l
l
e
h
c
t
i

M

.
l
a

t
e

l
l
e
h
c
t
i

M

(

7
0
0
2

)
7
0
0
2

=
N
e
l
i

h
w
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

.
s
p
u
o
r
g

t
s
i
l

t
i
a
w
o
t

3
2

y
l
m
o
d
n
a
R

.
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

o
t

6
2
=
N
d
e
n
g
i
s
s
a

5

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m
4
4

.
e
v
o
b
a

r
o

5
8

s
r
a
e
y

1
1
-
7

S
A
9
4

.
l
a

t
e

t
n
o
m
u
a
e
B

d
n
a

t
n
o
m
u
a
e
B
(

)
8
0
0
2

ﬀ
o
n
o
r
f
o
S

8
0
0
2

22

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

,
e
z
a
M

e
l
i

m
S

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

e
r
e
w
s
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

o
n

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
e
n
o
d

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
S
N

:
e
m
T

i

g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t
(

s
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

)
e
m
a
g

n
o
i
t
a
u
l
a
v
e

d
n
a

e
m
a
g

r
o
h
t
u
A

,
o
w
T

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
l
o
o
h
c
S

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

p
u
o
r
g

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

e
l
i
h
w
S
A
C
e
h
t

f
o

e
d
o
m
c
i
s
a
b

e
h
t

n
i

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

h
t
o
b

n
i

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

d
e
w
o
h
s

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
I

D
S
A

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
s
e
i
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
e
h
t

g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t

1
1
(

s
h
t
n
o
m
3

:
e
m
T

i

.
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
C

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

.
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

a

r
o

e
t
u

l
o
s
b
a

e
c
a
f

n

i

t
n
e
m

r
i
a
p
m

i

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

g
n

i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

S
N

-

t
n
e
m
i
r
e
p
x
e

.
d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

n
r
u
b
k
c
o
C
(

)
8
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

8
0
0
2

o
N

.
l
a

t
e

n
r
u
b
k
c
o
C

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

.
y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i

d
n

i

n
e
T

.
)
s
y
o
b

s
y
o
b

8
(

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

l
a
c
i

p
y
t

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

n
e
T

e
g
a
n
e
e
t

0
1
(
A
F
H

.
)
s
l
r
i
g

2

d
n
a

.
]
5
.
8
1
[

5
.
0
8

s
r
a
e
y

9
P
Y
T

A
F
H

;
)
0
.
1
(

s
r
a
e
y

2
1

.
)
2
.
1
(

,

P
Y
T
0
1
(

0
2

)
A
F
H
0
1

n
a
p
z
s
n
y
r
G

(

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
p
z
s
n
y
r
G

)
7
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
p
z
s
n
y
r
G

(

)
8
0
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

8
0
0
2

23

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

7
1

a

h
t
i
w
C
P
M
B
I

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
r
o
t
i
n
o
m
h
c
n
i

.
e
m
o
H
/
m
o
o
R
g
n
i
t
s
e
T

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

r
o
f

y
a
d

r
e
p

s
e
d
o
s
i
p
e

3
-
2

:
e
m
T

i

s
r
e
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
T
e
h
T

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.

D
V
D

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

d
n
ﬁ

o
t

d
e
s
u

e
r
e
w

e
t
e
r
c
n
o
c

o
n

h
g
u
o
h
t

y
t
i
l
e
d
ﬁ

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
s
u
l
c
n
o
c

l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
e

d
e
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

p
u
o
r
g

h
c
a
e

r
o
f

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
e
h
w
r
e
v
e
w
o
H

.
e
d
a
m

.
s
k
e
e
w
4

.
d
n
u
o
f

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

.
y
r
a
l
u
b
a
c
o
v

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

=
N
(

s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

6
5

s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p
D
S
A
0
2

h
t
i
w
d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
r
e
w

D
S
A
8
1
=
N

;

S
A
C

d
n
a

l
o
r
t
n
o
c

e
r
e
w

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
n

i
l
e
s
a
b

)
.
P
Y
T
8
1
=
N
h
t
i
w

A
/
N

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

8
1

;
S
A
/
A
F
H

l
o
r
t
n
o
c
D
S
A

;
)
0
.
1
(
6
.
5

)
0
.
1
(
2
.
6

)
P
Y
T

;
)
1
.
1
(
4
.
5

P
Y
T

D
S
A

8
3
(

6
5

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
l
o
G

.
l
a

t
e

n
a
l
o
G

(

9
0
0
2

)
9
0
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

24

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.
r
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

l
a
n
o
s
r
e
P

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

0
1
-
7

r
o
f

k
e
e
w
/
s
r
u
o
h

2
-
1

:
e
m
T

i

.

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
C

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

d
n
i
m
e
g
d
i
r
b
m
a
C

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

g
n
i
d
a
e
r

l
l
a
m

s

o
o
t

e
z
i
s

e
l
p
m
a
s

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

e
h
T

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

e
v
i
s
u
l
c
n
o
c

y
n
a

r
o
f

e
h
t

e
v
o
r
p

o
t

s
a
w
s
u
c
o
f

n
a
m
u
h

r
e
v
o

S
A
C

f
o

y
t
i
r
o
i
r
e
p
u
s

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

d
e
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
i

e
r
e
w
r
e
v
e
w
o
h

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

.
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
m
o
r
f

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

.
s
k
e
e
w

.
)
I
F
L
(

!
t
I

e
c
a
F
s
’
t
e
L

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

y
l
n
o

e
h
T

.
d
n
a
h

e
e
r
f

n
e
v
i
g

e
r
e
w

0
0
1

e
t
e
l
p
m
o
c

o
t

s
a
w
t
n
i
a
r
t
s
n
o
c

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

s
r
u
o
h

0
2

:
e
m
T

i

s
t
c
e
ﬀ
e

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

o
N

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
g
n
i
n
i
a
r
t

k
e
e
w
r
e
p

s
e
t
u
n
i
m

I
F
L

e
h
t

f
o

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

e
l
o
h
w
/

t
r
a
p

y
l
n
O

.
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
m
g
n
i
y
f
i
t
n
e
d
i

t
o
n

e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

.
l
i
a
t
e
d

t
n
e
i
c
ﬃ
u
s

n
i

d
e
ﬁ
i
c
e
p
s

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
e
m
o
H

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

d
n
a

e
g
a

f
o

s
r
a
e
y

1
1
-
7

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

.
e
t
a
r
e
t
i
l

r
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

d
n
a

t
x
e
t

A
/
N

s
r
a
e
y

6
.
8

)
8
.
0
(

A
F
H
4

.
l
a

t
e

a
v
a
c
a
L

.
l
a

t
e

a
v
a
c
a
L
(

0
1
0
2

)
0
1
0
2

25

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

d
n
a

s
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

h
t
i
w
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

I
F
L

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

p
p
a

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n

i

D
S
A
9
7

2
4
=
N
h
c
i

h
w
m
o
r
f

h
t
i
w
d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
r
e
w

7
3
=
N
e
l
i

h
w
S
A
C

.
t
s
i
l

g
n
i
t
i
a
w
e
r
e
w

s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

]
1
.
2
2
[
6
.
3
9

)
8
.
3
(

s
r
a
e
y

5
.
0
1
D
S
A

D
S
A
9
7

.
l
a

t
e

a
k
a
n
a
T

.
l
a

t
e

a
k
a
n
a
T
(

0
1
0
2

)
0
1
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.
s
c
i
s
a
B
:
n
w
o
T
h
c
a
e
T

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.

m
o
o
r
s
s
a
l
C

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

0
2
(
s
k
e
e
w
2
1

:
e
m
T

i

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
S

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
)
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
/
s
e
t
u
n
i
m

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

g
n
i
s
u

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
e
z
i
s

y
r
a
l
u
b
a
c
o
v

e
v
i
t
p
e
c
e
r

n
i

y
l
n
o

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

t
s
e
t

b
a
c
o
v

e
r
u
t
c
i
p

y
d
o
b
a
e
P

.
)
7
9
9
1

n
n
u
D
d
n
a

n
n
u
D
(

r
o
f

n
o
i
s
s
e
s
/
s
e
t
u
n
i
m
5
2
-
0
1
:
e
m
T

i

s
r
e
n
i
a
r
t

h
t
i
w

l
o
o
h
c
S

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

2
1
(

s
k
e
e
w
6

f
o

s
a
e
r
a

l
l
a

n
i

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

e
h
t

e
l
i
h
w
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

A
F
H
h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
I
:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

S
A
C
y
a
S
e
c
a
F

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

A
F
L

.
y
l
e
v
i
t
a
r
a
p
m
o
c

s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n
i

e
v
i
t
i
n
g
n
o
c

r
e
w
o
l

d
a
h

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

.
g
n
i
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f

n
o
i
t
o
m
e

n
i

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

l
a
i
c
o
s

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d
A
F
L

h
t
i
w

.
s
l
l
i
k
S

l
a
i
c
o
S

e
r
e
w
s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

2
2

n
o
n

5
2

e
l
i

h
w
d
e
n
i
a
r
t

s
t
n
a
p

i
c
i
t
r
a
p

d
e
n
i
a
r
t

.

D
S
A
h
t
i
w

A
/
N

s
r
a
e
y

8
.
3

)
8
.
0
(

D
S
A
7
4

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
l
a
h
W

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
l
a
h
W

(

0
1
0
2

)
0
1
0
2

26

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n

i

A
F
H
4
2

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

e
r
e
w
1
1
=
N

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

;
]
5
.
9
1
[

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

3
1
=
N
h
c
i

h
w
m
o
r
f

9
.
1
9
A
F
H

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

A
F
L

5
2

,
e
l
i

h
w
d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

1
.
5
5
A
F
L

.
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

h
c
i
h
w
m
o
r
f

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

]
9
.
0
2
[

5
0
.
0
1
A
F
H

;
)
3
.
2
(

s
r
a
e
y

)
3
.
3
(

s
r
a
e
y

3
.
0
1
A
F
L

;

A
F
H
4
2
(
9
4

)
A
F
L

5
2

.
l
a

t
e

s
n
i
k
p
o
H

.
l
a

t
e

s
n
i
k
p
o
H
(

1
1
0
2

)
1
1
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

o
n

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
S
N

:
e
m
T

i

,
r
e
w
o
l
F

e
c
a
F

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

.
d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

p
o
h
s
o
t
o
h
P
e
b
o
d
A
&
t
n
i
o
P
r
e
w
o
P

S
M

,
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
s

l
a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

0
.
1

e
m

i
r
P
E

-

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

t
a

n
o
i
t
u
l
o
s
e
r

p
o
t
p
a
l

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

2
7

t
a

n
o
i
t
u
l
o
s
e
r

e
g
a
m

i

8
6
7
x
4
2
0
1

.
s
e
g
a
m

i

g
n
i
t
i
d
e

r
o
f

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

f
o

y
r
o
m
e
m
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
r
o
h
t
u
A

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

n
e
h
w
r
o

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

8

:
e
m
T

i

.
t
e
m

s
a
w
a
i
r
e
t
i
r
c

e
h
t

f
o

r
e
h
t
i
e

n
o

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

e
c
a
f

/

e
s
u
o
h

:

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
d
o
m

.
n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
I
P
P

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
a
i
c
a
F

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

,
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
n

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

r
o

e
t
u

l
o
s
b
a

e
c
a
f

n

i

t
n
e
m

r
i
a
p
m

i

g
n

i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

S
N

-

t
n
e
m
i
r
e
p
x
e

.
d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

o
N

i
a
s
T
(

.
l
a

t
e

i
a
s
T

)
1
1
0
2

n
i
L

d
n
a

1
1
0
2

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

o
t

d
e
n
g
i
s
s
a

y
l
m
o
d
n
a
r

g
n

i

n
i
a
r
t

e
r
e
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

e
c
a
F

n

(

g
n

i

n
i
a
r
t

e
c
a
f

r
e
h
t
i
e

e
t
u

l
o
s
b
a

h
t
i
w
6

,
9
=

o
t

r
o

)
t
n
e
m

r
i
a
p
m

i

3
.
6
1
1

;
]
3
.
6
1
[

e
s
u
o
H

;
9
=
n
(

g
n
n

i

i
a
r
t

e
s
u
o
h

g
n

i

n
i
a
r
t

e
t
u

l
o
s
b
a

h
t
i
w
7

.
)
t
n
e
m

r
i
a
p
m

i

2
.
8
1
1

]
4
.
7
1
[

4
.
2
2

g
n

i

n
i
a
r
t

;
)
4
.
4
(

s
r
a
e
y

e
c
a
F

s
r
a
e
y

5
.
1
2

g
n
n

i

i
a
r
T

e
s
u
o
H

)
6
.
5
(

D
S
A
8
1

)
2
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

a
j
a
F
(

.
l
a

t
e

a
j
a
F

2
1
0
2

27

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

.
p
o
h
s

e
e
ﬀ
o
c

e
h
t

r
o

s
a

s
e
m
o
H

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

h
c
u
m

s
A

:
e
m
T

i

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

e
l
g
n
i
s

a

n
i

o
t

t
n
a
w
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

s

m
i
a
l
C

.
d
e
d
u
l
c
n
o
c

.
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

n
i

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
e

o
n

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

e
r
e
w
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.
g
n
i
t
t
i
s

b
a
L

n
e
d
n
i
L
(

1
.
2
v

e
f
i

L

d
n
o
c
e
S

h
t
i
w
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

)
3
0
0
2

/
0
0
5
8

n
o
e
d
a
R

i

T
A

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

h
c
n
i

4
2

h
t
i
w
U
P
C
z
H
G
5
.
1

.
r
o
t
i
n
o
m
0
0
2
1
x
0
2
9
1

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

0
1

:
e
m
T

i

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
I

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

n
o
i
t
o
m
e

n
i

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

e
m
o
s

n
i

s
r
e
h
t
o

n
i

s
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

e
h
t

r
e
f
n
i

o
t

y
t
i
l
i
b
a

e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c
e
r

g
n
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

f
o
m
r
o
f

e
h
t

.
s
l
l
i
k
s

a

n
i

g
n
i
v
i
l

y
b

s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
s

,
n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

.
y
r
o
t
s

e
m
a
g

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
N

l
a
i
c
a
f

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

r
o

e
t
u

l
o
s
b
a

e
c
a
f

n

i

t
n
e
m

r
i
a
p
m

i

.
g
n

i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

S
N

s
r
a
e
y

2
1

o
t

5

;

A
F
L

2

;

A
F
H

6
(
D
S
A
9

e
r
e
v
e
s

1

)
D
S
A

n
i
a
J
(

.
l
a

t
e

n
i
a
J

)
2
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

2
1
0
2

28

n
o
n

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
i
c
o
S

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
b
r
e
v

s
e
l
a
m
x
i
s
(

S
A
/
D
S
A

h
t
i
w
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n
I

8

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

o
w
t

d
n
a

8
8
.
1
1
1

Q
I
S
F

]
1
5
.
8
[

)
1
7
.
2
(

s
r
a
e
y

5
2
.
1
2

S
A
/
D
S
A
8

.
l
a

t
e

t
f
a
l
a
d
n
a
K

t
f
a
l
a
d
n
a
K

(

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

3
1
0
2

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

,
S
P
I
T
b
o
J

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
e
p

s
e
t
u
n
i
m
0
3

:
e
m
T

i

.

m
o
o
r

y
t
i
s
r
e
v
i
n
U

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

t
s
e
t

t
s
o
p

o
t

e
r
P

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o

r
e
f
s
n
a
r
t

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

.
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

n
i

s
l
l
i
k
s

g
n
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c

)
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

s
r
u
o
h

3
(

k
e
e
w
1

:
e
m
T

i

f
o

e
m
o
c
t
u
o

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

d
e
t
a
r
t
s
n
o
m
e
d

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

t
a
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

e
h
t

g
n
o
l
a

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n
i

d
i
d

s
a

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n
i

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i

e
h
t

g
n
i
t
e
l
p
m
o
c

r
e
t
f
a

s
e
c
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

e
v
i
t
a
c
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

r
i
e
h
t

.
s
k
s
a
t

e
h
t

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
y
r
a
r
b
i
l

,
l
o
o
h
c
S

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

w
e
i
v
r
e
t
n
i

b
o
j

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

e
h
t

e
l
i

h
w
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l
a
i
c
o
s

i

g
n
h
c
a
e
T

d
e
v
i
e
c
e
r

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

1
1

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

o
g

t
o
n

d

i

d

1
1

r
e
h
t
o

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

S
N

)
3
0
.
1
(

s
r
a
e
y

1
2
.
8
1

A
F
H
/
S
A
2
2

.
l
a

t
e

d
n
a
l
k
c
i
r
t
S

d
n
a
l
k
c
i
r
t
S
(

)
3
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

3
1
0
2

l
a
i
c
o
s

i

g
n
h
c
a
e
T

,
n
o
i
t
a
i
t
i

n

i

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

–

S
N

s
r
a
e
y

0
1
-
9

/

S
A
4
0

A
F
H

e
K
(

M

I

&
E
K

)
3
1
0
2
m

I

d
n
a

3
1
0
2

29

e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

n
o

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
.

.

.

a

e
c
i
w
t

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
u
o
h
-
1

:
e
m
T

i

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
p
a
d
a

e
l
b
a
t
i
u
s

.
s
k
e
e
w
4

r
o
f

k
e
e
w

l
a
e
r

n
o

d
n
a

s
r
a
t
a
v
a

n
o

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
e
t
f
a

n
e
e
s

e
r
e
w
s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

.
s
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

f
o

s
e
r
u
t
c
i
p

e
f
i
l

,

E
l
u
M

i
t
S
e
J

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

.

m
o
o
r
A

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

.
S
N

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

e
y
e

0
5
7
1

i
i
b
o
T

:
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
H

r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R

:
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
S

.
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
a

d
e
p
o
l
e
v
e
d

A
F
H

;
e
g
a
r
e
v
A
=
g
v
A

;
n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
D
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S
=
D
S

;
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
D
m
u
r
t
c
e
p
S
m

s
i
t
u
A
=
D
S
A

;
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
A
t
o
N
=
A
/
N

;
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
i

g
n
i
p
o
l
e
v
e
D
y
l
l
a
c
i
p
y
T
=
P
Y
T

e
s
i
w
r
e
h
t
O
t
o
N
r
e
d
r
o
s
i
D

l
a
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
D
e
v
i
s
a
v
r
e
P
=
S
O
N
D
D
P

-

;
e
m
o
r
d
n
y
S

s
r
e
g
r
e
p
s
A
=
S
A

;

m

s
i
t
u
A
g
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
n
u
F
w
o
L
=
A
F
L

;

m

s
i
t
u
A
g
n
i
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
F
h
g
i
H
=

y
t
i
l
a
e
R

l
a
u
t
r
i
V
=
R
V

;
s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

f
o
.
o
N
=
N

;
d
e
ﬁ
i
c
e
p
S

t
o
N
=
S
N

;
d
e
ﬁ
i
c
e
p
S

.
r
e
k
c
a
r
t

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
a
i
c
a
F

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n
I

:
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

c
i
t
a
t
s

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

.
d
e
d
e
e
n

s
a

h
c
u
m

s
A

:
e
m
T

i

e
h
t

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

i
l
u
m

i
t
s

.
i
l
u
m

i
t
s

c
i
m
a
n
y
d

.
S
N

:
g
n
i
t
t
e
S

n
o
i
t
a
c
i

n
u
m
m
o
c

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

l
a
b
r
e
v
-
n
o
n

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m
5
1
(
D
S
A
7
1

)
s
e
l
a
m
e
f

2

f
o
Q
V

I

f
o
Q
I
P

;

6
.
9
8

d
n
a

0
.
7
9

f
o
Q
I
S
F

2
.
2
9

s
r
a
e
y

1
2
-
4
1

D
S
A
7
1

.
l
a

t
e

y
d
i
s
s
a
C

.
l
a

t
e

y
d
i
s
s
a
C
(

5
1
0
2

)
5
1
0
2

30

n
o
i
t
o
m
e

g
n
n

i

i
a
r
T

,
s
l
l
i
k
s

n
o
i
t
i

n
g
o
c
e
r

,
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

l
a
i
c
a
f

y
t
i
l
a
e
r

l
a
u
t
r
i
v

s
e
l
a
m
e
f

2

d
n
a

s
e
l
a
m

1
3
(

s
l
a
u
d

i
v
i
d
n

i

3
3

n
a
c

9
1

h
c
i

h
w
m
o
r
f

e
r
a

4
1

e
l
i

h
w
d
a
e
r

.
)
s
r
e
d
a
e
r
-
n
o
n

S
N

s
r
a
e
y

4
.
1
1

)
6
1
.
3
(

A
F
H
3
2
(

3
3

)
S
O
N
D
D
P

-

4

;

A
F
L

/

6

;
S
A

.
l
a

t
e

t
e
r
r
e
S

.
l
a

t
e

t
e
r
r
e
S
(

)
4
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

s
e
i
d
u
t
S

d
e
w
e
i
v
e
R

f
o

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A
&
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

:
2

e
l

b
a
T

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

y
g
o
l
o
n
h
c
e
T

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
l
l
i
k
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

]

D
S

[

)
D
S
(

t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

Q
I

.
g
v
A

e
g
A
n
a
e
M

-
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
t
n
a
p

)
s
(

r
o
h
t
u
A

5 Conclusion and Future Directions

This survey describes how individuals of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are handled by tech-
nology based intervention methodologies, which include: contemporary Computer Aided Systems
(CAS), Computer Vision Assisted Technologies (CVAT) and Virtual Reality (VR). Individuals
with ASD have diﬃculty interacting with their peers, teachers and parents, etc. Most of them
prefer to interact with computers or augmented reality systems, which proves that technology
based interventions can be an eﬀective tool for enhancing the purpose of teaching and learning
facial expressions as well as social skills. As summarized in Table 2, most of the technology based
interventions are not designed to fulﬁll needs of individuals suﬀering from ASD completely, as
they have variable needs.

Major conclusions and future directions drawn from this extensive literature survey are pre-

sented below:

1. Generally, surveyed literature concluded much promise for CAS / CVAT interventions al-
though none of the studies reported concrete evidence that it was able to train or modify
a complete behavior of the selected individuals. However, many studies reported signiﬁcant
improvements often through statistical validations.

2. There is a need to design an intervention technology that follows a standard which is accepted
to the clinicians as well as to the AI research community. An eﬀort to standardize intervention
technologies can be seen in a recent study in robotics (Begum et al. 2016), while Clark et al.
(Clark and Choi 2005) & Higgins et al. (Higgins and Boone 1996) suggested principles to
guide the development of an eﬀective CAS / CVAT.

3. There is a dire need to create standard audio / video database of individuals facing ASD. In
the absence of such database making artiﬁcial intelligence / machine learning algorithms is
highly challenging. Secondly, the eﬃcacy or robustness of published results remain doubtful
or uncertain.

4. Most of the researchers described their CAS / CVAT in a therapeutic or a clinical fashioned
way. They demonstrated their ﬁndings and observations but do not elaborate the architecture
and design of CAS / CVAT thoroughly i.e. the way an application is structured and what
algorithms are deﬁned and utilized in developing those CAS / CVAT w.r.t. computer vision
(CV). While some researchers described and elaborated the architecture w.r.t CV domain
(Jain et al. 2011) (Tsai and Lin 2011) (Cockburn et al. 2008) (Jain et al. 2012).

5. It is required to develop ﬂexible intervention technology targeting the deﬁcit skills in an
individualized instruction settings. Designing an intervention technology, it is to be considered
that the system design should handle the common problems and cater the generic issues faced
by individuals of ASD. Thus, developing a single handed solution that can work with a variety
of deﬁcit issues which are described above in section 3.

6. Collaborative eﬀorts are required by the research community of AI, psychology and neuro-
science to develop an AI assisted intervention technology for individuals suﬀering from ASD,
to better understand needs of both the worlds. Scientists should focus on to remove the bar-
rier and boundaries between disciplines and move towards a broader perspective of education
and contribution towards the scientiﬁc community by providing more essential and eﬀective
ﬁndings.

References

Ralph Adolphs, Lonnie Sears, and Joseph Piven. Abnormal processing of social information from faces in autism.
J. Cognitive Neuroscience, 13(2):232–240, March 2001. ISSN 0898-929X. doi: 10.1162/089892901564289. URL
https://doi.org/10.1162/089892901564289.

Nuria Aresti-Bartolome and Begonya Garcia-Zapirain. Technologies as support tools for persons with autistic
spectrum disorder: a systematic review. International journal of environmental research and public health, 11
(8):7767–7802, 2014.

A.P. Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-
TR):. Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. American Psychiatric Association, 2000. ISBN
9780890420621. URL https://books.google.com.pk/books?id=qRj7lwEACAAJ.

Gillian Baird, Tony Charman, Simon Baron-Cohen, Antony Cox, John Swettenham, Sally Wheelwright, and Auriol
Drew. A screening instrument for autism at 18 months of age: a 6-year follow-up study. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 39(6):694–702, 2000.

31

S Baron-Cohen, O Golan, S Wheelwright, and JJ Hill. Mind reading: The interactive guide to emotions. London:

Jessica Kingsley Ltd Google Scholar, 2004.

Simon Baron-Cohen. Autism: the empathizing–systemizing (e-s) theory. Annals of the New York Academy of

Sciences, 1156(1):68–80, 2009.

Simon Baron-Cohen, Therese Jolliﬀe, Catherine Mortimore, and Mary Robertson. Another advanced test of
theory of mind: Evidence from very high functioning adults with autism or asperger syndrome. Journal of
Child psychology and Psychiatry, 38(7):813–822, 1997.

Marian Bartlett, Gwen Littlewort, Tingfan Wu, and Javier Movellan. Computer expression recognition toolbox.
In Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, 2008. FG’08. 8th IEEE International Conference on, pages 1–2.
IEEE, 2008.

Renae Beaumont and Kate Sofronoﬀ. A multi-component social skills intervention for children with asperger
syndrome: The junior detective training program. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49(7):743–753,
2008.

Momotaz Begum, Richard W Serna, and Holly A Yanco. Are robots ready to deliver autism interventions? a

comprehensive review. International Journal of Social Robotics, 8(2):157–181, 2016.

Vera Bernard-Opitz, N Sriram, and Sharul Nakhoda-Sapuan. Enhancing social problem solving in children with
autism and normal children through computer-assisted instruction. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 31(4):377–384, 2001.

Sven B¨olte, Sabine Feineis-Matthews, Simone Leber, Thomas Dierks, Daniela Hubl, and Fritz Poustka. The
development and evaluation of a computer-based program to test and to teach the recognition of facial aﬀect.
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 61(sup2):61–68, 2002.

Sven B¨olte, Daniela Hubl, Sabine Feineis-Matthews, David Prvulovic, Thomas Dierks, and Fritz Poustka. Facial
aﬀect recognition training in autism: can we animate the fusiform gyrus? Behavioral neuroscience, 120(1):211,
2006.

Ariane VS Buescher, Zuleyha Cidav, Martin Knapp, and David S Mandell. Costs of autism spectrum disorders in

the united kingdom and the united states. JAMA pediatrics, 168(8):721–728, 2014.

Sarah Cassidy, Danielle Ropar, Peter Mitchell, and Peter Chapman. Can adults with autism spectrum disorders

infer what happened to someone from their emotional response? Autism Research, 7(1):112–123, 2014.

Sarah Cassidy, Peter Mitchell, Peter Chapman, and Danielle Ropar. Processing of spontaneous emotional responses
in adolescents and adults with autism spectrum disorders: eﬀect of stimulus type. Autism Research, 8(5):534–
544, 2015.

Suniti Chakrabarti and Eric Fombonne. Pervasive developmental disorders in preschool children. Jama, 285(24):

3093–3099, 2001.

Shen Sing A Chen and Vera Bernard-Opitz. Comparison of personal and computer-assisted instruction for children

with autism. Mental retardation, 31(6):368, 1993.

Richard E Clark and Sunhee Choi. Five design principles for experiments on the eﬀects of animated pedagogical

agents. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 32(3):209–225, 2005.

Jeﬀ Cockburn, Marni Bartlett, James Tanaka, Javier Movellan, Matt Pierce, and Robert Schultz. Smilemaze: A
tutoring system in real-time facial expression perception and production in children with autism spectrum
disorder. In ECAG 2008 workshop facial and bodily expressions for control and adaptation of games, page 3,
2008.

Howard Cohen, Mila Amerine-Dickens, and Tristram Smith. Early intensive behavioral treatment: Replication of
the ucla model in a community setting. Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics, 27(2):S145–S155,
2006.

Kenneth Mark Colby. The rationale for computer-based treatment of language diﬃculties in nonspeaking autistic
children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 3(3):254–260, 1973. doi: 10.21236/ad0759717.
Michelle De Haan, Jay Belsky, Vincent Reid, Agnes Volein, and Mark H Johnson. Maternal personality and infants
neural and visual responsivity to facial expressions of emotion. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
45(7):1209–1218, 2004.

L Dunn and D Dunn. (1997). Peabody picture vocabulary test . circle pines: American guidance service, 1997.
Naomi I Eisenberger and Steve W Cole. Social neuroscience and health: neurophysiological mechanisms linking

social ties with physical health. Nature neuroscience, 15(5):669–674, 2012.

P Ekman. Emotions revealed: Understanding thoughts and feelings. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2003.
Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen. Facial action coding system: a technique for the measurement of facial movement.

Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists, 1978.

Paul Ekman and Wallace V Friesen. Constants across cultures in the face and emotion. Journal of personality

and social psychology, 17(2):124, 1971.

Paul Ekman and Harriet Oster. Facial expressions of emotion. Annual review of psychology, 30(1):527–554, 1979.
Paul Ekman and Erika L Rosenberg. What the face reveals: Basic and applied studies of spontaneous expression

using the Facial Action Coding System (FACS). Oxford University Press, USA, 1997.

Paul Ekman, Wallace V Friesen, and Phoebe Ellsworth. Emotion in the Human Face: Guide-lines for Research
and an Integration of Findings: Guidelines for Research and an Integration of Findings. Pergamon, 1972.
Marc Fabri, Salima Y Awad Elzouki, and David Moore. Emotionally expressive avatars for chatting, learning
and therapeutic intervention. In International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pages 275–285.
Springer, 2007.

Susan Faja, Elizabeth Aylward, Raphael Bernier, and Geraldine Dawson. Becoming a face expert: A computer-
ized face-training program for high-functioning individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Developmental
neuropsychology, 33(1):1–24, 2007.

Susan Faja, Sara Jane Webb, Emily Jones, Kristen Merkle, Dana Kamara, Joshua Bavaro, Elizabeth Aylward,
and Geraldine Dawson. The eﬀects of face expertise training on the behavioral performance and brain activity

32

of adults with high functioning autism spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
42(2):278–293, 2012.

Dr Fitzgerald, Michael. Autism and creativity : is there a link between autism in men and exceptional ability?
Hove ; New York : Brunner-Routledge, 2004. ISBN 1583912134 (hbk.). Includes bibliographical references (p.
[271]-283) and index.

Michael C Frank, Edward Vul, and Scott P Johnson. Development of infants attention to faces during the ﬁrst

year. Cognition, 110(2):160–170, 2009.

Ofer Golan and Simon Baron-Cohen. Systemizing empathy: Teaching adults with asperger syndrome or high-
functioning autism to recognize complex emotions using interactive multimedia. Development and psy-
chopathology, 18(2):591–617, 2006. doi: 10.1017/s0954579406060305.

Ofer Golan, Emma Ashwin, Yael Granader, Suzy McClintock, Kate Day, Victoria Leggett, and Simon Baron-
Cohen. Enhancing emotion recognition in children with autism spectrum conditions: An intervention using
animated vehicles with real emotional faces. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 40(3):269–279,
2009.

VK Govindan and AP Shivaprasad. Character recognitiona review. Pattern recognition, 23(7):671–683, 1990.
Thomas F. Gross. The perception of four basic emotions in human and nonhuman faces by children with autism
and other developmental disabilities. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 32(5):469–480, Oct 2004. ISSN
1573-2835. doi: 10.1023/B:JACP.0000037777.17698.01. URL https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JACP.0000037777.
17698.01.

Ouriel Grynszpan, Jean-Claude Martin, and Jacqueline Nadel. Exploring the inﬂuence of task assignment and

output modalities on computerized training for autism. Interaction Studies, 8(2):241–266, 2007.

Ouriel Grynszpan, Jean-Claude Martin, and Jacqueline Nadel. Multimedia interfaces for users with high function-
ing autism: An empirical investigation. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(8):628–639,
2008.

Ouriel Grynszpan, Patrice L Weiss, Fernando Perez-Diaz, and Eynat Gal. Innovative technology-based interven-

tions for autism spectrum disorders: a meta-analysis. Autism, 18(4):346–361, 2014.

Catherine Herba and Mary Phillips. Annotation: Development of facial expression recognition from childhood to
adolescence: Behavioural and neurological perspectives. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45(7):
1185–1198, 2004.

Kyle Higgins and Randall Boone. Creating individualized computer-assisted instruction for students with autism
using multimedia authoring software. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 11(2):69–78,
1996.

Elisabeth L Hill and Uta Frith. Understanding autism: insights from mind and brain. Philosophical Transactions

of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 358(1430):281–289, 2003.

Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statistics, pages

65–70, 1979.

Ingrid Maria Hopkins, Michael W Gower, Trista A Perez, Dana S Smith, Franklin R Amthor, F Casey Wimsatt,
and Fred J Biasini. Avatar assistant: improving social skills in students with an asd through a computer-based
intervention. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 41(11):1543–1555, 2011.

James S House, Karl R Landis, and Debra Umberson. Social relationships and health. Science, 241(4865):540,

1988.

Patricia Howlin, Simon Baron-Cohen, and Julie A Hadwin. Teaching children with autism to mind-read: A practical

guide for teachers and parents. J. Wiley & Sons, 1999.

S Jain, Birgi Tamersoy, Y Zhang, Jake K Aggarwal, and V Orvalho. An interactive game for teaching facial
expressions to children with autism spectrum disorders. In Communications Control and Signal Processing
(ISCCSP), 2012 5th International Symposium On, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2012.

Suyog Jain, Changbo Hu, and Jake K Aggarwal. Facial expression recognition with temporal modeling of shapes. In
Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1642–1649.
IEEE, 2011.

Micah K Johnson and Hany Farid. Exposing digital forgeries by detecting inconsistencies in lighting. In Proceedings

of the 7th workshop on Multimedia and security, pages 1–10. ACM, 2005.

Debora M Kagohara. Three students with developmental disabilities learn to operate an ipod to access age-

appropriate entertainment videos. Journal of Behavioral Education, 20(1):33–43, 2011.

Michelle R Kandalaft, Nyaz Didehbani, Daniel C Krawczyk, Tandra T Allen, and Sandra B Chapman. Vir-
tual reality social cognition training for young adults with high-functioning autism. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 43(1):34–44, 2013.

Fengfeng Ke and Tami Im. Virtual-reality-based social interaction training for children with high-functioning

autism. The Journal of Educational Research, 106(6):441–461, 2013.

Rizwan Ahmed Khan, Alexandre Meyer, Hubert Konik, and Saida Bouakaz. Exploring human visual system: study
to aid the development of automatic facial expression recognition framework. In Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Workshop on Gesture Recognition, pages 49–54, 2012a.

Rizwan Ahmed Khan, Alexandre Meyer, Hubert Konik, and Saida Bouakaz. Human vision inspired framework
for facial expressions recognition. In Image Processing (ICIP), 2012 19th IEEE International Conference on,
pages 2593–2596. IEEE, 2012b.

Rizwan Ahmed Khan, Alexandre Meyer, Hubert Konik, and Saida Bouakaz. Framework for reliable, real-time
facial expression recognition for low resolution images. Pattern Recognition Letters, 34(10):1159–1168, 2013.
Mohamed Ali Khenissi, Fathi Essalmi, and Mohamed Jemni. A learning version of pacman game. In Information
and Communication Technology and Accessibility (ICTA), 2013 Fourth International Conference on, pages
1–3. IEEE, 2013.

33

Tiﬀany Kodak, Wayne W Fisher, Andrea Clements, and Kelly J Bouxsein. Eﬀects of computer-assisted instruction
on correct responding and procedural integrity during early intensive behavioral intervention. Research in
autism spectrum disorders, 5(1):640–647, 2011.

Paul G Lacava, Ofer Golan, Simon Baron-Cohen, and Brenda Smith Myles. Using assistive technology to teach
emotion recognition to students with asperger syndrome: A pilot study. Remedial and Special Education, 28
(3):174–181, 2007.

Paul G Lacava, Ana Rankin, Emily Mahlios, Katie Cook, and Richard L Simpson. A single case design evaluation
of a software and tutor intervention addressing emotion recognition and social interaction in four boys with
asd. Autism, 14(3):161–178, 2010.

Shinyoung Lim, Kwanyong Lee, Okhwan Byeon, and Taiyun Kim. Eﬃcient iris recognition through improvement

of feature vector and classiﬁer. ETRI journal, 23(2):61–70, 2001.

Katherine A Loveland. Social-emotional impairment and self-regulation in autism spectrum disorders. Emotional

development, pages 365–382, 2005.

Johnny L Matson. Chronic schizophrenia and adult autism: Issues in diagnosis, assessment, and psychological

treatment. Springer Pub Co, 1989.

Tim McInerney and Demetri Terzopoulos. Deformable models in medical image analysis: a survey. Medical image

analysis, 1(2):91–108, 1996.

Daniel N. McIntosh, Aimee Reichmann-Decker, Piotr Winkielman, and Julia L. Wilbarger. When the social
mirror breaks: deﬁcits in automatic, but not voluntary, mimicry of emotional facial expressions in autism.
Developmental Science, 9(3):295–302, 2006. ISSN 1467-7687. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00492.x. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2006.00492.x.

James McPartland, Geraldine Dawson, Sara J. Webb, Heracles Panagiotides, and Leslie J. Carver. Event-related
brain potentials reveal anomalies in temporal processing of faces in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 45(7):1235–1245, 2004. ISSN 1469-7610. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00318.x.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004.00318.x.

Peter Mitchell, Sarah Parsons, and Anne Leonard. Using virtual environments for teaching social understanding to
6 adolescents with autistic spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 37(3):589–600,
2007.

David Moore, Yufang Cheng, Paul McGrath, and Norman J Powell. Collaborative virtual environment technology

for people with autism. Focus on autism and other developmental disabilities, 20(4):231–243, 2005.

Christos K Nikopoulos and Mickey Keenan. Using video modeling to teach complex social sequences to children

with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(4):678–693, 2007.

World Health Organization. ICD-10 Classiﬁcation of Mental and Behavioural Disorders (The): Diagnostic Cri-
teria for Research. ICD-10 classiﬁcation of mental and behavioural disorders / World Health Organization.
World Health Organization, 1993.
ISBN 9789241544559. URL https://books.google.com.pk/books?id=
HlnzVSbec18C.

Maria B Ospina, Jennifer Krebs Seida, Brenda Clark, Mohammad Karkhaneh, Lisa Hartling, Lisa Tjosvold, Ben
Vandermeer, and Veronica Smith. Behavioural and developmental interventions for autism spectrum disorder:
a clinical systematic review. PloS one, 3(11):e3755, 2008.

Sally Ozonoﬀ, Mikle South, and Judith N Miller. Dsm-iv-deﬁned asperger syndrome: Cognitive, behavioral and

early history diﬀerentiation from high-functioning autism. Autism, 4(1):29–46, 2000.

Sarah Parsons, Peter Mitchell, and Anne Leonard. The use and understanding of virtual environments by ado-
lescents with autistic spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental disorders, 34(4):449–466,
2004.

Sarah Parsons, Anne Leonard, and Peter Mitchell. Virtual environments for social skills training: comments from

two adolescents with autistic spectrum disorder. Computers & Education, 47(2):186–206, 2006.

Robert C Pennington. Computer-assisted instruction for teaching academic skills to students with autism spectrum
disorders: A review of literature. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 25(4):239–248, 2010.
Anthony J Plienis and Raymond G Romanczyk. Analyses of performance, behavior, and predictors for severely
disturbed children: A comparison of adult vs. computer instruction. Analysis and intervention in developmental
disabilities, 5(4):345–356, 1985.

Bertram O Ploog. Stimulus overselectivity four decades later: A review of the literature and its implications
for current research in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 40(11):
1332–1349, 2010.

Robert Plutchik. The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots, a fact that may explain

their complexity and provide tools for clinical practice. American scientist, 89(4):344–350, 2001.

Sathiyaprakash Ramdoss, Russell Lang, Austin Mulloy, Jessica Franco, Mark OReilly, Robert Didden, and Giulio
Lancioni. Use of computer-based interventions to teach communication skills to children with autism spectrum
disorders: A systematic review. Journal of Behavioral Education, 20(1):55–76, 2011.

Catherine Rice. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders–autism and developmental disabilities monitoring net-

work, united states, 2006. –, 2009.

Glenn Richmond. Comparison of automated and human instruction for developmentally retarded preschool chil-

dren. Journal of the Association for the Severely Handicapped, 8(3):78–84, 1983.

Sally J Rogers. Empirically supported comprehensive treatments for young children with autism. Journal of

clinical child psychology, 27(2):168–179, 1998.

Daniel A Rossignol and Richard E Frye. A review of research trends in physiological abnormalities in autism
spectrum disorders: immune dysregulation, inﬂammation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and en-
vironmental toxicant exposures. Molecular psychiatry, 17(4):389, 2012.

Keiran M. Rump, Joyce L. Giovannelli, Nancy J. Minshew, and Mark S. Strauss. The development of emotion
ISSN 1467-8624. doi:

recognition in individuals with autism. Child Development, 80(5):1434–1447, 2009.

34

10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01343.x. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01343.x.

Dennis C Russo, Robert L Koegei, and O Ivar Lovaas. A comparison of human and automated instruction of

autistic children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 6(2):189–201, 1978.

Frank J Sansosti and Kelly A Powell-Smith. Using computer-presented social stories and video models to in-
crease the social communication skills of children with high-functioning autism spectrum disorders. Journal
of Positive Behavior Interventions, 10(3):162–178, 2008.

Sylvie Serret, Stephanie Hun, Galina Iakimova, Jose Lozada, Margarita Anastassova, Andreia Santos, Stephanie
Vesperini, and Florence Askenazy. Facing the challenge of teaching emotions to individuals with low-and
high-functioning autism using a new serious game: a pilot study. Molecular autism, 5(1):37, 2014.

Miriam Silver and Peter Oakes. Evaluation of a new computer intervention to teach people with autism or asperger

syndrome to recognize and predict emotions in others. Autism, 5(3):299–316, 2001.

Amber Simpson, John Langone, and Kevin M Ayres. Embedded video and computer based instruction to improve
social skills for students with autism. Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, pages 240–252,
2004.

Dorothy C Strickland, Claire D Coles, and Louise B Southern. Jobtips: A transition to employment program for
individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 43(10):2472–2483,
2013.

James W Tanaka, Julie M Wolf, Cheryl Klaiman, Kathleen Koenig, Jeﬀrey Cockburn, Lauren Herlihy, Carla Brown,
Sherin Stahl, Martha D Kaiser, and Robert T Schultz. Using computerized games to teach face recognition
skills to children with autism spectrum disorder: the lets face it! program. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 51(8):944–952, 2010.

Laurie Tarkan. Autism therapy is called eﬀective, but rare, 2002. URL https://tinyurl.com/y8ew8ker.
Tzu-Wei Tsai and Meng-Ying Lin. An application of interactive game for facial expression of the autisms. In

Edutainment, pages 204–211. Springer, 2011.

D Wechsler. Manual for the wechsler abbreviated intelligence scale (wasi). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological

Corporation, 1999.

Iain Werry, Kerstin Dautenhahn, and William Harwin. Investigating a robot as a therapy partner for children

with autism. Procs AAATE 2001,, 2001.

Christina Whalen, L Liden, B Ingersoll, E Dallaire, and S Liden. Positive behavioral changes associated with
the use of computer-assisted instruction for young children. Journal of Speech and Language Pathology and
Applied Behavior Analysis, 1(1):11–26, 2006.

Christina Whalen, Debbie Moss, Aaron B Ilan, Manya Vaupel, Paul Fielding, Kevin Macdonald, Shannon Cer-
nich, and Jennifer Symon. Eﬃcacy of teachtown: Basics computer-assisted intervention for the intensive
comprehensive autism program in los angeles uniﬁed school district. Autism, 14(3):179–197, 2010. doi:
10.1177/1362361310363282.

Julie M Wolf, James W Tanaka, Cheryl Klaiman, Jeﬀ Cockburn, Lauren Herlihy, Carla Brown, Mikle South,
James McPartland, Martha D Kaiser, Rebecca Phillips, et al. Speciﬁc impairment of face-processing abilities
in children with autism spectrum disorder using the let’s face it! skills battery. Autism Research, 1(6):329–340,
2008.

Andreas Zendler. Multimedia Development Systems:(with Methods for Modeling Multimedia Applications), vol-

ume 8. Tectum Verlag DE, 1998.

Ji Zhang, Hui Quan, Jennifer Ng, and Michael E Stepanavage. Some statistical methods for multiple endpoints in

clinical trials. Controlled clinical trials, 18(3):204–221, 1997.

35

