Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework
for Surgical Applications

Micha Pfeiﬀer(cid:63) · Hannes Kenngott(cid:63) ·
Anas Preukschas · Matthias Huber ·
Lisa Bettscheider · Beat M¨uller-Stich ·
Stefanie Speidel

8
1
0
2

r
a

M
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
6
2
8
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pre-print version. Accepted: March 2018.
Published in ”International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery”
Doi: 10.1007/s11548-018-1730-x

Abstract Purpose The data which is available to surgeons before, during and
after surgery is steadily increasing in quantity as well as diversity. When plan-
ning a patient’s treatment, this large amount of information can be diﬃcult
to interpret. To aid in processing the information, new methods need to be
found to present multi-modal patient data, ideally combining textual, imagery,
temporal and 3D data in a holistic and context-aware system.
Methods We present an open-source framework which allows handling of pa-
tient data in a virtual reality (VR) environment. By using VR technology, the
workspace available to the surgeon is maximized and 3D patient data is ren-
dered in stereo, which increases depth perception. The framework organizes
the data into workspaces and contains tools which allow users to control, ma-
nipulate and enhance the data. Due to the framework’s modular design, it can
easily be adapted and extended for various clinical applications.
Results The framework was evaluated by clinical personnel (77 participants).
The majority of the group stated that a complex surgical situation is easier
to comprehend by using the framework, and that it is very well suited for ed-
ucation. Furthermore, the application to various clinical scenarios - including
the simulation of excitation-propagation in the human atrium - demonstrated
the framework’s adaptability. As a feasibility study, the framework was used
during the planning phase of the surgical removal of a large central carcinoma

(cid:63) These authors contributed equally to this work.

Micha Pfeiﬀer, Stefanie Speidel
National Center for Tumor Diseases, Dresden, Germany
E-mail: micha.pfeiﬀer@nct-dresden.de

Matthias Huber
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute for Anthropomatics and Robotics

Hannes Kenngott, Anas Preukschas, Lisa Bettscheider, Beat M¨uller-Stich
Heidelberg University Hospital, Department of General-, Visceral- and Transplant Surgery

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

Fig. 1 Left: Traditionally, 2D slices of CT scans are used for planning. Right: In complex
scenarios such as this one, where the tumor (yellow) and the various vessel trees (veins,
arteries and bile ducts) lie close together, a 3D visualization could greatly beneﬁt physicians
in analyzing patient data (screenshot of the virtual reality application).

from a patient’s liver.
Conclusion The clinical evaluation showed a large potential and high accep-
tance for the VR environment in a medical context. The various applications
conﬁrmed that the framework is easily extended and can be used in real-time
simulation as well as for the manipulation of complex anatomical structures.

Keywords Virtual Reality · Surgical Planning · Advanced Medical Visual-
ization

1 Introduction

The amount of data recorded before, during and after a surgery has drastically
increased in recent years, due to the availability of new imaging technologies
as well as better equipment for many non-imaging modalities. Supplementary
information such as segmentations and annotations can be generated and data
from other surgeries and patients can be used for comparison. Ideally, all of
these information sources should be considered when planning the treatment of
a patient. Managing the expanding amount of information will be increasingly
diﬃcult in the foreseeable future, and displaying the data to surgeons in a
meaningful context will require new visualization and rendering systems.

An important portion of the acquired data is inherently three-dimensional,
such as CT and MRI multi-slice scans. Usually, this data is viewed as individual
slices on conventional 2D screens, resulting in the loss of depth perception,
even though it has been shown that viewing data in 3D greatly enhances
the comprehension of the presented structures [12, 19]. When planning the
treatment of a patient, however, it is vital that the surgeons understand the
precise spatial location of tumors, organs and vessels to optimize a possible
surgical procedure and minimize patient risk (Fig. 1).

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

3

We present the IMHOTEP1 framework, which meets the need to visualize
very inhomogeneous data types in an intuitive, simple to navigate virtual real-
ity (VR) environment. The framework provides tools for loading, viewing and
manipulating patient-speciﬁc data. By rendering the scene in stereo (one im-
age for each eye, with slightly shifted perspective between the images), depth
perception is increased. We use Head-Mounted-Displays (HMDs) to expand
the available workspace to a full 360◦ virtual environment. By using modern
gaming technology we achieve frame rates high enough for real-time interac-
tion.

The aim of the framework is to be a development and research platform
for VR tools in clinical scenarios. To this end, we provide many standard
functions which facilitate the use of a VR environment in conjunction with
medical data. The core functionalities of the framework are open-source and
are available online2. The framework’s central design choices are discussed
below, while implementation details and instruction for usage can be found in
the project’s documentation. Readers are encouraged to experiment with the
project and add custom tools to develop their own medical VR applications.

1.1 Areas of Application

Pre-Operative Planning: Complex surgical operations require individual plan-
ning on a per-patient basis. Many factors have to be considered, such as patient
age, allergies and medication taken by the patient, as well as the patient his-
tory and previous surgeries. By visualizing the data in VR, the surgeons are
able to quickly view relations in the data within one single application and to
review the anatomical situation, even before performing the ﬁrst incision.

Simulation: Understanding complex dynamic 3D scenes is demanding. By
providing the tools to port such animations into VR, the framework can be
used to display simulations in stereo 3D, allowing users to view the animation
almost as if they were present in real life. The framework’s intuitive input
tools can be used to manipulate the simulation settings and the eﬀects can be
viewed in real-time.

Teaching and Learning in Virtual Reality: Current teaching material usu-
ally only shows projections of anatomical structures, which can make them
diﬃcult to understand. Simple learning tasks can be integrated into the frame-
work quickly. By expanding the framework with animations and simulations,
it can aid in the understanding not only of 3D but also of 4D (3D plus time)
processes.

1 Immersive Medical Hands-On Operation Teaching and Planning System
2 https://github.com/IMHOTEP-Medical/imhotep

4

1.2 Related Work

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

The potential of VR in the ﬁeld of data visualization has been widely recog-
nized [4,7,18]3. VR data visualization systems have been created for the areas
of climate research [23], social media feed data [20] and software analysis [26].
Companies such as Kineviz 4, Virtualitics 5 and Dynamoid 6 already oﬀer VR
data visualization applications for businesses, science and engineering. They
use data mining algorithms and machine learning with the goal of making big
data easier to analyze.

In the medical domain, the usage of VR applications has quickly increased
in recent years [14], mainly due to the development of low-cost hardware.
Many of these applications are focused on treating patients with traumas [25,
16,2] or chronic pain [22]. These applications place patients into an immersive
virtual scene, often as a form of exposure therapy.

In contrast, VR applications for physicians often focus on medical educa-
tion. These range from visualizations of anatomical structures [11] and tools
for surgical training [13,17] to virtual scenarios which aim to enhance the in-
teraction between clinical personnel and patients [10, 27]. In another project,
3D video captured during surgeries is played back and experienced in VR [5].
These systems are usually used with a ﬁxed data set (such as a generic pa-
tient model or pre-recorded video) and do not support the examination of
patient-speciﬁc data for clinical use. They are not focused on clinical day-to-
day routine and usually rely on older data sets.

Only recently, the ﬁrst VR systems have been developed which are designed
for diagnostic purposes. Examples are tools for the analysis of pathology slides
[9] and tools which visualize the changes in sizes and shapes of tumors over
time in a 3D virtual setting [21]. Ard et al. [1] have developed a VR system
which visualizes brain MRI scans as well as several augmentations of the data.
While these projects show the signiﬁcance of new VR tools in medicine, they
are aimed only at single areas of application and lack a broader, ﬂexible and
reusable architecture.

Egger et al. [8] implemented a VR plug-in for the medical image processing
software MeVisLab. The plug-in focuses on the rendering of the virtual scene
and relies on MeVisLab for loading and management of the data. However,
this method only moves small portions of the available data into VR, so rela-
tionships between the inhomogeneous data sources cannot be visualized and
context awareness may be lost.

Using our framework, Loewe et al. [15] have created an interactive VR ab-
lation simulation which allows physicians to explore the eﬀects which ablation
lesions have on atrial arrhythmias. Their work focuses on the usage of the

3 While older publications often use the term ”Virtual Reality” to refer to a very wide
range of methods, we use it only for those systems in which the user wears a Head-Mounted-
Display, with stereo rendering and positional as well as orientational tracking.

4 https://www.kineviz.com/
5 https://www.virtualitics.com/
6 http://dynamoid.com

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

5

Fig. 2 The virtual scene. The patient has been conﬁgured to show the surface rendering of
the liver, liver vessels and tumor (yellow), along with a volumetric rendering of the rib cage.
CT slice images are displayed on the virtual 2D screen for reference. On the bottom left,
part of a hand-held tool palette can be seen, displaying a tool to control organ transparency.

framework for one speciﬁc application. In contrast, this article describes the
underlying framework itself, its system components and design as well as a
more general evaluation.

2 Methods

VR-based surgical assistance tools have several requirements. They need to

– handle common clinical ﬁle formats and protocols,
– smartly position the inhomogeneous data types,
– render the virtual environment in stereo to allow for true 3D vision,
– feature an intuitive user interface tailored for clinical day-to-day usage,
– handle interaction with the VR hardware
– ensure a high frame rate to create an enjoyable VR experience.

Since these conditions are independent of the exact application, a platform
which abstracts away the required functionality can considerably speed up
the development of VR tools for clinical usage. Our framework combines tech-
niques from modern gaming technology with medical viewers. It provides func-
tions to control the asynchronous loading, visualization and organization of
patient data and handles user input and interaction with the hardware.

2.1 Patient Data - From Disk to Visualization

At the core of the framework lies the loading and visualization of patient-
speciﬁc data sets. These data sets can be comprised of textual information,
2D images, 3D volumes and 3D surface meshes (Fig. 2).

For the visualization of the 3D data, the framework provides two meth-
ods: If 3D volumes (such as the slices resulting from a CT or MRI scan) are

6

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

Fig. 3 Left: Volumetric rendering of a CT scan of a patient’s abdomen. The chosen transfer
function extracts the skeleton and some organs, but can be modiﬁed to display diﬀerent parts
of the volume. Right: Schematic top view of the workspace layout. The 3D data is displayed
in the center of the virtual room (a). The user (b) stands on a platform on the side of the
room, surrounded by a large curved transparent 2D screen (c). The user has a tool palette
(d) which follows them around. A virtual laser pointer (e) is used to interact with the UI
and the data.

available, they can be displayed via volumetric rendering (Fig. 3, left). This
is realized by a custom GPU shader program which renders 3D textures us-
ing a slice-based approach [6] and a Blinn-Phong lighting model [3]. Transfer
functions assign colors to the individual voxels in the data. By changing the
transfer functions, diﬀerent parts of the data can be visualized and highlighted.
The rendering process is done twice for each time frame, once for each eye, gen-
erating stereo vision. The volumetric data is loaded in the common DICOM7
standard via the ITK8 library.

If previously segmented surface meshes exist, these can be displayed in
the virtual scene (Fig. 1, right). The meshes (representing structures such as
organs, vessels and tumors) are generated using external tools. They are loaded
into the Blender3D software - which can import many common ﬁle formats
- and are then saved in Blender’s native .blend ﬁle format. Individual colors
can be assigned to the various meshes before they are opened and displayed
by the framework.

Additional data (such as laboratory results and patient history) can be
loaded and displayed alongside the image data. Optionally, text can be for-
matted in HTML to allow text coloring, font formatting and individual text
layouts depending on the application.

7 Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
8 Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

7

2.2 Data Organization: Introducing Workspaces

The type of information which is accumulated before, during and after a
surgery is extremely diverse. First, there is data which is best presented as
text, such as patient data (name, age, sex, diagnosis). Next, there is data
which is inherently 2D, such as images (slices from MR- and CT-scans, pho-
tographs or images from endoscopic video), graphs (development of patient
data over time) and ﬂow charts. Finally, there is 3D data such as the surface
meshes of the patient’s organs, along with annotations. Additionally, most of
the tools for data manipulation need space in which to display their input
elements and current status. In order to make best use of the available space
and to present each data type in an intuitive way, the virtual scene is divided
into three distinct workspaces (Fig. 3, right).

3D Workspace: To fully exploit the beneﬁts of the 3D display techniques
available in VR, the largest workspace in the center of the spherical virtual
room is dedicated to displaying the 3D patient data. This automatically draws
the initial attention of the user to the 3D visualization of the patient’s organs.
Since the space is so large, the organs can be scaled to a larger-than-life size,
allowing the viewer to focus on small details.

2D Screens: To supplement the 3D data with additional 2D information, a
curved screen is introduced, which surrounds the viewer in the virtual scene.
The resulting area is much larger than that of conventional 2D screens and the
user can view the entire screen simply by turning their head. Positions of the
various types of data (such as images or patient meta data) can be pre-deﬁned
so that similar data will always be found on a similar position on the screen.
Tool Palette: Most of the available tools have settings which can be manip-
ulated by the user. These settings can be accessed by choosing the tool from
the tool ring, a user interface element ﬁxed to one of the input controllers. Once
a tool has been chosen, its options are displayed in the tool palette next to the
controller. In this way, active tools are always easy to access while inactive
tools do not use up any of the available screen space.

2.3 Data Control Tools

The intention of the framework is to be used in very diﬀerent applications.
To implement these, researchers can add their own tools which build on the
framework’s interface. Some commonly used standard tools are already present
in the framework:

Annotation Control: Annotations are a simple way of marking structures
and positions in 3D space and are commonly used in 3D design and visu-
alization. The framework contains an annotation tool which can be used to
highlight important positions, areas and volumes. Each marker can be linked
to a textual label to add additional information. To minimize overlap between
the labels and the patient data, hedgehog labeling [24] is used to automatically
place the labels.

8

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

View Control: Surgeons and radiologists are used to viewing data from
certain orientations, such as for example the sagittal, transverse and coronal
views. The view control tool can be used to pre-deﬁne such views so that
the data from diﬀerent patients will be rotated and aligned to standard views
automatically.

2.4 User Interaction

The HTC Vive’s tracked controllers are used as the main input system. While
other methods, such as tracking the user’s hands or gestures, might seem more
natural at ﬁrst, they were less suited for productive work, since precise selection
and positioning of objects was not possible. By linking their movement to
actions like rotating the patient organs or zooming the 2D DICOM images,
user interaction becomes very intuitive. To precisely point at positions and
select objects, a virtual laser pointer tool is attached to one controller.

2.5 Implementation Details

In order to achieve real-time performance, the framework uses the Unity3D
engine as the rendering back-end. The engine is well suited for the task since
it is aimed at game development (an area where interactive frame rates are
necessary). To ensure extendability, the framework’s architecture is composed
of individual modules which exchange information through application pro-
gramming interfaces and threads (Fig. 4).

Supported Hardware and Modes: The system supports both the Occulus
Rift as well as the HTC Vive and auto-detects which of the two HMDs is
available. Depending on the supported functions of the detected hardware, the
framework switches between Room-Scale-VR where the user can walk around
the scene and seated mode. Furthermore, a development mode allows to use
the program without any headset.

Events and Threads: IMHOTEP builds upon an event system which limits
module inter-dependencies and realizes extendability. If one module ﬁres an
event, an arbitrary number of other modules can be notiﬁed and react indi-
vidually. The available core events can be extended with other, tool-speciﬁc
events. Since essential functions in a medical visualization framework require
a lot of processing time, such as the loading of large data sets or calculation of
a simulation response, expensive tasks are outsourced to background threads.
By using the threading system in conjunction with the event system, tasks can
be run asynchronously and then ﬁre an event to notify other modules upon
completion.

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

9

Fig. 4 IMHOTEP architecture overview. The framework builds on the Unity3D engine. It
uses ITK to parse DICOM data, reads Blender3D surface meshes and communicates with
VR hardware through OpenVR. The various data types can be manipulated by tools and
visualized using various methods. Demanding tasks can be outsourced to separate threads.
Asynchronous tasks can communicate across modules by ﬁring events. Tested with Unity3D
Version 2017.2, SimpleITK Version 1.0.1, OpenVR/SteamVR Version 1.2.1 and Blender3D
Version 2.78.

3 Results

User Study: Using a patient data set for a complex hepatectomy, a user study
was performed with 77 test persons (25 resident physicians, 30 medical stu-
dents and 22 clinical staﬀ). After viewing the data in VR, the test persons were
asked to assess the application in terms of clinical and educational usefulness.
Most participants stated that the application is beneﬁcial for the planning of
complex surgery, both in terms of quality as well as speed at which the anatom-
ical situation can be understood (Fig. 5). The participants also believed the
tool to be useful for the education of medical students and postgraduates
(Fig. 6). Of the 77 participants, most stated that the experience in the virtual
scene was comfortable (37) or very comfortable (33).

Operation Planning: To evaluate the feasibility in a clinical preoperative
planning setting, a pilot study was conducted using the data of a 75 year
old female patient with a large central hepatocellular carcinoma comprising
the segments I, IVa, V and VIII. The segmented 3D surface models were
displayed semi-transparently to allow for the visualization of all target and
risk structures without the need to change the view. CT images, laboratory
parameters and the patient diagnoses and current medication were loaded
into the system. Before surgery the surgeons revisited the patient information
ﬁrst in the classical way in the hospital information system (HIS) and Picture
Archiving and Communication System (PACS). Their judgment of the case
was based on the information in these systems. In addition they used the
system to visualize the patient’s data and records in VR.

IMHOTEPOpenVRITKBlender3DUnity3D Gaming EngineBackground ThreadsData StorageToolsVolumetricRenderingDICOMSurface MeshHTML……Surface MeshRenderingModule CommunicationData FlowEvent10

Better
Faster

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

39

32

32

25

0

1

1 (Not at all)

2

3

2

3

4

5 (Very much)

11

9

Fig. 5 Participants’ responses to the questions: By using the tool, can a complex surgical
situation be understood a) better (µ = 4.22, σ = 0.79) and b) faster (µ = 4.09, σ = 0.85)
when compared to traditional software? Given values represent the mean µ and standard
deviation σ of the responses.

Student education
Postgraduate education

44

33

29

21

14

10

0

0

1 (Very low)

2

1

2

3

4

5 (Very high)

Fig. 6 Participants’ responses to the questions: How high do you estimate the potential
of this technology for a) student education (µ = 4.39, σ = 0.81) and b) postgraduate
education for physicians (µ = 4.22, σ = 0.79)? Given values represent the mean µ and
standard deviation σ of the responses.

The surgeons who evaluated the system conﬁrmed qualitatively that it may
lead to a faster and possibly better preoperative reassessment of relevant clin-
ical data. They believed the system was able to show all relevant information
of the patient in the VR environment at point of care. The data could be
generated in a reasonable time frame considering the pilot study character of
the evaluation. Visualizations could be handled easily to virtually generate the
planned direct line-of-sight of the surgeons during operation.

Extendability: The aforementioned real-time capable ablation simulation
system [15] was built on top of our framework. The authors added their own
fast-marching algorithm to simulate excitation propagation, as well as tools
which allow the user to add and remove ablation lesions, handle tissue types,
manipulate pacemakers and control simulation time. By relying on our frame-
work’s ability to work with patient-speciﬁc data, their aim is to provide a tool
to study the eﬀect of lesions on arrhythmic behaviors in the human atrium for
diagnosis as well as therapy planning (Fig. 7). Their user study showed that
the application has a short learning curve due to the intuitive user interface
and leads to a greater understanding of arrhythmias.

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

11

Fig. 7 Screenshot of the ablation simulation of the human atrium [15]. The color of the
surface mesh is animated to show the activation wave (yellow), the refractory regions (green)
and regions which have not yet been activated (white). The user can draw ablation lesions
(red) and study their inﬂuence on the wave’s propagation.

4 Discussion

The clinical evaluation of the framework has shown a very high acceptance
for the use of VR in the context of surgical applications amongst medical
personnel and students. Most users found the interaction with the data very
intuitive and natural.

The framework has successfully been used to build an operation planning
tool as well as an ablation simulation tool. Various other projects are being
developed on top of the framework, including a resection planning system to
allow the placing of resection planes and the calculation of residual volume.
These results are encouraging when considering the future of VR in medical
applications.

The studies performed here were conducted using qualitative question-
naires and can only summarize subjective opinions of the test persons. To
objectively conﬁrm the beneﬁt of using a VR system when viewing complex
data, further studies have to be carried out. Ideally, these should evaluate
criteria such as cognitive load on the users, their ability to interpret a com-
plex anatomical situation, time needed for operation planning and operation
outcome and should be compared to results from a control group.

The framework can be used as-is to realize many medical applications. For

more advanced usages, additional functionalities would be needed:

Muli-User-Environment: For complex cases, a multi-user extension of the
framework would allow doctors to view and discuss the treatment with experts
from all over the world in a virtual tumor board. In this area, open questions
are the real-time interaction with the visualizations by multiple users at once,
secure transfer of data and automatic anonymization.

Educational Uses: Participants in the user study expect a high beneﬁt from
using the VR environment for educational purposes. To aid in the development
of such tools, functions common to various educational applications should be

12

Micha Pfeiﬀer et al.

implemented in the framework such as quiz and scoring systems, the rendering
of realistic tissue textures and gaming elements.

Clinical Integration: To make the system easier to use in a clinical day-
to-day scenario, it should be integrated into the hospital information system
(HIS), to allow rendering patient data directly from hospital servers. This is
currently limited since required data - such as surface meshes - is usually not
present for most patients, but would make the usage of VR in hospitals much
more feasible in the near future.

Acknowledgements We thank the Medien- und Filmgesellschaft Baden-W¨urttemberg for
supporting early development of the framework through the Karl-Steinbuch scholarship.

5 Compliance with Ethical Standard

Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of in-
terest.
Ethical Approval: All procedures performed in studies involving human par-
ticipants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional
and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration
and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.
Informed Consent: Informed consent was obtained from the study partici-
pant.

References

1. Ard, T., Krum, D.M., Phan, T., Duncan, D., Essex, R., Bolas, M., Toga, A.: NIVR:
In: 2017 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 465–466

Neuro imaging in virtual reality.
(2017)

2. Atherton, S., Antley, A., Evans, N., Cernis, E., Lister, R., Dunn, G., Slater, M., Freeman,
D.: Self-Conﬁdence and Paranoia: An Experimental Study Using an Immersive Virtual
Reality Social Situation. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy 44(1), 56–64 (2016)
3. Blinn, J.F.: Models of Light Reﬂection for Computer Synthesized Pictures. SIGGRAPH

Comput. Graph. 11(2), 192–198 (1977)

4. Butcher, P.W.S., Ritsos, P.D.: Building Immersive Data Visualizations for the Web. In:

International Conference on Cyberworlds (CW), pp. 142–145 (2017)

5. Cha, Y.W., Dou, M., Chabra, R., Menozzi, F., State, A., Wallen, E., Fuchs, H.: Im-
mersive learning experiences for surgical procedures, vol. 220, pp. 55–62. IOS Press,
Netherlands (2016)

6. Cullip, T.J., Neumann, U.: Accelerating Volume Reconstruction With 3D Texture Hard-

ware. Tech. rep., Chapel Hill, NC, USA (1994)

7. Donalek, C., Djorgovski, S.G., Davidoﬀ, S., Cioc, A., Wang, A., Longo, G., Norris, J.S.,
Zhang, J., Lawler, E., Yeh, S., Mahabal, A., Graham, M.J., Drake, A.J.: Immersive and
Collaborative Data Visualization Using Virtual Reality Platforms. CoRR (2014)

8. Egger, J., Gall, M., Wallner, J., Boechat, P., Hann, A., Li, X., Chen, X., Schmalstieg, D.:
HTC Vive MeVisLab integration via OpenVR for medical applications. CoRR (2017)
9. Farahani, N., Post, R., Duboy, J., Ahmed, I., Kolowitz, B., Krinchai, T., Monaco, S.,
Fine, J., Hartman, D., Pantanowitz, L.: Exploring virtual reality technology and the
Oculus Rift for the examination of digital pathology slides. Journal of Pathology Infor-
matics 7(1), 22 (2016)

IMHOTEP - Virtual Reality Framework for Surgical Applications

13

10. Goldman, J., Stebbins, G., Fredericks, D., Upchurch, M.: Experiencing Parkinsons Dis-
ease Psychosis via Virtual Reality Simulation: A Novel and Eﬀective Educational Tool.
Neurology 86(16 Supplement) (2016)

11. He, L., Guayaquil-Sosa, A., McGraw, T.: Medical Image Atlas Interaction in Virtual

Reality (2017). Immersive Analytics Workshop. IEEE Vis.

12. Herfarth, Lamad, Fischer, Chiu, Cardenas, Thorn, Vetter, Grenacher, Meinzer: The
Eﬀect of Virtual Reality and Training on Liver Operation Planning. Swiss Surgery
8(2), 67–73 (2002)

13. Huber, T., Paschold, M., Hansen, C., Wunderling, T., Lang, H., Kneist, W.: New dimen-
sions in surgical training: immersive virtual reality laparoscopic simulation exhilarates
surgical staﬀ. Surgical Endoscopy (2017)

14. Khor, W.S., Baker, B., Amin, K., Chan, A., Patel, K., Wong, J.: Augmented and virtual
reality in surgery - the digital surgical environment: applications, limitations and legal
pitfalls. Annals of translational medicine (2016)

15. Loewe, A., Poremba, E., Oesterlein, T.G., Pilia, N., Pfeiﬀer, M., Speidel, S.: An In-
teractive Virtual Reality Environment for Analysis of Clinical Atrial Arrhythmias and
Ablation Planning. CinC 44 (2017, in press)

16. Maples-Keller, J.L., Yasinski, C., Manjin, N., Rothbaum, B.O.: Virtual Reality-
Enhanced Extinction of Phobias and Post-Traumatic Stress. Neurotherapeutics 14(3),
554–563 (2017)

17. Mathur, A.S.: Low cost virtual reality for medical training.

In: 2015 IEEE Virtual

Reality (VR), pp. 345–346 (2015)

18. Moran, A., Gadepally, V., Hubbell, M., Kepner, J.: Improving Big Data visual analytics
with interactive virtual reality. In: 2015 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing
Conference (HPEC), pp. 1–6 (2015)

19. M¨uller-Stich, B.P., L¨ob, N., Wald, D., Bruckner, T., Meinzer, H.P., Kadmon, M., Bchler,
M.W., Fischer, L.: Regular three-dimensional presentations improve in the identiﬁcation
of surgical liver anatomy a randomized study. BMC Medical Education 13(1), 131
(2013)

20. Perhac, J., Zeng, W., Asada, S., Arisona, S.M., Schubiger, S., Burkhard, R., Klein, B.:
Urban Fusion: Visualizing Urban Data Fused with Social Feeds via a Game Engine. In:
2017 21st International Conference Information Visualisation (IV), pp. 312–317 (2017)
21. Reddivari, S., Smith, J., Pabalate, J.: VRvisu: A Tool for Virtual Reality Based Visual-
ization of Medical Data. In: 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Connected
Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE), pp. 280–281
(2017)

22. Schmitt, Y.S., Hoﬀman, H.G., Blough, D.K., Patterson, D.R., Jensen, M.P., Soltani,
M., Carrougher, G.J., Nakamura, D., Sharar, S.R.: A randomized, controlled trial of
immersive virtual reality analgesia, during physical therapy for pediatric burns. Burns
37(1), 61–68 (2011)

23. Simpson, M., Wallgrn, J.O., Klippel, A., Yang, L., Garner, G., Keller, K., Oprean,
D., Bansal, S.: Immersive Analytics for Multi-objective Dynamic Integrated Climate-
Economy (DICE) Models. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Companion on Interactive
Surfaces and Spaces, ISS Companion 16, pp. 99–105. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2016)
24. Tatzgern, M., Kalkofen, D., Grasset, R., Schmalstieg, D.: Hedgehog labeling: View man-
agement techniques for external labels in 3D space. In: 2014 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR),
pp. 27–32 (2014)

25. Valmaggia, L.R., Day, F., Rus-Calafell, M.: Using virtual reality to investigate psy-
chological processes and mechanisms associated with the onset and maintenance of
psychosis: a systematic review. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 51(7),
921–936 (2016)

26. Vincur, J., Navrat, P., Polasek, I.: VR City: Software Analysis in Virtual Reality Envi-
ronment. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and
Security Companion (QRS-C), pp. 509–516 (2017)

27. Zielke, M.A., Zakhidov, D., Hardee, G., Evans, L., Lenox, S., Orr, N., Fino, D., Math-
ialagan, G.: Developing Virtual Patients with VR/AR for a natural user interface in
medical teaching. In: IEEE 5th International Conference on Serious Games and Appli-
cations for Health (SeGAH), vol. 5, pp. 1–8 (2017)

