8
1
0
2

r
p
A
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
2
2
0
0
.
4
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Can Multisensory Cues in VR Help
Train Pattern Recognition to Citizen
Scientists?

Alina Striner
School of Information Science
College Park, MD 20742 USA
algol001@umd.edu

Paste the appropriate copyright statement here. ACM now supports three
diﬀerent copyright statements:
• ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the historical
approach.
• License: The author(s) retain copyright, but ACM receives an exclusive
publication license.
• Open Access: The author(s) wish to pay for the work to be open access.
The additional fee must be paid to ACM.
This text ﬁeld is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement
assuming it is single spaced.
Every submission will be assigned their own unique DOI string to be included
here.

Abstract
As the internet of things (IoT) has integrated physical and
digital technologies, designing for multiple sensory media
(”mulsemedia”) has become more attainable. Designing
technology for multiple senses has the capacity to improve
virtual realism, extend our ability to process information,
and more easily transfer knowledge between physical and
digital environments. HCI researchers are beginning to
explore the viability of integrating multimedia into virtual
experiences, however research has yet to consider whether
mulsemedia truly enhances pattern recognition and
knowledge transfer in virtual reality (VR). My work on
StreamBED, a VR training to help citizen scientists make
qualitative judgments of stream environments, plans to
consider the role of mulsemedia in observation and
pattern recognition. Future ﬁndings about the role of
mulsemedia in learning contexts will potentially allow
learners to experience, connect to, learn from spaces that
are impossible to experience ﬁrsthand.

Author Keywords
Multisensory Media; Qualitative Judgments; Citizen
Science;

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m [Virtual worlds training simulations Software
Design techniques User Centered Design]: .

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction
Since the early days of Star Trek, VR researchers have
pursued the realism of the Holodeck (ﬁgure 1), a fully
immersive experience with the potential to virtually
recreate the physical world using the ﬁve primary senses,
visual (sight), auditory (sound), tactile/haptic (touch),
olfactory (smell), and gustatory (taste) [13]. Heilig
patented the multisensory Sensorama machine as early as
1962 [11] (ﬁgure 2), however only recently have
researchers like Jacob [17] have suggested the shift of
technology away from disembodied interactions toward
“reality-based” experiences that build upon our existing
knowledge of the world. As IOT technologies have
become more integrated into end user experience,
designing for multiple senses has transformed from a TV
fantasy into a feasible goal.

In contrast to traditional media comprised of audio and
video senses, Ghinea [13] deﬁnes ”mulsemedia” as media
that incorporates three or more senses. Research suggests
that mulsemedia has many beneﬁts, allowing users to
more easily process and interpret information. Ghinea, for
instance, describes how sensory information is processed
and stored diﬀerently by the brain; unlike visual and
auditory information, tacitle, olfactory and gustatory
information contributes to episodic knowledges that helps
shape attention. Likewise, Haverkamp [14] suggests that
communicating information through multiple sensory
channels allow for optimal information processing on
multiple levels of consciousness.

Literature also suggests that sensory modalities aﬀect one
another; Krishna et. al. [19] describe the presence of
multisensory congruence, showing that sensory experience
in diﬀerent modalities (e.g. touch and smell) can impact
one another, and Fujisaki [10] and Donley [9] even

suggest the
impact overall perception and quality of an experience.

combination of diﬀerent modalities can

HCI researchers and designers have begun to explore the
viability of integrating multisensory technology into the
IOT space [23]. For instance, Israr [15] considered how to
enrich storytelling with haptic feedback, Iwata [16]
developed a haptic device to simulate biting food, and
Spence [28] overviewed the state of the art of transferring
chemical senses (smell and taste) online. In pursuit of the
Holodeck, researchers have also endeavored to integrate
diﬀerent sensory experiences into VR. Lopes [21] simulated
the physical impact of boxing in VR using electrical
muscle simulation, Kiltini [18] explored the role of
multisensory and senorimotor feedback in body ownership,
and Gerry [12] superimposed VR on top of physical reality,
allowing a novice painter to replicate artist’s movements
on a canvas while watching them paint in VR. HCI
research has likewise attempted to replicate ambient
experiences;
Ambioterm [26] simulated environmental
conditions in a VR headset, and Martins [22]
conceptualized a sensory wine tourism experience.

Multisensory Education Design
Literature suggests that multisensory information can
have positive eﬀects on learning. Shams and Seitz [27]
overview the many beneﬁts of multisensory learning on
information encoding, storage and retrieval, and note
eﬀects on recognition, and cross-modal memory transfer
and reinforcement learning. In light of these beneﬁts, HCI
has begun to consider the role of multisensory information
on engagement and learning; Yannier [32] found that
adding shaking interaction to a virtual learning game
helped children enjoy learning physics principles, Covaci
and Ghinea [4] found that olfactory information and
feedback in an education game engaged students in the

Figure 1: The Star Trek
Holodeck

Figure 2: Heilig’s Sensorama
Machine

task, and Zou [33] found that integrated olfaction,
airﬂow, and haptics stimulti increased learner enjoyment.
Likewise, multisensory information design has shown to
impact judgment and learning tasks. Demate [7] found
that olfactory cues could inﬂuence peoples judgments of
facial attractiveness, Yannier [32] and Brooks [3] found
that haptics helped improve visualization of complex data
sets, and Lee [20] found that visual, auditory, and tactile
feedback improved virtual racecar drivers’ performance.

Multisensory Learning in VR
Research has also begun conceptualizing the role of
multisensory cues on learning in VR. Early works by
Psotka [25] and Dihn [8] suggest that multisensory cues in
VR can reduce conceptual load, create salient memories
and emotional experiences, and increase memory and
sense of presence for environmental information. As well
as creating presence and vivid memories, Dede (1999) [6]
found that multisensory information helps students
understand complex scientiﬁc models through experiential
metaphors and analogies, which can help displace intuitive
misconceptions. In recent work on stream identiﬁcation
tasks, Dede (2017) [5] suggested that VR could help make
topographic characteristics of the watershed more
apparent and enhance transfer from virtual settings to the
real world; sensory information (e.g. sound, color and
turbidity of the water, weather variables, shifts in grass
color) could help learners sense pattern changes.

Figure 3: Two diﬀerent streams
that learners will experience as
360°videos paired with
multisensory cues. The top image
shows a stream in Scotland, and
the bottom shows a stream in
the Amazon rainforest.

Testing Multisensory VR Pattern
Recognition and Knowledge Transfer
Although research has begun to consider the beneﬁts of
mulsemedia in VR, researchers have yet to consider
whether training sensory pattern recognition in physical
spaces can be simulated, and whether learners can use
their experience with simulated multisensory cues to make

judgments in physical spaces. My work on StreamBED
VR [30] teaches citizen scientists, volunteers who
collaborate with researchers on scientiﬁc data
collection [2], to make qualitative assessments of local
watersheds using the EPA’s Rapid Bioassessment
Protocol [1]. Qualitative tasks are not taught to citizen
scientists because of the high cost of teaching background
and onsite skills [24], so my work considers the viability of
VR to train non-experts to make abstract judgments of
quality. Being able to train qualitative identiﬁcation tasks
to citizen scientists in VR has the potential to improve
data quality and participant retention [30, 31], and to
overcome onsite training costs and challenges.

My earlier work found that experts make stream quality
judgments using multiple senses, and that novice learners
require a high sense of realism to make accurate
judgments. To address learners’ need for realism and
replicate how experts make assessments, my current work
considers the combined eﬀect of audio, olfactory, thermal,
and wind cues on pattern recognition. In this study, I plan
to compare participants’ ability to make observations and
recognize patterns while watching 360°videos in VR with
and without additional multisensory cues; study ﬁndings
will help develop a better training system, and inform
researchers whether ambient environment cues can be
virtually recreated.

Study Setup
During the study, participants will experience 360°videos
of two streams with similar characteristics and two
streams with diﬀerent characteristics; for instance, ﬁgure 3
shows screenshots of streams with diﬀerent characteristics,
a stream from Scotland (top), and the Amazon (bottom).

We are testing the compound eﬀects of several
characteristics: video, audio, scent, wind, humidity, and

The stream in Scotland

temperature that diﬀer by region.
would be windy and cool, sound of red deer, water bats
and otters, and smell like thistle, wisteria, and limestone.
In contrast, the Amazonian stream would have high heat
and humidity, sound of cicadas, howler monkeys, and
Poison dart frogs, and smell like decomposed wood, soil,
and bananas. Participants will experience videos either
with or without these multisensory cues. Participants in
the multisensory cue condition will experience information
through a series of Arduino controlled diﬀusers, a mister
and fan, and a mini desk space heater, shown in ﬁgure 4.

Challenges
Scent Overlap and Removal. Gallace [11] describe the
challenge of olfactory design; it is easy to deliver odors,
however creating believable scents, changing and
removing odors is problematic. I plan to use manufactured
scents, and will deliver and extract fans using individual
diﬀuser fans, activated charcoal, and a fume extractor.

Multisensory Integration and Cross Modal Stimuli.
Stein [29] and others suggest that learners integrate and
synthesize information from cross-modal stimuli. Future
work should thus consider how combinations of diﬀerent
cues shape learner mental models.

Limited Cognitive Resources. Gallace [11] also describes
the limit of cognitive resources for multisensory
information processing; incorporating additional senses
adds to processing capacity, but decreases the accuracy of
judgments for individual variables, resulting in crude
judgments of simultaneous things. In order to be eﬀective,
multisensory experiences should be ”neurally-inspired” by
our brain mechanics. While not in the scope the described
study, my work plans to consider cognitive limitations
when iterating on the StreamBED training system.

Conclusions
This paper overviews the state of multisensory interaction
design, contends the need to study the eﬀect of
mulsemedia on pattern recognition and knowledge transfer
in VR, and overviews a study plan to consider
multisensory cues on pattern recognition in citizen science
stream monitoring training. Understanding how additional
sensory information contributes to realism, immersion,
and knowledge transfer will help the HCI community
design more eﬀective and meaningful IOT systems.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Dr. Jennifer Preece for her time and feedback.

References
[1] Barbour, M. T., Gerritsen, J., Snyder, B. D., and

Stribling, J. B. Rapid bioassessment protocols for use
in wadeable streams and rivers. Periphyton, Benthic
Macroinvertebrates, and Fish (2nd edn). US
Environmental Protection Agency, Oﬃce of Water,
Washington, DC EPA (1999).

[2] Bonney, R., Cooper, C. B., Dickinson, J., Kelling, S.,

Phillips, T., Rosenberg, K. V., and Shirk, J. Citizen
science: a developing tool for expanding science
knowledge and scientiﬁc literacy. BioScience 59, 11
(2009), 977–984.

[3] Brooks Jr, F. P., Ouh-Young, M., Batter, J. J., and
Jerome Kilpatrick, P. Project gropehaptic displays
for scientiﬁc visualization. In ACM SIGGraph
computer graphics, vol. 24, ACM (1990), 177–185.
[4] Covaci, A., Ghinea, G., Lin, C.-H., Huang, S.-H., and
Shih, J.-L. Multisensory games-based learning-lessons
learnt from olfactory enhancement of a digital board
game. Multimedia Tools and Applications (2018),
1–19.

[5] Dede, C., Grotzer, T. A., Kamarainen, A., and

Figure 4: Multisensory Setup for
Video Study

Metcalf, S. J. Virtual reality as an immersive
medium for authentic simulations. In Virtual,
Augmented, and Mixed Realities in Education.
Springer, 2017, 133–156.

[6] Dede, C., Salzman, M. C., Loftin, R. B., and

Sprague, D. Multisensory immersion as a modeling
environment for learning complex scientiﬁc concepts.
In Modeling and simulation in science and
mathematics education. Springer, 1999, 282–319.
[7] Dematte, M. L., ¨Osterbauer, R., and Spence, C.
Olfactory cues modulate facial attractiveness.
Chemical Senses 32, 6 (2007), 603–610.

[8] Dinh, H. Q., Walker, N., Hodges, L. F., Song, C.,
and Kobayashi, A. Evaluating the importance of
multi-sensory input on memory and the sense of
presence in virtual environments. In Virtual Reality,
1999. Proceedings., IEEE, IEEE (1999), 222–228.
[9] Donley, J., Ritz, C., and Shujau, M. Analysing the
quality of experience of multisensory media from
measurements of physiological responses. In Quality
of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX), 2014 Sixth
International Workshop on, IEEE (2014), 286–291.
[10] Fujisaki, W., Tokita, M., and Kariya, K. Perception
of the material properties of wood based on vision,
audition, and touch. Vision research 109 (2015),
185–200.

[11] Gallace, A., Ngo, M. K., Sulaitis, J., and Spence, C.
Multisensory presence in virtual reality: possibilities
& limitations. In Multiple sensorial media advances
and applications: New developments in MulSeMedia.
IGI Global, 2012, 1–38.

[12] Gerry, L. J. Paint with me: Stimulating creativity

and empathy while painting with a painter in virtual
reality. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics 23, 4 (2017), 1418–1426.

[13] Ghinea, G., Timmerer, C., Lin, W., and Gulliver,

S. R. Mulsemedia: State of the art, perspectives, and
challenges. ACM Transactions on Multimedia
Computing, Communications, and Applications
(TOMM) 11, 1s (2014), 17.

[14] Haverkamp, M. Application of synesthetic design as
multi-sensory approach on sound quality, 2001.

[15] Israr, A., Zhao, S., Schwalje, K., Klatzky, R., and

Lehman, J. Feel eﬀects: enriching storytelling with
haptic feedback. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP) 11, 3 (2014), 11.

[16] Iwata, H., Yano, H., Uemura, T., and Moriya, T.
Food simulator: A haptic interface for biting. In
Virtual Reality, 2004. Proceedings. IEEE, IEEE
(2004), 51–57.

[17] Jacob, R. J., Girouard, A., Hirshﬁeld, L. M., Horn,
M. S., Shaer, O., Solovey, E. T., and Zigelbaum, J.
Reality-based interaction: a framework for post-wimp
interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems, ACM
(2008), 201–210.

[18] Kilteni, K., Bergstrom, I., and Slater, M. Drumming
in immersive virtual reality: the body shapes the way
we play. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics 19, 4 (2013), 597–605.

[19] Krishna, A., Elder, R. S., and Caldara, C. Feminine
to smell but masculine to touch? multisensory
congruence and its eﬀect on the aesthetic experience.
Journal of Consumer Psychology 20, 4 (2010),
410–418.

[20] Lee, J.-H., and Spence, C. Assessing the beneﬁts of

multimodal feedback on dual-task performance under
demanding conditions. In Proceedings of the 22nd
British HCI Group Annual Conference on People and
Computers: Culture, Creativity, Interaction-Volume
1, British Computer Society (2008), 185–192.

[21] Lopes, P., Ion, A., and Baudisch, P. Impacto:

Simulating physical impact by combining tactile
stimulation with electrical muscle stimulation. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software & Technology, ACM (2015),
11–19.

[22] Martins, J., Gon¸calves, R., Branco, F., Barbosa, L.,
Melo, M., and Bessa, M. A multisensory virtual
experience model for thematic tourism: A port wine
tourism application proposal. Journal of destination
marketing & management 6, 2 (2017), 103–109.
[23] Obrist, M., Velasco, C., Vi, C., Ranasinghe, N., Israr,

A., Cheok, A., Spence, C., and Gopalakrishnakone,
P. Sensing the future of hci: touch, taste, and smell
user interfaces. interactions 23, 5 (2016), 40–49.

[24] Pond, G. Personal Communication. Environmental

Protection Agency, 2015-2017.

[25] Psotka, J. Immersive training systems: Virtual reality
and education and training. Instructional science 23,
5-6 (1995), 405–431.

[26] Ranasinghe, N., Jain, P., Karwita, S., Tolley, D., and
Do, E. Y.-L. Ambiotherm: enhancing sense of
presence in virtual reality by simulating real-world
environmental conditions. In Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM (2017), 1731–1742.

[27] Shams, L., and Seitz, A. R. Beneﬁts of multisensory
learning. Trends in cognitive sciences 12, 11 (2008),
411–417.

[28] Spence, C., Obrist, M., Velasco, C., and Ranasinghe,
N. Digitizing the chemical senses: Possibilities &

pitfalls. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 107 (2017), 62–74.

[29] Stein, B. E., and Stanford, T. R. Multisensory

integration: current issues from the perspective of
the single neuron. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9, 4
(2008), 255.

[30] Striner, A., and Preece, J. Streambed: Training

citizen scientists to make qualitative judgments using
embodied virtual reality training. In Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2016),
1201–1207.

[31] Wiggins, A., Newman, G., Stevenson, R. D., and

Crowston, K. Mechanisms for data quality and
validation in citizen science. In Proceedings of the
2011 IEEE Seventh International Conference on
e-Science Workshops, ESCIENCEW ’11, IEEE
Computer Society (Washington, DC, USA, 2011),
14–19.

[32] Yannier, N., Hudson, S. E., Wiese, E. S., and

Koedinger, K. R. Adding physical objects to an
interactive game improves learning and enjoyment:
Evidence from earthshake. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 23, 4 (2016),
26.

[33] Zou, L., Tal, I., Covaci, A., Ibarrola, E., Ghinea, G.,
and Muntean, G.-M. Can multisensorial media
improve learner experience? In Proceedings of the
8th ACM on Multimedia Systems Conference, ACM
(2017), 315–320.

