8
1
0
2

p
e
S
0
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

4
v
4
5
4
9
0
.
5
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Navigating a maze differently - a
user study

Aryabrata Basu*

Kyle Johnsen†

Emory University
aryabrata.basu@emory.edu

University of Georgia
kjohnsen@uga.edu

September 24, 2018

Abstract

Navigating spaces is an embodied experience. Examples can vary from rescue workers trying to save people
from natural disasters; a tourist ﬁnding their way to the nearest coffee shop, or a gamer solving a maze.
Virtual reality allows these experiences to be simulated in a controlled virtual environment. However, virtual
reality users remain anchored in the real world and the conventions by which the virtual environment is
deployed inﬂuence user performance. There is currently a need to evaluate the degree of inﬂuence imposed
by extrinsic factors and virtual reality hardware on its users. Traditionally, virtual reality experiences have
been deployed using Head-Mounted Displays with powerful computers rendering the graphical content
of the virtual environment; however, user input has been facilitated using an array of human interface
devices including Keyboards, Mice, Trackballs, Touchscreens, Joysticks, Gamepads, Motion detecting cameras
and Webcams. Some of these HIDs have also been introduced for non-immersive video games and general
computing. Due to this fact, a subset of virtual reality users has greater familiarity than others in using
these HIDs. Virtual reality experiences that utilize gamepads (controllers) to navigate virtual environments
may introduce a bias towards usability among virtual reality users previously exposed to video-gaming.

This article presents an evaluative user study conducted using our ubiquitous virtual reality framework
with general audiences. Among our ﬁndings, we reveal a usability bias among virtual reality users who
are predominantly video gamers. Beyond this, we found a statistical difference in user behavior between
untethered immersive virtual reality experiences compared to untethered non-immersive virtual reality
experiences.

I.

Introduction

Spatial navigation is one of the core abili-

ties of human beings. It is a useful skill
set that we employ on a daily basis to
navigate building interiors or busy streets to
reach our destinations. The act of navigating
a physical environment requires the simulta-
neous operation of both cognitive and motor
functions [12]. The majority of virtual real-
ity (VR) experiments are designed with spa-
tial navigation in mind as the primary means
for exploring virtual environments (VEs) [17].
That said, the potential implications of VE inter-

*Corresponding author
†Advisor

face and VR task model design on individual
user performance in VR have yet to be explored
adequately. As a result, understanding the un-
derlying concepts of spatial navigation as a
mathematical construct and its relationship to
immersive VR user performance is particularly
important, especially if we were to adopt VR
exercises designed to promote navigation skill
set building in users with measurable gain in
output.

In this work, we presume that the prior
video-gaming experience, age and the gender
of the users participating in a VR study im-
pacts their respective performance in execut-
ing immersive VR tasks. This study has been
extended from earlier work examining how

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

Figure 2: Key locations and decision nodes of the maze

immersive VR navigation performance [11].

In 1998, Bowman et al. proposed a formal-
ized methodology and framework [6] for the
evaluation of travel techniques in immersive
VEs. The basic construct of their framework
was a taxonomy of travel techniques. Their ex-
perimental analysis revealed the need to gather
more information about user analytics inside
VEs. In a second study, Bowman et al. stud-
ied the effects of various travel techniques on
the spatial orientation [5] of users inside im-
mersive VR environments. At the same time,
Ruddle et al. introduced a formal study com-
paring HMDs and desktop displays [10]. The
objective of this study was to perform a base-
line investigation that compared the two dif-
ferent types of displays. They found that par-
ticipants using the HMD navigated the virtual
buildings signiﬁcantly more quickly, and de-
veloped a signiﬁcantly accurate sense of rela-
tive straight-line distance. Behavioral analyses
showed that participants took advantage of
the natural, head-tracked interface provided
by the HMD in ways that include “looking
around” more often while traveling through
the VE and spending less time being stationary
while choosing a direction in which to travel.

In 2009, Smith et al. conducted a research
study to look into the impact of previous com-

Figure 1: Immersive (top) and non-immersive (bottom)
perspective of all study participants at the start
of the maze experience

physiological factors affect user performance
in immersive VR [1]. In this article, we describe
our virtual maze application as well as the de-
tailed system design. We report an extended
analysis conducted on the recorded user tra-
jectory data. To that end, we deﬁned a set of
mathematically derived features generalized
for each trajectory such as distance traveled,
decision points reached inside the maze, po-
sitional curvature, head rotation amount, and
coverage of the maze.

II. Related Work

Our application and system is built upon the
strategies, technology, and research involved
in previous studies conducted on the topic of
spatial navigation in immersive VR. A number
of researchers have addressed issues related
to spatial navigation and travel metaphors in
immersive VEs over the years [6, 14, 13, 18, 7].
A subset of these works have also looked into
the affects of prior video gaming experience on

2

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

puter gaming experience, user perceived gam-
ing ability, and actual gaming performance on
navigation tasks in a VE [11]. They found that
perceived gaming skill and progress in a linear
ﬁrst person shooter (FPS) game were found
to be the most consistent metrics. Both per-
ceived gaming skill and progress in a linear
FPS game bore a relationship to performance
in trivial searches, primed searches, the num-
ber of mistakes when performing an advanced
travel technique (jumping) and in traveling
time requiring high speed and accuracy. Smith
et al. [11], stated ‘this may require the develop-
ment of a gamer proﬁle including both similar
metrics to those used in this paper, metrics over
other 3D interface tasks such as selection and
manipulation and metrics for subjective condi-
tions such as user disorientation, cybersickness
and presence.’ In 2010, Suma et al. reported
a user study comparing real walking with
three virtual travel techniques; namely, gaze-
directed, pointing-directed, and torso-directed
travel [14]. Suma et al. found that real walking
is superior in terms of user performance as it
allowed more cognitive capacity for processing
and encoding stimuli than pointing-directed
travel metaphors. They also found that male
participants were slower and performed signif-
icantly worse on the attention task when the
spatial task became more difﬁcult in contrast to
female participants. In another related study,
Suma et al. reported that for complex VEs with
numerous turns, virtual travel techniques are
acceptable substitutes for real walking if the
goal of the application involves learning or rea-
soning based on information presented in the
environment [13].

Another component of studying spatial nav-
igation is spatial trajectory analysis. In 2005,
Zanbaka et al. described a between-subjects ex-
periment that compared four different methods
of travel, their effect on cognition, and paths
taken in an immersive VE [18]. This study
used participants’ trajectory (position and head
orientation) data in post-analysis by creating
overlays that ultimately revealed further differ-
ences in travel techniques. This study favored a
large tracked space over other travel techniques

in VR for applications where problem solving
and interpretation of material is important or
where opportunity to train is minimal. Jeong
et al. in 2005, reported on the differentiation
of information-gathering ability in the real and
the VE [7]. An important ﬁnding of their study
was that the users path of ﬁnding information
was similar, their information gathering ability
differs between the real and the VE.

This article does not address the cognitive
issues related to spatial exploration on an
individual basis. Rather our approach dis-
tinguishes task performance (as a trend) be-
tween two categories of users (gamers and
non-gamers) using VR systems. More than
one performance metric for solving a maze in
VR has been deployed, which allowed for a
nuanced discussion of navigation abilities.

Prior work on the evaluation of ubiquitous,
smartphone driven 3DUIs helped guide our
system architecture [3, 2]. A light-weight VR
system is logistically a sound design when
it comes to recruiting higher number of sub-
jects for a research study. Other studies exist
that looked into physical activity as a poten-
tial marker for performances in immersive VR
environments. One such study suggested that
physical activities of users can be a predictor
for VR task performance [3].
In regards to
physical activity, virtual reality has also been
explored as a means to motivate individuals
to exercise, a concept better known as VR ex-
ergaming [8]. While all these studies explore
the relationship between physical activity and
VR performance, there has been a lack of con-
crete connections between them. In contrast
to quantifying physical ﬁtness of users as sug-
gested by Basu et al.[1, 8], our approach shifts
the attention of the user performance predictor
to the gaming proﬁle.

III. Application

Our maze application requires the user to nav-
igate a maze and ﬁnd multiple target sites. For
consistency, every player had a ﬁxed starting
point and ﬁxed targets to reach in the maze.
The context of the maze experience was similar

3

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

to a previous study [1], in which the subject
is required to ﬁnd and rescue another human
(avatar). The task included ﬁnding a clue (min-
imap) before ﬁnding the human avatar and
then tracing back the path to the entrance of
the maze. On average, the participants spent
4.64 minutes in the immersive user interface
setting and 6.18 minutes in the non-immersive
user interface setting.

i. Game Design

The focal point of our VR experience was to tra-
verse a maze environment, ﬁnd multiple target
sites and trace back your path. To add to the
experience, we used an altruistic framework by
setting up a background story of a lost traveler
inside the maze. Each participant was given
the tasks of searching for and rescuing the lost
character in the maze. To better emphasize
this point, a restriction was placed upon the
participant in the form of ﬁnding a map of the
maze ﬁrst. Once the user was successful in
ﬁnding the map location, the user was then
asked to ﬁnd the lost character in the maze.
Upon meeting the character, which is an ani-
mated humanoid avatar, the participants were
required to trace back their path to the entrance
of the maze to complete the experience. The
maze design also included strategically placed
unique props (box, ﬁrst-aid kit, etc.) to help
with user localization and memory. Various
key locations, including targets and props in
our maze design, are illustrated in Figure 2.

ii. System Hardware

Our system setup included a mobile HMD and
a wireless gaming controller. We opted for
Samsung Galaxy Gear VR as our HMD solu-
tion and Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge+ with 5.7
inch screen size at 2560 pixels x 1440 pixels (518
ppi) screen resolution as our primary smart
phone display. For user controls in the maze,
we opted for a Bluetooth compatible Madcatz
C.T.R.L. gamepad controller which connects
easily with our display. A typical system setup
deployed for the study is illustrated in Figure 3.

4

Figure 3: A randomly selected participant partaking the

maze experience

iii. System Software

The VR maze experience was developed us-
ing the Unity game engine and deployed on
the HMD device as an Android app. While
each participant was busy solving the maze,
the system software kept an active log of their
in-session trajectory data along with their head
orientation data every 10 milliseconds. Fur-
thermore, the system software also logged rel-
evant event data such as participants quitting
the maze experience or participants ﬁnding
the targets successfully. A visual example of
participant tracking algorithm is illustrated in
Figure 4.

Once the user data was collected, scripts de-
veloped in C# programming language were
used to analyze the users’ trajectory data
in Unity game engine. These scripts parse
through user transformation (x,y,z) in real-time
and visualize their search patterns in the maze.
This, in turn, allows to conﬁrm visually emerg-
ing differences in user performance in immer-
sive VR. This sort of visual analysis can be gen-
eralized to apply to other studies concerning
spatial navigation in immersive VR.

IV. Study Design

Null hypothesis: There is not a signiﬁcant im-
pact on users’ ability to successfully navigate a 3D
maze under the inﬂuence of technical factors such
as immersive, non-immersive user interface.

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

Gamer N-Gamer

Participants

Gender

Player Level

Male
Female

Novice
Casual
Pro
Hardcore
Experiential

21

14
7

0
6
12
2
1

19

4
15

12
6
0
0
1

Table 1: Study demographics, based on the question-
naires; ‘Player Level’ is a derived scale reﬂect-
ing participant’s involvement and approach to
video-gaming;
‘Gamer’ vs. ‘Non-Gamer’ re-
ﬂects the self-assessment of being a gamer

prise a mix (by age, profession, background)
of university staff and students at Emory Uni-
versity's main campus.
In compliance with
the Institutional Review Board guidelines of
both University of Georgia and Emory Univer-
sity, every participant's consent was obtained
and recorded on paper forms. Furthermore,
the users were asked to ﬁll out a series of
forms including a general demographic ques-
tionnaire, pre-simulator and post-simulator
sickness questionnaire and a presence question-
naire. Additionally, these users were also asked
to ﬁll out a self-reported gaming proﬁle assess-
ment form. Each user was then tasked to solve
the same maze problem twice using an immer-
sive user interface and then a non-immersive
user interface. The order of deployment for
each user was random and can be classiﬁed
between the following two categories:

Condition 1. Immersive ﬁrst, and then non-

immersive.

Condition 2. Non-immersive ﬁrst, and then

Figure 4: Visualization of a randomly selected partici-
pant’s spatial trajectory data including gaze in-
formation represented as highlighted in cyan.

Alternate hypothesis: There is a signiﬁcant
impact on users’ ability to successfully navigate a
3D maze under the inﬂuence of technical factors
such as immersive, non-immersive user interface.

The primary goal behind the maze experi-
ence is to understand how users with varying
degree of exposure to video gaming solve a
complex three dimensional immersive naviga-
tion problem. We wanted to quantify spatial
decision making in terms of user activity in the
maze. To this end, we conducted a 2 x 1 study
with user type being one of our independent
variables. We recorded spatial user activity,
including gaze activity, every 10 millisecond
apart to help develop a model for spatial navi-
gation performance. The experiment required
users to navigate a maze with a three-fold task
model. The following subsections describe the
study design in details.

i. Population and Environment

immersive.

Over a course of 8 months, 40 self-motivated
participants (mean-age = 35.93; SD = 11.11)
volunteered for our study. Table 1 shows the
breakdown of the two study groups by popu-
lation demographics. These participants com-

Each participant was recruited using an on-
line recruitment drive advertised through the
internal university mailing list. A speciﬁc labo-
ratory was chosen to run the sessions with only
one participant at a time. The choice of our

5

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

study space was particularly critical to remove
any additional social anxiety within our partic-
ipants. Our study investigator sat down with
our participants and would start conversing to
ease them into our study. Upon agreeing to our
study requirements, a participant would start
his/her ﬁrst round of maze solving followed
by a ﬁve minute break before starting his/her
second round. The order of deployment for
each user was random. The study investiga-
tor made sure to capture an equal number of
participants for each category of deployment.
Between the two sessions, the users were given
ﬁve minute of break time to normalize their
fatigue level before starting their next session.

ii. Measures

Data automatically recorded during the course
of the maze navigation was used to measure
the performance of each participant. For each
session, we recorded, every 10 millisecond, the
participant’s spatial trajectory inside the maze
along with orientation of gaze information (Fig-
ure 4). This allowed us to effectively play-
back and calculate each participant’s spatio-
temporal activity including, but not limited to,
time spent at decision nodes in the maze and
cumulative gaze rotation at decision nodes in
the maze.

In addition, the participants ﬁlled out back-
ground survey questionnaires with empha-
sis on video gaming activity proﬁling, pre-
simulator and post-simulator sickness ques-
tionnaire (SSQ) [9] and a presence question-
naire [16] related to their immersive maze ex-
perience.

The data contained information retrieved
from 40 participants with the following at-
tributes: subject id, date, player proﬁle, gen-
der, age, 20/20 vision, gaming hours, athletic
score, condition of deployment, time of com-
pletion, relative simulator sickness score (low:
16; high: 160), and presence score (low: -21,
high: +21). Furthermore, we introduced a de-
rived scale of attribute based on participant’s
self reported gaming hours per week and their
video-gaming exposure proﬁling which we

Features

Distance traveled

Coverage

Number of decision points
reached

Positional Curvature

Head rotation amount

Deﬁnition

is the total
the
traveled
two

It
length of
path
between
positions.

Total number of
unit cubes cov-
ered (area).

Total number of
decision points
covered in the
maze.

The signed an-
gle of curvature
between
two
consecutive
position vectors.

The unsigned
head
rotation
angle between
consecu-
two
tive
rotation
transforms.

Table 2: Features extracted from users’ trajectory data
for deep exploration and their corresponding
deﬁnitions.

6

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

have termed as ‘Player Level’ [see Table 1]. Ad-
ditionally, for deep exploration of the trajec-
tory data, we deﬁned a set of mathematically
derived features generalized for each trajec-
tory such as distance traveled, decision points
(nodes) reached inside the maze, positional cur-
vature, head rotation amount, and coverage of
the maze. Some of these trajectory features are
illustrated in Figure 5. Positional curvature fea-
ture refers to the curvature of the trajectory cal-
culated per frame between successive position
vectors. Rotation amount feature refers to the
unsigned angle calculated per frame between
successive head rotation transforms stored as
Quaternions. Coverage feature is simply the
number of unit cubes covered (area) by the
user, calculated per frame. We conducted a
follow up secondary analysis of the trajectory
data using the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)
algorithm [4] to compute alignment distance
between two trajectory samples from our pool
of participant data. We used R and SPSS to-
gether to conduct the analysis of the trajectory
data.

Figure 5: Visualization of two trajectory features: posi-

tional curvature and head rotation amount.

We obtained information from each ses-
sions (immersive and non-immersive user in-
terface). Pre-experience and post-experience
survey questions relevant to this analysis are

Survey Question

Response type

Please indicate the number of
hours (per week) you play
video games

Ordinal,
1 (1-3 hours) . . .
5 (10+ hours)

Please indicate your overall
(perceived) athletic skills

Please indicate your response
to the questions related to
playing video games

Ordinal,
1 (Very poor) . . .
10 (Excellent)

Ordinal,
Yes/No/Maybe

Please indicate and rate any of
the symptoms listed in the
table below on a scale of 1 to
10 (SSQ)

Ordinal,
1 (Never felt) . . .
10 (Str. felt)

Please rate your agreement
with the following statements
w.r.t. both the VR sessions
witnessed (Presence)

Likert,
-3 (Str. Disagree)
. . .
+3 (Str. Agree)

Brieﬂy tell us about your
virtual experiences
(suggestions/comments)

Extended
comments/suggestions

Free Response

Free Response

Table 3: Pre-experience and post-experience survey

shown in Table 3.

iii. Procedure and Tasks

At the start of the experiment, participants
were given elaborate verbal instructions ex-
plaining the experimental procedure. Both the
gamer and the non-gamer group were then in-
terviewed in order to proﬁle their background
and account for prior exposure to video gam-
ing. The participants were given an overview
of the technology involved and were explained
how to wear a HMD and control their in-game
avatar using the controller. They were also ex-
plained their responsibility towards the study
(ﬁnding the targets inside the maze in a spe-

7

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

ciﬁc order, and if they were feeling nauseated,
then they should immediately stop their VR
experience). The participants were explicitly
told that there were no time limits to their ses-
sions and were advised to take their time to
solve the maze. The participants would then
initiate their two session maze experience with
either immersive or non-immersive user inter-
face control schematics. During the course of
solving the maze, the participants had the op-
tion of verbally communicating with the study
investigator in case they needed any further
information.

The maze task model consisted of three tasks,
all of which involve wayﬁnding. These tasks
were as follows:

1. Find your way to target 1, a mini map

( 12b)

2. Find your way to target 2, the animated

human avatar ( 12a)

3. Find your way back to the entrance of the

maze

The difference between immersive and non-
immersive user interface lies in the way the par-
ticipants controlled their gaze. Immersive user
interface control meant that the participants
used their natural head orientation to align
their view inside the maze environment (VE).
Non-immersive user interface control meant
the participants had to control their view in-
side the maze using the joystick analog control
on the gaming controller (gamepad) (Figure 1).
The participants were required to be seated
while going through the study because this
conﬁguration helped minimize simulator sick-
ness. After completing their ﬁrst session, the
participants were given a break of 5 minutes
before starting their next session to help nor-
malize any fatigue conditions. In their second
session, they were given the same maze once
again but with a different user interface con-
trol schematic from before. Upon completion
of their second session, the post-experience sur-
vey was administered, which included a pres-
ence questionnaire [16] along with personal
feedback. Simulator sickness questionnaires

Figure 6: Time of completion is signiﬁcantly less for par-
ticipants who self-reported their gaming proﬁle
(gproﬁle) as gamers

Figure 7: Presence score is higher for participants who
self-reported their gaming proﬁle (gproﬁle) as
non-gamers

8

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

[9] were provided contextually in-between the
sessions. At this point, all participant activity
have been logged, collated and uploaded for
further analysis.

Figure 8: Repeated measures analysis for current user
study; test of within-subjects effects.

Figure 9: Repeated measures analysis for current user

study; test of within-subjects contrast.

V. Results

Only 19 participants out of 40 completed both
maze sessions. We report that 2 participants
out of 40 were not appropriately logged due
to device I/O failure, resulting in complete
data loss of 2 data points from the analysis.
We investigate our dependent variable (time
of completion) against the set of independent
variables such as the participant’s gaming pro-
ﬁle type (gamer or non-gamer), the type of
deployment (immersive and non-immersive),
presence score, simulator sickness score, age,
and gender.

Figure 10: Visual comparison of user trajectories of a
randomly selected gamer (left) and a non-
gamer (right) while solving the maze in the
non-immersive interface.

We report a signiﬁcant difference between
groups of means of gaming proﬁle type and
time of completion (F-value = 12.885, P =
0.000914). The box plot of time of completion
with respect to gaming proﬁle [see Figure 6]
illustrates the difference between gamer and
non-gamer groups. We observe, a majority of
gamer participants took less time in solving
the maze on average, whereas a majority of
non-gamer participants took more time. Fur-
thermore, ﬁgure 14 shows a positive correlation
(scatterplot) between the time of completion of
the maze (in seconds) and the age of the partic-
ipants. We also report that female participants
in this study spent higher time completing the
maze on average than the male participants in
this study [see Figure 15]. This suggests that
there is a trend of age and gender together
impacting immersive VR user performance.

Additionally, we report a signiﬁcant differ-
ence between groups of means of gaming pro-
ﬁle type and self-reported presence score of
the successful participants (F-value = 9.565, P
= 0.00699). The box plot of presence score
with respect to gaming proﬁle [see Figure 7]
illustrates the difference between gamer and
non-gamer groups. Interestingly, we observed
another signiﬁcant difference between groups
of means of condition of deployment and the
self reported SSQ scores [see Figure 13]. It is
indicative of the fact that immersive user in-
terface control made participants nauseated to
a higher degree than non-immersive user in-

9

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

Figure 11: Bi-modality test

terface control. All of these ﬁndings together
are indicative of a trend, but we need inferen-
tial statistics to make an argument conclusively.
We then proceed to explore our recorded user
trajectory dataset.

Repeated measures analysis of the user tra-
jectory dataset revealed that technical factors,
such as immersive and non-immersive user
interfaces, do signiﬁcantly impact immersive
VR user performance [see Figure 9 and Fig-
ure 8]. This shows a signiﬁcant main effect of
treatment (difference between immersive and
non-immersive user interface) and an interac-
tive effect of treatment and condition (i.e. order
of deployment; immersive or non-immersive
ﬁrst, immersive or non-immersive second) com-
bined. We ﬁnd that condition is not a signiﬁ-
cant factor between subjects. Looking closely
at individual measures, we don’t ﬁnd a differ-
ence on any particular measure [see Figure 9].
This suggests small but consistent differences
that arise as a result of treatment (immersive
versus non-immersive user interface).

From our DTW analysis, we found that the
alignment distance of the trajectories (vector
based feature) between the gamer group and
non-gamer group is closer (tends to zero) in
the case of immersive user interface than non-
immersive user interface. This fact is further
backed by a positive bi-modality test (see Fig-
ure 11) between the two groups. This suggests
that immersive user interface normalizes the
maze solving experience between the gamer
and non-gamer groups.

10

(a) 3D mannequin model

(b) 3D Minimap model

Figure 12: Targets inside the maze

VI. Discussion

We reject our null hypothesis and accept the
alternate hypothesis. We found that prior ex-
posure to video-gaming, age, and gender has
a measurable impact on immersive VR user
performance. While conceptualizing our ex-
perimental design, there were concerns about
choosing the appropriate measurement param-
eters as performance metric for VR tasks, we
worried that the immersive and non-immersive
user interface control paradigms would be
confusing to users, and that visual cues to
understand decision making in mazes dur-
ing analysis would be complicated and con-
founding. During the course of the study, we
observed that users, who claimed to be self-
perceived video-gamers, aren’t confused by
the immersive, non-immersive interface control
paradigm. The video-gaming group seemed to
treat both immersive and non-immersive user
interface as the same, unlike the non-video-
gaming group. The ability to replay user trajec-
tory in the Unity game engine’s editor environ-

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

Figure 13: SSQ score is higher in immersive user inter-

Figure 15: Maze Study - Boxplot showing time of com-

face control

pletion of the maze by group (gender).

our study also proved to be fairly difﬁcult for
most of the participants, which helped offset
the balance between chance-based decisions
and skill-based decisions inside the maze. The
average time that the users spent in immersive
interface was 268 seconds while the average
time spent by the same users in non-immersive
interface was 364 seconds. As suspected, there
were differences in performance between the
gamer and the non-gamer groups [see Figure
10]. In the context of spatial problem-solving,
wayﬁnding, the combined ﬁnding of simulator
sickness and presence score could be indicative
of the fact that the two groups approached the
study differently. From a pedagogical point of
view, if immersive VR applications were to be
deployed while making a meaningful impact
to its user’s skill-building exercise, we would
have to account for the factor that different
groups of users conceive and treat immersive
environments differently based on their prior
experience. Standardized immersive experi-
ence, although logistically good, is not effective
in targeting individual speciﬁc needs.

VII. Conclusions

Immersive VR applications have been tradi-
tionally deployed in a controlled laboratory
setting ever since the advent of HMDs [15].
With the proliferation of highly accessible mo-
bile communication devices such as the smart-
phone, high pixel density display technology

11

Figure 14: Maze Study - Graph showing scatterplot of
time of completion of the maze as the y-axis
and age of the participants as the x-axis.

ment proved to be very useful. These visual
replays helped us determine user trajectory
features such as, curvature, and head-rotation
amount [see Figure 5] to analyze.

Additional ﬁndings: The interface worked
well except twice when it failed to record the
session due to a device malfunction. Due to the
minimalist nature of our system setup, we were
able to reduce points of failure in our system
so that our participants could focus better on
the study objectives. All user data logging was
done in the background and were stored locally
on-board the HMD device for faster I/O. The
maze provided ample space-time interactivity
for the participants which in turn provided us
a rich data set including high resolution user
trajectory data which can be parsed through
in real-time [see Figure 4]. The task model in

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

became available as an alternative to dedicated
and tethered HMDs. The mobility of these
smart devices inspired us to conceive a mo-
bile VR platform that is untethered and can
be deployed universally. Our work represents
another step toward ubiquitous deployment
of immersive virtual experiences which will
potentially advance general VR usability, in-
cite more research, and further the cause for
practical VR applications.

With the current study (a study of techni-
cal factor), we showed that prior exposure to
video-gaming, age, and gender is found to
have a measurable impact on user performance
when it comes to spatial maze navigation in
immersive VR. The current study design in-
volved a relatively complicated maze design
than Study III. The context of the maze expe-
rience was similar to Study III, in which the
subject is required to ﬁnd and rescue another
human (avatar). The task included ﬁnding
a clue (minimap) before ﬁnding the human
avatar and then tracing back the path to the en-
trance of the maze. The hardware setup for the
current study was kept similar to Study III for
maintaining consistency. The current study de-
sign also looked at each participant partaking
the maze experience twice with the distinction
that one of the session would require the user
to use only the game-controller to navigate the
maze while the other would involve the same
user solving the same maze combining natural
head gaze rotation and the game-controller to
navigate the maze. We found that the gaming
proﬁle coupled with age and gender is prov-
ing to be a strong indicator of success when it
comes to navigating immersive mazes in VR.
After our preliminary ﬁnding, we focused on
the important issue of exploring the core im-
pact on user task performance in an immer-
sive VR setup deployed under an immersive
setting. We conducted extended analysis on
recorded user trajectory data. To that end, we
deﬁned a set of mathematically derived fea-
tures generalized for each trajectory such as
distance traveled, decision points reached in-
side the maze, positional curvature, head rota-
tion amount, and coverage of the maze. Upon

12

closer inspection of the variation in these trajec-
tory features through repeated measure analy-
sis, we found a small but consistent difference
that arises as a result of the treatment of our
ﬁnal study design, that is immersive versus
non-immersive user interface. We ﬁnd that im-
mersive user interface helps users explore the
VE better with natural head gaze control than
the non-immersive user interface with analog
gaze control. These ﬁndings are useful to VR
designers in making appropriate trade-offs in
VR level design for speciﬁc VR applications.

To summarize, in this work, we have showed
that prior exposure to video-gaming, age, and
gender is found to have a measurable impact
on user performance when it comes to spa-
tial maze navigation in immersive VR. We con-
ducted extended analysis on recorded user tra-
jectory data. To that end, we deﬁned a set of
mathematically derived features generalized
for each trajectory such as distance traveled,
decision points reached inside the maze, posi-
tional curvature, head rotation amount, and
coverage of the maze. Upon closer inspec-
tion of the variation in these trajectory features
through repeated measure analysis, we found
a small but consistent difference that arises as a
result of the treatment of our ﬁnal study design,
that is immersive versus non-immersive user
interface. We ﬁnd that immersive user interface
helps users explore the VE more with natural
head gaze control than the non-immersive user
interface with analog gaze control.

References

[1] Basu, A., Ball, C., Manning, B., and
Johnsen, K. Effects of user physical ﬁt-
ness on performance in virtual reality. In
2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces
(3DUI) (March 2016), pp. 233–234.

[2] Basu, A., Johnsen, K., and Bogert, K.
Poster: Evolution and usability of ubiqui-
tous immersive 3d interfaces. In 2013 IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI)
(March 2013), pp. 131–132.

Spatial navigation in immersive VR • May 2018 • Iteration. 1

[3] Basu, A., Saupe, C., Refour, E., Raij, A.,
and Johnsen, K. Immersive 3dui on one
dollar a day. In 2012 IEEE Symposium on
3D User Interfaces (3DUI) (March 2012),
pp. 97–100.

[11] Smith, S. P., and Du’Mont, S. Measuring
the effect of gaming experience on virtual
environment navigation tasks. In 3D User
Interfaces, 2009. 3DUI 2009. IEEE Sympo-
sium on (2009), IEEE, pp. 3–10.

[4] Bellman, R., and Kalaba, R. On adap-
tive control processes. IRE Transactions on
Automatic Control 4, 2 (1959), 1–9.

[5] Bowman, D. A., Davis, E. T., Hodges, L. F.,
and Badre, A. N. Maintaining spatial ori-
entation during travel in an immersive
virtual environment. Presence: Teleopera-
tors and Virtual Environments 8, 6 (1999),
618–631.

[6] Bowman, D. A., Koller, D., and Hodges,
L. F. A methodology for the evaluation
of travel techniques for immersive virtual
environments. Virtual Reality 3, 2 (Jun
1998), 120–131.

[7] Jeong, D. H., Lee, C. S., Jeon, G. B., Song,
C. G., Babu, S., and Hodges, L. Differ-
entiation on information gathering ability
in real and virtual world. In Proceedings
of Paciﬁc Graphics (2005), Citeseer, pp. 157–
159.

[8] Johnsen, K., Ahn, S. J., Moore, J., Brown,
S., Robertson, T. P., Marable, A., and
Basu, A. Mixed reality virtual pets to re-
duce childhood obesity. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20,
4 (April 2014), 523–530.

[9] Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum,
K. S., and Lilienthal, M. G. Simula-
tor sickness questionnaire: An enhanced
method for quantifying simulator sick-
ness. The International Journal of Aviation
Psychology 3, 3 (1993), 203–220.

[10] Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., and Jones,
D. M. Navigating large-scale virtual envi-
ronments: what differences occur between
helmet-mounted and desk-top displays?
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environ-
ments 8, 2 (1999), 157–168.

[12] Spiers, H.

J., and Maguire, E. A.
Thoughts, behaviour, and brain dynam-
ics during navigation in the real world.
NeuroImage 31, 4 (2006), 1826 – 1840.

[13] Suma, E., Finkelstein, S., Reid, M., Babu,
S., Ulinski, A., and Hodges, L. F. Eval-
uation of the cognitive effects of travel
technique in complex real and virtual en-
vironments. IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics 16, 4 (2010),
690–702.

[14] Suma, E. A., Finkelstein, S. L., Clark,
S., Goolkasian, P., and Hodges, L. F. Ef-
fects of travel technique and gender on a
divided attention task in a virtual environ-
ment. In 3D User Interfaces (3DUI), 2010
IEEE Symposium on (2010), IEEE, pp. 27–
34.

[15] Sutherland, I. E. A head-mounted three
In Proceedings of
dimensional display.
the December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Com-
puter Conference, Part I (New York, NY,
USA, 1968), AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I), ACM,
pp. 757–764.

[16] Usoh, M., Catena, E., Arman, S., and
Slater, M. Using presence questionnaires
in reality. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments 9, 5 (2000), 497–503.

[17] Werkhoven, P., van Erp,

J. B., and
Philippi, T. G. Navigating virtual mazes:
The beneﬁts of audiovisual landmarks.
Displays 35, 3 (2014), 110 – 117.

[18] Zanbaka, C. A., Lok, B. C., Babu, S. V.,
Ulinski, A. C., and Hodges, L. F. Com-
parison of path visualizations and cogni-
tive measures relative to travel technique
IEEE Transac-
in a virtual environment.
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
11, 6 (2005), 694–705.

13

