Indy: a virtual reality multi-player game for navigation skills training 

Arnaud Mas*, Idriss Ismaël*, Nicolas Filliard* 

* EDF R&D, Palaiseau, France 

ABSTRACT 

Working in complex industrial facilities requires spatial navigation 
skills that people build up with time and field experience. Training 
sessions consisting in guided tours help discover places but they are 
insufficient to become intimately familiar with their layout. They 
imply  passive  learning  postures,  are  time-limited  and  can  be 
experienced  only  once  because  of  organization  constraints  and 
potential interferences with ongoing activities in the buildings. To 
overcome  these  limitations  and  improve  the  acquisition  of 
navigation  skills,  we  developed  Indy,  a  virtual  reality  system 
consisting in a collaborative game of treasure hunting. It has several 
key advantages: it focuses learners’ attention on navigation tasks, 
implies their active engagement and provides them with feedbacks 
on their achievements. Virtual reality makes it possible to multiply 
the number and duration of situations that learners can experience 
to  better  consolidate  their  skills.  This  paper  discusses  the  main 
design principles and a typical usage scenario of Indy. 

Keywords:  Collaborative  virtual  reality,  learning,  gamification, 
spatial navigation. 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Developing  spatial  understanding  of  an  industrial  building’s 
structure can be quite difficult. Indeed, the facility priority use is 
production. In particular, learning sessions in such a building, even 
short ones,  have  to  meet  the  production  constraints  such  as  busy 
schedule and safety measures. 

Virtual learning environments (VLE) offer a great alternative for 
learning tasks difficult to undertake in the real world [4]. Indeed, 
they  allow  learners  to  visit  a  facility  without  any  consideration 
about availability, distances or safety.  They also give trainers the 
possibility  to  modify  characteristics  of  the  environment  beyond 
what is possible in real life. They  give learners the possibility  to 
instead  of  passive  knowledge 
learn 
acquisition, as explained for instance by Pan et al. [14]. Besides, 
attention,  active  engagement,  feedback  and  strengthening  phases 
are important in a learning process to ensure effective acquisition 
of  knowledge,  as  already  identified  by  Dehaene  [5]  in  the  way 
children learn how to read. 

through  active  action 

Indy  is  a  new  virtual  reality  application  for  professionals  who 
will  work  in  industrial  facilities.  It  aims  at  helping  them  get 
familiarized  with  the  facilities  during  their  training  period.  It  is 
designed  to  provide  professional  trainers  a  tool  to  build  new 
pedagogical strategies based on virtual reality. 

2  DESIGN PRINCIPLES 

2.1  Collaboration 

Literature  tend  to  show  that  fostering  social  interactions  and 
collaboration leads to higher learning efficiency for a virtual group 

* arnaud-a.mas@edf.fr, idriss.ismael@edf.fr, 

nicolas.filliard@edf.fr 

[5][11][19]. Based on this hypothesis, we designed Indy to foster 
collaboration in a learning context, as defined by Roschelle et al. 
[16]: “the mutual engagement of participants in a coordinated effort 
to solve the problem together”. 

to 

can 

contribute 

to  Slavin  [19],  group  goals  and 
collaborative 

individual 
According 
accountability 
learning 
achievements. Kreijns et al. [11] also cite positive interdependence 
and promotive interaction as levers to enforce collaboration. The 
authors  insist  on  the  fact  that  “the  key  to  the  efficacy  of 
collaborative learning is social interaction, and lack of it is a factor 
causing  the  negative  effectiveness  of  collaborative  learning”. 
Nonetheless, 
allowing 
communication won’t automatically imply social interaction, and 
that  off-task  casual  communication  is  important  for  group 
cohesion. 

they  point  out 

technology 

that 

Indy  offers  trainers  a  tool  to  create  a  training  scenario  where 
several teams are immersed in a virtual industrial building, relying 
on an asymmetric collaboration method [12]: 

  Some learners are immersed, using a head mounted display 
(HMD), in a virtual mockup of the building. They will play 
the  “hunters”,  who  will  have  to  find  their  way  to  the 
objective. 

  Some  learners  use  floor  maps  and  360°  photographs,  on  a 
desktop computer. They will play the “radios”, who will have 
to guide the hunters. 

With  this  method,  learners  have  access  to  complementary 
information according to their role: each one has a key capability 
to achieve the scenario objective. This makes the communication 
within  the  team  necessary  to  navigate  in  the  virtual  building. 
Besides,  each  team  member  has  a  particular  point  of  view  and 
professional  background  that  can  be  shared  with  the  other  team 
members either to help one to be more efficient or to explain his/her 
choices. 

In  Indy,  communication  between  teammates  relies  on  two 
components: oral communication and pointing at objects in the 3D 
environment.  This  way  they  can  help  each  other,  share  their 
viewpoints  to  confirm  the  itinerary  (current  position  and  future 
direction) and identify the objective. 

However,  communication  is  not  limited  to  the  VLE:  Indy  is 
designed as part of a full training sequence, during which the trainer 
and the learners are physically in the same room. Although VLEs 
allow  virtual  teams,  with  physically  separated  members  [10],  we 
wanted  to  preserve  the  training  sequence,  which  fosters  social 
interaction. 

2.2  Gamification 
Gamification can be defined as “the use of game design elements 
in non-game contexts” [6]. It is commonly used to increase users’ 
motivation  and  engagement  [8][15].  Nah  et  al.  [13]  list  the 
following  design  elements  commonly  used 
in  gamified 
applications,  in  the  educational  and  learning  contexts:  points, 
levels/stages,  badges,  leaderboards,  prizes  and  rewards,  progress 
bars,  storyline,  and  feedback.  Sailer  et  al.  [18]  also  list  specific 
elements  known  to  show  positive  effect  on  users’  motivation: 
points,  badges,  leaderboards,  performance  graphs,  meaningful 
stories, avatars and teammates. 

 
 
 
Indy is a treasure hunt in an industrial facility: learners have to 
search  in  the  building  for  a  specific  equipment  or  zone.  These 
situations simulate the ones operators often face in real life, when 
planning an intervention in a building in which they can go  only 
occasionally. This approach is similar to “investigation-scenarios” 
already experimented in learning sessions [7]. 

Trainers can launch a contest between teams: the time taken by 
the teams to find the objective is recorded and displayed at the end 
of the hunt. The trainer then has the opportunity to use the following 
elements: 

  Level/stages:  the  trainer  can  create  a  new  hunt  in  a  few 
seconds,  adapting  the  difficulty  level  to  the  class.  The 
difficulty can vary according to the objective itself, but also 
to the presence of obstacles placed by the trainer, and the kind 
of information he/she gives orally or through the application 
before the hunt. 

  Points / leaderboard: the trainer can use the recorded time of 

each team to that matter. 

  Feedback:  after  the  end  of  a  hunt,  an  interface  allows  the 
trainer to show to the learners all their itineraries during the 
hunt  and  screenshots  that  he/she  might  have  taken.  He/she 
can use all this material for debriefing. 

2.3  Spatial navigation training 
3D VLE are an efficient tool for acquiring spatial navigation skills 
[4][1].  Waller  et  al.  [20]  suggest  that  using  immersive  VLE  for 
spatial navigation training might be equivalent to training in a real 
environment.  Indeed,  Rodrigues  et  al.  [17]  confirmed  that  good 
spatial knowledge transfer can occur from virtual reality to the real 
world. 

Chrastil et al. [3] affirmed that active navigation leads to better 
spatial  knowledge.  Particularly,  active  decision  making  plays  a 
great role in elaborating a mental model of the place. 

Carbonell-Carrera  et  al.  [2]  also  insisted  on  the  importance  of 

maps as a complement to VLE for spatial orientation. 

Figure 1: Overview of the elements of the building mockup used in 
Indy:  (a)  360°  photographs,  (b)  detailed  floor  maps,  (c)  3D  model 
(from Hullo et al. [9]). 

4  A LEARNING SESSION WITH INDY 

4.1  Software overview 
Indy  was  developed  with  Unity3D.  It  works  as  a  network 
application, and provides three different clients depending on the 
users’ role:  

  Trainer (desktop): shows the floor maps and gives extended 

views and controls over the scenario. 

  Learner (immersive): shows the 3D model in a HMD (HTC 

Vive). 

  Learner (desktop): shows the floor maps, 360° photos and the 
3D  model.  The  learner  can  walk  in  the  building  using  the 
mouse and the keyboard. 

4.2  Creating the learning scenario 
When the trainer creates a new hunt, several configuration options 
are available: 

  Type  of  hunt:  the  objective  can  be  to  point  at  a  specific 

As  a  result,  Indy  aims  at  maximizing  the  spatial  knowledge 

equipment or regroup into a target zone. 

acquired during training: 

  Starting  point:  the  trainer  can  choose  any  room  of  the 

  The  “hunters” have  to  move  along  the  entire  itinerary,  at  a 

building as a starting point. 

standard walking pace. 

  The  “radios”  have  to  orally  explain  the  itinerary  to  the 

hunters. 

  Objective:  depending  on  the  type  of  hunt,  the  trainer  can 
either point at an equipment in the 3D model or draw a circle 
on a floor map. 

  Finding  the  objective  involves  decision  making  along  the 

  Objective  as  displayed  to  the  learners:  text  that  will  be 

way, particularly when the trainer places obstacles. 

displayed, on demand, on the learners’ side. 

Indy  focuses  on  the development  of  4  skills: navigating  in  the 
building  (landmarks  identification),  reading  a  map  (survey 
and 
converting 
knowledge), 
communicating route information to others. 

information  between  both, 

3  BUILDING MOCKUP 

Indy  uses  the  virtual  mockup  of  a  reactor  building.  It  includes  a 
laser  scans,  360° 
detailed  3D  model  reconstructed  from 
photographs and updated floor maps [9]. 

  Obstacles:  the  trainer  can  place  obstacles  or  markings 

anywhere in the building. 

Figure  2:  Interface  allowing  the  trainer  to  place  obstacles  in  the 
building. 

 
 
 
4.3  Hunt 
The  learners  are  divided  into  teams  of  3  or  4  members.  In  each 
team,  one  person  plays  the  “radio”  and  the  others  play  the 
“hunters”. 

Before starting the hunt, each team can gather around the radio’s 
computer  to  prepare  its  itinerary.  The  learners  can  look  for  the 
equipment in the photos, and decide which itinerary  seems to be 
best and even select alternative paths. 

Afterwards,  each  hunter  puts  a  HMD  to  start  the  hunt.  All 
teammates can communicate orally, in order for the radio to give 
navigation  instructions  to  the  hunters.  They  also  have  the 
possibility to point at objects in the 3D environment, either with the 
mouse (for the radio) or with the Vive controllers (for the hunters). 
When doing so, a ray comes from the player’s avatar and the object 
intersected by the ray is highlighted. 

The  players  can’t  see  players  from  other  teams.  The  visibility 

between teammates is defined with the following rules: 

  The radio can see the hunters’ avatars (and pointing ray) in 
the 3D environment, and their positions on the floor maps. 
  The hunters can see other hunters’ avatars (and pointing ray), 
but not the radio’s avatar (nor pointing ray). This keeps the 
hunters from simply following the radio. 

During the whole hunt, the trainer can: 
  See  all  the  learners  on  the  floor  maps  or  in  the  3D 
environment:  he/she  can  choose  which  team(s)  to  see,  and 
which  team(s)  can  see  his/her  own  avatar  in  the  3D 
environment. 

  Point at objects (similarly to the radio players). The pointing 

ray will be seen by all players seeing his/her avatar. 

  See all learners’ point of view. 
  Take  screenshots:  they  are  saved  with  their  timestamp 

relative to the hunt. 

Figure 3: Trainer watching learners. He/she can either be visible or 
invisible. 

Figure 4: Trainer’s interface showing different learners’ point of view. 

4.4  End of the hunt 
To  complete  the  hunt,  all  the  hunters  of  the  team  must  either 
(depending on the type of hunt): 

  point at the target equipment at the same time: they have to 
keep pointing at the object for two seconds, while a validation 
animation is displayed ; 

  be present in the target zone at the same time, and stay in it 

for two seconds (with the same validation animation). 

Once the objective is found and validated, the team’s total time 
is saved. When all teams found the objective, the hunt ends: on all 
screens, a score board shows the total time of each team. The trainer 
can then start the debriefing. 

4.5  Debriefing 
For  a  training  session  to  produce  better  results,  we  propose 
feedback data to the trainer. On his/her computer, the trainer can 
see: the total time of each team in a single timeline, hunters’ paths 
drawn  on  floor  maps  and  screenshots  he/she  took  during  the 
session. 

Figure 5: Debriefing interface, showing leaners’ itineraries during the 
hunt, and the timeline on the bottom. 

The  debriefing  interface  is  completely  interactive.  The  trainer 
can move a cursor along the timeline to update hunters’ paths on 
the maps. All the screenshots the trainer took are also situated on 
the timeline. The column on the right, used to change floors, also 
indicates with markers the floors where the learners currently are, 
synchronized with the timeline cursor. 

The  debriefing  interface  was  designed  as  a  tool,  leaving  the 
liberty to the trainer to use it as he/she wants, and display it in the 
classroom to focus on the elements pedagogically relevant for the 
training. 

5  DISCUSSION 

Indy is a tool for professional trainers, allowing them to create 
and propose scenarios adapted to all kinds of learners: beginners, 
experienced  professionals,  engineers  or  operators.  The  treasure 
hunts can be repeated and debriefed as many times as necessary to 
achieve the trainers’ pedagogical objectives. 

The debriefing is a key functionality for trainers. It is designed 
to be as little restrictive as possible, so that trainers would have the 
entire  liberty  to  define  the pedagogical  valorization  of  the hunts. 
Among  its  possible  uses,  we  can  anticipate  the  following: 
discussing  learners’  itineraries  and  their  implications  in  terms  of 
safety,  suggesting  alternatives  taking  into  account  additional 
constraints than those experienced during the hunt, ask learners to 
explain  their  own  choices,  comparing  different  sessions  with  the 

 
 
 
 
 
[8] 

[7]  A.  Drakos,  G.  Filippi,  G.  Poizat  and  F.  Palaci.  «  Investigation-
scenarios » and digital mockup in training situation. 52ème Congrès 
de  la  SELF  –  Présent  et  Futur  de  l’Ergonomie  (Toulouse,  20–22 
septembre), 2017. 
J. Hamari, J. Koivisto and H. Sarsa. Does Gamification Work? — A 
Literature Review of Empirical Studies on Gamification. Proceedings 
of  the  47th  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System  Sciences 
(HICSS-47), 3025–3034, 2014. 
J.-F. Hullo,  G. Thibault, C. Boucheny,  F. Dory and A. Mas. Multi-
Sensor As-Built Models of Complex Industrial Architectures. Remote 
Sensing, 7:16339–16362, 2015. 

[9] 

[10]  S. D. Johnson, C. Suriya, S. Won Yoon, J. V Berrett, J. La Fleur. Team 
development  and  group  processes  of  virtual  learning  teams. 
Computers & Education, 39(4):379-393, 2002 

[11]  K. Kreijns, P. A. Kirschner, W. Jochems. Identifying the pitfalls for 
social  interaction  in  computer-supported  collaborative  learning 
environments:  a  review  of  the  research,  Computers  in  Human 
Behavior, 19(3):335-353, 2003. 

[12]  M. Le Chénéchal, J. Lacoche, J. Royan, T. Duval, V. Gouranton, B. 
Arnaldi. When the Giant meets the Ant An Asymmetric Approach for 
Collaborative and Concurrent Object Manipulation in a Multi-Scale 
Environment.  IEEE,  Proceedings  3DCVE  2016:  International 
Workshop on Collaborative Virtual Environments, 1–4, 2016. 
[13]  F.  F.-H.  Nah,  Q.  Zeng,  V.  R.  Telaprolu,  A.  P.  Ayyappa  and  B. 
Eschenbrenner. Gamification of Education: A Review of Literature. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8527:401–409, 2014. 

[14]  Z. Pan, A. D. Cheok, H. Yang, J. Zhu and J. Shi. Virtual reality and 
mixed  reality  for  virtual  learning  environments.  Computers  & 
Graphics, 30:20–28, 2006. 

[15]  O. Pedreira, F. García, N. Brisaboa and M. Piattini. Gamification in 
software  engineering  –  A  systematic  mapping.  Information  and 
Software Technology, 57:157–168, 2015. 

[16]  J. Roschelle and S. D. Teasley. The construction of shared knowledge 
in 
In  Computer-supported 
collaborative learning, C. O’Malley, Ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 
1995, pp. 69–97. 

collaborative  problem 

solving. 

[17]  J.  Rodrigues,  H.  Sauzéon,  G.  Wallet  and  B.  N’Kaoua.  Transfer  of 
spatial-knowledge  from  virtual  to  real  environment:  effect  of 
active/passive learning depending on a test-retest procedure and the 
type  of  retrieval  tests.  Journal  of  CyberTherapy  &  Rehabilitation, 
3(3):275–283, 2010. 

[18]  M. Sailer, J. U. Hense, S. K. Mayr and H. Mandl. How gamification 
motivates:  An  experimental  study  of  the  effects  of  specific  game 
design  elements  on  psychological  need  satisfaction.  Computers  in 
Human Behavior, 69:371–380, 2017. 

[19]  R.  E.  Slavin.  Research  on  Cooperative  Learning  and  Achievement: 
to  Know,  Contemporary 

What  We  Know,  What  We  Need 
Educational Psychology, 21(1):43-69, 1996. 

[20]  D. Waller, E. Hunt and D. Knapp. The Transfer of Spatial Knowledge 
in  Virtual  Environment  Training.  Presence:  Teleoperators  and 
Virtual Environments, 7(2):129–143, 1998. 

same objective, or even evaluate long-term progression during the 
learners’ careers.  

The variety of scenarios that trainers can build with Indy offers 
several  benefits.  It  allows  trainers,  when  needed,  to  adapt  to  a 
specific work profile. Indeed, different professionals have different 
needs  in  terms  of  spatial  knowledge  of  the  facilities:  emergency 
intervention  teams,  logistics  supervisors,  operators  performing 
non-destructive testing, safety engineers, etc. 

The obstacles adding functionality, in particular, plays a central 
role in adapting the scenarios. It also offers a way to evaluate the 
learners’ global understanding of the building structure, as they will 
adapt their strategies in real time to find the objective. 

By  fostering  collaboration  and  turning  the  learning  experience 
into  a  game,  we  intend  to  focus  learners’  attention  and  actively 
engage  them  in  using  their  navigational  abilities.  Indy  offers 
feedback  and  allows  trainers  to  integrate  strengthening  phases  in 
the learning sequence. Indy is a tool and the learning scenarios built 
upon it are an expression of the pedagogical strategy trainers will 
choose. The best practices are yet to be explored. 

However,  Indy  has  yet  to  be  experimented  in  a  real  learning 
session.  In  order  to  confirm  our  hypotheses  on  the  pedagogical 
benefits of the proposed approach, a comprehensive study should 
be  undertaken.  Despite  several  promising  studies,  the  empirical 
data is still sparse to fully understand the transfer mechanisms from 
virtual  reality  to  real  life,  especially  for  professionals  in  an 
industrial context. 

6  CONCLUSION 

We presented Indy, a collaborative virtual reality application using 
gamification to help professionals acquire navigation skills needed 
to work in industrial facilities. 

Indy  consists  in  a  treasure  hunt  in  a  virtual  building,  making 
learners cooperate in order to find an objective. It is designed to be 
integrated into existing training methods, and to be used by a trainer 
with a group of learners. 

This paper summarized the design principles of Indy and its key 

functionalities offering pedagogical benefits. 

7  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work is funded by EDF R&D, and was developed by Florian 
Gavel during his 6 months internship. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

J.  P.  Bliss,  P.  D.  Tidwell  and  M.  A.  Guest.  The  Effectiveness  of 
Virtual  Reality  for  Administering  Spatial  Navigation  Training  to 
Firefighters. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 6(1): 
73–86, 1997. 

[2]  C. Carbonell-Carrera and J. L. Saorin. Virtual Learning Environments 
to  Enhance  Spatial  Orientation.  EURASIA  Journal  of  Mathematics, 
Science and Technology Education, 14(3):709–719, 2018. 

[3]  E. R. Chrastil and W. H. Warren. Active and Passive Spatial Learning 
in Human Navigation: Acquisition of Graph Knowledge. Journal of 
Experimental  Psychology:  Learning,  Memory,  and  Cognition, 
41(4):1162–1178, 2015. 

[4]  B. Dalgarno and M. J. W. Lee. What are the learning affordances of 
3‐D  virtual  environments?  British  Journal  of  Educational 
Technology, 41(1), 10–32, 2010. 

[5]  S. Dehaene. Apprendre    à    lire    : Des    sciences    cognitives    à    

la    salle    de    classe, Odile Jacob, 2011. 

[6]  S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled and L. Nacke. From Game Design 
Elements to Gamefulness: Defining “Gamification”.  Proceedings of 
the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning 
Future Media Environments, 9–16, 2011. 

 
