Manifest the Invisible: Design for Situational
Awareness of Physical Environments in Virtual
Reality

1st Zhenyi He
New York University
zh719@nyu.edu

2nd Fengyuan Zhu
New York University
zhufyaxel@gmail.com

3rd Ken Perlin
New York University
ken.perlin@gmail.com

4th Xiaojuan Ma
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
xiaojuan.c.ma@gmail.com

8
1
0
2

p
e
S
6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
3
8
5
0
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Virtual Reality (VR) provides immersive experiences
in the virtual world, but it may reduce users’ awareness of phys-
ical surroundings and cause safety concerns and psychological
discomfort. Hence, there is a need of an ambient information
design to increase users’ situational awareness (SA) of physical
elements when they are immersed in VR environment. This is
challenging, since there is a tradoff between the awareness in
reality and the interference with users’ experience in virtuality.
In this paper, we design ﬁve representations (indexical, sym-
bolic, and iconic with three emotions) based on two dimensions
(vividness and emotion) to address the problem. We conduct an
empirical study to evaluate participants’ SA, perceived breaks
in presence (BIPs), and perceived engagement through VR tasks
that require movement in space. Results show that designs with
higher vividness evoke more SA, designs that are more consistent
with the virtual environment can mitigate the BIP issue, and
emotion-evoking designs are more engaging.

Index Terms—situational awareness, virtual reality, perception

I. INTRODUCTION

Creating the sense of immersion and presence in the virtual
world is critical in Virtual Reality (VR) design [1]. Due to the
fact that virtual and physical realities overlap with each other
in conceptualization and implementation [2], things occurring
to users in the real environment can affect their experiences in
the virtual environment (VE). Given that VR users’ situational
awareness(SA) of the real world diminishes as a result of
obscured vision, confusion between reality and virtuality, and
dynamics of the real environment [3], these may confront
various types of discomfort in the VR interaction. First, users
are isolated in an environment whose representation may not
align with their prior knowledge of the space [4]. If users
come into contact with elements in the physical environment
that are not rendered in or mapped to the VR world by design,
they might get confused or even injured. A recent news article
showed that a man accidentally killed himself by running into
furniture while playing a VR game, as he lacked feedback to
keep himself safe [5]. Bearing such risks in mind, users may
feel disempowered as they surrender control to the VR system
[4]. Second, if users are playing with the VR device in a public
venue, they are likely to be watched by others not present in
the virtual scene, introducing “a sense of vulnerability inherent
in surveillance by unseen observers” [4]. Moreover, VR users
have little knowledge of and control over the way an audience

impacts their physical presence. They might be subjected to
the audience’s capricious or mischievous behaviors, such as
tricking and taking likely embarrassing photos.

This actually presents a perplexing dilemma in VR interac-
tion design. On the one hand, if we do not improve VR users’
SA of the physical world, the entailing discomfort as men-
tioned above is likely to disturb users’ immersion in virtuality,
and even engenders breaks in presence (BIPs) [6], [7]. On the
other hand, if users are constantly made aware of their physical
experience, then they may lose focus on the alternative virtual
reality. As a result, they will experience BIP.This raises an
important question of how to ensure sufﬁcient SA to minimize
potential discomfort in VR interactions without breaking the
virtual experiences.

One possible solution is to project the consciousness of the
external world onto the representation of the virtual scene [8];
in other words, transforming situational awareness to mediate
perception of the environment (a.k.a. environmental presence
[1], [9]) as well as other beings in it (a.k.a. social presence
[1], [9]). Conventionally, social presence and environmental
presence in VR refer to the salience of and interaction with
characters and objects included in the VE [8]. However, little
work has been done to answer the question: if irrelevant “re-
ality” breaks through the boundary of the two worlds, how to
raise users’ awareness without transporting their consciousness
back to the physical surrounding, i.e., avoiding BIP?

In this paper, we apply the research through design (RtD)
method [10] and propose to promote users’ SA of physical
object(s) and human being(s) in reality when they break into
the VE, by rendering them as part of the environmental
and social presence in the digital world.Through a within-
subject study with 25 participants, we compared the efﬁcacy
of ﬁve designs in ﬁve representational ﬁdelities, i.e., index-
ical, symbolic, iconic with a positive emotion, iconic with
a neutral emotion, and iconic with a negative emotion, on
raising VR users’ SA of the physical world while maintaining
consciousness in the VE. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst technical discussion on the design of virtual presence
of physical elements in VR. Our main contributions are as
follows.

• We explore the design of situational awareness to physical
environmental factors and design ﬁve representational

 
 
 
 
 
 
ﬁdelities of presence based on aesthetic theories.

• We take a research through design (RtD) approach and
experiment with two properties of representation (vivid-
ness and emotion).

• We evaluate proposed hypotheses through a within-
subject user study, and provide guidelines for designing
virtual presence of environmental elements in virtual
reality.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Situational Awareness in VR

First, we identify situational awareness and look into the
approach to present and measure situational awareness. Sit-
uational awareness is the ability to identify, process, and
comprehend critical elements of information of what is hap-
pening with regards to a goal, or in other words, what is
going on in the environment. It can be measured in three
levels [3]. Level 1: Perception of elements in the environment.
Level 2: Comprehension of the current situation. and Level 3:
Projection of future status. Situational awareness is the key
to user-centered design. In terms of immersive experiences
like VR, discomfort will be introduced by low situational
awareness in VR.

B. Presence in VR

“Presence is consciousness in that virtual reality” [11].
Such saying refers to three types of presence, (1) Personal
presence, (2) Social presence, and (3) Environmental pres-
ence. For personal presence, it could be measured in various
approaches [1], and breaks in presence (BIP) is one important
issue that might happen during such experience. BIP is deﬁned
as any perceived phenomenon during the exposure to VR that
instigates users’ awareness of real-world setting during the
experience, ‘breaking’ their personal presence in the VE [9],
[11]. Social presence means “the degree of salience of others
in a mediated communication” [12]. Like what [13] presented,
social presence can be enhanced by implementing multi-play
(users can see each other) or different timelines (showing
“being there with others”). Environmental presence does not
refer to one’s surroundings as they exist
in the physical
world, but to the perception of those surroundings as mediated
by both automatic and controlled mental processes [14]. In
addition,
in
communication technologies during telepresence: vividness
and interactivity [14]. Vividness is the ability to induce a
sense of presence. It means the representational richness of a
mediated environment as deﬁned by its formal features [14].
Interactivity is how users can participate in revising the form
and content [14].

there are two dimensions which affect a lot

C. Presence of physical objects in VR

Prior research has shown that, by careful calibration, VR
designers can deliberately incorporate certain activities in the
physical world, such as real walking [15], [16], drawing [17],
[18] and actually touching the physical entity of a virtual
object [19] as a part of social and environmental presence,

to enhance the sense of immersion and presence in virtuality.
Sun et al. discussed the mapping between physical world
and virtual world [16]. Considering different room sizes, wall
shapes, and surrounding objects in the virtual and real worlds,
it attempted to warp the virtual world appearance into real
world geometry, for example how a physical table became a
virtual wall in users’ VR experience.

However, prior work mostly focused on (1) presenting
the physical objects including passive objects [20] and
actuated systems like NormalTouch [21], PhyShare [22],
SnakeCharmer [23] and TurkDeck [24]–[26] in VR for haptic
feedback or direct manipulation; Or (2) presenting human
being as another player in VR for social
interaction and
collaboration research [27], which has different identity from
our work. NormalTouch [21] provided direct manipulation
through the physical objects. PhyShare [22] created different
mapping between virtual proxy and physical robots and con-
trolled the robots to provide instant haptic feedback to indicate
the existence of physical objects. It visualized the object by
similar representation. SnakeCharmer [23] offered different
texture to mimic different objects so that users felt differently
when touching it. All objects are rendered as cubes which
exactly the same as physical object itself. TurkDeck [24]–[26]
is a multiuser experience, however users play as main-actor in
their own VR experience and play as part of the environment
in other’s scenarios. The design of the experiment avoids users
to have interactions with each other.

III. DESIGN FOR ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

A. Design Considerations

As mentioned above, vividness and interactivity are the two
important factors to presence. Considered that the environ-
mental elements we plan to design do not belong to the VR
experience originally, instead of stimulating users to revise
them, we prefer prohibiting them from interacting with the
elements. Hence we only keep vividness as one dimension of
the design. We base our design ideas from aesthetic theories:
imitationalism, formalism and expressionism [28], which share
similar categories with the levels of representational ﬁdelity:
indexical, iconic and symbolic [29], [30]. As a result we
generate our designs based on these three levels:

Imitationalism and indexical (IDX) refers to a direct high-
ﬁdelity representation of the target so that the viewer can
immediately recognize the object.

Formalism and symbolic (SYB) represent an abstract ap-
proach to presence. The target and its representation have a
basic idea in common, but there is little clarity on what exactly
they are.

Expressionism seeks to communicate a particular emotion
when an object is perceived, while iconic refers to a metaphor-
based mapping between the target and its representation.

Apart from vividness, we deﬁne emotion as another dimen-
sion for the ﬁdelity. Instead of combining them together, we
split only Expressionism and iconic representation into three
emotional categories: positive (POS), negative (NEG) and
neutral (NEU). For IDX design, such arrangement is more

(a) indexical design

(b) symbolic design

(c) iconic design with positive
emotion

(d) iconic design with nega-
tive emotion

(e) iconic design with neutral
emotion

Figure 1: Five designs in different representational ﬁdelities

realistic and there is little room to develop different emotions.
And for SYB design, ithe design is highly abstract and has
too few details to exhibit emotions.

Perceived engagement refers to how involved users feel in
the experience. We evaluated it through a questionnaire item
on a 5-pt Likert scale (as shown in Table I row 11).

The resulting designs following the rationale are shown
in Figure 1. Since furnitures such as table (a static object)
and chair (a passively movable object) and bystanders (people
proactively moving around) are representatives of different
types of common environmental elements in VR experiences,
we focused on designing the virtual presence of these three
entities. For the IDX style, we have a set of photo-realistic
3D models such as a realistic human being, a wooden table,
and a wooden chair (Figure 1(a)). And Figure 1(b) shows a
high-level abstract design in the form of a wire-frame box
with a warning panel for the SYB style. Then Figure 1(c)
displays a colorful, cute and vivid set of models including a
castle, cart and animals for the POS style. Figure 1(d) shows
a dangerous-looking set of representations including ﬁre and a
demon for the NEG style. And a simple colorless design with
a low polygon counts for the NEU style (Figure 1(e)).

Since these representations are not strictly part of the game
world, they do not interact or collide with the virtual objects in
the game. For example, physics-controlled objects in the game
world fall through these representations instead of landing on
them or bouncing off them.

To assess the efﬁcacy of the ﬁve styles of design, we
deﬁne the following the dependent variables: Situational
awareness could be measured at three levels, i.e., perception
of the elements, comprehension of the current situation, and
projection of future status. To be more speciﬁc, we captured
perception by awareness attraction and attention retention
on each element. Comprehension relates to how well users
perceive the physicality, risk, and the need to avoid. Projection
means the perceived ability to project an element’s status
(dangerous or not) in the future. We evaluated SA through
5-pt Likert scale rating in the questionnaires and post-study
interview (as shown in Table I row 3 to 9)

Perceived breaks in presence (BIPs) is the subjective
feeling of breaking feeling from immersive experience. We
evaluated perceived BIPs in questionnaires on a 5-pt Likert
scale. Additionally, we counted the number of different in-
cidents of BIPs through observation, such as collision of a
physical object, interruption of virtual task, and conversation
with the bystander, to get a sense of the participants’ actual
experiences (as shown in Table I row 10).

In addition, we added manipulation check questions (5-
pt Likert scale in Table I row 1 and 2) to verify whether
the participants’ perception of each design’s vividness and
emotion matches our design intention.

These are our main dependent variables of interest, allowing
us to gain a comprehensive understanding of how participants
experience VR when the existence of physical elements around
around is manifested in the virtual world.

B. Research Model and Hypotheses

Figure 2 shows our proposed research model. More specif-
ically, as vividness denotes the ability to introduce a sense a
presence [14], we hypothesize that:

• H1. Fidelity with higher vividness (IDX) leads to signif-
icantly more SA than that with lower vividness (SYB),
i.e., easier to gain (H1.1a) and retain (H1.1b) awareness
of representations, better comprehension of the (H1.2a)
physicality, (H1.2b) potential risk, and (H1.2c) need to
avoid of an element, and (H1.3) better projection of
future status. Among all of the above, iconic designs with
median vividness are in the middle.

• H2. Fidelity with higher vividness (IDX) leads to sig-
niﬁcantly fewer perceived BIPs than that with lower
vividness (SYB). In the middle there lies the Iconic
designs with median vividness.

• H3. Fidelity with higher vividness (IDX) is perceived
signiﬁcantly more engagement than that with lower vivid-
ness (SYB). Similarly Iconic designs with median vivid-
ness are in the middle.

Literature on the potential advantages of uncomfortable
interaction (including negative emotion) [31] suggests that
discomfort in interaction design can help produce a more
enlightening and focused experience. In spite of this, generally,
negative designs tend to intimidate users, while positive affect
may promote interactivity [32]. Hence we hypothesize that:
• h1. Fidelity with negative emotion (NEG) will lead to
more SA than positive (POS) and neutral (NEU) emotion,
i.e., easier to gain (h1.1a) and retain (h1.1b) awareness
of representations, better comprehension of the (h1.2a)
physicality, (h1.2b) potential risk, and (h1.2c) need to

Measure

Sub-measure

Questionnaire Item

Manipulation Check

Vividness
Emotional Valence

Q1: to what extent you think this design is vivid
Q2: to what extent you think the emotion of this design is positive

SA: perception

Awareness Attraction
Awareness Retention

Q3: to what extent you were aware of the virtual representations
Q4: to what extent the virtual representations held your awareness

SA: comprehension

SA: projection

Perceived BIP

Physicality
Perceived Danger
Avoidance
Interpretation

Q5: to what extent you think the representations have physical existence
Q6: to what extent you felt the virtual representations is dangerous
Q7: to what extent you intended to avoid the virtual representations
Q8(cid:63): Why do you think the element shows up here

Q9: to what extent you think it will become a threat in future
Q10(cid:63): what do you expect to happen for the virtual representations

Q11: to what extent you felt breaks from the immersive experience

Perceived Engagement

Q12: to what extent you felt engaged during experience

Table I: Measurements and corresponding questionnaire items. Note that only Q8(cid:63) and Q10(cid:63) are open-ended questions. All
the others are 5-pt Likert scale ratings (5 being the highest extent).

avoid of an element, and (h1.3) better projection of future
status.

• h2. Fidelity with positive emotion (POS) will lead to less
perceived BIPs than ﬁdelities with the other emotions.
• h3. Fidelity with negative emotion (NEG) will lead to
than that with the other

more perceived engagement
emotions.

(a) Hardware setup: 1) Vive
trackers. 2) and 3) real physi-
cal furniture. 4) a bystander not
using the VR system. 5) the
user wearing a VR headset. 6)
video camera. 7) Vive Light-
house tracking system.

(b) Software setup: the user is
highlighted in yellow, the vir-
tual scoreboard and bucket for
collection are at the left side of
the ﬁgure. Objects 1, 2, and 4
correspond to the same num-
bered objects in the hardware
setup.

Figure 3: Hardware and software setup for CandyDream

Figure 2: Research model and hypotheses

C. Implementation of Prototype: CandyDream

We aimed at creating a VR experience that:
1) Allows and encourages users to physically move around
in the space, and simulates scenarios where users need
to be aware of their physical surroundings during VR
tasks.

2) Provides a speciﬁc task with a clear goal for users to
achieve, and prevents users from getting into a confusion
situation and thus making unexpected decisions.

3) Includes a learning session to ensure that users have
mastered the task before proceeding to the main study.
This is to eliminate any possible ordering effects, as the
task is consistent across the ﬁve sessions.

4) Keeps the VR scene simple and controllable for evalu-

ation.

Based on these criteria, We designed a VR demo, Candy-

Dream, in Unity. The system setup is shown in Figure 3(a).

Our physical set-up was an HTC Vive system in a 4.0m
× 5.0m empty physical space. To ease the user’s learning

curve, we designed simple controls: performing the “grab”
and “throw” actions in CandyDream requires only pressing
and releasing the trigger button on one controller.

Users can throw a candy by mimicking a throwing motion
with the controller, releasing the trigger button when they wish
to release the candy. We used three extra Vive trackers to
track the physical elements used in the study, including a 1.5m
× 0.6m × 0.9m table as a static physical object, a 0.5m ×
0.5m × 1.0m rollable chair as a movable physical object, and
a bystander not wearing a VR headset. For safety reasons,
we scaled all the virtual objects to be slightly bigger than
their physical counterparts and added foam to all edges.We
used a powerful desktop computer (Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-
4790K CPU @4.00GHz, 16GB RAM, SSD 840 PRO Series,
GTX TITAN Black, Windows 10) to render the virtual world,
thereby guaranteeing a smooth experience.

IV. EVALUATING SITUATIONAL AWARENESS

A. Apparatus and Participants

We conducted a within-subject controlled experiment to

study users’ SA and potential BIPs under different designs.

We recruited 25 participants (P1-P25) via email and word-
of-mouth, including undergraduate and graduate students in ei-
ther computer science or art and design from a local university,
software engineers, and ﬁnancial workers. The participants
(44% female) are between the ages of 18 and 32 (M=24.72,
SD=3.13), and come from various countries, including the
United States of America, China, Africa, and Saudi Arabia.
According to the answers to the pre-screening questionnaire,
68% have tried VR and 56% have experienced HTC Vive.

B. Setup and Tasks

One researcher serves as the investigator,

in charge of
instructing the study and taking notes. Another researcher
plays the role of a normal ”bystander” entering the interaction
space. The bystander is instructed not to initiate contact with a
user, and to avoid coming into contact or acting aggressively
towards the user. We set up a video camera (as shown in
Figure 3(a)) and a computer next to the experience space
to record all the real-world events that happen among the
participants, the physical objects (table and chair), and the
bystander. We simultaneously record the screen of the Vive
system.

Trail session and main session share the same game logic.
At the beginning of the session, users are placed in a virtual
world with different decorations depending on the session.
During the session, virtual candies drop from the sky every
2 seconds and land randomly onto the virtual ﬂoor. To score
in the task, users need to grab candies either in mid-air
or on the ground with a handheld controller and throw the
grabbed candies into a virtual bucket that is out of reach.
The bucket stays at the same location (corresponding to the
virtual scoreboard) across the ﬁve sessions. Each successfully
collected candy counts as one point. The user’s goal for trail
is to earn 10 points before the time limit (two minutes) is
up. The current score is displayed on a virtual scoreboard as
shown in Figure 3(b).

C. Procedure

After obtaining consent from the participants, we ﬁrst
introduce the game logic and interactions involved. Then we
let the participants play a simple 2-minute trial of CandyDream
in VR, in order to familiarize them with the task and envi-
ronment without introducing our interventions. After a short
break, participants proceed to the main task, completing a 10-
minute experience including ﬁve 2-minute game sessions, each
corresponding to one of the ﬁve designs. We counterbalance
the order of the designs for each participant using Latin
Square. After each session, participants take a short break
and complete a questionnaire about their experience with the
associated design. Note that during the breaks, participants do
not get to see the objects or the bystander, so as to avoid
leaking our intention to the participants (these elements only
entered the room after participants put on the Vive Headset and
started the game). The locations of the physical objects and
bystander are also varied in each session to avoid participants
making guesses based on knowledge gained from previous

sessions. Upon the completion of all sessions, participants will
join a semi-structured exit interview, where they will provide
feedback on their overall experiences.

V. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Figure 4: Means and standard errors of manipulation check
for ﬁve designs on a 5-point Likert scale.

We conduct repeated measures MANOVA model on the
quantitative results to test our hypotheses. We test the homo-
geneity of variance for each measure, and apply Greenhouse-
Geisser correction when it is violated. We perform Bonfer-
roni’s test for post-hoc analysis.

A. Manipulation Check

We check whether the designs are as expected based on
two dimensions of representational ﬁdelity (shown in Table I
and Figure 4). First, analysis on our manipulation checks
shows that in dimension vividness, IDX is indeed perceived
as containing richer detail (M=4.2, SD=0.865, F(4,96)=11.4,
p¡0.01) than the others. And SYB is the most abstract and
least detailed (M=2.12, SD=1.43) of all. The results of other
three designs in iconic category are in between as expected.
Then we gather the valence of emotion among three iconic
designs (shown in Table I and Figure 4). POS is the most
emotionally positive design (M=4.36, SD=1.04, F(2,48)=16.2,
p¡0.05). And, NEG is perceived as the most negative design
(M=2.84, SD=1.37). For example, one participant mentioned
“The ﬁre element used in NEG is playful (rather than fright-
ening as we anticipated), as it reminded me of previous game
experiences”(P12, female). Thus the reason NEG does not
receive a very low score might be on account of this situation.
Lastly, NEU (M=3.04, SD=0.73) is close to the middle of
the scale. In summary, these ﬁve designs mostly met our
expectations in two dimensions.

B. Situational Awareness

Here we evaluate virtual representations of ﬁve designs
from the perspective of SA. For dimension vividness, we
evaluated all ﬁve designs covering three levels of richness.
For dimension emotion, we evaluated POS, NEG and NEU to
see how emotion of representation affects SA.

Dimension

DV

df

MS

F

p

η2

Result

Vividness

SA: Perception

SA: Comprehension

SA: Projection
Perceived BIPs
Perceived Engagement

Emotion

SA: Perception

SA: Comprehension

SA: Projection
Perceived BIPs
Perceived Engagement

Awareness Attraction
Awareness Retention
Physicality
Perceived Danger
Avoidances

Awareness Attraction
Awareness Retention
Physicality
Perceived Danger
Avoidances

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

3.174
1.934
8.126
12.306
1.400
11.590
2.610
2.080

1.560
6.418
0.871
38.298
2.618
28.093
1.013
2.560

3.401
1.422
5.740
10.034
0.879
12.875
2.926
5.859

0.010
0.228
0.020
0.003
0.478
0.001
0.025
0.002

H1.1a Accept
0.065
H1.1b Reject
0.028
H1.2a Accept
0.105
H1.2b Reject
0.170
H1.2c Reject
0.018
0.208 H1.3 Partially Accept
H2 Reject
0.109
H3 Reject
0.196

0.142
1.975
0.007
5.167
0.509
0.678
34.268 <0.001
0.138
2.010
33.763 <0.001
0.380
0.986
0.001
7.580

0.026
0.065
0.009
0.317
0.026
0.313
0.039
0.240

h1.1a Reject
h1.1b Reject
h1.2a Reject
h1.2b Accept
h1.2c Reject
h1.3 Accept
h2 Reject
h3 Accept

Table II: Results of hypotheses testing.

1) Level 1: Perception: We asked the participants about
attention attraction (Q3 in Table I).In dimension vividness,
statistical results reveal signiﬁcant differences in terms of each
representation’s ability to draw users’ awareness (see Figure 5
and Table II row 1, H1.1a Accept). According to the post-hoc
pairwise comparison, IDX designs (M=4.74, SD=0.4) arouse
signiﬁcantly higher awareness than SYB designs (M=4.12,
SD=0.95). Meanwhile the performance of POS, NEG and
NEU are in between. Thus the result indicates that the more
vivid the design is, the more the design attracts the user.
In dimension emotion, there is no signiﬁcant difference in
this dimension (see Table II row 9, h1.1a Reject). And NEG
designs (M=4.6, SD=0.32) attracted less attention than POS
designs (M=4.68, SD=0.30) which rejects that emotion has
strong impact to perception grasp. For example, one reminded
that “The bunny is really cute and large, and the demon is
large as well, that I can’t help but pay attention to them”(P18,
female.). Based on the feedback and our observation, one
possible explanation is that POS and NEG designs share
similar richness in common, which is the key to attention
attraction.

Then we asked the participants the question about attention
retention (Q4 in Table I).In dimension vividness, statistical
results reveal no signiﬁcant difference in terms of each repre-
sentation’s ability to maintain users’ awareness (see Table II
row 2, H1.1b Reject). One possible reason is that participants
lost their interest of exploring after they found these virtual
representations were not interactive and helpful to task, such as
“I did not pay too much attention after the very beginning be-
cause they did not affect my candy task. However, the elephant
(bystander metaphor in POS) looked really adorable so that I
came close to it sometimes”(P11, female). That also indicated
the richness of representation had poorer inﬂuence on attention
retention than emotion did. In dimension emotion, the result
showed the signiﬁcant difference (Table II row 10, h1.1b
Reject). According to the post-hoc pairwise comparison, NEG
(M=4.01, SD=0.75) keep more attention than POS (M=3.88,
SD=0.70 , not signiﬁcantly) and NEU (M=3.45, SD=0.82

,p<0.05). Considering that NEU design hold less attention
than both POS and NEG designs, one possible explanation
is that attention is hold more by stronger emotion than by
more negative emotion.

During the experiments, we observed that six participants
explicitly showed their fear towards the demon and stayed
alert the whole time to avoid it. “I just cannot move my eyes
away from it. I need to know where it is in case it suddenly
attacks me.” (P5, male). Meanwhile P4 (male) was fond of the
metaphor, “It looks so funny especially when walking.” That
also showed NEG has strong capability of holding attention.
In summary, vividness has positive inﬂuence on attention
attraction, and emotion has weak impact on attention hold.

Figure 5: Means and standard errors of ﬁve designs of SA for
perception and projection (threat) on a 5-point Likert scale.

2) Level 2: Comprehension: We asked the participants to
rate the physicality (Q5 in Table I). The score will be high
if the participants understand the existence of real physical
elements during their VR experience. In dimension vividness,
analysis shows signiﬁcant differences in users’ perceivability
(see Table II, H1.2a Accept). According to post-hoc pairwise
comparison, IDX received signiﬁcantly more perceivability of
physicality (M=4.44, SD=0.75) than SYB (M=3.36, SD=1.14,
p<0.001). Also the iconic designs (POS, NEG and NEU) have
scores in between (see Figure 6). The feedback “The moving
wire-frame looks really weird and I totally have no idea what

real physical objects around, perhaps serving as a warning.
The remaining 18% had a different opinion. They thought that
those content were all part of the game world.

3) Level 3: Projection: In this level, we assessed partic-
ipants’ projections in risk area and their prediction of the
elements (Q9 and Q10 in Table I).

For Q9, 5 means that the element is very likely to become
a threat. The analysis has signiﬁcant difference (see Table II,
H1.3 Partially Accept) in dimension vividness. Based on post-
hoc pairwise comparison, IDX designs (M=2.58, SD=0.98)
than SYB designs
projected less (not signiﬁcantly) threat
(M=2.88, SD=1.08). Also one iconic design (NEG) lead to
higher threat than SYB (see Figure 5). In dimension emotion, a
signiﬁcant difference remains (see Table II, h1.3 Accept). NEG
design (M=3.57, SD=0.43) has a (signiﬁcantly) higher score
than POS and NEU (see Figure 5). Combining the feedback
from participants, “The ﬁre looked growing all the time and
I felt like I will be engulfed very soon.” (P10, male; P17,
female). Thus we can tell that the cognition of threat is mostly
from the dimension of emotion and has weak connection with
the vividness.

Meanwhile there are some interesting ﬁnds for Q10. 52.8%
of the participants did not expect anything bad to happen.
Another 27.2% hoped to see some changes in the game scene
based on game logic so that the game would be more vivid.
And 20% expected to have more interaction with the elements,
either being attacked by them or playing with them proactively.
In addition, for POS and NEG, 60% of the participants
expected to see changes brought by both designs. What’s more,
20% thought that the elements in NEG would attack them,
which is much higher than other the results for other designs
(M=3%, SD=0.04). These ﬁndings suggest that participants
anticipate that designs with more details and colors are more
likely to change the game dynamics in the future, and they
expect aggressive actions when seeing a NEG design.

C. Perceived Breaks in Presence

We collected participants’ feedback of BIPs based on Q11
in Table I. Feelings of BIPs evoke marginal difference among
different designs (see Table II, H2 Reject) in dimension
vividness. IDX has does not have (signiﬁcantly) lower BIP
(M=1.68, SD=0.75) than SYB (M=2.24, SD=1.48). Mean-
while, some iconic designs (NEU and NEG) have larger BIP
than SYB do (see Figure 7). So vividness has only weak
inﬂuence on perceived BIPs. In dimension emotion (Table II,
h2 Reject), there is no signiﬁcant difference among these three
designs. One possible explanation might be the size of the
representation, ”I felt the bunny (from POS) and the demon
(from NEG) both occupied a lot of space which reminded me
their existence and stopped me from ﬁnishing my task”(P11,
female).

Although we do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences in
terms of perceived BIPs in the proposed dimensions, we
indeed observed several types of BIP incidents during the
experiments.

Figure 6: Means and standard errors of ﬁve designs of SA for
comprehension on a 5-point Likert scale.

it is. (P1, male)” also made the point that less richness of
representation leads to less comprehension of their physicality.
In dimension emotion, there were no signiﬁcant differences
(see Table II, h1.2a Reject and Figure 6). One possible reason
is that POS and NEG designs are both far away from the
real world so that participants treat them in similar ways no
matter which emotion is triggered. We can safely conclude that
emotion has almost no help to participants’ comprehension
about the elements’ physicality. Emotion has almost no effect
on participants’ comprehension of the elements’ physicality.
We assessed the perceived risk through questionnaire (Q6
and Q7 in Table I).For Q6, 5 means not dangerous at all.
Elements under different designs evoked signiﬁcantly different
perception of risk (Table II, H1.2b Reject) in dimension vivid-
ness. Based on post-hoc pairwise comparison, IDX evokes
less danger (not signiﬁcantly) than SYB designs. However,
IDX does not receive less feeling of dangerous than all iconic
(POS, NEG and NEU) designs (see Figure 6). Hence, the
richness of the representations has very few impact here. In
dimension emotion, there are still signiﬁcant differences shown
up (see Table II, h1.2b Accept). NEG designs (M=3.587,
SD=0.43) received (signiﬁcantly) higher danger perception
than POS designs (M=2.41, SD=0.45) and NEU designs
(M=2.29, SD=0.45) (see Figure 6). It is obvious that partici-
pants have more risky understanding about NEG design.

For Q7, 5 means no need to avoid. The results shows no
signiﬁcance among all elements (see Table II, H1.2c Reject) in
vividness, and likewise (see Table II, h1.2c Reject) in emotion.
Combining what we heard from interview, users tend to adopt
a more conservative strategy when they just start an immer-
sive experience. “Unless the task has a special request for
interaction, I prefer to not to touch the environment no matter
it is part of the virtual game or real at the beginning.” (P5,
male). Overall, the vividness has some positive inﬂuence on
comprehension. However, dimension emotion has no inﬂuence
here, no matter how strong the emotion is or how positive it
is, except for perceiving risk.

We further collected the participants’ interpretation of each
element (Q8 in Table I). It seems that 38.4% of the participants
did not have a clear idea of why these elements appeared in
the game. Another 43.6% shared the similar idea that these
elements showed up in speciﬁc locations because there were

Collision.We observed that 28.8% of

the participants
knocked into the static objects during the experience, while
12% collided with the bystander. Among all the participants,
the table and chair in POS received the largest number of
collisions. P11 (female), P22 (female) and P24 (male) share
similar thoughts, “The models looked so fantastic that I do
not think they were real.” And P2 (female), “I only realized
the metaphor represented a real object after the collision.”

Interruption.During the tasks, some participants suddenly
realized that someone was nearby. If they did not perceive that
the bystander metaphor around was that of a real bystander,
the experience was strongly broken.

Rest. We observed an interesting phenomenon that three
participants (P4, P8 and P24) sat on the chair when they
ﬁgured out the physicality of the chair, which slightly showed
that users’ experiences were broken to some extent. “Because
I feel there is a real-world correspondence with the VR object,
so I think I can sit on the chair.”(P8, male).

Figure 7: Means and standard errors of ﬁve designs of BIP
and engagement on a 5-point Likert scale

In the post-study interviews, we ask the participants for
means to avoid these BIP incidents. One theme that emerges
(mentioned by 72% of the participants) is that “good VR
content should adopt a consistent art style, even for VR
presence designs of physical objects, to minimize the feeling of
breaks.”(P7, male). This suggests that designs more consistent
with the look of the original VE might help reducing the BIPs.

D. Perceived Engagement

We asked participants to rate their engagement from 1 to
5 among ﬁve designs (Q12 in Table I). The results show
signiﬁcant differences in vividness dimension (Table II, H3
Reject). The perceived engagement of IDX (M=3.96, SD=94)
is slightly (not signiﬁcantly) higher than SYB (M=3.76,
SD=1.17) as hypothesized. However we found NEG received
the highest score (M=4.48, SD=0.72, compared to SYB and
NEU; p¡0.05). Thus we think vividness has very few inﬂuence
on engagement perceived. To dimension emotion, there shows
signiﬁcant difference (Table II, h3 Accept). Based on post-
hoc pairwise comparison, NEG received (signiﬁcantly) higher
engagement than NEU (M=3.84, SD=0.68) and (marginally)
higher engagement than POS (M=4.16, SD=0.48). Combining
the feedback of NEG design, “I feel nervous in NEG and I
was highly focused and engaged into the experience then.”
(P5, male). Meanwhile, another user (P17, female) with rich

game experience, “NEG is really close to what I usually play,
and it felt familiar.” So that we can tell emotion does affect
the engagement, and the vividness has weak inﬂuence here.

VI. DISCUSSION

A. Comparison across Table, Chair, and Bystander

During the analysis we found some speciﬁc elements have
different behavior from their design categories. Although the
whole NEG designs do not have signiﬁcant difference when
comparing to POS, bystander metaphor in NEG (M=4.72,
SD=0.324) holds the most attention and the score is signiﬁ-
cantly larger than that of chair metaphor (M=3.52, SD=1.5) in
POS. Hence, combining the feedback ”The demon is moving
all
the time which I can’t move my eyes away from it.”
(P11, female), we can safely conclude that the moveability
of the element have effects to some speciﬁc conditions such
as attraction attention.

B. Effect of Having a Rich Representation

Our results show that providing rich details in the design
of a virtual presence makes it easier for participants to be
and stay aware of the corresponding element. This is because
ﬁdelity vividness may affect humans’ perception of presence
in two aspects: realism and believability [33]. Realism “intends
to approximate the model, the real world, in a very accurate
way”, while believability only provide details “considered
relevant or representative of the intention behind the model”
[33]. On one hand, if a representation stresses cues of realism,
users are more likely to map it to the physical world. “Once
I saw the table and chair (metaphor in POS), I immediately
believe they are real ones. And that is why I sit on the chair
during the rest of this session.”(P4, male). On the other hand,
if a representation affords believability, or the feeling that it
goes with the virtual scene, users may experience fewer BIPs.
Additionally, it is essential to balance these two aspects in
the design, to avoid falling into the Uncanny Valley [34]. That
is to say, the design should not create doubts about the virtual
presence of the elements that users would ﬁnd disturbing. “The
woman I met in the fourth session (IDX) looks so unreal to
me. It has too few detail as a human and I am still confused
about what it exactly is.”(P12, female)

C. Effect of Stimulating Emotions in Design

Although our hypotheses on situational awareness and per-
ceived breaks in presence along the dimension of emotion
were not fully accepted, we found that designs that induce
emotion, regardless of the valence, performed signiﬁcantly
different from the NEU design along some of the measures. In
other words, the ability of a design to stimulate user emotion
may matter more than the actual direction of induced emotion
in some cases.

We also notice that, although NEG could arouse immediate
awareness of an environmental element, users may update
their belief as they proceed in the task. “I felt worried at
the beginning. However, after a few attempts to verify their
identities, I realize that there were physical objects behind the

representations. Then I feel OK to interact with them.” (P4,
male; P18, female).

Despite that an emotion-inducing design may not lead to
more severe BIPs than a neutral design, they may sidetrack
users for a longer time. In addition, many users express that
they have more interests in interacting with the POS/NEG
environmental factors than the core mission. If the goal is
to keep users focused on the main task in the virtual world,
it is better to keep the representation of environmental factors
neutral. “The ﬁrst one I tried (NEU) has very few color. Sort
of I felt no happiness or fear during the task and I chose to
ignore them (the elements) for most of the time.”(P14, female).

D. Limitations of this work

From a scenario perspective, we did not

implement a
game scene with rich details and interactions for the sake of
simplicity. When VR content and virtual presence of physical
surroundings are presented together, the situation becomes
complicated and the results might shift. In addition, we only
designed ﬁve representational ﬁdelities and evaluated them
separately. However, the design can be a mix across different
designs. For example, SYB can be added up to any iconic
design. When people approach those objects, a simple mesh
net should be shining, thus providing a hint of the existence
of physical surroundings.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we designed ﬁve representational ﬁdelities
(indexical IDX, symbolic SYB, and iconic with three emotions
– POSitive, NEUtral, and NEGative) from two dimensions
for displaying ambient entities in VR based on the existing
aesthetic theory. We evaluated the efﬁcacy of these ﬁve designs
in terms of raising users’ SA, perceived BIPs and perceived
engagement by a within-subject study with 25 participants.

Results show that designs with higher vividness evoke
more SA, designs that are more consistent with the virtual
environment can mitigate the BIP issue, and emotion-evoking
designs are more engaging.

In the future, we will evaluate our design in a more
complex VR environment with more diverse tasks to verify
the scalability and generality of our ﬁndings. And we will
also investigate how the intensity of emotion affects SA.
In addition, we plan to conduct a study in the wild to see
how participants may perceive and handle real risks, and
evaluate whether our design can truly alleviate psychological
discomfort in such settings.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Heeter, “Being there: The subjective experience of presence,” Pres-
ence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 262–271,
1992.

[2] D. A. Bowman and R. P. McMahan, “Virtual reality: how much

immersion is enough?” Computer, vol. 40, no. 7, 2007.

[3] M. R. Endsley, Designing for situation awareness: An approach to user-

centered design. CRC press, 2016.

[4] S. Benford, C. Greenhalgh, G. Giannachi, B. Walker, J. Marshall,
and T. Rodden, “Uncomfortable user experience,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 66–73, Sep. 2013.
[Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/2500468.2500889

[5] K. Kyung-Hoon, “Man bleeds out, reportedly too busy to notice fatal
cut while playing star wars vr game,” Dec 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rt.com/news/414057-man-dies-vr-game/

[6] M. Garau, D. Friedman, H. R. Widenfeld, A. Antley, A. Brogni, and
M. Slater, “Temporal and spatial variations in presence: Qualitative
analysis of interviews from an experiment on breaks in presence,”
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 17, no. 3, pp.
293–309, 2008.

[7] M. Slater and A. Steed, “A virtual presence counter,” Presence: Teleop-
erators and virtual environments, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 413–434, 2000.
[8] M. Sra, “Asymmetric design approach and collision avoidance tech-
niques for room-scale multiplayer virtual reality,” in Proceedings of the
29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
ACM, 2016, pp. 29–32.

[9] M. J. Schuemie, P. Van Der Straaten, M. Krijn, and C. A. Van Der Mast,
“Research on presence in virtual reality: A survey,” CyberPsychology &
Behavior, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 183–201, 2001.

[10] J. Zimmerman, J. Forlizzi, and S. Evenson, “Research through design
as a method for interaction design research in hci,” in Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser.
CHI ’07. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 493–502. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1240624.1240704

[11] M. V. Sanchez-Vives and M. Slater, “From presence to consciousness
through virtual reality,” Nat Rev Neurosci, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 332–339,
2005.

[12] J. Short, E. Williams, and B. Christie, “The social psychology of

telecommunications,” 1976.
of

[13] T. Torisu,
Aug 2016.
org/sense-of-presence-in-social-vr-experience.html

“Sense
experience,”
in
[Online]. Available: http://www.interactivearchitecture.

presence

social

vr

[14] J. Steuer, “Deﬁning virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepres-
ence,” Journal of communication, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 73–93, 1992.
[15] H. Iwata, H. Yano, H. Fukushima, and H. Noma, “Circulaﬂoor [loco-
motion interface],” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 25,
no. 1, pp. 64–67, 2005.

[16] Q. Sun, L.-Y. Wei, and A. Kaufman, “Mapping virtual and physical
reality,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35, no. 4, p. 64,
2016.

[17] M. Otsuki, K. Sugihara, A. Kimura, F. Shibata, and H. Tamura, “Mai
painting brush: an interactive device that realizes the feeling of real
painting,” in Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology. ACM, 2010, pp. 97–100.

[18] K. Sugihara, M. Otsuki, A. Kimura, F. Shibata, and H. Tamura, “Mai
painting brush++: Augmenting the feeling of painting with new visual
and tactile feedback mechanisms,” in Proceedings of the 24th annual
ACM symposium adjunct on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 2011, pp. 13–14.

[19] R. Stone, “Haptic feedback: A brief history from telepresence to virtual

reality,” Haptic Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 1–16, 2001.

[20] Y.-Y. Liao, L.-R. Chou, T.-J. Horng, Y.-Y. Luo, K.-Y. Young, and S.-
F. Su, “Force reﬂection and manipulation for a vr-based telerobotic
system,” PROCEEDINGS-NATIONAL SCIENCE COUNCIL REPUB-
LIC OF CHINA PART A PHYSICAL SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING,
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 382–389, 2000.

[21] H. Benko, C. Holz, M. Sinclair, and E. Ofek, “Normaltouch and
texturetouch: High-ﬁdelity 3d haptic shape rendering on handheld virtual
reality controllers,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, 2016, pp. 717–728.

[22] Z. He, F. Zhu, and K. Perlin, “Physhare: Sharing physical interaction
in virtual reality,” in Adjunct Publication of the 30th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ser. UIST ’17.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 17–19. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3131785.3131795

[23] B. Araujo, R. Jota, V. Perumal, J. X. Yao, K. Singh, and D. Wigdor,
“Snake charmer: Physically enabling virtual objects,” in Proceedings of
the TEI’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and
Embodied Interaction. ACM, 2016, pp. 218–226.

[24] L.-P. Cheng, S. Marwecki, and P. Baudisch, “Mutual human actuation,”
in Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. ACM, 2017, pp. 797–805.

[25] L.-P. Cheng, T. Roumen, H. Rantzsch, S. K¨ohler, P. Schmidt, R. Kovacs,
J. Jasper, J. Kemper, and P. Baudisch, “Turkdeck: Physical virtual reality
based on people,” in Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software & Technology. ACM, 2015, pp. 417–426.

[26] L.-P. Cheng, P. L¨uhne, P. Lopes, C. Sterz, and P. Baudisch, “Haptic turk:
a motion platform based on people,” in Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2014,
pp. 3463–3472.

[27] H. Hoyer, A. Jochheim, C. ROhrig, and A. Bischoff, “A multiuser
virtual-reality environment for a tele-operated laboratory,” IEEE Trans-
actions on education, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 121–126, 2004.

[28] R. Ragans, “Art talk . boston: Glencoe,” 2005.
[29] T. Kim, H. Hong, and B. Magerko, “Design requirements for ambient
display that supports sustainable lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. ACM, 2010, pp.
103–112.

[30] Z. Pousman and J. Stasko, “A taxonomy of ambient information systems:
four patterns of design,” in Proceedings of the working conference on
Advanced visual interfaces. ACM, 2006, pp. 67–74.

[31] S. Benford, C. Greenhalgh, G. Giannachi, B. Walker, J. Marshall, and
T. Rodden, “Uncomfortable user experience,” Communications of the
ACM, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 66–73, 2013.

[32] R. Beale and C. Peter, Affect and emotion in human-computer interac-

tion. Springer, 2008.

[33] R. Casati and E. Pasquinelli, “Is the subjective feel of “presence” an
uninteresting goal?” Journal of Visual Languages & Computing, vol. 16,
no. 5, pp. 428–441, 2005.

[34] H. Brenton, M. Gillies, D. Ballin, and D. Chatting, “The uncanny valley:
does it exist and is it related to presence,” Presence Connect, 2005.

