The use of Virtual Reality in Enhancing Interdisciplinary Research and Education 

Tiffany LEUNG  
 School of Computing, Queen’s University 
Kingston, ON, Canada 

Farhana ZULKERNINE 
School of Computing, Queen’s University 
Kingston, ON, Canada 

Haruna ISAH 
School of Computing, Queen’s University 
Kingston, ON, Canada 

ABSTRACT 

regarding 

Virtual  Reality  (VR)  is  increasingly  being  recognized  for  its 
educational  potential  and  as  an  effective  way  to  convey  new 
knowledge  to  people,  it  supports  interactive  and  collaborative 
activities.  Affordable  VR  powered  by  mobile  technologies  is 
opening a new world of opportunities that can transform the ways 
in which we learn and engage with others. This paper reports our 
study 
in  stimulating 
the  application  of  VR 
interdisciplinary communication. It investigates the promises of 
VR  in  interdisciplinary  education  and  research.  The  main 
contributions of this study are (i) literature review of theories of 
learning underlying the justification of the use of VR systems in 
education, 
types  and 
implementations  of  VR  systems  and  their  application  in 
supporting education and research (iii) evaluation of educational 
applications  of  VR  from  a  broad  range  of  disciplines,  (iv) 
investigation of how the learning process and learning outcomes 
are affected by VR systems, and (v) comparative analysis of VR 
and  traditional  methods  of  teaching  in  terms  of  quality  of 
learning. This study seeks to inspire and inform interdisciplinary 
researchers  and  learners  about  the  ways  in  which  VR  might 
support them and also VR software developers to push the limits 
of their craft.   

taxonomy  of 

the  various 

(ii) 

Keywords: Virtual Reality, Learning, Interdisciplinary Research 
and Education, VR Systems. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Virtual  Reality  (VR)  refers  to  interactive  scenes  in  which 
people's’ viewpoint could be moved or manipulated around in a 
virtual three-dimension and then presented as a two-dimensional 
image  on  a  computer  screen.  From 
the  standpoints  of 
communication  researchers,  VR  is  simply  defined  as  real  or 
simulated  environment  in  which  a  perceiver  experiences 
telepresence or an apparent participation in distant events [1]. VR 
is  one  of 
Information  and 
Communication  Technology  (ICT)  that  support  interactive  and 
collaborative  activities,  it  can  transform  the  ways  in  which  we 
learn  and  engage  with  one  another.  It  allows  for  action, 
movement, and sometimes speech on the part of users. In theory, 
it  may  be  any  or  a  combination  of  visual,  auditory,  haptic, 

the  many  components  of 

olfactory, gustatory, or thermal senses. The keywords to VR are 
visualization, which is concerned with presenting data in ways 
that make them perceptible and natural interaction, which  allows 
an easier responds to the computer [2].  

to  collaborate  with  each  other 

VR  is  transforming  education  and  learning  by  reshaping  the 
taught  process  into  an  interactive  experience  embodied  in  the 
objects of the virtual environment [3]. According to Chen et al. 
[4],  VR  offers  various  capabilities  that  can  provide  promising 
support  for  education.  Some  of  these  capabilities  include  the 
ability  to  allow  the  learners  to  experience,  manipulate,  and 
articulate their understanding of the virtual environment in real-
time,  interact  with  3D  virtual  representation,  and  visualize 
abstract concepts and the dynamic relationships between several 
variables  in  the  virtual  environment.  The  system  also  allows 
individuals 
in  a  virtual 
environment as well as to visit and interact with events that are 
unavailable or unfeasible due to barriers such as distance, time, 
cost, or safety factors. With VR headset students can explore 3D 
spaces  and  experience  dangerous,  expensive  or  inaccessible 
places and events. VR can be utilized to simulate emergencies, 
witness volcanic activity from close-by, to walk through ancient 
cities,  and  fly  through  the  solar  system.  Those  studying 
Architecture  can  evaluate  their  buildings  in  new  ways,  pilots 
training  can  be  simulated,  power  engineering  students  can 
simulate surge and how to control it in electric power systems, 
and medical students can learn about the body in 3D as shown 
Fig. 1 [5]. 

Fig. 1. The use of VR to manipulate objects in a virtual world [6]  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With 
the  continued  escalation  of  affordable  computing 
equipment,  VR has  the  potential  to  become  a  powerful  tool  in 
engineering education [7]. The growing need of learner-centered 
education in recent years has motivated the application of virtual 
reality  learning  environment  as  an  approach  via  engaging 
problem-solving  activities  [8].  This  study  seeks  to  explore  the 
potential  of  VR  in  interdisciplinary  research  and  education  by 
investigating the educational scenarios and impacts of VR. The 
rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  2  presents  a 
background on the use of VR in education containing a concise 
review of the related literature and some popular taxonomies of 
VR  found  in  the  literature.  Section  3  discusses  the  education 
applications of VR systems. Section 4 highlights the impacts of 
the use of VR over traditional approaches. Section 5 introduces 
the  application  of  VR  in  interdisciplinary  research  and  finally, 
Section  6  provides  an  overview  of  this  study  and  a  pointer  to 
lessons learned and future work.       

2.  BACKGROUND 

This  section  presents  a  concise  literature  review  of  the 
educational impact offered by VR systems and the taxonomies of 
VR found in the literature. 

in 

response 

2.1  Literature Review  
VR  generates  simulated  environments  to  enable  interactive, 
intuitive, and self-exploratory methods of learning [9]. Real-time 
interactivity is a critical feature of VR which allows learners to 
more  effectively  engage  with  the  learning  system  [10].  The 
learner can directly interact with virtual objects, test their ideas, 
and  observe  the  results  in  real  time.  The  virtual  environment 
provides  an  ideal  problem  space  for  learners  to  find  their  own 
solutions by changing the state of the objects in the virtual world. 
Multiple studies [11,12,13,14] have identified immersion as the 
key-added value of VR. Immersion creates a sense of immediacy 
and control through visual, auditory, or haptic devices that reflect 
to  user  activity.  Another 
scene  changes 
distinguishing feature of VR is the ability to interact with spatial 
representations from various frames of references (FOR), which 
can  deepen  the  learner’s  understanding  by  providing  different 
and  complementary  insights  of  the  knowledge  [15].  Users  can 
develop a strong conceptual understanding of the knowledge and 
the  relationship  between  its  components  by  engaging  with 
information from multiple roles and perspectives. VR increases 
motivation  and  mindful  engagement  by  offering  challenging, 
interactive, realistic, and immersive environments to learn from 
[13, 16]. High schools have effectively deployed VR to stimulate 
interest in algebra, geometry, science, and the humanities using 
only the crudest equipment [17]. These environments may also 
be artificial environments that simulate aspects of the real world 
which may not be accessible through direct experience [18].  For 
example, Immersive VR systems can model abstract phenomena 
(e.g.,  quantum  mechanics)  that  do  not  have  real-life  referents 
because they cannot be experienced in practice or perceived by 
human senses. 

MaxwellWorld  (MW)  is  a  3-D  immersive  VR  system  [14] 
designed  to  help  learners  understand  electrostatic  concepts. 
These  concepts  are  difficult  to  comprehend  since  they  are 
abstract, three-dimensional, and lack real life referents to which 
learners can anchor their understanding. In MW, users can create 
electrostatic forces and explore electrostatic fields without other 
phenomena  interfering  with  their  perceived  effects.  Users  can 
release positive and negative charges of varying magnitudes into 

the  virtual  environment  and  then  interactively  examine  the 
resulting configuration. Alternatively, users can switch FOR to 
become a tiny charged particle enhancing the saliency of force 
and energy as crucial variables. Students demonstrated more in-
depth  understanding  of  electrostatic  concepts  and  attributed 
immersive  3-D  representations  interactivity.  The  ability  to 
alternate  between  multiple  perspectives  (FORs)  proved  to  be 
influential  to  the  learning  process.  Students  reported  that  they 
thought  MW  was  a  more  effective  and  motivating  method  of 
learning electrostatic concepts than either textbooks or lectures. 
Researchers evaluated the learning outcomes between MW and a 
highly regarded and widely used computer application called EM 
Field  (EMF),  which  uses  2-D  representations  and  quantitative 
values to indicate strength [19]. Pre and post lesson assessments 
indicated  MW 
significantly  better 
understanding of concepts than EMF students did.   

students  developed 

The studies by Lange and Bell et al. [5, 7, 20] identified key steps 
to be followed and questions to be answered in the development 
and implementation of VR based educational modules. Beyond 
just  education,  VR 
in 
is  beginning 
interdisciplinary  research.  This  is  the  main  contribution  of  this 
study,  we  want  to  explore  the  potential  of  VR  in  supporting 
for 
communication,  which 
interdisciplinary 
interdisciplinary education and research. 

to  gain 

traction 

vital 

is 

in 

information 

2.2  VR System Taxonomies  
Chengling  et  al.  [21]  identified  the  following  types  of  VR 
systems: Immersive, Desktop, Collaborative, Projected Reality, 
and  Telepresence.  In  Immersive  VR,  the  systems  perceptually 
surround  the  user,  replacing  the  sensory  information  from  the 
the  virtual 
physical  world  with  sensory 
environment. The user is equipped with a head mounted display, 
trackers, and input devices that work together and are immersed 
through a variety of channels [22]. In a Desktop VR, the system 
displays  a  2-Dimensional  (2D)  or  3-Dimensional  (3D)  virtual 
environment on a computer screen rather than a head mounted 
display.  Despite  the  elimination  of  the  immersive  feature,  the 
user  can  still  experience  the  virtual  world  in  a  first-person 
perspective  by  navigating  freely 
the  space  and 
interacting with the virtual environment using a controller such 
as a joystick or a standard computer mouse. In Collaborative VR, 
normally  implemented  on  the  immersive  or  desktop  VRs,  the 
system  involves  a  multi-user  virtual  environment  in  which 
participants  interact  with  each  other  via  avatars  for  instance 
through  the  tracking  of  each  other’s  movements,  gestures, 
expressions, and sounds. Projected Reality, however, provides a 
second-person experience in which the user stands outside, but 
can see themselves as part of the virtual world superimposed onto 
a computer monitor. A video camera serves as the input device 
and is used by the users to view themselves inside a computer-
generated  virtual  world  presented  on  a  screen.  Finally, 
Telepresence allows users at one site to control a robot or another 
device located at a remote site. This is achieved by using a variety 
of devices such as cameras, microphones, and tactile and force 
feedbacks  to  simulate  the  feeling  of  being  at  another  location 
(e.g., space or undersea).  

through 

into  four 

their  features 

The study by Yao et al. [9] categorized current VR systems based 
on 
types:  Desktop,  Immersion, 
Reinforcement,  and  Network  Distributed.  The  Desktop  type 
utilizes  PC  as  virtual  environment  generator  while  a  computer 
screen is the window by which participants observe the virtual 
environment.  The  Immersion  type  basically  utilizes  high-grade 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workstations, high performance graphics acceleration cards and 
interactive devices to immerse totally into the virtual world. The 
Reinforcement type allows the participants to see objects in real 
environment,  and  at  the  same  time,  graphics  in  virtual 
environment are stacked on the real objects. Finally, the Network 
Distributed  type  is  a  large  distributed  interactive  simulation 
network system composed of the previous types, which is usually 
used in accomplishing more complicated tasks. 

Another taxonomy of VR systems was proposed by Muhanna et 
al.  [23];  two  factors  that  were  taken  into  consideration  in  the 
classification include the type of technology used in building the 
VR  system  and  its  level  of  mental  immersion.  In  terms  of 
technology, VR systems that require special hardware facilities 
were categorized as Enhanced while those VR systems which do 
not  require  such  facilities  are  said  to  be  Basic.  In  terms  of 
immersion,  the  authors  suggested  that  a  system  that  does  not 
provide any level of mental immersion should not be considered 
as  a  VR  system,  they  then  categorized  VR  systems  into  three 
levels of immersion, which included (i) lowest level, which only 
applies to the basic VR systems (ii) higher level, experienced in 
partially 
immersive  VR  systems  and  (iii)  highest  level, 
experienced  in  fully  immersive  VR  systems.  Fig.  2  shows  a 
graphical layout of the taxonomy including the examples. 

the  axioms  of  constructivist  learning  theory,  situated  learning 
theory, embodied cognition theory, and social cognition theory. 

individual’s 

through  an 

interaction  with 

learning  environments  for 

3.1  Constructivist Learning Theory 
According to the VR literature reviews by Chen [4] and Fokides 
et  al.  [24],  constructivist  philosophy  holds  that  knowledge  is 
constructed 
the 
environment and that people learn better when they are actively 
involved  in  constructing  knowledge  in  a  learning-by-doing 
situation.  VR  provides  a  controlled  environment  in  which 
learners  can  navigate,  manipulate,  and  observe  the  effects  of 
virtual  objects  found  within.  As  such  it  is  very  well  suited  for 
learning 
providing  exploratory 
through  experimentation.  Both  Chen  and  Fokides  described 
constructivism  as  the  underlying  learning  theory  that  fits  well 
with  the  characteristics  of  VR  technology.  As  such  the 
characteristics  of  VR  and  the  axioms  of  constructivist  learning 
theory  are  entirely  compatible.  Chen  [4]  proposed  a  VR 
instructional design and development model that offers explicit 
guidance on how to produce an educational virtual environment 
based  on  the  constructivist  theory.  Fokides  [24]  discussed  the 
advantages and disadvantages of the use of VR in Road Safety 
Education, which depends heavily on the development of motor 
skills,  and  perception  and  time  judgements  based  on  the 
constructivist  theoretical  and  cognitive  perspective.  One  of  the 
fundamental  attributes  of  the  multimedia  and  hypermedia 
applications  that  renders  them  compatible  with  the  theory  of 
constructivism is that they permit students to freely select their 
courses by allowing non-linear access to the contents.   

Fig. 2. Taxonomy of VR systems proposed in [23] 

Yao  et  al.  [9]  categorized  VR  main  features  into  (i)  multi-
sensation,  which  include  visual  sensation,  auditory  perception, 
touch perception, motion perception, taste sensation, and smell 
sensation;  (ii)  existence  sensation,  also  known  as  immersed 
sense,  which  means  the  reality  level  that  users  exist  in  the 
simulated  environment  in  the  leading  role;  (iii)  interactivity, 
which refers to the operational level where participants operate 
the objects in the simulated environment, and to the natural level 
where participants get feedback from the environment, and (iv) 
autonomy,  which  means  the  level  where  objects  in  simulated 
environment  move  independently  based  on  the  operator’s 
requirements according to their models and regulations. 

3.  EDUCATIONAL APPLICATIONS OF VR SYSTEMS 

Before  substantiating  the  application  of  VR  in  enhancing 
multidisciplinary  education,  Chen  et  al. [4]  first  outlined  some 
theoretical  foundations  which  are  imperative  in  establishing  a 
connection  with  theories  of  learning.  Forming  such  theoretical 
framework  can  be  used  to  categorize  the  experiences  and 
potential  uses  of  different  VRs 
in  education  [5].  The 
characteristics of VR, especially the immersive type, align with 

3.2  Situated Learning Theory 
Many  teaching  practices  implicitly  assume  that  conceptual 
knowledge  can  be  abstracted  from  the  situations  in  which  it  is 
learned  and  used,  however  Brown  et  al.  [25]  argued  that  this 
assumption inevitably limits the effectiveness of such practices. 
According to the situated learning theory proposed by Lave et al. 
[26],  learning  is  situated  in  a  specific  context  and  embedded 
within a particular social and physical environment; rather than 
just  an  abstract  knowledge  in  a  classroom,  learning  should  be 
embedded within activity, context and culture in which it occurs. 
Situated  learning  enables  learner  to  takes  on  active  role  in  the 
learning context in system being studied [8]. VR can enhance the 
scaffolding of situated learning through the simulation of the real 
world and integrating authentic tasks, thereby allowing users to 
learn in the context where the knowledge would be applied. Some 
of the features of VR that can facilitate situated learning include 
(i) the control and modification abilities of the environmental; (ii) 
the contextually rich and highly realistic nature of the learning 
environment; (iii) the flexibility of allowing users to adjust the 
difficulty of the problem, and thereby, building their knowledge 
and skills, and finally (iv) the opportunity for multiple practices, 
including  interdisciplinary  collaborations  and  practices  where 
different variables are enforced. Brown et al. [25] described some 
examples  of  mathematics  instruction  (e.g.  the  magic  square 
problem  and  story  problems  for  teaching  multiplication)  that 
exhibit  certain  key  features  of  situated  learning  theory  to 
teaching.  Yasin et al. [8] described an avatar implementation in 
VR  environment  using  situated  learning.  The  project  was 
designed to guide learners through virtual reality environment as 
they  participated  in  a  role-based  problem  solving  that  was 
targeted  at  Hajj  candidates  or  trainees.  For  those  interested  in 
many uses cases, Dawley et al. [27] provide a detailed review of 
recent  examples  of  virtual  worlds  and  immersive  simulations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either  designed  or  adapted 
experiences for educational purposes. 

to  support  situated 

learning 

3.3  Embodied Cognition Theory 
Embodied  cognition  is  the  idea  that  the  mind  alone  does  not 
dictate  a  worldview,  instead,  cognition  is  shaped  by  the 
relationship  between  the  mind  and  the  body  to  inform  and 
navigate the world, make meaning from the environments, and 
ultimately to result in learning [28]. Goldin-Meadow [29] found 
that  simple  gesturing  demonstrates  knowledge  not  found  in 
speech and can potentially change and improve the knowledge of 
elementary  students.  Teachers  use  embodied  cognition  in  the 
classroom  whenever  they  instruct  students  to  interact  with  the 
environment,  for  instance  by  conducting  science  experiments. 
Cowart [30] outlined the historical perspective of the theory. VR 
is  one  of  the  promising  tools  for  delivering  learning  through 
embodied cognition. Portnoy [28] gave an illustration of an ideal 
high  school  science  classroom  where  after  reading  about  cells, 
students entered a virtual environment where they were able to 
push past the membrane gates and get their first glimpse of a cell 
and  its  components.  Multi-sensory  cues  can  complement 
embodied cognition by utilizing visual, auditory, and haptic cues 
in  gathering  information.  Embodied  cognition  states  that  the 
knowledge we form is attributed to a broader system involving 
the  brain,  body,  and  environment.  Users  can  interpret  multi-
sensory  cues 
their 
proprioceptive  system  to  navigate  and  control  objects  in  the 
synthetic environment. This can potentially deepen learning and 
recall  because  the  environment  involves  senses  and  bodily 
activity.   

information  while  using 

to  gather 

3.4  Social Cognition Theory 
Social cognitive theory is a learning theory that is based on the 
idea that people learn by observing others, with the environment, 
behavior, and cognition acting as primary factors that influence 
development  in  a  reciprocal  triadic  relationship.  The  theory 
revolves around knowledge acquisition or learning processes that 
are  directly  correlated  to  the  observation  of  models.  In  other 
words, when learners observe a model performing a behavior and 
the consequences of that behavior, they remember the sequence 
of  events  and  can  use  it  to  guide  subsequent  behaviors  [31]. 
Although the theory originated in pure Psychology, it now finds 
application in Education and in Business. According to the study 
by Didehbani et al. [32], VR is well suited for social cognition 
training  interventions.  The  authors  utilized  VR  technology  to 
enhance social skills, social cognition, and social functioning in 
young  adults  with  autism  spectrum  disorders.  Imam  et  al  [33] 
presented  another  VR  application  in  mediated  learning,  which 
was  aimed  to  identify  the  VR  interventions  used  for  the  lower 
extremity rehabilitation in stroke population and to explain their 
theoretical  social 
underlying 
cognitive  and  motor  learning  frameworks.  Results  obtained 
suggested 
learning 
that  VR  applications  used  mediated 
environment by facilitating task-oriented learning. 

training  mechanisms  using 

4.  VR vs TRADITIONAL LEARNING APPROACHES 

Researchers  in  various  disciplines  have  studied  the  use  of  VR 
systems  for  learning.  This  stems  from  the  ability  of  VR  to 
implement contexts and relationships not possible to achieve in a 
traditional learning setting [31]. Here, we highlight the benefits 
of VR systems in facilitating learning over traditional methods. 
First,  let’s  consider  the  use  of  VR  as  a  tool  for  Road  Safety 

time 

teaching  reported  by  Imam  et  al.  [33].  Road  safety  education 
depends heavily in the development of motor skills, perception 
and 
judgements.  The  course  material  consists  of 
multimedia/hypermedia applications and focuses on knowledge 
acquisition. More so, training in conditions as close to real traffic 
as  possible  seems  to  be  probably  the  only  effective  teaching 
method available. The study was an attempt to evaluate whether 
VR  has  clear  advantages  compared  to  other  conventional  ICT 
based alternatives. It concluded that VR can be a great tool of use 
in  road  safety.  The  main  benefits  that  can  be  realized  through 
using VR for Road Safety Education include (i) training needs to 
be done in a manner very close to real traffic conditions; (ii) the 
possibility to simulate traffic situations that are very complicated 
to be presented in real life, or extremely dangerous for students 
to be exposed to; (iii) the chance to test alternative approaches in 
a  traffic  situation  through  the  use  of  elevated  degree  of 
interactions with the virtual world, and to experiment and learn 
from their mistakes; (iv) the fact that VR applications are very 
similar to the modern computer games, and as such, can stimulate 
students' interests by giving them extra incentives for learning,  
and (v) the possibility to implement different teaching styles, for 
example, the teacher can be present in the virtual world and can 
allow  for  collaboration  between  students  or  between  a  student 
and a guided tutoring. Unlike the real life Road Traffic education, 
this scenario is also perfect for interdisciplinary learning. It can 
allow many different  professionals (health, safety, psychology) 
to be brought together into the learning environment. However, 
in  VR,  the  students  may  miss,  to  a  large  extent,  the  benefits 
offered by first person experiences. 

Basketball  teaching  has  been  performed  for  a  long  time  by 
teachers  interpreting  and  demonstrating,  however,  for  a  quick 
and changeable group item, the application of only the traditional 
teaching method can have certain limitations. VR was introduced 
to improve this situation and its feasibility was analyzed by Yao 
et al. [9] to provide a scientific reference for basketball teaching 
reform.  Some  of  its  benefits  are  as  follows:  (i)  VR  eliminates 
sports  injury  in  basketball  teaching;  (ii)  it  can  make  up  for  a 
conditional  shortage  of  basketball  teaching  and  (iii)  limits  of 
room and time could be broken thoroughly. 

The  VR  system  proposed  by  Yasin  et  al.  [8]  showcased  an 
immersed 3D virtual world implementing avatar for hajj trainers, 
some of the benefits of this VR approach over traditional training 
methods included the following: (i) increased understanding of 
the  tawaf  ritual;  (ii)  better  visualization  of  the  tawaf  activity 
compared to the situation at the training center; (iii) flexibility, 
for example, having the VR system as an assistant or part of the 
content;  while  conducting  the  Hajj  course,  the  trainer  can 
simultaneously  instill  the  learning  process  at  the  same  time 
highlighting the participation of trainees socially during the tawaf 
activity; (iv) significant potential for fostering situated learning, 
in other words, the 3D virtual learning using the avatar allowed 
learners  to  actively  immerse  with  the  situated  role  based 
environment,  and  (v)  interdisciplinary  learning  beyond  tawaf 
activity, in other words, with the combination of high-end user 
graphical interface, learners could be motivated and empowered 
to collaborate, interact with a wide range of target learners. 

For  individuals  with  autism  spectrum  disorders,  transition  into 
adulthood  is  often  a  challenging  time.  Didehbani  et  al.  [32] 
observed young adults diagnosed with high-functioning autism 
completed  10  sessions  of  social  cognition  training  with  VR 
technology across 5 weeks and reported a significant increase on 
social  cognitive  measures  of  theory  of  mind  and  emotion 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recognition, as well as better social and occupational functioning 
in real life after the training. According to the authors, previous 
interventions outside the realm of VR quantified social skills and 
cognition over time using a variety of techniques and measures 
and had mixed success. As such these findings suggest that the 
VR is a promising tool for improving social skills, cognition, and 
functioning  in  autism.  Again,  stroke  is  a  global,  debilitating 
problem  which  is  increasing  both  in prevalence  and  incidence. 
Imam  et  al.  [33]  attempted  to  explain  the  underlying  training 
mechanisms of VR interventions in stroke population based on 
the  social  cognition  theory.  According  to  the  reports,  results 
obtained demonstrated a significant improvement in outcomes in 
favour of the VR group compared to the control group. 

Durbin  [34]  presented  a  study  that  was  conducted  by two 
organizations in China to take a look at the different  ways VR 
can  make  public  education  more  effective.  Compared  to  the 
traditional learning approaches, VR-based learning can boast the 
ability to make abstract problems concrete. It is vivid, supports 
theoretical  thinking  very  well,  and  helps  sharpen  students’ 
operational skills. It makes learning more fun, secure and active 
by  providing  an  immersive  learning  experience  and  enhancing 
students’ involvement in the class. In teaching abstract courses 
or  subjects  such  as  astrophysics,  in  which learners  may  not  be 
able to conduct experiments in the classroom but often will have 
to  understand 
teachers’ 
explanation, simulations with VR makes it possible to present to 
the learners the abstract aerospace in a 3D projection. 

imagination  and 

through 

their 

5.  VR IN INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH 

that  guided 

the  principles 

“Interdisciplinary research, education, and communication are 
inherently  related  to  each  other,  potentially  supported  by 
complexity studies and ICT”1. Interdisciplinary communication 
is  vital  to  the  success  of  every  interdisciplinary  research  and 
education and VR technology is one of those ICT tools that has 
the  potential  of  revolutionizing  it.  Multiple  viewpoints  are 
critical  in  interdisciplinary  matters.  Courses  and  modules  are 
now beginning to evolve in the academia that cuts across various 
disciplines.  For  example, 
the 
construction  of  the  course  “Introducing  Virtual  Reality  for 
Interdisciplinary  Applications”  in  the  study  by  Molvig    [35]  is 
the desire to mix future engineers with future non-engineers to 
solve  problems 
together.  Various  faculties  from  across 
Vanderbilt  University  are  serving  as  mentors  in  disciplines 
ranging  from  Art,  History,  and  Computer  Science,  thereby 
interdisciplinary 
creating  interdisciplinary  teams  to  tackle 
projects.  Other  similar  initiatives  include  the  summer  program 
for  interdisciplinary  research  and  education  at  the  Iowa  State 
University  Virtual  Reality  Applications  Center2  and  the  VR 
Learning Lab3 in Leiden, Netherlands.  Hain et al. [36] discussed 
an  industrial  heritage  project  consisting  of  buildings  and 
infrastructures  where  architects  often  found  themselves  in  the 
role  of  mediators  between  investors,  scientific,  community, 
preservation,  and  the  general  public. The  study  found  that  the 
lack  of  interdisciplinary  research  in  the  project  documentation 
resulted in non-complex solutions and low-quality developments 
and  provided  a  low-level  educational  sense  for  visitors.  The 
authors  then  developed  a  project  with  the  aim  of  exploring 
opportunities  for  collaboration  between  theoretical  research, 
monument preservation, virtual reality and architectural practice. 

VR  was  utilized  to  represent  objects  and  scenes  within  the 
industrial  heritage  conservation,  and  to  serve  as  an  effective 
communication  and  educational  tool  for  rediscovering  history 
and exploring of new scientific values by a wider range of users. 

Engineers  in  complex  automated  factories  often  encounter 
communication and comprehension problems. Ulewicz et al. [37] 
provided a typical case study where mechanical, electrical, and 
computer engineers worked on a high-tech project in a team, with 
each party lacking an understanding of the tasks performed and 
complex  information  created  by  the  other  party  in  the  other 
discipline.  While  their  specific  expertise  was  necessary  for  the 
project  success,  the  integration of  the  different  disciplines  was 
imperative for reaching a working end result. This is particularly, 
a difficult interdisciplinary communication situation that VR is 
well suited for. The authors attempted to use VR technology to 
instill  a  mutual  understanding  of  engineering  artefacts  and  the 
connections  among  development 
from 
heterogeneous  domains  and  working  at  different  locations. 
According to the report, the concept seemed very promising, yet 
many aspects needed to be investigated and developed in more 
detail. 

teams  stemming 

In this section we presented some recent case studies of the use 
of  VR  in  interdisciplinary  research.  More  such  systems  are 
expected in the near future as the related technology improves to 
leverage VR in interdisciplinary research and education. 

6.  CONCLUSIONS 

The  convergence  of  learning  theories  with  VR  technology 
permits  learning  to  be  enhanced  by  the  ability  to  directly 
manipulate objects in a virtual world. The unique affordances of 
VR are aligned with the components of the theories of learning 
on  which  educational  applications  can  be  developed  on  VR 
systems. Beyond just education, VR is beginning to gain traction 
in interdisciplinary research. This study investigates the extents 
to which VR technology is offering various capabilities that are 
able to provide promising support for education. We have also 
highlighted  the  benefits  of  VR  systems  in  facilitating  learning 
over traditional methods. Despite the potential of VR, there are 
that  should  be  addressed  before 
still  some  challenges 
implementation  and  deployment.  We  hope  to  look  into  these 
challenges  in  our  future  work  and  also  develop  a  VR-based 
environment for our projects which are mostly interdisciplinary 
in nature. Once again, this study is intended to inspire and inform 
interdisciplinary  researchers  and  learners  about  the  ways  in 
which VR might support them, and also VR software developers 
to push the limits of their craft.   

REFERENCES 

1.  Steuer, J., Defining virtual reality: Dimensions determining 
telepresence, Journal of Communication, 1992, 42(4): p. 73-
93. 

2.  Coomans,  M.K.D,  Timmerman,  H.J.P  Towards  a 
Taxonomy of Virtual Reality User Interfaces, Proceedings 
of 
Information 
Visualisation, 1997. 

International  Conference 

the 

on 

1 IDREC 2018 call 
2 http://www.vrac.iastate.edu/hci/reu/  

3 http://vrlearninglab.nl/ 

 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
   
 
 
 
students,  and  social  context,  The  Journal  of  the  Learning 
Sciences, 2008, 17(1): p. 102-141. 

23.  Muhanna, M.A., Virtual reality and the CAVE: Taxonomy, 
interaction  challenges  and  research  directions,  Journal  of 
King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 
2015, 27(3): p. 344-361. 

24.  Fokides, E. and Tsolakidis, C. Virtual reality in education: 
A theoretical approach for road safety training to students, 
European Journal of Open, Distance and E-learning, 2008, 
11(2). 

25.  Brown, J.S., Collins, A. and Duguid, P. Situated cognition 
and  the  culture  of  learning,  Educational  researcher,  1989, 
18(1): p. 32-42. 

26.  Lave,  J.  and  Wenger,  E.    Situated  learning:  Legitimate 
peripheral participation, Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
27.  Dawley, L. and Dede, C.  Situated learning in virtual worlds 
and  immersive  simulations,  in  Handbook  of  research  on 
educational communications and technology, 2014, p. 723-
734. 

28.  Portnoy,  L.,  Embodied  Cognition  and  the  Possibility  of 

Virtual Reality, 2017. 

29.  Goldin‐Meadow,  S.,  How  gesture  promotes 

learning 
throughout  childhood,  Child  development  perspectives, 
2009, 3(2): p. 106-111. 

30.  Cowart, M. Embodied Cognition, Internet Encyclopedia of 

Philosophy, 2018. 
31.  Bandura,  A.,  Social 

cognitive 

theory  of  mass 
communication, Media psychology, 2001, 3(3): p. 265-299. 
32.  Didehbani,  N.,  et  al.,  Virtual  Reality  Social  Cognition 
Training  for  children  with  high  functioning  autism,  
Computers in Human Behavior, 2016. 6: p. 703-711. 
33.  Imam,  B.  and  Jarus,  T.  Virtual  reality  rehabilitation  from 
social cognitive and motor learning theoretical perspectives 
in  stroke  population,  Rehabilitation  research  and  practice, 
2014.  

34.  Durbin, J., Research Study Suggests VR Can Have A Huge 

Impact In The Classroom, 2016. 

35.  Molvig, O. Introducing Virtual Reality for Interdisciplinary 
Applications, VU BreakThru , Vanderbilt University. 2017. 
36.  Hain,  V.,  Löffler,  R.,  and  Zajíček,  V.    Interdisciplinary 
Cooperation  in  the  Virtual  Presentation  of  Industrial 
Heritage Development, Procedia Engineering, 2016, 161: p. 
2030-2035. 

37.  Ulewicz,  S.,  Pantförder,  D.,  and  Vogel-Heuser,  B.  
Interdisciplinary  Communication  and  Comprehension  in 
Factory  Automation  Engineering  -  A  Concept  for  an 
Immersive  Virtual  Environment,  IFAC-PapersOnLine, 
2016, 49(19): p. 227-232. 

3.  Blascovich,  J.,  et  al.,  Immersive  virtual  environment 
technology as a methodological tool for social psychology, 
Psychological Inquiry, 2002. 13(2): p. 103-124. 

4.  Chen, C.J., Theoretical Bases for Using Virtual Reality in 
Education, Themes in Science and Technology Education, 
2009, 2: p. 71-90. 

5.  Lange,  R.d.,  Towards  a  theoretical  framework  for  Virtual 

Reality in Education - Robin de Lange, 2016.  

6.  Portnoy, L. Virtual Reality Will Fundamentally Transform 

Education, 2017. 

7.  Bell, J.T. and H.S. Fogler, Ten steps to developing virtual 
reality applications for engineering education. Ann Arbor, 
1997.  

8.  Yasin,  A.M.,  Z.  Darleena,  and  Isa,  M.A.M.    Avatar 
Implementation  in  Virtual  Reality  Environment  using 
Situated  Learning  for  “Tawaf”,  Procedia  -  Social  and 
Behavioral Sciences, 2012. 67: p. 73-80. 

9.  Yao,  H.-p.,  Liu,  Y.-z.  and  Han,  C.-s.  Application 
Expectation  of  Virtual  Reality  in  Basketball  Teaching, 
Procedia Engineering, 2012. 29: p. 4287-4291. 

10.  Huang, H-m and Liaw S-s, Applying Situated Learning in a 
Virtual  Reality  System  to  Enhance  Learning  Motivation. 
International  Journal  of 
Information  and  Education 
Technology, 2011.  

11.  Psotka, J., Immersive training systems: Virtual reality and 
education and training, Instructional Science, 1995, 23: p. 
405-431.  

12.  Bricken, M., and Byrne, C.M., Summer students in virtual 
reality: A pilot study on educational applications of virtual 
reality  technology,  Cambridge,  MA:  Academic  Press 
Professional, 1993. 

13.  Salamon, G., Perkins, D.N., and Globerson, T, Partners in 
cognition:  Extending  human  intelligence  with  intelligent 
technologies, Educational Researcher, 1991 20(3): 2-9. 
14.  Salzman,  M.C.,  Dede,  C.,  Loftin,  R.B.,  and  Chen,  J,  A 
Model  for  Understanding  How  Virtual  Reality  Aids 
Complex Conceptual Learning, Presence: Teleoperators and 
Virtual Environments, 1999, 8(3), p, 293-316.  

15.  Erickson,  T.  Artificial  realities  as  data  visualization 
environments.  In  Wexelblat,  A.  (Ed.),  Virtual  Reality: 
Applications and Explorations, New York: Academic Press 
Professional, 1993, p. 1–22. 

16.  Malone,  T.W.,  and  Lepper,  M,  Making  leaming  fun:  A 
taxonomy  of  intrinsic  motivations  for  Learning,  in  R.  E. 
Snow  and  M.J.  Farr  eds.,  Aptitude, 
learning  and 
instructions:  III,  Conative  and  affective  process  analyses, 
1987, p. 223-253. 

17.  Gay, E.R. and Santiago, R., VR Projects at Natrona county, 

Wyoming, Sci-VR-Apps bulletin, 1994.  

18.  Zucchermaglia,  C.,  Toward  a  cognitive  ergonomics  of 
educational  technology,  In  Duffy,  T.,  Lowyck,  J.,  & 
Jonassen,  D. 
for 
constructive learning, New York: Springer, 1993.  

(Eds.),  Designing  environments 

19.  Trowbridge, D., & Sherwood, B., EM Field, Raleigh, NC: 

Physics Academic Software, 1994.  

20.  Bell, J.T. and Fogler, H.S. The investigation and application 
of virtual reality as an educational tool, in Proceedings of 
the  American  Society  for  Engineering  Education  Annual 
Conference, 1995. 

21.  Chengling, Z. and Zhaohua, Z., Research and application of 
virtual reality in the field of web-based education, Advances 
in  Artificial  Reality  and  Tele-Existence,  2006,  p.  1305-
1309. 

22.  Bailenson, J.N., et al., The use of immersive virtual reality 
in the learning sciences: Digital transformations of teachers, 

 
