5G Applications: Requirements, Challenges, and
Outlook

Aaron Yi Ding
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
aaron.ding@tudelft.nl

Marijn Janssen
Delft University of Technology, Netherlands
m.f.w.h.a.janssen@tudelft.nl

8
1
0
2

t
c
O
4
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
5
0
6
0
.
0
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
The increasing demand for mobile network capacity driven
by Internet of Things (IoT) applications results in the need
for understanding better the potential and limitations of
5G networks. Vertical application areas like smart mobility,
energy networks, industrial IoT applications, and AR/VR
enhanced services all pose different requirements on the
use of 5G networks. Some applications need low latency,
whereas others need high bandwidth or security support.
The goal of this paper is to identify the requirements and to
understand the limitations for 5G driven applications. We
review application areas and list the typical challenges and
requirements posed on 5G networks. A main challenge will
be to develop a network architecture being able to dynami-
cally adapt to fluctuating traffic patterns and accommodating
various technologies such as edge computing, blockchain
based distributed ledger, software defined networking, and
virtualization. To inspire future research, we reveal open
problems and highlight the need for piloting with 5G appli-
cations, with tangible steps, to understand the configuration
of 5G networks and the use of applications across multiple
vertical industries.

KEYWORDS
5G Systems; Pilot; IoT; Smart City; Edge Computing

1 INTRODUCTION
The success of mobile communication stems from its per-
vasive coverage and substantial ecosystem that boost rapid
pace of innovation in terms of new applications and venture
creations. To withstand its long-term prosperity, the upcom-
ing fifth generation (5G) of mobile networks are expected to
generate new opportunities in the era of Internet of Things
(IoT), autonomous driving, augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR) services. This vision is supported by the on-going
development of 5G cellular architecture and its air interface
enhancement [1, 2] to cater for massive deployment of con-
nected devices, which are projected to reach more than 75
billion by 2025 [3].

Comparing with existing 4G, 5G networks encompass
new wireless interfaces to support higher frequencies and
spectrum efficiency. There is significant improvement in
terms of signaling, management and accounting procedures

at the 5G core networks in order to accommodate the needs
from diverse range of new applications that are outside tra-
ditional mobile broadband category [4]. By its design, 5G
deployment will provide extensive connectivity through its
heterogeneous wireless access, ranging from macrocell (long
range) to femtocell (short range). As shown in Figure 1, the
coverage will span across metropolitan area, municipal area
and down to campuses and buildings. This pervasive connec-
tivity is the key to seamless mobility and service availability
that has been centered in the cellular system since its debut.
Given the new demands from IoT, autonomous driving,
AR/VR and smart city services, one important pursuit for 5G
is to match its capacity to the scale and growth of various 5G
driven applications in an economical and sustainable manner.
This mission covers network architecture, communication
techniques, ecosystem design and actual deployment. Re-
cent efforts have sought the utilization of network function
virtualization (NFV), software-defined networking (SDN),
edge computing and offloading, as well as distributed data
analytics (e.g., Apache Spark [5]). Those technical innova-
tions have shown promising results [6–16]. Meanwhile, as
new application domains are inspired by 5G on almost daily
basis, we still lack a comprehensive understanding on re-
quirements originating from various domains which include
both technical and governance perspectives, especially what
opportunities and challenges 5G will endure in the current
transitional phase.

Motivated by the latest advance in 5G and trend of urban-
ization [17], this paper tackles the challenges of 5G from the
application perspective. In particular, we focus on vertical
application domains, which are built for target enterprise
and entities with specific requirements. As a solid step to
demystify the requirements in the context of IoT and smart
cities, we aim to answer the major question: ”How do we
consolidate 5G driven applications across multiple ver-
tical industries to unveil the full potential of 5G?” Be-
sides identifying challenges, our work also highlights the
opportunities for 5G applications in various vertical domains,
which can shed light on future development for researchers,
engineers and policy makers from academia, industry and
government.

Our key contributions are hence twofold:

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Envision of 5G Network Connectivity

• First, we classify the application domains inspired
by 5G, and quantify their key requirements. Our
requirement analysis covers major aspects including
communication range, bandwidth capacity, latency,
reliability, energy, security and privacy.

• Second, we pinpoint open challenges and opportuni-
ties based on reviewing the state-of-the-art research
and project initiatives. Our discussions cover both
technical aspect and also regulation and governance.
We further stress the need to pilot 5G experimental
testbed through tight cooperation across universities,
network operators, equipment vendors and govern-
mental institutes.

We note that although this work provides an extensive
sampling of existing and emerging 5G applications, our study
does not attempt to cover every nuance. The rest of this paper
is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of
application domains in 5G. Section 3 illustrates the applica-
tion requirements. Section 4 highlights open challenges and
potential opportunities in 5G. We discuss related work and
project initiatives and conclude with our outlook in Section
5.

2

2 5G ENABLED APPLICATIONS
The advances in mobile networking have created a myriad
of diverse applications to improve the life quality of end
users, including smart mobility, digital commerce, social
networking and health care. From a broader perspective,
mobile applications are part of the Internet services, which
have witness a rapid evolution over the past decades.

As illustrated in Figure 2, the Internet services have evolved
from conventional point-to-point data exchange, world wide
web (WWW), mobile and social applications, to the recent
IoT services and forthcoming tactile Internet [18–20]. In
specific, the tactile Internet applications will facilitate the
integration between digital sphere and our physical environ-
ments, covering advanced use cases of machine-to-machine
(M2M) communication. Those new applications are charac-
terized by the need for a network having ultra low latency,
high availability, reliability and security. Many of these ap-
plications are also context-aware where the context is sensed
for triggering actions, e.g., smartphones are nowadays aware
if the owner is driving and can avoid interrupting the driver
[21].

Figure 2: Advancement of Internet Services

Among several application domains, the IoT-empowered
smart city has become a focal concern of 5G. In this context,
smart city integrates traditional and modern Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) for a unified and simple
access to services for the city administration and the resi-
dents. The aim is an enhanced use of resources, improving
quality of services for citizens while reducing operational
costs of public administration [22] and reducing the admin-
istrative burden for citizens and businesses. For example,
smart transportation should reduce congestion and pollution
and at the same time result in higher utilization of transport.
On the one hand, IoT has quickly advanced from an ex-
perimental technology to the driving force of 5G systems.
To fully exploit the opportunities behind IoT, 5G has placed
IoT at a vital position in its ecosystem. On the other hand,
realizing the IoT vision of smart city depends on a careful
integration with 5G telecommunication technologies to pro-
vide scalable and robust connectivity. Comprehensive and
scalable supports from 5G are hence required to overcome
the economic and technical constraints of state-of-the-art
conceptualizations and implementations, while maintaining
both practical and commercial appeals.

For 5G driven applications, we highlight five domains
that can benefit from a tight integration with 5G and next
generation cyber-physical infrastructure.

• Smart Mobility: Mobility applications in 5G ranges
from traditional road/route planning to the emerg-
ing autonomous driving services (connected vehi-
cles) and extended sharing economics of smart trans-
portation. The benefits of smart mobility include
traffic balancing, efficient routing, accident preven-
tion, energy saving, cost and emission reduction [23].
From this group of applications, there is a strong de-
mand for 5G to support pervasive connectivity, low

3

latency, high speed and link reliability, security and
low power consumption.

• Smart Energy: This category of applications in-
cludes power plant monitoring and management,
smart grid networking, power failure detection and
response, new consumption saving services for homes
and office buildings, energy marketplace and smart
charging stations for electronic vehicles. Smart en-
ergy is expected to enhance efficiency and reliability
of power systems with renewable energy and achieve
intelligent distribution. The major demands for 5G
are on link reliability, security and privacy [24, 25].
• Smart Health: Health applications are becoming
popular among mobile users owing to the grow-
ing awareness of fitness and well-being. Together
with the advance of smart wearables, applications of
this category have covered mobile based condition
monitoring and diagnosis, environmental quality in-
spection. With more data collected from sensors
deployed on wearable devices, smart health will pos-
itively influence the medical and healthcare systems
[2]. Another emerging application in this domain
is the AR/VR enabled surgery, which will demand
low latency and high bandwidth, on top of the gen-
eral requirements of low power, security and data
privacy from 5G.

• Industrial Applications: Applications such as In-
dustry IoT 4.0 [26] represent the next generation
of cyber-physical services in terms of manufactur-
ing, machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, 3D
printing and AI supported construction. The impact
of those industrial applications will extend beyond
factories and plants, directly benefiting the entire
society. The major demands for 5G include critically

Figure 3: Application groups empowered by 5G

high reliability, ultra low latency, support of massive
deployment, security and privacy.

• Consumer Applications: The vast amount of con-
sumer applications (Apps) reflect the potential of 5G
mobile business and technology innovations. As we
are familiar with typical mobile applications running
on smartphones and tablets, the emerging applica-
tions include ultra HD (4K/8K) mobile streaming,
blockchain based financial technology (FinTech), per-
vasive gaming (like Pokemon GO 1), mobile AR/VR
mixed reality services supported by unmanned aerial
vehicles, and holographic technology such as HoloLens
2. All those advanced services are demanding 5G to
support extensive connectivity, high bandwidth, low
latency, low energy footprint, link reliability and
security.

3 REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS
To carry out a fine-grained analysis that reflects technical
interdependency, we break down the aforementioned appli-
cation domains (detailed Section 2) into four distinct types.
As shown in Figure 3, 5G driven applications are divided into
four categories: 1) domestic type with short communication

1https://www.pokemongo.com/en-us/
2https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens

4

range, 2) remote type with long range, 3) latency critical,
and 4) massive scale. Our goal is to quantitatively manifest
their requirements for facilitating future development and
deployment of 5G systems. We also note that although this
grouping includes a wide range of existing and emerging
applications, our discussions do not attempt to cover every
nuance.

3.1 General Requirements
For each type of applications, we highlight the general re-
quirements in Table 1, covering communication range, band-
width capacity, latency, link reliability, energy consumption,
security and privacy.

3.1.1 Domestic - short range. As shown in Figure 3, this
group of applications include consumer applications in the
context of smart homes and office buildings [22]. Owing to
their communication pattern, 5G needs to support low power
networking, which is crucial for wearable devices. Given
the exposed security issues at smart homes [32], there is a
strong demand to regulate unwanted traffic on the wireless
interfaces.

3.1.2 Remote - long range. Applications in smart farm-
ing and urban monitoring demand 5G support especially in
terms of communication coverage. Since devices deployed

Table 1: Vertical Application Requirements in 5G

Applications

Smart buildings
Smart devices
Smart farming
Urban monitoring
Autonomous driving
AR/VR services
Smart energy
Smart mobility

Communication
Range
short range
short range
long range
long range
long range
short range
median range
long range

Bandwidth
Capacity
10 - 1000 Mbps
10 - 1000 Mbps
1 - 100 Mbps
1 - 100 Mbps
10 - 5000 Mbps
100 - 5000 Mbps
10 - 1000 Mbps
10 - 1000 Mbps

Latency

Median
Median
Tolerant
Tolerant
Critical
Critical
Median
Median

Link
Reliability
Median
Median
Median
Median
High
Median
High
High

Energy

Security
Privacy
High
High
Median
Median
Critical
Median

Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Median High
Median Median

for farming and urban monitoring need to operate over long
time period, energy saving is another key requirement.

3.1.3

Latency critical. Industrial applications are typically
tied to safety in manufacturing and hence demanding high
level of security. For consumer domain such as autonomous
driving and AR/VR services, low latency (critical level) and
high bandwidth must be supported in 5G communication.
Due to the safety concern, autonomous driving also demands
high link reliability.

3.1.4 Massive scale. For scenarios of massive deployment
such as in smart grid and transportation systems, 5G needs to
elastically scale, to cater for increased traffic demand, number
of end devices, and applications, and with acceptable cost. In
particular to smart energy, high link reliability and security
are also required.

3.2 Requirements from Emerging Services
For emerging applications in both smart city and vertical in-
dustries, 5G architecture needs to consider the requirements
from several new angles. The first one rises from the swift of
traffic pattern from downlink driven to uplink driven. This
is mainly due to the introduction of high volume of data
generated from smart vehicles, drones, and industrial IoT
deployment. The traffic patterns might change and demand
from different vertical industries and can shift over time. Be-
ing able to adapt to the fluctuation will be a key requirement
for the 5G networks.

Secondly, due to the enforcement of General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) 3, data privacy is becoming an avid
issue. Data referring to an identifiable or identified person
falls under this regulation. Especially with more embedded
devices and autonomously flying drones/robots to collect
data for surveillance purposes, 5G needs to guarantee secu-
rity in communication and ensure privacy-by-design. The
latter refers to ensuring data protection by having a proper
architecture.

3https://www.eugdpr.org/

5

Besides technical requirements, 5G must take into account
the requirements from governmental and economical angles.
In this context, connectivity of 5G in the future will be re-
garded as one of the mandatory common-pool resources
(CPR) similar to water and electricity. This has strong impli-
cation on the regulation and management of 5G networks
in terms of interoperability across operators, cost of mainte-
nance, public-private sector ownership, wireless spectrum
bidding and allocation (especially above 3 Ghz). Being a pub-
lic resource, safety of large-scale operations will also become
a key requirement.

4 OPPORTUNITIES AND OPEN

CHALLENGES

4.1 Technology Opportunities
We identify four technology advancement that can benefit
5G, including blockchain inspired distributed ledger, light-
weight virtualization, software-defined Networking, and
edge computing.

Blockchain based Distributed Ledger

Besides upholding user privacy on the Internet, GDPR
is also accelerating the development of distributed ledger
technologies (i.e., blockchain based protocol design). Specifi-
cally, we are witnessing a strong demand nowadays to unify
the data management across end users, companies and gov-
ernment. This includes providing the appropriate means to
receive, track, and fulfill user requests, and to update the
data as requested.

Given the high risk for enterprise in the face of steep fines,
Blockchain Technology (BCT) which can store a secure his-
torical record of transactions in a tamper-proof format will
play a more visible role for many data driven applications in
5G. In this context, BCT stores information at different nodes.
The past information cannot be removed and information
can only be added when the nodes possess it [27]. BCT was

Figure 4: Edge-enabled Platform for 5G

introduced for Bitcoin and is based on Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT), in which each participant has access to
a shared ledger which is stored in many nodes [28]. All
transactions are stored in a ledger and all nodes have a copy
of this. In turn, blocks are time stamped batches of valid
transactions in which each block includes the hash of the
prior block. Creating new blocks is known as mining [29].
By linking the blocks a chain is formed which has resulted
in the use of the name ‘blockchain’. Blockchain uses can be
found in many sectors [30]. Especially for 5G empowered
IoT and mobile financial services, we will see a merge be-
tween IoT security solutions [31–35] and novel blockchain
and cryptocurrency designs to achieve better accountability
and privacy in 5G.

Virtualization and Software-Defined Networking

Network Function Virtualization (NFV) is a solid technol-
ogy to organize network related computation in 5G. By its
design, NFV utilizes virtualization technologies to decou-
ple physical network equipment from the functions running
on them [6]. This way, various virtual network functions
can be implemented and deployed on one or more physical

servers. In particular, the new lightweight virtualization tech-
nologies such as Docker and Unikernels [13] will facilitate
5G to support new services of IoT domain which demands
multi-tenancy, low cost, efficient resource utilization, and
low power consumption.

Meanwhile, for managing 5G network traffic, Software-
Defined Networking (SDN) is another powerful tool which
has been successfully applied to data centers and commercial
networks. In its essence, SDN decouples the data and control
plane so that all the control functions can be implemented in
a centralized network controller. Its design transfers the con-
trol functionality to software based entities, which eliminates
the use of vendor specific back-box hardware and promotes
the use commodity switches in data plane over proprietary
appliances [36]. On top of its security benefits [7], SDN can
better support multi-tenancy for large scale deployment of
5G services, such as in smart city and industrial operations,
e.g., by using frameworks such as SoftOffload [9, 10, 37].

Mobile Edge Computing

The convergence of mobile Internet and wireless systems
in 5G can trigger an explosive growth in resource-hungry
and computation-intensive applications, which cover a broad

6

paradigms of IoT. These IoT systems include real-time video
/ audio surveillance, smart e-health, smart transportation,
and Internet of Vehicles (IoV). Mobile edge computing, by
complementing various cloud resources and bringing com-
putation closer to smart devices/objects, has been envisioned
as an enabling and highly promising technology to reap the
potential of IoT in 5G.

Recently, multi-access mobile edge computing (MA-MEC),
which actively exploits a systematic and adaptive integration
of wireless access technologies in 5G, will further enhance
the access capacity between smart devices and mobile edge
platforms. The design of MA-MEC is in line with the evolu-
tion towards ultra-dense deployment of small-cells (micro
/ pico / femto cells) in future 5G. In specific, the densely
deployed 5G small cells can enhance the capacity and qual-
ity of the connections. As an example, the emerging dual-
connectivity in 5G networks can enable smart objects to
communicate with conventional macro-cells and offload data
traffic to small cells simultaneously [38–42]. This enhances
the access capacity of mobile edge cloud at small cells. In
addition, the existing computational offloading techniques
[43–45], including edge offloading [14], will further com-
plement the needs for speeding up computation and low
communication latency.

Edge-enabled 5G Service Framework

To exemplify how to combine new technologies into 5G,
we propose an edge-enabled platform for 5G to consolidate
data management in large scale cyber-physical system de-
ployment. As shown in Figure 4, through this platform, the
5G edge layer is expected to bring a variety of benefits, such
as i) ultra-low latency between smart devices and edge cloud
for real-time, interactive, and mission-critical applications,
e.g., industrial operations; ii) privacy and security in local
communications; and iii) fast data processing at the point
of capture for IoT applications. For instance, the proposed
platform will provide robust and ultra-low latency connec-
tions for smart vehicles to efficiently access the edge layer
deployed on road-side units for real-time information pro-
cessing. To build the edge layer, we can utilize the SDN
framework [37], IoT management tool [46, 47], and Kafka
framework. 4

4.2 Open Challenges
A combination of promising technologies like NFV and edge
computing is needed to meet the demands of new applica-
tions. Nevertheless, the success of 5G still requires tackling
many other challenges.

Technical Challenges

For 5G network operation, security is a major concern. The
role of encryption, especially the operator driven pervasive
encryption [48], has raised lots of discussions across service
providers (e.g., Google, Amazon), ISPs e.g., KPN, T-Mobile,
equipment vendors (e.g., Nokia, Ericsson) and standardiza-
tion units such as IETF 5 and ETSI 6.

In the context of cellular systems, the conventional net-
work management, security operations, and performance
optimization have been conducted over a large majority of
data traffic flows without encryption. While unencrypted
traffic could facilitate troubleshooting and management op-
erations at all network layers, it has also made pervasive
monitoring by unseen parties possible. With support from
service providers (e.g., Google) and increased awareness of
privacy on the Internet [49], more and more traffic are en-
crypted in an end-to-end manner. This trend has created a
challenge for 5G since existing management, operational,
and security practices have depended on the availability of
clear text to function. For 5G operators, it is important to
investigate if critical operational practices can be met by less
invasive means.

Besides conventional traffic balancing between real-time
and typical web traffic [50], 5G needs also to prioritize traffic
types with fine granularity. In some vertical applications
the quick response is needed to avoid failure, whereas other
applications response-time is less an issue. However, this
traffic differentiation is correlated with the net neutrality
debate whether the freedom and fairness of Internet will be
affected.

To efficiently exploit computation and storage resources at
mobile edge nodes, a joint optimization of placement of com-
putation/storage resource and cell-association with radio re-
source allocation are required. Such joint optimization must
be self-adaptive and with minimum manual efforts. The adap-
tation needs to take into account time-varying environments,
such as the varying wireless channel states when users move
across the cells and computation/storage resource utiliza-
tions.

Challenges from Regulation and Governance

As connectivity becomes a common-pool resource (CPR),
there is a need for governance to manage fair usage, ensure
sufficient bandwidth and scalability, enforce interoperabil-
ity and give priority to certain vertical applications. For
this change, regulations might interfere with the role of 5G
providers in the future. Latency critical application like con-
nected vehicle might be given priority to avoid car collisions

4https://kafka.apache.org/

5https://www.ietf.org/
6https://www.etsi.org/

7

Table 2: Comparison of 5G Pilot Initiatives

Pilots
Envisioned 5G Pilot

Experiment Scale
City Scale

Technology
5G driven

Operation Model
Public-Industry hybrid

Singtel 5G

Toronto Waterfront

Regional (Buona
Vista area,
Singapore)
Regional (Port area
in Toronto)

5G driven

Company driven - Ericsson
(vendor)

Fixed network

Company - Google (cloud
service provider), and
partially public sector

Infrastructure
oriented

Focus
Consumer and
public services
Network services

over other applications. Also the distributed nature might
demand redundant coverage of areas to avoid problems in
case of mall-function. Back-up and recovery plans might be
required by regulations.

Without regulation, it is challenging to ensure proper
functioning when some of the components are restricted or
fail (e.g., due to market failure). For instance, the spectrum
allocation is open to discussion as some spectra are already
occupied by Department of Defense applications in certain
countries. Failures can be disastrous for critical vertical ap-
plications areas. Edge computing architectures might be
needed to be able to operate independently of the network
to avoid failure of the larger system. Also security should
be enforced in such a way that the whole system cannot be
breached by a hack. Another aspect will be interoperability
between different providers and platforms. roaming between
providers should be possible to ensure proper functioning of
the vertical applications which are likely to be operated by
multiple 5G providers.

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) repre-
sents the largest change to European Union (EU) data protec-
tion laws in decades. For 5G applications, one major criteria
is on the private data collected from both end users and phys-
ical infrastructure. Privacy-by-design should be guaranteed
when using the 5G applications. In addition for better inte-
gration of 5G, we also need to draw lessons from studies on
standardization [51], ambidexterity [52], and applying open
data to smart cities [53].

5 INITIATIVE AND OUTLOOK
A main challenge for 5G will be to create a network archi-
tecture that adapts to fluctuating traffic patterns, consists
of promising technologies like edge computing, software
defined networking, virtualization, and combines wired and
wireless elements to deal with the requirements of various
vertical industries. The vertical industries yield various re-
quirements on 5G and the actual usage might fluctuate. This
requires that the architecture is dynamic, able to prioritize

traffic, and can ensure that edge computing power (as envi-
sioned in Figure 4) is available for fast and efficient process-
ing and response.

Reflecting on our main pursuit of this paper, ”How do
we consolidate 5G driven applications across multiple
vertical industries to unveil the full potential of 5G?”
we believe that this answer is non-trival and the answer
shall be sought from developing a comprehensive piloting
testbed integrating the various technologies and in which
vertical industries are involved.

This envisioned network testbed pilot needs to integrate
various technologies and be compliant to regulation and gov-
ernance. To shed light on the 5G pilot, which will combine
the efforts with Delft Green Village 7, we compare it against
the Singtel 5G initiative 8 and Toronto Waterfront 9. We sum-
marize our observations in Table 2 in terms of experiment
scale, driven technology, operation model, and project focus.
Given the challenges we outlined, this pilot project must
bridge the gap between research community, industrial stake-
holders, and governmental institutes. In particular from tech-
nical perspectives, the envisioned 5G pilot should allow us
to: 1) experiment novel radio access technologies and their
feasibility for different 5G applications; 2) incubate novel
applications by creating a trail infrastructure before entering
mass market; 3) expose unforeseen limitations of network
configurations; and 4) illustrate how to minimize unneces-
sary replacement costs through a feasible migration path,
which can lead to significant deployment scale.

We must note that although our work provides an exten-
sive sampling of existing and emerging vertical applications,
this study does not attempt to cover every nuance. Further
piloting can reveal new challenges and be used to understand
the nature of the challenges. Besides that, the requirement
analysis and technologies discussed can be applied to a broad
spectrum of scenarios on top of 5G context. In addition to

7https://www.thegreenvillage.org/
8https://www.singtel.com/about-Us/news-releases/journey-to-5g-singtel-
and-ericson-to-launch-singapores-first-5g-pilot-network
9https://sidewalktoronto.ca/

8

open challenges, our work highlights the opportunities for
5G-enabled applications from both technical and governance
perspectives, which can shed light on future development
for researchers, engineers and policy makers from academia,
industry and government.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Martin Kienzle (IBM), Inge van de Water (Gemeente
Delft), and Dennis Meerburg (TU Delft) for their contributory
feedback.

REFERENCES
[1] Wang et al. 2014. Cellular Architecture and Key Technologies for 5G
Wireless Communication Networks. IEEE Communications Magazine
52, 2 (2014), 122-130.

[2] Akpakwu et al. 2018. A Survey on 5G Networks for the Internet of
Things: Communication Technologies and Challenges. IEEE Access 6
(2018), 3619-3647.

[3] https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of-
connected-devices-worldwide/ (visited on 07/31/2018)

[4] NGMN Alliance. NGMN 5G White Paper. 2015.
[5] https://spark.apache.org/ (visited on 07/31/2018)
[6] Han et al. 2015. Network function virtualization: Challenges and
opportunities for innovations. IEEE Communications Magazine 53, 2
(2015), 90-97.

[7] Aaron Yi Ding, Jon Crowcroft, Sasu Tarkoma, and Hannu Flinck. 2014.
Software Defined Networking for Security Enhancement in Wireless
Mobile Networks. Computer Networks 66 (2014), 94-101.

[8] Costa-Requena et al. 2014. Software defined 5G mobile backhaul. In
Proceedings of 1st International Conference on 5G for Ubiquitous Con-
nectivity (5GU ’14). IEEE, 258-263.

[9] Aaron Yi Ding, Yanhe Liu, Sasu Tarkoma, Hannu Flinck, Jon Crowcroft.
2015. Demo: An Open-source Software Defined Platform for Collabo-
rative and Energy-aware WiFi Offloading. In Proceedings of the 21st
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MobiCom ’15). ACM Press, New York, NY, 182-184.

[10] Aaron Yi Ding, Yanhe Liu, Sasu Tarkoma, Hannu Flinck, Henning
Schulzrinne, and Jon Crowcroft. 2015. Vision: Augmenting WiFi Of-
floading with An Open-source Collaborative Platform. In Proceedings
of the 6th International Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing and
Services (MCS ’15). ACM Press, New York, NY, 44-48.

[11] Yi Ding. 2015. Collaborative Traffic Offloading for Mobile Systems. Ph.D.

Dissertation. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

[12] Flores et al. 2017. Large-scale Offloading in the Internet of Things. In
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing
and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops). IEEE, 479-484.
[13] Morabito et al. 2018. Consolidate IoT Edge Computing with Light-

weight Virtualization. IEEE Network 32, 1 (2018), 102-111.

[14] Cozzolino et al. 2017. FADES: Fine-Grained Edge Offloading with
Unikernels. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Hot Topics in Container
Networking and Networked Systems (HotConNet ’17). ACM Press, New
York, NY, 36-41.

[15] Cozzolino et al. 2018. Empowering Cyber-Physical Systems with
FADEX. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys ’18). ACM Press,
New York, NY, 537-537.

[16] Pu et al. 2015. Low Latency Geo-distributed Data Analytics. In ACM

SIGCOMM ’15.

[17] https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/publications/files/wup2014-highlights.

Pdf (visited on 07/31/2018)

9

[18] Zanella et al. 2014. Internet of Things for Smart Cities. IEEE Internet of

Things Journal 1, 1 (2014), 22-32.

[19] Fettweis et al. 2014. The Tactile Internet: Applications and Challenges.

IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine 9, 1 (2014), 64-70.

[20] Simsek et al. 2016. 5G-Enabled Tactile Internet. IEEE Journal on Selected

Areas in Communications 34, 3 (2016), 460-473.

[21] Shishkov et al. 2018. Three Categories of Context-Aware Systems.
In Proceedings of International Symposium on Business Modeling and
Software Design.

[22] L. G. Anthopoulos. 2015. Understanding the smart city domain: A
literature review. In Transforming City Governments for Successful
Smart Cities. Springer, 9-21.

[23] Benevolo et al. 2016. Smart Mobility in Smart City. In Empowering

Organizations. 13-28.

[24] Fang et al. 2016. Smart Grid - The New and Improved Power Grid:
A Survey. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials 14, 4 (2012),
944-980.

[25] Wang et al. 2013. Cyber security in the Smart Grid: Survey and chal-

lenges. Computer Networks 57, 5 (2013), 1344-1371.

[26] Wang et al. 2016. Towards smart factory for industry 4.0: a self-
organized multi-agent system with big data based feedback and coor-
dination. Computer Networks 101, 4 (2016), 158-168.

[27] Ølnes et al. 2017. Blockchain in government: Benefits and implications
of distributed ledger technology for information sharing. Government
Information Quarterly 34, 3 (2017), 355-364.

[28] S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. https:

//bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (visited on 09/03/2018)

[29] Narayanan et al. 2016. Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies: A

Comprehensive Introduction. Princeton University Press.

[30] Tapscott et al. 2016. The Impact of Blockchain Goes Beyond Finan-
cial Services. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2016/05/the-
impact-of-the-blockchain-goes-beyond-financial-services (visited on
09/03/2018)

[31] Hafeez et al. 2015. Demo: Cloud-based Security As a Service for Smart
IoT Environments. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Wireless of
the Students, by the Students, and for the Students (S3 ’15). ACM Press,
New York, NY, 20-20.

[32] Hafeez et al. 2016. Securebox: Toward Safer and Smarter IoT Networks.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Cloud-Assisted Networking
(CAN ’16). ACM Press, New York, NY, 55-60.

[33] Hafeez et al. 2017. IOTURVA: Securing Device-to-Device (D2D) Com-
munication in IoT Networks. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on
Challenged Networks (CHANTS ’17). ACM Press, New York, NY, 1-6.

[34] Hafeez et al. 2017. Toward Secure Edge Networks: Taming Device-to-

Device (D2D) Communication in IoT. arXiv: 1712.05958.

[35] Hafeez et al. 2018. Real-time IoT Device Activity Detection in Edge
Networks. In Proceedings of 12th International Conference on Network
and System Security. Springer.

[36] Kreutz et al. 2015. Software-Defined Networking: A Comprehensive
Survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 103, 1 (2015), 14-76.
[37] https://www.cs.helsinki.fi/group/eit-sdn/softoffload.html (visited on

07/31/2018)

[38] Ding et al. 2011. NAO: a framework to enable efficient mobile offload-
ing. In Proceedings of the ACM Middleware Workshop on Posters and
Demos (PDT ’11). ACM Press, New York, NY, Article No. 8.

[39] Korhonen et al. 2012. Controlling Traffic Offloading Using Neighbor

Discovery Protocol. IETF Internet Draft.

[40] Ding et al. 2012. Enabling energy-aware mobile data offloading for
smartphones through vertical collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM conference on CoNEXT student workshop. ACM Press, New York,
NY, 27-28.

[41] Korhonen et al. 2013. Toward Network Controlled IP Traffic Offloading.

IEEE Communications Magazine 51, 3 (2013), 96-102.

[42] Ding et al. 2013. Enabling Energy-Aware Collaborative Mobile Data
Offloading for Smartphones. In Proceedings of IEEE International Con-
ference on Sensing, Communications and Networking (SECON ’13). IEEE,
487-495.

[43] Cuervo et al. 2010. MAUI: making smartphones last longer with code

offload. In Proceedings of ACM MobiSys ’10.

[44] Chun et al. 2011. CloneCloud: elastic execution between mobile device

and cloud. In Proceedings of ACM EuroSys ’11.

[45] Kosta et al. 2012. ThinkAir: Dynamic resource allocation and parallel
execution in the cloud for mobile code offloading. In Proceedings of
IEEE INFOCOM ’12.

[46] Haus et al. 2017. Managing IoT at the Edge: The Case for BLE Beacons.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Experiences with the Design and
Implementation of Smart Objects (SMARTOBJECTS ’17). ACM Press,
New York, NY, 41-46.

[47] Haus et al. 2017. Demo: iConfig: What I See Is What I Configure. In
Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Challenged Networks (CHANTS
’17). ACM Press, New York, NY, 29-31.

[48] Moriarty et al. Effects of Pervasive Encryption on Operators. RFC 8404

2018.

[49] Haus et al. 2017. Security and Privacy in Device-to-Device (D2D)
Communication: A Review. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
19, 2 (2017), 1054-1079.

[50] J¨arvinen et al. 2013. Effect of Competing TCP Traffic on Interactive
Real-time Communication. In Proceedings of 14th International Confer-
ence on Passive and Active Measurement (PAM ’13). Springer.

[51] Ding et al. 2014. Bridging the Gap Between Internet Standardization
and Networking Research. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review 44, 1 (2014), 56-62.

[52] Matheus et al. 2017. How to Become a Smart City?: Balancing Am-
bidexterity in Smart Cities. In Proceedings of 10th International Confer-
ence on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance.

[53] Janssen et al. 2015. Big and Open Linked Data BOLD to Create Smart
Cities and Citizens: Insights from Smart Energy and Mobility Cases.
In Proceedings of 14th IFIP International Conference on Electronic Gov-
ernment.

10

