1 

Security, Privacy and Safety Risk Assessment for 
Virtual Reality Learning Environment Applications 

Aniket Gulhanea, Akhil Vyasb, Reshmi Mitraa, Roland Oruchea, Gabriela Hoeferc, 
Samaikya Valluripallya, Prasad Calyama, Khaza Anuarul Hoquea
University of Missouri-Columbiaa, Missouri University of Science and Technologyb, Samford Universityc, 
{arggm8,  rro2q2,  svbqb}@mail.missouri.edu,  avgm3@mst.edu,  ghoefer@samford.edu,  {mitrare,  calyamp,  hoquek}@missouri.edu 

Abstract—Social Virtual Reality based Learning Environments 
(VRLEs) such as vSocial render instructional content in a three- 
dimensional  immersive  computer  experience  for  training  youth 
with  learning  impediments.  There  are  limited  prior  works  that 
explored attack vulnerability in VR technology, and hence there is 
a need for systematic frameworks to quantify risks corresponding 
to  security,  privacy,  and  safety  (SPS)  threats.  The  SPS  threats 
can adversely impact the educational user experience and hinder 
delivery of VRLE content. In this paper, we propose a novel risk 
assessment  framework  that  utilizes  attack  trees  to    calculate  a 
risk  score  for  varied  VRLE  threats  with  rate  and  duration  of 
threats  as  inputs.  We  compare  the  impact  of  a  well-constructed 
attack  tree  with  an  adhoc  attack  tree  to  study  the  trade-offs 
between overheads in managing attack trees, and the cost of risk 
mitigation  when  vulnerabilities  are  identified.  We  use  a  vSocial 
VRLE testbed in a case study to showcase the effectiveness of our 
framework and demonstrate how a suitable attack tree formalism 
can result in a more safer, privacy-preserving and secure VRLE 
system. 

Index Terms—Social Virtual Reality, Security Risk Assessment, 

Attack  Tree,  Privacy  Control,  IoT  Application  Testbed 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Ensuring  human  safety  along  with  relevant  security  and 
privacy  mechanisms  are  major  challenges  in  emerging  Vir- 
tual  Reality  based  Learning  Environments  (VRLEs)  such  as 
vSocial  [1]  for  youth  with  learning  disabilities.  In  order  to 
assess  student  engagement  levels,  VRLEs  use  emotion  track- 
ing  sensors  whose  data  along  with  student  learning  progress 
are  stored  in  a  cloud  platform.  In  spite  of  their  promising 
potential  as  immersive  instructional  platforms,  the  real-time 
delivery of learning material poses security and privacy threats. 
This is a multi-modal system as shown in Fig. 1, which is built 
upon rendering 3-dimensional visualizations based on dynamic 
human  computer  interactions.  All  these  components  increase 
the  attack  surface area and  negligence  to address  threats  may 
result  in  negative  impacts  such  as  alteration  of  instructional 
content,  compromise  of  learning  outcomes  or  granting  users 
unnecessary “false strike” penalties. This in turn may result in 
poor  student engagement  in ongoing  classroom  sessions. 

Studies such as [2] highlight the importance of security and 
privacy issues in VR devices. However, there are few efforts in 

This  material  is  based  upon  work  supported  by  the  National  Science 
Foundation  under  Award  Numbers:  CNS-1647213  and  CNS-1659134.  Any 
opinions,  findings,  and  conclusions  or  recommendations  expressed  in  this 
publication  are  those  of  the  authors  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views   
of the National Science  Foundation. 

Fig. 1: vSocial system showing the cloud server used for 
real-time student learning session management. 

evaluating the threat scenarios in such dynamic, complex and 
large-scale collaborative systems, thereby hindering the design 
of  secured and usable  VRLEs. To the best  of  our  knowledge, 
our  work  is  one  of  the  first  systematic  studies  to evaluate  the 
security and privacy concerns along with the quality of human 
experience in  VRLEs. The  focus  of  our  work  is  to categorize 
threats  based  on  three  orthogonal  aspects  in  VR applications: 
security,  privacy  and  safety  (SPS).  We  define  security as  the 
robustness  of  the  VR  system  against  various  attacks,  privacy 
as the protection and secrecy over data sensitivity, and safety 
as  the  disruption  in  the  system  that  compromises  the  user’s 
overall  well-being. 

In  this  paper,  we  address  above  issues  by    proposing    a 
“risk assessment framework” utilizing attack trees to formalize 
and  evaluate  internal  and  external  vulnerabilities,  and  prior- 
itize  threats  based  on  impact.  Attack  trees  have  been  used 
extensively  in  threat  modeling,  and  for  understanding  intru- 
sion/attack  scenarios  by  their  quantitative  analysis.  We  apply 
the  concept  of attack  trees  to  VRLEs to  study  how  particular 
events  can  functionally  harm  specific  SPS  factors  using  a 
hierarchical  visual  representation  of  potential  vulnerabilities 
and  threats. With  the  outputs   of  attack  trees,   we  quantify 
the  risk  score  for  each  SPS  factor  using  frequency  rates  and 
duration of threats as  parameters. 

We  use  the  vSocial  [1]  system,  a  VRLE  for  youth  with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), as a case study to demon- 
strate the effectiveness of our framework. We introduce three 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

sample  attack  scenarios  that  cover  various  SPS  aspects  such  
as  malicious  network  discrepancies,  packet  loss,  and  packet 
sniffing to measure the impact of SPS threats on VRLE appli- 
cations. We use the measures from these simulations as inputs 
for attack tree nodes to demonstrate the difference in efficiency 
of  a  complete/well-constructed  and  incomplete/adhoc  attack 
tree. Corresponding risk score analyses provide insights about 
system component  vulnerabilities,  which  influence  the  VRLE 
policy management for threat  mitigation. 

performance visualization. Even intermittent network discrep- 
ancy  attacks  can cause  disruptions  during  sessions  leading to 
cybersickness  and  unnecessary  “false  strikes.”  Estimating the 
impact of these threats is complex and challenging in dynamic 
VRLEs  because  of  the  multi-modal  distributed  system  and 
high  volume  of  real-time  data.  Our  work  proposes  a  novel 
approach  in  addressing  and  evaluating  the  SPS  threats  with    
a  novel  risk  assessment  framework  in  context  of  exemplar 
VRLEs  such as  vSocial  in  a case  study. 

The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as 

follows: 
(1)  Risk  assessment  with  a  comprehensive  threat  model  for 
VRLEs  that  includes  threats  to  system  robustness,  user  infor- 
mation and well-being. 
(2) SPS attack trees to highlight the inter-relationship of threats 
and the corresponding system component(s), which ultimately 
affects the risk score. 
(3)  Trade-off  analysis  between  attack  tree  qualities  to  obtain 
insights for component vulnerability  to inform VRLE  design. 
The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Sec- 
tion  II  discusses  related  works  on  VRLE,  as  well  as  threats 
to security, privacy and safety in Internet-of-Things (IoT) 
devices. Section III formally states the SPS problem  using 
threat formalization and risk assessment. Section IV  presents 
performance  evaluation  results  of  our  risk  assessment  frame- 
work. Section V concludes the paper. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

A.  Virtual Reality Learning Environments 

Prior works on VRLEs have been developed for immersive 
and  special  education  purposes.  In  vSocial  [1],  a  Social 
Competence Intervention (SCI) curriculum [3] is delivered via 
a system that consists of various modules such as: VR render- 
ing,  web applications and classroom  portal  with  instructional 
content  hosted  as  web  pages.  The  vSocial  server  provides 
functionalities  such  as  access  control  for  users,  session  man- 
agement, network performance tracking, session progress, and 
user management, making it a critical target in the system. 

A  recent  study  [4]  on  security  and  privacy  challenges  in 
Augmented  Reality  (AR) and  VR  discusses  the  threat  surface 
area  for  educational  initiatives  without  characterizing  the  at- 
tack  impact,  however,  there  are  very  few  scholarly  works  on 
the interplay of SPS factors from a usability perspective (i.e., 
learning  experience in  our  use  case).  In  VRLE,  the instructor 
plays  a  critical  role  by  changing  the  pace  of  curriculum 
delivery  and educational  VR content in the  virtual classroom 
based  on  continuous  student  evaluation  (e.g.,  tokens,  passes  
or strikes). The VRLE administrator also occupies an elevated 
position as he or she controls the user data of several sessions. 
Thus,  any  disruption  due  to  masquerading  or  spoofing  by 
attacker with malicious intents [5] on the instructor’s VR con- 
tent  or  administrator  privileges  will  compromise  the  learning 
activities  in  such  a  collaborative  (virtual)  space. 

The geographically distributed students setup also makes the 
system  susceptible  to  Distributed  Denial  of  Service  (DDoS) 
attacks as it compromises with the availability of the learning 
environment, impacts real-time data collection and student 

B.  Security, Privacy and Safety 

We  present  a  summary  of  SPS  issues  in  emerging  tech- 
nologies  such  as  IoT  as  discussed  in  [6],  which  in  particular, 
comprises  of  an  exhaustive  compilation  of  potential  security 
and  privacy  threats  and  challenges.  Another  comprehensive 
study  about  this  topic  is  presented  in  [7].  A  typical  VRLE 
application  is  susceptible  to  similar vulnerabilities  along  with 
human well-being, which has not been previously addressed in 
existing works. It is important to note that we are not exploring 
the  trustworthiness,  but  rather  focusing  on  the  effect  of  VR 
usability  due to  potential  security and  privacy attacks. 

Authors  in  [8]  discuss  challenges  in  security  and  privacy   
for  Augmented  Reality  (AR)  applications  and  explore  oppor- 
tunities  for  securing  AR  systems  without  much  discussion 
about  the  safety  aspects.  Although  threats  in  AR  and  other 
IoT  systems  are also  relevant  in  VR applications,  VR  threats 
differ from AR threats because of the complete user immersion 
in  a  virtual  world.  Multiple  attacker  models  in  [9] for  threats  
in  security  and  privacy  for  distributed  IoT  systems  focus  on 
threats  such  as  DoS,  physical  damage,  eavesdropping,  etc. 
They suggest countermeasures but without evaluation studies. 
A survey in [10] classifies the security and privacy attacks in 
IoT  systems,  and  discusses  security  issues  in  different  layers 
i.e.,  in application, network, transport and  perception. 

Previous  research  has  examined  privacy  issues  in  AR,  fog 
and  mobile  computing.  The  AR  browser  in  [11]  examines  in 
depth  about  the  vulnerabilities  and  requirements  for  mobile 
devices  without  any  significant  evaluation  of  proposed  ap- 
proaches. Works about privacy attacks for fog computing [12] 
discuss  issues  such  as  trust  and  authentication,  data  storage, 
location  and  usage  privacy.  A  thorough  survey  on  mobile 
computing privacy threats [13] highlights the trade-off between 
functionality  and  privacy.  Some  major  threats  which  are  also 
applicable to our VRLE include: lack of transparency, tracking, 
leaks  from  (mobile)  sensor, among  others. 

A  seminal  work  on  safety  issues    for    virtual    environ-  
ments  [14]  established  that  human  performance  efficiency  is 
affected  by task and  user  characteristics. Existing  works  such 
as  [15], compared  a virtual  environment  in a  display  monitor 
with Head-Mounted Display (HMD) to establish its correlation 
with  cybersickness.  Most  recently,  works  such  as  [16]  high- 
light  the  problems  about  overexposure  and  cybersickness  in 
VRLEs for training youth with ASD. Considering the existing 
SPS  research  in  such  VRLE  applications,  our  work  not  only 
considers  security  and  privacy,  but  also  safety  threats  in  a 
single comprehensive risk assessment  framework. 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

C.  Risk Assessment Approaches 

Risk  assessment  is  performed  by  analyzing  threat  param- 
eters  (influence  on  asset,  recovery  cost,  probability  of  oc- 
currence)  to  determine  its  risk  priority.  This  can  help  in 
mitigating  the  risks  and  the  design  of  defense  mechanisms. 
Earlier  works  on  attacks  in  cyber-physical  systems  in  [17] 
perform  a  risk  assessment  for  supervisory  control  and  data 
acquisition (SCADA) and distributed control systems (DCSs) 
by quantitatively determining probability and impact of attack. 
This helps them perform risk reduction by designing targeted 
countermeasures.  Attack  tree  is  a  hierarchical  model  about 
threats and respective attack scenarios. Risk assessment using 
well-constructed  attack  trees  can  prove  to  be  a  cost-effective 
approach in designing a protected system. 

Authors in [18] explain the theory and importance of attack 
trees. In a practical use case of online banking [19], the authors 
show  how  to  use  attack  (and  protection)  trees  to  explain 
vulnerabilities, and develop a protection mechanism for system 
security. A work on smart cars using attack tree analysis [20] 
proposes a risk assessment framework to efficiently formulate 
the security measures. For analyzing security threats in ATMs 
[21],  the  authors  construct  attack-defense  trees.  Our  work 
builds upon their formalization of attack trees in the context of 
SPS factors in a collaborative VRLE with realistic application 
test scenarios and VR  content. 

III.  THREAT FORMALIZATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT 

To  facilitate  collaboration  among  students  distributed  over 
multiple  locations,  social  VRLE  applications  such    as    vSo- 
cial  [1]  demand  continuous  and  secured  interoperability  with 
entities  (e.g.,  network-connected  edge  cloud)  that  requires 
large-scale  capture,  processing,  and  visualization  of  sensor 
data  streams.  These  inherent  challenges  demand  novel  tech- 
niques  for  threat  modeling  of  SPS  factors  in  such  complex 
multi-modal systems. In our proposed work, we provide threat 
formalization and risk assessment of the virtual reality learning 
environments  using  vSocial  as  a  case  study.  We consider  the 
potential threats pertaining to the vSocial server as the critical 
attack  target,  along  with the  respective  SPS  factors  as  shown 
in Fig. 2. We use these threat-to-system component mappings 
to  design  our  attack  trees,  which  ultimately  quantify  the  risk 
score  for each  of  the  VRLE application  system  modules. 

A.  Threat Model 

A  threat  model  is  defined  as  a  framework  which  details 
internal  and  external  vulnerabilities,  as  well    as    objectives  
and  countermeasures  [22].  Threat  models  are  utilized  across 
various  disciplines  such  as  cloud  computing  [23],  health 
records [24], and storage [25]. Threat model for a multi-modal 
system  such  as  VRLE  can  provide  a  systematic  analysis  of 
possible  threats  and  help  identify  any  module  that  is  highly 
vulnerable to attacks. 

Rather  than  exploring  threats  in  the  entire  vSocial  system, 
we  consider  the  vSocial  server  as  a  critical  target  (i.e.,  the 
trusted  computing  base)  as  it  executes  several  functionalities 
such  as:  rendering  controls,  visualization,  web  applications, 
storage,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  session  permissions  refer to 
users’ ability to access session resources. The storage deals 

with transit data, which is any data collected in real-time such 
as  emotion  data  or  network  performance  measurements,  and 
static data, which refers to user data and progress reports. The 
visualization functionality allows for display of real-time data 
so  that  the  instructor  or  administrator  can  view  it  on  a  web 
portal.  The  rendering  controls  enable  the  instructor  to  invite 
students  (other users) to  join the  VR class.  A compromise in 
the security of these modules can leak confidential information 
or could compromise the integrity of the entire VRLE system. 
In  the  following  paragraphs,  various  SPS  attacks  on  server 
components are summarized: 

1)  Security: All VRLE systems are open to security attacks 
that  can  compromise  integrity  and  performance.  Session  fail- 
ure results from malicious activities carried out by attacker to 
crash VR sessions such as Denial of Service (DoS) attacks [9]. 
Threats such as Elevation of Privilege (EOP) provide attackers 
elevated access to sessions  and  activities  that  enable  them 
to  modify  system  contents  or  add  malicious  files.  A  typical  
VRLE  system  collects  large amounts  of  sensitive  data,  which 
are  susceptible  to  manipulation  through  data  tampering  per- 
formed via unauthorized channels. Furthermore, data integrity 
can be compromised by insertion of malicious code to modify 
session entities or data, or even change system configuration or 
access policies.  Also,  network attacks,  such as  DoS  or  DDoS 
result  in  system  crashes  and  data  unavailability.  Moreover, 
impersonation  attacks  can  occur  when  impostors  login  with 
stolen credentials,  and  access  sensitive user information. 

2)  Privacy: Threats to privacy impact VRLE data confiden- 
tiality. Attacks such as eavesdropping allow an attacker to ac- 
cess confidential information via packet sniffing. Also through 
shoulder surfing, attacker can gain access to user authorization 
information through  screen  or hand  movement observation in 
VR  sessions.  Furthermore,  data  security  breaches  including 
tampering  with  static  and  transit  data  allows  the  attacker  to 
gain  access  to  user  credentials  and  real-time  data.  Informed 
consent is also a  concern if  users are  not  notified about  what 
data  is  being  collected  from  them.  Improper  disposal  of  data 
can  also  compromise  privacy  due  to  deleted  information  still 
residing in the server, putting the users confidentiality at risk. 
3)  Safety:  We  consider  safety  threats  to  be  factors  that 
directly impact user well-being. For instance, session takeover 
allows an attacker to control the VR rendering, impacting user 
activity in a  VR  session.  Moreover,  any  network  discrepancy 
initiated by  an attacker can  cause  sudden  changes  in  VR  ren- 
dering  leading  to  user  disorientation.  Unintentional  activities 
can also cause safety issues. For example, computer bugs can 
cause glitches within the  VR  rendering  software,  resulting 
in  sudden  differences  in  visuals  inside  the  headset.  Extended 
sessions  can  cause  cybersickness  [15]  due  to  an  individual 
being  forced  to  stay  in  a  VR  session  for  an  extended  period   
of time. 

B.  Risk Assessment 

We  designed  a  risk  assessment  framework  to  examine 
consequences  of  undesirable  events,  predict  the  likelihood of 
an attack and prioritize the threats accordingly. In subsequent 
paragraphs we formalize our risk assessment framework using 
attack tree formalisms for threat scenarios described above. 

 
 
4 

Fig. 2: Threat model representing formalization and classification of Security, Privacy and Safety threats originating in the 
vSocial VRLE server hosting the virtual reality content. 

shows  its  flexibility  by  considering  several  input  parameters 
such  as:  rates,  weights,  and  counter  measure  nodes  at  every 
level  of  the  tree.  For  our  proposed  risk,  we  utilize  frequency 
rate  and  duration  of  attacks.  Frequency  rates  refer  to  the 
number  of  times  an  attack  occurs  in  a  specific  time  period,  
and  the  duration  is  the  timespan  of  the  attack  on  the  VRLE 
system.  Other  functionalities  such  as  counter  measure  node 
could  also  be  considered  within  a  VRLE  application  setup 
context. 

Fig. 3: A sample security attack tree showing denial of 
service attacks on network and rendering controls. 

Attack Trees: They provide a formal, hierarchical structure to 
represent  the  relationship  among  possible  system  vulnerabili- 
ties and their  respective attack  scenarios. The  format  of  these 
diagrams  is  the  tree  structure  with  ‘target  as  the  root  node’  
and the ‘leaf nodes describe the different activities carried out 
by  the  attacker.  For  the  parent  node  scenario  to  be  true,  it       
is  important  that  the  child  node  logical  condition  (AND/OR)  
is  also  true,  which  is  an  elegant  way  to  abstract  multi-level 
threat impact. An attack tree considers the probabilistic effect 
of a particular event when it is influenced by a combination of 
multiple events. In our work, we apply this concept to threats 
on the vSocial server for analyzing the risk score based on the 
probability  of  occurrence  of any threat event. 

Risk Assessment for vSocial: Our attack tree for risk 
assessment  covers direct and  indirect threats  that  manifest on 
the  vSocial  server and  maps  them  back  to  system  component 
that  was  the  point  of attack  origin. The  sample tree  as  shown 
in Fig. 3 is an example for DoS attacks impacting two separate 
system  components  -  network  and  VR  rendering  controls. 
Using this sample tree, we can demonstrate the attack impact 
on  system  security.  Propagating  up in the tree,  either  DoS or 
delayed  packets  can  disrupt  network  security,  whereas  any 
DoS  or  packet  loss  on  session  availability  can  cause  major 
issues  in  VR  rendering  controls.  The  overall  impact  is  a 
security  compromise  and  hence  marked  as  the  root    node.  
With  the  same  logic,  sample  attack  trees  are  shown  for  all    
the  SPS  factors  -  security  in  Fig.  4,  privacy  in  Fig.  5  and  
safety  in  Fig.  6,  respectively.  The  security  tree  explains  how 
attacks on VR space, storage, network, VR rendering controls 
and  visualization  can  impact  system  robustness.  The  privacy 
tree  exemplifies  that  loss  of  user  information  can  happen  at 
either storage, VR space or network. The safety tree represents 
that  user  well-being  can  be  compromised  due    to    issues    in 
VR  space,  VR  rendering,  location  information,  network  or 
extended  sessions. 

There  are  several  tools  to  develop  attack  trees  such  as 
ADTooL,  SecurITree  [26],  among  others  which  formalize 
attack trees as part of risk assessment. SecurITree specifically 

The  output  of  the  attack  tree  is  the  “probability  of  oc- 
currence,”  which is  a  popular  risk  metric.  Additional  metrics 
include distribution of loss or cost of attacks, however they are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

Fig. 4: Security attack tree showing threats in VR space, storage, network, rendering controls and visualization. 

Fig. 5: Privacy attack tree showing threats in storage, VR 
space  and network. 

Fig. 6: Safety attack tree showing threats on user safety 
concerns. 

(a) Normal virtual reality rendering with no packet loss 

(b) Virtual reality rendering is completely disrupted due 
to packet loss 

Fig. 7: Effect of packet loss on virtual reality rendering. 

difficult to measure within a pre-determined time period. The 
probability of occurrence combined with the individual threat 
impact  helps  us  perform  the  risk  assessment  by  generating   
the  risk  score  for  the  SPS  threats.  In  other  words,  this  will 
quantify  the  risk  score  associated  with  each  of  the  modules    
in  the  vSocial  server  as  shown  in  Figs.  4,  5  and    6.    The  
higher  the  SPS  risk  score  for   a   particular   threat,   higher  is 
the  corresponding  risk  associated  with  it.  Based  on  these 
values, the VRLE administrator can get better visibility about 
system  component  vulnerability  for  a  variety  of  threats  and 
subsequently  plan  defense  mitigation  strategies  for  a  safer, 
privacy-preserving and a  more  secure  VRLE  system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

In  this  section,  we  first  outline  our  data  collection  exper- 
iments  that  provide  insights  for  our  risk  score  evaluations. 
Following this, we study the importance of system design with 
complete/adhoc quality attack trees towards understanding the 
threat vulnerabilities in a well-defended VRLE system. 

A.  System Testbed and Measurement  Tools 

The  vSocial  testbed  described  in  [1]  is  a  cloud-based  and 
high-speed  network-enabled application  hosted on  the  Global 
Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) cloud rack [27], 
with  the  VR  content  developed  in  High  Fidelity  [28]. The 
users connect to the virtual classroom via HMD devices such 
as  HTC  Vive  and  Oculus  Rift.  The  measurement  tools  used  
for threat  simulations  in our  testbed are  summarized  below: 
(1)  Steam  -  Online  game  platform  [29]  which  also  contains  
an  inbuilt  VR  system  called  steam  VR.  We  utilize  its  frame 
timing  tool  to  record  frame  rates  in  real-time  under  different 
network conditions. 
(2)  Netlimiter  -  Internet  traffic  control  and  monitoring  tool  
for network monitoring and tuning in application under study. 
We  use  it  to  simulate  DoS  attacks  that  create  network  dis- 
crepancies on our High Fidelity based VRLE application, and 
measure  the  corresponding  frame  rate  and  other  impacts  on 
VR content rendering. 
(3)  Wireshark  -  A  free  and  open  source  network  protocol 
analyzer used for packet analysis, network troubleshooting and 
monitoring.  We  use  it  to  capture  packets  being  sent  to-and- 
from  our  High  Fidelity  based  VRLE  server  to  demonstrate 
possible data leaks resulting from the capturing of application 
packets. 
(4)  Clumsy  0.2  -  A  Windows  based  tool  [30]  that  allows 
controlling network conditions including features such as lag, 
drop, throttle, or tamper of live packets. We specifically utilize 
the  drop  feature  to  drop  a  specific  percentage  of  our  packets   
to  see the effect on  our  VRLE application  performance. 

B.  Test Case Evaluation 

Our experimental attack scenarios include network discrep- 
ancy  and  packet  loss  for  security,  packet  sniffing  for  privacy 
and their impacts on safety. Their real-time measurements are 
provided as inputs in our attack tree to generate a realistic risk 
score.  For  our  work,  the  duration  measurements  from  packet 
loss were supplied as inputs to the security attack tree as shown 
in Fig. 4. 

1)  Security: Using Clumsy 0.2, we changed the percentage 
of  packets  dropped  to  measure the  time  for  a  complete crash 
of a VRLE environment and recorded its effect on the VRLE 
environment as shown in Table I. The corresponding VR world 
screens  with  and  without  the  presence  of  severe  packet  loss  
are  shown in  Fig.  7a and  Fig.  7b,  respectively. 

For network discrepancy, we considered different bandwidth 
qualities  -  high  (normal),  medium  and  low  (see  Table  II)  for 
upload  and  download  speed  to  observe  the  frame  rate  and 
High Fidelity content download time. The results summarized 
in Table II show that any upload speed below 30 Kbps resulted 
in High Fidelity crashing. We observed similar impacts on VR 
headset content rendering. Fig. 8a shows the frame rates inside 

6 

TABLE I: Impact of packet loss on virtual reality learning 
environment with metrics including packet drop percentage 
and average crash time. 

Packet Drop  Crash Time (secs) 

Impact 

20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 

N/A 
123 
36 
12 

Slow content  Rendering 
Crash 
Crash 
Crash 

TABLE II: Upload and Download Speeds in Kbps for 
different bandwidth qualities. 

High 

Medium 

Low 

Screenshots 
Download Time (secs) 
Upload Speed (Kbps) 
Download Speed (Kbps) 

Fig. 10a 
12.2 
69 
134 

Fig. 10b 
33.3 
40.04 
86 

Fig. 10c 
>300 
<30 
27.66 

the  headset  under  high  network  performance  and  showcases    
a  smooth  VR  rendering.  Fig.  8b  displays  the  same  CPU 
performance  under  a  medium  network  condition,  where  the 
graph  now  contains  a  red  coloring  as  well.  This  means  that  
the  frame  rate  is  not  really  being  affected,  but  that  the  High 
Fidelity VRLE application is using more than its allotted CPU 
budget.  The  GPU  performance  shows  similar  trends,  but  has 
not  been  shown  for  space  constraints.  The  most  drastic  case   
in Fig. 8c displays the frame rate under a low bandwidth with 
disruptive  fluctuations  that  makes  the  experience  inside  the 
headset undesirably rough and  jittery. 

2)  Privacy:    In  order  to  simulate  packet  sniffing  attacks,  
we  captured a  subset  of  packets  being  sent  to/from  our  High 
Fidelity  VRLE  server  IP  address  using  Wireshark.  From  the 
stream for captured packets, we viewed the avatar information 
and confidential host as well as server details as shown in  Fig. 
9.  This  demonstrated  that  any  packet  containing  confidential 
information about the user or application can be captured and 
deciphered. This becomes a serious risk compromising privacy, 
especially  without  a  secured  network  protocol. 

3)  Safety:  For  the  simulation  of  safety  attacks,  we  con- 
ducted  a  usability  study  introducing  threats  such  as  session 
failure  and  network  discrepancy.  Through  this  study,  we 
measured  the  user  Quality  of  Experience  (QoE)  [31].  It  is 
important  to  note  that  any  security  and  privacy  threats  can  
also  have  safety  consequences.  For  example,  reducing  the 
bandwidth can cause sudden changes in the VR content, which 
could  severely  impact  the  users’  educational  experience.  A 
normal environment such as Fig. 10a can suddenly lose content 
as  shown  in  Fig.  10b  and  Fig.  10c.  This in turn  could  highly 
disorient  users  and  increase  confusion  and  frustration  levels. 
For  our  usability  study,  five  participants  entered  the  VRLE 
and their experience was measured under two conditions. They 
represented  the  two  scenarios  of  control  case  with  no  threats 
and security breach. 

Users  were  given  a  post  simulation  questionnaire,  where 
they  answered  28  questions  on  a  popular  psychometric  7- 
point  Likert  scale  (strongly  agree  to  strongly  disagree),  and 
seven additional open-ended questions further examining  their 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

(a) Effect of high bandwidth quality on frame rate. 

(b) Effect of medium  bandwidth quality on frame rate. 

Fig. 8: Effect of high, medium and low bandwidth quality on frame rate using Frame Timing tool in SteamVR; Effects of 
these conditions on virtual reality rendering are shown in Fig. 10. 

(c) Effect of low bandwidth quality on frame rate. 

TABLE III: Impact scale of threats on vSocial safety. 

Attack Events 

Scale of Impact 

Redirect Packets to Malicious Server 
Poorly Written Code 
Location Inference attack 
Jitter 
Low Bandwidth 
Long VR sessions 

4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
3 

Fig. 9: Packet Sniffing using Wireshark showing avatar and 
host server information getting disclosed. 

experience.  We  analyzed  the  statistically  significant  differ- 
ences  between  the  two  conditions  (breach    and    no    breach) 
and  displayed  the  results  in  Fig.  11  to  demonstrate  a  clear 
difference  specifically  in  dizziness,  confusion,  control,  and 
attitude towards the VRLE. 

This  further  proves  the  benefits  of  conducting  risk  assess- 
ments  by  using  attack  trees  and  through  characterization  of 
user experience under security and privacy threat conditions. 

C.  Attack Tree Evaluation 

Based  on the  simulation  for  packet  loss as  shown  in  Table  
I,  we  used  time  measurements  as  duration  input  values  and 
assumed  frequencies  to  generate  probabilities  of  occurrence 
for  the  security  attack  tree  shown  in  Fig.  4.  We  also  added 
some  intermediary  values and  obtained  the  results  in  Fig.  12, 
and observed a directly proportional relation between duration 
and  frequency  of  attack  with  the  risk  score. 

We next  present  the  characteristics  required  for  the  formu- 
lation  of  an  effective,  complete  attack  tree.  For  designing  a 
complete  attack  tree  and  getting  a  realistic  risk  score,  it  is 
imperative  to  also  consider  indirect  effects  of  threats  and  all 
system  components.  An  adhoc  attack  tree  alternately  under- 
represents  the  system  vulnerabilities  thus  having  a  reduced  
risk  score.  We   reiterate  our  earlier  observation  that   lower 

risk  score  represents  low  susceptibility  to  threats,  and  hence 
requires less sophisticated defense mechanisms. This seems to 
be  operationally  simple  and  also  cost  effective  for  a  VRLE 
administrator.  An adhoc attack    tree   quality,    however,  fails  
to  expose  the  comprehensive  attack  scenarios  giving  a  false 
impression of a well-defended system or a system that requires 
sophisticated cost-prohibitive defense mechanism. 

For  example  in  vSocial,  if  someone  gains  unauthorized 
access to the VRLE administrator or instructor accounts, other 
threats such as data tampering or elevation of privilege (EOP) 
can  be  triggered  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  If  indirect  implications   
of some threats are not considered in the formalization of the 
attack  tree,  the  complete  picture  of  possible  threats  will  not   
be  captured  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  3.  In  the  second  example,      
if  all  the  threats  in  storage  module  are  not  addressed,  then   
the  module  becomes  vulnerable  to  unaccounted  attacks.  This 
could  result  in  disclosing  confidential  user  data  or  session 
information. 

For  the characteristic  evaluation, attack  trees are tested  for 

different duration of attacks (d1 = 20 min, d2 = 10 min and d3 
= 5 min), and frequency of attacks (f1 = 5/day, f2 = 3/day and 
f3 = 2/day). Fig. 13 verifies that the SPS risk score increases 
as more threats are addressed. 

The  main  participants  in  VRLE  system  are  the  students, 
instructor(s), administrator(s) as shown in Fig. 1. Based on the 
threat  outcome  on  the  critical  system  components,  recovery 
cost and participants, we have categorized the impact level 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

(a)  Normal virtual reality session with 
good bandwidth quality 

(b)  Major content loss in virtual 
reality rendering in spite of medium 
bandwidth quality 

(c) Virtual reality rendering is 
completely lost due to bad  bandwidth 
quality 

Fig. 10: Effect of high, medium and low bandwidth quality on virtual reality rendering. 

No Breach  Breach 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

)
t
r
e
k
i
L
(

t
n
e
m
e
e
r
g
A

f
o
l
e
v
e
L
n
a
e

M

Fig. 11: Differences in experiences for Breach and No 
Breach scenarios. 

0.006 

0.005 

0.004 

0.003 

0.002 

0.001 

e
r
o
c
S

k
s
i
R
S
P
S

0.5 

0.45 

0.4 

0.35 

0.3 

0.25 

0.2 

0.15 

0.1 

0.05 

e
r
o
c
S

k
s
i
R
S
P
S

Low 

Low-Med     Medium    Med-High 

High 

Attack Tree Quality 

High-security 
High-safety  
 Med-privacy 
Low-security  
Low-safety 

High-privacy 
Med-security 
Med-safety 
Low-privacy 

Fig. 13: Risk Score characteristics based on the variation in 
quality of attack trees for all the SPS trees. 
TABLE IV: Impact scale of threats on vSocial security. 

Attack Events 

Scale of Impact 

XSS attack 
Delay Packets 
DoS 
DDoS 
Packet Loss 
Instructor Spoofing 
Admin Spoofing 
Get Password/Unautherized Login 
SQL injection 
Spoofing 

4 
2 
5 
5 
4 
2-3 
4-5 
2-3 
3 
2 

0.5 

1 

1.5 

2 

Duration (minutes) 

f4=4 per day 
f2=2 per day  

f3=3 per day 
f1=1 per day 

Fig. 12: Characteristic graphs showing Security Risk Score 
w.r.t. threat behavior including duration (minutes) and rate of 
threat occurrence. 

with  the  scale  ranging  from  1  (lowest)  to  5  (highest).  The 
least  impact  threats  with  score  of  1-2  can  be  easily  repaired, 
whereas  threats  with  significant  impact  with  score  of  4-5 
require  more  time  and  cost.  We  assigned  the  impact  level 
scores  to  each  threat  for  safety  in  Table  III,  security  in  Table 
IV and privacy in Table V. 

Selected  results  from  Table  III  are  shown  as  concrete 
examples. Redirecting packets to the malicious server can lead 
to session takeover or a change in the student and instructor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE V: Impact scale of threats on vSocial privacy. 

Attack Events 

Scale of Impact 

SQL Injection 
Undeleted Account 
Change Packet Destination 
Packet Sniffing 
Screen Observation 
Hand Movement Observation 
User not notified 

3 
1 
4 
5 
1  - 2 
1  - 2 
4 

VR  view(s).  Therefore,  high  impact  level  of  4  is  assigned  to 
this attack in Table III. On the other hand, minor programming 
errors  or  bugs  due  to  poorly  written  code  can  cause    only 
minor issues, and hence result in a impact level of 1. Medium 
impact  threats  are  those  that  are  not  as  severe  as  redirecting 
packets,  but  not  as  mild  as  poorly  written  code.  Example  is 
the  occurrence  of  extended  VR  sessions,  which  could  result   
in  mental  fatigue  or cybersickness of  a  student. 

V.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE  WORK 

In  this  paper,  we  propose  a  risk  assessment  framework  to 
address  the  SPS  challenges  in  a  VRLE  application  system.   
We  employ  formalized  attack  trees  to  map  threats  and  as- 
sociated  risks  to  the  various  system  modules  to  generate  a 
corresponding  risk  score.  To  show  the  effectiveness  of  our 
framework,  we  introduced  three  sample  attack  experiments 
(network  discrepancy,  packet loss  and  sniffing)  on  a  realistic 
vSocial testbed. We modified the quality of attack trees (well- 
designed vs. adhoc) based on the number and extent of threats 
being considered. A trade-off analyses between the adhoc and 
well-designed  attack  trees  was  performed.  We  found  that  - 
although the cost of managing the risk analysis increases, our 
approach  provides  realistic  insights  for  risks  associated  with 
the  system component  vulnerabilities to inform  VRLE  policy 
management  by an  administrator to  mitigate  risks. 

As part of future work, our risk assessment framework can 
be extended to investigate policy change control during VRLE 
sessions for ensuring a secure VR application that protects user 
privacy and ensures user  safety. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C. Zizza, A. Starr, D. Hudson,  S. S. Nuguri,  P. Calyam and Z. He, “To- 
wards a Social Virtual Reality Learning Environment  in High  Fidelity”, 
IEEE  Annual  Consumer  Communications  &  Networking  Conference 
(CCNC), 2018. 

[2]  J.  Jia,  W.  Chen,  “The  Ethical  Dilemmas  of  Virtual  Reality  Application   

in  Entertainment”,  IEEE Intl. Conference on Computational Science and 
Engineering (CSE), 2017. 

[3]  J.  P. Stichter,  M.  J.  Herzog,  K.  Visovsky,  C.  J.  Schmidt,  T.  Randolph, 
T.  Schultz,  N.  Gage,  “Social  Competence  Intervention  for  Youth  with 
Asperger  Syndrome  and  High-functioning  Autism:  An  Initial  Investiga- 
tion”,  Journal  of  Autism  and  Developmental  Disorders,  Vol.  40,  No.  9, 
pp. 1067-1079, 2010. 

[4]  B.  Fineman,  N.  Lewis,  “Securing  Your   Reality:   Addressing  

in  Virtual 

Privacy 
 EDUCAUSE 

and    Augmented   Reality 
and 
Security 
Applications”, 
Available: 
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2018/5/securing-your-reality-addressing- 
security-and-privacy-in-virtual-and-augmented-reality-applications 
[Accessed July 30, 2018]. 

  Review.  

[Online]. 

[5]  Y. Wei, X.  Wang,  P. Calyam,  D.  Xuan,  W. Zhao,  “On  detecting  camou- 

flaging worm”, IEEE ASAC,  2006. 

9 

[6]  W.  Zhou,  Y.  Jia,  A.  Peng,  Y.  Zhang,  P.  Liu,  “The  Effect  of  IoT  New 
Features  on  Security  and  Privacy:  New  Threats,  Existing  Solutions,  and 
Challenges Yet to Be Solved”, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2018. 

[7]  K.  Fu,  T.  Kohno,  D.  Lopresti,  E.  Mynatt,  K.  Nahrstedt,  S.  Patel,  D. 
Richardson,  B.  Zorn,  “Safety,  Security,  and  Privacy  Threats  Posed  by 
Accelerating  Trends  in  the  Internet  of  Things”,  Computing  Community 
Consortium (CCC) Technical Report, Vol. 29, No. 3, 2017. 

[8]  D.  Franziska  Roesner,  T. Kohno,  D.  Molnar,  “Security  and  Privacy  For 
Augmented Reality Systems”, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 57, No. 
4, pp. 88-96, 2014. 

[9]  R.  Roman, J. Zhou, J. Lopez,“On the  Features and Challenges of  Secu- 
rity  and  Privacy  in  Distributed  Internet  of  Things”,  Elsevier  Computer 
Networks Journal, Vol. 57, No. 10, pp. 2266-2279, 2013. 

[10] Y.  Yang,  L.  Wu,  G.  Yin,  L.  Li,  H.  Zhao,  “A  Survey  on  Security  and 
Privacy  Issues  in  Internet-of-Things”,  IEEE  Internet  of  Things  Journal, 
Vol. 4, No. 5, pp. 1250-1258,  2017. 

[11] R. McPherson, S. Jana, V. Shmatikov “No Escape from Reality: Security 
and  Privacy  of  Augmented  Reality  Browsers”,  Proc.  of  the  24th  Intl. 
Conference on World Wide Web, 2015. 

[12] S. Yi, Z. Qin, Q. Li, “Security and Privacy Issues of Fog Computing: A 
Survey”,  Proc. of Intl. Conference on Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and 
Applications, 2015. 

[13] M.  Haris,  H.  Haddadi,  P.  Hui  “Privacy  Leakage  in  Mobile  Computing 

Tools, Methods, Characteristics”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.4978, 2014. 

[14] K.  Stanney,  R.  Murant,  R.  Kennedy,  “Human  Factor  Issues  in  Virtual 
Environments: A Review of the Literature”, Presence: Teleoperators and 
Virtual Environments, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 327-351, 1998. 

[15] M.  Dennison,  A.  Wisti,  M.  D’Zmura,  “Use  of  Physiological  Signals  to 

Predict Cybersickness”, Displays, Vol. 44, pp. 42-52, 2016. 

[16] N. Glaser, M. Scmidt, “Usage Considerations of 3D Collaborative Virtual 
Learning  Environments  to  Promote  Development  and  Transfer        of 
Knowledge  and  Skills  for  Individuals  with  Autism”,  Technology, 
Knowledge and Learning, 2018. 

[17] P.  Ralston,  J.  Graham,  J.  Hieb,  “Cyber  Security  Risk  Assessment  for 
SCADA and DCS Networks”, ISA Transactions, Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 583- 
594, 2007. 

[18] S.  Mauw,  M.  Oostdijk,  “Foundations  of  Attack  Trees”,  Intl. Conference 

on Information Security and Cryptology, pp. 1-14, 2018. 

[19] K. Edge, R. Raines, M. Grimaila, R. Baldwin, R. Bennington, C. Reuter, 
“The  Use  of  Attack  and  Protection  Trees  to  Analyze  Security  for  an 
Online Banking System”, IEEE Annual Hawaii Intl. Conference, 2007. 
[20] H.  Kong,  M.  Hong,  T. Kim,  “Security  Risk  Assessment  Framework  for 
Smart Car using the Attack Tree Analysis”, Intl. Conference on Innovative 
Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), 2016. 
[21] M. Fraile, M. Ford, O. Gadyatskaya, R. Kumar, M. Stoelinga, R. Trujillo-
Rasua,  “Using  Attack-Defense  Trees 
to  Analyze  Threats  and 
Countermeasures  in  an  ATM: A  Case  Study”,  IFIP Working Conference 
on The Practice of Enterprise Modeling, 2016. 

[22] A.  Marback,  H.  Do,  K.  He,  S.  Kondamarri,  D.  Xu,  “A  Threat  Model- 
based Approach to Security Testing”, Software: Practice and Experience, 
Vol. 43, No. 2, pp. 241-258,  2012. 

[23]  A. Gholami, E. Laure, “Advanced Cloud Privacy Threat Modeling”, 

Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 37, pp. 489-496, 2014. 

[24]  A. Almulhem, “Threat Modeling for Electronic Health Record Systems”, 
Journal of Medical Systems, Vol. 36, No. 5, pp. 2921-2926, 2014. 
[25] R. Hasan,  S. Myagmar, A.  Lee,  W. Yurcik, “Toward a Threat  Model for 
Storage  Systems”,  Proc. of the ACM Workshop on Storage Security and 
Survivability, pp. 94-102, 2005. 

[26] “SecurITree 

for  Attack  Tree  analysis”. 

[Online]  Available  at: 

https://www.amenaza.com [Accessed July 30 2018]. 

[27] M.  Berman,  J.  Chase,  L.  Landweber,  A.  Nakao,  M.  Ott,  D.  Raychaud- 
huri,  R.  Ricci,  I.  Seskar,  “GENI:  A  Federated  Testbed  for  Innovative 
Network Experiments”,  Computer Networks, Vol. 61, pp. 5-23, 2014. 
[28] “High Fidelity”, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://highfidelity.com. [Ac- 

cessed July 30 2018]. 

[29] “SteamVR”, 

2018. 

[Online]. 

Available: 

http://store.steampowered.com/steamvr. [Accessed July 30 2018]. 

[30] C. 

Tao,“Clumsy 

0.2”, 

2018. 

[Online]. 

Available: 

https://jagt.github.io/clumsy. [Accessed July 30 2018]. 

[31] P. Calyam, M. Haffner, E. Ekici, C. G. Lee, “Measuring Interaction QoE 
in  Internet  Videoconferencing”,  IEEE/IFIP  Management  of  Multimedia 
and Mobile Networks and Services (MMNS), 2007. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
