Brain-Computer Interface in Virtual Reality

Reza Abbasi-Asl1, Mohammad Keshavarzi2, and Dorian Yao Chan3

8
1
0
2

v
o
N
3
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
4
0
6
0
.
1
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— We study the performance of brain computer
interface (BCI) system in a virtual reality (VR) environment
and compare it to 2D regular displays. First, we design
a headset that consists of three components: a wearable
electroencephalography (EEG) device, a VR headset and an
interface. Recordings of brain and behavior from human
subjects, performing a wide variety of tasks using our
device are collected. The tasks consist of object rotation
or scaling in VR using either mental commands or facial
expression (smile and eyebrow movement). Subjects are
asked to repeat similar tasks on regular 2D monitor screens.
The performance in 3-D virtual reality environment is
considerably higher compared to the to the 2D screen. Par-
ticularly, the median number of success rate across trials for
VR setting is double of that for the 2D setting (8 successful
command in VR setting compared to 4 successful command
in 2D screen in 1 minute trials). Our results suggest that
the design of future BCI systems can remarkably beneﬁt
from the VR setting.

I. INTRODUCTION

The development of brain-computer interface (BCI)
systems have valuable applications in areas such as
medicine [1], [2], robotics [3], [4], and human entertain-
ment industry [5], [6]. Helping people with movement
disabilities to retract their motor functionalities through
mental commands and communicate with the digital
world is one of the most important consequences of
such technology. A BCI system often consists of three
main components. First, a module to record the activity
of neurons in the brain (either single neuron [7] or av-
erage of thousands of neurons [8]). Second, a digital or
mechanical environment (such as computers or robotic
arms) that the user intend to control. Third, an interface
that processes the brain signal and translate it to an
actionable command in the target environment.

While there have been major progress in designing
and employing each of BCI three components over the
last decades, some limitations in each category are yet
to be addressed. The available devices that record from
the brain often have a very low signal-to-noise ratio
[9]. Researchers have shown a remarkable performance
for the invasive BCI systems that receive recordings
from single neurons [7]. However, developing BCI

1Reza Abbasi-Asl is with Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
abbasi@berkeley.edu
2Mohammad Keshavarzi

is with Department

of Ar-
Berkeley, CA, USA.

chitecture, University
mkeshavarzi@berkeley.edu

of California,

3Dorian Yao Chan is with Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
dorian8x8@berkeley.edu

system using non-invasive devices such as Electroen-
cephalography (EEG) [9] is a much more challenging
task. EEG devices are less expensive and more user-
friendly compared to invasive recording systems, but
the measures signal using each electrode in EEG is the
average activity of thousands of neurons. Additionally,
because EEG electrodes are placed along the scalp, EEG
signals are often noisy and distorted [9]. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to recover the underlying activity of the brain
from EEG recordings. Another limitation of the EEG
device is the number of channels. A higher signal to
noise ratio can be achieved using an EEG with large
number of electrodes. However, these high-bandwidth
EEG devices are often less user-friendly compared and
have higher cost. In this paper, we are interested in
applications of BCI that is adaptable to daily life of
users interacting with digital devices. Therefore, we
accept the challenge of the brain recordings with low
signal-to-noise ratio and limit our study to the user-
friendly wearable EEG headsets with small number of
electrodes.

EEG devices often record not only the average ac-
tivity of the brain areas, but also the facial expressions
such as eyebrow and lip movement [10]. To decode
the target command, EEG-enabled BCI device primar-
ily beneﬁt from state-of-the-art machine learning algo-
rithms. Methods such as deep neural networks [11],
[12], generative models [13] and Bayesian models [15]
have shown satisfactory performance in these systems.
Being able to efﬁciently interact with a digital device
is a necessity in many of today’s real-life applications.
These applications range from simple tasks such as us-
ing cellphones or moving a cursor on a screen to much
more complicated tasks such as controlling robotic arm
movements. In all of these applications, high band-
width in communication is considered one of the most
important aspects of the human-machine interactions
[16]. In this study, we are interested in the limitations of
user interaction with a virtual reality (VR) environment
and seek BCI solutions to increase the bandwidth.
VR is particularly an important tool in ﬁelds such as
design [17], education [18] and communication [19]. To
increase the communication bandwidth between user
and VR environment, we study the application of EEG-
based BCI systems in VR. With the recent progress
in development of virtual and augmented reality, it
has been necessary to analyze, study, and evaluate
the performance of BCI devices in controlling these
virtual environments. Being able to use communica-

 
 
 
 
 
 
be simple as possible to avoid user distraction. In the
event of a speciﬁc command, the 3D cross can move
forward and backward, rotate, scale and change color
(Figures 2.B and 2.C) . In the training process, such
transforms are initiated from the start of the training
session and last 10 seconds while in the execution pro-
cess the transforms occur when the mental command
are triggered and turn off when neutral conditions are
detected. In such events, the occurrence of the transfor-
mation gradually dissolves to minimize distraction of
the inconsistency of the mental and facial commands.
The virtual reality device used in this experiment is the
HTC Vive, as the larger size of the headset comparing
to the Oculus Rift - allows easier allocation of EEG
sensors.

C. Interface

We use Emotive mental-command software package
to train the model. Based on the notes from developers
[20], this software includes the following modules to
process the EEG signals. First, a basic ﬁltering and real-
time classiﬁcation to knock out spikes and other non-
biological signals/noise. In this step, a certain amount
of muscle noise (below a threshold) is allowed to
give a good experience for novice users and assist
the learning process. The training procedure is built
upon EEG features such as frequency content and
spatial distribution of components. Correlation analysis
technique is used to reduce the input dimensionality
to a manageable level for the amount of training data
available. Final classiﬁcation is done by calculating the
relative likelihood of a given observation belonging to
each of the trained classes, assigning the point to the
command with the highest posterior probability.

A. Data collection

III. RESULTS

To quantitatively compare the performance of BCI
system between a 2D display and 3-D virtual reality
environment, we designed the following protocol to
collect data from subjects. We ﬁrst trained commands
by having the user repeatedly attempt a command
over 5 minutes. We then performed 1 minute trials,
where we asked the participant to attempt a particular
command every 6 seconds (10 commands per trial). We
repeated this process for 10 times (100 commands for
each condition). We recorded the success rate, as well as
the number of false positives. Participants attempted to
use commands to rotate or push objects. On some trials,
we also asked the participants to alternate between
them, in order to compare the accuracies of different
command techniques. Figure 3 shows a picture of our
experiment setup.

B. Analysis

Figure 4.A and 4.B illustrates the boxplot for the
number of successful commands in each trial across 10

Fig. 1: Flowchart of the pipeline

tion channels that do not need hand movement and
gestures is essential in this setting. There has been a
limited number of studies trying to build such a con-
nection. Additionally, several industrial start-ups such
as Neurable [20] are aiming to improve the reliability
of BCI-driven VR.

In this paper, we design and implement protocols to
quantitatively study the possibility of directly control-
ling the virtual reality environment using commands
translated from brain activity. Additionally, we com-
pare the performance of BCI in 3D VR environment
to the 2D regular screen. The rest of the paper is
organized as follows. In section 2, we introduce our set
up to control a virtual reality application using an EEG
device. The experimental protocols followed by our
main results are presented in section 3. We conclude
and discuss our future directions in section 4.

II. DEVICE SETUP

Figure 1 shows the ﬂowchart of our BCI-enabled VR.
Our pipeline consists of an EEG module, a VR module
and and interface. Our speciﬁc choice for each module
is summarized in this section.

A. EEG

To record the brain activity, we use Emotiv EPOC+
EEG headset. This EEG device has 14 electrodes with
saline based wet sensors. These electrodes do not re-
quire any gel and therefore is a better match to our
application compared to regular wet electrodes. 14
channels is sufﬁcient in our application and has enough
bandwidth to enable us to control VR/AR device. The
user is able to wear this EEG headset together with the
AR/VR headset. Therefore, this design is user0friendly.
We did not chose Electro-cap EEG because it gradually
squeezes the users head and becomes uncomfortable
for the user after a short time.

B. Virtual reality module

To train and execute mental and facial expressions,
we use the Unity3D game engine to visualize the
outcome of the users commands in the 2D screen and
virtual reality. In this application, 7 boxes shaping a
3D cross each with different colors assigned are placed
in the middle of the users view (Figure 2.A). The
background and lighting of the scene is designed to

Fig. 2: A. 3D cross neutral. B. 3D cross scaled. C. 3D cross rotated.

sistent, where different trials would result in drastically
different results - perhaps due to movement of the EEG
headset. Mental commands were also persistent - they
tended to stay active far past when the user wanted the
command to stop. In contrast, facial expressions tended
to be both consistent and bursty. For comfort, facial
expressions were a bit difﬁcult for our subjects while
wearing the VR headset, due to the positioning on the
face. However, most users still found facial expressions
quite usable. Users also reported facial expressions to
be more repeatable than mental commands - thinking
a command multiple times the same way was found
to be rather difﬁcult. In contrast, users quickly picked
up facial expressions to accurately and consistently
achieve tasks.

We also postulate that facial expressions are much
more desirable than mental commands for the wider
VR environment, as facial expressions are easily trans-
ferable between applications. Meanwhile, mental com-
mands differ greatly between applications, as different
applications have different use cases. Due to the length
of training, this process can take signiﬁcant time and
effort. Thus, we conclude that for accuracy, a major
requirement for most practical VR applications, facial
expressions should be used. However, if a more simple
”state of mind” is more desirable, mental commands
are suitable.

C. Carving Brush - VR Application

Considering the performance results from each type
of command mentioned above, a VR application is
designed to enhance a simple creative process with
taking advantage of mental and facial controls. Using
a 3D game engine in our case Unity3D- an array of
boxes is generated based on the users preference of
dimension and scale. These boxes surrounded the user
and were rendered with distinguishable colors to form
a gradient box. Figure 6 illustrates three snapshots of
this application.

Using the VR controllers as a destructor brush, the
user can carve out negative volumes from its surround-

Fig. 3: Setup of the experiment

trials for VR and 2D screen. Figures 4.C and 4.D shows
the boxplots for the number of false positives in each
trail across 10 trails. The boxplots are shown separately
for three conditions. First condition is performing pull,
push or rotate using only mental command. Second
and third conditions are performing the same task
using eyebrow movement and smile, respectively. In
these ﬁgures, the accuracy for a binary experiment
is reported. That is, the command is either correctly
identiﬁed or not. In general, we found that mental
commands performed better under VR conditions. The
median number of success rate is 8 for VR setting
while for the 2D setting the median is 4. However,
were still far inferior to facial expressions for practical
application usage. In VR, 10 our 10 commands are
identiﬁed correctly using eyebrow movement in all
trails. The median for 2D screen setting is 9 in this case.
Figure 5 shows similar boxplots for the trinary ex-
periments. In this setting, the accuracy is deﬁned is
the number of successful identiﬁcation of a task from
three states. The states are object push, object rotation
and neutral state. The accuracies are lower compared
to binary experiments. Our trials demonstrate that in
the 3D environment, mental commands are suitable for
binary cases. However, when more than one command
is desired, accuracy plummets. In contrast, facial ex-
pressions maintain accuracy over all cases.

We found that mental commands were often incon-

ACBFig. 4: Number of successes for binary experiment in 2D display (A) and VR setting (B). Number of false positives
for binary experiment in 2D display (C) and VR setting (D).

Fig. 5: Number of successes for trinary experiment in 2D display (A) and VR setting (B). Number of false positives
for trinary experiment in 2D display (C) and VR setting (D).

ing to make stylized forms and objects with a negative
carving technique. This process was done by applying
a sphere collider at the top point of the VR controller
and deleting each pixel (box) when a collision was
detected. In order to optimize the computation process
and avoid rendering all the pixel arrays in the initial
gradient box, only the outer layer of the object was
rendered. With each collision between the brush and
speciﬁc pixel in space, its surrounding pixels would
instantiate to form the updated carved form of the
object. The size of the destructor brush changes with
mental and facial commands. When the user thinks of
a bigger brush or raises its eyebrows, the diameter of
the sphere collider increases resulting a larger brush
for the carving process. The brush size also decreases
when the user thinks of a smaller brush or furrows it
brows. The strength of the brush is also designed as a
function of speed, which depending on how fast the
stroke is made in space, it would change the collider
threshold for pixel destruction.

In addition to the size of the brush, changing the
color of pixels that surround the brush is also done by
mental and facial commands. By thinking of a lighter
pixel color or smiling, the surrounding pixels increment
their RGB values based on their proximity and position

to the VR controller. The closer the controller is to a
speciﬁc pixel, the more increase of RGB values happen
in each frame until they reach the limit of RGB (255,
255, 255) which indicates the color of white.

As this is a 6DOF experience, the user can walk in the
space to perform and perform the carving process and
mental/facial commands simultaneously . For larger
models, a touchpad walking function is implemented
which the user navigates the virtual space using touch-
pad buttons of the VR controller. This method is not
recommended as many users experience VR sickness
(nausea) in such locomotion functions.

IV. DISCUSSION, ASSESSMENT AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we developed a pipeline to assess
the application of BCI in VR environment. Our results
showed that BCI is more accurate in VR compared to
2D screen. However, ultimately, mental commands as a
valid input mechanism for VR applications may need
to wait for better technology. After experimenting and
analyzing mental and facial commands using EEG sen-
sors in both environments 2D screens and virtual en-
vironments we believe that due to the inaccurate and
noisy inputs, training and implementing commands
with current learning methods were not efﬁcient. We

ACBBasic     Eyebrow     Smile# Successes out of 10100Basic     Eyebrow     Smile# Successes out of 10100Basic     Eyebrow     Smile100DBasic     Eyebrow     Smile1002D Display2D DisplayVirtual RealityVirtual Reality# False positives out of 10# False positives out of 10ACBBasic           Facial# Successes out of 10100# Successes out of 10100# False positives out of 10100D100Basic           FacialBasic           FacialBasic           Facial# False positives out of 102D Display2D DisplayVirtual RealityVirtual Reality[3] Berger, T. W., Chapin, J. K., Gerhardt, G. A., McFarland, D. J.,
Principe, J. C., Soussou, W. V., ... and Tresco, P. A. (2008). Brain-
Computer Interfaces: An international assessment of research
and development trends. Springer Science and Business Media.
[4] Bell, C. J., Shenoy, P., Chalodhorn, R., and Rao, R. P. (2008).
Control of a humanoid robot by a noninvasive braincomputer
interface in humans. Journal of neural engineering, 5(2), 214.
[5] Alomari, M. H., Abubaker, A., Turani, A., Baniyounes, A. M.,
and Manasreh, A. (2014). EEG mouse: A machine learning-based
brain computer interface. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl, 5, 193-
198.

[6] Krepki, R., Blankertz, B., Curio, G., and Mller, K. R. (2007).
The Berlin Brain-Computer Interface (BBCI)towards a new com-
munication channel for online control in gaming applications.
Multimedia Tools and Applications, 33(1), 73-90.

[7] Maynard, E. M., Nordhausen, C. T., and Normann, R. A. (1997).
The Utah intracortical electrode array: a recording structure
for potential brain-computer interfaces. Electroencephalography
and clinical neurophysiology, 102(3), 228-239.

[8] Pfurtscheller, G., Scherer, R., and Neuper, C. (2007). EEG-
based brain-computer interface. OXFORD SERIES IN HUMAN-
TECHNOLOGY INTERACTION, 315.

[9] Teplan, M. (2002). Fundamentals of EEG measurement. Mea-

surement science review, 2(2), 1-11.

[10] Badcock, N. A., Mousikou, P., Mahajan, Y., de Lissa, P., Thie, J.,
and McArthur, G. (2013). Validation of the Emotiv EPOC EEG
gaming system for measuring research quality auditory ERPs.
PeerJ, 1, e38.

[11] Zhang, X., Yao, L., Sheng, Q. Z., Kanhere, S. S., Gu, T., and
Zhang, D. (2017). Converting Your Thoughts to Texts: Enabling
Brain Typing via Deep Feature Learning of EEG Signals. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1709.08820.

[12] Carvalho, S. R., Cordeiro Filho, I., De Resende, D. O., Siravenha,
A. C., De Souza, C., Debarba, H. G., ... and Boulic, R. (2017, Octo-
ber). A Deep Learning Approach for Classiﬁcation of Reaching
Targets from EEG Images. In Graphics, Patterns and Images
(SIBGRAPI), 2017 30th SIBGRAPI Conference on (pp. 178-184).
IEEE.

[13] Palazzo, S., Spampinato, C., Kavasidis, I., Giordano, D., and
Shah, M. (2017). Generative Adversarial Networks Conditioned
by Brain Signals. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 3410-3418).
[14] Alcaide, R. (2017). Evaluating a Novel Brain-Computer Interface
and EEG Biomarkers For Cognitive Assessment in Children
With Cerebral Palsy.

[15] Phillips, C., Mattout, J., Rugg, M. D., Maquet, P., and Friston,
K. J. (2005). An empirical Bayesian solution to the source
reconstruction problem in EEG. NeuroImage, 24(4), 997-1011.

[16] Cheng, M., Gao, X., Gao, S., and Xu, D. (2002). Design and
implementation of a brain-computer interface with high transfer
rates. IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, 49(10), 1181-
1186.

[17] Sherman, W. R., and Craig, A. B. (2002). Understanding virtual

reality: Interface, application, and design. Elsevier.

[18] Snchez, ., Barreiro, J. M., and Maojo, V. (2000). Design of virtual
reality systems for education: a cognitive approach. Education
and information technologies, 5(4), 345-362.

[19] Biocca, F., and Levy, M. R. (Eds.). (2013). Communication in the

age of virtual reality. Routledge.

[20] http://www.neurable.com.
[21] Abbasi-Asl, R., and Yu, B.

Interpreting Convolu-
tional Neural Networks Through Compression. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.02329.

(2017).

[22] Abbasi-Asl, R., Khorsandi, R., Farzampour, S., and Zahedi,
E. (2011). Estimation of muscle force with emg signals us-
ing hammerstein-wiener model. In 5th Kuala Lumpur Interna-
tional Conference on Biomedical Engineering 2011 (pp. 157-160).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

[23] Abbasi-Asl, R., and Yu, B. (2017). Structural Compression of
Convolutional Neural Networks Based on Greedy Filter Prun-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07356.

Fig. 6: VR Carving Brush application

believe advanced machine learning methods such as
interpretable deep learning tools [23], [21] and non-
linear model estimation algorithms [22] are helpful in
enhancing classiﬁcation problems.

Also, applying such commands for time-related func-
tions or accurate actions in games and applications can
not be applicable at this point. This concern ampliﬁes
as we see the number of false negatives increase when
a combination of commands is extracted for various
tasks. Actions such as eye-movement, unwanted facial
expressions, and walking also create noise signals in
the EEG recordings. These distortions are unavoidable
in some cases to control in the user experience process.
Our future work includes improving the quality of
the interface module. Designing an algorithm that is
robust to noise in processing the EEG signals is the
most important principle in this direction. Developing
new applications in virtual-reality such as in the artistic
painting, city design, and educational programs are a
few examples that require such precision. Robustness
to this brain noise also extends beyond EEG devices,
so work in this area will certainly help future BCI in-
terfaces that deal with the same issues as EEG devices.
We also plan to increase the number of human subjects
and tasks in future experiments. This will allow for a
more reliable evaluation of our pipeline.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Allen Yang and

James F. OBrien for their constructive feedback.

REFERENCES

[1] Pinheiro, O. R., Alves, L. R., Romero, M. F. M., and de Souza,
J. R. (2016, December). Wheelchair simulator game for training
people with severe disabilities. In Technology and Innovation
in Sports, Health and Wellbeing (TISHW), International Confer-
ence on (pp. 1-8). IEEE.

[2] Pfurtscheller, G., Flotzinger, D., and Kalcher, J. (1993). Brain-
computer interfacea new communication device for handi-
capped persons. Journal of Microcomputer Applications, 16(3),
293-299.

