35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018) 

Utilization of Virtual Reality Visualizations on Heavy 
Mobile Crane Planning for Modular Construction 

Navid Kayhani, Hosein Taghaddos, Mojtaba Noghabaee, and Ulrich (Rick) Hermann 

a Research Assistant at TECNOSA R&D Center, M.Sc. in Construction Engineering and Management, School of 
Civil Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Iran. 
bAssistant Professor, School of Civil Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Iran. 
c Ph.D. Student, Dept. of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, North Carolina State University

d Manager of Construction Engineering, PCL Industrial Management Inc., Edmonton, AB, Canada, T6E 3P4 
E-mail: navid_kayhani@ut.ac.ir, htaghaddoss@ut.ac.ir, snoghab@ncsu.edu, rhhermann@pcl.com 

, Raleigh, NC 27695. 

Abstract – 

Many kinds of industrial projects involve the use 
of prefabricated modules built offsite, and installation 
on-site  using  mobile  cranes.  Due  to  their  costly 
operation  and  safety  concerns,  utilization  of  such 
heavy lift mobile cranes requires a precise heavy lift 
planning.  Traditional  heavy 
lift  path  planning 
industrial  job  sites  are 
methods  on  congested 
ineffective, time-consuming and non-precise in many 
cases,  whereas  computer-based  simulation  models 
and visualization can be a substantial improving tool. 
(VR) 
This  paper  provides  a  Virtual  Reality 
environment in which the user can experience lifting 
process in an immerse virtual environment. Providing 
such  a  VR  model  not  only  facilitates  planning  for 
critical  lifts  (e.g.  modules,  heavy vessels),  but  also  it 
provides  a  training  environment  to  enhance  safe 
climate  prior  to  the  actual  lift.  The  developed  VR 
model  is  implemented  successfully  on  an  actual 
construction  site  of  a  petrochemical  plant  on  a 
modular basis in which heavy lift mobile cranes are 
employed. 

Keywords – 

Heavy  Lift  Planning;  Virtual  Reality  (VR); 
Modular Construction; Automation in Construction; 
Mobile Crane 

1 

Introduction 

Effective management and planning of resources are 
pivotal  tasks  in  construction  projects  management.  In 
recent decades, many industrial projects are constructed 
using industrialization/ prefabricated offsite construction 
methods, particularly modularization methods. Modules 
(e.g.  pipe  racks  or  vessels)  are  offsite  prefabricated 
elements that assembled in module yards and shipped to 
the site for installation [1]. A set of modules constructs a 

the  main 

larger  structure.  During  the  installation  process,  heavy 
mobile  cranes  are  employed  as 
lifting 
machinery. This heavy and large construction equipment 
is  highly  expensive  and  required  precise  planning  and 
control due to safety concerns and the extensive impact 
on the project schedule. For example, the rental cost of a 
heavy lift mobile crane  may reach $1,500 per hour [2]. 
Moreover, not only these resources force highly expenses 
(e.g. mobile crane rental cost, skilled crew, and mat cost) 
to a project, but also they are just available for a restricted 
period of time. 

Proper use of these heavy mobile cranes can reduce 
costs  and  make  the  construction  process  faster.  In 
contrast,  inappropriate  crane  operation  can  lead  to 
overruns,  delays,  and  safety  issues.  Heavy  lift  path 
planning is one of the most significant elements in heavy 
mobile  crane  planning  and  management.  Traditional 
heavy lift path planning methods on congested industrial 
job sites are ineffective, time-consuming and non-precise 
in many cases, whereas computer-based simulation and 
visualization can be considerable improving tools. 

is  provided 

With tremendous development of graphical computer 
aid  modeling  and  also  novel  interactive  hardware,  a 
definite  opportunity 
in  architecture 
engineering and construction (AEC) industry to facilitate 
the  training  process  and  effective  learning  in  virtual 
environments (i.e. virtual reality, augmented reality and 
mixed  reality)  through  that.  A  lot  of  research  has  been 
done  in  this  area,  and  scholars  tried  to  examine  the 
effectiveness  of  the  application  in  the  construction 
industry.  Additionally,  there  are  also  many  untapped 
opportunities in the construction planning process.  

The objective of this research is to provide a Virtual 
Reality (VR) environment in which one can experience a 
simulated 
immerse  virtual 
environment.  Providing  such  a  VR  model  not  only 
facilitates planning for blind or critical lifts (e.g. modules, 
training 
heavy  vessels)  but  also  provides  a  safe 

lifting  process 

in  an 

 
 
 
35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018) 

environment prior to the actual lift. Moreover, using VR 
technology  make  it  possible  to  provide  useful  extra 
information,  and  by  so  doing,  operators,  planners,  and 
engineers will have the opportunity to obtain a common 
understanding  and  would  be  capable  to  cooperate  to 
improve the plan. 

2  Related Works 

Throughout  the  recent  decades,  computers  have 
played a significant role in construction. Scheduling and 
many other planning tasks are done with the support of 
computers.  In  the  recent  years,  other  applications  have 
been  also 
investigated  particularly  in  construction 
operation  visualization.  Visualization  aims  to  verify 
trustworthiness and to provide presentable insights about 
the modeled system. For instance, four-dimensional (4D) 
computer-supported design CAD technology presents a 
visualization  of  the  advancement  of  construction  by 
linking three-dimensional (3D) computer models of the 
project and construction schedules [3]. 4D models barely 
enable  users 
to  envision  a  construction  schedule 
previously  developed.  However,  they  are  not  able  to 
simulate  the  construction  activities  [4].  More  recently, 

a faster design process and more optimized end products. 
The  first  industrial  use  of  VR  was  introduced  when 
virtual prototypes started to be used in the design process. 
VR  is  a  virtual  prototyping  technology  that  provides  a 
three-dimensional scene that can be manipulated in real 
time and used collaboratively to explore and navigate the 
3D model. By simulation of the construction process, VR 
makes users to get a better understanding and perception 
about the actual environment. As illustrated in Figure 1, 
there are many potential application areas for VR systems 
[5].  Various  conducted  research  in  the  case  of  VR 
technology applications has confirmed that VR can bring 
vital  value  improvement  and  cost  declines  to  the 
construction process [6].  

However, 

Management  of  heavy  construction  equipment  is  a 
sophisticated task due to highly dynamic activities such 
as work-space logistics, material deliveries, and resource 
allocation. 
equipment 
management suffers from some deficiencies in different 
levels  of  site  planning  and  their  movements.  Studies 
indicate that construction site planning highly depends on 
individuals’  experiences,  imaginations,  and  intuitions. 
Even though 4D visualization enhanced communications 
and mutual understanding of various stakeholders, there 

construction 

Figure 1- Potential Applications of VR in Construction [5] 

more pioneer computer-based technologies are employed 
to facilitate the visualization process. Immersive virtual 
technologies,  such  as  VR  technology,  enable  multiple 
design solutions to be evaluated digitally, which leads to 

is  no  effective  tool  to  analyze,  evaluate,  and  anticipate 
ongoing  challenges  and 
[7]. 
Furthermore,  in  modular  industrial  projects,  heavy 
mobile  cranes  are  employed  for  on-site  module 

future  difficulties 

 
35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018) 

installation  at  their  set  locations.  Efficient  planning  is 
essential  to  decrease  errors,  accidents,  additional  costs, 
and schedule delays [8]. An effective crane planning in 
these  kinds  of  projects  includes  many  tasks  (i.e.  crane 
type 
lift 
sequencing, lift path planning). Heavy lift path planning 
is a pivotal subtask in heavy lift planning. Many scholars 
proposed  computer-based  solutions  to  optimize  or 
enhance the process by automation [8]–[10].  

location  optimization, 

selection,  crane 

to 

link 

technologies 

scholars  employed 

In  order  to  increase  the  construction  productivity, 
these  novel 
investigations  are  conducted 
to  crane  planning  and 
visualization 
management.  Some 
the  VR 
technology  to  provide  a  virtual  environment  to  train 
cranes  operators  with  neither  dangers  or  expenses.  For 
instance,  overhead  crane  [11]  and  bridge  crane  [12] 
operator  training  systems  based  on  virtual  reality  are 
discussed. Some other efforts are made to evaluate and 
enhance  safety  conditions  in  this  regard  [13]–[15]. 
However,  authors  have  not 
found  any  specific 
investigation  in  the  application  of  VR  technology  in 
heavy lift planning process of mobile cranes. 

3  Development  of  VR-Based  Heavy  Lift 

Planning Simulator 

 The  objective  of  our  approach  is  to  unify  a  virtual 
environment for different use cases in lift planning and 
execution  of  heavy  lifts  of  prefabricated  modules  in 
industrial  projects.  Using  an 
interactable  virtual 
environment  (VE)  would  enable  users  to  have  more 
profound experiences. Virtual reality (VR) is a mixture 
of  digital  processing,  computer  graphics,  multimedia 

simulated 3D models in a VE. 

 Moreover, they would be capable to actively interact 
with  the  VE.  Navigation  is  one  of  these  interactions. 
Navigation  includes  the  ability  to  move  around  and 
explore  the  simulated  objects  in  a  virtual  environment. 
Similarly, interaction is the ability to control and affect 
the VE and also be affected by it. For example, the ability 
to move objects in a VE is an interaction between the user 
and  the  VE.  The  most  significant  advantage  of  VR 
models to other forms of VE such as personal computers 
(PC)  displays  is  providing  a  lifelike  three-dimensional 
and 360̊ experience via a wearable display-headset with 
a higher degree of virtual immersion. 

In this research, a prominent VR headset, Oculus Rift 
is  employed  which  consists  of  several  parts.  A  head-
mounted  display  (HMD),  an  Xbox  Controller,  and 
Oculus  Rift  Constellation  sensor,  an  optical-based 
tracking system developed by Oculus VR, are the main 
parts  of  the  VR  device.  The  VR  device  needs  to  be 
supported by a high-performance graphical process unit 
(GPU).  Thus,  the  user  can  experience  a  more  realistic 
environment than simple 3D-glasses. 

This paper presents the overall concepts of VrCrane, 
a  VR  simulator  for  heavy  mobile  cranes  (see  Fig  2). 
Authors proceeded five main steps in order to achieve a 
VR  tool  which  facilitates  the  lift  planning  for  heavy 
mobile cranes. In this regard, a 3D model of the selected 
crane and the construction site is required. It is possible 
to  use  BIM  models  or  a  raw  3D  model  and  a  manual 
database. Hence, a pilot BIM model of an industrial plant 
is employed which has both information and 3D model. 
Moreover,  it  is  required  to  make  users  able  to  control 
mobile  cranes’  every  possible  degree  of  freedom. 

Figure 2 - VR-Crane Development System 

technology,  sensor  technology,  and  other  computer-
to  VR 
based 
technology,  users  are  able  to  freely  navigate  any 

technologies.  Thanks 

information 

Therefore, Uinty3D as a handy and free game engine is 
used to simulate its every six degrees of freedom. These 
degrees of freedom are controlled by the Xbox controller 

Construction Site 3D ModelingMobile Crane 3D Modeling3D Objects Importing in Unity3DLifting Object Introducing to the scriptObstacle Introducing to the scriptCrane’s Components Introducing to the scriptVR Cameras Graphical EnhancementsClearance calculationsCapacity utilization Planned path Lift Complexity IndexVRCRANEProject DBCrane DB35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018) 

(see  Fig  3).  Various  types  of  virtual  cameras  equip  the 
simulated  model  to  make  users  experience  the  lifting 
operation as an operator, a signalman, or through other 
views  which is easily possible in  a virtual environment 
(i.e. bird view, plan view, dynamic view, etc.). Extra real-
time  calculations  and  information  presentations  (i.e. 
capacity  usage  percentage,  clearance  color-coding,  risk 
evaluations, etc.) for virtual operators and others would 
increase  the  common  understanding  and  facilitate  the 
communication process among all decision  makers and 
other  key  stakeholders  (Fig  4).  In  addition,  a  life-like 
experience  of  a  heavy  lift  would  reveal  the  underlying 
challenges  which  were  previously  concealed  during 
typical 2D lift planning. 

4  Conclusions 

it 

is  an 

industry, 

labor-intensive 

By  the  development  of  virtual  environments 
such  as  virtual  reality,  augmented  reality  and  mixed 
reality  in  architecture  engineering  and  construction 
(AEC) 
indisputable  need  for 
stakeholders  and  planners  to  use  a  better  approach  for 
activities 
and 
their 
particularly  in  heavy  lift  planning.  Provided  a  virtual 
reality  environment  in  which  the  user  can  experience 
lifting  process  in  an  immerse  virtual  environment  not 
only  facilitates planning for critical lifts (e.g.  modules, 
heavy vessels) but also provides a training environment 
to enhance safe climate prior to the actual lift in a safe, 
fast, and low-priced manner. 

error-prone 

Figure 3- Simulation Environment in Unity3D 

Figure 4- Users are experiencing the virtual lift operation 

 
35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018) 

based on virtual reality,” International Conference 
on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Education,  ICAIE 
2010, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA 2010. 

[12]  Dong  H.,  “Application  of  Virtual  Reality 
Technology  in  the  Training  of  Crane  Operators,” 
International Conference on Electrical, Electronics 
and  Mechatronics  2015  (ICEEM  2015),  Phuket, 
Thailand., 2015. 

[13]  Fang Y.  and Cho Y. K., “A framework of lift virtual 
prototyping  (LVP)  approach  for  crane  safety 
planning,”  33rd  International  Symposium  on 
Automation  and  Robotics  in  Construction  and 
Mining  (ISARC  2016),  Auburn,  Alabama,  USA, 
2016. 

[14]  Goulding J., Nadim W., Petridis P., and Alshawi M., 
“Construction industry offsite production: A virtual 
reality interactive training environment prototype,” 
Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 26, no. 1, 
pp. 103–116, 2012. 

[15]  Le Q. T., Pedro A., Lim C. R., Park H. T., Park C. 
S., and Kim H. K., “A framework for using mobile 
based  virtual  reality  and  augmented  reality  for 
experiential 
education,” 
International Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 
31, no. 3, pp. 713–725, 2015. 

construction 

safety 

5  Acknowledgment 

Sincere 

supports 

from  PCL 

Industrial 
Management  Inc.  and  TECNOSA  R&D  Center  are 
greatly appreciated. The writers are also thankful to those 
who participated in this study and supported the research 
project. 

References 

[1]  Lei  Z.,  “Automated  Simulation  Model  for  Crane 
Motion Planning in Heavy Industrial Projects”, PhD 
thesis, University of Alberta, 2014. 

[2]  Taghaddos  H.,  “Developing  a  generic  resource 
allocation framework for construction simulation”, 
PhD thesis, University of Alberta, 2010. 

[3]  Sheppard L. M., “Virtual building for construction 
and 

projects,” 
IEEE  Computer  Graphics 
Applications, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 6–12, 2004. 
[4]  Kang  S.  C.,  Chi  H.-L.,  and  Miranda  E.,  “Three-
Dimensional Simulation and Visualization of Crane 
Assisted Construction Erection Processes,” Journal 
of Computing in Civil Engineering, vol. 23, no. 6, 
pp. 363–371, 2009. 

[5]  Bouchlaghem D., Shang  H., Whyte J., and Ganah 
A., “Visualisation in architecture, engineering and 
construction  (AEC),”  Automation  in  construction, 
14(3), 287-295., 2005. 

[6]  Khanzode A., Fischer M., and Reed D., “Benefits 
and  lessons  learned  of  implementing  Building 
Virtual  Design 
(VDC) 
technologies  for  coordination  of  Mechanical, 
Electrical, and Plumbing (MEP) systems on a large 
Healthcare  project,”  Electron.  J.  Inf.  Technol. 
Constr., vol. 13, no. September 2007, pp. 324–342, 
2008. 

and  Construction 

[7]  Kayhani  N.,  “Construction  Equipment  Path 
Planning  Using  Virtual  Construction  Tools  (Case 
Study of Mobile Cranes),” MSc Thesis, University 
of Tehran, p. 150, 2018. 

[8]  Lei Z., Taghaddos H., Hermann U., and Al-Hussein 
M.,  “A  methodology  for  mobile  crane  lift  path 
checking in heavy industrial projects,” Automation 
in construction, vol. 31, pp. 41–53, 2013. 

[9]  Lin  Y.,  Yu  H.,  Sun  G.,  and  Shi  P.,  “Lift  Path 
Planning 
Picking/Placing 
Configurations:  Using  Crane  Location  Regions,” 
Journal of Computing Civil Engineering, vol. 30, no. 
1, p. 4014109, 2016. 

without 

Prior 

[10]  Zhang C. and Hammad A., “Multiagent Approach 
for  Real-Time  Collision  Avoidance  and  Path 
Replanning  for  Cranes,”  Journal  of  Computing  in 
Civil Engineering, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 782–794, 2012. 
[11]  Dong  H.,  Xu  G.,  and  Chen  D.,  “Research  on 
overhead crane training system and its construction 

 
 
