OMG-VR: Open-source Mudra Gloves for 
Manipulating Molecular Simulations in VR

Rachel Freire  

Mark Wonnacott 

Rachel Freire Studio & Intangible 

Intangible Realities Laboratory 

Realities Laboratory 

London/Bristol, UK 

University of Bristol 

Bristol, UK 

rachel@rachelfreire.com 

m.wonnacott@bristol.ac.uk 

Becca Rose Glowacki 

Alexander Jamieson-Binnie 

Department of Design 

Intangible Realities Laboratory 

Goldsmiths College  

University of London 

University of Bristol 

Bristol, UK 

b.glowacki@gold.ac.uk 

alexander.jamieson-binnie@bristol.ac.uk 

Rhoslyn Roebuck Williams 

David R Glowacki 

Intangible Realities Laboratory 

Intangible Realities Laboratory 

University of Bristol 

University of Bristol 

Bristol, UK 

Bristol, UK 

rhoslyn.roebuckwilliams@bristol.ac.uk 

glowacki@bristol.ac.uk 

Figure 1: Our application specific 
pinch sensing gloves (above) are 
adapted from a previous open 
source design (below). 

© 2020 Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 
(www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Abstract 
As VR finds increasing application in scientific research 
domains like nanotechnology and biochemistry, we are 
beginning to better understand the domains in which it 
brings the most benefit, as well as the gestures and form 
factors that are most useful for specific applications. 
Here we describe Open-source Mudra Gloves for VR 
(OMG-VR): etextile gloves designed to facilitate research 
scientists and students carrying out detailed and com-
plex manipulation of simulated 3d molecular objects in 
VR. The OMG-VR is designed to sense when a user 
pinches together their thumb and index finger, or thumb 
and middle finger, forming a “mudra” position. Tests 
show that they provide good positional tracking of the 
point at which a pinch takes place, require no calibration, 
and are sufficiently accurate and robust to enable scien-
tists to accomplish a range of tasks that involve complex 
spatial manipulation of molecules. The open source de-
sign offers a promising alternative to existing controllers, 
and more costly commercial VR data gloves.  

Author Keywords 
Data gloves; scientific simulation; Etextiles; open 
source. 

CSS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing ~ Virtual reality    

Introduction: Molecules in Virtual Reality 
Nanoscale molecular objects offer fertile testbeds for 
applying new methods in human-computer interaction, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
owing to the fact that molecules represent objects that 
are important to society and industry, but which we are 
unable to directly perceive, and which are characterized 
by considerable three-dimensional dynamic complexity 
that can be accurately simulated. Over the past few 
years we have developed an open-source VR frame-
work called Narupa [10], which enables multiple partic-
ipants to co-habit a virtual environment and interact 
with complex molecular structures whose non-intuitive 
dynamics and physics are simulated in real-time. 
Narupa is designed using a client/server architecture, in 
which each room-scale VR client (e.g., HTC Vive, Valve 
Index, etc.) connects to a real-time molecular physics 
server. To date, Narupa has found application as a tool 
for nanotechnology research [15] and education [1]. In 
a recent study, we examined how quickly scientists 
could accomplish different molecular research tasks 
using VR versus standard 2d interfaces [14]. For tasks 
requiring complex 3d spatial manipulation, we found 
that VR offered significant accelerations: e.g., when we 
asked scientists to create knots in small protein mole-
cule, we observed accelerations of ~10x. 

Accurately Sensing Virtual Objects 
Several Narupa users have reported that it enables 
them to ‘sense’ the flexibility of different molecular 
physics simulations [15]. On a few occasions, they 
have commented that plastic handheld VR controllers 
limited their ability to accurately sense the mechanical 
properties of the simulated molecular objects. Such 
reports have inspired us to investigate mechanisms for 
enabling users to manipulate simulated molecular ob-
jects, without mediation by a controller [16]. From a 
scientific research and educational perspective, it is 
advantageous to design VR frameworks that research-
ers and students can use to develop an accurate sense 
of a molecule’s dynamics and flexibility: it enables re-
searchers to accomplish simulation tasks faster than 
they would otherwise, and it enhances the insight that 
both researchers and students can gain into how mole-
cules behave, allowing them to make more intelligent 
hypotheses as to their design and function [2]. 

As an alternative to controllers, we have begun to 

explore the use of gloves, building on previous work 
where gloves have been used to enable people to 
“touch” virtual objects [8, 13]. As a first test of gloves 
in facilitating typical Narupa workflows, we interfaced 
the Narupa framework to two different commercial VR 
data gloves: the Manus [9] and the Noitom Hi5 [11]. 
These gloves are designed primarily for tracking of 
hand poses, to distinguish amongst a variety of ges-
tures (e.g., between a ‘thumbs-up’ or a Vulcan ‘live 
long and prosper’ gesture) for application in environ-
ments like motion capture studios. Each is equipped 
with a 9-degree of freedom, inertial movement unit, 
with bend sensors mounted along the back of each fin-
ger. Both came equipped with a wrist mount to which 
an HTC Vive tracker can be attached, enabling absolute 
positional tracking by the HTC Vive lighthouse tracking 
system. We carried out extensive tests evaluating the 
ability of each of these glove models to facilitate effi-
cient molecular manipulation and found their perfor-
mance not particularly well suited to our purposes, for 
the following reasons: (1) Owing to the number of sen-
sors in these gloves, they require frequent calibration 
to account for sensor drift and changes in position of 
the wrist mounted tracker. For example, calibration is 
required before and sometimes during a glove session, 
taking time and thus introducing a barrier to usage; (2) 
Neither glove is particularly reliable in detecting when a 
researcher is ‘pinching’ a particular atom (or selection 
of atoms), an important gesture for the molecular ma-
nipulation tasks that we regularly carry out with 
Narupa; (3) they are expensive (e.g., in Jan 2020, the 
Noitom Hi5 VR gloves cost $1k and the Manus VR 
gloves cost €3k, not including trackers); and (4) be-
cause they are size specific, they cannot be easily 
swapped between users. Given these issues, university 
laboratories like our own, which utilize the multi-person 
version of Narupa for both research and teaching, are 
unlikely to make such an outlay for non-commodity 
equipment, especially given that the Narupa VR frame-
work is often used with 3–4 users, all of whom require 
a separate pair of gloves, with different hand sizes. 

Figure 2: People wearing the 
open data gloves to manipulate a 
real-time simulation of a poly-
alanine protein (images taken 
from corresponding video 
vimeo.com/356981043) 

Figure 3: HTC vive tracker at-
taches to 3d printed mount that 
houses pogo pins. Pins connect to 
the silver plated fabric. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Open Source VR Glove Design 
As an alternative to the commercially available gloves, 
we took inspiration from recent open-source data glove 
designs [3, 7, 12] to design low cost gloves (ranging 
between $50-100 not including trackers). The OMG-VRs 
are designed so that they can be made in-house and 
used for VR-enabled molecular manipulation by multi-
ple glove-wearing participants (as shown in Fig 2 and 
the corresponding video at vimeo.com/356981043). 
The gloves (schematized in Fig 3) utilize a silver plated 
fabric circuit with pogo pins that connect to an HTC 
Vive tracker mounted on the back of the hand. The sil-
ver plated fabric is a stretch knit and the glove textile is 
a four-way stretch fabric. The circuit is bonded to the 
textile with a domestic iron using a heat-activated 
stretch adhesive film, reducing the amount of sewing 
required, and making the process more accessible to 
those with limited experience of working with fabric. 
This enables any given glove to fit a range of hand 
shapes, increases comfort for the user, and provides a 
larger error tolerance for the glove maker. Fig 3 shows 
the 3d printed connector that attaches to the glove and 
makes contact with the Tracker input pins. The silver 
plated fabric is used to construct two circuits that are 
completed when the thumb contacts either the index or 
the middle finger, forming a “mudra” position. Within 
Narupa, completing the thumb-index finger circuit ex-
erts an atomic force, pulling the nearest atom towards 
the approximate point at which the pinch occurs, as 
shown in vimeo.com/356981043. When the thumb-
middle finger circuit is completed simultaneously for 
both the left and right hand, the user can scale the size 
of the simulation, or rotate its orientation. 

The OMG-VR design achieves absolute positional 
tracking by mounting an HTC Vive tracker to the back 
of the hand. The rationale for this design arises from 
the fact that the spatial location of a pinch is relatively 
invariant to the back of the hand. Fig 5 shows results 
from 13 different scientists in our lab (3 pinches each), 
using a coordinate axis whose origin we defined to be 
coincident with the center of the tracker’s flat side 
(shown in Fig 3). Fig 5 shows that the respective x, y, z 

variances of the centroid pinch locations of right and 
left hands were ±1.7 (±1.4) cm, ±1.3 (±1.6) cm, and 
±1.7 (±1.2) cm. Given these relatively small variances, 
we found that it is a reasonable approximation to simp-
ly locate the left and right hand pinch point at the re-
spective left and right hand centroids in Fig 5. Com-
pared to the wrist mounted trackers used in the com-
mercial gloves we tested, our back-of-the-hand mount 
does not require calibration prior to a VR glove session. 
Because OMG-VR avoids bend sensors in favor of direct 
binary inputs for each pinch, they deliver little unneces-
sary data and require no extraneous hardware. As a 
result, we have found this design to be extremely relia-
ble for molecular manipulation compared to the com-
mercial gloves, owing to the fact that there are very 
few moving parts, and consequently few points of fail-
ure. This simplicity, along with detailed online instruc-
tions (instructables.com/id/Etextile-VR-Gloves-for-Vive-
Tracker) [4], allowed us to develop several pairs of data 
gloves “in-house” with basic technical infrastructure of 
the sort that is found in accessible makerspaces: sew-
ing machines, domestic and soldering irons, 3d print-
ers, as well as conductive and non-conductive fabrics. 

During field tests in Aug 2019, the gloves were used 

to facilitate a multi-person VR experience called “Is-
ness”: over 3 days, 4 pairs of gloves were worn by 
more than 64 people, for 45-60 mins at a time [6]. We 
observed zero failures, providing good evidence for the 
reliability of this design. Between sessions, we swapped 
gloves between different users, and observed that they 
could be intuitively utilized to successfully carry out 
molecular manipulation tasks without any need to re-
calibrate, even in cases where the users had different 
sized hands. In the latest iteration of OMG-VR, we add-
ed enhanced stabilization to the tracker mount, further 
improving its performance (Fig 4). We published the 
first version of the OMG-VR in Jan 2019, showing that a 
back-of-the-hand mounted HTC Vive tracker offered 
significant advantages compared to commercial wrist-
mounted designs [5]. By mid-2019, Manus VR adopted 
a similar design in their commercial VR glove, affirming 
the reliability of our open-source design. 

Figure 4: Sewing pattern for the 
V2.1 glove. 

Figure 5: Pinch positions of left 

(blue) and right (red) hands of 

participants wearing OMG-VR, 

showing respective centroids and 

variances. 

 
 
Conclusion 
Our tests to date suggest that the OMG-VR design is 
effective for undertaking complex spatial molecular 
manipulation tasks in VR. Compared to commercial 
gloves we trialed, complex tasks like molecular knotting 
(vimeo.com/305823646) are considerably smoother 
and less error prone using our glove design. They re-
quire less hardware, no calibration, are much cheaper, 
and one size fits a wide range of hand sizes. In terms 
of user comfort, the silver plated Etextile material feels 
lighter and less cumbersome than the thicker commer-
cial material. Positioning the tracker on the back of the 
hand minimizes error in hand tracking, enabling more 
specificity of hand angle and location, and smoother 
hand motion. Combined, these create a more embodied 
sense of molecular manipulation compared to the hand-
held room scale VR controllers. The open-source design 
is supported by comprehensive online documentation, 
enableing makers to understand how the glove works 
and how to combine different construction options. This 
enables makers to build a glove tailored to their skill-
set, choose materials that are more readily available, 
and adapt and develop their gloves to make iterative 
improvements for the benefit of the open source com-
munity, offering a robust and viable application specific 
alternative to the expensive commercial models. 

Moving forward, we plan to carry out more studies 

to evaluate the extent to which the OMG-VR enables 
research scientists to carry out complex 3d molecular 
manipulation tasks like protein-drug binding, and also 
investigate their utility in other scientific simulation and 
visualization domains beyond molecular science. We 
plan to carry out detailed comparisons evaluating the 
extent to which glove models like these enable re-
searchers to better sense of the systems with which 
they are interacting. Developing in-house skills though 
the open source approach makes maintenance and re-
pair easier. We are currently developing tutorials show-
ing alternate construction, repair methods, and a “no-
sew” version, constructed by modifying pre-constructed 
gloves, and testing with our user community.  

References 
[1]  Bennie et al. 2019. Teaching Enzyme Catalysis Using 

Interactive Molecular Dynamics in Virtual Reality. J. 
Chem. Educ. 2019, 96, 11, 2488-2496 

[2]  Cooper et al. 2010. Predicting protein structures with a 

multiplayer online game. Nature 466: 756 

[3] 

Freire. R, 2017. DIY ETextile glove workshop, 
bit.ly/2MZWdSR 

[4]  Freire. R, 2019. Etextile VR gloves for Vive Tracker,     
instructables.com/id/Etextile-VR-Gloves-for-Vive-
Tracker/ 

[5]  Glowacki B, et al, 2019, An open source Etextile VR glove 
for real-time manipulation of molecular simulations 
arXiv:1901.03532v1 [cs.HC] 

[6]  Glowacki. D, et al., “Isness: Using Multi-Person VR to 

Design Peak Mystical-Type Experiences Comparable to 
Psychedelics”, CHI 2020, 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3313831.3376649 

[7]  Kobakant. HOW TO GET WHAT YOU WANT: E-Textile 

Datagloves Overview, bit.ly/2QubH3i 

[8]  Mulder. A, 1994. How to build an instrumented glove 

based on the Powerglove flex sensors. PCVR 16, 10–14. 

[9]  Manus, https://manus-vr.com/ 

[10]  Narupa, https://gitlab.com/intangiblerealities  

[11]  Noitom, https://www.noitom.com/hi5-vr-glove 

[12]  Perner-Wilson. H, 2017. DIY VR glove, bit.ly/39HG0eH 

[13]  Perret. J, & Vander. E, 2018. Touching Virtual Reality: a 

Review of Haptic Gloves. ACTUATOR, 7 

[14]  O’Connor. M, et al. 2018. Sampling molecular confor-

mations and dynamics in a multiuser virtual reality 
framework. Science Advances 4, 6: eaat2731 

[15]  O’Connor. M, et al, 2019. Interactive molecular dynamics 
in virtual reality from quantum chemistry to drug binding 
J. Chem. Phys. 150, 220901 

[16]  Thomas. L, & Glowacki. D, 2018. Seeing and feeling in 

VR: bodily perception in the gaps between layered reali-
ties. International Journal of Performance Arts and Digi-
tal Media 14, 2: 145–1

 
 
 
