Virtual Manipulation in an Immersive Virtual Environment:  
Simulation of Virtual Assembly  

Mojtaba Noghabaei, SM.ASCE, 1Khashayar Asadi, 
SM.ASCE, 2and  Kevin Han, Ph.D., M.ASCE3

1Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, North Carolina State 
University, P.O. Box 7908, Raleigh, NC 27695-7908; e-mail: snoghab@ncsu.edu 
2Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, North Carolina State 
University, P.O. Box 7908, Raleigh, NC 27695-7908; e-mail: kasadib@ncsu.edu  
3Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, North Carolina State 
University, P.O. Box 7908, Raleigh, NC 27695-7908; e-mail: kevin_han@ncsu.edu  

ABSTRACT 

To fill the lack of research efforts in virtual assembly of modules and training, this paper presents 
a virtual manipulation of building objects in an Immersive Virtual Environment (IVE). A worker 
wearing a Virtual Reality (VR) head-mounted device (HMD) virtually perform an assembly of 
multiple  modules  while  identifying  any  issues.  Hand  motions  of  the  worker  are  tracked  by  a 
motion  sensor  mounted  on  the  HMD.  The  worker  can  be  graded  based  on  his/her  overall 
performance and speed during this VR simulation. The developed VR simulation can ultimately 
enable  workers  to  identify  unforeseen  issues  (e.g.,  not  enough  clearance  for  an  object  to  be 
installed). The presented method can solve current deficiencies in discrepancy detection in 3D 
scanned models of elements. The developed VR platform can also be used for interactive training 
and  simulation  sessions  that  can  potentially  improve  efficiency  and  help  achieve  better  work 
performance for assemblies of complex systems.  

INTRODUCTION 

Industrial construction is one of the major parts of the construction industry in all of the countries 
especially  industrially  developing  countries  (Nahangi  and  Haas  2016).  Industrial  construction 
mainly consists of power plants, petrochemical, and manufacturing facilities (Nahangi and Haas 
2016).  According  to  the  US  Census  Bureau,  the  total  construction  spending  on  power  plant 
construction  alone  was  more  than  $99  billion  for  both  private  and  public  entities  in  2017  (US 
Census Bureau 2018). This sector alone was more than eight percent of the total construction that 
has occurred in the US in 2017 (US Census Bureau 2018). 

Piping  is  one  of  the  most  important  systems  in  industrial  construction,  which  includes 
piping design, fabrication, and installation. The piping systems account for nearly 50% of the total 
industrial  construction  costs  (Nahangi  and  Haas  2016).  Despite  advancements  in  Building 
Information  Modeling  (BIM)  and  as-built  modeling  for  complex  piping  systems,  errors  and 
discrepancies are still a problem in industrial construction. The discrepancy in piping systems is 
still a common problem in most of the power plants with complex piping systems. Construction 
engineers need to detect these discrepancies before moving the components to the construction site 
from manufacturing facilities so they can reduce cost and schedule overruns. However, this is a 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 1 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cumbersome  task  since  checking  the  components  using  old  module  surveying  techniques  is  a 
labor-intensive task and requires years of experience. 

To  solve  these  problems,  researchers  used  3D  imaging  technologies  along  with  BIM 
models to generate as-built 3D models and detect discrepancies (Asadi et al. 2019b; Bosché et al. 
2015; Han et al. 2018; Nahangi and Haas 2016). Comparing as-built 3D models with BIM elements 
can help the engineers and technicians to detect the discrepancies easily(Boroujeni and Han 2017). 
To automatically detect the discrepancies in the elements after 3D scanning, researchers focused 
on  micro-level  point  cloud  analysis  and  noise  cancellation  techniques  (Nahangi  et  al.  2016). 
Although  this  approach  is  well  tuned  for  pipes,  it  will  not  work  efficiently  on  complex  piping 
systems where there are more complex components than pipes. This limitation of micro-level point 
cloud analysis on the 3D models slowed the adaptation of these technologies in a real construction 
site.  

In this paper, the authors suggest a macro-level analysis of 3D scanned as-built models for 
detecting manufacturing discrepancies as wells a platform for training workers in an immersive 
virtual environment (IVE) that enables workers and designers to identify potential problems and 
discrepancies of as-built elements before transferring them to the construction site. This platform 
can help the workers to detect the potential problems that might happen in the construction site 
such as insufficient space for performing a task and the positions that might be hard to access. 
Moreover, this platform enables workers and designers to virtually manipulate objects using hand 
motion tracker and head-mounted device (HMD) in an IVE and automatically detect whether the 
element has passed the  quality standards. Finally, the 3D scanned object snaps in its registered 
highlighted  area  in  the  BIM  model  if  the  object  passes  the  quality  standards.  Therefore,  this 
platform  can  reduce  cost  and  time  associated  with  quality  control  industrial  constructions.  Our 
contribution  in  this  study  is  proposing  a  novel  VR  training  platform  for  improving  workers 
performance for complex assembly tasks in industrial construction.  

BACKGROUND 

This  section  is  investigating  different  viewports  to  determine  the  potential  gaps  for  detecting 
discrepancies in the construction industry.  In the beginning, the existing tools for surveying and 
visualizing industrial modules and parts were investigated and both advantages and disadvantages 
were reviewed. Furthermore, current approaches for assessing the quality of as-built models versus 
BIM elements in terms of geometry in civil infrastructures were evaluated. Finally, the potentials 
of Virtual Reality (VR) and Virtual Manipulation technologies was discussed and the benefits of 
using these technologies were evaluated. 

Surveying techniques are grouped based on automation level that they can provide for data 
gathering.  The  most  famous  technique  in  surveying  is  using  conventional  tapes.  Since  this 
technique was performed manually, it can be error-prone and unreliable. Moreover, in complex 
systems, manual measurements are labor-intensive and error-prone. Alternatively, new automated 
data  collection  techniques  such  as  laser  scanning  and  photogrammetry,  have  the  potentials  to 
decrease  error  and  automate  surveying  process  (Fathi  et  al.  2015).  These  techniques  made 
substantial improvements in the project schedule, project monitoring, and as-built modeling (Asadi 
et al. 2018b, 2019a; Asadi and Han 2018; Golparvar-Fard et al. 2011).  

Using the accurate and reliable data form the automated data collection techniques, the as-
built status of each component in a construction site can be generated (Asadi et al. 2018a; Son et 
al.  2015).  However,  aligning  the  point  cloud  of  each  element  to  its  twin  in  BIM  to  detect 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 2 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
 
discrepancies is a manual task and yet to be automated (Nahangi and Haas 2016). Automating this 
task improves discrepancy detection.  

Despite all the benefits of 3D scanning and BIM in detecting the discrepancies, still there 
are other technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR) and Virtual Manipulation (VM) that can help 
to improve discrepancy detection process. In a survey, the industry professionals indicated that 
using VR along with BIM is one of the main solutions for the future of their company and the 
industry (Salama et al. 2018). VR can provide a one to one scale level of BIM (Heydarian et al. 
2015), therefore it is possible to improve discrepancy detection in such environments. In addition, 
many studies have shown, VR can improve spatial perception (Paes et al. 2017) and improving 
spatial  perception  along  with  one  to  one  scale  level  of  VR  can  help  technicians  to  detect  the 
discrepancies faster and more efficient. Furthermore, VR can improve communication between 
different parties (Balali et al. 2018), improve safety (State and State 2017), and provide effective 
training programs (Kayhani et al. 2019). In addition, combining VR with hand motion tracking 
technologies such as Leap Motion can provide a realistic first-person situation where the user can 
interact, move, and rotate the objects using their hands (Hilfert and König 2016). This technology 
further  improves  the  spatial  perception  of  the  user  which  finally  leads  to  easier  discrepancy 
detection and improving user performance in detecting manufacturing defects. 

METHOD 

The proposed method consists of two main components. The first component is to generate a point 
cloud for each building element (i.e., a pipe) and comparing this as-built point cloud with its BIM 
model, finding the corresponding BIM element and finding geometrical and/or spatial differences 
at the macro level. The second component is an IVE platform that enables users to manipulate 3D 
scanned as-built models of the elements for detecting discrepancies in the parts in a one to one 
scale virtual environment. The authors used Unity 3D as the main platform for comparing different 
BIM models and 3D point clouds 

In  this  paper,  the  author  used  three  parts  from  a  piping  section  and  generated  the  laser 
scanned models of those pipes. Figure 1. Shows the laser scanned models of the parts with label 
“a” and the image of the parts by label “b”. 

Figure 1. Pictures vs. the 3D scanned models of the parts. 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 3 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
 
 
 
To make 3D scanned models  of the parts, the authors used  the Artec  Eva laser scanner 
(Artec Eva 2018). This hand-held scanner can achieve the accuracy up to 0.1 millimeters. This 
scanner enables a technician to simply walk on the construction site and/or manufacturing site and 
easily  scan  different  parts.  Figure  2.  Represents  the  process  of  3D  scanning  a  pipe  using  the 
scanner. The pipe is on the rotary table while 3D hand-held 3D scanner stays fixed to generate an 
accurate and near noise-free 3D model. After scanning the parts, Artec Studio’s automated process 
was used to generate a 3D mesh using the point cloud that was generated by the device.  

Figure 2. The process of creating 3D models using Artec laser scanner 

To automatically compare the as-built models and BIM models, the authors defined three 
macro-level parameters with a certain threshold. The reason behind using macro-level parameters 
is the noise in 3D scanned models. 3D scanning techniques always have noise and it is the inherent 
deficiency of the current technologies. Both photogrammetry and laser scanning do not provide 
perfect  and  noise-less  point  clouds.  Therefore,  using  micro-level  parameters  to  compare  two 
models can be  complicated on complex elements and needs post-processing of the point cloud 
which  can  be  labor-intensive  and  error-prone.  However,  using  macro-level  parameters  can 
automate the alignment process for more complex elements. Table 1. defines three macro-level 
parameters  to  detect  differences  in  the  3D  scanned  model  and  BIM  model.  In  this  table,  each 
triangle  is  representing  each  triangle  in  the  3D  model’s  mesh. 𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥  and   𝐷𝑚𝑖𝑛  represent  the 
maximum and minimum value of all vertices in the 3D model’s mesh in direction D. 𝑁𝐷⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗  is the 
absolute value of the normalized vector of each triangles of the 3D model’s mesh in direction D.  

Table 1. Macro-level parameters for detecting discrepancies in 3D scanned Models.  

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 4 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

ParameterFormulaTotal Object SurfaceObject DimensionAggregated Normals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After defining the macro-level parameters, the authors created an immersive manipulation 
environment. Leap Motion that detects a user’s hands is attached to an HTC Vive VR headset. 
This integrated hardware enables users to interact with virtual objects in an IVE using their hands. 
Figure 3 presents an overview of this platform. First, BIM models and laser scanned models are 
imported in Unity 3D. Then, connect both VR device and hand tracker to the Unity 3D.  In the 
developed IVE, users can move, rotate, and connect virtual elements. 

Using this platform, a user can place 3D point clouds in the corresponding and highlighted 
BIM element. If the macro-level parameters for both 3D scanned model and BIM model are within 
the threshold, the object will snap into the highlighted area and the quality of the part is acceptable. 
Otherwise, the part will not snap and it has more discrepancy than acceptable range. This means 
that the part has to be changed and does not satisfy the quality standards. Therefore, the user can 
try virtual installation and inspection of building parts in the IVE.  

Figure 3. Overview of the developed VR manipulation platform  

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS 

The collected data from three objects in Figure 1. are as follows. Object one has 198,402 vertices 
and 396,800 faces. Object two has 125,742 vertices and 251,484 faces. Object three has 19,658 
vertices  and  38,703  faces.  To  validate  the  platform,  the  authors  compared  the  macro-level 
parameters values  from  3D scanned models  and  BIM models.  Table 2.  represents  the different 
macro-level parameters values for Object 2 in Figure 1. The BIM model row in Table 2. shows the 
macro-level  parameters  for  BIM  model  and  the  next  row  shows  the  value  of  the  macro-level 
parameter for 3D scanned objects. The difference of values between BIM and 3D scanned model 
are within a certain threshold. The acceptable threshold for this study assumed to be 25 percent, 
however, it can be changed based on the needed accuracy level and importance of the part.  

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 5 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Vision-based 3D models vs. the actual 3D scanned models of the parts. 

Figure 4. demonstrate the first person view of the user trying to place a 3D scanned model 
in  the  highlighted  area  in  a  petrochemical  plant  site.  In  Figure  4a,  the  3D  scanned  element  is 
hovering in the air in the right side of the screen and the position of the element in the BIM model 
is highlighted by green color in the center of the screen.  In  Figure 4b, the user grasped the 3D 
scanned model. The user goal is to place the 3D scanned part in the highlighted area and make 
sure  that  the  part  has  acceptable  quality.  In  Figure  4c,  the  user  moves  the  part  close  to  the 
highlighted area and in Figure 4d, the 3D scanned model snaps in the highlighted area since it is 
within a certain threshold. If the object does not snap in the highlighted area, the macro-parameters 
for that specific object is not within the defined threshold therefore, the user has to check the part 
manually and detect discrepancies in part so they can fix the issue with the real part. 

Figure 4. Worker view in a virtual petrochemical plant working with as-built 3D parts. 

CONCLUSION 

This study proposed a use case of virtual manipulation that can be potentially used for installation 
and inspection for industrial construction. The developed platform has the potential to reduce and 
solve on-site problems and in the module production plants and reduce unnecessary transportation 
of the elements. Also, this platform can help the workers to automatically detect discrepancies and 
avoid quality control on the parts that have high quality. In addition, the workers will perform the 
tasks faster in the construction site since they had proper training with virtual elements and this 
can help to avoid schedule overruns that might happen in a construction site.  

This platform can help to check the discrepancies in parts that were produced in different 
companies  before  transferring  them  to  the  construction  site.  The  VM  environment  helps 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 6 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

ParameterTotal Surface Direction (unit)(         )XYZX (mm)Y (mm)Z (mm)BIM Model28404.40.520.530.1890.089.547.0Laser Scanned Model27911.90.570.570.2490.992.355.1Weighted NormalsObject Dimension    
 
 
 
technicians to check the parts and virtually assemble the modules. In addition, this platform has 
the potential to  be used  as a training program  environment where technicians and workers can 
practice connecting complex piping systems in a safe environment. 

REFERENCES 

“Artec Eva.” (2018). <https://www.artec3d.com/portable-3d-scanners/artec-eva> (Feb. 12, 

2018). 

Asadi, K., and Han, K. (2018). “Real-Time Image-to-BIM Registration Using Perspective 

Alignment for Automated Construction Monitoring.” Construction Research Congress 
2018, American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA, 388–397. 

Asadi, K., Jain, R., Qin, Z., Sun, M., Noghabaei, M., Cole, J., Han, K., and Lobaton, E. (2019a). 
“Vision-based Obstacle Removal System for Autonomous Ground Vehicles Using a 
Robotic Arm.” Computing in Civil Engineering 2019. 

Asadi, K., Ramshankar, H., Noghabaee, M., and Han, K. (2019b). “Real-time Image 

Localization and Registration with BIM Using Perspective Alignment for Indoor 
Monitoring of Construction.” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering. 

Asadi, K., Ramshankar, H., Pullagurla, H., Bhandare, A., Shanbhag, S., Mehta, P., Kundu, S., 

Han, K., Lobaton, E., and Wu, T. (2018a). “Building an Integrated Mobile Robotic System 
for Real-Time Applications in Construction.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01745. 

Asadi, K., Ramshankar, H., Pullagurla, H., Bhandare, A., Shanbhag, S., Mehta, P., Kundu, S., 

Han, K., Lobaton, E., and Wu, T. (2018b). “Vision-based integrated mobile robotic system 
for real-time applications in construction.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 96, 470–
482. 

Balali, V., Noghabaei, M., Heydarian, A., and Han, K. (2018). “Improved Stakeholder 

Communication and Visualizations: Real-Time Interaction and Cost Estimation within 
Immersive Virtual Environments.” Construction Research Congress 2018, 522–530. 

Boroujeni, K. A., and Han, K. (2017). “Perspective-Based Image-to-BIM Alignment for 

Automated Visual Data Collection and Construction Performance Monitoring.” Congress 
on Computing in Civil Engineering, Proceedings, 171–178. 

Bosché, F., Ahmed, M., Turkan, Y., Haas, C. T., and Haas, R. (2015). “The value of integrating 
Scan-to-BIM and Scan-vs-BIM techniques for construction monitoring using laser scanning 
and BIM: The case of cylindrical MEP components.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 
49, 201–213. 

Fathi, H., Dai, F., and Lourakis, M. (2015). “Automated as-built 3D reconstruction of civil 

infrastructure using computer vision: Achievements, opportunities, and challenges.” 
Advanced Engineering Informatics, Elsevier, 29(2), 149–161. 

Golparvar-Fard, M., Bohn, J., Teizer, J., Savarese, S., and Peña-Mora, F. (2011). “Evaluation of 

image-based modeling and laser scanning accuracy for emerging automated performance 
monitoring techniques.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 20(8), 1143–1155. 
Han, K., Degol, J., and Golparvar-Fard, M. (2018). “Geometry- and Appearance-Based 

Reasoning of Construction Progress Monitoring.” Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, 144(2), 04017110. 

Heydarian, A., Carneiro, J. P., Gerber, D., and Becerik-gerber, B. (2015). “Immersive virtual 

environments , understanding the impact of design features and occupant choice upon 
lighting for building performance.” Building and Environment, Elsevier Ltd, 89, 217–228. 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 7 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
 
Hilfert, T., and König, M. (2016). “Low-cost virtual reality environment for engineering and 
construction.” Visualization in Engineering, Springer International Publishing, 4(1), 2. 
Kayhani, N., Taghaddos, H., Noghabaee, M., Ulrich, and Hermann. (2019). “Utilization of 

Virtual Reality Visualizations on Heavy Mobile Crane Planning for Modular Construction.” 
arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1901.06248. 

Nahangi, M., Czerniawski, T., Haas, C. T., Walbridge, S., and West, J. (2016). “Parallel Systems 

and Structural Frames Realignment Planning and Actuation Strategy.” Journal of 
Computing in Civil Engineering, 30(4), 04015067. 

Nahangi, M., and Haas, C. T. (2016). “Skeleton-based discrepancy feedback for automated 

realignment of industrial assemblies.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 61, 147–161. 

Paes, D., Arantes, E., and Irizarry, J. (2017). “Immersive environment for improving the 

understanding of architectural 3D models: Comparing user spatial perception between 
immersive and traditional virtual reality systems.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 84, 
292–303. 

Salama, T., Moselhi, O., and Al-Hussein, M. (2018). “Modular Industry Characteristics and 

Barrier to its Increased Market Share.” (April). 

Son, H., Bosché, F., and Kim, C. (2015). “As-built data acquisition and its use in production 

monitoring and automated layout of civil infrastructure: A survey.” Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, Elsevier, 29(2), 172–183. 

State, N. C., and State, N. C. (2017). “Development of Immersive Personalized Training 

Environment for Construction Workers Idris Jeelani 1 ; Kevin Han 2 ; and Alex Albert 3 1.” 
407–415. 

United States Census Bureau. (2018). Monthly Construction Spending. 

Proceedings Paper Formatting Instructions 

– 8 –  

Rev. 01/2019 

 
