Interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality from quantum chemistry to drug 
binding: An open-source multi-person framework  

Michael O’Connor,1,2,3 Simon J. Bennie,1,3 Helen M. Deeks,1,2,3 Alexander Jamieson-Binnie,1,3 Alex J. 
Jones,1,2,3 Robin J. Shannon,3 Rebecca Walters,1,2,3 Thomas J. Mitchell,1,4 Adrian J. Mulholland,3 and 
David R. Glowacki1,2,3* 

1Intangible Realities Laboratory, University of Bristol, Cantock’s Close, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK; 2Dept. of Computer Science, 
University of Bristol, Merchant Venturer’s Building, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK; 3Centre for Computational Chemistry, School of 
Chemistry, University of Bristol, Cantock’s Close, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK; 4Creative Technologies Laboratory, University of the 
West of England, Bristol, BS16 1QY, UK  

*glowacki@bristol.ac.uk 

Abstract 

As molecular scientists have made progress in their ability to engineer nano-scale molecular structure, we are facing 
new challenges in our ability to engineer molecular dynamics (MD) and flexibility. Dynamics at the molecular scale 
differs from the familiar mechanics of everyday objects, because it involves a complicated, highly correlated, and three-
dimensional many-body dynamical choreography which is often non-intuitive even for highly trained researchers. We 
recently described how interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality (iMD-VR) can help to meet this challenge, 
enabling researchers to manipulate real-time MD simulations of flexible structures in 3D. In this article, we outline 
various efforts to extend immersive technologies to the molecular sciences, and we introduce ‘Narupa’, a flexible, open-
source, multi-person iMD-VR software framework which enables groups of researchers to simultaneously cohabit real-
time  simulation  environments  to  interactively  visualize  and  manipulate  the  dynamics  of  molecular  structures  with 
atomic-level precision. We outline several application domains where iMD-VR is facilitating research, communication, 
and creative approaches within the molecular sciences, including training machines to learn reactive potential energy 
surfaces (PESs), biomolecular conformational sampling, protein-ligand binding, reaction discovery using ‘on-the-fly’ 
quantum  chemistry,  and  transport  dynamics  in  materials.  We  touch  on  iMD-VR’s  various  cognitive  and  perceptual 
affordances, and how these provide research insight for molecular systems. By synergistically combining human spatial 
reasoning and design insight with computational automation, technologies like iMD-VR have the potential to improve 
our ability to understand, engineer, and communicate microscopic dynamical behavior, offering the potential to usher 
in a new paradigm for engineering molecules and nano-architectures. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 

In  1977,  artificial  and  augmented  reality  pioneer 
Myron  Krueger  began  his  paper  Responsive 
Environments  with  the  observation  that  “human-
machine  interaction  is  usually  limited  to  a  seated 
[person]  poking  at  a  machine  with  [their]  fingers  or 
perhaps  waving  [their]  hands  over  a  data  tablet.”  1 
Krueger  went  on  to  speculate  that  real-time,  multi-
sensory  interaction  between  humans  and  machines 
might enable exciting and efficient new approaches for 
exploring  realities  that  are  otherwise  impossible  to 
access.  Nanoscale  molecular  objects  offer  fertile 
testbeds  for  exploring  new  technological  frontiers  in 
human-computer  interaction  (HCI),  owing  to  the  fact 
that  molecules  represent  objects  that  are  important  to 
society  and  industry,  but  which  we  are  unable  to 
directly  perceive,  and  which  are  characterized  by 
considerable  three-dimensional  dynamic  complexity. 
As  Krueger  observed,  the  sensory  modes  we  use  to 
obtain insight and navigate the complex and dynamic 
terra incognita of nanoscale structures are limited: our 
representational methods are confined mostly to 2d, and 
primarily  designed  for  parsing  by  our  visual  cortex 
(plots, images, movies, articles, etc.). Recent research 
in  psychology  and  neuroscience  has  shown  that  our 
attention is enhanced when we engage in multi-sensory 
processing,2, 3 simultaneously integrating complex data 
across  our  various  sensory  channels,  spanning  the 
visual, auditory, olfactory, and somatosensory cortexes. 
In some sense, we do not make full use of the array of 
information  processing 
sensory,  perceptual,  and 
machinery  which  we  have  evolved  as  thinking  and 
feeling  beings  to  make  sense  of  the  natural  world 
around us. This not only limits our ability to understand 
the 3D complexity of dynamical microscopic systems; 
in many cases it is also extremely inefficient. Beyond a 
relatively  small  size  threshold  of  ~50  atoms,  2D 
representational  tools  quickly  become  unwieldy  for 
handling  3D  molecular  systems.  For  example, 
researchers  lose  lots  of  time  struggling  with  2D 
molecular  viewers  to  build  complex  3d  structures, 
attempting to represent 3D structural dynamics in a 2D 
fighting  with  scripting 
presentation 
languages 
to  undertake  complex  3D  molecular 
manipulations. 

format,  or 

Over the past several years, our laboratory has been 
carrying  out  an  interdisciplinary  research  program 
exploring 
interactive  molecular  dynamics  (iMD) 
beyond standard 2d interfaces, designed to enable direct 
multisensory interaction with molecular simulations.4-9 
The recent emergence of robust and affordable virtual 
reality  (VR)  technologies  has  been  a  key  enabler  in 
these efforts, allowing us to develop a framework where 
scientists can manipulate rigorous real-time simulations 
of molecular systems, as shown in Figure 1 and Video 

illustrated 

1  (vimeo.com/244670465).  Figure  1  shows 
two 
optically tracked participants (each wearing a VR head-
mounted  display  (HMD)  and  holding  in  each  hand 
function  as  atomic 
wireless  controllers  which 
‘tweezers’)  manipulating  the  real-time  MD  of  a  C60 
molecule  using  interactive  molecular  dynamics  in 
virtual  reality  (iMD-VR).  As  shown  in  the  video,  the 
participants can easily ‘lock onto’ individual C60 atoms 
and manipulate their real-time dynamics to pass the C60 
back and forth between one other. This is possible and 
immediately intuitive because interaction with the real-
time  C60  simulation  and  its  associated  ball-and-stick 
visual representation is perfectly co-located – i.e., the 
interaction  site  in  3D  physical  space  is  exactly  the 
interaction  site 
in  3D  simulation  space.  The 
in  Figure  1 
client/server  architecture 
provides each VR client access to global position data 
of all other participants, so that any participant can see 
through their headset a co-located visual representation 
of all other participants. To date, our available resources 
and 
to 
simultaneously  co-locate  six  participants  in  the  same 
room  within  the  same  simulation.  The  interaction 
shown  in  Video  1,  where  multiple  participants  in  the 
same room are able to easily pass a simulated molecule 
between themselves (or e.g., collaboratively tie a knot 
in a protein) as if it were a tangible object, represents a 
class  of  simulated  virtual  experience  which  is  simply 
not  possible  within 
immersive 
the 
stereoscopic  CAVE  environments  that  have  become 
popular  within  academic  and 
industrial  research 
institutions.10 In previous work,8 we have shown that – 
with an good network connection –  the Figure 1 MD 
server can be cloud-mounted, so that remotely located 
workers can occupy the same virtual space.  

constraints  have 

allowed  us 

large-scale 

space 

iMD-VR 

interaction 

Whilst adoption of new forms of immersive human 
computer 
is  not  yet 
like 
widespread within the molecular sciences, several case 
studies across a range of fields have demonstrated the 
quantitative benefits that arise from utilizing immersive 
forms of human computer interaction beyond standard 
2d GUIs and text-based displays. For example, in the 
medical field, detailed interactive surgical simulations 
in VR have an established track record for more than a 
decade. A number of studies have quantitively shown 
that VR-trained surgeons complete surgical procedures 
faster, with significantly lower error rates (for example, 
a  2002  paper  reported  7x  fewer  errors).11  Similarly, 
digital animation firms like Dreamworks have reported 
time and cost reductions on the order of 3x following 
adoption of immersive technologies which allow their 
digital  animators  to  reach  into  scenes  and  carry  out 
direct  manipulations  (e.g.,  to  animated  characters)  in 
3d.12  Recent  controlled  studies  carried  out  in  our  lab 
have  quantitatively  demonstrated  iMD-VR  enables 

2 

 
researchers  to  complete  molecular  modelling  tasks 
more  quickly  (2x  –  10x)  than  they  can  using 
conventional interfaces like a mouse or a touchscreen. 
increasingly 
The  observed  accelerations  become 
significant  for  molecular  pathways  and  structural 
transitions  whose  conformational  choreographies  are 
intrinsically  3-dimensional.8  For  reactive  systems 

where  multiple  competing  reaction  channels  are 
available,  we  have  also  recently  demonstrated  that 
iMD-VR combined with ‘on-the-fly’ ab initio quantum 
chemistry  offers  an  extremely  efficient  strategy  for 
sampling  reactive  geometries  along  the  minimum 
energy  path  (MEP)  which  can  be  used  to  train  neural 
networks.13

Figure 1: schematic of the setup for Narupa, our open-source multi-person iMD-VR framework, showing two participants using handheld wireless 
controllers to manipulate a real-time MD simulation of a C60 molecule. The position of each user’s head mounted display (HMD) and wireless 
controllers is determined using a real-time optical tracking system composed of synchronized IR light sources (‘lighthouses’). Each user’s HMD 
is rendered locally on a VR client computer fitted with a suitable GPU. MD calculations and maintenance of global user position data take place 
on a separate MD server, shown here as a local workstation (which alternatively can be cloud-mounted). As long as the network connecting client 
and server enables sufficiently fast data transfer, system latency is imperceptible. The figure shows a local network setup optimized to minimize 
latency, with the MD server and VR clients communicating via LAN cables connected to a router. 

they 

enable 

because 

Beyond  these  quantitative  benefits,  we  have  also 
observed  a  number  of  qualitative  benefits  from  iMD-
VR. Whilst these benefits are less easy to capture in a 
graph,  a  table,  or  a  number,  they  are  nonetheless 
significant, 
improved 
understanding  and  insight  into  complex  molecular 
systems,  furnishing  an  improved  sense  for  how 
molecular  objects  move  and  respond  to  perturbation, 
facilitating  efficient  clear  communication,  and 
encouraging researchers to think creatively about their 
systems.  Many  of 
in 
understanding and communicating aspects of molecular 
science result from the fact that our ‘ways of knowing’ 
the nanoscale molecular world are indirect – a result of 

the  difficulties 

that  arise 

the fact that molecular lengthscales are very small and 
molecular  timescales  are  very  fast.  Unable  to  directly 
perceive  these  lengthscales  and  timescales  using  our 
human  sensory  apparatuses,  we  rely  instead  on 
instrumental  data-feeds14  and  abstract  models.  Our 
ability to ‘know’ the molecular world relies primarily 
on our ability to parse instrumental data feeds and our 
ability to undertake cognitive abstraction and develop 
models, in order to make connections between abstract 
domains  and  experimental  domains  –  e.g.,  using 
abstract  models 
experimental 
to  generate 
hypotheses,  and  using  experimental  data  to  refine 
abstract  models.  Successful  organic  chemists,  for 
example,  are  able  to  undertake  complex  cognitive 

an 

3 

 
 
 
 
mappings to translate between 3d molecular structures 
and their 2d molecular notation.  

In  his  visionary  essay  The  Ultimate  Display,  Ivan 
Sutherland  highlighted  our  lack  of  intuition  for 
scientific  domains  where  we  cannot  directly  perceive 
our objects of study and are therefore always ‘one step 
removed’: We live in a physical world whose properties 
we have come to know well through long familiarity. We 
sense  an  involvement  with  this  physical  world  which 
gives  us  the  ability  to  predict  its  properties  well.  For 
example,  we  can  predict  where  objects  will  fall,  how 
well-known  shapes  look  from  other  angles,  and  how 
much force is required to push objects against friction... 
We  lack  corresponding  familiarity  with  the  forces  on 
charged  particles,  forces  in  non-uniform  fields…  and 
high-inertia, low friction motion…15 Over the last few 
decades,  advances  in  experimental  techniques  like 
super-resolution  fluorescence  microscopy  and  cryo-
electron  microscopy  have  helped  refine  our  ability  to 
map  molecular  structure  and  dynamics.  It  has  been 
proposed  that  advances  in  nano-engineering  may  one 
day  allow  us  to  design  and  construct  nanoscale 
structures and machines with the sort of precision that 
is  possible 
the  design  and  engineering  of 
macroscopic  objects.  For  example,  in  his  oft-quoted 
‘plenty  of  room  at  the  bottom’  lecture,16  Richard 
Feynman speculated that we would one day be able to 
carry out routine atomic level manipulation at the scale 
of individual atoms17, 18 – a kind of atomically resolved 
surgery  which  remains  a  holy  grail  for  scientists 
working at the nanoscale.  

in 

As we make progress in our ability to engineer and 
design  molecular  structure  and  function,  a  new 
fundamental challenge is emerging: namely, our ability 
to  understand  and  engineer  molecular  motion, 
dynamics, and flexibility. Here we encounter exactly the 
sorts  of 
‘non-intuitive’  physics  highlighted  by 
Sutherland: forces acting on charged particles in non-
uniform  fields  are  the  norm,  and  high-inertia-low-
friction regimes are not uncommon. Moreover, because 
molecular systems typically have thousands of degrees 
of freedom, their motion is characterized by a complex, 
highly correlated, many-body dynamical choreography 
which is unintuitive because it has few analogues in our 
day-to-day experience. As we aim to not only engineer 
structure, but also dynamics and flexibility, we require 
tools which enable us to obtain a designer’s sense of the 
properties of the various materials which constitute our 
building blocks. In the same way that VR enables better 
surgical peformance, we can imagine a scenario where 
biomimetic molecular designers use iMD-VR to gain a 
sense for how biological molecules move and how they 
‘feel’, in order to make more informed creative design 
hypotheses.  

a 

the 

computer 

In  classifying  different  forms  of  human-computer-
interaction, experts often refer to the ‘affordances’ of a 
particular environment or technology – i.e., the features 
of a particular environment or technology that elicit a 
particular  kind  of  behavior  or  interaction.19-22  For 
example, 
screen-mouse-keyboard 
combination  clearly  has  a  distinct  set  of  design 
affordances compared to a virtual reality interface. Both 
technologies  enable 
rendering  of  computer 
generated  images;  however,  a  virtual  reality  interface 
allows one to walk around in space to inspect the image 
from  various  angles  and  quickly  intuit  depth,  while  a 
screen requires that the user observe the image from a 
particular  perspective  and  carry  out  a  sequence  of  2d 
mouse manipulations to understand depth. As another 
the 
example,  a  keyboard  primarily  emphasizes 
transmission  of  text-based  information  via  button 
presses and a mouse affords one-handed manipulations 
in  two  dimensions  in  order  to  navigate  the  screen. 
Neither  a  set  of  wireless  tracked  VR  controllers  (like 
those shown in Figure 1) nor a pair of VR gloves is well 
suited to rapid text input like that which is afforded by 
a keyboard, but they afford precise and intuitive two-
research 
handed  spatial  manipulation.  From  a 
perspective, a key question for the molecular sciences 
involves understanding those particular areas where the 
affordances of new VR environments (compared to 2d 
screen-mouse-keyboard  environments)  enable  deeper 
insight,  a  better  feel  for  nanoscale  design  and 
engineering,  more  effective  scientific  communication 
and collaboration, and accelerated research progress in 
important  molecular  systems  and 
understanding 
concepts.  23  In  a  recent  paper,  Goddard  et  al.  have 
outlined  a  number  of  the  software  tools  which  have 
emerged  for  use  in  head-mounted  virtual  reality 
environments, 24 many of which have their conceptual 
origins in software frameworks originally designed for 
use 
stereoscopic,  multi-projector  CAVE-like 
environments.  10,  25-30  In  the  last  few  years,  software 
frameworks which have emerged for head mounted VR 
displays  can  be  broadly  schematized  according  to  the 
extent of active participation which they enable. These 
include applications: 
•  Enabling  a  participant  to  inspect  either  a  static 
molecular  structure  or  a  pre-recorded  molecular 
trajectory in three dimensions. In such applications, 
the role of the participant is primarily observational; 
the head mounted display essentially operates as a 
mechanism for enabling a 360-degree video where 
the participant can look around;31-34 

in 

•  Where a participant has a more active role, and can 
navigate  a  simulated  space  to  inspect  a  structural 
rendering  from  various  angles  and  quickly  intuit 
depth.  In  many  cases,  participants  are  able  to 
manipulate  aspects  of  the  structural  model  or 

4 

 
trajectory  –  e.g.,  changing  its  representation  and 
rendering  options,  pausing  and  resuming 
the 
trajectory,  showing  or  hiding  certain  parts  of  the 
the  model,  and 
structure, 
perhaps  querying  structural  aspects  of  the  model 
(e.g., bond distances, angles, residue names, etc.); 24, 
35-39 

rotating/translating 

•  Enabling a participant to carry out modifications on 
a  molecular  structure,  e.g.,  to  build  or  modify 
molecules  by  connecting  together  atoms  or  amino 
acids,  replacing  one  functional  group  with  another 
functional group, etc.;35 

To date, our own research has specifically explored 
interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality (iMD-
VR)  –  i.e.,  applications  that  emphasize  simulation  at 
interactive latencies, in which the affordances of two-
handed  interaction  within  the  three-dimensional  VR 
space enable a participant to 'reach out and manipulate’ 
rigorous MD simulations, and carry out detailed three-
dimensional  structural  manipulations  in  real-time,  as 
shown  in  Figure  1.8  Our  experiments  suggest  that the 
utility  of  iMD-VR  as  a  research  tool  arises  from  its 
ability  to  transform  abstract  molecular  models  into 
tangible dynamic realities. In section 2 of this article, 
we  discuss  VR’s  recent  resurgence,  and  outline  a 
particularly useful way to schematize the various types 
of  VR  which  are  emerging  in  the  commodity  market. 
We  follow  this  with  a  brief  history  of  interactive 
molecular  simulation,  and  then  discuss  participants’ 
reports that they can ‘feel’ the dynamics of simulated 
molecular  objects  within  the  iMD-VR  environment. 
Section  3  of  this  article  outlines  a  project  we  have 
provisionally  named  ‘Narupa’,  an  open-source  (GPL 
v3.0)  iMD-VR  software  framework  which  we  made 
publicly available to coincide with this article (source 
at gitlab.com/intangiblerealities and a stable executable 
at  irl.itch.io/narupaxr).  The  name  ‘Narupa’  combines 
the  prefix  'nano'  and  suffix  ‘arūpa’  (a  Sanskrit  word 
describing  non-physical  and  non-material  objects), 
which represents our attempt to capture what it is like 
to  interact  with  simulated  nanoscale  objects  in  VR. 
Section  4  details  a  variety  of  research  applications 
which we have carried out using Narupa, and section 5 
outlines  some  new  interaction  strategies  which  are 
exploring in order to increase the utility of iMD-VR for 
researchers in the molecular sciences. In section 6, we 

conclude  this  article,  and  discuss  research  directions 
moving forward.  

In  designing  Narupa,  we  have  aimed  at  a  ‘low 
threshold-high  ceiling’  design.40,  41  This  established 
design  paradigm  emphasizes  tools  that  are  easy  for 
novices to get started using (i.e., a low threshold), but 
which  are  sufficiently  powerful  to  enable  experts  to 
make progess on sophisticated and complex projects (a 
high-ceiling).  In  the  last  couple  years,  we  have  made 
countless  demonstrations  of  Narupa  to  international 
research  colleagues,  and  we  have  observed  that  the 
‘low-threshold’  aspect  of  our  design  approach  leads 
some researchers to dismiss the software as ‘a gimmick’ 
or  ‘a  toy’.  At  its  core,  however,  Narupa  is  a  rigorous 
scientific  simulation  environment,  with  three  key 
emphases:  (1)  the  integration  of  real-time  simulation 
methodologies 
framework, 
enabling  participants  to  manipulate  and  ‘feel’  the 
dynamical  responses  of  molecular  systems;  (2)  the 
ability  to  make  the  VR  experience  one  in  which 
facilitates  communication,  by  enabling  multiple 
participants to cohabit the same virtual world together, 
either  together  in  the  same  room,  or  distributed 
remotely;  and  (3)  active  engagement  with  designers, 
artists, and human-computer interaction (HCI) experts, 
in  order  to  create  a  framework  which  not  only  has 
scientific utility, but which is aesthetically compelling.5, 
7, 42 This latter point is particularly important given the 
level  of  immersion  which  can  be  achieved  in  VR 
environments.  An  unattractive  aesthetic  makes 
participants unlikely to utilize immersive tools.  

interaction 

into  our 

Faced with traditional scientific publication formats, 
one of the most well-known difficulties for workers in 
VR  concerns  exactly  how  to  write  about  it.  43  This  a 
particularly  important  point  for  the  purposes  of  this 
article,  given  that  ‘reaching  out  to  touch  molecules’ 
falls into a class of perceptual experience which does 
not  have  a  very  good  analogue  in  our  day-to-day 
phenomenological  experience.  In  an  attempt  to  deal 
with  this  difficulty,  this  article  makes  reference  to  a 
number  of  videos  (listed  in  Table  1),  each  with  a 
hyperlinked  URL,  which  we  encourage  the  reader  to 
watch  alongside  the  corresponding  text,  because  we 
have found that they go a long way toward overcoming 
the difficulties in writing about aspects of multi-person 
iMD-VR  that  are  difficult  to  communicate  with  text 
alone.

5 

 
 
 
Video Index 

URL 

Description 

Force Engine 

Video 1 

vimeo.com/244670465 

Video 2 

vimeo.com/305459472 

Video 3 

vimeo.com/315239519 

Multi-person demo showing:8 
(a) C60 being passed back and forth; 
(a) CH4 transit through a nanotube; 
(b) helicene changing from right to left-handed twist; 
(c) 17-ALA peptide being tied in a knot 
Illustrating the iMD-VR selection interface with 
Cyclophilin A 
Narupa secondary structure visualization demo of 
neuraminidase (PDB 3TI6) 

Video 4 

vimeo.com/315218999  Reactive & non-reactive OH + CH4 scattering 

Video 5 

vimeo.com/311438872 

Video 6 

vimeo.com/312963823 

Exploring reactive PESs for CN + isobutane for NN 
fitting using interactive ab initio quantum chemistry13 
On-the-fly reaction discovery for OH + propyne using 
interactive ab initio quantum chemistry 

Video 7 

vimeo.com/306778545  Reversible Loop Dynamics in Cyclophilin A 

Video 8 

vimeo.com/274862765 

Video 9 

vimeo.com/296300796 

Video 10 

vimeo.com/312957045 

Video 11 

vimeo.com/312994336 

Video 12 

vimeo.com/305823646 

Using the Narupa-OpenMM plugin to dock 
benzamindine with trypsin 
Using the Narupa-OpenMM plugin to dock 
oseltamivir with neuraminidase 
Guiding 2-methyl-hexane through a ZSM-5 zeolite 
using the Narupa-PLUMED interface 
Real-time sonification of a biomolecule’s potential 
energy illustrated by tying a knot in 17-ALA peptide 
Use of our custom Extextile VR gloves to tie a knot in 
17-ALA peptide50 

(a) MM344 
(b) MM344 
(c) MM344 
(d) OpenMM45 
OpenMM45 

OpenMM45 

DFTB+46 
SCINE47 

SCINE47 

OpenMM45 
OpenMM45 

OpenMM45 

PLUMED/DL_POLY48, 49 

OpenMM45 

OpenMM45 

Table 1: videos discussed in this article, along with their respective URLs, a brief description, and the force engine utilized in the video 

2.  iMD and VR: context & history 

2.1 A hierarchy for classifying VR technologies 

to 

solutions 

commodity-priced 

A  detailed  review  of  the  history  of  VR  is  available 
elsewhere.  43,  51  Whilst  VR  technologies  have  been 
available for much longer than the latest hype cycle, the 
distinguishing  feature  of  the  current  resurgence  is  the 
fact  that  technology  which  was  previously  only 
available in specialist research labs or medical school 
facilities is now available at considerably lower prices. 
Driven  mostly  by 
the  consumer  gaming  and 
entertainment market, recent advances in VR hardware 
provide 
the 
longstanding problem of co-located interaction in three 
dimensions.  HCI  technologies  are  co-located  when 
there  is  a  perfect  alignment  between  the  interaction 
sites  in  physical  space  and  the  interaction  sites  in 
virtual space.  52 Touchscreens, for example, solve the 
problem of 2D co-location because the interaction site 
in  physical  space  is  identical  to  the  interaction  site  in 
virtual space. This is a significant reason why children 
at a very young age find it straightforward to navigate a 
touchscreen.  Combining  infrared  optical  tracking, 
inertial  movement  units  (IMUs),  and  application 
specific  integrated  circuits  (ASICS),  commodity  VR 
technology  such  as  the  HTC  Vive  offers  fully  co-
located  interaction  in  three  dimensions,  tracking  a 
participant’s real-time 3D position with errors less than 

a centimeter, and allowing participants to reach out and 
touch simulated objects in the virtual world, as shown 
in Figure 1 & Video 1. 

A  wide  array  of  relatively  distinct  technologies  are 
currently  available  which  are  often  referred  to  as 
‘virtual  reality’,  each  of  which  offers  different 
affordances.  However,  it  is  important  to  address  a 
widespread misconception: strapping a screen to one’s 
head implies nothing about the level of immersion the 
participant experiences. VR pioneers like Jaron Lanier 
have emphasized this point, highlighting the fact that a 
number  of  frameworks  which  are  often  referred  to  as 
‘virtual reality’ enable participants to do little more than 
‘just  looking  around  in  a  spherical  video’.  51  Lanier, 
along with other HCI researchers, has made a point to 
distinguish those technologies which do afford reaching 
out to touch the virtual world: If you can’t reach out and 
touch the virtual world and do something to it, you are 
a  second  class  citizen  within  it...  a  subordinate  ghost 
that  cannot  even  haunt.  51  From  this  point  on  in  this 
article, we use the term ‘virtual reality’ specifically in 
reference  to  technologies  like  the  HTC  Vive  and  the 
Oculus  Rift,  whose  design  affordances  enable  one  to 
‘reach out and touch’ simulated realities. In an excellent 
recent  review  of  virtual  reality  principles  and 
applications,43  Mel  Slater  highlights  a  useful  way  to 
schematize different VR technologies according to the 
level  of  immersion  which  they  offer.  VR  technologies 

6 

 
 
  
 
 
are  ultimately  sophisticated  simulators,  and  therefore 
any VR technology’s level of immersion can be defined 
relative  to  another  VR  technology  by  making  a 
determination as to whether its affordances enable it to 
simulate in principle (or not) the experiences available 
with another technology. So we can say that a specific 
VR technology A is ‘more immersive’ than another VR 
technology  B  so  long  as  A  could  be  designed  (in 
principle)  to  simulate  the  experience  of  using  B.  Our 
efforts to date have focused primarily on the HTC Vive, 
because  it  represents  one  of  the  most  immersive 
commodity  frameworks  according  to  this  definition  – 
i.e., its versatility enables it to simulate the vast majority 
of other VR technologies (e.g., a CAVE, 10 a Samsung 
Gear headset, a Playstation headset, etc.), but not vice 
versa.  

enable 

simulated 

Beyond virtual reality, other forms of technology are 
emerging  which 
immersive 
experiences,  including  augmented  reality  (AR),  and 
mixed  reality  (MR).  While  a  detailed  discussion  of 
these  various  emerging  technologies  is  beyond  the 
scope of this paper (and complicated owing to the fact 
that  the  technology  is  evolving  rapidly),  we  note  that 
the  various  forms  of  embodied  digital  interaction 
(whether they are forms of virtual, augmented, or mixed 
reality) are sometimes referred to on aggregate as ‘XR’, 
or ‘extended’ reality. Having experimented with a wide 
range  of  available  technologies,  we  have  found  the 
aforementioned HTC Vive to be generally robust for the 
purposes  of  molecular  simulation  and  visualization. 
Moreover,  the  HTC  Vive  also  allows  us  to  design 
experiences which enable groups of people within the 
same  space  (as  shown  in  Figure  1)  to  simultaneously 
co-habit the same simulated virtual world. However, we 
note  that  the  technology  is  steadily  advancing,  and 
many of the ideas in this paper are not limited to VR. 
They could easily be extended to any of a range of XR 
technologies, so long as their affordances enable one to 
‘reach out and touch’ simulated realities, and then carry 
out  spatial  manipulations  with  a  sufficient  degree  of 
precision so as to enable workers to carry out detailed 
atomic  adjustments  and  rearrangements.  Throughout 
this  article,  we  describe  people  who  use  VR  as 
‘participants’ rather than ‘users’, recognizing that VR is 
different  from  other  forms  of  human–computer 
interface because the human can actively participate in 
the virtual world. 43 

2.2 Interactive Molecular Simulation 

Historical efforts to use computing to designing new 
ways to interact with molecular simulations have been 
strongly  influenced  by  the  kinds  of  tangible  (e.g., 
plastic, metal, wood, etc.) molecular models that have 
been  historically 
in  chemistry  and 
important 
biochemistry  –  e.g.,  tangible  three-dimensional  (3D) 

the  often  non-intuitive  mechanics 

molecular  models 
like  Dorothy  Hodgkin’s 
crystallographic  model  of  penicillin’s  structure,  53 
Pauling’s  models  to  identify  the  structure  of  alpha-
helices, 54 Watson and Crick’s famous DNA model, and 
the  55 large room-sized models, made from e.g., wire, 
plastic,  brass,  balsawood,  and  plasticene which  were 
used to refine and represent protein crystal structures by 
pioneers  such  as  Kendrew  and  Perutz.56,  57  Physical 
models like these provide structural insight, but cannot 
represent 
that 
determine  how  molecules  move  and  flex.  The  first 
researchers to pursue the idea that computers could be 
used  to  construct  tangible  molecular  models  whose 
motion was based on rigorous physical laws included 
Fred  Brooks58  and  Kent  Wilson59,  pioneers  whose 
interests spanned both scientific simulation and human-
computer-interaction  (HCI).  Brooks  and  Wilson  were 
amongst  the  first  to  imagine  how  such  technology 
would offer better insight, and also have the potential to 
accelerate research workflows. Following on from the 
ideas  outlined  by  Sutherland,  they  speculated  that 
interactive  molecular  simulation  (iMS)  frameworks 
would  lead  to  models  which  would  be  as  intuitive  to 
manipulate  as  the  old  tangible  models,  but  which 
followed rigorous physical laws.  

(DOF) 

Brooks  for  example  designed  an  immersive  six-
degree-of-freedom 
force-feedback  haptic 
system which participants could manipulate to carry out 
molecular  tasks,  58,  60  mounted  at  the  UNC  Dept  of 
Computer Science.58, 60-62  The original system was built 
from  an  enormous  robotic  arm  called  the  Argonne 
Remote  Manipulator  (ARM).62  Building  on  evidence 
that  force  feedback  tools  allowed  participants  to 
efficiently carry out remote manipulation tasks relevant 
research,  underwater  operations,  and 
to  space 
nuclear/radiation  laboratories,  63  Brooks  sought  to 
investigate whether the same was true for manipulation 
of  molecular  models.  He  designed  a  study  in  which 
participants were instructed to carry out a simple force 
minimization 
ligand-receptor 
task  emulating  a 
molecular  docking-type  problem  –  namely  a  rigid 
diatomic molecule in which each atom is acted upon by 
three unique harmonic forces, and initialized in a non-
optimal  configuration.  His  results  suggested  that 
participants  were  able  to  minimize  the  interaction 
potential  energy  faster  relying  upon  “blind”  force-
feedback compared to visual feedback. Inspired by this 
work,  Klaus  Schulten  and  co-workers  subsequently 
miniaturized Brooks’ setup: by manipulating a desktop-
mounted  haptic  pointer,  participants  could  steer  the 
real-time  dynamics  of  molecules  rendered  on  a 
stereographic  screen.  64  This  remains  the  approach 
utilized in most published iMS approaches58 – i.e., the 
participant manipulates a small pen-shaped mouse that 
can move in three translational dimensions (x,y,z), and 

7 

 
 
three rotational dimensions (rx, ry, rz). This pen-shaped 
mouse  is  attached  to  a  robotic  arm  which  can  be 
programmed to ‘resist’, a phenomenon which workers 
in HCI often refer to as ‘force-feedback’. This approach 
has been extended by others, including Marc Baaden, 
Markus  Reiher,  Todd  Martinez,  and  co-workers  to 
interactively  manipulate  molecular  mechanics  65  and 
quantum chemistry simulations.66, 67 

2.3 ‘Feeling’ molecules in virtual reality 

The  use  of  VR  in  surgical  contexts  –  where  it  is 
to  simulate  a  surgeon’s  experience  of 
intended 
manipulating  and  cutting  human  tissues  –  is  rather 
distinct  from  the  use  of  VR  to  manipulate  molecular 
structure  and  dynamics.  Perhaps  the  most  important 
difference  pertains  to  the  design  reference.  Surgical 
simulator  applications  have  a  well-defined  and 
measurable  design  reference,  with  a  well-defined 
design  question:  how  does  the  simulation  ‘feel’ 
compared  to  an  experience  involving  human  tissue? 
Molecular  applications,  on  the  other  hand,  have  no 
similarly  well-defined  design  reference  –  i.e.,  there  is 
neither  a  clear  answer  to  the  question  “What  does  a 
molecular system ‘feel’ like?’ nor to the question “what 
should  a  molecular  system  ‘feel’  like?”.  The  lack  of 
reference is a central part of what makes developing a 
real-time  molecular  simulation  and  manipulation 
framework  such  a  fascinating  and  creative  challenge, 
which must necessarily consider aesthetics, design, and 
participant psychology in order to be effective.  

Brooks did much to develop practical iMS strategies, 
and  nearly  everybody  who  has  persisted  in  exploring 
iMS  over  the  years  has  adopted  his  6  DOF  haptic 
approach.  The  miniaturization  of  such  haptic  devices 
has  also  made  them  practical  for  use  within  surgical 
simulators, where they can operate (for example) as a 
surgical knife, or be programmed to accurately simulate 
the resistance of tissues. As a result of the work by both 
Brooks  and  Wilson,  many  workers  in  iMS  have 
concluded that simulating the ‘feeling’ of a molecular 
structure  requires  the  use  of  force  feedback  haptics 
connected  to  robotic  arms.  One  problem  with  these 
sorts of haptic devices is that they face a well-known 
limitation  in  their  ability  to  achieve  3D  ‘co-location’. 
For interactive molecular simulations, 3D co-location is 
an  important  design  consideration,  owing  to  the  fact 
that  molecules  are  3D  objects  which  move  in  3D.  In 
principle,  co-located  solutions  involving  haptics  are 
possible – e.g., by co-locating the haptic device within 
the VR environment. However, such strategies require 
layers  of  non-
compatibility  between  multiple 
commodity 
it  remains  unclear 
whether  their  technological  cost  and  sophistication 
outweighs their benefits. Moreover, haptic technologies 
face  fundamental  limitations,  owing  to  the  fact  that 

technologies,  and 

there are excellent solutions available for specific types 
of interaction (e.g., pushing a needle through tissue in a 
surgical  simulation,  or  using  an  exoskeleton  to  apply 
force  feedback  to  an  arm);  however,  there  are  no 
generalized  solutions  in  the  form  of  a  single  device 
which enables participants in a VR environment to feel 
anything (e.g., in the same way that visual or auditory 
display  can  be  programmed  to  display  anything).  For 
this reason, some have argued that a generalized haptic 
solution is likely only possible in the form of a direct 
brain  interface,  in  which  case  haptics  will  becomes  a 
branch of applied neuroscience.68 

Haptic  technologies  like  a  robotic  arm  which  a 
participant  can  pull,  and  which  then  pulls  back,  offer 
one  particular  form  of  ‘felt’  sensation;  however,  our 
own research experience to date strongly suggests that 
felt sensation can be accomplished without the use of 
haptic  pointers.  Indeed,  our  experience  of  taking 
thousands  of  people  into  iMD-VR  over  the  past  few 
years,  and  enabling  them  to  manipulate  a  range  of 
different molecular structures, has shown that people do 
indeed  ‘feel’  molecular  responses  as  they  manipulate 
them. One particularly notable example of this occurred 
during an experiment which we will henceforth refer to 
as  the  ‘Burke  Perception  Experiment’  (BPE),  carried 
out during a visit by Professor Kieron Burke to our lab 
in Bristol – and one particular comment which he made 
during  his  30-minute  iMD-VR  experience.  After 
Kieron  successfully  threaded  methane  through  a 
nanotube, we instructed him to perturb a simulation of 
a  small  peptide  (17-Alanine)  from  its  native  structure 
and  then  tie  it  into  a  knot.  While  manipulating  the 
peptide, Kieron remarked “this feels so much different 
than the nanotube”.  

Kieron’s comment during the BPE is notable because 
it is extremely common. Multiple people, from a wide 
range of backgrounds, consistently comment on the fact 
that  different  molecules  simulations  ‘feel’  differently. 
However, it is not obvious why these sorts of comments 
consistently emerge: watching people from outside of 
VR, as shown in Video 1, they appear to be grasping at 
air. They are not touching anything physical. In a first 
attempt to unravel the mechanisms which might be at 
play  here,  we  have  been  developing  a  concept  of 
‘layered  perceptions’.9,  69  At  the  moment,  we  believe 
that  one’s  ability  to  ‘feel’  a  molecular  object  in  VR 
arises  from  a  layering  of  visual  perception  on  top  of 
proprioception (the non-visual sense through which we 
perceive the position and movement of our body). So 
when Kieron Burke reaches out to ‘touch’ a nanotube 
in  VR,  he  locks  his  force  tweezers  onto  an  atom  (or 
selection  atoms)  in  a  nanotube,  whose  underlying 
physics  are  dominated  by  covalent 
interactions 
(simulated  in  real-time).  The  form  of  these  forces 
requires Kieron to move in a particular way in order to 

8 

 
 
make the system respond as he wishes. The protein, on 
the  other  hand,  has  dynamics  which  are  largely 
governed  by  much  weaker  non-bonded  interactions. 
And therefore, Kieron must move in a slightly different 
way in order to tie the protein into a knot. Our working 
hypothesis  is  that  Kieron’s  proprioceptive  sensations 
are working alongside his visual sense to project a sense 
of  ‘feeling’  onto  objects  which  are  otherwise  only 
virtual  –  i.e.,  his  brain  is  integrating  visual  and 
proprioceptive details to ‘fill in’ the details of what such 
an object would feel like. This hypothesis is grounded 
in part from published work demonstrating that virtual 
reality can be used to heighten proprioceptive recovery 
in  stroke  patients,70  along  with  research  showing  that 
well-constructed  VR  experiences  operate  so  as  to 
encourage the brain to ‘fill in’ the perceptual details of 
a given scenario.43  

We are currently working to test these hypotheses in 
further  detail.  Whatever  the  precise  mechanism,  it 
appears that people can ‘feel’ simulated objects which 
do not have a material essence. That sense of ‘feeling’ 
provides 
them  an  embodied  awareness  of  how 
nanoscale systems (simulated using classical dynamics 
on an approximate PESs) behave, and how they respond 
to perturbation. This is an important insight because it 
means  that  it  is  possible  to  ‘feel’  a  molecule  without 
expensive  haptic 
technologies,  which  are  non-
commodity pieces of equipment and therefore tend to 
be  rather  expensive  and  cumbersome.  Moreover,  by 
heightening our proprioceptive sensitivities, it may be 
possible  to  enhance  our  ability  to  ‘feel’  simulated 
realities. Because there is no design reference for what 
a  molecule  should  feel  like,  using  subtle  mechanisms 
like  proprioception  represent  an  approach  which  is 
equally reasonable compared to haptic approaches. The 
extent  to  which  we  can  effectively  design  for  the 
proprioceptive  sense  of  feeling  remains  to  be  seen. 
Further  HCI  tests  will  provide  insight  into  each 
approach’s respective strengths and weaknesses. 

3.  An open-source multi-person iMD-VR 
environment 

3.1 Narupa 

Figure  1  and  Video  1  illustrates  the  Narupa 
framework  we  have  developed  to  interface  the  HTC 
Vive  with  rigorous  real-time  molecular  simulation 
algorithms, which we have released as an open-source 
project.  Narupa  overcomes  several  limitations  of  the 
proof-of-principle  iMD-VR  prototype  framework  we 
previously described in an article by O’Connor et al8: 
(a) 
the  multi-person 
functionality  illustrated  in  Figure  1,  so  that  multiple 
participants 
iMD-VR 
environment;  (b)  rather  than  the  simulations  being 

it  enables  easy  access 

inhabit 

same 

can 

the 

to 

predefined in advance, it enables participants to set up 
and  customize  their  own  simulations  using  a  flexible 
force API (discussed further below); and (c) it can be 
set up to run on local networks (i.e., does not require 
access to cloud computing over fast networks). While a 
real-time  MD  simulation  of  C60  using  molecular 
mechanics  force  fields  is  relatively  cheap,  the  client-
server architecture shown in Figure 1 enables access to 
a more powerful computational back-end as needed, in 
order  to  simulate  systems  of  increased  complexity 
(discussed  further 
in  what  follows).  The  URL 
irl.itch.io/narupaxr,  where  we  have  made  the  Narupa 
executable available, contains a link to documentation 
included as part of the open-source software repository, 
listing  the  hardware  required  to  set  up  a  multi-person 
accommodate  n 
VR 
participants  (where  ! ≤ 8),  along  with  costs  and 
instructions on how one goes about setting up a lab of 
their own.  

environment  which 

can 

3.2 Force biasing 

The  VR-enabled  interactive  MD  shown  in  Video  1 
effectively  amounts  to  a  real-time  classical  dynamics 
simulation which responds to real-time biasing forces, 
building  on  our  previous  work  using  optical  tracking 
technologies to interactively steer real-time molecular 
simulations.  4  In  classical  mechanics, 
time-
dependent  dynamics  of  molecular  systems  are  solved 
by  numerically  integrating  Newton’s  equations  of 
motion. The vector of forces acting on a set of atoms 
F(t)  can  be  written  in  terms  of  the  system’s  potential 
energy V, i.e.: 

the 

F(t) = −

dV
dq

Eq (1) 

where q is a vector containing the position of each atom 
in  the  ensemble.  Our  system  effectively  allows 
participants to interactively chaperone a real time MD 
simulation by splitting V into two different components 

V = Vint + Vext

            Eq (2) 

where Vint corresponds to the system’s internal potential 
energy, and Vext corresponds to the additional potential 
energy  added  when  a  participant  exerts  a  force  on  a 
specific  atom  (or  group  of  atoms)  when  they  grab  it 
using the handheld wireless controller shown in Figure 
1. Substituting Eq (2) into Eq (3) then gives 

F(t) = −

dVint
dq

−

dVext
dq

Eq (3) 

The external forces can be implemented in a number of 
ways, including by projecting a spherical Gaussian field 
9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the system at the point specified by the participant, 
and applying the field to ‘lock onto’ the nearest atom $ 
as follows: 

%&'()
%*

=

,-.
/0 1*2 − 4567

0
89*-8459
0:0

            Eq (4) 

where ;2 is the atomic mass of the nearest atom, < is a 
scale factor that tunes the strength of the interaction, qj 
is  the  position  of  atom  j,  gi  is  the  position  of  the 
interaction  site,  and  =  controls  the  width  of  the 
interactive  fields.  <  is  variable  parameter  that  the 
participant  can  set,  so  as  to  achieve  responsive 
interaction while preserving dynamical stability, and = 
is  typically  set  to  the  default  value  of  1nm.  While  an 
interaction  is  active,  it  is  always  applied  to  the  same 
atom  (or  group  of  atoms),  which  means  a  participant 
can dynamically adjust the course and strength of the 
interaction  simply  by  repositioning  their  field  with 
respect  to  the  atoms  with  which  they  are  interacting, 
until  they  decide  to  ‘let  go’.  As  an  alternative  to  the 
Gaussian potential outlined above, we also use spring 
iMD 
potentials,  a 
implementations  that  predate  modern  virtual  reality,71 
which take the following form:  

technique  used  by  previous 

%&'()
%*

= 2;2<1*2 − 456   

            Eq (5) 

The Gaussian field has the advantage that the maximum 
force is limited by the Gaussian height, while the spring 
has  no  limit.  To  prevent  instability  in  the  molecular 
system, the maximum force a participant can apply is 
limited so as not exceed a maximum value.  

The  Gaussian  potential  has  more  flexibility  for 
tuning the strength of the potential, and the fact that it 
decays to zero at long distances reduces the chance of 
accidentally exerting a large force on an atom. On the 
other hand, the spring potential may be more intuitive 
in  some  cases,  because  it  allows  one  to  increase  the 
strength of the force by simply increasing the distance. 
Determining  which  interactive  potential  is  better  for 
particular  applications  remains  a  question  for  further 
study in participatory tests. Much of the ‘art’ of iMD-
VR  involves  understanding  how  to  set  the  interaction 
parameters in Eq (4) and Eq (5) so as to enable smooth, 
stable,  and  intuitive  dynamics  for  a  given  dynamics 
simulation  setup,  which  does  not  excessively  perturb 
the  system.  Narupa  enables  participants  to  easily 
modify the value of the scaling parameter c from within 
VR, tuning the interaction on the fly as they experiment 
with a given system. 

3.3 Interaction Selection and Force Damping 

shown 

systems 

complex 

selection 

interface, 

in  more 

in  Video 

interaction  algorithms  beyond 

The  applications  discussed  in  section  4  led  us  to 
design  new 
those 
described  above,  in  order  to  facilitate  molecular 
manipulation 
like 
biomolecules. In particular, we realized that there were 
many cases in which it was advantageous to be able to 
apply a force to an entire subunit of a given molecular 
system,  for  example  if  one  wishes  to  manipulate  a 
portion  of  a  protein’s  secondary  structure  and  ensure 
that it remains intact. To address this we implemented 
2 
a 
(vimeo.com/305459472), which allows a participant to 
identify  a  group  of  atoms  which  they  would  like  to 
manipulate (a similar selection interface also enables a 
participant to choose different renderings for different 
parts  of  the  molecule).  Having  specified  a  particular 
selection,  the  participant  can  then  exert  an  interactive 
force on the center of mass of the entire subunit, in a 
fashion  that  keeps  secondary  structures  intact.  Such  a 
method  is  also  extremely  useful  studying  systems 
linked to protein-ligand binding, for example enabling 
a  researcher  to  exert  an  interactive  force  on  an  entire 
ligand. If we let ?@ be the center of mass of the atoms 
included within a particular selection, and assume that 
an interactive potential is applied to this group, then the 
overall force to apply to the atoms, AB, is calculated as 
in the single atom case described by Eq (4) and Eq (5), 
except instead of a single atomic position, the center of 
mass  is  used  as  the  center  of  interaction,  effectively 
substituting ?@ for *2, and setting ;2 to 1, which gives:  

.

A@ =

/0 (?@ 	 − 45)7

0
8F?G	845F
0:0

            Eq (6) 

This  total  force  is  divided  amongst  the  atoms  and 
applied in a mass-weighted fashion as follows: 

%&'()
%*

=

H

@

;2A@   

            Eq (7) 

The resulting interaction allows complex manipulations 
which  for  example,  can  preserve  protein  secondary 
structure.  

We also realized that, similar to medical surgery, the 
ability  to  carry  out  manipulations  on  a  real-time  MD 
simulation depends critically on a participant’s ability 
to  make  gentle  movements  which  do  not  irreversibly 
perturb too many parts of the system. Interacting with 
the atomic system by applying bias potentials enables 
the  motion  of  the  system  to  be  integrated  as  usual. 
However,  in  some  cases  the  accumulation  of  biasing 
forces  on 
can  have  unintended 
consequences,  as  the  forces  are  integrated  into  the 
velocities of the atoms of the system. This can make a 
system challenging to control, because the only way for 
10 

system 

the 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an  atom  (or  selection  thereof)  to  lose  the  momentum 
added  by  participant  manipulation  either  by:  (1) 
velocity-damping  energy  transfer  through  collisions 
with other parts of the system, (2) velocity dampening 
and friction from the thermostat, or (3) the participant 
applying a force in the opposite direction. One strategy 
which  avoids  excess  momentum  build-up  during 
interactive molecular simulations involves performing 
energy  minimization66 
continuous 
than 
continuously  integrating  the  system  dynamics.  This 
strategy  works  well  for  small  molecular  systems  and 
reactions,  in  which  manipulating  a  single  atom  and 
having  the  system  constantly  minimize  its  energy  is 
tractable. Inspired by this strategy, we have developed 
a hybrid method which uses velocity reinitialization as 
the  effects  of  accumulated 
a  way 
momentum.  Upon  interacting  with  a  single  atom  or 
group of atoms, the molecular dynamics continues to be 
integrated as usual, except now the interactive biasing 
potentials are also being applied. Once the participant 
stops interacting with the atoms, the atoms involved in 

to  mitigate 

rather 

the  interaction  have  their  velocities  randomly  drawn 
from  a    Maxwell-Boltzmann  distribution  at  a  target 
temperature  of  IJ,  where  J  is  the  target  equilibrium 
temperature of the thermostat, and I ∈ (0,1] is a scale 
factor chosen by the participant, which by default is set 
to  a  value  of  0.5.  To  maintain  stability,  velocities  are 
typically  reinitialised  to  a  temperature  lower  than  the 
target  equilibrium  temperature.  This  is  similar  to  the 
Andersen thermostat, except rather than being applied 
to  atoms  at  random,  the  velocity  re-initialization  is 
specifically  targeted  at  those  atoms  involved  in  an 
interaction. By reinitializing the velocities, any overall 
momentum  in  the  atoms  in  a  particular  direction  is 
removed. Of course, there is a timescale associated with 
re-equilibration, but applying interactive forces already 
takes the system out of equilibrium, and the benefit of 
being  able  to  accurately  manipulate  groups  of  atoms 
which  are  in  an  approximately  correct  ensemble, 
outweighs this effect.

Scheme 1: Broad outline of the Narupa server/client design, and the API that enables communication between the VR client and the MD server. 
The MD server contains the (thermostatted) integrator, as well as engines for calculating both internal and external forces. The API enables 
flexibility for connecting different force engines to the VR client. 

3.4 The Narupa Force API 
Simulating  the  dynamics  of  a  particular  molecular 
system  requires  an  engine  to  calculate  the  internal 
forces.  Here  we  benefit  from  the  fact  that  our 
framework has been designed to flexibly communicate 
with  a  wide  range  of  force  engines  via  a  defined 
application programming interface (API). As illustrated 
in  Scheme  1,  the  API  functions  in  a  straightforward 
manner,  sending  coordinates  to  a  force  engine,  and 
receiving forces in return. The idea here is that the force 
engines which communicate to Narupa can effectively 
operate  as  ‘black  boxes’,  which  simply  plugin  to 
Narupa.  For example, we have connected our API to 
the following force engines: an implementation of the 
MM3  forcefield  44,  72; 
the  OpenMM  molecular 
dynamics  package,  which  allows  access  to  a  range  of 
GPU-accelerated force engines 45; PLUMED, using the 
VMD IMD API,71 which is capable of communicating 
with a wide range of programs, e.g., GROMACS 48 and 

LAAMPS;73 the tight binding density functional theory 
package  DFTB+  46;  and  the  semi-empirical  quantum 
chemistry package SCINE. 47 The flexibility of our API 
enables  us 
interactive 
to  undertake  VR-enabled 
simulations on a wide range of systems, and optionally 
include  either  implicit  (e.g.,  continuum)  or  explicit 
(e.g., TIP3P water) solvent models. In cases where we 
model explicit solvent, we do not typically visualize the 
solvent molecules, in order to maintain clarity and high-
quality  rendering.  Force 
typically 
undertaken using a Velocity Verlet integrator, with an 
Andersen  thermostat  74  set  to  a  predefined  target 
temperature. A time step of 1 fs is typical, although we 
recently 
the  SETTLE  and  CCMA 
constrained dynamics algorithms, 75, 76 which enables us 
to  achieve  stable  dynamics  utilizing  greater  timesteps 
of up to 2 fs for biomolecular systems. The scientific 
applications  outlined  in  section  4  benefit  from  the 
flexibility  of  this  force  plugin  architecture.  Narupa 

implemented 

integration 

is 

11 

 
 
 
 
includes  options  which  enable  participants  to  store 
trajectories  which  they  generate  whilst  in  VR,  for 
subsequent analysis and post-processing. 

3.5 Narupa renderers  

The  flexibility  of  the  Narupa  force  API  enables  the 
simulation of a wide range of molecular systems, and 
we are consequently working to implement a number of 
rendering  aesthetics.  Familiar  styles  such  as  ball-and-
stick, liquorice and VDW representations are available, 
as well as a ribbon renderer for protein structures, some 
of  which  are  shown  in  Video  2.  These  styles  can  be 
applied to any selection layer created in VR, enabling 
intuitive  customization.  The  visualization  settings  can 
then  be  stored  for  repeat  use  or  transmitted  to  other 
participants  to  synchronize  visualization  for  shared 
experiences. High performance rendering of molecular 
structures in VR is a challenge, requiring a target frame 
rate  of  90  frames  per  second  for  each  eye,  which  is 
further complicated by the requirement for rendering of 
simulations  that  are  continuously  updating  from  data 
being  received  over  the  network.  We  are  currently 
working to improve rendering performance, and build 
additional  renderers,  such  as  a  secondary  structure 
renderer which can dynamically indicate biomolecular 
features  such  as  alpha  helices  and  beta  sheets.  For 
example,  Video  3  (vimeo.com/315239519)  shows  a 
first person perspective of a real-time MD simulation of 
neuraminidase (PDB 3TI6) displayed using a prototype 
secondary structure renderer which we will soon add to 
the main Narupa source distribution. This renderer uses 
the DSSP algorithm77 to calculate the hydrogen bonds 
and secondary structure present in the molecule. This is 
combined with a cubic Hermite spline passing through 
the  alpha  carbon  chain  of  the  enzyme  to  render  a 
continuous  3D  chain.  The  secondary  structure 
assignment is used to color the chain appropriately and 
to stretch the chain to highlight arrows and helices. The 
video shows how bits of the secondary structure flicker 
in and out over the duration of the MD simulation. 

3.6 Narupa examples 

Narupa  comes  packaged  with  a  number  of  stable 
examples,  which  participants  can  inspect  in  order  to 
guide  them  in  setting  up  their  own  interactive 
simulations.  At  present,  the  following  examples  are 
packaged with Narupa: 
•  Two  C60  buckyballs  at  300K  simulated  with  a 
timestep  of  1fs.  This  is  the  usual  introductory 
simulation for familiarizing users with the iMD-VR 
environment. 

•  A carbon nanotube and methane molecule simulated 
at 200K with a 0.5fs timestep. The ‘task’ here is to 
pass the methane molecule through the nanotube. 

•  A  short  helicene  fragment  at  300K  and  with  a  1fs 
timestep,  which  users  can  manipulate  to  switch 
between conformations characterized by either a left 
or right-handed screw sense. 

timestep  simulated  with 

•  A 17-ALA helical peptide chain at 300K and with a 
2fs 
the  Amber99SB 
forcefield,  used  to  demonstrate  the  ability  to  tie  a 
the 
molecular  knot.  This  simulation  requires 
OpenMM package. 

•  The  enzyme  H7N9  Neuraminidase  and  the  drug 
Oseltamivir,  to  demonstrate  drug  unbinding  and 
rebinding, with the protein using the Amber03 force 
field,  and  the  drug  force  field  parameterized  using 
GAFF.  This  simulation  is  run  using  an  Andersen 
thermostat  at  300K,  with  a  Verlet  integrator  with 
timestep  0.5fs.  This  simulation  also  requires  the 
OpenMM package. 

•  The smallest known knotted protein MJ0366 in its 
the  utility  of  3D 
illustrate 
to 
native  state, 
visualization, 
the  Amber03 
simulated  with 
forcefield  using  an  Andersen  thermostat  at  300K 
with  a  Verlet  integrator  with  timestep  0.5fs.  This 
simulation requires the OpenMM package. 

thermostat  and 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  simulations  use  the 
Berendsen 
the  velocity  Verlet 
integrator.  The  three  hydrocarbon  simulations  all  use 
the  MM3  force  field.  In  the  near  future,  we  will  be 
adding  a  number  of  additional  examples  to  the  open-
source repository (e.g., those outlined in section 4). For 
the  smaller  simulations,  good  performance  and  fluid 
interactivity  can  be  achieved  by  running  the  force 
engine  server  and  VR  render  client  on  the  same 
machine.  However,  for  the  larger  simulations  (e.g., 
the  quantum 
H7N9  Neuraminidase,  MJ0366,  or 
chemical  systems  described  in  section  4),  achieving 
good  performance  &  fluid  interactivity  often  requires 
running the force engine on one machine  and the VR 
render  client  on  another,  with  communication  over  a 
fast local network. 

4. Scientific Research Applications 

4.1 Measuring Task Completion Times 
As we have come to demonstrate this framework more 
extensively,  we  have  often  encountered  the  question: 
‘does this provide any research benefit?’ To answer this 
question,  we  published 
recent  work  aimed  at 
quantitatively  evaluating  the  extent  to  which  our 
framework  accelerated 
typical  molecular 
simulation tasks. In a series of controlled HCI studies, 
we  tasked  participants  with  a  range  of  molecular 
manipulation  goals:  (1)  threading  methane  through  a 
nanotube;  (2)  changing  screw-sense  of  a  helicene 
molecule  (from  left  to  right  handed);  and  (3)  tying  a 

some 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
protein  knot.  These  tasks  were  selected  because  each 
requires  a  complicated  3D  dynamical  choreography, 
and  also  because  they  represent  distinct  classes  of 
dynamical  change  which  are  important  across  natural 
and  engineered  nano-systems.  For  example, 
the 
CH4/nanotube task provides an analogue for transport 
dynamics  across  nano-pores  of  the  sort  which  are 
ubiquitous  across  bio/materials  chemistry.78  The 
helicene task provides an example of induced changes 
in  molecular  helicity,  which  synthetic  biologists  have 
explored as a strategy to transmit chemical messages.79, 

80 Molecular knots have been successfully designed in 
recent synthetic work,81 and have also been observed to 
occur  in  protein  structures,  where  they  have  been 
associated  with  neurodegenerative  diseases.82  The 
results, shown in Figure 2, quantitatively demonstrate 
that participants within the iMD-VR environment can 
complete molecular modelling tasks more quickly than 
they can using conventional interfaces like a mouse or 
a  touchscreen,  especially  for  molecular  pathways  and 
structural 
conformational 
choreographies are intrinsically 3-dimensional.

transitions 

whose 

Figure  2:  left  hand  panel  shows  interactive  molecular  simulation  tasks  used  as  application  tests:  (A)  threading  CH4  through  a  nanotube;  (B) 
changing the screw-sense of a helicene molecule; and (C) tying a knot in a polypeptide (17-ALA). Colors selected in this figure are chosen for 
the sake of clarity. The right hand panel shows the user study results corresponding to each task, including accomplishment rates for each task (n 
= 32 for all tasks), with Poisson error estimates, and the distribution of task accomplishment times. In the box-and-whisker plots, whiskers indicate 
the data range and the box indicates the standard error of the distribution. The mean is shown as a solid line, and the median as a dashed line. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to  provide 

For tasks A and C, Figure 2 indicates that iMD-VR 
provides  a  clear  acceleration  benefit  compared  to  the 
other platforms, and also that - the more inherently 3D 
the  task,  the  greater  the  benefit.  The  knot-tying  task 
results (Figure 2C) are the most dramatic. A task like 
knot-tying, which is so intrinsically 3D, is very difficult 
to  accomplish  outside  of  VR.  For  the  nanotube  task 
(Figure 2A), the accomplishment rates, mean time, and 
median time in iMD-VR are a factor of approximately 
2x – 3x faster than on other platforms. At first glance, 
the helicene task (Figure 2B) is a case in which iMD-
rate 
VR  appears 
enhancement compared to other platforms. Observation 
of  the  study  participants  show  that  this  is  because 
changes  in  helicene  screw-sense  are  most  efficiently 
accomplished  using  a  simple  2D  circular  motion,  as 
shown in Video 1. Essentially, the 2D limitations of the 
mouse  and  touchscreen  constrain  the  participant  to 
carrying out a motion which is well suited to inducing 
changes  in  molecular  screw-sense,  so  that  iMD-VR 
provides  little  additional  benefit.  Closer  inspection  of 
the  helicene  time  distributions  shows  that  iMD-VR 
does afford some advantage: the median time required 
to  change  molecular  screw-sense  in  iMD-VR  is  30–
40%  less  than  the  median  time  required  on  a 
touchscreen or using a keyboard/mouse. 

significant 

little 

Reassuringly, we found zero instances where users 
the  experiments 
experienced  VR-sickness  during 
carried  out  to  gather  the  data  in  Figure  2.  To  date, 
thousands of people have volunteered to experience our 
system,  and  very  few  (less  than  ten)  instances  have 
arisen where participants report any form of sickness – 
a  very  small  probability.  This  is  an  important  point, 
because there is a widespread misconception that a VR 
experience  necessarily  entails  some  form  of  motion-
related illness. This is not in fact the case. The causes 
of  VR  sickness  are  well  understood  by  workers  in 
human  computer  interaction  and  psychology.  One  of 
the  most  common  causes  of  VR  sickness  arises  from 
inconsistency  between  the  visual  information  arriving 
to the brain and the information arriving for processing 
by  the  vestibular  and  proprioceptive  system.  For 
example, a sure-fire way to induce VR sickness is by 
simulating  motion  within  the  VR  headset  whilst  a 
participant  is  stationary.  In  such  a  case,  the  brain’s 
visual  system  is  presented  cues  suggesting  motion,  at 
odds with the cues to the vestibular and proprioceptive 
systems,  which  are  not  experiencing  motion.  This 
perceptual  disconnect  leads  to  sickness  in  significant 
fractions of people (including several of the authors on 
scientific 
this 
applications  like  those  being  discussed  herein,  VR 
sickness  can  sometimes  arise  as  a 
result  of 
computational  bottlenecks  which  cause  the  system  to 
‘lag’.  In  such  cases,  it  is  often  possible  to  improve 

article!).  For  high-performance 

system performance through detailed optimizations, or 
at least to define the operational performance limits of 
the  system  which  avoid  participants  experiencing 
illness. The important point is this: high-end commodity 
VR enables designers to avoid experiences which lead 
to illness. In the vast majority of cases, the origins of 
VR sickness are well-understood, and neither designers 
nor participants should settle for VR experiences which 
induce illness. 

4.2  Using  iMD-VR  to  train  neural  networks  to  learn 
reactive PESs 

The first iMD-VR simulation we ever ran (in Sept 
2016)  was  OH  +  CH4,  using  a  multi-state  EVB  force 
field83, 84 which we designed to simulate OH + CH4 → 
CH3  +  H2O.  Tests  run  on  a  number  of  participants 
indicated that our system provided insight into several 
subtle nuances characteristic of dynamical systems. For 
example, participants reported that: (1) when using their 
handheld  force  ‘tweezers’  to  manipulate  the  CH4 
Carbon, they could detect the vibrational wobbliness of 
the  much  lighter  attached  Hydrogens;  (2)  as  they 
brought OH + CH4 into close proximity, they could feel 
the non-local electrostatic repulsions which arise; and 
(3)  when  releasing  the  OH  or  CH4  molecules  with 
translational kinetic energy, they could see the resulting 
translational and vibrational damping as a consequence 
of the thermostat. Successfully undertaking a reaction 
to  make  CH3  +  H2O  required  that  participants  place 
sufficient  kinetic  energy  into  the  relative  translational 
motion of the reactants to get over the barrier, and also 
that  they  guide  OH  +  CH4  into  an  orientation  which 
could overcome the randomizing influence of entropy 
and  enables  hydrogen  abstraction.  These  early 
4 
experiments, 
(vimeo.com/315218999),  provided  the  first  indication 
that our iMD-VR system was sufficiently intuitive and 
afforded  adequate  control  for  simulation  tasks  to  be 
in  a  way  which  was 
successfully  undertaken 
reproducible by a wide cross-section of participants.  

illustrated 

Video 

in 

In  general,  the  simulation  of  chemical  reactions 
requires  quantum  mechanical  approaches,  which  are 
computationally  expensive  compared  to  molecular 
mechanics, and limit the size of simulation that can be 
performed.  For  example,  parallelized  semi-empirical 
methods enable us to explore systems with 100 – 200 
atoms at interactive latencies. Using machine learning, 
it  is  possible  to  train  models  which  are  faster  than 
quantum  mechanical  methods,  and  which  reproduce 
quantum  mechanical  energy  surfaces.  To  enable  the 
interactive simulation of even larger systems, we been 
exploring  using  Narupa  as  an  iMD-VR  strategy  for 
rapidly sampling chemical space and building up data 
sets which can then be used to train machine learning 
algorithms in order to learn potential energy functions. 

14 

 
 
The  rise  of  machine  learning  has  resulted  in  an 
interesting paradigm shift which sees increasing value 
being  placed  on  data  curation—that  is,  data  size, 
quality, bias, format, and coverage. Data-related issues 
are becoming as important and time-consuming as the 

algorithmic methods used to process and learn from the 
data,  and  iMD-VR  provides  an  efficient  strategy 
whereby human experts can curate data which can then 
be used to train machines.

Figure 3: (A) shows the bond distances defining the Hydrogen abstraction reaction coordinate. (B) shows the  Kernel density estimate of the 
configurational  energies  sampled  using  the  iMD-VR  approach  (orange)  and  the  constrained  MD  approach  (blue).  The  dotted  lines  show  the 
average  energy  of  the  sampled  reactant  and  product  geometries.  Panels  (C)  and  (D)  show  the  PESs  predicted  by  Neural  nets  trained  using 
geometries sampled using iMD-VR and CMD, respectively. 

Curating data sets of molecular geometries and their 
corresponding ab initio energies, which can then be fit 
using  functions  that  yield  efficient  energies  and 
gradients  on  the  PES,  represents  a  longstanding 
research problem in computational molecular physics. 
In  recent  work,  we  have  shown  that  exploration  of 
molecular  configuration  space  by  human  participants 
using iMD-VR to steer ‘on-the-fly’ ab initio MD can be 
used  to  generate  molecular  geometries  for  training 
GPU-accelerated  neural  networks  (NN) 
learn 
reactive  potential  energy  surfaces  (PESs).13  Video  5 
(vimeo.com/311438872)  shows  our  first  application 
using  this  strategy,  focused  on  hydrogen  abstraction 
reactions  of  CN  radical  +  isopentane  using  real-time 
semi-empirical quantum chemistry through a plugin to 
the SCINE Sparrow package developed by Reiher and 

to 

(scine.ethz.ch),  which 

co-workers85-87 
includes 
implementations  of  tight-binding  engines  like  DFTB 
alongside a suite of other semi-empirical methods.47 To 
obtain the results described herein, we have utilized the 
SCINE  Sparrow  implementation  of  PM6,  with  the 
default set of parameters. Using real-time PM6 in VR, 
graduate student Silvia Amabilino spent approximately 
one hour in iMD-VR, using it to sample a wide range of 
H-abstraction  pathways  at  primary,  secondary,  and 
tertiary  sites  on  isopentane.  Figure  3  shows  an 
illustrative example abstraction of a primary Hydrogen, 
and compares the PESs predicted by NNs trained using 
data obtained from iMD-VR versus NNs trained using 
a more traditional method, namely molecular dynamics 
(MD) constrained to sample a predefined grid of points 
those  coordinates  which  define  hydrogen 
along 
15 

 
 
 
 
abstraction  reactions  (shown  as  D1  and  D2  in  Figure 
3A). Figure 3B shows the density of points sampled for 
each  method  as  a  function  of  energy;  the  bimodal 
structure of the iMD-VR curve reflects sampling in the 
product  and  reactant  minima,  indicating  that  user-
sampled structures obtained with the quantum chemical 
iMD-VR  machinery  enable  excellent  sampling  in  the 
vicinity of the minimum energy path (MEP). The data 
in  Figure  3B  provides  strong  evidence  that  iMD-
participants can generate data which is clustered along 
the MEP, and therefore not too far from an equilibrium 
in 
ensemble.  Constrained  MD  data 
comparison, did less well in sampling along the MEP, 
but  enabled  sampling  of  high-energy  ‘off-path’ 
structures.  Figure  3C  shows  the  predictions  of  NNs 
trained  using  iMD-VR  data  and  Figure  3D  shows  the 
predictions  of  NNs  trained  using  the  constrained  MD 
data. Both reproduce important qualitative features of 
the  reactive  PESs  such  as  a  low  and  early  barrier  to 
abstraction. The NN trained on the iMD-VR data does 
very  well  predicting  energies  which  are  close  to  the 
MEP,  but  less  well  predicting  energies  for  ‘off-path’ 
structures, whereas the CMD data does better predicting 
high-energy ‘off-path’ structures. 

(CMD), 

More  broadly,  we  are  developing  an  API  plugin 
which will enable communication between Narupa and 
the QML quantum machine learning package initiated 
by von Lilienfield and co-workers,88 so that QML can 
be  used  as  a  force  engine  for  iMD-VR.  QML  has 
available  a  wide  range  of  machine  learned  models  to 
provide  forces  and  energies  trained  on  high-level 
quantum data. Kernel-based models like those available 
in  QML  can  be  used  to  describe  molecular  potential 
energy  surfaces  with  spectroscopic  accuracy,  using 
only  a  very  limited  amount  of  training  data.  Such 
models  are  inherently  fast,  with  O(N)  scaling  if  used 
with appropriate cut-offs. 

4.3  Reaction  discovery  using  ‘on-the-fly’  ab  initio 
dynamics 

A  particularly  prevalent  problem  in  the  chemical 
sciences  involves  mapping  complex  networks  of 
reactions  in  order  to  predict  how  a  particular  system 
(e.g.,  the  gas  mixture  in  a  combustion  engine,  89  or  a 
complex  catalytic  cycle  90)  evolves  in  time.  Devising 
automated methods for discovering important reactions 
and  transformations  characterizing  a  given  chemical 
system is an area that has attracted significant interest 
in recent years, with a number of strategies proposed to 
tackle  the  problem.  89,  91-96  Building  on  a  number  of 
recent  examples  where  scientific  problems  have  been 
‘gamified’,  97-99  we  have  been  using  Narupa  to 
investigate the extent to which human insight might be 
harnessed  to  accelerate  mechanism  discovery  and 

understand  how  human  search  differs  from  machine 
search.  

reaction 

Video  6 

mechanism 

shows 
as 

(vimeo.com/312963823) 
perspective 
first-person 

a 
they 
participant’s 
manipulate  a  real-time  simulation  using  a  quantum 
mechanical  force  engine 
to  ‘discover’  chemical 
reactions in the OH + propyne system. Figure 4 shows 
preliminary data obtained from a participant group of 
21 University of Bristol undergraduate students, each of 
whom  were  given  five  minutes  using  iMD-VR  in 
Narupa  to  discover  reactions  in  this  way.  In  our 
preliminary tests, the students were given a very simple 
instruction to ‘discover’ as many different reactions as 
they could. Forces in these simulations were obtained 
thorough  an  interface  with  the  semi-empirical  Scine 
code using the PM6 level of theory. 47 Figure 4 shows a 
comparison of these preliminary participant-generated 
results  with  those  obtained  from  the  ChemDyME 
automated 
generator 
the 
(github.com/RobinShannon/ChemDyME)  using 
same  level  of  theory.95  In  Figure  4  each  node  in  the 
network  diagram  represents  a  different  molecular 
configuration,  all  originating  from  the  green  OH  + 
iMD-VR 
propyne  node.  Figure  4  shows 
participants  and  ChemDyME  initially  found  many  of 
the same reactions, represented by the red nodes. The 
reactions  sampled 
(blue)  and  by 
ChemDyME  (orange)  then  diverge,  characterized  by 
two  very  different  search  strategies.  ChemDyME 
sampling covers a smaller number of reactions with lots 
of  dead  end  nodes,  whereas  human  guided  VR-
identifies  many  more  channels,  with 
sampling 
significant 
nodes. 
Preliminary analysis indicates that human guided iMD-
VR  searches  were  particularly  adept  at  finding 
association and dissociation processes – e.g., involving 
high  energy  association  and  dissociations  of  a  single 
species  into  2  or  more  fragments.  In  this  instance, 
ChemDyME  appears  better  at  finding  isomerization 
barriers.  

inter-conversion 

iMD-VR 

between 

that 

in 

We  devised  a  preliminary  ‘scoring  function’  for 
comparing  the  performance  of  the  respective  search 
strategies.  The  scoring  function  awarded  points  for 
finding  new  pathways.  In  an  attempt  to  incentivize 
iMD-VR users to discover lower energy pathways, less 
points  were  awarded  for  higher  energy  pathways. 
Figure  5  shows  this  scoring  function  applied  to  the 
iMD-VR and the ChemDyME results as a function of 
the  number  of  timesteps.  iMD-VR  participants  were 
extremely  effective  at  finding  a  large  number  of  high 
to 
bimolecular 
scoring 
ChemDyME,  our  preliminary 
function 
implementation appears to incentivize human experts to 
find  more  channels  overall,  but  to  miss  lower  energy 
channels.  Moving  forward,  we  plan  to  investigate  the 

channels.  Compared 

scoring 

16 

 
 
extent  to  which  different  scoring  mechanisms  in 
conjunction  with  auditory  feedback  might  influence 
search  strategies.  We  are  particularly  interested  in 
understanding  the  difference  in  human  vs.  computer 

search  strategies,  and  understanding  whether  human 
search techniques might be used to devise new kinds of 
automated search algorithms. 99

Figure  4:  Comparison  of  reactions  (edges)  and  species  (nodes) 
found  by  humans  in  iMD-VR  vs.  those  from  the  automated 
ChemDyME software. The starting node (OH + propyne) is green, 
those chemical species found in both iMD-VR and ChemDyME are 
in red, those found in iMD-VR only are in blue and those found from 
ChemDyME only are in orange.  

Figure  5:  The  time-dependent  score  as  reactions  are  discovered, 
using both iMD-VR and the automated ChemDyME software 

Figure 6: Conformational snapshots of CypA secondary structure sampled during a single representative iMD-VR trajectory, where the 
participant was specifically exploring gating motion of the 100s loop (colored orange).  Conformational snapshot 1 shows CypA in its native 
state, with the 70s loop (formed by residues 65 – 75) colored purple, and residues 80 – 90 colored cyan.  Conformational snapshot 3 shows the 
100s loop is in close proximity to the 70s loop. Conformational snapshot 2 shows an intermediate conformation, where the 100s loop lies 
between the 70s loop, and residues 65-75. 

4.4 Measuring Task Reversibility in Complex Systems 

If iMD-VR is to evolve into a sophisticated tool for 
carrying out detailed atomic manipulations on systems 
which  are  larger  and  more  complicated  than  those 
discussed above, then a critical question is the extent to 
which  complex  structural  manipulations  –  e.g.,  in  a 
biomolecule  –  are  in  fact  reversible.  The  level  of 
reversibility is an indicator of: (1) the level of control 
which  a  participant  has  over  the  systems  they  are 

investigating,  and  (2)  the  extent  to  which  the  iMD-
participant  is  able  to  maintain  the  system  in  an 
ensemble  which  is  not  too  far  from  equilibrium.  In  a 
first  attempt  to  try  and  evaluate  this,  we  have  been 
looking  at  loop  motions  in  the  well-studied  protein 
cyclophilin  A  (CypA),  where  there  is  evidence  that 
large-scale  collective  motions  take  place.  100,  101  Here 
we highlight some preliminary results which we have 
obtained during studies of the so-called ‘100s’ loop in 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from 

(formed 

CypA 
residues  100-110),  which 
undergoes  a  gating  motion  shown  in  Figure  6.  The 
representative configurations shown in Figure 6 come 
from an interactive trajectory generated using iMD-VR, 
whichis  shown  in  Video  7  (vimeo.com/306778545). 
Snapshot 1 of Figure 6 shows the CypA native state, in 
which the 100s loop (highlighted in orange) is in close 
proximity to residues 80-90 (colored cyan). Snapshot 2 
shows  a  conformational  state  in  which  the  loop  has 
begun to move away from residues 80–90, and toward 
the  purple  70s  loop  (composed  of  residues  65-75).  In 
Snapshot 3, the 100s loop is in very close proximity to 
the 70s loop.  

Starting from the native state shown in Figure 6A, 
we generated three different iMD-VR trajectories, with 
our intent being to move the loop away from its native 
structure,  and  then  back  again,  following  a  similar 
progression as shown in Figure 6. Figure 7 shows the 
fraction of native contacts along each of the three iMD-
VR trajectories A, B, and C. It shows that two of the 
trajectories (B and C) make excursions away from the 
native state before returning towards it. The trajectory 
coloured in orange (A), however, does not returns close 

to its original native state structure over the duration of 
the  iMD-VR  run.  Closer  inspection  of  trajectory  A 
shows that the 100s loop did indeed move towards the 
70s  loop  (as  intended),  but  that  upon  returning  back 
toward  the  native  state,  the  loop  contained  too  much 
momentum.  As  a  result,  it  irreversibly  distorted  the 
structure. The right hand panels of Figure 7 tell a similar 
story as the left hand panel, but using a slightly different 
representation:  here  we  show  the  time-dependence  of 
the  trajectories  in  the  space  of  the  first  two  principle 
components of the heavy atom contacts. In both Figures 
6  and  7,  iMD-VR  trajectory  C  (colored  green)  is 
particularly  noteworthy:  it  shows  that  a  careful 
participant can return the loop to a configuration which 
is very close to the native state, with 0.996 of all native 
contacts  restored.  Whilst  the  sample  size  here  is 
relatively  small,  this  is  nonetheless  an  encouraging 
result:  it  shows  that,  if  molecular  manipulation  is 
carried out with requisite attention to detail, then it is 
possible to perform subtle, reversible manipulations of 
the  protein  structure  from  within  an 
iMD-VR 
environment.

Figure 7: The left hand panel shows fraction of native contacts over the course of the three iMD-VR trajectories (labelled here as A, B, and C) 
in which the 100s loop motion of CypA was explored; right hand panel shows the corresponding iMD-VR trajectories projected onto the first 
two principal components obtained from PCA using the all heavy-atom contact distances as the features. Trajectories are coloured from light to 
dark to indicate the passage of time. 

18 

 
 
 
4.5 Protein-ligand binding 

The preliminary results outlined above suggest that 
complex biomolecular manipulations using interactive 
molecular dynamics in iMD-VR are in fact reversible. 
With this knowledge in hand, we have been exploring 
additional  biomolecular  application  domains  where 
iMD-VR  might  be  used  to  provide  insight  into 
biomolecular  structure,  function,  and  dynamics.  One 
specific domain where we have been concentrating our 
efforts  involves  the  use  of  iMD-VR  to  undertake 
flexible  docking  of  small  molecule  ligands  to  protein 
structures, as illustrated in Figure 8. Broadly speaking, 
the  discovery  of  molecular  binding  poses  using 
interactive  molecular  dynamics  amounts  to  a  four-
dimensional puzzle in which correct solutions are found 
by moving, rotating, and fitting a ligand into a protein 
binding  pocket.  Whilst  there  are  increasing  efforts 
aimed at using molecular dynamics to examine protein-
ligand binding, 102-105 an iMD-VR approach focuses on 
providing  experts  with  a  straightforward  and  intuitive 

means for expressing their molecular design insight to 
evaluate  potential  drug  designs  and  corresponding 
binding  hypotheses.    Using  Narupa,  we  have  been 
exploring the extent to which human design insight and 
spatial  reasoning  can  be  used  to  guide  binding 
hypotheses,  discover  potential  binding  poses,  and 
generate  dynamical  binding  pathways  for  analyzing 
binding kinetics and mechanisms. Resolving the kinetic 
mechanisms  of  the  ligand-protein  association  process 
has increasingly been recognized to provide additional 
insight  into  safe  and  differentiated  responses  of 
candidate therapeutics.103  

For  example,  Video  8  (vimeo.com/274862765) 
shows  interactive  binding  experiments  which  we 
undertook to dock the benzamidine ligand to the trypsin 
protein  using 
interface. 
Specifically,  the  video  was  generated  beginning  from 
the benzamidine-trypsin complex (PDB:1S0R), which 

the  Narupa-OpenMM 

Figure  8:  Top  panel  illustrates  a  researcher  using  iMD-VR  investigate  pathways  for  binding  and  unbinding  a  ligand  (magenta)  to  a  protein. 
Snapshots 1 – 3 in the bottom panel show three of the geometries generated as a researcher utilizes Narupa to interactively manipulate a real-time 
Amber  MD  simulation  of  H7N9  neuraminidase  and  oseltamivir,  exploring  dynamical  pathways  for  unbinding  and  rebinding  oseltamivir. 
Conformational  snapshot  1  shows  a  structure  near  the  beginning  of  the  iMD-VR  session,  where  oseltamivir  is  bound  to  neuraminidase; 
conformational snapshot 2 shows oseltamivir after the iMD-VR researcher has undocked it from neuraminidase; and conformational snapshot 3 
shows the final pose once the iMD-VR researcher has re-docked oseltamivir to neuraminidase. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
we  parameterized  using  GAFF  and  the  Amber14SB 
forcefield,  treating  solvent  effects  using  an  OBC2 
generalized  Born  implicit  solvent  model.  In  order  to 
ensure the iMD-VR user didn't accidentally perturb the 
tertiary  structure  of  trypsin,  a  restraint  was  applied  to 
the  protein  backbone;  however,  subsequent  tests 
without restraints have since shown that careful iMD-
VR  users  are  able  to  undertake  drug  unbinding  and 
rebinding without perturbing protein tertiary structure. 
The  movie  shows  benzamidine  being  interactively 
guided out of the trypsin binding pocket, and then re-
docked.  Our  preliminary  results,  established  through 
tests carried out in collaboration with participants at a 
recent  UK  CCP-BioSim  workshop,  indicate  that 
participants,  starting  from  a  state  where  benzamidine 
was  undocked,  were  then  able  to  identify  the  trypsin 
binding pocket and subsequently generated a dynamical 
pathway  which  established  a  bound  pose.  These 
preliminary  results  provide  evidence  that  it  is  indeed 
possible  to  accelerate  protein-ligand  binding  rare 
events,  and  also  that  the  Narupa  toolset  furnishes 
sufficient  control  for  this  class  of  rare  events  to  be 
reversible,  consistent  with  the  conclusions  of  the 
previous section. Combined, these results suggest that 
the spatial cognition of a trained biochemist can furnish 
insight  into  protein-ligand  binding  events,  in  order  to 
quickly explore a wide range of thermodynamic states 
and kinetic pathways. By combining molecular insight 
and  spatial  reasoning,  participants  were  able  to 
manipulate the  benzamidine in a fashion that allowed 
the  primarily  electrostatic  binding  forces 
to  be 
overcome,  and  then  reestablished.  Preliminary  results 
which we have undertaken to investigate the docking of 
oseltamivir  (commercially  known  as  Tamiflu)  to  the 
H7N9  strain  of  avian  flu  neuraminidase  are  similarly 
encouraging, and indicate that docking can be achieved 
even in a system where the docking dynamics are more 
complicated,  where  unbinding  and  rebinding  require 
the opening and closing of a protein loop, as shown in 
Figure 8 and Video 9 (vimeo.com/296300796). 

4.6 Molecular Transport in Zeolites 

We  have  also  been  applying  the  Narupa  iMD-VR 
framework  to  understand  the  transport  of  small 
molecules  through  periodic  solid-state  materials  like 
zeolites 106 and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). 107 
Compared  to  protein  structures  of  the  sort  discussed 
above,  nanoporous  materials 
these  can  we 
constructed  from  a  number  of  different  elements,  and 
are  often  characterized  by  a  similarly  wide  range  of 
distinct  bonding  patterns.  Whereas  the  important 
interactions governing protein-ligand type interactions 
tend  to  occur  relatively  near  the  surface  of  protein 

like 

fact 

like 

The 

typically 

alkylation, 

structure,  the  same  is  not  true  for  small  molecule 
transport  in  structures  like  zeolites.  Small  molecule 
transport  in  structures  like  these  tends  to  occur  in 
channels  which  are  buried  in  the  interior,  and  which 
have a complex branched structure, which can lead to 
transport which involves non-intuitive directionalities. 
Such structures are particularly important for industrial 
applications  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  are  able  to 
accommodate  small  molecules  like  hydrocarbons, 
facilitating  both  transport  108,  109  and  catalysis.  For 
example, within the petrochemical industry, these sorts 
of  materials  have  essential  functions  as  catalysts  for 
processes 
and 
hydroxylation, 
epoxidation,  106  where  they  operate  at  much  higher 
temperatures and pressures than typical biocatalysts.  
find 
that  such  materials 
application under more extreme conditions means that 
studying  them  in  iMD-VR  requires  a  force  regime 
which is quite distinct from those which are typically 
used  in  our  biomolecular  studies.  It  also  means  that 
these  structures  are  more  robust  to  the  formation  of 
local ‘hotspots’ of the sort that can sometimes arise in 
iMD-VR  applications.  Figure  9  and  video  10 
(vimeo.com/312957045)  shows  a  ZSM-5  zeolite 
structure which we have recently begun to study using 
Narupa,  in  order  to  better  understand  the  transport 
kinetics  of  2-methyl-hexane.  In  order  to  study  this 
particular  system,  we  connected  the  Narupa  API  to 
PLUMED, which enables communication with a wide 
variety  of  force  engines  including  DL_POLY,49  from 
which  we  obtained  forces.  The  PLUMED  interface 
allows us to retain the full flexibility of the DL_POLY 
program  and  run  simulations  using  any  of  its  internal 
MD  parameters  and  methods.  The  system  shown  in 
Figure 9 is comprised of 288 zeolite atoms, and was set 
up to be fully periodic with a vacuum gap of 10 Å along 
the Z axis. The Langevin thermostat was set to 648K 
with a friction coefficient of 5 ps-1. The left hand panel 
first-person  participant’s 
of  Figure  9  shows  a 
perspective  as  they  manipulate  the  zeolite;  the  right-
hand panel shows a partially extracted hydrocarbon in 
a  van  der  Waals  representation.  As  the  video  shows, 
iMD-VR enables one to perform detailed inspection of 
the  zeolite  microstructure,  interact  with  substrates  in 
order to navigate them within the channels, and test a 
range  of  pathways 
the 
in  order 
mechanism and kinetics for adsorption, desorption, and 
transport. In our preliminary studies on small-molecule 
transport  through  zeolite  frameworks,  we  have  found 
that  the  ability  to  manipulate  and  deform  the  channel 
has  enabled  us  to  better  understand  how  the  channel 
structure  and  its  corresponding  flexibility  impacts  on 
the hydrocarbon transport dynamics.110

to  understand 

20 

 
 
 
Figure 9: ZMS-5 2ME-hexane structure. The left hand panel shows interaction with a methyl group using the NarupaXR controllers, 
in order to manipulate the hydrocarbon position. The right hand panel shows the van-der Waals radius representation for the same 
structure where the hydrocarbon has been partially extracted from the structure.  

5. Ongoing HCI Research 

5.1  Sound as a real-time data channel 

In a typical iMD-VR simulation, a massive quantity 
of data is available for real-time streaming, much more 
than a participant can easily synthesize and understand 
on-the-fly.  One  of  the  challenges  of  using  the  Fig.  1 
framework arises from the fact that there are a range of 
important  interactions  which  researchers  often  care 
about during the course of a simulation, but which can 
be  difficult  to  render  ‘on-the-fly’  as  a  result  of visual 
congestion.  There  is  simply  not  enough  screen  space 
nor  graphical  processing  power  to  render  all  of  the 
interactions  a  researcher  may  care  about  as  they  use 
iMD-VR  to  explore  a  given  system.  One  potential 
solution  would  be  to  create  multiple  real-time  visual 
displays (e.g., plots) within the iMD-VR environment; 
however, this risks splitting the participant’s attention 
away  from  the  molecular  system  which  they  are 
studying. Furthermore, many of the features which are 
important during the course of an iMD-VR simulation 
– nonbonded energies, potential energy, steric clashes, 
or  the  instantaneous  values  of  complex  collective 
variable values – are difficult to represent visually. Data 
sonification  –  where  real-time  data  streams  are 
converted  into  audio  channels  –  offers  a  potential 
solution to these problems: it allows for the possibility 
that auditory channels can be used to convey important 
information, thereby reducing the quantity of onscreen 
rendering  congestion,  and  it  offers  ways  of  tracking 
real-time  data  streams  that  are  difficult  to  render 
visually. 
Apart 

112,113  data 
sonification  represents  relatively  unexplored  territory 
for the molecular sciences. However, research in human 

few  examples,111, 

from  a 

perception has shown that audio information can have 
an important impact on visual perception; in some cases 
audio  perception  even  overrides  visual  perception.114 
Moreover, our auditory system has a significantly faster 
time  resolution  and  a  larger  dynamic  range  than  our 
visual system. Audio can also be spatialized audio (e.g., 
we can ‘hear where things are coming from’, even when 
the  sound  source  is  not  directly  pointed  at  our  ears). 
These  features  of  audio  make  it  an  indispensable 
information  channel  in  video  gaming  and  flight 
simulators, and an interesting data channel to explore in 
an  immersive  iMD-VR  environment.  Inspired  by 
studies showing that multisensory integration of vision 
with sound improves our ability to accurately process 
information,3  we  have  begun  to  explore  how  sound 
might  be  utilized 
to  augment  structural  visual 
information in the molecular sciences.6  

The  underutilization  of  sound  in  the  molecular 
sciences  arises  in  part  because  methods  for  auditory 
rendering  are  less  well  defined  than  their  visual 
counterparts. Depicting an atom as a sphere and a bond 
as  a  stick  is  an  arbitrary  decision,  but  is  intelligible 
owing  to  the  fact  that  both  an  atom  and  a  sphere  are 
spatially  delimited.  Defining  such  a  clearly  delimited 
object in the audio realm is not straightforward, neither 
spatially nor compositionally: it is difficult to imagine 
what constitutes an ‘atomistic’ object in a piece of audio 
design  or  music.  Our  preliminary  work  suggests  that 
sound  is  best  utilized  for  representing  non-local  and 
dynamic properties of the sort which are important in 
molecular science – e.g. potential energy, free energy, 
non-bonded  energy,  electrostatic  energy, 
local 
temperature,  strain  energy,  etc.  Owing  to  their  non-
locality, properties like these are difficult to represent 
using conventional visual rendering strategies. Sound, 

21 

 
  
 
 
to 

their 

the  visual 

things.  Moreover, 

however,  offers  an  excellent  means  for  representing 
these 
rapid  dynamical 
fluctuations have a better chance of being detected by 
the auditory system, given its faster temporal resolution 
compared 
system.  Video  11 
(vimeo.com/312994336)  shows  a  real-time  iMD-VR 
simulation  of  17-ALA  peptide  in  which  the  potential 
energy can be heard as a real-time audio stream. As the 
participant  manipulates  the  peptide,  taking  it  from  its 
native folded state to a high-energy knotted state which 
is kinetically trapped, the sound dynamically changes. 
Eventually, the participant unties the peptide knot, and 
the  protein  relaxes  to  a  lower  energy  state,  which  is 
reflected in the sound. Interactively rendering the real-
time  potential  energy  of  a  molecule  poses  a  serious 
challenge for visual display methods, owing to the fact 
that  the  potential  energy  of  a  molecule  is  a  non-local 
descriptor  which  depends  on  the  entire  coordinate 
vector q. However, audio effectively captures changes 
in the energy. We are currently undertaking user tests 
to  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  audio  improves 
accomplishment for tasks like drug-ligand binding. 

5.2 VR Gloves: Beyond controller-based interaction 

Several participants who have experienced Narupa 
have  remarked  that  the  controllers  act  as  a  barrier  in 
their  ability  to  feel  the  dynamics  of  the  simulated 
molecular systems.9, 69 As a result of these comments, 
we  have  been  pursuing  another  avenue  of  research 
which  involves  the  ability  to  reach  out  and  ‘directly 
touch’  real-time  molecular  simulations  in  iMD-VR  – 
i.e., without being mediated by a wireless VR controller 
like that wielded by the participants shown in the Figure 

1 schematic. We have been experimenting with a wide 
range  of  VR-compatible  glove  technologies.  For 
example, technologies like the Noitom Hi5 glove and 
the Manus VR glove, which are equipped with 9 degree 
of freedom (DOF) inertial movement units (IMUs) and 
several  finger  mounted  bend  sensors,  are  able  to 
interactively  track  the  relative  position  of  the  hand.  To 
get positional tracking within a VR system like that shown 
in Figure 1, these gloves can be combined with a wrist-
mounted HTC Vive Tracker. The commercially available 
Noitom  Hi5  and  Manus  VR  gloves  are  primarily 
designed  for  gestural  tracking  in  order  to  distinguish 
amongst  different  hand  poses  for  application  in  motion 
capture  studios  (e.g.,  identifying  a  ‘thumbs-up’  gesture 
versus  or  a  Vulcan  ‘live  long  and  prosper’  gesture). 
However,  these  gloves  are  relatively  expensive,  and  we 
have found that their performance is not particularly well 
suited to the kinds of tasks that a molecular scientist might 
want  to  carry  out  in  VR.  For  example,  in  an  iMD-VR 
simulation,  the  ability  to  accurately  distinguish  between 
hand  poses  is  far  less  important  than  the  ability  to 
accurately detect when a molecular scientists is reaching 
out  to  ‘grasp’  a  particular  atom  (or  selection  of  atoms) 
between their thumb and their forefinger.  

We  have  made  progress  in  designing  our  own  data 
gloves,50 a prototype of which is shown in Figure 10. By 
sewing modern conductive fabrics into the glove, we can 
detect when a participant closes one of two circuits, either 
by making a pinching motion between (a) their thumb and 
index  finger,  or  (b)  their  thumb  and  forefinger.  The 
absolute position of the hand is obtained from mounting 
an  HTC  Vive  Tracker  on  the  back  of  the  glove.  Our 
preliminary  results,  obtained  from  a  small  set  of  user 
studies carried out in our own laboratory, suggest that 

Figure 10: images on the left show the pinch sensing data glove we designed to enable robust molecular manipulation. The sequence of images 
on the right (A – D) show a glove-wearing iMD-VR user’s first-person perspective within Narupa as they tie a knot in a real-time simulation of a 
17-ALA peptide. A and B show the user unravelling the helical secondary structure; C and D show the protein being tied into a knot. 

22 

 
 
  
 
 
participants  find  the  molecular  and  atomic  interaction 
afforded  by  this  glove  extremely  intuitive.  Compared  to 
the  standard  HTC  Vive  handheld  controllers  (shown  in 
Figure 1), participants have indicated that they prefer the 
direct sense of ‘touching’ virtual simulations afforded by 
this  glove.  Moreover,  for  accomplishing  a  range  of 
molecular  manipulation  tasks,  we  have  found  that  the 
Figure  10  glove  design  results  in  more  stable  iMD-VR 
experiences  than  the  much  more  expensive  Manus  and 
Noitom gloves. Video 12 (vimeo.com/305823646) shows 
the perspective of participant who is wearing these gloves 
as they undertake a protein knot-tying task. To ‘touch’ an 
atom and exert a force on it, the participant simply reaches 
out  to  the  atom  they  wish  to  touch,  and  brings  together 
their thumb and forefinger, as they would do if they were 
grasping  a  normal  object.  We  are  currently  working  to 
undertake more thorough HCI experiments to evaluate the 
Figure  10  gloves  compared  to  the  standard  wireless 
controllers  shown  in  Figure  1.  In  separate  set  of 
experiments,  we  have  devised  a  sonification  algorithm 
which  lets  participants  hear  a  real-time  feed  of  the 
nonbonded  protein-ligand  energies  in  section  4.4,  and 
evaluating the extent to which this audio feed helps users 
to  find  drug  binding  poses,  and  carry  out  binding  and 
rebinding tasks. 

6. Conclusions & Future Directions 

In  this  article,  we  have  attempted  to  provide  an 
overview of possibilities which the current generation 
of immersive technologies (spanning both VR and XR) 
hold  for  advancing  the  molecular  sciences.  We  have 
introduced  our  open-source  multi-person  iMD-VR 
framework  Narupa,  and  described  some  of  our  initial 
applications across different areas of molecular science, 
including small molecules, materials, and biochemistry. 
The applications which we have outlined in this paper, 
obtained  by  connecting  our  iMD-VR  client  to  both 
molecular  mechanics  and  quantum  mechanics  force 
studying  3d 
engines  –  are  encouraging.  For 
conformational  dynamics,  the  results  in  section  4.1 
shown that iMD-VR enables efficiency gains of 2 – 10x 
compared to standard computer interfaces. The results 
in  section  4.2  demonstrate  that  iMD-VR  offers  an 
efficient  way  to  train  machines  to  learn  reactive 
potential  energy  surfaces.  Curating  accurate  training 
data remains a longstanding problem for learning PES 
topologies;  the  paper  by  Amabilino  et  al.  shows  how 
data curated (in one hour by a single graduate student!) 
using iMD-VR to steer ‘on-the-fly’ ab initio dynamics 
can be used to train neural nets which are accurate in 
the vicinity of the minimum energy path. The results in 
section  4.3  show  that  studies  like  those  carried  out 
Amabilino  et  al.  can  be  utilized  as  kind  of  more 
generalized  search  strategy  to  discover  important 
molecular  conformations  and  transition  pathways  on 

reactive PESs, similar to the observation that arose from 
the  FOLDIT  studies:  humans  are  extremely  adept  at 
solving complex spatial search problems.97 Section 4.4 
(exploring  loop  motion  in  CypA)  and  section  4.5 
(outlining iMD-VR drug docking studies) provide two 
important  insights  into  the  results  which  participants 
generate  using  iMD-VR,  illustrating  that  careful 
participants  can  generate  results  which  are  both 
reversible and reproducible. Combined with the results 
of Amabilino et al., these observations suggest that the 
regime which participants sample during the course of 
an  iMD-VR  run  does  not  stray  too  far  from  the 
equilibrium  ensemble.  Section  4.6  highlights  an 
exciting  emerging  application  of  iMD-VR,  which  is 
important  in  a  wide  range  of  industrial  contexts, 
because it will enable us to get a sense of the extent to 
which pores can be engineered in zeolite structures so 
as  to  tune  molecular  transport  properties.  Together, 
these  applications  provide  strong  evidence  that  our 
iMD-VR 
the  sophistication 
required for experts to make progress on complex and 
bespoke scientific projects – i.e., it satisfies the ‘high-
ceiling’  design  criterion  which  we  discussed  in  the 
introduction. 

framework  provides 

and 

technology  development 

Our observations to date suggest that new tools like 
iMD-VR  have  the  potential  to  change  the  kind  of 
science  that  people  undertake,  115  but  there  remains  a 
great  deal  of  work  to  be  done  in  developing  the 
technology  and  understanding  those  applications  to 
which  it  is  best  suited.  The  ideal  scenario  is  one  in 
which 
scientific 
applications  are  closely  coupled,  so  that  each  can 
inform the other. In the near term, we believe that the 
most promising applications for tools like iMD-VR are 
those which: (1) are intrinsically three-dimensional and 
(2)  require  exploring  extremely  high  dimensional 
search spaces. For these sorts of problems, brute force 
strategies  take  a  very  long  time  to  converge,  and 
moreover  the  human  brain  is  quite  adept  at  using  its 
powers  of  spatial  reasoning  to  make  intelligent 
mechanistic  and  design  hypotheses,  especially  when 
its  spatial 
presented  with 
reasoning powers to be fully expressed – i.e., without 
wasting  valuable  time  fiddling  with  a  2d  molecular 
visualization 
line  scripting 
tool,  or  a  command 
interface. 

that  enable 

interfaces 

Exploring  3D  conformational  dynamics  on  rugged 
PESs  to  determine  kinetic  transition  rates  between 
minima on a PES, and also providing free energies and 
kinetics  along  those  pathways  is  an  “NP-complete” 
problem for which no optimal method exists,116 and a 
good example of the kind of problem where we plan to 
apply  iMD-VR.  For  PES  searching,  brute  force 
methods are impossible for all but the smallest systems, 

23 

 
 
 
and sophisticated search algorithms often struggle (e.g., 
umbrella sampling, adaptive force biasing, temperature 
accelerated  MD,  metadynamics,117  replica  exchange, 
transition path sampling, string methods, markov state 
models,104,  118  forward  flux  sampling,  milestoning, 
adaptive BXD,119 etc.). Most of these methods require 
as input an initial guess at a pathway, or else a set of 
collective variables (CVs) along which biasing should 
be  carried  out,  and  the  quality  of  the  results  they 
generate  depends  on  how  close  the  initial  pathway  or 
CV definition is to the actual minimum free energy path 
(MFEP)  a  system  takes  as  it  moves  between  minima. 
iMD-VR allows molecular scientists to combine spatial 
reasoning,  proprioceptive  ‘feel’  of  the  molecular 
system,  auditory  renderings  of  observables  like  the 
potential  energy,  and  their  molecular  training  to 
effectively  ‘draw’  candidate  pathways  within  the  3N-
dimensional simulation space. The results in section 4.1 
(threading CH4 through a nanotube, changing helicene 
chirality,  and  tying  a  peptide  knot),  section  4.4  (loop 
motion  in  CypA)  and  section  4.5  (drug  docking) 
represent our first attempts toward the goal of allowing 
molecular scientists to sketch dynamical hypotheses in 
3D,  and  provide  compelling  evidence  that  iMD-VR 
participants  are  indeed  able  to  quickly  generate  good 
pathways. In order to derive a free energy from these 
3D  drawings,  an  additional  post-processing  step  is 
required  –  namely,  the  3N-dimensional  path  must  be 
processed using a dimensionality reduction algorithm, 
which  can  then  be  used  as  input  to  a  path-based  free 
energy  sampling  method.  Whilst  we  have  made 
progress  toward  developing  additional  tools  which 
enable iMD-VR to form a workflow for path-based free 
energy sampling, further methods development efforts 
are  required  to  enable  this  idea  to  become  a  reality 
which can be applied to a wide range of systems. 

during 

We  are  currently  making  progress  in  developing  a 
VR-enabled  molecular  builder  which  can  be  used  in 
conjunction  with  our  iMD-VR  framework.  This  will 
give  molecular  designers  the  ability  to  atomistically 
modify  molecular 
iMD-VR 
structures 
simulation  runs,  and  evaluate  the  dynamical  and 
functional  consequences  of  structural  modifications. 
For  this  unified  builder-simulator  framework,  we 
envision molecular machines and synthetic biology to 
be two important application domains. The 2016 Nobel 
prize  in  chemistry  to  Sauvage,  Stoddart,  and  Feringa 
highlighted  molecular  machines  with  controllable 
movements  which  can  perform  tasks  when  energy  is 
added.  Molecular  machines  span  a  wide  range  of 
application  domains  –  e.g.,  molecular  walkers,120 
molecular pumps,121 molecular information ratchets,122 
molecules  that  can  synthesize  other  molecules,123 
interlocked molecular rotors,124 nanocars,125 and many 
iMD-VR  perspective  molecular 
others.  From  an 

and 

three 

dimensional, 

machines  represent  an  interesting  application  area 
because:  (1)  the  potential  design  space  for  molecular 
machines is enormous; (1) their function is intrinsically 
dynamic, requiring the directed injection of energy into 
the  system;  and  (3)  the  majority  of  the  machines 
reported to date have structures and dynamics which are 
intrinsically 
therefore 
challenging for conventional 2D modelling interfaces. 
These  same  principles  are  also  true  within  synthetic 
biology,126  where  researchers  seek  to  use  molecular 
design  in  order  to  develop  targeted  drug  therapies, 
protein 
augment 
architectures  which  can  operate  as  purpose-built 
catalysts,128,  129  or  develop  new  supramolecular 
structures which can bind small molecules.130 For this 
reason, we are looking to extend Narupa’s flexible API 
beyond atomistic modelling to also communicate with 
coarse-grained modelling engines. 

photosynthesis,127 

construct 

Like  many  domains  of  scientific  computing,  the 
basic workflow for molecular simulation has remained 
largely  unchanged  for  the  last  30  –  40  years:  i.e., 
iterative  cycles  of  job  submission  to  HPC  resources, 
followed by visualization on a 2D display.  8 At some 
point,  this  paradigm  will  change,  and  it  may  be  that 
immersive  technologies  like  VR,  combined  with  the 
power  of  modern  HPC  and  fast  networks,  drive  this 
change. The extent to which a new technology ends up 
being adopted within a particular domain is difficult to 
foresee;  nevertheless,  we  believe  that  the  range  of 
research applications outlined herein provide a glimpse 
into  what  might  be  possible  should  next-generation 
immersive  interaction  technologies  like  iMD-VR  find 
more  widespread  use  within  the  molecular  sciences. 
Adoption is only likely to arise by demonstrations (e.g., 
that  XR 
controlled  user  studies)  which  show 
technologies  are  better  than  existing  technologies  in 
some  measurement  space,  and  also  by  good 
applications  which  generalize 
to  other  areas  of 
nanoscience.  

represents  an 

With the ever-accelerating rise of machine learning 
and automation across all areas of science and society, 
immersive  technologies  like  iMD-VR  represent  an 
interesting  research  domain  precisely  because  they 
cannot  be  disentangled  from  issues  linked  to  human 
perception.  The  usage  and  development  of  iMD-VR 
tools 
inherently  cross-disciplinary 
pursuit, which – if it is to be successful – must connect 
scientists,  technologists,  interaction  designers,  artists, 
and  psychologists.  With  recent  advances  in  high-
performance  computing,  data  science,  robotics,  and 
machine learning, many have begun to speculate about 
the  future  of  scientific  practice,  asking  important 
questions as to the sort of scientific future we should be 
consciously  working  to  design  over  the  next  few 
decades. 23, 51 In an increasingly automated future which 

24 

 
to 

for 

and 

humans 

advanced 

is reliant on machines, it is important to think carefully 
about  and  discuss  the  role  which  human  creative 
expression and human perception will play. Narratives 
of our emerging technological future sometimes default 
to a philosophical sentiment which casts automation as 
the  ultimate  end,  sometimes  leaving  one  to  wonder 
where  exactly  the  human  fits  in.  So  long  as  human 
creativity  continues  to  play  an  important  role  in  the 
process  of  scientific  understanding,  discovery,  and 
design, then we believe that immersive frameworks like 
iMD-VR  may  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  our 
emerging scientific future. Precisely because iMD-VR 
is  a  technology  which  is  ultimately  designed  for  the 
human  perceptual  system,  it  represents  a  technology 
where  the  human  cannot  be  automated  away.  In  our 
interaction 
visualization 
view, 
frameworks  are  complementary  to  research  activities 
aimed  at  increasing  the  automation  of  research  tasks 
and  scientific  discovery,  because  they  provide  an 
undertake 
efficient  means 
communication  and  collaboration,  and  express  high-
level  creative  scientific  and  design  insight,  leaving 
automated  frameworks  to  subsequently  sort  out  the 
computational  and  mechanistic  details.  The  recent 
paper by Amabilino et al.13 offers an example of how 
human experts can utilize iMD-VR to train ML in order 
to accelerate molecular science workflows. In the near 
term, ML will not eliminate humans; rather it will result 
in  a  scenario  where  humans  focus  their  efforts  on  a 
different kind of problem: how to best train a machine. 
Amabilino et al. gives one particular example of what 
might be possible moving forward, and how VR might 
be  productively  used  in  conjuction  with  ML  to 
accelerate scientific workflows. 
At  the  moment,  computational  science  tends  to 
privilege  those  who  are  able  to  deftly  process  a 
particular flavor of mathematical cognitive abstraction. 
One interesting comment we have encountered to our 
iMD-VR  work  is  that  it  makes  things  ‘too  easy’,  and 
risks  researchers  feeling  they  no  longer  need  to  toil 
away  in  the  details  of  mathematical  abstraction. 
However,  in  some  sense  this  is  the  definition  of 
scientific progress. For example, there was a time when 
anybody  who  wanted  to  solve  a  matrix  eigenvalue 
problem wrote their own diagonalizer. Nowadays most 
scientists are content to use an existing diagonalization 
tools,  so  they  can  focus  their  intellectual  energy  on 
other  kinds  of  problems.  Technology  like  iMD-VR 
enables  us 
intangible  mathematical 
abstractions  like  molecular  force  fields  into  more 

transform 

to 

tangible realities, which consequently engage a broader 
range  of  our  sensory  modalities.  In  so  doing,  we  can 
make complicated problems more accessible to a wider 
spectrum of intelligences, perhaps facilitating creative 
solutions which have been heretofore inaccessible. 

Acknowledgements 

is 

MOC  has  received  support  through  the  Royal 
Society (RGF\EA\181075), BBSRC (BB/R00661X/1), 
and  an  EPSRC  industrial  CASE  studentship.  SJB 
thanks EPSRC grant EP/M022129/1, HECBioSim, the 
University  of  Bristol  School  of  Chemistry,  and  a  BP 
Innovation  Fellowship.  HMD  and  AJB  are  funded  by 
PhD  studentships  from  EPSRC.  Funding  for  AJB  is 
from the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral training, Theory 
and  Modelling  in  Chemical  Sciences,  under  grant 
EP/L015722/1.  RJS 
supported  by  EPSRC 
Programme  grant  EP/P021123/1.  TJM  thanks  the 
Leverhulme  Trust,  Royal  Society  and  the  Academies 
for funding (APX\R1\180118). AJM thanks EPSRC for 
funding  (EP/M022609/1)  and  also  the  Collaborative 
Computational  Project  for  Biomolecular  Simulation 
(CCP-BioSim,  www.ccpbiosim.ac.uk),  supported  by 
EPSRC.  DRG  acknowledges  funding  from:  Oracle 
Corporation (University Partnership Cloud award); the 
Royal  Society  (URF\R\180033);  EPSRC  (impact 
acceleration  award,  institutional  sponsorship  award, 
and  EP/P021123/1),  the  Leverhulme  Trust  (Philip 
Leverhulme  Prize);  and  the  London  Barbican  (Open 
Lab  Funding).  We  also  thank  the  following:  Sidd 
Khajuria  (Barbican),  Chris  Sharp  (Barbican),  James 
(Royal  Society),  Simon  McIntosh-Smith 
Upton 
(University  of  Bristol),  Dek  Woolfson  (University  of 
Bristol),  Lisa  May  Thomas  (University  of  Bristol), 
Rachel  Freire  (London),  Becca  Rose  Glowacki 
(University  of  the  West  of  England);  and  Interactive 
Scientific  (Bristol)  for  support  and  engagement 
throughout  this  work;  Jenny  Tsai-Smith  (Oracle)  and 
Phil  Bates  (Oracle)  for  provision  of  cloud  computing 
facilities;  Markus  Reiher,  Alain  C.  Vaucher,  and 
Thomas  Weymouth  (ETH)  for  support  designing  a 
plugin  between  Narupa  and  the  SCINE  code;  Julien 
Michel  and  Jordi  Juarez  Jimenez  (Edinburgh)  for 
helpful  discussions  about  the  Cyclophilin-A  system; 
Anders  S.  Christensen,  Jimmy  C.  Kromann,  and  O. 
Anatole von Lilienfield (Basel) for engaging with us to 
build  a  plugin  between  Narupa  and  the  SCINE  code;  
and  Ed  Clarke  and  Ellie  Burfoot  for  their  help  in 
carrying out studies evaluating reaction discovery using 
quantum mechanical force engines.

25 

 
 
 
References 

[1] Krueger, in Proceedings of the June 13-16, 1977, national computer conference (ACM, Dallas, Texas, 1977), pp. 
423; 
[2] Talsma, Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 9 (2015); 
[3] Proulx et al., Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 41, 16 (2014); 
[4] Glowacki et al., Faraday Discuss. 169, 63 (2014); 
[5] Mitchell et al., Leonardo 49, 138 (2016); 
[6] Arbon et al., in Proceedings of the Interntional Conference on Audio Displays (2018), Vol. 30; 
[7] Davies et al., in Evolutionary and Biologically Inspired Music, Sound, Art and Design. EvoMUSART 2016, edited 
by C. Johnson, V. Ciesielski, J. Correia and P. Machado (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016), Vol. 9596, 
pp. 17; 
[8] O’Connor et al., Science Advances 4, eaat2731 (2018); 
[9] Thomas, Glowacki, International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media 14, 145 (2018); 
[10] Cruz-Neira, Sandin, DeFanti, in Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and 
interactive techniques (ACM, Anaheim, CA, 1993), pp. 135; 
[11] Seymour et al., Annals of surgery 236, 458 (2002); 
[12] Wallen, in Supercomputing 2014 (New Orleans, 2014); 
[13] Amabilino et al., The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpca.9b01006 (2019); 
[14] Weibel, Fruk, Molecular Aesthetics. (MIT Press, 2013); 
[15] Sutherland, Proceedings of the IFIP Congress 2, 506 (1965); 
[16] Feynman, in Feynman and computation, edited by J. G. H. Anthony (Perseus Books, 1999), pp. 63; 
[17] Fuechsle et al., Nature Nanotechnology 7, 242 (2012); 
[18] Leinen, Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 6, 2148 (2015); 
[19] Gibson, The senses considered as perceptual systems. (Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1966); 
[20] Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. (Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1979); 
[21] Withagen et al., New Ideas in Psychology 30, 250 (2012); 
[22] Norman, interactions 6, 38 (1999); 
[23] Aspuru-Guzik, Lindh, Reiher, ACS Central Science 4, 144 (2018); 
[24] Goddard et al., Journal of Molecular Biology 430, 3982 (2018); 
[25] Ai, Fröhlich, Computer Graphics Forum 17, 267 (1998); 
[26] Anderson, Weng, Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 17, 180 (1999); 
[27] Moritz, Meyer, in Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE Symposium on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (2004), pp. 
503; 
[28] Férey et al., Virtual Reality 13, 273 (2009); 
[29] Block et al., Source Code for Biology and Medicine 4, 3 (2009); 
[30] Au - Doblack, Au - Allis, Au - Dávila, JoVE, e51384 (2014); 
[31] Balo, Wang, Ernst, Nature Methods 14, 1122 (2017); 
[32] García-Hernández, Kranzlmüller, in Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Computer Graphics. AVR 2017. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017), Vol. 10324, pp. 309; 
[33] Borrel, Fourches, Bioinformatics 33, 3816 (2017); 
[34] Stone, Sherman, Schulten, in 2016 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium 
Workshops (IPDPSW) (2016), pp. 1048; 
[35] Zheng, Waller, Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 73, 18 (2017); 
[36] Norrby et al., Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 55, 2475 (2015); 
[37] Grebner et al., Future Medicinal Chemistry 8, 1739 (2016); 
[38] Salvadori et al., International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 116, 1731 (2016); 
[39] Ratamero et al., Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 32, 703 (2018); 
[40] Myers et al., ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 7, 3 (2000); 
[41] Wessel, Wright, Comput. Music J. 26, 11 (2002); 
[42] Hyde, Mitchell, Glowacki, in Proceedings of the 17th International Generative Art Conference, (GENArt 2014) 
(Roma, Italia, 2014); 
[43] Slater, Sanchez-Vives, Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3 (2016); 
[44] Allinger, Yuh, Lii, Journal of the American Chemical Society 111, 8551 (1989); 
[45] Eastman et al., Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 9, 461 (2013); 
[46] Aradi, Hourahine, Frauenheim, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 111, 5678 (2007); 

26 

 
[47] Husch, Vaucher, Reiher, International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 118, e25799 (2018); 
[48] Bonomi et al., Computer Physics Communications 180, 1961 (2009); 
[49] Todorov et al., Journal of Materials Chemistry 16, 1911 (2006); 
[50] Becca Rose Glowacki, arXiv:1901.03532 [cs.HC] (2019); 
[51] Lanier, Dawn of the new everything: a journey through virtual reality. (Penguin, London, 2017); 
[52] Swapp, Pawar, Loscos, in Virtual Reality (2006), Vol. 10, pp. 24; 
[53] Crowfoot et al., in Chemistry of penicillin, edited by H. T. Clarke, J. R. Johnson and R. Robinson (Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1949), pp. 310; 
[54] Pauling, Corey, Branson, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 37, 205 (1951); 
[55] Crick, Watson, Proc. Royal Soc. A 223, 80 (1954); 
[56] Kendrew et al., Nature 181, 662 (1958); 
[57] Perutz et al., Nature 185, 416 (1960); 
[58] Brooks et al., ACM SIGGraph computer graphics 24, 177 (1990); 
[59] Atkinson et al., Computers & Graphics 2, 97 (1977); 
[60] Surles et al., Protein Sci 3, 198 (1994); 
[61] Brooks, Faraday Discuss. 169, 521 (2014); 
[62] Ming, Beard, Brooks, in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (IEEE, 1989), pp. 1462; 
[63] Bejczy, Science 208, 1327 (1980); 
[64] Pollack, VMD: 20 Yrs History and Innovation, available at ks.uiuc.edu/History/VMD/; 
[65] Dreher et al., Procedia Comp. Sci. 18, 20 (2013); 
[66] Haag et al., ChemPhysChem 15, 3301 (2014); 
[67] Luehr, Jin, Martínez, Journal of chemical theory and computation 11, 4536 (2015); 
[68] Slater, Frontiers in Robotics and AI 1 (2014); 
[69] Thomas et al., arXiv:1901.03536 [cs.HC] (2019); 
[70] Cho et al., Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 113, 258 (2014); 
[71] Stone, Gullingsrud, Schulten, in Proceedings of the 2001 symposium on Interactive 3D graphics (ACM, 2001), 
pp. 191; 
[72] Glowacki et al.,  (fOOm-d, a framework for object-oriented molecular dynamics, 
https://sourceforge.net/projects/foom-d/); 
[73] Plimpton, Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1 (1995); 
[74] Berendsen et al., The Journal of Chemical Physics 81, 3684 (1984); 
[75] Miyamoto, Kollman, J Comput Chem 13, 952 (1992); 
[76] Eastman, Pande, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 6, 434 (2010); 
[77] Kabsch, Sander, Biopolymers 22, 2577 (1983); 
[78] Kalra, Hummer, Garde, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 108, 544 (2004); 
[79] De Poli et al., Science 352, 575 (2016); 
[80] Alder, Butts, Sessions, Chem Sci 8, 6389 (2017); 
[81] Gil-Ramírez et al., Journal of the American Chemical Society 138, 13159 (2016); 
[82] Ziegler et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 7533 (2016); 
[83] Dunning et al., Science 347, 530 (2015); 
[84] Glowacki, Orr-Ewing, Harvey, The Journal of Chemical Physics 143, 044120 (2015); 
[85] Haag, Reiher, International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 113, 8 (2012); 
[86] Vaucher, Haag, Reiher, Journal of Computational Chemistry 37, 805 (2016); 
[87] Haag, Reiher, Faraday Discussions 169, 89 (2014); 
[88] Christensen et al.,  (http://www.qmlcode.org); 
[89] Gao et al., Computer Physics Communications 203, 212 (2016); 
[90] Varela, Vazquez, Martinez-Nunez, Chem Sci 8, 3843 (2017); 
[91] Martinez-Nunez, J Comput Chem 36, 222 (2015); 
[92] Wang et al., Nat Chem 6, 1044 (2014); 
[93] Zador, Miller, P Combust Inst 35, 181 (2015); 
[94] Zheng, Pfaendtner, J Phys Chem C 118, 10764 (2014); 
[95] Shannon et al., Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 14, 4541 (2018); 
[96] Ohno, Maeda, Chemical Physics Letters 384, 277 (2004); 
[97] Cooper et al., Nature 466, 756 (2010); 
[98] Eiben et al., Nat Biotechnol 30, 190 (2012); 

27 

 
[99] Heck et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, E11231 (2018); 
[100] Eisenmesser et al., Nature 438, 117 (2005); 
[101] Chi et al., Angewandte Chemie International Edition 54, 11657 (2015); 
[102] Plattner, Noé, Nature Communications 6, 7653 (2015); 
[103] Buch, Giorgino, De Fabritiis, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 10184 (2011); 
[104] Wu et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, E3221 (2016); 
[105] Huggins et al., Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Molecular Science 0, e1393 (2018); 
[106] Yilmaz, Müller, Topics in Catalysis 52, 888 (2009); 
[107] Czaja, Trukhan, Müller, Chemical Society Reviews 38, 1284 (2009); 
[108] Bu et al., Catalysis Today 312, 73 (2018); 
[109] Granato et al., Chemical Engineering Science 65, 2656 (2010); 
[110] Bereciartua et al., Science 358, 1068 (2017); 
[111] Rau et al., in 2015 IEEE 1st International Workshop on Virtual and Augmented Reality for Molecular Science 
(VARMS@IEEEVR) (2015), pp. 25; 
[112] Grand, Dall Antonia, in Proceedings of the Interntional Conference on Audio Displays (2008), Vol. 30; 
[113] Ballweg, Bronowska, Vickers, in Proceedings of ISon 2016, 5th Interactive Sonification Workshop, CITEC 
(2016); 
[114] Shams, Kamitani, Shimojo, Nature 408, 788 (2000); 
[115] Brooks, Faraday Discuss. 169, 521 (2014); 
[116] Hart, Istrail, J. Comput. Biol. 4, 1 (1997); 
[117] Pérez de Alba Ortíz et al., The Journal of Chemical Physics 149, 072320 (2018); 
[118] Husic, Pande, Journal of the American Chemical Society 140, 2386 (2018); 
[119] O'Connor et al., Faraday Discuss. 195, 395 (2016); 
[120] von Delius, Geertsema, Leigh, Nature Chemistry 2, 96 (2009); 
[121] Cheng et al., Nature Nanotechnology 10, 547 (2015); 
[122] Serreli et al., Nature 445, 523 (2007); 
[123] Kassem et al., Nature 549, 374 (2017); 
[124] Leigh et al., Nature 424, 174 (2003); 
[125] Kudernac et al., Nature 479, 208 (2011); 
[126] Grayson Katie, Anderson, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 15, 20180472 (2018); 
[127] Swift Thomas et al., Interface Focus 9, 20180048 (2019); 
[128] Röthlisberger et al., Nature 453, 190 (2008); 
[129] Watkins et al., Nature Communications 8, 358 (2017); 
[130] Thomas et al., ACS Synthetic Biology 7, 1808 (2018); 

28 

 
 
  
