IEEE VR 2019 Workshop on Human Augmentation and its Applications

Post-Data Augmentation to Improve Deep Pose Estimation of Extreme and
Wild Motions

Kohei Toyoda*
The University of Tokyo

Michinari Kono†
The University of Tokyo

Jun Rekimoto‡
The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories, Inc.

9
1
0
2

b
e
F
2
1

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
2
4
0
.
2
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Applying data augmentation approach for the estimation/generation phase in deep pose estimation can improve the
quality of extreme/wild motion pose estimation. Our approach can be used with pre-trained models, and without new training with
self-collected dataset. This ﬁgure shows results compared with using raw OpenPose [1].

ABSTRACT

1 INTRODUCTION

Contributions of recent deep-neural-network (DNN) based tech-
niques have been playing a signiﬁcant role in human-computer inter-
action (HCI) and user interface (UI) domains. One of the commonly
used DNNs is human pose estimation. This kind of technique is
widely used for motion capturing of humans, and to generate or
modify virtual avatars. However, in order to gain accuracy and to
use such systems, large and precise datasets are required for the
machine learning (ML) procedure. This can be especially difﬁcult
for extreme/wild motions such as acrobatic movements or motions
in speciﬁc sports, which are difﬁcult to estimate in typically pro-
vided training models. In addition, training may take a long duration,
and will require a high-grade GPU for sufﬁcient speed. To address
these issues, we propose a method to improve the pose estimation
accuracy for extreme/wild motions by using pre-trained models, i.e.,
without performing the training procedure by yourselves. We as-
sume our method to encourage usage of these DNN techniques for
users in application areas that are out of the ML ﬁeld, and to help
users without high-end computers to apply them for personal and
end use cases.

Index Terms:
Computing methodologies—Motion capture;
Computing methodologies—Neural networks; Human-centered
computing—Human computer interaction (HCI)

*e-mail: toyoda-kohei648@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
†e-mail: mchkono@acm.org
‡e-mail: rekimoto@acm.org

Measuring human pose is an important topic for analyzing the mo-
tion of the human body, which has been studied and applied to
various research ﬁelds, such as sports science and human-computer
interaction (HCI). Typical approaches for motion capturing were to
use optical or mechanical sensors ﬁxed or worn by the user. However,
the recent growth of the deep-neural-network (DNN) techniques
have presented remarkable results for human pose estimation by us-
ing simple monocular cameras that can retrieve 2D poses [1, 12, 14]
or even 3D poses [7, 8]. These approaches have several beneﬁts, for
example, they do not require camera calibration and can be obtained
by single RGB images.

In DNN techniques, they usually require to have large datasets
that can be used for training models, and online available data is
used (e.g., [6]). Unfortunately, using such data sometimes ﬁnd dif-
ﬁculty to be applied for rare or speciﬁc postures, such as extreme
or wild motions. In order to solve this problem, a typical solution is
to gather data by yourselves by using other motion capturing tools
for reference data, however, there are still difﬁculties to gather data
for some motions. For example, gathering data for swimming may
require an expensive or special environment for motion capturing.
Instead of gathering such data, Peng et al. [11] suggested that ro-
tation data augmentation can improve the performance of the pose
estimation for in the wild images. This solution may improve the
quality of pose estimation for extreme and wild motions.

However, this may result to another problem, where the training
data becomes very large. Training with large dataset may require
much more time for training and require high-grade GPUs. There-
fore, it may be difﬁcult for some users to use the DNN pose estima-
tion by themselves. For such users, they may ﬁnd beneﬁt from just
using the pre-trained model that is often provided by the developers.
What we mean by saying users here, are people working out of the

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE VR 2019 Workshop on Human Augmentation and its Applications

Figure 2: The overview of our approach. Instead of augmenting data for training, we apply augmentation for the estimation process. Pose
estimation is applied multiple times for each frame, and then we select the best consistent pose from the set. A simple reconstruction is applied to
get the ﬁnal output.

Figure 3: Conﬁdence levels of some example video sequences. Note that the conﬁdence do not exactly present the accuracy, but is a simple
reference for the quality of prediction. The conﬁdence level presented here is the output retrieved from OpenPose, with and without augmentation
with our method.

ML ﬁeld, who do not develop DNN by themselves, but use them for
developing applications.

DNN pose estimation techniques are used for various applications,
for both realtime and non-realtime use cases. Move Mirror1 allows
you to ﬁnd images with the similar pose with the input. Other
applications include use cases for entertainment purposes [5, 13]
and sport analysis [2, 3, 9]. Some even focus on analyzing hands or
facial expressions for other purposes [4, 10]. We can see that pose
estimation is important for the users, and do not always have to be
available for realtime use.

In this paper, we propose a simple but effective method to improve
the pose estimation for extreme/wild motion videos, without gather-
ing new reference data, and by just using the provided pre-trained
model. Referring to the approach of Peng et al. [11], we apply pose
estimation for videos rotated multiple times for each frame to ﬁnd a
conﬁdent pose, i.e., we apply a kind of data augmentation technique
at the estimation process. As a proof-of-concept, we present exam-
ple results using OpenPose [1] with in the wild videos and some
videos recorded in speciﬁc activities (Figure 1).

2 METHOD
The approach of our method is shown in Figure 2. First, we ap-
ply OpenPose at various rotations to get predictions obtained from
various angles, which is expressed by equation 1 and 2.

t }. When t = 1, Jθ

rotation matrix for a 2D rotation at θ , and θ takes values at [0◦, 360◦]
sampled every d degrees. d is 10◦ in our current case. Jθ
is sets
t
of estimated joints when the image is rotated θ . Therefore, Jθ
t can
be understood as a pose that is predicted at a certain rotation but is
ﬁxed to the original image coordinates and consists of a set of poses
as {k jθ
1 takes the pose that satisﬁes objective
function 3, where ¯xθ
t . We then
t
select the ideal Jθ
from the set, by using objective function 4. We
t
ﬁnd the top 5 poses for objective 4, and then use objective 3 to
select the best matching pose. In addition, we deﬁned a threshold
for objective 4 as 500, and when all the calculation exceeds the
threshold, we used objective 3 to ﬁnd the best pose instead. This
approach was taken because we experimentally found that simply
selecting the pose with the best conﬁdence level did not always
present the correct pose.

is the mean of conﬁdences of Jθ

max ¯xθ
t
t −k j p
(cid:107)k jθ

t−1(cid:107)2

min∑
k

(3)

(4)

Here, p is the ﬁnal reconstructed pose that is obtained by equa-

tion 5 and 6.

t = k j(cid:48)
k jθ
t R−1
t = {k jθ
Jθ
t }

(1)

(2)

t + (1 − w)J p
J p
t = wJθ
t−1
t = {k j p
J p
t }

(5)

(6)

k j(cid:48)
θ , and k jθ
t

t is the predicted k th joint at frame t when the image is rotated
is the joint ﬁxed to the original coordinates. R is the

1https://experiments.withgoogle.com/collection/ai/move-mirror/view

w represents the weight for the current frame and is set to w = 0.8.
J p
is used for representing the pose at every t. Note that for the
t
procedures that are taken when selecting the best joints, we do not
consider the joints around the head.

2

IEEE VR 2019 Workshop on Human Augmentation and its Applications

Figure 4: Example result of pose estimation applied to a video sequence. The top row is the input, the middle is the result obtained by using raw
OpenPose, and the bottom is the result obtained by using our method.

3

IEEE VR 2019 Workshop on Human Augmentation and its Applications

3 RESULTS
We applied our method for various video sequences, and the follow-
ings are some examples.

• Cartwheel: A person performs a cartwheel, and jumps verti-

cally at the end.

• Handstand: A person performs a handstand, and moves his

legs.

• Swimming: A person swims across the camera settled above

the swimming pool.

• Pole Vault: A person performs a pole vault.

Figure 3 displays conﬁdence levels of some video sequences
that were tested. We can observe that the overall conﬁdence level
tends to be higher by using our method. However, since we work
on typical body models, it is still difﬁcult to estimate poses that
exceed the constraints of such models. We can also observe that
the conﬁdence level sometimes becomes lower than the results of
using raw OpenPose. This happens when the predicted pose has ﬁne
conﬁdence, however, do not match the pose from the prior frame,
and therefore exceeds the threshold of objective 4.

Figure 1 and 4 presents some visual results of pose estimation
using our method for videos with extreme/wild motions. We can
see that using OpenPose with its default usage can suffer to estimate
sufﬁcient results especially when the human body is sideways or up-
side down. Our method successfully allows estimating a better pose
throughout the motion. However, we still observed some difﬁculties
for estimating poses of pole vault sequences. This happens when the
body curls up, or when the pole disturbs the pose estimation.

Since our interest was to work on extreme/wild motions that do
not have open source dataset provided (in the wild scenes), we cur-
rently have not conducted a quantitative evaluation for the accuracy.
In the future, we plan to collect data for these extreme/wild mo-
tions with motion captures, and to evaluate our method against other
methods, including training models created with the data.

4 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our results suggest that our method can improve the quality of deep
pose estimation, however, still has some limitations.

Since our work applies pose estimation multiple times for each
frames, it requires more time for the whole pose estimation proce-
dure. Therefore, we can say that there is a trade-off between time
and accuracy. We must note that our method cannot be applied
for use cases that require realtime analysis. In addition, while the
strength of OpenPose is where it can be applied for multi-person
simultaneously, our current method focuses on a single person.

For future work, we will apply our approach to 3D pose esti-
mation as well. We will also investigate other data augmentation
approaches to be used for our method. Currently, we apply the pose
estimation for all considerable rotation of the frame. However, we
assume that the computation cost can be minimizing by referring
to the selected rotation angle of adjunct frames, and to limit the
rotation angle of the frame so that we can decrease the number of
the pose estimation times applied for each frame. Figure 5 presents
the θ value of a cartwheel sequence. In this sequence, a person
starts standing, and then performs a cartwheel, and ﬁnally when
the cartwheel is completed, he performs a small jump vertically.
During the cartwheel, the θ value gradually decreases following the
progress of the cartwheel. When the person is standing or jumping,
θ takes values near the original angle (typically around 0–30◦ and
330–360◦). We may observe that pose estimation can perform better
when the head is in the upper area of the image and the legs are
at the bottom. Therefore, we may possibly estimate a range of θ ,
which can make a good estimation.

Figure 5: Plot of the θ value of a video sequence (cartwheel).

We also expect our approach of post-data augmentation can be
applied for other application domains, not limited to pose estimation.
The approach where we adapt the input data and to help the train-
ing model to perform the prediction more easily can improve the
overall performance of estimation, and can be effective for various
models. We assume that the approach can be expanded with other
data augmentation methods, not limited to rotation augmentation.

Our motivation for this work is to encourage researchers in human
augmentation and HCI to use DNN based pose estimation methods
for various sports/activities with irregular motions. Introducing a
method that does not require data collection and training on your
own, will hopefully improve the acceptability and reduce the obsta-
cles for applying such methods.

5 CONCLUSION

This paper introduces a method to improve pose estimation with
DNN, but with a post-data augmentation approach that can be ap-
plied for pre-trained models. When using traditional methods, it can
be difﬁcult to obtain accurate poses from extreme/wild motions. Our
method augments the input data with rotation augmentation, and use
pose estimation method multiple times for every frame. We then
select the most consistent pose, followed by a motion reconstruction
for smoothing. The results show that our method can improve the
overall quality of pose estimation for videos where people take irreg-
ular poses, such as when performing acrobatic motions. We expect
our method to be used for applications where collecting datasets
for the activity are difﬁcult, and do not require real-time estima-
tion. This approach can be considered as a post-data augmentation
method, which can be used after the training process.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work is supported by ISID Technosolutions, Ltd.

REFERENCES

[1] Z. Cao, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. Sheikh. Realtime multi-person 2d
pose estimation using part afﬁnity ﬁelds. CoRR, abs/1611.08050, 2016.
[2] H. Fani, A. Mirlohi, H. Hosseini, and R. Herperst. Swim stroke analytic:
Front crawl pulling pose classiﬁcation. In 2018 25th IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 4068–4072, Oct 2018.
doi: 10.1109/ICIP.2018.8451756

[3] P. Felsen and P. Lucey. Body shots: Analyzing shooting styles in the
nba using body pose. In MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2017.
[4] K. Fujii, P. Marian, D. Clark, Y. Okamoto, and J. Rekimoto. Sync
class: Visualization system for in-class student synchronization. In

4

IEEE VR 2019 Workshop on Human Augmentation and its Applications

Proceedings of the 9th Augmented Human International Conference,
AH ’18, pp. 12:1–12:8. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.
1145/3174910.3174927

[5] D.-H. Hwang and H. Koike. Parapara: Synthesizing pseudo-2.5d
content from monocular videos for mixed reality. In Extended Abstracts
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI EA ’18, pp. LBW608:1–LBW608:6. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2018. doi: 10.1145/3170427.3188596

[6] C. Ionescu, D. Papava, V. Olaru, and C. Sminchisescu. Human3.6m:
Large scale datasets and predictive methods for 3d human sensing in
natural environments. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 36(7):1325–1339, jul 2014.

[7] A. Kanazawa, M. J. Black, D. W. Jacobs, and J. Malik. End-to-end
recovery of human shape and pose. CoRR, abs/1712.06584, 2017.
[8] J. Martinez, R. Hossain, J. Romero, and J. J. Little. A simple yet effec-
tive baseline for 3d human pose estimation. CoRR, abs/1705.03098,
2017.

[9] M. Nakai, Y. Tsunoda, H. Hayashi, and H. Murakoshi. Prediction of
basketball free throw shooting by openpose. In Proceedings of Fifth
International Workshop on Skill Science, SKL ’18, 2018.

[10] T. Okumura, S. Urabe, K. Inoue, and M. Yoshioka. Cooking activities
recognition in egocentric videos using hand shape feature with open-
pose. In Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Multimedia for Cooking
and Eating Activities and Multimedia Assisted Dietary Management,
CEA/MADiMa ’18, pp. 42–45. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi:
10.1145/3230519.3230591

[11] X. B. Peng, A. Kanazawa, J. Malik, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Sfv:
Reinforcement learning of physical skills from videos. In SIGGRAPH
Asia 2018 Technical Papers, SIGGRAPH Asia ’18, pp. 178:1–178:14.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3272127.3275014

[12] A. Toshev and C. Szegedy. Deeppose: Human pose estimation via

deep neural networks. CoRR, abs/1312.4659, 2013.

[13] S. Tsuchida, S. Fukayama, and M. Goto. Automatic system for edit-
ing dance videos recorded using multiple cameras. In A. D. Cheok,
M. Inami, and T. Rom˜ao, eds., Advances in Computer Entertainment
Technology, pp. 671–688. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2018.

[14] S. Wei, V. Ramakrishna, T. Kanade, and Y. Sheikh. Convolutional pose

machines. CoRR, abs/1602.00134, 2016.

5

