Immersive VR as a Tool to Enhance Relaxation 
for Undergraduate Students with the Aim of 
Reducing Anxiety – A Pilot Study 

J Lewis, B Rorstad  
Department of Computing, Nottingham Trent University  

Corresponding author: J. Lewis  (e-mail: james.lewis@ntu.ac.uk). 

ABSTRACT Despite extensive use in related domains, Virtual Reality (VR) for generalised anxiety disorder 
(GAD) has received little previous attention.  We report upon a VR environment created for the Oculus Rift 
and  Unreal  Engine  4  (UE4)  to  investigate  the  potential  of  a  VR  simulation  to  be  used  as  an  anxiety 
management tool. We introduce the broad topic of GAD and related publications on the application of VR to 
this, and similar, mental health conditions. We then describe the development of a real time simulation tool, 
based upon the passive VR experience of a tranquil, rural alpine scene experienced from a seated position 
with head tracking.  Evaluation focused upon qualitative feedback on the application. Testing was carried out 
over the period of two weeks on a sample group of eleven students studying at Nottingham Trent University. 
All participants were asked to complete the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale – 21 Items (DASS21) at 
the beginning and at the end of the study order to assess their profile, and hence suitability to comment upon 
the software. Qualitative feedback was very encouraging, with all participants reporting that they believed 
the experience helped and that they would consider utilising it if it was available.  Additionally, a psychologist 
was asked to test the application to provide a specialist opinion on whether it would be appropriate for use as 
an anxiety management tool. The results highlight several areas for improvement but are positive overall in 
terms of its potential as a therapeutic tool.  

INDEX  TERMS  Virtual  reality,  VR,  Unreal  Engine,  UE4,  stress,  depression,  anxiety,  mental  health, 
undergraduate

I. INTRODUCTION 
Generalised Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is a disorder of chronic 
uncontrollable worry, with a lifetime population prevalence 
of around 5% [1]. It is often considered that GAD is not as 
serious as other anxieties, such as social anxiety or specific 
phobias  and  research  shows  that  it  is  not  uncommon  for 
patients  to  wait  for  a  considerable  number  of  years  before 
seeking treatment [2]. However, GAD can have a significant 
impact upon a person’s life due to its long-term and chronic 
nature.  Anxiety  does  not  simply 
the 
psychosocial  conduct  of  the  affected  individual,  there  are 
physiological  symptoms  such  as  difficulty  concentrating, 
muscle tension and disturbed sleep. It has also been shown 
to  have  in  impact  upon  mortality  with  increased  risk  of 
suicide  [3]  and  death  from  cancer[4].  The  development  of 
effective  treatment  regimens  for  generalised  anxiety  is 
therefore  a  matter of substantial interest and importance to 
public health and wellbeing. 
People usually develop GAD  from the late teens and early 
twenties onwards and it typically lasts for around 20 years 

impact  upon 

[1]. It is also not uncommon for people diagnosed with GAD 
to  experience  other  types  of  anxiety  or  mood  disorders. 
These include social anxiety,  depression or  alcohol misuse 
and these are often experienced at the same time as the GAD 
[1].People  tend  to  seek  treatment  for  these  problems 
individually,  rather  than  for  their  tendency  to  worry 
excessively [3]. 
VR is a powerful technology which has proven itself to be a 
potentially effective way to enhance psychotherapy [5]. The 
aim  of  this  project  was  therefore  to  investigate  whether 
healthcare for young adults with GAD can be enhanced by 
using VR. 

II. BACKGROUND AND EXISTING TREATMENT 
REGIMES 
Multiple studies  have been conducted regarding the  use  of 
VR to treat anxiety disorders through forms of VR exposure 
therapy  (VRET).  These  include  flying  [6]-[8],  spiders  [9], 
[10],  heights  [11],  public  speaking  [12],  agoraphobia  [13], 
[14]  ,and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  [15].  In  general, 

1 

 
 
 
 
these  interventions  have  been  found  to  be  effective  and 
acceptable to users. Negative side effects are  not generally 
serious and in most cases factors such as disorientation and 
motion sickness can be associated with shortcomings in the 
VR technology available rather than the method per se. 

no  tasks  to  perform  or  demands  made  upon  them.  The 
intentions  at  this  stage  were  to  make  a  quick  assessment 
about  the  usability  of  the  technology  utilised,  the  visual 
fidelity possible and the acceptability amongst the user group 
of this kind of intervention. 

Previous attempts at using VR to treat GAD included some 
kind of interactivity allowing the user to move around in a 
three  dimensional  scene  using  a  head-mounted  display 
(HMD)  and  a  keyboard  [18],  [19],  [21].  Whilst  the 
relationship  between  interactivity  and  presence  is  well 
established  [22]  it  is  unclear  whether  deep  presence  is  a 
necessary  component  in  VR  relaxation,  especially  when 
considering Gorini’s [19] utilisation of imagery on a mobile 
phone. Whilst a room scale six degree of freedom experience 
is  well  within  the  capabilities  of  the  existing  desktop 
systems,  these  have  substantial  limitations  in  terms  of 
convenience  and  widespread  access.  Standalone  mobile 
solutions,  such  as  Gear  VR  or  Oculus  GO  offer  great 
potential in terms of low cost, ease of use and ‘low friction’ 
in  terms  of  adoption,  but  to  do  so  they  sacrifice  the 
translational degrees of freedom, making exploration of an 
environment more difficult to facilitate in a naturalistic way. 

IV. METHODS 

A. DESIGN 

The  starting  point  of  the  research  was  the  idea  that 
naturalistic environments were supportive of relaxation and 
contemplation.  There  remained  a  specific  question  over 
exactly what kind of environment should be developed. To 
help inform this stage of the design a cohort of students in 
the Computing Department of Nottingham Trent University 
were polled with the question; 

 “If you could imagine yourself in a 
peaceful and safe environment – a place 
that makes you relaxed and happy, where 
would it be?” 

Despite there being a large body of evidence supporting the 
effectiveness  of  VR  in  the  treatment  of  specific  anxiety 
disorders,  research  on  the  use  of  VR  applications  in  the 
treatment of GAD is still at a very early stage. GAD has been 
well  documented  as  one  of  the  most  difficult  anxiety 
disorders to treat, yielding lower treatment response relative 
to  other  anxiety  disorders  [16].  It  would  therefore  be  of 
substantial  interest if it can be shown that VR can play an 
effective role in this context. 

It has been shown that relaxation is an effective approach in 
the treatment of GAD [17]. One of the limitations however, 
is that, for somebody who is anxious, depressed or stressed, 
a state of relaxation can be difficult to achieve. To overcome 
this problem, VR has been used as a means of facilitating the 
relaxation  process  by  visually  presenting  key  relaxing 
images to the patients. Gorini and Riva [18] suggested that 
VR  imagery  makes  the  experience  more  “real”  than  most 
people can create using their own imagination and that VR 
therefore induces a sense of presence which can enhance the 
relaxation  experience.  The  randomised  controlled  trial  of 
Gorini  et  al  [19]  combined  a  VR  headset  with  a  mobile 
phone,  facilitating  the  relaxation  therapy  in  an  outpatient 
setting, albeit not in an immersive fashion. It was shown that 
this use of VR for relaxation represents a promising approach 
when it comes to treating individuals diagnosed with GAD. 
The  perceived  sense  of  presence  was  cited  as  a  factor; 
however, the results also suggest that a mobile phone lacking 
in immersive content can still be useful to help individuals 
relax in an outpatient  setting,  with 91% of  the participants 
reporting satisfaction with using a mobile phone to practice 
relaxation exercises at home.  

Baños  et  al.  [20],  investigated  stress-related  disorders. 
Examining the efficacy of using a VR application for treating 
stress-related  disorders,  including  post-traumatic  stress 
disorder  (PTSD),  pathological  grief  (PG)  and  adjustment 
disorders  (AD).  The  study 
that  cognitive 
behavioural  therapy  (CBT)  with  the  addition  of  the  virtual 
environments was at least as effective as the traditional CBT 
therapy. Furthermore, where significant differences existed 
these were in favour of the VR therapy. The data obtained in 
this study showed that VR can be used to improve a patient’s 
continued 
thereby 
relaxation 
investigation.   

justifying 

intensity, 

indicated 

III. AIMS 
The aim of the project is to develop a VR application which 
could be used as a tool to reduce stress and anxiety amongst 
young  adults  with  GAD.  The  application  aims  to  facilitate 
relaxation  by  placing  the  user  in  a  naturalistic  VR 
environment which can simply be experienced. The user has 

As  the  lake  had  the  greatest  support  this  was  the  starting 
point for the design. It was recognised that the context of an 
alpine lake would facilitate the incorporation of the ‘Happy 
Place’ proposed triggers of snow and trees in an attempt to 
maximise the reach of a single simulated environment. 

 
 
 
 
 
The environment was developed using the Unreal Engine 4 
game  engine  by  Epic  Games,  with  assets  including  trees, 
plants and flowers modelled in 3Ds Max and supplemented 
with  assets  already  available  from  Epic  Games  in  the 
marketplace.  Custom  textures  for  the  landscape  and  water 
shaders  were  developed  using  Adobe  Photoshop.  Spatially 
referenced sound loops of running water, wind in the trees, 
and  birdsong  were  also  incorporated.  Figures  1  and  2 
illustrate the graphical fidelity achieved and show the bench 
which was the locus of the user’s experience. 

The low-cost Oculus based Samsung GearVR was initially 
selected  as  the  development  platform.  The  device  costs 
around  £50  and  is  therefore  a  relatively  inexpensive 
platform,  a  key  factor  when  considering  the  potential  for 
widespread  adoption.  It  is  also  the  bestselling  advanced 
consumer VR device of all time with over 5 million units in 
circulation  [23].  This  platform  was  therefore  a  mature  and 
viable test bed for a potential rollout of the system. As the 
prototype  evolved  it  became  clear  that  the  rendering 
requirements for the detailed naturalistic landscape planned 
was exceeding the capabilities of the Samsung smartphone 
which  was  powering  the  system.  Rather  than  simplify  the 
environmental  features  a  decision  was  made  to  utilise  the 
Oculus  Rift  instead.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  the 
development  methodology  employed,  in  particular  the 
utilisation  of  the  Unreal  4  Game  engine,  means  that  the 
application developed is somewhat platform agnostic. Whilst 
it was necessary to utilise a desktop PC at this time, for this 
phase of the work, it was clear that faster phones & improved 
mobile VR systems such as the HTC Vive Focus or Oculus 
Quest  would  soon  become  viable  platforms  for  rich  and 
detailed  VR  experiences.  Redeploying 
the  software 
prototype  from  a  desktop  implementation  to  mobile  VR 
would be a relatively trivial step as the prototype remained 
within  the  expected  operating  parameters  of  newer  mobile 
VR devices. 

Figure 1 - The simulated alpine scene 

Figure 2 - The Bench 

B. Testing Tools & Methods 

The study procedures were conducted in accordance with the 
Declaration of Helsinki and received ethical approval from 
the  Research  Ethics  Committee  of  the  authors’  university. 
All participants provided written informed consent prior to 
their participation in this study. 

Participants  were  a  mixed  sex  group  of  volunteer 
undergraduate students aged 20-22. To get an understanding 
of  each  participant’s  level  of  anxiety,  all  participants  were 
asked to complete the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale 
– 21 items (DASS21) both at the start of the user testing and 
two weeks later, at the end of the user testing. The DASS21 
uses  a  4-point  scale  which  measures  the  frequency  or 
severity of the participants’ experiences over the last week. 
The scale is a great tool for separating out the analysis across 
depression, anxiety and stress [24]. Our aim in applying this 
scale was to provide a glimpse at the mental health profile of 
our undergraduate participants. Participants volunteered for 
the  trial  and  there  was  no  attempt  to  profile  or  manage 
recruitment towards a representative sample. The study was 
advertised as a trial of a virtual reality experience and was 
not  presented  to  potential  volunteers  as  a  mental  health 
intervention at the outset. The sample is therefore likely to 
be biased towards individuals with an interest in technology, 
but  not  necessarily  those  seeking  help  with  their  mental 
health. 

All participants  were  given a  short  explanation of  how  the 
equipment  works,  with  an  introduction  stating  that  they 
experience an alpine scene showing a calm lake surrounded 
by  mountains  together  with  sounds  such  as  birds  tweeting 
and  running  water.  Participants  were  instructed  to  look 
around to observe the surroundings whilst remaining seated 
on a bench  and to attempt to  simply relax. The participant 
was then seated on an office  chair, assisted in donning the 
Oculus Rift headset and positioning the headphones. Testing 
was  based  on  two  15-minute  sessions.  The  sessions  were 
separated  by  a  duration  of  two  weeks  due  to  participant 
availability and to facilitate a period of reflection.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. RESULTS AND EVALUATION 

A.  Quantitative Results 

which many academic staff will have anecdotally observed 
but which is laid bare by these figures 

the  DASS21 
The  Quantitative  results  obtained  from 
questionnaire are presented first to illustrate the profile of the 
participants. Changes in the scale are discussed where noted, 
however  the  authors  make  no  claim  of  significance 
associated  with  these,  they  are  merely  discussed  for 
completeness  and  as  preliminary  indicators  only.    In 
interpreting the DASS21 the conventional cut-off values for 
severity thresholds indicated by Lovibond & Lovibond have 
been utilised [25] 

Figure 5 - level of stress before and after testing 

The  authors  also  suggest  these  results  indicate  that  the 
application  appears  to  cause  no  harm,  and  that  there  are 
tentative indications that it might help reduce levels of stress 
and anxiety.  More robust methods, including a ‘waiting list’ 
control  condition  and  a  larger  sample  will  be  employed  in 
future testing to see if any statistical significance underlies 
these observations. 

Figure 3 - Level of depression before and after testing 

B. Qualitative Results 

Turning  to  the  qualitative  results,  which  were  the  key 
purpose  of  this  phase  of  the  research,  we  asked  three 
questions. These were designed to test assumptions made at 
the outset, and reported in the literature, as well as indicate 
the  desirability  of  this  type  of  intervention.  A  five  point 
Likert  scale  was  utilised  and  the  questionnaire  presented 
immediately  after  the  second  experience  of  the  VR 
environment. 

I felt like the application helped me relax better 
than if I were to use my own imagination. 

Figure 4 - Level of anxiety before and after testing 

The key observations of relevance to this study are the 
results relating to stress and anxiety. It is interesting to note 
that only three participants indicated normal levels of stress 
and only three indicated normal levels of anxiety. All other 
indications are of elevated levels of stress and anxiety. The 
authors present this to indicate that the test group are 
suitably representative candidates to comment upon the 
application. It is also interesting to note the extent of stress 
and anxiety amongst undergraduate students, something 

Figure 6 - Relaxation effectiveness 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  elicit  an 

individual 
This  question  was  designed 
perspective  on  how  the  participant  felt  with  regard  to  the 
utility of the application. Figure 6 shows that all participants 
believe the simulation helps them to relax more effectively 
than  they  could  through  simply  applying  their  own 
imagination. The authors take this belief as an indication that 
participants are likely to have faith in the application, and are 
therefore  likely  to  remain  engaged  for  the  duration  of  a 
longitudinal  study.  Ten  out  of  eleven  participants  strongly 
agreed with the statement, this was a stronger reaction than 
the authors anticipated and indicates that for these users at 
least, they believe the application to be an effective tool to 
enhance relaxation. 

their 

to  utilise 

It  is  important  to  note  that  participants  were  not  asked  to 
attempt 
imagination  as  a  relaxation 
mechanism  as  a  formal  part  of  the  study.    This  question 
therefore  does  not  objectively  tell  us  whether  or  not  the 
application  is  more  effective  than  imagination  alone  could 
be.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  participants  will  have  have  been 
trained to utilise their imagination effectively in this context, 
and  it  is  very  possible  that  with  such  guidance  this  result 
could look very different. 

If given the opportunity, I would consider using 
this application as a tool to help me relax when 
feeling stressed or anxious. 

Figure 7 - User acceptance of the tool 

As  can  be  seen  from  figure  7,  every  single  participant 
reported that they would consider using the application as a 
tool  for  enhancing  relaxation  when  feeling  stressed  or 
anxious.  This  suggests  that  if  it  could  be  made  easily 
available, in a “low friction” manner, the application could 
be attractive to a large number of people. The authors did not 
anticipate such a strongly positive response to this question 
but note that there is a difference between “considering the 
use of” something and stating that you “would actually use” 
something.  It  would  be  useful  to  investigate  what,  if  any, 
factors  convert  somebody  considering  use  of  the  VR 
simulation into somebody who does or doesn’t actually use 
the  tool.    This  will  form  the  qualitative  focus  of  future 
studies. 

I felt a strong sense of presence in the 
environment. 

Figure 8 - Sense of presence 

The results shown in figure 8 show that all the participants 
of  the  study  felt  a  sense  of  presence  in  the  virtual 
environment.    This  was  in  line  with  the  anticipated  result. 
The  restriction  of  the  participant  to  a  seated  position  may 
have led to a reduced sense of presence, versus experiencing 
at room scale. However, the authors present this as indicative 
that 3 degree of freedom mobile VR solutions are likely of 
offer  a  degree  of  presence  sufficient  for  effective  VR 
relaxation therapy. 

In  order  to  identify  any  potential  improvements  to  the 
application, participants  were encouraged to give  feedback 
on the system throughout the course of the user testing.  

“It felt really weird when I looked down and couldn’t see my 
body. I don’t know if would help, but I think it would be better 
if you could see a body instead of being invisible.” 

Several participants commented on this theme, highlighting 
that the absence of an avatar may lower the sense of presence 
within  the  environment.  An  appropriate  mechanism  for 
achieving this for a diverse group of users, thereby enabling 
the participant to identify as the  avatar requires  significant 
further research. 

told 

 “I am currently on the waiting list to receive CBT treatment 
as  I  have  just  been  diagnosed  with  generalised  anxiety 
disorder…  I’ve  been 
is 
approximately eight weeks… I feel like this app could really 
help me relax more whilst waiting for treatment... Although 
it wouldn’t necessarily make me feel that different, I’m sure 
it would make more of a difference than not doing anything 
at all.” 

the  waiting 

time 

that 

This chance anecdote from within a small sample is perhaps 
indicative  of  the  prevalence  and  individual  experience  of 
young people with GED. The authors also noted that in this 
case  the  participant  indicates  that  they  would  use  it,  even 
though  they  did  not  anticipate  it  making  much  difference.  
Such  an  observation  perhaps  reveals  a  kind  of  desperation 
for anything to fill the treatment void in which people find 
themselves.  Even  where  the  perceived  chance  of  success 
seems  slim.  It  also  cautions  against  making  the  leap  from 
something people say they like, and report helps them relax, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  making  the  assumption  that  it  therefore  might  provide 
meaningful therapeutic benefit.  

app  shows  great  potential  and  would  be  of  great  help 
especially if used together with therapy.” 

C. EXPERT REVIEW 
interview  with  a  professional  psychologist  was 
An 
conducted  in  order  to  assess  the  potential  use  of  the 
application.  The psychologist was given a short explanation 
of how the system worked before testing it.  

The psychologist identified that the system only consisted of 
one environment. 

“The environment looks great, but you have to remember that 
people are different and should therefore be provided with 
different options as to what they find relaxing.” 

This  highlights  that  the  application  could  benefit  from 
having  more  than  one  environment.  Although  results 
indicate that the lake environment seems to be effective in 
releasing  stress  and  anxiety,  the  application  could  have  a 
bigger impact if more environments were added for the user 
to choose from.  

The  virtual  environment  was  described  as  looking  very 
realistic.  However,  one  suggestion  was  made  that  could 
potentially  increase  the  sense  of  presence  within  the 
environment. 

“The scene looks very realistic and I had a strong sense of 
presence. I don’t know if it’s possible, but it would be good 
to  be  able  to  walk  around  the  environment  as  well  as  this 
could potentially improve the sense of presence.” 

this  highlights  an  area 

Although 
improvement, 
movement  around  the  environment  was  not  encouraged  at 
this stage due the potential risk of trips or falls and due to a 
desire  to  mirror  the  experience  possible  through  widely 
accessible mobile VR.  

for 

“The birds tweeting and the sound of running water make the 
environment  seem  more  realistic,  but  I  feel  like  the 
application  would  be  more  useful  for  relaxation  if  a  voice 
over was added in order to guide the patient in what to do.” 

This  highlights  that  although  there  is  a  strong  sense  of 
presence, the patients might find the application more useful 
if guided through the relaxation experience.  
After assessing some areas of the system, the psychologist 
was  asked  two  fixed  questions  in  order  to  assess  the 
usefulness of the application. 

Do you think GAD patients could potentially benefit from 
this application? 

“Yes, absolutely. Although it would be better to have more 
options to choose from in terms of environments, I think the 

If given the opportunity, would you consider  using this 
application on some of your patients? 

“I don’t know much about VR to be honest, so I would have 
to  look  into  it  in  a  bit  more  detail  first,  but  yes,  I  would 
definitely  consider  it  as  this  seems  like  a  great  way  of 
enhancing the relaxation experience.” 

It  is  encouraging  to  note  that  there  is  an  openness  and 
enthusiasm for VR from practitioners, even where their prior 
experience has not exposed them to state of the art practice 
in the use of VR for psychotherapies.  This openness implies 
that  barriers  to  adoption  are  not  actually  particularly 
significant,  and  that  widespread  adoption  could  quickly 
follow proof of clinical effectiveness.  

VI. Conclusions  
Generalised  anxiety  disorder  has  been  shown  to  be  a 
widespread  and  pernicious  disease  which  substantially 
impacts upon the lives of people. The high prevalence of the 
disorder,  and  the  absence  of  effective  and  accessible 
treatment  regimens  makes  the  investigation  of  novel 
approaches  to  managing  the  condition  one  of  significant 
interest.  

The  Unreal  4  computer  game  engine,  together  with  3D 
design tools can be utilised to create a synthetic environment 
with  a  high  degree  of  realism.  When  combined  with  an 
Oculus  Rift  head  mounted  display  the  fidelity  of  the 
experience was sufficient to evoke a sense of presence in all 
users.  The  reported  level  of  presence  is  high  despite  the 
interactive  parameters  of  the  simulation  being  restricted  to 
those  matching  the  technical  capabilities  of  mobile  VR 
solutions. 

relaxation, 

All participants reported that the simulation was helpful in 
facilitating 
every  participant  who 
and 
experienced the simulation reported that they would consider 
using the tool to help them relax it if were made available for 
them  to  use.  It  was  reviewed  by  a  domain  specialist  who 
made several suggestions for future improvements, but who 
was  overall  supportive  of  the  potential  offered  by  the 
application. 

this 

This  study  provided  encouraging  evidence  supporting  the 
implementation of a larger scale trial. It is currently planned 
that 
trial  will  offer  a  selection  of  naturalistic 
environments to better reflect the preferences of individual 
participants. It will also be delivered via a mobile, wireless 
headset, facilitating a lower friction route to wider adoption. 
Evaluation  will  be focused upon increasing the confidence 
measures  of  the  preliminary  quantitative  results  reported 
here through a larger scale randomised trial incorporating a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waiting list control condition. It will also incorporate the use 
of  EEG  methods  as  an  objective  comparison  to  the  self-
reported measures of relaxation effectiveness. 

[11] M. Krijn et al, "Treatment of acrophobia in virtual 
reality: The role of immersion and presence," Behav. Res. 
Ther., vol. 42, (2), pp. 229-239, 2004.  

REFERENCES 

[1] American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5®). 
American Psychiatric Pub, 2013. 

[2] E. M. Johnson and M. E. Coles, "Failure and delay in 
treatment-seeking across anxiety disorders," Community 
Ment. Health J., vol. 49, (6), pp. 668-674, 2013.  

[3] E. A. Hoge, A. Ivkovic and G. L. Fricchione, 
"Generalized anxiety disorder: diagnosis and treatment," 
Bmj, vol. 345, pp. e7500, Nov 27, 2012.  

[4] O. Remes et al, "Generalised anxiety disorder and 
excess cancer deaths: findings from a large, longitudinal 
population study," The Lancet, vol. 388, pp. S100, 2016.  

[5] G. Riva, "Virtual reality: an experiential tool for clinical 
psychology," British Journal of Guidance & Counselling, 
vol. 37, (3), pp. 337-345, 2009.  

[6] A. Mühlberger et al, "One-session virtual reality 
exposure treatment for fear of flying: 1-year follow-up and 
graduation flight accompaniment effects," Psychotherapy 
Research, vol. 16, (1), pp. 26-40, 2006.  

[7] B. O. Rothbaum et al, "Twelve-month follow-up of 
virtual reality and standard exposure therapies for the fear 
of flying." J. Consult. Clin. Psychol., vol. 70, (2), pp. 428, 
2002.  

[8] B. K. Wiederhold and M. D. Wiederhold, "Three-year 
follow-up for virtual reality exposure for fear of flying," 
Cyberpsychology & Behavior, vol. 6, (4), pp. 441-445, 
2003.  

[9] A. Garcia-Palacios et al, "Virtual reality in the treatment 
of spider phobia: a controlled study," Behav. Res. Ther., 
vol. 40, (9), pp. 983-993, 2002.  

[10] D. Michaliszyn et al, "A randomized, controlled 
clinical trial of in virtuo and in vivo exposure for spider 
phobia," Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking, vol. 13, (6), pp. 689-695, 2010.  

[12] Y. Ling et al, "Effects of stereoscopic viewing on 
presence, anxiety, and cybersickness in a virtual reality 
environment for public speaking," Presence: Teleoperators 
and Virtual Environments, vol. 21, (3), pp. 254-267, 2012.  

[13] Y. Choi et al, "Effects of group experiential cognitive 
therapy for the treatment of panic disorder with 
agoraphobia," CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 8, (4), pp. 
387-393, 2005.  

[14] C. Botella et al, "Virtual reality exposure in the 
treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia: A controlled 
study," Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy: An 
International Journal of Theory & Practice, vol. 14, (3), 
pp. 164-175, 2007.  

[15] A. ‘ Rizzo and R. Shilling, "Clinical Virtual Reality 
tools to advance the prevention, assessment, and treatment 
of PTSD," European Journal of Psychotraumatology, vol. 
8, (sup5), pp. 1414560, 2017.  

[16] B. O. Olatunji, J. M. Cisler and B. J. Deacon, "Efficacy 
of cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: a 
review of meta-analytic findings," Psychiatr. Clin. North 
Am., vol. 33, (3), pp. 557-577, Sep, 2010.  

[17] S. A. Hayes-Skelton, L. Roemer and S. M. Orsillo, "A 
randomized clinical trial comparing an acceptance-based 
behavior therapy to applied relaxation for generalized 
anxiety disorder." J. Consult. Clin. Psychol., vol. 81, (5), 
pp. 761, 2013.  

[18] A. Gorini and G. Riva, "The potential of Virtual 
Reality as anxiety management tool: a randomized 
controlled study in a sample of patients affected by 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder," Trials, vol. 9, (1), pp. 25, 
2008.  

[19] A. Gorini et al, "Virtual reality in the treatment of 
generalized anxiety disorders," Stud. Health Technol. 
Inform., vol. 154, pp. 39-43, 2010.  

[20] R. M. Baños et al, "A virtual reality system for the 
treatment of stress-related disorders: A preliminary analysis 
of efficacy compared to a standard cognitive behavioral 
program," International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, vol. 69, (9), pp. 602-613, 2011.  

[21] C. Repetto et al, "Virtual reality and mobile phones in 
the treatment of generalized anxiety disorders: a phase-2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
clinical trial," Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 17, 
(2), pp. 253-260, 2013.  

[22] M. Lombard and T. Ditton, "At the heart of it all: The 
concept of presence," Journal of Computer‐Mediated 
Communication, vol. 3, (2), 1997.  

[23] (Jan 4th 2017). Samsung Confirms 5 Million Gear VR 
Mobile Headsets Sold To Date. 

[24] P. F. Lovibond and S. H. Lovibond, "The structure of 
negative emotional states: Comparison of the Depression 
Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck Depression 
and Anxiety Inventories," Behav. Res. Ther., vol. 33, (3), 
pp. 335-343, 1995.  

[25] S. Lovibond and P. Lovibond, "Manual for the 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scales. Psychology Foundation 
of Australia; Sydney," Nsw, 1995.  

 
 
 
  
