Low-cost VR Collaborative System equipped with Haptic Feedback 

Samir Benbelkacem 
Abdelkader Bellarbi 
Nadia Zenati-Henda  
Centre for Development of Advanced 
Technologies (CDTA), Algiers, Algeria 
sbenbelkacem@cdta.dz 

Ahmed Bentaleb 
Ahmed Nazim Bellabaci 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic  
Engineering (IGEE), Boumerdes, Algiers 

   bentalebahmed98@gmail.com 

Samir Otmane      

 University of Evry, Paris, France 
 samir.otmane@ibisc.univ-evry.fr  

ABSTRACT 

In  this  paper,  we  present  a  low-cost  virtual  reality  (VR) 
collaborative  system  equipped  with  a  haptic  feedback  sensation 
system. This system is composed of a Kinect sensor for bodies and 
gestures  detection,  a  microcontroller  and  vibrators  to  simulate 
outside interactions, and smartphone powered cardboard, all of this 
are put into a network implemented with Unity 3D game engine. 

CCS CONCEPTS 
• Interaction paradigms → Virtual reality; Collaborative 

interaction; 

• Hardware → Sensors and actuators; Wireless devices; 

KEYWORDS 
collaborative virtual reality, haptic feedback system. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

In  this  paper,  haptic  feedback  system  is  proposed.  The  aim  is  to 
allow  users  to  interact  in  collaborative  VR  environment  using 
avatars  and  feel  these  interactions  on  their  bodies.  This  haptic 
feedback system is implemented with vibrator motors attached to 
different  part  of  the  body  and  controlled  by  a  microcontroller. 
Collisions and interactions on the virtual world are signaled to a Wi-
Fi module which then sends appropriate data to the microcontroller 
and vibrates the motors causing a realistic sensation. 

2  SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The  system  uses  clients/server  architecture  where  a  Kinect  is 
connected to a central server (Figure1). 

The key aspect of our system is to allow avatars to interact between 
them  so  that  their  corresponding  users  can  feel  the  interaction  by 
using haptic feedback system attached on each user’s body. 

In our case, the users’ avatars are grouped on a room and each user 
using, a VR box, see the avatars of other users. The Haptic feedback 
system  receives,  through  Wi-Fi,  a  collision  information  that 
indicates which avatar and part of the avatar body collided. 

Players’ 
sensation systems 

Kinect 

Server 

Figure 1: Low-cost VR collaborative system. 

This  system  interprets  the  collision  information  and  activates  the 
corresponding vibrator motor located on the user’s real body. This 
user will feel a vibration as if he has been really touched by another 
user. 

3  HAPTIC FEEDBACK SYSTEM DESIGN 

Two aspects have been developed. The first consists in realizing a 
haptic  feedback  while  the  second  aspect  implements  a  VR 
collaborative  application  using  this  feedback.  Our  haptic  feedback 
system (called also sensation system) allows users to feel vibrations 
when their corresponding avatars interact. For example, we take a 
scene where user “A” views its avatar and the other avatars. If the 
user “A” touch, using its avatar, a neighbor avatar called user “B”, 
the  latter  will  feel  a  vibration  at  the  place  that  corresponds  to  the 
contact  of  the  two  avatars.  User  “B”  will  feel  that  he  has  been 
touched by user “A”. 

The haptic feedback system is an electronic circuit composed of 
ATmega microcontroller [Reh 2013], vibrators and Wi-Fi module. 
The vibrators, controlled by ATmega microcontroller, are attached 
in different parts of users’ body. The ATmega is interfaced with a 
Wi-Fi  module  (ESP-01)  using  esp8266  chip  [Esp8266ex  2018]  to 
connect  to  the  network.  This  connection  is  made  through  TCP 
protocol  using  sockets  [Fatourou  2012].  The  Wi-Fi  module  is 
programmed  to  be  as  a  modem  or  monitor  (configured  in  station 
mode), so, it can act as a mini-sever. Each mini-server contains its 
proper  IP  address.  The  Wi-Fi  module  send  this  IP  address  to  the 
central  server  to  allow  the  communication  between  Wi-Fi  module 
and  server.  Also,  Wi-Fi  module  can  be  configured  as  client  with 
another IP address. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VRST’18, November 28-December 1, 2018, Tokyo, Japan 

                                       S. Benbelkacem et al. 

The haptic feedback system evolution can be given as follows: 
in the beginning, the Wi-Fi module is connected to the central server 
and send the IP address of the station mode using TCP protocol. 

A total of 20 subjects (6 females, 14 males) participated in the test. 
Their ages were ranged between 18 and 49. According to the filled 
questionnaires, most participants appreciated the simplicity and the 
ease of the application. They also liked the sensations and feelings 
provided by the system (Figure 4). 

Figure 2: Communication between haptic feedback sensation 
system and server. 

interruption  signal, 

it  communicates  with 

Wi-Fi module wait for interruption signal that corresponds to a 
3D  world  interaction  (collisions  between  avatars  or  between  an 
avatar and a 3D object) in VR environment. When Wi-Fi module 
receives  an 
the 
microcontroller  in  order  to  actuate  the  corresponding  vibrator 
engine on the human’s body. Each time, an interaction (example: 
collision between two avatars) is made on the VR environment, the 
corresponding client opens a socket and sends a TCP request with 
its proper user ID and the body part collided to WiFi Module.The 
latter  send  these  data  to  ATmega  microcontroller  through  serial 
UART  [UART  2010].  ATmega  sends  a  signal  to  vibrate  the 
corresponding  motor  according  to  the  user  ID  and  the  body  part 
collided. Figure 2 above describes the communication between the 
haptic feedback system and VR environment. 

Figure 4: Usability evaluation for VR Haptic feedback system. 

We also asked subjects to give feedback about the effectiveness 
of our design by answering question related to the smoothness of the 
interaction,  realism,  synchronization  of  motion  (between  VR  and 
real  world) and the 3D quality taking into account factors such as 
depth perception, impressiveness and visual comfort (Figure 5). 

4  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

The USE [Davis 1989] (Usefulness, Satisfaction and Ease of Use) 
questionnaire  was  used  to  evaluate  subjectively  our  work.  Users 
were  asked  to  rate  agreement  with  the  statements,  ranging  from 
strongly  disagree  to  strongly  agree.  Users  are  equipped  with  VR 
headsets,  haptic  feedback  system  (electronic  circuit  +  vibrator 
motors on the different parts of each user’s body + Wi-Fi module), 
see Figure 3. We have develop a simple Unity 3D application which 
is composed of a red cube inserted in the middle of the scene.  

Vibrator motors 

Wi-Fi module 

Figure 3: User equipped with our haptic feedback system Kit. 

The users are asked to grab the cube with his hand. As soon as the 
collision  is  detected  on  the  game,  the  haptic  feedback  system  is 
notified.  Then, it produces vibrations of the  motor located on the 
user’s hand.  

Figure 5: Subjective evaluation for VR Haptic feedback system. 

5  SUMMARY 

In this paper, we proposed a haptic feedback system that allow the 
user to feel real interactions initially produced on a VR environment. 
Experimental results on the proposed system show relevant results. 
In fact, the users participating in the evaluation had the possibility to 
feel  their  interaction  initially  produced  on  the  simulation  using 
Kinect. 

REFERENCES 
Benjamin  Reh,  “An  Introduction  to  programming  an  Atmega  microcontroller”, 

Technical report, November 14, 2013. 

Esp8266ex 2018. Specifications of Esp8266ex, Datasheet version 5.8, 2018. 
Panagiota Fatourou, “Introduction to Sockets Programming in C using TCP/IP”, May 

2012.  

UART 2010. Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter (UART), user guide, 2010. 
Fred. D. Davis. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of 

Information Technology. MIS Quarterly, Vol. 13, pp. 318-340, 1989. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
