Symmetrical Reality: Toward a Uniﬁed Framework
for Physical and Virtual Reality

Zhenliang Zhang1, Cong Wang3, Dongdong Weng1,2,*, Yue Liu1,2, Yongtian Wang1,2

[1] Beijing Engineering Research Center of Mixed Reality and Advanced Display, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
[2] AICFVE of Beijing Film Academy, 4 Xitucheng Rd, Haidian, Beijing, China
[3] China Electronics Standardization Institute, Beijing, China

9
1
0
2

r
a

M
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
2
7
2
0
.
3
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we review the background of physical reality, virtual
reality, and some traditional mixed forms of them. Based on the
current knowledge, we propose a new uniﬁed concept called sym-
metrical reality to describe the physical and virtual world in a uniﬁed
perspective. Under the framework of symmetrical reality, the tradi-
tional virtual reality, augmented reality, inverse virtual reality, and
inverse augmented reality can be interpreted using a uniﬁed presen-
tation. We analyze the characteristics of symmetrical reality from
two different observation locations (i.e., from the physical world and
from the virtual world), where all other forms of physical and virtual
reality can be treated as special cases of symmetrical reality.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Human computer in-
teraction (HCI)—Interaction paradigms—Mixed/augmented reality

1 INTRODUCTION
It has been a long time since the ﬁrst concept of virtual reality (VR)
was proposed. Actually, that is the very beginning for our physical
world to embrace the virtual world (or the digital world). As of now,
we have heard a lot of concepts about various kinds of forms that
represent the combination of the physical world and the virtual world,
such as virtual reality, mixed reality (MR) [6], augmented reality
(AR) [2], inverse virtual reality (IVR) [8], and inverse augmented
reality (IAR) [9]. Each form has its speciﬁc application ﬁeld, but all
of these forms share a common framework.

Symmetrical Reality (SR) is to unify all of the existing forms about
the combination of the physical world and the virtual world. Sym-
metrical reality is deﬁned regarding two crucial attributes: Object
and Interaction. For Object, the ratio between the virtual elements
and the physical elements determines the existing style of symmetri-
cal reality. For example, if all elements are virtual, SR appears to be
virtual reality, and if both virtual parts and physical parts exist, SR
appears to be the mixed reality. For Interaction, two kinds of actors
should be considered. If the actor is located in the physical world,
SR appears to be the traditional virtual reality or augmented reality.
Conversely, if the actor is located in the virtual world, SR appears to
be the inverse virtual reality or inverse augmented reality.

We all know that there is still some undiscovered matter of our
world. Inspired by the physical concept of the parallel world [1],
the virtual world might be kind of similar to a parallel world of the
physical world. If we consider the physical world as a combination
of the humans and the environment, the virtual world should also be
composed of the similar two components, i.e., the virtual agents and
the virtual environment. Since the physical environment can evolve
by itself and humans are fully autonomous individuals, it is expected
that the virtual environment and the virtual agent should also possess
the capability of evolving automatically. Artiﬁcial intelligence can
be used to make the virtual environment more intelligent [4], and
the virtual world, including virtual agents, can even evolve by itself.
Hence the virtual environment and the virtual agent can be treated
as two kinds of agents [5], i.e., the character agent and the virtual
environment agent. Here we notice that the virtual world is created
by humans, but it can grow according to its own rules without direct

*crgj@bit.edu.cn

Figure 1: Basic structure of symmetrical reality. (Left) The physical
world is represented by blue elements. The physical human can sense
a part of P1, P2 and V2,p. (Right) The virtual world is represented by
orange elements. The virtual agent can sense a part of V1,V2 and P2,v.

intervention from the physical world, though the physical world can
still send some signals to the virtual world.

Some researchers have proposed related works belonging to the
proposed SR framework. For example, the concept of “dual real-
ity” [3] refers to building the reﬂected virtual and physical world,
which is similar to the mutually mirrored world [8] regarding the
structure. However, the former one does not consider a self-learning
ability of the virtual agent when compared to the later one.
In
addition, Roo et al. [7] proposed the “one reality” system, which
contained a 6-level mixture of virtual and real contents ranging
from purely physical to purely virtual world, which is also a human-
centered framework. The above contents are discussing the Object
attribute of SR, and the other attribute called Interaction is more
signiﬁcant under this framework. We emphasize the equivalent in-
teraction between the physical world and the virtual world. Milgram
et al. [6] analyzed the concepts of AR, MR, and VR, which treated
the human as the absolute center of the whole framework. How-
ever, the proposed SR can extend the prior framework by adding the
virtual agent-centered part [9]. Therefore, the proposed SR break
the current frontier by considering a two-center symmetrical world
structure and the symmetrical interaction style between the physical
and virtual world. In this paper, we proposed the framework of
symmetrical reality to unify the current concepts related to physical
and virtual reality.

2 THEORY OF SYMMETRICAL REALITY
The typical structure of SR is shown in Fig. 1. All solid squares
(P1, P2) denote physical objects in the physical world, and all empty
squares (P2,v) denote the virtual correspondences of the physical ob-
jects. Symmetrically, all solid circles (V1,V2) denote virtual objects
in the virtual world, and all empty circles (V2,p) denote the physical
correspondences of the virtual objects.

Let Wp denote the set of objects that exist in the physical world,
including the virtual-to-physical mapping objects of some virtual
objects, Wv denote the set of objects that exist in the virtual world,
including the physical-to-virtual mapping objects of some physical
objects, then we have

(cid:26) Wp = P1 ∪ P2 ∪V2,p
Wv = V1 ∪V2 ∪ P2,v
where P1 denote the set of physical objects that are not sensed by the
physical human, P2 the set of physical objects that has been sensed by
the physical human, V2,p the set of the virtual-to-physical mapping
objects that are originally located in the virtual world. Similarly, we

(1)

,

HumanAgentP1P2P2P1V1V2V2V1V2,𝑝P2,𝑣P2,𝑣V2,𝑝P2,𝑣V2,𝑝V2,𝑝P2,𝑣 
 
 
 
 
 
can know the deﬁnitions of V1, V2 and P2,v by replacing “physical”
with “virtual”. Let WSR denote the set of objects in symmetrical
reality, then

WSR = Wp ∪Wv ∪ Hp ∪ Hv,
(2)
where Hp and Hv denote the set of physical humans and the set
of virtual humans (or virtual agent), respectively. The physical
humans are not treated as general physical objects, because they
have independent minds and they can be observers of the SR system.
The same thing happens to the virtual humans.

We deﬁne an operation “(cid:63)” on the set WSR. For two given sets
a and b, which are subsets of WSR, a (cid:63) b denote the status that a
and b coexist in one system. Since in an SR system, the physical
human and the virtual human both have the ability to observe the
outer environment, we can deﬁne the observation function for both
of them. Let FHp (·) denote the observation function of the physical
human, and FHv (·) denote the observation function of the virtual
human. The input of the functions can be any subset of WSR, and
the output of the functions are the observed part of the input set.
For example, if there are input sets I, I1, I2, we have the following
rules: FHp (I) = [I; α] and FHp (I1 ∪ I2) = [I1; α1] (cid:63) [I2; α2] , which
means that the percentage of I, I1, I2 being observed is α, α1, α2,
respectively. There should be

and

FHp (Wp) = FHp (P1 ∪ P2 ∪V2,p)

= [P1; α1] (cid:63) [P2; α2] (cid:63) [V2,p; α3],

FHv (Wv) = FHv (V1 ∪V2 ∪ P2,v)

= [V1; β1] (cid:63) [V2; β2] (cid:63) [P2,v; β3],

(3)

(4)

where α1, α2, andα3 indicate the ratio by which the P1, P2, andV2,p
are observed by the physical human, and β1, β2, andβ3 indicate the
ratio by which the V1,V2, andP2,v are observed by the virtual human.
The model of the proposed SR framework can be represented as:

MSR =FHp (WSR) (cid:63) FHv (WSR)

=FHp (Wp ∪Wv ∪ Hp ∪ Hv) (cid:63) FHv (Wp ∪Wv ∪ Hp ∪ Hv)
=FHp (Wp ∪ Hv) (cid:63) FHv (Wv ∪ Hp)
=FHp (P1 ∪ P2 ∪V2,p ∪ Hv) (cid:63) FHv (V1 ∪V2 ∪ P2,v ∪ Hp)
=[P1; α1] (cid:63) [P2; α2] (cid:63) [V2,p; α3] (cid:63) [Hv; α4] (cid:63) [V1; β1] (cid:63) [V2; β2]

(cid:63) [P2,v; β3] (cid:63) [Hp; β4],

(5)
where we hold an assumption that the physical human cannot sense
the Wv and the virtual human cannot sense the Wp. In Eq. 5, to
simplify the discussion, we also assume that the physical human
does not sense himself/herself, and the virtual human does not sense
itself, either.

3 SPECIAL CASES OF SYMMETRICAL REALITY

According to Eq. 5, if we set the parameters to different values, the
SR will converge to different special cases, as shown in Table 1. In
this table, all parameters can range from 0 to 1. For example, if α1
equals 0, it means P1 cannot be sensed by the physical human at all;
if α1 is a greater than 0, it means P1 can be sensed by the physical
human. Note that the parameters only determine the ratio that the
objects are sensed by physical or virtual humans. No matter what
values the parameters are, all physical and virtual objects, including
the mapping relations between the physical and the virtual world,
always exist in the symmetrical reality.

Parameter conﬁguration of typical modes of the combi-
Table 1:
nation of the virtual world and the physical world. The bottom row
indicates that all parameters can range from 0 to 1 in SR, while some
parameters cannot be 0 in other modes.

Mode

VR
AR
IVR
IAR
SR

α1

0
(0,1]
0
0
[0,1]

α2

0
(0,1]
0
0
[0,1]

α3

(0,1]
(0,1]
0
0
[0,1]

α4

(0,1]
(0,1]
0
0
[0,1]

β1

0
0
0
(0,1]
[0,1]

β2

0
0
0
(0,1]
[0,1]

β3

0
0
(0,1]
(0,1]
[0,1]

β4

0
0
(0,1]
(0,1]
[0,1]

Virtual Reality: Physical Human’s Perspective Virtual
reality is a paradigm which treats the physical human as the center
of the whole system. In a VR system, the human need to wear a kind
of device (e.g., the immersive head-mounted display) to experience
the virtual vision and even other virtual feelings.

Augmented Reality: Physical Human’s Perspective
Similar to VR, augmented reality [2] is a paradigm which also treats
the physical human as the center of the whole system. Different
from a VR system, the AR system can provide the human with a
scene that mixed both the virtual and the real elements. Another
concept called mixed reality is similar to the above structure, but it
emphasizes the high fusion of the virtual and the real elements.

Inverse Virtual Reality: Virtual Agent’s Perspective In-
verse virtual reality [8] is a paradigm which treats the virtual agent
(or virtual human) as the center of the whole system. In an IVR
system, the virtual agent, which may be created by humans but can
develop by itself, acts as a physical human regarding the living habits.
Hence it could also sense all things in the physical world (e.g., the
physical objects, and the physical human, etc.) that surrounds it.

Inverse Augmented Reality: Virtual Agent’s Perspec-
tive Similar to IVR, inverse augmented reality [9] is a paradigm
which also treats the virtual agent (or virtual human) as the center of
the whole system. Different from an IVR system, the IAR system
can provide the virtual agent a mixed scene of the world. Speciﬁ-
cally, all the physical elements become virtual, while all the virtual
elements become kind of “real” because the virtual agent itself is
exactly a virtual object.

4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Symmetrical reality is a uniﬁed concept of the combination of the
virtual world and the real world. We derive the formulation of SR in
the perspective of set theory, which may provide some insight for
understanding and designing various systems that bridge the virtual
world and the real world. Especially, the artiﬁcial intelligence is
assumed to construct the mind of the virtual agent in the virtual
world. The understanding of SR should be helpful in the future
exploration about mixed space of the virtuality and the reality, where
the human intelligence and the artiﬁcial intelligence coexist.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Devel-
opment Program of China (No. 2017YFB1002504) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1605254).

REFERENCES
[1] Z. Berezhiani. Mirror world and its cosmological consequences. Inter-
national Journal of Modern Physics A, 19(23):3775–3806, 2004.
[2] T. P. Caudell and D. W. Mizell. Augmented reality: An application of
heads-up display technology to manual manufacturing processes. In
System Sciences, 1992. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Hawaii Interna-
tional Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 659–669. IEEE, 1992.

[3] J. Lifton and J. A. Paradiso. Dual reality: Merging the real and virtual. In
International Conference on Facets of Virtual Environments, pp. 12–28.
Springer, 2009.

[4] M. Luck and R. Aylett. Applying artiﬁcial intelligence to virtual reality:
Intelligent virtual environments. Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 14(1):3–
32, 2000.

[5] S. Mateus and J. Branch. Intelligent virtual environment using a method-
ology oriented to agents. In International Conference on Virtual, Aug-
mented and Mixed Reality, pp. 714–723. Springer, 2016.

[6] P. Milgram and F. Kishino. A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays.
IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, 77(12):1321–1329,
1994.

[7] J. S. Roo and M. Hachet. One reality: Augmenting how the physical
world is experienced by combining multiple mixed reality modalities.
In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, pp. 787–795. ACM, 2017.

[8] Z. Zhang, B. Cao, J. Guo, D. Weng, Y. Liu, and Y. Wang. Inverse virtual
reality: intelligence-driven mutually mirrored world. In Proceedings of
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp.
735–736. IEEE, 2018.

[9] Z. Zhang, D. Weng, H. Jiang, Y. Liu, and Y. Wang. Inverse augmented
reality: A virtual agent’s perspective. In Proceedings of International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2018.

