MODSIM World 2019 

XR: Enabling training mode in the human brain 

Sébastien Lozé 
Epic Games  
Montreal, Canada 
sebastien.loze@epicgames.com   

Philippe Lépinard 
Associate professor 
Université Paris-Est Créteil, France 
philippe.lepinard@u-pec.fr 

ABSTRACT 

The  face  of  simulation-based  training  has  greatly  evolved,  with  the  most  recent  tools  giving  the  ability  to  create  virtual 
environments that rival realism. At first glance, it might appear that what the training sector needs is the most realistic simulators 
possible, but traditional simulators are not necessarily the most efficient or practical training tools. With all that these new 
technologies have to offer; the challenge is to go back to the core of training needs and identify the right vector of sensory cues 
that will most effectively enable training mode in the human brain. Bigger and Pricier doesn’t necessarily mean better. 

Simulation with cross-reality content (XR), which by definition encompasses virtual reality (VR), mixed reality (MR), and 
augmented reality (AR), is the most practical solution for deploying any kind of simulation-based training. The authors of this 
paper (a teacher and a technology expert) share their experiences and expose XR-specific best practices to maximize learning 
transfer.  

ABOUT THE AUTHORS 

Sebastien Loze : Starting his career in the modeling and simulation community more than 15 years ago, Sébastien has focused 
on learning about the latest simulation innovations and sharing information on how experts have solved their challenges. He 
worked on the COTS integration at CAE and the Presagis focusing on Simulation and Visualization products. More recently, 
Sebastien put together simulation and training teams and strategies for emerging companies like CM Labs and D-BOX. He is 
now  the  Simulations  Industry  Manager  at  Epic  Games,  focusing  on  helping  companies  develop  real-time  solutions  for 
simulation-based training. 

Philippe Lepinard: Former military helicopter pilot and simulation officer, Philippe Lépinard is now an associate professor at 
the University of Paris-Est Créteil (UPEC). His research is focusing on playful learning and training through simulation. He is 
one of the founding members of the French simulation association. 

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 1 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MODSIM World 2019 

XR: Enabling training mode in the human brain 

Sébastien Lozé 
Epic Games  
Montreal, Canada 
sebastien.loze@epicgames.com   

Philippe Lépinard 
Associate professor 
Université Paris-Est Créteil, France 
philippe.lepinard@u-pec.fr 

INTRODUCTION: The evolution of simulation-based training 

Early adopters 

The area that saw the first adoption and development simulation-based training was the training of aircraft pilots. The 
simulation cost was so high that only pilots and their equipment represented a risk high enough to invest in a tool so 
sophisticated and expensive. With advances in technology and increasing accessibility, the community opened the 
potential to train operators and experts in a larger scope of works. Medical personnel, truck operators, first responders, 
military, robotic operators, and construction equipment operators, among others, are now able to leverage simulators 
in the context of their training. These two factors, technological advances and diversification of audience, combined 
are forcing the training and simulation community to reinvent itself and identify disruptive technologies in order to 
scale up quickly without introducing new costs. 

Bring the trainee to the simulator 

Around the year 2010, many simulation providers went from the model of providing simulators to their customers on 
site at their place of employment to a model of providing training at centralized training centers. Customers would 
visit  the  training  centers  and  rent  the  necessary  hours  of  training  on  these  simulators.  The  main  driver  for  such  a 
business model evolution was to lower the total cost of ownership of these traditional simulators while still keeping 
up with the evolving technology. The center could invest in new technology, and the customer did not have to keep 
upgrading, providing and training operators for the equipment, etc. For the specific use cases of full flight simulators, 
where the regulation associations impose specific requirements, the training center model is a good approach. 

Bring the simulator to the trainee 

While the training center model solved some problems, many of the community players need solutions more pragmatic 
and efficient to train their personal, operators, and drivers. One example would be a company that is situated far from 
the nearest training center. Another is a niche industry for which custom training is needed. Instead of bringing the 
trainees to the simulator, we propose a return to the paradigm of bringing the simulators to the trainees. Advances in 
technology have made the necessary hardware much more affordable, development tools are now much easier to use, 
and the advent of cloud-based technology gives us a new tool for developing, delivering, and evaluating training. 
Thanks to the flexibility of cloud-based VR and AR systems, trainees around the world can have access to training. 
By bringing the training environment on site, curriculum can be adapted, customized, and updated as needed. This 
paradigm also reduces overall cost by eliminating the costs associated with travel. 

The technology evolution 

In the early days of VR technology, in order to display an image which was close enough to reality in a 3D scene 
graph, we had to either pre-process it (eliminating a truly interactive experience) or generate images in real time as 
the viewer turns his/her head (real-time rendering). We know from the film industry that a frame rate of at least 24 fps 
(frames per second) is required to trick the human brain well enough to accept a moving environment; in XR, 30 fps 
is considered the minimum acceptable rate. To meet a 30 fps rate with real-time rendering in earlier days of this field, 
all  the  visual  cues  that  make  a  rich,  convincing  environment--shadows,  reflections,  complex  surfaces--had  to  be 
eliminated. Basically, we ended up with a very sterile world, a “synthetic” training environment. New features and 
technologies are constantly emerging to provide new means, tools, and approaches to simulation-based training with 

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 2 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MODSIM World 2019 
XR. Perhaps most importantly right now, training schools don’t have to choose between visual realism, high frame 
rate,  and  true-to-life  behaviors  of  simulated  objects.  A  simulation  developer  can  choose  any  of  these  goals  in 
developing training for a particular task, or even all three. 

1.  ENABLING TRAINING MODE WITH XR 

While we can mimic reality with XR technology, it is not necessarily advisable to do so for a training environment. A 
too-real  environment,  besides  being  time-consuming  and  costly  to  produce,  can  adversely  impact  learning  with 
overloading. “There is a limit to how much information people can process simultaneously, and this impacts how 
information is stored. Too much information, or too difficult a task, presented in an ill-considered or unstructured 
way, can result in cognitive overload for a learner.” (Reedy, 2015). 

To determine the best level of XR realism for a given training task, we consider XR in the context of the Reality-
Virtuality  continuum  of  Milgram  and  Kishino  (1994a,  1994b,  Figure  1)  and  the  Reality,  Virtuality  and  Mediality 
Taxonomy of Mann (2002, Figure 2). These models identify possible combinations of real and virtual elements in 
order to change the perception of the world by adding, altering or deleting information.  

Figue 1. Reality–virtuality continuum (Milgram and Kishino, 1994) 

Figure 2. Reality, Virtuality and Mediality Taxonomy (Mann, 2002) 

These capabilities allow us to consider a parallel pedagogical continuum by offering learners the training device most 
suited  to  the  targeted  learning.  This  adaptation  can  then  be  expressed  through  an  individualization  of  the  training 
courses. In other words, this adaptation and contextualization of information make it possible to offer learners only 
scenarios that they will be able to reasonably accomplish at their current skill level.  

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 3 of 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MODSIM World 2019 
For  example,  the  technique of  a  holding pattern  in aeronautics  can be learned  first  in  a  deliberately  impoverished 
virtual  world,  and  then  in  the  real  world  with  an  augmented  reality  device  embedded  on  board  and  configurable 
according to the level of the learner and the educational objectives of the trainer. 

The strength of the XR is therefore as much (if not more) in the reduction or adaptation of complexity than in the 
search for the most faithful representation of the real world, always too complex to cognitively apprehend by novice 
professionals or learners. Cognitive overload can lead to a blocking of learning or even a negative transfer of learning 
that will be harmful for the following of the training course.  

In  the  context  of  virtual  reality  headset,  this  negative  transfer  can  also  come  from  “simulation  sickness”  due  to  a 
cognitive conflict between vision and the inner ear. These considerations are discussed later in this paper. 

Besides  these  physiological  constraints,  and  in  order  to  properly  integrate  XR  into  training  courses,  didactic  and 
pedagogical engineering must evolve to create links between the new technological capabilities offered by XR and 
the zone of proximal development concept, that is to say, the margin of development that an individual actually has. 
"This margin of development is explored by asking an individual to solve problems of a stage higher than the stage in 
which he finds himself with the help of an adult who plays the role of mediator "(Raynal and Rieunier, 2012, p.510). 
In our context, we can then imagine an artificial mediator either manually triggered by the learner or the instructor, or 
in the form of an artificial intelligence coupled with physiological sensors that automatically propose a representation 
of the world adapted to the mental state and the physics of the learner. 

The fidelity of the task doesn’t necessarily require a strong sensory and digital immersion during the first stages of its 
learning, and the human interpersonal relationships in formation (companionship, for example) can limit the uses of 
certain modalities of XR envisaged by the designers. 

These facets of learning with XR have yet to be fully explored. As more institutions develop XR training programs 
specific  to  their  needs,  we  shall  perhaps  see  innovative  solutions  around  impoverished-to-rich  world  progression, 
serving of learning experiences based on margins of development, and mediator-assisted learning programs. 

2.  XR CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS 

XR, and particularly VR, has long been embraced by such organizations as the Department of Defense for training 
military  personnel. As VR  technology  constantly  evolves,  new  challenges  appear  each  year.  Here, we  discuss  the 
known challenges, and how to overcome them to build an effective simulation-based training system. 

VR content considerations 

Creating content for VR is similar in many ways to developing content for a movie or game, but different in many 
significant ways. 

●  Scale all objects in the VR world as 1:1 with reality.  
●  Consider the angles at which viewers will be able to see objects when traversing through the environment. 
●  Use less costly lighting solutions whenever possible. With a static lighting solution, the effects of lights are 
precomputed,  the  equivalent  of  “painting”  the  lighting  and  shadows  permanently  onto  objects.  With  a 
dynamic lighting solution, the lighting is updated at every frame. Static lighting is faster, and less expensive 
computationally, than dynamic. 

●  When  characters  are  moving  around  together  in  a  VR  world,  precomputed  shadows  won’t  work,  and 
characters will appear to float above the ground. An inexpensive solution is a blob or capsule shadow, which 
follows the character around and casts a roughly blob-shaped shadow on the ground and other surfaces. 
●  Keep materials and textures as basic as possible. Matte finishes (as opposed to shiny) will look better with 

static lighting. Transparency and translucency are expensive, so use them sparingly. 

●  Don’t create smoke, fluids, etc. as visual effects unless these are critical to the training exercise. There are 
ways to fake water and smoke with inexpensive materials, so consider using these instead of their cinematic-
quality counterparts. 

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 4 of 6 

 
 
 
 
MODSIM World 2019 
These are a few of the most important considerations when making a VR world that will play back smoothly at 30 fps 
or above. Fortunately, most of them argue for greater simplicity in the creation of VR worlds. 

Simulation sickness 

Some users of HMD devices experience a phenomenon known as simulation sickness, where simply watching through 
VR glasses induces headaches, dizziness, and other temporary symptoms. This, of course, ruins the experience for the 
viewer and makes XR-based training difficult, if not impossible. 

Simulation sickness is caused by the fact that visualizing in VR is not the same as viewing reality. Even if the viewer 
logically knows he/she is safe in an VR world, cognitive conflicts between visual perception and the inner ear cause 
a physical reaction.  

The following are some broad guidelines for making the XR experience safe for all viewers: 

●  Maintain  the  HMD’s  native  frame  rate,  which  is  60-120  fps  depending  on  the  hardware.  This  requires 

optimization of the scene. 

●  Design the VR environment with dimmer lights and less saturated colors than you would use in 2D media 

● 

like a traditional video game or movie. 
In developing the simulation, set it up so the viewer has control of his/her view at all times. This means you 
should  not  use  the  following:  a  cinematic  type  of  camera  view,  where  the  simulator  and  not  the  trainee 
chooses what to view; a walking/bobbing head in view, as in a first-person game; a camera shake to indicate 
an explosion or other disturbance. Similarly, set and maintain the Field of View to match the headset, and 
don’t use cinematic storytelling devices like Depth of Field and Motion Blur. Let the viewer see what they 
see. 

●  Movement should accelerate at the same rate at all times. Don’t limit initial acceleration then increase it later 

in the experience.  

●  Test  the simulation on  the people  who will  be getting  the  training, not the developers.  If  you  don’t have 
trainees handy, test on other people at your company, anyone other than developers. Developers are often 
too accustomed to VR and XR to be accurate indicators for simulation sickness in the general public. 

This is not a complete list of all the considerations for simulation sickness but does provide a starting point.  

Despite a significant and permanent improvement of VR technologies, it is surprising that the practices carried out 
with  such  helmets  (games,  professional  applications,  artistic  experiments,  etc.)  do  not  specify  more  formally  the 
known risks of this kind of motion sickness, which can persist for up to 24 hours after the simulation session (Merhi 
and al., 2007, Paquette and Bélanger, 2015) even for people in good health and having undergone a selection process, 
as with aircraft pilots. 

CONCLUSION 

XR is not neutral. Its pedagogical integration into an organization (and therefore in a specific culture) must be thought 
out well in advance, and in a systemic way, in order to avoid a naive technological determinism as was sometimes the 
case with full-scale simulators, and to facilitate adoption in fields that would benefit greatly from its use. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES  

Borg, M., Johansen, S.S., Krog, K.S., Thomsen, D.L., Kraus, M. (2013), Using a Graphics Turing Test to Evaluate 

the Effect of Frame Rate and Motion Blur on Telepresence of Animated Objects. GRAPP/IVAPP. 

Elhelw,  M.,  Nicolaou,  M.,  Chung,  A.,  Yang,  G.-Z.,  Atkins,  S.  (2008),  A  Gaze-Based  Study  for  Investigating  the 

Perception of Visual Realism in Simulated Scenes, ACM Transactions on Applied Perception, Vol.5, No.1. 

Mann,  S. 

(2002),  Mediated  Reality  with 

implementations 

for  everyday 

life,  Presence  Connect, 

http://wearcam.org/presence_connect/.  

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 5 of 6 

 
 
 
 
MODSIM World 2019 
Merhi, O., Faugloire, E., Flanagan, M., Stoffregen, T. (2007), Motion Sickness, Console Video Games, and Head-
Mounted Displays, Human Factors: The Journal of Human Factors and Ergonomic Society, Vol.49, No.5, pp.920-
934. 

Meyer,  A.,  Loscos,  C.  (2003),  Real-Time  Reflection  on  Moving  Vehicles  in  Urban  Environments,  VRST  '03 

Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology, pp.32-40, Osaka, Japan. 

Milgram, P., Kishino, F. (1994a), A taxonomy of mixted reality visual displays, IEICE Transactions on Information 

Systems, Vol.77, No.12, pp.1321-1329. 

Milgram, P., Takemura, H., Utsumi, A., Kishino, F. (1994b), Augmented Reality: A class of displays on the reality-

virtuality continuum, SPIE Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies, Vol.2351, pp.282-292. 

Paquette, E., Bélanger, D.-C. (2015), Le mal du simulateur : un frein à l’apprentissage de la prise de décision en 

conduite d’un véhicule de police ?, Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, Vol.41, No.2. 

Pausch, R., Crea, T. (1992), A Literature Survey for Virtual Environments: Military Flight Simulator Visual Systems 
No.TR92-25, 
Computer 

and 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~stage3/publications/93/journals/PRESENCE/militaryFlight/paper.html.  

Simulator 

Sickness, 

Science 

Report, 

Perroud,  B.,  Régnier,  S.,Kemeny,  A.,  Merienne,  F.  (2017),  Model  of  realism  score  for  immersive  VR  systems, 

Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, pp.1-14. 

Raynal, F., Rieunier, A. (2012), Pédagogie, dictionnaire des concepts clés : apprentissage, formation, psychologie 

cognitive, Bielsko-Biala : Esf Éditeur. 

Reedy, G. (2015), Using Cognitive Load Theory to Inform Simulation Design and Practice, Clinical Simulation in 

Nursing, No.11, pp.355-360. 

Vygotski, L. (1985), Pensée et langage, Paris : Editions sociales. 

2019 Paper No. nnnn Page 6 of 6 

 
 
 
 
