Accessibility of Virtual Reality Locomotion Modalities to
Adults and Minors
Yu Zhang∗
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States
yu_zhang@berkeley.edu

Kathryn C. Quigley
Lawrence Hall of Science
Berkeley, United States
kquigley@berkeley.edu

Zhijiong Huang∗
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States
zhijiong@berkeley.edu

9
1
0
2

r
p
A
6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
0
0
8
0
.
4
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ramya Sankar
Lawrence Hall of Science
Berkeley, United States
rsankar@berkeley.edu

Clemence Wormser
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States

clemence.wormser@berkeley.edu

Xinxin Mo
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States
xinxinmo@berkeley.edu

Allen Y. Yang
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States
yang@eecs.berkeley.edu

ABSTRACT
Virtual reality (VR) is an important new technology that is fun-
damentally changing the way people experience entertainment
and education content. Due to the fact that most currently
available VR products are one size ﬁts all, the accessibility of
the content design and user interface design, even for healthy
children is not well understood. It requires more research to
ensure that children can have equally good user compared to
adults in VR. In our study, we seek to explore accessibility of
locomotion in VR between healthy adults and minors along
both objective and subjective dimensions. We performed a
user experience experiment where subjects completed a simple
task of moving and touching underwater animals in VR using
one of four different locomotion modalities, as well as real-
world walking without wearing VR headsets as the baseline.
Our results show that physical body movement that mirrors
real-world movement exclusively is the least preferred by both
adults and minors. However, within the different modalities
of controller assisted locomotion there are variations between
adults and minors for preference and challenge levels.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Accessibility design and
evaluation methods; Virtual reality;

*The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this paper.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI’16, May 07–12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.475/123_4

Author Keywords
Virtual Reality, Locomotion Modalities, Underwater
Simulation, Accessibility

INTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in Virtual Reality (VR) have disrupted
lots of traditional business, thereby changing many aspects of
our daily lives. However, accessibility issues hinder people
from adopting VR and restrict its application domain. In User
Experience and Game Design literature, accessibility issues
typically refer to how to design software and computers to
make them more accessible to humans with various types of
impairments.

In particular, there are three types of sub-problems that lead to
accessibility issues: the constraint to receive feedback from
the software due to a sensory impairment, the constraint to
provide input to the software due to a motor impairment, and
the constraint to not being able to understand the meaning of
the software content due to a cognitive impairment. In the
emerging VR ﬁeld, accessibility problems can be magniﬁed to
create bad experiences for users, mainly because the interac-
tions are designed in 3D space that typically require the user
to provide 6 degree-of-freedom (DOF) input and to perceive
the 3D environment from their egocentric perspective.

In this paper, we focus on understanding the accessibility
issue of locomotion techniques in virtual reality for minors in
comparison with adults. We identify ﬁve main modalities of
locomotion in VR with wearable VR head-mounted display
(HMD) and hand-held controller(s)

1. Mapping human lower body movement to the movement
of the egocentric perspective in VR, typically involving the
walking motion.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Mapping human upper body movement to the movement
of the egocentric perspective in VR, typically involving the
ﬂying and swimming motion.

3. Using buttons on the controller to provide direction and
velocity commands, which resembles driving a vehicle in
racing games.

4. Teleportation, which refers to transporting the user’s ego-
centric perspective instantaneously to a 3D location selected
by the controller.

5. Any combination of the above modalities.

Our target subject population includes adults (age older than
17 years) and minors (age older than or equal to 7 and younger
than or equal to 17 years) who do not have known physical
and cognitive impairments. In this setting, we want to under-
stand whether the different physical and cognitive capabilities
between healthy adults and minors would lead to different user
experience when the goal is to move their virtual egocentric
perspective to achieve certain goals in VR environment. We
believe better understanding of the question is signiﬁcant in
improving the UI/UX design in 3D VR games for both adults
and minors. For example, the majority of the 3D VR expe-
rience available today are designed with a typical adult user
in mind, in part because the current generation consumer VR
devices have not been custom-built for young minors. In fact,
several commercial VR systems speciﬁcally advise against us-
age by minors younger than 13 years old. When the software
design does not consider the physical and cognitive variations
from younger population, their user experience may suffer.
This creates a barrier for adopting VR technology for minors
in the education sector and other ﬁelds.

To address these issues, we set up an experiment in VR to
investigate the validity of the following two hypotheses:

1. In VR, using controller assisted movement modalities can
improve the user experience compared to that using only
physical body movements.

2. There exist variations in the challenge level and preference
using these locomotion modalities between adults and mi-
nors.

In order to test our hypotheses, we chose to design a simulated
VR experience in an underwater environment. In an under-
water environment, the human avatar has true 6 DOF in body
movement, and the real-world motion would involve both the
upper body and the lower body. Therefore, it is more challeng-
ing and complex to control underwater body movement than
moving on the ground in a stand-up posture. We believe this
experimental setup enables us to thoroughly investigate the
accessibility issues of the locomotion modalities.

According to [2], which provides a comprehensive overview of
VR locomotion techniques, the locomotion techniques are clas-
siﬁed into steering travel, selection-based travel, manipulation-
based travel, and walking locomotion. For example, steering
techniques include gaze-directed steering with which the user
is moving in their gaze direction or optionally in lateral direc-
tions [5]. Selection-based travel requires the user to perform a
selection task, e.g., by pointing to a destination in the virtual
world, which will teleport the user’s viewpoint to the target lo-
cation [1, 3, 13]. Manipulation-based locomotion is motivated
by user’s body motion [2]. For example, drawing a circle in the
air makes the user move forward. Walking locomotion could
be taken as a natural travel technique when the VR settings
are based on the ground, which is implemented by mapping
users’ motion information in the virtual world with that in the
real world [11].

Additionally, some previous works compare user outcomes
for VR locomotion techniques. The joystick technique, which
is an instance of steering travel, has been reported to lead
to a signiﬁcant increase in motion sickness compared to the
other locomotion techniques [9]. Teleportation, which is an
example in the selection-based travel category, requires some
time for users to understand their new surroundings after tele-
porting. This potentially leads to disorientation and can break
immersed feeling for users [6, 10, 12]. Finally, natural locomo-
tion techniques like walking have been reported to be slightly
more advantageous than semi- or non-natural techniques when
it comes to a sense of presence or user preference [3, 12].

Another group of research focuses on comparing how different
age groups walk in VR compared to walking in the real world.
In one research study conducted by Omar et.al. [7, 8], the
spatiotemporal parameters for young adults (age 18-34 years)
and older adults (age 45-83 years) in both reality and VR are
measured. The results indicate that older adults have similar
walking biomechanics in both conditions. On the other hand,
for young adults the gait speed is slower and steps are shorter
in VR compared to the real world [7]. This result is also
supported by [8], which had 19 participants with ages between
18-38.

With respect to the research in this paper, the natural locomo-
tion implementation is deﬁned as swimming motion instead
of walking, because it is more natural for users to swim rather
than walk in an underwater world. A group in the NHTV Uni-
versity of Applied Sciences Breda conducted research related
to the swimming locomotion. They created a diving game, in
which players swim with a virtual Diver Propulsion Vehicle.
The paper demonstrated that minors have more consistency
between the real world and VR than the adults [4], which
could imply that people of different ages may have their own
preference for swimming locomotion.

RELATED WORK
Previous academic works relevant to this study are divided into
two categories. The ﬁrst category is the research illustrating
principles, beneﬁts, and drawbacks of different locomotion
techniques. The second is to understand challenge and prefer-
ence variations between different age groups’ for locomotion
systems in VR.

METHODOLOGY
In order to study the accessibility of different locomotion
methodologies for healthy adults and minors with respect to
the two hypotheses in Section 1, we have chosen to implement
four modalities in a simulated underwater VR environment,
and designed an experiment to investigate the performance
and preference for these modalities.

Four Locomotion Modalities
The four locomotion modalities and one baseline modality
are described in Table 1, one type Swimming is considered
a natural locomotion based on physical movements, while
the other three are controller assisted locomotion. The ﬁrst
technique Swimming mirrors body movement when swimming
in real life. The implementation of this modality is to detect
the motion, velocity, and position of controllers controlled by
the user’s two hands. The user needs to pull the triggers at
the beginning and release them after each stroke. Controllers’
motion during each stroke is mapped to movement of the
user’s avatar. The faster the user moves the controllers the
faster they moves in the VR, mirroring the natural swimming
process. Steering is controlled by the starting and ending point
of the controllers for each stroke.

Second, we use controllers to allow subjects to teleport. A user
can move to a selected location instantaneously by pulling and
releasing a trigger deﬁned as the teleportation function on the
controller. The location itself is determined by the orientation
of the controller for the direction and then by touching a
forward or backward trigger for choosing the distance. In
this study, we classify this as a controller assisted locomotion
technique.

Third, we deﬁne another controller assisted modality called
Look & Follow. The modality is implemented by deﬁning the
direction of the user movement through the orientation of the
user’s head pose, which is typically tracked in real time by the
HMD. It then deﬁnes the movement speed by pulling a trigger
on the controller.

Finally, we create an Assisted Swimming modality as a combi-
nation of Swimming and Look & Follow, where subjects would
move the controller as in a swimming method, but pull the
trigger to move with the same steering motion as the Look
& Follow modality. We will not tell the users that moving
the arms in swimming motion actually had no effect to the
actual movement in VR. Instead, the actual movement was
determined exactly as the Look & Follow modality. The pur-
pose of adding a "fake" swimming motion is to enhance the
immersiveness of the locomotion for the underwater environ-
ment. We also classify this as a controller assisted locomotion
technique.

In order to compare the challenge level and preference of the
four locomotion modalities, we have also created a baseline
where the subjects are asked to walk naturally to complete
similar tasks in a room without wearing VR devices. In our
study the baseline serves as a point of comparison to see
how challenge level and preference compare to the neutral,
everyday experience of walking.

Tasks
In order to compare the challenge level and preference of the
four modalities, we set up a simple task. The requirement for
the task is that subjects need to move towards three different
groups of ﬁsh and touch them in the VR space as three sub-
tasks. At the beginning, the subject will always be placed
in the same location relative to the three groups of marine
animals, i.e., the origin of the world coordinate system. The

Table 1. Four Locomotion Modalities in VR and a Baseline

Descriptions

Locomotion
Modalities
Swimming The subjects hold two controllers and
mimic the motion of swimming in the
real world.
Subjects will move in the direction they
are facing when pulling the trigger on
controller.

Look
Follow

&

Assisted
Swimming

Teleportation Subjects will see a target ball when
pulling the trigger. They will traverse to
the position of the targeted ball instanta-
neously after releasing the trigger.
Subjects follow a natural swimming mo-
tion with controllers, but use the trigger
to move with the Look & Follow loco-
motion technique. This mode is a com-
bination of the ﬁrst two modalities.
Subjects walk around a room naturally
to complete a simple task without wear-
ing VR devices.

Baseline

average distance between the subject to each group of the
animal is ﬁve meters. As the subject approaches any one
group of the animals, if they can use one of the controllers to
touch one of the animals within their arm’s reach, the sub-task
is deemed complete. Subsequently the subject can proceed to
move towards the rest animal groups if those sub-tasks have
not been complete.

To experience each locomotion modality, a subject would
need to repeat the above task (that contains three separate
sub-tasks) for each locomotion type. In our experiment, on
average, it would take about 15 minutes for an adult or a
minor to complete one task in VR, except in baseline where
the duration is quite fast since it is natural to walk in the real
world.

This situation presents a problem when we enroll subjects who
are minors, some of whom were as young as 7 years old. We
have found that very few minors can complete more than one
task in VR without feeling tired or distracted. Therefore very
early on we can conclude that each subject, especially as a
minor, can only be interviewed to experience one locomotion
in VR.

Under this limitation, we still need to frame a fair comparison
to compare the performance and preference of the all four
locomotion types. To achieve that, we rely on the use of the
baseline as described in Table 1. In particular, in each of the
interview session, a subject regardless being an adult or a
minor will be asked to complete one session of the baseline
and one session of the one of the VR locomotion types. Then,
quantitative and qualitative metrics that aim to measure the
user experience will be collected, which we will describe next.

Metrics
We collected objective data for objective performance analysis,
and collected subjective data for both challenge level and

Figure 1. Flowchart for the Experiment Process

preference analysis. The objective metric for challenge level
analysis was done by recording the completion time for each
subjects experimental task in one of the four VR locomotion
modalities.

Table 2. Questionnaire

Questions
Q1. How would you rate the challenge level mov-
ing in real life on a scale of 0-10 (10 means most
difﬁcult)?
Q2. How would you rate the challenge level mov-
ing in virtual reality on a scale of 0-10 (10 means
most difﬁcult)?
Q3. Comparing real movement with the virtual
movement, which one do you ﬁnd easier?
Q4. How would you rate your preference level
moving in real life on a scale of 0-10 (10 means
most preferred)?
Q5. How would you rate your preference level
moving in virtual reality on a scale of 0-10 (10
means most preferred)?
Q6. Comparing real movement with virtual move-
ment, which one did you prefer?

Ranking
0-10

0-10

Real or
Virtual
0-10

0-10

Real or
Virtual

For the collection of subjective data for both challenge level
and preference analysis, we conducted short interviews with
subjects, which is shown in Table 2. For subjective challenge
level evaluation we asked subjects to rate the difﬁculty level
of the real-world baseline and locomotion modalities for a
range between 0 and 10, see Q1 and Q2 in Table 2. For the
preference side, we asked subjects to rate their preference for
both the baseline and one of the locomotion modalities for a
range between 0 and 10, see Q4 and Q5 in Table 2. Finally, in
the interview with subjects Q3 and Q6 in Table 2 were set up
as sanity checks for the subjects to make sure that they were
answering consistently.

Once we collected the data, our ﬁrst step was to calculate a
baseline for each dimension. Since the baseline was designed
as a real-world experience, as shown in the Table 1, we cal-
culated mean values of all 40 children subjects’ assessment
for the real-world experience for each dimension. In next step
we obtained two mean values for each locomotion modality
among the 10 subjects who tried and gave evaluation to this
that speciﬁc modality. The ﬁnal step was the most important
procedure, in which we compare the differences between the
mean value of the locomotion modality and that of the base-
line. The differences were regarded as relatively unbiased
evaluation for each locomotion modality and the same process
was applied on the data obtained from the adult group.

Experiment Process Summary
The ﬂowchart in Figure 1 illustrates the experiment process.
Before the experiment, subjects were asked to read and sign
consent forms and a screening form. In the ﬁrst step of the
experiment, subjects were asked to complete a real-world task
of walking in the room. Next, the subjects begin the VR
portion of the experiment.

In the experiment, each subject only tries one locomotion
modality. First they do a short tutorial, which teaches the
subject how to navigate in VR with the speciﬁc locomotion
modality they are assigned with. The tutorial lasts until the
subjects reach the target position in the tutorial or reach 80
seconds, whichever is shorter.

Once subjects are trained on how to move, they begin their the
task mentioned above in VR with their assigned locomotion
modality. The time limitation for the task is 300 seconds. We
assigned the order for testing the four locomotion methods
in advance to guarantee each modality would have metrics
data from 10 adults and 10 minors. After the subjects com-
pleted both the real-world and VR tasks, they were invited to
complete a short interview to assess their experience of the
baseline and locomotion modalities in VR.

Selection of Participants
A total of 100 subjects were recruited randomly from people
on campus and visitors to museum, comprising of 43 adults
aged between 19 − 65 and 57 minors aged between 7 − 17.
Each subject spent around 15 minutes in the experiment and
interview. The minors and adults were tested separately but
following the exact same protocol. The Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approval was obtained ahead of this experiment.

At the end of the experiment, 40 sets of adult data and 40 sets
of minor data were considered valid. We rejected three sets of
adult data and 17 sets of minor data. There are two criteria that
lead to the rejection of subject data. First, four minors who
reported discomfort in VR and declined to complete the exper-
iment. Second, 16 sets of data were rejected due to subjects’
inconsistent answers to the questions on the questionnaire (Ta-
ble 2). Q3 and Q6 were designed to be sanity checks and if
subjects were inconsistent in an answer to Q3 or Q6, their
data set was rejected. For instance, when asked about which
experience they preferred (Q6 on the questionnaire) and to
rate their preference (Q4 and Q5 on the questionnaire), some
participants said they preferred the virtual experience to the
baseline but gave a lower rate to the virtual experience.

RESULTS
In the study we calculated average of challenge and preference
level for each type of locomotion. In addition we also calcu-

lated the average completion time for each type of locomotion
for adults and minors.

Results from the Minor Group
Figure 2 contains the average completion time and standard
deviation (std) among minor subjects with respect to each
locomotion modality. It shows that minors completed the task
quickest with Assisted Swimming modality (avg. = 117.84s)
and slowest with the Swimming modality (avg. = 286.60s).

Figure 2. Average time and standard deviation for minors to ﬁnish a task
in different modalities.

Results of subjective assessment are presented in Figure 3.
The presented values are the mean values of each locomotion
modality and the baseline, indicating that minors rated Assisted
Swimming with best average score (2.10) and rated Swimming
with worst average score (6.70).

Figure 4. The average and standard deviation of the Preference level
ranged between 0 to 10 from the questionnaire. The baseline numbers
are average 6.63 (shown as the red dash line) and standard deviation
2.29.

Furthermore, Figure 6 presents interviewee’ subjective evalua-
tion for each modality’s challenge level. Adults rated Swim-
ming with the worst average score (6.10) and gave Look &
Follow the best score (2.60).

Figure 5. Average time and standard deviation for adults to ﬁnish a task
in different modalities.

The

average

3.
challenge

of
Figure
from the-
the
https://www.overleaf.com/project/5c63abf57615f53d5f5beb56
ques-
tionnaire. The baseline numbers are average 1.68 (shown as the red
dash line) and standard deviation 1.59.

and
between

deviation

standard

ranged

level

10

to

0

Figure 4 illustrates the preference level of each modality,
which is represented through the mean values of each loco-
motion modality and the baseline. The plot indicates that the
Assisted Swimming is minors’ favorite locomotion modality
(avg. = 8.20), and they rated the Swimming with the lowest
average score (6.40).

Figure 6. The average and standard deviation of the challenge level
ranged between 0 to 10 from the questionnaire. The baseline numbers
are average 1.15 (shown as red dash line) and standard deviation 1.19.

Results from the Adult Group
Figure 5 illustrates average completion time and std among
adults subjects with respect to each locomotion modality. The
graph shows that adults spent longest time completing the task
with Swimming modality (avg. = 276.00s), and adults com-
pleted tasks most quickly with Look & Follow (avg. = 80.50s).

As for the preference level, Figure 7 illustrates adult group’s
evaluation, which is again represented by the mean values of
the locomotion modality and the baseline. The plot indicates
that adults liked Look & Follow the most with an average score
of 8.10, and they least preferred Swimming with an average
score of 4.90.

that the adult preference higher than the baseline of (avg. =
6.93, std. = 2.59) was for Look & Follow at (avg. = 8.1,
std. = 1.37), meaning that adults found the other three forms
of locomotion either worse or the same as walking in the
real-world. Although the adult preference for Assisted Swim-
ming at (avg. = 7.1, std. = 1.7) and Teleportation (avg. = 6.8,
std. = 1.78) are close to the adult preference baseline, the
standard deviation makes those results uncertain. On the other
hand, minors preferred both Assisted Swimming at (avg. = 8.2,
std. = 2.00) and Look & Follow at (avg. = 7.3, std. = 1.50)
over the baseline of (avg. = 6.63, std. = 2.29), meaning they
preferred these two movements over walking in the real-world,
and the remaining two less than walking. Although minors’
had a slight preference for Teleportation of (avg. = 6.75,
std. = 1.81) and Swimming of (avg. = 6.4, std. = 2.80) near
the baseline, due to the standard deviation these results were
not certain.

Hypotheses Veriﬁcation
Based on the discussion above-mentioned, we can verify the
two hypotheses we have proposed.

First, both adult and minor groups show signiﬁcantly more
difﬁculty with Swimming motion than the other three assisted
motions, and subjects from both groups reﬂected obvious pref-
erence to the controller assisted locomotion over the natural
Swimming modality. Additionally, both adults and minors took
much longer to complete the task using the natural swimming
modality, which further indicates that it is more difﬁcult to
use. The ﬁnding conﬁrms our ﬁrst hypothesis, which states
that using controller assisted movement modalities in VR can
improve the user experience compared to locomotion which
only uses physical body movements in VR.

Secondly, although both groups found controller assisted loco-
motion more accessible, there is still variation for preference
and challenge level within different types of assisted move-
ment. For example, minors preferred Assisted Swimming over
walking and also found it easier than walking. This also cor-
relates with Assisted Swimming having the shortest average
completion time for minors. Minors also had a preference
for Look & Follow over walking, but found it more difﬁcult
than walking. On the other hand, adults found Look & Follow
easiest and preferred it over walking, while ﬁnding all the
others harder and less preferable to walking. Adults also had
the shortest completion time for Look & Follow, supporting
the result that it was top rated. These ﬁndings aligns well with
our second hypothesis predicting the existence of variations
between minors and adults.

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we conducted an experiment to evaluate the
accessibility of virtual reality locomotion modalities to healthy
adults and minors. We found that in virtual reality, assisted
movement modalities could provide better experience to users
than natural movement modality. On top of that, there are
variations between adults and minors in the evaluation for
each modality.

Figure 7. The average and standard deviation of the Preference level
ranged between 0 to 10 from the questionnaire. The baseline numbers
are average 6.93 (shown as red dash line) and standard deviation 2.59.

DISCUSSION
In our study we found similarities and differences between
adults and minors for both challenge level and preference
across the four locomotion modalities.

Accessibility Comparison Between Adults and Minors
For the average time to ﬁnish the task, as presented in Figure
2 for minors and Figure 5 for adults, we found that minors
spent least time completing the task with Assisted Swimming
modality (avg. = 117.84s) and Swimming modality took them
most time (avg. = 286.60s), indicating that the former being
the easiest and the later being the most difﬁcult for minors.
Similarly, among adult group, the average completion time
was highest for Swimming modality (avg. = 276.00s), mean-
ing that Swimming modality is also the most difﬁcult for adults.
However, adults ﬁnished the task most quickly in the Look &
Follow modality (avg. = 80.50s), which is different from that
of minors, meaning that Look & Follow could be the easiest
modality for adults.

For the challenge level illustrated in Figure 3 for minors and
Figure 6 for adults, we compared the results. The evaluation
given by minors for Assisted Swimming (avg. = 2.1) was quite
close to their evaluation for the baseline (avg. = 1.68), while
the other three modalities were signiﬁcantly more challenging
than the baseline. This means that minors regard Assisted
Swimming to be almost as easy as walking and the others much
harder. Even considering the standard deviation for Swimming
(std. = 1.60) , Look & Follow (std. = 1.63), and Teleportation
(std. = 1.74), they are still higher than the baseline for walking
(std. = 1.59), with Swimming ranking as the most difﬁcult at
(avg. = 6.70). Adults assigned the lowest challenge level to
the Look & Follow modality (avg. = 2.6), but still found it to
be more difﬁcult than the baseline for walking of (avg. = 1.15)
even considering the standard deviation. The other three were
much higher than the baseline, with Swimming at (avg. = 6.1)
ranked the most challenging modality. Additionally, compared
to minors’ group, results from adult group show relatively
lower standard deviation in the evaluation, which may indicate
more reliability in adults’ data or possibly more variation in
motor-skill abilities in minors.

The preference level between adults Figure 7 and minors Fig-
ure 4 showed some similarities and differences. We found

In the following, we conjecture some reasons for the conclu-
sions obtained above, which could be potential directions of
future research on this topic.

The Assisted Swimming modality turned out to be the most
popular among minors, probably because it is less tiring than
the Swimming modality but at the same time is more immersive
and more fun to do than Look & Follow and Teleportation.

Compared with minors, adults usually have better physiologi-
cal conditions and many of them tend to be less sensitive to
uncomfortable feelings such as locomotion sickness. Adults
also have more life experience compared to minors, espe-
cially the experience of interacting with the environment. This
difference could make it less attractive for adults to mimic
swimming motions in virtual reality. Furthermore, compared
to minors, many adults tend to value efﬁciency more, which
means they may prefer methods that enable them to reach their
goal without much effort. That may explain the adult group’s
preference for the Look & Follow mode over the Swimming
and Assisted Swimming modalities.

Finally, if we look at the top two most preferred types of
locomotion, they are between Assisted Swimming and Look
& Follow. If one would further consider the situation when
subjects would have motor impairment to the upper or lower
limps, which we did not consider in this paper, Look & Follow
would be the most preferred modality and Assisted Swimming
would be less desirable.

REFERENCES
1. Benjamin Bolte, Frank Steinicke, and Gerd Bruder. 2011.
The jumper metaphor: an effective navigation technique
for immersive display setups. In Proceedings of Virtual
Reality International Conference.

2. Doug Bowman, Ernst Kruijff, Joseph J LaViola Jr, and
Ivan P Poupyrev. 2004. 3D User interfaces: theory and
practice, CourseSmart eTextbook. Addison-Wesley.

3. Evren Bozgeyikli, Andrew Raij, Srinivas Katkoori, and

Rajiv Dubey. 2016. Point & teleport locomotion
technique for virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2016
Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in
Play. ACM, 205–216.

4. Licia Calvi, Carlos P Santos, Joey Relouw, Bojan

Endrovski, Chris Rothwell, Antonio Sarà, Serena Lucrezi,
Marco Palma, and Ubaldo Pantaleo. 2017. A VR game to
teach underwater sustainability while diving. In 2017
Sustainable Internet and ICT for Sustainability
(SustainIT). IEEE, 1–4.

5. Yam San Chee and Chit Meng Hooi. 2002. C-VISions:

socialized learning through collaborative, virtual,
interactive simulations. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning:
Foundations for a CSCL Community. International
Society of the Learning Sciences, 687–696.

6. Sebastian Freitag, Dominik Rausch, and Torsten Kuhlen.

2014. Reorientation in virtual environments using
interactive portals. In 2014 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI). IEEE, 119–122.

7. Omar Janeh, Gerd Bruder, Frank Steinicke, Alessandro
Gulberti, and Monika Poetter-Nerger. 2018. Analyses of
Gait Parameters of Younger and Older Adults During
(Non-) Isometric Virtual Walking. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics 24, 10 (2018),
2663–2674.

8. Omar Janeh, Eike Langbehn, Frank Steinicke, Gerd

Bruder, Alessandro Gulberti, and Monika Poetter-Nerger.
2017. Walking in virtual reality: Effects of manipulated
visual self-motion on walking biomechanics. ACM
Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP) 14, 2 (2017),
12.

9. Eike Langbehn, Paul Lubos, and Frank Steinicke. 2018.
Evaluation of locomotion techniques for room-scale vr:
Joystick, teleportation, and redirected walking. In
Proceedings of the Virtual Reality International
Conference-Laval Virtual. ACM, 4.

10. Roy A Ruddle, Ekaterina Volkova, and Heinrich H

Bülthoff. 2011. Walking improves your cognitive map in
environments that are large-scale and large in extent.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) 18, 2 (2011), 10.

11. Frank Steinicke, Yon Visell, Jennifer Campos, and
Anatole Lécuyer. 2013. Human walking in virtual
environments. Springer.

12. Martin Usoh, Kevin Arthur, Mary C Whitton, Rui Bastos,
Anthony Steed, Mel Slater, and Frederick P Brooks Jr.
1999. Walking> walking-in-place> ﬂying, in virtual
environments. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.,
359–364.

13. Robert C Zeleznik, Joseph J LaViola, D Acevedo Feliz,

and Daniel F Keefe. 2002. Pop through button devices for
VE navigation and interaction. In Proceedings IEEE
Virtual Reality 2002. IEEE, 127–134.

