UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

1

Ready Player One: UAV Clustering based
Multi-Task Ofﬂoading for Vehicular VR/AR
Gaming

Long Hu, Yuanwen Tian, Jun Yang, Tarik Taleb, Lin Xiang, Yixue Hao

9
1
0
2

r
p
A
8

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
6
8
3
0
.
4
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With rapid development of unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) technology, application of the UAVs for task ofﬂoading has
received increasing interest in the academia. However, real-time
interaction between one UAV and the mobile edge computing
(MEC) node is required for processing the tasks of mobile end
users, which signiﬁcantly increases the system overhead and is
unable to meet the demands of large-scale artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) based applications. To tackle this problem, in this article, we
propose a new architecture for UAV clustering to enable efﬁcient
multi-modal multi-task task ofﬂoading. By the proposed architec-
ture, the computing, caching and communication resources are
collaboratively optimized using AI based decision-making. This
not only increases the efﬁciency of UAV clusters, but also provides
insight into the fusion of computation and communication.

Index Terms—Task Ofﬂoading, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle,

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Cognitive Computing

I. INTRODUCTION

With rapid advances in mobile computing and wireless
communication technologies, the demands of mobile end users
have been largely met by deploying edge computing [1] and
other solutions on the ground, while employing Internet of Ve-
hicles as a supplementary infrastructure to accommodate un-
manned applications [2], [3]. Recently, researchers have shown
increasing interest towards processing in the air complex tasks
as automatic cruise, aerial photography, and precision target
identiﬁcation. However, traditional architecture for enabling
collaboration between one unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
and mobile edge computing (MEC) is not applicable. Firstly,
the miniaturization of UAV severely limits its computation,
caching and communication (3C) capabilities. That is, for the
same cost, the computing capabilities of UAVs are inferior to
those of autonomous vehicles on the ground. Secondly, due to
frequent interactions between the UAV and the MEC during
processing tasks of mobile end users, the battery power of
the UAV will be drained rapidly, resulting in low processing
efﬁciency. Thus, the architectures of the ground-based systems
cannot be directly applied in aerial systems, highlighting the
demand for new computing architectures in UAV scenes.

L. Hu, Y. Tian, J. Yang and Y. Hao are with School of Computer Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. (Email:
hulong@hust.edu.cn, yuanwentian@hust.edu.cn, junyang cs@hust.edu.cn)

T. Taleb is with Aalto University, Finland, Centre for Wireless Com-
munications (CWC), University of Oulu, Finland, and The Computer and
Information Security Department, Sejong University, South Korea. (Email:
tarik.taleb@aalto.ﬁ)

L. Xiang is with University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

(Email:

lin.xiang@uni.lu)

Yixue Hao is the corresponding author. (Email: yixuehao@hust.edu.cn)

Due to their ﬂexible deployment, UAVs have attracted
extensive research activities. For example, researchers have
investigated cooperating UAVs for providing communication
coverage. In particular, Motlagh et al. [4] investigate a UAV-
aided MEC system for crowd surveillance scene. Mozaffari et
al. [5] propose an efﬁcient deployment scheme for providing
coverage to ground users by exploiting multiple UAVs as
wireless base stations. Lyn et al. [6] propose a UAV-aided hy-
brid network architecture to assist ground base station (GBS),
which can exploit UAV-aided ofﬂoading for both throughput
gains and cost savings. However, these works [4]– [6] have
not explored the role of UAV clusters nor the application
of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technology. Other researchers
have considered the problem of one UAV processing AI tasks
such as disaster relief task, precision target
identiﬁcation,
etc. For example, Zhao et al. [7] propose a deep learning
algorithm for applying a UAV to identify wildﬁre. However,
for wide-range mountain ﬁres in reality, e.g., the large-scale
California mountain ﬁres in November 2018, UAV clusters
need to complete the disaster relief task in a timely manner.
Schwarzrock et al. [8] propose an efﬁcient task allocation
scheme for UAV clusters based on the swarm intelligence.
The task investigated in [8] can be decomposed into computa-
tion, caching and communication to achieve the collaborative
optimization of resources. The aforementioned works [4]– [8]
have promoted the development of UAV technology. However,
in the scenes of large-scale mobile users, heavy task load
will lead to high delay. To tackle this challenge, we propose
a UAV collaboration framework to ofﬂoad multiple complex
tasks and consider the coordination of computation, caching
and communication resources [9], where the efﬁciency of UAV
teams is maximized using AI based decisions.

We consider the virtual reality/augmented reality (VR/AR)
gaming scene as shown in Fig. 1. With the development of
AI technology, the number of mobile users and the demand
for high-quality user experiences are increasing rapidly. In
the VR/AR hybrid gaming scene described in “Ready Player
One” [10], the driver and the passengers may enjoy a real-
time experience from augmented visual effects while the car
is moving at high speed in the physical environment. Wearable
devices [11] can be utilized to augment user experience.
However, as the user distribution is changing dynamically
in real-time, deploying static/ﬁxed edge computing nodes in
the state-of-the-art networks fails to meet their computing
demands. As a result, a large number of computing tasks may
pile up in hot spots. UAVs ﬂexibly deployed for tracing the

 
 
 
 
 
 
UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

2

Fig. 1.

Illustration for vehicular VR/AR gaming scene enabled by UAV clustering based multi-task ofﬂoading

mobile users provide a promising solution to tackle this issue.
Based on the real-time high resolution videos in peripheral
physical scenes, UAVs can facilitate virtual scene processing
and provide the users with personalized experience. However,
UAVs are expensive and a large number of UAVs may cause
strong mutual interference in the air. Therefore, enhancing the
efﬁciency of UAVs is crucial for meeting the requirements of
large-scale mobile users and, at the same time, guaranteeing
high-quality user experience. Several important characteristics
of the proposed architecture are listed as follows.

• Multi-task ofﬂoading: The traditional scheme [7] only
considers a single UAV for processing a single task.
For VR/AR applications, although the UAV-aided MEC
system [4] can mitigate this problem, it depends heavily
on the infrastructure and, hence, is not applicable herein.
In contrast, by our proposed scheme, one UAV can
serve multiple tasks. In particular, the results of each
task can be partially reused to serve other tasks in an
opportunistic manner. As a result, the proposed scheme
can signiﬁcantly enhance the efﬁciency of UAVs on a
large scale.

• Collaboration of UAV clusters: By our proposed
scheme, one task can be jointly processed using multiple
UAVs. The UAV network consists of multiple dynamic
resources. Considering that each UAV may have different
loads while processing different tasks, the computation
resources of the idle UAVs can be shared with to over-

loaded UAVs to improve resource utilization.

• Joint optimization of computing, caching and com-
munication resources: The completion of one task is
successful only if sufﬁcient computing, communication
and storage resources are available. The VR/AR task
may easily fail in the traditional single-UAV scene as
the resources are ﬁxed and limited. By considering UAV
collaborations in multi-task ofﬂoading scenes, the UAV
clusters form a dynamic resource pool. Meanwhile, their
computing, caching and communication resources can be
shared with each other, in a dynamic and ﬂexible manner,
to balance the utilization of resource.

• AI based decision-making: By the traditional scheme,
the interaction between one UAV and MEC causes heavy
overhead. When considering multiple-UAVs collaborative
operation, each UAV must perceive and forecast the mo-
bility of neighboring UAVs and the dynamic resources of
the UAV network, before the task ofﬂoading decisions are
made on this basis. This causes many open problems such
as high delay, task failure. In fact, considering UAV coop-
eration in multi-task ofﬂoading scenes can achieve joint
optimization of computing, caching and communication
resources of UAV clusters. Moreover, AI based decision-
making is crucial to enhance the utilization of available
resources for maximization of the system performance.

The contributions of this work are as follows.

• We investigate the fusion of computation and communi-

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

3

cation in UAV networks. The current research of mobile
UAV networks has only focused on the communication
aspects of UAVs or the task-processing capability of one
UAV. Different from the UAV literature, we consider
the entire large-scale applications of vehicular VR/AR
gaming, and propose a new research direction by the
fusion of two ﬁelds.

• Moreover, we construct a novel architecture, called UAV-
M3T, for UAV clusters to collaboratively perform dif-
ferent tasks. Under this architecture, the trajectory, task
ofﬂoading and network resource allocation for the coop-
erating UAVs within the clusters can be jointly optimized.
• Finally, we propose an AI based decision-making frame-
work to facilitate UAV cooperation and joint optimization
of computing, caching and communication resources. In
this framework, deployments of UAV clusters both in
advance based on historical data mining and in real-
time based on real-time perception are considered. Ex-
perimental evaluation reveals that our proposed strategy
can effectively improve the collaboration of UAV clusters.

In the remainder of this article, we present
the proposed
UAV collaboration architecture for multiple task scenarios in
Section II. Moreover, in Section III we introduce the resource
coordination method for cooperating UAVs and discuss its
advantages. Furthermore,
the dynamic deployment scheme
and its experimental evaluation are elaborated in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper and discusses some
interesting future work.

II. UAV CLUSTERING BASED MULTI-MODAL MULTI-TASK
(UAV-M3T) OFFLOADING ARCHITECTURE

A. Architecture of UAV-aided MEC task ofﬂoading

Recently,

the task-processing mode of UAV-aided MEC
networks has been proposed in [4], whereby the computing
task beyond a user’s processing capability is ofﬂoaded to the
UAV. The architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. If the UAV
has limited computing capability available, the task is then
ofﬂoaded to the ground MEC server for processing. In the
latter case, the UAV is used as a repeater to efﬁciently ofﬂoad
of the user’s computing task to the MEC server when e.g. the
user has a poor communication connection to the MEC server.
However, the UAV-aided MEC networks may fail to meet
the users’ required quality of experience in several key scenes.
For example, for the VR/AR application scene in wild, desert,
and complex topographies, the ground MEC network may
not be conveniently and reliably built. If the ground MEC
system is absent, the UAV-assisted MEC network architecture
fails to promptly address the situation. On the other hand,
even if the ground MEC exists, the users may distribute in
a large area such that it is difﬁcult to fully ofﬂoad the tasks
to the static/ﬁxed MEC, which degrades the users’ quality of
experience. To tackle these issues, it is necessary to adopt
a ﬂexible task processing architecture based on e.g. UAV
clustering.

B. Architecture of UAV-M3T task ofﬂoading

We construct a novel architecture, called UAV-M3T, for
UAV clusters to collaboratively perform different tasks. The
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3.

1) UAV-O2O Mode (One UAV to One Task): The simplest
mode in UAV-M3T ofﬂoads one user task to one UAV that
has sufﬁcient computing, caching and communication
capabilities for processing. This mode has the lowest
cost but can still fully exploit the advantages of UAV
clusters. We note that the one UAV-aided MEC service
mode discussed in Section II-A is essentially a result of
introducing the MEC server as backup resources into the
UAV-O2O mode.

2) UAV-O2M Mode (One UAV to Multi-Task): The UAV-
O2M mode differs from the UAV-O2O mode in that the
former does not process the tasks separately, but can reuse
the tasks fo improve the users’ quality of experience. An
example of the UAV-O2M mode is illustrated in Fig. 3. If
the UAV-O2O mode is adopted, the tasks of users Adam,
Bob and Cindy will be processed by UAVs A, B and
C, respectively. This signiﬁcantly reduces the processing
efﬁciency of the UAVs. For example, the data collection
tasks from a group of neighboring users within the same
time window are usually the same. Therefore, the multi-
user data collection task can be delegated to one UAV for
saving computing resources. As shown in Fig. 3, since
Adam and Bob are in the same area, the data collected
at UAV A can be transmitted to UAV B for computing,
while the computation results of UAV B can be directly
fed back to and used at both Adam and Bob. In this
way, the UAV-O2M mode utilizes the technique of task
resuing.

3) UAV-M2O Mode (Multi-UAV to One Task): In the
UAV-M2O mode, multiple UAVs collaboratively process
one task. As shown in Fig. 3, the VR/AR gaming task
of user Adam is allocated to UAVs A, B and C for joint
processing. In particular, the landscape data collected by
UAV A is ﬁrst transmitted to UAV B for processing. If
UAV B has only limited computing resources and fails
to serve all the task requests of Adam, a portion of the
tasks will be then ofﬂoaded to UAV C. Finally, UAV C
will utilize its idle computing resources to process the
task of Adam jointly with UAV B. As a result, the M2O
mode can efﬁciently utilize the network resources of the
UAV clusters by enabling cooperation among neighboring
UAVs. This signiﬁcantly improves the users’ quality of
experience and leads to efﬁcient resource allocation.
4) UAV-M2M Mode (Multi-UAV to Multi-Task): The
UAV-M2M hybrid service mode combines the UAV-O2M
mode and the UAV-M2O mode. The hybrid service mode
is the most common mode of UAV clusters cooperation
in processing multi-task scenes. Multi-agent system has
been investigated in communication systems [12], along
with agent-based implementation on smart objects in IoT
systems [13]. By adopting the UAV-M2M mode,
the
trajectory, task ofﬂoading and network resource allocation
for the cooperating UAVs within the clusters can be

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

4

Fig. 2. Architecture of UAV-aided MEC task ofﬂoading

Fig. 3. Architecture of UAV clustering based multi-modal multi-task ofﬂoading (UAV-M3T)

TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THREE ARCHITECTURES: MEC WITHOUT UAV, UAV-AIDED MEC AND UAV=M3T

Architecture

MEC without UAV

UAV-aided MEC

UAV-M3T

Deployment
dynamicity

N/A

Limited

High

Resource
ﬂexibility

Medium

Medium

High

Real-time
response

Medium

Medium

High

Intelligent
decision-making

Limited

Limited

High

Cost

Low

User’s quality of
experience

Low

Medium

Medium

High

High

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

5

jointly optimized.

Research into UAV-M3T architecture is promising for future
AI based applications. Although the UAV-M3T architecture in
the hybrid service mode has a relatively high deployment cost,
it can signiﬁcantly improve users’ quality of experience and
provide brand new market returns for the service provider.
Table I presents a comparison of the three architectures. In
fact, several projects on facilitating the UAV-aided MEC ap-
plications have been recently launched by Google, Facebook,
Amazon and Huawei. It
the deployment
cost of UAV clusters will be continuously reduced in the
future. Moreover, the advent of advanced Beyond 5G (B5G)
technology will facilitate a widespread deployment of UAVs
to meet users’ rising requirements on quality of experience.

is expected that

III. COORDINATION OF COMPUTING, CACHING AND
COMMUNICATION RESOURCES

The key performance indices of UAVs include capacity, de-
lay, energy, reliability, and cost, etc. The quality of experience
measures customer’s satisfaction level, which depends on the
personal preference of the user, environment and service. Dur-
ing the task processing, the actual tasks themselves are multi-
modal. Due to their heterogeneity, different tasks demand for
different computation, caching, and communication resources.
In the proposed system,
the deployment of computation,
caching, and communication resources using UAV clusters has
advantages in the following aspects.

• Amount of information collected: Even if UAVs serve
different independent objects, the collected information
can be highly redundant due to the requirements of
the same business such as the VR/AR gaming scene.
Therefore, the data validity can be enhanced by means
of data reusing, content caching and task migration etc.
• Real-time performance: For UAV-aided MEC architec-
ture, a large quantity of information collected by the
UAVs needs to be transmitted back to the ground without
compression. This causes communication disruptions and
fails the tasks when the bandwidth is insufﬁcient. For the
multi-UAV clustering based collaboration architectures,
many tasks are compressed and processed in real-time
during the UAVs’ ﬂight before been ofﬂoaded, therefore
can reduce the communication delay of data transmission.
• Decision capability: Due to its limited computing,
caching and communication capabilities, a single small
UAV can only support limited network decision-making.
UAV-M3T architecture can realize decision based on
network resources and mobility, as stated in Section IV.
Next, for the performance of decisions, the tasks with
very high requirements on performance can be completed
by ensemble learning. However, one UAV deploying the
ensemble learning fails to meet the user requirements of
real-time performance due to high computing cost.

• Efﬁciency: For complex application scenes such as
VR/AR gaming scenes, enhancing the efﬁciency of UAV
will reduce costs. On the one hand, efﬁcient data col-
lection and task processing can be achieved by task
reusing, content caching and other strategies. On the

other hand, UAV clusters collaboration including multi-
UAV data collection, resource allocation coordination,
and intelligent decision-making can enhance the overall
resource efﬁciency of UAV clusters.

By considering the cooperation between UAVs in multi-
user scenes, we can achieve efﬁcient sharing of computation,
caching, and communication resources among the UAVs to
increase the system throughput. Meanwhile, the data and sig-
naling exchanges between cooperating UAVs can be reformed
using e.g. device-to-device (D2D) connections. The price is
an increased transmission delay as the resources need to be
ofﬂoaded to other terminals using the D2D communication
between UAVs. Thus, in case of multiple users, the trade-
off between the cooperation gains and the resulting system
overhead needs to be investigated. For this purpose, we assume
that UAV clusters within the same organization are connected
by D2D and that one user’s task is completed by a designated
UAV. For notational convenience, we assume that only one
user requests a VR/AR gaming task. Let rt
i,j be the commu-
nication data rate between UAVs i and j. Moreover, βt
i,j and
κt
i,j are the amounts of computation ofﬂoading and caching
content conveyed from the UAV i to UAV j, respectively. For
the considered VR/AR gaming scene, we optimize the average
delay of the UAVs subject to the energy capacity of each
UAV. We denote the UAV serving the requesting terminal as
“master” UAV of the task and the UAV connecting the master
UAV to provide 3C resources as the “slave” UAV. The delay
DU E of the requesting user terminal accounts for both the
average computating delay, which includes the computation
delays in the master and slave the UAVs and the latency
of D2D connection setup, and the average communication
delay, which is the time needed to ofﬂoad the tasks between
different nodes. Moreover, EU AV
denotes energy consumption
of task computing and D2D transmission of U AVi. EM AX
denotes the maximum energy for U AVi. The resulting resource
allocation for UAV collaboration optimization problem is
formulated as follows,

i

i

min
r,β,κ

DU E

s.t. EU AV

i

≤ EM AX
i

,

i = 1, 2, 3 . . . , n .

The solution of such optimization problem has been inves-
tigated in [14]. We can adopt online algorithms to determine
the optimal resource allocation when collaboration between
UAVs is enabled. Furthermore, this problem formulating can
be extended to include collaboration between UAV clusters.
When multiple tasks arrive simultaneously, the UAV clusters
can collaboratively optimize their 3C resources in the same
manner as above.

IV. DYNAMIC DEPLOYMENT STRATEGY OF UAV
CLUSTERING BASED ON INTELLIGENT DECISIONS
A. Deployment in advance based on historical data mining

The task assignment and resource allocation for UAVs can
be deployed a priori before the actual task requests are known,
as shown in the right part of Fig. 4. This pre-deployment

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

6

Fig. 4. Dynamic deployment strategy for UAV clustering

enhances the user experience because it can improve the
network capacity and reduce the likelihood of network con-
gestion. For the VR/AR gaming scene, the tasks requested by
different users in the same location usually contain redundant
information about the physical environment. Hence, historical
and social data can be utilized via data mining to forecast
the demands. If the data mining result indicates that a large
number of users make similar task requests within a time
window, the UAV can cache the results and reuse them to
serve the user demands at subsequent times. In this way, the
delay and energy consumption are reduced simultaneously.

Next, the mobility of the UAVs can be forecasted peri-
odically by collecting the trace data of the UAV clusters in
the historical time period to optimize resource allocation. For
3C resource coordination in multi-task scenes, the resources
available at a given UAV and at its neighboring UAVs should
be jointly considered. When the mobility of UAVs is high, the
connection between UAVs may be interrupted due to increased
likelihood of link outage. In this case, dynamic adjustment of
3C resources is crucial to improve the efﬁciency of resource
allocation.

B. Deployment in real-time based on real-time perception

However, the historical and social data cannot accurately
forecast the user demands due to their dynamic nature. Thus,
adaptive adjustment of the UAV clustering via real-time
scheduling must also be made based on real-time perception
to improve the network capacity and the user experience,
as shown in the left part of Fig. 4. Sine each UAV in the
UAV clusters may have a different path, the data perceived
and the knowledge learned at the UAVs are different. In this
way, the analysis of mutual information between UAVs can
be enhanced using machine learning. When communication,
computation and storage capacities change dynamically, the
relevant real-time network status should be further analyzed in
real time such that more UAVs will be sent to the hot spots.
The real-time collaboration and tracking optimization are
conducted by several UAVs to balance the network resources.
By considering multi-modal data, our optimization problem

Fig. 5. Real-time task load forecasting for three UAVs collaboration

is generally non-convex due to non-convex constraints. The
traditional optimization scheme has long task duration. In
view of high complexity of deep reinforcement learning, we
learning
should design the lightweight deep reinforcement
algorithm for decision-making of UAV clusters. In our future
work, we will try combing the Lyapunov optimization and
deep reinforcement learning to further improve 3C resource
allocation.

C. Experiment: LSTM-based multi-UAVs load forecasting

We adapt the real-time load forecasting and investigate the
cooperation and resource coordination among multiple UAVs.
We then investigate on how multiple UAVs coordinate the
resources with limited communication resource between each
other. In real scenes, players need to be served by multi-
UAVs in UAV clusters simultaneously to carry out global
resource scheduling on UAV clusters and estimate the load
of the UAV nodes in the next time period. The UAV node
deﬁnes a time series data, which can be forecasted using
recurrent neural network (RNN) model. It has been shown
that RNNs are able to analyze deep semantic expression
and time series information in data mining. However, RNNs
suffer from a poor forecast capability when the resource load
changes at large rate. To maintain the long-term memory of
the RNN, we use long short term memory (LSTM) network to
eliminate the dependence of the forecast model on abnormal
data. In the experiment, we forecast the changes of the UAV
communication load state as an example.

Fig. 5 shows the communication load state serving 3 UAVs
to one player. The communication load changes of each UAV
in the next time period are forecasted using the data of an hour
prior to current time point as the reference, and forecast the
current load change trend. After obtaining the communication
load trend of each UAV, player divides the ﬂexible task into a
series of subtasks. Meanwhile, coordination of 3C resources is
considered during task ofﬂoading to reduce the task delay and
energy consumption. From our selected time window, around
250 second in particular, it can be observed that UAV 2 was

0200400600800100005001000150020002500UAV 10200400600800100005001000150020002500Data Package Number(Per S)UAV 202004006008001000Time(S)05001000150020002500UAV 3UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX

7

[13] N.H. Motlagh, T. Taleb, and O. Arrouk, “Low-Altitude Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles-Based Internet of Things Services: Comprehensive Survey and
Future Perspectives”, IEEE J. on IoT, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 899-922, Dec.
2016.

[14] M. Chen, Y. Hao, K. Lin, L. Hu, Z. Yuan, “Label-less Learning for
Trafﬁc Control in an Edge Network”, IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 6, pp.
8–14, 2018.

[15] M. Chen, W. Li, G. Fortino, Y. Hao, L. Hu, I. Humar, “A Dynamic
Service-Migration Mechanism in Edge Cognitive Computing”, ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1808.07198,
2018.

trying to share some task load from UAV 1 while UAV 3
stayed relatively stable.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we propose a new architecture, referred to as
UAV-M3T, for vehicular VR/AR gaming. The UAV-M3T ar-
chitecture utilizes AI based decision making for collaborative
optimization of the UAV team and the network resources and,
hence, improves the task performance and resource efﬁciency
of the UAVs. Our proposed scheme has extensive applications
in the military industry as well as city and business appli-
cations. However, many research challenges also need to be
tackled. For example, we should consider improving resource
coordination of UAVs in more complex scenes such as task
migration [15] and investigate efﬁcient algorithms for dynamic
deployment of UAV clusters, which are left as future work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant61802138, Grant 61802139), the
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2018M632859).
This work was partially supported by the Academy of Fin-
land 6Genesis Flagship (Grant No. 318927) and the Primo-
5G project,
that has received funding from the European
Unions Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme
under Grant Agreement No.815191. The work of L. Xiang is
supported by the European Research Council (ERC) project
AGNOSTIC.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Chen, Y. Hao, “Task Ofﬂoading for Mobile Edge Computing in
Software Deﬁned Ultra-dense Network”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 36, No. 3, pp. 587–597, Mar. 2018.

[2] M. Chen, Y. Tian, G. Fortino, J. Zhang and I. Humar, “Cognitive Internet
of Vehicles”, Computer Communications, vol. 120, pp. 58–70, 2018.
[3] H. Hellaoui, O. Bekkouche, M. Bagaa, and T. Taleb, “Aerial Control
System for Spectrum Efﬁciency in UAV to Cellular Communications”,
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 108–113, Oct. 2018.
[4] N.H. Motlagh, M. Bagaa, and T. Taleb, “UAV-based IoT Platform: A
Crowd Surveillance Use Case”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.
55, no. 2, pp. 128–134, Feb. 2017.

[5] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis and M. Debbah, “Efﬁcient Deployment
of Multiple Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Optimal Wireless Coverage”,
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1647–1650, Aug. 2016.
[6] J. Lyu, Y. Zeng and R. Zhang, “UAV-aided Ofﬂoading for Cellular
Hotspot”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2018.
[7] Y. Zhao, J. Ma, X. Li and J. Zhang, “Saliency Detection and Deep
Learning-Based Wildﬁre Identiﬁcation in UAV Imagery”, Sensors, vol.
18, no. 3, 2018.

[8] J. Schwarzrock, I. Zacarias, A. L.C. Bazzan, et al., “Solving task
allocation problem in multi Unmanned Aerial Vehicles systems using
Swarm intelligence”, Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 72, pp. 10–20, 2018.

[9] M. Chen, Y. Hao, L. Hu, M. Hossain, A. Ghoneim, “Edge-CoCaCo: To-
wards Joint Optimization of Computation, Caching and Communication
on Edge Cloud”, IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 21–
27, June 2018.

[10] E. Cline, “Ready player one”, New York: Crown, 2011, ISBN: 978-

0307887436.

[11] M. Chen, J. Zhou, G. Tao, J. Yang, L. Hu, “Wearable Affective Robot”,

IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 64766–64776, 2018.

[12] G. Fortino, A. Garro, W. Russo, “An integrated approach for the devel-
opment and validation of multi-agent systems”, International Journal of
Computer Systems Science & Engineering, 20 (4), 259–271. 2005.

