A Qualitative Post-Experience Method for Evaluating Changes
in VR Presence Experience Over Time

Christian Mai
LMU Munich
christian.mai@ifi.lmu.de

Heinrich Hußmann
LMU Munich
hussmann@ifi.lmu.de

9
1
0
2

y
a
M
4
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
7
6
5
0
.
5
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: We propose a post-experience drawing method to collect data about the temporal cause of a presence experience.
After ending the experience (1), the user is asked to draw the course of the presence experience (2) into a template we provide.
The horizontal axis represents the time, the vertical axis the experienced state of presence, either being in the real or in the
virtual world. The user is asked to annotate the drawing (2), in particular breaks in presence and phases of constant presence,
to relate the drawing to events during the experience. A supervising person might support the annotation. Afterwards the
drawing is analyzed by identifying distinctive points and phases by an expert (3). We propose a descriptive model that explains
these distinctive points and phases based on related work on the presence phenomenon. The points’ position is stored as
compact numerical data in a database, for storage, comparison and evaluation (4) purposes.

ABSTRACT
A particular measure to evaluate an head-mounted display (HMD)
based experience is the state of feeling present in virtual reality.
Interruptions of a presence experience – break in presence (BIP) –
appearing over time, need to be detected to assess and improve an
application. Existing methods either lack in taking these BIPs into
account – questionnaires – or are complex in their application and
evaluation – physiological and behavioral measures –. To provide a
practical approach, we propose a post-experience method in which
the users reflect on their experience by drawing a line, indicating
their experienced state of presence, in a paper-based drawing tem-
plate. The amplitude of the drawn line represents the variation
of their presence experience over time. We propose a descriptive
model that describes temporal variations in the drawings by the
definition of relevant points over time – e.g., putting on the HMD
–, phases of the experience – e.g., transition into VR – and parame-
ters –e.g., the transition time–. The descriptive model enables us to
objectively evaluate user drawings and represent the course of the
drawings by a defined set of paramters. An exploratory user study
(N=30) showed that the drawings are very consistent, the method
can detect all BIPs and shows good indications for representing the
intensity of a BIP. With our method practitioners and researchers
can accelerate the evaluation and optimization of experiences by
evaluating BIPs. The possibilty to store objective paramters paves
the way for automized evaluation methods and big data approaches.

KEYWORDS
presence, head-mounted displays, usability, method

1 INTRODUCTION
The availability of consumer grade head-mounted displays (HMD)
fosters the usage by a growing group of users in the research com-
munity and gives industrial users new commercial perspectives.
To improve VR experiences during development and to answer
research questions, methods and tools are needed to evaluate these
experiences. A unique measure used for VR systems is the quantifi-
cation of the user’s state to feel present in the VR.

The state of feeling present in the VR was shown to vary over
time [5, 11, 26, 28, 29]. Temporal variations can have short-term as
well as long-term effects on the user. Particularly negative effects
in the course of an experience are noticed by the user, so-called
breaks in presence (BIPs) [26]. An example are people acting in
the real world touching an HMD user. Also cognitive processes
of the user, like getting bored or frustrated in the VR experience,
can make a user attention shift from the virtual environment back
to the real world [28]. Practical tools are missing that asses the
presence experience or to detect these disturbances.

Today more than 90% of studies using the state of presence as
a measure rely on questionnaires [4, 7, 20]. Questionnaires are
typically used post experience which can distort results due to
inaccurate recall and are not able to detect variations of the presence
over time [5, 14]. Interviews, in addition to questionnaires, can
support the evaluation of temporal events. However, interviews do
not give a continuous view on the experience, require interpretation
and effort by the examiner and do not give a quantification of the
state of presence. Physiological measurements enable a continuous
evaluation of the users’ state of being present. They are complicated

ExperienceAnnotateAnnotateEvaluateRealWorldVirtualWorld12Draw+AnnotatePresenceExperienceEndofExperience3Analyze4 
 
 
 
 
 
to use, intrusive to a user and the association of the measured
signal and the state of presence is often not clear [5, 14]. Behavioral
observations are not intrusive to a user. In most cases, behavioral
observations do not enable continuous evaluation as they need to
follow a particular protocol. This protocol might be only suitable
to detect the reaction ones or only to specific points in time – e.g.,
an unexpected car approaching the user – [14].

Therefore the main goal of this paper is to provide a method
that enables quick, simple to use and reliable evaluation of the pres-
ence experience considering temporal variations, in particular, the
detection of BIPs. To achieve this we propose a drawing method
based on the work of Garau [5]. The drawing method supports
HMD users’ reflection on the VR experience, by drawing a continu-
ous line along a time axis (Figure 1). The amplitude of the drawn
line expresses the variations of the presence state during the cause
of the experience, indicating the experience to be in a physical room
or a virtual environment. As Garau’s approach is in a conceptual
state it does not yet describe a full method and does not incorporate
related work on temporal variations of the presence state. Hence we
designed a drawing template that takes into account related work
and give recommendations for its application. In an iterative design
process, we optimized the template by taking into account related
work and user needs while drawing. To enable quantitative evalua-
tion and storage of the data in a database, we propose a descriptive
model (Figure 3) that we derive from related work and experience
from application. It replaces the users’ drawings by describing the
important points and phases that occur during a VR experience, e.g.,
the point describing the end of the transition into VR.R (e.g., [29]).
From the formal description we then derive concrete phases – e.g.,
transitioning into VR–, and further parameters describing temporal
effects and changes of the presence state.

In an application example with 30 participants naive to the
method, we demonstrate the feasibility and potential of the pro-
posed drawing method. In the progress of a 15 minutes long expe-
rience, they were exposed to five breaks in presence with varying
intensity. They did not know about the breaks in advance, nor
where they asked to identify breaks during the experience. The
resulting drawings are valid and can be used for the evaluation. We
found that our method is able to detect 100% of the breaks. The
detection rate will remain 100% with less participants. Further we
were able to find disturbances that we did not detect with tradi-
tional usability methods during the design process of the study.
Additionally there is strong evidence that the drawings reflect the
strength of a break.

With our work we contribute:

• A drawing template and method to collect user reports about

their presence experience over time.

• A model describing temporal variations of presence using
parameters to replace the drawings by compact numerical
data for storage, comparison and evaluation purposes.

• Insights in the application of the drawing method.

2 BACKGROUND
As the term presence is crucial to our work, we will introduce it
first. We continue by presenting literature that assesses and con-
ceptualizes temporal variations of the presence experience.

2

2.1 Presence
There are multiple definitions of the term presence (e.g. [17, 23, 27,
32]). We distinguish presence from the term immersion. Immersion
describes the measurable attributes of a system enabling to evoke
the feeling of being present. The sense of presence is a cognitive
construct that integrates incoming stimuli with user attributes,
leading to a variable state of presence. The term presence is often
referred to a feeling of ”being there“, the spatial presence [22] or
place illusion [24]. Other forms of presence can be experienced
like involvement [22] in a story or the general plausibility [24]/
realness [22] of an experience and social presence [6]. Our work is
not particularly linked to one of the definitions, as the usage of the
drawing method depends on the question one asks the users. The
supervising person of the proposed drawing method needs to con-
sider which definition s/he wants to follow and ask the participant
the according questions. In our user study, we follow the definition
of Schubert and colleagues [23]. They propose the three compo-
nents realness, involvement and spatial presence that influence the
presence feeling.

2.2 Assessing Temporal Variations of Presence
We focus on user self-reports. To date, self-reports offer the most
practical way to evaluate an HMD-based experience, which is re-
flected in a high proportion of the use of the presence evaluation
method [4, 7, 20]. Continuously asking the users about their pres-
ence state during the experience is the simplest form of user self-
reports. As this would foster a reorientation of a user’s attention
to the real world, Slater [26] introduced the concept of a virtual
presence counter.

The presence counter asks for the experience of breaks in pres-
ence when they appear, a binary measure, instead of reporting a
presence state on a scale. Slater argues that users are not aware
of the transition to VR and therefore cannot reflect the presence
status in which they find themselves. Users can very well explain
when they transition back into the real world, as a result from
a break in presence (BIP). Although the method is convenient, it
might overemphasize the report of weak BIPs. The breaks might
have been unrecognized when left out for further attention, and
the method is not feasible to determine the strength of a BIP [14].
Other work used mechanical sliders to give the user the oppor-
tunity to report the feeling of being present by manipulating the
position of a mechanical or virtual slider over time [3, 8]. The phys-
icality of the sliders constantly reminds the users about the real
world, although the authors tried to limit this effect, and therefore
negatively influence the feeling of being present [3, 8]. The users’
ability to interact in the VR is limited, as they continuously need
one hand to manipulate the slider. To avoid interruptions during
the experience, we aim for a post-experience measure, which adds
the possibility to evaluate temporal experiences in particular with
the goal to detect and rate BIPs.

Besides the collection of data, there are a few advances to con-
ceptualize the temporal variations of presence. Slater’s presence
counter gives a stochastic view on the appearance of breaks, but
does not define the temporal variation in more detail [26]. Liebold
and colleagues discuss the rationale of the strength of break in

presence, based on human cognition [14]. They provide parame-
ters to rate the degree of disruption created by a BIP for the HMD
user. Their detection method relies on a physiological measure and
does not give a formal description of temporal variations. Chung
and colleagues describe the temporal course of a break in presence
by the impact length and the recovery time from a BIP [2]. The
impact length described by them is the drop in the presence value
to the lowest value during the BIP. They do not define the param-
eters describing the points chosen for their measurements. They
do not report how they handle plateaus in the drawings, next to
or during the BIP. Garau and colleagues [5] introduced a drawing
method to gain insights on temporal variations during an HMD
based experience. They found that the reflection on the experience
of drawing supported the users’ memory of the course of temporal
fluctuations. The drawing template was not grounded in related
work and therefore did not give any guidance to the user when
drawing the experience. Therefore the drawings were very diverse
and did not show phases of transitioning into or out of VR. As the
drawings were thought to support the discussion, the presented
analysis sticks to a mere description of the drawings.

Kujala and colleagues [13], provide a method to assess user
experience over several month and was positivly confirmed in
other studies [21, 31]. In their retrospective method, the user has to
draw the degree of pleasantness of using, e.g., a smartphone, being
either positive or negative. They show that the method is beneficial
as it supports the users’ remembering of using a phone over several
month. The participants were asked to leave comments on the
curve, which revealed that in the long term experience especially
the hedonic quality of the system was remembered [13], which was
confirmed by Sahara and colleagues [21]. The proposed drawing
method does not fit the context of a VR experience that last only
several minutes or hours and is assessed immediately afterwards.
Therefore the results on the application of the drawing method
can not be transferred. An exemplary difference would be a better
remembrance of pragmatic qualities of the system, as the time
between experience and evaluation is much shorter. In addition,
the question about the presence experience is different from the
question of the pleasantness of a product. Different cognitive models
by the participants might need a different design of the drawing
template and influence the way users draw the line.

We conclude from the related work that there is a need and
several attempts to asses temporal effects of a presence experience.
Letting the participants draw their presence experience is a feasible
approach to the problem, however a feasible method is missing.
Further related work does not provide a complete model to de-
scribe the course of the temporal fluctuations. Hence we propose a
descriptive model that links existing work together and provides
a model of temporal fluctuations. We use the model primarily to
analyze the outcome of our drawing method, but it can also be
used as a communication model to discuss temporal effects of a VR
experience on as it summarizes all possible effects.

3 DRAWING THE PRESENCE EXPERIENCE
We want to provide a method that is feasible to detect and evaluater
the temporal course of presence in a VR experience. Therefore we

3

propose a post-experience drawing method that supports the HMD
user in expressing and reflecting the experience.

3.1 Design Process of the Drawing Template
To theoretical motivations we add practical findings from a collec-
tion of 60 presence drawings of four different user studies, unrelated
to the study presented in this work. We collected these drawings
to better understand and support participants usage of the draw-
ing template. The participants were presented variations of the
drawing template that were improved between sessions during
an iterative design process. Participants were asked to draw their
feeling of spatial allocation in the VR or the real world, the experi-
enced involvement in the experience and the general plausibility
of the experience. The collection of drawings was accompanied
by interviews with the participants about the course of drawing
and their understanding of the drawing template. The Template for
the drawings included event ticks for particular tasks in a linear
story-line along the time axis for about one third of the participants
(similar to Figure 6). The other two thirds were not provided event
ticks as the experience was exploratory without an order of events
(Figure 2).

Figure 2 shows the final version of the template. As a result
from the iterative design process, we added a dot that indicates
the starting point for the drawing. We introduce linear, gradual
transition from pure white to 25% grey from the time axis towards
the extremes (See Figure 2). By this, we give the user orientation
while drawing along the time axis and indicate the states in which
the other world is forgotten.

3.2 The Drawing Template
Previous work uses a drawing area with a horizontal time axis and
the presence state on top of it, without negative values [2, 5, 9].
Therefore, the drawing area is limited to the bottom, which indicates
to be fully present in the real world and open at the top.

Figure 2: The basic drawing template can be used to collect
user reports of temporal variations in the presence experi-
ence after having an HMD experience. The left icon indi-
cates the moment the user put on the HMD, the right icon
the moment the user took of the HMD. The basic template
should be accompanied by a definition of the term presence
(e.g., from the IPQ [22]), according to the preference of the
conducting person.

We propose to provide a scale as shown in Figure 2, with the
time axis indicating the middle between being fully present in the
virtual and being fully present in the real world. By introducing a
middle line, we provide a balanced diagram, which is equidistant to
the extremes of being fully present in the real or the virtual world.
Further, the middle line represents a common description by users
of the transition from the real to the virtual world or going over
to another world. The y-axis we chose to be 40mm in the positive
and -40cm in the negative direction. The time-axis was chosen to
be 200mm between the point Ptransition and the Pphysical exit (Figure
3). The end of the experience is indicated by a dashed line with a
symbol below it, indicating the time of HMD removal. In Section 4
we define and discuss the defining points in more detail.

As in the ex post facto confrontation suggested by Garau [5], the
remembrance of variations in presence can be supported by adding
event ticks to the timeline. Ideally, these event ticks have the same
order and relative distribution on the timeline as they appeared
during the VR experience. The event ticks might influence how
the users draw their lines as they feel the need to "fit" the lines
between the ticks. Hence, depending on the evaluation objective,
the examiners must decide whether a free drawing or the support
of remembrance through the presentation of event ticks is more
important to them. In an exploratory VR experience, it is more
difficult to provide markings of events along the timeline in advance.
In this case the supervising person can manually note done some
significant events during the experience and mark it on the timeline.
Another approach would be to take screenshots throughout the
experience and present them to the participant afterwards. In the
later case the ticks and according screenshots are ideally presented
on a digital drawing display as it can adapt automatically to the
previous experience.

The template can be used to collect general feedback for the
experience or get a detailed view on single events. In this work, we
use the method as a usability tool to detect breaks in the presence
experience.

First the evaluate marks descriptive points Pi (Figure 3, black
points). Then all points are measured and the value is stored in a
data base, e.g., a table. The position along the time-axis starts with
0mm at the line indicating putting on the HMD. The presence state
is measured from the middle line with positive values towards the
virtual world and negative value towards the real world, in our case
40 and -40mm.

As drawing areas might vary in their dimensions, we normalize
the values collected in the previous step. Normalization is done by
dividing the measured position for time by the distance between
the lines indicating taking on the HMD and taking of the HMD, in
our case 200mm. The presence measure is divided by the distance
between the middle line and the maximum positive distance, in our
case 40mm. From these values, the parameters ti and shi (Figure 3)
are calculated by subtracting the presence values of the according
Pbreak from Pdropping, which leads to a negative value.

For statistical analysis, we argue to treat the drawing as an ordi-
nal scale. In particular, the presence values is a continuous scale.
Therefore it is not guaranteed that the participants will use all val-
ues of the scale equidistant. For instance a change from 0.1 to 0.5
might express less impact on the users experience then the change

from 0.5 to 0.6. Further one participant might experience a value of
0.6 as very high presence and another participant as low presence.
The user study further down shades some light on these effects in
the usage of the drawing template.

4 THE DESCRIPTIVE MODEL
Theoretical and practical insights influence our proposal of a de-
scriptive model about temporal variations of a presence experience.
From the literature we derive the three main phases of (1)
transitioning into VR [5, 19, 26, 28–30], (2) the experience itself
[5, 25, 26] and (3) the exit from VR [11]. To visualize our descriptive
model, we use the template introduced in the previous section
(Figure 2).

In the following, we define starting and ending points Pi of the
phases, phases itself and events. Points Pi have absolute values
in the coordinate system. Parameters ti (time) and shi are relative
values between the points Pi. The parameters shi are called shift of
attention, as they describe the cognitive shift of attention [14].

4.1 Phases of a VR Experience
The phases of every VR experience are the transition into, the expe-
rience itself and the exit out of VR (Figure 3).

Transition into VR – The transition into the virtual world can be
divided into a physical and a virtual transition [10, 28]. During the
physical transition, the HMD user habituates with the hardware, by
taking on the HMD [10, 15, 28]. The virtual transition follows the
habituation, when the user can perceive a virtual picture [10, 28].
The starting point of the transition could, therefore, be defined as
the contact to the VR hardware or the first moment the user can
perceive a virtual picture. We argue that an HMD based experience
is visually dominated (e.g., [12]) and one of the critical elements
in a VR experience is to maintain a stable sensomotory loop [25],
mainly based on the users’ visual perception. Also, Slater describes
that the transition is not accompanied by a distinct perception of
the user [25] that could be used as a defined point in the course of
an experience. Taking on the HMD is a conscious action that marks
a distinct point in time, clearly identifiable for a supervising person
and a participant. Habituating with the hardware will influence the
transition phase [10, 15, 28], but does provoke an reaction in the
user’s state of presence. Hence, we argue that the actual transition
starts as soon as the HMD user puts on the HMD and is able to see
a picture of the virtual world. Point Ptransition marks the start of
transitioning (Figure 3). The end of the transitional phase is defined
by any point Pi, indicating a change in the course of presence. In
our exemplary Figure 3 a constant phase (green) ends the transition.
The VR Experience - The experience phase is the summary of all
temporal variations and phases of constant presence while acting
in VR, described in the following subsection in more detail. The
first event Pi defines the start of the VR experience, Pexperience,
after the transition phase. The end of the VR experience is the
beginning of the last phase of dropping presence, indicated by the
point Pmentalexit. We could not define a presence parameter for the
experience phase. The experienced time is described by texperience
(Figure 3, brown phase).

Exiting VR – The transition out of VR can be considered as the
final drop in presence [11]. The difference is that the VR experience

4

Figure 3: The drawing shows the phases experienced during a VR experience. For reasons of readability, the description shows
only one example for each point and parameter.Capital letters indicate Points which define the course of the experience. Lower
case letters encode the resulting parameters.

ends after the VR exit phase. We assume that the VR exit phase
follows a similar process as the transition phase but in reverse
order. We base the assumption of the reverse order on Liebold [14]
description of the transition out of VR as a conscious act, which is
in line with Slater description of a BIP [26]. The transition out of
VR is a sudden realization of the user that they just had focused on
a virtual environment [14]. Knibbe [11] collected user reports about
their experience of exiting VR and found the phases, first, a mental
transition – getting aware that the VR experience ends – and then
a physical transition – taking off the headset –. However, they also
found reports by users that describe the moment of taking off the
headset as the end of the experience. Therefore we assume both
types of drawings to be valid. As we argue that the exit might follow
a reverse order to the transition into, we add the moment of taking
off the headset and being able to perceive the real world visually
as a defined point to the model. The start of the VR exit phase
we define as the beginning of the last phase of dropping presence
which then is called Pmentalexit (Figure 3). The end of the mentalexit
is defined by the end of the user’s visual immersion. The start of
the Pphysicalexit is always situated on the crossing of the drawn
line and the auxiliary line. At Pphysicalexit the user might not be
fully present in the real world yet. By this, we take into account
reports of possible aftereffects like the need for reorientation [11].
VR exit phase ends at the point Preturn, describing the moment when
participants report being fully present in the real world, again.

4.2 Events in the Progress of a VR Experience
The variation of experienced presence in a VR experience is a series
of phases with constant and changing presence.

5

Constant Phase – Constant phases we define as phases without
a change in the reported presence level. In other words, the line
representing the presence state over time has a slope close to zero.
We define the start of the phase of constant presence as the first
point on the curve that does not show a change in presence towards
the one before it. The end of a phase of constant presence we define
as the last point on the curve before the slope changes from 0.

Raising Phase – The start of a phase of raising presence we define
as the first point on the curve that does not show a slope. The end
of the phase of constant presence can be any event Pi.

Dropping Phase – The start of a phase of dropping presence we
define as the first point on the curve that shows a negative slope.
The end of the phase of constant presence can be any event Pi.

4.3 Parameters
Parameters are relative measures between two relevant points Pi
and are represented in Figure 3 by lower case letters. The proposed
concept includes known parameters, reveals new parameters and
offers the opportunity to derive new measure for the presence
experience, e.g., ratios.

People need different lengths of time to feel present in the virtual
environment, which is represented by ttransition. Breaks in Presence
(BIPs) [26] are represented by the Point Pbreak and the parameter
shbreak. Chung [2] defined a parameter similar to shbreak as the
intensity of an attention shift.

The parameter tdropping helps to differentiate between sudden
BIPs, e.g., a loud noise from the real world, or longer lasting effects,
e.g., a tedious experience that makes the users attention drift slowly
back to the real world over time [5, 14] (compare exemplary Figure

timeVirtualWorldRealWorldttransitionshtransitiontdroppingshbreakPdroppingPexperiencetraisingPbreaktconstanttphysicaltmentalshphysicalexitshexitshconstantshraisingPconstantPraisingtexitshmentalexitPmentalexitPphysicalexitPreturnPtransitionfullyfullysomewhatTransitionExitVRExperiencesomewhatPhaseofConstantPresencePhaseofDroppingPresencePhaseofRaisingPresenceshi=shiftofattentionti=experiencedtimePi=relevantpoint3 first and second phase of dropping presence). Further, the rela-
tion between shbreak and a following traising gives insights into the
intensity of the break as recovery time was shown to be slightly
correlated with the intensity of the break [3]. We expect, according
to Slater [26], that tdropping in general will be shorter then traising.
ttransition is expected to be longer than texit.

For the phase of exiting VR we define the three temporal pa-
rameters, total time texit, mental transition tmental and tphysical, as
argued in the subsection Exiting VR above.

5 EXPLORATION OF THE METHOD
In the previous sections we introduced a method to collect and store
user reports about temporal fluctuations in the presence experience
during an HMD session. As we propose, the method can be used
as a method to detect breaks in presence (BIP) in an experience,
a tool evaluate temporal fluctuations in more detail or a tool to
compare experiences against each other. In this work, we focus on
showcasing the feasibility of the method and the usage as a BIP
detector. Further, this exploratory study gives insights in the usage
of the drawing template and the possibilities to store and evaluate
data. We conducted a controlled lab experiment to gain insights in
the application of the drawing method and the descriptive model.
The experience was designed in such a way that, using classical
methods, it no longer showed any breaks in presence. We then
introduced different kinds of BIP with varying strength. The goal
of the exploration is (1) to gain insights into the repeatably of the
drawing method between users and (2) the quality of detecting and
evaluating BIPs.

5.1 Measures
To gather insights in the (1) repeatably we argue that the drawings
need to follow a certain progress. As the drawings will have strong
interpersonal variations we will look for particular events that are
known from related work (see Section 4 for more detail). Hence we
will analyze the drawings on key characteristics, we defined in the
descriptive model (Figure 3). The characteristics we expect a user
to draw are:

a: Lines will start at the point Ptransition.
b: Point Preturn exists.
c: Break in presence are dropping lines (shbreak).
d: The experience phase will cover most of the time axis.
e: An attention shift towards the virtual world takes a longer

time span then towards the real world.

If the majority of participants follows this structure, our method

is feasible of analyzing VR experiences.

To gain insights on the possibilities of the method as a BIP detec-
tor (2) we will count the detected breaks. Furthermore, we analyze
possible order effects, e.g. how the early occurrence of a BIP affects
the possibility to get reported. Finally, we gain insights in the pos-
sibility to reflect the strength of a BIP. Additionally, we collected
qualitative feedback to gain better insights into the understanding
and usage of the drawing method by the participants.

5.2 Task
The proposed drawing method is thought to detect BIPs. We de-
signed a linear game consisting of six subtasks to be solved by

Figure 4: Perspective of the user when entering the room.

the user that did not include any BIPs. The dimensions of the vir-
tual room were 3.5x2.5meters and fitted into the lab space with
4.0x3.0meters (Figure 4). In three iterative design steps with a total
of 14 participants and four experts, we removed all unintended BIPs.
We used the virtual experience test [1] and the igroup presence
questionnaire (IPQ) [22] during the design process. In addition,
we conducted semi-structured interviews asking the participants
for the positive and negative aspects of the experience as well as
reminders of the real world and flaws in the design of the virtual
world. In a final evaluation with eight novice participants the ex-
perience was rated to have a high presence on the IPQ (G1 : 4.6;
SP : 5.1; I NV : 4.8; REAL : 3.1) and no events influencing the
experience were reported.

During the experience, the participants fulfilled six tasks. The
first was a paper-tossing, in which they threw paper balls in a
garbage bin. The second was to find two pictures of cats in the
room and hang it on the corresponding spot on the wall. In the
third participants had to find and tidy up pens. In the fourth, the goal
was to find books and put them in the right order into a bookshelf
to complete the word reality. In the fifth, they had to solve a riddle
which solution was to use a switch on the wall. The sixth task was
also a riddle which solution was to turn on the music and make it
play Beethoven.

5.3 Stimuli – Breaks in Presence
As stimuli we designed BIPs. We varied the intensity, which is a
combination of violations of the users mental model about the VR
and the strength of the distracting stimulus, which is described in
detail by Liebold [14]. The duration was chosen to be between 2 and
4 seconds, according to related work [2, 5]. The breaks targeted spa-
tial presence, realness, and involvement as defined by Schubert [22]
and affected all senses.

We introduced five BIPs that are ordered in the following list

from the strongest to the weakest:

(1) BIP Cable Malfunction (BIPCM) A four second long blue
screen error is shown in the HMD and the examiner asks the
participants verbally not to move, followed by touching and
moving the cable attached to the HMD to "solve" the issue.
(2) BIP Whitescreen (BIPWHITESCREEN) A four-second long
white screen with a beeping audio track was shown similar
to Garau [5].

6

(3) BIP Teleport (BIPTELEPORT) The users are teleported for
four seconds to an empty virtual room, having the same
dimension as the main room, but showing pictures of the
physical room surrounding them on the wall.

(4) BIP Failed Interaction (BIPFAIL) Users’ had to put two framed
pictures of a cat on the wall by holding it next to a marking
on the wall and releasing the grasp. The second picture was
made to stick after the seventh attempt to put the picture on
the wall. Until the seventh attempt, the picture will fall, or
the user might catch it in the air.

(5) BIP Unrelated Controller Vibrations (BIPVIBRATION) The
right controller vibrated for four seconds when it was not
used for any purpose.

The breaks were triggered between 5 and 10 seconds after a task
was solved. The BIPs appearance was randomized in three groups.
The concept was to have a weak and strong break at the beginning
and the end in the sequence of BIPs, in one condition each. Further
the strong breaks were clearly separated once and one time close
together. The resulting randomization orders are: A (2-4-5-3-1), B
(5-4-2-1-3) and C (1-4-3-5-2).

5.4 Apparatus
The setup consisted of an HTC Vive HMD with according con-
trollers1 , the TP-Cast system wireless system for the HTC Vive 2.
The participant used Bose QC25 Noise Cancelling Headsets. The
virtual experience was generated and run at 90 frames per second
using Unity 5.6 on a desktop PC with NVIDIA GTX 1080 graphics
card and an Intel I7 processor. The presented virtual scene was
optimized to evoke presence according to the five parameters in-
troduced by Schubert [23]. Dramatic Involvement was realized by
giving the user the overall task to clean up the office, as the boss will
arrive soon. Quality of Immersion was addressed by optimizing the
visual appearance of the VR scene regarding 3D models, texturing
and lighting. In addition, spatialized sound was used with three
ambient sound sources and twenty audio sources. The controllers
vibrated when an object was touched. To support Exploration of VE,
all objects, but heavy furniture was movable or reactive to actions
(e.g., spinning a globe on the desk, Figure 4) and behave physically
to support Predictability. Interface Awareness was reduced by en-
abling basic interactions with just one button all the time – the
users had virtual hands that supported a grasping animation –, and
a wireless HMD.

5.5 Participants
30 participants (11 females, 19 males, mean age= 24) that did not
take part in the iterative design process were invited by mailing
lists, paper displays, social media, and personal social network. The
participants had backgrounds from diverse fields. Twelve partic-
ipants had never used a VR headset before, the rest reported to
have used HMDs less than one time a year. None of the participants
had used the drawing template before. Participants were rewarded
study credits or 10 euro according to their choice.

1https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTC_Vive
2https://www.tpcastvr.com

7

Figure 5: All drawings collected in the exploratory study.
Annotations removed for better readability. The figure illus-
trates the need for our descriptive model based on numerical
values and logical values that enable a comparison indepen-
dent of the drawings. Colours represent the randomization
groups (дreen = A, red = B, blue = C)

5.6 Procedure
Participants were welcomed, and the purpose of the study was
explained as being a user experience study about interaction in VR.
The whole study took about 60 minutes, whereby approximately 15
minutes were spent in VR. The participants were informed about
anonymous storage and evaluation of their movement data given
by the HTC Vive tracking system, recording of screen capture and
sound in the room and asked to fill out a consent form. The usage
of the HMD, noise canceling headset and controllers was explained
to and tested by the participant in the standard grey Steam VR
environment. As soon as the participants felt comfortable in using
the system, they took off the HMD again, were guided to a starting
position marked on the floor. The participants were instructed that
the examiner will not help them during the experience. They were
informed that the session will end after the last task and a prompt
will show up, indicating the end of the experience. No information
about possible BIPs was given. They started the experience on their
own by taking on the HMD. The first thing the participants saw,
was a transitional room. The transitional room had the same size
and layout as the final room, but only a few objects were presented
on a desk in front of the user. The objects were used to again train
the interaction in VR. The participants were guided by instructions,
which were presented textually on a monitor on the desk, during
the whole experience. After completing the tutorial, users were
teleported into the main room. By pressing a virtual button they
activated the teleport themselves.

After the experience, the participants conducted the drawing task
as described in Section 3. When finished, the examiner conducted
an interview about the graphs to record details about the general
course of presence and to assign the appropriate drawn BIPs to
the actual ones. Finally, the participants were asked to fill out the
IPQ [22] and demographic information about age, sex and previous
experience with HMDs.

5.7 Results
The results section is thought to answer our research questions.
Additionally we showcase how to use and analyze the data by the

give a justification. Exiting VR was influenced for one participant
of Randomization C as the BIPWHITESCREEN happened as the
last break before the end of the experience. It was removed in
Figure 6 (right picture) as no exit phase was drawn according to
our definition. The excluded cases are still visible in the overview
of drawings (Figure 3).

Further, Figure 6 is an example for the application of the analysis
(Figure 1). As we are able to store the data in a database, we can
calculate parameters, for instance on the experience of time. In
average participants used 21% (SD = 10%) of the timeline to report
the transition into VR (ttransition). Further they used 8% (SD = 5%)
to express the transition out of VR (texit). As a result the experience
phase took 71% of the available space. Ptransition was always situated
at the defined position, as it was an instruction. Participants finished
their drawings in average at Preturn 99.6% (SD = 1%) of the timeline,
and at −93% (SD = 30) of the negative presence axis.

In no cases, participants reported separating their exit experi-
ence in the mental and physical exit. 25 of the drawings show an
drop which accelerates continuously over time and shows a uni-
formly accelerated slope of the curve between the points Pmentalexit
and Preturn. Five participants drew their experience as a sudden
breakpoint at which Pmentalexit is at the same value on the timeline
as Preturn.

5.7.2 Breaks in Presence. Detection Frequency – The detection fre-
quency is the percentage of participants reporting a BIP. We report
the detection frequencies in Table 1. Strong BIPs – Cable Malfunc-
tion, White Screen – are more likely to be reported than weak BIPs,
no matter if they appear early or late during the experience. BIPFAIL
stands out from this with a high detection rate in two randomization
groups. Although, we defined it as a weak BIP and the disturbance
resulting from it was perceived by the participants as such during
the experiment (Figure 7), the detection rate was similar to the
stronger BIPs. An individual participant was able to identify 2.8
BIPs (SD = 0.9) on average and across all randomization groups.
Order effects – The order might show an effect in our study, but
the results are not clear as the number of detections was low for
some BIPs, which prevents further statistics. The two strongest
breaks are 10% and 40% more likely to be reported when in the
last position of the BIPs compared to being the first. However the
weaker breaks do not show such an effect. The BIP failed interaction,
which is in the same position of the sequence of BIPs in all random-
izations, shows a variation in the detection rate between 50% to 90%.
The unrelated vibration of the controller was not reported, when in
the first position of the randomization – Position 1, Randomization
B –.

Intensity – Figure 7 shows Box-Plots for the presence value of
Pbreak considering all randomization groups as one. The intensity
for Pbreak in the single groups can be found in Table 1 but is not
used for further discussion, as the number of participants is to small
to recognize the trend. A trend in the order of the BIPs’ strength
is visible that fits the prediction we derived from related work
in Section 5.3. The weaker breaks are drawn with a tendency of
their median towards the virtual world. In particular, the strongest
BIP BIPCM is reported to be close to the real world, the weakest
BIP BIPVIBRATION. We did not find a tendency for the parameter
shbreak in our study.

Figure 6: Transition into VR is reported to be longer than the
transition out of VR, which is in line with the related work.
Black dots show the transition points Pexperience (left) and
Pmentalexit (right). (Randomization groups: дreen = A, red =
B, blue = C)

help of the method and the descriptive model we proposed. To get
a better understanding for the method we will present the data in
different levels of detail. We propose analyses that are useful to
answer our research question, but future researchers are open to
work with their data in their own way.

Figure 5 shows the drawing collected during the exploratory
study. It showcases the diversity in user drawings. Since all the
randomization groups are shown in the figure, it represents the
possible result of a real application where the occurrence of BIPs
is unpredictable. To obtain data that can be analyzed, we use our
proposed method and the descriptive numerical model. Exemplary
Figure 6 shows the marking of the points indicating the end of
transitioning into and the begin of exiting VR. The values of these
points are stored in the database together with the annotations
describing them. We were able to store all points with the help of
the proposed descriptive model and stored them the database. One
Preturn could not be described by our model as the end of the line
did not show a position that is defined as being fully present in the
real world and therefore was excluded.

Tabel 1 presents the outcome of a statistical evaluation of the
drawings based on the database for the single randomization groups.
It shows the evaluation of points (Pbreak) as well es derived param-
eters (shbreak). Figure 7 is en example for the visualization of the
numerical data. It shows Box-Plots for the introduced BIPs, com-
bining the results of all randomization groups.

5.7.1 The Transitional Phases. Figure 6 shows the drawn transition
and exit phases, without the experience in between. Six participants
experienced a disturbance during transition, not caused by the BIPs
we introduced intentionally. We exclude them in Figure 6 (left
picture). The unintended disturbances are caused by the HMD not
fitting and readjustments by the participants. One very shallow
transition drawing was caused by boredom during the instructional
part, leading to a low feeling of involvement. The last one did not

8

TransitionExitVRExperienceA

Randomization
B

C

POS

Detect.
(%)

shbr eak

Pbr eak

POS

Detect.
(%)

shbr eak

PBr eak

POS

Detect.
(%)

shbr eak

PBr eak

5

1

4

2

3

100

-0.33

-0.72

60

30

70

20

-0.38

-0.45

-0.2

-0.1

-0.4

-0.15

-0.23

0.19

4

3

5

2

1

90

70

50

90

0

-0.28

-0.33

-0.25

-0.18

-0.15

-

-0.03

0.08

0.23

-

1

5

3

2

4

70

70

40

50

20

-0.28

-0.34

-0.28

-0.3

-0.34

-0.22

-0.29

-0.11

-0.2

0.09

Breaks in

Presence
Cable
Malfunction
White
Screen
Teleport
Failed
Interaction
Vibration

Table 1: The results for detection rate and reported intensity of the BIP in the three randomizations. The strongest – Cable
Malfunction – is in the top row, the weakest – controller vibration – in the bottom row. POS describes the appearance in each
visualization group, whereas 1 is first place and 5 is the last place. The values shbreak Pbreak (see Section 4 and Figure 3 for
more details) report the averages.

Time Parameters – At this point we want to stress that the timely
order is not of particular interest for the detection of BIPs and in
our study. However, it gives an estimate on how precise users are
able to report the appearance of a BIP, if the method is used in a
real world application. We were interested in the ability to report
appearance of BIPs relative to events in the experience. We counted
the correct positioning of Pdropping or the following Pi. BIPs were
counted as positioned correctly if one of the points was situated
within 5mm (2.5%) before and 25mm (12.5%) after the according task
tick. We found that participants had 97 of the 118 detected breaks
positioned correctly. As a result in 18% of the cases the relation
between the event in VR and the drawing would not be clear.

We further compared the time it takes that a BIP comes into
full effect, tdropping, to the time participants need to recover from
it, traising. We calculated the average of each and then divided the
result of tdropping by traising. The resulting ratio is 0.8, which means
that a dropping phases is drawn 20% shorter than a raising phase.

5.8 Other Anecdotal Findings
When drawing the curves, many users started to reflect on the
drawings, stimulated by the drawn line. Some recognized, after
drawing a second BIP, that previous one was stronger. Therefore
they went back to the first and changed the curve to fit relative to
the second. We found similar behavior for ordering the appearance
BIPs and their relative position to the event ticks on the timeline.

6 DISCUSSION
The method enables users to reflect temporal variations – The draw-
ings fulfill our five prerequisites (Section 5.1) to report temporal
variations during a presence experience. In particular we could
show that all participants started at Ptransition (prerequisite a) and
end with Preturn (prerequisite b). Only one event was drawn that did
not fit into the model. In the particular case, presence was reported
as raising again after the last dropping phase (Figure 3, randomiza-
tion C). All participants understood that a BIP is an attention shift
towards the real world and drew it as a dropping line (prerequisite

Figure 7: Absolute BIP intensity average for all randomiza-
tion. The strength of the breaks is reported according to
our assumptions, which indicates that drawings give an es-
timate for the intensity of a break.

c). Most of the template (71%) was used to express the temporal
variation during the main experience phase (prerequisite d). Ac-
cording to the related work, we showed that participants report
an attention shift towards the real world to happen faster than
towards the virtual world (prerequisite e). In particular ttransition
was 38% longer than texit and to recover from a break (traising) took
in average 20% longer than the break (tdropping).

In summary, we were able to show that our method is superior
to established methods, e.g., by using Garau’s approach [5], when
it comes to understanding temporal variations in the presence
experience. The expression was not possible in such possible before.
We want to stress at this point, that the participants had minor
experience in HMD usage and were not given any information
about expectations on the drawings progress. The strong coherence
between the theoretical model we provide in section 5.1 and the

9

VirtualWorldRealWorldfullyfullysomewhatsomewhatCableMalfunctionWhiteScreenTeleportFailedInteractionVibrationdrawings, reflecting the users actual mental model, underlines the
feasibility of our method.

Drawing Method is a tool to detect BIPs – The following para-
graphs target research question two that we raised in Section 5.
The groups of ten Participants were able to detect all BIPs, but the
weakest BIP when it occurred at the beginning of the experience
(Table 1). The two strongest breaks base on visual disturbances and
are detected by at least 60% of the participants. We find it interesting
that the failed interaction was reported by 50% to 90% of the users.
A failed interaction is not a technical failure disturbing the percep-
tion of the virtual world. It is a logical failure of the experience,
disturbing the plausibility illusion [25] for the HMD user.

Furthermore, we found BIPs that we did not find during the
design phase with established methods. In particular, in the transi-
tion phases we identified 7 disturbances, with accompanying user
reports on the effects on the further course of experience. These
results underline the possibilities offered by our method compared
to established methods. Additionally, it demonstrates the advan-
tage of being able to analyze the temporal cause of the presence
experience. The disturbance in the beginning affected the user over
a long period in time, which would have been impossible to express
with a questionnaire and more complex to explain in an interview.
Similar to other post-experience methods the drawing method
suffers from inaccurate recall by the participants [5]. However, in
each randomization group, with 10 participants each, almost all
breaks were reported (Table 1) by at least 20%. As a result, we
argue that 10 participants are enough to discover all BIP in a VR
experience with a maximum duration of 15 minutes. There might
be a chance to need even fewer participants, but with the risk of
not finding a weak disturbance that occurs early in an experience.
We want to highlight at this point, that using 10 or less people to
find errors in a system is similar to established recommendations
from usability testing of other systems [18]. Longer experiences
might demand more participants, to counteract inaccurate recall of
weak breaks at the beginning of the experience.

In summary, our method is able to detect a variety of BIPs be-
longing to all aspects of the presence experience. Finding BIPs that
we have not consciously implemented in the experience shows the
advantage of our method over established methods.

Drawings indicate the intensity of a BIP – The users reported the
disturbance introduced by the BIPs (Figure 7). The points Pbreaks
represent BIPs the best, which is in line we Chung’s suggestion
[3]. We were speculating that the parameter shbreak might report
the relative evaluation by the participants. We could not find a
clear trend for shbreak, as it might depend on things that precede or
follow. However, future research might have a closer look on the
parameter shbreak, as it has the potential to analyze accumulative
effects of events on the overall presence experience.

In contrast to the overall intensity for PBreak (Figure 7), the single
randomization groups do not show a clear trend for the intensity
of a break (Table 1). One reason might be that the lower number
of participants is not enough to detect a difference. Another be
that the randomization levels out effects that are introduced by the
order the breaks had in our study.

From this, we conclude that our drawing template has good
potential to evaluate the intensity of a BIP. However, the number
of participants needed to evaluate the strength of a break needs to

be much higher then for the detection of the breaks. It needs to be
mentioned that we decided not to remove outliers. We decided to
leave all data in the database, as the users decided to draw the line
according to their believe on how to use the model. Therefore they
did nothing wrong that justifies an exclusion. It will need further
studies to gain a deeper understanding of why people chose to draw
their line very differently to others to decide for outliers.

Drawing the transitional phases has potential – We could show
that people report the experience of a transition phase in average
around three times longer than the exit phase (Figure 6). This is
according to the assumption that people do harder to detect the
change of the presence state towards the VR but the break shifting
their attention towards the real world [14, 26].

We could not find a separation of the mental and physical exit of
VR [11]. Novice participants might be overwhelmed by the things
happening in the short time during the exit. 83% of the participant
drew the exit as a continuous curve that might indicate a sepa-
ration of these phases. The rest drew a sudden break (Figure 6).
However the continuous curves might be a result of a more natural
or comfortable drawing behavior and not related to the experienced
changes. Informing the user about possible effects during the exit
phase might support a more differentiated report.

As our study was not designed to evaluate the transitional phases,
certain parameters might need clarification in future studies. For
example, we defined the parameter ttransition to be the time between
Ptransition and the next prominent point, as it is an ongoing process.
However, the time ttransition it actually needs to develop a sufficient
presence experience might be indicated by the point that crosses
the middle line between real world and virtual world.

We can not answer these questions here, as they are not the
main goal of hour study. However, in conjunction with the findings
discussed above about detailed user reports on their transitional
phases, we see great potential to better understand the transitional
phases of a VR experience when using our method.

6.1 Limitations
The report of a longer transition time into VR then to exit VR,
is in line with the related work. However, there might be a bias
introduced by the drawing template. In the template the ticks for
the tasks – e.g., putting a picture on the wall – are distributed along
the time axis according to their appearance relative to events in the
experience. The first task in the experience – paper toss – was much
later in time, then it took between the last task – Riddle Beethoven
– and the end of the experience. Therefore, there was much more
space to draw the transition into than the exit of VR, which might
lead to the current result (Figure 6).

We do not cover drawings that show a step raising at the begin-
ning and then change to a more shallow curve when transitioning
into VR. We decided to stick to our decision and used the first
point of constant presence or dropping presence for the parameters
ttransition and shtransition. However, people might express that they
felt present in the virtual world very fast, but became more and
more confident over time, as known from other studies [16].

The experience in this study took about 15 minutes. Longer ex-
perience might amplify possible inaccurate recall of the experience.

10

An analysis of longer experiences should include more than 10
participants.

7 FUTURE WORK
The current work aimed on creating the drawing method and the
proposal of a descriptive model to describe the outcome in an objec-
tive way. Exemplary we chose the use case to explore the method
was the BIP detection. Motivated by the demonstrated the feasibil-
ity, we argue to explore other forms of using the template, e.g., to
compare experiences to each other. For instance, specific questions,
like the comparison of transitional environments, we suggest to
present the same drawing template after each condition. The users
then can reflect on the drawn line of the previous condition and ex-
press the latest experience by drawing the line relative to the other.
In this way, we expect more detailed insights into the temporal
course of a presence experience, e.g., influenced by system design
or story telling. We found a clear tendency that the method is used
to express the strength of a BIP. Future work, therefore, might work
on the elaborate the method and test its validity and reliability to
transform it into a measurement tool, as questioannaires are today.

8 CONCLUSION
In contrast to the established questionnaires – main measurement
method in more than 90% of studies –, the usage of the drawing
method gives insights into temporal effects. Methods enabling the
assessment of temporal variations, like physiological and behavioral
measures, are hardly not used.

The method we provide enables users to express variations in
their presence experience over time by drawing. To enable the
evaluation of the drawings, we propose a descriptive numerical
model based on related works in presence research. Our descriptive
model replaces the drawings by compact numerical data for storage,
comparison and evaluation purposes.

The drawing method is applied after an experience and allows
the participant to draw a line that indicates the state of presence in
VR over time by changing the amplitude of the line during drawing.
In an exploratory user study, we demonstrate the feasibility of the
method. We show the higher accuracy in understanding temporal
variations of the presence experience compared to existing methods.
In particular, we could show that our method is feasible for detect-
ing 100% of breaks in the presence experience (BIP) requiring only
10 participants. Participants self reflection on their experience was
stimulated by the drawing, resulting in a very detailed expression
of their presence experience. Additionally, participants were able
to express the influence of a BIP on the following cause of the expe-
rience by their line drawing. In addition, we have good indications
that, by collecting data from more participants, the method can
be used to evaluate the strength of a single break in attendance.
The proposed drawing method in combination with the descriptive
model closes the gap between the existing cumbersome techniques
and the questionnaires that do not capture temporal variances.

REFERENCES
[1] Dustin B. Chertoff, Brian Goldiez, and Joseph J. LaViola. 2010. Virtual Experience
Test: A Virtual Environment Evaluation Questionnaire. In Proceedings of the 2010
IEEE Virtual Reality Conference (VR ’10). IEEE Computer Society, Washington,
DC, USA, 103–110. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2010.5444804

11

[2] Jaeyong Chung and Henry Gardner. 2009. Measuring Temporal Variation in
Presence During Game Playing. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry (VRCAI ’09). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 163–168. https://doi.org/10.1145/1670252.1670287

[3] Jaeyong Chung and Henry Gardner. 2012. Temporal Presence Variation in Im-
mersive Computer Games. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction
28 (08 2012), 511–529. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2011.627298

[4] James Cummings and Jeremy Bailenson. 2015. How Immersive Is Enough? A
Meta–Analysis of the Effect of Immersive Technology on User Presence. Media
Psychology 19, 2 (2015), 272–309. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2015.1015740
[5] Maia Garau, Doron Friedman, Hila Ritter Widenfeld, Angus Antley, Andrea
Brogni, and Mel Slater. 2008. Temporal and Spatial Variations in Presence:
Qualitative Analysis of Interviews from an Experiment on Breaks in Presence.
Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 17, 3 (2008), 293–309. https://doi.org/10.1162/
pres.17.3.293

[6] Carrie Heeter. 1992. Being There: The Subjective Experience of Presence. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1, 2 (1992), 262–271. https://doi.org/10.
1162/pres.1992.1.2.262 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1992.1.2.262

[7] Dimitri Hein and Christian Mai. 2018. The Usage of Presence Measurements
in Research: A Review. In Proceedings of the International Society for Presence
Research Annual Conference (Presence). The International Society for Presence
Research.

[8] Wijnand Ijsselsteijn and Huib. Ridder, de. 2000. Measuring temporal variations in
presence. In Papers from the workshop on presence in shared virtual environments,
Ipswich, UK, June 10-11 1998.

[9] Wijnand IJsselsteijn, Huib Ridder, de, Jonathan Freeman, and Steve Avons. 2000.
Presence : concept, determinants and measurement. In Human Vision and Elec-
tronic Imaging V, January 24-27, 2000, San Jose, USA (Proceedings of SPIE - The
International Society for Optical Engineering), B.E. Rogowitz and T.N. Pappas
(Eds.). SPIE, United States, 520–529.

[10] Sungchul Jung, Pamela J. Wisniewski, and Charles E. Hughes. 2018. In Limbo:
The Effect of Gradual Visual Transition Between Real and Virtual on Virtual
Body Ownership Illusion and Presence. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality
and 3D User Interfaces, VR 2018, Tuebingen/Reutlingen, Germany, 18-22 March
2018. 267–272. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2018.8447562

[11] Jarrod Knibbe, Jonas Schjerlund, Mathias Petraeus, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2018.
The Dream is Collapsing: The Experience of Exiting VR. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 483, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174057
[12] Luv Kohli. 2013. Redirected Touching. Ph.D. Dissertation. Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Advisor(s) Brooks,Jr., Frederick P. AAI3562754.

[13] Sari Kujala, Virpi Roto, Kaisa Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, Evangelos Karapanos,
and Arto Sinnelä. 2011. UX Curve: A Method for Evaluating Long-term User
Experience. Interact. Comput. 23, 5 (Sept. 2011), 473–483. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.intcom.2011.06.005

[14] Benny Liebold, Michael Brill, Daniel Pietschmann, Frank Schwab, and Peter Ohler.
2017. Continuous Measurement of Breaks in Presence: Psychophysiology and
Orienting Responses. Media Psychology 20, 3 (2017), 477–501. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15213269.2016.1206829 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2016.1206829
[15] Christian Mai and Mohamed Khamis. 2018. Public HMDs: Modeling and Under-
standing User Behavior around Public Head-Mounted Displays. In Proceedings of
the 7th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays (PerDis ’18). ACM,
New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3205873.3205879

[16] Christian Mai, Tim Wiltzius, Florian Alt, and Heinrich Hußmann. 2018. Feeling
Alone in Public. Investigating the Influence of Spatial Layout on Users’ VR
Experience. In Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction (NordiCHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3240167.3240200

[17] Marvin Minsky. 1980. Telepresence. Omni 2, 9 (1980), 45–52.
[18] Jakob Nielsen and Thomas K. Landauer. 1993. A Mathematical Model of the
Finding of Usability Problems. In Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’93). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 206–213. https://doi.org/10.1145/169059.169166

[19] Sebastian Oberdörfer, Martin Fischbach, and Marc Erich Latoschik. 2018. Effects
of VE Transition Techniques on Presence, Illusion of Virtual Body Ownership,
Efficiency, and Naturalness. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Spatial User
Interaction, SUI 2018, Berlin, Germany, October 13-14, 2018. 89–99. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3267782.3267787

[20] Christine Rosakranse and Soo Youn Oh. 2014. Measuring Presence: The Use
Trends of Five Canonical Presence Questionaires from 1998–2012. In In Proceed-
ings of the 15th International Workshop on Presence (ISPRâĂŹ14).

[21] Farrukh Sahar, Jari Varsaluoma, and Sari Kujala. 2014. Comparing the Effective-
ness of Electronic Diary and UX Curve Methods in Multi-component Product
Study. In Proceedings of the 18th International Academic MindTrek Conference:
Media Business, Management, Content & Services (AcademicMindTrek ’14). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 93–100. https://doi.org/10.1145/2676467.2676500

[22] Thomas Schubert. 2003. The sense of presence in virtual environments: A
three-component scale measuring spatial presence, involvement, and realness.
Zeitschrift für Medienpsychologie 15, 2 (2003), 69–71. https://doi.org/10.1026/
/1617-6383.15.2.69

[24] Mel Slater. 2009.

[23] Thomas Schubert, Frank Friedmann, and Holger Regenbrecht. 2001. The Experi-
ence of Presence: Factor Analytic Insights. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Envi-
ronments 10, 3 (June 2001), 266–281. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474601300343603
Place illusion and plausibility can lead to real-
in immersive virtual environments.
Philosophical
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0138

istic behaviour
Transactions of
364,
1535
arXiv:http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/364/1535/3549.full.pdf

3549–3557.

(2009),

[25] Mel Slater. 2009.

Place illusion and plausibility can lead to real-
in immersive virtual environments.
Philosophical
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0138

istic behaviour
Transactions of
364,
1535
arXiv:http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/364/1535/3549.full.pdf
[26] Mel Slater and Anthony Steed. 2000. A Virtual Presence Counter. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 9, 5 (Oct. 2000), 413–434. https://doi.org/
10.1162/105474600566925

3549–3557.

(2009),

[27] Mel Slater and Sylvia Wilbur. 1997. A Framework for Immersive Virtual Envi-
ronments (FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environments.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 6 (1997), 603–616. https:
//doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603
[28] Daniel Sproll, Jacob Freiberg, Timofey Grechkin, and Bernhard Riecke. 2013.
Poster: Paving the way into virtual reality - A transition in five stages. In IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interface 2013 - Proceedings (SUI ’13). 175–176.

[29] Frank Steinicke, Gerd Bruder, Klaus Hinrichs, Anthony Steed, and Alexander
Gerlach. 2009. Does a Gradual Transition to the Virtual World increase Presence?.
In 2009 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference. 203–210. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.
2009.4811024

[30] Dimitar Valkov and Steffen Flagge. 2017. Smooth Immersion: The Benefits
of Making the Transition to Virtual Environments a Continuous Process. In
Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Spatial User Interaction (SUI ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 12–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3131277.3132183

[31] Jari Varsaluoma and Farrukh Sahar. 2014. Measuring Retrospective User Experi-
ence of Non-powered Hand Tools: An Exploratory Remote Study with UX Curve.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Academic MindTrek Conference: Media
Business, Management, Content & Services (AcademicMindTrek ’14). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 40–47. https://doi.org/10.1145/2676467.2676485

[32] Bob G. Witmer and Michael J. Singer. 1998. Measuring Presence in Virtual
Environments: A Presence Questionnaire. Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 7, 3
(June 1998), 225–240. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474698565686

12

