CO-DESIGNING IN SOCIAL VR

Process awareness and suitable representations to empower user participation

TOMÁS DORTA1, STÉPHANE SAFIN2, SANA BOUDHRAÂ3 and
EMMANUEL BEAUDRY MARCHAND4
1,3,4Design Research Laboratory Hybridlab, University of Montreal
1,3,4{tomas.dorta|sana.boudhraa|
emmanuel.beaudry.marchand}@umontreal.ca
2Télécom ParisTech i3-CNRS
2stephane.safin@telecom-paristech.fr

Abstract. To allow non-designers‘ involvement in design projects
new methods are needed. Co-design gives the same opportunity to
all the multidisciplinary participants to co-create ideas simultaneously.
Nevertheless, current co-design processes involving such users tend
to limit their contribution to the proposal of basic design ideas only
through brainstorming. The co-design approach needs to be enhanced
by a properly suited representational ecosystem supporting active
participation and by conscious use of structured verbal exchanges
In this respect, we
giving awareness of the creative process.
developed two social virtual reality co-design systems, and a co-design
verbal exchange methodology to favour participants’ awareness of
the co-creative process. By using such representations and verbal
exchanges, participants could co-create with more ease by benefiting
from being informed of the process and from the collective immersion,
empowering their participation. This paper presents the rationale behind
this approach of using Social VR in co-design and the feedback of three
co-design workshops.

Keywords.
ecosystem; User participation; Co-design.

Social VR; Project awareness; Representational

1. Introduction

Design projects are complex because they relate to a wide variety of end-users
and also involve multiple stakeholders along the process. Going beyond current
participatory design approaches, we claim new methods are needed to allow
better involvement of users in these projects, in a perspective of active co-design
instead of merely looking for user approval or consensus on
(bottom-up),
previously set decisions (top-down). But involving non-designers in the hearth
of design raises two major issues. On one hand, public organizations and design
offices dictate or mediate the engagement of projects’ prime stakeholders by

Intelligent & Informed, Proceedings of
the Association for
Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA) 2019, Volume 2, 141-150. © 2019
and published by the Association for Computer-Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA),
Hong Kong.

the 24th International Conference of

142

T. DORTA ET AL.

using processes, representations, methodologies and technologies that are not
well adapted for lay persons, reducing them to the role of receptors instead
of actors to whom the final designs belong. On the other hand, spontaneous
initiatives coming from users themselves as non-designers need the appropriate
means to result in relevant design solutions. Co-design must give the opportunity
to all the participants to co-create ideas upstream, simultaneously (co-ideation),
in a democratic (horizontal) and multidisciplinary way. Nowadays, co-design
processes involving non-designers tend to limit their contribution to proposing
general, abstract and ”immature” design ideas through creative techniques like
brainstorming and post-it notes, without further diving into design concepts
at a mature level and resolving them. Consequently, the co-design approach
needs to be enhanced by an appropriate representational ecosystem supporting
active participant intervention and through the identification of structured verbal
exchanges providing awareness of the ongoing creative process. To this end, we
developed two Social VR (Virtual Reality) co-design systems (see section 6), to
support democratic user participation. Thanks to its natural interaction, immersion
and embodiment without wearing VR headsets, users can resolve design problems
together with other specialist collaborators, using life-sized representations,
immersive and 3D sketches, actively interacting with design ideas. Diverse groups
of co-located participants (including architects) are immersed within different
kinds of representations. Because complexe codified representations like plans
or scaled presentation mock-ups are challenging to grasp for neophytes, Social
VR supports representations suited for the creative phases: real-scale, immersive,
with high evocative power, and with the easiness of sketch-based graphical
expression. Also, we developed a co-design methodology to support and bring
design process awareness to participants through structured conversations. Pairing
such structuring of discourse along with the aforementioned representational
ecosystem, supports user co-creation and exchanges with greater ease by being
more aware and immersed in the project, thus empowering them through facilitated
participation via Social VR.

2. Participatory design

Participatory design projects aim for user implication during the process but
nevertheless, users rarely have the power to be fully involved due to several
reasons. One is that the project’s owner often arrives with projects designed
beforehand, only seeking for user approval (Jutand 2013), persuading them
that they were involved in the creative process while all decisions are already
set. Another reason is that users themselves as non-designers are not properly
supported to fully engage during the first steps of the design process (ideation)
where main, driving ideas are generated and most important decisions are made.
Consequently, end-users have problems appropriating or embracing such projects.
Risks of integration conflicts within the context could arise (Lehtovuori 2016) and
designs could even fail to fulfill their initial goals. Moreover new initiatives are
emerging, allowing users to participate firsthand in design processes that concern
them, no more only as passive subjects to be consulted, but rather as co-authors
of design proposals (e.g. Living Labs). Nonetheless, under the appearance of

CO-DESIGNING IN SOCIAL VR

143

participation, these initiatives are often limited to a collection of primitive ideas or
are intended only to obtain the approval of people. Receivers or users must assume
new roles. They should no longer be passive or solely capable of a posteriori
reaction but should become more and more considered as referents of the project.
There is a need for informed, conscious awareness of the creative process (Farina
et al. 2014). From being simple users, they have to be more involved as the
ones for whom the projects are truly conceived, then becoming active contributors
along the process (Jutand 2013). The “author project” is replaced by a networked,
pluralistic design, where the user also becomes a co-author and participates in the
design. The role of the designer then evolves towards that of a “midwife” or, as
Sanders and Stappers (2008) describe, an accompanist.

3. Co-design approach

To cope with this, new design approaches named co-design or co-creation consist
in a creative and collective activity where two or more persons, or a community,
get involved along with designers and architects in a design project that matters to
them (Sanders and Stappers 2008). Kleinsmann and Valkenburg (2008) describe
co-design as a process where actors from various disciplines share their knowledge
of the process and the design content in order to create a shared understanding of
both aspects and achieve a common goal. Besides, co-design has been proposed
as a way to improve idea generation, decision making, communication and
creativity (Steen et al. 2011). Steen (2013) emphasizes that co-design focuses
on the concrete practices of people, their experiences and the role of practical
knowledge. Co-design is also understood as a technique of collaborative design
involving participants simultaneously in a co-creation process. The simultaneous
character of co-design is an important component in the process compared to
cooperative design consisting in an asynchronous process (Kvan 2000). Here,
cooperative design refers to when a group of individuals accomplish different tasks
separately in order to achieve a common goal (Achten 2002). Participatory design
and co-design both share the advantages of integrating individuals’ skills and
experience(s), as revealed through the unfolding exchanges (Schuler and Namioka
1993). Moles (1986) calls them repertoire, that is to say, a constitutive knowledge
of each one, which joins Schön’s own notion of repertoire (1985). Mattelmäki et
al. (2011) raise the question of power attribution to all participants in a fair way
(democratic) in collaborative design processes. We define co-design as a particular
collaborative design process.
It requires engaging the group in simultaneous
mutual collaboration and actively involving all participants. The generation of
concepts then takes place together through a spontaneous exchange where ideas
are built, negotiated and accomplished by a common agreement. To build on
these concepts, our proposed co-design approach using Social VR (see section
6) has two main ingredients: a process made aware to the participants through
the structure of verbal exchanges, and a particular representational ecosystem that
allows layperson to fully understand design proposals and fully engage in the
co-design process.

144

T. DORTA ET AL.

4. Process awareness: informed through verbal exchanges

Verbal communication constitutes, above sketches, the prime design tool allowing
designers to externalize intentions and launch ideation (Jonson 2005).
In a
collaborative setting, designers communicate their ideas verbally, but also through
gestures and representations (graphical and physical). The conversation around
collaborative ideation is a kind of rhetoric that seeks to build consensus where
all stakeholders aim to resolve a common problem (Asher and Lascarides 2003).
In previous work where we analyzed the design discourse during collaborative
ideation between designers, we identified recurrent conversational patterns at
different moments of the process (Dorta et al. 2011). These patterns characterize
the designers’ thinking in action as well as the maturity degree of design ideas. We
distinguished six main elements: naming, constraining, proposing (key element),
negotiating (questioning and explaining), decision making and moving forward
the idea via representations (sketching and gesturing). The first five relate to verbal
exchanges while the latter is an act of representation that transforms the design
situation (Goldschmidt 1990; Valkenbug and Dorst 1998). In addition, we also
identified four recurrent conversational patterns that are linked to different phases
of the co-ideation process and different levels of idea maturity: collaborative
conversations (presenting and discussing), immature collaborative ideation loops
(immature CI-loop), mature CI-loop and collaborative moving. The two kinds
of CI-loops are the most important patterns in the process since they are where
ideas are proposed and negotiated. During immature CI-loops participants are
focusing on what they have to design using longer negotiations, while in mature
CI-loops they reflect on how the design concept will be anchored to reality (Dorta
et al. 2011). Moreover, in 2015 we developed a co-design course at the university
level where we teach this patterns identification as a design strategy to students,
in order to make them aware of the creative process. In addition, we have been
realizing multiple local and international co-design workshops (involving mainly
non-designers) using this approach to make the co-design process more explicit to
further support participation and contribution from all actors.

5. Representational ecosystem and Social VR

Involving design lay persons (untrained in design) in collaborative design
projects faces a major practical challenge: an adapted representational ecosystem.
Non-designers can have trouble visualizing and placing themselves into design
ideas. In particular, the representations that are mobilized by design professionals
(scaled models, technical drawings, Computer-Aided Design “CAD” models)
do not always make it possible to evoke effectively the characteristics of the
project (Van de Vreken and Safin 2010). In addition, there is a lack of adequate
representational tools for inter-professional actors (designers, engineers, users,
to graphically and physically externalize their ideas, that is, to involve
etc.)
positively users in design and ultimately transform non-specialists into real
actors. Indeed, non-designers are rarely trained in freehand sketches, perspective
views or 3D modelling, tools that are central in “professional” design practice.
Externalizing and framing design ideas are also critical for the construction of a
common ground in collective processes, which is necessary for the development

CO-DESIGNING IN SOCIAL VR

145

of quality projects (Stempfe and Badke-Schaub 2002). Kvan (2000) indicates
that collaboration is more complicated than the mere participation of a group of
individuals. It requires a greater synchronization of work and simply bringing new
software and hardware is not sufficient to create the right environment to foster
collaboration (Kvan 2000). Thus, communication plays a decisive role for this
synchronization which subsequently allows the evolution of each person’s mental
representations (Darses 2006).

Figure 1. HIS, individual immersive sketching + model making; Hyve-3D, multi-user
immersive 3D sketching.

We have previously studied the characteristics of the representational
ecosystem that support or enhance the co-design processes (Dorta et al. 2016).
Four main required elements were found: it has to (1) be hybrid, mixing analog
(made by hand) and digital representations; (2) allow project visualization using
several scales including life-sized; (3) support active co-design by allowing all
users to represent through sketches and physical models and manipulate these
representations, all in an intuitive way; and finally, (4) the ecosystem must grant
opportunities to use and bridge across several kinds of representations, including
physical (models) and graphical (different views, photos, etc.). For this purpose,
since 2007 we have been developing immersive co-design platforms HIS (Dorta
2007) and Hyve-3D (Dorta et al. 2016), its successor (Figure1), improving
local and remote design communication. These systems allow local immersive
co-ideation while integrating themselves to the representational ecosystem. The
systems consolidate multiple representations which support co-ideation without
interfering with the process, in contrast to traditional CAD tools. It permits to
work at different scales (including life-sized) with hybrid representations and to
co-ideate in an active way via immersive and 3D sketches, immersive model
making (using physical mock-ups) and interaction using handheld devices. Both
systems are Social VR systems supporting the communication between local
participants because they don’t use occlusive headsets that hinder their verbal and
non-verbal communication (e.g. design gestures) allowing to share the collective
design experience.

6. Co-designing in Social VR approach

This paper presents the Co-designing in Social VR approach we put in place on
six-hour (9am to 4pm) workshops, a duration which ensure people participation.
During the workshops, participants that are not designers or architects are able
to generate mature design proposals in the form of scaled physical models and

146

T. DORTA ET AL.

immersive virtual representations (immersive and 3D sketches on a basic 3D
geometry used as context). Designers and architects can also get involved in
the project as well as engineers, other specialists, and design students as design
accompanists. The workshop is structured in different sessions, each focused on a
specific project stage: problem framing, immature co-ideation, mature co-ideation
and final presentation. During each session, participants alternate between Master
classes on core concepts (co-design vs. cooperation, verbal design exchanges
and the representational ecosystem) and design studio in the representational
ecosystem. The goal is to show the rationale underpinning the design’s verbal
and representational exchanges, after each step is realized, to favour a better
comprehension of the process by the participants. Concerning the representational
(1)
ecosystem, participants alternate using two kinds of representations.
Traditional graphical and physical representations consisting mostly in freehand
sketching on paper and working with a physical model where all the architectural
components (walls, furniture, columns, etc.) are already pre-cut in foam-board or
cardboard at the right scale (depending on the dimension of the given project). The
model can be easily assembled and manipulated collaboratively by the participants
This facilitates project discussion and manipulation through their modification
as boundary objects (Arias and Fischer 2000). (2) Social VR system in order to
visualize the project life-sized and sketch immersively or in 3D (Hyve-3D). The
mock-up can be brought inside the system’s space by using a small 360° camera
inside the model and experience it in immersion, from within (HIS). At the end,
the physical models and the virtual models on the Social VR system are used
to deliberate the best proposition (several if the group of participants is large).
The physical and virtual models then also provide final 3D representations of
the project used to show to project makers. The schedule of the day consists of
four one-hour sessions, in rooms dedicated to each group (around 6 persons each
max.). During each session, the groups are called in turn in the Social VR system
for 20 minutes to design within the immersive environment. These sessions are
interspersed with pauses and theoretical returns on their co-design activities by the
facilitators. Each session is focused on a specific aspect of design conversation:
the first session on the problem (re-)definition and the collaborative conversations
CC; the second session on proposing a large set of ideas (Immature CI loops);
the third session on the concept deepening (Mature CI loops); and the last on the
preparation of the final presentation. At the end of the day, formal presentations are
held, using physical models and hybrid representations in the Social VR system as
support. These presentations lead to the selection of the most collegially promising
project among the proposed solutions made by each team.

7. Examples of Co-designing in Social VR workshops

We realized several co-design workshops using this approach and using different
kind of user interactions: mixed reality, installing the Social VR system in the
same space to be designed; scale model endoscopy, where the participants were
immersed inside their physical models; and collective 3D sketches using the
Hyve-3D, in which several users sketch simultaneously in 3D using as contextual
background a dynamic 3D model. In this paper we present only those workshops

CO-DESIGNING IN SOCIAL VR

147

involving non-designers as participants. Each of these projects was focused on
preliminaray phase of the (re)design of the interior of an existing space, or a space
currently being buit. The first two were executed in the context of a business school
of an university campus and the third for a university’s library in another country.
All involved were participants institutions’ employees and users (professors and
students that attend that facility). As mentioned before, in these workshops some
architects and design students participated as accompanists to facilitate the design
process. Among their tasks, the accompanists focused on the proper use of the
different kinds of representations, on exploring alternatives to avoid getting stuck
with only one idea or on helping in the discussions and the development of design
arguments.

7.1. MIXED REALITY: BUSINESS SCHOOL’S TEACHING SPACE

Figure 2. (Right) Space to be redesigned and the sub-spaces of the workshop for each group
(Left) Social VR displaying a virtual model and digital sketches combined with a scaled model.

The workshop we conducted consists in the re-design of an existing teaching
space in the building of the business school, underused and inappropriate (Figure
2). This space is composed of a large main room and six small rooms and is
designed to support negotiation courses. Participants (24) were divided into three
groups, and each group had the goal to achieve a design proposal for the future
space. Since the Social VR systems are mobile, this workshop took place into
the same space to be redesigned, allowing participants to use elements of the real
space as a support and as referents for discussion in a context of mixed reality
(Safin et al. 2013). Figure 2 shows the different sub-spaces (one room per group)
and a central room with the Social VR system (HIS) installed in the center of
the redesigned space. Digital models of this space were built and displayed in
the HIS as 360° panoramas. Participants therefore had the opportunity to see an
immersive projection of a digital model of the design space in the heart of this
real space, with the possibility of aligning the same point of view. In the HIS, no
special skills was required since the participants were sketching (life-sized) over
the immersive panorama. Spontaneously, some participants were manipulating the
digital pencil of the Wacom Cintiq tablet of the HIS, while others were designing
and discussing alternating from the immersive representation and the real space,
visually accessible from the HIS.

148

T. DORTA ET AL.

7.2. SCALE MODEL ENDOSCOPY: BUSINESS SCHOOL’S LIBRARY

This workshop was related to the redesign of the business school’s main library.
Several library users and employees also participating in the workshop (25),
using the same representational ecosystem and the HIS of the previous workshop.
However, this time the activity took place in our laboratory’s rooms. They
developed several physical models and became immersed inside those scaled
model by using the 360° camera (Figure 3).

Figure 3. (Left) Life-sized immersive view on HIS of the rough physical model using the 360°
camera (Right).

7.3. COLLECTIVE 3D SKETCHING: UNIVERSITY’S LIBRARY

Figure 4. Hyve-3D allowing collective 3D sketching; and rough scaled physical models.

This last example took place in another university (in another country) where, this
time the Hyve-3D was transported and installed. The participants were again
users and employees of the the library and 1 design accompanists per team (2
teams of 6). Concerning the representational ecosystem, once again scale model
pieces were pre-cut and used as boundary objects to assemble the physical model
while designing the ideas. The Hyve-3D, compared to HIS, allows collective 3D
sketching using two handheld tablets. In that concern, we also provide a basic 3D
model as a contextual background, made from SketchUp and textured in a baking
process using a rendering software (Figure 4). In two periods of 30 min., four
participants were trained to sketching in 3D using the two tablets of the Hyve-3D.

CO-DESIGNING IN SOCIAL VR

149

8. Feedback from the workshops

All groups came to interesting results, even surprising, given the initial objectives,
and according to the client and the participants. All participants reported having
experienced a rich and interesting day, and having actually contributed to their
project. Although this informal observation can’t allow us to draw definitive
conclusions, it sheds light on the relevance of this new co-design approach, which
is based on the representational ecosystem (Social VR and traditional tools such
as pen-and-paper and physical models) and the process awareness through verbal
exchanges. Another interesting informal observation relates to the relevance of the
phenomenon of Social VR for the construction of a shared vision of the project.
Indeed, we found that the different teams right out of Social VR directly address
new issues of design, without going through a reformulation of the discussions
made in the system. So it seems that the teams are directly operational for
the design starting from Social VR, indicating its capacity to support a truly
shared vision of the problem. The Social VR and the physical models have
been widely used both by all participants, even those who were not familiar with
design (business students, teachers, etc.). These representation modes seem more
intuitive than the conventional representation tools like 2D or perspective sketches.
The directly perceptible scale that these two modes of representation convey
seems to be a determinant of the perceived effectiveness. It appears that both the
Social VR systems that the physical model were relevant platforms for supporting
multidisciplinary collaborative design. These two elements of the representational
ecosystem seem to support different ways to design, which are complementary:
mock-ups afford assembly of elements, spatial arrangement with a global view of
the space, whereas Social VR support the contextual sketching and proporsions of
proposed design elements in space (new furniture, walls, etc.). Finally, we made
another interesting observation: as the workshops were progressing, we have seen
an evolution of the commitment of the participants. While the first sessions were
held calmly, with very fluid speech turns, the last sessions were characterized
by more assertive behaviours from all the participants: more verbal exchanges,
many collective actions on representation tools (mainly physical model) and more
engaged postures. Finally, although all stakeholders were very enthusiast about
the process and the project, the impact of these workshops on the design project
has not been formally assessed.

9. Conclusions

This paper presented a new co-design approach based on Social VR combined
with physical mock-ups as boundary objects. Also, verbal exchanges structuration
method allows non-designers participants to get informed and be aware of the
creative process. Feedback from real co-design workshops involving lay persons
as participants was reported. Different kinds of interaction were exposed: mixed
reality, endoscopy of physical models and collective immersive 3D sketching. The
approach allows during a single day workshop to propose mature designs via 3D
representations to engage with real project makers. Even if specific Social VR
devices were used, other VR systems as headsets combined with big projections
and immersive walls could be used. The goal is to consider the use of the

150

T. DORTA ET AL.

appropriate representational ecosystem and structured verbal exchanges to allow
awareness and improve participations of non-designers in co-design processes.

References

Achten, H.: 2002, Requirements for collaborative design in architecture, 6th Design & Decision

Support Systems in Architecture & Urban Planning Conference, Eindhoven, 1-13.

Arias, E. G. and Fischer, G.: 2000, Boundary objects: Their role in articulating the task at
hand and making information relevant to it, International ICSC Symposium on Interactive
& Collaborative Computing, Australia, 567–574.

Asher, N. and Lascarides, A.: 2003, Logics of conversation, Cambridge University Press.
Darses, F.: 2006, Analyse du processus d’argumentation dans une situation de reconception

collective d’outillages, Le travail humain, 69(4), 317-347.

Dorta, T.: 2007, Implementing and Assessing the Hybrid Ideation Space: a Cognitive Artifact
for Conceptual Design, Int. Journal of Design Sciences and Technology, 14(2), 119-133.
Dorta, T., Kalay, Y. E., Lesage, A. and Pérez, E.: 2011, Elements of Design Conversation in
the interconnected HIS, Int. Journal of Design Sciences and Technology, 18(2), 65-80.
Dorta, T., Kinayoglu, G. and Hoffmann, M.: 2016, Hyve-3D and the 3D Cursor: Architectural
International Journal of Architectural

co-design with freedom in Virtual Reality,
Computing, 14(2), 87-102.

Farina, C., Kong, H., Blake, C., Newhart, M. and Luka, N.: 2014, Democratic deliberation in the
wild: The McGill Online Design Studio and the RegulationRoom Project, Fordham Urban
Law Journal, 41(5), 1527-1580.

Goldschmidt, G.:

assessing design productivity, Cyberbetics and
System’90, Proceedings of the Tenth European Meeting on Cybernetics and Systems
Research, 291-298.

1990, Linkography:

Jonson, B.: 2005, Design ideation: the conceptual sketch in the digital age, Design Studies,

26(6), 613-624.

Jutand, F. and Dartiguepeyrou, C.: 2013, La métamorphose numérique: vers une société de la

connaissance et de la coopération, Alternatives, Paris.

Kleinsmann, M. and Valkenburg, R.: 2008, Barriers and enablers for creating shared

understanding in co-design projects, Design Studies, 29(4), 369-386.

Kvan, T.: 2000, Collaborative design: what is it?, Automation in construction, 9(4), 409- 415.
Lehtovuori, P.: 2016, Experience and conflict: The production of urban space, Routledge.
Mattelmäki, T. and Sleeswijk Visser, F.: 2011, Lost in Co-X: Interpretations of Co-design and

Co-creation, Diversity and Unity, Proceedings of IASDR2011.

Safin, S., Lesage, A., Hébert, A., Kinayoglu, G. and Dorta, T.: 2013, Analyse de référents
de l’activité de co-design dans un contexte de Réalité Mixte, Proceedings of Interaction
Homme-Machine, IHM, 23-32.

Sanders, E. B.-N. and Stappers, P. J.: 2008, Co-creation and the new landscapes of design,

Co-Design, 4(1), 5-18.

Schuler, D. and Namioka, A.: 1993, Participatory design: Principles and practices, CRC Press.
International Journal of
Steen, M.: 2011, Tensions in human-centred design, CoDesign:

CoCreation in Design and the Arts, 7(1), 45-60.

Steen, M.: 2013, Co-design as a process of joint inquiry and imagination, Design Issues, 29(2),

16-28.

Stempfle, J. and Badke-Schaub, P.: 2002, Thinking in design teams: an analysis of team

communication, Design Studies, 23, 473-496.

Valkenburg, R. and Dorst, K.: 1998, The reflective practice of design teams, Design Studies,

19(3), 249-271.

Van de Vreken, A. and Safin, S.: 2010, Influence du type de représentation visuelle
sur l’évaluation de l’ambiance d’un espace architectural, Proceedings of Interaction
Homme-Machine, IHM, 49-56.

