Toward the Internet of No Things: The Role of
O2O Communications and Extended Reality

Martin Maier and Amin Ebrahimzadeh

1

9
1
0
2

n
u
J

6
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
3
7
6
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Future fully interconnected virtual reality (VR)
systems and the Tactile Internet diminish the boundary between
virtual (online) and real (ofﬂine) worlds, while extending the
digital and physical capabilities of humans via edge computing
and teleoperated robots, respectively. In this paper, we focus on
the Internet of No Things as an extension of immersive VR from
virtual to real environments, where human-intended Internet
services—either digital or physical—appear when needed and
disappear when not needed. We ﬁrst introduce the concept of
integrated online-to-ofﬂine (O2O) communications, which treats
online and ofﬂine channels as complementary to bridge the
virtual and physical worlds and provide O2O multichannel expe-
riences. We then elaborate on the emerging extended reality (XR),
which brings the different forms of virtual/augmented/mixed
reality together to realize the entire reality-virtuality continuum
and, more importantly, supports human-machine interaction as
envisioned by the Tactile Internet, while posing challenges to
conventional handhelds, e.g., smartphones. Building on the so-
called invisible-to-visible (I2V) technology concept, we present
our extrasensory perception network (ESPN) and investigate how
O2O communications and XR can be combined for the nonlocal
extension of human “sixth-sense" experiences in space and time.
We conclude by putting our ideas in perspective of the 6G vision.

I. INTRODUCTION

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) has di-
vided 5G mobile network services into the following three
categories: (i) enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), (ii) ultra-
reliable low-latency communications (URLLC), and (iii) mas-
sive machine type communications (mMTC). The latter one is
also referred to as machine-to-machine (M2M) communica-
tions in the context of the Internet of Things (IoT). The IoT
without any human involvement in its underlying M2M com-
munications is useful for the automation of industrial and other
machine-centric processes while keeping the human largely
out of the loop. Conversely, some of the most interesting 5G
applications designed to keep the human in the loop sit at the
crossroads between eMBB and URLLC. Among others, virtual
reality (VR) is expected to be one of the killer applications in
5G networks [1].

According to [2], VR systems will undergo the following
three evolutionary stages. The ﬁrst evolutionary stage includes
current VR systems that require a wired connection to a PC
or portable device because current 4G or even pre-5G wireless
systems cannot cope with the massive amount of bandwidth
and latency requirements of VR. The PC or portable device

This work was supported by NSERC Discovery Grant 2016-04521 and the

FRQNT B2X doctoral scholarship programme.

M. Maier and A. Ebrahimzadeh are with the Optical Zeitgeist Laboratory,
Institut National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (INRS), Montréal, QC, H5A
1K6, Canada. Email: maier@ieee.org

in turn is connected to the central cloud and the Internet via
backhaul links. At the second evolutionary stage, VR devices
are wirelessly connected to a fog/edge server located at the
base station for local computation and caching. The third and
ﬁnal evolutionary stage envisions ideal (fully interconnected)
VR systems, where no distinction between real and virtual
worlds are made in human perception. In addition, according
to [2], the growing number of drones, robots, and self-driving
vehicles (to be discussed in more detail in Section IV) will
take cameras to places humans could never imagine reaching.
Another interesting 5G application that involves the inherent
human-in-the-loop nature of human-machine interaction is the
so-called Tactile Internet, which allows for the tactile steering
and control of not only virtual but also real objects, e.g.,
teleoperated robots, as well as processes. The emerging IEEE
P1918.1 standards working group develops a generic Tactile
Internet reference architecture based on several key principles.
Among others, the key principles envision to support local
area as well as wide area connectivity through wireless (e.g.,
cellular, WiFi) or hybrid wireless/wired networking and to
leverage computing resources from cloud variants at the edge
of the network. Recently, in [3], we showed that the human-
centric design approach of the Tactile Internet helps extend the
capabilities of humans through the Internet by supporting them
in the coordination of their physical and digital co-activities
with robots and software agents by means of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) enhanced multi-access edge computing (MEC).

The above discussion shows that future fully interconnected
VR systems and the future Tactile Internet seem to evolve
towards common design goals. Most notably, the boundary
between virtual (i.e., online) and real (i.e., ofﬂine) worlds is
to become increasingly imperceptible while both digital and
physical capabilities of humans are to be extended via edge
computing variants, ideally with embedded AI capabilities. In
fact, according to the inaugural report “Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Life in 2030" of Stanford University’s recently launched
One Hundred Year Study on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI100), an
increasing focus on developing systems that are human-aware
is expected over the next 10-15 years. Clearly, such a shift
of research focus represents an evolutionary leap from today’s
IoT without any human involvement in its underlying M2M
communications.

An interesting practical extension of immersive VR from
virtual to a real environment is the so-called Naked world vi-
sion that aims at paving the way to an Internet of No Things by
offering all kinds of human-intended services without owning
or carrying any type of computing or storage devices [4]. The
term Internet of No Things was coined by Demos Helsinki
founder Roope Mokka in 2015. The term nicely resonates with

 
 
 
 
 
 
Eric Schmidt’s famous statement at the 2015 World Economic
Forum that “the Internet will disappear" given that there will
be so many things that we are wearing and interacting with
that we won’t even sense the Internet, though it will be part
of our presence all
the time. The Naked world envisions
Internet services to appear from the surrounding environment
when needed and disappear when not needed. Similar to the
aforementioned evolution of today’s VR systems, the transi-
tion from the current gadgets-based Internet to the Internet
of No Things is divided into three phases that starts from
bearables (e.g., smartphone), moves towards wearables (e.g.,
Google and Levi’s smart jacket), and then ﬁnally progresses
to the last phase of so-called nearables. Nearables denote
nearby surroundings or environments with embedded comput-
ing/storage technologies and service provisioning mechanisms
that are intelligent enough to learn and react according to user
context and history in order to provide user-intended services.
According to [4], their successful deployment is challenging
not only from a technological point of view but also from a
business and social mindset perspective due to the required
user acceptability and trust.

In this paper, we focus on two emerging technologies
that hold great promise to help realize the Internet of No
Things by achieving the aforementioned common design goals
of interconnected VR systems and the Tactile Internet. In
Section II, we introduce the concept of online-to-ofﬂine (O2O)
communications and review recent progress on how it may
be used to tie both online and ofﬂine worlds closer together
while opening new business opportunities and fostering user
acceptability and trust. Section III elaborates on the reality-
virtuality continuum that comprises various types of extended
reality (XR), including not only VR but also augmented and
mixed reality. In Section IV, we elaborate on how O2O
and XR technologies can be leveraged toward realizing the
Internet of No Things based on emerging invisible-to-visible
technologies. Finally, in Section V, we put our presented ideas
in perspective of the future 6G vision and draw our conclusions
in Section VI.

II. ONLINE-TO-OFFLINE (O2O) COMMUNICATIONS
The term O2O was ﬁrst coined by Alex Rampell in 2010
after witnessing that the links between online and physical
commerce are becoming stronger with the growth of local
commerce on the Web such as Groupon. According to Ram-
pell, the key to O2O is that it serves as a discovery mechanism
for ﬁnding consumers online, bringing them into real-world
stores, and delivering social experiences like restaurants, given
that most of the disposable income is spent locally ofﬂine.
Despite the fact that millenials spend on average 7.5 hours a
day online, it is interesting to note that 70% of them prefer
shopping in conventional brick-and-mortar stores because they
want to have an experience that allows them to hold, touch, and
in some cases try on products. Thus, it comes as no surprise
that according to recent studies only 8.3% of U.S. retail sales
are done online while more than 80% of them will still happen
inside physical stores in 2020 [5].

With the growing smartphone market, various attempts have
been made to combine the merits of the diversity and afford-

2

Fig. 1. Online-to-ofﬂine and ofﬂine-to-online (O2O) service model [7].

ability of online activities and the credibility and immediacy
of ofﬂine activities, resulting in an expanded range of O2O
services beyond the initial concept of O2O commerce [6]. In
the United States, O2O services started with lodging (AirBnB),
transportation (Uber), and others such as neighborhood food
delivery (e.g., GrubHub). An interesting example is Amazon’s
newest online-inspired Amazon 4-star brick-and-mortar store
concept, which opened in New York City just recently on
September 27, 2018. Amazon 4-star is a physical store where
everything for sale is rated 4 stars and above, is a top seller, or
is new and trending on the website Amazon.com. The concept
is a clever example of experiential retail to ﬁll customers with
conﬁdence in that everything they buy won’t disappoint and
inspire frequent visits due to dynamic assortment features such
as local trends. Given that every product in the store has
two different prices for Amazon Prime members and non-
members, the concept also helps promote and drive Prime
membership. In China, among other countries, QR codes
have been widely used to display O2O services to customers,
e.g., Tencent’s so-called Weshopping service for Valentine’s
Day that directly orders the item a customer wants to buy
online by merely scanning the QR code. Note that QR codes
they provide ofﬂine-to-
widen the notion of O2O in that
online (rather than online-to-ofﬂine) services by connecting
a customer scanning the QR code on a physical product
with related online services. Thus, in general, the term O2O
involves both online-to-ofﬂine and ofﬂine-to-online services
to bridge the physical and virtual worlds and thereby provide
integrated online-ofﬂine/ofﬂine-online experiences.

In [7], the authors developed an O2O service model for
integrating online-to-ofﬂine and ofﬂine-to-online services. As
shown in Fig. 1, the proposed O2O service model relies on
the proper orchestration of proximity, mobile, and social com-
merce. The top of Fig. 1 represents the real-world marketing
service model, where manufacturers produce and deliver their
products through various channels and stores. The bottom
of Fig. 1 illustrates the online market of the service model,
where users may read other customers’ opinions online before
deciding to make a purchase. They click on likes, share, and
post comments on social events, while retailers may monitor

3

TABLE I
ONLINE VS. OFFLINE ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES

Advantages

Disadvantages

Online
Low costs
Zero inventory
Low investment risk
More information for customer
One-click order possibility
Easy scalability
Lower customer loyalty
Credit problems
Limited logistic service
Lack of physical interaction
Shipping and handling

Ofﬂine
Higher customer trust
Deeper customer experience
Instant gratiﬁcation
Personal face-to-face service
Multi-modal physical interaction
Localized service
Higher inventory costs
Higher training costs
Personnel quality demands
Subject to waiting time in line-ups
Product distribution and warehousing

online word-of-mouth (WoM) to sustain a relationship with
their customers directly and instantly. In addition, retailers
may organize social events to inﬂuence and engage consumers’
social network friends to participate.

Interestingly, Fig. 1 illustrates that a variety of O2O chan-
nels can be applied to create multichannel consumer experi-
ences. This gives rise to O2O communications, which comes
in different ﬂavors. Cross-channel retailing is deﬁned as the
transmission of content through various media in marketing
and interaction design. Omnichannel retailing is the evolution
of cross-channel retailing, putting an emphasis on providing
real-time, seamless, consistent, and personalized consumer
experiences through all available shopping channels such as
social, mobile, store, online-to-ofﬂine, and ofﬂine-to-online.
Overall, O2O communications aim at maximizing the use of
both online and ofﬂine resources and promoting each other in
order to create novel win-win business opportunities [7].

To better understand how O2O communications may be
leveraged for realizing the Internet of No Things, Table I com-
pares the advantages and disadvantages of online and ofﬂine
domains in greater detail. Apart from its various commerce
related aspects, the online advantages of particular interest
comprise lower costs, wider range of information sources, one-
click control simplicity, and superior scalability. By means
of O2O communications,
these online advantages may be
combined with the higher user trust, deeper experiences, in-
stant gratiﬁcation, and multi-modal physical interactions with
people, products, and localized services in the ofﬂine domain,
treating online and ofﬂine channels as complementary rather
than competitive.

III. EXTENDED REALITY (XR)
Despite the ofﬂine domain’s superiority of providing deeper
experiences in local environments, augmented reality (AR)
provides the capabilities to make similar experiences from
far away. A good AR example is Shopify’s ARKit, which
allows smartphones to place 3D models of physical items
and see how they would look in real life. To do so, AR
overlays virtual objects/images/information on top of a real-
world environment.

AR and the aforementioned VR are part of the so-called
reality-virtuality continuum shown in Fig. 2. The reality-
virtuality continuum ranges from pure reality (ofﬂine) to
pure virtuality (online), as created by VR. Both reality and

virtuality may be augmented, leading to AR on one side of
the continuum and augmented virtuality (AV) on the other.
AR enables the live view of a physical, real-world environ-
ment, whose elements are augmented by computer-generated
perceptual information, ideally across multiple sensory modal-
ities, including visual, auditory, haptic, somatosensory, and
olfactory information. The overlaid sensory information can
be constructive (i.e., additive to the natural environment) or
destructive (i.e., masking of the natural environment). In doing
so, AR alters one’s perception of the real-world environment,
as opposed to VR, which replaces the real-world environment
with a simulated one. Conversely, AV occurs in a virtual
environment, where a real object is inserted into a computer-
generated environment. An illustrative AV example is an
aircraft maintenance engineer, who is able to visualize a real-
time model, often referred to as digital twin, of an engine that
may be thousands of kilometers away (digital twin will be
further discussed in Section IV-B).

The term mixed reality (MR) includes AR, AV, and mixed
conﬁgurations thereof, blending representations of virtual and
real-world elements together in a single user interface. MR
helps bridge the gap between real and virtual environments,
whereby the difference between AR and AV reduces to where
the user interaction takes place. If the interaction happens
in the real world, it is considered AR. By contrast, if the
interaction occurs in a virtual space, it is considered AV. The
ﬂagship MR device is Microsoft’s HoloLens, which is the
ﬁrst self-contained, holographic computer that enables users
to engage with digital content and interact with holograms in
their surrounding environment.

A recently emerging term is the so-called extended reality
(XR), which refers to all real-and-virtual combined environ-
ments as well as human-machine interaction [8]. XR helps
improve the time-space ﬂexibility of users by avoiding their
need to be at the same place at the same time when working
on a project, thus empowering industry with a faster and
more powerful decision making process. The areas where
most industries apply XR is in remote guidance systems for
performing complex tasks such as maintenance and assembly.
According to Qualcomm, XR will be the next-generation
mobile computing platform that brings the different forms of
reality together in order to realize the entire reality-virtuality
continuum of Fig. 2 for the extension of human experiences.
For illustration, Table II compares the main characteristics of

4

Fig. 2. The reality-virtuality continuum, ranging from pure reality (ofﬂine) to pure virtuality (online).

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF VR, AR, MR, AND XR.

Characteristics

Is user aware of real world?
Is it possible to create mediated
virtuality?
Is extent of virtuality controllable?
Does it support human-machine inter-
action in real and virtual worlds?

VR
No
Yes

No
No

AR MR
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

No
No

Yes
No

XR
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

XR with those of VR, AR, and MR. Note that only XR is
suitable to support human-machine interaction as envisioned
by the Tactile Internet (see Section I). Furthermore, the advent
of XR technologies pose serious challenges to handheld de-
vices such as smartphones since their design principles focused
mainly on ergonomics and battery life. Instead of bearables, it
is more suitable to use wearables such as VR and AR head-
mounted devices (HMD), while outsourcing their computation
and mobility to the mobile edge cloud.

Clearly, the discussion above demonstrates the need for
designing mechanisms to deal with the heavy trafﬁc loads
put on underlying communication networks, given that XR
applications have stringent capacity, latency, and reliability
requirements to ensure a satisfactory quality-of-immersion
(QoI). In fact, according to a recent ABI Research and
Qualcomm study [9], some of the most exciting AR and
VR use cases include remotely controlled devices and the
Tactile Internet. More precisely, looking beyond the remote
machine control of today to the future Tactile Internet, ultra-
low latency feedback below 5 milliseconds will enable novel
uses of multisensory remote tactile control with responses
rapid enough to be imperceptible to the operator.

IV. TOWARD THE INTERNET OF NO THINGS:
INVISIBLE-TO-VISIBLE (I2V) TECHNOLOGIES

In this section, we elaborate on how emerging O2O and XR
technologies may be leveraged to realize the Internet of No
Things. Recall from Section I that future fully interconnected
VR systems will leverage on the growing number of drones,
robots, and self-driving vehicles. A very interesting example of
future connected-car technologies that merges real and virtual
worlds to help drivers ‘see the invisible’ is Nissan’s recently
unveiled invisible-to-visible (I2V) technology concept [10].

immersion connected-car
I2V creates a three-dimensional
experience that
is tailored to the driver’s interests. More
speciﬁcally, by merging information from sensors outside and
inside the vehicle with data from the cloud, I2V enables the
driver and passengers not only to track the vehicle’s immediate
surroundings but also to anticipate what’s ahead, e.g., what’s
behind a building or around the corner. Although the initial
I2V proof-of-concept demonstrator used AR headsets (i.e.,
wearables), Nissan envisions to turn the windshield of future
self-driving cars into a portal to the virtual world, thus ﬁnally
evolving from wearables to nearables, as discussed in Section I
in the context of the Internet of No Things.

I2V is powered by Nissan’s omnisensing technology, a
platform originally developed by the video gaming company
Unity Technologies, which acts as a hub gathering real-time
data from the trafﬁc environment and from the vehicle’s
surroundings and interior to anticipate when people inside the
vehicle may need assistance. The technology maps a 360-
degree virtual space and gives guidance in an interactive,
human-like way, such as through avatars that appear inside
the car. It can also connect passengers to people in the so-
called Metaverse virtual world that is shared with other users.
In doing so, people may appear inside the car as AR avatars
to provide assistance or company. For instance, when visiting
a new place, I2V can search within the Metaverse for a
knowledgeable local guide. The information provided by the
guide may be stored in the cloud such that others visiting the
same area can access it or may be used by the onboard AI
system for a more efﬁcient drive through local areas.

Clearly, I2V opens up endless opportunities by tapping
into the virtual world. In fact, the emerging IEEE P1918.1
standard, brieﬂy mentioned in Section I, highlights several
key use cases of the Tactile Internet, including not only the
automative control of connected/autonomous driving but also
the remote control of robots (i.e., teleoperation). According
to [11], the vastly progressing smart wearables such as ex-
oskeletons and VR/AR devices effectively create real-world
avatars, i.e., tactile robots connected with human operators
via smart wearables, as a central physical embodiment of
the Tactile Internet. More speciﬁcally, the authors of [11]
argue that the Tactile Internet creates the new paradigm of an
immersive coexistence between humans and robots in order
to achieve tight physical human-robot interaction (pHRI) and
entanglement between man and machine in future locally con-

5

nected human-avatar/robot collectives. Assistive exoskeletons
are thereby envisaged to become an important element of the
Tactile Internet in that they extend user capabilities or supple-
ment/replace some form of function loss, e.g., lifting heavy
objects or rehabilitation systems for people with spinal cord
injury. In addition, many studies have shown that the physical
presence of robots beneﬁted a variety of social interaction
elements such as persuasion, likeability, and trustworthiness.

A. Extrasensory Perception Network (ESPN)

the

there

exists

In contemporary physics,

so-called
“principle of nonlocality,” also referred to as quantum-
interconnectedness of all things by quantum physicists such as
David Bohm, which transcends spatial and temporal barriers.
Nonlocality occurs due to the phenomenon of entanglement,
where a pair of particles have complementary properties when
measured.

Quantum-interconnectedness might be the cause of another
phenomenon widely known as extrasensory perception (ESP),
which allows humans to have nonlocal experiences in space
and time. ESP denotes anomalous processes of information or
energy transfer. According to Wikipedia, ESP is also called
sixth sense, which includes claimed reception of information
not gained through the recognized ﬁve physical senses, but
sensed with the mind. There exist different types of possible
ESPs. In this paper, we focus on the following two ESPs
to illustrate nonlocal experiences in both space and time:
clairvoyance (i.e., viewing things or events at remote loca-
tions) and precognition (i.e., viewing future events before they
happen). While clairvoyance may be viewed as the ability
to perceive the hidden present, precognition is a forecast
(not prophecy) of events to come about in the future unless
one does something to change them based on the perceived
information. In other words, precognition may be viewed as
a probable future that does not necessarily have to become
actualized, depending on one’s behavior. Thus, steering human
behavior based on precognition appears to be a powerful
means to prevent undesirable future events from happening.

Note that despite reports based on anecdotal evidence, there
has been no convincing scientiﬁc evidence that ESP exists
after more than a century of research. However, instead of
rejecting ESP as pseudoscience, in this paper we argue that
with the emergence of XR it might become possible to disrupt
the old impossible/possible boundary and mimic ESP by using
multi-/omnichannel O2O communications as an underlying
extrasensory perceptual channel.

Let our point of departure be Joseph A. Paradiso’s pi-
oneering work on ESP in an IoT context at MIT Media
Lab [12]. In a sensor-driven world, network-connected sensors
embedded in anything function as extensions of the human
nervous system and enable us to enter the long-predicted
era of ubiquitous computing, as envisioned by Mark Weiser
as the “computer for the 21st century” more than a quarter
of century ago. In addition to visualizing mostly invisible
sensor data, Paradiso investigated the impact of ubiquitous
computing on the meaning of presence. In [12], the authors
showed that network-connected sensors and computers make

Fig. 3. Extrasensory perception network (ESPN) architecture integrating
ubiquitous, pervasive, and persuasive computing.

it possible to virtually travel to distant environments and “be”
there in real time. Interestingly, in their ﬁnal remarks, the
authors concluded that future technologies will fold into our
surroundings that help us to get our noses off the smartphone
screen and back into our environments, thus making us more
(rather than less) present in the world around us.

Fig. 3 depicts the architecture of our proposed ESP network
(ESPN) in greater detail. Its physical network infrastruc-
ture consists of a ﬁber backhaul shared by WLAN mesh
portal points (MPPs) and cellular base stations (BSs) that
are collocated with optical network units (ONUs). Recently,
in [13], we studied the emerging Tactile Internet as one of the
most interesting 5G low-latency applications enabling novel
immersive experiences by means of haptic communications.
Based on real-world haptic traces, we studied the use case of
nonlocal teleoperation between a human operator and teleop-
erator robot, which are both physical, i.e., ofﬂine, entities (see
also Fig. 3). We showed that AI enhanced MEC helps decouple
haptic feedback from the impact of extensive propagation
delays by forecasting delayed or lost haptic feedback samples.
This enables humans to perceive remote task environments in
real-time at a 1-ms granularity.

As shown in Fig. 3, our proposed ESPN integrates the
following three evolutionary stages of mobile computing: (i)
ubiquitous, (ii) pervasive, and (iii) persuasive computing.
Ubiquitous computing is embedded in the things surrounding
us (i.e., nearables), while pervasive computing involves our
bearables and wearables. In the subsequent subsection, we use
our developed AI enhanced MEC to realize persuasive comput-
ing, which aims at changing the behavior of users through so-
cial inﬂuence via human-machine interaction utilizing sensors
and machine learning algorithms. An interesting phenomenon
for changing behavior in an online virtual environment is the
so-called “Proteus effect,” where the behavior of individuals

is shaped by the characteristics and traits of their avatars,
especially through interaction during inter-avatar events.

B. Nonlocal Awareness of Space and Time

In this section, we elaborate on how awareness of nonlocal
events in space and time can be realized in our proposed ESPN
via O2O communications and XR.

1) Clairvoyance: Clearly, a straightforward approach to
realize clairvoyance is the use of network-connected drones,
robots, and self-driving vehicles that take cameras to places
humans could never imagine reaching, as mentioned in Sec-
tion I. Likewise, recall that network-connected sensors allow
humans to see obstacles hidden from plain sight. Collecting
real-world sensor data feeds and thereby absorbing the real
world into the virtual create what David Gelernter calls mirror
worlds, which give rise to new opportunities for providing
user-intended services. For instance, according to Google’s
chief economist Hal Varian, Google Trends help in “predicting
not the future but the present,” e.g., the search terms may
predict accurately whether a searcher has the ﬂu. Unlike virtual
avatars, teleoperated robots may be used for physically embod-
ied communication, which was shown to enhance telepresence
in a variety of social tasks via multisensory tactile control.

Typically, there exists a spatial difference between virtual
and physical topologies. In our ESPN, this spatial difference
can be overcome by sending a nudge given by avatar i to
intended avatar j to the corresponding MEC server, which then
physically nudges the human belonging to avatar j through his
wearable(s), e.g., smart jacket. That human in turn may use
embodied communication to establish an embodied encounter
and proximate relation with the human belonging to avatar i.
In the following, we extend the above
virtual/physical nudges to cognitive nudges for achieving
precognition in our ESPN. Speciﬁcally, we extend our AI
enhanced MEC forecasting scheme in [13] for using persua-
sive computing as a tool to explore causal relationships and
inﬂuence task completion.

2) Precognition:

Our AI enhanced MEC forecasting scheme used a type of
parameterized artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) known as multi-
layer perceptron (MLP), which we trained by using haptic
traces obtained from real-world teleoperation experiments. It
was shown in [13] that the developed MLP is able to achieve
a high forecasting accuracy (mean squared error below 1‰)
for nonlocal teleoperation. Note that in general the training
phase of an ANN is highly critical for setting the weights of its
neurons properly. However, the training may become irrelevant
in changing or unstructured real-world environments, resulting
in a decreased forecasting accuracy. How can we know when
or even before this happens?

One way to achieve this is to leverage the aforementioned
mirror worlds (e.g., teleoperator robot’s digital twin, as dis-
cussed in Fig. 2) for realizing an omniscient oracle that
uses its context-awareness of the remote task environment
for monitoring current teleoperation conditions and detecting
faults/failures. In doing so, the effectiveness of our AI en-
hanced MEC forecasting scheme can be estimated by giving
it self-awareness of changing haptic trace based training

6

Fig. 4. Precognition measured as future regret (given in seconds) of relying
on MLP-based ANN vs. probability of misforecast with different human
capability fh (given in operations per second) for nonlocal task completion.

requirements. To quantify the decreasing effectiveness, the
omniscient oracle computes the metric regret, which measures
the future regret a human operator will have after relying
on our haptic sample forecasting scheme even though it has
become less trustworthy. Generally, regret is deﬁned as the dif-
ference between the reward earned by the policy under study
and the best possible reward that could have been obtained
by an omniscient oracle. In our teleoperation scenario, we
deﬁne regret as the difference between the achievable and the
optimum task execution times. Note that the metric regret is
used to inﬂuence the human operator’s decision to abort the
teleoperation before unintended consequences might occur.

For illustration, Fig. 4 depicts regret as a function of the
probability of misforecast, which is deﬁned as the probability
that k of the last n received haptic feedback samples are
subject to misforecast. Further, let us consider a physical task
that requires 20 operations for completion and let fh denote
the number of operations per second the human operator is
capable of executing under ideal conditions, i.e., probability
of misforecast is zero. Clearly, task completion time increases
for increasing probability of misforecast. Fig. 4 shows the
general trade-off between the human operator’s capability and
our MLP-based ANN’s forecasting accuracy for k = 3 and
n = 5, where a less skillful human operator would require a
more accurate AI to remain at the same level of regret. More
importantly, we observe that especially less skillful human
operators with a small fh may learn from an increasing regret
to refrain from blindly relying on a presumably intact AI.

V. 6G VISION: PUTTING (INTERNET OF NO) THINGS IN
PERSPECTIVE

Envisioned 6G mobile networks are anticipated to enable
many exciting services and applications that allow for the
inclusion of additional human sensory information and even
human emotions by making extensive use of powerful knowl-
edge discovery, machine learning, and context awareness tech-
niques. In [14], the authors advocate that 6G should embrace

7

causes of increasing inequality in our society. To cope with the
intangible inequality, the Internet of No Things has to unleash
its full potential by making people more interested and tolerant
of new experiences for the beneﬁt of a whole society.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors are thankful to Saeid Jamshidi for his collabo-

ration.

REFERENCES

[1] M. S. Elbamby, C. Perfecto, M. Bennis, and K. Doppler, “Toward Low-
Latency and Ultra-Reliable Virtual Reality,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no.
2, pp. 78-84, Mar./Apr. 2018.

[2] E. Ba¸stu˘g, M. Bennis, M. Médard, and M. Debbah, “Toward Intercon-
nected Virtual Reality: Opportunities, Challenges, and Enablers,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 110-117, Jun. 2017.
[3] M. Maier, A. Ebrahimzadeh, and M. Chowdhury, “The Tactile Internet:
Automation or Augmentation of the Human?,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
41607-41618, Jul. 2018.

[4] I. Ahmad, T. Kumar, M. Liyanage, M. Ylianttila, T. Koskela, T. Braysy,
A. Anttonen, V. Pentikinen, J.-P. Soininen, and J. Huusko, “Towards
Gadget-Free Internet Services: A Roadmap of the Naked world,” Elsevier
Telematics and Informatics, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 82-92, Apr. 2018.

[5] A. Orendorff, “O2O Commerce: Conquering Online-to-Ofﬂine Retail’s
Trillion Dollar Opportunity,” May 21, 2018. [Online: Accessed on June
15, 2019]

[6] W. Kim, S. Chung, and Y. H. Bae, “O2O Trend and Future: Focused on
Difference from Each Case,” Journal of Marketing Thought, vol. 3, no.
4, pp. 42-59, Feb. 2017.

[7] T.-M. Tsai, W.-N. Wang, Y.-T. Lin, and S.-C. Choub, “An O2O Commerce
Service Framework and its Effectiveness Analysis with Application to
Proximity Commerce,” Elsevier Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp.
3498-3505, 2015.

[8] Å. Fast-Berglund, L. Gong, and D. Li, “Testing and Validating Extended
Reality (XR) Technologies in Manufacturing,” Procedia Manufacturing,
vol. 25, pp. 31-38, May 2018.

[9] ABI Research and Qualcomm, “Augmented and Virtual Reality: the First

Wave of 5G Killer Apps,” White Paper, Feb. 2017.

[10] Nissan Newsroom, “Nissan unveils Invisible-to-Visible technology con-
cept at CES: Future connected-car technology merges real and virtual
worlds to help drivers ‘see the invisible’,” Jan. 3, 2019. [Online: Accessed
on June 15, 2019]

[11] S. Haddadin, L. Johannsmeier, and F. D. Ledezma, “Tactile Robots as
a Central Embodiment of the Tactile Internet,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 471-487, Feb. 2019.

[12] G. Dublon and J. A. Paradiso, “Extra Sensory Perception,” Scientiﬁc

American, vol. 311, no. 1, pp. 36-41, Jul. 2014.

[13] M. Maier and A. Ebrahimzadeh, “Towards Immersive Tactile Internet
Experiences: Low-Latency FiWi Enhanced Mobile Networks With Edge
Intelligence [Invited],” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications
and Networking, Special Issue on Latency in Edge Optical Networks,
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. B10-B25, Apr. 2019.

[14] K. David and H. Berndt, “6G Vision and Requirements: Is There Any
Need for Beyond 5G?,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 72-80, Sep. 2018.

[15] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision of 6G Wireless Systems:
Applications, Trends, Technologies, and Open Research Problems,” arX-
ivorg, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA, Feb. 2019.

a new mode of thinking from the get-go by including social
awareness and understanding the social impact of advanced
technologies. They argue that deepened personalization of 6G
services that could predict future events for the user and pro-
vide good advice would certainly be appreciated. Clearly, these
ideas are similar to our investigated concept of precognition.
In [15], the authors observed that the ongoing deployment
of 5G cellular systems is exposing their inherent limitations
compared to the original premise of 5G as an enabler for
the Internet of Everything (IoE). They argue that 6G should
not only explore more spectrum at high-frequency bands but,
more importantly, converge upcoming technological trends.
Their bold, forward-looking vision of 6G systems and com-
prehensive research agenda intend to serve as a basis for
stimulating more out-of-the-box research that will drive the
6G revolution. More speciﬁcally, they claim that there will
be the following four driving applications behind 6G: (i)
multisensory XR applications, (ii) connected robotics and
autonomous systems, (iii) wireless brain-computer interaction
(a subclass of human-machine interaction), as well as (iv)
blockchain and distributed ledger technologies. Among other
6G driving trends and enabling technologies, they emphasize
the importance of haptic and even empathic communications,
edge AI, the emergence of smart surfaces/environments and
new human-centric service classes, as well as the end of the
smartphone era, given that smart wearables are increasingly
replacing the functionalities of smartphones.

We believe that the Internet of No Things with its underlying
human-intended services and our proposed ESPN for the
nonlocal extension of human “sixth-sense" experiences in both
space and time may serve as a useful stepping stone towards
realizing the far-reaching 6G vision above. It’s still early in the
game. But maybe it turns out that 6G will usher in the Internet
of No Things instead of Everything. After all, the best things
in life aren’t things they say.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have explored the role of O2O communications and XR
in extending the digital and physical capabilities of humans
and their experiences in the Internet of No Things, which aims
at tying online and ofﬂine worlds closer together. We argued
that with the emergence of XR it might become possible to
disrupt the old impossible/possible boundary and mimic ESP
by using multi-/omnichannel O2O communications as an un-
derlying extrasensory perceptual channel. Our proposed ESPN
integrates the three evolutionary stages of mobile computing—
ubiquitous, pervasive, and persuasive computing—to perceive
the hidden present (clairvoyance) and prevent undesirable
future events from happening (precognition) based on the
nonlocal awareness of space and time.

At

the heart of the experience matrix of today’s O2O
commerce lies the replacement of the consumption of tangible
goods with the consumption of intangible experiences. In
their latest book Capitalism without Capital, J. Haskel and
S. Westlake made the important observation that the rise of
the intangible economy may lead to a decreasing openness
to experience among certain people, thus exacerbating the

8

Martin Maier is a full professor with the Institut National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque (INRS), Montréal, Canada. He was educated at the Technical
University of Berlin, Germany, and received M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees (summa
cum laude) in 1998 and 2003, respectively. He was a co-recipient of the 2009
IEEE Communications Society Best Tutorial Paper Award. Further, he was
a Marie Curie IIF Fellow of the European Commission from March 2014
through February 2015. In March 2017, he received the Friedrich Wilhelm
Bessel Research Award from the Alexander von Humboldt (AvH) Foundation
in recognition of his accomplishments in research on FiWi enhanced networks.
In May 2017, he was named one of the three most promising scientists in
the category “Contribution to a better society" of the Marie Skłodowska-
Curie Actions (MSCA) 2017 Prize Award of the European Commission.
He is the founder and creative director of the Optical Zeitgeist Laboratory
(www.zeitgeistlab.ca).

Amin Ebrahimzadeh received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Electrical
Engineering from the University of Tabriz in 2009 and 2011, respectively.
From 2011 to 2015, he was with the Sahand University of Technology (SUT),
Iran. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in the Optical Zeitgeist Laboratory
at INRS, Montréal, Canada. His research interests include ﬁber-wireless
networks, Tactile Internet, teleoperation, artiﬁcial intelligence enhanced multi-
access edge-computing (MEC), and multi- robot task allocation.

