CoAug-MR: An MR-based Interactive Ofﬁce Workstation
Design System via Augmented Multi-Person Collaboration

Lin Wang
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
wanglin@kaist.ac.kr

Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

0
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

3
v
7
0
1
3
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1. This paper proposes CoAug-MR, a MR-based interactive design method via augmented multi-person collaboration. We emphasize the
importance of collaboration and initiate an augmented design paradigm, which enables user, designer, and even ergonomist to gather up to achieve
reliable and real-time design and prototyping based on user’s pose either locally or remotely.

ABSTRACT
Digital human models (DHMs) are useful for designing prod-
ucts considering the general population. Besides, the Do-It-
Yourself (DIY) approach somehow enables fast prototyping
by casual users themselves via virtual mannequins. However,
DHMs suffer from insufﬁcient body data, and DIY lacks re-
liability and quality of design due to a lack of professional
guidance and less accessibility of 3D modeling tools. This
paper addresses the above-mentioned problems and proposes
CoAug-MR, an MR-based interactive design method via aug-
mented multi-person collaboration. We emphasize the im-
portance of collaboration and initiate an augmented design
paradigm, which enables user, designer, and ergonomist to
gather up to achieve reliable and real-time design and proto-
typing based on user’s pose either locally or remotely. Our
system consists of an information-sharing module, a multi-
person interaction module, and a spatial engagement module.
Usability study shows that our augmented collaborative design
system is effective for reliable and fast product design and
evaluation.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04. . . $15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.XXXXXXX

Author Keywords
Collaborative design; Human factors; MR; Augmented
collaboration; Multi-person interaction.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Human computer inter-
action (HCI); User studies;

INTRODUCTION
In recent years, digital modeling and prototyping have been
burgeoning in the ﬁeld of industrial design and human-
computer interaction (HCI). Computer Aided Design (CAD)
tools are typical platforms that focus on the virtual modeling
of 2D and 3D products. These tools are more utilized by pro-
fessionals who have mastered the knowledge of creating 3D
geometry through the CAD interface. However, some tools are
relatively difﬁcult to learn, and special training is needed for
familiarization of the interface. Hence, research has been con-
centrated on creating novel interfaces using gestures, sketching
[19], virtual reality [16], augmented reality [11], and other
existing objects [3] as references. On the other hand, digital
human models(DHMs) are the other type of tools that enable
ergonomic evaluation for the quality of products. DHMs are
utilized to assess the safety and usability of products and en-
vironment in the virtual space [14]. However, it suffers from
the difﬁculties of accurate prediction of human behaviors due
to the lack of human anthropometric data. Most DHMs tend
to represent variations of body shapes for the general popula-
tion, which can be a challenging problem when it comes to
customizing products. Now, the question is how to make the
product design connected to those people who are not only in

 
 
 
 
 
 
the general range but also beyond the general range? One chal-
lenge is how to connect a user’s anthropometrics with pose
recommendations and design dimensions, which may take
large amount of time to get information from an individual in
the usual way. Another challenge is the ergonomic evaluation
for the individuals out of the general range. Since most of the
ergonomic evaluations using DHMs have highly relied on the
general population, it makes the evaluations inapplicable to
these minorities.

With these challenges ahead, research has been focused on
real-time ergonomic evaluations. Recent research endeavors
to use sensor tracking devices [20] and wire-free sensor-based
device [15] to provide an ergonomic guideline for the indi-
viduals. Since these devices support real-time interaction
with objects, and they provide a way to get body information
through sensors and trackers. Sensors can be integrated into
modern computer graphics technology such as Virtual Reality
(VR). It also helps to offer new possibilities when we perform
product design [13], design evaluation [27], ergonomic evalu-
ation [4, 8], simulation [6] and manufacturing [2]. It turned
out that some VR technologies aiming to design, simulation
and manufacturing seem to be mature, but, in order to be more
scientiﬁc, human-centered VR system of product evaluation
still needs a long way to go. The reason why ergonomic evalu-
ation for human-centered systems is difﬁcult is that humans
vary from one to another and a certain range of body parts
cannot represent others. In a VR environment, human bodies
are replaced by virtual mannequins, which actually impede
the intuitive interaction with the 3D world in the evaluation of
human-centered systems. Some research utilizes the body scan
and 3D reconstruction to make an avatar for individuals [4],
however, it seems to be very cumbersome and time-consuming
when we have to scan and reconstruct each by each. On the
other hand, some studies try to enable casual users themselves
to design and evaluate body postures by themselves [4, 7], in
which the method is called Do-It-Yourself (DIY). Although
the framework could be good in some way, since they know
better what they want, and it could be more convenient for their
personal preference, it cannot ensure reliability and quality.

Regarding these challenges and drawbacks, it makes us more
conscious about how to make design possible for all body
types through a better way. What if we do not need to try to
scan the body and make an mannequin to make interaction
with virtual products? What can we do to overcome the un-
certainty and unreliability of DIY? What can we do to make
a more instant ergonomic evaluation and design feedback for
all types of users? What if prototyping manifests itself in a
way that designer, user, and even ergonomist could virtually
gather together to accomplish fast prototyping? With these
questions, in this paper, we aim to accomplish reliable and
real-time design and evaluation in physical space with mixed
Reality (MR). Unlike VR, which creates an entirely new and
immersive 3D environment, MR adds more information to
the user’s current environment. Meanwhile, in order to meet
the prejudice of casual users and overcome the unreliability
of the design through DIY, it would be better if we include
designer and ergonomist to the design process. We emphasize
the importance of collaboration, and initiate an augmented

design paradigm, which enables user, designer and even er-
gonomist to gather up to achieve reliable and real-time design
and prototyping based on user’s pose either locally or remotely.
The contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) A novel
interactive design strategy for reliable and instant prototyping
by connecting user, designer and ergonomists together. (2)
CoAug-MR, a novel MR-based interactive design system that
enables multi-person collaboration locally or remotely. (3)
An initial usability study for the design system that shows the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

RELATED WORKS
Designing interfaces or systems for modeling 3D objects that
are accessible to casual users is of great importance for cus-
tomization since they enable non-professionals to show their
preferences, needs and expectations, meanwhile, engage them-
selves in design by themselves or with specialists. As men-
tioned in [4], it is very crucial to provide people with the
capacity to create what they want and make the design ﬁt their
geometries. They focus on building the experience prototyping
technique initiated in [26]. However, how to know whether the
pose is good or not should highly rely on ergonomic evaluation
[4, 15, 5].

Understanding user and pose measuring
The intention of understanding users is that, in a user-centered
approach, they need to model 3D products through design
interfaces. Lee et al. [8] conduct formative and evaluative
studies that target on the casual users in the iterative process
of personalizing items related to their use. In this way, casual
users have the chance to determine dimensions using their
body posing and acting.
In the virtual environment, they
can experience their design idea and evaluate their design
through the feedback. However, the prototype captures the
user’s body pose and supports a referral of a wide range of
body parts, which can only be working for some simple boxed
based design. For more complex designs, the location and
hand gestures and poses must be captured to support reference
plane.

On the other hand, understanding the user’s pose is also a
challenging task. Some studies have focused on using wire-
embedded sensors to measure poses [9, 23], others use wireless
sensors[21] and augmented mirror[1] to measure poses. Saul
in [19] develop a design system for end users. The
et al.
system allows end users to draw different styles of chairs and
then a virtual human representing the user is placed on the
chair to verify the stability of the chair. However, the DHMs
cannot represent the real human body and the anthropometric
information is limited due to a shortage of data. Therefore,
in this research, we claim that using the real human body for
evaluation should be the better and more reliable approach for
end-users. In summary, these studies strive to help users to un-
derstand and retain comfortable poses in their work, however,
they fail to take the work environment into account, which
could be problematic when their poses are disjointed with their
work circumstances.

Research focus DIY frabraction DIY ergonomic

Weichel [25]

Lee [8]

guidelines

Taylor[21]
Pose training

Pontonnier [18] Saul [19]
Ergonomic de-
sign

Chair sketch de-
sign system

Platform
H/W

AR
Kinect/HMD

VR
Kinect/HMD

VR
Kinect

VR
Mocap, EMG Webcam mark-

VR

S/W
Augmented
collaboration
Real-time
ergonomic
evaluation

Active pose
measuring
Interactive
simulation in
design
Evaluation of
system

N/A
No

N/A

No

Yes

Yes

Unity 3D
No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

N/A
No

Yes

Yes

No

No

N/A
No

N/A

No

No

No

ers

NyARToolkit
No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Ours
Augmented
collaborative
design
MR
Hololens,
motion
tracker,Kinect
Unity 3D
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Table 1. A systematic comparison with the state-of-art works. Different from other works, we propose a novel MR-based design system based on
augmented multi-person collaboration. Our method enables active pose measuring and interactive simulation in product design. Besides, through
augmented collaboration among casual users and professionals, our method also facilitates real-time ergonomic evaluation, instant feedback and instant
prototyping without the limitation of location. (N/A indicates not available.)

Ergonomic evaluation in design
Ergonomic evaluation is extremely crucial part of the design.
Woldstad et al. [24] use DHMs to design both equipment and
work environments to meet human operations. Through the
use of DHMs, designers and ergonomists can position and
manipulate operator with different anthropometry within the
simulated work environment. Mochimaru et al. [10] try to
target people with special and embed digital human models
to support design workshop. However, DHMs suffer from in-
sufﬁcient anthropometric and strength data, and the accuracy
of prediction still needs to be improved to reach the goal of
accurate prediction. In recent years, some real-time ergonomic
assessment methods have provided a great platform for the
design process. In [5], Haggag et al. use Kinect sensor as
a platform to support real-time rapid upper limb assessment
(RULA) for assembly operations in industrial environments.
They use voxel-based angle estimation to calculate angles of
each joint of the upper body part. However, the joint occlu-
sion makes the estimation unstable, and hand tracking is not
supported in the current sensor, which impedes the arm as-
sessment. In [15], Pastura et al. developed a computational
system for joint angles calculation of human body. They use
tracking markers positioned on speciﬁc anatomical points of
the body to design deﬁne body segments. Through the AR
environment, they build a low-cost infrastructure, which is
comprised of webcam and paper makers to compute joint an-
gles. Lee et al. [8] then visualize the ergonomic guideline
for furniture design.They explore ergonomic guidelines in
personal fabrication and identify a dependency map between
the user’s anthropometrics, pose recommendations and design
dimensions.

In this paper, we explore to provide intuitive ergonomic eval-
uation and instant design prototyping based on user’s on-site
performance of tasks. One problem about general ergonomic
guidelines for ofﬁce workstation design is that they are most
ﬁt to the large percentage of an intended user population, and
are conﬁned with a range from 5 percentiles to 95 percentiles.
On the other hand, as mentioned in [7], the guidelines for
ergonomists are based on the observation of body poses and
angles to evaluate design quality, however, these guidelines are
not directly aimed for individuals and for providing reliable
design recommendations. As they have divided the guidelines
into body-centered guidelines, object-centered guidelines and
space-centered guidelines. Body clearance indicates the dis-
tance between body and desk, body reachability indicates the
limitations of our hands and arms. They also modiﬁed the
guideline from the general population to a person. The elbow
angle for sitting posture is explained between 70 to 100 de-
grees. In this paper, we consider using this person-oriented er-
gonomic guideline for design evaluation and decision-making
based on [7].

Collaboration design system and VR/AR
In [28], Yee et al. propose a method to do in-situ 3D sketching
in the augmented environment. Gjosater et al. in [19] present
research called FurnitureAR, which applies augmented reality
to collaborative furniture design. They highlight the idea of
collaboration among designers who can ﬁrst sketch design
ideas in the CAD program and load model to FurnitAR for
collaboration.
In the collaborative environment, the CAD
model can be freely modiﬁed by designers and, meanwhile,
the usability factors can also be determined. However, the er-
gonomic evaluation of the design model is not considered. In
this paper, we argue that human-centered design with a group

Figure 2. The proposed design strategy. Instead of focusing on designer-centered design or user-centered design, we initialize collaborative design
among both casual users and specialists trough augmented collaboation, which enables fast and reliable prototyping and evaluation.

of professionals and non-professionals is much more reliable
and efﬁcient than one casual user or designers themselves. The
ﬁrst collaborative design framework with ergonomists was ini-
tiated by Pontonnier et al.
in [18]. They propose to use a
VR-based immersive virtual environment to represent worksta-
tion. They suggest to compute and visualize bio-mechanical
factors that could be represented as virtual manikin or sim-
ple curves to ergonomist. The basic idea of the framework
is to user sensor-bridging and sensor-sharing information to
enhance the user’s cognition and comprehension of the task.
However, this idea was just considered as a potential appli-
cation of the VR-supported prototyping of the workstation
design. Their proposal can provide us the indication for collab-
orative design with professionals and end users. However, in
virtual environment, human body can only be represented by
virtual mannequins, which can not represent real human body.
Thus, it is difﬁcult to conduct accurate ergonomic evaluation
in virtual environment. Noh et al.[12] propose an MR system
for avatar-mediated remote collaboration. They present an
application that enables a local user to interact and collaborate
with another user from remote space using natural hand mo-
tion. The system summons the remote user to the local space,
which is displayed as a virtual avatar in the real world view
seen by the user. We claim that DIY design is not reliable than
collaboration. We emphasize the importance of collaboration,
and initiate an augmented design paradigm, which enables
user, designer and even ergonomist to gather up to achieve
reliable and real-time design and prototyping based on user’s
pose either locally or remotely.

PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we describe the methodology for our design
system via augmented collaboration. For convenience, we
focus on ofﬁce workstation design as a typical example for
our method. There are some basic challenges to be solved for
our system. First of all, we try to overcome the drawbacks
of capturing the human body as a virtual human model as
done in [8, 18]. Since it takes too much time and energy to
scan the body and make an avatar, we propose a new way to
represent human body in the interactive environment. Our

approach is to avoid avataring user but instead to directly
utilize real body. Second, as discussed in previous section, DIY
is limited and less reliable, thus we instead address the concept
of collaborative design by which we get rid of the demerits of
pure user-centered design and pure designer-centered design
paradigms. As shown in Fig. 2, our method is to elaborate a
platform where casual users and specialists can all perform
their design and evaluation. Our goal is to enable designer
and ergonomist from either local space or remote space to
have collaboration with users to accomplish an efﬁcient and
reliable design. Third, we aim to design more intuitive and
situated experience according to the design guidelines. We
aim to create more immersive design environment by using
hand gestures, poses, and locations in MR environment. Last
but not least, we strive to create a platform that is ﬂexible for
the designer and ergonomist to participate in the design and
ergonomic evaluation no matter where they are ( either locally
or remotely).

Augmented collaborative design paradigm
Ergonomic guidelines for personal ﬁt
As shown in the left portion of Fig. 3, the designer needs to
take care of the design of ofﬁce workstation that should be
able to prevent any repetitive strain injury, eye strain, fatigue,
and discomfort. One problem about general ergonomic guide-
lines for ofﬁce workstation design is that they are most ﬁt to
the large percentage of an intended user population, and are
conﬁned with a range from 5 percentiles to 95 percentiles. On
the other hand, as mentioned in [7], the guidelines are based
on the observation of body poses and angles to evaluate de-
sign quality, however, these guidelines are not directly aimed
for individuals, thus making it hard for providing reliable de-
sign recommendations. As [7] have divided the guidelines
into body-centered guidelines, object-centered guidelines and
space-centered guidelines, which could be seen from Fig. 4.
Body clearance indicates the distance between body and desk,
body reachability indicates the limitations of our hands and
arms. They also modiﬁed the guideline from the general pop-
ulation to a person. The elbow angle for sitting posture is
explained between 70 to 100 degrees.

Figure 3. An illustration of our augmented collaboration design process. Our method incorporates the design guidelines based on the need from user,
human-centered design paradigm (both user and designer) and expert participation and inspection (designer and ergonomist). With this strategy, the
design system enables the local or remote collaboration for the design and evaluation among the user, designer and ergonomist.

Figure 4. Person-centered ergonomic design guidelines. We adopt the
ergonomic guidelines from [7].

In this paper, we consider using the person-oriented ergonomic
guideline for design evaluation and decision-making. We put
the user in the center place, where we ﬁrst study the needs of
users. The user cases are concentrated in order to establish
design guidelines. We ﬁrst ﬁnd the gap of designing for the
general population and designing for minorities. As most users
are suffering from various pains (e.g. neck pain, musculoskele-
tal disorders, etc), which is more or less indicating that there
might be improper design problems. Since designer-centered
workstation prototype cannot satiate the requirement of all
users, we aim to make the design approachable to all users
whether they are tall or short, fat or thin, young or old. We
are trying to specially take care of minorities and make design
guidelines for the convenience of designers as shown in left
portion in Fig. 3.

Extending human-centered design
As shown in the middle portion of Fig. 3, we try to incorporate
the human-centered design paradigm based on the ergonomic
design guidelines. The aim is to develop the situated and
interactive environment to assist designer who provide var-
ious design solutions. We try to initiate a system that ﬁrst
enables user and designer to achieve the customization of
workstation, and the system can provide real-time feedback
and recommendations to the design and body pose. Based
on the guidelines and needs, we design our system that en-
ables designers to make human-centered ofﬁce workstation
prototypes and provide users with various solutions. For ofﬁce

workstation design, there will be many kinds of types, either
for sitting or for standing. Thus, we strive to make the system
possible for designers to provide various the digital prototypes
and make adjustments while resorting to the preference of
users.

Collaborative evaluation from expert
As mentioned above, the user and designer can achieve the
goal of design and customization, however, whether it is er-
gonomically reasonable or not should be based on professional
ergonomist. As shown in the right portion of Fig. 3, we ini-
tialize new paradigm based on expert inspection, in which the
controlled pose study is conducted. We focus on the evalu-
ation of ergonomist who will provide more robust analysis
for the design and more scientiﬁc feedback based on the pose
study and estimation. We claim that the collaboration with
ergonomist can ensure the design quality based on the proto-
type from both users and designers. Besides, ergonomist can
have deeper analysis on some unreasonable poses and make
decisions with designers to ensure the product or prototypes
to be comfortable and safe.

MR-based interactive design via augmented collaboration
Fig. 5 shows the hardware and software conﬁguration of our
MR-based design system. We highlight three crucial inter-
action modules for our system, namely, information-sharing,
multi-user interaction and spatial engagement.

Information sharing
The ergonomic guidelines and workstation dimensions can
be provided in different ways. In this research, we focus on
visualizing them in the augmented space. The ergonomic
postures and angles from back, neck, and elbow are visual-
ized based on the ergonomic guidelines from [8, 17, 22]. We
visualize the ergonomic guidelines based on real people in
physical space under MR environment and the dimensions
(height, width, length, etc.) of virtual workstation as shown
Fig. 6. Through the topology mapping of Hololens, the vir-
tual desk is connected with the ground, and also the physical
dimensions to the ground is also consistent with real-world

Figure 5. The system diagram of our MR-based interactive design system via augmented multi-person collaboration. Our MR system consists of
information sharing module, multi-person interaction module and spatial engagement module. We utilize Kinect, vuforia and Hololens as our hardware
components and we develop our MR-based design system in Unity. The information sharing module consist of sharing information among user, designer
and ergonomist. The multi-person interaction module contains interaction between user and designer, user and ergonomist, and user and ergonomist.
The spatial engagement module contains design analysis and pose analysis.

associated with user’s body, pose and preference, hence, the
system needs to provide communication and interaction be-
tween the user, designer and ergonomist. For instance, when
the user wants to ﬁx certain desk height after adjustments,
the designer needs to get feedback from the user and observe
user’s body and workstation dimensions to make sure that they
are in the allowed ranges or sizes. Meanwhile, the ergonomist
and designer need to provide feed-forward and feedback in-
formation to each other when the user performs tasks. For the
ergonomist and user, they also need to have real-time interac-
tion. For example, when a user says that he/she is content with
the workstation design, the egonomist has to check several rep-
resentative poses and make sure that the ergonomic evaluation
is reasonable and reliable. This idea is to make the interaction
ﬂows not only between human and computer but also human
and human. We accomplish this multi-person interaction via
the sharing of Hololens space. As shown in Fig. 5, there exists
Hololens one ( we call as master Hololens). In reality, the mas-
ter Hololens will mostly dominated by the user, and there are
two slave Hololens that are used by designer and ergonomist.

Spatial engagement
One crucial aspect for the collaborative design and evaluation
is that it needs to support immersive environment where all
people who participate can be fully engaged. One challenge
might be the case where user cannot see the virtual scene
clearly due to the narrow ﬁeld of view of Hololens. Therefore,
the system must ensure that all information in Fig. 2 should
be shown in the augmented space, and all participants could
be able to fully engaged in the design process. If all necessary
design parameters, related anthropometrics and ergonomic
recommendations are not apparently shown, either user or
designer will lose concentration, which could be detrimental

Figure 6. A captured scene of virtual ofﬁce workstation in physical space
from our MR-based design system.

dimensions. Besides, upper body angles are highlighted when
the angles are beyond the range of recommendations. We
aim to make the workstation design a process that includes
information gathering, and information collection, especially
the user’s preference and pose, and eventually information
sharing among all participants. Fig. 7 shows the body joints
from Kinect. We mainly track the upper body joints when user
is sitting, and all body joints when standing. We fuse body
pose tracking with Hololens projection, such that the pose
tracked from real person will be projected to MR space, where
the ergonomic information will shared to all people joining
the system. We also calculated the RULA [5] angles based
on the ergonomic guidelines from [8]. In design process, the
information related to workstation and RULA angles based
ergonomic guidelines will be shared in the MR space.

Multi-person interaction
As the design and evaluation are conducted among user, de-
signer, and ergonomist, and meanwhile, design guidelines are

Figure 7. A scene showing the body joints captured from Kinect and
projected to Hololens space (MR space).

to the effectiveness of design and evaluation. Upon the fact
that Hololens has narrow ﬁeld of view (FoV), however, we
successfully merge all information needed to Hololens space.
We initiate some space projection methods based on vufo-
ria markers after Kinect calibration. We then fuse the body
skeleton information with the virtual workstation to the MR
environment. We show all the information needed for user,
designer and ergonomist in the shared space so that they can
be engaged to the largest extent. We also conduct usability
study, which will be described in next section.

System conﬁguration
Fig. 5 depicts the detailed principle of our system. For hard-
ware, it contains Kinect, vuforia makers, Hololens and PC
(Windows 10, 8G memory). For software, it consists of Unity
together with C# API. The conﬁguration is built in Unity 3D
as a platform for creating the basic MR environment. We
create two types of ofﬁce workstations by a designer, which
are somehow simpliﬁed but similar to the real ones. A vir-
tual computer with keyboard and mouse was placed in the
workstation so that it provides the user with the chance to be
fully immersed when performing tasks as shown in 6. The
system consists of three key functions. First of all, in order
to conduct an ergonomic evaluation, we use Microsoft Kinect
as the skeleton and pose tracking device. The main aim is
to track body joints and conduct ergonomic evaluation using
RULA[18] based on the guidelines from [7] for upper body es-
timation. The measured angles include viewpoint angles from
eyes, arm angles, trunk ﬂexion angle, and lower arm ﬂexion
angle. These angles and poses in ergonomic measurements are
further projected to MR space generated in Hololens. Second,
calibration and localization using vuforia marker as shown in
the top portion of Fig. 8. The calibration is done through
a virtual box created in MR space and is based on the afﬁne
transformation matrix calculated from quaternion as shown in
the bottom portion of Fig. 8. Besides, the vuforia marker is
also utilized as an approach to localize Kinect in MR space.
Since the pose tracked by Kinect from a user is aligned with
coordinate of Hololens, through localization, it is possible to
share all topology information. Lastly, the distance of ofﬁce
workstation layer to ground and workstation dimensions are
shared in the MR space, where user, designer and ergonomist
can view and refer. The ergonomic body pose evaluation was
assessed in Hololens space, where the projected body joints
and measured angles from Kinect are shown in the user’s body.
Meanwhile, the virtual desk is displayed in front of the user.

Figure 8. A scene showing vuforia marker for localization and calibra-
tion. The upper ﬁgure shows the vuforia marker we designed for local-
ization of Kinect. Bottom one shows that Kinect is projected to Hololens
space as a green box.

The sharing of Hololens scenes is conveyed through a server,
which connects other Hololens through WiFi. The collabo-
rative design system aims to personalize workstation design
with ergonomic guidelines through the incorporation with an-
thropometrics, pose and design dimensions through sharing
in MR space. The system not only focuses on the interaction
between human and computer but also the interaction between
human and human in the augmented space.

USER STUDY AND EVALUATION
In order to evaluate our system, we conducted usability study
and tried to get some feedback from participants about how
they thought about our MR-based design system. We are in-
terested in how well they feel about the non-specialists could
collaborate with the designers and to what extent they could
feel the augmented workstation when performing tasks. Dur-
ing the study, we collected preliminary qualitative feedback
to gain insight into the experience of collaborating with the
designer and ergonomist.

Participants
We recruited one designer who was a student majoring in-
dustrial design (Age:26, M) and had experience of product
design using VR. We also recruited one researcher majoring
in human factors (Age:28, M) and he had experience of using
MR devices. We also recruited 5 participants as users between
the ages of 25 to 32 (M: 26.4, SD=1.95) to do a preliminary
evaluation of our system. The users all had no experience in in-
dustrial design or had no knowledge about ergonomics. Most
of them never studied the principle of human-computer inter-
action and VR/AR. Most participants worked mostly at school
library or labs. All participants had their own preference and
needs for their ofﬁce workstations.

Figure 9. Experimental results of our proposed MR-based design system via augmented collaboration. Left shows the workstation design and evaluation
when user is sitting, and right shows the scene when user is standing. The design information (workstation dimensions and color, etc) and ergonomic
information (RULA angles from ergonomic guidelines) are shared with all participants.

Procedure of usability study
The usability study consists of three stages: familiarization of
design and interaction, collaborative design, and feedback sur-
vey. The goal of the ﬁrst stage was to let the participants know
what was the hardcore of design and the basics of human-
computer interaction, especially interaction in MR. We started
by explaining the concept of CoAug-MR in conjunction with
the interface, interactions and design strategies. The partici-
pants were ﬁrst asked to listen to our introduction to the tasks
and system principles. We introduced why we did this, what
they can see from Hololens and what they will be doing in the
augmented environment. In the second stage, the participants
were asked to join the design with experts.We ﬁrst provided a
chance for them to practice, then the users started designing
with the designer and ergonomist until all them are satisﬁed
with their expectation. The design was immediately followed
by an questionnaire survey in the third stage regrading their
design and engagement in the design and evaluation. For
analysis, we checked the feedback from the users from each
question and also the open suggestions in the last question.

Results and discussion
All of the users participated in the design of ofﬁce worksta-
tion that met their needs and preferences via augmented multi-
person collaboration. As shown in the left of Fig.9, one subject
was designing the workstation with the designer in augmented
space locally, while ergonomist was checking the body poses
and provideed ergonomic analysis based on design. The right
side of in Fig. 9 shows the scene where the user was designing
the workstation with the designer in standing pose locally, and
ergonomist was also conducting ergonomic evaluation. The
ergonomic pose angles and ofﬁce workstation information
were all shared in the MR space. The user, designer and er-
gonomist will interact and instantly achieve the design task via
augmented collaboration. Right after the users’ participation
of design with designer and ergonomist, they were asked to
immediately ﬁnish a questionnaire survey.

The ﬁrst question we asked was ‘how clearly can you feel the
existence of computer workstation in Hololens space?’. As
shown in Fig. 10, a few participants replied that the ﬁeld of
view of Hololens was narrow, but it did not affect the clear
existence of ofﬁce workstation in the Hololens. And 80% of

them were very satisﬁed with the 3D ofﬁce workstation model
in Hololens.

Figure 10. The usability study results from question.1. Around 20% of
participants respond that they were okay to see the virtual ofﬁce work-
station in MR space even though they felt the FoV of Hololens was nar-
row. And 80% participants were satisﬁed with the clearance of ofﬁce
workstation.

In the following question ‘to what extent can you be absorbed
in performing the task on the virtual desk?’, we asked them
about their concentration when performing the design tasks.
As shown in Fig. 11, 20% of participants replied that they were
almost immersed when performing design tasks. Most users
(80%) were fully concentrated on the design and prototyping
of the ofﬁce workstation, and had a nice interaction with both
designer and ergonomist via the augmented collaboration.

Figure 11. Usability study results from question 2. Most participants
respond that they are fully absorbed in the design process.

In question 3, we asked ‘to what extent they felt engaged
during the collaboration with the designer in certain scenar-
ios?’. 80% of participants replied that they were highly content
with the engagement with the designer as shown in Fig. 12.

They mentioned that the design was interesting since they
can have a real-time design under the assistance of designer
and ergonomist, who provided professional knowledge for
them regarding ofﬁce workstation style and safe body pose.
This actually reﬂects that our MR system is well designed for
engagement of users, designer and ergonomist.

Figure 12. Usability study results from question 3. Most participants
(around 80%) were highly conﬁdent that they were able to be engaged
in the collaboration with designer and ergonomist.

We then evaluated how much they were convinced about their
poses when they said they were sitting in a proper way or
standing correctly. As shown in Fig. 13, more than 60% of
the participants said that they were highly sure that their poses
were good for them when they ﬁnalized their expected work-
station dimensions done by the designer. The remained replied
they are almost sure that they were sitting in the proper po-
sition in a correct pose. The results show that our system
can accurately estimate their body poses, which is more efﬁ-
cient (no need for DHMs and mannequins) and reliable for
dangerous pose prevention.

Figure 13. Usability study results from question 4. More than 60% par-
ticipants replied that they were highly convinced that they were sitting in
a proper way, which was consistent with the feedback from ergonomist.

In question 5, we asked them about their satisfaction with the
design of ofﬁce workstation made by the designer. Fig. 14
shows that more than 60% of participants gave a reasonable
feedback about the design done by the designer. The other
two participants said that they were somehow sure about the
design quality due to the small ﬁeld of view of Hololens.

Figure 14. Usability study results from question 5. Most people are
satisﬁed with the design work done with designer.

future, we will ﬁnd an alternative to improve the effectiveness
of design engagement.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented CoAug-MR, a MR-based
interactive design method via augmented multi-person col-
laboration. We emphasized the importance of collaboration,
and initiate an augmented design paradigm, which enables
user, designer and even ergonomist to gather up to achieve
reliable and real-time design and prototyping based on user’s
pose either locally or remotely. The evaluation of the sys-
tem showed that users can successfully conduct collaborative
design with designer based on ergonomic evaluations with
experts, which demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed
method. It is worthy of mentioning that our system is also
capable of designing any other products based on the usage
and application, which will be our future work. We will also
focus more on remote collaboration via teleportation technol-
ogy, which provides the possibility to transport a person or
a product instantly from one place to the other. In this way,
our proposed CoAug-MR can handle more complex product
design and remote collaboration problem. The other goal is
to ﬁnd better device for better user experience since Hololens
has some drawbacks in terms of spatial engagement.

REFERENCES

[1] Fraser Anderson, Tovi Grossman, Justin Matejka, and
George Fitzmaurice. 2013. YouMove: enhancing
movement training with an augmented reality mirror. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology. ACM, 311–320.

[2] Leif P Berg and Judy M Vance. 2017. Industry use of
virtual reality in product design and manufacturing: a
survey. Virtual reality 21, 1 (2017), 1–17.

[3] Sean Follmer, David Carr, Emily Lovell, and Hiroshi

Ishii. 2010. CopyCAD: remixing physical objects with
copy and paste from the real world. In Adjunct
proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology. ACM, 381–382.

Lastly, we provided that chance for them to give any sugges-
tions to the design of our system. Most people said the design
is fabulous, however, the ﬁeld of view of Hololens was too nar-
row, which might weaken the quality of design and evaluation
experience in the experiment. They all wanted to get a wider
view for better immersion in the augmented space. In the near

[4] Claudio Henrique dos Santos Grecco, Isaac José

Antônio Luquetti dos Santos, Antônio Carlos Abreu
Mol, Paulo Victor Rodrigues de Carvalho,
Antonio Carlos Silva, Francisco José Oliveira Ferreira,
Marco Dutra, and others. 2007. Virtual reality
technology as a tool for human factors requirements

evaluation in design of the nuclear reactors control
desks. (2007).

Canadian Engineering Education Association (CEEA)
(2007).

[5] Hussein Haggag, Mohammed Hossny, Saeid Nahavandi,
and D Creighton. 2013. Real time ergonomic assessment
for assembly operations using kinect. In 2013 UKSim
15th International Conference on Computer Modelling
and Simulation. IEEE, 495–500.

[6] Pavel G Ikonomov and Emiliya D Milkova. 2003. Using
virtual reality simulation through product lifecycle. In
ASME 2003 International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection, 761–767.

[7] Bokyung Lee, Minjoo Cho, Joonhee Min, and Daniel

Saakes. 2016. Posing and acting as input for
personalizing furniture. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. ACM, 44.

[8] Bokyung Lee, Joongi Shin, Hyoshin Bae, and Daniel
Saakes. 2018. Interactive and Situated Guidelines to
Help Users Design a Personal Desk That Fits Their
Bodies. In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing
Interactive Systems Conference. ACM, 637–650.

[17] Stephen Pheasant and Christine M Haslegrave. 2018.

Bodyspace: Anthropometry, ergonomics and the design
of work. CRC Press.

[18] Charles Pontonnier, Georges Dumont, Asfhin Samani,

Pascal Madeleine, and Marwan Badawi. 2014.
Designing and evaluating a workstation in real and
virtual environment: toward virtual reality based
ergonomic design sessions. Journal on Multimodal User
Interfaces 8, 2 (2014), 199–208.

[19] Greg Saul, Manfred Lau, Jun Mitani, and Takeo Igarashi.
2011. SketchChair: an all-in-one chair design system for
end users. In Proceedings of the ﬁfth international
conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied
interaction. ACM, 73–80.

[20] Hagen Schumann, Silviu Burtescu, and Frank Siering.

1998. Applying augmented reality techniques in the ﬁeld
of interactive collaborative design. In European
Workshop on 3D Structure from Multiple Images of
Large-Scale Environments. Springer, 290–303.

[9] Corinne Mattmann, Oliver Amft, Holger Harms,

[21] Brett Taylor, Max Birk, Regan L Mandryk, and Zenja

Gerhard Troster, and Frank Clemens. 2007. Recognizing
upper body postures using textile strain sensors. In 2007
11th IEEE international symposium on wearable
computers. IEEE, 29–36.

[10] Masaaki Mochimaru. 2017. Digital human models for
human-centered design. Journal of Robotics and
Mechatronics 29, 5 (2017), 783–789.

[11] Toshihiro Morisawa, Masashi Sawa, Kenji Tamaki,

Toshiharu Miwa, Kousaku Tachikawa, Hisahiko Abe,
Toshihiro Nakajima, and Yoshio Iwata. 2003.
Development of Run-to-Run Control System for Oxide
Film CMP for High-Product Mix Fab, 4th European
AEC. In APC Conference.

[12] Seung-Tak Noh, Hui-Shyong Yeo, and Woontack Woo.

2015. An HMD-based mixed reality system for
avatar-mediated remote collaboration with bare-hand
interaction. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality and Telexistence and
20th Eurographics Symposium on Virtual Environments.
Eurographics Association, 61–68.

[13] Stig Ottosson. 2002. Virtual reality in the product

development process. Journal of Engineering Design 13,
2 (2002), 159–172.

[14] Hyungjun Park, Jeong-Soo Son, and Kwan-Heng Lee.
2008. Design evaluation of digital consumer products
using virtual reality-based functional behaviour
simulation. Journal of Engineering Design 19, 4 (2008),
359–375.

[15] FCH Pastura, GL de Almeida, and G CUNHA. Joint
angles calculation through augmented reality. In
Proceedings of The 2nd International Digital Human
Modeling Symposium 2013.

[16] Qingjin Peng. 2007. Virtual Reality Technology in

product design and manufacturing. Proceedings of the

Ivkovic. 2013. Posture training with real-time visual
feedback. (2013).

[22] Peter Vink. 2004. Comfort and design: principles and

good practice. CRC press.

[23] Qi Wang, Marina Toeters, Wei Chen, Annick

Timmermans, and Panos Markopoulos. 2016. Zishi: a
smart garment for posture monitoring. In Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3792–3795.

[24] Diana Wegner, Jim Chiang, Brent Kemmer, Dan
Lämkull, and Roland Roll. 2007. Digital human
modeling requirements and standardization. Technical
Report. SAE Technical Paper.

[25] Christian Weichel, Manfred Lau, David Kim, Nicolas
Villar, and Hans W Gellersen. 2014. MixFab: a
mixed-reality environment for personal fabrication. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3855–3864.

[26] Hsin-Chieh Wu, Min-Chi Chiu, Cheng-Lung Lee, and
Ming-Yao Bai. 2013. Usability evaluation of the
universal computer workstation under supine, sitting and
standing postures. In International Conference on
Human Interface and the Management of Information.
Springer, 151–156.

[27] Jilin Ye, Saurin Badiyani, Vinesh Raja, and Thomas

Schlegel. 2007. Applications of virtual reality in product
design evaluation. In International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 1190–1199.

[28] Brandon Yee, Yuan Ning, and Hod Lipson. 2009.

Augmented reality in-situ 3D sketching of physical
objects. In Intelligent UI workshop on sketch
recognition, Vol. 1. Citeseer.

