A SHORT VIRTUAL REALITY MINDFULNESS MEDITATION 
TRAINING FOR REGAINING SUSTAINED ATTENTION 
1ASATI Minkesh,   2MIYACHI Taizo 

1,2Electrical and Electronics Engineering Department, Tokai University, Japan 
Email: 1minkeshasati@gmail.com, 2miyachi@tokai-u.jp 

Abstract:  The ability to focus one’s attention underlies success in many everyday tasks, but voluntary attention cannot be 
sustained for a long period of time. Several studies indicate that attention training using computer-based exercises can lead to 
improved attention in children and adults. A major goal of recent research is to create a short (10 minutes) and effective VR 
Mindfulness meditation particularly designed for regaining or improving sustained attention. In this study, we have created a 
custom virtually relaxing environment including an archery game with multiple targets. In the experiment, the attention span 
of  12  adults  are  tested  before  and  after  the  virtual  reality  session  by  a  non-action  video  game  ([19])  score  and  Muse 
headband EEG-signals. After the 10-minute virtual reality session, participants’ game scores increased (according to game 
experience): for the beginner by 275%, for intermediate by 107%, and for an expert by 17%. For Muse headband data, calm 
points increased by 250% irrespective of the participants gaming experience. After the experiment, all participants reported 
feeling recharged to continue their daily activities. 

Keywords: Sustained Attention, Mindfulness Meditation, Virtual Reality, Archery game. 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

Sustained attention is "the ability to direct 

and focus cognitive activity on specific stimuli over 
a long period of time." In order to complete any 
cognitively planned activity, any sequenced action, 
or any thought, one must use sustained attention. It 
is what makes it possible to concentrate on an 
activity for as long as it takes to finish, even if there 
are other distracting stimuli present. Examples of 
sustained attention include listening to a lecture, 
reading a book, playing a video game, or fixing a 
car. Problems occur when a distraction arises. A 
distraction can interrupt and consequently interfere 
in sustained attention.  

Cohen R.A. (2011) [1] describes Sustained 

attention as one of the primary elements or 
component processes of attention. It enables the 
maintenance of vigilance, selective and focused 
attention, response persistence, and continuous 
effort despite changing conditions. DeGangi and 
Porges (1990) [2] indicate there are three stages to 
sustained attention which include: attention getting, 
attention holding, and attention releasing.  The 
level of sustained attention varies from person to 
person. However, a key aspect of sustained 
attention is the ability to refocus on the task after a 
distraction arises. 

Mindfulness meditation training has been 

linked to a broad range of cognitive, affective, and 
health outcomes. Some of the most robust findings 
in the cognitive domain pertain to how mindfulness 
meditation training can foster on-task, sustained 
attention and reduce mind-wandering (see e.g. [3] 
[4] [5] [6] [7] [8]). Hayley A. Rahl,2016 [9] tested 
two competing accounts for how mindfulness 
training reduces mind-wandering. 

Virtual reality technologies have been 

successfully used in many therapies, especially 

those that rely on mental imagery: to elicit and 
modulate psychophysiological symptoms of 
anxiety and fear reactions, in both patients with 
anxiety disorders and healthy individuals [10]. 
Patients with phobias who traditionally have 
attempted to desensitize themselves within their 
imagination can face their fears in a controllable 
virtual environment [11].  Similarly, patients with 
eating disorders who suffer from distorted body 
image can change their self-image through a virtual 
body [12]. 

     We propose “10-minute Virtual Reality 
Mindfulness Meditation Training” particularly for 
regaining sustained attention. Anyone can take 
even in the middle of busy everyday life for 
recharging and regaining sustained attention at their 
best. 

EXISTING METHODOLOGIES 

2.  
AND THEIR PROBLEMS 

2.1 Most effective existing methodology/system 
of Sustained Attention Training 

Traditionally, meditation has been 
considered as something that needs to be exercised 
almost daily and for long periods. However, 
recently there has been a growing interest in short-
duration meditation or mindfulness programs, 
which could provide results quickly. There are now 
several studies showing that brief mindfulness 
meditation training reduces mind-wandering and 
improve sustained attention (see e.g. [4] [5]). 

Neuroadaptive virtual reality meditation 

system (that combines virtual reality with 
neurofeedback) provides a very effective 
Meditation and Mindfulness Training. Shaw et al. 
[13] introduced the Meditation Chamber, an 
immersive virtual environment for meditation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training. The system used skin conductance as the 
biofeedback mechanism in three guided meditation 
and relaxation exercises. RelaWorld [14] measures 
participants' brain activity in real time via EEG and 
calculates estimates for the level of concentration 
and relaxation. These values are then mapped into 
the virtual reality. Similarly, PsychicVR [15] non-
invasively monitors and records the electrical 
activity of the brain and incorporates this data in 
the VR experience using an Oculus Rift and the 
MUSE headband. When the participant is focused, 
they are able to make changes in the 3D 
environment and control their powers (focusing 
ability). 

A study by Zeidan et al. [16] hints that a 
brief mindfulness meditation intervention of only 
three sessions leads to reduced heart rate and 
increased heart rate variability (which is related to 
well-being and positive affect; [17]) immediately 
after or during meditation tasks, whereas Steffen 
and Larson [18] present evidence of reduced 
cardiovascular reactivity to a stressor during a 
single mindfulness meditation session. 

Traditional approach (see e.g. [3] [4] [5] 
[6] [7] [8]) are effective but not enough attractive 
to motivate the participant to take the session in the 
busy daily schedule. Neuroadaptive virtual reality 
meditation training is enjoyable and effective but 
time-consuming (EEG or Skin conductance sensors 
require at least 10-minutes to record quality signals 
before starting the training). Also, these are 
complex procedures such as attaching EEG sensors 
or skin conductors to the body and those are not 
usually comfortable during the mediation. To 
minimize the downsides of these systems, in this 
research, we are contributing a short and simple but 
effective VR mindfulness meditation training 
particularly for improving or regaining sustained 
attention. 

2.2 Problems of existing methodology/system of 
Sustained Attention Training 

P1: Hand-eye coordination training is not available 

Hand-eye coordination is a complex 
cognitive ability, as it calls for us to unite our 
visual and motor skills, allowing for the hand to be 
guided by the visual stimulation our eyes receive. 
Most activities that we do in our day-to-day life use 
some degree of eye-hand coordination, and it is a 
crucial aspect of sustained attention training. 

P2: Reaction time training is not available 

Reaction time refers to the amount of time 

that takes places between when we perceive 
something to when we respond to it. It is the ability 
to detect, process, and respond to a stimulus. 
Reaction time necessarily includes a motor 
component, unlike processing speed. Therefore, 
having good reaction time is associated with having 

good reflexes. Its mean distractions can be avoided 
without dividing the attention. 

P3: Traditional video game is not enjoyable 

Some research is effective, but they are 

based on traditional computer/mobile video games 
(action or non-action) training. These video games 
are not interesting enough in this modern VR world 
to motivate the participant to play it. 

We explained above three problems (P1, 
P2, P3) where P1 and P2 belongs to existing VR 
mindfulness mediation systems ([13] [14] [15]) and 
P3 belongs to traditional approaches ([3] [4] [5] [6] 
[7] [8]). 

Virtual Reality Mindfulness 

3.  
Meditation Training 

3.1 Methodology for problems 
Solution 1 for P1: 

We introduced a hand-eye coordination 
training in the VR archery game by placing five 
targets in a very systematic position (four of them 
are placed on the corners and one is in the center of 
a virtual cube). Additionally, the archer must shoot 
in a way similar to shooting in real life archery; 
otherwise the archery shot will not be complete. In 
these situations, hand-eye coordination is very 
important.  

Solution 2 for P2: 

We also included reaction time training in 

the VR archery game. If the arrow hits the target, 
then it will flash out (and disappear) and reappear 
after five seconds. There are total 5 targets so that 
participant need 5 seconds to finish all targets. If 
the participant takes one second to finish one target 
then after 5 seconds, the participant will see only 
one target and it will be continuing until participant 
continue this cycle (one target in one second). 
Participants are advised to finish all targets in a 
way that you should be able to see only one target 
at a time. To achieve this condition, the archer must 
shoot each target in one or less than one second. In 
these situations, the reaction time is going to play 
an important role. 

Solution 3 for P3: 

An immersive and calm virtual 
environment was created where the participant can 
walk and will feel refreshed by observing the 
mountains, trees, fireplace, paintings, and aquarium.  

3.2 Strong Points of 10-minute Virtual Reality 
Mindfulness Meditation Training 

1.  Hand-eye Coordination Training with 

archery game in a very calm and enjoyable 
virtual environment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Reaction time training by creating a 

competitive situation in the archery game. 

3.  Peaceful music, beautiful scenery, and 
realistic feeling of air flow through the 
mountains and jellyfish movement in an 
aquarium to give an immersive and 
refreshing virtual experience to the 
participant. 

These three points together make an effective 

VR Sustained Attention Training through 
Mindfulness Meditation session.  

3.3 Our Method vs Other Archery games 

Ordinary archery games are designed just 
for fun or general brain training. Our archery game 
is particularly designed for sustained attention 
training, and VR immersion provides an enjoyable 
and calm environment. The main advantages are as 
follows: 
(1)  Easy shooting: 

The participant does not have to do any extra 
effort to get/align the arrow with the bow 
because the arrow will appear and be aligned 
automatically when the archer pulls the string 
of the bow. 

(2)  Easy adjustment with short distance motion to 

next target: 
Archery game has six-degree of freedom. 
Therefore, the participant can easily change 
their short distance position and orientation to 
shoot the next target.  

(3)  Rhythmical shooting Motivation: 

In the archery game, there are total 5 targets. If 
the arrow hits the target, then it will flash out 
(and disappear) and reappear after five 
seconds. This will create a cycle and motivate 
the archer to keep focus and continue the cycle 
(one target in one or less than one second) 
because if a single target is missed, then the 
cycle will be broken. 

3.4 System Feature and Structure 

The underlying motivation and design 

principle of this system was to create a short 
training by combining the proven methods of 
Mindfulness Meditation and virtual reality into one 
package that would allow novice or even 
experienced meditators to regain the sustained 
attention even in the middle of busy everyday life. 

Virtual Reality Environment: 

A Virtual Reality Environment was 
created with a room made of three walls. Instead of 
the 4th wall, there was a balcony, and from the 
balcony, the participant a wonderful view of 
mountains and trees. To decorate the room, there 
was a fireplace, some paintings, and chandeliers. 
We created a large aquarium in the balcony. By 
standing beside the aquarium, participant can shoot 
light-bubbles (archery target) with an archery bow. 

In the aquarium, there are some jellyfish, making 
the real sound while moving to provide a calm 
environment to the participant. Also, the participant 
can feel the sound of air and tree leaves while 
standing or playing the archery game in the balcony. 
This setup is created to provide a very calm 
environment and fresh feeling for the participant. 

Figure 1: Immersive VR environment (Scene) 

Hand-eye Coordination Training: 

In the archery game, the participant is 

standing beside the aquarium, oriented towards the 
mountain view. There are five light bubbles 
(archery target). Four of them are placed on the 
corners, and one is in the center of a cube. The 
archer does not have to do any extra effort to 
get/align the arrow with the bow because the arrow 
will appear and be aligned automatically when the 
archer pulls the string of the bow. However, both of 
the archer’s hands should be aligned in the right 
direction (such as the real archery hand positions); 
otherwise the shot will not be completed. This type 
of situation is created for Hand-eye coordination 
Training. 

Reaction Time Training: 

In the archery game, if the arrow hits the 

target, then it will flash out (and disappear) and 
reappear after five seconds. Participants must finish 
all target in a way where you are able to see only 
one target at a time. To achieve this condition, the 
archer must shoot a target in one second or less. 
This will create a cycle and motivate the archer to 
keep focus and continue the cycle because if a 
single target is missed, then the cycle will be 
broken, and more than one target will have 
appeared. These situations are created for Reaction 
Time Training. 

This training helps the participant to 

increase the attention span, and Virtual Reality 
Environment provides an enjoyable and calm 
environment. All these three parts together make an 
effective sustained attention training. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

3 

1 

5 

4
1 

Figure 2: VR Archery game (1 bow and 5 target) 

3.4 Evaluation 

To evaluate the system, we were looking 
for a game which would be able to check response 
time and sustained attention with a very good 
participant experience. Finally, we selected a non-
action video game [19] after playing more than 30 
similar types of games. All you must do in this 
game is guess the right color and tap on the right 
answer of the three given options. Hence the 
questions are a set of words spelling a color, 
although the color in which they are written is 
different. You must select the right color filling that 
word. What makes this game interesting but 
confusing at the same time is that when you play 
the game, there is a strict time limit for each answer. 
Therefore, it becomes very difficult, and any break 
in your attention forces you to start over. Your 
score increases with every right answer you give, 
and you start over every time you answer 
incorrectly. 

Figure 3: Home and Play screen of Game [19] 

We let participants practice the video 

game [19] before evaluation to become familiar 
with it. In the evaluation process, participants were 
instructed to play this game before (three times) 
and after (three times) the VR Training and 
recorded the game-score. We set up to play the 
game three times before and after the training to get 
a precise score (average) and reducing any 
accidental errors. Also, participants wore Muse 
headband (5 EEG sensors) while playing the game, 
and we captured the mind state of the participant by 

recording the eye blinking and EEG signals. Data 
was recorded in the interval of every 100 ms (10 
times in a second). 

4.  

EXPERIMENTS 

4.1 Participants 
Subject: 

12 random participants (eight male and 

four female) were selected between 20 to 24 years 
old.  

During selection, we also considered 

gaming experience of the participants (four 
beginning, four intermediate, and four expert 
gamers).  

Two participants wore glasses (-
1<eyesight<+1.25) on daily basis. Also, 
participants were invited to our lab in the middle of 
the day when their morning freshness has faded, 
and their sustained attention is not at their best. 

Major arm: 

 Two participants were left handed. The 

rest of the 10 participants were right handed. 

Game name: 

VR Archery for sustained attention. 

4.2 Procedure: 

When arriving in the lab, the participant 
sat in a comfortable chair. We checked the heart 
rate with a wristband (Fitbit charge 3) and waited 
until the heart rate is not steady to get a real insight 
of heart rate variation during the experiment 
(training and evaluation).  
(1)  VR participants experienced a demo game 
(Oculus first contact) before VR training.  

(2)  Before and after the VR Training, the 

participant is instructed to play a computer-
based non-action video game [19] to evaluate 
the attention span.  

(3)  We let the participant practice the video game 
[19] before evaluation for getting familiar with 
it. For evaluating the calmness of the 
participant during the evaluation game, a 
Muse-headband were used to record brain 
signals and eye-blink data.  

(4)  The participant experienced the Mindfulness 

session (sustained attention training) for 10 
minutes.  

(5)  After the experiments, we thanked the 

participant and provided a short briefing about 
the purpose of the experiment. 

The whole experiment session took 

between 25 to 40 minutes. 

4.3 Hardware 

This Mindfulness Meditation Session is a 

3D-virtual reality environment designed for 
Sustained Attention Training. It utilizes the Oculus 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Rift DK2 head-mounted display and its touch 
controllers. A Fitbit charge-3 wristband used to 
check the heart rate variability of the participant 
during VR Training and Evaluation. A Muse 
headband was used to capture eye-blink data and 
EEG signals during evaluation. 

5.  

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

5.1 Results:  

Every participant played the game [19] for 
evaluation before (3-times) and after (3-times) the 
training and recorded the scores. Also, by using the 
Muse headband, three types of data were recorded, 
a) Calm points, b) Recoveries, and c) Birds count. 
Also, by using a wristband (ECG sensors), heart 
rate variability (HRV) was recorded during the 
entire experiment (training as well as evaluation). 
In this section, we define all the terms in 
which we have presented the recorded muse data. 
Participants’ state of mind can be divided into three 
states (neutral, calm, and active). Calm points are 
calculated with this formula – [(neutral (seconds) * 
1 + calm (seconds) * 3)/8]. Recoveries mean total 
counts of returning from the active state to the 
neutral state. Also, birds count stands for being in a 
calm state for a long time. 

Evaluation game [19] is an endless game. 
So, for getting the highest score possible, we let 3 
participants (1 from each category) to play the 
game until they are satisfied with their score and 
picked the highest one among all game’s scores. 
They played the game around 45-50 times to 
achieve these scores. 

Evaluation game score 

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

405

323

278

269

203

131

120

98

32

Beginner

Intermediate

Expert

Before Training

After Training

Highest possible score

Figure 4: Average game score for categories. Highest 
possible score is the absolute score. 

Game [19] score increased on average for 
the 12 participants: for the beginner from 32 to 120, 
for intermediate from 98 to 203, and for the expert 
from 278 to 323, after the training. 

Also, by observing three types of data 

recorded by the Muse headband, calm points 
increased from 6 to 21, Birds count increased from 
3 to 10, and Recoveries decreased from 2 to 0 – 
indicating that participants always remain either in 
neutral or in a calm state (did not enter the active 
state) after the training. Headband data was 
irrespective of the participants’ gaming experience.  

Muse Headband data 

21

6

30

20

10

0

10

3

2

0

Calm Points Birds count

Recoveries

Before Training

After Training

Figure 5: Average data of all participants 

We found that participants’ game scores 

increased for beginner by 275%, for the 
intermediate by 107%, and for expert by 17%. For 
Muse headband data, calm points increased by 
250%, Birds count increased by 233%, and 
Recoveries decreased from two to zero. 
Participants were able to regain sustained attention 
at their best and recharge for the rest of the day. 
Heart rate variability (HRV) also slightly increased 
after the experiments. 

5.2 Discussions  

Evaluation game [19] required sustained 

attention and even mind wandering for a second 
can force participant to restart the game. After the 
training, participants recharged and got their 
sustained attention at their best that’s why they 
were able to perform better. As well as Muse-
headband data also shows that they were fully calm, 
and their mind remained always in a calm or 
neutral state during the evaluation game. 

In this section, we will describe heart rate 
changes during the VR training. In the beginning, 
when participants were observing the immersive 
virtual environment, heart rate increased but slowly 
went down to normal as participant got familiar 
with the Virtual environment. Moreover, during the 
VR archery game, heart rate was constantly 
increasing as the participant came close to 
achieving the game’s objectives and then changes 
were persistent during the entire time of the game. 
We can relate these changes with the competency 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the game (for response time training), and these 
changes will always be there whenever participant 
plays the game. Because of this, we are considering 
these changes as an improvement in HRV (Heart 
Rate Variability). Furthermore, during the 
evaluation after the training, heart rate was near to 
the resting heart rate of the participant. That 
indicates that participants were so relaxed and 
focused after VR training. 

Poor vision can affect the VR experience 

of the participant. In our experiments, three 
participants use glasses on a daily basis. The first 
one had the eyesight of +1.25 for the right eye and 
+1.00 for the left eye. The second one had the 
eyesight of +0.75 for the right eye and +1.00 for the 
left eye. The third one had -6.00 for the left eye and 
-5.00 for the right eye. We asked the participants to 
close their eyes one at a time. We discovered that 
eyesight of in between ±1 don’t affect the 
experience of the participant in VR. They shared 
the experience as a normal participant. However, 
more the +1 and less than -1 affected the 
experience at a significant level. That’s why we 
didn’t consider the 3rd participant evaluation scores 
in our average. 

In general, high game scorers cannot 
improve their scores after any type of short training. 
Also, in our experiments expert game participant 
scores increased by only 17% even though they felt 
refreshed and their biological data improved 
(improved sustained attention and reduced mind-
wandering) compared to a normal participant. 
That’s where we were able to achieve our objective 
of improving sustained attention and recharging the 
participant for the rest of the activity of the day 
after only a short 10-minute training. 

In general, left-handed people do better in 

games. In our experiments, left-handed (two 
participants) participants because familiar with the 
Oculus touch easily, and their target hit rate 
(archery game) was also slightly better than right-
handed participants. 

When we asked participants about the 

difference between this VR archery game and other 
similar types of games (VR or Non-VR), most of 
them replied that the game was enjoyable and even 
they can play it daily because of combination of 
competency, VR Immersive environment, hand-eye 
coordination training, and ease of use. 

6.  

CONCLUSION  

In this research, we are contributing a 

short (10 minute) and effective VR Mindfulness 
meditation particularly designed for regaining or 
improving sustained attention. Anyone can use it in 
the middle of a busy day to recharge and regain 
sustained attention at their best. We evaluated our 
training by a game [19] score, Muse headband data, 
and ECG sensor data. Participants mind wandering 

(no one entered the active state) was significantly 
reduced, and evaluation-game [19] score was 
increased after the training. 

7.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  

We are grateful for the support of the 

Japan International Agency (JICA). 

REFERENCES 

1.  Cohen R.A. (2011) Sustained Attention. In: Kreutzer J.S., 
DeLuca J., Caplan B. (eds) Encyclopedia of Clinical 
Neuropsychology. Springer, New York, NY 
2.  DeGangi, Georgia and Porges, Stephen. (1990). 

3. 

Neuroscience Foundations of Human Performance. 
Rockville, MD: American Occupational Therapy 
Association Inc. 
Jha AP, Morrison AB, Dainer-Best J, Parker S, Rostrup N, 
Stanley EA. Minds “At Attention”: Mindfulness Training 
Curbs Attentional Lapses in Military Cohorts. PLoS ONE. 
2015;10(2):e0116889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116889 
4.  Morrison AB, Goolsarran M, Rogers SL, Jha AP. Taming 
a Wandering Attention: Short-Form Mindfulness Training 
in Student Cohorts. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 
2013;7(897):1662–5161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00897. 
5.  Mrazek MD, Smallwood J, Schooler JW. Mindfulness and 

Mind-Wandering: Finding Convergence Through 
Opposing Constructs. Emotion. 2012 doi: 
10.1037/a0026678. Advance online publication 

6.  Mrazek MD, Franklin MS, Phillips DT, Baird B, Schooler 
JW. Mindfulness Training Improves Working Memory 
Capacity and GRE Performance While Reducing Mind-
wandering. Psychological Science. 2013;24(5):776–781. 
doi: 10.1177/0956797612459659. 
Slagter HA, Lutz A, Greischar LL, Francis AD, 
Nieuwenhuis S, Davis JM, Davidson RJ. Mental Training 
Affects Distribution of Limited Brain Resources. PLoS 
Biol. 2007;5(6):e138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0050138. 

7. 

8.  Tang YY, Ma Y, Wang J, Fan Y, Feng S, Lu Q, Posner 

MI. Short-term meditation training improves attention and 
self-regulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2007;104(43):17152–17156. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0707678104. 

9.  Rahl, H. A., Lindsay, E. K., Pacilio, L. E., Brown, K. W., 

& Creswell, J. D. (2016). Brief mindfulness meditation 
training reduces mind wandering: The critical role of 
acceptance. Emotion (Washington, D.C.), 17(2), 224-230. 

10.  Julia Diemer, Andreas Mühlberger, Paul Pauli & Peter 

Zwanzger (2014) Virtual reality exposure in anxiety 
disorders: Impact on psychophysiological reactivity, The 
World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 15:6, 427-442, 
DOI: 10.3109/15622975.2014.892632. 

11.  Powers, M. B., and Emmelkamp, P. M. Virtual reality 

exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Anxiety Disorders 22, 3 (2008), 561 – 569.  

12.  Ferrer-Garcia, M., Gutirrez-Maldonado, J., and Riva, G. 

Virtual reality based treatments in eating disorders and 
obesity: A review. Journal of Contemporary 
Psychotherapy 43, 4 (2013), 207–221.  

13.  Shaw, C., Gromala, D., and Song, M. The meditation 
chamber: Towards self modulation. Metaplasticity in 
Virtual Worlds: Aesthetics and Semantics Concepts(2010), 
121–133.  

14.  Kosunen, Ilkka & Salminen, Mikko & Järvelä, Simo & 
Ruonala, Antti & Ravaja, Niklas & Jacucci, Giulio. 
(2016). RelaWorld: Neuroadaptive and Immersive Virtual 
Reality Meditation System. 10.1145/2856767.2856796. 

15.  Judith Amores, Xavier Benavides, and Pattie Maes. 2016. 
PsychicVR: Increasing mindfulness by using Virtual 
Reality and Brain Computer Interfaces. In Proceedings of 
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '16). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2-2. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2889442. 

16.  F. Zeidan, S.K. Johnson, N.S. Gordon, P. Goolkasian; 

Effects of brief and sham mindfulness meditation on mood 
and cardiovascular variables, Journal of Alternative and 
Complementary Medicine, 16 (2010), pp. 867-873. 
17.  J.R. Krygier, J.A.J. Heathers, S. Shahrestani, M. Abbott, 
J.J. Gross, A.H. Kemp, Mindfulness meditation, well-
being, and heart rate variability: a preliminary 
investigation into the impact of intensive Vipassana 
meditation, International Journal of Psychophysiology, 89 
(2013), pp. 305-313. 

18.  Steffen, P. R., and Larson, M. J. A brief mindfulness 

exercise reduces cardiovascular reactivity during a 
laboratory stressor paradigm. Mindfulness 6, 4 (2015), 
803–811. 

19.  Vaishali, Ramesh. Advergame Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 

(India). The gaming company, 2016. Web. 10 Dec 2018. 
https://www.gamezop.com/attention-span. 

 
