9
1
0
2

l
u
J

2
1

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
8
2
1
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

CoachAI: A Project for Microscopic Badminton
Match Data Collection and Tactical Analysis

Tzu-Han Hsu† Ching-Hsuan Chen† Nyan Ping Ju† Ts`ı-U´ı ˙Ik†∗ Wen-Chih Peng†
Chih-Chuan Wang‡ Yu-Shuen Wang† Yuan-Hsiang Lin(cid:5) Yu-Chee Tseng†
Jiun-Long Huang† Yu-Tai Ching†
†Department of Computer Science, College of Computer Science
National Chiao Tung University
1001 University Road, Hsinchu City 30010, Taiwan
∗Email: cwyi@nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—Computer vision based object tracking has
been used to annotate and augment sports video. For sports
learning and training, video replay is often used in post-
match review and training review for tactical analysis and
movement analysis. For automatically and systematically
competition data collection and tactical analysis, a project
called CoachAI has been supported by the Ministry of
Science and Technology, Taiwan. The proposed project
also includes research of data visualization, connected
training auxiliary devices, and data warehouse. Deep
learning techniques will be used to develop video-based
real-time microscopic competition data collection based on
broadcast competition video. Machine learning techniques
will be used to develop tactical analysis. To reveal data
in more understandable forms and to help in pre-match
training, AR/VR techniques will be used to visualize data,
tactics, and so on. In addition, training auxiliary devices
including smart badminton rackets and connected serving
machines will be developed based on the IoT technology
to further utilize competition data and tactical data and
boost training efﬁciency. Especially, the connected serving
machines will be developed to perform speciﬁed tactics
and to interact with players in their training.

Index Terms—Badminton, broadcast video, competi-
tion data collection, tactical analysis, computer vision,
deep learning, machine learning, TrackNet, YOLOv3,
OpenPose, visualization, cloud service, smart racket, pro-
grammable serving machine

‡Ofﬁce of Physical Education, National Chiao Tung University,

Hsinchu City 30010, Taiwan.

(cid:5)Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, National
Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei City 106,
Taiwan.

I. INTRODUCTION

In the high-rank badminton competitions,
the
outstanding performance of athletes depends on not
only the persistent and solid training but also the
mastery of the opponents’ superiority, inferiority,
and even tactics and emotion in the games. Hence,
supporting systems for real-time tactical information
collection and analysis are critical and signiﬁcant
for top athletes to win their games. Possible services
during matches may include monitoring of ball type
usage and ball accuracy, evaluating players’ reaction
agility and footwork techniques, alerting happening
of continuous loss and analyzing the causes, and
detecting modes of defensive or offensive playing.
According to the information, coaches can advise
players to take corresponding tactics. Furthermore,
in the post game review, such a system can provides
accurate gaming data for the discussion. Therefore,
automatic competition data collection and tactical
analysis are turnkey technologies for professional
athletes.

Videos can be considered as logs of visual sensors
and retain a large amount of information. In most
tactical data were manually labeled from
cases,
this approach is time-consuming and
video, but
laborious. In the last few years, smartphone apps
have been used to assist on-site labeling. Due to
the fast rhythm of the games, mistakes happen
from time to time. It would be efﬁcient to extract
competition data from video based on computer
vision techniques, and real-time tactical analysis

 
 
 
 
 
 
incorporated with big data analysis could be real-
ized. This method not only reduces manual errors,
but also improve efﬁciency and accuracy. Moreover,
beyond macroscopic data such as ball types, com-
puter vision can provide microscopic data such as
shuttlecock trajectories and player postures frame
by frame. Furthermore, AR/VR can help coaches
and athletes to easily catch the key information and
utilize the information in their training.

The Hawk-eye [1] is a multiple cameras sys-
tem that can calculate 3D ball trajectories and has
been widely used in various international com-
petitions such as football, cricket, tennis, etc. to
assist umpires in the judgments of controversial
balls. In NBA, professional companies deploy high-
resolution cameras in arenas incorporated with of-
ﬂine image processing for the tracking of the ball
and players. However,
these systems are expen-
sive and accompanied high operating cost. In the
study of shuttlecock trajectory prediction [2], 2D
laser scanners are used to locate the badminton
shuttlecock in the real world environment. In addi-
tion, shuttlecock speed and orientation, etc. can be
known. However, the equipment is not popular and
lead to limited application. In [3], computer vision
incorporated with machine learning are applied to
detect the court and players and classify ball types.
types are
The data of player positions and ball
used in the classiﬁcation of tactics. Most works
mentioned require the assistance of experienced
coaches. That hinders the development of automatic
data collection systems.

In this paper, a project for badminton competi-
tion data collection and tactical analysis is intro-
duced. Fig. 1 depicts the scope of this project, a
mobile computing and cloud service based solu-
tion. The turnkey techniques include deep learn-
ing video analysis, machine learning and big data
tactical analysis, wearable sensor and IoT technol-
ogy, and AR/VR visualization. The data collection
sub-project utilizes broadcast videos from public
medias such as the BadmintonWorld.TV channel
on YouTube or videos taken by mobile devices or
consumer cameras to efﬁciently collect microscopic
competition data by deep learning video analy-
sis. TrackNet [4] is used to track the shuttlecock,
YOLOv3 [5] is used to locate the players, and
OpenPose is used to detect the skeletons of the

players. The tactics sub-project develops ball type
classiﬁcation and spatial and temporal tactical anal-
ysis. Real-time court-side feedback will be possible
for coaching via mobile devices. The visualiza-
tion sub-project provides graphic user interfaces
and data representation for easy understanding and
speedy knowledge discovery. The data warehouse
sub-project provides the data exchange platform and
keeps all microscopic and macroscopic competition
data for further analysis. Most of the services will be
hosted on cloud platforms. In addition, an IoT-based
serving machine system that can be programmed
to perform speciﬁed tactics will be developed to
interact with players in their training.

Fig. 1. The scope of CoachAI.

Overall speaking, we are going to build the ca-
pability of microscopic data collection and tactical
analysis of badminton competitions. In addition,
visualization techniques such AR/VR will be used
to help data presentation and data mining, and con-
nected serving machines and smart rackets will be
developed to boost training efﬁciency. Finally, back-
end servers will be built to host cloud services and
data warehouse. The rest of this paper is organized
as below. Section II presents the architecture of the
proposed system in the CoachAI project. In Section
III, the deep learning network for shuttlecock tra-
jectory tracking is described. Section IV introduces
the deep learning networks for player positioning
and skeleton detection. Section V provides current
implementation status. The conclusion and future
works are given in Section VI.

II. OVERVIEW OF THE COACHAI PROJECT
The scope of the CoachAI project is illustrated in
Fig. 1. The data collection sub-project, Sub-project

2

1,
is going to build the capability of automatic
microscopic data collection based on deep learning
technology. The videos of top-rank professional
badminton competitions, that are available on pub-
lic domain such as All England Open Badminton
Championships on YouTube, are the subjects to be
analyzed. The frame-level microscope data include
the position of the shuttlecock, the locations and
skeletons of the players. For each frame, a deep
learning network, called TrackNet, that can locate
high-speed and tiny objects from ordinary broadcast
video is adopted to position the ﬂying shuttle-
cock; and the well known YOLOv3 and OpenPose
packages are ﬁne-tuned to segment players and
detect the skeletons of players, respectively. More
macroscopic data, such as shuttlecock speeds, stroke
times, ball types and footworks, can be available
based on the microscope data.

The tactical analysis sub-project, Sub-project 2,
is going to build the capability of tactical analysis
and recommendation based on machine learning
techniques and big data analysis. The tactical infor-
mation not only will be provided for athletes and
coaches’ reference but also can be further used to
program the connected serving machines to boost
the training efﬁciency. Classiﬁers will be designed
to identify stroke times, recognize ball types and
proactive/active modes of playing, and predict the
drop point of the shuttlecock. Statistic analysis can
be applied to analyze the footwork patterns and to
ﬁnd the reasons of continuous loss. Spatial analysis
can help to understand the ability of ball control and
to ﬁnd ball usage patterns. Temporal analysis can be
used to estimate physical declination and to detect
tactical change. During the matches, the capability
of real-time tactical analysis is important in order to
provide tactical information for coaches and players.
The visualization sub-project, Subproject 3, pro-
image processing
interfaces,
vides graphic user
functionality, and AR/VR capability. By the help
of Subproject 3, the data obtained by Subproject
1 and Subproject 2 can be presented in the ways
of easy understanding. That not only helps athletes
and coaches to quickly catch the insight of the data
but also beneﬁts data mining processes. Further-
more, virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality
(AR) techniques can help athletes familiar with
opponents’ ball type usage, footwork, and tactics in

immersed ways. That can strengthen psychological
quality of players.

In addition to data collect and tactical analysis,
training auxiliary devices can directly beneﬁt train-
ing efﬁciency. The training assistant sub-project,
Subproject 4, is going to develop a real-time training
auxiliary system including smart badminton rack-
ets and connected serving machines. Besides the
computer vision based ball type classiﬁcation, smart
rackets are designed to recognize stroke types by
utilizing wearable IMU sensors installed at the bot-
tom of the racket handle. The wearable sensors are
composed of MPU9250 and Nordic nRF52 chips.
The MPU9250 chip has a 3-axis accelerometer and
a 3-axis gyroscope, and the nRF52 chip supports the
Bluetooth 4.0 protocol stack. An app is developed
to collect the IMU data and classify strokes. The
system architecture of the smart rackets is illustrated
in Fig. 2, and the app UI is depicted in Fig. 9.
In addition, IoT-based connected serving machines
provide APIs for programmable online operation.
Therefore, the serving machines can simulate op-
ponent’s ball usage patterns to reinforce pre-match
training.

Fig. 2. The architecture of Smart rackets.

The data warehouse sub-project, Subproject 5,
provides database and cloud computing services.
It stores a large amount of video data, trajectory
data and sensor data to support the development of
other sub-projects, especially for tactical analysis.
Besides, it provides cloud computing services such
as deep learning, big data analysis or other complex
operations. Parallel computing will be used to ac-
celerate calculation, and docker technology will be
introduced to fully utilize GPU resources.

3

We cooperate with the school badminton team
of NCTU as well as top-ranked athletes in Taiwan
through the coordination of the Chinese Taipei
Badminton Association. To help national athletes
to improve their performance, the developed tech-
niques will be used to collect top 16 athletes in
the world ranking in the future. At
the current
stage, the NCTU badminton team members provide
their professional knowledge on data labeling and
data representation. They also provide professional
consultation on tactical analysis and data presenta-
tion. The prototype system will be assessed by the
school team to take feedback from the perspective
of professionals. The value of the prototype system
will be ﬁnally evaluated by the national athletes. We
expect to provide players with a big data analysis
system that combines real-time strategy analysis
and training-assisted devices. By Strategy Recom-
mendation system, players can adjust their tactic
during the game instantly. By real-time training
auxiliary devices, players can adjust the training
content to improve the training efﬁciency. The pro-
posed system can enable players to have outstanding
performance and provide players a better training
environment.

III. SHUTTLECOCK TRAJECTORY TRACKING

It is challenging to track small objects from low
resolution or low quality video. Even worse is that
for sports like tennis, badminton, and baseball, due
to the small size and high ﬂying speed of the balls,
the images of the balls in the video are typically
blurred, and the ball recognition and positioning be-
come harder. In addition, occlusion is another issue
that may hinder recognition algorithms. Currently,
commercial solutions in the market usually rely on
high resolution and high frame rate video. However,
the hardware investment and operation cost are also
high.

A convolutional neural network (CNN) based
framework, called TrackNet [4], has been proposed
to take consecutive frames together to generate
a heatmap for ball detection. Fig. 3 depicts the
framework of TrackNet. In the ﬁgure, TrackNet
is designed to process three consecutive frames at
once, and to output a ball detection heatmap corre-
sponding to the last frame. Since three frames are
input together, not only the appearance but also the

trajectory of the shuttlecock could be cues for ball
detection and positioning. In this work, we adpoted
TrackNet to track the high speed shuttlecock from
broadcast videos or those token by consumer mobile
devices such as smartphones.

Fig. 3. The architecture of TrackNet

For training and testing purposes, a dataset based
on videos available on Youtube with resolution
1280 × 720 and then downsampled to 640 × 480
has been prepared. TrackNet is trained to generate a
probability-like detection heatmap that has the same
size as the input images. The ﬁrst 13 layers referring
to the design of VGG16 [6] whose input data array
has dimension 640×480 is for the purpose of feature
extraction, and the 14th to 24th layers referring to
DeconvNet [7] follows to perform upsampling. At
the end, a ball detection heatmap is generated by
applying pixel-wise softmax. The ground truth of
a heatmap is an scaled 2D Gaussian distribution
located at the head of the shuttlecock. The ball
center is available in the dataset, and the variance
of the Gaussian distribution refers to the size of
shuttlecock images. The formula is showed in Eq.
(1).

G(x, y) = (cid:98)(

1

2πσ2 e− (x−x0)2+(y−y0)2

2σ2

)(2πσ2 · 255)(cid:99)

(1)
The ﬁrst part is a Gaussian distribution centered at
(x0, y0) with a variance σ2. The second part scales
the value to the range [0, 255]. Since the average
radius of the shuttlecock in the images is about 5
pixels, we set σ2 = 10. Fig.3 depicts an example of
the heatmap function.

The detection heatmap is not directly used in the
calculation of the loss function, and therefore is not
considered as part of the deep convolution network.

4

[5] is used in the player bounding box detection,
and OpenPose [8] is used in the player skeleton
detection.

Object detection needed in many computer vision
applications is one of the most early studied prob-
lems in deep learning. The R-CNN family [9]–[11]
and YOLO family [12] are two main frameworks
in object detection. R-CNN-like networks ﬁrst gen-
erate many region proposals each of which might
enclose an object, and then detect and classify the
object in each region proposal. To speed up the
processing speed, YOLO-like networks apply end-
to-end philosophy. A set of pre-deﬁned grid-based
regions will be examined to estimate the probability
of existing some kinds of objects. YOLO’s are con-
sidered as good choices for real-time applications.
YOLOv3 is currently one of the widely used object
detection networks. It is worth mentioned that at
resolution 320 × 240, YOLOv3 runs in 22 ms per
image and reaches accuracy 28.2 mAP, as accurate
as SSD but three times faster [5]. Hence, in this
work, YOLOv3 is adopted to get player bounding
boxes.

The YOLOv3 pre-trained model is used to detect
the bounding boxes of players in video. However,
YOLOv3 marks all of the people in the pictures
including non-players. Therefore, based on the in-
formation of the badminton court layout, an homog-
raphy matrix is calculated to estimate the projection
2D coordinate on the court. The midpoint on the
lower boundary of a bounding box is considered as
the 2D coordinate of the object that is used to ﬁlter
out non-plyers’ bounding boxes. The bounding box
coordinates which are outside the court region will
be ﬁltered out. Based on the information collected,
we can roughly locate and analyze the player’s
position on the ﬁeld.

Besides the bounding boxes that can give the
position information, the skeletons of players can
tell the movement details of players. The bound-
ing boxes of players are enlarged by 0.5 times
to enclose a whole image of the player. Then,
OpenPose [8], which was developed by Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU), is adopted to depict the
skeleton on the MPII model for the human near the
center of the bounding box. Players on both sides
are processed separately. In the MPII model, the
human body is sketched in 15 keypoints. Based

Fig. 4. Heatmap example.

The last second layer that is the one right before the
softmax operation has size 640×480 and depth 256.
The size is the same as the input image size, and the
depth is corresponding to the grayscale values from
0 to 255. The pixel-wise one hot encode is used to
encode heatmap into the output matrix. The pixel
with the largest value on the heatmap is considered
as the location of the shuttlecock. In the training
phase, the cross-entropy function is used to calculate
the loss function of P (i, j, k). P (i, j, k) denotes
the pixel-wise probability of gray-scale value k at
position (i, j), and Q(i, j, k) is the corresponding
ground truth. Let HQ(P ) denote the loss function.
Then,

HQ(P ) = −

(cid:88)

i,j,k

Q(i, j, k)logP (i, j, k)

(2)

After all, if a detection heatmap is given, the po-
sition of the shuttlecock can be decided as follows.
First, the heatmap is converted into a black-white
binary map by a threshold. If the value of a pixel on
the heatmap is greater than the threshold, the output
of the pixel is set to 255. Otherwise, the output is set
to 0. Then, a circle ﬁnding algorithm named Hough
Gradient Method is applied to ﬁnd the center of each
spot. If exactly one circle is identiﬁed, the center of
the circle is reported as the location of a shuttlecock.
In other cases, the image is considered as without
a shuttlecock.

IV. ATHLETE POSTURE DETECTION
In order to evaluate the movements of players,
the posture data are important. The collection of
posture data is divided into two stages, the bounding
box detection and the skeleton detection. YOLOv3

5

on the series of skeletons, the player’s footwork
and physical movements can be understood and
analyzed. Furthermore, the playing modes of players
in the matches,
including defensive playing and
offensive playing, could be classiﬁed. In the future,
is composed of the
a new skeleton model
MPII skeleton model as well as an extra keypoint
representing the racket will be trained.

that

In summary, combined with the bounding boxes
of players obtained by YOLOv3 and the skeletons
of athletes obtained by OpenPose, the movements
and footwork can be analysis. Moreover, big data
analysis will be introduced to improve the efﬁciency
of players’ training and event
to adjust playing
tactics in their matches.

V. IMPLEMENTATION

In this section, we introduce some preliminary re-
sults of the CoachAI project. First of all, for training
and testing, two matches of Tai Tzu-Ying in 2018
All England Open have been manually labeled, in-
cluding Tai Tzu-Ying vs. Akane Yamaguchi and Tai
Tzu-Ying vs. Chen Yufei. There are about 150,000
frames in the two match videos. In the frame level,
the shuttlecock position, bounding boxes of players,
and skeletons of players were labeled. In the rally-
level, the shuttlecock hit time and ball types were
annotated, and the reasons of score or loss were also
remark. The rally-level labeling is implemented by
the members of the NCTU school badminton team.
A badminton match can usually last for near an
hour. The video may have nearly 100,000 frames.
The labeling task is quite laborious. Therefore, a
video preprocessing tool helped to mark out non-
competition screens, and also provided rough start
and ﬁnish times of rallies. To increase the efﬁciency
of skeleton labeling, YOLOv3 was used to segment
players. After magnifying the edges of the player
bounding box by 1.5 times, the segmented image
was analyzed by OpenPose package to detect the
skeleton in the MPII model. The skeleton data
are clustered to identiﬁed outliers. Only skeletons
considered as outliers are manually labeled. Fig. 5
illustrates the process. The clusters of skeletons
detected by the MPII pre-trained model are sketched
in the box on the left hand side. If a outlier cluster
is selected, many incorrect skeletons with images
are displayed. See the pictures in the box at the

middle. Only those skeletons will be adjusted. See
the pictures in the box on the right hand side. After
the skeletons are corrected, the new dataset is used
to ﬁne-tune the model. In the future, we will add
a keypoint corresponding to the racket neck join in
our skeleton model.

Fig. 5. Flow chart for skeleton adjustment.

For the labeling of shuttlecock, due to the high
moving speed, the shuttlecock images in the video
may be blur and with afterimage trace. In such
cases, the latest ball image is labeled to be the
position of the shuttlecock. This method is the same
as the method of labeling tennis proposed in the
work of TrackNet [4]. The racket keypoint is labeled
at the join of the neck and face of the racket. For
example, in Fig. 6, the shuttlecock is ﬂying in the
direction from the top-side player to the bottom-side
player. Therefore, the shuttlecock is labeled at the
red dot. In addition, the racket of the top-side player
is labeled at the yellow dot.

Fig. 6. An example of frame-level labeling: This picture is captured
from the video of 2018 Indonesia Open Final Match [13].

6

Tactical analysis and visualization can provide us
details and insights of a badminton match. Fig. 7
shows an example of the distribution of stroke types
and the statistics of loss reasons in a game. It can
be observed that
the two players use a slightly
different stroke type. More rally-level information
is illustrated in Fig. 8. The left sub-ﬁgure shows the
stroke count for each rally. The color at the vertices
denotes the player who scored this rally. As a vertex
is clicked, a radar chart like the right sub-ﬁgure will
pop up to show the statistics of ball type usage in
this rally.

Fig. 7. Left: the distribution of the ball type usage. Right: the
distribution of the reasons of loss.

Fig. 8. Left: the statistics of stroke count per rally; Right: the
distribution of ball type usage in a rally.

Fig. 2 illustrates the system architecture of the
smart badminton racket. Fig. 9 shows the UI of
the smart racket system. When receiving the signal
of strokes from the smart racket via Bluetooth,
the system classiﬁes the strokes and shows the
results on the interface instantly, as illustrated in
Fig. 9. Currently, seven common stroke types can be
recognized, including cut, drive, lob, long, netplay,
rush and smash. The UI has been developed as a
mobile app and on web platform.

7

Fig. 9. The UI of the smart badminton racket system.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a project for badminton competi-
tion data collection and tactical analysis has been
introduced. Deep learning techniques are adopted
to develop video-based competition data collection,
including shuttlecock trajectory and players’ posi-
tions and skeletons. Based on the microscopic data,
machine learning techniques are used to develop
tactical analysis. Visualization techniques are used
to properly and meaningfully represent and display
microscopic and macroscopic competition data for
easy understanding. Besides, training auxiliary de-
vices including smart badminton rackets and con-
nected serving machines will be developed in order
to improve the training efﬁciency. In the future,
besides developing the techniques depicted in the
road-map, we would like to develop the capability
of 3D data collection and analysis, and extend the
research on singles matches to doubles matches.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work of T.-U. ˙Ik was supported in part by the
Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan under
grant MOST 107-2627-H-009-001 and MOST 105-
2221-E-009-102-MY3. This work was ﬁnancially
supported by the Center for Open Intelligent Con-
nectivity from The Featured Areas Research Center
Program within the framework of the Higher Edu-
cation Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education
(MOE), Taiwan. We thank Ms. Yu-Ching Kao,
Mr. Nien-En Sun and the school badminton team,
NCTU for assistance in data labeling, and Advanced
Database System Laboratory (ADSL Lab), NCTU
in the work of tactical analysis.

[7] H. Noh, S. Hong, and B. Han, “Learning deconvolution net-
work for semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2015),
Santiago, Chile, 11-18 December 2015, pp. 1520–1528.
[8] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y. Sheikh,
“OpenPose: Realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using
part afﬁnity ﬁelds,” in arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08008, 2018.
[9] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich
feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic
segmentation,” in Proceedings of the 27th IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2014).
Columbus, Ohio, USA: IEEE, 23-28 June 2014, pp. 580–587.
[10] R. Girshick, “Fast R-CNN,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2015).
Santiago, Chile: IEEE, 07-13 December 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[11] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN:
Towards real-time object detection with region proposal net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1137–1149, Jun 2017.

[12] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You
only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection,” 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR 2016), Jun 2016.

[13] BadmintonWorld.tv,

“WS

vs CHEN Yufei

[1]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vs3ZUem nT0,
2018.

[5]

TAI

|
(CHN)

Tzu Ying
| BWF

(TPE)
2018,”
July

REFERENCES

[1] Wikipedia contributors, “Hawk-eye - Wikipedia,

the free
20-May-2019].
encyclopedia,”
[Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Hawk-Eye{&}oldid=894277089

accessed

[Online;

2019,

[2] G. Waghmare, S. Borkar, V. Saley, H. Chinchore, and S. Wa-
bale, “Badminton shuttlecock detection and prediction of tra-
jectory using multiple 2 dimensional scanners,” in 2016 IEEE
First International Conference on Control, Measurement and
Instrumentation (CMI). Kolkata, India: IEEE, 8-10 January
2016, pp. 234–238.

[3] W.-T. Chu and S. Situmeang, “Badminton video analysis based
on spatiotemporal and stroke features,” in Proceedings of the
2017 ACM on International Conference on Multimedia Re-
trieval.
Bucharest, Romania: ACM, 06-09 June 2017, pp.
448–451.

[4] Y.-C. Huang, “TrackNet: Tennis ball tracking from broadcast
video by deep learning networks,” Master’s thesis, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan, 19 April 2018,
advised by Chih-Wei Yi.

[5] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental improve-

ment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767, 2018.

[6] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.

8

