Deadeye Visualization Revisited: Investigation of Preattentiveness
and Applicability in Virtual Environments

Andrey Krekhov, Student Member, IEEE, Sebastian Cmentowski, Student Member, IEEE,
Andre Waschk, Student Member, IEEE, and Jens Kr ¨uger, Member, IEEE

9
1
0
2

l
u
J

0
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
0
7
4
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Left: Our experiments in VR with homogeneous and heterogeneous distractors, as we investigate the preattentiveness and
robustness of Deadeye in such scenarios. Right: We demonstrate and evaluate volume rendering in VR as a possible real-world
application scenario for our technique.

Abstract—
Visualizations rely on highlighting to attract and guide our attention. To make an object of interest stand out independently from a
number of distractors, the underlying visual cue, e.g., color, has to be preattentive. In our prior work, we introduced Deadeye as an
instantly recognizable highlighting technique that works by rendering the target object for one eye only. In contrast to prior approaches,
Deadeye excels by not modifying any visual properties of the target. However, in the case of 2D visualizations, the method requires an
additional setup to allow dichoptic presentation, which is a considerable drawback. As a follow-up to requests from the community, this
paper explores Deadeye as a highlighting technique for 3D visualizations, because such stereoscopic scenarios support dichoptic
presentation out of the box. Deadeye suppresses binocular disparities for the target object, so we cannot assume the applicability of our
technique as a given fact. With this motivation, the paper presents quantitative evaluations of Deadeye in VR, including conﬁgurations
with multiple heterogeneous distractors as an important robustness challenge. After conﬁrming the preserved preattentiveness (all
average accuracies above 90 %) under such real-world conditions, we explore VR volume rendering as an example application scenario
for Deadeye. We depict a possible workﬂow for integrating our technique, conduct an exploratory survey to demonstrate beneﬁts and
limitations, and ﬁnally provide related design implications.

Index Terms—Popout, virtual reality, preattentive vision, volume rendering, dichoptic presentation, binocular rivalry

1 INTRODUCTION

Highlighting objects of interest in scientiﬁc visualizations allows our
attention to be attracted and guided. Researchers have uncovered a
number of effective ways to make an object pop out, be it color, motion,
or ﬂickering. Such visual cues can be recognized by our visual system
preattentively, i.e., within a split second, no matter how complex the
overall visualization. Hence, advances in the exploration of preattentive

• Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, Andre Waschk and Jens Kr¨uger are
with Center of Visual Data Analysis and Computer Graphics (COVIDAG),
University of Duisburg-Essen. E-mail: {andrey.krekhov,
sebastian.cmentowski, andre.waschk, jens.krueger}@uni-due.de.
• Jens Kr¨uger is also with SCI Institute, University of Utah. E-mail:

jens@sci.utah.edu.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

features can provide substantial beneﬁts to visualization researchers
and practitioners.

Our prior work introduced Deadeye [39], a preattentive visualization
technique based on dichoptic presentation. Deadeye attracts and guides
attention by rendering the target object for one eye only, which works
preattentively due to the induced binocular rivalry. One particular
beneﬁt to visualizations is that Deadeye does not modify any visual
properties of the target object in contrast to other preattentive cues
that have to alter the target by recoloring, reshaping, or displacing (3D
depth cue). Clearly, such alterations are undesirable, as they might lead
to data misinterpretation. Also, by using Deadeye, we do not have to
reserve visual dimensions, such as color for highlighting, and can use
these variables for, e.g., encoding more data dimensions. Our studies
also conﬁrmed that the display of inconsistent stimuli for each eye does
not lead to headache or any other physical strain, which is an important
consideration for real-world applicability.

To render the target for one eye only, Deadeye relies on a stereo-
scopic setup such as a 3D TV with stereo glasses. The only difference

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. A selection of VR visualizations that can beneﬁt from Deadeye highlighting. (a) Educational visualizations of particle physics [14]: Deadeye
can be used to capture and guide the attention of the students. (b) Immersive graph visualizations [42]: Utilizing Deadeye during user interaction to
highlight the selected vertices and edges. (c) Dinosaur track formation [56]: Emphasizing 3D pathlines of interest in unsteady ﬂow visualizations.

between the left and right image is the presence or absence of the target.
Hence, one might consider such a setup solely for highlighting pur-
poses as an overkill, and several members of our community proposed
applying Deadeye in a truly stereoscopic environment. In such a case,
our technique would not require any additional hardware and would
perform out of the box. Furthermore, due to the availability nowadays
of consumer VR equipment, visualization research increasingly em-
ploys virtual environments as a target scenario [24, 37, 44, 51, 63, 65],
and having more complex visualizations in VR triggers the need for
suitable highlighting approaches.

Given that community-driven motivation, we revisit Deadeye under
stereoscopic conditions. In contrast to more established preattentive
cues such as color or ﬂickering, it is rather difﬁcult to predict the be-
havior of Deadeye in such a setup due to its monocular nature. By
removing the object for one eye, we lose the binocular disparity in-
formation for the target, which is a crucial part of depth estimation.
However, the disparity-based mechanism is not the single point of
failure, as our vision system relies on numerous mechanics, such as
occlusion geometry [75], to estimate the depth of an object, which
suggests a successful application of Deadeye in VR scenarios.

1.1 Motivation for Extending Deadeye to VR

There are manifold reasons for visualization in VR, such as a better
understanding of spatial relationships [64], or the increased presence
and an improved cognitive map due to natural locomotion (i.e., walk-
ing) [38, 61, 62]. Nevertheless, these advantages cannot prevent us
from possibly getting lost in the amount of visualized data, and, thus,
we continue to need robust and intuitive highlighting techniques. And
while certain preattentive cues, such as color, are not affected by the
transition to VR, temporal approaches, such as ﬂickering, often inter-
fere with aliasing caused by constant micromovements in VR. Hence,
we postulate that establishing Deadeye as a validated highlighting ap-
proach in VR without occupying any additional visual dimension offers
signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the visualization community, as outlined in
Figure 2.

One possible application scenario of Deadeye is the educational
context. Instructors in virtual reality classes need a subtle, yet efﬁcient
way to draw the students’ attention to a certain element or an area,
such as a particle shower caused by a near-light-speed collision in
the Belle II experiment [14]. Similarly, we can utilize Deadeye to
highlight particles or pathlines in ﬂow ﬁeld visualizations [56], as our
method is not limited to a single target. The only requirement is that
the highlighted property, target, or region need to be binary in their
nature, as Deadeye either shows or removes it for one eye.

Such highlighting is also beneﬁcial for visual storytelling, be it for
experts or the general audience. One example is the biological explo-
ration of cells in VR to better understand the cellular processes [33].
Again, Deadeye can be used to emphasize various points of interest,

such as the nucleus or endosomes, and help the audience to follow their
movement during the visualization.

Another candidate for our method would be visualizations that in-
volve cluttered, complex graphs. One important reason for such ap-
plication scenarios is that VR usually allows to perceive and analyze
larger graphs compared to non-stereo setups [78]. Naturally, aspects
like layout and interaction [41–43] are the dominant factors that impact
the success of such visualizations. However, as color is often over-
represented in these scenarios, we postulate that Deadeye is a valuable
alternative to, e.g., highlight the vertices or edges being currently se-
lected by the user. To summarize, we assume that the unique selling
point of Deadeye, i.e., the fact that it does not require a dedicated visual
dimension, such as color or motion, is of enough value for a number of
VR visualizations, which justiﬁes our follow-on research.

1.2 Key Advances of the Follow-On Research

In this section, we brieﬂy outline the key novelties to facilitate com-
prehension. Especially readers that are familiar with the basic idea of
Deadeye [39] will ﬁnd four key advances in this paper:

Preattentiveness in VR. As a ﬁrst step, we explore whether Dead-
eye is still preattentive in a VR setup, despite being considered a subtle
cue [88]. Apart from the listed beneﬁts for VR visualizations, having
Deadeye in VR would also remove its prior disadvantage of requiring
extra stereo hardware for highlighting.

Heterogeneous Distractors. The original studies on Deadeye were
executed with one type of objects, i.e., colored circles. And while this
is a valid and most commonly used approach for detecting preattentive
cues, it is not guaranteed that these cues perform equally well in a
heterogeneous setup with varying distractors. As visualizations are
rarely limited to homogeneous objects, we need to assure that the
method maintains its robustness under such circumstances. Therefore,
we extend the initial research scope by studying the performance of
Deadeye under different combinations of heterogeneous distractors:
color, shape, and 3D depth.

Deadeye and depth perception. As Deadeye removes the object for
one eye, our visual system cannot rely on binocular disparity for depth
estimation of the target object anymore. We examine whether our visual
system is still able to extrapolate the depth based on additional cues,
such as occlusion geometry. This is an important detail, as otherwise,
Deadeye might limit our understanding of spatial relationships in VR.
Evaluation of real-world applicability. We demonstrate how to
integrate Deadeye into complex scientiﬁc visualizations in VR using the
example of volume rendering (cf. Figure 1). In particular, we present a
workﬂow for an intuitive application of such a highlighting feature and
conduct an exploratory survey with visualization practitioners. Based
on the survey outcomes, we discuss the beneﬁts and drawbacks of
Deadeye in such scenarios and generate a set of design implications for
future research and applications.

Fig. 3. (a) Color as a cue: The red circle can be recognized preattentively independent of the number of blue distractors. (b) Da Vinci stereopsis: The
near surface results in different occlusions for both eyes, which leads to monocular regions in the far plane. (c) Valid and invalid setups of unpaired
image points in da Vinci stereopsis according to Nakayama and Shimojo [53]. Images redrawn from [5] and [39].

2 PREATTENTIVE CUES

Before exploring the behavior of Deadeye [39] in a virtual, stereoscopic
environment, we brieﬂy introduce the essence of preattentive features
and provide a motivation for such research. We will not go into detail
regarding the basics of our visual system [32,55,83] in order to maintain
focus on the visualization-related aspects. We recommend the state-
of-the-art summary by Healey and Enns [28] for a broad overview of
preattentive research done in past decades.

In short, our visual system is able to detect certain outstanding
features such as color in a glance, i.e., before our eyes initiate a saccadic
movement. Consider the example in Figure 3: looking at such an image
for a split second would sufﬁce to tell whether or not there was a red
circle among blue ones. Since a saccade usually needs about 200-250
ms [28] to initiate, researchers utilize that threshold to determine if a
cue is preattentive.

Apart from color, prior work has already discovered a large set of
other preattentive features, including size, density, lighting direction,
ﬂicker, or orientation. For a more detailed overview, we refer to the
work by Wolfe and Horowitz [82] and Healey and Enns [28]. At this
point, we also emphasize that preattentive cues differ in their underlying
nature, and, thus, the performance or detectability usually depends
on various factors, such as the type and heterogeneity of distractors,
viewing angle, or lighting condition.

A straightforward application for preattentive cues in visualization
is to draw and guide attention [7, 23, 77] due to the nearly instant
recognition time. Here, an even more important advantage is that
preattentive features perform equally well, no matter how many other
objects—also called distractors—are present. In other words, we can
conﬁrm a red circle from the previous example in less than 250 ms,
even if hundreds of blue elements are on the screen.

Our community has made extensive use of preattentive cues for
different approaches, such as dynamic narrative visualizations in the
case of Attractive Flicker [76] or document representations as done
with Popout Prism [69]. Other examples include the shading-effects-
based Stylized Focus [11] and the utilization of 3D depth in graph
visualizations [3]. Readers seeking further application examples and
higher level design guidelines for such visual features might also be
interested in the work by Huber and Healey [30]. In addition, studies
by Gutwin et al. [22] provide insights into performance differences
of preattentive cues in the peripheral sight area. Note that Deadeye
also suffers from decreasing performance in areas far from the focus
point [39], and, if this aspect is of high importance (e.g., multimonitor
setups), other cues such as motion or ﬂickering should be favored
instead.

Although we can spot a single cue instantly, searching for a combina-
tion of multiple features often results in a serial and no longer parallel
process [50, 71–74, 80]. A detailed discussion of that so-called con-
junction search is outside the scope of this paper, yet it is important to
know about this limitation of preattentive cues when designing complex

visualizations. This rule has a few exceptions, i.e., conjunction search
setups where parallel processing can be achieved. Prominent examples
are the works by M¨uller and Muhlenen [52] (form and motion) and
Nakayama Silverman [54] (3D depth and color/motion). That latter
report was the main motivation for studying conjunction search abili-
ties of Deadeye, since 3D depth and Deadeye both rely on binocular
disparities. However, the experiments did not support the hypothesis
that Deadeye is suitable for parallel processing when combined with
color. Hence, we are not further examining conjunction search in our
VR setup, as we do not see any evidence for a change in behavior in
this regard.

To fully understand the underlying mechanisms behind conjunction
search and preattentive processing in general, we recommend starting
with the Integration Theory by Treisman [74]. Other fundamental
research regarding preattentive models includes the Texton Theory by
Julesz et al. [36] and the Boolean map theory by Huang and Pashler [29].
As we will not go into detailed explanations of these models, the state-
of-the-art paper by Healey and Enns [28] might be considered as a
starting point for obtaining an overview.

3 UNDERLYING MECHANICS OF DEADEYE

The concept behind the original Deadeye visualization technique is
to highlight an object by removing it for one eye only. We refer to
such a principle when each eye is exposed to a different stimulus as
dichoptic presentation.
In general, that difference in stimuli leads
to binocular rivalry [2, 6, 19, 47, 59], i.e., our vision system enters a
context-switching mode that allows us to perceive both monocular
images alternately instead of experiencing a superimposition.

Whether or not binocular rivalry can be perceived in a preattentive
manner has been discussed in a number of prior works. Wolfe and
Franzel [81] assumed that such a cue is not preattentive in general, with
the exception of the so-called luster effect where the target object is
dimmer than the background for one eye and brighter for the other
eye. Such luminance variations and luminance disparities in general
were subjects of further extensive research [4, 13, 18, 70]. Zou et
al. [88] reported that although dichoptic presentation can be preattentive,
it is usually too weak and overridden by more pronounced features
such as orientation. Consequently, dichoptic presentation has only
rarely been employed in visualization or for highlighting purposes in
general [84, 85].

On the other hand, research by Paffen et al. [58] and especially
the work by Zhaoping [86] has provided further evidence that binocu-
lar rivalry should be reconsidered as a preattentive cue. In particular,
Zhaoping conﬁrmed that ocular discontinuities can be used for drawing
attention by comparing ocular singletons to orientation singletons and
evaluating the role of the primary visual cortex during the construction
of related bottom-up saliency maps. The original studies on Deadeye
also align with these ﬁndings and conﬁrm the achievable preattentive-
ness.

Fig. 4. Top: Exp-1 with an increasing number of homogeneous distractors on the same depth plane with a slight positional jittering applied to each
cube. Bottom: Exp-2 with heterogeneous distractors, from left to right: depth2 (two depth planes), depth2-color-shape (two depth planes, different
color and shape), and depth3-color (three depth planes, different color).

A well-known case of dichoptic presentation is the binocular dispar-
ity generated by the horizontal offset of our eyes. That information is
processed by our visual system to gather depth information and forms
the basis for stereo vision [9,34,35,48,49]. On a side note, a number of
related stereo cues such as lighting direction and three-dimensionality
have also been proven to be preattentive [15, 16, 57].

In contrast to the disparity-based depth perception, da Vinci stereop-
sis [53] provides depth information based on monocular vision. This
phenomenon is common in daily life, i.e., when an object is partially
occluded by another, our vision system perceives monocularly occluded
regions as depicted in Figure 3. Although receiving little attention by
the general public, monocular occlusion plays an important role in
our depth perception process [21, 25, 46, 66, 67]. Consequently, prior
research [8, 27, 48, 79, 87] established several models that show how
such unpaired image points contribute to depth estimation.

Regarding Deadeye, one important aspect of da Vinci stereopsis
is the classiﬁcation of monocular areas in valid and invalid combina-
tions as shown in Figure 3. Clearly, only valid cases appear in nature.
As shown by Shimojo and Nakayama [66], such valid regions are
not subject to binocular rivalry and usually appear as part of more
distant surfaces, whereas invalid regions appear more ambiguous in
depth estimation. In the case of Deadeye, the exposed image pair falls
into the invalid category. Hence, at ﬁrst glance, depth estimation for
the highlighted object might be error prone. However, more recent
research [5, 20, 31] has revealed that da Vinci stereopsis works in a
rather stimulus-dependent way, i.e., the quantitative depth computa-
tion approach depends on the given occlusion conﬁguration. Tsirlin
et al. [75] concluded that occlusion geometry is most likely the main
source for depth extraction in such cases. These recent ﬁndings allow
us to assume that Deadeye-enhanced objects would also perform well
regarding depth estimation in VR setups, especially when we consider
that such a stereoscopic environment allows us to observe the object
in question from multiple perspectives to achieve a more sophisticated
depth impression [68].

4 PREATTENTIVENESS OF DEADEYE IN VR

We conducted an evaluation to understand whether and how the preat-
tentiveness of Deadeye behaves in a virtual environment. In a ﬁrst step,
we recreated an experiment similar to the original Deadeyes tudy [39]
to generate a set of comparable data. The design of our experiment fol-
lows the traditional approach for preattentive cues: series of images—or
scenes in our case—are displayed for a short amount of time (100-250

ms), and participants have to decide for each image whether a high-
lighted object is present or not. If a cue is preattentive, the high success
rate (typically > 80%) is maintained independently from the number of
overall objects on the screen. Hence, preattentive experiments are per-
formed with a varying number of distractors to verify the performance
stability.

Accordingly, we formulated a ﬁrst hypothesis H1: Stereoscopic
environments do not impact the accuracy of Deadeye in the case of
homogeneous distractors. Note that although we utilized stereoscopic
equipment in the original experiments to hide the target object for one
eye, the image pairs were otherwise identical, i.e., no disparity-based
depth cues were present. In contrast, the experiments to be presented
utilize a 3D scene that allows spatial vision and where all objects are
three-dimensional, as shown in Figure 4.

In a second step, we signiﬁcantly extended the original setup by
utilizing objects that vary in protruding properties, such as color or
shape, to explore the robustness of our technique. Note that preattentive
cues perform differently under heterogeneous conditions, and under-
standing such behavior is crucial because visualizations seldom consist
of only one type of objects. Since prior research [88] has demonstrated
that dichoptic presentation is a rather weak cue that could be easily
overridden by stronger features, we regard an evaluation under hetero-
geneous conditions as an important milestone for establishing Deadeye
as a “working” cue for real-world visualizations. Hence, our second
hypothesis is that Deadeye accuracy remains robust in scenarios where
distractors and the targets have heterogeneous visual properties (H2).

4.1 Procedure and Applied Measures
Our experiments took place in a virtual reality lab. In our recruitment
call, we requested normal or corrected to normal visual acuity and
no defects of vision as a study prerequisite. Upon entrance, we in-
formed the participants about the overall procedure and administered a
questionnaire to obtain general demographic data.

We then provided the participants an Oculus Go [17] HMD with
a per eye resolution of 1280 x 1440 pixel and brieﬂy explained its
usage. The remainder of the study took place in the VR environment,
i.e., all trials, brieﬁngs, pauses, and questionnaires were done via the
HMD to guarantee equal conditions (e.g., between-run delays) for all
participants.

On-screen text briefed the participants that they would see a series
of static 3D scenes consisting of ﬂoating objects, and one of the ob-
jects might pop out. Each scene was shown for a split second, and,
subsequently, participants would vote via yes and no buttons whether

Fig. 5. Average accuracies for Exp-1 and Exp-2 compared to our previous results [39] for the 2D case. A repeated measures ANOVA shows no
signiﬁcant difference in accuracy between the sets, supporting our hypotheses that the transition to 3D scenes does not impact the performance of
Deadeye and that our technique remains robust even in the presence of strong visual cues such as color or shape.

they thought that a highlighted object was present. Before each scene,
participants saw a crosshair in the middle of the screen and were asked
to maintain focus on it. This detail is important to prevent saccadic eye
movements such that the eyes would remain in the focus stage when a
scene becomes visible. The brieﬁng also mentioned that there would
be a training stage before each round where participants would receive
audio feedback that indicated the correctness of the given answer. Dur-
ing the real run, the audio would be replaced by a neutral sound to
prevent distractions, i.e., reﬂecting upon wrong answers and lack of
concentration as a result.

The entire study consisted of two parts: Exp-1 with homogeneous
distractors and Exp-2 focusing on heterogeneous distractors. Exp-1
consisted of three sets that differed only in the number of displayed
objects: 4, 16, and 30. We utilized randomly generated cubes on a 5 x
6 grid with jittering/offset functions as depicted in Figure 4. All cubes
were aligned on the same depth plane, resulting in a horizontal viewing
angle of 14.93◦ from the focus point (vertical: 12.23◦). Each cube had
a size of approximately 1.8◦. Each of the three sets included 48 scenes,
half of them with a target object at a random position in a randomized
order. We exposed each scene for 250 ms to the participants; the
previously displayed crosshair lasted for 2500 ms. Furthermore, each
set began with a training round with 20 scenes. To summarize Exp-1,
we replicated our setup from the previous study as precisely as possible
to generate statistically comparable data. The only altered condition
was the shift from a 2D image with ﬂat objects to a scene with three-

Fig. 6. Excerpt from our VR implementation of the NASA-TLX survey. All
brieﬁngs, pauses, and questionnaires were done via the HMD to provide
same conditions to all participants.

dimensional objects with binocular disparity.

Exp-2 included the three sets depth2, depth2-color-shape, and
depth3-color in random order. All three sets consisted of 30 objects and
varied only in the type and/or depth distribution of utilized elements.
All other conditions were similar to Exp-1 to allow direct comparisons.
For depth2, we chose the same objects as in Exp-1, but distributed them
on two distinct depth planes as shown in Figure 4 and also included a
minor depth jittering function. The distance between the depth planes
was twice the cube-side length. The maximum partial occlusion of a
far-plane object by a closer one was 10 % of its screen space, i.e., at
least 90% of the far object remained visible. For depth2-color-shape,
we included different forms of objects and also randomly assigned
different colors to see how Deadeye performs in the presence of two
rather dominant visual cues. In addition, we kept the depth distribution
over two planes. The scenes of depth3-color further increased the depth
variance by adding a third plane and increasing the maximum possible
occlusion of the furthermost object to 20 %. The objects were all cubes
with randomly assigned color.

Between all sets of our study, we displayed a stereoscopic 3D
landscape photo for 30 seconds to provide short pauses and reduce
task fatigue, similar to the original Deadeye experiments. We also
re-implemented the original questionnaire in VR, as shown in Figure 6,
and administered it after Exp-1 and after Exp-2. The questionnaire is
based on the NASA-TLX survey [26], which includes six subscales:
mental demand (low/high), physical demand (low/high), temporal de-
mand (low/high), performance (good/poor), effort (low/high), and frus-
tration level (low/high). Each scale ranges from 0 to 100 in increments
of 5. Our questionnaire also contains two additional items on a seven-
point Likert scale ranging from 0 to 6, with larger numbers indicating a
more positive outcome: Clearness: how well have you perceived the
highlighted object? and Decision-making: how sure were you that you
made the right decisions?

4.2 Results

The quantitative study included twenty-four persons (ﬁfteen females,
nine males), aged 18 to 43 (M = 26.71, SD = 6.82). All reported nor-
mal or corrected to normal visual acuity and no defects of vision. The
presented results are based on the automated logging of our VR applica-
tion. All variables were normally distributed according to Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests.

The average accuracies, as depicted in Figure 5, for Exp-1 (4 ob-
jects: M = 0.93, SD = 0.08; 16 objects: M = 0.91, SD = 0.09; 30
objects: M = 0.91, SD = 0.07) and Exp-2 (depth2: M = 0.93, SD =
0.08; depth2-color-shape: M = 0.91, SD = 0.06; depth3-color: M =
0.90, SD = 0.06) are similar to the values of other preattentive cues.

Fig. 7. Results of the NASA-TLX survey for Exp-1 and Exp-2 compared to the prior values of the 2D case. Lower values are preferable.

We applied a repeated measures ANOVA with the set type as a
within-subject variable to investigate whether the number and kind
of distractors inﬂuence the accuracy of Deadeye in VR. The result,
F(5, 115) = 1.04, p = .397, shows no signiﬁcant difference. In other
words, the performance of the participants was affected by neither in-
creasing the number of cubes nor adding depth layers and modifying
the shape and color of displayed objects. Regarding the false negatives
to false positives ratio in case of wrong answers as depicted in Figure 5,
it is more likely to miss a target than to report a false alarm, which is
also a common behavior of other preattentive cues.

We also performed independent samples t-tests to explore whether
the transition to VR had an impact on performance. To enable such
comparisons, our sets in Exp-1 replicated the prior 2D setup [39] as
close as possible. The results for 4 (t(43) = −1.97, p = .055), 16
(t(42.18) = −0.02, p = .988), and 30 objects (t(43) = −0.85, p = .402)
show no signiﬁcant differences in accuracy between 2D and 3D experi-
ments.

To evaluate the subjective perception of Deadeye, we conducted a
paired-samples t-test to compare the outcomes of the NASA-TLX ques-
tionnaire for Exp-1 and Exp-2, as shown in Figure 7. Physical demand
(t(23) = −2.22, p = .037) and temporal demand (t(23) = 2.72, p =
.012) are signiﬁcantly different. Physical demand was reported to

Fig. 8. Results of our custom questions. Larger numbers indicate a more
positive outcome.

be signiﬁcantly higher (M = 39.58, SD = 18.65 vs M = 26.88, SD =
23.35) in Exp-2, whereas temporal demand was signiﬁcantly higher in
Exp-1 (M = 48.33, SD = 20.62 vs M = 38.13, SD = 24.44). Further-
more, we applied independent samples t-tests to compare the NASA-
TLX results of Exp-1 with the prior 2D experiment and found no
signiﬁcant differences between any of the subscales.

In a similar way, we compared our custom questions regarding clear-
ness (Exp-1: M = 3.83, SD = 1.90; Exp-2: M = 3.54, SD = 1.35)
and decision-making (Exp-1: M = 3.58, SD = 1.44; Exp-2: M =
3.00, SD = 1.29) as can be seen in Figure 8. We found no signiﬁ-
cant differences between Exp-1 and Exp-2, or between Exp-1 and our
prior 2D results.

4.3 Discussion

Our results support our assumption that a virtual environment does not
limit the preattentive nature of Deadeye, because the feature is still
recognized with an average accuracy of ∼ 90%. In particular, the out-
comes of our independent samples t-tests for the sets of Exp-1 and the
respective sets of the prior 2D experiment support our hypothesis H1,
i.e., the transition to fully stereoscopic environments does not impact
the behavior of Deadeye in the case of homogeneous distractors.

The behavior regarding wrong answers also remains unchanged:
about ∼ 65% of the errors were false negatives, which is quite common
for preattentive cues. In other words, it is easier to overlook a high-
lighted object rather than it is to mistakenly call out a false alarm in the
absence of a highlight.

In our opinion, the most important ﬁnding of our experiment is
that the performance of Deadeye was not impacted by heterogeneous
distractors, because our evaluation did not reveal any signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in performance and fully supported our second hypothesis
H2. We intentionally picked strong visual attributes for our distrac-
tors, such as shape and color, because previous work suggested that
the preattentive character of binocular rivalry might be easily overrid-
den [88]. However, Deadeye performed surprisingly robustly, which
allows us to suggest the technique as a suitable highlighting method
for real-world applications. Clearly, an unstable performance under
heterogeneous conditions would have signiﬁcantly limited the potential
of Deadeye, because visualizations, in most cases, involve a complex
interplay among multiple visual attributes.

Furthermore, we made two rather unexpected observations during
Exp-2. First, the performance of the depth3-color set surpassed our
expectations. We suspected that target objects on the most distant depth
plane would perform signiﬁcantly worse due to the small screen size
and the partial occlusion. However, as shown in Figure 9, a detailed
analysis of missed target locations did not reveal any error trend toward

The generation of such a mask volume depends on the application
domain. For instance, in the case of already segmented [45] data
sets, the per-voxel segment ID of the region of interest can be utilized.
Another option is to interactively create and modify the mask volume
by “erasing” the target for one eye directly in VR, as done in our study.

5.2 Procedure of the Study

To gather more information about the behavior of Deadeye in real-
world-conditions, we conducted a semistructured exploratory study
based on medical volume rendering in VR. Our main goal was to
determine possible limitations of our preattentive highlighting method
and to generate a preliminary set of design guidelines for the application
of Deadeye in such scenarios.

Since we were interested in feedback from people who are already
familiar with volume rendering, we decided to recruit our participants
manually via direct e-mail requests to limit the discard rate. The exper-
iment took place in our VR lab and was supervised by two researchers.
One of them was responsible for brieﬁng and interviewing the partic-
ipant during the experiment. All participants agreed that we would
perform an audio recording of the whole session to facilitate the ﬁnal
evaluation. The second researcher monitored the volume rendering
application and executed certain requests from participants, such as
resetting the highlighted regions or switching between data sets. We
intentionally reduced the direct interactions of the participants with the
software to a minimum to focus on the highlighting aspect.

After assessing the demographic data and conducting a hole-in-
the-card-test for eye dominance (Dolman method, e.g., [10, 60]), we
equipped our participants with an HTC Vive Pro [12] with a wireless
adapter and explained the remainder of the study. For volume rendering,
we used a VR-optimized, GPU-based ray caster implementation that
guaranteed a minimum refresh rate of 90 frames per second. We used
two data sets to simulate common medical situations, a CT scan of
a human head (+neck/shoulders), and a CT scan of a human torso;
both are subsets from the frozen CT visible human data set [1]. In
the ﬁrst part of the study, participants explored both data sets with a
medical greyscale transfer function. For the second part, we applied
a transfer function that included color to explore its interplay with
Deadeye. Each of these four scenarios (2x greyscale, 2x colored; cf.
Figure 10) consisted of the following tasks:

• Detection - we displayed two different presets (scale, orientation,
clip plane); each preset included between one and four Deadeye-
enhanced regions. Assignment: Tell whether and how many parts
of the data set pop out. Describe where the highlighted elements
lie in depth relative to their surrounding.

• Application - participants were able to apply Deadeye on their
own using the trigger button of the controller similar to 3D paint-
ing. Assignment: Pick two regions of interest and highlight them
as precisely as possible.

• Comparison - we displayed two presets that utilized alternative
popout techniques, color and ﬂickering, to highlight between one
and four regions. In the case of colored scenarios, only ﬂicker-
ing was applied. Assignment: Locate the highlighted regions.
Describe your perceived beneﬁts and drawbacks compared to
Deadeye.

During each assignment, we explicitly asked the participants to
provide feedback in a think-aloud manner if possible. We did not
impose any time limit for the scenarios and encouraged brief pauses
between them. Upon completion of the experiment, we offered the
opportunity to provide any additional feedback if desired.

5.3 Findings

The exploratory study included nine participants (three females, six
males), aged 29 to 45 (M = 36.67, SD = 5.68) participated in the
exploratory study. All had prior experience with volume rendering, and
six of the nine participants had used VR HMDs before. The majority
(N = 7) had a right dominant eye, and all participants reported normal

Fig. 9. Average success rates for the detection of a Deadeye-enhanced
object at each position. The matrices indicate an increase of the error rate
with increasing distance from the focus point and no notable difference
regarding the target’s depth location.

a speciﬁc depth plane. Second, we assumed that thinner objects, i.e.,
cylinders in the depth2-color-shape set, might perform worse due to
the inﬂuence of aliasing (“shimmering”) caused by slight HMD move-
ment. Yet again, analyzing the missed target locations did not reveal
any relation between shape and error rate. The only notable connec-
tion between the target position and its likeliness to be overlooked is
the angular distance from the focus point, i.e., Deadeye performance
decreases for objects in the outer columns. At this point, we will not go
into detail regarding this ﬁnding, because it was already described and
analyzed in the original Deadeye paper [39]. Furthermore, as the visual
quality of current HMDs is very limited in peripheral areas, this aspect
is of low importance compared to non-VR, multi-monitor setups.

Interestingly, a closer inspection of the NASA-TLX questionnaire
outcomes does not give us a clear picture regarding the actual exertion
induced by Deadeye. Although the average values are positive com-
pared to other visual cues [22], we point our readers at the rather large
standard deviations. For each subscale, the answers provided by the
participants always contained both extreme values, i.e., 0 and 100. We
suppose that such a spread is due to the subtle nature of Deadeye and
our inability to put the perceived effect into words. This presumption
is also underpinned by our custom questions that reﬂect an average
conﬁdence of participants regarding their made decisions.

As a side note, we attribute the signiﬁcant differences for physical
and mental demand between Exp-1 and Exp-2 to possible sequence
effects of our study. Temporal demand decreased over time, because
participants got used to the fast pace of the trials. In contrast, physical
demand increased with the duration of the experiment, because the
HMD is still an uncomfortable device when worn over a longer period
of time.

5 INTEGRATION INTO VR VOLUME RENDERING

In addition to rather fundamental studies on preattentiveness, we now
consider volume rendering in VR as a real-world application scenario
of Deadeye. We present an integration example and an exploratory
study to demonstrate the beneﬁts and limitations of our approach.

5.1 Implementation

Given a volume rendering system with VR support (cf. [37, 65]), the
technical implementation of Deadeye can be done in the following
way. For simplicity, let us assume that Deadeye should be achieved
by removing the target for the right eye. To remove the footprint of
the target volume regions for the right eye, we store a per-voxel mask
volume on the GPU along with the volume data. During GPU-based
ray-casting (cf. [40]), we compare this mask value against a global
constant in the shader, which whether the rendering is done for the left
or right eye. A voxel is skipped if the mask is set and rendering is done
for the right eye.

large angle, that area is no more present for the eye that is further away.
Hence, binocular rivalry becomes disabled, and we perceive a valid
monocular image from the nearer eye that either contains the object or
not.

At the end of the detection assignment, we also varied the eye
for which the object would be removed. However, participants were
indecisive, and only three of them expressed a weak tendency toward
the object removal for their dominant eye. Other participants stated that
they felt a slight difference, but cannot say which option is better (P4).
Application. All participants were able to manually apply Deadeye
onto self-chosen regions of interest. However, the majority (N = 8)
perceived the task as rather challenging especially when moving the
controller in the depth dimension (P2). One participant compared it to
a VR painting tool: It feels the same as 3D painting in VR, which was
not very intuitive to me, either (P5). Seven participants told us that they
intuitively closed one eye from time to time to verify the result and speed
up the highlighting because it feels more controlled that way (P3). No
participants attested to any negative feelings about that one-eye trick.
As expected, all participants stated that applying Deadeye is easier for
colored data sets because one could just pick a region of a speciﬁc color
which already has a clear visual separation from the surroundings
(P1).

Comparison. In the case of greyscale scenarios, all participants
preferred color over Deadeye for two reasons. First, color as highlight
is more prominent, straightforward, and already known (P6). Second,
as pointed out by six participants, color, in contrast to Deadeye, is not
binary. One could utilize a meaningful color scheme for highlighting
different regions and even have gradients and interpolations if needed
(P9). Deadeye instead is either active or not, without any possibility
of providing an additional meaning or more granular differentiation
(P7). However, color is not applicable as a preattentive highlighting
method in the case of colored data sets, which is an important limitation
compared to Deadeye.

When comparing Deadeye to ﬂickering as a highlighting method,
the majority (N = 8) preferred Deadeye; one participant remained
indecisive. The most prominent reason for that preference was that
ﬂickering is often affected by aliasing and other artifacts (P2) that
occur because such a VR experience is never a static scene due to
the permanent view changes. Hence, the preattentiveness of temporal
effects such as animation or ﬂickering can be rather weakened in such
setups, whereas the performance of Deadeye remains stable.

5.4 Discussion and Design Implications

The results of both studies support our vision that Deadeye is applicable
as a preattentive visualization technique in real-world scenarios. Even
in complex visualizations such as volume-rendered CT scans, we can
still recognize the highlighted region and identify its depth. Although
disparity-based depth perception is limited, our vision system is still ca-
pable of utilizing less straightforward cues such as occlusion geometry.
Furthermore, if in doubt, we can easily reﬁne our depth estimation of a
region by slightly moving our head to generate different view angles.
One interesting aspect of Deadeye is that we can look behind the
highlighted target by focusing on objects that lie behind it. This mul-
tistable perception—induced by binocular rivalry—can be regarded
as a beneﬁt or drawback depending on the use case. On one hand,
such conditional perception allows us to gather additional information
without any interaction with the underlying system. In particular, we
think of scenarios with very limited interaction possibilities due to, e.g.,
asepsis requirements. In such cases, having the ability to see or fade out
certain elements by simply focusing on the region of interest might be
a valuable technique. On the other hand, the focus-dependent approach
is mentally more demanding compared to alternatives such as semi-
transparency or hiding/showing an object via user input. Although the
fatigue results of the NASA-TLX questionnaire are quite reasonable,
we expect that a longer, active use of the described switching between
highlighted target and background might lead to signiﬁcant exhaustion.
As that phenomenon is less related to the highlighting aspect of Dead-
eye per se, we would rather consider a more ﬁne-grained exploration
as possible follow-up research.

Fig. 10. Participants went through four different visualization scenarios
based on the visible human data set: head including neck and shoulders,
and torso, both with greyscale and color transfer functions. Each scenario
consisted of three tasks: spotting Deadeye and determining the depth
of the target (Detection), interactively applying Deadeye (Application),
and comparing Deadeye to ﬂickering and color (in greyscale scenarios
only) as alternative highlighting approaches (Comparison).

or corrected to normal visual acuity. In the remainder of this section, we
group the obtained results by the respective task to provide a structured
exposition.

Detection. In all four scenarios, participants delivered solid perfor-
mances in spotting and pointing at highlighted regions via a selection
ray. Only two participants made a false negative error each. Both par-
ticipants missed the same small, thin region located rather deep within
the data set. Four participants told us that they were able to spot target
regions easier when the data sets were colored (P3). All participants
were able to describe the relative depth of the highlighted objects rela-
tive to the surrounding elements. Four participants stated that they had
to move the head a little bit to view the object from different angles to
be 100 % sure (P7).

We received differing comments regarding the perception of the high-
lighted object. All but one participant utilized the adjective transparent
in certain variations, e.g., pseudo-transparent (P1) or semitransparent
(P6). All participants stated that they could see the target as well as the
objects behind it (P3). Seven participants emphasized that they seemed
to be able to decide whether they want to “see” the highlighted region
or suppress it by focusing on the background objects (P4). Note that
this observation aligns with general binocular rivalry behavior where
we perceive both monocular images alternately instead of seeing a
superimposition. Two participants were particularly intrigued by that
behavior, describing it as a kind of willpower-dependent rendering
where one could mentally alter the perceived visualization similar to
ambiguous image puzzles (P8). Three participants also noticed that one
could modify the transparency level of the highlighted object by rotating
the head (P9). This phenomenon is caused by the rather limited ﬁeld
of view of the HMD, i.e., when we look at an object from a sufﬁciently

Ultimately, the question remains whether one should pick Deadeye
or one of the more common preattentive techniques to draw and guide
attention in VR visualizations. According to our qualitative evaluation,
people prefer color over Deadeye in the case of greyscale scenarios.
In our opinion, the most important advantage of color is its nonbinary
nature, i.e., we can encode additional information into the highlighted
target and differentiate between multiple targets by utilizing diverse
colors. However, many visualizations are not greyscale, and applying
our technique in such cases has clear advantages over other preattentive
approaches: Deadeye does not alter any visual properties such as size
or shape; performs well in complex, heterogeneous environments; and
is straightforward to implement in stereoscopic setups. Compared to
temporal approaches such as ﬂickering, Deadeye does not suffer from
typical VR-related issues such as aliasing due to constant movements of
the HMD. To summarize, even though color is still superior in greyscale
use cases, we emphasize the applicability and usefulness of Deadeye in
colored scenarios and consider the technique as a viable addition to our
visualization toolbox.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This work explored the performance of Deadeye in virtual environ-
ments. Initially, Deadeye was introduced as a preattentive technique
for drawing attention in 2D visualizations by removing the object of
interest for one eye only. The major drawback for real-world usage
was the requirement for extra stereoscopic equipment for highlighting,
without taking any further advantage of such a setup. Hence, as a
natural next stage of our research, we have now applied Deadeye in
stereoscopic environments to study its interplay with 3D visualizations.
The paper made two contributions. First, the results from our preat-
tentive tests with homogeneous and heterogeneous distractors con-
ﬁrmed that Deadeye behaves preattentively in VR, and, even more
important, maintains its robustness in more complex setups with dis-
tractors varying in signiﬁcant visual properties such as depth, color,
and shape. Second, we demonstrated how Deadeye can be integrated
into VR visualizations using the example of volume rendering. The
outcomes of the exploratory study underpinned the highlighting ca-
pabilities of Deadeye and conﬁrmed our ability to estimate depth of
objects highlighted in this manner. Especially in colored visualizations,
Deadeye was perceived as a valuable extension to our visualization
toolkit, as the technique does not alter any visual properties, maintains
robustness under common issues such as aliasing (“shimmering”), and
comes with a straightforward implementation.

For our future work, we are particularly motivated by an observation
during the presented volume rendering study: our participants noticed
that the highlighted object could be faded in or out depending on focus,
i.e., concentrating on the objects behind the target allows the user to
suppress the target completely and see the background only, and vice
versa. As possible follow-up research, we suggest investigating this
multistable perception phenomenon in more detail to show its full
potential for scientiﬁc visualizations beyond pure highlighting.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are immensely grateful to Christine Pickett for her comments that
greatly improved the manuscript. We would also like to show our
gratitude to the anonymous reviewers of the original Deadeye paper
and the IEEE VIS community for motivating us to explore Deadeye in
virtual reality environments. This research was made possible in part
by Award Number R01NR014852 from the NINR - National Institute
of Nursing Research.

REFERENCES

[1] M. J. Ackerman. The visible human project. Proceedings of the IEEE,

86(3):504–511, March 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.662875
[2] D. Alais and R. Blake. Binocular rivalry. MIT press, 2005.
[3] B. Alper, T. Hollerer, J. Kuchera-Morin, and A. Forbes. Stereoscopic
highlighting: 2d graph visualization on stereo displays. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):2325–2333, Dec. 2011.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.234

[4] S. Anstis and A. Ho. Nonlinear combination of luminance excursions
during ﬂicker, simultaneous contrast, afterimages and binocular fusion.
Vision Research, 38(4):523–539, 1998.

[5] A. Assee and N. Qian. Solving da vinci stereopsis with depth-edge-
selective v2 cells. Vision Research, 47(20):2585 – 2602, 2007. doi: 10.
1016/j.visres.2007.07.003

[6] R. Blake. A neural theory of binocular rivalry. Psychological review,

96(1):145, 1989.

[7] A. Borji and L. Itti. State-of-the-art in visual attention modeling. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(1):185–
207, Jan 2013. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2012.89

[8] Y. Cao and S. Grossberg. A laminar cortical model of stereopsis and
3d surface perception: Closure and da vinci stereopsis. Spatial vision,
18(5):515–578, 2005.

[9] B. Caziot and B. T. Backus. Stereoscopic offset makes objects easier to
recognize. PLoS ONE, 10(6):e0129101, 2015. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0129101

[10] C.-Y. Cheng, M.-Y. Yen, H.-Y. Lin, W.-W. Hsia, and W.-M. Hsu. As-
sociation of ocular dominance and anisometropic myopia. Investigative
ophthalmology & visual science, 45(8):2856–2860, 2004.

[11] F. Cole, D. DeCarlo, A. Finkelstein, K. Kin, K. Morley, and A. Santella.
Directing gaze in 3d models with stylized focus. In Proceedings of the 17th
Eurographics Conference on Rendering Techniques, EGSR ’06, pp. 377–
387. Eurographics Association, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland,
2006. doi: 10.2312/EGWR/EGSR06/377-387

[12] H. Corporation. HTC Vive Pro. Website, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2019

from https://www.vive.com/.

[13] C. M. De Weert and W. J. M. Levelt. Binocular brightness combinations:
Additive and nonadditive aspects. Perception & Psychophysics, 15(3):551–
562, 1974.

[14] Z. Duer, L. Piilonen, and G. Glasson. Belle2vr: A virtual-reality visu-
alization of subatomic particle physics in the belle ii experiment. IEEE
computer graphics and applications, 38(3):33–43, 2018.

[15] J. T. Enns and R. A. Rensink. Inﬂuence of scene-based properties on

visual search. Science, 247(4943):721, 1990.

[16] J. T. Enns and R. A. Rensink. Sensitivity to three-dimensional orientation

in visual search. Psychological Science, 1(5):323–326, 1990.

[17] Facebook Technologies. Oculus Go. Website, 2019. Retrieved March 12,

2019 from https://www.oculus.com/go/.

[18] M. A. Formankiewicz and J. Mollon. The psychophysics of detecting
binocular discrepancies of luminance. Vision research, 49(15):1929–1938,
2009.

[19] J. Friedenberg. Visual attention and consciousness. Psychology Press,

2012.

[20] B. Gillam, M. Cook, and S. Blackburn. Monocular discs in the occlusion
zones of binocular surfaces do not have quantitative deptha comparison
with panum’s limiting case. Perception, 32(8):1009–1019, 2003.

[21] B. Gillam and K. Nakayama. Quantitative depth for a phantom surface can
be based on cyclopean occlusion cues alone. Vision Research, 39(1):109–
112, 1999.

[22] C. Gutwin, A. Cockburn, and A. Coveney. Peripheral popout: The in-
ﬂuence of visual angle and stimulus intensity on popout effects. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’17, pp. 208–219. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2017. doi:
10.1145/3025453.3025984

[23] K. Hall, C. Perin, P. Kusalik, and C. Gutwin. Formalizing emphasis in
In Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 35, pp.

information visualization.
717–737, 2016.

[24] C. H¨anel, B. Weyers, B. Hentschel, and T. W. Kuhlen. Visual quality
adjustment for volume rendering in a head-tracked virtual environment.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 22(4):1472–
1481, 2016.

[25] J. M. Harris and L. M. Wilcox. The role of monocularly visible regions in
depth and surface perception. Vision research, 49(22):2666–2685, 2009.
[26] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland. Development of nasa-tlx (task load index):
Results of empirical and theoretical research. Advances in psychology,
52:139–183, 1988.

[27] R. Hayashi, T. Maeda, S. Shimojo, and S. Tachi. An integrative model of
binocular vision: a stereo model utilizing interocularly unpaired points
produces both depth and binocular rivalry. Vision Research, 44(20):2367–
2380, 2004.

[28] C. Healey and J. Enns. Attention and visual memory in visualization and
computer graphics. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer

Graphics, 18(7):1170–1188, July 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.127

0042-6989(90)90161-D

[29] L. Huang and H. Pashler. A boolean map theory of visual attention.

[54] K. Nakayama and G. H. Silverman. Serial and parallel processing of visual

Psychological review, 114(3):599, 2007.

[30] D. E. Huber and C. G. Healey. Visualizing data with motion. In Visualiza-

tion, 2005. VIS 05. IEEE, pp. 527–534. IEEE, 2005.

[31] J. HKKINEN and G. NYMAN. Depth asymmetry in da vinci stereopsis.
Vision Research, 36(23):3815 – 3819, 1996. doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(96)
00099-5

[32] L. Itti and C. Koch. Computational modelling of visual attention. Nature

reviews. Neuroscience, 2(3):194, 2001.

[33] A. P. Johnston, J. Rae, N. Ariotti, B. Bailey, A. Lilja, R. Webb, C. Ferguson,
S. Maher, T. P. Davis, R. I. Webb, et al. Journey to the centre of the cell:
Virtual reality immersion into scientiﬁc data. Trafﬁc, 19(2):105–110, 2018.
[34] B. Julesz. Binocular depth perception of computer-generated patterns.

Bell Labs Technical Journal, 39(5):1125–1162, 1960.
[35] B. Julesz. Foundations of cyclopean perception. 1971.
[36] B. Julesz et al. Textons, the elements of texture perception, and their

interactions. Nature, 290(5802):91–97, 1981.

[37] A. Kratz, M. Hadwiger, A. Fuhrmann, R. Splechtna, and K. B¨uhler. Gpu-
based high-quality volume rendering for virtual environments. In Interna-
tional Workshop on Augmented Environments for Medical Imaging and
Computer Aided Surgery (AMI-ARCS), vol. 2006. Citeseer, 2006.
[38] A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, K. Emmerich, M. Masuch, and J. Kr¨uger.
Gullivr: A walking-oriented technique for navigation in virtual reality
games based on virtual body resizing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play, CHI PLAY ’18,
pp. 243–256. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3242671.
3242704

[39] A. Krekhov and J. Kr¨uger. Deadeye: A novel preattentive visualization
technique based on dichoptic presentation. IEEE transactions on visual-
ization and computer graphics, 25(1):936–945, 2019.

[40] J. Kruger and R. Westermann. Acceleration techniques for gpu-based
volume rendering. In Proceedings of the 14th IEEE Visualization 2003
(VIS’03), p. 38. IEEE Computer Society, 2003.

[41] O.-H. Kwon, C. Muelder, K. Lee, and K.-L. Ma. Spherical layout and
In 2015 IEEE

rendering methods for immersive graph visualization.
Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium (PaciﬁcVis), pp. 63–67. IEEE, 2015.
[42] O.-H. Kwon, C. Muelder, K. Lee, and K.-L. Ma. A Study of Layout,
Rendering, and Interaction Methods for Immersive Graph Visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(7):1802–
1815, 2016.

[43] O.-H. Kwon, C. Muelder, K. Lee, and K.-L. Ma. A study of layout,
rendering, and interaction methods for immersive graph visualization.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 22(7):1802–
1815, 2016.

[44] B. Laha, K. Sensharma, J. D. Schiffbauer, and D. A. Bowman. Effects
of immersion on visual analysis of volume data. IEEE Transactions On
Visualization & Computer Graphics, (4):597–606, 2012.

[45] G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi, M. Ghafoo-
rian, J. A. Van Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, and C. I. S´anchez. A survey
on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image analysis,
42:60–88, 2017.

[46] L. Liu, S. B. Stevenson, and C. M. Schor. Binocular matching of dissimilar

features in phantom stereopsis. Vision Research, 37(5):633–644, 1997.

feature conjunctions. Nature, 320(6059):264–265, 1986.

[55] D. Noton and L. Stark. Scanpaths in saccadic eye movements while
viewing and recognizing patterns. Vision Research, 11(9):929 – IN8, 1971.
doi: 10.1016/0042-6989(71)90213-6

[56] J. Novotny, J. Tveite, M. L. Turner, S. Gatesy, F. Drury, P. Falkingham,
and D. H. Laidlaw. Developing virtual reality visualizations for unsteady
ﬂow analysis of dinosaur track formation using scientiﬁc sketching. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 25(5):2145–2154,
2019.

[57] A. J. OToole and C. L. Walker. On the preattentive accessibility of
stereoscopic disparity: Evidence from visual search. Perception & Psy-
chophysics, 59(2):202–218, 1997.

[58] C. L. Paffen, R. S. Hessels, and S. Van der Stigchel. Interocular conﬂict
attracts attention. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 74(2):251–256,
2012.

[59] C. L. E. Paffen, I. T. C. Hooge, J. S. Benjamins, and H. Hogendoorn.
A search asymmetry for interocular conﬂict. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 73(4):1042–1053, May 2011. doi: 10.3758/s13414-011
-0100-3

[60] C. Porac and S. Coren. The dominant eye. Psychological bulletin,

83(5):880, 1976.

[61] R. A. Ruddle and S. Lessels. The beneﬁts of using a walking interface to
navigate virtual environments. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 16(1):5, 2009.

[62] R. A. Ruddle, E. Volkova, and H. H. B¨ulthoff. Walking improves your
cognitive map in environments that are large-scale and large in extent.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 18(2):10,
2011.

[63] I. Scholl, S. Suder, and S. Schiffer. Direct volume rendering in virtual
reality.
In A. Maier, T. M. Deserno, H. Handels, K. H. Maier-Hein,
C. Palm, and T. Tolxdorff, eds., Bildverarbeitung f¨ur die Medizin 2018,
pp. 297–302. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2018.
[64] P. Schuchardt and D. A. Bowman. The beneﬁts of immersion for spatial
understanding of complex underground cave systems. In Proceedings of
the 2007 ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology, pp.
121–124. ACM, 2007.

[65] R. Shen, P. Boulanger, and M. Noga. Medvis: A real-time immersive
visualization environment for the exploration of medical volumetric data.
In 2008 Fifth International Conference BioMedical Visualization: Infor-
mation Visualization in Medical and Biomedical Informatics, pp. 63–68.
IEEE, 2008.

[66] S. Shimojo and K. Nakayama. Real world occlusion constraints and

binocular rivalry. Vision research, 30(1):69–80, 1990.

[67] S. Shimojo and K. Nakayama. Interocularly unpaired zones escape local

binocular matching. Vision Research, 34(14):1875–1881, 1994.

[68] S. Shimojo, G. H. Silverman, and K. Nakayama. An occlusion-related
mechanism of depth perception based on motion and interocular sequence.
Nature, 333(6170):265, 1988.

[69] B. Suh, A. Woodruff, R. Rosenholtz, and A. Glass. Popout prism: Adding
perceptual principles to overview+detail document interfaces. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’02, pp. 251–258. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2002.

[47] N. K. Logothetis, D. A. Leopold, and D. L. Sheinberg. What is rivalling

[70] D. Y. Teller and E. Galanter. Brightnesses, luminances, and fechners

during binocular rivalry? Nature, 380(6575):621, 1996.

paradox. Perception & Psychophysics, 2(7):297–300, 1967.

[48] D. Marr and T. Poggio. A computational theory of human stereo vision.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological Sciences,
204(1156):301–328, 1979.

[71] J. T. Townsend. Serial vs. parallel processing: Sometimes they look like
tweedledum and tweedledee but they can (and should) be distinguished.
Psychological Science, 1(1):46–54, 1990.

[49] D. Marr, T. Poggio, et al. Cooperative computation of stereo disparity.

From the Retina to the Neocortex, pp. 239–243, 1976.

[50] P. McLeod, J. Driver, and J. Crisp. Visual search for a conjunction of
movement and form is parallel. Nature, 332(6160):154–155, 1988.
[51] M. Mil´an, W. David, and M. Stefan. Extending a virtual reality nasal cavity
education tool with volume rendering. In 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Teaching, Assessment, and Learning for Engineering (TALE),
pp. 811–814. IEEE, 2018.

[52] H. J. M¨uller and A. von Muhlenen. Visual search for conjunctions of
motion and form: The efﬁciency of attention to static versus moving items
depends on practice. Visual Cognition, 6(3-4):385–408, 1999.

[53] K. Nakayama and S. Shimojo. Da vinci stereopsis: Depth and subjec-
tive occluding contours from unpaired image points. Vision Research,
30(11):1811 – 1825, 1990. Optics Physiology and Vision. doi: 10.1016/

[72] A. Treisman and S. Gormican. Feature analysis in early vision: Evidence
from search asymmetries. Psychological review, 95(1):15, 1988.
[73] A. Treisman and J. Souther. Illusory words: The roles of attention and
of top–down constraints in conjoining letters to form words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 12(1):3,
1986.

[74] A. M. Treisman and G. Gelade. A feature-integration theory of attention.

Cognitive psychology, 12(1):97–136, 1980.

[75] I. Tsirlin, L. M. Wilcox, and R. S. Allison. Da vinci decoded: Does da

vinci stereopsis rely on disparity? Journal of Vision, 12(12):2–2, 2012.

[76] M. Waldner, M. L. Muzic, M. Bernhard, W. Purgathofer, and I. Viola.
Attractive ﬂicker: Guiding attention in dynamic narrative visualizations.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(12):2456–
2465, Dec. 2014.

[77] C. Ware. Information visualization: perception for design. Elsevier, 2012.
[78] C. Ware and G. Franck. Evaluating stereo and motion cues for visualizing
information nets in three dimensions. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 15(2):121–140, 1996.

[79] O. Watanabe and K. Fukushima. Stereo algorithm that extracts a depth cue
from interocularly unpaired points. Neural Networks, 12(4-5):569–578,
1999.

[80] J. M. Wolfe, K. R. Cave, and S. L. Franzel. Guided search: an alternative
to the feature integration model for visual search. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human perception and performance, 15(3):419, 1989.
[81] J. M. Wolfe and S. L. Franzel. Binocularity and visual search. Attention,

Perception, & Psychophysics, 44(1):81–93, 1988.

[82] J. M. Wolfe and T. S. Horowitz. Five factors that guide attention in visual

search. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(3):0058, 2017.

[83] A. L. Yarbus. Eye movements during perception of complex objects. In

Eye movements and vision, pp. 171–211. Springer, 1967.

[84] H. Zhang. Spectacularly Binocular: Exploiting Binocular Luster Effects
for HCI Applications. PhD thesis, School of Computing, Natuanal Univer-
sity of Singapore, 2014.

[85] H. Zhang, X. Cao, and S. Zhao. Beyond stereo: An exploration of
unconventional binocular presentation for novel visual experience. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’12, pp. 2523–2526. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2012. doi:
10.1145/2207676.2208638

[86] L. Zhaoping. Attention capture by eye of origin singletons even without
awarenessa hallmark of a bottom-up saliency map in the primary visual
cortex. Journal of Vision, 8(5):1–1, 2008.

[87] C. L. Zitnick and T. Kanade. A cooperative algorithm for stereo matching
IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and

and occlusion detection.
machine intelligence, 22(7):675–684, 2000.

[88] B. Zou, I. S. Utochkin, Y. Liu, and J. M. Wolfe. Binocularity and visual
searchrevisited. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 79(2):473–483,
2017.

