A controlled study of virtual reality in first-year magnetostatics 

C. D. Porter1 
1Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruff Ave, Columbus, OH, 43210 

J. Brown2, J. R. Smith1, A. Simmons1, M. Nieberding1, A. Ayers3, C. Orban1  
2College of Engineering, The Ohio State University, 2070 Neil Ave., Columbus, OH, 43210 
3Advanced Computing Center for the Arts and Design, The Ohio State University, 1813 N. High St.., Columbus, OH, 43210  

Stereoscopic virtual reality (VR) has experienced a resurgence due to flagship products such as the Oculus 
Rift, HTC Vive and smartphone-based VR solutions like Google Cardboard. This is causing the question to 
resurface: how can stereoscopic VR be useful in instruction, if at all, and what are the pedagogical best practices 
for its use? To address this, and to continue our work in this sphere, we performed a study of 289 introductory 
physics  students  who  were  sorted  into  three  different  treatment  types:  stereoscopic  virtual  reality,  WebGL 
simulation,  and  static  2D  images,  each  designed  to  provide  information  about  magnetic  fields  and  forces. 
Students  were  assessed  using  preliminary  items  designed  to  focus  on  heavily-3D  systems.  We  report  on 
assessment  reliability,  and  on  student  performance.  Overall,  we  find  that  students  who  used  VR  did  not 
significantly  outperform  students  using  other  treatment  types.  There  were  significant  differences  between 
sexes, as other studies have noted. Dependence on students’ self-reported 3D videogame play was observed, 
in keeping with previous studies, but this dependence was not restricted to the VR treatment.

 
I. INTRODUCTION 

shown 

    Many  topics  in  physics  are  inherently  three-dimensional 
(3D),  but  are  usually  taught  using  two-dimensional  media 
such  as  whiteboards  and  computer  screens.  Stereoscopic 
virtual reality (VR) is a 3D medium that might be suitable 
for  teaching  some  content  in  physics  and  other  STEM 
disciplines. 
    In recent years, VR technology has advanced rapidly, and 
the past few years have seen an explosion of VR consumer 
products  [1].  Inexpensive  solutions  have  emerged  that 
leverage the computational power of smartphones to create 
a VR experience, as in a Google Cardboard setup [2]. This 
setup requires only a smartphone and an investment of a few 
dollars  for  cardboard  or  plastic  headsets.  This  minimal 
investment  means  each  student  can  have  their  own  VR 
headset,  which  allows  each  student  more  exposure  time. 
Although  this  is  logistically  promising,  there  are  open 
questions about how to best utilize VR in STEM education. 
Specifically, 
that 
research  has  consistently 
technology by itself does not do much to enhance students’ 
learning  if  it  is  not  integrated  in  the  classroom  based  on 
sound educational theories [3,4]. 
    Many prior studies have described the application of VR 
interventions  in  various  STEM  classes,  and  with  varying 
degrees  of  success.  Students  given  VR  interventions  have 
reported being more engaged with the material, or having a 
better  conceptual  understanding  than  control  students,  but 
the advantage of VR over other media in achieving gains in 
specific learning outcomes is still unclear [5-14]. Because of 
the prohibitive cost of conventional VR headsets, many of 
these  prior  studies  have  limited  sample  sizes  and  in  some 
cases VR treatment was not compared to a control group. But 
there have been large studies with careful controls. Madden 
et al. considers a VR intervention for an astronomy course 
on the topic of the seasons [14]. Another study by Smith et 
al.,  which  is  co-authored  by  several  authors  of  this  paper, 
considered a VR intervention on the topic of electrostatics 
[15].     Both  works  found  only  small  differences  in  gains 
between the VR treatment group and others. One explanation 
for this for the electrostatics study is that the intervention in 
Smith et al. was comparatively passive and non-interactive. 
A  metastudy by  Hundhausen et  al.  in [16] found  that how 
students use VR is more important than what visualizations 
are  displayed,  and  that  VR  is  most  effective  when  it  is 
constructively  interactive,  meaning  that  the  student  can 
effect change in the virtual environment, not merely view it. 
VR-based  classroom  projects  have  led  to  large  gains  over 
control  groups  in  the  context  of  mathematics[17].  The 
present  study  uses  interventions  that  are  slightly  more 
interactive than those used in Smith et al., and we consider a 
different area of physics: magnetostatics. 
    Due to a lack of independently-validated assessments for 
magnetism (see Methods section) with a high fraction of 3D 
questions, we developed a suite of questions as a preliminary 

survey of 3D magnetostatics. The reliability of this survey is 
discussed below, along with student performance. 

II. METHODS 

    As students entered the testing area, they were randomly 
assigned to one of three treatment types (VR, WebGL, and 
static  2D  images).  The  assessments  were  identical  for  all 
students,  regardless  of  treatment  type,  except  for  a  few 
questions posed in the VR treatment itself which were used 
to ensure students were engaging with the treatment. Scores 
on those questions asked within the VR simulation are not 
discussed  here.  The  students’  average  overall  performance 
in  physics  was  fairly  constant  between  treatment  types,  as 
determined by post-hoc analysis of students’ final scores as 
a  percentage  of  points  in  their  physics  course  (VR:  81%, 
WebGL: 81%, Images: 83%). There was slight variation in 
the percentage of students reporting their sex as female in the 
three  treatment  types  (VR:  23%,  WebGL:  15%,  Images: 
23%). All treatment types involved visualization of magnetic 
fields due to moving point-like charged particles or due to 
long  current-carrying  wires,  and  also  the  visualization  of 
magnetic forces and torques. 

A. Treatments 

    Virtual  reality:  VR  visualizations  were  created  as 
Android  smartphone  applications.  The  apps  were  written 
using  Unity,  a  cross-platform  game  engine  developed  by 
Unity Technologies [18], and the Google VR SDK for Unity. 
Existing  3D  posable  hands  were  used  for  the  “right-hand 
rule” visualizations [19]. The application used in this portion 
of  the  VR  study  displayed magnetic  field  vectors  due  to  a 
moving  point-like  charged  particle  and  also  due  to  long 
current-carrying wires. The magnetic field was represented 
as  an  array  of  vectors  as  opposed  to  using  the  density  of 
continuous field lines. The application was then built as an 
Android  application  package  (APK  file),  and  installed  on 
two OSU-owned Nexus 5X smartphones. The app splits the 
phone’s screen into two halves, one for each eye. Each phone 
is then placed in a cardboard or plastic viewer. The students 
can then view the magnetic systems in stereoscopic 3D. The 
app  utilizes  the  smartphone’s  sensors  so  that  when  the 
students turn their heads, the system being displayed on the 
phone  rotates,  allowing  students  to  see  it  from  any 
orientation. Students were shown 5 instructional scenes and 
were  told  to  “look  around”  and  study  the  magnetic  field 
vectors from many angles before moving on. Students were 
also asked a series of 7 questions within the VR simulation 
to  ensure  that  students  were  engaging  with  the  content. 
Students  controlled  the  rate  at  which  the  visualizations 
progressed. 
    WebGL: The same visualizations used in VR were also 
exported for use in a web browser (WebGL format). Students 
could  rotate  the  systems  by  clicking  and  dragging  with  a 
mouse, and could advance scenes using the space bar. The 

only  other  difference  between  VR  and  WebGL  treatments 
was  that  the  screen  was  not  split  and  the  user  was  not 
“immersed” in the WebGL treatment.  

Images:  Students  in  this  treatment  group  were  shown 
static  2D  images  of  moving  charges  and  current-carrying 
wires and the magnetic fields around them. The images were 
taken  both  from  textbooks  and  from  screenshots  of  the 
WebGL simulations. Since these students were shown only 
the type of visualization found in their textbooks and shown 
to them in class, this “treatment” serves as a control group. 

B. Assessment 

    Discussions  with  experienced  instructors  were  used  to 
determine what aspects of magnetic fields and forces were 
most  fundamental  to  student  progress  in  general,  and 
specifically in OSUs introductory electricity and magnetism 
course. From the general themes that arose, the study team 
selected  a  subset  that  can  be  highly  three-dimensional  in 
nature,  and  are  therefore  most  likely  to  be  aided  by 
stereoscopic 3D treatments. The themes selected were 

1.  The  direction  of  magnetic  fields  due  to  simple 
sources (using the right-hand rule for currents) 
2.  Superposition  of  magnetic  fields  from  two  or 

more sources 

3.  Magnetic  forces  (using  the  right-hand  rule  for 

forces) 

4.  Magnetic torque 

Fig. 1. Two scenes used in the VR and WebGL treatments. 
The left panel shows the right-hand rule for fields applied to 
a current-carrying wire. The right panel shows the right-hand 
rule for magnetic forces. 

    Treatment  scenes  were  designed  to  illustrate  critical 
aspects of the above themes, and to address common pitfalls. 
Two screenshots from example scenes are shown in Fig. 1. 
    Prior to any VR instruction, students were given a pretest 
that  consisted  of  about  20  multiple  choice  questions  on 
magnetic field directions, forces, and torques. Two example 
systems are shown in Fig. 2. 
    The  post-test  consisted  of  about  20  multiple  choice 
questions. The multiple-choice questions were very similar 
to the pretest questions; in some cases they were verbatim 
repetitions, and in other cases they were modified slightly by 

Fig. 2. System setups used in pretest and posttest questions. 
Students were asked for the direction of the magnetic field at 
point P (left), and for the direction of the net force and torque 
on the upper wire due to the lower wire (right). 

asking for the field direction at a different point in space, or 
by reversing current direction. 
    From an experimental design perspective, it would have 
been preferable to assess learning using established validated 
metrics such as the Brief Electricity and Magnetism Survey 
(BEMA)  [20]  or  the  Conceptual  Survey  in  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  (CSEM)  [21].  However,  review  of  existing 
validated  assessments  suggested  that  none  are  sufficiently 
focused on three-dimensional magnetostatics problems to be 
suited to this type of study. For example, the BEMA has only 
4  questions  (out  of  30)  that  involve  a  system  that  is 
necessarily three-dimensional, or have a correct answer that 
involves a third dimension (into or out of the page). Since 
VR is most likely to be implemented and useful in areas that 
involve three dimensional systems, any practical assessment 
of student use of VR required a new assessment instrument 
focused on three-dimensional systems. The reliability of the 
preliminary assessment (in four subscales matching the four 
themes  above)  is  discussed  in  the  Results  and  Discussion 
section. 

C. Logistics 

    Participants were recruited from an introductory calculus-
based electricity and magnetism course taken primarily by 
engineering and physical science majors. Students received 
points equivalent to one homework assignment for attending 
our  testing  session.  Students  were  given  informed  consent 
forms,  and  those  who  declined  to  participate  in  a  research 
study were given an alternative assignment and all their data 
were removed from our database. Approximately 96% of all 
students  agreed  to  participate  in  research,  resulting  in  289 
participants. 
    In  addition  to  the  pre-post  questions  on  magnetism, 
students  were  asked  the  following  background  questions: 
“How  often  did  you  play  video  games  when  you  were 
younger?”, “How often do you play videogames now?” and 
“When you do play video games, are they primarily 2D or 
3D?”. In that last question, examples of 2D games such as 
Candy Crush were given, and examples of 3D games such as 
Minecraft were given. Students were also asked their sex and 
race. 

 
 
 
 
 
III. RESULTS & DISCUSSION 

A.  Assessment reliability 

    The  reliability  of  the  subscales  was  assessed  using 
Cronbach’s alpha. The results are shown in Table I. Only one 
subscale  showed  high  reliability  (magnetic  fields  due  to 
superpositions of two sources). All other subscales showed 
marginal or unacceptable reliability. The reliability measures 
were fairly consistent between pretest and posttest. 

TABLE I. Cronbach’s alpha for four subscales on the pre 
and posttests 

Theme 
1  
2  
3 
4 

Alpha (pre) 
0.59 
0.85 
0.35 
0.60 

Alpha (post) 
0.61 
0.84 
0.57 
0.65 

    No subscale appeared to be at floor or ceiling in terms of 
student scores. The means and standard deviations are shown 
in Table II. 

    Table II. Mean percentages on the four subscales  

Theme 
1  
2  
3 
4 

Pre Mean (%) 
53±1 
66±1 
41±1 
39±1 

Post Mean (%) 
66±1 
66±1 
43±1 
42±1 

    Future  work  should  build  upon  the  one  well-behaved 
subscale.  In  the  interests  of  both  accurate  reporting  and 
adherence to a well-behaved subscale, in what follows, we 
report results on both the single well-behaved subscale and 
on the overall set of items. 

B.  Assessment results by treatment 

    None  of  the  treatment  groups  showed  statistically 
significant gains from the pretest to posttest when all items 
are included in the score (see Fig. 3). This was tested using 
a  repeated  measures  analysis  in  SPSS  which  yielded  p  = 
0.27. 
    The lack of improvement is not entirely attributable to the 
poor  reliability  of  the  subscales,  since  there  were  also  no 
statistically  significant  gains  on  the  superposition  subscale 
(p > 0.5). Adding the treatment type as a between-subjects 
factor  in  the  repeated  measures  analysis  again  does  not 
reveal statistically significant differences between treatment 
groups  on  all  items  (p  >  0.4),  nor  on  the  superpositions 
subscale (p > 0.8). 
    The small to non-existent gains, and lack of dependence 
on 
type  make  further  analysis  somewhat 
questionable. However, potential new treatments related to 
visuospatial rotations cannot completely ignore possible 

treatment 

All B-field/force items

)

%

(
e
r
o
c
S
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

60

55

50

45

VR (N=95) WebGL (N=106)

Images (N=88)

Pre

Post

Fig. 3. Pre-post results for different treatment groups 

interactions  with  student  sex  and  prior  experience  with 
visuospatial rotations in an electronic context. We therefore 
note that when both treatment type and student sex are added 
as between-subject factors, there is a statistically significant 
dependence on treatment, sex, and a statistically significant 
interaction between treatment and sex (with p < 0.01 in all 
cases).  This  is  true  both  of  the  entire  item  set  and  of  the 
superposition subscale. Although the sex question was asked 
using a write-in text box, no student reported a sex other than 
male or female. The results on all items are shown broken 
down by treatment and sex in Fig 4. 

Male/Female Scores on B-field/force Items

60

50

40

30

)

%

(
e
r
o
c
S
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

VR (N=95) WebGL (N=106)

Images (N=88)

Pre (M)

Post (M)

Pre (F)

Post (F)

Fig.  4.  Student  scores  on  all  items  broken  down  by  both 
treatment and sex. 

    One  measure  of  interest  is  how  different  are  male  gains 
from female gains in the three treatments. If we call the gains 
  , 
for  females  in  treatment  i: 

then the relevant effect size could be written as a comparison 
between  gains  by  these  two  sexes  in  treatments  i  and  j:

The effect sizes are not trivial to calculate in this case, since 
each  category  being  considered  (sex,  treatment)  have 
different  population  sizes.  In  order  to  estimate  the  effect 
sizes, a simple bootstrapping (with replacement) technique 

()()F,F,F,avavPostPreiiig=−()()F,M,F,M,avaviijjijggggdSD−−−= 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
was  employed.  Monte  Carlo  sampling  of  actual  student 
scores were used to generate new data sets. These new data 
sets were used to determine the relevant standard deviation 
for  use  in  the  effect  sizes.  Convergence  to  two  significant 
digits was reached after 100,000 bootstrapping samples were 
used. The resulting effect sizes are shown in Table III. 

TABLE III. Effect sizes (d) for gender gap in gains by treatment 

Treatments 
VR-WebGL 
VR-Images 
WebGL-Images 

d 
0.39 
0.18 
0.20 

Here,  the  positive 

,  for  example,  indicates  that 

women’s gains beat men’s gains by a greater amount in the 
VR  treatment  than  in  the  WebGL  treatment.  It  must  be 
emphasized that these effect sizes are based on comparisons 
between  very  small  gains.  What  is  worth  noting  is  that 
females  are  not  disadvantaged  by  the  VR  treatment 
compared to other treatments. 
    There  was  some  dependence  on  self-reported  prior 
experience  with  heavily-3D  videogames.  A  repeated 
measures  analysis  in  SPSS  of  students  within  a  given 
treatment  type  using  3D  videogame  play  as  a  between-
subjects  factor  showed  a  significant  difference  between 
gains  by gamers  and non-gamers,  as outlined  in  Table IV. 
Students  who  reported  heavy  gameplay  outperformed 
students with low videogame play in all three treatments. But 
unlike the work by Smith et al. [15], the VR treatment did 
not  benefit  frequent  video  game  players  more  than  the 
WebGL and Images treatment benefited them. 

TABLE IV. Gains by treatment and videogaming 

Treatment 

VR 

WebGL 

Images 

3D Video-
game Exp. 

Mean 
Gains 

Gains 
95% CI 

p (high 
vs low) 

High 

Low 

High 

Low 

High 

Low 

3.0 

-0.4 

4.1 

-2.1 

4.7 

1.9 

(-0.6, 6.6)  <0.01 

(-4.1, 3.2) 

(0.6, 7.5) 

<0.01 

(-5.9, 1.6) 

(0.9, 8.4) 

<0.01 

(-1.9, 5.8) 

C.  Factors that may contribute to poor gains 
    The low gains in the Images treatment are to be expected, 
since students were only shown images very similar to those 
they  had  already  seen  multiple  times  in  their  classes, 
homework, and textbooks. The fact that no additional gains 
were  observed  in  the  VR  and  video  treatments  may  be 
explained by the fact that these treatments were not highly 
interactive.  The  potential  importance  of  this  is  discussed 
further in the Conclusions section. 

    The  fact  that  the  assessment  items  were  experimental 
introduces two potential problems: (1) Many items did not 
load well onto subscales as theoretically predicted. (2) The 
assessments  were 
test  fatigue  may  have 
long,  and 
contributed to flat performances. 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

    We have conducted a controlled study of VR treatments 
in teaching freshman magnetostatics. The overall low gains 
and  relative  independence  of  gains  on  treatment  type  are 
similar to those found in other VR studies. Work is currently 
under  way  to  make  VR  interventions  that  are  much  more 
constructively  interactive  through  the  use  of  a  Bluetooth 
controller paired to the phone, allowing more diverse input. 
However, it is worth noting that recently Madden et al. [14] 
found  a  similar  lack  of  dependence  of  gains  on  treatment 
when using an augmented reality (AR) treatment, which they 
argue is more interactive than the treatment used in Smith et 
al., and likely more than the present work. They found this 
to  be  the  case,  even  when  students  showed  a  strong 
attitudinal preference for AR over other media. Additionally, 
Brown et al. found very small differences between VR and 
control treatments in a highly interactive intervention in an 
introductory engineering context [22]. More work is needed 
to  establish  the  importance  of  constructive  interactivity  in 
VR/AR interventions. 
    The preliminary assessment used in this study is a useful 
initial  step  toward  developing  a  heavily  3D  conceptual 
magnetostatics  instrument.  Significant  additional  work  is 
needed. Future work may build upon the subscale assessing 
the  magnetic  fields  due  to  two  current  sources,  the  only 
subscale with an acceptably high Cronbach’s alpha. 
    In  these  data  there  is  no  indication  that  VR  treatments 
disadvantage one sex over another. Students reporting heavy 
3D videogame-play do experience higher gains. This holds 
for all treatment groups, unlike the previous study by Smith 
et al. [15] in which only VR-treated gamers had significantly 
higher  gains  than  non-gamers.  If  gaming  is  a  reasonable 
proxy  for  familiarity  with  visuospatial  rotations  in  an 
electronic context, it is not clear why it previously correlated 
with  higher  gains  in  the  VR  treatment  only,  and  now 
correlates  with  higher  gains  in  all  treatments.  Future  work 
will not rely solely on videogame play as an indicator, but 
will  also  examine  data  from  students  given  a  preliminary 
training in the VR environment, prior to instruction. Future 
studies  might  cross-reference  prior  videogame  play  with 
scores on validated metrics such as the Purdue Visualization 
of Rotations Test [23]. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  development  of  VR  visualizations  has  been 
supported  by  the  OSU  STEAM  Factory,  OSU’s  Marion 
campus,  and  the  Office  for  Distance  Education  and 
eLearning  (ODEE)  at  OSU.  The  WebGL  websites  were 
hosted by OSU’s ASCTech.

VR-WebGLd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
[1] K. Hodgkins, “NASA Combines Flight Sims with Real-World 
Flying in Crazy New ‘Fused Reality’ Tests.” Emerging Tech. 
https://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/nasa-fused-reality/. 
Retrieved 6/26/19. 

 [17] C. D. Porter and B. Snapp, “Impacts of smartphone based 
virtual reality projects in Calculus III”, submitted to J. Res. 
Math. Ed. June 2019. 

[18] Unity website. http://www.unity3d.com. Retrieved 6/26/19. 

[2] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Cardboard. Retrieved 

[19] M. Saric, LibHand: A Library for Hand Articulation, 

6/26/19. 

http://www.libhand.org/, Version 0.9, (2011) 

[3] H. Hauptman, “Enhancement of Spatial Thinking with Virtual 
Spaces 1.0.” Computers & Education, 54, 123–35 (2010). 

[20] L. Ding, R. Chabay, B. Sherwood and R. Beichner, Phys. 

Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2 (1), 7 (2006). 

[21] D. P. Maloney, T. L. O’Kuma, C. J. Hieggelke and A. van 

Heuvelen, American Journal of Physics, 69, S12-S23 (2001).  

[22] J. R. Brown, I. Kuznetcova, E. Andersen, N. Abbott, D. M. 
Grzybowski and C. D. Porter (2019, July), “Implementing 
Classroom-Scale Virtual Reality into a Freshman Engineering 
Visuospatial Skills Course.” Paper presented at 2019 FYEE 
Conference, University Park, Pennsylvania. (accepted, url 
pending).  

[23] R. Guay,  Purdue Spatial Visualization Tests; Purdue 
Research Foundation: West Lafayette, IN (1977). 

[4] J. Harris, P. Mishra, and M. Koehler, “Teachers’ 

Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge and Learning 
Activity Types: Curriculum-Based Technology Integration 
Reframed.” Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 
41, 393–416 (2009). 

[5] D. Demaree, S. Stonebraker, W. Zhao, and L. Bao, “Virtual 
Reality in Introductory Physics Laboratories.” AIP Conf. 
Proc., 790(1), 93-96 (2005). 

[6] P. Johnson, J. Will, and C. R. Graunke, “Virtual Reality for 3D 
Visualization in a Statics Course.” ASEE Annual Conference 
and Exposition, Conference Proceedings, 157, 15–24 (2005). 

[7] J. Will, and E. Johnson, “Scientific Visualization for 

Undergraduate Education.” ASEE Annual Conference 
Proceedings, 124, 55–60 (2004). 

[8] S. Zhou, J. Han, N. Pelz, X.Wang, L. Peng, H. Xiao and L. 

Bao, “Inquiry Style Interactive Virtual Experiments: A Case 
on Circular Motion.” European Journal of Physics, 32, 1597–
1606 (2011). 

[9] R. Moreno and R. Mayer, “Personalized Messages That 

Promote Science Learning in Virtual Environments.” Journal 
of Educational Psychology, 96, 165–73 (2004). 

[10] W. Winn, and W. Bricken, “Designing Virtual Worlds for 

Use in Mathematics Education: The Example of Experiential 
Algebra.” Educational Technology XXXII, 12–19 (1992). 

[11] H. Kaufmann, D. Schmalstieg and M. Wagner, 

“Construct3D: A Virtual Reality Application for Mathematics 
and Geometry Education.” Education and Information 
Technologies, 5, 263–76 (2000). 

[12] H. Kaufmann and D. Schmalstieg, “Mathematics and 

Geometry Education with Collaborative Augmented Reality.” 
Computers & Graphics, 27(3), 339-345 (2003). 

[13] J. Trindade, C. Fiolhais and L. Almeida, “Science Learning 
in Virtual Environments: A Descriptive Study.” British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 33, 471–88 (2002). 

[14] J. H. Madden, A. S. Won, J. P. Schuldt, B. Kim, S. Pandita, 

Y. Sun, T. J Stone, and N. G. Holmes, PER Conf. Proc., 2018, 
Washington D. C., (2018). 

[15] J. R. Smith, A. Byrum, T. M. McCormick, N. T. Young, C. 

Orban, and C. D. Porter, “A Controlled Study of Stereoscopic 
Virtual Reality in Freshman Electrostatics.” PER Conf. Proc., 
2017, 376-79 (2018). 

[16] C. D. Hundhausen, S. A. Douglas, and J. T. Stasko, A Meta-
Study of Algorithm Visualization Effectiveness, J. Vis. Lang. 
Comput., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 259–290 (2002). 

 
 
