9
1
0
2

g
u
A
6

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
0
2
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eurographics Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) 2018
J. Heer, H. Leitte, and T. Ropinski
(Guest Editors)

Volume 37 (2018), Number 3

Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

Yalong Yang1,2, Bernhard Jenny1, Tim Dwyer1, Kim Marriott1, Haohui Chen2 and Maxime Cordeil1

1Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
2Data61, CSIRO, Victoria, Australia

(a) Exocentric globe

(b) Flat map

(c) Egocentric globe

(d) Curved map

Figure 1: Four interactive visualisations for geographic data in Virtual Reality (VR).

Abstract
This paper explores different ways to render world-wide geographic maps in virtual reality (VR). We compare: (a) a 3D exo-
centric globe, where the user’s viewpoint is outside the globe; (b) a ﬂat map (rendered to a plane in VR); (c) an egocentric 3D
globe, with the viewpoint inside the globe; and (d) a curved map, created by projecting the map onto a section of a sphere which
curves around the user. In all four visualisations the geographic centre can be smoothly adjusted with a standard handheld VR
controller and the user, through a head-tracked headset, can physically move around the visualisation. For distance comparison
exocentric globe is more accurate than egocentric globe and ﬂat map. For area comparison more time is required with exocen-
tric and egocentric globes than with ﬂat and curved maps. For direction estimation, the exocentric globe is more accurate and
faster than the other visual presentations. Our study participants had a weak preference for the exocentric globe. Generally
the curved map had beneﬁts over the ﬂat map. In almost all cases the egocentric globe was found to be the least effective
visualisation. Overall, our results provide support for the use of exocentric globes for geographic visualisation in mixed-reality.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; Geographic visualization; Empirical studies in HCI;

1. Introduction

Maps and globes are widely used to visualise geographic data.
They underpin how we understand the world and our place on
it. They are the foundation for geovisualisation and thematic car-
tography, in which qualitative and quantitative data with a spatial
aspect is overlaid on its geographic location [SMKH09]. Geovi-
sualisation is widely used to understand both social and physical
data, for instance analysing census data [Mar89], studying epidemi-
ology [MC99], planning urban transportation policies [AKSA04],
and exploring animal migration patterns [KSW∗13, SvL17].

Terrestrial maps and globes were used by the Ancient Greeks
more than two thousand years ago. During the Renaissance
matched pairs of celestial and terrestrial globes were the main tool
for teaching geography and cosmology [Dek07], but in subsequent
centuries the use of globes declined as they are more expensive to
produce than maps, much bulkier to store, and do not scale. Ad-
ditionally, from the Renaissance onwards many sophisticated map

projections were invented [Sny97] that at least partly overcame the
great disadvantage of a map: that it is not possible to draw the sur-
face of the earth on a 2D surface without signiﬁcant spatial distor-
tion.

In the 21st century, however, the globe has made a remarkable
comeback. Virtual globes have become familiar to most VR users,
e.g. [Goo17]. With the arrival of commodity head-mounted dis-
plays (HMDs) for VR (e.g. HTC Vive) and also augmented- and
mixed-reality (AR and MR, e.g. Microsoft Hololens, Meta2 and so
on), we can expect to see more virtual globes being used in geo-
graphic visualisation applications. MR in particular, has great ap-
peal in situated analytics scenarios [ETM∗15] where visualisations
are made available in challenging situations (in the ﬁeld, surgery,
or factory ﬂoor), and also for collaborative visualisation scenarios,
where two or more people wearing HMDs can each see and inter-
act with the globe, while still seeing each other directly for com-
munication [CDK∗16]. A key question, however, is whether virtual

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

globes are the best way to show global geographic data in immer-
sive environments or whether maps or some other visualisations
may be better. Surprisingly, given the fundamental importance of
this question for the design of geovisualisation applications in VR
and MR, it has not been formally tested previously. Our paper ﬁlls
this gap by making two main contributions:

First, in Sec. 3 we present four different interactive visualisa-
tions of the earth’s geography designed for use in VR for head
mounted displays (HMD). The ﬁrst two are well-known: the ex-
ocentric globe (Fig. 1(a)) and the ﬂat map (Fig. 1(b)). The other
two are more novel. The standard globe is an exocentric visualisa-
tion such that the viewer stands outside the globe. An alternative
approach is to place the viewer inside the globe [ZLZ16]. With our
egocentric globe (Fig. 1(c)) the viewer sees a map projected onto a
surrounding 360◦ sphere. One possible advantage of the egocentric
sphere is that, if the viewpoint is close to the centre of the sphere,
the inside surface of the globe is a constant distance away, reducing
perceptual distortion. Our fourth visualisation is a novel VR visual-
isation we call the curved map (Fig. 1(d)). This is a map projected
onto a section of a sphere. The viewer faces the concave side of
the map, so again a possible advantage is that the distance from the
viewpoint to the surface of the map is relatively constant resulting
in reduced perceptual distortion. All four visualisations support the
same basic interaction, detailed in Section 3. The user can interac-
tively move any geographic location to the centre of the view, an
interaction we found to be essential to enable the tasks tested in our
study. Users can also change their viewpoint through headtracked
motion standard to modern VR.

Our second main contribution is a controlled study with HMD
in VR investigating user preferences and the efﬁcacy (accuracy and
time) of these four different interactive visualisations (Sec. 4). We
evaluate three fundamental spatial analysis tasks: distance and area
comparison, as well as estimation of orientation between two lo-
cations. We also analyze physical movement and user interaction
with the visualisations.

The ego- and exo-centric globes and curved maps are naturally
3D visualisations, while the ﬂat map view is a 2D visualisation.
Testing across different devices (e.g. ﬂat map on regular screen
versus 3D visualisations in VR) would introduce a large number of
variables into the evaluation. For example: resolution; head-tracked
vs non-headtracked interaction; comfort of headset; and so on –
all of which are purely a function of the limitations of the current
(rapidly developing) technology. Thus, we evaluate all four visual-
isations in VR such that these variables are eliminated. Rather, we
can focus on the geometry of the geographic surface over differ-
ences between devices.

The results of our study (Sec. 6) show that the exocentric globe is
the best choice for most of the tested tasks. This surprised us, since
in such a display only half of the geographic surface is visible to
the user at any time. Further, it has the most perceptual distortion
(Sec. 3), though less distortion due to projection than the ﬂat and
curved map. Though not as effective overall, for some tasks the ﬂat
map and curved map also perform well and were preferred by some
participants. This result motivated a prototype implementation of a
novel interaction for smoothly transitioning from exocentric globe
to ﬂat map and back (Sec. 7).

2. Related Work

Immersive visualisation with geospatial data: Commodity VR
and AR HMD has fuelled interest in so-called immersive analyt-
ics, the exploration of emerging immersive interaction and dis-
play technologies to support analytical reasoning and decision
making [CCC∗15]. Since most geospatial data is inherently three-
dimensional, analysing geospatial data in VR is an obvious ﬁt for
immersive analytics. Indeed the use of VR for geographic visu-
alisation was an early application of VR [Hed15]. Today, VR is
used in various geospatial ﬁelds, such as architecture and environ-
mental planning [PNFG15]. A recent review [DRST14] provides
a framework for understanding 2D and 3D presentation of spatial
data, clarifying that the choice of 2D or 3D applies to both the refer-
ence space and the attribute space. Here we are concerned with 2D
and 3D presentation of the reference space, i.e. the surface of the
earth. Exocentric globes can only show one hemisphere, which is a
limitation for many global visualisations. GeoPeels was a proposal
to create a hybrid between an exocentric globe and a ﬂat map to
address this limitation [DDAS15]. GeoPeels bends selected lobes
of the hidden hemisphere into the ﬁeld of view, resulting in a visu-
alisation resembling a semi-peeled orange.

Kwon et al. [KMLM16] introduced an egocentric spherical lay-
out for networks in which the layout was wrapped around the
head of the user in VR. They found that such immersive layouts
were more effective for typical graph visualisation tasks (e.g. path
and neighbour ﬁnding) than traditional non-immersive 2D layouts.
This idea was extended to geospatial data (for the visualisation and
analysis of geospatial networks), resulting in immersive egocen-
tric globes [ZLZ16]. However, the interaction design for egocen-
tric globes has not been discussed, and no controlled user study
has been conducted to evaluate their effectiveness in comparison to
other geospatial VR visualisations.

Map perception tasks for user studies: A series of cognitive map
studies have sought to better understand the creation, preserva-
tion and recall of geographic maps. Tasks tested include the es-
timation of area [BM09] and position or distance (for example,
[FB00, FM06, Car10]). Recently, the continuity of paths across
edges of world maps has also been studied. It has become apparent
that map edges have a negative impact on the perception of path
continuity [Hen15] and the estimation of distances [HAA16].

Map projections and distortion: A map projection transforms a
sphere to a ﬂat surface [Sny87]. Hundreds of map projections have
been devised [Sny97], however, all map projections either distort
angles or the relative size of areas. No projection can preserve the
distances between all locations on a map and most only preserve
distance along very few, carefully selected lines. Cartographers
compromise in choice of projection based on the area displayed
and the purpose of the map [JŠA∗17, ŠJJ16].

3. Showing the Earth in VR

In this section we describe the four geospatial VR visualisations
that we tested in the user study. We compare the different visualisa-
tions in terms of the amount of distortion introduced by projecting
the earth’s surface onto the visualisation surface, the amount of per-
ceptual distortion, and also the amount of the earth’s surface that is
visible to the viewer (Table 1). Perceptual distortion arises because

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

Exocentric Globe
Flat Map
Egocentric Globe
Curved Map

Amount of distortion
Projection
None
High
None
High

Perceptual
High on edge
Medium
Low
Very low

Approximate area
in ﬁeld of view

Hemisphere
Entire sphere
Hemisphere
Entire sphere

Table 1: Estimate of distortion and ﬁeld of view of the four visu-
alisations. Perceptual distortion and ﬁeld of view are estimated for
the initial position of the viewer.

the viewer essentially sees the VR image as a 2D image projected
onto each eye and the visual system must reconstruct the position of
elements on the surface using depth cues such as linear perspective,
texture gradient, etc. [War13]. The degree of perceptual distortion
depends upon the relative position of the viewer and representation.
It is also inﬂuenced by the depth cues provided by the VR environ-
ment. All visualisations were implemented in the Unity3D engine
for the HTC Vive headset. The HTC Vive provides head-tracked
stereoscopic VR and we used the Unity3D engine to provide lin-
ear perspective, texture gradient and shadows from a light source
placed above and behind the viewer.

Exocentric Globe: A direct three-dimensional rendering of the
spherical model (Fig. 1(a)). Our exocentric globe has an invariable
radius of 0.4 metres. The globe is initially positioned 1 metre in
front of the user at head height. Because of occlusion the user can
see at most one hemisphere. There is no distortion due to projecting
the earth’s surface onto the surface of the globe, but there is areal
and angular distortion along the edges of the visible hemisphere.

Flat Map: An elliptical projection is texture-mapped onto a quad
measuring 1×0.5 metres and is placed 1 metre from the user
(Fig. 1(b)). For vector data, we use our own partial port of the
D3 library for spherical rotation, cutting, clipping and resampling
[BD13]. For raster images we use a GPU rendering technique
[JŠL15].

We chose the Hammer map projection, which preserves the rel-
ative size of areas. To reduce the distortion of shapes and also for
aesthetic reasons, we chose to use an equal-area projection with an
elliptical boundary. We did not to use a projection that shows the
poles as lines, when the map centre can be adjusted by the user as
this is potentially confusing. We preferred the Hammer to the area-
preserving Mollweide projection for computational efﬁciency. In
comparison to other projections for world maps, the Hammer pro-
jection adds small distortion to distances in the central area of the
map.

The great advantage of a map over a globe is that the entire sur-
face of the earth is visible. While the Hammer map projection does
not distort the relative size of areas, it introduces angular distor-
tion, which increases away from the center of the map. There is
some perceptual distortion because the distance between the viewer
and the display surface varies; perceptual distortion increases as the
viewer nears the map. Foreshortening distortion results when the
map is viewed with an oblique angle.

Egocentric Globe: In a design (Fig. 1(c)) following Zhang et al.
[ZLZ16], we initially set the radius to 3 meters, and positioned the
user at the centre of the globe. However, pilot participants reported
that they felt their ﬁeld of view was limited when they are at the

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Figure 2: Distortion of an egocentric globe changes with user po-
sition: (b) view at the initial location; (a) view from left close to the
sphere’s hull; (c) close view from right.

centre and wished to move to the edge of the globe to enlarge their
ﬁeld of view. So we adjusted the position of the globe to allow the
participants to stand at the edge of the globe (80% of radius away
from the centre). To ensure that participants cannot walk out of the
sphere, we increased the radius to 8 meters, which is larger than the
walkable space.

The motivation for this design is to create a visualisation for
VR with a maximum immersive experience. Areas, distances and
shapes are not distorted on the egocentric sphere model, as there
is no map projection involved. When the head is positioned at the
center of the sphere, there is little perceptual distortion, but if the
user moves closer to the sphere and views it under an oblique angle,
there is considerable distortion (see Fig. 2). Slightly more than half
of the sphere is visible to the user in the initial position.

In our pilot study, participants reported experiencing motion
sickness in the egocentric globe. A stable external horizon refer-
ence is known to reduce motion sickness [BMP06]. Thus, we added
two static rings (Fig. 2) to create a stable horizon. These rings align
with two lines of constant latitude when the north pole is placed
above the user. The rings remain in this static position when the
user rotates the sphere. After adding this artiﬁcial horizon, partici-
pants reported that dizziness was reduced and manageable.

Curved Map: We project an area-preserving map onto a spheri-
cal section (Fig. 1(d)). The user stands at the centre of this sphere,
which has a radius of 1 metre. The map covers a horizontal angle
of 108◦ and a vertical angle of 54◦. Using a section of a sphere
as a projective surface is not a new idea in VR, e.g., Kwon et
al. [KMLM16] use spherical projection surfaces for graph analysis.
However, these previous applications did not use geospatial data or
geographic maps.

The motivation for the curved map is to (a) create a more im-
mersive experience than with ﬂat maps, (b) allow the user to view
the entire map with minimum head or eye movements, and (c) re-
duce perceptual distortion created by an oblique viewing angle. Our
curved map is rendered with an additional ramp shader with a gra-
dient texture to create the impression of a concave surface. As for
the ﬂat map, we use the Hammer projection when transforming the
sphere to an initial ﬂat map. We then apply a second transforma-
tion, which linearly maps the Hammer map onto the sphere. The
resulting curved map does not preserve the relative size of areas.

Interaction: We provide similar interaction across the four visual-
isations. First, the VR model is ﬁxed in space allowing the viewer
to approach and move around it. Second, we allowed the viewer to
adjust the centre of the geographic area in the visualisation. They
could pick any location and drag it to a new position using a stan-
dard VR controller. The geographic location smoothly follows the

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

beam that is sent from the controller and intersects the map or globe
surface. A spherical rotation is applied to the geometry model be-
fore the model is projected (for the ﬂat and curved maps) or ren-
dered (for the exocentric and egocentric globes) [BD13, Dav13].
With this interactive adjustment of the map centre, users can ﬁne-
tune the visualisations such that the area of interest is displayed at
the centre of the map or globe.† Adjusting the geographic centre
allows for (1) bringing features of interest to the centre of the vi-
sualisation, (2) reducing distortion in shape of features of interest,
and (3) avoiding the path or area of interest being split into two by
the edge of the maps or out of view with the globes.

A degree of zooming interaction is possible by the viewer phys-
ically moving closer to the surface of the map. For simplicity, the
experiment was designed such that more extreme zooming was un-
necessary. That is, all targets were sufﬁciently visible at the natural
view position. While other zoom interactions were not included in
this study, it is worth noting that they would be required to support
tasks where multiple view scales were necessary, e.g. moving from
country to city scale.

4. User Study

Following [BM09, FB00, FM06, Car10] we evaluated four visu-
alisations with three tasks essential to geospatial data visualisa-
tion: distance comparison, area comparison, and direction estima-
tion. These tasks relate to real-world analysis scenarios, for ex-
ample: area comparison is used to analyse the global forest cover
change [HPM∗13], global air quality monitoring [CKZ∗03]; dis-
tance comparison and direction estimation are used to help analyse
the global movement of ocean animals [BJJ∗11], cargo ship move-
ments [KKGB10], and air transportation networks [GMTA05].
Stimuli and tasks
In order to rule out the inﬂuence of previous geographic knowl-
edge, we avoided basing tasks on real-world geographic features,
such as comparing the size of two existing countries, and used arti-
ﬁcial distances and areas instead.

Distance Comparison Task: Given two pairs of points, ﬁnd the pair
separated by the largest (spherical great circle) distance. Following
Feiner et al. [FMS93], we use leader lines to link the points with
labels: “A”, “B” for one pair and “X”, “Y” for the other. Labels were
kept horizontal and oriented towards the viewer via rotation in real
time. Two factors that may affect user performance: Variation of the
relative distance between each pair of points; Geographic distance
between geographic midpoints of the two pairs.

The coefﬁcient of variation (CV) [Bro98] was used to measure
the variation between the distances of two pairs. We designed three
groups of tasks with different difﬁculty levels: easy, with large
variation in the pairwise distances and close geographic distance
between the pairs; small variation between the pairwise distances
and close geographic distance between the pairs; far distance with
large variation in the pairwise distance and far geographic distance
between the pairs. In our pilot testing, far distance with small vari-
ation was found to be too difﬁcult.

Initially, 20% and 10% CV were used as large and small varia-
tions, however, the resulting error rates were very low in our ﬁrst

† A video demonstration of this interaction is included in this submission

Figure 3: Tissot indicatrices on the Natural Earth raster map with
a graticule, (a) on an exocentric globe, (b) on a ﬂat map.

pilot study. We therefore adjusted the CV values to 10% and 5%, re-
spectively. For the geographic distance, we chose 60◦ for the short
distance, which approximately spans the size of a continent, and
120◦ was chosen for the long distance. Two pairs of points were
randomly generated. The distance between a pair of points is re-
stricted to lie in the range of 40◦- 60◦.
Area Comparison Task: Given two labeled polygons, identify the
polygon with the larger area. Steradian (spherical area) was used
to calculate the reference areas of polygons. The leader line system
was again used to link the centroids of the polygons with labels.
As with the distance comparison task, user performance may be
affected by: variation between the the areas of the polygons; geo-
graphic distance between the centroids of polygons.

Again, three groups of tasks of different difﬁculty levels were
designed. 20% and 10% CV were initially used as large and small
variations, but the error rates were very low in the ﬁrst pilot study.
We adjusted the CV values to 10% and 5%, respectively, but par-
ticipants found small variation tasks to be too difﬁcult. Finally, we
changed the CV values to 10% and 7.5%, respectively. As for the
distance comparison tasks, 60◦ and 120◦ were used to distinguish
the geographic distance between the centroids of the two polygons.

A convex polygon was created by linking eight random points
generated with the same geographic distance (8◦) from a centroid.
To ensure the generated polygons are in similar shape, the mini-
mum central angle between two adjacent points was 30◦. To avoid
the effect of color on area perception, the two polygons were placed
on a similar background (either both in the sea or both on land).

Direction Estimation Task: Given a short arrow, estimate whether
or not the path continuation passes through a given location. The
main factor that might affect user performance is geographic dis-
tance between the two locations. Again, 60◦ and 120◦ were used
to distinguish the geographic distance. Two groups with different
difﬁculty levels were designed for direction estimation tasks.

Measures: response time, accuracy and interactions
The response time was the interval between the initial rendering of
the visualisation and the double-click of the trigger button on the
controller. After double-click, the visualisation was hidden and two
answer options shown. As our tasks provide binary options we used
the accuracy score from [WJID15]: ( number o f correct responses
number o f total responses −
0.5)/0.5, where 1 indicates a perfect performance and 0 indicates
a result equal to chance (i.e. randomly guessing).

We also measured the degree of interaction. The number of
clicks has been widely used in conventional interaction evaluations,
as well as in VR [KMLM16]. However, unlike those systems, the
HTC Vive allows users to move in a larger open space, thus, not
only the number of interactions, but also the user’s movements need

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

to be considered. In our experiment, the positions and rotations of
the user’s head and the controller were recorded every 0.1s while
the participants were viewing the visualisations. We used the ag-
gregated changes in positions (in euclidean distance) and rotations
(in degrees) between records to analyse user interactions.

Experimental Setup
An HTC Vive with 110◦ ﬁeld of view and 90Hz refresh rate
[Dem16] was used as the VR headset in the experiment. The PC
was equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 graphics card
and Intel i7-6700K 4.0GHz processor. Only one controller was
needed in the experiment; a pointer from the controller (a shoot-
ing beam) was available at all times. We conﬁgured all interac-
tions to work with the controller trigger. Participants could hold the
trigger and manipulate the geographic centre. The framerate was
around 110FPS throughout the experiment, i.e. computation was
faster than the display refresh rate. The Natural Earth raster map
from naturalearthdata.com was used as the base texture
for all tasks. A graticule was created for every 10◦ both in longi-
tude and latitude. A thicker line was used for the equator. Tissot
indicatrices (discussed below) shown in the training were rendered
every 30◦ longitude and latitude (Fig. 3). The initial position of the
globes and maps for each question was adjusted to ensure the user
was looking at 0◦ longitude and 0◦ latitude.

Participants
We recruited 32 participants (11 female) from our university cam-
pus, all with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants in-
cluded university students and researchers. 22 participants were
within the age group 20–30, 7 participants were between 30–40,
and 3 participants were over 40. VR experience varied: 25 partici-
pants had less than 5 hours of prior VR experience, 6 participants
had 6–20 hours, and 1 participant had more than 20 hours.

Design
The experiment was within-subjects: 32 participants × 4 visualisa-
tions × 3 tasks × 9 repetitions = 3,456 questions (108 questions
per participant) with performance measures and lasted one hour
on average. Each of the three difﬁculty conditions for distance and
area comparison tasks was repeated 3 times. For direction estima-
tion, we trialled 5 repetitions for the two difﬁculty conditions in the
pilot study. Pilot participants reported the direction estimation for
long distance was too difﬁcult. We modiﬁed the repetition of the
direction estimation to 3 repetitions for far distance and 6 for close
distance. The mapping between tasks and techniques was counter-
balanced across subjects by keeping the order of tasks constant (in
the order of distance comparison, area comparison, and direction
estimation) and using a Latin square design to balance the order of
visualisations.

Procedure
Participants were ﬁrst given a brief introduction about this project,
the four types of visualisations, and the three types of tasks. Two
types of training were included in this experiment: interaction train-
ing and task training.

their view and double-click on it. This activity familarised partici-
pants with the VR headset and controller, as well as each interactive
visualisation.

Task training was conducted when each condition (task × visu-
alisation) was presented to the participants for the ﬁrst time. Two
sample tasks, different from the experimental tasks, were given to
participants with unlimited time. After participants ﬁnished a train-
ing task, we highlighted the correct answer and presented addi-
tional geographic information related to the task when applicable:
for distance comparison tasks, lines connecting each pair showing
actual geographic distances were shown; for direction estimation
tasks, actual geographic trajectories were shown. We reminded the
participants to test their strategies both when they were doing the
training tasks and when the correct answers were shown. For the
two training direction estimation tasks, participants were presented
with one “hit” and one “miss” condition.

Participants were asked to ﬁnish the different types of tasks one
by one. Within one task, they were presented the four visualisations
one after the other. They were not explicitly informed about the
area and angular distortion that can be caused by map projections,
but during the training we displayed Tissot indicatrices (Fig. 3) to
show scale variation and angular distortion on all four visualisa-
tions. A Tissot indicatrix appears as a circle on maps without an-
gular distortion, and appears as an ellipse on maps with angular
distortion. The size of Tissot indicatrices changes with area distor-
tion, resulting in larger ellipses where area is inﬂated, and smaller
ellipses where area is compressed [Sny87]. Tissot indicatrices were
not shown during the experimental tasks.

A posthoc questionaire recorded feedback on:
- preference ranking of visualisations in terms of visual design and
ease of use for the experimental tasks;
- experience of motion sickness in the different visualisations;
- advantages and disadvantages for each visualisation;
- strategies for different types of tasks;
- background information about the participant.

5. Results

Histograms and Q−Q plots revealed that the error rate distribu-
tion was not normal. As there were more than two conditions, we
used the Friedman test to check for signiﬁcance and applied the
Wilcoxon-Nemenyi-McDonald-Thompson post-hoc test to conduct
pairwise comparisons [HW99]. To compare response time and user
interactions we considered only times and interactions for correct
responses. Histograms and Q−Q plots showed both distributions
were approximately normal. Due to the unbalanced number of cor-
rect answers per participant, we chose linear mixed-effects (LME)
ANOVA to check for signiﬁcance and applied Tukey’s HSD post-
hoc tests to conduct pairwise comparisons [McC13,PB00]. For user
preferences and motion sickness ratings we again used the Fried-
man test and the Wilcoxon-Nemenyi-McDonald-Thompson post-
hoc test to test for signiﬁcance.

Interaction training was conducted when each visualisation was
presented to the participants for the ﬁrst time. The participants
were introduced to the interactive visualisations and given sufﬁ-
cient time to familiarise themselves with the interaction. They were
then asked to use the interaction to move Melbourne to the centre of

Distance Comparison
The Friedman test revealed a statistically signiﬁcant effect of vi-
sualisations on accuracy (χ2(3) = 11.453, p = .0095). Fig. 4(a1)
shows the average accuracy score of exocentric globe (0.88) was
higher than that of egocentric globe (0.73) and ﬂat map (0.75).

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

Figure 4: (a1) Average performance of distance comparison task
per visualisation, with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2) graphical de-
piction of results of pairwise post-hoc test.

While curved map (0.83) outperformed egocentric globe and ﬂat
map, this was not found to be statistically signiﬁcant. A post-hoc
test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 4(a2). The LME
ANOVA analysis showed signiﬁcant effect of visualisations on
time (χ2(3) = 6.837, p = .0773). Fig. 4(a1) shows avg. response
times with curved map (16.1s) and ﬂat map (16.7s) were less than
the avg. response times for exocentric (17.9s) and egocentric globe
(18.4s), however, the post-hoc test did not ﬁnd statistical signiﬁ-
cance. By difﬁculty condition the Friedman test revealed signiﬁcant
effect for avg. accuracy:
Easy: χ2(3) = 10.711, p = .0134. Fig. 5(a1) shows avg. accuracy of
egocentric globe (0.69) < exocentric globe (0.90), ﬂat map (0.88),
and curved map (0.86). Signiﬁcance in post-hoc testing detailed in
Fig. 5(a2).
Small variation: χ2(3) = 10.938, p = .0120. Fig. 5(b1): avg. ac-
curacy of ﬂat map (0.58) < egocentric globe (0.90) and exocentric
globe (0.86), post-hoc signiﬁcance Fig. 5(b2)). Curved map accu-
racy (0.69) is similar to ﬂat map.
Far distance: χ2(3) = 20.131, p = .0001. Fig. 5(c1): avg. accu-
racy of egocentric globe (0.60) < curved map (0.94) and exocen-
tric globe (0.90). Post-hoc testing indicated statistical signiﬁcance
(see Fig. 5(c2)). Avg. accuracy of ﬂat map (0.79) is higher than
that of the egocentric globe, however, the post-hoc test did not ﬁnd
statistical signiﬁcance.

For avg. response time, LME ANOVA analysis revealed:
Easy: no signiﬁcance (χ2(3) = 4.903, p = .179). Although in
Fig. 5(a1), egocentric globe (16.3s) tended to be slower than others
(ﬂat map 13.5s, exocentric globe 14.7s and curved map 14.1s).
Small variation: no signiﬁcance (χ2(3) = 1.147, p = .765).
Far distance: a signiﬁcant effect (χ2(3) = 10.451, p = .0151).
Fig. 5(c1) shows curved map (16.0s) was faster than either exocen-
tric globe (19.2s) or egocentric globe (20.6s). Post-hoc: Fig. 5(c2)).
Flat map response time (17.1s) was similar to curved map.

Participant strategies: From the questionnaires, we found two gen-
eral strategies for distance comparison with all visualisations:
- Using the graticule grid to calculate distance – two explicitly
mentioned using Manhattan distance;
- Moving each pair in turn to the centre of the map or globe – usu-
ally more than once and alternating between them.

There were also speciﬁc strategies for different visualisations:
- For ﬂat and curved maps: moving the two pairs so they are placed
symmetrically around the centre. “It seems they will have the same
scale”. This strategy was not usually possible in the globes because
of the more limited ﬁeld of view.

Figure 5: Break down of distance comparison task into different
difﬁculty conditions. (a1,b1,c1) Average performance per visuali-
sation with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2,b2,c2,c3) graphical de-
piction of result of pairwise post-hoc test.

- For exocentric and egocentric globes: some participants used pro-
prioception to estimate the distance between the points in each pair.
They used interaction to rotate the sphere to move the points past
a reference point (such as the center of the globe) and the effort
required for each pair gave an estimate of the relative distance.
- For the exocentric globe: use the top of the visible hemisphere
as a reference point, in turn placing one point of each pair at this
position and memorising the position of the other point in the pair,
then switching to the other pair. Often they ensured the pairs were
vertically aligned.

Area Comparison
The Friedman test revealed a statistically signiﬁcant effect of vi-
sualisations on accuracy for the area comparison task (χ2(3) =
7.218, p = .0652). Fig. 6(a1) shows the average accuracy score of
egocentric globe (0.67) was lower than that of the others (exocen-
tric globe 0.82, ﬂat map 0.81, and curved map 0.76). The post-hoc
test only shows a signiﬁcant difference between the comparison of
ﬂat map and egocentric globe (see Fig. 6(a2)). The LME ANOVA
analysis revealed a statistically signiﬁcant effect of visualisations
on time (χ2(3) = 46.762, p < .0001). Fig. 6(a1) shows the average
response times with curved map (9.6s) and ﬂat map (9.7s) were less
than those of exocentric globe (12.3s) and egocentric globe (14.7s).
The exocentric globe also performed signiﬁcantly faster than ego-
centric globe. A post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per
Fig. 6(a3). By difﬁculty condition the Friedman test revealed sig-

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

Figure 6: (a1) Average performance of area comparison task per
visualisation, with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2, a3) graphical de-
piction of results of pairwise post-hoc test.

niﬁcant effect for avg. accuracy:
Easy: χ2(3) = 27.545, p < .0001. Fig. 7(a1) shows the avg. accu-
racy score of egocentric globe (0.69) < the other visualisations (ex-
ocentric globe 1.00, ﬂat map 0.94, and curved map 0.94). A post-
hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 7(a2).
Small variation: χ2(3) = 15.451, p = .0014. Fig. 7(b1) shows the
avg. accuracy score of curved map (0.92) > the other visualisations
(egocentric globe 0.71, ﬂat map 0.63, and excocentric globe 0.50).
The post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcance for the difference
between curved map and exocentric globe (see Fig. 7(b2)).
Far distance: χ2(3) = 39.346, p < .0001. Fig. 7(c1) shows the avg.
accuracy scores with excocentric globe (0.96) and ﬂat map (0.88)
> egocentric globe (0.60) and curved map (0.42). The egocentric
globe also performed more accurately than curved map. A post-hoc
test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 7(c2).

LME ANOVA revealed signiﬁcant effect for avg. response time:
Easy: χ2(3) = 31.269, p < .0001. Fig. 7(a1) shows egocentric
globe (13.2s) was slower than that of the other visualisations
(curved map 7.9s, ﬂat map 8.6s, and exocentric globe 9.3s). A post-
hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 7(a3).
Small variation: χ2(3) = 21.663, p < .0001. Fig. 7(b1) shows
curved map (9.2s) and ﬂat map (10.0s) were faster than those of
egocentric globe (13.4s) and exocentric globe (15.4s). A post-hoc
test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 7(b3).
Far distance: χ2(3) = 36.511, p < .0001. Fig. 7(c1) shows egocen-
tric globe (17.91s) was slower than those of the other visualisations
(ﬂat map 10.7s, curved map 12.5s, and exocentric globe 17.9s). A
post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 7(c3)).

Participant strategies: From the questionnaire we found two gen-
eral strategies for area comparison used for all visualisations
- Using the graticule grid to estimate the area.
- Moving each polygon in turn to the centre of the map or globe,
usually more than once and alternating between them.

One speciﬁc strategy for ﬂat and curved maps was identiﬁed:
- For ﬂat and curved maps, moving the two polygons so they are
placed symmetrically around the centre. This strategy was not usu-
ally possible in the exocentric globes and egocentric globes because
of the more limited ﬁeld of view.

Direction Estimation
The Friedman test revealed a statistically signiﬁcant effect of vi-
sualisations on accuracy for the direction estimation task (χ2(3) =
24.937, p < .0001). Fig. 8(a1) shows the average accuracy score of
exocentric globe (0.63) is higher than those of the other visualisa-

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Figure 7: Break down of area comparison task into different difﬁ-
culty conditions. (a1,b1,c1) Average performance per visualisation
with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2,a3,b2,b3,c2,c3) graphical depic-
tion of results of pairwise post-hoc test.

tions (curved map 0.35, egocentric globe 0.35, and ﬂat map 0.15).
The post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcance for these differ-
ences. The curved map also had a statistically signiﬁcantly higher
accuracy score than the ﬂat map (see Fig. 8(a2)). The LME ANOVA
analysis revealed a statistically signiﬁcant effect of visualisations
on time (χ2(3) = 11.846, p = .0079). In Fig. 8(a1), we can see
the avg. response time with exocentric globe (9.4s) was faster than
curved map (11.1s), ﬂat map (11.9s), and egocentric globe (12.7s).
The post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcance (see Fig. 8(a3)).
By difﬁculty condition the Friedman test revealed signiﬁcant effect
for avg. accuracy:
Close distance: χ2(3) = 26.162, p < .0001. Fig. 9(a1) shows the
avg. accuracy score of exocentric globe (0.70) > other visualisa-
tions (curved map 0.47, egocentric globe 0.43, and ﬂat map 0.19).
Curved map also had a signiﬁcantly higher accuracy score than
ﬂat map. A post-hoc test showed statistical signiﬁcances as per
Fig. 9(a2).
Far distance: χ2(3) = 8.496, p = .0368. Fig. 9(b1) shows the avg.
accuracy score of the exocentric globe (0.50) > other visualisations
(egocentric globe 0.19, curved map 0.10, and ﬂat map 0.06). The
post-hoc test only showed statistical signiﬁcance between the exo-
centric globe and the ﬂat map (see Fig. 9(b2)).

LME ANOVA revealed signiﬁcant effect for avg. response time:
Close distance: χ2(3) = 7.444, p = .0590. Fig. 9(a1) shows texo-
centric globe (8.2s) was signiﬁcantly faster than those of ﬂat map

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

Figure 8: (a1) Average performance of direction estimation task
per visualisation, with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2, a3) graphical
depiction of results of pairwise post-hoc test.

Figure 10: (a) Average accumulated movements of head and con-
troller per task; (b) average accumulated rotations of head and
controller per task.

egocentric globe:
- Placing the start point of the arrow at the center of the globe, then
rotating the globe following the direction of the arrow.

User interactions
We analysed aggregate change in positions (euclidean distance) and
rotation (in degrees) of the user’s head and the controller, Fig. 10,
all results signiﬁcant by LME ANOVA (p < .0001). Pairwise post-
hoc testing revealed signiﬁcant differences: egocentric globe > ex-
ocentric globe > curved map > ﬂat map; with all p < .05. For head
movement, post-hoc test revealed signiﬁcance: egocentric globe >
exocentric globe ≈ curved map > ﬂat map; with all p < .05, except
≈ means no signiﬁcant differences. For the rotations of the head,
the post-hoc test revealed signiﬁcant differences: egocentric globe
> curved map > exocentric globe ≈ ﬂat map; with all p < .05,
except again ≈ means no signiﬁcant differences.

Figure 9: Break down of direction estimation task into different
difﬁculty conditions. (a1,b1) Average performance per visualisa-
tion with 95% conﬁdence interval, (a2,a3,b2,b3) graphical depic-
tion of results of pairwise post-hoc test.

(10.0s) and egocentric globe (10.2s). The exocentric globe tended
to outperform the curved map (8.9s), however, no statistical sig-
niﬁcance is evident from the post-hoc test. A post-hoc test showed
statistical signiﬁcances as per Fig. 9(a3).
Far distance: χ2(3) = 10.335, p = .0159. Fig. 9(b1) shows ex-
ocentric globe (12.0s) tended to be faster than ﬂat map (16.1s),
curved map (16.9s), and egocentric globe (18.8s). The post-hoc test
showed the statistical signiﬁcance between exocentric globe and
curved map and egocentric globe (see Fig. 9(b3)), but no statistical
signiﬁcance with ﬂat map.

Participant strategies: From the questionnaire we identiﬁed three
general strategies for direction estimation used for all visualisa-
tions:
- Mentally following the arrow – Those participants “attempted to
‘sit behind’ the direction of the arrow.” and “imagined a marble
running down the arrow.”
- Moving the mid-point of the two points – to the centre of the map
or globe.
- Moving the start point of the arrow to the centre – some partici-
pants also tried to vertically/horizontally align the arrow.

There was one speciﬁc strategy for the exocentric globe and the

The

rating

Motion sickness rating

from no motion sickness

scale was
participant motion

Motion sickness
used
A ﬁve-point-Likert
sick-
for
ness,
to
strong motion sickness .
Fried-
man test revealed a signiﬁcant effect of
visualisations on motion sickness rating
(χ2(3) = 53.84, p < .0001). From the
ﬁgure, we can see that the percentage of
participants that did not experience motion sickness in the ego-
centric globe (21.9%) and the curved map (50%) is signiﬁcantly
less than the percentage that did not experience motion sickness in
the exocentric globe (84.4%) and the ﬂat map (75%). The post-hoc
test showed that participants experienced signiﬁcantly more motion
sickness in the egocentric globe and the curved map than they did
in the exocentric globe and the ﬂat map (all p < .05). The egocen-
tric globe also caused signiﬁcantly more motion sickness to partic-
ipants than the curved map with p = .0074.

Visual Design Ranking

User preference and feedback
Participant ranking for each of the four vi-
sualisations by percentage of respondents
is shown by colour: 1st , 2nd , 3rd and
4th . For visual design, the Friedman test
revealed a signiﬁcant effect of visualisa-
tions on preference (χ2(3) = 10.612, p =
.0140). The strongest preference was for
the exocentric globe, with 78.1% voting it
as ﬁrst or second place. The preference
for the ﬂat map and the egocentric globe were similar, each received

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

43.8% and 56.3% votes as ﬁrst or second place. The curved map
was the least preferred, with 21.9% votes for ﬁrst or second place.
The post-hoc tests only showed a signiﬁcant difference between the
exocentric globe and the curved map with p = .0080.

Readability Ranking

For readability, the Friedman test indi-
cated no signiﬁcant effect of visualisations
on preference (χ2(3) = 5.363, p = .1471).
The strongest preference is again for the
exocentric globe, with 65.6% of respon-
dents voting it ﬁrst or second place. The
other visualisations have similar prefer-
ences, with the ﬂat map, egocentric globe,

and curved map receiving 46.9%, 50% and 37.5% votes respec-
tively as ﬁrst or second place.

The ﬁnal section of the study allowed participants to give feed-
back on the pros and cons of each design. Qualitative analysis of
these comments reveal (overall):

Exocentric globe was intuitive, familiar and easy to manipulate:
“It is the same with a physical globe, the way to manipulate it is
just nature, you can also walk around it.”, “I feel like I am most
habituated to this kind of representation”. Some also commented
on the tasks: “I think this one is the most suitable for solving the
given tasks. It is not distorted at all.” One noted, “occlusion is a
problem if targets are too far apart.” Note that even at 180 degrees
separation, two points will still be visible at antipodes. However,
perceptual distortion due to curvature of the globe was problem-
atic for our participants in the far condition. Some also suggested a
different interaction, which would synchronise the rotations of the
exocentric globe with the hand rotations.

Flat map was again very familiar: “Similar to what we see on pa-
per”. Some enjoyed the ability to show the whole world at once.
Others were excited about the interaction of manipulating the ge-
ographic centre: “it works as ﬂuid and has a feeling of artwork”.
However, this interaction was unfamiliar to most participants: “it
took a while to get used to controlling the map in the way that I
wanted to.” Interacting with the map can result in landmasses with
unusual orientation, which is also unfamiliar to most participants.
Yet, some commented that it is boring to have a ﬂat map in VR.

Egocentric globe was novel and immersive: “It is cool and exciting
being inside of the world”. However, “I don’t like it when it comes
to answering questions”. Some also commented “it is easier to look
around rather than manipulating with the wand”, while some com-
plained about the head movements: “have to move my head a lot.”,
and some reported motion sickness.

Curved map was generally similar to the ﬂat map. Concerning cur-
vature: “it is like facing a curved TV”. On visual design: “It is the
most visually impressive one.” Some perceived it as more distorted
than ﬂat map, some experienced motion sickness.

6. Discussion
Exocentric Globe: Exocentric globes present geographic informa-
tion without projection distortion, and this seems to greatly beneﬁt
accuracy for our tasks as described below. The overall response
time is also comparatively good, except for one task (small vari-
ation condition in area comparison). Overall, exocentric globe ap-

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

pears to be a good choice for the three fundamental geographic
analysis tasks in VR with the following details and caveats:

Best for overall accuracy – The exocentric globe was the most ac-
curate visualisation in almost all cases. One exception is in small
variation for area comparison, where it performed the worst.
Time for distance comparison similar to other visualisations – The
response time for the exocentric globe was similar to the other vi-
sualisations when comparing distances.
Area comparison slower than with maps – Overall, participants
were slower with the exocentric globe than the ﬂat and curved
maps. If we break the results down by task difﬁculties, however,
performance for exocentric globe was similar to the ﬂat and curved
maps in easy and far distance conditions. However, it performed
much slower than these two in the small variation condition. We
believe this is due to the relatively small variation of area between
the two polygons, and the fact that participants can only view half
of the globe. Participants had to rely on their memory to compare
areas, and they tended to conﬁrm their choice multiple times by
using interactions to switch between viewing each of the two poly-
gons. Interestingly, this did not happen in the small variation condi-
tion in distance comparison tasks. A likely explanation is that com-
paring the magnitude of length is easier than area [TSS75], thus
less interactions were needed in distance comparison tasks.
Fastest for direction estimation tasks – Overall, the exocentric
globe is the fastest visualisation for ﬁnding directions.

Flat Map: This visualisation is capable of presenting the entire
surface of the world within the user’s ﬁeld of view, making it time-
efﬁcient for distance and area comparison. However, projection and
perceptual distortion appears to lead to poor accuracy in all direc-
tion estimation tasks, and the small variation condition of distance
and area comparison tasks.

Relatively fast for distance and area comparison, however, the ac-
curacy is relatively low for distance comparison tasks.
Drop in accuracy for small variation – In distance and area com-
parison tasks, accuracy was relatively high in easy and far dis-
tance conditions, but dropped signiﬁcantly in the small variation
conditions. For distance comparison, no map projection can pre-
serve all distances, thus, projection distortion makes comparing dis-
tances with small differences more difﬁcult. For area comparison,
although the map projection preserves the relative size of areas, the
shape of the polygons is distorted (e.g., a polygon is elongated at
the edge of a ﬂat map), which affects area perception [Teg65].
Poor for direction estimation – The ﬂat map was the least accu-
rate visualisation and relatively slow in direction estimation. We
attribute this to distortion effects.

Egocentric Globe: This is the most immersive visualisation. It per-
formed stably in accuracy across different difﬁculty conditions in
the comparison of distances and areas. However, the perceptual dis-
tortion introduced by changing view point and the extra effort of
body interaction (e.g. users needing to turn their head) make it a
poor choice in VR for the three tasks tested.

Worst performance overall – The egocentric globe performed sig-
niﬁcantly worse in almost all cases. Particularly, for distance com-
parison, it seems less accurate and slower than other visualisations
in easy and far distance conditions.
Good for small variation – Despite being the worst performer over-

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

all, one exception is in small variation for distance comparison, in
which, it seems to perform the best of all (both faster and more
accurate). One possible explanation is that it was the largest scale
visualisation - i.e. it maximised the size of the distances relative to
the participants’ ﬁeld of view at the default viewing distance. While
it is possible for participants to move closer to the visualisations to
achieve a similar relative scale, doing so may be inconvenient or
cost them time.
Stable across difﬁculties – For distance and area comparison,
the accuracy with egocentric globes stayed relatively stable across
three difﬁculty conditions.
Motion sickness – Although we placed two ﬁxed-position refer-
ences (horizon lines) to help participants perceive their direction,
they reported a relatively strong motion-sickness feeling in this vi-
sualisation. The egocentric spherical globe covered the full ﬁeld
of view all the time. Together with the curvature of sphere, this
seemed to cause participants to feel more motion-sickness.
Curved Map: This is generally an improvement on the ﬂat map
in VR. The curved map was more accurate than the ﬂat map in
direction estimation. However, motion-sickness is a practical issue,
but one that may be mitigated by shrinking the size of the map or
by improved hardware.

Better than ﬂat map for direction – Participants had greater accu-
racy with curved map than with ﬂat map in direction estimation
tasks, and performed similar to ﬂat map in almost all other cases.
Accurate small variation area comparison – In area comparison
tasks, curved map seems to be the most accurate visualisation in
the small variation condition, but was the least accurate one in far
distance condition. The possible reason might be that, the curved
map is not an area-preserving visualisation, and the difference be-
tween distortions of areas are larger if two polygons are far apart.
Direction estimation – In direction estimation tasks, the curved map
outperformed the ﬂat map in the close variation condition. Less dis-
tortions of directions occurs in the curved map than the ﬂat map.
Second worst for motion-sickness – Participants reported more feel-
ings of motion-sickness than for exocentric globe and ﬂat map. The
reason might be similar as to the egocentric globe, the curved map
covers 108◦ horizontally of the ﬁeld of view, and the perception of
curvature might produce extra motion-sickness.
User interactions: In the egocentric globe, participants tended to
interact signiﬁcantly more than with other visualisations. This is
also reﬂected in participants’ feedback, and could be one reason
for slow response times in the egocentric globe condition.

The exocentric globe needed more controller interactions than
curved and ﬂat maps, and a similar degree of head movement. From
Figure 10 and investigators’ observation, it seems participants did
not like to move themselves in space for all visualisations, espe-
cially in the exocentric globe, as its ratio of controller interactions
is
signiﬁcantly larger than with other visualisations. This is possibly
due to unfamiliarity with the VR environment, and the ease of ma-
nipulating visualisations using the controller.

head interactions

7. Conclusion and Future Work

We have conducted the ﬁrst user study evaluating the effectiveness
of different visualisations of global geography in VR. Of the four
conditions and three task types tested, we found that the exocen-
tric globe is generally the best choice of VR visualisation. This

Figure 11: Animated transformation from a ﬂat map to an exocen-
tric globe: top row - top view; second row - front view and bottom
row - side view. The touchpad dynamically controls the progress.

is despite the fact that less of the earth’s surface is visible in the
exocentric globe than the other representations and that it has the
most perceptual distortion, though no distortion due to map projec-
tion. We also found that the curved map had beneﬁts over the ﬂat
map, but the curved map caused the users greater motion-sickness.
In almost all cases the egocentric globe was found to be the least
effective visualisation.

Our study was performed using VR HMDs as these offer a sig-
niﬁcantly better ﬁeld of view compared to the currently available
AR devices. However, it is expected that AR technology will im-
prove in this regard. Thus, our results have signiﬁcant implications
for the design of geovisualisation applications for VR, AR and MR,
providing support for the use of exocentric globes when visualising
data with global extent. While our study found that the exocentric
globe had the best overall performance of the four visualisations,
the inability to show the entire surface hindered users in some tasks.
We therefore think it would be reasonable to combine the exocen-
tric globe with a map representation. As the curved map was more
likely to cause motion sickness and the ﬂat map was more familiar,
we are currently investigating how to combine the exocentric globe
and ﬂat map.

As a ﬁrst possible hybrid we have developed a prototype imple-
mentation that allows the viewer to interactively transition between
exocentric globe and ﬂat map. Due to the complexity of the tran-
sition, we allow the user to control the progress of the morphing.
Fig. 11 shows the animated transformation from a ﬂat map to an
exocentric globe, the reverse transformation is symmetric. We used
linear interpolation to transition between the 3D position of points
in the rendered textures of the source visualisation and the target
visualisation. Refer to our video for a demonstration. Evaluation of
this hybrid visualisation remains future work.

Other future work is to design and evaluate other interactions
including (non-physical) zooming. We also wish to investigate if
our ﬁndings continue to hold for higher-level data analysis tasks of
global spatial data using thematic maps such as ﬂow, choropleth or
prism maps. We also believe that the curved map has considerable
potential and wish to explore how we can reduce motion-sickness
and also investigate the use of other map projections.

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

funding scheme

Acknowledgments
This research was supported under Australian Research Coun-
cil’s Discovery Projects
(project number
DP180100755). Data61, CSIRO (formerly NICTA) is funded by
the Australian Government through the Department of Commu-
nications and the Australian Research Council through the ICT
Centre for Excellence Program. We would like to thank all of our
user study participants for their time and feedback. We would also
like to thank the reviewers for their valuable comments.

References

[AKSA04] ARAMPATZIS G., KIRANOUDIS C. T., SCALOUBACAS P.,
ASSIMACOPOULOS D.: A GIS-based decision support system for plan-
ning urban transportation policies. European Journal of Operational
Research 152, 2 (Jan. 2004), 465–475. 1

[BD13] BOSTOCK M., DAVIES J.: Code as Cartography. The Carto-

graphic Journal 50, 2 (Nov. 2013), 129–135. 3, 4

[BJJ∗11] BLOCK B. A., JONSEN I. D., JORGENSEN S. J., WINSHIP
A. J., SHAFFER S. A., BOGRAD S. J., HAZEN E. L., FOLEY D. G.,
BREED G. A., HARRISON A. L., GANONG J. E., SWITHENBANK
A., CASTLETON M., DEWAR H., MATE B. R., SHILLINGER G. L.,
SCHAEFER K. M., BENSON S. R., WEISE M. J., HENRY R. W.,
COSTA D. P.: Tracking apex marine predator movements in a dynamic
ocean. Nature 475, 7354 (July 2011), 86–90. 4

[BM09] BATTERSBY S. E., MONTELLO D. R.: Area Estimation of
World Regions and the Projection of the Global-Scale Cognitive Map.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99, 2 (Apr. 2009),
273–291. 2, 4

[BMP06] BOS J. E., MACKINNON S. N., PATTERSON A.: Motion Sick-
ness Symptoms in a Ship Motion Simulator: Effects of Inside, Outside
and No View. Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine 76, 12 (Jan.
2006), 1111–1118. 3

[Bro98] BROWN C. E.: Coefﬁcient of Variation. In Applied Multivari-
ate Statistics in Geohydrology and Related Sciences. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 155–157. 4

[Car10] CARBON C.-C.: The Earth is ﬂat when personally signiﬁcant
experiences with the sphericity of the Earth are absent. Cognition 116, 1
(2010), 130–135. 2, 4

[CCC∗15] CHANDLER T., CORDEIL M., CZAUDERNA T., DWYER T.,
GLOWACKI J., GONCU C., KLAPPERSTUECK M., KLEIN K., MAR-
RIOTT K., SCHREIBER F., WILSON E.: Immersive Analytics. In 2015
Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA) (2015), IEEE, pp. 1–8. 2

[CDK∗16] CORDEIL M., DWYER T., KLEIN K., LAHA B., MARRIOTT
K., THOMAS B. H.: Immersive Collaborative Analysis of Network Con-
nectivity: CAVE-style or Head-Mounted Display? IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 23, 1 (2016), 441–450. 1

[CKZ∗03] CHU D. A., KAUFMAN Y. J., ZIBORDI G., CHERN J. D.,
MAO J., LI C., HOLBEN B. N.: Global monitoring of air pollution over
land from the Earth Observing System-Terra Moderate Resolution Imag-
ing Spectroradiometer (MODIS). Journal of Geophysical Research: At-
mospheres 108, D21 (Nov. 2003), 32,141. 4

[Dav13] DAVIES J.: Rotate the World, 2013. URL: https://www.

jasondavies.com/maps/rotate/. 4

[DDAS15] DEBIASI A., DE AMICIS R., SIMÕES B.:

GeoPeels:
Deformation-Based Technique for Exploration of Geo-Referenced Net-
works. In International Conference on Computer Graphics, Visualiza-
tion and Computer Vision WSCG (June 2015). 2

[Dek07] DEKKER E.: Globes in Renaissance Europe.

In The History
of Cartography: Volume 3–Cartography in the European Renaissance
(Part 1). University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 135–173. 1

[Dem16] DEMPSEY P.: The Teardown: HTC Vive virtual reality headset.

Engineering & Technology 11, 7 (Aug. 2016), 80–81. 5

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

[DRST14] DÜBEL S., RÖHLIG M., SCHUMANN H., TRAPP M.: 2d and
3d presentation of spatial data: a systematic review. In 2014 IEEE VIS
International Workshop on 3DVis (3DVis) (2014), IEEE, pp. 11–18. 2
[ETM∗15] ELSAYED N., THOMAS B., MARRIOTT K., PIANTADOSI J.,
In Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA),

SMITH R.: Situated analytics.
2015 (2015), IEEE, pp. 1–8. 1

[FB00] FRIEDMAN A., BROWN N. R.: Reasoning about geography.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 129, 2 (2000), 193–219.
2, 4

[FM06] FRIEDMAN A., MONTELLO D. R.: Global-scale location and
distance estimates: Common representations and strategies in absolute
and relative judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 32, 2 (2006), 333–346. 2, 4

[FMS93] FEINER S., MACINTYRE B., SELIGMANN D.: Knowledge-
based augmented reality. Communications of the ACM 36, 7 (1993),
53–62. 4

[GMTA05] GUIMERÀ R., MOSSA S., TURTSCHI A., AMARAL L.
A. N.: The worldwide air transportation network: Anomalous central-
ity, community structure, and cities’ global roles. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 102, 22 (May 2005), 7794–7799. 4

[Goo17] GOOGLE: Google Earth VR, 2017. URL: https://vr.

google.com/earth/. 1

[HAA16] HRUBY F., AVELINO M. C., AYALA R. M.: Journey to the
End of the World Map – How Edges of World Maps Shape the Spatial
Mind. Journal for Geographic Information Science Volume 1 (2016),
314–323. 2

[Hed15] HEDLEY N.: Virtual reality.

In The History of Cartography:
Cartography in the Twentieth Century, Monmonier M., (Ed.), vol. 6.
University of Chicago Press, 2015, pp. 1680–1683. 2

[Hen15] HENNERDAL P.: Beyond the Periphery: Child and Adult Under-
standing of World Map Continuity. Annals of the Association of Ameri-
can Geographers 105, 4 (July 2015), 773–790. 2

[HPM∗13] HANSEN M. C., POTAPOV P. V., MOORE R., HANCHER M.,
TURUBANOVA S. A., TYUKAVINA A., THAU D., STEHMAN S. V.,
GOETZ S. J., LOVELAND T. R., KOMMAREDDY A., EGOROV A.,
CHINI L., JUSTICE C. O., TOWNSHEND J. R. G.: High-Resolution
Global Maps of 21st-Century Forest Cover Change. Science 342, 6160
(Nov. 2013), 850–853. 4

[HW99] HOLLANDER M., WOLFE D. A.: Nonparametric Statistical

Methods. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1999. 5

[JŠA∗17]

JENNY B., ŠAVRI ˇC B., ARNOLD N. D., MARSTON B. E.,
PREPPERNAU C. A.: A Guide to Selecting Map Projections for World
and Hemisphere Maps. In Choosing a Map Projection. Springer, 2017,
pp. 213–228. 2

[JŠL15]

JENNY B., ŠAVRI ˇC B., LIEM J.: Real-time raster projection
for web maps. International Journal of Digital Earth 9, 3 (Jan. 2015),
215–229. 3

[KKGB10] KALUZA P., KÖLZSCH A., GASTNER M. T., BLASIUS B.:
The complex network of global cargo ship movements. Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 7, 48 (July 2010), 1093–1103. 4

[KMLM16] KWON O.-H., MUELDER C., LEE K., MA K.-L.: A Study
of Layout, Rendering, and Interaction Methods for Immersive Graph Vi-
sualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
22, 7 (2016), 1802–1815. 2, 3, 4

[KSW∗13] KÖLZSCH A., SLINGSBY A., WOOD J., NOLET B. A.,
DYKES J.: Visualisation design for representing bird migration tracks
in time and space. In Workshop on Visualisation in Environmental Sci-
ences EnvirVis (2013). 1

[Mar89] MARTIN D.: Mapping Population Data from Zone Centroid
Locations. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 14, 1
(1989), 90. 1

[MC99] MOORE D. A., CARPENTER T. E.: Spatial Analytical Meth-
ods and Geographic Information Systems: Use in Health Research and
Epidemiology. Epidemiologic Reviews 21, 2 (Feb. 1999), 143–161. 1

Y. Yang et al. / Maps and Globes in Virtual Reality

[McC13] MCCULLOCH C. E.: Repeated Measures ANOVA, R.I.P.?

CHANCE 18, 3 (Aug. 2013), 29–33. 5

[PB00] PINHEIRO J. C., BATES D. M.: Mixed-Effects Models in S and

S-PLUS. Springer, New York, NY, 2000. 5

[PNFG15] PORTMAN M. E., NATAPOV A., FISHER-GEWIRTZMAN D.:
To go where no man has gone before: Virtual reality in architecture, land-
scape architecture and environmental planning. Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems 54 (Nov. 2015), 376–384. 2

[ŠJJ16] ŠAVRI ˇC B., JENNY B., JENNY H.: Projection Wizard – An On-
line Map Projection Selection Tool. The Cartographic Journal 53, 2
(June 2016), 177–185. 2

[SMKH09] SLOCUM T. A., MCMASTER R. B., KESSLER F. C.,
HOWARD H. H.: Thematic cartography and geovisualization, 3rd ed.
Pearson Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2009. 1

[Sny87] SNYDER J. P.: Map projections: A working manual. U.S. Gov-

ernment Printing Ofﬁce, 1987. 2, 5

[Sny97] SNYDER J. P.: Flattening the earth: two thousand years of map

projections. University of Chicago Press, 1997. 1, 2

[SvL17] SLINGSBY A., VAN LOON E.: Temporal tile-maps for char-
acterising the temporal occupancy of places: A seabird case study. In
GISRUK 2017 Conference Proceedings (Apr. 2017). 1

[Teg65] TEGHTSOONIAN M.: The Judgment of Size. The American

Journal of Psychology 78, 3 (Sept. 1965), 392. 9

[TSS75] TEGHTSOONIAN R., STEVENS S., STEVENS G.:

Psy-
chophysics: Introduction to its perceptual, neural, and social prospects.
The American Journal of Psychology 88, 4 (1975), 677. 9

[War13] WARE C.:

Information visualization: perception for design,

3rd ed. Elsevier, 2013. 3

[WJID15] WILLETT W., JENNY B., ISENBERG T., DRAGICEVIC P.:
Lightweight Relief Shearing for Enhanced Terrain Perception on Inter-
active Maps. In the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Apr. 2015), ACM, pp. 3563–3572. 4

[ZLZ16] ZHANG M.-J., LI J., ZHANG K.: An immersive approach to
the visual exploration of geospatial network datasets. In VRCAI ’16 Pro-
ceedings of the 15th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual-Reality
Continuum and Its Applications in Industry (Dec. 2016), ACM, pp. 381–
390. 2, 3

© 2018 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum © 2018 The Eurographics Association and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

