Outstanding: A Multi-Perspective Travel Approach
for Virtual Reality Games

Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, Jens Krüger
High Performance Computing Group
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
{sebastian.cmentowski, andrey.krekhov, jens.krueger}@uni-due.de

9
1
0
2

g
u
A
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
7
3
0
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1. Our proposed navigation technique allows players to switch to a scaled third-person perspective on demand and control a virtual avatar to
cover large distances in open world VR scenarios.

ABSTRACT
In virtual reality games, players dive into ﬁctional environ-
ments and can experience a compelling and immersive world.
State-of-the-art VR systems allow for natural and intuitive nav-
igation through physical walking. However, the tracking space
is still limited, and viable alternatives are required to reach fur-
ther virtual destinations. Our work focuses on the exploration
of vast open worlds – an area where existing local naviga-
tion approaches such as the arc-based teleport are not ideally
suited and world-in-miniature techniques potentially reduce
presence. We present a novel alternative for open environ-
ments: Our idea is to equip players with the ability to switch
from ﬁrst-person to a third-person bird’s eye perspective on

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI PLAY ’19, October 22–25, 2019, Barcelona, Spain
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-6688-5/19/10. . . $15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3311350.3347183

demand. From above, players can command their avatar and
initiate travels over large distance. Our evaluation reveals a
signiﬁcant increase in spatial orientation while avoiding cyber-
sickness and preserving presence, enjoyment, and competence.
We summarize our ﬁndings in a set of comprehensive design
guidelines to help developers integrate our technique.

Author Keywords
Virtual reality games; navigation; perspectives; virtual avatar;
orientation; virtual body size; world-in-miniature

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; •Software
and its engineering → Interactive games;

INTRODUCTION
Virtual reality allows players to explore ﬁctional environments
in an immersive and natural manner, to experience a feeling of
being there, and almost to forget the real surrounding. Contin-
uous technical improvements and faster rendering approaches
make it possible to push the boundaries of VR even further and
develop vast open environments that could be explored freely

 
 
 
 
 
 
and immersively. However, large and detailed VR worlds
require proper techniques to travel these landscapes.

Physical walking using room-scale tracking offers an intuitive
and natural kind of navigation [40]. However, the available
walking space is usually conﬁned to the size of a living room.
Game developers overcome this limitation by adding virtual
locomotion techniques such as the prominent teleport (see
Figure 5). Most of these approaches were designed for local
navigation and are not ideally suited for exploring large and
open worlds. Only a few exceptions exist, such as the world-
in-miniature (WIM) [49], where players use a miniature model
of the virtual scenario to teleport themselves to distant places.
Nevertheless, this approach relies on an artiﬁcial user interface
and does not provide an opportunity to explore an environment
freely and continuously which potentially reduces the players’
possibility to immerse themselves in the virtual world.

Our research closes the gap between local teleportation and
WIM relocation by introducing a novel approach for con-
tinuous long-distance traveling. Our main idea is to switch
dynamically between a ﬁrst-person and a third-person bird’s
eye perspective on demand. The ﬁrst-person mode offers a
familiar experience and is used to explore the local surround-
ing and interact with the environment. In the third-person
mode, players see and command their avatar from a bird’s eye
perspective, as depicted in Figure 1.

Using the correct perspective for every situation offers impor-
tant beneﬁts [15]: ﬁrst-person is suited best for interaction-
intensive tasks while third-person provides a better overview.
We combine both perspectives to achieve an intuitive navi-
gation approach. Moreover, we extend this basic concept by
additional features to enhance the experience further: Virtual
scaling of the player in third-person mode is used to improve
the spatial orientation and deliver a feeling of moving through
a miniature world while commanding an avatar. Addition-
ally, we use a smooth and fast transformation between both
perspectives to prevent cybersickness and to emphasize the
impression of leaving and re-embodying the virtual avatar.

Our main contribution is the proposed navigation technique us-
ing dynamic perspective switching. We validate this approach
by comparing it against the arc-based teleport using a 3D ad-
venture game. Our experiments reveal signiﬁcant beneﬁts to
spatial orientation and overview while preserving equal levels
of presence, enjoyment, and competence. Additionally, our im-
provements prevent adverse effects through cybersickness. As
the ﬁnal step, we discuss the unique strengths and weaknesses
of our proposed approach and condense these into a set of
design implications that can help developers and practitioners.

RELATED WORK
Our work belongs to the virtual reality research with a partic-
ular focus on VR games and locomotion techniques. Conse-
quently, we ﬁrst introduce basic concepts and issues behind
VR games such as immersion, presence, and cybersickness.
Subsequently, we outline the current state of the art in VR
locomotion research. Since our technique centers around the
concept of perspective-switching and dynamic virtual rescal-
ing, we also provide the necessary background to these topics.

Two concepts seem to be of utmost importance when dealing
with VR applications: immersion [8] and presence [18]. To
stay in line with the majority of recent research, we use the
term immersion to describe the technical quality of a VR
setup [6, 45]. Immersive setups can induce a feeling of being
there, which is commonly called presence. This distinction is
further formalized by Slater et al. [46], Lombard et al. [33] and
IJsselsteijn et al. [21]. For a particular focus on locomotion-
related presence, we point to the work by Slater et al. [47].

Cybersickness
A typical problem most VR applications have to tackle is
the occurrence of cybersickness [29]. Even though often
being used synonymously with the effect of simulator sick-
ness [25], both are different strains of the motion sickness phe-
nomenon [35, 20, 36]. Typical symptoms such as headaches,
eye strain, sweating, nausea or vomiting arise due to a mis-
match of our vestibular-ocular system.

Humans sense acceleration using their vestibular system which
usually matches the sensory input gathered from the visual
system [29]. In the case of a mismatch between these signals,
the resulting symptoms differ in strength and form [39]. The
reason for this body reaction remains unsolved, but so far
three major prominent theories have been established: sensory
conﬂict theory (most accepted), poison theory, and postural
instability theory [29]. The difference between both speciﬁc
strains of motion sickness was extensively explored by Stan-
ney et al. [48]: Simulator sickness usually occurs when a
simulator, typically used for pilot or astronaut training, is not
correctly conﬁgured [24]. This technical problem can lead
to rather mild oculomotor and nausea symptoms. In contrast,
cybersickness is caused by a broad set of reasons ranging from
technological issues such as ﬂickering and lags to a wrong
visual image being caused by mismatches in movement, eye
distance or vergence. The results are mainly severe symptoms
such as disorientation and nausea [48].

Additionally, Hettinger et al. [19] introduced the phenomenon
of vection as a possible source for cybersickness. Vection is a
feeling of moving that is solely induced by the visual system
and usually experienced when sitting on a standing train and
watching the adjacent train accelerating. This effect is sup-
ported by different factors listed by La Viola Jr [29]: the ﬁeld
of view (FOV) of the HMD, the optical ﬂow rate, the degree
of movement and proximity of objects. In short, close and
fast-moving objects ﬁlling the player’s view combined with
a big ﬁeld of view tend to amplify the amount of perceived
vection and potential cybersickness. Consequently, Fernandes
et al. [13] propose limiting the FOV to reduce cybersickness.
A broader discussion about the inﬂuence of the FOV on cyber-
sickness can be found in the work of Lin et al. [32].

Additionally, recent studies have shown that the accumu-
lated ﬂow over time, perceived via central and peripheral
vision, forms a critical factor in the occurrence of motion
sickness [31]. Instead of avoiding cybersickness at all costs,
von Mammen et al. [53] showed that games with artiﬁcially
induced cybersickness can still be enjoyable. This leads to
the conclusion that a reduction of potential motion sickness to

an acceptable level could be more favorable than limiting the
opportunities of virtual reality to avoid risking any symptoms.

Locomotion
Most non-VR games use joysticks to control the player’s avatar.
Such approaches involving continuous motion are rarely trans-
ferable to VR as they tend to induce cybersickness [17]. Al-
ternatively, VR games can use natural walking [40] to achieve
intuitive and presence-preserving navigation. However, the
conﬁned space of currently available room-scale tracking lim-
its natural walking to a few square meters.

Recent research focused on overcoming this limitation by ex-
tending the range of real walking to enable the player to reach
further. Bhandari et al. [5] combined walking with walking
in place [47, 51] and reported higher presence compared to
traditional controller input. This result is in line with the work
by Usoh et al. [52]: According to their research, walking is
superior to walking in place, while both outperform virtual
locomotion. Another approach by Bolte et al. [7] uses the
detection of physical jumping: When a jump is detected, the
forward motion is augmented to travel larger distances.

In contrast to these augmented walking approaches, purely
virtual navigation techniques sacriﬁce the advantages of natu-
ral walking to achieve unlimited traveling. A typical problem
that arises from the necessary decoupling of real and virtual
movement is an increase in cybersickness. This is best tack-
led by "short, fast movements in VR (with no acceleration or
deceleration)" [17], which has been conﬁrmed by the work of
Medeiros et al. [34] and Yao et al. [55]. The most prominently
used navigation approach, using such short movements, is the
arc-based teleportation technique: players aim at an accessible
destination and are directly teleported there. This approach
is superior to the traditional gamepad locomotion [14] and
is actively promoted and encouraged by the majority of es-
tablished VR systems such as the HTC Vive [10]. However,
the perceived presence and spatial orientation are signiﬁcantly
lowered by instant relocations. Even worse, the necessity
to see the target location limits the maximal distance to be
traversed in one jump and vastly increases the necessary work-
load for more considerable travels or occluded areas.

Apart from virtual travel techniques, a couple of other so-
lutions for inﬁnite locomotion have been developed. One
famous approach is the extension of available walking space
by unconsciously altering the virtual movement from the real
walk. Users are not able to sense slight rotations in the vir-
tual environment leading to a feeling of walking on a straight
line, whereas in reality, they are moving in circles. How-
ever,
the necessary minimal turning rate leads to extensive
space requirements. This impediment is the main reason why
the concept of redirected walking [37, 38] has stayed a pure
research topic despite numerous improvements [12, 16, 28].

One remedy for true large distance travel in VR is the con-
cept of a world-in-miniature (WIM) [49]: a virtual three-
dimensional minimap is shown on players’ hands and can be
used to move instantaneously to any point within a large and
complex environment. This concept has been further reﬁned
by La Viola Jr et al. [30] to achieve a walkable minimap that

is grown around the player’s feet to replace the previous envi-
ronment. In comparison to teleport, WIM works better with
larger distances and occlusions [3]. However, it introduces the
minimap as an additional artiﬁcial interface which is decou-
pled from the original virtual world. Since both approaches
were never designed to be a perfect solution for long-distance
travel, this encouraged us to develop a possible alternative.

Perspective and Scale
Our approach is based on switching between ﬁrst-person (1PP)
and third-person (3PP) perspectives. After early studies on the
potential use of 3PP in virtual environments [43], Gorisse et
al. [15] administered the perceptual differences in an extensive
study: According to their experiments, both perspectives are
able to preserve high levels of presence and agency. However,
1PP is best suited for interaction-intensive tasks while 3PP
provides advantages to spatial awareness and environmental
perception. These ﬁndings support our idea for a navigation
metaphor using 3PP for large-distance navigation and 1PP
for local interaction. Gorisse et al. [15] decided to place the
3PP viewpoint directly behind the avatar. However, this is not
suitable in our case as it does not improve the view distance
or environmental knowledge of the user. Instead, we have
decided to scale the disembodied players to giant size, similar
to the work by Abtahi et al. [1]. The virtual camera position
is moved to a greater height and enables players to perceive
the environment as a miniature world. Meanwhile, their avatar
resides at his original size to the feet of the players.

Dynamic scaling of the virtual world or the player is not new
and mostly used within so-called multiscale virtual environ-
ments (MSVE) [56]. Kopper et al. [26] used MSVEs to ex-
plore the inner organs of virtual human bodies and reported
that automatic scaling outperforms a manual-chosen scaling
factor regarding usability. Similarly, Argelaguet et al. [2]
emphasized the importance of automatic scaling speeds and
optimized stereoscopic rendering parameters to minimize ad-
verse side effects such as diplopia or cybersickness. While
MSVEs use different scaling factors to access distinct obser-
vation levels within their virtual environment, our technique
focuses on the locomotion aspect and only resides on the scal-
ing as a means to improve visibility and overview. In this
manner, the closest resembling approach is the GulliVR tech-
nique by Krekhov et al. [27] that focused on full-body scaling
in the ﬁrst-person perspective. One widely proposed request
from the CHIplay-community was to combine this approach
with perspective-switching to overcome the limited ﬁeld of
use and to decouple avatar and player. This wish was a major
motivation in developing our presented technique.

A core aspect of our idea is a bird’s eye view on a miniature
world. Following previous work, we decided to scale the stereo
camera separation accordingly to the rest of the body. While
smaller variations of this virtual eye distance do not have any
measurable impact on size judgments [4], larger differences
lead to a false eye separation [9]. The result is an altered size
perception that produces the desired miniature world effect.
Additionally, the resulting impression closely matches the
perceived virtual movement that the scaled players experience
and has been shown to avoid inducing cybersickness [27].

Figure 2. Normal mode (left) and travel mode (right): In normal mode
(NM) (left), players use their virtual hands to interact with the environ-
ment. Upon switching to travel mode (TM) on demand, the players con-
trol their avatar from a third-person bird’s eye perspective.

Figure 3. The different transition parameters that were used to realize
a continuous perspective switch and convey the feeling of embodying or
disembodying the avatar.

NAVIGATION TECHNIQUE
The main idea behind our locomotion technique is to switch
between different perspectives on demand based on the current
situation. In normal mode (NM), players perceive their sur-
rounding from a ﬁrst-person point of view. This perspective is
used for short-range exploration by physical walking, detailed
observation of local points-of-interest, and basic interactions
such as picking up objects. In travel mode (TM), players leave
their avatar behind and are scaled to a third-person bird’s eye
perspective. The virtual avatar is displayed at the players’ feet
symbolizing their original ﬁrst-person position in the world.
This view allows the disembodied players to observe the sur-
rounding area from an elevated view and to command their
avatar by setting navigation targets using raycast aiming (see
Figure 2). In TM, the players are completely decoupled from
their avatar and are able to explore the world independently.
Each perspective has beneﬁts and drawbacks [15]: Third-
person is excellent for environmental perception while ﬁrst-
person outperforms in interaction-intensive tasks. Through
dynamic perspective switching, we combine the strengths of
both views and achieve easy traveling and superior overview
with local exploration and interaction on demand.

Our technique can be split into three components: normal
mode, travel mode, and the transition between both states.
We emphasize a proper design of such transitions, as they
contribute to the players’ spatial orientation and should not
induce cybersickness. The naive approach would be an in-
stantaneous switch between both perspectives [17]. However,
this contradicts the primary goal of our approach to eliminate
the immediate relocations known from arc-based teleport that
could lead to disorientation. Instead, a fast automatic camera
translation is used, as earlier work [27, 17] showed that fast
and brief movements do not induce cybersickness.

Additionally, we extend the dolly-shot-like animation to im-
prove the impression of embodying or disembodying the avatar.
Early implementations kept the virtual position of the enlarged
players so that they were located right above their avatar. How-
ever, this forced them to look straight down to see and com-
mand their character. A viewing angle of nearly 90° is not only
putting a strain on the human neck but also leads to a blurry
vision through the headset as less pressure is applied to keep
it tightly in place. Instead, we decided to add a translation
backward to achieve a comfortable 45° viewing angle after
switching to TM. Furthermore, a curved animation between

both states emphasized a horizontal disembodiment followed
by a steeper vertical growth (see Figure 3). Early testers col-
lectively approved this design decision as it felt more natural
and matched the intended experience. As ﬁnal extension, we
implemented a previously requested feature: The possibility
to speed up the avatar’s movements to reduce the travel time.

EVALUATION
We conducted a study to evaluate our proposed navigation tech-
nique. In this process, we designed a virtual environment with
several square kilometers in size suited for testing large-scale
locomotion and used it to compare the method against the most
common and established alternative: the arc-based teleport.
We were especially interested in how players would use the
different mechanisms and how these would perform regarding
performance, usability, orientation, and cybersickness.

Research Questions and Hypotheses
Our main goal is to explore the difference between the two
techniques. Since our approach is novel, our priority is to
determine if players can complete all tasks regardless of the
used locomotion approach. Furthermore, we are interested in
whether there are any differences regarding the perceived pres-
ence, enjoyment, and competence. A particular focus is placed
on the perspective-switching as it is a unique feature of our
technique and has not yet been used for navigation approaches.
Additionally, we hypothesize that our short and smooth ani-
mation curve, coupled with correctly altering the modeled eye
distance, prevents the occurrence of cybersickness. Finally,
we assume that the virtual scaling leading to an increased view
height, provides signiﬁcant advantages to spatial orientation
and overview, as players can see much more and further. To
summarize, our hypotheses and research questions are:

• H1: The perspective switching provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts

to spatial orientation and overview.

• H2: The proposed navigation through perspective-switching

does not induce cybersickness.

• RQ3: How do players perceive the perspective switch? Are

they able to use this technique intuitively?

• RQ4: Are there any differences between both approaches

in terms of perceived presence and enjoyment?

• RQ5: How does our navigation technique perform regarding
task completion and playtime against the arc-based telepor-
tation?

Figure 4. Overview of the used scenario, including all important points of interest. From left to right: players follow on a path (Q1), meet a knight (Q2),
destroy runes (Q3), and activate stones (Q4). The locations of all seven runes are marked as red dots.

Scenario
The game used to compare the different navigation techniques
is realized using the Unity3D game engine [50] and is set in a
ﬁctive, historical world including some fantasy aspects. The
environment is a massive plateau-like scenery with multiple
forests, lakes, and medieval towns. Everything is surrounded
by a mountainous hinterland to achieve a restricted and en-
closed play area. A long, wide, and twisted path connects all
relevant locations and serves as the main point of orientation
(see Figure 4). To use the different navigation techniques to a
full extent, this path with adjacent points of interests is cho-
sen to cover an extensive length of more than two kilometers.
The main character, portrayed by the players, is a wandering
mercenary and adventurer who just seeks the next unexpected
incident. In the chosen scenario, the players are given the
task to follow the path (Q1) that ultimately leads to the largest
settlement on the map. However, after a short walk of about
150 meters, the players reach a forlorn farmhouse and a knight
waiting for them. The knight asks the players to help him
with a bigger quest: they have to destroy a red glowing rune
ﬂoating above an obelisk next to the NPC (Q2). A harmless
rabbit sits nearby and is under a spell from the rune. After the
rune is picked up by the player, it dissolves, and the rabbit is
freed. This ﬁrst interaction allows the subjects to try out object
manipulation through virtual grabbing. The knight asks the
players to continue saving animals by following the path and
destroying all other runes they encounter during their journey
(Q3). In total, the game features seven distinct runes, each
surrounded by different animals. This task is the central part
of the quest and involves local object manipulation as well as
large-scale navigation and long-distance orientation.

The last rune is located right in front of the large settlement
serving as the ﬁnal destination and ﬂoats in the middle of a

Figure 5. Player’s perspective in the two study conditions: arc-based
teleport (left) and perspective switching (right).

circle of seven obelisks. After this last rune is destroyed, the
knight reappears and asks the players to help him for the last
time: They have to activate the seven obelisks surrounding
them (Q4). To complete this last local task, the players have
to approach each obelisk - usually by just stepping forward -
and press their hand on the stone until a ring of engraved runes
lights up. This task combines ﬁrst-person interactions with
short-range navigation. After activating all obelisks, the knight
hands a sack of gold to the player and the game is completed.

Procedure and Applied Measures
We conducted a between-subject study splitting the group of
participants randomly in two groups, each using either the arc-
based teleport or our technique as navigation concept. This
approach was chosen to avoid adverse sequence effect from
repetition as one of the central use-cases for our technique is
the exploration of unknown large-scale environments. The
study was conducted in our VR lab using an HTC Vive Pro
Wireless setup and took 50 minutes on average. We began
by informing the participants about the overall procedure and
administered a general questionnaire to assess gender, age,

gaming behavior, and prior VR experience. Additionally, we
assessed the ability to get immersed into games, books, or
movies, by administering the Immersive Tendencies Question-
naire (ITQ) [54] consisting of the four subscales involvement,
focus, games, and emotions. Finally, we introduced the sub-
jects to the HTC Vive Pro and helped them to adjust the headset
to their needs.

The game was preceded by a tutorial guiding the players
through every critical aspect of VR games in general and our
testbed scenario in detail. It included navigation-independent
parts such as walking naturally in a room-scale environment or
using the trigger buttons to grab and release objects. Addition-
ally, the subjects were introduced to the particular navigation
technique and had to use it to reach speciﬁed targets in the
virtual world. After completing the tutorial, subjects were
placed into the actual testbed game and given the main task.
We logged all durations, interactions, and distances through-
out the playthrough. Upon completion of the ﬁnal quest, the
players were asked to remove the head-mounted display.

As the ﬁnal step in this study, we administered a series of
questionnaires regarding the subjects’ experiences. In order
to assess the feeling of presence, we relied on two different
questionnaires. The Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) [44]
focuses on general presence and contains one single item
regarding the perceived general presence ("In the computer-
generated world, I had a sense of ’being there’ "), as well as
the three subdimensions spatial presence, involvement, and
experienced realism. For all of these items, participants had
to rate statements on a 7-point Likert scale (coded 0 - 6). The
Presence Questionnaire (PQ) [54, 11] focusing on interaction-
related presence was used to determine the inﬂuence of the
chosen navigation technique. It includes the items realism,
possibility to act, quality of interface, possibility to examine,
and self-evaluation of performance (coded 0 - 6). In order to
measure the intuitiveness of the controls, we further adminis-
tered the Player Experience of Need Satisfaction (PENS) [42]
questionnaire with the subscales autonomy, competence, and
intuitive controls. Additionally, we included a single sub-
scale of the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) [41]: inter-
est/enjoyment (coded 0 - 6).

Finally, we used the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire
(SSQ) [22] to examine whether the game in general or one of
both navigation techniques might have caused cybersickness.
The SSQ consists of the three subscales nausea, oculomotor,
and disorientation using a scale from 0 (none) to 3 (severe).
The questionnaires were completed by several custom ques-
tions (coded 0 - 6) to gain essential insights into how the
participants used the different navigation approaches (see Ta-
ble 3). The study was ﬁnished by semi-structured interviews
to allow all participants to share their experiences.

RESULTS
In total, 30 persons (9 female, 21 male) participated in our
study with a mean age of 27.2 (SD = 11.09). Most partici-
pants reported playing digital games at least a few times a
month. Even though the majority (83%) had already used VR
systems before, only 43% of those reported using VR regu-
larly. Therefore, the group of participants could be split nearly

evenly into three categories: newcomers, occasionally users,
and experienced VR gamers. All subjects were randomly split
into two groups, one for each condition. These groups did not
differ signiﬁcantly regarding the distribution of VR experience,
age, gender, or immersive tendencies (t = 0.44, p = .662).

To answer our research questions and evaluate the hypothe-
ses, we compared the results of all measures between the two
conditions. To ensure the necessary requirements for para-
metric calculations, we tested for homogeneity of variances
using Levene’s and for normal distribution with Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests. If the requirements were not met, we replaced
independent sample t-tests through Mann-Whitney U tests.

Questionnaires
In H2, we assumed that our technique avoids inducing addi-
tional cybersickness. The resulting weighted scale scores of
the SSQ are depicted in Table 2. It is to note that, concern-
ing to reference values by Kennedy et al. [23], all values are
very low and indicate no problems with cybersickness in both
conditions. Even though most dimensions show slightly better
results for our approach in comparison to the control group,
these differences are not signiﬁcant (all p > .393).

In order to assess the research questions, we measured the
perceived presence, competence, and enjoyment between the
two study conditions. The resulting scores and independent
sample t-tests are shown in Table 1. The two presence ques-
tionnaires do not indicate any signiﬁcant difference between
our approach and the teleportation technique. However, two
subscales stand out: players using the teleport tend to expe-
rience more involvement, while subjects in the other group
report slightly more possibilities to act (both p < .100). Fur-
thermore, most subscales show slightly better values for the
teleport group. Similarly, the IMI questionnaire does not show
any signiﬁcance regarding the perceived enjoyment despite a
slight tendency towards the established teleportation approach
and very high values for both groups in general. Finally, the
analysis of the PENS subscales reveals that both navigation
approaches are perceived as reasonably intuitive. Neverthe-
less, the basic teleportation signiﬁcantly outperforms the more
complex perspective switching regarding the intuitiveness.

Custom Questions and Logging Data
Apart from using standardized questionnaires to compare both
groups, we assessed several custom questions to gain further
insights into how players experience our technique. These
questions covered intuitiveness, usability, orientation, and
perspective-switching. The results shown in Table 3 indi-
cate a signiﬁcant difference in spatial orientation: Participants
using our presented approach reported being able to orient
themselves far better and needing less time to recover from re-
locations. Additionally, the questions reveal several interesting
trends between both groups.

We logged all relevant data that occurred during the play ses-
sions (see Figure 6). In comparison to the teleport group,
players using our technique played 66% longer on average
(t(28) = 6.00, p < .001). This extended game time was mainly
used to navigate in TM as the subjects played almost two-
thirds of the complete game in third-person. One aim of our

Table 1. Mean scores, standard deviations, and independent samples t-test values of the iGroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ), the Presence Question-
naire (PQ), the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) Questionnaire, and the Player Experience of Need Satisfaction (PENS) Questionnaire.

Outstanding (N = 15)

Teleportation (N = 15)

PQ (scale: 0 - 6)
Realism
Possibility to Act
Interface Quality
Possibility to Examine
Performance
Total

IPQ (scale: 0 - 6)

Spatial Presence
Involvement
Realism
General
IMI (scale: 0 - 6)

Interest/Enjoyment

PENS (scale: 0 - 6)
Autonomy
Competence
Intuitive Controls

M (SD)

4.12 (0.93)
4.28 (0.65)
4.53 (0.75)
4.31 (1.00)
4.47 (1.23)
4.29 (0.62)

4.47 (0.60)
3.23 (1.31)
2.57 (1.05)
4.00 (1.25)

4.63 (0.74)

2.87 (0.85)
3.91 (1.33)
4.82 (0.60)

Table 2. Mean scores and standard deviations of the Simulator Sickness
Questionnaire (SSQ).
SSQ Dimension

Outstanding
M (SD)

Teleport
M (SD)

Nausea
Oculomotor
Disorientation
Total

7.00 (8.43)
21.22 (16.26)
25.06 (21.91)
19.95 (14.87)

14.63 (33.02)
20.72 (21.91)
25.98 (37.89)
22.94 (32.63)

proposed approach was to enable longer and fewer aiming
operations using raycast arcs. The result is a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in target aiming by 57% in contrast to the control group
(t(16.63) = −4.72, p < .001). In return, these saved interac-
tions are replaced by the necessary switches between NM and
TM. In sum, there is no signiﬁcant difference in total user in-
teraction count (t(28) = −0.88, p = .388). However, the type
of aiming operations being used differs signiﬁcantly: Players
in the teleport-group mainly used medium-range teleportations
exceeding the room scale-scope of two meters but mostly stay-
ing below 40 to 50m at max. In contrast, our navigation tech-
nique enabled players to shift a huge amount of these medium-
range arcs to a few long-distance travels. This advantage does
not transfer to very near targets. In this case, the necessary
aiming operations are nearly equal between both groups. Fi-
nally, we assessed the distance players walked in the real world
while playing. While both study groups performed equally
concerning the active walking in the ﬁrst-person perspective
(t(28) = −0.67, p = .506), i.e. approaching a rune, players
using perspective switching walked 60% more while com-
manding their avatar in travel mode (t(28) = 3.31, p = .003).
This closely reﬂects the results of CQ6.

M (SD)

t (28)

4.05 (0.92)
3.87 (0.62)
4.69 (0.79)
4.71 (0.75)
4.90 (0.74)
4.31 (0.55)

4.53 (0.89)
4.18 (1.31)
2.60 (0.87)
4.73 (1.10)

4.93 (0.96)

3.49 (1.46)
4.82 (1.24)
5.64 (0.48)

0.23
1.79
-0.55
-1.24
-1.17
-0.08

-0.24
-1.99
-0.10
-1.70

-0.96

-1.43
-0.47
-4.14

p

.824
.084
.586
.225
.252
.935

.812
.057
.925
.100

.345

.165
.640
.000

**

*p <.05, ** p <.01

DISCUSSION
RQ3: How do players perceive the perspective switch? Are
they able to use this technique intuitively?

In general, most participants approved using different perspec-
tives to experience the world from various views (CQ1). These
were often described as "impersonating the avatar"(P18) ver-
sus switching to a "god-mode"(P22) and guiding a protégé
through the world. The general concept of dynamic perspec-
tive switches was understood intuitively and did not confuse
the subjects at all (CQ11). Instead, players appreciated the
"balance between long-distance overview and local detailed
exploration"(P5).

One challenge our proposed technique introduces is the in-
creased number of control mechanisms. In contrast to the
teleport, our approach uses a second button to switch per-
spectives and an optional third control to speed up the travel
process through running. These more complex interactions
are one possible reason for the results from the PENS sub-
scales and the custom questions. Subjects generally rated
our approach as being less intuitive (CQ2) and reported more
problems with the controls (CQ3). Especially new players
stated that it "took some minutes not to confuse the different
buttons anymore"(P9). Nevertheless, a majority of players still
reported being able to reach every destination easily (CQ4)
after getting used to the technique.

H1: The perspective switching provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts to
spatial orientation and overview.

In TM, most participants perceived the environment as a toy
world (CQ9). This perspective was generally appreciated
(CQ10) as it placed the local surrounding "in greater con-
text"(P28) and invited players to "explore the world"(P2). This

Table 3. Mean scores and standard deviations of the custom questions (CQ) and independent samples t-test values of comparison.

Question Item

Outstanding Teleportation

M (SD)

M (SD)

t (28)

Sig. p

I would have preferred to move through the world
using another technique.

3.27 (2.28)

3.60 (2.06)

I think the navigation technique is intuitive.

4.00 (1.46)

4.60 (1.45)

I had problems with the supplied controls.

2.20 (2.08)

1.00 (1.36)

It was easy to reach the next destination.

4.73 (1.49)

4.87 (1.46)

I would have liked to have more variety during
the journey.

I felt very active while playing.

3.73 (1.67)

3.07 (1.87)

4.07 (1.62)

3.27 (2.09)

I could orient myself well in the game world.

5.07 (0.88)

3.67 (2.02)

CQ1

CQ2

CQ3

CQ4

CQ5

CQ6

CQ7

CQ8

CQ9

1.13 (1.73)

3.80 (1.61)

4.60 (1.60)

4.73 (1.33)

0.67 (1.45)

–

–

–

0.42

1.13

-1.87

0.25

-1.03

-1.17

-2.46

4.37

–

–

–

.678

.270

.074

.806

.312

.251

.024

*

.000

**

–

–

–

After each relocation, I needed a moment
to orient myself.

From above, the world appeared to me as a
miniature or toy world.

CQ10

I liked the ability to experience the world
from above.

CQ11 The perspective-switch confused me.

feedback ﬁts the results of CQ7, revealing signiﬁcant advan-
tages to spatial orientation. Furthermore, the applied transition
animation between TM and NM helped participants to pre-
serve their cognitive map of the surrounding and reduced the
necessary reorientation time after each switch (CQ8). These
ﬁndings illustrate the most important advantage of our pro-
posed technique: players can coordinate themselves better in
a vast open world while avoiding to induce confusion through
instant teleportation.

H2: The proposed navigation through perspective-switching
does not induce cybersickness.

The results from the SSQ indicate that our technique does
not negatively affect players in terms of cybersickness. Even
though our approach includes an automated virtual movement
that contradicts the signals from the vestibular system, this
does not cause any symptoms. This positive ﬁnding is in line
with earlier work [27, 17], emphasizing the importance of
short and fast movements. Additionally, we eliminate any side
effects arising from the altered perception in TM by scaling
the virtual eye distance accordingly to the body size.

RQ4: Are there any differences between both approaches in
terms of perceived presence and enjoyment?

In general, the two navigation techniques did not differ signiﬁ-
cantly concerning presence. However, the teleport was mostly
rated slightly higher than our proposed approach, which is es-
pecially true for the IPQ subscale involvement. This result ﬁts
the general feedback: Players did not have the feeling of con-
trolling their avatar from a third-person perspective but felt like
"disembodied beings guarding a traveler on his path"(P24).

*p <.05, ** p <.01

The results from PQ and IPQ and the verbal feedback show
that the participants were less involved while using the TM to
travel through the world.

Even the best interaction technique will never be adopted in
games if it does not provide a compelling and fun experience.
On ﬁrst sight, the interest/enjoyment subscale of the IMI ques-
tionnaires reveals slightly lower results for the perspective
switching approach in comparison to the teleport. However,
when comparing the techniques more closely, two aspects
become clear: First, the general scores for both groups are
very high, and subjects in the lower rated Outstanding-group
played roughly 66% longer. Together, these ﬁndings illustrate
that the proposed approach preserves nearly equal levels of
enjoyment despite a signiﬁcantly extended playtime.

RQ5: How does our navigation technique perform regarding
task completion and playtime against the arc-based teleporta-
tion?

All participants were able to complete the presented tasks and
ultimately ﬁnish the game. However, subjects using our pro-
posed navigation technique needed signiﬁcantly more time for
the same quests. Most of this overhead is due to the natural
avatar walking speed: Even without any pause or switch to
NM, the virtual avatar would need nine minutes of continuous
walking or four minutes of running to reach the ﬁnal destina-
tion. This difference in playtime does not necessarily imply a
worse performance, as the game did not issue a time-relevant
task. Instead, players were free to travel the world at their
own speed. However, most subjects still requested either faster
travels or more varieties during the journey: The presented sce-
nario did not include enough point of interest for 15-minute

Figure 6. Results from the data logged during the play sessions. From left to right: The difference in playtime for both study groups in seconds; The
average distance (in meters) players walked in the real room; The difference in navigation-relation interaction count between both study groups; The
distribution of aiming operations based on distance.

Combination with other Navigation Techniques
One central goal of our proposed technique was to make trav-
els easier and reduce the necessary effort of multiple tele-
portations. The study undermines the beneﬁts of perspective
switching for long distances. However, the necessary inter-
actions add additional overhead for local areas. Therefore,
we propose to accompany our approach through an additional
navigation technique for short ranges, e.g., the teleport.

Choosing the Parameters
In our early design phase, we administered multiple variants
of the parameters, such as TM scaling size, transformation
curve, and horizontal offset. Even though these values proved
to be optimal for our setup, other use cases could potentially
make adjustments necessary.

• Size: In our scenario, we used a predeﬁned scale of 10x
to preserve most details while still beneﬁting to a general
overview and better aiming. Participants generally appre-
ciated this balance, even though it introduced additional
challenges, i.e., avatar visibility in dense forests. A pos-
sible solution would be to add user-deﬁned sizes, though
these introduce additional degrees of freedom and generally
perform worse than predeﬁned values [26].

• Transformation: The transformation between NM and TM
should be chosen fast enough to avoid inducing cybersick-
ness and slow enough to convey the feeling of embodiment.
In our early design phases, values around half a second
were rated best. Additionally, a curved transformation (see
Figure 3) was preferred over a linear movement and growth,
as it felt smoother and more natural. Another critical aspect
to a successful perspective switch is the correctly modeled
eye distance. Misalignments in the so-called stereo base
easily lead to strong symptoms of cybersickness.

• Horizontal offset: Initially, we used a linear vertical growth
and placed the avatar right to the players’ feet. However,
looking straight down induces severe strain on the users’
necks and often leads to blurry vision as the HMDs are not
entirely ﬁxated. Instead, we propose an additional horizon-
tal offset backward (see Figure 3) so that the players can
see their avatar at a comfortable 45°angle.

Figure 7. Our proposed navigation technique performed differently de-
pending on the distance: When traveling short distances (left), the over-
head from switching perspectives outperformed the advantages. Longer
travels (right) could be achieved through a single click.

gameplay. We propose to enrich the virtual world through
interesting spots that make traveling a compelling experience.

One of the minor motivations to develop this navigation alter-
native was to reduce the large number of aiming operations
that are necessary when using the teleport to traverse long
distances. This goal was only partly fulﬁlled: For small dis-
tances, e.g., reaching a rune nearby, the perspective-switching
technique did not lower the necessary aiming operations (see
Figure 6, right) but imposed a minor overhead through the
necessity to switch between NM and TM. We, therefore, con-
clude that our approach should be accompanied by an alter-
native fallback technique such as the teleport for very short
travels. Nevertheless, the analysis reveals a major reduction
of raycast-arcs in the medium-range between 2and40meters
that were replaced by fewer very long travel operations (see
Figure 7). This ﬁnding underlines our initial assumption: the
elevated point of view enables players to aim further and travel
large distance with the ease of one command.

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
The proposed navigation technique introduces dynamic per-
spective switches and extends the collection of the existing
locomotion approaches for VR. This section presents a set of
design implications regarding the use of our approach for VR
games and applications.

Closed Areas and Vertical Level Design
Naturally, our proposed technique does not work very well
with closed ceilings as players are scaled to a bird’s eye per-
spective and would clip through the roof while switching to
TM. However, this problem is solvable for environments that
are not restricted to indoor areas, such as caves. In the popular
case of a house in an open-world scenario, it would be easy to
hide the roof or parts of the walls while the players are in TM.
This tweak would enable them to control their avatar in the
house even for multi-story buildings while standing outside of
the house and ’looking’ through the walls.

Catching Up
Many participants suggested an additional control mechanism
to catch up on the avatar. Usually, they sent him to a far-away
target and had to switch between TM and NM regularly to
accompany him during the journey. Since this provided an
unnecessary overhead, they wished to be able to skip ahead
and close the gap between the player and the avatar without
switching perspectives. However, overuse of this artiﬁcial
transition process could easily evoke cybersickness and should
be used cautiously and sparsely.

Avatar Visibility
In areas like dense forests, players sometimes lost sight of
their avatar due to occlusions by obstacles, such as trees or
rocks. This made it hard to set proper navigation targets and
follow the requested path. This drawback could be solved by
culling or fading occluding objects or highlighting the avatar
with an outline. Another solution would be to increase the
virtual scaling of the travel mode.

Higher Point of View
While providing superior orientation and overview, the higher
point of view in TM raises additional design challenges as well.
The player could easily get spoiled from seeing too far ahead.
This issue could be tackled by various possible solutions, e.g.,
placing natural obstacles such as mountains or using artiﬁcial
techniques like the fog of war.

Providing Variety during Travel
One of the biggest requests to make our approach more com-
pelling was the variety during longer journeys. Players had to
wait for their avatar to reach his target and had quickly seen
everything of their surrounding. Usually, digital games try to
keep the players engaged by introducing new events regularly.
In our case, a walk of two to three minutes is likely too long
to preserve or increase the perceived enjoyment. Therefore,
we propose to add additional incidents, either ﬁrst-person en-
counters that force the players to switch back to NM or special
actions that can be completed while waiting for the avatar, e.g.,
removing road barriers that stop the avatar from reaching his
target. Such interactions could provide novel game mechanics
and possibilities.

Novel Player Experiences
Even though the participants intuitively understood the con-
cept of switching between the two perspectives, they com-
monly reported not having the feeling of controlling their own

avatar. Instead, it was perceived more as a protector-protégé-
relationship: The players controlled an avatar and could pos-
sess him whenever necessary. This experience is basically a
ﬂipped understanding of the underlying perspective-switch
and could be used as a novel game mechanics, e.g., by control-
ling multiple characters at once. Additionally, the participants
emphasized the importance of creating coherence between
both perspectives to achieve a plausible transition.

Another interesting side effect of our approach is the impres-
sion of a miniaturized world. The proportional increase in
modeled eye distance leads to perceiving the surrounding as
a toy world, which allows equipping players with respective
"godlike" abilities, such as increased strength. One possible
application would be special TM interactions: For instance,
certain obstacles, e.g., logs or boulders, could be too heavy for
the ﬁrst-person character and would need to be lifted in TM.

Possible Applications
We asked the participants to name potential games that would
proﬁt from our navigation approach. The most commonly
named genres were adventures, role-playing games, and strat-
egy games. We consider that especially slow titles relying
on huge open worlds are suited best.
In general, the per-
spective switching is too slow for fast-paced gameplay, as in
ﬁrst-person shooters. Apart from VR gaming, our proposed
technique could provide essential beneﬁts for scenarios requir-
ing spatial orientation. Examples for such applications are
large VR exhibitions or environmental visualizations.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The variety of established navigation techniques for virtual
environments is immense. Nevertheless, there is currently no
perfect approach for compelling and continuous travel over
large distances. Our presented technique is a novel alterna-
tive based on dynamic perspective switching. Players can
interact with the world on a local scale and switch to a third-
person travel mode on demand. In contrast to the prominent
teleport technique, our approach increases spatial orientation
in large worlds while avoiding cybersickness and preserving
high levels of presence, competence, and enjoyment. Our
experiments showed that players generally liked the idea of
the dynamic switching between different perspectives and that
they were able to use the technique without major problems.
Additionally, we summarized the key insights from the vari-
ous measures and verbal feedback into a set of comprehensive
design guidelines.

In our future research, we will focus on improvements and ap-
plications of our technique. A special focus will be placed on
altering the approach for additional use cases, such as indoor
traveling. Another interesting research question that could pro-
vide essential insights towards playing multiple characters at
once, is the relationship between the players and their avatars.
Furthermore, we suggest to combining Outstanding with al-
ternative techniques for close-range navigation. Finally, we
propose to investigate the potential use cases of our technique
for different game genres and VR applications in general.

REFERENCES
[1] Parastoo Abtahi, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, Eyal Ofek, and
Anthony Steed. 2019. I’m a Giant: Walking in Large
Virtual Environments at High Speed Gains. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 522.

[2] Ferran Argelaguet and Morgant Maignant. 2016. GiAnt:
stereoscopic-compliant multi-scale navigation in VEs. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Virtual
Reality Software and Technology. ACM, 269–277.

[3] Laurenz Berger and Katrin Wolf. 2018. WIM: Fast

Locomotion in Virtual Reality with Spatial Orientation
Gain & without Motion Sickness. In Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM, 19–24.

[4] Scot Best. 1996. Perceptual and oculomotor implications
of interpupillary distance settings on a head-mounted
virtual display. In Aerospace and Electronics
Conference, 1996. NAECON 1996., Proceedings of the
IEEE 1996 National, Vol. 1. IEEE, 429–434.

[5] Jiwan Bhandari, Sam Tregillus, and Eelke Folmer. 2017.

Legomotion: Scalable Walking-based Virtual
Locomotion. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology
(VRST ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 18, 8
pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3139131.3139133

[6] Frank Biocca and Ben Delaney. 1995. Communication
in the Age of Virtual Reality. L. Erlbaum Associates
Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA, Chapter Immersive Virtual
Reality Technology, 57–124.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=207922.207926

[7] Benjamin Bolte, Frank Steinicke, and Gerd Bruder.
2011. The jumper metaphor: an effective navigation
technique for immersive display setups. In Proceedings
of Virtual Reality International Conference.

[8] Paul Cairns, Anna Cox, and A Imran Nordin. 2014.
Immersion in digital games: review of gaming
experience research. Handbook of digital games (2014),
337–361.

[9] Isaac Cho, Jialei Li, and Zachary Wartell. 2014.
Evaluating dynamic-adjustment of stereo view
parameters in a multi-scale virtual environment. In 3D
User Interfaces (3DUI), 2014 IEEE Symposium on.
IEEE, 91–98.

[10] HTC Corporation. 2018. HTC Vive. Website. (2018).

Retrieved July 14, 2018 from https://www.vive.com/us/
product/vive-virtual-reality-system/.

[11] U. Q.O. Cyberpsychology Lab. 2004. Presence

Questionnaire: Revised by the UQO Cyberpsychology
Lab. (2004).
http://w3.uqo.ca/cyberpsy/docs/qaires/pres/PQ_va.pdf

[12] David Engel, Cristóbal Curio, Lili Tcheang, Betty
Mohler, and Heinrich H Bülthoff. 2008. A
psychophysically calibrated controller for navigating
through large environments in a limited free-walking

space. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM symposium on
Virtual reality software and technology. ACM, 157–164.

[13] Ajoy S Fernandes and Steven K Feiner. 2016.

Combating VR sickness through subtle dynamic
ﬁeld-of-view modiﬁcation. In 3D User Interfaces
(3DUI), 2016 IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, 201–210.

[14] Julian Frommel, Sven Sonntag, and Michael Weber.

2017. Effects of controller-based locomotion on player
experience in a virtual reality exploration game. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the
Foundations of Digital Games.

[15] Geoffrey Gorisse, Olivier Christmann, Etienne Amato,
and Simon Richir. 2017. First-and Third-Person
Perspectives in immersive Virtual Environments:
Presence and Performance analysis of embodied Users.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI (2017).

[16] Timofey Grechkin, Jerald Thomas, Mahdi Azmandian,
Mark Bolas, and Evan Suma. 2016. Revisiting Detection
Thresholds for Redirected Walking: Combining
Translation and Curvature Gains. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Applied Perception (SAP ’16).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 113–120. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2931002.2931018

[17] M.P. Jacob Habgood, David Wilson, David Moore, and

Sergio Alapont. 2017. HCI Lessons From PlayStation
VR. In Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play
(CHI PLAY ’17 Extended Abstracts). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 125–135. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3130859.3131437

[18] Carrie Heeter. 1992. Being there: The subjective

experience of presence. Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments 1, 2 (1992), 262–271.

[19] Larry Hettinger, Kevin Berbaum, Robert S. Kennedy,
William P. Dunlap, and Margaret Nolan. 1990. Vection
and simulator sickness. 2 (02 1990), 171–81.

[20] Lawrence J Hettinger and Gary E Riccio. 1992. Visually
induced motion sickness in virtual environments.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 1, 3
(1992), 306–310.

[21] Wijnand A. IJsselsteijn, Huib de Ridder, Jonathan

Freeman, and Steve E. Avons. 2000. Presence: concept,
determinants, and measurement. (2000). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.387188

[22] Robert S. Kennedy, Norman E. Lane, Kevin S. Berbaum,

and Michael G. Lilienthal. 1993a. Simulator Sickness
Questionnaire: An Enhanced Method for Quantifying
Simulator Sickness. The International Journal of
Aviation Psychology 3, 3 (1993). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327108ijap0303{_}3

[23] Robert S Kennedy, Norman E Lane, Kevin S Berbaum,

and Michael G Lilienthal. 1993b. Simulator sickness
questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation
psychology 3, 3 (1993).

[24] Robert S Kennedy, Michael G Lilienthal, Kevin S
Berbaum, DR Baltzley, and ME McCauley. 1989.
Simulator sickness in US Navy ﬂight simulators.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 60, 1
(1989), 10–16.

[25] Eugenia M Kolasinski. 1995. Simulator Sickness in

Virtual Environments. Technical Report. Army Research
Inst. for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, Alexandria,
VA.

[26] Regis Kopper, Tao Ni, Doug A Bowman, and Marcio
Pinho. 2006. Design and evaluation of navigation
techniques for multiscale virtual environments. In
Virtual Reality Conference, 2006. Ieee, 175–182.

[27] Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, Katharina

Emmerich, Maic Masuch, and Jens Krüger. 2018.
GulliVR: A Walking-Oriented Technique for Navigation
in Virtual Reality Games Based on Virtual Body
Resizing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. ACM,
243–256.

[28] Eike Langbehn, Gerd Bruder, and Frank Steinicke. 2016.
Subliminal reorientation and repositioning in virtual
reality during eye blinks. In Proceedings of the 2016
Symposium on Spatial User Interaction. ACM, 213–213.

[29] Joseph J LaViola Jr. 2000. A discussion of

cybersickness in virtual environments. ACM SIGCHI
Bulletin 32, 1 (2000), 47–56.

[30] Joseph J LaViola Jr, Daniel Acevedo Feliz, Daniel F
Keefe, and Robert C Zeleznik. 2001. Hands-free
multi-scale navigation in virtual environments. In
Proceedings of the 2001 symposium on Interactive 3D
graphics. ACM, 9–15.

[31] Jiun-Yu Lee, Ping-Hsuan Han, Ling Tsai, Rih-Ding

Peng, Yang-Sheng Chen, Kuan-Wen Chen, and Yi-Ping
Hung. 2017. Estimating the Simulator Sickness in
Immersive Virtual Reality with Optical Flow Analysis.
In SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Posters (SA ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, Article 16, 2 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3145690.3145697

[32] JJ-W Lin, Henry Been-Lirn Duh, Donald E Parker,
Habib Abi-Rached, and Thomas A Furness. 2002.
Effects of ﬁeld of view on presence, enjoyment, memory,
and simulator sickness in a virtual environment. In
Virtual Reality, 2002. Proceedings. IEEE. IEEE,
164–171.

[33] Matthew Lombard and Theresa Ditton. 1997. At the

heart of it all: The concept of presence. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 3, 2 (1997), 0–0.

[34] Daniel Medeiros, Eduardo Cordeiro, Daniel Mendes,

Maurício Sousa, Alberto Raposo, Alfredo Ferreira, and
Joaquim Jorge. 2016. Effects of speed and transitions on
target-based travel techniques. In Proceedings of the
22nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality Software and
Technology. ACM, 327–328.

[35] K E Money. 1970. Motion sickness. Physiological

Reviews 50, 1 (1970), 1–39.

[36] Seizo Ohyama, Suetaka Nishiike, Hiroshi Watanabe,

Katsunori Matsuoka, Hironori Akizuki, Noriaki Takeda,
and Tamotsu Harada. 2007. Autonomic responses during
motion sickness induced by virtual reality. Auris Nasus
Larynx 34, 3 (2007), 303–306.

[37] Sharif Razzaque. 2005. Redirected walking. University

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

[38] Sharif Razzaque, Zachariah Kohn, and Mary C Whitton.

2001. Redirected walking. In Proceedings of
EUROGRAPHICS, Vol. 9. Citeseer, 105–106.

[39] James T Reason and Joseph John Brand. 1975. Motion

sickness. Academic press.

[40] Roy A Ruddle and Simon Lessels. 2009. The beneﬁts of

using a walking interface to navigate virtual
environments. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 16, 1 (2009), 5.

[41] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. 2000.

Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation, social development, and well-being.
American psychologist 55, 1 (2000), 68.

[42] Richard M. Ryan, C. Scott Rigby, and Andrew

Przybylski. 2006. The Motivational Pull of Video
Games: A Self-Determination Theory Approach.
Motivation and Emotion 30, 4 (2006), 344–360. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11031-006-9051-8

[43] Patrick Salamin, Daniel Thalmann, and Frédéric Vexo.
2006. The beneﬁts of third-person perspective in virtual
and augmented reality?. In Proceedings of the ACM
symposium on Virtual reality software and technology.
ACM, 27–30.

[44] T. W. Schubert, Frank Friedmann, and H. T.

Regenbrecht. 1999. Decomposing the sense of presence:
Factor analytic insights. In 2nd international workshop
on presence, Vol. 1999.

[45] William R Sherman and Alan B Craig. 2002.

Understanding virtual reality: Interface, application,
and design. Elsevier.

[46] Mel Slater. 2003. A note on presence terminology.

Presence connect 3, 3 (2003), 1–5.

[47] Mel Slater, Martin Usoh, and Anthony Steed. 1995.

Taking steps: the inﬂuence of a walking technique on
presence in virtual reality. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 2, 3 (1995),
201–219.

[48] Kay M. Stanney, Robert S. Kennedy, and Julie M.

Drexler. 1997. Cybersickness is Not Simulator Sickness.
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting 41, 2 (1997), 1138–1142. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/107118139704100292

[49] Richard Stoakley, Matthew J Conway, and Randy

Pausch. 1995. Virtual reality on a WIM: interactive
worlds in miniature. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM Press, 265–272.

[50] Unity Technologies. 2018. Unity. Website. (2018).

Retrieved March 29, 2018 from https://unity3d.com/.

[51] Sam Tregillus and Eelke Folmer. 2016. Vr-step:

Walking-in-place using inertial sensing for hands free
navigation in mobile vr environments. In Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1250–1255.

[52] Martin Usoh, Kevin Arthur, Mary C Whitton, Rui

Bastos, Anthony Steed, Mel Slater, and Frederick P
Brooks Jr. 1999. Walking> walking-in-place> ﬂying, in
virtual environments. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive

techniques. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.,
359–364.

[53] Sebastian Von Mammen, Andreas Knote, and Sarah
Edenhofer. 2016. Cyber sick but still having fun. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Virtual
Reality Software and Technology. ACM, 325–326.

[54] Bob G. Witmer and Michael J. Singer. 1998. Measuring

presence in virtual environments: A presence
questionnaire. Presence 7, 3 (1998), 225–240.

[55] Richard Yao, Tom Heath, Aaron Davies, Tom Forsyth,

Nate Mitchell, and Perry Hoberman. 2014. Oculus vr
best practices guide. Oculus VR (2014), 27–39.

[56] Xiaolong Zhang and George W. Furnas. 2002. Social

Interactions in Multiscale CVEs. In Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Collaborative Virtual
Environments (CVE ’02). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
31–38. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/571878.571884

