A Research Framework for Virtual Reality Neurosurgery Based on
Open-Source Tools

Lukas D.J. Fiederer*
Translational Neurotechnology Lab,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

Hisham Alwanni
Translational Neurotechnology Lab,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

Martin V ¨olker
Translational Neurotechnology Lab,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

Oliver Schnell
Department of Neurosurgery,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

J ¨urgen Beck
Department of Neurosurgery,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

Tonio Ball
Translational Neurotechnology Lab,
Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Germany

9
1
0
2

g
u
A
4
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
1
5
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

Fully immersive virtual reality (VR) has the potential to improve
neurosurgical planning. For example, it may offer 3D visualizations
of relevant anatomical structures with complex shapes, such as blood
vessels and tumors. However, there is a lack of research tools specif-
ically tailored for this area. We present a research framework for VR
neurosurgery based on open-source tools and preliminary evaluation
results. We showcase the potential of such a framework using clini-
cal data of two patients and research data of one subject. As a ﬁrst
step toward practical evaluations, two certiﬁed senior neurosurgeons
positively assessed the usefulness of the VR visualizations using
head-mounted displays. The methods and ﬁndings described in our
study thus provide a foundation for research and development aiming
at versatile and user-friendly VR tools for improving neurosurgical
planning and training.

Index Terms: Virtual reality, Imaging, Health informatics, Image
segmentation, Medical technologies, 3D imaging.

1 INTRODUCTION

As of 2019, neurosurgeons still plan many interventions using 2D
images on 2D screens to build an internal 3D representation of what
to expect during surgery and of how to proceed to achieve best pos-
sible outcomes. However, this process is time-consuming, requires
extensive experience, and mentally reconstructing the relevant com-
plex 3D structures, such as blood vessels and their relation to brain
tumors, from the 2D data may lead to inaccuracies. Virtual Reality
(VR) offers the possibility for an immersed experience of 3D content,
and thus gives neurosurgeons the means of a direct 3D perception
of and interaction with the anatomy relevant for planning. A crucial
step for applying VR to neurosurgery is the precise segmentation
needed to create sufﬁciently accurate models (as required by neu-
rosurgeons) based on imaging data recorded in the clinical routine.
Most current pipelines are based on research-grade data (higher
signal-to-noise and spatial resolution compared to routine clinical
data) and their applicability to clinical routine data is questionable.
For example, previously, we published a high-end segmentation
framework for the creation of whole-head sub-mm resolved mod-
els [13]. This framework is based entirely on open-source tools,
and has been shown to be especially effective for segmenting the
intricate blood vessel trees supplying the brain and the surrounding
structures, as well as being able to process imaging data at a ﬁner
resolution than the widely used 1-mm isotropic resolution. Knowl-
edge about the exact position of even small blood vessels is crucial

*e-mail: lukas.ﬁederer@uniklinik-freiburg.de

for the planning of neurosurgical interventions.

However, this segmentation pipeline was designed and evaluated
for research-grade MRI images of healthy individuals and conjoint
with conventional 3D visualization. Therefore, it is unclear how
this processing approach could be translated to MRI and CT images
acquired during clinical routine and as a basis for immersive visu-
alization in VR. As described above, neurosurgeons have to create
a complex internal representation of the surgical situation and this
process can potentially be eased by VR technology. So far, while
ﬁrst commercial products are currently being developed in this area,
an open-source immersive VR framework is not available for this
task, nor therefore, for research and development in this application
context. However, using open-source tools in research is important
to ensure that the work can be reproduced properly and can be used
as a foundation for further work by the community.

In relation to this we have started to addressed the following
questions and report our preliminary results: 1) Can a versatile
and user-friendly VR framework for neurosurgery be implemented
using open-source tools? 2) How can the existing segmentation
framework be adapted to allow reliable segmentation of cranial
structures, including pathological changes, from clinical imaging
data obtained in neurosurgical patients, for subsequent visualization
in VR? 3) In particular, how can individual differences, such as in
the type and quality of the available imaging data, be accounted for
in the data processing approach?

To address these questions, we propose a research framework for
VR neurosurgery, based on open-source tools, for the transformation
of patient-speciﬁc imaging data into VR 3D representations (Fig.
1). Our framework extends the conventional planning of surgical
interventions by segmenting and modeling patient-speciﬁc anatomi-
cal structures in 3D and integrating them into an immersive 3D VR
environment. Surgeons can use head-mounted displays (HMDs) and
wireless controllers to interact with the modeled imaging data in
real-time (smoothly, without any time delays) via a user-friendly
interface. The interaction capabilities include, but are not limited
to, navigation through the structures, scaling and adjusting the visi-
bility of individual components, applying cross-sectional views and
simulating surgical operations with basic mesh manipulations. Our
framework is still work in progress. We here present preliminary
results.

As a ﬁrst step in practical evaluation, the resulting VR visual-
izations were preliminary assessed using HMDs by two certiﬁed
senior neurosurgeons. We demonstrate here the capabilities of our
framework on data of one healthy subject and two patients suffering
from intracranial tumors.

2 RELATED WORK

Visualization and Segmentation With the rapid development
of computer graphic capabilities, modeling software and structural
neuroimaging techniques, some research groups successfully imple-

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: A Virtual Reality (VR) Framework for Neurosurgery: Current state of our framework for providing realistic 3D models of patient
speciﬁc data to neurosurgeons in fully immersive VR (visual and auditory senses are fully captured by the VR). The arrows indicate the ﬂow of
data/information in the framework. Circling arrows indicate recurrent steps in time. Signiﬁcant improvements are still planned.

mented realistic 3D visualizations of brain structures. Kin et al. [22]
demonstrated the superiority of 3D visualization by fusing MRA
and fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition data acquired
from patients suffering from neurovascular compression syndrome.
They implemented a 3D interactive VR environment, where neu-
rosurgeons were efﬁciently able to detect the simulated offending
vessels. Furthermore, Chen et al. [9] fused fMRI activation maps
and neuronal white matter ﬁber tractography acquired by magnetic
resonance diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and created precise VR
visualizations that aim to describe cortical functional activities in
addition to neuronal ﬁber connectivity. H¨anel et al. [16] effectively
visualized the progression of brain tissue loss in neurodegenerative
diseases in an interactive VR setting. Both transparency based and
importance-driven volume rendering were used to highlight spatial
localization and temporal progression. Abhari et al. [1] emphasized
the importance of contour enhancement and stereopsis in visualizing
vascular structures. Their study showed that volume rendering and
a non-photorealistic shading of non-contrast-enhanced MRA based
models increase the perception of continuity and depth. Recently, in
a collaboration between anatomists, 3D computer graphics artists
and neurosurgeons, Hendricks et al. [17, 18] exploited state of the
art computer graphics and digital modeling technologies to create in-
tricate, anatomically realistic and visually appealing virtual models
of the cranial bones and cerebrovascular structures.

Furthermore, brain image segmentation benchmarks have been
established to accelerate research and assessment of segmentation
methods, including BRATS [29] for brain tumors, MRBrainS [28]
for targeting brain tissue segmentation and ISLES [27] for stroke
lesions. In addition to traditional methods, recent advances in deep
learning algorithms and artiﬁcial neural networks architectures have
shown promising results in image segmentation tasks. Reviews
regarding the implementation of deep learning in medical imaging
and computer-aided diagnosis can be found in [24, 36].

Commercial VR frameworks Several VR integrated hardware
and software platforms have been established in recent years in the
ﬁeld of neurosurgical planning, medical training and education. The
Dextroscope®presents brain components in a stereoscopic visual-
ization as 3D holographic projections that can be manipulated in
real-time to simulate and plan neurosurgeries. It has been used in
a variety of intervention simulations including arteriovenous mal-
formations resection [30, 37], cerebral gliomas [32], cranial base
surgery [23, 39] clipping of intracranial aneurysms [38] and menin-
gioma resection [25]. NeuroTouch, a training framework, incorpo-
rates haptic feedback designed for the acquisition and assessment of
technical skills involved in craniotomy-based procedures and tumor
resection [4, 5, 7, 11]. ImmersiveTouch®also provides platforms
in AR and immersive VR environments with haptic feedback for
neurosurgical training [2], mainly for cerebral aneurysm clipping [3]
and ventriculostomy [26, 34]. Platforms that lack scientiﬁc assess-

ment include NeuroVR1, Surgical Theater2, Osso VR3 and Touch
Surgery4. More comprehensive reviews regarding the development
and utilization of VR environments for neurosurgical purposes can
be found in [8, 31, 33, 35]. The main differentiation of our work
in relation to the above is that we focus on the use of off-the-shelf
consumer hardware and open-source software. These two criteria
ensure that our work can potentially be used by anyone, for non-
commercial purposes. Finally, quantitative scientiﬁc assessment of
our framework is planned upon achievement of the ﬁrst RC.

3 METHODS

3.1 Data

We have used the MRI and CT data of one healthy subject (S1, MRI
only) and 2 patients (P1-2) as our pilot cohort to construct detailed
3D models to be viewed and interacted with in VR. Table 1 gives
an overview of the cohort. The MRI and CT data we used for the
segmentation is listed in table 2. These data were acquired as part
of the routine pre-surgical diagnostic procedure. The selection of
imaging sequences is purely driven by the diagnostic procedure,
which results in different sets of data per patient.

3.2 Segmentation

To produce high-quality results on the clinical routine data, we
adapt the segmentation pipeline used to create the model of S1 [13]
for each patient individually. The pipeline, which is still work
in progress, had to be adapted on an individual basis to account
for the wide range of available data, their variable quality and the
different pathologies. As our, yet unpublished, deep-learning-based
segmentation pipeline reaches maturity we plan to replace the current
pipeline to have a single, fully automated, pipeline covering all
segmentation cases. First, we converted the imaging data from the
DICOM to the NIfTI format. Then, we co-registered and resliced
every volume to the T1 MRA (P1) or the TOF MRA (P2) using
FSL FLIRT [15, 19, 20] with default parameters. We segmented
the skull, intracranial catheters and implants (P1), from the CT
volumes using our own semi-automatic multi-stage region growing
algorithm. We mask the CTA & MRA volumes with the dilated skull
to prevent segmentation spillage during the semi-automatic multi-
stage region growing segmentation of blood vessels (P1: arteries
from CTA, mixed vessels from T1 MRA. P2: arteries from TOF
MRA) . FreeSurfer5 was used to create the segmentation of the
cerebral cortex [10], sub-cortical structures, cerebellum, ventricles
and brainstem [14]. Tumors, brainstem nerves (P2), optic tract (P1)
and eyes (P1) were segmented manually using T1 MRA, T2 MRA

1https://caehealthcare.com/surgical-simulation/neurovr/
2https://www.surgicaltheater.net/
3http://ossovr.com/
4https://www.touchsurgery.com/
5Documented and freely available for download online (http://surfer.

nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/)

SegmentationModel-basedRegion-growing-basedCo-registrationManualImaging hardwareCT/MRI ImagingVirtual realitySurface selectionSurface renderingSurface handlingModelingSurface extractionMeshingTable 1: Overview of pilot cohort

Age

Sex

Diagnosis

Subject 1 [13]
Patient 1
Patient 2

27
23
70

M
F
F

no history of neuro-psychiatric disease
pilocystic astrozytoma, temporo-mesial, left
undeﬁned tumor with cystic components, pontomedullary junction, right

Table 2: Overview of imaging data

Imaging modality

Subject 1 [13]

Patient 1

Patient 2

Whole-head
CE-MRI T1 MPRAGE (T1 MRA)
CE-MRI T2 SPACE (T2 MRA)
MRI T1 MPRAGE
MRI T2 SPACE
MRI FLAIR
CT

Region of Interest
Skull-base MRI TOF (TOF MRA)
Skull-base CT
CT angiography (CTA)

-
-
0.6×0.6×0.6 mm
0.6×0.6×0.6 mm
-
-

0.5×0.5×1 mm
1×1×1 mm
1×1×1 mm
1×1×1 mm
1×1×1 mm
0.5×0.5×0.5 mm

0.5×0.5×1 mm
0.5×0.5×1 mm
0.488×0.488×1 mm
-
1.016×1.016×1 mm
-

-
-
-

-
-
0.25×0.25×0.25 mm

0.352×0.352×0.7 mm
0.396×0.396×0.400 mm
-

CE: contrast-enhanced (ProHance®), MPRAGE: magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo, MRA: magnetic resonance angiography, SPACE: sampling
perfection with application optimized contrasts using different ﬂip angle evolution, FLAIR: ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery, TOF: time of ﬂight

and T1, respectively, imported into 3D Slicer [12,21] (Fig. 2). Fig. 3
gives a graphical representation of the original segmentation pipeline
used for S1 and the individually adapted segmentation pipelines
of P1 and P2. When running on an i7-8700K CPU (12 3.7 GHz
threads), the semi-automated part of the pipeline (without manual
segmentation) generally takes 6-7 h to complete, with FreeSurfer
taking 5-6 h.

3.3 Visualization
We used Blender6 to calculate inner and outer surface normals to
enable inner and outer visualization of the volumetric models. Also,
smooth shading was applied to modify shading calculations across
neighbouring surfaces to give the perception of smooth surfaces
without modifying the model’s geometry.

We developed our VR 3D environment using the Unity3D game
engine. Unity3D is equipped with easy-to-use navigation and in-
teraction tools designated to maximise the user experience. We
designed the environment as follows: 2 directional real-time light
sources and environment lighting ambient mode set to real-time
global illumination were used to enhance illumination from all direc-
tions and create realistic reﬂections with various model orientations
in real-time. The standard Unity3D shader was used. Perspective
projection rendering was used to improve the sense of depth. Addi-
tionally, forward rendering was used for cost-effective calculations
and applying transparency shaders, which will be implemented in
future versions. Another advantage of using forward rendering in
VR is the ability to use multisample anti-aliasing as a pre-processing
step, which is a very useful technique to improve surface smoothness
and minimize jagged edges. The reﬂectivity and light responses of
the surfaces of each layer was set to give a glossy plastic texture
by maximizing smoothness, and minimizing the metallic property,
which also eliminated reﬂections when looking at the surface face-
on. An Oculus Rift7 headset and two Touch controllers bundle were
used for a fully immersive VR environment.

3.4 User interface
As seen in Fig. 6A, user interface (UI) elements holding the layers’
names and control modes are generated inside a canvas that can be

6https://www.blender.org/
7https://www.oculus.com/rift/

switched on/off. The canvas is rendered in a non-diegetic fashion,
i.e., heads up display, to enable the canvas to track and stay within
the ﬁeld of vision in the world space with ﬁxed distance. This would
improve eye focus on the UI elements.

Two modes of interaction were implemented effectively, the ray-
caster interaction (RI) mode and the controllers tracking interaction
(CTI) mode. In RI mode, UI elements in the canvas include both
layers’ names and control modes, namely, Move Avatar, which en-
ables translational movement in three perpendicular axes, i.e., surge,
heave and sway, relative to the gaze forward direction. The second
control mode is Rotate Model, which allows yaw and pitch rotations.
The Scale Model UI element enables the user to scale the model up
and down. Finally, a Reset option is provided to return the model
and the avatar to their initial state. Furthermore, a graphic raycaster
is used to interact with the UI elements through unity’s event system.
The CTI mode is based on the distance and the relative angles be-
tween the controllers, allowing yaw, pitch, roll rotations and model
scaling, by creating circular and linear motions with the controllers,
respectively. The canvas in this mode only includes the layers’
names. CTI interactions have been suggested to us by the experi-
enced neurosurgeons having preliminarly evaluated the framework.
Lastly, a cross-sectional view of the model is provided by control-
ling three planes. In that way, surgeons can compare cross-sections
of the segmented models with the corresponding cross-sections in
the raw MRI or CT data.

4 RESULTS

Videos showcasing our
site
medical-vr-segmentation/aveh_2019.

results are available on our web-
https://www.tnt.uni-freiburg.de/research/

4.1 Subject 1

From the data of S1, the following structures were segmented and
modeled: Cerebrovascular tree, skull, CSF, dura mater, eyes, fat,
gray matter, white matter, internal air, skin, and soft tissue. All mod-
els are compatible with further extension by adding more segmented
areas or structures. Fig. 4 shows an overview of S1’s model in Unity.

Figure 2: Example of segmentation in Slicer with data of P1 (face area blurred). A) Contrast-enhanced T1 MRI data (top row) and segmentation
overlay (bottom row), including vessels segmented from MRA (cyan) and CTA (red), catheters (yellow), tumor (green), eyes (orange), and optic
tract (purple). B) Resulting 3D model in Slicer.

4.2 Patient 1

From the data of P1, the following anatomical structures were seg-
mented and modeled, as they were of importance to the tumor region:
Meninges, catheters, optic tract, MRA vessels, CTA arteries, skull,
tumor, eyes, cerebral and cerebellar gray and white matters, subcor-
tical structures, ventricles and brainstem. Not all structures were
included into the VR representation. Fig. 5 shows an overview of
the model created from data of P1.

4.3 Patient 2

From the data of P2, the following anatomical structures were seg-
mented and modeled: Intracranial arteries, skull, tumor, cerebral and
cerebellar gray and white matters, subcortical structures, ventricles
and brainstem and brainstem nerves. Not all structures were included
into the VR representation. Fig. 6 shows an examplary interaction
with the model of P2, including application of cross-sectional views.

4.4 First Evaluation

Performance We preliminarly evaluated the performance of the
VR visualizations by recording the frame delta time and the count
of vertices passed to the GPU for different model conﬁgurations and
interactions. A NVIDIA GTX 1080 Ti is used as GPU. Frame rates
never dropped below 30 FPS for any given model, which ensures that
the interaction stays smooth under any load. Results are visualized
in Fig. 7.

Physicians Two experienced neurosurgeons (senior physicians)
inspected the 3D models postoperatively in VR prior to inspecting
the 2D images in 2D. They reported being surprised by the accuracy
of the models, the degree of immersion and the speed at which
they were able to assimilate the information. During the subsequent
inspection of the 2D images, the neurosurgeons were able to quickly
verify their VR-based internal 3D representation and successfully
transferred these insights from VR to 2D.

5 DISCUSSION

In the present study we have designed and performed a ﬁrst prelimi-
nary evaluation of, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst dedicated,
research software immersive VR framework for neurosurgery.This

also shows that existing open-source tools and consumer hardware
can be used to create a research framework for VR neurosurgery.

The requirements in the context of neurosurgery are highly spe-
cialized. For example, the exact spatial interrelations of blood ves-
sels, pathological structures such as a brain tumor, and both gray
and white matter brain structures can be decisive for planning the
detailed neurosurgical approach, such as the extent of a planned
resection. In parallel to ongoing development by commercial so-
lutions, we believe that there is also a need for academic research
into topics including optimized segmentation algorithms, intuitive
visualization, and interface design. We anticipate that the availabil-
ity of frameworks based on open-source tools will facilitate future
research and development into VR applications in the context of
neurosurgical planning, as well as teaching and training.

We have showcased the working procedure of our framework on
data of one healthy subject and two tumor patients. Due to different
requirements in regard to the ﬁnal models, the processing pipeline
had to be personalised and differed between the cases. For automated
segmentation and modeling methods, this need for personalisation
represents a big challenge. In order to solve this issue, we plan
to apply state-of-the-art machine learning techniques, e.g., deep
convolution neural networks, in the future.

To further improve our framework, we will devise a more intuitive,
user-friendly and interactive UI, and implement mesh manipulations
to mimic neurosurgical procedures, e.g., sawing and burring as
demonstrated by Arikatla et al. [6]. Moreover, transparent shaders
will be implemented in the near future to improve spatial perception
of overlaying brain structures.

6 CONCLUSION

Here we present ﬁrst evidence that 3D models of pre-neurosurgical
data presented in VR could provide experienced neurosurgeons with
additional information and could potentially ease the preparation
of surgery. Thus VR is a promising tool to speed up and improve
the preparation of surgery, reduce time needed for surgery and in
doing so improve the outcomes. To assess the true potential of VR
surgical planning, in the context of improving surgical outcomes, we
are currently preparing a quantitative evaluation of our framework
and are planning a retrospective study of poor outcome patients.

Figure 3: Segmentation pipelines. Colours indicate the components of the overarching framework, as used in Fig. 1. Boxes enclose the steps
performed with individual open-source frameworks. The texture of the lines indicate which imaging modality was used in which step. MTV (MRI
TV) is our own, Matlab-based MRI processing framework.

* restrict segmentation to skull cavity+ remove tissue from compoundFLIRTcoregistrationSlicerTOF MRAT1 mprageT2 MRAFLAIRT1 MRAROI CTDICOM2NIfTIUnitytumorbrainstem nervessurface extraction & meshingdiﬀ+VRFreeSurfercerebrum, subcortical, ventricles, cerebellum, brainstemMTVarteriesskullmasking*Patient 2SlicerFreeSurfercerebrum, subcortical, ventricles, cerebellum, brainstemFLIRTcoregistrationUnityT1 MRAT1 mprageT2 spaceFLAIRCTAskull CTDICOM2NIfTItumorn. opticussurface extraction & meshingdiﬀ+VRPatient 1MTVmasking*vessels, tumor & meningesarteriesskullimplantsFreesurferskull strippingMTVSimBio-VGridSPM8T1 mpragePD GEcoregistrationDICOM2NIfTImeshingFASTbrain segmentationT1/PDduradiﬀ+air cavitiesskineyeslenseswhite mattergray matterCSFvesselsskullfatsoft tissueshrink-wrapregion growingregion growingregion growingregion growingthresholdingfrangi ﬁlteringregion growingSCIRunsurface extractionUnityVRSubject 1BET2skull segmentationFigure 4: Model overview of S1. The upper row shows a frontal view
of the cerebrovascular tree (A) with white matter (B) or gray matter
(C). The middle row displays a view from the left side of the vessels
(D) with white (E) or gray matter (F). The lower row includes views
from the top of the vessels (G) with white matter (H) or skull (I).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the German Research Foundation grant
EXC 1086.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Abhari, J. S. Baxter, A. R. Khan, T. M. Peters, S. D. Ribaupierre,
and R. Eagleson. Visual enhancement of mr angiography images to
facilitate planning of arteriovenous malformation interventions. ACM
Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 12(1):4, 2015.

[2] A. Alaraj, F. T. Charbel, D. Birk, M. Tobin, C. Luciano, P. P. Banerjee,
S. Rizzi, J. Sorenson, K. Foley, K. Slavin, et al. Role of cranial and
spinal virtual and augmented reality simulation using immersive touch
modules in neurosurgical training. Neurosurgery, 72(suppl 1):A115–
A123, 2013.

[3] A. Alaraj, C. J. Luciano, D. P. Bailey, A. Elsenousi, B. Z. Roitberg,
A. Bernardo, P. P. Banerjee, and F. T. Charbel. Virtual reality cerebral
aneurysm clipping simulation with real-time haptic feedback. Opera-
tive Neurosurgery, 11(1):52–58, 2015.

[4] F. E. Alotaibi, G. A. AlZhrani, M. A. Mullah, A. J. Sabbagh,
H. Azarnoush, A. Winkler-Schwartz, and R. F. Del Maestro. Assessing
bimanual performance in brain tumor resection with neurotouch, a
virtual reality simulator. Operative Neurosurgery, 11(1):89–98, 2015.
[5] G. AlZhrani, F. Alotaibi, H. Azarnoush, A. Winkler-Schwartz, A. Sab-
bagh, K. Bajunaid, S. P. Lajoie, and R. F. Del Maestro. Proﬁciency
performance benchmarks for removal of simulated brain tumors using
a virtual reality simulator neurotouch. Journal of surgical education,
72(4):685–696, 2015.

[6] V. S. Arikatla, M. Tyagi, A. Enquobahrie, T. Nguyen, G. H. Blakey,
R. White, and B. Paniagua. High ﬁdelity virtual reality orthognathic
surgery simulator. In Medical Imaging 2018: Image-Guided Proce-
dures, Robotic Interventions, and Modeling, vol. 10576, p. 1057612.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018.

[7] H. Azarnoush, G. Alzhrani, A. Winkler-Schwartz, F. Alotaibi,
N. Gelinas-Phaneuf, V. Pazos, N. Choudhury, J. Fares, R. DiRaddo, and
R. F. Del Maestro. Neurosurgical virtual reality simulation metrics to
assess psychomotor skills during brain tumor resection. International

Figure 5: Model overview of P1. The upper row contains screenshots
showing a frontal view A) with skull, B) without skull, and C) inside
the skull cavity. The middle row contains close-up pictures of the
tumor region as D) frontal view showing the tumors growth displacing
and enveloping optic chiasm, E) frontal view showing tumors growth
enveloping arteries, and F) posterior view showing tumors growth
enveloping arteries and optic tract. The lower row contains screen-
shots from within the tumor. G) Frontal view centered on C1/A1/M1
junction, H) lateral view centered on C1/A1/M1 junction, and I) lateral
view centered on C1/A1/M1 junction. Please note that the model of
P1 was not smoothed to asses whether neurosurgeons prefer to see
the models in their CT/MRI ground truth form or in a smoothed form.

journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, 10(5):603–618,
2015.

[8] S. Chan, F. Conti, K. Salisbury, and N. H. Blevins. Virtual reality
simulation in neurosurgery: technologies and evolution. Neurosurgery,
72(suppl 1):A154–A164, 2013.

[9] B. Chen, J. Moreland, and J. Zhang. Human brain functional mri and
dti visualization with virtual reality. In ASME 2011 World Confer-
ence on Innovative Virtual Reality, pp. 343–349. American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, 2011.

[10] A. M. Dale, B. Fischl, and M. I. Sereno. Cortical surface-based analysis:
I. segmentation and surface reconstruction. Neuroimage, 9(2):179–194,
1999.

[11] S. Delorme, D. Laroche, R. DiRaddo, and R. F. Del Maestro. Neuro-
touch: a physics-based virtual simulator for cranial microneurosurgery
training. Operative Neurosurgery, 71(suppl 1):ons32–ons42, 2012.

[12] A. Fedorov, R. Beichel, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, J. Finet, J.-C. Fillion-
Robin, S. Pujol, C. Bauer, D. Jennings, F. Fennessy, M. Sonka, J. Buatti,
S. Aylward, J. V. Miller, S. Pieper, and R. Kikinis. 3d Slicer as an image
computing platform for the Quantitative Imaging Network. Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, 30(9):1323–1341, Nov. 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.
2012.05.001

operative anatomy: An immersive 3d and virtual reality description.
Operative Neurosurgery, 15(6):613–623, 2018.

[18] B. K. Hendricks, A. J. Patel, J. Hartman, M. F. Seifert, and A. Cohen-
Gadol. Operative anatomy of the human skull: a virtual reality expedi-
tion. Operative Neurosurgery, 15(4):368–377, 2018.

[19] M. Jenkinson, P. Bannister, M. Brady, and S. Smith. Improved Opti-
mization for the Robust and Accurate Linear Registration and Motion
Correction of Brain Images. NeuroImage, 17(2):825–841, Oct. 2002.
doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1132

[20] M. Jenkinson and S. Smith. A global optimisation method for robust
afﬁne registration of brain images. Medical Image Analysis, 5(2):143–
156, June 2001. doi: 10.1016/S1361-8415(01)00036-6

[21] R. Kikinis, S. D. Pieper, and K. G. Vosburgh. 3d Slicer: A Platform for
Subject-Speciﬁc Image Analysis, Visualization, and Clinical Support.
In F. A. Jolesz, ed., Intraoperative Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy,
pp. 277–289. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2014. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4614-7657-3 19

[22] T. Kin, H. Oyama, K. Kamada, S. Aoki, K. Ohtomo, and N. Saito.
Prediction of surgical view of neurovascular decompression using
interactive computer graphics. Neurosurgery, 65(1):121–129, 2009.

[23] R. A. Kockro and P. Y. Hwang. Virtual temporal bone: An interac-
tive 3-dimensional learning aid for cranial base surgery. Operative
Neurosurgery, 64(suppl 5):ons216–ons230, 2009.

[24] G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi,
M. Ghafoorian, J. A. Van Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, and C. I. S´anchez.
A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Medical image
analysis, 42:60–88, 2017.

[25] D. Low, C. K. Lee, L. L. T. Dip, W. H. Ng, B. T. Ang, and I. Ng.
Augmented reality neurosurgical planning and navigation for surgical
excision of parasagittal, falcine and convexity meningiomas. British
journal of neurosurgery, 24(1):69–74, 2010.

[26] C. Luciano, P. Banerjee, G. M. Lemole, and F. Charbel. Second
generation haptic ventriculostomy simulator using the immersivetouch
system. Studies in health technology and informatics, 119:343, 2005.
[27] O. Maier, B. H. Menze, J. von der Gablentz, L. H¨ani, M. P. Heinrich,
M. Liebrand, S. Winzeck, A. Basit, P. Bentley, L. Chen, et al. Isles 2015-
a public evaluation benchmark for ischemic stroke lesion segmentation
from multispectral mri. Medical image analysis, 35:250–269, 2017.

[28] A. M. Mendrik, K. L. Vincken, H. J. Kuijf, M. Breeuwer, W. H. Bouvy,
J. De Bresser, A. Alansary, M. De Bruijne, A. Carass, A. El-Baz,
et al. Mrbrains challenge: online evaluation framework for brain
image segmentation in 3t mri scans. Computational intelligence and
neuroscience, 2015:1, 2015.

[29] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Farahani,
J. Kirby, Y. Burren, N. Porz, J. Slotboom, R. Wiest, et al. The mul-
timodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (brats). IEEE
transactions on medical imaging, 34(10):1993, 2015.

[30] I. Ng, P. Y. Hwang, D. Kumar, C. K. Lee, R. A. Kockro, and Y. Sitoh.
Surgical planning for microsurgical excision of cerebral arterio-venous
malformations using virtual reality technology. Acta neurochirurgica,
151(5):453, 2009.

[31] P. E. Pelargos, D. T. Nagasawa, C. Lagman, S. Tenn, J. V. Demos, S. J.
Lee, T. T. Bui, N. E. Barnette, N. S. Bhatt, N. Ung, et al. Utilizing
virtual and augmented reality for educational and clinical enhancements
in neurosurgery. Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, 35:1–4, 2017.
[32] T.-m. Qiu, Y. Zhang, J.-S. Wu, W.-J. Tang, Y. Zhao, Z.-G. Pan, Y. Mao,
and L.-F. Zhou. Virtual reality presurgical planning for cerebral gliomas
adjacent to motor pathways in an integrated 3-d stereoscopic visual-
ization of structural mri and dti tractography. Acta neurochirurgica,
152(11):1847–1857, 2010.

[33] R. A. Robison, C. Y. Liu, and M. L. Apuzzo. Man, mind, and machine:
the past and future of virtual reality simulation in neurologic surgery.
World neurosurgery, 76(5):419–430, 2011.

[34] C. M. Schirmer, J. B. Elder, B. Roitberg, and D. A. Lobel. Virtual
reality–based simulation training for ventriculostomy: an evidence-
based approach. Neurosurgery, 73(suppl 1):S66–S73, 2013.

[35] C. M. Schirmer, J. Mocco, and J. B. Elder. Evolving virtual reality
simulation in neurosurgery. Neurosurgery, 73(suppl 1):S127–S137,
2013.

[36] D. Shen, G. Wu, and H.-I. Suk. Deep learning in medical image

Figure 6: Interaction example in data of P2. A) With the right Touch
controller, the user can choose which anatomical structures they want
to display and if they want to move, rotate or scale the model (excerpt
of menu). Examples of the displayed anatomical structures B) without
gray matter and C) with gray matter. Further, the user can apply and
slice cross-sectional views in horizontal and vertical plane using the
buttons and joystick on the left Touch controller. Pictures D-E show
examples of different cross-sectional views of the whole head (D, F)
or after zooming in (E, G).

[13] L. D. J. Fiederer, J. Vorwerk, F. Lucka, M. Dannhauer, S. Yang,
M. D¨umpelmann, A. Schulze-Bonhage, A. Aertsen, O. Speck, C. H.
Wolters, et al. The role of blood vessels in high-resolution volume
conductor head modeling of eeg. NeuroImage, 128:193–208, 2016.

[14] B. Fischl, A. Van Der Kouwe, C. Destrieux, E. Halgren, F. S´egonne,
D. H. Salat, E. Busa, L. J. Seidman, J. Goldstein, D. Kennedy, et al.
Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex. Cerebral cortex,
14(1):11–22, 2004.

[15] D. N. Greve and B. Fischl. Accurate and robust brain image alignment
using boundary-based registration. NeuroImage, 48(1):63–72, Oct.
2009. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.060

[16] C. H¨anel, P. Pieperhoff, B. Hentschel, K. Amunts, and T. Kuhlen.
Interactive 3d visualization of structural changes in the brain of a
person with corticobasal syndrome. Frontiers in neuroinformatics,
8:42, 2014.

[17] B. K. Hendricks, J. Hartman, and A. A. Cohen-Gadol. Cerebrovascular

Figure 7: Preliminary Performance Evaluation of the VR Visualization. Performance is stable across interactions but decreases with increasing
number of vertices passed to the GPU. Vertices of multiple models are accumulated to showcase the performance. Occlusion culling of vertices
not visible to the user still has to be implemented to further increase the performance.

analysis. Annual review of biomedical engineering, 19:221–248, 2017.
[37] G. K. Wong, C. X. Zhu, A. T. Ahuja, and W. Poon. Stereoscopic virtual
reality simulation for microsurgical excision of cerebral arteriovenous
malformation: case illustrations. Surgical neurology, 72(1):69–72,
2009.

[38] G. K. Wong, C. X. Zhu, A. T. Ahuja, and W. S. Poon. Craniotomy
and clipping of intracranial aneurysm in a stereoscopic virtual reality
environment. Neurosurgery, 61(3):564–569, 2007.

[39] D. L. Yang, Q. W. Xu, X. M. Che, J. S. Wu, and B. Sun. Clinical
evaluation and follow-up outcome of presurgical plan by dextroscope: a
prospective controlled study in patients with skull base tumors. Surgical
neurology, 72(6):682–689, 2009.

