© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

Evaluating an Immersive Space-Time Cube
Geovisualization for Intuitive Trajectory Data Exploration

Jorge A. Wagner Filho, Student Member, IEEE, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, Member, IEEE,
and Luciana Nedel, Member, IEEE

9
1
0
2

t
c
O
8

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
8
5
0
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Our immersive space-time cube (STC) aims to lower the known steep learning curve of this three-dimensional spatio-temporal
representation. The base map is coupled to a virtual reproduction of the analyst’s own real desk and all data manipulations and queries
are implemented through intuitive gestures and tangible controls, increasing usability and comfort, while decreasing mental workload.

Abstract—A Space-Time Cube enables analysts to clearly observe spatio-temporal features in movement trajectory datasets in
geovisualization. However, its general usability is impacted by a lack of depth cues, a reported steep learning curve, and the requirement
for efﬁcient 3D navigation. In this work, we investigate a Space-Time Cube in the Immersive Analytics domain. Based on a review of
previous work and selecting an appropriate exploration metaphor, we built a prototype environment where the cube is coupled to a
virtual representation of the analyst’s real desk, and zooming and panning in space and time are intuitively controlled using mid-air
gestures. We compared our immersive environment to a desktop-based implementation in a user study with 20 participants across 7
tasks of varying difﬁculty, which targeted different user interface features. To investigate how performance is affected in the presence of
clutter, we explored two scenarios with different numbers of trajectories. While the quantitative performance was similar for the majority
of tasks, large differences appear when we analyze the patterns of interaction and consider subjective metrics. The immersive version
of the Space-Time Cube received higher usability scores, much higher user preference, and was rated to have a lower mental workload,
without causing participants discomfort in 25-minute-long VR sessions.

Index Terms—Space-time cube, Trajectory visualization, Immersive analytics.

1 INTRODUCTION

Visualizing how objects’ or people’s positions vary over time and
facilitating the extraction of meaningful patterns and insights from
such visualizations is a topic of growing interest for a wide range of
stakeholders, from regular people planning their journeys to human
geographers and decision-makers preparing for possible situations in
the future or analyzing the past [2]. Nowadays, GPS-enabled mobile
devices, telecommunication networks [7], and even social networks
[43] can easily collect large and detailed datasets recording people’s
positions over time, with applications in a broad range of domains,
including urban planning, mobility optimization, sports analytics, and
behavioral studies.

• Jorge A. Wagner Filho is with the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul

and Simon Fraser University. E-mail: jawﬁlho@inf.ufrgs.br.

• Wolfgang Stuerzlinger is with Simon Fraser University. E-mail: w.s@sfu.ca.
• Luciana Nedel is with the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul. E-mail:

nedel@inf.ufrgs.br.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

Due to their spatial nature, such trajectory datasets are typically
explored with the aid of 2D map representations via animations to rep-
resent variations across time, but this often obscures relevant temporal
features and patterns in the data. An alternative that aims to more ade-
quately address the temporal component is the Space-Time Cube (STC),
a 3D representation that uses an additional, third dimension to represent
time. Originally proposed in the 1970s by H¨agerstrand [19], it attracted
more attention after the introduction of computer-based systems that
enable an interactive analysis from different points of view [27], essen-
tial for its effective use. The STC enables a clear observation of various
features in time and space, such as varying movement durations and
speeds (shown as non-vertical lines lengths and slopes), stop durations
and locations (which are represented by a vertical line) and meetings
between different individuals (when they share the same position in
time and space). Such analysis is usually (much) more difﬁcult with
standard 2D map-based visualizations.

However, and similar to other 3D data representations, the STC suf-
fers from well-known limitations in terms of perception and interaction
when it is used in conventional desktop setups [55]. These are a result
of the difﬁculties in estimating distances and visual depths from monoc-
ular depth cues alone and the mismatch in terms of control between a
3D environment and a 2D interaction device such as the mouse, as well
as of the challenges introduced by occlusion and visual clutter. This is

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
even worse when taking into account that domain experts are typically
not—and should not be required to be—trained in 3D manipulation.
Previous work identiﬁed that experts speciﬁcally complained about a
steep learning curve for the STC [34].

In this work, we hypothesize that the usability of STCs could greatly
beneﬁt from an immersive approach. Immersive Analytics applications
combine stereoscopic displays and intuitive 3D interaction techniques
to better explore 3D data representations [8, 39], with promising results
found in multiple domains [11, 14, 37, 52]. The ability to easily and
quickly change the viewpoint through smaller or larger head movements
enables users to deal with occlusion and visual clutter effectively. Also,
head movements combined with stereopsis facilitate the comparison
of distances and depths [52], as well as the understanding of spatial
relationships. Yet, so far little work has explored immersive approaches
for spatio-temporal data. Even though prior work failed to identify
beneﬁts of stereopsis for the exploration of STCs, it only considered
event data instead of complete 3D trajectories, and a very limited set of
tasks [25]. We believe that a broader set of tasks, the integration of new
interaction methods, and the inclusion of qualitative factors justify a
revisitation of this matter. Moreover, we are interested in assessing not
only the beneﬁts of stereopsis but also of immersive exploration as a
whole, including more direct and intuitive interaction.

Considering the vast design space for immersive environments, it
is clear that system design choices directly affect user experience and
performance, and that user comfort, efﬁciency, and integrability into a
traditional work environment are critical requirements for the adoption
of an approach by domain experts. With this in mind, we reviewed vari-
ous implementations of the STC in the literature (Sect. 2) and collected
the most appropriate design choices for our immersive environment
(Sect. 3). Moreover, we decided to base our work on a virtual desk
metaphor for seated exploration [51]. The STC’s base map is coupled
to the surface of a virtual representation of the analyst’s real work desk.
The trajectories, rendered within arm’s reach, can be intuitively ma-
nipulated with mid-air gestures and the aid of tangible control buttons
positioned on the desk.

In summary, we present the following contributions:
• A comparative user study across a large set of tasks and two data
density conditions to investigate the potential of an immersive
STC for spatio-temporal data exploration.

• Design recommendations for future immersive STC systems.
In the remaining of this paper, we discuss our strategy to evaluate
the new prototype implementation (Sect. 4) and report on a controlled
user study conducted with 20 novice participants (Sect. 5), comparing
performance for 7 typical movement data analysis tasks in terms of sub-
jective preferences, measured workload, accuracy and completion time,
against a standard desktop-based implementation (Sect. 6). Moreover,
we explore two different data scenarios to investigate how the presence
of clutter affects each condition. We also analyzed completion times in
terms of the usage of different interactivity features. Our hypotheses
are listed in Sect. 5.1.

2 RELATED WORK

The exploration of spatio-temporal data is a frequent task in the ﬁeld of
geovisualization, integrating approaches from cartography, geographic
information science and data visualization [28]. Typically such ex-
ploration involves interactive representations. Here, we focus on the
Space-Time Cube (STC) representation.

2.1 Visualization of Movement with the Space-Time Cube

The Space-Time Cube (STC) was originally proposed by H¨agerstrand
[19] as part of his time-geography studies, which saw space and time
as inseparable. The cube’s main idea is to use the axis perpendicular
to a map’s surface to represent time, thus allowing the precise display
of trajectories (called Space-Time Paths), which makes movement fea-
tures, such as varying speeds, meetings between people, and stationary
periods (clearly represented as vertical lines, called Stations) more
evident. Since the original STC representation required manual re-
drawing for the inspection of alternative points of view, its application

remained limited for a long time. However, with the advent of interac-
tive computer-based systems, the STC was revisited by Kraak [27] as
part of an extended visualization environment for movement data. A
similar concept was also adopted by GeoTime [23].

Since then, interactive STCs have been employed to visualize move-
ment trajectories in various domains, such as vessel navigation [57],
running sports [29], historic events [29], and urban mobility [1, 17, 31].
The STC can also be applied in the exploration of other kinds of
spatio-temporal datasets, such as event data (e.g., occurrences of earth-
quakes [16], crimes [41] or disease cases [25, 29]), origin-destination
data (e.g., movement patterns obtained from activity diaries [9]), and
even eye-tracking recordings [38]. The STC was also used by Bach et
al. [4] as a conceptual framework to survey temporal data visualizations.
The STC can be used either with a small set of trajectories, pri-
oritizing the perception of individual movement behaviors, or with a
much larger set of trajectories to identify collective similarities and
differences between behaviours of population subgroups, for example
from different ethnic origins or socio-economic status [34], or between
pedestrians who access a given region from different entrances [36].
However, when displaying many trajectories at the same time, the STC
can become cluttered and potentially important features can be oc-
cluded, sometimes motivating the usage of aggregation techniques [13].
In this work, we consider two data scenarios with varying degrees of
clutter to assess the performance of immersive exploration for each
case. In both scenarios we are mostly interested in the identiﬁcation of
individual movement features—which ultimately also contribute to the
identiﬁcation of broader patterns.

For the original interactive implementations of the STC, there was
no clear evidence of analytical beneﬁts [27]. Thus, a series of follow-up
studies addressed the need for controlled evaluations.

2.2 Questions about Movement Data

To evaluate any movement data representation, it is important to select
a set of relevant typical tasks to be conducted by data analysts in this
domain. One of the most inﬂuential taxonomies for this is the Spatio-
Temporal Triad framework by Peuquet [46], which identiﬁes three
basic kinds of questions, corresponding to two known information
components and the one being investigated: ‘when + where → what’,
‘when + what → where’ and ‘where + what → when’. Andrienko
et al. [3] later revisited the notion of different reading levels from
Bertin [5], indicating whether a question component (i.e., space, time,
or objects) refers to a single data element (elementary question) or to a
group of elements (general question). To reduce the size of the typology,
however, they simpliﬁed the types of question by focusing only on
whether time is given or asked: ‘when → where + what’ or ‘where
+ what → when’, where each side of the arrow can be elementary or
general. More recently, Amini et al. [1] proposed an updated taxonomy
where each of the three question variables can refer either to a single
value or multiple values (i.e., be it singular or plural), and these values
can be either explicitly given (known) or the target of a discovery action
(unknown). This model allows for more ﬂexibility, providing a clearer
picture of the task design space, and helps to estimate a task’s overall
complexity level considering the values of each dimension.

2.3 Previous Evaluations of Desktop-based STCs

To date, most empirical evaluations of the STC compare it against
equivalent 2D interactive maps and animations, investigating possible
performance advantages or disadvantages in typical tasks. One of the
ﬁrst comparisons was presented by Kristensson et al. [30], in a study
with 30 novice users and four categories of tasks based on Andrienko
et al.’s typology and a campus mobility use case. For simple tasks (e.g.,
“Where is the red person at 2pm?”), they found lower error rates using
the baseline 2D interactive map, while for more complex questions,
which required comparison between multiple candidates (e.g., “Who
was on the campus for the longest time?”), the cube afforded similar
accuracy but response times were twice as fast. Amini et al. [1] similarly
compared an STC-based system, the Space-Time Visualizer, against a
2D interactive map, but employed different design choices and tasks
in a study with 12 participants. No differences in error rates were

2

© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

found, but their results indicate that the STC is beneﬁcial in terms of
completion time for tasks such as identifying meetings and stationary
moments. They also analyzed the time spent on different actions, noting
that participants spent considerable time rotating the STC, possibly to
beneﬁt from structure-from-motion depth cues.

In a more domain-speciﬁc study, Willems et al. [57] compared
the STC to animations and density representations, investigating the
visibility of vessel movement features under varying clutter. Their user
study with 17 participants indicated that, for this domain and the chosen
tasks, the density representation performed best, being outperformed
by the STC only in determining the trafﬁc lane with the most vessels.
Kveladze et al. [33] presented a series of usability evaluations of an
extended analytical environment including the STC and other coordi-
nated representations, employing multiple case studies and an iterative
framework based on a series of phases, from the identiﬁcation of system
requirements by interviewing multiple domain experts (between 1 and
8 depending on the case study), to the proposal of design guidelines
and conduction of expert user evaluations. They found that the STC
was the most used representation in all tasks [31, 34]. Experts familiar
with the data reportedly performed better, probably due to their higher
motivation to explore, but still complained about the steep learning
curve and visual clutter of the STC—both issues that could potentially
be minimized with a more intuitive immersive approach. As part of
this study, Kveladze et al. [32] also investigated the effectiveness of
different visual variables, concluding that color schemes are useful to
group trajectories, while the addition of depth cues based on shading
creates too much clutter and should be avoided. However, when eval-
uating data of different complexities [35], color in combination with
shading was the best performing option.

Gonc¸alves et al. [18] advocated the combined usage of the STC and
2D maps, since the analysis of trajectories is not limited to a single type
of task. In user studies involving between 16 and 30 participants, they
found that the 2D map is always faster and more accurate for location
tasks, while the STC performs best for association tasks [17].

2.4 Immersive Analytics and the STC

The hypothesis that stereoscopic displays could improve data explo-
ration in an STC has been previously suggested, e.g., by Amini et
al. [1]. Others, such as Kveladze et al. [33], have also emphasized the
importance of depth (3D) perception for the STC. Nevertheless, little
past work has actually explored this question.

Kjellin et al. [25] compared monoscopic and stereoscopic versions
of the STC, using a retro-projected table and polarized glasses in a
disease spread event dataset (i.e., with data points, but not trajectories).
Their results from a study with 32 participants indicated that stereopsis
did not improve performance, and they claimed that the classes of
structures that users need to perceive determine the applicability of the
cube more than the depth cues used. Their tasks, however, consisted
of identifying which data subsets spread in concentric circles (as real
diseases), and which one had spread the most (i.e., had the largest
diameter at the top level), making it possible to easily solve the task via
a top view of the cube with time encoded by point size. This means that
they did not evaluate the more complex data exploration tasks typical
for STC use. Moreover, no qualitative evaluation was conducted. In
subsequent work, the same stereoscopic STC was compared to a 2D
map and animation for the visualization of trajectory data [26]. The
STC was more precise and much faster for the determination of the
order of arrival of different people at a meeting, while the map was more
accurate for the prediction of a future meeting point of two trajectories.
Yet, in this study the authors did not investigate a monoscopic version.
More recently, others employed systems with Head-Mounted Dis-
plays (HMDs) for STC visualization. Theuns [50] reported on focus
group sessions discussing immersive prototypes of several movement
data representations, including the STC. An unconventional “map on
the wall” metaphor was used, with time depicted on a horizontal axis,
and the users physically walked around to explore. Okada et al. [44] pre-
sented a large-scaled STC of Disneyland in VR, where geo-referenced
tweets were grouped according to time and location, and the user
inspected it by ﬂying around. Saenz et al. [47] reported on work-in-

progress to implement an Augmented Reality (AR) STC for event data
using the Hololens HMD. Walsh et al. [53, 54] discussed the potential
of using purpose-built tangible controllers in Immersive Analytics for
entity colocation in geospatial data. The STC was used in their system,
but was not the focus of their study. Others, such as Nguyen et al. [42],
have introduced immersive representations of spatial trajectories, but
without depicting temporal information. None of these studies included
evaluations of the STC with user studies, shedding little light into the
speciﬁc questions investigated in our work.

GeoGate is the work most similar to ours [49]. It is a system that
combines a 2D tabletop display with a 3D AR “hologram” to visualize
trajectories in the maritime domain. Due to the limited ﬁeld of view of
current AR HMDs, the STC is shown at a small size and its position is
controlled by moving a tangible device, which works as a spatial ﬁlter.
In a study with 24 participants, GeoGate reduced errors in tasks where
users had to correlate different data sources. Due to its different focus
domain and approach, that work is largely complementary to ours.

These examples also illustrate the vast design space available for
Immersive Analytics [39]. Very different metaphors, such as virtual
ﬂying and physical walking, can be adopted, which can impact user
experience and performance directly. One interesting option is to keep
the analyst seated at their work desk [59], using gestures to manipulate
3D data positioned above it. In a recent study, Wagner Filho et al. [51]
reported much lower completion times and simulator sickness incidence
with a desk-based metaphor, called VirtualDesk, compared to ﬂying.
Taking into consideration the requirements of a domain analyst for
a solution that is comfortable, efﬁcient and easily integrable to their
workspace, we assume here that a desk-based approach is more ﬁt and
adaptable for the immersive exploration of STCs.

3 PROTOTYPE IMMERSIVE STC ENVIRONMENT
Here we introduce our approach for the immersive trajectory visual-
ization environment that served as apparatus in our evaluation, as well
as the rationale behind its main concepts and design choices for its
implementation.

3.1 Interaction Design
Although other approaches, such as ﬂying or room-scale walking, are
possible and should also be investigated, we believe that a desk-based
metaphor, such as VirtualDesk [51], is a natural ﬁt for the STC. By
allowing the user to remain seated and as no ﬂoor space is required, this
approach is more easily integrable in current analyst’s workspaces and
workﬂows. Displaying the base map on the surface of their work desk
is also a more natural metaphor and could aid the cognitive process, by
mimicking a standard physical map exploration scenario (see Fig. 1).
Moreover, we selected a one-to-one mapping between gestural interac-
tions in the physical and virtual worlds, instead of a laser-pointer-based
approach, to reduce the user’s cognitive workload [12], and to afford
higher precision, stronger stereopsis, and head-motion parallax through
body-relative interactions within arm’s reach [40].

To allow a larger portion of the geographic space to be visualized, we
choose to make the virtual desk larger (3m × 1.5m), taking advantage
of the absence of space constraints in the virtual environment. This can
also be seen as a focus+context approach [10], where the data shown on
the easily reachable part of the real desk is in focus and the remainder
provides context.

3.2 Visualization Design
To implement an efﬁcient immersive environment for our user study,
we reviewed multiple interactive implementations of the STC (Sect. 2),
selecting the most appropriate design choices.

Time Direction. The ﬁrst design choice concerns the direction in
which time is displayed by default. While it may seem more natural in
a 3D representation for the vertical axis to increase upwards, we agree
with Amini et al.’s decision to display time increasing downwards [1],
as also used in the GeoTime system [23]. This way, the current center
of inspection in time can be positioned to intersect the map’s surface,
while all previous movement that led to this moment remains visible
above, instead of being occluded by the map (see Fig. 2 – left). Also, by

3

Fig. 2. In our immersive Space-Time Cube environment, all actions are implemented through intuitive mid-air gestures, such as grabbing (left),
stretching (center left), and tapping (center right), or by tangible interaction with controls on the desk’s surface (right). Since time advances
downwards, the trajectories show the movement history up to the point currently crossing the map. Blue hand contours added for clarity.

moving the trajectories slowly upwards, the moment currently crossing
the map advances and the user can visualize an intuitive animation of
how the objects moved over time. Grid walls were positioned around
the desk up to 1m of height to complete the familiar STC environment
and allow the analyst to quickly perceive (at least approximate) times
for events, and also to indicate the current represented time granularity
and direction. The user can also inspect any speciﬁc position with the
aid of additional red horizontal lines, which permanently follow the
movements of the hands when the index ﬁnger is raised (see Fig. 1). To
support other use cases, we offer an option to invert the vertical axis.
Moving the Trajectories vs. the Map. The second design choice
concerns how different moments in time are inspected. Many imple-
mentations of the cube, including the original one by Kraak [27], allow
the transposition of a movable base plane across the trajectories to
better identify object positions at a speciﬁc moment. Here, we chose to
allow the user to move the trajectories themselves upwards and down-
wards. Compatible with our desk metaphor, this keeps the map on the
desk surface, while also ensuring it is always visible and at a constant
viewing angle [1].

Color Encoding of Time. Another choice was to allow the use of
color encodings to represent the period of the day, as used by Gonc¸alves
et al. [17] (see Fig. 2 – center left). This feature is very helpful, for
example, for the observation of recurring patterns and the quick identi-
ﬁcation of key locations, e.g., where each object spends their nights.

Trajectory Footprints. Finally, we also allow the projection of
trajectory footprints onto the base map. This traditional feature of
the STC [27] may be useful for tasks that do not require the temporal
dimension, and also avoids the commonly observed strategy of users
ﬂattening the cube to obtain a 2D view [17].

3.3 Mid-air and Tangible Interaction
The exploration of the STC requires that the user is able to manipulate it
to ﬁnd an appropriate view, and also to query its contents [27]. With the
goal of minimizing cognitive load by adopting a one-to-one mapping
between real and virtual actions [12], interactions are based on two
main gestures in our prototype: grabbing (with a closed ﬁst, see Fig. 2
– center left) and tapping (with the index ﬁnger, see Fig. 2 – center
right) . By grabbing with one hand, the user can translate the data in
any direction, i.e., either through time or space. Moving two closed
hands closer or apart scales the data either in time or space, altering
the granularity at which that dimension is displayed. Spatial scaling is
performed around the midpoint of the shown data, while time scaling
is performed around the instant currently positioned at the map surface
(assumed to be the current center of inspection). By rotating two hands,
it is also possible to rotate the map to obtain different viewpoints. For
inspecting trajectories, we use tapping actions (single tap), which shows
a tooltip panel with the trajectory’s name and the exact timestamp (see
Fig. 2 – center right) or select trajectories with a double tap, rendering
the remaining ones semitransparent to facilitate analysis of speciﬁc
data. Interactions with the trajectories produce haptic feedback on the
controllers, to give better feedback for the mid-air content.

Our prototype affords a second category of interaction through con-
trols displayed on the desk’s surface, which makes it possible for users
to tap them physically. These controls can be used to activate most
of the features described in the previous subsection and also to select
annotation colors from a palette (see Fig. 2 – right). Annotation col-
ors become attached to the user’s ﬁngertip and act as ink, allowing
pinpoints to be placed on any point of the map, or to ﬁx wall lines at
any instant in time by touching different parts of the trajectories. The
purpose of annotations is to mark places or moments of interest during
the exploratory process and these can persist for future analysis.

3.4 Technical Details

The virtual environment was built in Unity3D and visualized through an
Oculus Rift CV1 HMD (with two 1200x1080 displays). Oculus Touch
hand controllers were used to track users’ hands and to implement the
hand gestures. However, all interactions are controller-agnostic, since
they do not rely on any speciﬁc controller buttons [51]. To minimize
user discomfort [58], adequate computing and graphics hardware en-
sured a frame rate above 80 FPS. Dynamically zoomable maps were
obtained from the Mapbox Unity SDK.

The trajectories were constructed as 3D tube meshes. Diameters
were adjusted according to map zoom and started at 1cm. To optimize
performance while preserving visual feedback, particularly in denser
datasets, they were rendered with a lower level-of-detail, i.e., fewer
vertices per position, during interactions, such as scaling, and then
revert back to higher detail, when static for more than a second.

Finally, we also updated the original VirtualDesk method of calibrat-
ing the desk’s position by placing the hand controllers at a predeﬁned
location [51] with a new reﬁned height adjustment method that asks
the user to touch the desk’s surface, which reduces the effect of any
mis-calibration due to different real and virtual hand sizes.

4 HOW TO EVALUATE AN IMMERSIVE STC?

Building on prior work that compared non-immersive STCs to other
representations, we discuss here potential evaluation strategies.

Measuring User Performance in Relevant Tasks. Aided by rel-
evant taxonomies (Sect. 2.2), the deﬁnition of representative tasks is
essential for comparative evaluations, and should take the potential
strengths of the compared systems into account. For comparisons be-
tween the STC and 2D interactive maps or animations, for example,
selected tasks often require a good integration of space and time. In the
case of the immersive STC, we believe that tasks with more require-
ment for interaction or involving comparisons between multiple objects
and events are more likely to enable us to identify performance differ-
ences in comparison with a regular desktop-based STC, due to the more
intuitive, one-to-one mapping between real and virtual actions [12].

Observing How Users Interact With It. Amini et al. proposed
examining the interaction process separately in terms of all features to
gain an understanding of the causes behind the observed performance,
and to isolate the static exploration time in each condition [1]. Kveladze

4

© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

Action
Scale map
Scale time
Translate map
Translate time
Rotate map
Rotate camera

Immersive
Move 2 closed hands
Move 2 closed hands
Move 1 closed hand
Move 1 closed hand
Rot. 2 closed hands
Move head

Translate cam.

Move head

Inspect traj.
Select traj.

Index-ﬁnger tap
Double tap

Desktop
Scroll on map
Scroll on walls
Left-click drag map
Left-click drag wall
Middle-click drag
Middle-click drag
Right-click drag,
Ctrl+Scroll
Mouse over
Double-click

Table 1. While interaction commands in Immersive are mostly intuitive
and body-related, Desktop mimics a typical Rotate-Pan-Dolly paradigm.

H2 The immersive STC will allow faster completion for tasks requir-

ing the comparison between many possible alternatives.

H3 In the immersive STC, stereopsis and proprioception will lead to

better accuracy in difﬁcult tasks.

H4 In the immersive condition users will interact more frequently,

due to the intuitivity of mid-air gestures.

H5 In the immersive condition users will perform fewer rotations, as

there is less need to perceive structure-from-motion.

H6 The immersive condition will lower the user’s mental workload.
H7 The immersive system will be rated as signiﬁcantly more usable.
H8 The desk-based immersive condition will be comfortable and not

induce simulator sickness.

5.2 Baseline Condition

The design for our baseline Desktop condition is based on the same
choices, but uses standard mouse and keyboard controls for interaction,
see Table 1 for the mapping. Some modiﬁcations were included to
increase the compatibility with previous implementations of the STC
in desktop settings, thus increasing the external validity. To this end,
an extra degree of freedom for rotation was added, allowing the cube
to be rotated up to 90◦ around its x axis, enabling the user to obtain
a birds-eye view. Such a rotation is not supported in the immersive
version, since it would break the VirtualDesk metaphor. Even though
one could argue that this additional degree of freedom could increase
the interaction effort, our observation of users indicates that this was
actually an advantage for the Desktop system, as it supports user ex-
pectations for a 3D manipulation interface and even makes some tasks
easier. Note that we thus assume that the beneﬁts introduced by the
immersive metaphor compensate for any advantage resulting from this
extra degree of freedom.

The Desktop cube was also rendered in its more typical form with
a square base, to keep the trajectories closer to a reference wall and
to fairly represent a typical desktop-based STC system. The STC
manipulation was based on a typical 3D manipulation Rotate-Pan-
Dolly paradigm [22]. A small strip at the bottom of the screen includes
all commands that are available on the top of our virtual desk (see
Fig. 3). This condition was experienced on a 22” 1920x1080 display.

5.3 Data Scenarios

Due to their controlled nature and previous use in a similar study, we
chose the simulated trajectory datasets by Amini et al. [1] for our
evaluation. These were created constructing a street intersections graph
for the city of Dublin, Ireland, and obtaining shortest paths between
predeﬁned points. The 3-day dataset reproduces a controlled routine:
each day, objects spend the night at their home points, leave for four
different appointments in different locations during the day (morning,
lunch, afternoon, and dinner) and then return back home.

Taking into account that the presence of clutter is a deciding factor
in the usability of the STC, with some reports that more than 10 trajec-
tories result in excessive clutter [13, 17], we decided to investigate two

Fig. 3. The baseline condition builds on the same design choices but
with adaptations to fairly represent a typical desktop-based STC system.

et al. also proposed a similar approach for the usage of different visual
representations in their system, which they used to, e.g., deduce the
participants’ exploration strategies and to compare usage patterns of
expert users familiar and unfamiliar with the data [34].

Interviewing Users About Their Subjective Experience. Qualita-
tive results obtained through standardized questionnaires and/or user
interviews can be as important as the quantitative task results. Con-
sidering the previously reported steep learning curve for the STC [34],
one of the hypothesized beneﬁts of an immersive STC is better system
usability. Besides easing the analyst’s cognitive effort and allowing
more attention to be paid to the actual information, a lower mental
workload and higher usability can lead to higher adoptability of the
STC. Yet, it is necessary to evaluate whether the lower familiarity of
users with a VR environment does not result in a higher cognitive load.
Novice Users vs. Domain Experts. Both novice users and domain
experts are important for evaluating a new visual representation or
comparing a novel approach to an existing one. Domain experts are
known to be more effective in the tasks due to their inherent motivation
and familiarity with the data and analytical problems, and are able to
perform more detailed analysis [34]. For complex representations, such
as the STC, they are also the main target users. Kveladze et al. recently
proposed a methodological framework for assessing the usability of
an STC which included several iterative steps integrating the domain
experts before a ﬁnal usability test [33]. However, their focus was on
understanding the utility of the STC for expert users in comparison to
other representations. In our work, we build upon their result that STCs
are beneﬁcial for experts. Our goal is to improve user performance by
increasing learnability, ease-of-interaction, and spatial understanding,
which motivated us to conduct our evaluation with novice users. This
choice allows us to assess a larger population and more accurately
detect differences related to human perception and behavior. Moreover,
it can also be argued that, in the words of Andrienko et al., nowadays
“everyone is a spatio-temporal analyst” in some way [2]. Additionally,
our tasks were designed to be atomic and easy to understand, without
requiring speciﬁc domain knowledge.

5 USER STUDY

To investigate how our proposed immersive analytics environment
performs in comparison with a conventional approach, we implemented
a comparable desktop-based condition, and selected two data scenarios.
We also formally deﬁned a set of tasks and applied the experiment
design to a group of non-expert participants.

5.1 Hypotheses

We formulated 8 hypotheses for this study, concerning task performance
(H1-H3), interactivity (H4-H5) and subjective experience (H6-H8).

H1 The immersive STC will enable faster completion for tasks re-

quiring much interaction.

5

Fig. 4. Different tasks being performed in the Immersive condition with Dense data: comparisons of instant distance (left), stop durations (center left),
movement speeds (center right) and event locations (right). Blue hand contours added for clarity.

Target Feature
Instant position

Example
Where was Person A (red) at 10am on the 8th?
T1
T2 Meeting event, Time At what time did Person B (green) meet others for the ﬁrst time on the 6th?
T3

Stop duration

T4

T5
T6
T7

Events locations

Instant distance
Movement speed
Order of events

Where did Person C (blue) spend less time on the 6th?
Where did Person B (green) have his/her ﬁrst lunch appointment closest to
his/her home during all days?
Who was closest to the red point on the map at 9am on the 8th?
Who moved the fastest after leaving home in the morning on the 6th?
Who was the ﬁrst to arrive at his/her lunch appointment on the 7th?

Object
K,S
K,S
K,S

K,S

U,S
U,S
U,S

Time
K,S
K,P
K,P

U,P

K,S
K,S
K,P

Space
U,S
U,S
U,S

U,S

K,S
U,P
U,P

Table 2. Evaluated tasks target different movement features, with different levels of difﬁculty and required interaction. Using Amini et al.’s approach [1],
the three movement task components are classiﬁed as Known or Unknown, and Singular or Plural.

different data scenarios: a Simple dataset with only 3 different trajecto-
ries (see Fig. 2), and a Dense dataset with 24 simultaneous trajectories
(see Fig. 1 and Fig. 4). The latter was constructed by combining all
datasets provided by Amini et al. Since the data spans a relatively small
region of 10 square kilometers, the resulting set is very dense.

data. There, users were expected to ﬁnd the home site of the target
subject and each of the three locations where they had lunch, marking
them on the map for a later comparison. Thus, before the start of this
task, participants were explicitly reminded about the availability of map
annotations and color encodings.

5.4 Participants

5.6 Experiment Design

A population of 20 graduate and undergraduate students (16 male/4
female, mean age 22.2, SD 3.2) was recruited from our University
campus. Half the users presented corrected-to-normal vision and wore
glasses in combination with the HMD. 13 reported no or low previ-
ous experience with VR HMDs, while only 5 were very experienced.
Nonetheless, all participants reported at least average experience with
3D computer games, 17 with gamepads, and 12 with motion controllers,
characterizing a population familiar to navigation in 3D environments.

5.5 Evaluated Tasks

We deﬁned seven tasks that aim at different target movement features,
levels of difﬁculty, and required interaction. They are presented and
classiﬁed in Table 2. Tasks 1 to 4 concern a single trajectory, with
relatively similar difﬁculties in both data scenarios (the target object
can be selected, which renders the remaining ones semitransparent and
minimizes the inﬂuence of clutter). Tasks 5 to 7 require the comparison
of all objects, which becomes much more difﬁcult in the dense scenario.
We selected two different task stimuli points or periods for each task in
each data scenario, targeting similar situations and with similar degrees
of difﬁculty. In all cases, it was reasonably easy to perform all required
selections, and tasks required a reasonable degree of comprehension
and exploration to extract the information from the STC. All tasks
had an objective known answer which was used to assess user choices
without introducing subjective criteria. For tasks which required the
selection of a time or location, we adopted an error margin of 15
minutes or 2 centimeters on the map’s surface.

The procedure was similar for all tasks: users must ﬁrst identify the
target element or period, then move the desired time or period closer to
the map plane and identify the answer or compare different possibilities.
We designed Task 4 to force the exploration of multiple regions of the

The experiment followed a mixed design, with 2 within-subjects vi-
sualization conditions × 2 between-subjects data scenarios × 7 tasks,
totaling 14 trials per participant with an average duration of 65 minutes
including the familiarization phases and questionnaires ﬁlling. The
need for a between-subjects independent variable became clear in pilot
testing, where we observed that, even for a very small number of tasks,
untrained users required a long time. Increasing the test length would
introduce additional noise resulting from participant fatigue and also
lead to a very long VR exposure period. Considering that the visual-
ization condition is our main investigated variable, we prioritized it as
within-subjects to avoid the interference of interpersonal differences.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the data scenarios at the
beginning of their tests. The presentation of conditions was alternated
to counterbalance learning biases. Task stimuli were also alternated
between conditions after each test to balance occasional unintended
difﬁculty differences. Task order was always preserved.

At the beginning of each condition, users received a guided tour
of the main system features, and also instruction for how to interpret
the cube, since it is a representation unfamiliar to most users. During
this period, which lasted on average 8 minutes for Immersive and 6.2
minutes for Desktop, they freely explored a practice dataset with three
trajectories and were asked to practice ﬁnding simple information, such
as an object’s position at a given time. During the experiment, task
questions were presented via text at the bottom of the screen in Desktop
and on a small panel above the desk’s surface in Immersive. Participants
could read and ask for clariﬁcations before pressing a button to start
and the trajectories were only shown after this moment. Participants
were always asked to prioritize accuracy over speed in their answers.
The supplementary videos demonstrate all system functionality and
how tasks were performed in both conditions.

6

© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

Fig. 5. Times were similar in both conditions, with the exception of the simplest task. Success rates were generally similar across scenarios and
conditions, except for T5, which became more difﬁcult for Dense data in Desktop, but not in Immersive. Error bars indicate standard deviation.

Fig. 6. Task workload components of the Nasa TLX questionnaire un-
der Desktop and Immersive. Mental Workload and Frustration were
signiﬁcantly lower in the latter. Error bars indicate standard deviation.

After experiencing each condition, participants were asked to ﬁll
standardized questionnaires, including the System Usability Scale
(SUS) [6], the NASA Raw TLX for workload assessment [20], and
the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) [24], where the latter was
applied pre and post VR exposure.

6 RESULTS

We report here the user study results in terms of quantitative measures,
qualitative performance, interactivity and participant feedback. Since
most variables were not normally distributed, paired or unpaired non-
parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests [56] were used and signiﬁcance
is indicated as follows: (∗) for p < 0.05, (∗∗) p < 0.01 and (∗ ∗ ∗) p <
0.001. We also report Z-values and effect sizes (r) [45].

6.1 Task Performance

Fig. 5 presents averages and standard deviations for elapsed times and
success rates, overall and per task. Few signiﬁcant differences were
observed, contradicting hypotheses H1-H3.

In terms of time, T1 (instant position) was slightly slower in Immer-
sive for both Simple (p = .08, Z = -1.7, r = .38) and Dense (p = .005,
Z = -2.8, r = .61) datasets. In Desktop, this very basic task could be
answered by positioning the required time on the map’s surface and
selecting the position from a distance, while in Immersive the selection
requires ﬁrst reaching that location. On the other hand, T3 (stop com-
parison) was faster in Immersive for the Simple dataset (p = .08, Z =
-1.7, r = .38).

In terms of success rates, we found only a single signiﬁcant differ-
ence. For T5 (instant distance), increasing data density in Desktop
signiﬁcantly decreased the correct rate (p = .03, Z = -2.1, r = .47),
while for Immersive no differences were found. The low success
rate presented by Immersive in task T2 for Dense data was partially
contaminated by unintended selections, given that time annotations
were performed by a single tap and trajectories were very close in this
scenario. Still, there was no signiﬁcant difference, with p = .4.

As expected, tasks T5-T7, which require comparisons between all
objects, presented a signiﬁcant slowdown in the Dense condition. Only
T5, however, presented fewer successes, and only for Desktop (p = .03,
Z = -2.1, r = .47).

7

6.2 Usability, Comfort and Workload

Desktop and Immersive presented signiﬁcantly different usability eval-
uations on the System Usability Scale (SUS). While the former was
rated with an average score of 62.1 (SD 20.6), the latter received 82.3
(SD 10.1), conﬁrming our hypothesis H7 (∗ ∗ ∗).

In terms of workload as measured by the NASA Raw TLX ques-
tionnaire, results were also favorable to the immersive system (see
Fig. 6), with a non-signiﬁcant smaller overall index (26.8 vs. 31.6, p =
.07) but signiﬁcantly lower Mental Workload (32.4 vs. 41.6, ∗), which
supports H6. Frustration was also greatly reduced (from 35 to 12.5,
∗∗) with immersive interaction, while the Physical Demand naturally
increased (from 10.8 to 28.3, ∗). Moreover, perceived performance was
also signiﬁcantly better in Immersive (25.8 vs. 34.1, ∗, where lower
is better). Comparing participants across both data scenarios, the only
signiﬁcant difference is the Mental Demand for Desktop, which was
31.6 in Simple and 51.6 in Dense (∗), while participants in Immersive
did not present a signiﬁcant difference.

Finally, no signiﬁcant difference was found between pre and post-
VR Simulator Sickness scores (p = .22), with an average delta of 2.8
(SD 16.5), considered negligible [24], conﬁrming H8. Furthermore,
no user reported discomfort, despite an average of 25 minutes of VR
exposure (SD 8.2, max = 45.16 min).

6.3 Interactivity Analysis

Fig. 7 illustrates the distribution of users’ times across all possible
interactions. For this analysis, camera rotations and translations in the
Immersive condition refer to head movements (above a small threshold
empirically determined as 1◦ and 1 mm, respectively), and, in Desktop,
to vertical rotations around the cube and straﬁng/zooming. Camera
rotations around the vertical axis in Desktop are seen as map rotations.
When no speciﬁc interaction was detected, we assumed that users were
performing static exploration of the data [1].

In this data, differences in terms of multiple interactions are evident
and participants appear to perform many more interactions in the Im-
mersive condition (H4). Camera movements are much more common
in Immersive, where users spend a large part of their times rotating
and moving their heads to look at different points and from alternative
points of view. While zooming, straﬁng, and vertically rotating the
cube are also important features in Desktop, a very small fraction of
interaction time is dedicated to these actions. On the other hand, map
rotations (which in Desktop correspond to actually rotating the whole
cube around its vertical axis) are one of the most performed interactions
in Desktop, conﬁrming previous observations from Amini et al. [1],
while they are rare in Immersive (conﬁrming H5). Such rotations were
even more frequent in Desktop in the Dense scenario, possibly to obtain
different points of view and to avoid occlusions.

Another notable difference is the much higher number of trajectory
inspections in Desktop, which display a tooltip with the exact time of
any point. Since this feature is activated by placing the mouse over
any trajectory point, this can be performed from a distance at any
time (sometimes even unintentionally). In contrast, in Immersive the

Fig. 7. Distribution of time across the different interaction features, for tasks in both conditions and scenarios. Users in Desktop performed many
more map rotations, to beneﬁt from structure-from-motion, and inspections, to be able to accurately determine times. In Immersive, users intuitively
performed much more data translations and scalings, and constantly moved their heads to change their point of view.

user would have to tap at the 3D location. This can also be partially
attributed to the much greater difﬁculty of identifying the correct times
of points using the cube walls in Desktop than in Immersive, where
users have an egocentric point of view.

6.4 Participant Feedback
Participants were also asked to provide feedback through Likert-scale
questions (see Fig. 8) and open comments. We observed that for four
out of six assertions presented, agreement rates were signiﬁcantly larger
for Immersive. For Immersive, 90% of participants agreed that it was
easy to manipulate the data and to remember how to do what was
needed, 80% that it was easy to ﬁnd the required information, and 90%
that the technique was comfortable, in line with the usability results
(Sect. 6.2). The only questions which did not see signiﬁcance were
related to interactions with the buttons and trajectories. Yet, considering
that physically touching a button on the desk or selecting a trajectory
mid-air could be potentially more difﬁcult, this is also positive and
the results for these questions are probably related to challenges with
selections and in understanding the meanings assigned to the buttons.

In open comments, several participants reported that the immersive
environment was “more fun” and “more interesting”. However, one
participant mentioned that it was also “tiring” to scale and rotate the
data, and some complained that, using gestures rather than a mouse, it
was more difﬁcult to perform precise actions, such as moving a speciﬁc
time to the desk surface. One explicitly justiﬁed that this could be due
to their little experience with VR, but this can be seen also a limitation
of using mid-air manipulation gestures. With respect to Desktop, one
participant mentioned its controls were similar to the game TheSims,
which made it easier to use.

A feature that caused difﬁculty for many users was the double-
tapping gesture. To avoid unintended selections and confusion with the
single tap inspection, our implementation of double tapping required
precision in tapping frequency and location, which mimics a mouse
double-click. However, perfecting this mid-air action requires practice,
and, in contrast to our expectations, users often became less and less
precise with time, due to their frustration. Yet, no signiﬁcant difference
against Desktop was found in terms of ease to interact with trajectories
(Fig. 8).

Some users had difﬁculty with rotations, which required both hands
to be at the same height to avoid confusion with temporal scaling, and
complained about this constraint. They also often tried to translate the
data by moving two closed hands, which was again constrained to avoid
confusion with spatial scaling and rotation. However, when multiple
actions were assigned to the same gesture, such as spatial and temporal
translation with one closed hand, some also paradoxically complained
about the difﬁculty to perform one without affecting the other.

Finally, participants were asked to rank the two conditions on differ-
ent criteria. 19 judged Immersive to be more engaging, 18 to be more
intuitive, and 13 also deemed it the fastest. In terms of being the most
accurate, half the participants chose each condition, which is possibly
linked to the difﬁculty of executing precise movements in Immersive.

Fig. 8. Likert-scale agreements to different assertions ranging from
strongly disagree (dark red) to strongly agree (dark green). Participants
found it signiﬁcantly easier to ﬁnd information and interact in Immersive
(IM) than in Desktop (D), and also considered it more comfortable.

7 DISCUSSION
Here we discuss our ﬁndings to extract recommendations for future
work in the STC community, and possible explanations for why some
of our initial hypotheses could not be validated at this time.

7.1 Findings for the STC Community
In comparison to the conventional desktop-based approach, our re-
sults indicate several clear qualitative beneﬁts for the exploration of
trajectories with immersive STCs. The 32% larger usability score and
32% smaller Mental Workload index indicate that immersion could
be a signiﬁcant improvement for the acceptability of the STC, which
partially addresses the reported steep learning curve and cumbersome
manipulation. This was conﬁrmed by the Likert-scale data, where
16/20 considered it easy to ﬁnd the required information and 18/20
considered this technique comfortable, compared with 6/20 and 8/20
in Desktop, respectively. Even though this is not the ﬁrst time an im-
mersive visualization system has presented lower workload than its
desktop-based counterpart [51], each speciﬁc representation has its
own particularities in terms of required interactions and information-
seeking activities, demanding an independent evaluation. Considering
the large number of possible interactions and low previous familiarity
of participants with the proposed interactions, and even though we
expected to see such behavior (H6 and H7), we were still surprised
with the large observed differences between conditions. Moreover, the
immersive system exhibited similar Mental Workload and success rates
for all tasks in the Simple and Dense data scenarios, in contrast to
Desktop, which was more susceptible to the presence of clutter. This
observation could guide STC users when selecting the best approach
for their analysis depending on data complexity.

In terms of visualization design, our observations indicate that our
choices were successful in providing an easily understandable STC
implementation, even for novice users, and we recommend them for
future similar studies. The downwards direction of time, albeit initially
confusing, was generally appreciated due to the possibility of following

8

© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

an object’s position on the map by dragging the trajectories upwards.
The color encoding of time was very useful for task T7, which required
the identiﬁcation and comparison of lunch locations and times.

constrained the observation of quantitative performance. Participants
required an average of 65 minutes to complete only 14 trials, which
can be considered very long for this kind of experiment.

For our interaction design, user feedback demonstrates that our
choices were successful in enabling easier and more intuitive explo-
ration of the data (see Sect. 6.4), but also indicates directions for future
improvements. First, interaction gestures cannot suffer from (seem-
ingly) unnecessary constraints or ambiguities that contradict users’
expectations.Visual or haptic feedback could be used to deal with such
situations. Second, the requirement for direct selection of points by
double tapping resulted in small time overheads in task T1. Remote
point selection functionality without breaking the interaction metaphor
is a topic for future work. Finally, we could consider alternative mid-air
manipulation techniques for map zoom-and-pan to minimize potential
arm fatigue during longer use, as discussed by Satriadi et al. [48].

The intuitive interaction scheme deeply affected the interaction pat-
terns. Besides constantly moving their heads to obtain different points
of view, users performed more data translations and scaling using ges-
tures. Yet, the total time was still similar to Desktop (with the exception
of T1, the simplest task, which was slightly faster in Desktop). In
Desktop, users based their exploration on frequent map rotations to
better perceive the scene. Differences in data translation over time or
space can probably be attributed in a large part to the intuitivity of the
grabbing action, which stimulated its frequent usage, but also to the
need to ﬁrst move the data and then select, inspect, or annotate it, which
is not required in Desktop. Finally, data scaling was also noticeably
more common in Immersive and in the Dense scenario. Scaling is an
important feature to increase the spacing between objects in a dense
representation. The fact that it was not more frequently used in Desktop,
despite mouse scrolling being a standard command for zooming, is
surprising. Yet, based on our observations and the requirements of our
speciﬁc tasks, we have no reason to believe that the reduced resolution
in the immersive condition is a possible explanation for the results.
Instead, we observed that users felt more inclined to use scaling to
“dive” into the data in Immersive, when they deemed it necessary.

Keeping in mind that our participants are accustomed to 3D navi-
gation, we expect that difference for other user groups, such as data
specialists, could potentially be even larger. Furthermore, results for
simulator sickness were also excellent, despite relatively long sessions.
This concern seems to be a non-issue for our desk-based VR metaphor.

7.2 Why Was Quantitative Performance Not Improved?

Contrary to our initial hypotheses H1-H3, few differences were found
in user performance. We believe several factors contributed to this.
First of all, participants were unfamiliar with the STC. According to
our observation, error rates increased when difﬁculties to correctly in-
terpret the representation arose. Also, times increased due to difﬁculties
in understanding how to efﬁciently extract the required information.
Moreover, despite our intention to explore a wide range of task com-
plexities, the conceptual difﬁculty experienced by many users led to
tasks being always either too easy or too difﬁcult, which becomes clear
when looking at the success rates Fig. 5. Yet, providing more training
would render test sessions very long, introducing fatigue noise. Finally,
and even though two of our hypotheses refer to time, we asked users to
prioritize being accurate to avoid rushed or careless answers. This led
many to lose focus during the exploration, especially in the immersive
condition, which was more novel and interesting to them.

Our participants were previously familiar with 3D navigation in
computer games and generally not familiar with VR environments, but
still preferred the latter and considered it easier. Moreover, it is positive
that Immersive did not increase times despite adding an additional
level of new information to be learned. In summary, considering the
population of our study and the complexity of the tasks evaluated,
we are not completely surprised that we could not observe signiﬁcant
improvements in terms of quantitative performance.

7.3 Limitations

A main limitation of our study was the fact that a novice population was
assessed, with no previous familiarity or training with the STC, which

In terms of the technique, one limitation detected by participants was
the difﬁculty to apply precise adjustments, for example in data transla-
tion, as well as to translate time and space independently, actions which
are better supported by Desktop. On the other hand, when gestures
were constrained to increase precision, users were also not satisﬁed.
This indicates that gestures should be made as natural as possible to
correspond to users’ expectations, but more speciﬁc techniques should
be considered for cases when precision is required. One possibility is
the use of dedicated buttons on the desk’s surface to enable adjustments
with ﬁxed increments, which could also reduce physical demand.

Further, several participants experienced difﬁculties with the double-
tapping action. To avoid confusion with simple inspections (which
correspond to a mouse-over), our implementation necessitated high
precision in frequency and position of the taps. This action must be
revisited to enhance usability and lower training requirements, while
still preserving precision. However, we are conﬁdent that the gesture is
appropriate for selection, maintaining the desired embodied metaphor,
in line with the remaining interactions in the prototype. One evidence
for this is that participants still rated the interaction with trajectories
better in the immersive environment. The importance of double-tapping
also became evident when considering the high number of unintended
annotations (requiring only a single-tap action), which partially con-
taminated results for task T2 (Sect. 6.1).

Finally, the results are limited to the design choices made in our study,
and alternative approaches, e.g., an egocentric room-scale environment,
should be assessed in future work.

7.4 Perspectives for Future Work

We see many perspectives for the immersive STC. Besides an evalua-
tion with domain experts, one is the expansion to other categories of
spatio-temporal data, such as event and origin-destination datasets, both
of which will introduce different requirements, and beneﬁt from our
approach in different ways. Further evaluation employing alternative
datasets, including real-world data, are also planned. In particular, we
are considering the exploration of big trajectory datasets for collective
behavior exploration [34, 36]. To this end, novel trajectory mesh ren-
dering techniques are needed to preserve the essential high interactivity
and frame rate required for VR comfort [21].

Further, we also plan to expand our immersive environment to in-
clude complementary data representations and support more task cat-
egories [18, 31]. We might also investigate additional information
encodings, such as varying tube radii, and the integration of desktop-
based and immersive implementations, to allow seamless transitions,
according to the analyst’s needs [15].

8 CONCLUSION

In this work, we evaluated an immersive implementation of the
STC geovisual representation based on the VirtualDesk exploration
metaphor, aiming to increase its usability and to decrease its learn-
ing curve. To this end, we reviewed previous literature in Immersive
Analytics and Geovisualization and made a series of design choices.

Even though our work can only be considered a ﬁrst step into the
investigation on the beneﬁts of immersive STCs, we were able to report
very promising results for the qualitative experience, with much higher
usability and user preferences, very low simulator sickness incidence,
and a lower measured mental workload. The next steps for our re-
search include further detailed evaluations with domain experts and the
application of our approach to real-world spatio-temporal datasets.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank the user study participants for their feedback and
the reviewers for their insightful contributions. We also acknowledge
ﬁnancial support from CNPq–Brazil and Global Affairs Canada. This
study was ﬁnanced in part by the Coordenac¸ ˜ao de Aperfeic¸oamento de
Pessoal de N´ıvel Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001.

9

REFERENCES

[1] F. Amini, S. Ruﬁange, Z. Hossain, Q. Ventura, P. Irani, and M. J. McGufﬁn.
The impact of interactivity on comprehending 2D and 3D visualizations
of movement data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 21(1):122–135, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2329308
[2] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, U. Demsar, D. Dransch, J. Dykes, S. I. Fab-
rikant, M. Jern, M.-J. Kraak, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski. Space, time
and visual analytics. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 24(10):1577–1600, 2010. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2010.508043
[3] N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky. Exploratory spatio-temporal
visualization: An analytical review. Journal of Visual Languages &
Computing, 14(6):503–541, 2003. doi: 10.1016/S1045-926X(03)00046-6
[4] B. Bach, P. Dragicevic, D. Archambault, C. Hurter, and S. Carpendale. A
review of temporal data visualizations based on space-time cube operations.
In R. Borgo, R. Maciejewski, and I. Viola, eds., Eurographics Conference
on Visualization - STARs. The Eurographics Association, 2014. doi: 10.
2312/eurovisstar.20141171

[5] J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps. ESRI

Press, 2011.

[6] J. Brooke. SUS – A quick and dirty usability scale. In P. W. Jordan,
B. Thomas, I. L. McClelland, and B. Weerdmeester, eds., Usability Evalu-
ation in Industry. Taylor & Francis, 1996.

[7] F. Calabrese, L. Ferrari, and V. D. Blondel. Urban sensing using mobile
phone network data: A survey of research. ACM Computing Surveys,
47(2):25:1–25:20, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2655691

[8] T. Chandler, M. Cordeil, T. Czauderna, T. Dwyer, J. Glowacki, C. Goncu,
M. Klapperstueck, K. Klein, K. Marriott, F. Schreiber, et al. Immersive
analytics. In 2015 Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA), pp. 1–8. IEEE,
September 2015. doi: 10.1109/BDVA.2015.7314296

[9] J. Chen, S.-L. Shaw, H. Yu, F. Lu, Y. Chai, and Q. Jia. Exploratory data
analysis of activity diary data: A space–time GIS approach. Journal of
Transport Geography, 19(3):394–404, 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2010
.11.002

[10] A. Cockburn, A. Karlson, and B. B. Bederson.

A review of
overview+detail, zooming, and focus+context interfaces. ACM Computing
Surveys, 41(1):2:1–2:31, Jan. 2009. doi: 10.1145/1456650.1456652
[11] D. Coffey, N. Malbraaten, T. Le, I. Borazjani, F. Sotiropoulos, and
D. F. Keefe. Slice wim: A multi-surface, multi-touch interface for
overview+detail exploration of volume datasets in virtual reality. In Sym-
posium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games, pp. 191–198. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2011.

[12] M. Cordeil, B. Bach, Y. Li, E. Wilson, and T. Dwyer. Design space
for spatio-data coordination: Tangible interaction devices for immersive
information visualisation. In Proceedings of IEEE Paciﬁc Visualization
Symposium (PaciﬁcVis), pp. 46–50. IEEE, April 2017. doi: 10.1109/
PACIFICVIS.2017.8031578

[13] U. Demˇsar and K. Virrantaus. Space–time density of trajectories: Ex-
ploring spatio-temporal patterns in movement data. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 24(10):1527–1542, 2010. doi: 10.
1080/13658816.2010.511223

[14] M. Drouhard, C. A. Steed, S. Hahn, T. Proffen, J. Daniel, and M. Math-
eson. Immersive visualization for materials science data analysis using
the oculus rift. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), pp. 2453–2461. IEEE, October 2015. doi: 10.1109/BigData.2015.
7364040

[15] J. A. W. Filho, C. M. D. S. Freitas, and L. Nedel. Comfortable immersive
analytics with the virtualdesk metaphor. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 39(3):41–53, May 2019. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2019.2898856
[16] P. Gatalsky, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko. Interactive analysis of event
data using space-time cube. In International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV), pp. 145–152. IEEE, July 2004. doi: 10.1109/IV.2004.
1320137

[17] T. Gonc¸alves, A. P. Afonso, and B. Martins. Cartographic visualization of
human trajectory data: Overview and analysis. Journal of Location Based
Services, 9(2):138–166, 2015. doi: 10.1080/17489725.2015.1074736
[18] T. Gonc¸alves, A. P. Afonso, and B. Martins. Why not both?: Combining
2D maps and 3D space-time cubes for human trajectory data visualization.
In Proceedings of the 30th International BCS Human Computer Inter-
action Conference: Fusion!, HCI ’16, pp. 22:1–22:10. BCS Learning &
Development Ltd., Swindon, UK, 2016. doi: 10.14236/ewic/HCI2016.22
[19] T. H¨agerstraand. What about people in regional science? Papers in

Regional Science, 24(1):7–24, 1970.

[20] S. G. Hart. Nasa-task load index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later. In Pro-
ceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
vol. 50, pp. 904–908. Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2006.
[21] C. Hurter, N. H. Riche, S. M. Drucker, M. Cordeil, R. Alligier, and
R. Vuillemot. Fiberclay: Sculpting three dimensional trajectories to reveal
structural insights. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 25(1):704–714, Jan 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865191
[22] J. Jankowski and M. Hachet. Advances in interaction with 3D environ-
ments. Computer Graphics Forum, 34(1):152–190, 2015. doi: 10.1111/cgf
.12466

[23] T. Kapler and W. Wright. Geotime information visualization. In IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, pp. 25–32. IEEE, Oct 2004. doi:
10.1109/INFVIS.2004.27

[24] R. S. Kennedy, J. M. Drexler, D. E. Compton, K. M. Stanney, D. S.
Lanham, and D. L. Harm. Conﬁgural scoring of simulator sickness,
cybersickness and space adaptation syndrome: Similarities and differences.
In L. J. Hettinger and M. W. Haas, eds., Virtual and adaptive environments:
Applications, implications, and human performance issues, chap. 12, pp.
247–276. CRC Press, 2003.

[25] A. Kjellin, L. W. Pettersson, S. Seipel, and M. Lind. Different levels of
3D: An evaluation of visualized discrete spatiotemporal data in space-time
cubes. Information Visualization, 9(2):152–164, 2010. doi: 10.1057/ivs.
2009.8

[26] A. Kjellin, L. W. Pettersson, S. Seipel, and M. Lind. Evaluating 2D and
3D visualizations of spatiotemporal information. ACM Transactions on
Applied Perception (TAP), 7(3):19:1–19:23, 2010. doi: 10.1145/1773965.
1773970

[27] M.-J. Kraak. The space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization per-
spective. In Proc. 21st International Cartographic Conference, pp. 1988–
1996. Citeseer, 2003.

[28] M.-J. Kraak. Visualization viewpoints: Beyond geovisualization. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 26(4):6–9, July 2006. doi: 10.1109/
MCG.2006.74

[29] M.-J. Kraak. Geovisualization and time – new opportunities for the space-
time cube. Geographic visualization: Concepts, tools and applications,
pp. 293–306, 2008. doi: 10.1002/9780470987643.ch15

[30] P. O. Kristensson, N. Dahlback, D. Anundi, M. Bjornstad, H. Gillberg,
J. Haraldsson, I. Martensson, M. Nordvall, and J. Stahl. An evaluation of
space time cube representation of spatiotemporal patterns. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(4):696–702, July 2009.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.194

[31] I. Kveladze, M. Kraak, and C. van Elzakker. Researching the usability
of a geovisual analytics environment for the exploration and analysis of
different datasets. In The 28th International Cartographic Conference,
2-7 July 2017, Washington DC, USA, 2017.

[32] I. Kveladze and M.-J. Kraak. What do we know about the space-time
cube from cartographic and usability perspective. Columbus, Ohio, USA:
Proceedings of Autocarto, pp. 16–18, 2012.

[33] I. Kveladze, M.-J. Kraak, and C. P. van Elzakker. A methodological
framework for researching the usability of the space-time cube. The
Cartographic Journal, 50(3):201–210, 2013. doi: 10.1179/1743277413Y.
0000000061

[34] I. Kveladze, M.-J. Kraak, and C. P. Van Elzakker. The space-time cube
as part of a geovisual analytics environment to support the understanding
of movement data. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 29(11):2001–2016, 2015. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2015.1058386
[35] I. Kveladze, M.-J. Kraak, and C. P. van Elzakker. Cartographic design and
the space-time cube. The Cartographic Journal, 56(1):73–90, 2019. doi:
10.1080/00087041.2018.1495898

[36] I. Kveladze, S. van der Spek, and M.-J. Kraak. The recognition of temporal
patterns in pedestrian behaviour using visual exploration tools. In 7th In-
ternational Conference, GIScience 2012, Columbus, OH, USA, September,
Proceedings 7478 (Paperback), 2012.

[37] O.-H. Kwon, C. Muelder, K. Lee, and K.-L. Ma. A study of layout,
rendering, and interaction methods for immersive graph visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(7):1802–
1815, July 2016. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2520921

[38] X. Li, A. C¸ ¨oltekin, and M.-J. Kraak. Visual exploration of eye move-
ment data using the space-time-cube. In International Conference on
Geographic Information Science, pp. 295–309. Springer, 2010. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-642-15300-6 21

[39] K. Marriott, F. Schreiber, T. Dwyer, K. Klein, N. H. Riche, T. Itoh,
W. Stuerzlinger, and B. H. Thomas, eds. Immersive Analytics, vol. 11190

10

© 2019 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415

of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978
-3-030-01388-2

[40] M. R. Mine, F. P. Brooks Jr, and C. H. Sequin. Moving objects in space:
Exploiting proprioception in virtual-environment interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the 24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, pp. 19–26. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., New
York, NY, USA, 1997. doi: 10.1145/258734.258747

[41] J. D. Morgan. A visual time-geographic approach to crime mapping. The

Florida State University, 2010.

[42] H. Nguyen, F. Wang, R. Williams, U. Engelke, A. Kruger, and P. d. Souza.
Immersive visual analysis of insect ﬂight behaviour. In IEEE VIS Workshop
on Immersive Analytics: Exploring Future Interaction and Visualization
Technologies for Data Analytics. IEEE, 2017.

[43] A. Noulas, S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, and M. Pontil. An empirical study
of geographic user activity patterns in foursquare. In Fifth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. AAAI, 2011.

[44] K. Okada, M. Yoshida, T. Itoh, T. Czauderna, and K. Stephens. VR
system for spatio-temporal visualization of tweet data. In International
Conference Information Visualisation (IV), pp. 91–95, July 2018. doi: 10.
1109/iV.2018.00026

[45] J. Pallant. SPSS survival manual. McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2013.
[46] D. J. Peuquet. It’s about time: A conceptual framework for the representa-
tion of temporal dynamics in geographic information systems. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers, 84(3):441–461, 1994. doi: 10.
1111/j.1467-8306.1994.tb01869.x

[47] M. Saenz, A. Baigelenov, Y.-H. Hung, and P. Parsons. Reexamining the
cognitive utility of 3D visualizations using augmented reality holograms.
In IEEE VIS Workshop on Immersive Analytics: Exploring Future Interac-
tion and Visualization Technologies for Data Analytics. IEEE, 2017.
[48] K. A. Satriadi, B. Ens, M. Cordeil, T. Czauderna, W. Willett, and B. Jenny.
Augmented reality map navigation with freehand gestures. In Proceedings
of the 26th IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces.
IEEE, March 2019.

[49] S. Y. Ssin, J. A. Walsh, R. T. Smith, A. Cunningham, and B. H. Thomas.
Geogate: Correlating geo-temporal datasets using an augmented reality
space-time cube and tangible interactions. In Proceedings of the 26th
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces, March 2019.
[50] J. Theuns. Visualising origin-destination data with virtual reality: Func-
tional prototypes and a framework for continued VR research at the itc
faculty. B.S. thesis, University of Twente, 2017.

[51] J. A. Wagner Filho, C. M. Freitas, and L. Nedel. VirtualDesk: A Com-
fortable and Efﬁcient Immersive Information Visualization Approach.
Computer Graphics Forum, 37(3):415–426, 2018. doi: 10.1111/cgf.13430
[52] J. A. Wagner Filho, M. F. Rey, C. M. D. S. Freitas, and L. Nedel. Immersive
visualization of abstract information: An evaluation on dimensionally-
reduced data scatterplots. In Proceedings of the 25th IEEE Conference on
Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces. IEEE, March 2018.

[53] J. Walsh, A. Cunningham, R. Smith, and B. Thomas. Tangible braille
plot: Tangibly exploring geo-temporal data in virtual reality. In 2018
International Symposium on Big Data Visual and Immersive Analytics
(BDVA), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2018.

[54] J. A. Walsh, J. Zucco, R. T. Smith, and B. H. Thomas. Temporal-geospatial
cooperative visual analysis. In 2016 Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA),
pp. 1–8, Nov 2016. doi: 10.1109/BDVA.2016.7787050

[55] C. Ware.

Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2nd ed., 2004. doi:
10.1016/B978-155860819-1/50001-7

[56] F. Wilcoxon. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics

Bulletin, 1(6):80–83, 1945.

[57] N. Willems, H. Van De Wetering, and J. J. Van Wijk. Evaluation of
the visibility of vessel movement features in trajectory visualizations.
Computer Graphics Forum, 30(3):801–810, June 2011. doi: 10.1111/j.
1467-8659.2011.01929.x

[58] R. Yao, T. Heath, A. Davies, T. Forsyth, N. Mitchell, and P. Hoberman.

Oculus VR best practices guide. Oculus VR, 2014.

[59] D. Zielasko, B. Weyers, M. Bellgardt, S. Pick, A. Meibner, T. Vierjahn,
and T. W. Kuhlen. Remain seated: Towards fully-immersive desktop
VR. In IEEE 3rd Workshop on Everyday Virtual Reality (WEVR), pp. 1–6.
IEEE, March 2017. doi: 10.1109/WEVR.2017.7957707

11

