On the Uplink Transmission of Extra-large Scale
Massive MIMO Systems

Xi Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Fan Cao, Student Member, IEEE,
Michail Matthaiou, Senior Member, IEEE, and Shi Jin, Senior Member, IEEE

1

0
2
0
2

v
o
N
9

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
6
7
6
0
.
9
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the inherent beneﬁts, such as, better cell
coverage and higher area throughput, extra-large scale massive
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) has great potential to
be one of the key technologies for the next generation wireless
communication systems. However, in practice, when the antenna
dimensions grow large, spatial non-stationarities occur and users
will only see a portion of
the base station antenna array,
which we call visibility region (VR). To assess the impact of
spatial non-stationarities, in this paper, we investigate the uplink
transmission of extra-large scale massive MIMO systems by
considering VRs. In particular, we ﬁrst propose a subarray-
based system architecture for extra-large scale massive MIMO
systems. Then, tight closed-form uplink spectral efﬁciency (SE)
approximations with linear receivers are derived. With the
objective of maximizing the achievable SE, we also propose
schemes for the subarray phase coefﬁcient design. In addition,
based on the obtained ergodic achievable SE approximations,
two statistical channel state information (CSI)-based greedy user
scheduling algorithms are developed. Our results indicate that the
statistical CSI-based greedy joint user and subarray scheduling
algorithm collaborating with the on-off switch-based subarray
architecture is a promising practical solution for extra-large scale
massive MIMO systems.

Index Terms—Ergodic spectral efﬁciency, extra-large scale
massive MIMO, scheduling, spatial non-stationarity, subarray
design.

I. INTRODUCTION

Massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), whose
idea is to employ a large-scale antenna array at a base station
(BS) to serve multiple users simultaneously, thus, achieving
great spatial multiplexing gains and better spectral efﬁciency,
has been identiﬁed as one of the key technologies in ﬁfth-
generation wireless communication systems [1–6]. When the

Copyright (c) 2015 IEEE. Personal use of this material

is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
Manuscript received February 23, 2020; revised June 16, 2020, August
8, 2020, and October 21, 2020; accepted November 4, 2020. This work
was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program
2018YFA0701602, the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) for
Distinguished Young Scholars with Grant 61625106, the NSFC under Grant
61921004, and Shenzhen Basic Research JCYJ20170412104656685. The
work of M. Matthaiou was supported by a research grant from the Department
for the Economy Northern Ireland under the US-Ireland R&D Partnership
Programme and by the EPSRC, U.K., under Grant EP/P000673/1. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was Y. Zhou. (Corresponding author: Shi Jin.)

X. Yang, F. Cao, and S. Jin are with the National Mobile Communications
Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, P. R. China (e-
mail: ouyangxi@seu.edu.cn; cao.fan@seu.edu.cn; jinshi@seu.edu.cn).

M. Matthaiou is with the Institute of Electronics, Communications and
Information Technology (ECIT), Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, U.K.
(e-mail: m.matthaiou@qub.ac.uk).

antenna dimension continues to increase, the arrays turn out
to be physically very large and the beneﬁts such as, channel
hardening, asymptotic inter-user channel orthogonality, cell
coverage, area throughput, etc., promised by massive MIMO
can be fully harnessed from a theoretical point of view.
These extra-large scale antenna arrays could be developed
and be integrated into large infrastructures, such as, the roof
of airports, the walls of stadiums, or large shopping malls
[7]. With these enhanced beneﬁts, extra-large scale massive
MIMO is a very promising technology for the sixth-generation
of wireless communications [8].

However, the reality is not so idealistic: based on some
recent measurement results in [9, 10], when the antenna
dimensions become large, spatial non-stationarities start to
kick in. This arises from the fact that when the dimension of
an antenna array is large, the far-ﬁeld propagation assumption
breaks down since the distances between the BS and scatterers
or users are smaller than the Rayleigh distance.1 Thus, in
contrast to traditional massive MIMO systems equipped with
compact uniform planar arrays, extra-large scale massive
MIMO systems with extra-large antenna array size (for
example, massive antennas coated on the ceiling of a vast
football stadium or the walls of a hundred-meter tall building
[12]) generally operate in near-ﬁeld propagation conditions.
In these extra-large scale massive MIMO systems, users can
only see a portion of the BS antenna array due to the rapid
power attenuation of the transmitted signals and the extra-
large array size. The portion of the antenna array at the BS
seen by users is called visibility region (VR) [13]. Each user
has its speciﬁc VR and the locations of VRs for different
users can be separate, partially overlapped, or completely
overlapped, depending on the surrounding environment and
the users’ relative positions along the antenna array. Note
that the difference between the traditional stationary massive
MIMO and the extra-large massive MIMO is determined by
the relationship between users’ location and Rayleigh distance
with respect to the maximum antenna array size, instead of
merely the number of antennas.

1The exterior ﬁelds of a radiating antenna (array) can be generally divided
into two ﬁelds [11], i.e., the near ﬁeld and the far ﬁeld. The Rayleigh distance,
which is equal to (2D2/λ+λ), is the dividing line between the near ﬁeld and
the far ﬁeld, where λ is the carrier wavelength and D denotes the maximum
electrical size of the antenna aperture. Note that the near-ﬁeld region can be
further divided into two subregions, i.e., the reactive near-ﬁeld region and the
radiating near-ﬁeld region. The reactive near ﬁeld is within a wavelength of
the antenna (array), while the radiating near ﬁeld is measured from the outer
boundary of the reactive near ﬁeld of the antenna (array) to the Rayleigh
distance. In this paper, we mainly focus on the communication in the radiating
near ﬁeld.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Due to the existence of VRs, the performance characteriza-
tion of extra-large scale massive MIMO systems is different
from that of stationary massive MIMO systems by simply
letting their number of BS antennas go to inﬁnity. There
are a few works exploiting the performance of extra-large
scale massive MIMO systems. In [14], with the objective of
improving the computational efﬁciency, a disjoint subarray-
based receiver architecture and distributed linear data fusion
receiver with bipartite graph-based user selection method were
proposed. The work of [15] presented an ergodic capacity
analysis of extra-large scale massive MIMO by introducing
a tractable non-stationary channel model which divides the
scattering clusters into two categories,
i.e., wholly visible
clusters and partially visible clusters, and regards these clusters
as an array with virtual antennas. A simple non-stationary
channel model, which has connections with the stationary
massive MIMO channel model, was proposed in [16]. The
downlink analysis of extra-large scale massive MIMO systems
with linear precoders was also provided by deriving an
approximate deterministic equivalent of
the instantaneous
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR). The numerical
results in [16] indicated that the VR signiﬁcantly impacts the
performance of linear precoders. Despite that, there is less of
work that investigates the uplink performance of extra-large
scale massive MIMO systems when taking the spatial non-
stationarities into account.

Motivated by these existing works, we mainly focus on
the uplink transmission of extra-large scale massive MIMO
systems by considering VRs. In particular, we ﬁrstly propose
a practical system architecture suitable for extra-large scale
massive MIMO, where a subarray-based hybrid architecture is
adopted to alleviate the overall hardware cost and complexity.
Then,
the uplink achievable spectral efﬁciencies (SEs) of
the extra-large scale massive MIMO system with linear
receivers are examined. Afterwards, we investigate the design
of the subarray in order to maximize the achievable SE.
Two statistical channel state information (CSI)-based greedy
user scheduling algorithms are also proposed and numerical
simulations are performed to validate their performance. The
main contributions of this paper can now be summarized as
follows:

receivers,

• We derive tight closed-form ergodic uplink achievable
SE approximations for the extra-large scale massive
MIMO system with linear
i.e., maximum
ratio combining (MRC) receiver and linear minimum
mean squared error (LMMSE) receiver. The ergodic
achievable SE approximation for the MRC receiver shows
that, in order to maximize the system sum achievable
SE, users with their VRs covering different subarrays
or VRs with less overlap should be simultaneously
scheduled. On the other hand, the ergodic achievable SE
approximation for the LMMSE receiver indicates that
we should simultaneously schedule as many users as
possible.

• By considering two subarray architectures,

the
subarray with phase shifters and the on-off switch-based
subarray, we investigate the design of the subarray for

i.e.,

2

the extra-large scale massive MIMO system. For the
subarray with phase shifters, to boost the sum achievable
SE, the optimal phase coefﬁcients are the phases of the
eigenvectors corresponding to the maximum eigenvalues
of the main block matrices of the channel correlation
matrix. For the on-off switch-based subarray, the user
who has the larger sum energy radiated to the subarrays
should be selected for communication.

i.e.,

• Based on the obtained ergodic achievable SE approx-
imations, we propose two statistical CSI-based greedy
the statistical CSI-based
scheduling algorithms,
greedy user scheduling algorithm and the statistical
CSI-based greedy joint user and subarray scheduling
algorithm, for the purpose of maximizing the system
achievable SE. Numerical results manifest that in the
extra-large scale massive MIMO regime,
is not
necessary to simultaneously turn on all subarrays and
radio frequency (RF) chains to serve the users at uplink.
The introduction of dynamic subarray scheduling is
to achieve better system performance with
beneﬁcial
lower energy consumption, and the on-off
switch-
based subarray architecture with LMMSE receiver is a
promising low cost solution, especially in terms of system
energy efﬁciency.

it

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section
II, we present the system architecture and the signal model
for the extra-large scale massive MIMO system. Section
III investigates the uplink ergodic achievable SEs under the
linear receivers and Section IV provides the phase coefﬁcient
design of subarrays. The proposed statistical CSI-based user
scheduling algorithms are provided in Section V. Section VI
presents the numerical results and we conclude the paper in
Section VII.

Throughout the paper, we use bold lowercase a and bold
uppercase A to denote vectors and matrices, respectively.
The superscripts (·)∗, (·)T , and (·)H represent the conjugate,
transpose, and conjugate-transpose operations of matrix,
respectively; IN is an identity matrix with dimension N × N ;
(cid:12) and ⊗ denote the element-wise product and the Kronecker
product, respectively. Also, E{·} is the expectation operation,
(cid:107)a(cid:107) stands for the norm of the vector a; tr(A), det(A),
and A−1 stand for the trace, determinant, and inverse of the
matrix A, respectively. [A]ij denotes the element at the ith
row and the jth column of A. diag(x1, x2, ..., xN ) represents
a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements xi, i = 1, . . . , N ,
while blkdiag(X1, X2, . . . , XN ) represents a diagonal matrix
with block diagonal matrices Xi, i = 1, . . . , N .

II. SYSTEM MODEL

In this section, we ﬁrstly describe the system architecture
of the extra-large scale massive MIMO system, and then the
signal model is provided.

A. System Architecture

Consider an extra-large scale massive MIMO system
illustrated in Fig. 1, where a BS equipped with an M -element

3

Fig. 1. The system architecture of an extra-large scale massive MIMO system, in which a BS equipped with an M -element large uniform linear array (ULA)
serves K single-antenna user simultaneously. A subarray-based hybrid architecture is adopted at BS. Each subarray includes M/N antenna elements and
there are N subarrays in total.

large uniform linear array (ULA)2 serves K single-antenna
users simultaneously.

Since the massive number of antennas at the BS render
an independent RF chain per antenna element impractical in
terms of hardware cost and system complexity, we propose a
subarray-based hybrid architecture3 as presented in Fig. 1. The
BS consists of subarrays, an RF chain pool, and a baseband
processing unit. Each subarray includes M/N antenna
elements and, thus, N subarrays are conﬁgured. The RF chain
pool contains RF chains and each RF chain can be statically
or dynamically assigned to a dedicated subarray. Digital
processing, such as, channel estimation, data detection, or user
scheduling is performed in the baseband processing unit. Note
that each subarray is connected with an RF chain and therefore
can support one data stream. Due to existence of VR in
extra-large scale massive MIMO systems, multiple consecutive
subarrays could be covered by one user. Moreover, when
overlapped VRs occur,
the multiple consecutive subarrays
may also support other users simultaneously, which inevitably
creates inter-user interference.

To harvest the array gain provided by the large number of
antennas, two different subarray architectures i.e., the subarray
with phase shifters and the on-off switch-based subarray, are
considered. In the former architecture, each antenna element
in the subarray is connected with a phase shifter, while in the
latter type, the phase shifter is replaced by a switch. Hence, the
signals acquired by antennas in a on-off switch-based subarray
are directly combined without adjustable phase shifts before
conveyed to the RF chain in the uplink. It is worth noting that
compared with the subarray with phase shifters and despite the

2In this paper, we take ULA as a simple example, yet, the proposed system
architecture can also be applied to other antenna array topologies, such as,
uniform planar antenna array (UPA), and so on.

3Hybrid analog and digital beamforming architectures, including the fully-
connected architecture (i.e., each phase shifter is connected to all the BS
antennas) and the subarray-based architecture, have been widely applied in
traditional massive MIMO systems [17–19]. We mainly focus on the subarray-
based hybrid beamforming architecture in this paper due to the extremely large
size antenna array in extra-large scale massive MIMO systems.

anticipated performance loss, the on-off switch-based subarray
is much cheaper and more hardware-implementation friendly,
especially in extra-large scale massive MIMO regime. In
addition, as will be presented in the numerical results, the on-
off switch-based subarray also yields great performance when
combined with the LMMSE receiver.

B. Signal Model

We focus on the uplink transmission of the extra-large scale
massive MIMO system in this paper. Taking the spatial non-
stationarity of the extra-large scale MIMO system channels
into consideration, we model the channel hk ∈ CM ×1 between
the k-th user and the BS as4

hk = Θ1/2

k gk,

(1)

where gk ∼ CN (0, IM ) and Θk ∈ CM ×M represents the
correlation matrix at the BS for the k-th user, given as [16]

Θk = D1/2

k RkD1/2
k .

(2)

Note that Rk ∈ CM ×M denotes the spatial correlation matrix
of user k corresponding to the case of a stationary massive
MIMO channel, whose structure relies on the antenna array
topology at the BS and the angular spread. The spatial non-
in the extra-large scale
stationarity,
massive MIMO channel is characterized by the real diagonal
matrix

the user k’s VR,

i.e,

Dk = diag(d(k)

1 , d(k)

2 , . . . , d(k)
M ),

(3)

where d(k)
m , m = 1, . . . , M, denotes the spatial non-stationarity
for user k at the antenna element m. Note that the large scale
fading, e.g., the path loss, of user k can be still incorporated

4Although the channel model in (1) is usually employed for sub-6G wireless
channel modeling, the subsequent analysis in Section III is actually irrelevant
to the speciﬁc structure of Θk. On the other hand, the ﬁnite-dimensional
channel model [20, 21], which is typically used for millimeter wave band
channel modeling, can also be casted into a similar expression, i.e., hk =
˜Akgk, where ˜Ak = DkAk, Ak contains the steering vectors, and gk ∼
CN (0, IP ) contains the complex path gains. Hence, the analysis presented
in Section III can also be applied to millimeter wave systems.

M/NantennaelementsM/N//antennaelements(cid:258)(cid:258)(cid:258)M/Nantennaelements#1#N-1#NRFchainpoolRFChainRFChainRFChain(cid:258)BasebandprocessingPhaseshifterorSwitchM/N//antennaelementsM/NantennaelementsUE1UE2UEKNantennaelements(cid:258)ScatteringClusterScatteringClusterScatteringClusterScatteringClusterΣ(cid:258)ΣΣin d(k)
m . We point out only a few diagonal elements of Dk are
non-zero [16],5 and the number of non-zero diagonal elements
directly reﬂects the size of the user’s VR. Different users
can have different VR sizes, owing to their distances to the
BS or their different uplink transmit power. When a ULA is
employed at BS, the Rk in Θk can be expressed as [23]

Rk = (cid:2)a(θk)aH (θk)(cid:3) (cid:12) P(θk, σk),
where a(θk) ∈ CM ×1 is the steering vector of the ULA,
deﬁned as

(4)

a(θk) = [1, ej2πd sin θk , . . . , ej2π(M −1)d sin θk ]T ,

(5)

where θk represents the mean angle of arrival (AoA) of the k-
th user and d denotes the antenna element spacing normalized
by the carrier wavelength. In our simulations, we set d = 1/2.
Most importantly, P(θk, σk) ∈ CM ×M captures the angular
spectrum of AoA and its entries come from a Gaussian angular
k [23]. The {m, n}th entry
spread distribution with variance σ2
of P(θk, σk) can be given by
{P(θk, σk)}m,n = e−2[πd(m−n)2]σ2

kcos2θk , m, n = 1, . . . , M.
(6)
Therefore, in the uplink transmission of the extra-large scale
MIMO system, the received signal at the BS can be written
as

√

y =

puHx + n,

(7)

where pu is the transmit power of each user, H =
[h1, h2, . . . , hK]
represents the multi-user uplink channel
matrix, and x = [x1, x2, . . . , xK]T is the transmitted signal
from K users with xk ∼ CN (0, 1) for k = 1, 2, ..., K; n is
(cid:1).
the complex Gaussian noise satisfying n ∼ CN (cid:0)0, σ2IM
Without loss of generality, we set σ2 = 1. Additionally, for
ease of exposition, we assume that E{gigH
k } = 0, ∀i (cid:54)= k, that
is to say, there is no correlation between any pair of channels
across different users.

Since we employ a subarray-based hybrid architecture in
the extra-large scale MIMO system as presented in Fig. 1,
the received signals at BS will be ﬁrstly combined in the
analog domain and then be linearly demodulated in the digital
domain. Thus, the processing procedure can be formulated as

√

r =

puAHWH Hx + AHWH n,

(8)

where r ∈ CK×1 is the recovered signal vector; W =
blkdiag(w1, w2, . . . , wN ) ∈ CM ×N represents the combin-
ing matrix in the analog domain and wi ∈ C(M/N )×1 is a
constant modulus vector, that is to say, all the elements of
wi have constant amplitude of (cid:112)N/M and wH
i wi = 1 for
i = 1, 2, ..., N .6 Also, A ∈ CN ×K is the linear detection
matrix in the digital domain, which has different expressions
linear receivers such as, MRC receiver and
for different

5Although the subsequent analysis is applicable for general cases (e.g., the
amplitude distribution of the non-zero diagonal elements forms a Hamming
window or complies with the spherical wave propagation), we set the non-zero
diagonal elements of Dk to be 1 in the simulations section for simplicity.

6When the on-off switch-based subarrays are deployed, we assume that the
number of the speciﬁed switches at “ON” status in each subarray is equal
and the value of wH
i wi should be corrected with a scalar according to the
number of the switches at “ON” status.

4

LMMSE receiver. Here, we deﬁne F = WH H and assume
that perfect CSI is available at the BS7, then A can be given
by

(cid:40)

A =

F,
(cid:16)
FH F + 1
pu

F

(cid:17)−1

IK

for MRC,

,

for LMMSE.

(9)

Hence, the signal of the k-th user at the BS can be expressed
as

√

rk =

puaH

k WH hkxk+

K
(cid:88)

√

pu

k WH hixi+aH
aH

k WH n,

where ak = A(:, k) is the k-th column of the matrix A.

i=1,i(cid:54)=k

(10)

By modeling the noise-plus-interference term as additive
Gaussian noise independent of xk with zero mean and variance
(cid:13)aH

k WH hi|2 + (cid:13)

[22], we obtain the

k WH (cid:13)
2
(cid:13)

of pu

|aH

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

ergodic achievable SE of the k-th user in the uplink data
transmission as

Rk =


log2


Eh



1 +






pu

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

k WH hk|2
pu|aH
k WH hi|2 + (cid:13)
|aH

(cid:13)aH

k WH (cid:13)
2
(cid:13)

,









(11)

and the sum uplink achievable SE of the extra-large scale
massive MIMO system becomes

R =

K
(cid:88)

i=1

Ri.

(12)

In the next section, we aim to examine the ergodic
achievable SEs in (11) and (12) under two different types
of receivers, i.e., MRC receiver and LMMSE receiver, and
then identify the inﬂuence of speciﬁc VR distributions on the
system ergodic achievable SE.

III. UPLINK ACHIEVABLE SPECTRAL EFFICIENCY
ANALYSIS

In this section, we investigate the ergodic uplink achievable
i.e., MRC receiver and LMMSE

SEs of linear receivers,
receiver, for extra-large scale massive MIMO systems.

A. MRC Receiver

When the MRC receiver is employed at

the
approximation of the ergodic achievable SE is provided in
the following theorem.

the BS,

7Channel state information can be obtained by various methods, such as,
by sending orthogonal pilots from users. Similar to [15] and [16], we assume
perfect CSI at the receiver in order to assess in detail the impact of non-
stationarities without complicating the notation.

Theorem 1: When the MRC receiver is adopted in the uplink
of the extra-large scale massive MIMO system, the ergodic
achievable SE of the kth user can be approximated by

RMRC,app


k

=

log2

1 +






tr(BΘkBΘk) + tr2(BΘk)

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

tr(BΘiBΘk) + 1
pu

tr(BBH Θk)








,

(13)

where B (cid:44) WWH .

Proof: When the MRC receiver is employed at the BS,

5

user k. Then, only these E antennas at the BS actually collect
the signals radiated by the user k. In other words, no matter
how many antennas the BS is equipped with, the number of
effective receive antennas is mainly limited by E. Thereby, the
increase of user k’s uplink ergodic achievable SE is severely
compromised.

What is more, to maximize the ergodic achievable SE per
user and consequently maximize the system sum achievable

SE,

the multi-user interference

tr(BΘiBΘk) term

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

should be minimized in (13). Assume now that
B = blkdiag( ¯B1, ¯B2, . . . , ¯BN),

(20)

(21)

we have the linear detection matrix A = F, and

ak = WH hk.

then

(14)

¯Bi = wiwH

i , i = 1, . . . , N.

Substituting (14) into (11), the ergodic uplink achievable SE
for the kth user can be written as

RMRC
k

(a)
≈ log2



1 +






pu

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

puEh{|hH

k Bhk|2}
k Bhi|2} + Eh

Eh{|hH








,

(cid:110)(cid:13)

(cid:13)hH

k B(cid:13)
(cid:13)

2(cid:111)

(15)
where (a) applies the approximation E{log2(1 + X/Y )} ≈
log2(1 + E{X}/E{Y }) from [24]. Note that W is a
block diagonal matrix owing to the subarray-based hardware
thus B = WWH is also a block diagonal
architecture,
matrix. Therefore, the results in (13) can be derived directly
by calculating the terms in the numerator and the denominator
of (15) as following:

Eh{hH

k Bhk} = tr(BΘk),

Eh{|hH

k Bhk|2} = tr(BΘkBΘk) + tr2(BΘk),

Eh{|hH
(cid:110)(cid:13)

k Bhi|2} = tr(BΘiBΘk),
k B(cid:13)
(cid:13)

= tr(BBH Θk).

2(cid:111)

(cid:13)hH

Eh

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

Substituting (16)-(19) into (15), we obtain (13).

It is worth to mention that the derivations in Theorem 1 do
not rely on the speciﬁc structure of Θk in terms of the antenna
array topology, thus, the results in Theorem 1 can also be
applied to other antenna array topologies e.g., UPA. Observe
from Theorem 1 that, the ergodic achievable SE is dominated
by the matrix product BΘ, which therefore necessitates the
design of subarray corresponding to the users’ correlation
matrices. In addition, the impact of VR characterized by D is
contained in Θ, which ﬁnally constrains the increase of the
ergodic achievable SE with the number of antennas at BS,
even if there is no multi-user interference. For example, for
user k we assume

Dk = diag(0, . . . , 0, d(k)

i+1, d(k)

i+2, . . . , d(k)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
VR of user k

, 0, . . . , 0),
i+E
(cid:125)

where E denotes the number of antennas covered by the VR of

k

i RiD1/2

k RkD1/2

Since tr(BΘiBΘk) (cid:62) 0, Θi = D1/2
and Θk =
D1/2
are block diagonal matrices, and B is a block
diagonal matrix corresponding to the subarray architecture
as well, we can obtain tr(BΘiBΘk) = 0 when 1(Di) (cid:12)
1(Dk) = 0,
in which 1(Di) denotes the N -dimension
indicator function with its nth element calculated by

i

[1(Di)]n =

(cid:26) 1, Di (cid:12) blkdiag(0, . . . , ¯Bn, . . . , 0) (cid:54)= 0,
0, Di (cid:12) blkdiag(0, . . . , ¯Bn, . . . , 0) = 0.

(22)

As a result, we obtain the following remark.

Remark 1: For the MRC receiver, in order to maximize
the system sum achievable SE, users with their VRs covering
different subarrays or VRs with less overlap should be
scheduled simultaneously.

Furthermore, by recalling that the MRC receiver has no
capability of cancelling inter-user interference, which becomes
more problematic in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
regime, we exploit the LMMSE receiver in the next subsection.

B. LMMSE Receiver

When the LMMSE receiver is employed at the BS, we
(cid:17)−1

have the linear detection matrix A = F
.
Substituting A into (11), the ergodic achievable SE of the kth
user under LMMSE receiver can be expressed as


FH F + 1
pu

IK



(cid:16)






1
(IK + puFH F)−1(cid:105)

kk








.

(23)

RLMMSE

k

= Eh

log2



(cid:104)

Since [M−1]kk = det(Mkk)(cid:14)det(M) where Mkk is the
(k, k)th minor of the matrix M [25], combining (FH F)kk =
FH
represents F with the kth column
removed [26], we can rewrite (23) as

(k)F(k) where F(k)

RLMMSE

k

=Eh

(cid:8)log2 det (cid:0)IK + puFH F(cid:1)(cid:9)
(cid:16)
IK−1 + puFH

log2 det

(cid:110)

− Eh

(k)F(k)

(cid:17)(cid:111)

.

(24)

it

is greatly challenging,

Note that
to
directly evaluate (24) under general cases, hence, in what
follows we analyze the ergodic achievable SE by giving a
separate treatment for two cases, i.e., (i) completely overlapped
VR case, (ii) partially overlapped VR case. The following

impossible,

if not

analysis for these two cases mainly relies on their different
characteristics originating from their different VR overlapping.
It is also worth mentioning that the scenario, where the VRs
of different users do not overlap, is regarded as a special case
of the partially overlapped one.

Completely Overlapped VR Case: In this case, users are
closely distributed in a relatively small region in front of the
extra-large scale massive MIMO system, therefore, the VRs of
different users completely overlap. Since the VRs completely
overlap, the non-zero portions of Θ for different users have
the same location, and we assume that the size of VR is ˜M .
To further simplify the problem, we also assume that Θ1 =
· · · = ΘK = Θ, then

H = Θ1/2G,

(25)

where G (cid:44) [g1, g2, . . . , gK] and G ∼ CN (0, IM ⊗ IK).
Therefore,

FH F = GH ˜ΘG,

(26)

where we deﬁne ˜Θ (cid:44) Θ1/2WWH Θ1/2. Substituting (26)
into (24), we have the ergodic achievable SE of the kth user
under the completely overlapped VR case as

RLMMSE,Com

k

= Eh

(cid:16)

IK + puGH ˜ΘG

(cid:17)(cid:111)

(cid:110)

log2 det
(cid:110)

− Eh

log2 det

(cid:16)

IK−1 + puGH
(k)

˜ΘG(k)

(cid:17)(cid:111)

(cid:18)

˜M
(cid:88)

det EK, ˜M (i)

i= ˜M −K+1

(cid:19)

det EK−1, ˜M (i)

,

(27)

(a)
=

Klog2e
m<n(βn − βm)

Π ˜M

˜M
(cid:88)

−

i= ˜M −K+2

where (a) comes from [26], β1 > . . . > β ˜M are the nonzero
eigenvalues of ˜Θ, EK, ˜M (i) and EK−1, ˜M (i) are ˜M × ˜M
matrices with their (s, t)th element being

(cid:40)

(cid:104)

Ep, ˜M (i)

(cid:105)

s,t

=

βt−1
s

e

βt−1
s
βspu (cid:80)p− ˜M +t

,

1

h=1

t (cid:54)= i,
(cid:16) 1
Eh
βspu

(cid:17)

, t = i,

(28)

where Eh(·) denotes the exponential integral function.

Note that (27) is a lower bound of the ergodic achievable
SE of the completely overlapped VR case since the multi-
user interference is maximized when Θ1 = · · · = ΘK =
Θ. Besides, due to the existence of VR, only a relatively
small block diagonal portion of Θ will be non-zero. In
this case,
the redundant parts are removed according to
basic math operations, and the analysis of the non-stationary
extra-large massive MIMO system is similar to a stationary
massive MIMO system. Hence, the performance analysis of
the stationary/traditional massive MIMO can be somewhat
regarded as a special case of the extra-large scale MIMO when
the VRs of different users completely overlap [13].

Partially Overlapped VR Case: In this case, users are
randomly and relatively sparsely distributed along the whole
extra-large scale antenna array and the VRs of different users
partially overlap. Theorem 2 analyzes the ergodic achievable

SE for this partially overlapped VR case.8

6

Theorem 2: When the LMMSE receiver is employed in the
uplink of the extra-large scale massive MIMO system, the
ergodic achievable SE of the kth user can be approximated
by

RLMMSE,app

k

= log2 [1 + putr(BΘk)] .

(29)

Proof: See Appendix I.

Note that in the partially overlapped VR case, there exists a
special scenario that only a few users are sparsely distributed
in front of the extra-large scale massive MIMO system and,
thus, no overlapped VRs appear. The analysis for this special
scenario is also presented in Appendix I. Furthermore, since
there is less possibility that VRs of different users completely
overlap, especially when cooperated with user scheduling
algorithms, we mainly focus on the partially overlapped VR
case in the subsequent analysis.

Similar to Theorem 1, Theorem 2 indicates that the ergodic
achievable SE per user under LMMSE receiver
is also
dominated by the matrix product BΘ. Hence, for the purpose
of maximizing the system sum achievable SE with the
LMMSE receiver, the subarray e.g., the phase coefﬁcients of
the phase shifter network, should be well designed to match
the correlation matrix Θ, such that tr(BΘ) is maximized.
Based on Theorem 2, we also have the following remark.

Remark 2: For the LMMSE receiver, in order to maximize
the system sum achievable SE, we should simultaneously
schedule as many users as possible who have larger tr(BΘk).
Different from the MRC receiver, Remark 2 indicates that
the LMMSE receiver can effectively cancel the interference
from VRs’ overlap and thus support more users’ communica-
tion simultaneously. In the next section, we precisely elaborate
on the phase coefﬁcient design of the subarray with a phase
shifter network. Another architecture, i.e., the on-off switch-
based subarray, is also investigated to provide insights into the
corresponding user scheduling.

IV. SUBARRAY DESIGN

In this section, we investigate the design of the subarray
in the proposed extra-large scale massive MIMO system
architecture. Referring back to the hardware architecture
illustrated in Section II, two subarray architectures i.e., the
subarray with phase shifters and the on-off switch-based
subarray, are considered in this section.

A. Subarray with Phase Shifters

When subarrays with phase shifters are deployed, every
antenna at the BS is connected with an independent phase
shifter. In what follows, we consider high precision phase
shifters, nevertheless, low resolution phase shifters can also
be employed to further reduce the hardware cost which is,
however, beyond the scope of this paper. On the basis of (13)
in Theorem 1 and (29) in Theorem 2 and in order to boost the
ergodic achievable SE of each user as much as possible, we

8In fact, when we approximate (IK +puFH F) with diag(IK +puFH F),
the ergodic achievable SE for the completely overlapped VR case can also be
approximated by (29) in Theorem 2 with a looser tightness.

have the following proposition for the phase coefﬁcient design
which seeks to maximize tr(BΘ).9

Proposition 1: For subarray with phase shifters, the phase
shifter coefﬁcients of the ith subarray wi served for user k
should be designed as

wi =

N
M

ej∠vk,i ,

(30)

introduced for normalization, vk,i

where N/M is
is
the eigenvector of ¯Θk,ii corresponding to the maximum
eigenvalue, ∠(·) represents the angle of its input complex
argument, and ¯Θk,ii ∈ C(M/N )×(M/N ), ∀i = 1, . . . , N
denotes the ith block diagonal matrix of Θk.

Proof: Since B = blkdiag( ¯B1, ¯B2, . . . , ¯BN ) and ¯Bi =
i , i = 1, . . . , N , we deﬁne

wiwH

Θk =






¯Θk,11
...
¯Θk,N 1

. . .
. . .
· · ·




 ,

¯Θk,1N
...
¯Θk,N N

(31)

and

where ¯Θk,ij ∈ C(M/N )×(M/N ), ∀i, j = 1, . . . , N denotes the
ith row jth column block matrix of Θk; then,
¯B1 ¯Θk,11
¯B1 ¯Θk,1N
...
...
¯BN ¯Θk,N 1

. . .
. . .
· · · ¯BN ¯Θk,N N

BΘk =


 .

(32)








Hence,

tr(BΘk) = tr

(cid:33)

¯Bi ¯Θk,ii

(cid:32) N
(cid:88)

i=1

(a)

= (cid:88)
i∈Sk
(cid:88)

=

tr(wH
i

¯Θk,iiwi)

wH
i

¯Θk,iiwi,

(33)

i∈Sk

where Sk represents the ensemble of the non-zero block
matrices ¯Θk,ii for Θk and (a) utilizes the trace property
tr(AB) = tr(BA). Consequently, based on (33), to maximize
the ergodic achievable SE for user k, wi should be chosen
as the eigenvector of ¯Θk,ii corresponding to the maximum
eigenvalue. Similar to [28, 29], considering that wi is realized
by phase shifters with constant-modulus constraints, we design
wi as in (30).

It is important to note that the phase coefﬁcient design
of each subarray in (30) is designed in terms of the low-
dimension matrix ¯Θk,ii ∈ C(M/N )×(M/N ), instead of the
correlation matrix Θk ∈ CM ×M across the entire extra-
large scale antenna array. Therefore, the calculation of wi
for different subarrays can be executed in parallel and the
computation complexity can also be greatly reduced.

9For the MRC receiver in (13),

to simplify the analysis, we assume
that sophisticated user scheduling algorithms are performed and,
thus,
the inter-user interference item at the denominator is neglected. Because
tr2(BΘk) > tr(BΘkBΘk), we concentrate on maximizing tr(BΘk) as
with the LMMSE receiver in (29).

7

B. On-Off Switch-Based Subarray

At

the expense of performance degradation, an on-
off switch-based subarray requires much lower hardware
complexity and hardware cost when compared with a subarray
with phase shifters. To investigate how to maximize the
ergodic achievable SE when on-off switch-based subarrays
the switches are all
are conﬁgured, we ﬁrst assume that
turned on in the uplink, and B for the on-off switch-based
subarray becomes B = N
M diag(1M/N , 1M/N , . . . , 1M/N ),
where 1M/N denotes the all-ones matrix. Suppose Λ =
blkdiag(1M/N , 1M/N , . . . , 1M/N ), then B = N Λ/M , such
that (13) and (29) can be simpliﬁed to

RMRC,app

k

= log2



1 +






tr(ΛΘkΛΘk) + tr2(ΛΘk)

K
(cid:80)
i=1,i(cid:54)=k

tr(ΛΘiΛΘk) + M

puN tr(ΛΘk)
(34)








RLMMSE,app

k

(cid:20)

= log2

1 +

(cid:21)

N putr(ΛΘk)
M

(35)

respectively. As with the case of subarray with phase shifters,
to maximize the ergodic achievable SE, we pay attention to
the analysis of tr(ΛΘk) as well. In the on-off switch-based
subarray, we have

tr(ΛΘk) =

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i∈Sk

m<n

2 Re (cid:0)(cid:0) ¯Θk,ii

(cid:1)

(cid:1) + tr(Θk),

mn

(36)

i∈Sk

where (cid:0) ¯Θk,ii
(cid:1)
of ¯Θk,ii and Re (cid:0)(cid:0) ¯Θk,ii
(cid:0) ¯Θk,ii

mn denotes the mth row nth column element
(cid:1) represents the real part of
(cid:1) + tr(Θk) is
2 Re (cid:0)(cid:0) ¯Θk,ii

mn. Hence, (cid:80)

mn

mn

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:80)
m<n

the sum of the real parts of the M/N -dimension non-zero
main block diagonal matrices of the kth user’s correlation
matrix. This indicates that tr(ΛΘk), to some extent, reﬂects
the sum power that has been radiated on the on-off switch-
based subarrays at the BS by the kth user. As a consequence,
we obtain the following proposition for user scheduling when
on-off switch-based subarrays are conﬁgured.

Proposition 2: When on-off switch-based subarrays are
deployed at the extra-large scale massive MIMO system, the
user who has larger sum energy radiated to the subarrays
should be scheduled for communication in order to maximize
the system sum achievable SE.

Moreover, combining (36) and the existence of VR, we
observe that, for the on-off switch-based subarray architecture,
only the switches in the energy-dominant subarrays are needed
to be turned on while the others can be turned off during the
uplink data transmission. This conclusion will be leveraged in
the proposed user scheduling algorithm and be manifested in
Section VI.C.

V. USER SCHEDULING
Based on the acquired ergodic achievable SE approxima-
tions provided in Theorems 1 and 2 as well as the subarray
design provided in Propositions 1 and 2, we propose two user
scheduling algorithms for the extra-large scale massive MIMO
system in this section.

Scheduling is of great signiﬁcance in multi-user com-
munication systems, especially for extra-large scale massive
MIMO because of the existence of VRs, which could be
used for further improving the spectral and energy efﬁciency.
However, instantaneous CSI-based scheduling is practically
challenging for extra-large scale massive MIMO due to
the unconventionally large number of antenna elements and
relatively large number of users to be served. To tackle this
problem, on the basis of Theorems 1 and 2, we propose two
statistical CSI-based greedy scheduling schemes with the aim
of maximizing the system sum achievable SE. Given that
the MRC receiver is adopted, Remark 1 indicates that, users
whose VRs cover different subarrays or those with fewer
overlapped VRs should be scheduled so as to maximize the
sum achievable SE. In the other case, where a LMMSE
receiver is employed, Remark 2 showcases that, to obtain the
maximum of the achievable SE, as many users as possible
with larger tr(BΘi) should be scheduled. In the following,
we ﬁrstly schedule users utilizing statistical CSI in a greedy
manner. Then, the algorithm investigating the feasibility of
jointly scheduling users and subarrays after taking energy
consumption into consideration is provided.

A. Statistical CSI-based Greedy User Scheduling

Generally, utilizing exhaustive search could return the
it may
optimal solution in scheduling problems, however,
not be appropriate for extra-large scale massive MIMO due
to the extremely large computational complexity and long
runtime. Therefore, a sub-optimal user scheduling algorithm,
i.e., the greedy user scheduling algorithm, whose main idea is
to achieve an optimal result during each scheduling step and,
thus, greatly reduce the algorithm complexity, is employed.
We summarize our proposed statistical CSI-based greedy user
scheduling algorithm in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Statistical CSI-based Greedy User Scheduling
Algorithm
Input: Us = ∅, Un = {1, 2, . . . , K}, Ns = 0, Nu, R = 0,

Rtemp = 0.

for each ui ∈ Un do

1: while Ns < Nu do
2:
3:
4:
5:

calculate the system sum achievable SE RUs∪ui ;

end for
select ui with the largest R among RUs∪ui as a newly
scheduled user candidate usel;
if Rtemp ≤ R then

Us = Us ∪ usel, Un = Un\{usel}, Rtemp = R, Ns =
Ns + 1;

6:
7:

else

break;

8:
9:
10:
11:
12: end while
Output: Us, R.

end if
R = Rtemp;

In Algorithm 1, ﬁrstly, we initialize all

the system
parameters, including the scheduled user set Us = ∅, the
number of scheduled users Ns = 0, and the unscheduled
user set Un = {1, 2, . . . , K}. The total number of users to be

8

scheduled and served is Nu, and the system sum achievable
SE is initialized as R = Rtemp = 0.

Next, we select the users in the unscheduled user set Un
one by one and calculate their corresponding updated system
sum achievable SEs based on the scheduling results of the
previous iteration. A user will be added to the scheduled user
set only if it reaches the maximum of the updated system
sum achievable SEs among all unscheduled users from Un,
as well as produces a positive gain compared with the last
iteration results. To update the system sum achievable SE in
this step, (13) and (29) are leveraged when MRC and LMMSE
receivers are respectively considered. Note that in the phase
shifter-based subarray, if a subarray is not covered by any
user’s VR, the phase coefﬁcients of the subarray will be set to
the default value zero, i.e., ∠wi = 0; if a subarray is covered
by multiple users simultaneously, then the phase coefﬁcients of
the subarray will be set to the sum of the phases corresponding
to the multiple users.

Then, the algorithm keeps running until Ns = Nu or there
is no SE gain when adding a new user. Finally, the algorithm
outputs the ﬁnal scheduling results i.e., the scheduled user set
Us and the system sum achievable SE R.

Note that the proposed greedy user scheduling algorithm
exploits only statistical CSI, i.e., the knowledge of the channel
correlation information instead of the instantaneous channel
gains. This is beneﬁcial and more practical especially for extra-
large scale massive MIMO systems. Moreover, considering
the existence of VR and the cases that some subarrays may
be covered by no user, we further examine the possibility to
jointly schedule users and subarrays and propose a statistical
CSI-based greedy joint user and subarray scheduling scheme
in the next subsection.

B. Statistical CSI-based Greedy Joint User and Subarray
Scheduling

Different from Algorithm 1, subarrays are jointly scheduled
in the proposed statistical CSI-based greedy joint user and
subarray scheduling algorithm i.e., Algorithm 2. Taking into
consideration that each user only covers a limited portion of
antenna arrays of BS and that some BS subarrays are possibly
covered by no user, Algorithm 2 can signiﬁcantly enhance
the energy efﬁciency by turning off uncovered subarrays,
thereby facilitating the practical implementation of extra-large
scale massive MIMO systems. The details of Algorithm 2 are
presented in the following.

We initialize all the system parameters at the ﬁrst step
in Algorithm 2, including the scheduled user set Us = ∅,
the scheduled subarray set S = ∅, the unscheduled user set
Un = {1, 2, . . . , K}, the unscheduled subarray set Sn =
{1, 2, . . . , N }, the number of scheduled users Ns = 0, the
total number of users to be scheduled and served Nu, and the
system sum achievable SE R = Rtemp = 0. The maximum
and minimum number of scheduled subarrays per user are set
as Submax and Submin, respectively.

Next, for each user in the unscheduled user set Un, we
select its best subarray set from the unscheduled subarray set
Sn (the number of selected subarrays must not be greater than

Algorithm 2 Statistical CSI-based Greedy Joint User and
Subarray Scheduling Algorithm
Input: Us = ∅, S = ∅, Un = {1, 2, . . . , K}, Sn = {1, 2, . . . , N },

Ns = 0, Nu, R = 0, Submax, Submin, Rtemp = 0.

for each ui ∈ Un do

for each Sui ⊂ Sn do

1: while Ns < Nu do
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

continue;

else

if Submin ≤ |Sui | ≤ Submax then

calculate the system sum achievable SE RUs∪ui,Sui

;

end if
end for
select Ssel,ui with the largest R among RUs∪ui,Sui
subarray candidate;

11:
12:

13:
14:

end for
select usel with the largest R among RUs∪ui,Ssel,ui
newly scheduled user candidate;
if Rtemp ≤ RUs∪usel,Ssel,usel

then

Us = Us ∪usel, S = S ∪Ssel,usel , Un = Un\{usel}, Sn =
Sn\Ssel,usel , Rtemp = R, Ns = Ns + 1;

as ui’s

as a

else

break;

15:
16:
17:
18:
19: end while
Output: Us, S, R.

end if
R = Rtemp;

9

TABLE I
VALUES OF MAIN PARAMETERS USED IN NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS.

Parameter
M
N
K
E

Fig. 2
1024
128
20
160

Fig. 3
1024
128
10
128

Fig. 4
1024
128
5
160

Fig. 5
1024
128
5
160

Fig. 6
1024
128
22
128

Fig. 10
1024
128
22
128

A. Tightness of the Approximated Uplink Ergodic Achievable
SE

Since the diagonal-dominant property of Z plays an
important role in the derivation of the approximated uplink
achievable SEs, we ﬁrst verify it in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 provides the
amplitudes of all the elements in Z when K = 20 where all
the users are randomly located along the extra-large antenna
array with each user’s VR covering 160 antenna elements,
i.e., E = 160.10 Table I summarizes the values of the main
parameters used in the numerical simulations for each ﬁgure.
As can be seen from Fig. 2, the diagonal elements of Z are
apparently larger than the off-diagonal ones, which veriﬁes the
conclusion we drew in Section III.B.

Submax and less than Submin) for transmission and receive
combining, so that the system sum achievable SE is maximized
after the current user is added. If the updated system sum
achievable SE is larger than its counterpart, then we record
the corresponding user index with its selected subarray set
and the updated system sum achievable SE. As a result, this
user becomes a candidate.

Based on the obtained candidates, the user who contributes
with the strongest gain to the sum achievable SE is ﬁnally
selected and added to Us, with its corresponding selected
subarray set Ssel,usel added to S. At the same time, its user
index usel and selected subarray set Ssel,usel are removed
from Un and Sn respectively. After that,
the number of
scheduled users, i.e., Ns, increases by one. When Ns = Nu
or there is no SE gain when adding a new user, the scheduling
algorithm terminates and outputs Us, S and R. The next
section demonstrates the performance of the proposed greedy
joint user and subarray scheduling algorithm.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, the tightness of the approximated uplink er-
godic achievable SEs under both MRC and LMMSE receivers
is ﬁrstly investigated. Then, we verify the effectiveness of the
proposed phase coefﬁcient design in Section IV. After that, we
demonstrate the energy efﬁciency of different architectures.
The performance of these proposed two statistical CSI-based
the statistical CSI-based
user scheduling algorithms,
greedy user scheduling algorithm and the statistical CSI-based
greedy joint user and subarray scheduling algorithm, is also
evaluated. During the simulation, the channel model presented
in Section II.B is adopted, with the antenna element spacing
being half carrier wavelength and the non-zero diagonal
elements of Dk being 1.

i.e.,

The amplitudes of all the elements in Z when K = 20 and all
Fig. 2.
the users are randomly located along the extra-large antenna array with each
user’s VR covering 160 antenna elements, i.e., E = 160.

Next, we investigate the tightness of the approximated
uplink achievable SEs. Fig. 3 presents
the uplink sum
achievable SEs under the architectures of the phase shifter-
based subarray and the on-off switch-based subarray. Users
are randomly located along the extra-large antenna array
without user scheduling. Note that in the phase shifter-based
subarray, if a subarray is not covered by any user’s VR, the
phase coefﬁcients of the subarray would be set to zero by
default; otherwise, if a subarray is covered by multiple users
simultaneously, then the phase coefﬁcients of the subarray
to the sum of the phases corresponding to
would be set

10For simplicity, we assume that each user’s VR covers the same number
of antenna elements. However, the simulation methodology also supports the
general case, i.e., different E for different users.

1314201918171216151412111098764321131151918171098765432116152001020304050607080the multiple users. For the on-off switch-based subarray, and
unless otherwise discussed, we assume all the switches are
turned on in the simulation for simplicity.

10

Fig. 4 presents the sum achievable SE under the special
scenario of no overlapped VR, namely users are far apart
from each other and the signal radiated by a different user
covers different portions of the antenna array. The on-off
switch-based subarray architecture is considered. As can be
observed in Fig. 4, the proposed achievable SE approximations
(13) and (29) yield again great tightness. Moreover, since
users’ VRs do not overlap and, thus, no interference exists
between users, the system sum achievable SE under the MRC
receiver continuously increases with an increasing transmit
power. Consequently, the MRC receiver achieves the same
spectral efﬁciency as the LMMSE receiver. Hence, when there
are fewer users to be served or when the scheduled users
have no overlapped VR, the hardware-friendly MRC receiver
should be considered, thereby achieving lower computational
complexity with satisfactory performance.

Fig. 3. The uplink sum achievable SEs with phase shifter-based subarrays
and on-off switch-based subarrays: M = 1024, N = 128, K = 10, and
E = 128, and users are randomly located along the extra-large antenna array
without user scheduling.

From Fig. 3, the proposed achievable SE approximations
match well with the Monte-Carlo results.11 This indicates
that the proposed achievable SE approximations in (13) and
(29) are inherently useful for the subsequent user scheduling
to maximize the system sum achievable SE. In addition,
as the power of transmitted signal
the system
sum achievable SEs continuously increase with the LMMSE
receiver since it can effectively eliminate the interference
between different users. However, for the MRC receiver, the
system sum achievable SEs rapidly tend to saturation due to
the persistent inter-user interference.

increases,

Furthermore, comparing these results in Fig. 3, we ﬁnd that,
although the on-off switch-based subarray has an apparent
performance loss in comparison to the structure of subarray
with phase shifters, it can still achieve nearly 70% spectral
efﬁciency performance with the MRC receiver and 80%
with the LMMSE receiver. For example, with the MRC
receiver, the saturated sum achievable SE under the phase
shifter-based subarray architecture is 60 bits/s/Hz, while the
saturated sum achievable SE with the on-off switch-based
subarray is about 40 bits/s/Hz; for the LMMSE receiver at the
transmit SNR of 36 dB, the system sum achievable SEs are
142.7 bits/s/Hz and 156.3 bits/s/Hz under the on-off switch-
based subarray and phase-shifter-based subarray, respectively.
Moreover, the on-off switch-based subarray architecture can
effectively reduce the hardware cost of the system by replacing
the expensive phase shifters with low-cost switches. Hence,
it would be a more practical hardware solution to apply the
on-off switch-based subarray architecture in extra-large scale
massive MIMO.

11The Monte-Carlo results are obtained according to (11).

The uplink sum achievable SEs under the scenario of no VR
Fig. 4.
overlapping: M = 1024, N = 128, K = 5, and E = 160. The architecture
of the on-off switch-based subarray is considered.

B. Comparison of Different Subarray Phase Coefﬁcient
Design

The sum achievable SEs under the special scenario of
no overlapped VR for both the phase shifter-based subarray
architecture and the on-off switch-based subarray architecture
are provided in Fig. 5. The LMMSE receiver is employed and
two phase coefﬁcient designs i.e., the proposed eigenvector-
based phase coefﬁcient design in Section IV and the random
phase coefﬁcient design, are considered for the phase shifter-
based subarray. The results in Fig. 5 indicate that the proposed
eigenvector-based phase coefﬁcient design achieves the best
performance and reaps about 9 bits/s/Hz and 14 bits/s/Hz sum
achievable SE gains over the random phase coefﬁcient design
and the on-off switch-based subarray design, respectively.
What is more, due to the lack of phase alignment, the on-off
switch-based subarray has the lowest system sum achievable
SE. However, the on-off switch-based subarray induces the
lowest hardware cost and computation complexity, therefore

4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu020406080100120140160Sum Achievable SE (bits/s/Hz) Monte-Carlo MRCMRC-ApproxMonte-Carlo LMMSELMMSE-ApproxSubarray with phase shifterOn-off switch-basedsubarray4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu20304050607080Sum Achievable SE (bits/s/Hz) Monte-Carlo MRC, on-off switchMRC-Approx, on-off switchMonte-Carlo LMMSE, on-off switchLMMSE-Approx, on-off switch19.619.82020.25050.250.450.650.811

subarray architecture can be calculated as

ηP
EE = B

ηS
EE = B

RP

MRC/LMMSE
P U
P

RS

MRC/LMMSE
P U
S

(bits/Joule),

(bits/Joule),

respectively, where B denotes
the system transmission
bandwidth. Fig. 6 presents the energy efﬁciency of different
architectures with simulation parameters consistent with Fig. 3.
the on-off switch-based
architecture can achieve better energy efﬁciency than the phase
shifter-based architecture when a LMMSE receiver is utilized.
This further manifests the advantages of the former.

As can be observed in Fig. 6,

Fig. 5. Comparison of the different subarray phase coefﬁcient design under
the scenario of no VR overlapping: M = 1024, N = 128, K = 5, and
E = 160.

offering a low-cost alternative. Additionally, even if we adopt
the on-off switch-based subarray architecture, 48 bits/s/Hz
system sum achievable SEs can still be achieved at the SNR
of 20 dB, which means that the averaged achievable SEs per
user are 9.6 bits/s/Hz.

C. Energy Efﬁciency Analysis

In this subsection, we demonstrate the energy efﬁciency
analysis for different subarray architectures. Similar to [30],
we can construct the energy consumption model for different
architectures as follows:

P = M PPhase shifter + N (PLNA + PRF chain + PADC) + P U
P U
BB,
S = M PSwitch + N (PLNA + PRF chain + PADC) + P U
P U
BB,

and P U
S

where P U
denote the uplink system power
P
consumption of the phase shifter-based architecture and the
on-off switch-based architecture, respectively; PPhase shifter and
PSwitch represent the power consumption of phase shifter and
switch, respectively; PLNA is the low noise ampliﬁer’s power
consumption; PRF chain denotes the power consumption of the
including mixer, ﬁlter, and so on; PADC
RF components,
represents the ADC’s power consumption, and P U
BB is the
power consumption for uplink baseband signal processing.
Similarly, we can also set

PPhase shifter = 20 mW, PSwitch = 10 mW,

PLNA = 20 mW, PRF chain = 40 mW,
PADC = 200 mW, P U

BB = 200 mW.

the system uplink energy efﬁciencies of the phase
Then,
shifter-based subarray architecture and the on-off switch-based

Fig. 6. Energy efﬁciency comparison of the different subarray architectures.
M = 1024, N = 128 and B = 20 MHz.

D. User Scheduling

Two user scheduling algorithms, i.e., the statistical CSI-
based greedy user scheduling algorithm and the statistical CSI-
based greedy joint user and subarray algorithm, were proposed
in Section V. We ﬁrstly investigate the performance of the
statistical CSI-based greedy user scheduling algorithm. Fig. 7
presents the system sum achievable SEs for the MRC and the
LMMSE receivers under the statistical CSI-based greedy user
scheduling algorithm. Users are randomly distributed along the
extra-large antenna array as shown in Fig. 8 and the number
of users to be served is Nu = 12. The proposed eigenvector-
based phase coefﬁcient design is leveraged in the phase shifter-
based subarray architecture.

As can be observed from Fig. 7, regardless of the type of
linear receivers (i.e., MRC receiver or LMMSE receiver), the
phase shifter-based subarray provides an apparent performance
improvement compared to the on-off switch-based subarray;
especially with the MRC receiver, nearly 30 bits/s/Hz sum
achievable SE gains are achieved. At low SNR, the LMMSE
receiver does not apparently outperform the MRC receiver.
However, as the transmit SNR increases, inter-user interference

4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu2030405060708090Sum Achievable SE (bits/s/Hz) Monte-Carlo MRCMRC-ApproxMonte-Carlo MMSEMMSE-AnalyticalPhases of eigenvectors.Random phases.On-off switch-based subarray.4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu1234567Energy Efficiency (bit/Joule) 107MRC, phase shifterMRC, on-off switchLMMSE, phase shifterLMMSE, on-off switch12

Fig. 7. The uplink sum achievable SEs with a phase shifter-based subarray
and the on-off switch-based subarray. The parameters M = 1024, N = 128,
K = 22, and E = 128 are selected and users are randomly located along
the extra-large antenna array. The statistical CSI-based greedy user scheduling
algorithm is utilized and the number of users to be scheduled and served is
Nu = 12.

Fig. 9. The scheduled 7 users when using the MRC receiver at the transmit
SNR of 36 dB under the architecture of the phase shifter-based subarray. The
index vector of the scheduled users is [1, 6, 7, 8, 12, 20, 21].

Fig. 8. The VR coverage distribution of the total 22 users in the extra-large
scale massive MIMO system.

the transmit SNR of 36 dB under

Fig. 10.
at
shifter-based subarray. The index vector of
[1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 22].

The scheduled 12 users when using the LMMSE receiver
the phase
is

the scheduled users

the architecture of

becomes stronger owing to the large number of scheduled
users and the overlapped VRs. Therefore, the LMMSE receiver
begins to exhibit its superiority. Note that nearly 90 bits/s/Hz
sum achievable SE gains can be acquired by the LMMSE
receiver at high SNR.

It is also important to mention that, with an increasing
transmit SNR and, thus, stronger inter-user interference, the
number of users ﬁnally scheduled to be served under the
MRC receiver does not always reach the target number of
i.e., Nu. For example, only 7 users are
scheduled users,
scheduled when using the MRC receiver at the transmit SNR
of 36 dB with a phase shifter-based subarray. The index vector

of the ﬁnally scheduled users is [1, 6, 7, 8, 12, 20, 21] and
Fig. 9 plots their positions and corresponding VRs’ coverings.
Nevertheless, the LMMSE receiver shows its superiority in
supporting more users to be served. The scheduled 12 users
the transmit SNR of 36 dB when using the LMMSE
at
receiver are presented in Fig. 10, with their index vector being
[1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 22]. Additionally, based on
Figs. 9 and 10, it has also been veriﬁed that, to maximize
the system sum achievable SE, for the MRC receiver, users
whose VRs cover different subarrays or those with fewer VR
overlaps should be scheduled, while for the LMMSE receiver,
users with larger tr(BΘi) should be scheduled as frequently

4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu406080100120140160180200220Sum Achievable SE (bits/s/Hz) Greedy user scheduling, LMMSE, phase shifterGreedy user scheduling, LMMSE, on-off switchGreedy user scheduling, MRC, phase shifterGreedy user scheduling, MRC, on-off switch1234567891011121314151617181920212223UE ID01002003004005006007008009001000Antenna Index at BS1234567891011121314151617181920212223UE ID01002003004005006007008009001000Antenna Index at BS1234567891011121314151617181920212223UE ID01002003004005006007008009001000Antenna Index at BS13

these approximations, users with their VRs covering different
subarrays or VRs with less overlap should be scheduled
simultaneously with a MRC receiver, while users with larger
tr(BΘ) should be selected with a LMMSE receiver. In
addition, for the subarray with phase shifters, an optimal phase
coefﬁcient design was proposed, which relates to the phases of
the eigenvectors corresponding to the maximum eigenvalues
of the main block matrices of Θ. We also proposed two
statistical CSI-based greedy user scheduling algorithms. Our
numerical results demonstrated that in the extra-large scale
massive MIMO system, it is not necessary to simultaneously
turn on all subarrays and RF chains to serve the users.
There is a tradeoff between the hardware cost and the system
performance. Speciﬁcally,
the statistical CSI-based greedy
joint user and subarray scheduling algorithm collaborating
with the on-off switch-based subarray architecture and the
LMMSE receiver is a promising practical solution for extra-
large scale massive MIMO systems.

APPENDIX I
PROOF OF THEOREM 2

When the VRs of different user partially overlap, we have

FH F = HH BH


1 Θ1/2
gH

=





1 g1

1 BΘ1/2
...
K BΘ1/2

1 g1

K Θ1/2
gH

. . . gH
. . .
· · · gH

1 Θ1/2

K gK

1 BΘ1/2
...
K BΘ1/2

K gK

K Θ1/2







.

(37)

=

Since E{gigH
(cid:54)=
k }
i Θ1/2
i BΘ1/2
E{gH
k gk} = 0, ∀i (cid:54)= k and
E{IK + puFH F} =diag(1 + pugH

0, ∀i

k, we

obtain

1 Θ1/2

1 BΘ1/2

1 + pugH

K Θ1/2

K BΘ1/2

1 g1, . . . ,
K gK).

(38)

Furthermore, since the VRs of different users only partially
overlap, we can safely draw a conclusion that (IK +puFH F) is
a diagonal-dominant matrix. This diagonal-dominant property
has been veriﬁed in the numerical results in Section V.
Additionally, from (12) and (23), we have

RLMMSE =

=

K
(cid:88)

i=1

K
(cid:88)

i=1

RLMMSE

i



log2








Eh

(a)
(cid:62) −KEh

(cid:40)

(cid:32)

log2

(b)
(cid:62) −Klog2

(cid:18) 1
K

Eh

1
(IK + puFH F)−1(cid:105)
(cid:104)

ii










K
(cid:88)

1
K

(cid:110)

(cid:104)(cid:0)IK + puFH F(cid:1)−1(cid:105)
tr(cid:0)IK + puFH F(cid:1)−1(cid:111)(cid:19)

i=1

(cid:33)(cid:41)

ii

, (39)

where we leverage the inequality of arithmetic and geometric
means in (a) and the Jensen’s equality in (b). Deﬁne Z (cid:44)
IK + puFH F and Λ = diag(1/z11, 1/z22, . . . , 1/zKK), then
Z is a diagonal-dominant matrix. Therefore, according to the

Fig. 11. The uplink sum achievable SEs with a phase shifter-based subarray
and the on-off switch-based subarray. The parameters M = 1024, N =
128, K = 22, and E = 128 are selected and users are randomly located
along the extra-large antenna array. The statistical CSI-based greedy joint user
and subarray scheduling algorithm is utilized. The maximum and minimum
number of subarrays that each user can be allocated are Submax = 8 and
Submin = 6 respectively and the number of users to be served is Nu = 12.

as possible.

Next, we exploit the performance of the statistical CSI-
based greedy joint user and subarray scheduling algorithm in
Fig. 11. The maximum and minimum number of subarrays that
each user can be allocated to in the joint user and subarray
scheduling algorithm are Submax = 8 and Submin = 6
respectively and we set Nu = 12. Hence, the number of
subarrays (namely RF chains) for each user in the joint user
and subarray scheduling algorithm is much less than that in
the greedy user scheduling algorithm. Nevertheless, compared
with Fig. 7, Fig. 11 indicates that the performance of these two
linear receivers in the on-off switch-based subarray is only
slightly deteriorated, and the performance loss with the phase
shifter-based subarray is marginal and even can be neglected.
in extra-large scale
Based on these results, we ﬁnd that,
massive MIMO systems, it is not necessary to simultaneously
turn on all subarrays and RF chains to serve the users. The
introduction of dynamic subarray scheduling is beneﬁcial to
achieve better system performance with lower system energy
consumption. Besides, the statistical CSI-based greedy joint
user and subarray scheduling algorithm collaborating with the
on-off switch-based subarray architecture and the LMMSE
receiver is a promising practical solution for extra-large scale
massive MIMO.

VII. CONCLUSION

This paper has investigated the uplink transmission of
to
extra-large scale massive MIMO systems.
perform this
task, a subarray-based system architecture
was ﬁrstly proposed. Then, we derived tight closed-form
uplink achievable SE approximations for the extra-large scale
massive MIMO system under linear receivers. Based on

In order

4812162024283236Transmit SNR [dB] pu406080100120140160180200220Greedy joint user and subarray scheduling, LMMSE, phase shifterGreedy joint user and subarray scheduling, LMMSE, on-off switchGreedy joint user and subarray scheduling, MRC, phase shifterGreedy joint user and subarray scheduling, MRC, on-off switchinverse can be expressed as Z−1 ≈

Neumann Series [27], for a diagonal-dominant matrix Z, its
(IK − ΛZ)nΛ, where
L represents the number of terms used in the Neumann Series.
For simplicity, we set L = 1 and thus

L
(cid:80)
n=0

Z−1 ≈ 2Λ − ΛZΛ.

(40)

Applying (40) into (39), we obtain

RLMMSE (cid:62) −Klog2

(cid:19)

(cid:8)tr(Z−1)(cid:9)

≈ −Klog2

(cid:19)

Eh {tr (2Λ − ΛZΛ)}
(cid:19)

= −Klog2

tr (Eh{Λ})

.

(41)

Eh

(cid:18) 1
K
(cid:18) 1
K
(cid:18) 1
K
i BΘ1/2
i Θ1/2

Moreover, zii = 1 + pugH

i gi and

tr (Eh{Λ}) (cid:62)

=

K
(cid:88)

i=1
K
(cid:88)

i=1

1
Eg{zii}

1
1 + putr(BΘi)

.

(42)

Substituting (42) into (41), we have

RLMMSE ≈ −Klog2

(cid:32)

1
K

K
(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:33)

1
1 + putr(BΘi)

K
(cid:88)

(a)
(cid:54)

i=1

log2 [1 + putr(BΘi)],

(43)

where (a) utilizes the inequality of arithmetic and geomet-
the approximated ergodic system sum
ric means. Hence,
achievable SE under partially overlapped VR scenario can be
expressed as

RLMMSE,PartialApp =

K
(cid:88)

i=1

with each user contributing

log2 [1 + putr(BΘi)] ,

(44)

RLMMSE,PartialApp

k

= log2 [1 + putr(BΘk)] .

(45)

The proof is concluded.

Special Scenario: When the VRs of different users do not

overlap, we have Θ1 (cid:12) Θ2 · · · (cid:12) ΘK = 0, thus
K Θ1/2

FH F = diag(gH

1 g1, . . . , gH

1 BΘ1/2

1 Θ1/2

K BΘ1/2

K gK),
(46)

and

Eh

(cid:111)

kk

(cid:110)(cid:104)(cid:0)IK + puFH F(cid:1)−1(cid:105)
k Θ1/2
= Eh{(1 + pugH
(a)
k Θ1/2
(cid:62) (Eh{1 + pugH
(b)
= [1 + putr(BΘk)]−1,

k BΘ1/2
k BΘ1/2

k gk)−1}

k gk})−1

(47)

where (a) applies Jensen’s equality E{1/x} (cid:62) 1/E{x} for
x > 0 and (b) comes from Eh{pugH
k gk} =

k BΘ1/2

k Θ1/2

putr(BΘk). From (23), we have

14

RLMMSE

k

= Eh



log2



(cid:104)






1
(IK + puFH F)−1(cid:105)

kk











(a)
(cid:62) log2





1
(IK + puFH F)−1(cid:105)

(cid:110)(cid:104)

Eh

kk

 ,

(cid:111)

(48)

where Jensen’s equality E{log2(1/x)} (cid:62) log2(1/E{x}) for
x > 0 is applied in (a). Combining (48) with (47),
the
approximated ergodic achievable SE of the kth user with no
overlapping VRs can be given by
RLMMSE,NoApp

= log2 [1 + putr(BΘk)] ,

(49)

k

which is consistent with (45) as expected.

REFERENCES

[1] T. L. Marzetta, “Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited
numbers of base station antennas,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol.
9, no. 11, pp. 3590-3600, Nov. 2010.

[2] J. Zhang, E. Bj¨ornson, M. Matthaiou, D. W. K. Ng, H. Yang, and D. J.
Love, “Prospective multiple antenna technologies for beyond 5G,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1637-1660, Aug. 2020.
[3] E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive
MIMO for next generation wireless systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol.
52, no. 2, pp. 186-195, Feb. 2014.

[4] V. Garcia, Y. Zhou, and J. Shi, “Coordinated multipoint transmission
in dense cellular networks with user-centric adaptive clustering,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 4297-4308, Aug. 2014.
[5] L. Liu et al., “Economically optimal MS association for multimedia
content delivery in cache-enabled heterogeneous cloud radio access
networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 1584-1593,
Jul. 2019.

[6] L. Liu et al., “Load aware joint CoMP clustering and inter-cell resource
scheduling in heterogeneous ultra dense cellular networks,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2741-2755, Mar. 2018.

[7] A. O. Martinez, E. D. Carvalho, and J. Nielsen, “Towards very large
aperture massive MIMO: A measurement based study,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM Workshops, Dec. 2014, pp. 281–286.

[8] E. Bj¨ornson, L. Sanguinetti, H. Wymeersch, J. Hoydis, and T. L.
Marzetta, “Massive MIMO is a reality–What is next? Five promising
research directions for antenna arrays,” Digital Signal Processing, vol.
94, pp.3-20, Nov. 2019.

[9] X. Gao, O. Edfors, F. Rusek, and F. Tufvesson, “Massive MIMO
performance evaluation based on measured propagation data,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 3899-3911, Jul. 2015.
[10] X. Gao, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and E. G. Larsson, “Massive MIMO
in real propagation environments: Do all antennas contribute eually?”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3917-3928, Nov. 2015.
[11] A. D. Yaghjian, “An overview of near-ﬁeld antenna measurements,”

IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 30-45, Jan. 1986.

[12] Ericsson, Radio Stripes:

re-thinking mobile networks,

Available:https://www.ericsson.com/en/blog/2019/2/radio-stripes,
2019.

[13] E. D. Carvalho, A. Ali, A. Amiri, M. Angjelichinoski, and R. W.
Heath, Jr., “Non-stationarities in extra-large scale massive MIMO,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 74-80, Aug. 2020.

[14] A. Amiri, M. Angjelichinoski, E. de Carvalho, and R. W. Heath, Jr.,
“Extremely large aperture massive MIMO: Low complexity receiver
architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2018.

[15] X. Li, S. Zhou, E. Bj¨ornson, and J. Wang, “Capacity analysis for
spatially non-wide sense stationary uplink massive MIMO systems,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 7044-7056, Dec.
2015.

[16] A. Ali, E. D. Carvalho, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Linear receivers in
non-stationary massive MIMO channels with visibility regions,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol.8, no. 3, pp. 885-888, Feb. 2019.

[17] O. E. Ayach, S. Rajagopal, S. Abu-Surra, Z. Pi, and R. W. Heath, Jr.,
“Spatially sparse precoding in millimeter wave MIMO systems,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1499-1513, Mar. 2014.

[Online].
Feb.

15

[18] T. E. Bogale, L. B. Le, A, Haghighat, and L. Vandendorpe, “On the
number of RF chains and phase shifters, and scheduling design with
hybrid analog-digital beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 3311-3326, May 2016.

[19] A. Alkhateeb, Y.-H. Nam, J. Zhang, and Robert W. Heath, Jr., “Massive
MIMO combining with switches,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol.5,
no. 3, pp. 232-235, Jun. 2016.

[20] J. Brady, N. Behdad, and A. M. Sayeed, “Beamspace MIMO
for millimeter-Wave communications: system architecture, modeling,
analysis, and measurements,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61,
no. 7, pp. 3814-3827, Jul. 2013.

[21] A. M. Sayeed, “Deconstructing multiantenna fading channels,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2563-2579, Oct. 2002.
[22] H. Q. Ngo, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Energy and spectral
efﬁciency of very large multiuser MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1436-1449, Apr. 2013.

[23] M. R. McKay, Random Matrix Theory Analysis of Multiple Antenna

Communication Systems. PhD thesis, 2006.

[24] Q. Zhang, S. Jin, K.-K. Wong, H. Zhu, and M. Matthaiou, “Power
scaling of uplink massive MIMO systems with arbitrary-rank channel
means,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 966-981,
Oct. 2014.

[25] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, 4th ed. New York:

Cambridge Univ. Press, 1990.

[26] M. R. McKay, I. B. Collings, and A. M. Tulino, “Achievable sum rate
of MIMO MMSE receiver: A general analytic framework,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 396–410, Jan. 2010.

[27] D. Zhu, B. Li, and P. Liang, “On the matrix inversion approximation
based on Neumann series in massive MIMO systems,” in Proc. IEEE
ICC, June 2015, pp. 1763–1769.

[28] S. Payami, M. Ghoraishi, and M. Dianati, “Hybrid beamforming for
large antenna arrays with phase shifter selection,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 7258-7271, Nov. 2016.

[29] S. Payami, N. M. Balasubramanya, M. Ghoraishi, and M. Dianati,
“Phase shifters versus switches: An energy efﬁciency perspective on
hybrid beamforming,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
13-16, Feb. 2019.

[30] R. M´endez-Rial et al., “Channel estimation and hybrid combining for
mmWave: Phase shifters or switches?” in Proc. IEEE ITA,, Oct. 2015.

(with distinction)

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Michail Matthaiou (S’05–M’08–SM’13) was born
in Thessaloniki, Greece in 1981. He obtained
the Diploma degree (5 years) in Electrical and
Computer Engineering from the Aristotle University
of Thessaloniki, Greece in 2004. He then received
the M.Sc.
in Communication
Systems and Signal Processing from the University
of Bristol, U.K. and Ph.D. degrees
from the
University of Edinburgh, U.K. in 2005 and 2008,
respectively. From September 2008 through May
2010, he was with the Institute for Circuit Theory
and Signal Processing, Munich University of Technology (TUM), Germany
working as a Postdoctoral Research Associate. He is currently a Professor
of Communications Engineering and Signal Processing and Deputy Director
of the Centre for Wireless Innovation (CWI) at Queen’s University Belfast,
U.K. after holding an Assistant Professor position at Chalmers University
of Technology, Sweden. His research interests span signal processing for
wireless communications, massive MIMO systems, hardware-constrained
communications, mm-wave systems and deep learning for communications.
Dr. Matthaiou and his coauthors received the IEEE Communications Society
(ComSoc) Leonard G. Abraham Prize in 2017. He was awarded the prestigious
2018/2019 Royal Academy of Engineering/The Leverhulme Trust Senior
Research Fellowship and also received the 2019 EURASIP Early Career
Award. His team was also the Grand Winner of the 2019 Mobile World
Congress Challenge. He was the recipient of the 2011 IEEE ComSoc Best
Young Researcher Award for the Europe, Middle East and Africa Region and a
co-recipient of the 2006 IEEE Communications Chapter Project Prize for the
best M.Sc. dissertation in the area of communications. He has co-authored
papers that received best paper awards at the 2018 IEEE WCSP and 2014
IEEE ICC and was an Exemplary Reviewer for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS
LETTERS for 2010. In 2014, he received the Research Fund for International
Young Scientists from the National Natural Science Foundation of China.
He is currently the Editor-in-Chief of Elsevier Physical Communication, a
Senior Editor for IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS and an
Associate Editor for the IEEE JSAC SERIES ON MACHINE LEARNING
FOR COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKS. In the past, he was an Associate
Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS and Associate
Editor/Senior Editor for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS.

Xi Yang received the B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2013,
2016 and 2019, respectively. Her current research
interests include wireless communication system
prototyping, massive MIMO, and millimeter wave
communications.

Fan Cao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
School of Information Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China in 2017 and
2020, respectively. His main research interests in-
clude massive MIMO, metamaterial communication
and millimeter wave communications.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Shi Jin (S’06–M’07–SM’17)
received the B.S.
degree in communications engineering from Guilin
University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China,
in 1996, the M.S. degree from Nanjing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China,
in 2003, and the Ph.D. degree in information and
communications engineering from the Southeast
University, Nanjing, in 2007. From June 2007 to
October 2009, he was a Research Fellow with
the Adastral Park Research Campus, University
College London, London, U.K. He is currently with
the faculty of the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory,
Southeast University. His research interests include space time wireless
communications, random matrix theory, and information theory. He served as
an Associate Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
and IEEE Communications Letters, and IET Communications. Dr. Jin and
his co-authors have been awarded the 2011 IEEE Communications Society
Stephen O. Rice Prize Paper Award in the ﬁeld of communication theory
and a 2010 Young Author Best Paper Award by the IEEE Signal Processing
Society.

