iVRNote: Design, Creation and Evaluation of an Interactive Note-Taking
Interface for Study and Reﬂection in VR Learning Environments

Yi-Ting Chen1*

Chi-Hsuan Hsu1†

Chih-Han Chung1‡

Yu-Shuen Wang1§

Sabarish V. Babu2¶

1National Chiao Tung University

2Clemson University

Figure 1: We present iVRNote, an interactive note taking interface, to help students study video lectures in VR (middle and right).
To enable students to take notes in VR (right), we install a digital tablet (bottom left) on the desk and track a stylus’s position and
orientation using the tablet’s interface and the leap motion controller (top left).

ABSTRACT

In this contribution, we design, implement and evaluate the pedagog-
ical beneﬁts of a novel interactive note taking interface (iVRNote)
in VR for the purpose of learning and reﬂection lectures. In future
VR learning environments, students would have challenges in taking
notes when they wear a head mounted display (HMD). To solve
this problem, we installed a digital tablet on the desk and provided
several tools in VR to facilitate the learning experience. Speciﬁcally,
we track the stylus’ position and orientation in the physical world
and then render a virtual stylus in VR. In other words, when students
see a virtual stylus somewhere on the desk, they can reach out with
their hand for the physical stylus. The information provided will
also enable them to know where they will draw or write before the
stylus touches the tablet. Since the presented iVRNote featuring our
note taking system is a digital environment, we also enable students
save efforts in taking extensive notes by providing several functions,
such as post-editing and picture taking, so that they can pay more
attention to lectures in VR. We also record the time of each stroke
on the note to help students review a lecture. They can select a
part of their note to revisit the corresponding segment in a virtual
online lecture. Figures and the accompanying video demonstrate
the feasibility of the presented iVRNote system. To evaluate the
system, we conducted a user study with 20 participants to assess
the preference and pedagogical beneﬁts of the iVRNote interface.

*e-mail: asd2846531@gmail.com
†e-mail: ace810408@gmail.com
‡e-mail: chihhichihhi@gmail.com
§e-mail: yushuen@cs.nctu.edu.tw
¶e-mail: sbabu@clemson.edu

The feedback provided by the participants were overall positive and
indicated that the iVRNote interface could be potentially effective
in VR learning experiences.

Keywords: Virtual reality, classroom, on-line learning

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—Visu-
alization techniques—Education; Human-centered computing—
Visualization—Visualization design and evaluation methods

1 INTRODUCTION
Virtual Reality (VR) learning has been promoted for many years
worldwide, which has several advantages such as low cost, comfort,
and free of distance limitation [35, 40, 48]. As VR technology
become more accessible and ubiquitous, students who are willing to
learn have the potential to take any course they want without moving
to a completely unknown city or country by participating in the
VR learning experience remotely. It has been shown that although
thousands of students participate in online courses in the physical
world, the completion rate of most such courses is below 13% [34].
One of the challenges noted is that in online situations, students are
often distracted by external sources, such as television, social media
or mobile phone applications. However, VR has the potentially
to immerse and isolate learners in the classroom experience, and
facilitate greater concentration and attention to the learning materials,
as preliminary evidence shows in the use of VR learning experiences
for students with ADD [2, 36]. They also can potentially learn
anytime and anywhere, pause the lecture to take notes, and revisit the
lecture to understand difﬁcult materials. Although the technological
potential for such widespread VR classroom experience exists, there
is a lack of tools and interaction metaphors in a VR classroom
settings to facilitate active immersive note taking in concert with
lecture viewing, and tools for review and reﬂection. Current best
existing interactive note taking and learning interfaces in VR do
not have the complexity to facilitate active learning experiences

beyond merely the capability of writing [6, 37], and these tools
and techniques have not been empirically evaluated with regards to
their pedagogical beneﬁts, preference and impressions. Therefore,
in order for future VR classroom experiences to be pedagogically
effective, efﬁcient and engaging, the interactive features, similar to a
physical world classroom environment, must be designed, developed
and evaluated for active learning experiences in VR. Thus, the above
mentioned problem space motivated us in this contribution to design,
create and evaluate the iVRNote interaction metaphor for interactive
note-taking, study and reﬂection in VR classroom situations (see
Figure 1).

Leveraging the capabilities of commercially available VR sys-
tems, we aimed to help students immerse and engage with classroom
materials via interactions with our iVRNote in a custom build collab-
orative VR classroom environment that served as a backdrop for the
development of the interactive features and evaluation. Considering
that note taking is an important feature [31] for students towards
active learning of any new material, and the inspiration from a hand-
writing interface in VR [38], we implemented iVRNote in the VR
classroom. Speciﬁcally, we installed a digital tablet on a desk for
users to write and draw. The handwriting and drawing trajectories
were recorded and displayed on a note paper in the VR classroom.
To match the visual and haptic feedback perceived by users, we
tracked the physical stylus and applied the tracked position and ori-
entation to render the virtual stylus in the student’s virtual hand that
was co-located with the physical stylus. The tracking can be done by
the tablet itself if the stylus is close to the tablet. However, if this is
not the case, we track the stylus according to stereo infrared images
captured by a leap motion controller mounted on the HMD. The two
tracking results switch over based on the presence and absence of
signals received from the digital tablet.

Several physical limitations can be eliminated in VR because the
whole learning process via iVRNote has been digitized. For example,
students may need to correct or post-edit their note taking when
taking classes. Digital note taking systems have great advantages
over traditional note taking in this situation. iVRNote provides users
with not only basic functions, but also advanced operations such
as post-editing of notes and review by selection. The post-editing
could be very useful when students attempt to insert a line of text
into the middle of a paragraph. In a traditional way, they have to
write the text next to the paragraph and draw an arrow to point
out the position they would like to insert. While using iVRNote,
they can move the pre-written text to accommodate the space for
insertion, which would make the notes well-organized. In addition,
since traditional notes are taken by pen and paper, such notes can be
read only in a review phase. Students could be confused if the notes
are too brief or contain mistakes. In contrast, when students take
notes in using iVRNote, the time of every stroke is recorded by the
system. Hence, in the review phase, if students do not understand
a part of the note and fail to build their own knowledge, they can
specify in the digital note where they are unclear, and then watch
the corresponding part of the video lecture again.

To evaluate iVRNote interaction metaphor’s effectiveness, we
conducted a user study with 20 participants. They were asked to
study online video lectures in VR and in the physical world, and
compared the behaviors of note taking in these two platforms. Exper-
imental results indicate that the presented VR note taking system can
help students study and review lectures. The participants also gave
us quite positive feedback and conﬁrmed the feasibility of effectively
using iVRNote in virtual classroom learning situations.

2 RELATED WORK

2.1 Online Learning Interactions

Online learning has becoming popular. An important advantage is
that students can study a lecture anywhere and anytime as long as
they can access the Internet [33]. As many online learning systems

are built using video lectures, students can pause the video to think
and reﬂect about the materials, or replay the video to revisit if they
have problems in interpretation of the material. There were many
studies that have provided systematic analyses [7,29,32,41] to prove
the effectiveness of online learning environments. However, on the
negative side, there were also studies showing that students pay less
time to take online courses, as compared to students who take tra-
ditional classes [10]. The situation is even worse for male students,
younger students, African-American students, and low-achieving stu-
dents [46]. Moreover, there were many studies presented to discuss
the high dropout rates of massive open online courses (MOOCs) [34].
Several negative reasons for the high dropout rates include the lack
of time [8], course difﬁculty, and lack of support [28].

2.2 Note Taking in Education

Although many researches have shown that note taking can facil-
itate study [44], taking notes longhand and using laptops can be
considerably different. Speciﬁcally, because most students can type
signiﬁcantly faster than they can write, they tend to transcribe con-
tent mindlessly or indiscriminately [11]. On the other hand, when
students take notes longhand, they have to select important informa-
tion to include in their notes, which forces them to process content
deeply in the class [23]. Accordingly, note taking longhand has more
advantages in improving learning and retention, whereas the use
of laptop can leave a more complete record for future review [31].
Given the different ways of note taking, the studies in [31] show
that participants who took notes longhand studied much better than
those who used laptops. In addition, they found that telling students
who used laptops not to take notes verbatim could not prevent the
behavior. They also found that, even when participants could review
their notes before the test, the experiment results were the same.

2.3 VR in Education

There have been many VR applications presented for training skills.
For example, surgeons can learn and practice surgical skills in a
virtual operating room without any danger to patients [21, 22]; pilots
can practice takeoff and landing skills in a virtual airplane without
causing death and ﬁnancial loss [4, 47]; and ADHD-diagnosed chil-
dren can train themselves to rehabilitate their attention deﬁcits [40].
In addition, VR can be used to develop spatial abilities. Kaufmann et
al. [25] presented a software called Construct3D for students at high
school and university level to create 3D models by a two-handed 3D
interaction tool. Anecdotal evidence in their pilot study shows that
Construct3D can help students learn and encourage experimentation
with geometric constructions. Angulo and Velasco showed that VR
can support the design of architectural spatial experiences [3]. The
real-time feedback in VR environment greatly improves student’s
spatial design and enhances results. Abulrub et al. demonstrated
that, by using 3D interactive tools to examine 3D prototypes in
VR, engineering graduates can apply theoretical knowledge to real
industrial problems and obtain practical experience [1].

The survey on existing solutions to virtual learning environment
suggests that providing learners with a high level of immersion and
involvement can facilitate learning [39]. Chittaro and Buttussi [14]
educated passengers by allowing them to experience a serious air-
craft emergency with the goal of survival. Experimental results
showed that VR educated participants can retain the safety proce-
dures over a long time span. Cheng et al. [13] attempted to explore
whether a virtual foreign environment can help people stay engaged
in learning language and culture. They adapted a 3D video game
called crystallize to a VR version and let users interact through
verbal and physical motions. Bailenson et al. [5] designed several
experiments in a VR classroom for the study of human behavior and
communication. From the experiments, they found that students’
learning performance can be effected by their locations relative to
the teacher’s ﬁeld of view and other model students or distracting

students. Since there are many VR educational applications to be
listed in the paper, we refer readers to [12, 19, 30, 39] for details.

2.4 Note Taking in VR
Although, note taking can be facilitated via keyboard based text entry,
and illustrations can be sketched via mouse based interaction, these
interaction metaphors in the past could not be readily afforded in
immersive VR situations due to challenges in tracking and rendering
external objects as well as our corresponding ﬁne motor actions on
them [26]. Natural interaction metaphors have been proposed for
note recording via a tracked stylus and tablet surfaces in VR to allow
users to have visuo-haptic feedback, and perform the ﬁne motor task
of recording observations in an intuitive manner. Thus, leveraging
the learned perceptual-motor coordination of the same task from the
physical world writing, as well as the tactile augmentation between
the stylus tip and virtual canvas [17, 37]. These natural metaphors
have also been shown to promote a greater sense of presence, and
improve the efﬁcacy of task performance in VR. Many studied have
investigated the effects of a stylus or pen based interaction to mouse
based interaction in digital input on horizontal interfaces [9, 18].
Research shows that participants preferred a pen based interaction on
a digital plane, as compared to a mouse based interaction [16]. The
design and development of natural pen or stylus based interaction
in VR in the past suffered from latency issues between the motor
component and corresponding rendering of the content on the canvas,
which was detrimental to participant performance in writing and
drawing [37]. However, contemporary VR simulations afford high
resolution viewing, high frame-rate tracking and rendering, such that
using hybrid tracking solutions a natural pen based interactions for
writing and sketching can be readily implemented. This has led to
the popularity of writing application in contemporary VR systems,
such as Google’s Tilt Brush [24].

Although VR sketching and writing by itself have been formu-
lated and tested with regards to variables such as presence and task
performance, there is a need for more advanced 3D interaction
metaphors associated with note taking and sketching towards en-
hancing learning outcomes, engagement, study and reﬂection in VR
classroom situations. This contribution aims to design, create and
evaluate these advanced VR interaction metaphors (via iVRNote)
for usable, engaging, and effective pedagogical interaction in VR
classroom experiences.

3 REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS FOR IVRNOTE
In this research, the goal was to help students study in VR as they
are used to studying in the physical world. Therefore, similar to
a traditional setting, in VR, students can also sit in front of a desk
and could watch the video lecture to study. Considering that note
taking provides several beneﬁts, such as improving memory, aiding
in the organization of information in a class presentation, students
should be able to take notes in VR as well. To achieve an easy-to-
use VR education application, we discussed with several cohorts
of undergraduate and graduate students in our University, as well
as with a group of education experts, and arrived at several system
requirements that should be included. They were as follows:

1. Support when students have problems in understanding ma-
terials. Referring to external resources, such as Wikipedia, for
understanding prerequisites that are not explained in the lecture
video is important in study. This feature can be easily achieved
in the physical world. However, taking off the HMD and leav-
ing the VR classroom is tedious and would prevent students
from reaching external resources when they have problems in
understanding lectures. Students should have ways to obtain
solutions in VR.

2. Visibility of stylus. Students would be blind to the physical
environment when they wear an HMD. Therefore, showing

Figure 2: (Left) Stereo infrared images captured by the leap motion
(Top right) The photograph shows how the user holds
controller.
the physical stylus. (Bottom right) We track the stylus’ position and
orientation in the physical environment and shows the virtual stylus in
the VR classroom.

a virtual stylus as it appears in the physical environment is
important. Students should be able to reach out their hand for
the stylus, when it is somewhere on the desk, and they also
should be aware of (visually perceive) where the virtual stylus
could touch the note paper before they write.

3. As many words can be written on a note paper. Students may
need to write many words and draw diagrams on a note paper
to clearly describe and illustrate an important idea. In other
words, the note taking interface should be of high precision
so that students can write words in the VR classroom as small
as they write in the physical environment (similar in writing
quality to the physical world).

4. Correction and post-editing of notes. Note taking inevitably
can result in mistakes. Students should be able to erase the
notes when they write something incorrectly.
It would be
great if students can post-edit and organize the notes when
they would like to re-organize the notes after the class. This
characteristic is important because students have to take notes
and watch a video lecture simultaneously. Students typically
may not have much time to organize their notes during a class
lecture.

5. An efﬁcient way to take notes. There can be many important
points to be written in a class. While students have to watch a
video lecture, think about the materials, and take notes simul-
taneously, they can be very busy in doing everything well. In
addition, when the lecture goes to the next slide, students may
not have enough time to write down what they would like to
record. Hence, an efﬁcient way to take notes is needed.

4 IVRNOTE SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
The presented note taking system aims to help students study in
VR. Therefore, we consider the requirements raised by the students
and educators to implement this system. Speciﬁcally, we build
a 3D classroom, setup a set of corresponding hardware, integrate
these virtual and physical objects seamlessly, and then provided a
framework for the iVRNote interaction metaphor.

Figure 3: Basic functions implemented in the presented iVRNote. (a) Eraser. (b-d) Post-editing of notes. Students can select a part of the note
and then move it to different positions.

4.1 Hardware and Software

We implemented the VR classroom by integrating an HTC Vive,
Leap motion controller, and a Wacom tablet ( Intuos Pro large,
PTH-860/K0). Figure 1 shows the hardwares used in the presented
system. Speciﬁcally, we setup a desk in the physical environment
and placed a Wacom tablet on the desk for users to take notes.
Similarly, we set a desk and a note paper in the virtual environment.
The 1:1 correspondence between virtual and physical objects were
determined by the HTC tracking in advance. In addition, we installed
the leap motion controller in front of the HMD to track the physical
stylus if the stylus is far away from the tablet. Users would be able
to see a virtual stylus as long as the physical stylus is within the ﬁeld
of view (R2).

4.2 Stylus Tracking

Our system tracks the physical stylus and applies the tracked position
and orientation to render the virtual stylus in the VR classroom.
Thanks to the electromagnetic sensors installed in the Wacom digital
tablet, when the stylus is close enough (roughly 1 cm) from the
tablet, it’s position and orientation can be obtained via the Wacom
API1. When the stylus is far away from the tablet, we track the pose
of the stylus using a computer vision technique. The two versions
of the stylus tracking are switched according to the sensor readings
obtained from the API.

We installed a leap motion controller at the front of the HMD
to capture stereo infrared images (Figure 2). To ensure that the
stylus is salient in the infrared spectra, we wrapped the stylus in
a segment of IR reﬂective tape. The stylus in the infrared images
would be the brightest after the illumination (by the leap motion
controller). Hence, we identify the pixels that have intensities larger
than 250 in the stereo infrared images, compute their correspondence
using the iterative closest points method [42], and then obtain the
horizontal disparities between the corresponding pixels. Since the
horizontal disparities can be used to determine the depth from the
HMD (i.e., user’s head) to the stylus, we un-project the stylus pixels
from 2D back to 3D. In addition, limited by the stylus’ shape, these
un-projected 3D pixels were expected to appear as a thin cylinder.
Subsequently, we applied principal component analysis (PCA) [15]
to compute the main axis of these 3D pixels, and then determine
the stylus’ position and orientation. We also applied the Kalman
ﬁlter [45] to smooth the axis as illumination and occlusion problems
may occur with the user’s hand during stylus tracking.

We wrapped the stylus in a segment of IR reﬂective tap to facilitate
stylus tracking. Although the tape could be occluded by the user’s
hand, we found that the approach worked well in the experiment
because the stylus was on the hand web when participant was writing
or drawing. A large portion of the tape was still visible in this
situation, no matter participants held the stylus near or far away
from the nib. However, lost tracking to the stylus can still occur if
participants shook or rotated their hands arbitrarily, as the tape was

1https://developer-docs.wacom.com/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=10422351

mostly occluded. Regarding the two versions of the stylus’ pose,
we adopted the result obtained from the Wacom API if the stylus
can be tracked by the device, which was indicated by a parameter
received from the API. If this was not the case, we adopted the result
tracked by the computer vision technique. The switch may induce
motion discontinuity because of the imperfect tracking results. We
interpolated the two poses in our implementation to ease the visual
artifacts.

5 STUDYING IN VR USING IVRNOTE

We build a VR classroom for students to study video lectures that
are publicly available online. To engage students’ attention in the
class, we create a 3D classroom and placed a projection screen at
the front to display the lecture videos. Students sit in front of a
desk as they usually do in the physical classroom environment. In
addition, they take notes on the electronic papers that are placed on a
virtual desk (R3). Considering that a digital tablet can detect ﬁnger
touch as well, we let users ﬂip the note to previous and next pages
by swiping their ﬁnger left and rightward on the tablet surface. To
make this interaction metaphor intuitive, we implemented the 3D
page ﬂipping animation. The animation is predeﬁned and would
play automatically when the ﬁnger swiping event is detected.

In addition to taking notes by using a virtual stylus, students can
switch the stylus to other tools, such as utility knife, magic stick,
and markers, in VR. To achieve this, they simply click the forward
and back buttons on the physical stylus. Figure 4 shows the tools
available in the presented system. Each tool corresponds to a func-
tion that will be described in the later sections. We also show a small
card next to the note paper to indicate to users the current function
if they are new to the system. Note that we encourage readers to
view the accompanying video for the introduction to these tools as
the interactive operations are difﬁcult to visualize in still images. If
participants were using the VR classroom system for the ﬁrst time,
then they were provided with an interactive training session to accli-
mate themselves to these 3DUI educational interaction metaphors in
a manner similar to best existing VR applications [26].

5.1 Eraser and Post-Editing

Mistakes often occur when students take notes. Therefore, consider-
ing that a stylus in iVRNote has two sides, students can ﬂip the stylus
to become an eraser (Figure 4 (b)) and erase the notes if they make
mistakes (Figure 3 (a)). In addition to this fundamental function, the
presented VR classroom allows users to post-edit the notes, which
would be very useful when they attempt to insert a line of text into
the middle of a paragraph. In a traditional manner, users have to
write the text next to the paragraph and draw an arrow to point out
the position they would like to insert a given text. While in the VR
classroom, by switching the stylus to the utility knife (Figure 4 (f)),
they can cut the pre-written text and virtually move or translate it to
a different position to accommodate space for insertion (Figure 3
(b-d)). The post-editing helps students organize the notes well (R4).

(a)(b)(c)(d)tracing from the user’s head through the user-deﬁned 3D rectangle.
The four corners of the capturing area are then rendered on the slide
for indication. Students can still ﬁne tune the area by moving their
pinched ﬁngers. The picture would be captured when they unpinch
the ﬁngers. To embed the picture, students have to sketch an area on
the note paper by using the glue (Figure 4 (e)). A bounding box is
then computed for embedding. The system automatically pauses the
class if pinch gestures are detected and continues the class after the
pictures are embedded.

It is suggested that users can drop the stylus on the table when
taking a picture, and then pick up the stylus to sketch an area on their
note for embedding the picture. Otherwise, the stylus can interfere
with the gesture detection by the leap motion controller.

5.4 Revisiting a Speciﬁc Part of a Lecture
In the VR classroom, with iVRNote students can revisit the video
lecture by dragging the time slider. To achieve this, they have to
switch the stylus to a magic stick (Figure 4 (c)) and drag horizontally
on the tablet. The time slider on the top of paper shows the lecture
time. Considering the small ﬁeld of view of the HMD, we render
a preview above the time slider for students to discover the slides
(Figure 7) so that they can roughly obtain the relations between the
lecture time and the content.

5.5 Review by Selecting Notes
Studying notes is an effective way to review a lecture. However,
notes can be too brief to understand or contain errors because stu-
dents have to listen to instructors and write important points si-
multaneously. As a result, students may have difﬁcult interpreting
their notes or obtain incorrect knowledge from a review. In order
to address this difﬁculty, we record the time of each stroke written
by students so that they can review the video lecture if they get
confused from their notes. In the process, they can select a part of
the notes by using a marker that is shown by the system at the time
when the notes were written by the student (Figure 4 (d)). Then, our
system would move the lecture video to the time corresponding to
the selected note (Figure 7) and review the lecture.

5.6 Hardware Speciﬁcations of the System
We have implemented the VR classroom and iVRNote interactions
on Unity 3D and ran the program on a desktop PC with Core i7
3.0 GHz CPU and NVIDIA GeForce GTX 970 graphics card. The
system runs in real time at 70Hz, so that users can interact with the
virtual environment smoothly.

6 USER STUDY
We conducted a user study with 20 participants to evaluate the user
experience, user impressions and effectiveness of note taking and
reviewing in VR using iVRNote and in the physical world (PW). The
participants were asked to study online lectures in both conditions.

6.1 Physical World Condition
We compared VR to PW condition because we aimed to know
whether transforming students to a VR classroom with the iVRNote
interaction metaphor can help them engage with online lectures and
study better. We also aimed to understand whether the presented note
taking system iVRNote can help students learn and review online
lectures effectively. Hence, in an experiment, we let participants in
the PW group used physical pens and papers to take notes. To allow
participants in this group to take notes in their usual way as they do
in a traditional in-class session, we did not setup the VR and PW
conditions to be highly similar, except that the size of the physical
and virtual notepads were the same. Speciﬁcally, participants in
PW condition sat in front of a desk and studied by using a personal
computer, whereas participants in VR condition watched the lecture
video on a projector screen in the virtual world. The notepad in the

Figure 4: Students can use different tools in the iVRNote to help them
learn lectures, take notes, and review. Each tool corresponds to a
function. (a) Stylus. (b) Eraser. (c) Magic stick. (d) Marker. (e) Glue.
(f) Utility knife.

Figure 5: Students can check the Wikipedia page on a display on their
desks in the virtual classroom, if they encounter difﬁcult words and
terms in a lecture. (Left) The student scrolls the web page by swiping
his ﬁnger on the virtual display that is physically co-located with a
Wacom tablet for passive haptic feedback. (Right) The Wikipedia web
page is shown in the VR classroom on a virtual desktop computer.

5.2 Virtual Wikipedia Reference for Learning

Students may encounter difﬁcult words or terms in classes. Consid-
ering that the instructor cannot answer questions in the presented
VR classroom, we let students check Wikipedia for obtaining solu-
tions (R1). To implement this idea in iVRNote, we placed a virtual
screen on the left of the desk that shows the Wikipedia page, which
was co-located with a physical display for passive haptic feedback.
Students can examine the screen and then speak the word they would
like to search. For example, when they say “search pyramid”, the
presented system would process the voice command by the Google
speech API and then link the page to “pyramids.” In addition, since
the page can be too long to be fully displayed on the screen, stu-
dents may need to scroll down the page in order to read the whole
description. On the virtual display, students can move pages up and
down by swiping their ﬁngers on the virtual display surface. Figure
5 shows the operation.

5.3 Taking Notes by Virtual Photography

In recent years, many students take notes by taking pictures to obtain
slides or writings on the blackboard so as to save effort and pay more
attention to listening to instructors. These pictures are then used in
the review. However, when students are in a class, adding comments
and annotations to the pictures is problematic because cameras and
notes are independent of each other. Since both pictures and notes in
the VR classroom are digital, the problem can be easily solved. That
is, in iVRNote, users ﬁrst take a picture with a predeﬁned gesture,
and then sketch an area on their note for embedding the picture (R5).
Figure 6 shows the steps. To take a picture, users pinch the thumbs
and the foreﬁngers of their two hands to deﬁne a rectangle in 3D.
The presented system obtains the capturing area on the slide by ray

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)Figure 6: Students can take notes by photograph in the VR classroom. (Left) The pre-deﬁned pinch and un-pinch gestures used to take photograph.
(Middle left) Students can move their hands with thumbs and foreﬁngers pinched to deﬁne the cropping area. (Middle right and right) After they
take the picture by un-pinching the ﬁngers, they draw an area on the note paper to paste the picture.

Figure 7: (Left) Students can revisit a part of the video lecture by dragging the time slider. (Middle and right) The presented VR classroom records
the time of each written stroke. If students have problems in interpreting their note, they can simply select the confusing part. Our system will
replay the video lecture from the time stamp corresponding to the selected note for students to revisit.

VR condition was ﬁxed at a location on the desk, whereas the paper
in the PW condition could be moved. In addition, the pen used in
the PW condition was thinner and lighter than the Wacom stylus,
and the ink stroke size in PW condition was thinner than that in
VR condition. We were aware of the inﬂuence of pen parameters
on writing [20]. However, the constant size and the weight of the
stylus, and the ink stroke size were considered to be a limitation
in the current VR condition, although they were not ergonomically
challenging to use.

6.2 Participants

Participants were recruited via an online recruiting system, and
came from diverse backgrounds and majors. There were 6 female
participants and 14 male participants. Their ages ranged from 21
to 27 (M=23.4 and SD=1.88); and 95% of them had experience
of taking video lectures in remote learning systems. In addition,
participants were interviewed to insure that they were unfamiliar
with the lecture topics of the study.

6.3 Study Design

In a within-subjects repeated measures evaluation, participants were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions in the ﬁrst session and
to the other condition in the second session. Participants were also
randomly assigned to learn either a Meteorology (Science topic)
or History (Humanities topic) related topic in the ﬁrst and second
sessions. These two topics are not something one would know
through general knowledge, or could reason by common sense.
There were advanced topics that needed to be learned through study
and reﬂection. We also conﬁrmed by interviewing the participant
that they were not familiar with the topics before the study. The
order of learning condition and topic was counter-balanced between

the two sessions. The research question was, “to what extent is the
VR classroom with iVRNote effective, user friendly, engaging and
satisfying, as compared to a physical learning environment?” Our
study aimed to compare and contrast, and verify how the iVRNote
interaction metaphor for note taking, study and reﬂection in a VR
classroom differed from a traditional pen and paper method for the
same purpose.

6.4 Procedure
There were four phases in each session. The ﬁrst two phases and the
last two phases were three days apart. First, in the training phase,
the participants learned how to use the assigned system. After being
familiar with the system, the participants learned the lecture topic
using the assigned system in a learning phase. During the learning
phase, participants were asked to take notes like they normally do in
a traditional classroom setting. In addition, they were free to pause
and continue the lecture if they needed some time to take notes. The
length of the learning phase was approximately 45 minutes. This
phase ended after the participants learned the lecture topic. After
three days or more, the participants came back and were asked to
review the lecture for a speciﬁed period of time by revisiting the
lectures, notes, and review features in the same system in a reviewing
phase - enabling researchers to evaluate the review components of
the system. Participants were told that they would be tested on the
topic immediately after the review session. After the review phase,
participants were then given a 10 question test on the lecture topic
in a testing phase.

At the conclusion of the testing phase, participants then completed
a post-experiment questionnaires consisting of usability, ease of use,
presence [43], and learnability of the systems that covered both
usability and user experience metrics. After the conclusion of the
post-experiment phase, participants were scheduled for the second

session. In the second session, participants were randomly assigned
to the other learning system and were asked to learn a different
topic as compared to the ﬁrst session. Then, the training, learning,
reviewing and testing phases were repeated using the other system
with the second lecture topic. At the end of the second session,
participants were again given the post-experiment questionnaire,
a preference questionnaire and were interviewed, and then were
ﬁnally debriefed prior to dispensing the incentive for participation
and concluding the study.

6.5 Quantitative Results

6.5.1 Test Performance

The participants’ post-experiment session test scores in PW and
VR were subjected to a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA analysis.
One within subjects factor was the topic of study (Metereology vs.
History), and the other within subjects independent factor was the
condition (VR vs. PW). There was no signiﬁcant main or interaction
effects in the participants test score performance. In order to test
if the learning performance was equivalent between the VR and
PW conditions in each of the topics (Humanities or Science), we
conducted an equivalence test between the mean scores in each topic
to demonstrate that the means between VR and PW were equivalent.
Equivalence is demonstrated by showing that the 95% conﬁdence in-
terval for the difference between the scores is entirely within a range
of -25 and +25, by running two one-sided tests (TOST). The equiva-
lence test between the mean scores in the VR (M=69.0%, SD=14.45)
and PW (M=75%, SD=23.34) conditions in the Climate topic were
found to be statistically equivalent, Lower 95% CL=-20.27 p=0.016
and Upper 95% CL = 8.28 p=0.0006. Likewise, the equivalence test
between the mean scores in the VR (M=71.25%, SD=16.70) and PW
(M=79.75%, SD=12.17) conditions in the History topic were found
to be statistically equivalent, Lower 95% CL=-19.24 p=0.0077 and
Upper 95% CL = 2.25 p=0.0001.

6.5.2 Preference Questionnaire

After experiencing either the VR or the PW condition in either ses-
sion, we asked participant their impression of the learning system.
The questions in the survey addressed the following dimensions
(based on the IBM System Usability questionnaire [27]) to what
extent the learning system motivated the participant to learn, allowed
participants to focus or attend to the study, enabled the participants
to overcome learning difﬁculties via its features, made participants
willing to use the system, user satisfaction and usability. Partici-
pants rated each dimension on a 5-point Likert scale with higher
scores indicating higher preference for the system. A Wilcoxon’s
Signed-Ranks test was administered on the scores on each dimen-
sion of the preference questionnaire between the VR and PW con-
ditions revealed the following. The analysis (Figure 8) revealed
that participants rated the VR condition (M=3.85, SD=0.81) signif-
icantly more motivating to learn than the PW condition (M=3.40,
SD=0.68), Z=117.0, p=0.049. Participants rated the VR condition
(M=3.80, SD=0.83) signiﬁcantly higher in enabling them to focus
or attend to the lecture and study than the PW condition (M=3.10,
SD=0.78), Z=124.0, p=0.018. Participants rated the VR condition
(M=3.60, SD=0.82) signiﬁcantly higher in enabling them to over-
come learning or study difﬁculties than the PW condition (M=3.10,
SD=1.02), Z=74.5, p=0.032. Finally, participants rated the VR con-
dition (M=3.85, SD=0.74) signiﬁcantly more satisfying overall than
the PW condition (M=3.35, SD=0.74), Z=114.5, p=0.047.

6.5.3 iVRNote Writing Performance

We compared the size of characters written in PW and VR because
the participants were asked to take notes in the virtual and the phys-
ical environments. Speciﬁcally, for each participant, we manually
cropped the characters written by using the virtual tablet surface,
and the traditional pen and paper, respectively, and then computed

Figure 8: Results of mean Motivation scores (top left), mean Focus
scores (top right), mean Overcome Challenges scores (bottom left),
and mean Satisfaction scores (bottom right), between VR and PW
conditions, respectively.

the diagonal length of each character. Note that we measured the
size of each character by its diagonal length rather than the x-height
because the notes were in Chinese. In addition, the characters in both
PW and VR were in the same measure, and the size and location of
the canvas/paper were the same in both conditions. A Wilcoxon’s
Signed-Ranks test revealed that participants wrote with character
sizes that were signiﬁcantly larger in the VR condition (M=3.20 cm,
SD=1.15 cm) as compared to the PW (M=1.01 cm, SD=0.71 cm),
Z=-3.82, p<0.001, Figure 9. There could be two reasons that lead to
this result. First, we set the stroke to be thicker in the VR classroom
to reduce ﬂickering artifacts caused by the low resolution of the
HMD. Second, the participants were unfamiliar with taking notes
in the virtual environment. The note with the maximum character
size was written by one participant (6.48 cm) in the VR condition.
We found that the participant’s note taking in the VR classroom was
somewhat haphazard, and was thus an outlier. The participant took
the notes mainly based on photographs and annotations with only
few words. In addition, the note with minimum character size was
written by another participant (1.84 cm) in the VR condition. This
value indicated that writing in the presented VR classroom can be
small. Overall, students are able to write many words and draw
diagrams to explain a complex idea in VR.

6.6 Qualitative Results
Most of the participants like the presented iVRNote interaction
metaphor in the VR classroom experience. They mentioned that
they could stay focused in VR than in PW. When studying video
lectures by using a personal computer, they were often distracted
by external sources. However, when they were in VR, what they
could do were only listening to the instructors and taking notes. One
participant reported, “I may pause the video lecture and then start
surﬁng on the Internet or cleaning my desk during the study. But
I cannot do that in the VR classroom.” Several participants also
pointed out that a new environment would help them stay focused.
One participant said, “The virtual classroom is new and attractive. I
feel like I am more focused.”

More than half of the comments on the Wikipedia reference func-
tionality in the VR classroom were positive. Several participants
who preferred the function also suggested us to extend the search
from Wikipedia to Google because in that way they could check

6.7 Discussions

We obtained the quantitative and qualitative feedback in the user
study. Overall, the participants were very happy to be able to engage
their attention, take notes, and review lectures using iVRNote inter-
action metaphor in a VR classroom. An interesting ﬁnding was that,
the participants considered the presented system to be a very good
tool for study in VR classrooms because disturbance from external
sources were blocked. In the past, they were often distracted from
the online courses and surfed on the Internet. But in the VR class-
room they could only study because of the lack of distractions and
the ability to focus. In addition, we measured the size of characters
written by the participants. Although the participants tended to write
larger characters in VR than in PW, the mean size of the characters
in VR can be small at an average of 1.84 cm. The value indicates that
the notes taken in VR can be complex. However, the participants
also pointed out several drawbacks that make them less than willing
to study in the VR classroom. For example, they felt that the HMD
was heavy and of low resolution. They easily got tired in the study.
In addition, they complained about the tracking accuracy, which
would remind them what they saw was not real. However, despite of
the disadvantages, the participants commented that the iVRNote was
useful and would be more than willing to use it once the technical
problems were solved.

7 CONCLUSIONS

We presented an interaction metaphor called iVRNote in a VR class-
room for students in interactive note taking, learning, review and
reﬂection in VR classroom situations when viewing lectures in ped-
agogical experiences. We conducted a user study evaluating the
iVRNote interaction metaphor in a VR classroom learning against
PW learning from viewing a lecture, study, and reﬂection. We found
that participants can be immersed in the classroom and engage their
full attention in study leveraging the interactive features of iVRNote.
In addition, when they have problems in understanding materials
in a lecture, they can check the Wikipedia to overcome difﬁculties.
Considering that note taking is an important feature to facilitate
an active learning experience in VR, we provided students with an
intuitive interface to write down important points, well-organize the
notes, and review lectures in a convenient and effective way through
iVRNote. The results of our study revealed that the iVRNote had po-
tential for greater pedagogical beneﬁts, if VR displays and tracking
systems gradually improve in the upcoming years. In future work,
we aim to conduct an empirical evaluation examining participants’
ﬁne motor perception-action coordination in VR and PW writing,
drawing, and sketching activities in pedagogical situations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments. We are also grateful to all the participants who joined
the user study. This work is partially supported by the Ministry of
Science and Technology, Taiwan, under Grant No. 104-2221-E-009-
041-MY3, 107-2811-E-009-004-, and 105-2221-E-009-135-MY3.

REFERENCES

[1] A. G. Abulrub, A. N. Attridge, and M. A. Williams. Virtual reality in
engineering education: The future of creative learning. In IEEE Global
Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), pp. 751–757, April
2011.

[2] R. Adams, P. Finn, E. Moes, K. Flannery, and A. . Rizzo. Distractibility
in attention/deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (adhd): The virtual reality
classroom. Child Neuropsychology, 15(2):120–135, 2009.

[3] A. Angulo and G. V. de Velasco. Immersive simulation of architectural
spatial experiences. Blucher Design Proceedings, 1(7):495–499, 2014.
[4] T. Aslandere, D. Dreyer, and F. Pankratz. Virtual hand-button inter-
action in a generic virtual reality ﬂight simulator. In IEEE Aerospace
Conference, pp. 1–8, 2015.

Figure 9: Results of mean diagonal distance of character writing
between VR and PW condition.

more external sources. One participant said, “I can obtain the infor-
mation immediately by checking the Wikipedia. Besides, searching
the word by voice is more efﬁcient than searching the word by using
a mobile phone.”

Most of the participants liked the note taking system presented
in the VR classroom. Particularly, they were grateful that the note
taking by photograph greatly saved their effort in classes. One
participant said, “The note taking system is impressive. I like the
photograph the most because it can be embedded in the note.” An-
other participant reported, “Sometimes the professor would erase
writings on blackboard or go to the next slide before I completed
the notes. Taking a picture and then pasting it on the note can help
prevent this problem.” However, in spite of the convenience, one
commented, “I used to take notes by writing although I can take
a picture instead. Writing the important points improves my mem-
ory.” Besides the note taking by photograph, several participants
were in favor of post-editing of notes as well. One participant said
“Sometime I have to organize the note by rewriting after the class.
But with this, I don’t need to do that.” As for the review, all of the
participants commented that reviewing a speciﬁc part of the lecture
by selecting notes is convenient. However, in the reviewing phase
of the user study, we observed that the participants seldom used the
review function. For the participants whose notes were informative
and well-organized, they simply read their notes during the review
session. For the remaining participants, they quickly went through
the video lecture by dragging the time slider. After discussing with
the participants about our observation, they explained that the lec-
tures we chose in the user study were only about 30 minutes. They
could review all topics in a lecture in 5 minutes. A participant said
“If I have to review the whole course taken in a semester, I would
deﬁnitely use the function. There are too many topics to review,
and I need an effective way.” Finally, since the tools, such as the
pencil, eraser, and the utility knife, in the virtual environment have
different shapes compared to the physical stylus, we suspected that
the participants could have difﬁculties in reconciling the differences.
However, the participants did not report this problem to us during
the interview. They only complained that the eraser may occlude the
area they would like to erase.

The participants pointed out several drawbacks and limitations
of the presented VR classroom. Some of them were caused by the
hardware. For example, they complained that the HMD is heavy
and has low resolution. For the resolution problem, they had to
experience the ﬂickering artifacts of their notes. They also had to
write characters in the virtual environment larger than those in the
physical environment. Otherwise, they would have problems in
reading them. Besides, the participants mentioned that the stylus
tracking in the presented system could be improved. Sometimes the
virtual stylus may shake or locate at the wrong position. We found
that the problem usually occurs when the stylus is occluded by the
users’ hand or lies in the direction parallel to the viewing direction.

[5] J. N. Bailenson, N. Yee, J. Blascovich, A. C. Beall, N. Lundblad, and
M. Jin. The use of immersive virtual reality in the learning sciences:
Digital transformations of teachers, students, and social context. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17(1):102–141, 2008.

[6] M. Billinghurst, S. Baldis, L. Matheson, and M. Philips. 3d palette:
a virtual reality content creation tool. In ACM symposium on Virtual
reality software and technology, pp. 155–156. ACM, 1997.
[7] W. G. Bowen, M. M. Chingos, K. A. Lack, and T. I. Nygren.

In-
teractive learning online at public universities: Evidence from a six-
campus randomized trial. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
33(1):94–111, 2014.

[8] R. Boyatt, M. Joy, C. Rocks, and J. Sinclair. What (use) is a mooc? In
International workshop on learning technology for education in cloud,
pp. 133–145. Springer, 2014.

[9] P. Brandl, C. Forlines, D. Wigdor, M. Haller, and C. Shen. Combining
and measuring the beneﬁts of bimanual pen and direct-touch interaction
on horizontal interfaces. In International Conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces, pp. 154–161. ACM, 2008.

[10] B. W. Brown and C. E. Liedholm. Can web courses replace the class-
room in principles of microeconomics? The American Economic
Review, 92(2):444–448, 2002.

[11] C. M. . Brown. Comparison of typing and handwriting in two-ﬁnger
typists. Human Factors Society Annual Meeting, 32(5):381–385, 1988.
doi: 10.1177/154193128803200533

[12] Y. Cai. 3D Immersive and Interactive Learning. Springer Publishing

Company, Incorporated, 2013.

[13] A. Cheng, L. Yang, and E. Andersen. Teaching language and culture
with a virtual reality game. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pp. 541–549, 2017.

[14] L. Chittaro and F. Buttussi. Assessing knowledge retention of an
immersive serious game vs. a traditional education method in aviation
safety. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
21(4):529–538, 2015.

[15] J. L. Crowley, F. Wallner, and B. Schiele. Position estimation using
principal components of range data. Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
23(4):267–276, 1998.

[16] M. F. Deering. Holosketch: a virtual reality sketching/animation
tool. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI),
2(3):220–238, 1995.

[17] R. Elmgren. Handwriting in vr as a text input method, 2017.
[18] C. Forlines, D. Wigdor, C. Shen, and R. Balakrishnan. Direct-touch vs.
mouse input for tabletop displays. In SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, pp. 647–656. ACM, 2007.

[19] L. Freina and M. Ott. A literature review on immersive virtual reality
in education: state of the art and perspectives. In The International
Scientiﬁc Conference eLearning and Software for Education, vol. 1, p.
133. ” Carol I” National Defence University, 2015.

[20] R. S. Goonetilleke, E. R. Hoffmann, and A. Luximon. Effects of pen
design on drawing and writing performance. Applied ergonomics,
40(2):292–301, 2009.

[21] P. J. Gorman, A. H. Meier, and T. M. Krummel. Simulation and virtual
reality in surgical education: Real or unreal? Archives of Surgery,
134(11):1203–1208, 1999.

[22] R. S. Haluck and T. M. Krummel. Computers and virtual reality for
surgical education in the 21st century. Archives of Surgery, 135(7):786–
792, 2000.

[23] L. B. Igo, R. Bruning, and M. T. McCrudden. Exploring differences in
students’ copy-and-paste decision making and processing: A mixed-
methods study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(1):103, 2005.

[24] G. INC. Tilt Brush by Google web description, 2018.
[25] H. Kaufmann, D. Schmalstieg, and M. Wagner. Construct3d: A virtual
reality application for mathematics and geometry education. Technical
Report TR-186-2-00-16, 2000.

[26] J. J. LaViola Jr, E. Kruijff, R. P. McMahan, D. Bowman, and I. P.
Poupyrev. 3D user interfaces: theory and practice. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2017.

[27] J. R. Lewis. Ibm computer usability satisfaction questionnaires: psy-
chometric evaluation and instructions for use. International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, 7(1):57–78, 1995.

[28] J. Mackness, S. Mak, and R. Williams. The ideals and reality of

participating in a mooc. In International Conference on Networked
Learning. University of Lancaster, 2010.

[29] B. Means, Y. Toyama, R. Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones. Evaluation
of evidence-based practices in online learning: A meta-analysis and
review of online learning studies. US Department of Education, 2009.
[30] T. A. Mikropoulos and A. Natsis. Educational virtual environments:
A ten-year review of empirical research (1999-2009). Computers &
Education, 56(3):769–780, 2011.

[31] P. A. Mueller and D. M. Oppenheimer. The Pen Is Mightier Than
the Keyboard: Advantages of Longhand Over Laptop Note Taking.
Psychological Science, 25(6):1159–1168, 2014.

[32] P. Navarro and J. Shoemaker. Performance and perceptions of distance
learners in cyberspace. American Journal of Distance Education,
14(2):15–35, 2000.

[33] T. Nguyen. The effectiveness of online learning: Beyond no signiﬁcant
difference and future horizons. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning
and Teaching, 11(2):309–319, 2015.

[34] D. F. O. Onah, J. Sinclair, and R. Boyatt. Dropout rates of massive open
online courses : behavioural patterns. In International Conference on
Education and New Learning Technologies, pp. 5825–5834, 2014.
[35] D. Parmar, J. Isaac, S. V. Babu, N. D’Souza, A. E. Leonard, S. J¨org,
K. Gundersen, and S. B. Daily. Programming moves: Design and
evaluation of applying embodied interaction in virtual environments to
enhance computational thinking in middle school students. In IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 131–140. IEEE, 2016.

[36] T. D. Parsons, T. Bowerly, J. G. Buckwalter, and A. A. Rizzo. A
controlled clinical comparison of attention performance in children
with adhd in a virtual reality classroom compared to standard neu-
ropsychological methods. Child Neuropsychology, 13(4):363–381,
2007.

[37] I. Poupyrev, N. Tomokazu, and S. Weghorst. Virtual notepad: hand-
writing in immersive vr. In IEEE Virtual Reality Annual International
Symposium, pp. 126–132. IEEE, 1998.

[38] I. Poupyrev, N. Tomokazu, and S. Weghorst. Virtual notepad: hand-
writing in immersive vr. In IEEE Virtual Reality Annual International
Symposium, pp. 126–132, 1998.

[39] H. Rajaei and A. Aldhalaan. Advances in virtual learning environments
and classrooms. In Communications and Networking Symposium, pp.
133–142, 2011.

[40] A. A. Rizzo, J. G. Buckwalter, T. Bowerly, C. Van Der Zaag,
L. Humphrey, U. Neumann, C. Chua, C. Kyriakakis, A. Van Rooyen,
and D. Sisemore. The virtual classroom: a virtual reality environment
for the assessment and rehabilitation of attention deﬁcits. CyberPsy-
chology & Behavior, 3(3):483–499, 2000.

[41] A. P. Rovai and H. Jordan. Blended learning and sense of commu-
nity: A comparative analysis with traditional and fully online graduate
courses. The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed
Learning, 5(2), 2004.

[42] S. Rusinkiewicz and M. Levoy. Efﬁcient variants of the icp algo-
rithm. In IEEE International Conference on 3-D Digital Imaging and
Modeling, pp. 145–152, 2001.

[43] M. Slater, M. Usoh, and A. Steed. Depth of presence in virtual environ-
ments. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 3(2):130–144,
1994.

[44] V. Slotte and K. Lonka. Review and process effects of spontaneous note-
taking on text comprehension. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
24(1):1–20, 1999.

[45] G. Welch, G. Bishop, et al. An introduction to the kalman ﬁlter. 1995.
[46] D. Xu and S. S. Jaggars. Adaptability to online learning: Differences
across types of students and academic subject areas. ccrc working paper
no. 54. Community College Research Center, Columbia University,
2013.

[47] I. Yavrucuk, E. Kubali, and O. Tarimci. A low cost ﬂight simulator
using virtual reality tools. IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Magazine, 26(4):10–14, 2011.

[48] C. Youngblut. Educational uses of virtual reality technology. Technical
report, INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES ALEXANDRIA
VA, 1998.

