9
1
0
2

t
c
O
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
8
5
1
0
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Secondary Inputs for Measuring User Engagement
in Immersive VR Education Environments

1st David Murphy
School of Computer Science and Information Technology
University College Cork
Cork, Ireland
d.murphy@cs.ucc.ie

2nd Conor Higgins
School of Computer Science and Information Technology
University College Cork
Cork, Ireland

Abstract—This paper presents an experiment to assess the
feasibility of using secondary input data as a method of de-
termining user engagement in immersive virtual reality (VR).
The work investigates whether secondary data (biosignals) ac-
quired from users are useful as a method of detecting levels of
concentration, stress, relaxation etc. in immersive environments,
and if they could be used to create an affective feedback loop
in immersive VR environments, including educational contexts.
A VR Experience was developed in the Unity game engine,
with three different levels, each designed to expose the user in
one of three different states (relaxation, concentration, stress).
While in the VR Experience users’ physiological responses were
measured using ECG and EEG sensors. After the experience
users completed questionnaires to establish their perceived state
during the levels, and to established the usability of the system.
Next a comparison between the reported levels of emotion and
the measured signals is presented, which show a strong corre-
spondence between the two measures indicating that biosignals
are a useful indicator of emotional state while in VR. Finally
we make some recommendations on the practicalities of using
biosensors, and design considerations for their incorporation in
to a VR system, with particular focus on their integration in to
task-based training and educational virtual environments.

Index Terms—VR, EEG, ECG, Secondary Input, Biosignals,

Education

they are consciously, directly controlling it – this is what
we term as a ‘primary input’ [8]. Secondary input can be
thought of as ‘passive input’ or latent signals that a user
generates while interacting in VR or an immersive virtual
education environment. These secondary inputs can be divided
into two categories, (a) secondary (performance) data sources
derived from interaction, such as time-on-task and number-of-
errors, which are a measure of how well a user is performing
cognitively with a task or environment, and (b) endogenous
physiological signals captured from the user, which can be
used to objectively measure how a user is engaging with the
task or environment [9], [10]. Endogenous secondary input
can be thought of as physiological responses and reactions to
stimuli within the VR experience.

The current work focuses on the endogenous secondary
inputs from the physiological sensors, investigating the use
of biosignals while a user is participating in an immersive VR
experience. We analyse the signals to determine whether or
not they are robust enough to be used as an input source to
measure the user’s engagement with the VR environment and
to enhance the learning experience.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Virtual Reality is an immersive medium where the goal is
for the user to believe that they are in a different reality.
Conventionally we use various instruments, such as surveys
and questionnaires, to measure the level of immersion, pres-
ence and the emotional state of users in VR [1]–[6]. With
recent developments in physiological sensor technology [7]
we maintain that the incorporation of physiological signals
(biosignals) can provide an objective measure of a user’s
performance and emotional state while in VR and serious
games [8]–[10].

The current experiment examines the use of users’ ‘sec-
ondary input’, which can be fed back into an immersive
experience, to create an affective and reactive feedback loop,
or can be used as part of a summative assessment of a student’s
participation in a VR Education Experience.

To begin we should deﬁne what we mean by the different
types of assessment/data inputs. If a user is playing a game
or participating in an immersive experience with a controller,

As the ﬁnal outcome would be to use secondary input
signals in order to enhance immersion,
to
understand ﬁrst the current level of immersion in modern VR
experiences, and why it is important.

is important

it

The use of immersion in video and serious games often
enhances the play experience, especially in games that require
a certain level of suspension of disbelief, such as fantasy
or science ﬁction games. Author and game designer Ernest
Adams deﬁnes immersion as one of three distinct kinds;
tactical immersion, strategic immersion, and narrative immer-
sion [11]. Adams deﬁnes tactical immersion as immersion
found in the moment-to-moment gameplay,
the feeling of
being “in the zone”, after completing tasks in game, achieved
by slick, responsive user interfaces. Strategic immersion is
associated with mental challenge, by coming up with strategies
to solve problems, and optimising solutions to achieve victory,
something that is very relevant in the development of serious
games and educational VR experiences. Finally, narrative

 
 
 
 
 
 
immersion is described as being invested in a story and in
interesting characters, similar to a book or a ﬁlm.

In addition to these three forms of immersion, a fourth was
identiﬁed by Bj¨ork and Holopainen, which is more relevant to
VR than the others; spatial immersion [12]. Spatial immersion
is recognised as feeling as though the user is physically present
in the scene, feeling that the experience is realistic. Each
of these types of immersion are important when developing
a game or experience, but spatial immersion can be crucial
for developing VR; if a virtual environment is not immersive
enough, or not perceptually convincing enough for users, it
may interfere with the learning, as users may feel they are
taken out of the experience. While these levels of immersion
are important in helping an experience feel more realistic, they
are often challenging to create. Before it was more widely
and commercially available, there was some scepticism about
the ability of VR to provide a decent level of immersion.
Early experiments showed that using VR devices to perform
cognitive tasks (in one particular case, searching for a speciﬁc
target inside a room) did not necessarily provide a substantial
beneﬁt over using a standard desktop [5]. However, if was
found that if the target was not present in the scene, then VR
users were quicker in asserting that fact, suggesting that using
the VR system helped users built a better spatial frame of
reference that non-VR users. Expanding on this study, Pausch
et al. explored the same ﬁndings, while attempting to expand
the type of testing, and determine whether different types of
VR, e.g. Desktop VR and Head-Mounted Display (HMD) VR,
or different forms of cognitive trials could affect a user’s level
of immersion [5]. As the technology behind VR has evolved,
along with the evolution of storytelling and visual graphics
in games, more and more studies have been undertaken in
determining just how immersive VR can, or should be.

III. BIOSIGNALS

As mentioned earlier, we believe that

the incorporation
of biosignals as sources of secondary input data provides
objective measures of a user’s physiological response to events
and stimuli in a virtual environment. In certain types of VR
education experiences it is important to know whether the
user is stressed or not, or whether the user is concentrating
adequately, which are of particular interest in domains such as
medical and health education, aviation training, or task-based
training systems.

A. EEG

The Electroencephalogram (EEG) signal is a representation
of the brain’s electrical activity – the electrical impulses of the
brain’s cells communicating with one another. The EEG has a
number of medical uses, such as checking for conditions such
as epilepsy, studying sleep disorders, and detecting general
brain activity. An EEG signal is typically measured using
electrodes that are placed on the scalp. The brainwave output
gathered from an EEG is actually a complex compound signal
that needs to be broken down into a number of different
frequency bands, each with a corresponding wave (frequency

bandwidth) which is associated with a different mental or
cognitive function. These waves are delta, theta, alpha, beta
and gamma waves [13]. Table I shows each wave’s frequency
band, as well as some of the states it is generally associated
with.

Wave
Delta (δ)
Theta (θ)
Alpha (α)
Beta (β)
Gamma (γ) > 30

Frequency (Hz)
0.1 − 4
4 − 8
8 − 13
13 − 30

States
Deep sleep
Daydream, trance, drowsiness
Conscious relaxation, meditation
Focused, engaged, attention, thinking
Cognition, perception, memory

TABLE I
THE DIFFERENT BRAINWAVES, FREQUENCY BANDS, AND ASSOCIATED
STATES.

In recent years, there have been a number of papers pub-
lished exploring the usefulness of these brainwaves, in both
detecting certain physiological states of a user and of attempt-
ing to inﬂuence a virtual experience. The studies undertaken
investigated the use of commercial, entertainment focused
EEG devices, rather than medical-grade probes, as these would
be too expensive for regular users. Testing on users showed
that while they were not up to standard for use as a medical
device, commercial grade devices such as those created by
NeuroSky and Emotiv could be useful in BCI (brain-computer
interface) applications [14]. Subjects having their EEG signal
monitored showed results that were indicative of the expected
response for each brainwave, e.g. when placed in a relaxing
environment, users’ alpha waves were reported to have higher
activity. These devices were tested under a number of different
conditions, to assess not only their accuracy in retrieving the
EEG data, but also in their reliability; if they data could be
recaptured in a number of different situations, it would be very
possible that it could be used in such applications to measure
a user’s cognitive state. Results showed that devices like these
could be highly useful in gathering individual EEG readings,
for applications other than medicine or health [15].

B. ECG

An Electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical signals
of the heart. Each beat of the heart is triggered by an electrical
impulse normally generated in the upper right chamber of the
heart. Sensors (electrodes) are placed on the body to detect
this electrical activity. An ECG records the timing and strength
of these signals as they travel through the heart. From these
recordings we can determine a number of characteristics of the
performance of the heart, including the heart rate and rhythm,
and its variability (HRV), which are indicators of stress [16]
and mental workload [17]. ECGs, as well as other forms of
heart performance measurement, have become more common
in immersive virtual environments [18]. In the current work,
the inclusion of an ECG signal would help in determining
whether or not the EEG signal would be a viable and robust
source of secondary input.

The sensors for each signal were chosen based on their
ergonomics, ease of use, and the reliability of the signal
received from them. For the EEG signal, the chosen sensor

was the MyndPlay BrainBand, a consumer and research grade
EEG; it outputs the wearer’s raw brainwave data (the EEG
signal itself) at a sampling frequency of 512Hz. The device
consists of a single electrode placed on the user’s left temple,
along with an accompanying ear clip which was afﬁxed in
order to cancel out the electrical noise produced by the body.
This probe was attached via a Velcro strap to the rim of a VR
headset (Oculus Rift) in this project. For the ECG we used
AliveCor’s Kardia, a device that can provide medical-grade
ECG readings, with a very small and sleek form factor, about
the thickness of a coin and the size of a large plaster. To use it,
the user places one to two ﬁngers on one of two metallic pads
(one per pad per hand), which then allows an ECG to be read.
Designed to work as a highly mobile device, it connects to a
Kardia Mobile app for iOS and Android, which displays the
user’s ECG signal in real time. The form factor, ease of use,
and medical accuracy of the device meant that it was a very
good ﬁt for the project, and thus it was decided that it would
be used as the second source of secondary data to accompany
the BrainBand’s EEG signal.

IV. METHODS

Fig. 1. The Simon Says glowing orbs which the user must reproduce on the
XBox Controller

A three-scene Virtual Reality environment was constructed
in Unity 3D that incorporated the MyndPlay BrainBand EEG
and the AliveCor Kardia ECG. The three-scenes represented
relaxation, concentration, and stress respectively. The expe-
rience also included an introductory level, where users are
introduced to VR and the navigation scheme, which afforded
an opportunity to get a base-level reading for the EEG and
ECG sensors while the user is in a neutral scene.

A. Scene 1 - Relaxation

A simple free exploration Forest-based scene was designed
to make the user feel relaxed and at ease. The scene included
ambient outdoor music and was accompanied by gradual
transitions and a pleasant voiceover. A number of camera
image effects were added, in order to soften the lighting,
correct the colour of the scene by making it warmer, and add
a slight blur, in addition to adding some sunbeams.

B. Scene 2 - Concentration

The second scene was designed to have the user focus
on a speciﬁc mental task, in order to observe if a level of
concentration could be determined. This was achieved using
a “Simon Says” style game, in which the user is presented
with a speciﬁc sequence of glowing objects (orbs), and was
asked to reproduce the pattern by pressing the corresponding
coloured buttons on the Xbox controller. As the pattern went
on, the rate of the sequence increases, thus requiring the users
to concentrate more and focus on getting the button sequence
correct (see ﬁgure 1).

C. Scene 3 - Stress

The third and ﬁnal scene was designed to place the users in
an environment where they would feel stress and tension. The
scene was modelled on the inside of an ‘abandoned’ spaceship,

with dark metallic interiors, narrow corridors, ﬂashing lights,
and foreboding spatialised sound effects. Other cinematic
devices such as camera effects, mechanical noises, and so on
were used to heighten tension.

D. Integration of Devices

The BrainBand connected to the system via software called
MyndPlayer over Bluetooth. The software provides access
to the raw EEG data at 512Hz and proprietary “eSense”
data, which measures of attention, focus and mediation as
determined by the Neurosky algorithm. In this research we
used the raw EEG, which was subsequently processed and
split in to frequency bands using an FFT in MATLAB.

The Kardia device transmits the ECG data as an ultrasonic
signal which is picked up by a phone’s microphone and pro-
cessed within the mobile app; it sends a frequency modulated
(FM) signal containing the ECG data [19]. From the patent,
it was found that the device was sending the data using a
19kHz carrier wave, in order to keep the signal immune to
ambient noise. This carrier wave was then modulated with the
200Hz/mV ECG signal, with a range of ±5mV, giving a signal
of between 18 and 20kHz. The signal was run through a sound
check application to conﬁrm that it was indeed transmitting a
signal at 19kHz. When integrating the Kardia in to our setup,
we had to attach it to a controller that ensured both hands were
in contact at all times, hence we used the XBox controller
that shipped with the Oculus Rift. Next we used an Android
phone to receive the FM audio signal, demodulate and send
it over Bluetooth to our VR workstation. Fig 2 illustrates the
arrangement.

to maintain the electrical circuit it is paramount that the user
keeps both hands in direct contact with the respective sensor.
During the experiment there were occasions where that contact
was momentarily broken which led to a loss of data.

A. ECG

The heart rate data shows strong indications of an increased
heart rate in the stressful scene. Interestingly, there was also
indications of an elevated heart rate during the concentra-
tion/focus scene; this may be as a result of the mental workload
involved in the scene, or associated with frustration each time
the user was beaten in the memory task. Figure 3 illustrates
the mean heart rate per subject, over the three different scenes
(Relaxed, Focused/Concentration, and Stressed).

Fig. 3. Heart Rate mean values for the three scenes.

B. EEG

The results from the EEG signal were slightly more am-
biguous. The main elements being looked for were: an elevated
alpha level for relaxation, an elevated beta level for concentra-
tion/focus, and an elevated theta level and reduced alpha level
for stress. In Figure 4, while the alpha waves did have a larger
magnitude in the relaxation level, they did not appear to be
reduced in the stress level; this may have been due to the fact
that the participants tended to move their heads a lot more in
the stress level, as they were constantly trying to examine their
surroundings. However, most participants had a larger alpha
wave in the relaxation scene over the concentration scene, both
of which had far less head movement. This, combined with
the heart rate and answers from the questionnaire may point
towards the alpha wave being a good indicator of relaxation.
In terms of concentration, it was slightly more difﬁcult to
determine. While generally it is asserted that the beta wave
is associated with concentration [20], the EEG data received
did not show a marked increase in beta wave activity in
the concentration scene over the other two scenes (ﬁgure 5).
Perhaps this was once again due to an increase in head
movement; the concentration scene seemed to be the scene
in which the users were the most stationary.

In terms of stress level, the indicators are a high theta wave
and low alpha wave [20], [21]. In ﬁgure 6, the mean values for
theta wave did indeed appear to be greater than in other scenes;

Fig. 2. Kardia ECG attached to Android Phone attached to XBox Controller

E. Participants

Twenty one subjects (n=21, 16 Male, 5 Female) from a
population of University students. Table II shows VR Expe-
rience as a percentage of subjects. None of the participants
reported having a pre-existing heart condition (e.g. arrhythmia,
tachycardia).

Amount
None
Low
Some
Much

Percentage
23.8%
38.1%
14.3%
23.8%

TABLE II
VR EXPERIENCE.

F. Procedure

Subjects participated individually in the experiment. Sub-
jects were told that the purpose of the experiment was to
determine the ergonomics of using the physiological sensors
while in VR. The researcher explained the devices as they
were attached to the subject. When the subject entered in
to the Virtual Environment they ﬁrst went through an In-
troductory Level, which conditioned them to this particular
implementation of VR and associated control scheme, and
also served to act as a ground-truth for the sensors. Next the
subject undertook the three-scene experience. Following the
experiment subjects completed a post-test questionnaire and a
System Usability Survey.

V. EVALUATION AND RESULTS

Early analysis of the results from the physiological sensors
are promising, however there are some caveats with this
data. When attaching a single-electrode EEG on to a Head
Mounted Display (Oculus Rift) one has to ensure that the
arrangement is comfortable, while at the same time providing
a stable/reliable signal reading. As we subsequently found
out, excessive movement by the user, and of the user’s head
introduced noise in to the raw signal. With respect to the ECG,

VI. DISCUSSION
While the analysis of the questionnaire and SUS are outside
the scope of this paper, some items of note can be mentioned
which helped with the interpretation of the sensor data. Sec-
ondary input systems are designed to be as unobtrusive as
possible. While the majority of participants reported that the
sensors did not have an effect, there were some responses indi-
cating that it was an issue, with one user strongly agreeing that
they were conscious of the sensors throughout the experiment.
It is also interesting to note that while a number of users were
conscious of the sensors during the experiment, the majority
of users didn’t feel that it negatively affected them. This may
indicate that there is a level of balance that can be achieved
between the number of sensors and the ergonomic effect they
have on performance and enjoyment.

Another important point to note is that not all users who
agreed or strongly agreed with their reported level of stress
showed ECG or EEG signs of this; i.e. not everyone who
asserted they were stressed had a much higher heart rate or
higher theta wave. This may indicate that a person’s own
perception of relaxation and stress does not always correlate to
their physiological signals; other secondary input sensor types
(e.g. GSR/EDA) may have shown a different result, but at the
very least is poses an interesting question and merits further
study.

While there were some limitations with the experiment,
namely head movement causing spikes in EEG data, the use of
a single dry-electrode EEG, and the ECG requirement to keep
both hands on the contact sensors – the results are promising,
and indicate that heart rate, alpha waves, and theta waves may
be viable sources of secondary input.

These merit further examination in the context of VR edu-
cation environments, where the measurement of concentration
and/or stress may be an important measure of a student’s
performance in a learning exercise or experience. It would
seem particularly suited to task-based or constructivist learning
environments, especially those that require the student to oper-
ate under uncertainty or stressful situations, examples of which
include surgical training, ﬁrst-responder training, driving/ﬂight
training, laboratory tasks, or police/security education.

VII. CONCLUSION
A three-scene VR environment was developed to ascertain
the suitability of incorporating EEG and ECG biosignals as
sources of secondary input data. The three scenes covered
relaxation, concentration/focus, and stress, each of which
result in different physiological responses from users. This
experiment has shown that the measurement of heart rate,
alpha waves and theta waves as captured by the sensors are
good indicators of a user’s emotional response to stimuli and
the virtual environment, and their level of engagement in the
system.

REFERENCES

[1] M Schuemie. M. Krijn, and der Mast, C.(2001). Research on presence
in VR: a survey. Journal of Cyberpsychology and Behavior, January
2001.

Fig. 4. Alpha wave mean values for each subject.

Fig. 5. Beta wave mean values for each subject.

that said, it is necessary to realise that the head movement may
have affected the data. This may also have been the reason that
the alpha wave was not substantially lower, despite a lowered
alpha being regarded as an indicator of stress. While this may
have been the case, it was clear to see that the theta wave is
proportionally higher in some cases, such as in subjects 4 and
10, both of whom had much higher heart rates in the stress
scene. This may be an indicator that, despite the spikes in
signal due to head movement, the theta wave does appear to
be a reliable indicator of stress levels.

Fig. 6. Theta wave mean values for each subject.

[2] Martin Usoh, Ernest Catena, Sima Arman, and Mel Slater. Using
Presence Questionnaires in Reality. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 9(5):497–503, 2000.

[3] B G Witmer and M J Singer. Measuring presence in virtual environ-
ments: A presence questionnaire. Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ.,
7(3):225–240, June 1998.

[4] B E Insko. Measuring presence: Subjective, behavioral and physiological
methods. In G Riva, F Davide, and W IJsselsteijn, editors, Being There:
Concepts, Effects and Measurements of User Presence in Synthetic
Environment. April 2003.

[5] Randy Pausch, Dennis Profﬁtt, and George Williams. Quantifying im-
mersion in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’97,
pages 13–18, New York, NY, USA, 1997. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co.

[6] V Schwind, P Knierim, N Haas, and N Henze. Using Presence

Questionnaires in Virtual Reality. In CHI, 2019.

[7] B K Wiederhold, D P Jang, M Kaneda, I Cabral, and Y Lurie. An
investigation into physiological responses in virtual environments: An
objective measurement of presence. In Towards Cyberpsychology. IOS
Press, January 2001.

[8] Aidan Sliney, David Murphy, and John O’Mullane. Secondary assess-
ment data within serious games. Serious Games on the Move, pages
225–233, 2009.

[9] Katie Crowley, Aidan Sliney, Ian Pitt, and Dave Murphy. Evaluating a
brain-computer interface to categorise human emotional response. In Ad-
vanced Learning Technologies (ICALT), 2010 IEEE 10th International
Conference on, pages 276–278. Ieee, 2010.

[10] Aidan Sliney and David Murphy. Assessment procedure using neu-
rosky’s mindkit-em. In International Symposium Electronic Arts 2009,
2009.

[11] Ernest Adams. Postmodernism and the three types of immersion, 2004.
[12] Jussi Holopainen and Staffan Bj¨ork. Patterns in game design. Charles

River Media Inc.,, Hingham, Massachusetts, 2005.

[13] Lara V Marcuse, Madeline C Fields, and Jiyeoun (Jenna) Yoo. 2 -
the normal adult eeg.
In Lara V Marcuse, Madeline C Fields, and
Jiyeoun (Jenna) Yoo, editors, Rowan’s Primer of EEG (Second Edition),
pages 39 – 66. Elsevier, London, second edition edition, 2016.

[14] Wojciech Salabun. Processing and spectral analysis of the raw eeg signal
from the mindwave. Przeglad Elektrotechniczny, 90:169–174, 02 2014.
[15] Jeffrey M. Rogers, Stuart J. Johnstone, Anna Aminov, James Donnelly,
and Peter H. Wilson. Test-retest reliability of a single-channel, wireless
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 106:87 – 96,
eeg system.
2016.

[16] Hye-Geum Kim, Eun-Jin Cheon, Dai-Seg Bai, Young Hwan Lee, and
Bon-Hoon Koo. Stress and Heart Rate Variability: A Meta-Analysis
and Review of the Literature. Psychiatry Investigation, 15(3):235–245,
March 2018.

[17] N Meshkati. Heart Rate Variability and Mental Workload Assessment.

In Human Mental Workload, pages 101–115. Elsevier, 1988.

[18] Marzena Mali´nska, Krystyna Zu˙zewicz, Joanna Bugajska, and Andrzej
Grabowski. Heart rate variability (HRV) during virtual reality immer-
International Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics,
sion.
21(1):47–54, May 2015.

[19] David Albert, Bruce Richard Satchwell, and Kim Norman Barnett.
Wireless, ultrasonic personal health monitoring system, October 30
2012. US Patent 8,301,232.

[20] Ssang-Hee Seo and Jung-Tae Lee. Stress and eeg. In Convergence and

hybrid information technologies. IntechOpen, 2010.

[21] Ahmad Rauf Subhani, Likun Xia, and Aamir Saeed Malik. Eeg signals to
measure mental stress. In 2nd International Conference on Behavioral,
Cognitive and Psychological Sciences, pages 84–88. Maldives, 2011.

