AeroVR: Virtual Reality-based Teleoperation with Tactile Feedback
for Aerial Manipulation

Grigoriy A. Yashin, Daria Trinitatova, Ruslan T. Agishev, Roman Ibrahimov, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou

9
1
0
2

t
c
O
5
2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
0
6
1
1
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Drone application for aerial manipulation is tested
in such areas as industrial maintenance, supporting the rescuers
in emergencies, and e-commerce. Most of such applications
require teleoperation. The operator receives visual feedback
from the camera installed on a robot arm or drone. As aerial
manipulation requires delicate and precise motion of robot
arm, the camera data delay, narrow ﬁeld of view, and blurred
image caused by drone dynamics can lead the UAV to crash.
The paper focuses on the development of a novel teleoperation
system for aerial manipulation using Virtual Reality (VR). The
controlled system consists of UAV with a 4-DoF robotic arm
and embedded sensors. VR application presents the digital twin
of drone and remote environment to the user through a head-
mounted display (HMD). The operator controls the position
of the robotic arm and gripper with VR trackers worn on
the arm and tracking glove with vibrotactile feedback. Control
data is translated directly from VR to the real robot in real-
time. The experimental results showed a stable and robust
teleoperation mediated by the VR scene. The proposed system
can considerably improve the quality of aerial manipulations.

I. INTRODUCTION

The technologies aimed at aerial manipulation by un-
manned aerial vehicle (UAV) draw deep attention from
companies of e-commerce (e.g., Amazon, Walmart, etc.). In
many applications, such as industrial maintenance, structure
inspection, it is required to carry out aerial manipulation with
the objects. For example, picking and delivering the parcel,
inspection of the pipelines and bridges with the sensors,
holding a heavy object with the swarm of drones, etc. In such
situations, it is required to equip a drone with a dexterous
robotic manipulator. Nowadays, several research teams are
working on the development of UAV with a robotic arm.
The control system, dynamics, and stabilization of multirotor
with manipulators are studied in [1], [2], [3]. In the paper of
T. W. Danko and P. Y. Oh [4], the manipulator is visually
servoed using an eye-in-hand camera. Flying robot which
is capable of grasping objects in ﬂight is presented in [5].
In [6], the cable-suspended aerial manipulator is developed
for safe aerial manipulation in a complex environment. A.
Suarez et al. [7] developed the ﬂying robot with the vari-
able parameter integral backstepping controller for industrial
maintenance. Japanese company PRODRONE demonstrated
multirotor with two manipulators, which can lift objects from
the ground and land on the railing by using two manipulators
[8].

The authors are with the Intelligent Space Robotics Laboratory, Space
CREI, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russian
Federation. grigory.yashin@skolkovotech.ru, daria.trinitatova@skoltech.ru,
ruslan.agishev@skoltech.ru,
roman.ibrahimov@skoltech.ru, d.tsetserukou
@skoltech.ru

The ﬂight

Fig. 1.
test of the aerial manipulation. a) Robot during
teleoperation. b) VR visualization. c) Operator with HMD and motion
capturing system.

It is worth to mention that the delivery of objects is of
interest not only for commercial purposes but also for life-
saving, security, posting, etc. Industrial maintenance and as-
sistance in rescue operations in dilapidated buildings are the
two most important tasks for which ﬂying robots capable of
performing aerial manipulation are of the particular interest.
For this, the robot should carry out speciﬁc tasks with high
accuracy that could not be performed in autonomous mode.
This can be achieved with teleoperation. Additionally, in
this case, the robot and the operator can be located in the
remote places, which is important for hazardous conditions.
According to J. J. Roldan et al. [9],
the integration of
the robots with virtual reality interface can be the most
convenient way to remotely control the robots. A solution for
inspecting industrial facilities via teleoperation is proposed in
[10]. A. Suarez et al. designed a hexarotor platform equipped
with a 2-DOF compliant joint arm which is controlled by a
wearable exoskeleton interface via visual feedback. Despite
the proposed concepts and systems, to our knowledge, the
experiments of teleoperation of aerial manipulation have
never been demonstrated in real conditions.

The system proposed in this paper (Fig. 1) is aimed at
accurate object manipulation by the UAV equipped with
a robotic arm in a remote environment when there is no
direct visual contact between a human operator and drone.
This goal is achieved by specially developed human-robot
interaction strategy. In our case, the robotic arm attached
to the quadrotor is capable of reproducing human hand
movements. Such intuitive control allows an operator to

 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I
TECHNICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF FLYING ROBOT

Recommended load of motors DJI E600
Weight of ﬂying robot
Manipulator weight (with electronics)
Maximum robot payload
Manipulator length
Distance between the edges of the propeller and end of
the grip
Number of the manipulator DoF

600 g/axis
2080 g
918 g
400 g
740 mm
400 mm

4

material. The stress-strain analysis of links was carried out in
FE Software Abaqus 6.14 to select the most optimal design
in terms of minimum weight and maximum rigidity. For
the ﬁnite element method, the robot link was considered
as cantilever beam loaded by uniform gravity force and
torque of 5.3 N·m at the opposite end (while holding an
object weighing 400 grams in the extended position of the
manipulator). The distributions of displacement along Z-axis
and stresses in the manipulator link are provided in Fig. 3(a)
and Fig. 3(b), respectively. The displacement along Z-axis is
less than 3.5 mm at maximum payload, the deﬂection angle
is less than 1 degree. Thus, the manipulator has a robust
structure while manipulating an object.

manipulate remote objects successfully without any pre-
liminary training. In addition to this, the system provides
an operator with the tactile feedback, informing whether
the target object is grasped. To expand human capabilities
to interact with objects of interests in remote or occluded
environment,
the robot with manipulator as well as the
objects are also simulated in virtual reality. Their positions
and displacements are transmitted to the VR environment in
real-time. This enhances an operator perceptional capabilities
about the hardly reachable or remote environment.

II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

Our solution for the teleoperation of the 4-DoF force-
sensing manipulator attached to the ﬂying robot (Fig. 1 (a)) is
a virtual reality system that consists of VR application (Fig.
1 (b)), HMD, HTC VIVE trackers (trackers) and a glove
(Fig. 1 (c)). Trackers and glove transfer the position and
the orientation of the operator’s hand to the VR application
designed in the Unity platform, which sends target angles
to the robot manipulator. The glove controls the closing of
the grip and delivers feedback to the operator via vibration
motors when the gripper bars interact with an object. For
veriﬁcation of the whole developed system, we tested the VR
teleoperation of aerial manipulation using a VICON motion
capture system (mocap), which provides localization data of
the robot and object.

A. Robot Design

A payload of more than 1 kg, long continuous ﬂight time,
and size are the main UAV requirements. Taking into account
these limitations, we assembled a quadrotor based on the
frame DJI Flame Wheel ARF KIT F450 with propulsion
system DJI E600, and Cube Flight Controller (based on
Pixhawk 2.1). The robot is connected to a stationary power
supply via cable to eliminate the need for a changing battery
during long ﬂight tests.

Fig. 2. Layout of the manipulator servo motors.

4-DoF manipulator (Fig. 2) consists of three motors in
articulated joints (Dynamixel servomotors MX-106T, MX-
64T and AX-12 in the shoulder, elbow and wrist
joints
respectively), two links, one servomotor for the grip rota-
tion (Dynamixel AX-12) and the grip with 1-DoF (Futuba
S9156). The grip design is based on the four-bar linkage
mechanism. The technical characteristics of the developed
robot are presented in Table I.

Fig. 3. The distributions of displacement along Z-axis (a) and stresses (b)
in manipulator link.

B. VR System

The VR setup includes HTC Vive Pro base stations, HMD,
and Vive trackers attached to the arm for tracking the user’s
hand motion in VR. The ﬁrst tracker is mounted on the
shoulder to control the rotation of the shoulder joint of the
manipulator. The second tracker is fastened around the elbow
joint and aimed to control the elbow joint rotation of the
manipulator. Experimentally we deﬁned the optimal position
of trackers, which provides the largest work area of the elbow
and shoulder joint angles of the operator’s arm.

C. System of Interaction with the Target Object

Manipulator links have a truss structure to achieve a light
and rigid construction. The links are 3D-printed from PLA

The robotic arm is equipped with two force sensors FSR
400 mounted on the gripper bars. These sensors detect the

contact between the gripper and the object and determine the
force with which the bars of the gripper hold the cargo.

The design of the tracking glove was inspired by the glove
of T.K. Chan and et al. [11]. They tested the glove equipped
with inertial measurement unit (IMU) and ﬂex sensors.
Our glove for grip control consists of the fabric glove, 5
embedded ﬂex sensors, coin vibration motors, battery, and
control electronics (Fig. 4). Spectra symbol ﬂex sensors 4.5
measure ﬂexion angles of ﬁngers that directly controls the
opening/closing of the gripper. IMU sensor AltIMU 10 v4
determines the rotation of the hand in space (angles of the
wrist joint). We sewed 5 vibration motors into the glove
at the ﬁngertip areas that allows transferring the feedback
about the interaction of the manipulator with the grasped
object. The use of the vibration motors on the ﬁngertips
to get feedback from the micro UAVs was proposed in
the paper [12]. Control of sensors and vibration motors is
performed via Arduino Nano. The data exchange between
the microcontroller and computer is carried out by Bluetooth
module HC-05. The assembled electrical circuit is powered
by a 7.5V Li-Po battery via DC-DC converter MP1584EN.

Fig. 4. The scheme of the smart glove.

III. CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE ROBOT

A. Manipulator Kinematics

We used inverse kinematics to calculate the desired po-
sition of the gripper and the possible geometric limitations
of the manipulator. For VR teleoperation mode, we applied
forward kinematics. At the calculation of the kinematics, we
do not take into account the rotational degree of freedom of
the grip since we are transmitting the desired angle directly to
the servomotor controlling this DoF. Thus, we consider the
kinematics of 3-DoF planar manipulator. Fig. 5 shows the
scheme of the robotic arm. The abbreviations are as follows:
θ, β, and α are the joint angles; l1 and l2 are the link lengths;

l3 is the position of the grip end in relation to the wrist
joint; (xi, zi) coordinate system (CoS) is attached to i-th
CoS transformation; ldis is the transition from CoS (x2, z2)
to CoS (x3, z3) due to the shape of link 1; T1, T2, and T3
are torques in shoulder, elbow and wrist joints, respectively.
1) Inverse Kinematics: For the 3-DoF planar manipulator,
we used the following transition matrix, which corresponds
to the transformation from the CoS (x5, z5) to drone coordi-
nates (x0, z0):

p T = T 0
B

5 =







cos(φ) − sin(φ)
cos(φ)
sin(φ)
0
0
0
0







0 x
z
0
0
1
1
0

(1)

where

(cid:40)

φ = α − β + θ
x = l1 · cos(θ) + l2 · cos(β − θ) − ldis · sin(θ)
z = l1 · sin(θ) − l2 · sin(β − θ) + ldis · cos(θ)

Since the system is underconstrained, we decided to
impose an additional limitation for α to keep the object
parallel to the ground. This condition is supposed to provide
the stability of the grabbed object. Firstly, we calculate
β from (1) using MATLAB function solve for symbolic
computation. Secondly, using systems of equations (1) and
(2) [13] we calculate θ and α:

(cid:40)

x = k1 · cos(θ) − k2 · sin(θ)
z = k1 · sin(θ) + k2 · cos(θ)
k1 = l2 · cos(β) + l1
k2 = −l2 · sin(β) + ld

(cid:40)

θ = −(arctan(x, y) − arctan(k1, k2))
α = β − θ

(2)

(3)

2) Forward Kinematics: We used forward kinematics to
display the position of manipulator components in Unity. To
do this, it is necessary to write the transformation matrix
for each joint of the manipulator via rotation and translation
matrices from the drone CoS (x0, z0) to each joint CoS. Thus,
we got the following equations for position of elbow, wrist
joints (4, 5) and the grip end (6):

xe = xs + l1 · cos(θ) − ldis · sin(θ)
ze = zs + l1 · sin(θ) + ldis · cos(θ)

xw = xe + l2 · cos(β − θ)
zw = ze − l2 · sin(β − θ)

xg = xw + l2 · cos(α − β + θ)
zg = zw + l2 · sin(α − β + θ)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Fig. 5. Scheme of the manipulator.

where xs, zs are the coordinates of the shoulder joint that
corresponds to the current position of the UAV.

Fig. 6. GUI to monitor the manipulator state.

B. GUI to Monitor the Manipulator State

C. The UAV Localization

The connection of motors and sensors to MATLAB is
performed via board OpenCM 9.04. Wireless control of the
robotic arm is carried out by Bluetooth module HC-05.
Debugging of the control algorithm and monitoring the state
of the robot is realized by the developed GUI interface in
MATLAB (see Fig. 6). Using the GUI, we can conveniently
conﬁgure the robot and observe the real-time manipulator
behavior using a computer. In addition, we can send a
command to turn on (off) the manipulator power supply
using the transistor switch. It is necessary if the behavior
of UAV will become unstable.

Depending on the manipulator components, GUI provides
information about the work area of the manipulator and the
required torque of servomotors. It also displays information
about the current technical parameters of servomotors (volt-
age, speed, PID coefﬁcients) and sensor data. The user can
change the following manipulator settings:

• Control modes of motors depending on the controllers:
Arduino UNO, USB2Dynamixel or OpenCM9.04.
• Work area via changing the acceptable value of joint

angles.

The external position estimation system is used to localize
the UAV during the ﬂight. In order to get the high-quality
tracking of the quadrotor and a target object during the
experiments, we use mocap with 12 cameras (Vantage V5)
covering 5 m x 5 m x 5 m space. Robot Operating System
(ROS) Kinetic framework is used to run the development
software and mavros ROS stack for drone control and ground
station communication. The position and attitude update rate
for the quadrotor and the target object
is 100 Hz. The
estimated poses of the tracked robot and object are sent to
the computer running Unity 3D software for VR simulation.
While the main goal of the experiment is to manipulate an
object in virtual and real environments at the same time,
the quadrotor is commanded to give in place holding its
position close to the object (in this position, the object is
located within the robotic arm’s manipulation area). During
the aerial manipulation, the robot position is corrected by a
UAV operator in order to prevent high oscillations around
the desired location of the robot.

IV. VR CONTROL SYSTEM

• Lengths of manipulator links.
• Types of the manipulator motors (ordinary servomotors

or Dynamixel smart servomotors).

• Teleoperation and manual manipulator control modes.
In manual mode, the operator can change the position
of the gripper by writing desired X and Y coordinates or
pushing on the arrow keys (forward, back, up or down).
The step size is set separately for the usage of the arrow
keys. Teleoperation mode switches the GUI to the mode of
displaying and recording the experimental data, while control
of the manipulator is transferred to Unity and the operator.

Fig. 7 shows the scheme of communication among mo-
cap, ROS, Unity, the ﬂying robot, and the operator. Unity
application is the core part of this system, which receives
the data from the operator and the robot through a Bluetooth
connection and from ROS through a cable. Also, Unity sends
the necessary commands to the devices in accordance with
predeﬁned scripts. To provide the user with a visual control,
the operator wears HMD to experience VR application,
which includes a simpliﬁed model of the room along with a
ﬂying robot. Mocap cameras transfer positioning and rotation
tracking data of each object to the Unity 3D engine. The

Fig. 7. The scheme of communication of the VR-based teleoperation.

Fig. 9. The trajectory of the wrist joint position during experiment.

connection between Mocap and VR application is based on
the method proposed in [14]. In addition, data from the
manipulator are transmitted to the GUI.

The work space for testing the teleoperation system con-
sists of two rooms (Fig. 8). The ﬁrst room, where the aerial
manipulation is carried out, is equipped with mocap cameras.
In addition, the UAV operator with a radio remote control is
present in this room to eliminate unforeseen high oscillations
around the target position. In the second room, we installed
HTC VIVE equipment and base station (PC with Unity).
The operator can freely move his or her hand on which the
trackers and glove are worn. Transfer data about the relative
position of the robot and the object in VR from mocap allows
the operator to accurately navigate robotic arm in the current
situation which corresponds to the real context in the room
where the ﬂight experiment is carried out.

which includes a command to drop the object in point No.
9. A wooden cube weighing 77 grams was used as an object
for this experiment.

Fig. 10(c) shows that the maximum deviation of the roll
angle is of 5.22 degrees (standard deviation is of 0.99
degrees). The ﬂuctuations in the roll direction in the range of
points 3 to 9 arise due to the fast manipulator movement with
a considerable distance. The standard deviation of pitch angle
is of 3.51 degrees, the maximum pitch error of 9.38 degrees
(see Fig. 10(d)) occurs when the manipulator is moved along
one of the coordinates about 0.2 m, which is accompanied by
a signiﬁcant change of the servomotor torque in the elbow
joint.

Fig. 8. Scheme of the rooms for VR-based teleoperation experiment.

V. EXPERIMENTS

Experiments have been conducted in two stages: the ﬂight
test with GUI manual teleoperation and VR-based teleoper-
ation in stationary and ﬂight modes.

A. Teleoperation Tests using GUI

In the ﬁrst trials, we tested the robot operation in ﬂight
using a GUI control of the manipulator. We moved the
manipulator along the speciﬁed path (Fig. 9, Fig. 10(a))

Fig. 10. Dependences of coordinates (a) and motor torques (b) of the
manipulator, roll (c) and pitch (d) angles from the experiment time for the
ﬂight test with the GUI teleoperation.

B. VR Teleoperation Tests

For the VR teleoperation experiment we chose a plastic
cylinder weighing 105 grams as the object to be grasped.
During stationary testing of the teleoperation system, we
deﬁned that the position of the trackers on the shoulder and
forearm inﬂuences the possibility of trackers’ circular offset
on the hand, which can decrease the work area of θ and β.
After that, we calibrated delays of control codes for the ma-
nipulator, glove, and Unity. Long delay or non-synchronous
repetition of the movement of the operators hand by the

manipulator can cause unsuccessful aerial manipulation with
the object.

we plan to add the function of the UAV control to the VR
application.

Fig. 11 shows the change of the position of the wrist
joint, the torques of the servomotors of the manipulator, roll,
and pitch angles of the UAV in time. The recorded time
interval is shown between the moment when the robot hangs
over the target position and the time when it is stabilized
after releasing the object. Furthermore, the time-stamps of
the key operations (contact with an object, object grasping,
raising and releasing) are marked on this ﬁgure. The largest
pitch deviation is 7.15 degrees (at 11.2 sec, Fig. 11(d)) that
corresponds to the reliable contact of the manipulator with
the object. Grasping the object and picking it after 2 seconds
caused a signiﬁcant ﬂuctuation of the UAV attitude that
affected on the roll angle (maximum standard roll deviation
is of 2.61 degrees). After the object grasping, the drone was
conﬁned in movement in the direction along Y -axis. That is
why its roll angle during this period (8 - 20 sec) deviated
from the desired value, i.e. its set-point. The movement of the
object in new position also increased the torque value in the
elbow joint. The object release caused a sharp decrease of the
robot mass (in comparison to the robot with the object) and
the robot CoM moved quickly. The drone controller handled
this situation, and the robot stabilized itself after 4 seconds.
During aerial manipulation, standard deviations in pitch and
roll directions were 2.03 and 0.83 degrees, respectively.

Fig. 11. Coordinates (a) and motor torques (b) of the manipulator, roll
(c) and pitch (d) angles vs. time for the ﬂight test with the VR-based
teleoperation.

To conclude, the teleoperation of aerial manipulation was
successful. Tactile feedback from vibration motors of the
glove effectively complements the visual information of the
virtual environment, being a tangible conﬁrmation of contact
with the object. The main difﬁculties of the teleoperation
were related to the data transfer from Unity to the manip-
ulator controller. There were the cases when it manifested
itself in delays in the execution of real movements of the
manipulator. Throughout the experiments, a live telephone
connection was used between the operator and the technical
operator of UAV. It was necessary to perform the adjustment
of the position of the robot in the perpendicular direction to
the manipulation. In the future, it will not be necessary since

VI. CONCLUSION

We have proposed a VR-based teleoperation system for the
UAV robotic manipulator. The ﬂight tests of the developed
robot showed a stable UAV behavior while grasping of the
target object. The combined use of HTC VIVE trackers
and designed glove demonstrated a robust data transmission
to the Unity application. The average deviations in pitch
and roll directions were 2.03 and 0.83 degrees, respectively.
The future work will be devoted to the development of
the controller for decreasing deviations of the ﬂying robot
during the interaction with different objects and accurate
robot position control in VR.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Korpela, M. Orsag, M. Pekala, and P. Oh, “Dynamic stability
of a mobile manipulating unmanned aerial vehicle,” in 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2013,
pp. 4922–4927.

[2] A. Jimenez-Cano, J. Martin, G. Heredia, A. Ollero, and R. Cano,
“Control of an aerial robot with multi-link arm for assembly tasks,”
in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 4916–4921.

[3] S. Kim, S. Choi, and H. J. Kim, “Aerial manipulation using a
quadrotor with a two dof robotic arm,” in 2013 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. IEEE, 2013, pp. 4990–
4995.

[4] T. W. Danko and P. Y. Oh, “Toward coordinated manipulator-host
visual servoing for mobile manipulating uavs,” in 2014 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Technologies for Practical Robot Applications
(TePRA).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6.

[5] J. Thomas, G. Loianno, J. Polin, K. Sreenath, and V. Kumar, “To-
ward autonomous avian-inspired grasping for micro aerial vehicles,”
Bioinspiration & biomimetics, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 025010, 2014.

[6] Y. S. Sarkisov, M. J. Kim, D. Bicego, D. Tsetserukou, C. Ott,
A. Franchi, and K. Kondak, “Development of sam: cable-suspended
aerial manipulator,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.02426, 2019.

[7] A. Suarez, A. Jimenez-Cano, V. Vega, G. Heredia, A. Rodr´ıguez-
Casta˜no, and A. Ollero, “Lightweight and human-size dual arm aerial
manipulator,” in 2017 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (ICUAS).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1778–1784.

[8] “Prodrone unveils the worlds ﬁrst dual robot arm large-format drone,”
in https://www.prodrone.jp/en/archives/1420/, Retrieved July 18, 2019.
[9] J. J. Rold´an, E. Pe˜na-Tapia, D. Garz´on-Ramos, J. de Le´on, M. Garz´on,
J. del Cerro, and A. Barrientos, “Multi-robot systems, virtual reality
and ros: Developing a new generation of operator interfaces,” in Robot
Operating System (ROS). Springer, 2019, pp. 29–64.

[10] A. Su´arez, P. Sanchez-Cuevas, M. Fernandez, M. Perez, G. Heredia,
and A. Ollero, “Lightweight and compliant long reach aerial ma-
nipulator for inspection operations,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 6746–6752.

[11] T. K. Chan, Y. K. Yu, H. C. Kam, and K. H. Wong, “Robust
hand gesture input using computer vision, inertial measurement unit
(imu) and ﬂex sensors,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Mechatronics, Robotics and Automation (ICMRA).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
95–99.

[12] L. Labazanova, A. Tleugazy, E. Tsykunov, and D. Tsetserukou,
“Swarmglove: A wearable tactile device for navigation of swarm of
drones in vr environment,” in International AsiaHaptics conference.
Springer, 2018, pp. 304–309.

[13] J. J. Craig, Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control, 3/E.

Pearson Education India, 2009.

[14] R. Ibrahimov, E. Tsykunov, V. Shirokun, A. Somov, and D. Tset-
serukou, “Dronepick: Object picking and delivery teleoperation with
the drone controlled by a wearable tactile display,” in RO-MAN
2019-The 28th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication.

IEEE, 2019.

