9
1
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
5
0
6
9
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A brief chronology of Virtual Reality

Aryabrata Basu∗

Emory University

Atlanta, Georgia, United States

Abstract

In this article, we are going to review a brief history of the ﬁeld of Virtual Reality
(VR)1, VR systems, and applications and discuss how they evolved. After that, we
will familiarize ourselves with the essential components of VR experiences and
common VR terminology. Finally, we discuss the evolution of ubiquitous VR as a
subﬁeld of VR and its current trends.

Keywords: Virtual Reality, History, Timeline

“Equipped with his ﬁve senses, man explores the universe around him
and calls the adventure Science.”

— Edwin Powell Hubble, The Nature of Science, 1954

1. Introduction

Computer graphics are an essential aspect of modern computation platforms.
At the turn of the last century, it was required that engineers, architects and de-
signers have the common know-how to operate a graphics workstation in their
respective workplaces. With the rapid progress of microprocessor technology, it
became possible to produce three-dimensional computer graphics that can be ma-
nipulated in quasi real-time. This technology, which enabled interactions with
three-dimensional virtual objects, immediately made its way into several diﬀer-
ent mainstream industry including design, visualization and gaming. This article
chronicles the crucial moments in the ﬁeld of VR and its evolution. We will go

∗Corresponding author
Email address: aryabrata.basu@emory.edu (Aryabrata Basu)
1Circa 2018

Preprint submitted to ArXiv

November 25, 2019

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Ivan Sutherland's head-mounted 3D display (c. 1968). The display had a suspending
counterbalance mechanical arm and used ultrasonic transducers to track the head movement. (Left)
The system in use. (Right) The various parts of the three-dimensional display system. Images
reproduced from Sutherland (1968), with permission from Dr. Ivan Sutherland.

through the timeline of major VR technological shifts and events to understand
and appreciate the progress of the ﬁeld of VR.

In 1963, Ivan Sutherland introduced Sketchpad [14], a computer program that
used an x-y vector display and tracked light pen for computer-aided drawing. This
was arguably the ﬁrst interactive graphical user interface connected to a computer.
Two years later, Sutherland described the ‘ultimate display’ as the “a room within
which the computer can control the existence of matter” [15]. He added, “a chair
displayed in such a room would be good enough to sit in. Handcuﬀs displayed
in such a room would be conﬁning, and a bullet displayed in such a room would
be fatal.” Eventually, Sutherland and his student Bob Sproull created the ﬁrst
HMD system for interactive computer graphics. This system generated binoc-
ular imagery that was rendered appropriately for the position and orientation of
the moving head. As shown in Figure [1], the display was suspended from a
counterbalanced robotic arm and ultrasonic transducers were used to track the

2

natural movement of the head. This was the ﬁrst time in the history of computer
graphics that people could see into a computer generated virtual world. Suther-
land said “make that (virtual) world in the window look real, sound real, feel real,
and respond realistically to the viewer’s actions” [15]. This laid the foundation for
modern VR applications speciﬁcally for immersive VR. Modern VR systems have
widespread application domains ranging from simulation and training, industrial
design, exposure therapy, surgical planning and assistance, education, and video
games. To understand the current trends in the ﬁeld of VR, it is important to study
the history of technologies from which the ﬁeld of VR has evolved. By exploring
the important milestones that have led to the advent of VR technology, the source
of many current endeavors becomes evident. We shall see that all the basic ele-
ments of VR had existed since 1980, but it took high-performance computers, with
their powerful image rendering capabilities, to make it work. This trend continued
into the late 2000s until the emergence of smartphones. By 2011 the possibility of
having completely untethered immersive VR experience was rising. The section
that follows represents a timeline (from 1916-2015) in the development of VR as
a ﬁeld.

The timeline of VR technology and applications showcases important mile-
stones in the ﬁeld of VR. It includes personal achievements of scholars in the
ﬁeld as well as industrial accomplishments. But there is more to this timeline, for
example the gap (approximately 17 years) between Sutherland creating the ﬁrst
HMD in 1965 and the ﬁrst actual application of an HMD in the form of VCASS
in 1982 shows us that computer graphics technology was not ready in 1965. An-
other interesting trend occurs around in the late 2000s when the mass market was
ripe with touch-based smartphone technology. There emerges the need to use
the smartphone technology as an inexpensive VR display. The advantage lies in
the fact that the smartphones have inbuilt sensors like gyroscope, inertial mea-
surement unit (IMU), and magnetometer to enable sensor fusion, which oﬀers
seamless head rotation tracking. Through advances in technology and democ-
ratization on an industrial scale, modern day VR systems have become portable
and more ubiquitous. The concept of portable, light-weight, easily accessible VR
systems is not a very new concept. In 1991, Randolph Pausch proposed his ‘5
dollar a day’ VR system [8] for everyday use. He built this system using the then
available video-gaming apparatus. The Pausch approach sparked a democratizing
movement in VR technology.

In 2011, before we see a trend of leveraging smartphone technology as primary
VR display by commercial entities, the VR research community paved the way.
Basu et.al built a system that allowed untethered portability and instant deploy-

3

Table 1: VR timeline

1916 U.S. Patent 1183492 is awarded for a head-based periscope display (WEAPON) to

Albert B. Pratt

1929 Advent of the ﬁrst mechanical ﬂight simulator by Edward Link. Instead of ﬂying
short winged aircrafts also known as Penguin trainers, pilots were made to sit in
a replica cockpit with every instrument panel replicated. This is an example of an
early adoption of VR technology.

1946

The ﬁrst digital computer ENIAC was developed at the University of Pennsylva-
nia.

1956 Morton Heilig created a multi-sensory simulator using pre-recorded ﬁlm in color
and stereo. He augmented binaural sound, scent, wind and vibratory experiences.
It was a complete experience, except that it was not an interactive system.

1960 U.S Patent 2955156 was awarded to Morton Heilig for a stereoscopic television

apparatus which closely resembled the concept of HMDs.

1961

1963

Philco engineers Comeau and Bryan create an HMD which follows head move-
ment to follow a remote video camera viewing system. This is an early example
of telepresence system.

Ivan Sutherland creates the Sketchpad. This is the world’s ﬁrst interactive com-
puter graphics application which can select and draw using the light pen in addi-
tion to keyboard input.

1964 General motors corp. begins research on the Design Augmented by Computer

(DAC) system, an interactive application for automotive design.

1965

1967

1968

Ivan Sutherland explains the concept of his ultimate display in which the user can
interact with objects in a hypothetical world which does not conform with our
physical reality.

The ﬁrst prototype of a force-feedback system realized at the University of North
Carolina (UNC). Inspired by Sutherland’s ultimate display concept. Fred Brooks
initiated GROPE to explore the use of kinesthetic interaction as a tool for helping
biochemist feel interactions between protein molecules.

Ivan Sutherland publishes “A Head-mounted Three-Dimensional Display” describ-
ing his development of tracked stereoscopic HMD. The display uses mini cathode
ray tubes with optics to present separate image for each eye with mechanical and
ultrasonic tracking.

4

Table 1.1: VR timeline (cont.)

1972

Pong, developed by Atari, brings real-time multiplayer interactive graphics to the
public.

1973 Novoview, the ﬁrst digital computer image-generation system for ﬂight simulation
was delivered by the Evan and Sutherland Computer Corp. It was only capable of
simulating night scenes with limited display to a single shaded horizon.

1974

Jim Clark, who is a future founder of Silicon Graphics, Inc. submits his thesis on
HMD research and development under the supervision of Dr. Ivan Sutherland.

1976 Myron Krueger created artiﬁcial reality called Videoplace. This system captured

the silhouettes of the users from the cameras and projected them on a large screen.
The users were able to interact with each other’s silhouettes as their positions
were mapped to the 2D screen’s space. This would be arguably the ﬁrst example
of collocated collaborative VR, in which locally tracked users were able to interact
inside the virtual world.

1977

1979

1981

The Sayre Glove was developed at the Electronic Visualization Lab at the Uni-
versity of Illinois at Chicago. This glove uses light-conductive tubes to transmit
varying amounts of light proportional to the amount of ﬁnger bending thus es-
timating the user’s hand conﬁguration. The same year Commodore, Apple, and
Radio Shack announced their line of personal computers for general purpose com-
puting at home.

Eric Howlett develops the LEEP (Large Expanse Enhanced Perspective) system
for implementing the optics to deliver a wide ﬁeld of view from a small display.
This technology will be later integrated into early HMDs developed at NASA
(VIVID display).

Silicon Graphics, Inc. is founded by Jim Clark and his students at Stanford to
produce high-speed, cost eﬀective, graphics workstations to be used at VR facili-
ties. Super Cockpit becomes operational at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. The
Super Cockpit includes a see-through, head display mounted to the pilot’s helmet.
As pilots look in diﬀerent directions, their vision is augmented with relevant in-
formation. In the same year, at MIT, the stereoscopic workspace project team be-
gins work on an early augmented reality display that allows users to explore sub-
ject matter such as 3D drawing, architectural blueprint and 3D layout of computer
chips. The device leveraged a half-silvered mirror to superimpose a computer im-
age over the real-world objects such as the user’s hands.

5

Table 1.1: VR timeline (cont.)

1982

Sara Bly in her doctoral thesis proposes to use sound to represent large data sets.
She classiﬁes non-ordered multivariate data sets from which she creates discrete
auditory events. She eﬀectively mapped a number of parameters within the dataset
to speciﬁc parameters of sound. This early soniﬁcation of laid the ground work
for sound generation and representation in VR. In the same year, Thomas Furness
at the US Air Force’s Armstrong Medical Research Laboratories developed the
Visually Coupled Airborne Systems Simulator (VCASS) – an advanced ﬂight sim-
ulator. The pilots wore a HMD that augmented the out-of-sight window view by
graphically describing target or ﬂight path information.

1983 Mark Callahan at MIT develops one of the early HMD style VR systems outside

of Sutherland’s work.

1984

1987

Scott Fisher is hired by NASA Aerospace Human Factors Research Division to
create the Virtual Interface Environment Workstation (VIEW) lab. In the same
year, VPL Research, Inc. is founded by Jaron Lanier, who also happens to be the
person to coin the term virtual reality. NASA’s VIEW lab contracts VPL Research
to work on DataGlove and EyePhone. EyePhones are HMDs that leveraged LEEP
optics. At the same time, VIVID display was created at NASA Ames with oﬀ-the-
shelf technology: a stereoscopic monochrome HMD.

Jim Humphries, lead engineer for the NASA VIEW lab, designed and prototyped
the original BOOM, which is later commercialized by Fake Space labs in 1990.
At the same time, Polhemus, Inc. introduces the Isotrak magnetic tracking system.
This tracking system detects and reports the location and orientation of a small,
user worn sensor.

1989 VPL announces RB-2, a complete virtual reality system. Autodesk, Inc. an-

nounces their CyberSpace project, a 3D world creation program for PC. In the
same year, Mattel introduces PowerGlove for the Nintendo home video game sys-
tem. This device becomes more popular among DIY VR enthusiasts.

1990 A system commercialized by Fake Space Labs, the BOOM is a small box con-

taining two cathode-ray tube (CRT) monitors that can be viewed through the eye-
pieces. The user holds the box close to the eyes and a mechanical arm attached
to the box tracks the position and orientation of the box. In the same year, NASA
Ames Research Labs developed a VR application, the Virtual Wind tunnel, to ob-
serve and investigate ﬂow-ﬁelds of ﬂuids for better aerodynamic design, with the
help of DataGlove and BOOM.

6

Table 1.1: VR timeline (cont.)

1991 Virtual Research System, Inc. releases the VR-2 ﬂight helmet. This was the ﬁrst
time when HMD price point came down to less than ten thousand USD.

1992

1993

1994

Projection VR is presented at SIGGRAPH’92 as an alternative to head-based dis-
plays. The main attraction was the CAVE system. CAVE is a virtual reality and
scientiﬁc visualization system using multiple wall projected stereoscopic images
as opposed to HMDs. It introduced the superior quality and resolution of viewed
images and has much higher ﬁeld of view in comparison to HMD based systems.

The ﬁrst two academically oriented conference are held for the VR community.
The VRAIS’93 in Seattle and Research Frontiers in Virtual Reality IEEE work-
shop in San Jose. Later VRAIS and Research Frontiers in VR simply merged to
be known as IEEE VR. Also, SensAble devices releases the ﬁrst PHANTOM de-
vice. The PHANTOM is a low-cost force display device developed at MIT.
The VROOM venue at SIGGRAPH demonstrates more than 40 applications run-
ning in CAVE VR system.

1995 Virtual I/O breaks the one thousand dollar price barrier for a HMD with VIO dis-
plays. These displays include an inertial measurement unit providing the head ro-
tation information.

1996 Ascension Technologies corp. introduces the MotionStar wireless magnetic track-

ing system at SIGGRAPH’96. This new system had receivers for 14 diﬀerent
parts of the body and was targeted for largely motion capture industry.

1998 Disney opens up its DisneyQuest family arcade centers. These centers featured
both HMD based and projection-based VR systems. In the same year, the ﬁrst
six-sided CAVE-style display is installed at the Swedish Royal Institute of Tech-
nology, Center for Parallel Computers.

1999

2000

The ARToolKit, a free open source tracking library, primarily targeted for Aug-
mented Reality applications, is released with collaboration between the HIT lab
and the ATR Media Integration. Although designed for AR, the tracking library
provides inexpensive solution to do position tracking with just a webcam.

The ﬁrst six-sided CAVE system in North America was installed at Iowa State
University.

7

Table 1.1: VR timeline (cont.)

2007 Google introduced Street View, its web based 360 degrees panoramic views of

street level images. These images are highly eﬀective in simulating the immersive
experience when rendered through its 3D stereoscopic mode later announced in
2010.

2011 Our work started here*.

2012

Fov2Go project is introduced at University of Southern California, MxR lab. It
is software and hardware kit that supports the creation of immersive virtual re-
ality experiences using smartphones. The same year, Palmer Luckey launched a
VR kickstarter campaign to crowdfund the Oculus Rift DK1 HMD. This was the
ﬁrst time that a HMD design was oﬀered commercially for a price point of three
hundred USD.

2013 Valve discovered and freely shared the breakthrough of low-persistence displays

which make lag-free and smear-free display of VR content possible.

2014

Facebook purchases Oculus VR for two billion USD.

2015 HTC and Valve corp. together announce the VR system HTC Vive and con-

trollers. The system includes tracking technology called Lighthouse, which utilizes
wall-mounted base stations for positional tracking using infrared light.

8

ment of immersive VR experiences [1]. This system used a smartphone device as
the display and its internal IMU sensors tracking head orientation. For the ﬁrst
time, a truly untethered VR deployment was achieved outside of a controlled lab-
oratory setting. This setup provoked a host of other researchers to follow suit.
For example, Evan Suma’s MuVR [17] system has a similar build that support
low-cost, ubiquitous deployment of immersive VR applications. Bachmann et al.
[4] have been working with their portable immersive virtual environment system
that utilizes IMUs placed on the feet and head. They use zero-velocity updates
to derive nearly accurate positions and orientations from the sensors. In outdoor
applications, a GPS is used for position tracking, and an ultrasonic transducer is
used to plot the landscape in front of the user to create redirected walking paths
and prevent the user from walking into obstacles.

This timeline embodies VR evolution through limitation. The standardized
need to render and interact with a virtual 3D model evolved slowly but steadily
over time. The concept of interacting with a virtual entity (3D models, environ-
ments, etc.) with real-time (60 FPS or higher) feedback is the basis of all VR
experience.

2. What constitutes a VR experience?

The key elements in experiencing VR are a virtual environment, immersion,

sensory feedback and interactivity.

2.1. Virtual Environment

A virtual environment (VE) is the content and the subject matter of any vir-
tual experience. It comprises of virtual entities (objects) and their descriptions.
A VE ‘capitalizes upon natural aspects of human perception by extending visual
information in three spatial dimensions,’ ‘may supplement this information with
other stimuli and temporal changes,’ and ‘enables the user to interact with the
displayed data’ [19]. VEs oﬀer a new inexpensive communication medium for
human machine interaction. For example teleoperation tasks, such as in a laparo-
scopic surgical simulation, requiring coordinated control of the viewing position
beneﬁt from a VE interface as opposed to physically recreating a surgical simu-
lation. VEs are considered a communication medium that has broad applications
ranging from education and training to exploratory data analysis/visualization to
entertainment. Furthermore, VEs are an essential tool in psychophysical, physio-
logical, and cognitive science research, providing these ﬁelds with the backdrop
to conduct experiments.

9

Deﬁnition: Virtual environments are a description of a collection of objects in

a virtual space and the rules and relationships governing those objects.

2.2. Immersion

Part of having a virtual experience demands the user being immersed via VR
apparatus into an alternate reality. In general terms, immersion refers to a state
of mind, a temporary suspension of disbelief which allows a user to move at will
from real to virtual and vice versa. Good novelists exploit this fact to pull readers
into their story. But none of this immersion is direct and is often presented from a
third person point of view. In VR, however, the eﬀect of entering an alternate real-
ity is physical rather than being purely mental. For example, the process of putting
on a HMD physically separates the peripheral vision of a user from the real to the
virtual. A VR experience typically comprises both forms (physical and mental) of
immersion. The VR community simply refers to mental immersion as presence.
The terms immersion and presence are often confused and interchangeably used
but Mel Slater [12] deﬁnes the terms as follows:

• Immersion refers to the objective level of sensory ﬁdelity a VR system pro-

vides.

• Presence refers to a user’s subjective psychological response to a VR sys-

tem.

2.3. Sensory Feedback

VR as a medium allows its participants to experience an embodied perspective
[11]. For example, in a ﬂight simulator, the user embodies a virtual ﬂight through
direct control of a virtual cockpit. In order to elicit a perfectly immersed virtual
cockpit, the VR system needs to track the user’s head gaze and synchronize the
ego-centric perspective to match the user’s head gaze. This is a form of sensory
feedback by a VR system. Sensory feedback is essential to VR and a VR sys-
tem provides direct sensory feedback to the user based on their physical position
[Figure 2]. The most predominant form of sensory feedback is visual, but there
are other VR experiences that are based exclusively on haptic (touch) and aural
(spatial audio) experiences. With regards to the scope of this dissertation, we will
be discussing only visual sensory feedback.

Deﬁnition: A VR system is an integrated collection of hardware, software and

content assembled for producing VR experience.

Deﬁnition: Position tracking is the sensing of the position (and/or orientation)

of an object in the physical world.

10

Figure 2: This is an example of a real-time position tracking using a ﬁve camera OptiTrack system
(Flex 3 cameras) with retro-reﬂective markers being tracked at 100 FPS. This picture is courtesy
of the old Virtual Experiences Lab at the University of Georgia.

2.4. Interactivity

A VR experience is authentic only when the user feedback loop [11] is closed.
In other words, when immersed inside a VE, the user should be able to interact
with the VE and the VE should respond appropriately. Virtual experiences are
associated with the ability to interact with the VE by changing locations, picking
up objects and manipulating them, and closely following physical reality. There
are many forms of interactions that contextually vary depending on the simulation
subject matter. For example in a ﬂight simulator, ﬂipping the switches on the
control panel of the virtual cockpit makes logical sense and should be interactive
as part of the ﬂight simulation virtual experience.

3. Ubiquitous VR design

The vision of ubiquitous computing in Mark Weiser’s words [18] is that ‘a
good tool is an invisible tool. By invisible, I mean that the tool does not intrude

11

on your consciousness; you focus on the task, not the tool.’ For VR systems to
achieve such invisibility as described by Mark Weiser, the number of hardware
(wearable) components has to be minimized so that the VR users can focus better
on tasks. In 1991, it was quoted [8] that ‘the ﬁeld of virtual reality research is
in its infancy, and will beneﬁt greatly from putting the technology into as many
researchers’ hands as possible.’ This marked an important shift in the conceptu-
alization of VR system design with a focus on minimalism and the idea of using
oﬀ-the-shelf hardware components to build an inexpensive VR system that would
be highly accessible and aﬀordable to users and researchers.

3.1. A brief history of ubiquitous VR system design

With an increased focus on motion-based and natural interfaces, the gaming
industry has created a wide variety of readily accessible, oﬀ-the-shelf virtual re-
ality equipment. This oﬀ-the-shelf equipment has vastly reduced the barriers of
entry into immersive VR development, reduced costs in the virtual reality industry,
and increased the ubiquity of virtual reality devices. While this trend has received
much attention [6, 20], it has a humble begining with Randy Pausch’s initial eﬀort
back in 1991 [8].

Pausch’s ‘Five dollar a day’ VR system was built using an 80386 IBM-PCTM,
a Polhemus 3Space IsotrakTM, two Reﬂection Technology Private EyeTM displays,
and a Mattel Power GloveTM. At the time, the entire system cost less than $5000.
The system displays could render monochrome wireframe of virtual objects at
720x280 spatial resolution. Pausch’s work focused on oﬀering a seamless VR
experience rather than focusing on high resolution graphics and sterepscopic dis-
plays. Pausch quoted ‘low-latency interaction is signiﬁcantly more important than
high-quality graphics or stereoscopy’ [8]. Pausch’s work revealed the importance
of user experience and what really matters to the users in terms of having a con-
sistent VR experience. Another important aspect of Pausch’s work is accessibility
and its redesign of VR systems so that they can be easily democratized. Pausch
said ‘the ﬁeld of virtual reality research is in its infancy, and will beneﬁt greatly
from putting the technology into as many researchers’ hands as possible’ [8].

In order to design a universally accessible VR platform that oﬀers seamless
experience to users, we need to evaluate each individual components; namely, dis-
plays, user input schematics, and VR software. Pausch started with the evaluation
of HMDs and stationary displays and their respective impacts on user performance
[9]. To simplify the study design, Pausch merely compared a head-tracked ver-
sus non-head-tracked camera controlled searching task in a virtual room. Pausch

12

found that head tracking reduced task completion time by allowing the subjects to
build a better internal representation of the environment.

Building on Pausch’s early works, we conceptualized a new framework of col-
laborative computing in 2011 called the Ubiquitous Collaborative Activity Virtual
Environment (UCAVE) [1]. UCAVEs are portable immersive virtual environ-
ments that leverage mobile communication platforms, motion trackers, and dis-
plays to facilitate ad-hoc virtual collaboration.

Following our UCAVE framework, Anthony Steed published his work on de-
sign and implementation of a smartphone based VR system in 2013 [13]. In this
work Steed described the development of a HMD-based VR system that is inte-
grated into an iPhone-based platform. Steed’s design of the system is novel in
that it exploits the iPhone itself as an unseen touch controller. Steed’s main im-
plementation challenge was to align the two diﬀerent IMU sensors; one from the
smartphone and the other from the Freespace head tracker. Given that there we
no external frame of reference to utilize, the user interface had to be adapted as
discrepancies in yaw between the two sensors rapidly grew. To overcome these
limitations, Steed introduced two mechanisms: a gesture to automatically realign
the coordinate systems crudely, and a clutch to manually realign them precisely.
Steed’s system can operate at 60Hz for VEs with a few thousand polygons and
latency is acceptable at approximately 100ms.

The limitation of diﬀerent IMU sensor registration was resolved in our fol-
lowing work introducing a wearable electromagnetic (e-m), six degrees of free-
dom (6-DOF) single hand (position and orientation) tracking user interface that
is inexpensive and portable [2]. The e-m tracker was integrated successfully with
our UCAVE framework. The e-m tracker provides a single frame of co-ordinate
reference thereby oﬀering fully untethered and self-contained conﬁguration. The
e-m tracker does not track user position in real world, which is not a mandatory
requirement towards seamless VR experience.

At the same time, Judy Vance published her work on the potential of low-
cost VR equipment [7] delving into various combinatorial feasibility analysis of
consumer-grade video-gaming hardware such as Razer Hydra, Wiimote, and Mi-
crosoft Kinect. Vance’s ﬁndings are, that in addition to providing 3D motion
tracking, having analog controls and buttons are useful to create a more ﬂuid in-
terface for users.

Following the previous work, Suma et al. published his work on a multi-user
VR platform [16]. Suma argued that factors such as poor accessibility, lack of
multi-user deployment capability, dependence on external infrastructure to render
and track, and the amount of time to put all these factors together restrict ubiq-

13

uitous deployment of immersive VR experiences. Suma’s MuVR platform oﬀers
to solve all logistical hindrances in deploying immersive VR experiences. Suma’s
prototype is similar to our UCAVE prototype [2] with the diﬀerence of Oculus
Rift DK1 dev kit as the HMD and the smartphone device being attached to the
hips using a wearable harness. Suma’s proposed system pushes the ideology of
ubiquitous, immersive VR setup in the right direction by conceptualizing a mod-
ular setup towards democratized VR design.

In 2015, Ponto et al. introduced DSCVR [10], a commodity hybrid VR sys-
tem. Ponto’s work presents design considerations, speciﬁcations, and observa-
tions in building DSCVR, a new eﬀort in building a fully democratized CAVE [3]
like setup using commodity grade technology. Even though Ponto’s work is not
directly related to mobile, ubiquitous VR design, it follows a similar trend in that
it is an attempt to democratize VR technology.

4. Current trends in ubiquitous VR

The ubiquitous nature of computer graphics workstations capable of driving
complex real-time graphics, three-dimensional displays with higher frame rates
and overall cost eﬀectiveness and miniaturization of hardware resources are some
of the key reasons behind the current push toward modern VR systems. 3D dis-
plays and VR systems existed before but the paradigm shift occured with the ad-
vent of smartphones and the app store. For example, the earlier ﬂight-simulators
such as the VCASS [5] had signiﬁcant graphics capability but have been expensive
in deployment and required high maintenance to upkeep. Flight simulators are
generally developed keeping in mind a very speciﬁc application such as training
for particular military plane. They need to be programmed and micro coded in an
assembly level language to reduce the overall graphics and CPU cycles required.
This limits the code maintainability and further restricts potential upgrades both in
terms of software and hardware. A majority of such systems such as VCASS are
proprietary and thus are limited to a specialized class of users such as the military.
In the last decade, personal computing has evolved to provide higher accessi-
bility and to provide an entry pathway to a larger domain of users who can con-
tribute and open up other potential domains such as Education and Public Health.
In contrast to their predecessors, current VR systems are much more eﬃcient in
design and performance, yet there is a fundamental lack of knowledge as to how
and why users react to immersive VR in the way they do. With the introduction
of mobile VR systems into the foray, we can understand the usability aspects of
users engaging with VR and its content better than before. More features in VR

14

Table 6: Ubiquitous VR timeline

1991

1993

Randy Pausch’s 1991 Paper on ‘Five dollar a day’ VR system [8].

Randy Pausch’s user study comparing HMD and stationary displays [9].

2011 UCAVE started here*.

2012

Fov2Go project is introduced at University of Southern California, MxR lab. It
is software and hardware kit that supports the creation of immersive virtual re-
ality experiences using smartphones. The same year, Palmer Luckey launched a
VR kickstarter campaign to crowdfund the Oculus Rift DK1 HMD. This was the
ﬁrst time that a HMD design was oﬀered commercially for a price point of three
hundred USD.

2013 Design and implementation of an immersive virtual reality system based on a

smartphone platform by A. Steed.

2013

3d gestural interaction: The state of the ﬁeld by J. LaViola.

2013 A Virtual Environment for Studying Immersion with Low-Cost Interaction Devices

by Judy Vance.

2013 UCAVE - Pilot study reported.

2013 Valve discovered and freely shared the breakthrough of low-persistence displays

which make lag-free and smear-free display of VR content possible.

2014 MuVR: A multi-user virtual reality platform by Evan Suma.

2014

Facebook purchases Oculus VR for two billion USD.

2015 DSCVR: designing a commodity hybrid virtual reality system [10].

2015 HTC and Valve corp. together announce the VR system HTC Vive and con-

trollers. The system includes tracking technology called Lighthouse, which utilizes
wall-mounted base stations for positional tracking using infrared light.

2016 UCAVE - Physical ﬁtness study ﬁndings reported.

2018 UCAVE - Navigating maze study ﬁndings reported.

15

technology does not correlate with better VR experiences. With the continued ad-
vancement of hardware, the VR community has reached a certain threshold where
more insight in user analytics is required.

Future Work

The author intends to keep the article up to date as and when appropriate.

Acknowledgment

This article has stemmed from my Ph.D. dissertation work under the supervi-

sion of Dr. Kyle Johnsen at the University of Georgia.

References

[1] Basu, A., Raij, A., and Johnsen, K. Ubiquitous collaborative activity vir-
tual environments. In CSCW ’12 Computer Supported Cooperative Work,
Seattle, WA, USA, February 11-15, 2012 (2012), pp. 647–650.

[2] Basu, A., Saupe, C., Refour, E., Raij, A., and Johnsen, K. Immersive 3dui
on one dollar a day. In 2012 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI)
(March 2012), pp. 97–100.

[3] Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., DeFanti, T. A., Kenyon, R. V., and Hart, J. C.
The cave - audio visual experience automatic virtual environment. Commun.
ACM 35, 6 (1992), 64–72.

[4] Hodgson, E., Bachmann, E. R., Waller, D., Bair, A., and Oberlin, A. Virtual
reality in the wild: A self-contained and wearable simulation system.
In
2012 IEEE Virtual Reality, VR 2012, Costa Mesa, CA, USA, March 4-8,
2012 (2012), pp. 157–158.

[5] Kocian, D. F. A visually-coupled airborne systems simulator (vcass)-an ap-
proach to visual simulation. Tech. rep., AIR FORCE AEROSPACE MEDI-
CAL RESEARCH LAB WRIGHT-PATTERSON AFB OH, 1977.

[6] Lee, J. C. Hacking the nintendo wii remote. IEEE pervasive computing 7, 3

(2008).

[7] Lu1, C., Disselkoen, C., Butler, L., Rosenberg, M., and Vance, J. A virtual
environment for studying immersion with low-cost interaction devices.

16

[8] Pausch, R. Virtual reality on ﬁve dollars a day. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA,
1991), CHI ’91, ACM, pp. 265–270.

[9] Pausch, R., Shackelford, M. A., and Proffitt, D. A user study compar-
In Virtual Reality, 1993. Pro-
ing head-mounted and stationary displays.
ceedings., IEEE 1993 Symposium on Research Frontiers in (1993), IEEE,
pp. 41–45.

[10] Ponto, K., Kohlmann, J., and Tredinnick, R. Dscvr: designing a commodity

hybrid virtual reality system. Virtual Reality 19, 1 (2015), 57–70.

[11] Sherman, W. R., and Craig, A. B. Understanding virtual reality: Interface,

application, and design. Elsevier, 2002.

[12] Slater, M. A note on presence terminology. Presence connect 3, 3 (2003),

1–5.

[13] Steed, A., and Julier, S. Design and implementation of an immersive vir-
tual reality system based on a smartphone platform. In 3D User Interfaces
(3DUI), 2013 IEEE Symposium on (2013), IEEE, pp. 43–46.

[14] Sutherland, I. E. Sketchpad, A Man-Machine Graphical Communication
System. Outstanding Dissertations in the Computer Sciences. Garland Pub-
lishing, New York, 1963.

[15] Sutherland, I. E. A head-mounted three dimensional display. In Proceed-
ings of the December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I
(New York, NY, USA, 1968), AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I), ACM, pp. 757–764.

[16] Thomas, J., Bashyal, R., Goldstein, S., and Suma, E. Muvr: A multi-user
virtual reality platform. In Virtual Reality (VR), 2014 iEEE (2014), IEEE,
pp. 115–116.

[17] Thomas, J., Bashyal, R., Goldstein, S., and Suma, E. A. Muvr: A multi-user
virtual reality platform. In 2014 IEEE Virtual Reality, VR 2014, Minneapolis,
MN, USA, March 29 - April 2, 2014 (2014), pp. 115–116.

[18] Weiser, M. Creating the invisible interface:(invited talk). In Proceedings of
the 7th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology
(1994), ACM, p. 1.

17

[19] Wilson, J. R. Virtual environments applications and applied ergonomics.

Applied Ergonomics 30, 1 (1999), 3–9.

[20] Wingrave, C. A., Williamson, B., Varcholik, P. D., Rose, J., Miller, A.,
Charbonneau, E., Bott, J., and LaViola Jr, J. J. The wiimote and beyond:
Spatially convenient devices for 3d user interfaces. IEEE Computer Graph-
ics and Applications 30, 2 (2010), 71–85.

18

