9
1
0
2

v
o
N
7
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
4
8
5
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

RecyGlide : A Forearm-worn Multi-modal Haptic Display aimed
to Improve User VR Immersion

Juan Heredia
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Juan.Heredia@skoltech.ru

Jonathan Tirado
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Jonathan.Tirado@skoltech.ru

Vladislav Panov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Vladislav.Panov@skoltech.ru

Miguel Altamirano Cabrera
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Miguel.Altamirano@skoltech.ru

Kamal Youcef-Toumi
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
youcef@mit.edu

Dzmitry Tsetserukou
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
D.Tsetserukou@skoltech.ru

Figure 1: a) Novel wearable haptic display RecyGlide. b) The user with RecyGlade and Tracking System HTC c) VR Appications

ABSTRACT
Haptic devices have been employed to immerse users in VR envi-
ronments. In particular, hand and finger haptic devices have been
deeply developed. However, this type of devices occlude the hand
detection by some tracking systems, or in other tracking systems, it
is uncomfortable for the users to wear two hand devices (haptic and
tracking device). We introduce RecyGlide, which is a novel wear-
able forearm multimodal display at the forearm. The RecyGlide
is composed of inverted five-bar linkages and vibration motors.
The device provides multimodal tactile feedback such as slippage,
a force vector, pressure, and vibration. We tested the discrimina-
tion ability of monomodal and multimodal stimuli patterns in the
forearm, and confirmed that the multimodal stimuli patterns are
more recognizable. This haptic device was used in VR applications,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
VRST ’19, November 12-15, 2019, Sidney, Australia
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

and we proved that it enhances VR experience and makes it more
interactive.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Haptic devices.

KEYWORDS
Multi-modal haptics, vibrotactile feedback, VR aplications

ACM Reference Format:
Juan Heredia, Jonathan Tirado, Vladislav Panov, Miguel Altamirano Cabr-
era, Kamal Youcef-Toumi, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou. 2019. RecyGlide : A
Forearm-worn Multi-modal Haptic Display aimed to Improve User VR Im-
mersion. In VRST ’19, November 12-15, 2019, Sidney, Australia. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Recently, several VR applications have been proposed in many fields:
medicine, design, marketing, etc. , and to improve user immersion
new methods or instruments are need. Haptics provides a solution,
and enhances user experience using stimuli [3]. Most of the haptics
devices are located in the palm or fingers. However, in some cases
the haptic device position is a problem because VR Hand Tracking

 
 
 
 
 
 
VRST ’19, November 12-15, 2019, Sidney, Australia Juan Heredia, Jonathan Tirado, Vladislav Panov, Miguel Altamirano Cabrera, Kamal Youcef-Toumi, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou

Systems need a free hand (Leapmotion) or a hand instrument (HTC)
to recognize the position. Therefore, we propose a novel multi-
modal haptic display located in the forearm.

Various haptic devices have been developed in the forearm with
mono-modal stimulus [2, 4]. However, they have a persistent prob-
lem: users have more difficulty perceiving a stimulus in the forearm.
The forearm is a not advantageous zone since it does not have as
many nerves as the palm or fingertips have. Consequently, our
device produces multi stimuli for improving user perceptions. Fur-
thermore, multimodal stimuli experiments have been employed on
the user’s hands, where the results show improvements in patterns
recognition [1].

RecyGlide is a novel forearm haptic display to provide multi-
modal stimuli. RecyGlide consists of one inverted five-bar linkage
2-DoF system installed parallel to the radius, which produce a slid-
ing force along the user’s forearm. The second stimulus is vibration;
two vibration motors are placed in the device’s edges (see Fig. 2
(b)). The schematic and 3D representation are shown in Fig 2.

The user study aims to identify the advantages of multimodal
stimuli use in comparison with monomodal sensations. The experi-
ment consists of multimodal and monomodal pattern recognition
by users. In our hypothesis, two tactile channels could improve the
perception of patterns.

2 DEVICE DEVELOPMENT
RecyGlide provides the sensation of vibration, contact at one point,
and sliding at the user’s forearm. The location of the haptic contact
point is determined using kinematics model of inverted five-bar
linkages, inspired by LinkTouch technology [5]. The second stimu-
lus is generated by two vibration motors located on the extreme
sides of the device. The two types of stimuli allow creating differ-
ent patterns at the forearm. Also, it could be used to interact with
the VR environment, e.g., the sensation of submerging in liquids,
the felling of an animal movement in the forearm, or information
delivery about the relative location.

The device has 2-DOF defined by the action of two servomotors.
The slippage stimulus is produced by the movement of the motors
in the same direction. Conversely, the movement of the motors in
the opposite direction generates the force stimulus. The derivation
of the previous stimuli creates other stimuli like temperature or
pressure.

RecyGlide location is convenient for hand tracking systems.
Commercial tracking systems have different principles to achieve
their objective. However, the use of a device in hand decreases the
performance. In the case of a visual track, if the haptic device is
located in hand, the typical shape of the hand changes producing
poor tracking performance. For systems with trackers like HTC,
it is uncomfortable for the user to wear two devices in hand. The
device has been designed to adapt ergonomically to the user’s fore-
arm, allowing free movement of the hand when working in the
virtual reality environment.

The technical characteristics are listed in the Table 1. The table
shows the type of servomotors,and also the weight, the material of
the device.

RecyGlide is electronically composed by an Arduino MKR 1000,
servomotors and vibration motors. This Arduino model helps for

(a) Isometric view of the 3D model.

(b) Front view of the 3D model.

Figure 2: 3D CAD model of wearable tactile display.

Table 1: Technical specification of RecyGlide.

Motors
Weight
Material
Max. normal force at
contact point

Hitec HS-40
95д
PLA and TPU 95A

2 N

IoT applications because of its wifi module. The Arduino is in charge
of signal generation to the motors and communication wifi TCP/IP
to the computer. The device maintains constant wifi communica-
tion with the computer throws a python script. A virtual socket
transmits the data from python to the VR application in Unity.

In the experiment, a TCP/ IP server in Arduino was designed.
The server provides direct access to the device, avoiding the use of
the computer. This utility allows generating apps for cellphones
too.

3 USER STUDY
The objective of the following experiment is to analyze the user’s
perception and recognition of patterns when mononodal and mul-
timodal stimuli are rendered on the forearm, and to determine if

RecyGlide : A Forearm-worn Multi-modal Haptic Display aimed to Improve User VR Immersion

VRST ’19, November 12-15, 2019, Sidney, Australia

the multimodal stimuli increase the user’s perception of the con-
tact point position. The first user experience is a contact stimulus
over the cutaneous area by the sliding action of the contact point
generated by the inverted five-bar linkages device. The second user
experience implements stimuli by the combination of vibrating mo-
tors and the sliding of the contact point generated by the inverted
five-bar linkages device. The results of the experiment will help to
understand if the multimodal stimuli improves the perception the
position generated by RecyGlide device.

3.1 Experimental Design

Figure 3: (a)Displacement patterns: (A) Small Distance (SD):
progress of 25% , (B) Medium Distance (MD)progress of 50% ,
(C) Large Distance (LG): progress of 75% , (D) Small Distance
with vibration (SDV): progress of 25%, (E) Medium Distance
with vibration (MDV): progress of 50%, (F) Large Distance
with vibration (LDV): progress of 75%.

For the execution of this experiment, a pattern bank of 6 differ-
ent combinations between displacement and vibratory signals was
designed and is shown in the Fig. 5. In the first group of patterns, A
(Small Distance (SD): progress of 25%), B (Medium Distance (MD):
progress of 50%) and C (Large Distance (LG): progress of 75%), where
monomodal stimuli are delivered; the second group, D (Small Dis-
tance with vibration (SDV): progress of 25%), E (Medium Distance
with vibration (MDV): progress of 50%) and F (Large Distance with
vibration (LDV): progress of 75%), includes multimodal stimuli.The
vibration is delivered progressively according to the position of the
contact point: while the position of the contact point is nearest to
the edge where the vibration motor is located, the vibration fre-
quency is higher; when the contact point is located at the middle
distance, the vibration is the same in both vibration motors. The
higher frequency used in the vibration motors is equal to 500Hz.
The sliding speed of the contact point over the skin is constant and
has a value of 23mm/s.

3.2 Experimental Setup
The user was asked to sit in front of a desk, and to wear the
RecyGlide device on the right forearm. The device was connected

to one Arduino MKR1000. From the python console, the six patterns
were sent to the micro-controller throw TCP/IP communication. To
reduce the external stimuli, the users wear headphones with white
noise. A physical barrier interrupted the vision of the users to their
right arm. Before each section of the experiment, a training session
was conducted, where all the patterns were delivered to the users
five times. Six participants volunteering complete the experiments,
two women and four men, with an average age of 27 years old.
Each pattern was delivered on their forearm five times in a random
order.

3.3 Results
To summarize the data obtained in the experiment, a confusion ma-
trix is tabulated in the Table 2. The diagonal term of the confusion
matrix indicates the percentage of correct responses of subjects.

Table 2: Confusion Matrix for Patterns Recognition.

Category

Answers(predicted class)

s
n
r
e
t
t
a
P

Small Distance (SD)

Medium Distance (MD)

Large Distance (LD)

Small Distance Vibration (SDV)

Medium Distance Vibration (MDV)

Large Distance Vibration (LDV)

SD
77
0
3
0
0
0

MD
20
80
3
0
0
0

LD
3
20
93
0
0
0

SDV
0
0
0
97
3
0

MDV
0
0
0
0
93
0

LDV
0
0
0
3
3
100

The results of the experiment revealed that the mean percent
correct scores for each subject averaged over all six patterns ranged
from 80 to 96.7 percent, with an overall group mean of 90.6 per-
cent of correct answers. Table 1 shows that the distinctive patterns
LDV and SDV have higher percentages of recognition 100 and 97,
respectively. On the other hand, patterns MD and SD have lower
recognition rates of 80 and 77 percent, respectively. For most par-
ticipants, it was difficult to recognize pattern SD, which usually
was confused with pattern MD. Therefore, it is prove the require-
ment of more distinctive tactile stimuli (vibration) to improve the
recognition rate.

The ANOVA results showed a statistically significant differ-
ence in the recognition of different patterns (F(5, 30) = 3.2432, p =
0.018532< 0.05). The paired t-tests showed statistically significant
differences between the SD and SDV (p=0.041<0.05), and statisti-
cal difference between MD and MDV (p=0.025<0.05). This results
confirm our hypothesis, that the multimodal stimuli improves the
perception of the humans in the forearm for short distances. How-
ever, the results of paired t-tests between the long distances with
and without vibration do not reveal significant differences, thus for
long distances perceptions, the multimodal stimuli are not required.

4 APPLICATIONS
For the demonstration of RecyGlide, some applications were de-
veloped using the game engine Unity 3D. The SubmergingHand
application clearly illustrate how the device improves the user im-
mersion in a virtual reality environment. The device provides a
sensation of the liquid level by the position of the contact point in
the forearm. The viscosity of the liquid is represented by the normal

VRST ’19, November 12-15, 2019, Sidney, Australia Juan Heredia, Jonathan Tirado, Vladislav Panov, Miguel Altamirano Cabrera, Kamal Youcef-Toumi, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou

REFERENCES
[1] Miguel Altamirano Cabrera and Dzmitry Tsetserukou. 2019. LinkGlide: A Wearable
Haptic Display with Inverted Five-Bar Linkages for Delivering Multi-contact and
Multi-modal Tactile Stimuli. In Haptic Interaction, Hiroyuki Kajimoto, Dongjun
Lee, Sang-Youn Kim, Masashi Konyo, and Ki-Uk Kyung (Eds.). Springer Singapore,
Singapore, 149–154.

[2] David Dobbelstein, Evgeny Stemasov, Daniel Besserer, Irina Stenske, and Enrico
Rukzio. 2018. Movelet: A Self-actuated Movable Bracelet for Positional Haptic
Feedback on the User’s Forearm. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International
Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 33–39.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3267242.3267249

[3] Ping-Hsuan Han, Yang-Sheng Chen, Kong-Chang Lee, Hao-Cheng Wang, Chiao-
En Hsieh, Jui-Chun Hsiao, Chien-Hsing Chou, and Yi-Ping Hung. 2018. Haptic
Around: Multiple Tactile Sensations for Immersive Environment and Interaction
in Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology (VRST ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 35, 10 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3281505.3281507

[4] Taha Moriyama, Takuto Nakamura, and Hiroyuki Kajimoto. 2018. Development
of a Wearable Haptic Device That Presents the Haptic Sensation Corresponding
to Three Fingers on the Forearm. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Spatial User
Interaction (SUI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 158–162. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3267782.3267795

[5] D. Tsetserukou, S. Hosokawa, and K. Terashima. 2014. LinkTouch: A wearable
haptic device with five-bar linkage mechanism for presentation of two-DOF force
feedback at the fingerpad. In 2014 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS). 307–312.
https://doi.org/10.1109/HAPTICS.2014.6775473

force applied in the contact point. When the liquid is viscous, the
applied force is high and the vibration motors work in a higher
frequency. The application is shown in the Fig. 4.

Figure 4: Submerging Hand : moving the contact point the
user recognizes the immersion in the liquid.

The application "Boundaries Recognition" is an example of how
our device helps to perceive the VR environment. Habitually VR
users go forward the object boundaries and don’t respect the physics
limits of static objects in the scene, such as walls and tables. Re-
cyGlide informs the boundary collision of the hand tracker by
activating the vibration motors and moving the contact point to
one of the two sides, which is call collision side.

Figure 5: Boundaries Recognition: The display informs
when the user has crashed whit an environment boundery

These two applications are basic examples, that can be applied
in more complex ones. Additionally, the patterns can represent
the current state of some variable or environment characteristic;
for example, they can communicate the tracker battery status, the
selected environment or the distance to an objective, etc.

4.1 Conclusions
We proposed a new haptic device in the forearm and made some ex-
periments with it. Due to the results of the experiment, we demon-
strated that multimodal stimuli patrons are easily recognizable.
Therefore we consider that the device is suitable for communicat-
ing some VR messages through the use of patterns.

Though the forearm is not an advantageous area, the device
has excellent performance and improves VR realism and the user
immersion. The feeling of submersion in liquids can be used in
numerous applications such as summing simulators, medical op-
erations, games, etc. Boundaries collision detection is useful for
all kind of VR applications because it is a constant problem in VR
environments.

