9
1
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
5
9
9
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint — PhotoTwinVR: An Immersive System for
Manipulation, Inspection and Dimension Measurements
of the 3D Photogrammetric Models of Real-Life Structures
in Virtual Reality

Sławomir Konrad Tadeja∗ (cid:63), Wojciech Rydlewicz†, Yupu Lu(cid:63)‡,
Per Ola Kristensson(cid:63), Tomasz Bubas†, Maciej Rydlewicz†

(cid:63)Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U. K.,
†Centrum Systemów Softdesk, Łódź, Poland,
‡School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract

Photogrammetry is a science dealing with obtaining reliable information about physical objects using their imagery
description. Recent advancements in the development of Virtual Reality (VR) can help to unlock the full potential
oﬀered by the digital 3D-reality models generated using the state-of-art photogrammetric technologies. These models
are becoming a viable alternative for providing high-quality content for such immersive environment. Simultaneously,
their analyses in VR could bring added-value to professionals working in various engineering and non-engineering
settings and help in extracting useful information about physical objects. However, there is little research published
to date on feasible interaction methods in the VR-based systems augmented with the 3D photogrammetric models,
especially concerning gestural input interfaces. Consequently, this paper presents the PhotoTwinVR – an immersive,
gesture-controlled system for manipulation and inspection of 3D photogrammetric models of physical objects in VR.
Our system allows the user to perform basic engineering operations on the model subjected to the oﬀ-line inspec-
tion process. An observational study with a group of three domain-expert participants was completed to verify its
feasibility. The system was populated with a 3D photogrammetric model of an existing pipe-rack generated using a
commercial software package. The participants were asked to carry out a survey measurement of the object using the
measurement toolbox oﬀered by PhotoTwinVR. The study revealed a potential of such immersive tool to be applied
in practical real-words cases of oﬀ-line inspections of pipelines.

Keywords

virtual reality; industrial visual analytics; immersive analytics; digital twin; photogrammetry; oﬀ-
line inspection

∗Address all correspondence to slawomir.tadeja@alumni.cern

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

1.1 Research problem and suggested solution

Recent advancements in the development and adaptation of the so-called immersive interfaces,
speciﬁcally VR and AR, can help to unlock the full potential oﬀered by 3D-reality models created
using state-of-art photogrammetric technologies. Photogrammetry consists in extracting informa-
tion about physical objects using images [1]. There is a noticeable gap in the literature, described
in Section 2, concerning the investigation for an appropriate interaction method in the context of
VR-based systems that augment data extraction, including measurements, from digital photogram-
metric models.

This paper aims to present software and provide analyses of user-based experiments to breach
this gap. The research is of relevance, as the systems that combine these two technologies are
gaining more and more interest from both academia and industry. Consequently, we demonstrate
PhotoTwinVR – an immersive, gesture-controlled system for manipulation, inspection and dimen-
sion measurements of a 3D photogrammetric model of a physical object in VR. Our system allows
the user to manipulate the 3D model using the user’s own hands (see Fig. 5). The user can (i) move
the model to any part of the 3D space (see Fig. 6); (ii) decrease or increase the model’s size (see
Fig. 8); or (iii) rotate the model along a chosen axis (see Fig. 7). These manipulation methods are
facilitated by the hand-tracking sensor attach on the Oculus Rift HMD as shown in Fig. 1). More-
over, the user can take distance measurements of the model using a built-in measurement toolkit,
as seen in Fig. 12-13.

In addition, we also present the two-step process for system’s veriﬁcation and evaluation dis-

cussed together with the accompanying results.

First, we judge our system against the well-established Nielsen’s guidelines [2, 3]. We use
Nielsen’s heuristics [2, 3] to assess and reason about the fundamental usability and functionality of
our system. Secondly, we run an observational study [4] with a small group of three domain-expert
participants. Two of them worked for Urzad Dozoru Technicznego (UDT, eng. Oﬃce of Technical
Inspection) [5] which is an EU Notiﬁed Body No. 14331 . UDT functions based on the Act on con-
formity assessment and market surveillance systems. The third expert participant had experience
as a designer of industrial piping systems.

The participants were to complete an oﬀ-line inspection of an existing pipe-rack (located in Łódź,
Poland, at the junction of Lodowa and Andrzejewskiej streets [6]), using the 3D photogrammetric
model of this piping system, while using the measurement toolbox oﬀered by our system. This
model can be reviewed online at [7].

This exploratory, formative study allowed us to test PhotoTwinVR system with potential target-
users for whom such a toolkit could potentially bring the most beneﬁts. The positive reactions and
comments of the study participants, together with the observation of their behaviour and analysis of
qualitative data, suggest that such system potentially has a breadth of applications in an engineering
domain, including the immediate applications.

1UDT is a Polish state institution appointed to conduct activities aiming at the safe operation of technical equipment in Poland. The main scope
of the UDT activity is technical inspection deﬁned by the provisions of Act on technical inspection (in Poland) [5]. It also acts as the UDT-CERT
Certiﬁcation Body, for the certiﬁcation of personnel, products and management systems. UDT has, within its structure, a separate UDT Academy
Unit, responsible for the technical safety training of technical specialists, senior management and personnel operating technical equipment. The
UDT is also accredited by the Polish Accreditation Centre (a member of EA) to perform grant certiﬁcates, perform inspections and testing. [5].

2

1.2 Motivation

Photogrammetry has been deﬁned in a number of ways, diﬀering in the approach to the problem
and concentrating on its various particular aspects [8], including the aforementioned [1], but also [9,
10, 11, 12]. However, the most general deﬁnition has been formulated by the American Society for
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ASPRS). It states that photogrammetry is an art, science and
technology, which deals with collecting data on physical objects and the environment, by recording,
measuring, and interpreting photographic images and patterns of radiant electromagnetic energy
and other phenomena [13]. History and development of photogrammetry has been described and
updated in detail in several notable works and summaries published throughout the last decades,
for example in [1, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 12, 19]. Various techniques and technologies in the ﬁeld of
photogrammetry have been utilized to create topographic maps, orthophoto maps, digital models
of elevation and to quantify distance, measure coordinates, heights, areas and volumes [20].

Photogrammetry has been widely applied in a number of ﬁelds, For example in land surveying
and topography [18, 21, 22], landslide measurements [23], forestry [24, 25], rock glaciers monitor-
ing [26], cultural heritage preservation and restoration [27, 28], archaeology [29, 30, 31], medicine
and dentistry [32, 33, 34] and other.

Notable, qualitative changes in the approach to this science included the introduction of digital
photogrammetry [15, 35, 8] and, later, algorithms for semi-automated or automated triangulation of
the captured images. An interesting analysis of the state-of-art of 2006 was conducted by Seitz et al.
[36]. The driving force to enhance the performance of these algorithms was the willingness to aug-
ment the ability to produce 3D models of large areas, with the focus on 3D urban mapping, which
required capturing large numbers of images [37]. However, at that time, the algorithms tended to
output exceedingly complex meshes and traded high-details for loss of distinct geometric features
of the 3D models. The situation led to further advancements and ﬁndings, for example, the ones
proposed by Labatut et. al [37]. They introduced a novel algorithm which automatically outputs
segmented model, capturing its essential geometric features. Consequently, with the commercial-
ization of the solutions [38], detailed physical models and terrain reconstruction, in the form of
digital 3D models, generated using multi-image digital photogrammetry, has been made accessible
to wider public.

In this paper, we deal with multi-image digital photogrammetry, with digital 3D models prepared
by the means of a commercial solution, i.e. the ContextCapture [39, 40] software. In ContextCap-
ture, an algorithm to automatically detect pixels, which correspond to the same physical points, is
implemented. Visual data extracted from numerous images allows camera positions to be deﬁned
and a precise 3D shape of the physical object and terrain to be generated [40]. ContexCapture was
applied in city-scale 3D mapping, as in case of Paris, Tokyo, Helsinki [41], enhancing cultural her-
itage preservation [42], yet also in estimating the volumes in excavations for the mining industry.
Other applications included architecture and civil construction industry, for example to provide con-
text for the design phase of an investment, to enhance design and coordination workﬂows enabled
by Building Information Modeling (BIM) [43], but also to aid revitalization. An exemplary digi-
tal 3D photogrammetric model of Archcathedral Basilica of St. Stanislaus Kostka (Łódź, Poland),
created to aid such actions, is presented in [44].

Noticeably, utilizing digital 3D photogrammetric models of reality reconstruction has gradu-
ally started being used in various industries, and for diﬀerent purposes. A noteworthy possible
application includes assets management in petrochemical, chemical, power and oil&gas industries,
achieved by supporting the Digital Twin of Infrastructure concept [45, 46]. An example of the ap-
plication in the industrial projects is presented in [47]. It is a general model of a coke plant, created

3

with data acquired by an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), and with the help of ﬂight automation
software [48]. The models could be used not only for measurements, but also for multipurpose
quantitative or qualitative analyses of the operation as well as condition monitoring of an asset.
However, there are still obstacles to be overcome. They include legislation, safety measures on
sites, presence of non-ﬂight zones (in case of applying UAV for data acquisition), existence of haz-
ardous areas, and the speciﬁcity of the geometry of the installations, which requires signiﬁcant
number of images to be taken to allow the industrial installations to be reproduced in detail. Yet,
developments are made and the aforementioned issues, once overcome, may also be responsible for
the success of 3D photogrammetric models, when implemented on a larger scale. They may, for
example, increase the safety of the on-site workers due to the ability to perform oﬀ-line inspections
and inventories.

Simultaneously, implementation of digital 3D photogrammetric models to supervise the course
of various construction projects, including BIM 4D enabled workﬂows[43], is getting even more
attention and is sought after by the industry. The models can be applied in the construction industry
for inspecting, completing inventories before and after the investment, verifying the construction
site’s organization quality, controlling and predicting a timely delivery of subsequent stages of the
construction project, in accordance with the schedule, to adhere with the provisions of the contract
with the investor or general contractor. An exemplary model of a very small construction site in
Poland is shown in [49].

Moreover, photogrammetry starts to be widely considered as a feasible way of generating high-
quality content that can signiﬁcantly enhance the users experience while working with an immersive
environment such as VR. For instance, Vajak et al. [50] argue that to strengthen the feeling of
presence in the virtual world, an appropriate mapping between the VR and real-world is needed
[50]. It may be stated that VR can add another layer of realism on top of the one already given by the
3D photogrammetric models, presented with the help of a standard computer screen. Consequently,
the use of photogrammetry to increase the simulation ﬁdelity is suggested [50].

Finally, creating easily-accessible digital 3D models and the ability to comfortably manipulate
them to extract data, such as dimension, surface and volume measurements, is highly relevant.
A single image or even a set of images, while carrying useful information, may inﬂuence the ﬁnal
interpretation of the empirical data presented due to a distinct perception of the object by the viewer
[51].

Thus, we believe that there is merit in verifying how the proper application of VR-based systems
could help to ease the usage of the photogrammetric 3D models and deliver new added-value to
the end-users, across many ﬁelds and industries, with particular focus on immediate applications
to oﬀ-line inspections.

1.3 Structure of the paper

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 oﬀers information on the literature review
concerning the usage of VR and photogrammetric 3D models. Section 3 describes the case of
gestural inputs for the manipulation of the photogrammetric models in VR. Whereas, Section 4
presents a detailed description and the rationale behind the architecture of PhotoTwinVR system.
Furthermore, Section 5 shows the description of the experimental veriﬁcation of the system. Section
6 provides a thorough discussion of the attained results, while Section 7 formulates conclusions
regarding the ﬁndings and recommendations for future work.

4

2 Related Work

Recently, with the advances in both the photogrammetry and immersive environments, the for-
mer becomes more widely considered as a feasible way of generating high-quality content for VR.
Simultaneously, as remarked in 1998 by Chapman et al. [52], VR opens up a range of new opportu-
nities for application of digital photogrammetric technologies, not only for measurements purposes.
Therefore, in this review, we report both on research that emphasizes enriching user-experience and
facilitating the use of the VR immersive environment by the application of photogrammetric mod-
els, and on the usage of VR to aid extracting relevant data from the digital photogrammetric models,
for practical, domain-related purposes.

2.1 Photogrammetry and VR

Research in which both the VR and photogrammetry were coupled together includes various
areas of engineering. For instance, MOSIS (Multi-Outcrop Sharing & Interpretation System) de-
veloped by Gonzaga et al. [53] aims to leverage the beneﬁts given by an immersive environment in
using photogrammetry for geoscientists working in the oil&gas industry. MOSIS[53], similarly to
our system, leverages VR environment to facilitate the usage of photogrammetric models, by allow-
ing the user to take distance measurement. It also oﬀers several additional tools such as a built-in
compass or capability to calculate the distance between the points or orthogonal distance between
calculated planes [53]. The authors reﬂect on the fact that it is hard to capture the levels of immer-
siveness felt by the users, hence they measured the usability using System Usability Scale [53]. Liu
et al.[54] discuss the beneﬁts of integrating UGIS with digital photogrammetry and remote sensing
with interfaces such as VR to enhance urban planning and management [54]. Murano et al. [55]
proposed using market-available VR hardware to simulate robotic sensor data such as audio, video
and motion sensors data, to facilitate research in the area of human-robot interaction. For this type
of study, the simulation must reassemble as closely as possible an existing real-world environment
[55]. Therefore, photogrammetry was applied to acquire data used to build their system.

Another domain attempting to leverage the photogrammetry and VR is heritage preservation and
archaeology. Photogrammetry is applied speciﬁcally to reconstruct, in detail, single objects or areas
of interest. For instance, Calvert et al. [56] presents the Kokoda VR system that uses the photogram-
metry to provide a more immersive learning environment for high-school students. The researchers
created a Virtual Reality Learning Environment (VRLE) using a mixture of photographs, anima-
tions and photogrammetry scans [56]. The study concluded that there was a signiﬁcant increase
in students engagement while using VR compared to a group using 360◦ videos [56]. Borba et
al. [57] describes Itapeva 3D, a system that tries to provide its user with fully immersive, VR-based
environment for cyber-archaeology [57] developed using the Unity game engine [58]. Moreover,
Ipteva 3D uses a target-based travel metaphor [57] i.e. the change in the user’s viewpoint is trig-
gered by focusing the user’s view on a target point within the environment [57]. The authors also
report on positive results concerning the feel of immersion observed among participants of a small
user study conducted with their system [57]. The Itapeva Rocky Shelter archaeological site is also
explored using the ArcheoVR software package presented in Borba et al. [59]. Woods et al.[60]
used photogrammetry to generate detailed 3D models of graves used in a virtual simulation of the
Beacon Island by the Beacon Virtua system [60]. Antlej et al. [61] investigated the use of VR and
photogrammetry-generated models in an immersive system that allows the users to “visit” a paleon-
tological digging site in Victoria, Australia [61]. Juckette et al. [62] looked into combining detailed,
photogrammetric models with virtual surroundings constructed with the help of GIS and other data

5

[62]. The authors reﬂected on a fact that such setup can enhance the user’s experience [62]. Huang
[63] presents a VR-based serious game that uses artefacts reconstructed using the photogrammetry
combined with a hand reconstructed Maya city of Cahal Pech. Sanders [64] discusses the CUNAT
(the CUNeiformAutomated Translator) software package for automatic translations and contextual-
ization of ancient Mesopotamian texts in a phone-based VR environment that uses photogrammetry
scans of these documents for the content. Whereas Giloth et al. [65], using photogrammetry re-
constructed and visualized some object for their VR app of a no longer existing garden labyrinth
of Versailles. Adão et al. [66] discuss a system that combines photographic and geographic data
obtained through unmanned aerial systems (UAS) imagery with procedural modelling to generate
detailed models later on immersed in a VR environment. Fritsh et al. [67] introduces the Gyrolog
Project whose goal is to digitize a large collection of gyroscopes in a form of 3D models accessible
through a VR interface using, among others, the photogrammetry method[67]. See et al.[68] de-
scribes the room-scale VR experience in which the photogrammetry was used to reproduce the tomb
of Sultan Hussein Shahin in Malacca. Another tomb excavation site, the Dayr al-Barsha in Egypt,
was digitized and placed in a web-based VR environment by Lima et al. [69]. Fritsch et al.[70]
discuss the potential of using 3D photogrammetry, among other spatial data acquisition methods,
to generate high-quality urban content used in 3D and 4D apps for VR [70]. Moreover, in Xiao et
al. [71] the authors discuss geoinformatics and spatial technologies such as photogrammetry or VR
as a means of protection and preservation of cultural heritage.

3 Gestural Input as Means of Photogrammetric Models Manipulation in VR

Noticeably, there are several publications describing research about the advantages and beneﬁts
of using photogrammetry to enrich the experiences of VR users and to apply VR to ease the usage
of photogrammetric models. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, few papers are dealing
speciﬁcally with the interactive aspect of the photogrammetry-augmented, VR-based environment.
It may be argued that such conjunction is one of the key components of immersive visualization.

Investigations into gestural input for VR has a long history, for example, Nishino et al. [72],
in his paper from 1997, introduced the TGSH (Two-handed Gesture environment SHell) interface.
Furthermore, Song et al. [73] discusses the Finger-Gesture method for selection and manipulation,
whereas Latoschik [74] presented a VR designated framework for gesture detection and analysis.

In our literature review, only a modest number of publications investigating the gestural input
as the main interaction method for systems combining both VR and photogrammetry was found.
For instance, See et al. [68] ran a usability study with 18 participants using virtual hands facili-
tated by hand-held controllers to increase the feeling of presence in the VR environment. In their
experiment, the authors compared two conditions in which the participants were seeing either vir-
tual hands or controllers avatars, as they are seen in the real-world [68]. The study concluded that
overall, using even low ﬁdelity virtual hands is more favourable [68]. To remedy this issue, Zhang
et al. [75] proposed to augment the VR controllers with an attached, near-infrared camera to track
and display the hand and ﬁnger postures. Juckette et al. [62] mention the use of Leap Motion de-
vice [76] to facilitate the gesture-interface for the VR experience exploring an ancient Maya temple
[62]. Manders et al. [77] proposed their technique that leverages the fact that HMDs leave the user’s
chin visible for tracking. Coupled with stereo camera data to capture the user’s gestural input, it
can be used to manipulate 3D objects in virtual space. For comparison, our system adds only one
sensor i.e. Leap Motion [76], attached to the front of the HMD and provides an alternative set of
single and double-hands gestures supported by the Leap Motion SDK [76]. Furthermore, by using

6

Figure 1: The visualization and tracking hardware used in our study: (a) the Oculus Rift with mounted Leap Motion;
(b) Leap Motion hand-tracking sensor with mounting case and a USB cable; (c) the Oculus Rift’s tracking sensor. All
three components have to be connected to a supporting PC via USB (a-c) and HDMI (a) cables.

the Leap Motion [76] controller, one can build a system for recognition of more complex gestures,
for instance, Clark et al. [78] developed real-time hand-gesture recognition system for VR using
machine learning methods.

Another interesting area of research is how the appearance and ﬁdelity of hand avatars in VR
aﬀect the user. In addition to the previously discussed studies [68, 75], Lin et al. [79] investigated
how diﬀerent virtual hand model impact the user’s body ownership illusion (BOI). He reﬂected,
that, although the results were inconclusive, using more realistic human-hands model might be
favorable [79].

Moreover, Tecchia et al. [80] describes a system that utilizes color-coded thimbles (for thumb
and index ﬁngers) tracked by the RGBD camera, i.e. RGB camera with additional depth sensor,
attached to the headset for real-time projection of the user’s hands and body in the Mixed Reality
(MR) environment and hypothesise that such realistic hand-models can strongly impact the user’s
feel of presence [80].

4 Supporting Interaction with Photogrammetric Model in VR

The latest wave of the head-mounted displays (HMDs) can be considered as a relatively new
technology concerning the previous generations of immersive interfaces. The concept of an HMD
was ﬁrst introduced in 1968 by Ivan Sutherland [81]. Diﬀerent approaches to how to immerse the
user into the VR environment, the CAVE [82], was proposed in 1992 by Cruz-Neira et al. Presently,
a plethora of HMDs exist on the market, including families of devices such as HTC Vive [83] or
Facebook’s Oculus [84] (see Fig. 1). As such, the appropriate interaction methods within VR that
can be utilized across all the possible applications have to be yet fully understood. For instance,
the user cannot comfortably use the standard input/output devices such as the computer mouse or
keyboard when wearing the headset that – by design – tries to completely cut oﬀ the user’s peripheral
vision to intensify the feeling of immersion.

7

(a)(b)(c)Figure 2: The FAST diagram of the function structure for the PhotoTwinVR system

4.1 Function structures

To capture the list of requirements that our system, the PhotoTwinVR tool, must fulﬁll to be
eﬀective, we employed the Function Analysis System Technique (FAST) [85]. The results of this
analysis are presented in the form of a diagram shown in Fig. 2. The diagram should be read from
left to right in the top to bottom fashion. We start with the most high-level functionality (functions)
and whilst moving in the horizontal direction, by answering the how? question, we split these
functions into logical steps (sub-functions to the right) that are necessary in order to achieve the
goal of the previous-level function (to the left) that would answer the why? question if we backtrack
our steps. As we are looking into capture the solution-independent system requirements, we ﬁnish
this process before we start to come up with actual solutions.

8

Figure 3: The diagram models the signals ﬂowing between these four main elements of the visualization: (A) the
user; (B) the hand-tracking setup; (C) the 3D model and (D) the measurement toolkit. Both the unidirectional and
bidirectional signals alike are shown. Moreover, components of (A) and (B) overlap as the user’s hands are both parts
of the hand-tracking (B) and the user (A).

4.2 Tasks Analysis

The FAST analysis presented in the previous section 4.1 allowed us to identify a list of four
main, high-level tasks that user has to be able to complete using our system. Here, we discuss and
describe in detail each of these primary tasks:

T1—Model visualization: The system should allow the user to visualize any given 3D model
(e.g. a photogrammetric or CAD model) representing a 3D structure (see Fig. 4) or another 3D
object which user wants to work within the VR environment.

T2—Model manipulation: The user should be able to eﬀortlessly and eﬀectively manipulate
the visualized model. The manipulation functionality should allow these three basic operations: (a)
rotation of the model around a chosen axis (see Fig. 7); (b) displacement of the model into a chosen
position within the 3D space; (c) changing the size of the model (see Fig. 8). This functionality
is facilitated with the hand-gesture tracking and recognition system i.e. the Leap Motion [76] and
Leap Motion SDK [76].

T3—Model inspection: The system should allow the user to easily visually inspect all the
models’ elements. This can be achieved twofold through an adequately prepared visualization (see
Fig. 7) and appropriate interaction methods built-in into the system (see Fig. 5). Moreover, this task
is inﬂuenced and vastly overlaps with task T2 as the interaction, especially in an immersive envi-
ronment such as VR, is an inseparable part of the visualization itself. Thus, the model manipulation
methods take a crucial role in how the user can inspect a 3D model visualized in our system.

T4—Model measurements: The system should permit the user to take and, if needed, retake
desired measurements of the entire model and all its elements (see Fig. 10-13). Moreover, such mea-
surements should be automatically stored and easily retrievable for future reference (see Fig. 12).

4.3 System Structure

To reason about the system structure, we decided to observe the way signals ﬂow within the
system. A similar approach was utilized in Tadeja et al. [86] to describe the signals ﬂux observed
in the VR-based system for aeronautical design. We observed the four key components: (A) the

9

(C)(A)UserPhotogrammetric ModelLeft-HandAvatar Hand-trackingSensorRight-HandAvatar Gaze-Tracking (Cross-Hair)Right-HandLeft-HandRulers, Rulers’ Markers and LegendGaze-Tracking (Cross-Hair)(B)(D)Left-HandMenuuser; (B) the hand-tracking sensor together with the avatars of the hands; (C) the photogrammetric
model of an object or structure; (D) the measurement’s tools. Some parts of the visualization were
encompassed together as they form logical structures, and others, especially the user’s hands, can
be assigned to multiple groups (see Fig. 3).

(A) The user: When speaking about signals ﬂowing in any interactive system, the user has to be
considered as one of the crucial elements as the system itself relies on receiving and sending
signals to and from the user. In our case, it is especially important as the interaction is facili-
tated by a mixture of a gaze-tracking coupled with the hand-tracking and gesture recognition
capabilities. As such, the user was a part of components (A) and (B) detailed below. The
user was interacting with the system twofold. First, with the bidirectional signal via the ray-
traced by an orange cross-hair, which signaled to the system what the user is focusing on at the
moment. Whilst the user was gazing over an interactive element, mainly the ruler’s markers
(see Fig. 12), the system responded by highlighting the object i.e. signaling to the user that
this element can be interacted with. Then, the user could use a hand-gesture (see Fig. 5) by
invoking an action dependent on both the gesture type and the object itself. Moreover, any
kind of manipulation of a model, as can be seen in Fig. 6-8 and, i.e. its displacement, rotation
and re-sizing, are signaled to the user by immediate system response. The same can be said
about the operations of taking and retaking measurements of the model as shown in Fig. 9-13.
Hence, all the signals ﬂowing between the user and the system are bidirectional.

(B) Hand-tracking: As the main method of interaction is hand-tracking facilitated by a Leap
Motion[76] sensor, the signal received and sent by this component are usually the result of
a constant feedback loop. The hands’ current position and gesture are always signaled to the
user via virtual avatars of hands (see Fig. 5-10 and Fig. 11-13). If the hands are not visible
to the user, it means that they are outside of the sensor ﬁeld of tracking and as such cannot
interact with the system. However, actions executed by the user on either the model (C) or the
measurement tools (D) are immediately applied and as such signaled to the user via a range
of visual clues. For instance, the ruler’s markers are ready to be linked with the help of ruler
or moved with the user’s hand when a color-coded halo surrounds it signaling to the user with
which hand it can be moved with i.e. blue or red for the left and right hand respectively, see
Fig. 10. If the user selects the rulers’ markers to connect it with another one, the halo around
the marker becomes green. Hence, each action executed as a response to the user’s gestures
is forthwith signaled back to the user in a visual form i.e. causes an instant change in the
visualization.

(C) Photogrammetric model: The model (C) responses instantly to all operations initiated with
the user’s gestural input. These include the object rotation, resizing and displacement. The ﬁrst
two can be seen in Fig. 7- 8 whereas the gesture used to grab and change position of an object
is shown in Fig. 6 respectively. As such, all these changes in the visualization are instantly
presented to the user but are not signaled to the hand-tracking sensor (B) as there is no need to
use this information by this element.

(D) Measurement tools: The tools include the rulers (vectors/lines in the 3D space), ruler’s mark-
ers and the legend show to the user through the heads-up display (HUD). These can be seen in
Fig. 11-13. All of these respond to actions invoked with the user’s hands. The rules’ markers
can be created, removed or displaced and highlight while the user is gazing over them with a
cross-hair. Moreover, their halo signalizes to the user which hand they could be moved with,

10

i.e. blue or red for the left and right hand respectively, and green whilst the user is in the pro-
cess of connecting them with a ruler. The rulers themselves change their length and position
depending on the user’s displacement of the attached markers and can be completely removed
from the visualization as well. The legend itself responds to the changes made over the rulers
showing the most recent state of the taken measurements. Hence, all these elements are send-
ing unidirectional visual signals to the user (A) and respond to unidirectional signals received
using hand-tracking (B).

4.4 Visualization Framework: VR Environment

To implement and test our system we used the Unity [58] game engine together with a small
number of Unity assets [87, 88]. The hardware setup consisted of the Oculus Rift HMD[89, 84],
Oculus position-tracking sensor and the Leap Motion [76] hand-tracking sensor. All these three el-
ements can be seen in Fig. 1. The VR-based visualization framework itself that is underpinning our
tool was previously developed for the application to aeronautical design i.e. the AeroVR system
described in detail in series of publications (see Tadeja et al.[90, 91, 86, 92]). However, the inter-
action method has been vastly changed and amended with the hand-tracking capabilities provided
by the Leap Motion [76] sensor and developed around the Leap Motion SDK [76]. This subsection
will describe in detail all the key elements of our framework.

4.4.1 Photogrammetric Model: Pipe-Rack

Figure 4: The 3D photogrammetric model of the pipe-rack [7] as seen by the VR user: (a) the full model; (b) zoom-in
on the left-hand side of the model; (c) zoom-in on the right-hand side of the model. The user’s gaze direction is marked
with the orange cross-hair.

11

(a)(b)(c)The pipe-rack is located in Lodz, Poland, at the junction of the Lodowa and Andrzejewskiej
streets [6]. The data used to reconstruct this installation, in the form of a 3D photogrammetric
model seen in Fig. 4, was captured by an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). The model is available
at [7]. Data was processed by a commercial package - ContextCapture [39]. In this case, we can
deﬁne the process as multi-image close-range digital photogrammetry (due to the source of data and
the distance to the physical object, even though the data was acquired using an UAV). The camera-
capture photographs were obtained during a 10 minutes UAV ﬂight. The model was reconstructed
from 204 photos with re-projection error (RMS) of 0.58 pixels and was geo-referenced using a
photo meta-data gathered by the UAV and then veriﬁed in the pre-processing phase of the process
of 3D model creation. As a result, the model was properly scaled and geo-positioned. The ﬂight
trajectory was a combination of an automated mission programmed with Drone Harmony software
[48], with an additional manually steered ﬂying passes.

Using UAVs to acquire data for photogrammetry models that are later on included in an immer-
sive environments, as remarked by Huang [63], seems to be one of the most preferred methods,
especially when dealing with larger structures or areas. Furthermore, Xu et al. [93] reﬂects, that
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) algorithms that can use, for example, UAV captured multi-view im-
age data in order to reconstruct 3D scenes, have a range of application, including heritage docu-
mentation, urban planning and VR [93]. For instance, Lee et al. [94] used drones to capture data
before placing the resulting models in a VR interface.

These particular pipelines are used to transport the heating medium to the residential buildings
and industrial facilities located in this district of the city. The piping system section presented
for visual inspection in this model is supported by three steel frames in order to safely lead pipes
above the road. Supporting system need to restrict the deﬂection caused by gravity loads as well as
wind and other environmental factors. Such pipelines and supporting frames need to be inspected
on a regular basis. On the other hand, numerous diﬃculties and threats for inspecting person ex-
ists. With the help of a UAV-assembled camera only, this procedure might be executed faster and
safer, but not necessarily precisely. However, having a correctly dimensioned 3D photogrammetric
model, created with a software allowing multi-image digital photogrammetry, and enhancing the
physical object reconstruction procedures with automatic algorithms for camera positioning and
triangulation, gives more time and comfort for proper and, what is important, detailed inspection
in the oﬀ-line mode. The model is also a valuable resource for later referencing.

4.4.2 Interaction Methods: Gaze and Hand Tracking

The manipulation of the object occurs via the user’s gestural input, i.e. the hand-tracking facili-
tated with the Leap Motion [76] sensor. The gesture-recognition capabilities were built around the
Leap Motion SDK [76]. Essentially, there are four types of gestures that are recognized by our sys-
tem that leads to diﬀerent actions depending on the mode in which the system is operating. These
are (1) the left-palm up gesture which invokes the menu as can be seen in Fig. 5(a) together with
(2) the pointing ﬁnger used to press one of the menu buttons; (3) item as seen in Fig. 5(b) shows
the pinch gesture whereas (4) the thumbs-up gesture is presented in Fig. 5(c). Recognition of these
gestures coupled with the use of gaze-tracking (simulated with an orange cross-hair) for selecting
objects which user wants to interact with, was the basis of the main interaction method incorporated
in our system. Slambekova et al. [96] remarks that the combination of these two techniques may
have a positive impact on the tasks performed in a virtual setup.

12

Figure 5: The avatars of the hands as seen by the VR user: blue for left-hand and red for the right-hand. (a) Making the
left-hand palm-up gesture causes the attached menu to pop up. The user can press one of the buttons using any ﬁnger
on the other hand. The menu options are as follows: (1) reset the visualization; (2) show the help menu; (3) switch
mode to remove the rulers’ markers; (4) switch mode to add more rulers’ markers; (5) switch mode to manipulate the
3D model. If none of the buttons is active (pressed) the user can connect the markers with rulers to take measurements.
(b-c) The pinching and thumbs-up gestures respectively made with the user’s right hand. The (b) pinching gesture is
the most basic gesture used throughout the system and can be used to, for instance, placing the model in any part of the
3D space available to the user. The icons used in the menu are courtesy of Icons8[95].

4.4.3 Model Manipulation Methods

The system supports three main methods of manipulating the given 3D model be it a CAD
drawing or a photogrammetric model as it was in our case: (1) displacement; (2) rotation and (3)
resizing. To be able to manipulate the model, the user has to press the [house] button on the left-
hand menu as shown in Fig. 5(a). Moreover, all these actions are ﬂuent and can be executed in
unison, hence the user can simultaneously move, rotate and resize the model. Thus, making the
manipulation of the model very easy and intuitive as observed during the user study.

(1) Displacement: The user can move the model into any position in the 3D space by using any
hand to make a pinching gesture (i.e. grabbing the object) and moving the hand which results
in the displacement of the model corresponding to the hands’ movement (see Fig. 6). This
procedure can be repeated by the user as many times as needed to place the model in the desired
location. In the Fig. 6 the user’s avatar is included to show that the user is not changing position
and the model is not scaled down but the user’s perspective with regards to the model changes,
hence the model seems to be smaller.

(2) Rotation: The rotation of a model has to be executed using both hands. When the user makes
the pinch gesture with both hands and starts to rotate the hands, one of the hands can become
the rotation axis while the other is responsible for the rotation arc in the X − Z plane. An
example of the whole process is shown in Fig. 7. Rotation in only one chosen plane at a time is
also available in professional CAD software packages, as Microstation [97], SolidWorks [98],
Catia [99]. In further versions of PhotoTwinVR, adding rotation in other planes is to be added.

(3) Resizing: Similarly to the rotation, to resize i.e. to enlarge or decrease the model’s size, the
user has to grab the model using both hands. Then, if the user moves the hands apart, the model
automatically scales up as can be seen in Fig. 8(a-b). In response to the opposite movement i.e.
when the user moves the hands closer together, the model scales down as shown in Fig. 8(c).

13

13245(a)(b)(c)Figure 6: The user moves the model further dawn from its current position by (a) grabbing the object with the pinch
gesture and (b-c) extending the grabbing hand forward. This operation pushes the model on the trajectory corresponding
to the user’s hand movement e.g. by straightening the user’s elbow. The displaced object is not scaled but seems smaller
due to change in perspective and the distance from which the user is seeing the model.

Figure 7: The user rotates the model using both hands. In this case, the left hand (blue avatar) becomes the axis about
which the rotation occurs. We do not explicitly need one hand to be the axis, the virtual axis can sit anywhere on the
line connecting two pinch points. When the user grabs the model (pinch gesture) with the right-hand (red avatar) and
continuously moves the hand on an arc the models rotate in the X − Z plane. The green arrows show the rotation
direction whereas the rotation axis is shown as a dashed line.

Figure 8: The user resizes the model by making simultaneous pinch gestures with both hands (blue and red hand avatars)
and continuously moving the hands (a-b) apart to enlarge or moving them (c) closer together to reduce the size of the
model. The green arrows show the direction in which the user’s hands are moving. The heads-up display (HUD) is
showing the diﬀerence in the models scale going from (a) 0.011 to (b) 0.018 and back to (c) 0.011.

14

(a)(b)(c)(a)(b)(c)(d)(a)(b)(c)4.4.4 Snapping Grid

The main function of the snapping grid was to support the user in the process of placing the
rulers’ markers around and on the model. Initially, the snapping points, i.e. small, grey spheres, are
placed in preselected positions around the model. When the user tries to place the marker in close
vicinity of such point, depending on the snapping radius, the marker would “snap” automatically
to the position of the snapping point. Hence, allowing the user to place the markers quickly in the
selected positions. The generation of the snapping grid was twofold: (1) we created a dense, 3D
snapping grid around the photogrammetric structure, to insert a number of snapping points on it;
(2) then, we checked with which such snapping-points the object collided with and removed all the
points where there was no collision recorded. This process was relatively eﬃcient as we did not
have to use additional code and could rely on features natively built-in into Unity [58] game engine.
We could also set the size of small, grey spheres that acted as our snapping points (see Fig. 9) as
well as the step-size used to generate the grid. The snapping radius i.e. distance from which the
rulers’ markers would be snapped into the position of a snapping point was automatically scaled
concerning the structures current size.

Figure 9: The snapping points (i.e. the small, grey spheres) belonging to the automatically generated snapping-grid.
If the user places the ruler’s marker (green spheres) in close vicinity to such a point, the marker will immediately snap
into that position.

4.4.5 Taking Measurements of the Model

The process of taking a measurement, i.e. a length between any two points in the 3D space,
is twofold. First, the user has to switch to the generation mode by pressing the [+] button on the
left-hand menu (see Fig. 5(a)) and generate (see Fig. 10) and place at least two rulers’ markers,
represented by green spheres, in the desired locations in the 3D space (see Fig. 11). Second, the
user has to connect the selected markers with the ruler i.e. a vector in the 3D space. The length of
this ruler measured from within the centers of the markers is the euclidean distance calculated in
the 3D space. Each marker can be connected to three other markers, hence, the user can, at least in
principle, cover and measure with rulers the lengths of all the edges of a triangular mesh.

To not occlude the user’s ﬁeld of view, only the last three changes i.e. new measurements or
change in the previously taken ones are shown to the user via a heads-up display (HUD) (see Fig. 12-
13). However, all measurements are automatically written into a ﬁle in order of when they were
taken or changed.

15

Figure 10: To generate the new rulers’ markers, the user has to make a pinching gesture with both hands (a) with the
all four pinching ﬁngers at once i.e. the thumbs and pointing ﬁngers close to each other. Then, a new marker will be
generated between the user’s hands (b) .

Figure 11: After creation of the ruler’s markers (see Fig. 10), the user can placed them anywhere in the 3D space (c)
using either hand (a-b) as long as the working mode is set to the markers generation state invoked by the push of [+]
button on the left-hand menu (see Fig. 5). If the user places the ruler’s marker (green spheres) in close vicinity to
such point, the marker will immediately snap into that position overlying this point (see Fig. 9). The ﬂoating text-box
HUD (Heads-Up Display) shows the current scale of the model and the information about up to three of the latest
measurements whereas all the previous ones are saved automatically in a text ﬁle. To let go of a marker, i.e. release the
hand’s handle over it, the user has to make a thumbs-up gesture with the hand with which the marker was manipulated
with or wait a two-seconds period for it to automatically deselect.

5 Interface Veriﬁcation

Our approach to verify if the interface proposed by us is meeting requirements and usability
standards were twofold. Firstly, we used the well known Nielsen’s heuristics [2, 3] to asses and
reason about the usability of our system. Secondly, we ran a small formative study with three
volunteers from the UDT [5] organization to test our system with domain-experts who are potential
target users of such toolkit. Results of this evaluation can be found in the next two subsections.

5.1

Interface Usability

(1) Visibility of system status: User hand-gestures are shown to the user in the form of hand-
avatars (see Fig. 5). If the avatars are not within the user’s ﬁeld of view it means that they are
outside of the sensor’s ﬁeld of tracking. The system continuously responds to all user actions.
For instance, when the user is manipulating the model by displacing, rotating or re-sizing it,
all the changes made to the model are immediately visible to the user. With respect to taking

16

(a)(b)(a)(b)(c)Figure 12: To measure the object’s or structure’s dimension one has to place two ruler’s markers in the 3D space and
connect them with a ruler. The length of such a ruler is equal to that dimension measured. (a) The user creates a
connection between two points by gazing over (orange cross-hair) the initial marker which automatically highlights
itself (top-right marker) and making a pinch gesture (see Fig. 5). Before any rules are added into the scene, the HUD
shows only the current scale of the model (b) When user gazes over another marker and repeats the pinch gesture a new
ruler is generated between the two markers (b-c). Each taken measurement is automatically written to an output ﬁle
that keeps track of user actions in order of execution.

Figure 13: Once the markers are connected with rulers, when the user changes the position of any of the connected
markers (a-b) the rulers will not disconnect itself from the markers and will adjust their position and length concerning
the new marker’s position. They will automatically recalculate their respective lengths which will be immediately
visible on the user’s HUD.

measurements of the model, all the user’s actions such as generation of the rulers’ markers (see
Fig. 10), their placement or change thereof (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 13) together with connecting
them with the rulers (see Fig. 12) are also immediately visible to the user. The recently taken
measurements itself i.e. the Euclidean lengths of the rulers are shown to the user via the self-
updating HUD (see Fig. 12).

(2) Match between the system and the real-world: The system supports the usage of the 3D
photogrammetric model of a real-life, existing piping system (see Fig. 4) that mimic, in great
detail, the original structure. Hence, the match between this main element of the visualization
and the real-world is extremely high. Moreover, the user’s hands were also visible to the user
via the hands’ avatars (see Fig. 5) and all used gestures such as pinching, thumbs-up or pointing
ﬁnger are well known and very natural to the users as well. Furthermore, technique used for
taking the models measurements including manipulation of the rulers’ markers i.e. using the
user’s hand to grab and place them (see Fig. 12), or showing the measurements’ results in
the form of a map legend displayed on a HUD (Fig. 13) are also closely following real-world
conventions.

17

(a)(b)(c)(b)(a)(3) User control and freedom: It is very easy for the user to manipulate the model i.e. the models
size, position or rotation (see Fig. 6-8). Moreover, the user can change the position of the exist-
ing rulers’ markers (see Fig. 13). The user can also completely remove any marker by pressing
the [−] button on the left-hand menu and gaze over the marker and simultaneously making the
double-pinch gesture for the marker to be removed. This operation will automatically remove
also any existing connection between the deleted and any other markers. Also, whenever nec-
essary, the user can choose to reset the visualization to its default state by pressing the [reset]
button on the left-hand menu as shown in Fig. 5(a). This action will preserve all the previously
taken measurements in the form of a text ﬁle.

(4) Consistency and standards: In some respect, our interaction methods follows standards known
from other systems. For instance, the user has to push the hands apart or bring them closer
together, respectively, to increase or decrease the model’s size. The same can be said about
placing the rulers’ markers (see Fig. 11) which follows grabbing and dropping gestures that the
user would have to execute to place a marker in the real world as well.

(5) Error prevention: The situation in which the user could encounter an error was to place the
ruler’s markers in a way that would cause vastly imprecise measurements of an object. We
tried to remove completely such situations by automatically placing the snapping grid as shown
in Fig. 9. However, the used approach, at least in the current version of the code, proved not
to be precise enough for most users. In the future iterations, we will design a more robust
algorithm that would allow the system to automatically placing the grid’s snapping points in
most desirable locations around the model, for instance on the vertices given by its triangular
mesh.

(6) Recognition rather than recall: First, as we are using three-dimensional photogrammetric
models of real-life objects, (see Fig. 4) they are, in a way, intuitively recognizable by the
domain-expert users as objects with which they are working daily within a physical environ-
ment. Moreover, the users can immediately recognize hands-avatars and easily perform the set
of four gestures (see Fig. 5) identiﬁable by the hand-tracking sensor [76]. Presenting the ﬁnal
measurements in a form a legend similar to the ones encountered on the cartographic maps.

(7) Flexibility and eﬃciency of use: The majority of the user’s actions can be carried out by
both left and right-hand user alike without any changes made to the system. The hand-tracking
sensor [76] recognize the gestures (see Fig. 5) made with any or both the hands.

(8) Aesthetic and minimalist design: The visualization consists only of three elements: (i) the
main visualized object, in this case, the pipe-rack model; (ii) the user’s hands-avatars; (iii) the
rulers’ markers, rulers and their legend displayed on a HUD. The system does not visualize any
other additional information with except the left-hand menu that can be called and hidden on
the user’s demand with a simple hand gesture as can be seen in Fig. 5(a).

(9) Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors: The main error that user can make
is to place the ruler’s markers in an unwanted position or connect wrong markers which will be
immediately visible to the user on inspection of the model. All these operations can be undone
and, if needed, the user can reset the entire visualization to its default setting simultaneously
preserving obtained measurements in an output ﬁle.

(10) Help and documentation: The system has built-in help that can be accessed by simply pressing

the [?] (help) button on the left-hand menu as shown in Fig. 5(a).

18

5.2 Hand-Menu Usability

With regards to the hand-attached menu, Azai et al. [100] investigated placement of an immersive
application menu in front of the user’s palm, and based on the study and participant’s comments
suggested that such menus are feasible when tasks require frequent change in menu positioning and
for which the menu does not have to be constantly displayed [100]. Such a situation closely relates
to our system as well. Moreover, the authors proposed a set of design guidelines that, for instance,
suggest that vertical layout is more favorable and three columns and four rows of items is a feasible
limit for such menus [100]. In our case, the menu had two columns and three rows in total as shown
in Fig. 5(a).

With respect to the pinch gesture, user study conducted by Jude et al. [101] concluded that
the users favor the grasp over pinch gesture which in turn was preferred over the grab gesture.
However, as our system very poorly diﬀerentiated between the grasp and pinch gestures as, for
instance, seen in Fig. 7, thus, we are allowing the users greater freedom in the selection of their
favorite manipulation technique. Cui et al. [102] investigated mental models accompanying mid-
air gesture-based interaction facilitated with Leap Motion [76]. The authors note that the users
preferred bimanual interaction and having virtual hands assist the users in assessing respective
virtual object’s sizes [102]. Furthermore, it helps the user in planning and execution of a composite,
complicated task [102].

5.3 Formative Study

To conduct our experiment, we chose to apply the observational study methodology cataloged by
Lam et al. [4] as one of the methods often used for visualization evaluation. Two models were used
to prepare and perform the formative study, including the training video presented to the volunteers
before they participated in the experiment. After seeing the short video clip, the participants were
asked to perform slightly diﬀerent tasks depending on with which model they were working with.
Here, we report only about the results related to the pipe-rack model. This model, shown as it is
seen by the VR headset wearer can be seen in Fig. 4.

5.3.1 Study Participants

All the participants, hereinafter referred to P1, P2 and P3, have years of experience working
for either the industry (P3) or the Urzad Dozoru Technicznego [5] (UDT, eng. Oﬃce of Technical
Inspection) [5] which is an EU Notiﬁed Body No. 1433 (P2-P3), purpose and work of which is
described in detail in Section 1.

The participants were asked to ﬁll in the Simulation Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) developed by
Kennedy et al.[103] and restructured by Bouchard et al. [104] before and after they spent time in the
VR environment during the experimental phase of the study. They were also told to immediately
discontinue the experiment if they developed any of the simulation sickness symptoms or other
forms of discomfort. Moreover, we asked them to ﬁll in the Flow Short Scale (FSS) [105], Igroup
Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) [106] and NASA Task Load Index (NASA TLX) [107]. The ﬁrst two
were used to gain input of how participants experienced the VR environments and the latter to check
their cognition load whilst executing the given task. All the above questionnaires were translated
into the Polish language by the authors. Also, we obtained an independent validation of our transla-
tions from a native-speaking researcher from an uninvolved academic institution with expertise in
both psychology and human-computer interaction research. Before commencing the experiment,

19

using a Likert-like scale, the participants were also asked for complete self-assessment of their level
of familiarity with the VR environment and hand-tracking sensor such as the LeapMotion [76].

Participant 1 (P1) was 26 years old and holds an engineering degree in power engineering. The
professional experience of this Participant included three years of working for the UDT, mainly as
an installation inspector responsible also for the analysis of gathered measured data both during the
inspection and installation operations.

Participant 2 (P2) reported being 41 years old and holds a master and an engineering degree
in process engineering. He worked for six years as a plant pipelines designer. He also reported to
have vast experience with a range of professional designing and CAD modeling software.

Participant 3 (P3) was 29 years old working and holds an engineering degree in power engi-
neering. He has four years of experience as a plant pipelines designer and has worked with many
software packages considered as standards in the industry.

5.3.2 Training and Experimental Procedure

As mentioned before, our participants reported very basic or non-existent prior experience with
using either the VR or hand-tracking interfaces. Hence, some initial training was required to get
them acquainted with our system and its capabilities.

Before the experimental part of the study, each of the three volunteers was given short oral
instructions and presentation of our tool. The showcasing had the form of a short video clip with
subtitles in the participants’ native language, lasting 3:18 minutes and presenting details of all the
possible interaction techniques. The video was featuring two photogrammetric models including
the pipe-rack as one of them.

In the experimental part the participants were asked to carry all the work while standing and
instructed to ﬁrst play with the system for a while to familiarize themselves with the model’s ma-
nipulation method, and then to fulﬁll the following task (translated to the English language): Please
measure – using the interaction methods presented – the height of the supporting structure [part of
the pipe-rack model (see Fig. 4)] and the distance between neighboring structures, as well as the
width of one of them. Please take all other measurements that you consider relevant concerning
surveying the asset. They were also given unlimited time to perform the given task. Moreover,
they were asked to instantly share aloud their thoughts during the experiment, and inform the re-
searcher about what and why they are trying to achieve at the moment. Also, they were asked to
inform the researcher what obstacles they are facing, as well as comment on what they ﬁnd frus-
trating and, in positive meaning, what works well for them and what makes them satisﬁed from the
tool they were using. The researchers were tracking the participants’ actions and their respective
results in a real-time on a computer screen where the participant’s ﬁeld of view was continuously
streamed. The experiment was followed by a semi-structured discussion between the participant
and the researchers. The experimental phase was video and audio recorded for further analysis.

These exercises aimed to give the participants a possibility to learn the interaction methods
while simultaneously giving them a goal on which they could focus. This was especially important
as we wanted to observe their behavior when using our system with context to their engineering
background, training and experience. We wanted to see how they are going to approach learning
the interaction method and how easy or how diﬃcult they would ﬁnd the entire process. In regard to
this, we were not interested in very detailed measurements but rather about the overall participants’
experience and observed behaviour. As such, both parts of the given exercise were considered
as ﬁnished when either the researcher or participant decided that they had gained enough ﬂuency
in using the system so the participant would be able to carry out any measurements of the given

20

Questionnaire and Survey Results

Participant Exercise Duration

IPQ

SSQ

FSS

NASA TLX

number

minutes

average score

nausea

oculo-motor

ﬂow

anxiety

total score

P1

P2

P3

31:35

21:32

14:67

3.21/7

3.64/7

3.14/7

0/27

3/27

1/27

0/21

3/21

3/21

3.4/7

4.0/7

5.4/7

3.0/7

5.5/7

4.5/7

10/100

28/100

20/100

Table 1: The table shows the results of the questionnaire and survey that each participant had to undergo prior (only
SSQ) and after carrying out a task in the VR environment. The time duration is given only as an approximation as the
exercise given to the participant had no strict time constraints.

model. Bearing this in mind, the participants were using the headset for approximately: P1-31.35
min, P2-21.32 min, and P3-14.67 min.

5.3.3 Questionnaire and Survey Results

Since the number of participants was fairly small i.e. the gathered sample size is not large enough
to warrant any statistical analysis, here we present the results of the questionnaire and survey results
that can also be found in Tab. 1.

With respect to the SSQ [103], P1 reported none symptoms whereas P2 (3/21 and 3/27 for
nausea and oculomotor strain respectively) and P3 (3/21 and 3/27 for nausea and oculomotor strain
respectively) reported experiencing some slight simulation sickness symptoms.
It is worthy of
noting that both P1 (2/21 and 0/27 for nausea and oculomotor respectively) and P3 (2/21 and 2/27 for
nausea and oculomotor strain respectively) noted about having some preexisting symptoms before
the experiment commenced.

In case of the FSS [105], all three participants reported relatively high levels of ﬂow and anxiety:
P1 (4.3/7.0 and 4.7/7.0 respectively), P2 (5.4/7.0 and 3.0/7.0 respectively), and P3 (5.5/7.0 and
4.5/7.0 respectively).

Regarding the IPQ [106], similarly to Schwind et al. [108] we have averaged the results from all
the questions that participants answered. With the seven-point scale in each, the highest possible
score that could have been given was seven. The scores were: P1 (3.21/7.0), P2 (3.64/7.0), and P3
(3.14/7.0) respectively. These results were to be expected as we were not designing our environment
to increase the user’s feeling of presence but we rather optimize for the user’s comfort and ease
concerning the task fulﬁllment.

For the NASA TLX [107], the participants reported relatively small levels of experienced cog-

nition load i.e. P1-10/100, P2-28/100, and P3-20/100 respectively.

5.3.4 Measurements Results

The results of the measurements taken to fulﬁll the requirements of the ﬁrst part of the exercise
i.e. to measure the width and height of the supporting structure, as well as the distance between
the neighboring structures are shown in Table 2. All of the participants managed to obtain similar
results with certain variability and precision within the ±0.5[m] meter. It should be noted that the
most experienced participant, P2, stated that although it is hard to make general comments on the
accuracy required in such measurements (as it depends on the engineering purpose in hand), in the

21

case of pipelines (...) even half a meter is enough [of accuracy] and (...) no more is needed [based
on his vast experience as an inspector, in this particular case] because it is quite a large pipe (...).

Measurements Results: Pipe-Rack Supporting Structure

Participant Height Width

Distance b/w Neighbouring

number

[m]

[m]

P1

P2

P3

7.128

10.443

7.028

10.441

6.895

10.047

[m]

23.730

24.044

23.433

Table 2: The measurements taken by the participants. The second column from the left shows the height of the sup-
porting structure as measured by the participant using our measurement toolkit. The third presents the measured width
of the supporting structure whereas the last one shows the distance measured between the two neighbouring supporting
structures.

6 Discussion

When analyzing the users’ comments and behavior, one has to remember that the domain-expert
participants can be, in a way, largely biased by their current work interests and their professional
background. Hence, for instance, their suggestions regarding what they would like to have as an
addition to the presented software can vary. Here, we discuss three diﬀerent areas of particular
interest, i.e. (1) how they commented on and interacted with the model while immersed in our VR
environment; (2) how helpful was our interface in carrying out the assigned task using the given
measurement toolkit, and (3) what are their suggestions and ideas of further development directions
for our system.

6.1 Model Manipulation

On the other hand, with respect to the model manipulation, the participants seemed to be happy
with the way they could interact with the model, for instance, P1 said that (...) what I like very
much is (...) rotating, moving, bringing closer (...) [the model] and further, here I can see the entire
pipeline, all suspensions but it does not give me the opportunity to focus on details. Moreover, as

Quantitative Feedback: Model Manipulation

Participant Total Displacement Maximum Rotation

Scale [nominal = 0.05]

number

nominal units

angle [degrees]

minimum

maximum

P1

P2

P3

106.16

12.82

26.40

153.15◦

83.48◦

78.55◦

0.004

0.002

0.004

1.479

0.050

0.300

Table 3: The table contains information about extents to which the participants manipulate the pipe-rack model. The
second column from the left show total displacement of the model in nominal units; the third maximal angle of rotation
of the model; and the fourth and ﬁfth showing minimal and maximal scale of the model applied by the participant. For
instance, at some point, P1 enlarged the model by almost 30 times.

22

can be seen in Table 3, P1 was the one who moved the object the most and rotated it by the largest
angle as well. He was also the participant who magniﬁed the object by the largest factor, i.e. almost
30 times (see Table 3). Concerning this, it is also worthy of noting that he was the youngest and the
least work-experienced participant, which may have had inﬂuenced his behaviour. P2 commented
that in terms of displacement, zooming in and out of the model it is OK. The observation of the
participants’ behaviour would also suggest and conﬁrm that all the participants quickly gain ﬂuency
in model manipulation.

6.2 Measurement Toolkit

One of the key parts of the system was the snapping grid, which, at least in a current form,
was decisively superﬂuous and, instead of being helpful, it caused rather more confusion for the
users. For instance, P1 commented that these spheres [snapping points] don’t help me (...) they
are confusing, because they suggest something to me. and also remarked that if it was not for these
[snapping] spheres, I could indicate more precisely the place I want [to put the marker at]. He
also suggested that it may be helpful for the user to be able to turn the snapping grid on and oﬀ.
Similarly, P3 was experiencing issues with grabbing and moving the ruler’s markers. However, he
remarked that (...) I think it’s a question of practice.

In general, even though all the participants (P1-P3) managed to capture the required measure-
ments, with a certain degree of variability between them, they would prefer to have a higher accuracy
when placing the markers. This possibility was constrained by the snapping radius predeﬁned in the
interface program, which grew in direct proportion to the model increase in size. There are a few
ideas that can be implemented in this case. For instance, the snapping radius could be constant and
relatively small, or it could decrease following the model’s enlargement. Moreover, as suggested by
P1, it could also be turned on and oﬀ on the user’s demand. The algorithm for automatic generation
and placement of the snapping points could also be reﬁned to facilitate better the user needs. For
example, with the help of computer vision algorithms, the system could recognize both major and
minor elements of interest, such as the supporting structure’s parts and pipeline (P2), together with
cracks and discolouring on the pipe (P1), and place the snapping points relatively close to these.
Consequently, they could be used as indications of the crucial parts of the model, where users focus
should be put.

6.3

Ideas For System Extension

The discussion with P1 revealed that he would be more interested in the details (surfaces, cracks,
corrosion) of the pipeline trestle bridge rather than in taking the measurements of it. He commented
that P1: (...) If the details could be seen, it would be the perfect tool for me. I do not see these details,
and this is a problem for me.. For instance, he can see that there is discolouration or a crack visible
on the pipe model that he would like to inspect with intense detail. He would also be interested
in additional information overlaid on the model, like the temperature or pressure values at certain
points of the pipe. This type of data he would like to inspect due to his current work interests. P2
commented that I am interested in the distances between supports, [distance] between the change
of direction of the pipeline, i.e. between the knees. The condensation, things like that. To draw a
pipeline route. He also remarked that system like ours might have other beneﬁts. For instance, the
engineer does not have to be physically present at the object site to take measurements, and as such,
does not have to worry about the atmospheric conditions at the day of measurement. Moreover,
frequently, direct exposure to the substances in the pipes, for instance, while working at the oil

23

reﬁnery, can be hazardous to human health, and as such, any contact with them should be minimized
or, ideally, completely avoided. In the case of our system, only a UAV or other unmanned vehicle
operator would have to be physically present relatively near the object, the photographic data of
which is acquired. Furthermore, once the model is ready, one can introduce the avatars of sensors
placed in the same spots as on a real-life object. These could provide additional, real-life sensor
data streamed directly onto the model.

All these ideas can be added on top of the existing PhotoTwinVR implementation. However,
if it contains views of all key
the applicability depends on the accuracy of the model itself, i.e.
elements, photos are detailed enough, and the ﬁnal model is properly positioned in and calibrated
to the global reference system (latitude, longitude and elevation).

7 Summary and Conclusions

In this paper, we investigated the application of VR to unlock the full potential oﬀered by digital
3D photogrammetric models of reality reconstruction generated using the state-of-art photogram-
metric technologies.

We identiﬁed that, to the best of authors’ knowledge, there is little research published on the
feasible interaction methods in the VR-based systems augmented with the 3D photogrammetric
models. Especially in the context of the systems designed to help the professional to derive impor-
tant information on the physical objects using gestural interfaces.

Consequently, we presented the PhotoTwinVR – an immersive, gesture-controlled system for
manipulation, inspection and dimension measurements of a 3D photogrammetric model of a phys-
ical object in the VR environment populated with a pipe-rack model [7] obtained with the help of
a commercially available software package.

To verify and validate our analysis, completeness and implementation of the system require-
ments, we run an observational study [4] with a small group of three domain-expert participants.
Notably, two of the participants were representatives of Urzad Dozoru Technicznego (UDT, eng.
Oﬃce of Technical Inspection) [5] – an EU Notiﬁed Body No. 1433.

In the study, we explored a possibility of using the hand-tracking and gesture recognition ca-
pabilities aﬀorded by the Leap Motion sensor [76], coupled with the gaze-tracking and the VR
environment oﬀered by the Oculus Rift VR headset [84]. The qualitative data and our own obser-
vations of the participants behaviour and comments gathered during this experiment allowed us to
reason about the feasibility of using such interaction technique to interact and extract relevant data
from 3D photogrammetric models whilst being immersed in VR. The resulting measurements (see
Table 3), taken during the oﬀ-line inspection of a pipe-rack (see Fig. 4) by domain-expert partici-
pants suggest that the experts were able to obtain pipe-rack [6, 7] dimensions within a reasonable
accuracy

Moreover, all the participants were able to promptly gain ﬂuency in manipulating the model with

their hand gestures, as was conﬁrmed by their comments.

With regards to future work, as suggested by Azai et al. [100], we will allow the user to choose
their dominant hand and as such, allow the palm-up menu to be attached to either of the user’s hands
based on preference.

Furthermore, Caputo et al. [109] investigated diﬀerent methods of 3D object’s translation and
rotations in VR using the Leap Motion [76] controller. One of the rotation method described by the
authors is the one-handed translation and second-hand rotation (2HR) [109] which was later com-
pared to results of a user study that suggested that in-direct, more abstract methods of rotation can

24

be more preferable and beneﬁcial to the users. Following this result, we will implement diﬀerent,
in-direct methods of rotation for subsequent research.

We are also planning to test these changes and updates together with ideas of further extensions

proposed by the study participants in a series of controlled user experiments.

To sum up, the study revealed the PhotoTwinVR’s potential to be applied in practical real-words
cases, including oﬀ-line inspections of pipelines, which are common in chemical, petrochemical,
power and oil&gas industries. It also showed that there is a great promise in populating VR immer-
sive environment with digital 3D photogrammetric models.

Acknowledgements

The authors would also extend the gratitude to the Bentley Systems Incorporated for allowing us
to access the ContextCapture software used to generate the 3D reality meshes of the structure used
to carry out this study. The authors would also like to thank the following people: Krzysztof Kutt for
verifying translations of the questionnaires, to Wioleta Cabała, for advice on the SSQ translation,
and to Jerzy Sokołowski and Roman Górecki from UDT Łódź for their aid in the preparations and
execution of this study. Finally, the authors would like to thank the volunteers for their participation
and valuable suggestions and comments.

Funding: This work was supported by the Cambridge European & Trinity Hall, the Tsinghua
Academic Fund for Undergraduate Overseas Studies, and the Fund from Tsien Excellence in Engi-
neering Program.

References

[1] Thompson, M. M., 1966. “Manual of photogrammetry”. Geoscience Abstracts.

[2] Nielsen, J., 1994. “Usability Inspection Methods”. In Conference Companion on Human

Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’94, ACM, pp. 413–414.

[3] Nielsen, J., 1994. “Enhancing the Explanatory Power of Usability Heuristics”. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’94, ACM,
pp. 152–158.

[4] Lam, H., Bertini, E., Isenberg, P., Plaisant, C., and Carpendale, S., 2012. “Empirical Studies
in Information Visualization: Seven Scenarios”. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 18(9), Sept., pp. 1520–1536.

[5] UDT, [Online]: September 2019. Urzad Dozoru Technicznego (UDT). https://www.udt.

gov.pl.

[6] Google, Last accessed: November 2019. Google maps - pipe-rack’s location (lodz, poland).

https://goo.gl/maps/UBfPnvgkqrQ8jNgw8.

[7] CS Softdesk, Last accessed: November 2019. Cs softdesk - 3d photogrammetric model of

the pipe-rack (lodz, poland). https://www.softdesk.pl/estakada_duza.

[8] Chatzifoti, O., 2015. “On the popularization of close-range digital photogrammetry: A hand-

book for new users”. Master’s thesis, National University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

25

[9] Lexico: Powere by Oxford, Last accessed: November 2019. Deﬁnition of photogrammetry

in english. https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/photogrammetry.

[10] Merrian-Webster Dictionary, Last accessed: November 2019. Deﬁnition of photogrammetry.

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/photogrammety.

[11] Colins Dictionary, Last accessed: November 2019. Deﬁnition of ’photogrammetry’. https:

//www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/photogrammetry.

[12] Luhmann, T., Robson, S., Kyle, S., and Boehm, J., 2013. Close-Range Photogrammetry and

3D Imaging. De Gruyter Textbook. De Gruyter.

[13] American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Last accessed: November 2019.
What is asprs? https://www.asprs.org/organization/what-is-asprs.html.

[14] Wolf, P. R., and Dewitt, B. A., 2000. Elements of photogrammetry : with applications in

GIS, 3rd ed. / paul r. wolf, bon a. dewitt. ed. McGraw-Hill Boston.

[15] Kasser, M., and Egels, Y., 2002. Digital Photogrammetry. Taylor & Francis Group.

[16] Mikhail, E. M., Bethel, J. S. J. S., McGlone, J. C., of Photogrammetry, A. S., Sensing, R., and
Society, I. . G. I., 2004. Manual of photogrammetry, 5th ed ed. Bethesda, Md. : American
Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing. "ASPRS, The Imaging And Geospatial
Information Society".

[17] Schenk, T., 2005. “Introduction to photogrammetry”. The Ohio State University, Columbus,

106.

[18] Matthews, N. A., 2008. Aerial and close-range photogrammetric technology : providing
resource documentation, interpretation, and preservation. Tech. rep., U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Land Management.

[19] The Center for Photogrammetric Training, U. o. B. C., [Last Accessed]: October 2019. His-
tory of Photogrammetry. https://ibis.geog.ubc.ca/courses/geob373/lectures/
Handouts/History_of_Photogrammetry.pdf.

[20] Aber, J. S., Marzolﬀ, I., and Ries, J. B., 2010. “Chapter 3 - photogrammetry”. In Small-
Format Aerial Photography, J. S. Aber, I. Marzolﬀ, and J. B. Ries, eds. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 23 – 39.

[21] Bertin, S., Friedrich, H., Delmas, P., and Chan, E., 2013. “On the use of close-range digital
stereo-photogrammetry to measure gravel-bed topography in a laboratory environment”. In
Proceedings of the 35TH IAHR World Congress, Tsinghua University, pp. 5584–5594.

[22] Rastiveis, H., and Abbaszadeh, S., 2017. “A comparison of close-range photogrammetry us-
ing a non-professional camera with ﬁeld sruveying for vplume estimation”. In Tehran’s Joint
ISPRS Conferences of GI Research, SMPR and EOEC 2017, The International Archives of
the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences.

[23] Liu, W.-C., and Huang, W.-C., 2016. “Close range digital photogrammetry applied to topog-
raphy and landslide measurements”. ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry,
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, XLI-B5, pp. 875–880.

26

[24] Guyon, D., and Bréda, N., 2016. “7 - applications of multispectral optical satellite imaging
in forestry”. In Land Surface Remote Sensing in Agriculture and Forest, N. Baghdadi and
M. Zribi, eds. Elsevier, pp. 249 – 329.

[25] Bettinger, P., Boston, K., Siry, J. P., and Grebner, D. L., 2017. “Chapter 3 - geographic
information and land classiﬁcation in support of forest planning”. In Forest Management
and Planning (Second Edition), P. Bettinger, K. Boston, J. P. Siry, and D. L. Grebner, eds.,
second edition ed. Academic Press, pp. 65 – 85.

[26] Thornbush, M. J., 2018. Chapter 15 Photographic Technique Used in a Photometric Ap-
proach to Assess the Weathering of Pavement Slabs in Toronto (Ontario, Canada). pp. 303–
316.

[27] Miles, J., Pitts, M., Pagi, H., and Earl, G., 2014. “New applications of photogramme-
try and reﬂectance transformation imaging to an easter island statue”. Antiquity, 88(340),
p. 596–605.

[28] Genin, S. M., 2019. “Photogrammetry: Methods of survey and applications on restoration
works”. ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, XLII-2/W11, pp. 557–564.

[29] Olga, G., Dimitrios, K., Georgios, K., and Petros, P., 2004. “Photogrammetry and archaeol-

ogy : An integrated case study in the archaeological site of philippoi in n . greece.”.

[30] Petti, F. M., Petruzzelli, M., Conti, J. M., Spalluto, L., Wagensommer, A., di Bacino
Della Puglia, M. L. A., Puglia, R., Montrone, G., Sabato, L., and Tropeano, M., 2018. “The
use of aerial and close-range photogrammetry in the study of dinosaur tracksites: Lower
cretaceous (upper aptian/lower albian) molfetta ichnosite (apulia, southern italy)”.

[31] Earl, G., Basford, P. J., Bischoﬀ, A., Bowman, A., Crowther, C., Dahl, J., Hodgson, M., Mar-
tinez, K., Isaksen, L., Pagi, H., Piquette, K., and Kotoula, E., 2011. “Reﬂectance transforma-
tion imaging systems for ancient documentary artefacts”. In EVA London 2011: Electronic
Visualisation and the Arts, J. P. Bowen, S. Dunn, and K. Ng, eds., BCS, pp. 147–154.

[32] Heike, C. L., Upson, K., Stuhaug, E., and Weinberg, S. M., 2010. “3d digital stereopho-
togrammetry: a practical guide to facial image acquisition”. Head & Face Medicine, 6(1),
jul.

[33] Lonnemann, M., 2017. “Chapter 62 - functional anatomy of the sacroiliac joint”. In Or-
thopaedic Physical Therapy Secrets (Third Edition), J. D. Placzek and D. A. Boyce, eds.,
third edition ed. Elsevier, pp. 495 – 500.

[34] Capitán, L., Simon, D., and Capitán-Cañadas, F., 2020. “8 - facial feminization surgery and
In Comprehensive Care of the Transgender Patient,

facial gender conﬁrmation surgery”.
C. A. Ferrando, ed. Content Repository Only!, Philadelphia, pp. 54 – 72.

[35] Brusaporci, S., 2015. “Semantic representation of accurate surveys for the cultural heritage:
Bim applied to the existing domain”. In Handbook of Research on Emerging Digital Tools
for Architectural Surveying, Modeling, and Representation, S. Garagnani, ed. IGI Global,
ch. 3, pp. 94–123.

27

[36] Seitz, S. M., Curless, B., Diebel, J., Scharstein, D., and Szeliski, R., 2006. “A comparison
and evaluation of multi-view stereo reconstruction algorithms”. In Proceedings of the 2006
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition - Volume
1, CVPR ’06, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 519–528.

[37] Labatut, P., Pons, J.-P., and Keriven, R., 2009. “Hierarchical shape-based surface reconstruc-

tion for dense multi-view stereo”. In ICCV, pp. 1598–1605.

[38] McCarthy, J., 2014. “Multi-image photogrammetry as a practical tool for cultural heritage
survey and community engagement”. Journal of Archaeological Science, 43, pp. 175 – 185.

[39] Bentley Systems Inc., Last accessed: November 2019. Reality modeling software. https:

//www.bentley.com/en/products/brands/contextcapture.

[40] Bentley Systems Inc., Last accessed: November 2019. Acute3d - contextcapture. https:

//www.acute3d.com/contextcapture/.

[41] InterAtlas/Acute3D, Last accessed: November 2019. Paris in 3d by ubick. https://www.

acute3d.com/city-mapping/.

[42] on-situ/Acute3D, Last accessed: November 2019. Autun tympanum in 3d for the movie

“revelation”. https://www.acute3d.com/cultural-heritage/.

[43] NBS, Last accessed: November 2019. Bim dimensions - 3d, 4d, 5d, 6d bim explained.

[44] CS Softdesk, Last accessed: November 2019. Cs softdesk - a digital 3d photogrammetric
model of archcathedral basilica of st. stanislaus kostka (lodz, poland). http://softdesk.
pl/katedra.

[45] CS Softdesk, Last accessed: November 2019. Cyfrowy blizniak rzeczywistosci. https:

//softdesk.pl/digitaltwin/.

[46] Macchi, M., Roda, I., Negri, E., and Fumagalli, L., 2018. “Exploring the role of digital twin
for asset lifecycle management”. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 51(11), pp. 790 – 795. 16th IFAC
Symposium on Information Control Problems in Manufacturing INCOM 2018.

[47] CS Softdesk, Last accessed: November 2019. Cs softdesk - a limited accuracy digital 3d

photogrammetric model of a coke plant. http://softdesk.pl/koksownia.

[48] Drone Harmony AG, Last accessed: November 2019. Drone harmony - main website.

https://droneharmony.com/.

[49] CS Softdesk, Last accessed: November 2019. Cs softdesk - 3d photogrammetric model of a

small construction site ( poland). https://www.softdesk.pl/budowa_mala.

[50] Vajak, D., and Livada, ., 2017. “Combining photogrammetry, 3D modeling and real time
information gathering for highly immersive VR experience”. In 2017 Zooming Innovation
in Consumer Electronics International Conference (ZINC), pp. 82–85.

[51] Mudge, M., Malzbender, T., Schroer, C., and Lum, M., 2006. “New reﬂection transformation
imaging methods for rock art and multiple-viewpoint display”. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage,
VAST’06, Eurographics Association, pp. 195–202.

28

[52] Chapman, D., and Deacon, A., 1998. “Panoramic imaging and virtual reality — ﬁlling the
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 53(6),

gaps between the lines”.
Dec., pp. 311–319.

[53] Gonzaga, L., Roberto Veronez, M., Kannenberg, G. L., Alves, D. N., Cazarin, C. L., Santana,
L. G., Fraga, J. L. d., Inocencio, L. C., Souza, L. V. d., Marson, F., Bordin, F., and Tognoli,
F. M. W., 2018. “Immersive Virtual Fieldwork: Advances for the Petroleum Industry”. In
2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 561–562.

[54] Liu, R., Zhu, Y., Luo, Y., and Liu, X., 2009. “Construction Urban Infrastructure Based on
Core Techniques of Digital Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing”. In 2009 International
Forum on Information Technology and Applications, Vol. 1, pp. 536–539.

[55] Murnane, M., Breitmeyer, M., Matuszek, C., and Engel, D., 2019. “Virtual Reality and
Photogrammetry for Improved Reproducibility of Human-Robot Interaction Studies”.
In
2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1092–1093.

[56] Calvert, J., Abadia, R., and Tauseef, S. M., 2019. “Design and Testing of a Virtual Reality
Enabled Experience that Enhances Engagement and Simulates Empathy for Historical Events
and Characters”. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR),
pp. 868–869.

[57] Borba, E. Z., Montes, A., Lopes, R. d. D., Zuﬀo, M. K., and Kopper, R., 2017. “Itapeva 3D:

Being Indiana Jones in virtual reality”. In 2017 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 361–362.

[58] Unity Technologies, Last accessed: September 2019. Unity game engine. https://unity.

com/.

[59] Borba, E. Z., Montes, A., Almeida, M., Nagamura, M., Lopes, R., Zuﬀo, M. K., Araujo, A.,
and Kopper, R., 2017. “ArcheoVR: Exploring Itapeva’s archeological site”. In 2017 IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 463–464.

[60] Woods, A., Bourke, P., and Oliver, N., 2018. “Beacon Virtua”. In 2018 IEEE Conference on

Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 844–844.

[61] Antlej, K., Bykersma, M., Mortimer, M., Vickers-Rich, P., Rich, T., and Horan, B., 2018.
“Real-world Data for Virtual Reality Experiences: Interpreting Excavations”. In 2018 3rd
Digital Heritage International Congress (DigitalHERITAGE) held jointly with 2018 24th
International Conference on Virtual Systems Multimedia (VSMM 2018), pp. 1–8.

[62] Juckette, C., Richards-Rissetto, H., Aldana, H. E. G., and Martinez, N., 2018. “Using Vir-
tual Reality and Photogrammetry to Enrich 3d Object Identity”. In 2018 3rd Digital Heritage
International Congress (DigitalHERITAGE) held jointly with 2018 24th International Con-
ference on Virtual Systems Multimedia (VSMM 2018), pp. 1–5.

[63] Huang, J., 2019. “Pieces of the Past, Maya Treasure Hunt: A Virtual Reality Game Expe-
rience”. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2019 Posters, SIGGRAPH ’19, ACM, pp. 20:1–20:2. event-
place: Los Angeles, California.

[64] Sanders, D. H., 2018. “Neural Networks, AI, Phone-based VR, Machine Learning, Com-
puter Vision and the CUNAT Automated Translation App – not your father’s archaeologi-
cal toolkit”. In 2018 3rd Digital Heritage International Congress (DigitalHERITAGE) held

29

jointly with 2018 24th International Conference on Virtual Systems Multimedia (VSMM
2018), pp. 1–5.

[65] Giloth, C. F., and Tanant, J., 2017. “VR in the garden: The Labyrinthe of Versailles re-
visited”. In 2017 23rd International Conference on Virtual System Multimedia (VSMM),
pp. 1–7.

[66] Adão, T., Pádua, L., Hruska, J., Peres, E., Sousa, J. J., Morais, R., and Magalhdães, L. G.,
2017. “Bringing together UAS-based land surveying and procedural modelling of buildings
to set up enhanced VR environments for cultural heritage”. In 2017 24o Encontro Português
de Computação Gráﬁca e Interação (EPCGI), pp. 1–8.

[67] Fritsch, D., Wagner, J. F., Simon, S., Ceranski, B., Niklaus, M., Zhan, K., Schweizer, T., and
Wang, Z., 2018. “Gyrolog — Towards VR Preservations of Gyro Instruments for Historical
and Didactical Research”. In 2018 Paciﬁc Neighborhood Consortium Annual Conference
and Joint Meetings (PNC), pp. 1–7.

[68] See, Z. S., Santano, D., Sansom, M., Fong, C. H., and Thwaites, H., 2018. “Tomb of a Sul-
tan: A VR Digital Heritage Approach”. In 2018 3rd Digital Heritage International Congress
(DigitalHERITAGE) held jointly with 2018 24th International Conference on Virtual Sys-
tems Multimedia (VSMM 2018), pp. 1–4.

[69] Lima, R. d., and Vergauwen, M., 2018. “From TLS Recoding to VR Environment for Docu-
mentation of the Governor’s Tombs in Dayr al-Barsha, Egypt”. In 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), pp. 293–298.

[70] Fritsch, D., and Klein, M., 2017. “3D and 4D Modeling for AR and VR App Developments”.
In 2017 23rd International Conference on Virtual System Multimedia (VSMM), pp. 1–8.

[71] Xiao, W., Mills, J., Guidi, G., Rodríguez-Gonzálvez, P., Gonizzi Barsanti, S., and González-
Aguilera, D., 2018. “Geoinformatics for the conservation and promotion of cultural heritage
in support of the UN Sustainable Development Goals”. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing, 142, Aug., pp. 389–406.

[72] Nishino, H., Utsumiya, K., Kuraoka, D., Yoshioka, K., and Korida, K., 1997. “Interactive
Two-handed Gesture Interface in 3D Virtual Environments”. In Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’97, ACM, pp. 1–8. event-
place: Lausanne, Switzerland.

[73] Song, C. G., Kwak, N. J., and Jeong, D. H., 2000. “Developing an Eﬃcient Technique of
Selection and Manipulation in Immersive V.E.”. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’00, ACM, pp. 142–146. event-place:
Seoul, Korea.

[74] Latoschik, M. E., 2001. “A Gesture Processing Framework for Multimodal Interaction in
Virtual Reality”. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computer Graphics,
Virtual Reality and Visualisation, AFRIGRAPH ’01, ACM, pp. 95–100. event-place: Camps
Bay, Cape Town, South Africa.

[75] Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Hashizume, S., Muramatsu, N., Omomo, K., Iwasaki, R., Wataru, K.,
and Ochiai, Y., 2018. “EXController: Enhancing Interaction Capability for VR Handheld

30

Controllers Using Real-time Vision Sensing”. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’18, ACM, pp. 87:1–87:2. event-place:
Tokyo, Japan.

[76] Leap Motion, Last accessed: September 2019. Leap motion. https://www.leapmotion.

com.

[77] Manders, C., Farbiz, F., Yin, T. K., Miaolong, Y., Chong, B., and Guan, C. G., 2008. “In-
teracting with 3d Objects in a Virtual Environment Using an Intuitive Gesture System”. In
Proceedings of The 7th ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual-Reality Con-
tinuum and Its Applications in Industry, VRCAI ’08, ACM, pp. 5:1–5:5. event-place: Sin-
gapore.

[78] Clark, A., and Moodley, D., 2016. “A System for a Hand Gesture-Manipulated Virtual Reality
Environment”. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the South African Institute of
Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, SAICSIT ’16, ACM, pp. 10:1–10:10.
event-place: Johannesburg, South Africa.

[79] Lin, L., and Jörg, S., 2016. “Need a Hand?: How Appearance Aﬀects the Virtual Hand
Illusion”. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied Perception, SAP ’16, ACM,
pp. 69–76. event-place: Anaheim, California.

[80] Tecchia, F., Avveduto, G., Brondi, R., Carrozzino, M., Bergamasco, M., and Alem, L., 2014.
“I’m in VR!: Using Your Own Hands in a Fully Immersive MR System”. In Proceedings of
the 20th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’14, ACM,
pp. 73–76. event-place: Edinburgh, Scotland.

[81] Sutherland, I. E., 1968. “A Head-mounted Three Dimensional Display”. AFIPS ’68 (Fall,
part I) Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I,
pp. 757–764, DOI:10.1145/1476589.1476686.

[82] Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., DeFanti, T. A., Kenyon, R. V., and Hart, J. C., 1992. “The
cave: Audio visual experience automatic virtual environment”. Commun. ACM, 35(6), June,
pp. 64–72.

[83] HTC Vive, Last accessed: September 2019. HTC Vive, Vive Pro, Vive Pro Eye, Vive Focus,

Vive Cosmos. https://www.vive.com.

[84] Oculus VR, Last accessed: September 2019. Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, Oculus Go. https:

//www.oculus.com.

[85] Shefelbine, S., Clarkson, J., Farmer, R., and Eason, S., 2002. Good Design Practice for Med-
ical Devices and Equipment - Requirements Capture. University of Cambridge, Engineering
Design Centre and University of Cambridge Institute for Manufacturing.

[86] Tadeja, S. K., Seshadri, P., and Kristensson, P. O., 2019. “AeroVR: An Immersive Visual-
ization System for Aerospace Design and Digital Twinning in Virtual Reality”. The Royal
Aeronautical Journal, under review.

[87] Unity Technologies, Last accessed: November 2018.

Unity VR Samples pack.

https://assetstore.unity.com/packages/essentials/tutorial-projects/
vr-samples-51519.

31

[88] Greyman studios S.L., Last accessed:

July 2017. Oﬀ Screen Indicator.

https://

assetstore.unity.com/packages/tools/gui/off-screen-indicator-57062.

[89] Oculus VR, Last accessed: November 2018. Oculus Utilities for Unity 5. https://

developer.oculus.com.

[90] Tadeja, S. K., Seshadri, P., and Kristensson, P. O., 2019. “Exploring Aerospace Design in

Virtual Reality with Dimension Reduction”. In AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum.

[91] Tadeja, S. K., Kipouros, T., and Kristensson, P. O., 2019. “Exploring Parallel Coordinates
in Virtual Reality”. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI’19).

[92] Tadeja, S. K., Kipouros, T., and Kristensson, P. O., 2020. “IPCP: Immersive Parallel Coor-
dinates Plots for Engineering Design Processes”. In Proceedings of AIAA SciTech Forum
and Exposition, forthcoming.

[93] Xu, Z., Wu, L., Gerke, M., Wang, R., and Yang, H., 2016. “Skeletal camera network embed-
ded structure-from-motion for 3d scene reconstruction from UAV images”. ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 121, Nov., pp. 113–127.

[94] Lee, D., Muir, W., Beeston, S., Bates, S., Schoﬁeld, S. D., Edwards, M. J., and Green, R. D.,
2018. “Analysing Forests Using Dense Point Clouds”. In 2018 International Conference on
Image and Vision Computing New Zealand (IVCNZ), pp. 1–6.

[95] Icons, [Online]: September 2019. Icons by Icons8. https://icons8.com/.

[96] Slambekova, D., Bailey, R., and Geigel, J., 2012. “Gaze and Gesture Based Object Manip-
ulation in Virtual Worlds”. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology, VRST ’12, ACM, pp. 203–204. event-place: Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

[97] Bentley Systems Incorporated, Last accessed: November 2019. Bentley systems microsta-

tion. https://www.bentley.com/en/products/brands/microstation.

[98] Dassault Systemes, Last accessed: November 2019. Dassault systemes solidworks. https:

//www.solidworks.com/.

[99] Dassault Systemes , Last accessed: November 2019. Dassault systemes catia. https://

www.3ds.com/products-services/catia/.

[100] Azai, T., Otsuki, M., Shibata, F., and Kimura, A., 2018. “Open Palm Menu: A Virtual Menu
Placed in Front of the Palm”. In Proceedings of the 9th Augmented Human International
Conference, AH ’18, ACM, pp. 17:1–17:5. event-place: Seoul, Republic of Korea.

[101] Jude, A., Poor, G. M., and Guinness, D., 2016. “Grasp, Grab or Pinch? Identifying User
Preference for In-Air Gestural Manipulation”. In Proceedings of the 2016 Symposium on
Spatial User Interaction, SUI ’16, ACM, pp. 219–219. event-place: Tokyo, Japan.

[102] Cui, J., Kuijper, A., Fellner, D. W., and Sourin, A., 2016. “Understanding People’s Mental
Models of Mid-Air Interaction for Virtual Assembly and Shape Modeling”. In Proceedings
of the 29th International Conference on Computer Animation and Social Agents, CASA ’16,
ACM, pp. 139–146. event-place: Geneva, Switzerland.

32

[103] Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum, K. S., and Lilienthal, M. G., 1993. “Simulator Sick-
ness Questionnaire: An Enhanced Method for Quantifying Simulator Sickness”. The Inter-
national Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3(3), July, pp. 203–220.

[104] Bouchard, S., Robillard, G., and Renaud, P., 2007. “Revising the factor structure of the Simu-
lator Sickness Questionnaire”. Annual Review of CyberTherapy and Telemedicine (ARCTT),
5, pp. 117–122.

[105] Rheinberg, F., Vollmeyer, R., and Engeser, S., 2003. “Assessment of ﬂow experiences”.
Diagnosis of Motivation and Self-Concept (Tests and Trends N.F.2), pp. 261—-279, eds. J.
Stiensmeier–Pelster and F. Rheinberg (Göttingen: Hogrefe).

[106] Igroup, [Online]: Nov. 2018. Survey on experiences in virtual worlds. http://www.

igroup.org.

[107] Hart, S. G., and Staveland, L. E., 1988. “Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index):
Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research”. In Advances in Psychology, Vol. 52. Else-
vier, pp. 139–183.

[108] Schwind, V., Knierim, P., Haas, N., and Henze, N., 2019. “Using Presence Questionnaires
in Virtual Reality”. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI ’19, ACM, pp. 360:1–360:12. event-place: Glasgow, Scotland Uk.

[109] Caputo, F. M., and Giachetti, A., 2015. “Evaluation of Basic Object Manipulation Modes
for Low-cost Immersive Virtual Reality”. In Proceedings of the 11th Biannual Conference
on Italian SIGCHI Chapter, CHItaly 2015, ACM, pp. 74–77. event-place: Rome, Italy.

33

