SlingDrone: Mixed Reality System for Pointing and Interaction
Using a Single Drone

Evgeny Tsykunov∗
Evgeny.Tsykunov@skoltech.ru

Roman Ibrahimov∗
Skoltech, Moscow

Skoltech, Moscow

Derek Vasquez
Derek.Vasquez@byu.edu
BYU, Provo, Utah, USA

Dzmitry Tsetserukou
D.Tsetserukou@skoltech.ru
Skoltech, Moscow

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
2
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
8
6
4
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: a) The drone points in the slingshot mode: the user pulls the drone using a leash and a hand grip causing a dis-
placement. b) While the drone is in slingshot mode, the trajectory and the object of interest is visualized in virtual scene by
simplifying pointing. c) The drone is in projectile mode: it approaches and grabs the object of interest.

ABSTRACT
We propose SlingDrone, a novel Mixed Reality interaction paradigm
that utilizes a micro-quadrotor as both pointing controller and
interactive robot with a slingshot motion type. The drone attempts
to hover at a given position while the human pulls it in desired
direction using a hand grip and a leash. Based on the displacement,
a virtual trajectory is defined. To allow for intuitive and simple
control, we use virtual reality (VR) technology to trace the path
of the drone based on the displacement input. The user receives
force feedback propagated through the leash. Force feedback from
SlingDrone coupled with visualized trajectory in VR creates an
intuitive and user friendly pointing device. When the drone is
released, it follows the trajectory that was shown in VR. Onboard
payload (e.g. magnetic gripper) can perform various scenarios for
real interaction with the surroundings, e.g. manipulation or sensing.
Unlike HTC Vive controller, SlingDrone does not require handheld
devices, thus it can be used as a standalone pointing technology in
VR.

∗Both authors contributed equally to the paper

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interac-
tion (HCI).

KEYWORDS
human-robot interaction, mixed reality, quadrotor, haptics

ACM Reference Format:
Evgeny Tsykunov, Roman Ibrahimov, Derek Vasquez, and Dzmitry Tset-
serukou. 2019. SlingDrone: Mixed Reality System for Pointing and In-
teraction Using a Single Drone. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Con-
ference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Three-dimensional human-computer interaction (HCI) is a rich
field which is under active development in the robotics and VR/AR
communities.

Pointing during HCI often happens via controllers, such as joy-
sticks or different wearable or handheld devices [Billinghurst and
Starner 1999; Howard and Howard [n. d.]]. For instance, authors
in [Speicher et al. 2018] used HTC Vive controllers to select keys
on a virtual keyboard. In [Yuan et al. 2019], a human-assisted quad-
copter navigation system where the user guides the robot through
eye-tracker glasses was proposed. Wearable devices are widely
used to control remote [Tsykunov et al. 2019] or virtual vehicles
[Labazanova et al. 2019]. Although different devices proved rich
functionality, the user has to hold or wear them during the whole
interaction.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Evgeny Tsykunov, et al.

One alternative approach is gesture-based interaction which is
widely used in VR/AR. [Valentini and Pezzuti 2016] showed that
Leap Motion is capable of demonstrating suitable accuracy for hand
tracking in some operational zones. The drawback is that the finger
pointing allows the user to define direction, but not magnitude.
Nielsen et al. [Nielsen et al. 2004] stated that performing certain
gestures or long lasting gesturing could be stressful. In addition,
these approaches in most cases require a camera setup and provide
no haptic or tactile feedback.

Mixed Reality (MR) plays an important role for creating new in-
teraction methods, combining VR and robotics. Hoenig et al. [Hönig
et al. 2015] used MR to simulate bigger quadrotors with small ones,
which followed a virtual human. In this way authors tested human-
robot interaction algorithms safely and preserved real flight dynam-
ics. Authors in [Freund and Rossmann 1999] used MR for industrial
robot teleoperation. A human wore a tracked glove and motions
from VR were translated to real manipulators.

In contrast with the discussed works, we introduce a novel MR
concept of using a single drone for three-dimensional virtual point-
ing and interaction. The drone acts as a slingshot and a projectile at
the same time. SlingDrone is a selection device which is first used
for pointing to an object, then it performs the defined maneuvers
to interact with the environment.

The drone has a hand grip hanging from the bottom. By default,
the drone hovers at the same position and the human pulls it in some
direction using a hand grip, see Fig.1(a). The physical displacement
of the drone (which is three-dimensional) is connected to the virtual
pointing and visualized in VR (an example of pointing is shown in
Fig.1(b)). A force feedback system with a leash (Fig.1(a)) gives the
user a better understanding of the interaction. After the pointing
phase, the drone is able to perform the defined maneuvers to interact
with the surroundings.

In contrast to the GridDrones project [Braley et al. 2018], where
the operator grabs one drone to control the motion of the others
agent, the interaction with the drone is smooth by its nature, (i)
due to the elastic hardware element (leash) in the interface and (ii)
due to the fact that the leash is connected to the center of the drone
providing zero angular momentum.

The main novelty of the SlingDrone is that we propose to design
and perform maneuvers using one drone, without any additional
handheld or wearable control device. For the proof of concept, we
tracked the user hand (to be shown in VR to facilitate holder grab)
with hand mounted infrared reflective markers, but they can be
replaced with Leap Motion attached to the HMD. On the other
side, the user also could rely purely on haptic sensation from drone
airflow for the hand grab. Since SlingDrone is a flying robot, one of
its main advantages is that it can fly to a location that is convenient
for a human to perform pointing.

2 SLINGDRONE TECHNOLOGY
A holder allows a human to grab and pull the SlingDrone in any
direction in the X −Y plane and downwards (except upwards, which
limits the operational zone). The drone tries to maintain its desired
spatial position pdes while the operator is pulling the hand grip,
which causes a slight change in position. The state of the Sling-
Drone, including the current position p, is estimated with onboard

sensors and a motion capture system. The real displacement vector
D is defined as p − pdes and connected to the virtual pointing.

The relation between the real displacement vector and the virtual
pointing could have multiple implementations, which incorporates
different three-dimensional interaction techniques. For instance,
SlingDrone allows to select an object that the user’s hand cannot
reach. We propose to generate virtual trajectory that starts from
the drone position and is defined using the displacement vector D.
Vector D is tree-dimensional, therefore it is possible to map it to a
point in tree-dimensional space.

Force with a vector F distributes through the leash from the drone
to the human hand. Based on the slingshot analogy, we assume that
force feedback potentially helps to improve interaction and make
more accurate pointing.

After the pointing phase, the drone can be transformed to the
projectile mode and is able to fly and perform different cases of 3D
interaction with the real or virtual environment.

When the drone experiences extreme values in the state param-
eters (e.g. pitch, roll) during the pointing, the motors shut down.
This functionality is introduced as an emergency stop to ensure
safety of the operator.

2.1 Pointing During the Slingshot Mode
A pointing or the object selection could be defined in multiple
ways. One of the most straightforward solutions is a scaling of
displacement vector D with the coefficient k (usually k >> 1). When
the new vector R = −kD defines the point in the mid-air (negative
sign also can be omitted, but here it helps to replicate slingshot -
we pull in one direction and the projectile fly in the opposite one).
But taking into account that the SlingDrone technology somehow
replicates the slingshot operation, we propose to design a ballistic
trajectory instead of the straight line. The ballistic trajectory better
replicates the projectile flight after the slingshot execution. An
intersection of the ballistic trajectory with some surface, line or
object could help to define a point in three-dimensional space.

The proposed ballistic trajectory is generated by an air-drag
model defined by a system of second order, nonlinear differential
equations:

(cid:220)x =

−ρCd Ax (cid:219)x 2
2m

, (cid:220)y =

−ρCd Ay (cid:219)y2
2m

(cid:220)z =

−0.5ρCd Az (cid:219)z2 ∗ sin( (cid:219)z) − mд
m

(1)

(2)

where ρ is the air density, Cd is the coefficient of drag, A is the
frontal area of the drone in the respective direction, and m is the
mass. An air drag model was used to generate an intuitive trajectory
of the free ballistic flight.

Equations (1-2) are solved using a numerical ODE solver with six
initial conditions: the three dimensional vector pdes as the initial
position and the three dimensional displacement vector D as a proxy
for initial velocity. D can be scaled by a coefficient k to achieve a
desired distance scale for the trajectory. A value of k = 95 was used.
The three columns representing position are extracted to form a
position vector which defines the trajectory. To command the drone
to execute the trajectory, polynomial coefficients were generated
as in [Richter et al. 2016].

SlingDrone: Mixed Reality System for Pointing and Interaction Using a Single Drone

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

The coefficients of equations (1) and (2) have been selected to
model a smooth sphere on a ballistic trajectory. The air density ρ is
1.23 kg/m3. The coefficient of drag (Cd ) is held constant at 0.4. The
area is Ax = Ay = Az = 0.01m2 and the mass of the virtual body
m is 10 kg. Like the trajectory itself, these values can be modified
to suit specific use cases.

2.2 Transition between the Slingshot and the

Projectile Modes

While hovering without interaction with a human, the drone stabi-
lizes itself and experiences small displacements. All displacements
= 20mm) are not considered as
under the certain threshold (δd
inputs. During the pointing, the velocity of the drone displacement
is small due to the fact that small displacements cause big change in
trajectory (which is defined with the k coefficient, described above).
In addition, aiming is almost always performed in a slow manner
by the user. Therefore, the drone maintains small velocity v which
is mostly under the threshold δv . Based on that fact, we assume
that while the following statements are true

(3)

D > δd , v < δv
the drone is in the slingshot mode. We update the trajectory every
loop while (3) is true. When the user releases the holder, the drone
starts to accelerate towards the default hover position and the
velocity v becomes bigger than δv (the trajectory is not updated
any more). When the drone approaches the hover position D < δd ,
it becomes a projectile and starts to follow the last valid trajectory
towards the defined point in space to interact.

2.3 Human-SlingDrone Interaction Strategy
First, the SlingDrone approaches the human and starts to hover,
entering the slingshot mode (Fig.1(a)). The user estimates the posi-
tion of the drone utilizing visual feedback from VR coupled with a
haptic sensation form the airflow below the quadrotor, which helps
to catch the hand grab. After the human grabs the holder, he or she
starts to pull it. When the magnitude of the current displacement
vector |D| exceeds the δd threshold, the trajectory is being visu-
alized in VR. Now, the human is able to point the SlingDrone by
pulling the holder. When the user is satisfied with the pointing or
the selection, he can release the holder. The drone enters the pro-
jectile mode (Fig.1(c)) and performs the maneuvers and interaction
with the surroundings.

2.4 Implementation
The SlingDrone itself, together with the user’s hand, and the object
of interest are real objects and tracked by a motion capture system
with visualization in virtual scene.

2.4.1 Aerial Platform. We used a Crazyflie 2.0 quadrotor to perform
the verification of the flight tests. To get the high-quality tracking
of the quadrotor during the experiments, we used Vicon motion
capture system with 12 cameras (Vantage V5) covering a 5m ×
5m × 5m space. We used the Robot Operating System (ROS) Kinetic
framework to run the developed software and ROS stack [Hönig
et al. 2015; Preiss et al. 2017] for Crazyflie 2.0. The position and
attitude update rate was 100 Hz for all drones. Before the verification
of the proposed approach, we ensured that we were able to perform

a stable and smooth flight, following the desired trajectory. In order
to do so, all PID coefficients for position controller were set to
default values for Crazyflie 2.0, according to [Preiss et al. 2017] (for
x,y-axis kp =0.4, kd =0.2, ki =0.05; for z-axis kp =1.25, kd =0.4, ki =0.05).
Finally, to be able to reach stable displacement of the SlingDrone
during interaction, we set all positional integral terms of the PID
controller to zero.

An elastic wire (100 mm in length) is connected to the bottom

of the SlingDrone, as shown in Fig.1(a), with a holder at the end.

2.4.2 VR Development. A Virtual Reality application in Unity3D
was created to provide the user with a pleasant immersion. Quad-
copter, human hand, and remote object models were simulated in
VR. The size of each virtual object changes like in real life depend-
ing on the distance between the operator and the objects. Vicon
Motion Capture cameras were used to transfer positioning and
rotation tracking data of each object to the Unity 3D engine. The
operator wears HTC Vive VR headset to experience Virtual Reality
application.

The virtual trajectory is updated 30 times per second and the
human can get visual feedback in VR about the potential flight path
(to avoid obstacles) and about the destination point.

2.5 Application: Grabbing a Remote Object
The goal of the proposed application is to grab a remote object
using a magnetic gripper placed on the Crazyflie 2.0 drone. As a
gripper for the user, we used a magnet which is also used to attract
the remote object of interest.

During the pointing, when the end point of the generated trajec-
tory hits the remote object that is intended to be picked, the user
releases the holder. The drone enters the projectile mode (Fig.1(c))
and starts to follow the defined trajectory representing the slowed
flight of passive object. When the quadrotor approaches the end of
trajectory, to increase the chances of grabbing, it performs a search
of object of interest by moving in a square with 0.15 meter side.
After that, the drone flies back to the user to perform a delivery.
After the delivery the user is able to experience a tangible sensation
of the object of interest.

3 USER STUDY
Seven right-handed users (22 to 28 years old, six male and one
female) took part in the experiments. The protocol of the experiment
was approved by a Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
review board and all participants gave informed consent.

3.1 Experimental Methods
As described above, the user’s hand, the drone, and the object of
interest are visualized in VR. The drone hovered near the human
and maintained 1.5 meters in height as shown in Fig. 2(a). For the
experiment we decided to focus on the pointing functionality of the
SlingDrone purely in VR. Therefore, we kept the slingshot mode of
the drone for the whole experiment. After the user performed aim-
ing (with visualized trajectory as shown in Fig. 2(b)) and released
the hand grip, the drone avoided the transition to the projectile
mode. Instead, after the release, the drone just moved to the default
hover position. Then, the virtual ball appeared and became a projec-
tile; then, it flied along the desired trajectory in virtual scene (Fig.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Evgeny Tsykunov, et al.

Figure 2: Workflow of the user study experiment. (a) No interaction between the human and the drone, (b) User points towards
the object of interest, (c) Pink ball represents the projectile.

2(c)). All subjects were asked to evaluate the pointing capabilities
of SlingDrone technology for 5 minutes. Pointing is just a part of
the idea behind SlingDrone (another part is the physical flight for
interaction), which means that the experimental results cannot be
extrapolated to the whole technology.

Table 1: Evaluation of the participant’s experience. Volun-
teers evaluated these statements, presented in random or-
der, using a 7-point Likert scale (1 = completely disagree, 7
= completely agree). Means and standard deviations are pre-
sented.

3.2 Experimental Results and Discussion
All participants positively responded to the device convenience.
After the experiment, we also asked the subjects to answer a ques-
tionnaire of 8 questions using bipolar Likert-type seven-point scales.
The results are presented in Table 1.

All participants reported that it is was easy to learn of how to
use the SlingDrone (in fact it took 10-30 second to understand the
workflow), which is supported by question 1 in Table 1. According
to the users, it was slightly hard to grab the holder, as far as it is not
visualised in VR. For the future work, the holder will be visualised
in VR. For the trajectory representation, we used small white balls
thrown from the position of the drone. Therefore, when the users
change the direction, the trajectory did not change instantly - it
takes some time for the balls to perform a flight. That fact was not
positively supported by the users. For the future, we plan to replace
the balls with a trajectory visualised with dashed line that can be
changed instantly. Surprisingly, in spite of the small size of the
used quadrotor, most of the users reported that they felt some force
feedback from the drone, which provides additional information
about the magnitude of the input.

In question 5 users were satisfied with the actual destination
of the virtual projectile. Along with that, pulling a drone looks
similar to the slingshot operation, which could have an acceptable
accuracy in certain cases. Therefore, we propose a hypothesis that
the SlingDrone potentially could have a high accuracy. During the
experiment we did not measure the accuracy of the pointing, but it
will be done in the future work.

4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we developed SlingDrone - a novel interaction technol-
ogy that combines the advantages of real and virtual environments.
One of the core features is that SlingDrone provides a powerful
and easy to use 3D pointing technology. Therefore, SlingDrone can
also be used for pointing of other robots. The intersection between

Questions
It was easy to learn how to use SlingDrone.
It was easy to grab and keep the holder of
the drone.
The visualized trajectory in VR clearly
represented the flight path.
I felt the force response from the drone
when pulling the rope.
I was satisfied with the actual destination
of the virtual projectile.
I was tired at the end of the experiment.
I felt comfortable when I used SlingDrone.
I felt safe when I used SlingDrone.

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
8

Mean SD
0.49

6.4

5.4

5.6

5.8

5.2

1.4
6.0
7.0

1.02

0.8

1.47

0.74

0.48
0.89
0

the virtual trajectory and a floor can be used as a desired position
for a ground based robot such as car.

As a perspective development, we are planning to introduce the
SlingDrone placement mode, when the user moves the SlingDrone
in space to the most suitable location by pulling the rope. This can
be done as a preliminary setup before the actual pointing process.
To provide deeper immersion into the pointing process, instead
of the magnetic hand grab, the vibromotor can be used. The vi-
bromotor is connected to the drone via coiled elastic wire and it
is powered/controlled from onboard electronics. Different tactile
patterns can deliver additional information about the potential in-
teraction with the surroundings. But for the selection applications
a press button instead of the vibromotor can be more suitable.

For the future work, we plan to conduct a user study to evaluate
the participants’ experience of using SlingDrone and to estimate
the accuracy and precision of pointing and flight. The SlingDrone
platform can also be implemented in an Augmented Reality (AR).
This would allow for more direct information about the trajectory
to the goal and provide additional safety.

SlingDrone: Mixed Reality System for Pointing and Interaction Using a Single Drone

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

REFERENCES
M. Billinghurst and T. Starner. 1999. Wearable devices: new ways to manage informa-

tion. Computer 32, 1 (1999), 57–64. https://doi.org/10.1109/2.738305

Sean Braley, Calvin Rubens, Timothy R. Merritt, and Roel Vertegaal. 2018. GridDrones.
In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems - CHI '18. ACM Press.

E. Freund and J. Rossmann. 1999. Projective virtual reality: bridging the gap between
virtual reality and robotics. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 15, 3 (jun
1999), 411–422. https://doi.org/10.1109/70.768175

Wolfgang Hönig, Christina Milanes, Lisa Scaria, Thai Phan, Mark Bolas, and Nora
Ayanian. 2015. Mixed Reality for Robotics. In IEEE/RSJ Intl Conf. Intelligent Robots
and Systems. 5382 – 5387.

B. Howard and S. Howard. [n. d.]. Lightglove: wrist-worn virtual typing and pointing.
In Proceedings Fifth International Symposium on Wearable Computers. IEEE Comput.
Soc. https://doi.org/10.1109/iswc.2001.962130

Luiza Labazanova, Akerke Tleugazy, Evgeny Tsykunov, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou.
2019. SwarmGlove: A Wearable Tactile Device for Navigation of Swarm of Drones
in VR Environment. In Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Springer Singapore,
304–309. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-3194-7_67

Michael Nielsen, Moritz StÃűrring, Thomas B. Moeslund, and Erik Granum. 2004.
A Procedure for Developing Intuitive and Ergonomic Gesture Interfaces for HCI.
In Gesture-Based Communication in Human-Computer Interaction. Springer Berlin

Heidelberg, 409–420. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24598-8_38

James A. Preiss, Wolfgang Honig, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, and Nora Ayanian. 2017.
Crazyswarm: A large nano-quadcopter swarm. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/icra.2017.7989376
Charles Richter, Adam Bry, and Nicholas Roy. 2016. Polynomial trajectory planning
for aggressive quadrotor flight in dense indoor environments. In Robotics Research.
Springer, 649–666.

Marco Speicher, Anna Maria Feit, Pascal Ziegler, and Antonio KrÃĳger. 2018. Selection-
based Text Entry in Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '18. ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3174221

Evgeny Tsykunov, Ruslan Agishev, Roman Ibrahimov, Luiza Labazanova, Akerke
Tleugazy, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou. 2019. SwarmTouch: Guiding a Swarm of
Micro-Quadrotors With Impedance Control Using a Wearable Tactile Interface.
IEEE Transactions on Haptics 12, 3 (jul 2019), 363–374. https://doi.org/10.1109/toh.
2019.2927338

Pier Paolo Valentini and Eugenio Pezzuti. 2016. Accuracy in fingertip tracking using
Leap Motion Controller for interactive virtual applications. International Journal
on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM) 11, 3 (jul 2016), 641–650. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s12008-016-0339-y

Liangzhe Yuan, Christopher Reardon, Garrett Warnell, and Giuseppe Loianno. 2019.
Human gaze-driven spatial tasking of an autonomous MAV. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters 4, 2 (2019), 1343–1350.

