Exploring Conﬁgurations for Multi-user Communication in
Virtual Reality
Karl Rosenberg
New York University
New York, United States
ktr254@nyu.edu

Zhenyi He
New York University
New York, United States
zh719@nyu.edu

Ken Perlin
New York University
New York, United States
ken.perlin@gmail.com

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
5
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
8
6
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Virtual Reality (VR) enables users to collaborate while explor-
ing scenarios not realizable in the physical world. We propose
CollabVR, a distributed multi-user collaboration environment,
to explore how digital content improves expression and under-
standing of ideas among groups. To achieve this, we designed
and examined three possible conﬁgurations for participants
and shared manipulable objects. In conﬁguration (1), partic-
ipants stand side-by-side. In (2), participants are positioned
across from each other, mirrored face-to-face. In (3), called
"eyes-free," participants stand side-by-side looking at a shared
display, and draw upon a horizontal surface. We also explored
a "telepathy" mode, in which participants could see from each
other’s point of view. We implemented "3DSketch" visual ob-
jects for participants to manipulate and move between virtual
content boards in the environment. To evaluate the system, we
conducted a study in which four people at a time used each of
the three conﬁgurations to cooperate and communicate ideas
with each other. We have provided experimental results and
interview responses.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.3. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Computer-
supported cooperative work; H.5.3. Information Interfaces
and Presentation: Miscellaneous

Author Keywords
Multi-user communication; computer-supported collaborative
work; shared workspace

INTRODUCTION
Virtual Reality (VR) is being explored increasingly, spurred
by the availability of high quality consumer headsets in recent
years. VR enables rich design spaces in HCI by providing
3D input and immersive experiences. In 1998, an idea, the
"Ofﬁce of the future," was proposed to allow remotely lo-
cated people to feel as though they were together in a shared
ofﬁce space [21], via a hybrid of modalities including telep-
resence, large panoramic displays and manipulation of shared

3D objects. The core idea was that VR had the potential
to enhance communication and collaboration among groups
of people. Since then, signiﬁcant progress has been made
in exploring techniques for communication [9, 17], collab-
orative works [28, 10], infrastructure [15, 29] and various
modalities [4] for multi-user experiences. For example, Syn-
chronizAR designed a registration algorithm for mobile AR
so the participants could join the co-located experience and
not need to take extra steps to ensure good-quality positional
tracking [7]. SpaceTime focused on improving the experience
for two experts collaborating on design work together [31].
InForce created a set of novel interaction techniques including
haptic feedback for distributed collaboration [13]. Many such
collaboration systems allow users to communicate as in every-
day life, without enhancement. Less studied is how VR can
enhance communication and be integrated into various kinds
of collaborative work.

In daily life while speaking to others, we commonly use ges-
tures or visual aids [30] to help present ideas, either subcon-
sciously or purposefully. Visual aids can be drawn on paper, a
whiteboard[2], or a screen via desktop sharing in video confer-
ences. A key task for collaborators is visually, physically, and
cognitively following the content being drawn and the people
who are speaking with. They need a clear view of the content
under discussion and need to be aware of other collaborators’
presence when communicating [8]. They should also under-
stand and be able to reason about what is being shown and said.
According to Regenbrecht et al. [22], facial interaction like
eye contact and mutual gaze has always been recognized as
an important requirement for effective visual communications.
That suggests it is helpful during communication to look at
the person who is talking or at least be aware of the person’s
location. Oftentimes, participants in a group discussion also
need to move around physically to follow the content and each
other. In addition, following and presenting content requires
the ability to express ideas clearly as well as a fair understand-
ing of the ideas. This may become particularly challenging in
discussions revolving around, for example, the placement and
design of 3D objects, which cannot easily be visualized using
traditional 2D communication media (paper, whiteboard, and
so on).

Prior work tried to improve communication using alternative
arrangements of spaces and enhanced digital content for com-
munication. One trend has been to help people maintain face-
to-face interaction during communication. ClearBoard [9]
created a shared workspace in which two users collaborate

 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Side-by-side Conﬁguration

(b) Mirrored Face-to-face Conﬁguration

(c) Eyes-free Conﬁguration

Figure 1: Side view of multiple conﬁgurations

remotely without losing all the advantages of in-person face-
to-face interactions. MMSpace changed participants’ poses
and positions automatically to mirror the remote users’ heads
to enable face-to-face interactions [17]. Tan et al. built a
face-to-face presentation system for remote audiences [27].
Interacting with digital content in a shared space is common
too. Three’s Company [28] explored collaborative activities
over connected digital tabletops which support a shared sense
of presence among people and artifacts associated with the
task. Tele-Board [6] designed a groupware system specialized
in creative working modes using traditional whiteboard and
sticky notes in digital form for distributed users.

Still, it is unclear how the arrangement of users and content
in a VR space and how advanced digital content affect com-
munication for co-located and distributed collaboration. We
implemented CollabVR, a multi-user VR collaboration envi-
ronment, to explore how spatial arrangements of people and
visual content impact communication.

• Three different Conﬁgurations: 1) side-by-side, 2) mirrored
face-to-face and 3) eyes-free. A Conﬁguration is a spatial
arrangement including the digital content and the partici-
pants. Each Conﬁguration explores a different arrangement
for the shared workspace.

• Telepathy mode, which gives participants the ability to view
the world from another user’s perspective, either through a
windowed overlay or immersively. We refer to the person
who chooses to see from someone else’s perspective as the
"observer." The person whose perspective is chosen is the
"observee."

• 3DSketch, which is an enhanced Chalktalk sketch (see 4.1)
which can be manipulated in the immersive environment.
Rich interactions are designed so users can quickly share
are demonstrate different ideas with each other.

We conducted a user study with groups of four people at a
time. They were asked to experience each conﬁguration and
complete the same tasks for each of them. Afterwards, we
proceeded to user interviews in which participants shared their

thoughts on the three Conﬁgurations, telepathy mode and the
usability of the CollabVR communication platform.

RELATED WORK
Here we present previous work focusing on manipulation
of interactive content, collaborative work for co-located and
distributed groups, and enhancement of communication with
immersive environments.

Manipulation on Interactive Contents
Some work made use of physical proxies to manipulate digital
content directly. Photoportals allowed direct manipulation
of 3D references to objects, places, and moments by mov-
ing the physical proxy directly [10]. MAI Painting Brush
imitated a real paint brush, and constructed a mixed reality
(MR) painting system that enabled direct painting on physical
objects [18]. Eckard et al. designed a multi-modal actuated
Tangible User Interface(TUI) for distributed collaboration,
so users could control the remote items by moving the local
corresponding items [24]. Physical Telepresence proposed a
series of shared work spaces so remote physical objects and
physical renderings of shared digital content could be manipu-
lated locally [12]. In our system, we also seek to make direct
manipulation of interactive content straightforward and intu-
itive. Similarly, the interactions we designed for 3DSketch 3.3
follow that philosophy as well.

Co-located and Distributed Collaboration
Much work has been done in collaborative applications in
VR/MR. T(ether) is a spatially-aware display system for co-
located collaborative manipulation and animation of objects
[11]. Trackable markers on pads and digital gloves allow par-
ticipants to use gestures to manipulate objects in space. Virtual
Replicas for Remote Assistance is a remote collaboration sys-
tem, allowing a remote expert to guide local users to assemble
machine parts by using virtual replicas [14]. Martin et al. pro-
posed an MR system that allowed distributed users to align
and understand each other’s perspective by video feed [3].
SpaceTime is a scene editing tool supporting multi-user col-
laboration in VR, either co-located or remote [31]. To support

conﬂict resolution when two users wish to work on the same
object simultaneously, SpaceTime creates per-user branches
of the object, which can later be automatically merged or man-
ually resolved. Most of the system supported audio for general
communication. Our system aims to enhance the experience
of general communication, which can beneﬁt various kinds of
more speciﬁc collaborative work.

Communication in VR/MR
Some previous work contributed to rendering remote partic-
ipants to give them presence during communication. Hrvoje
Benko et al. proposed a unique spatial AR system that com-
bines dynamic projection mapping and multiple perspective
views to support face-to-face interaction [1]. MetaSpace did
full body tracking for distributed users to create a better sense
of presence [26]. Holoportation demonstrated 3D reconstruc-
tions of an entire space, including people [16].

Some previous work contributed to communication in immer-
sive environments. ClearBoard allowed a pair of users to shift
easily between interpersonal space and a shared workspace [9].
The key metaphor of ClearBoard is “talking through and draw-
ing on a big transparent glass board.” No gaze or eye contact
information is lost while working on the content. ShareVR
enables communication between an HMD user and a non-
HMD user [5]. By using ﬂoor projection and mobile displays
to visualize the virtual world, the non-HMD user is able to
interact with the HMD user and become part of the VR experi-
ence. The work discusses how people with different devices
communicate with each other. MMSpace allows for face-
to-face social interactions and telepresence in the context of
small group remote conferences [17]. It uses custom-built me-
chanical displays on which images of remote participants are
projected, and which move in response to users’ movements.
Pairs of participants can maintain eye contact with each other
and remain aware of each other’s focus. TwinSpace supports
deep interconnectivity and ﬂexible mappings between virtual
and physical spaces [23]. Your Place and Mine explored
three ways of mapping two differently sized physical spaces
to shared virtual spaces to understand how social presence,
togetherness, and movement are inﬂuenced [25].

Some previous works aiming to improve communication with
VR experimented with the placement of users and content,
but did not focus on looking at how these factors affected
users’ ability to follow content and other people during com-
munication. We designed and implemented three different
conﬁgurations as well as telepathy mode to investigate how
communication could be improved with VR, using 3DSketch.
In the following section, we discuss the design of CollabVR
and its conﬁgurations.

COLLABVR DESIGN

(a) two people in side-
by-side conﬁguration

(b) four people in side-
by-side conﬁguration

(c) people in eyes-free
conﬁguration

(d) two people in mir-
rored face-to-face con-
ﬁguration in P1’s view

(e) two people in mir-
rored face-to-face con-
ﬁguration in P2’s view

(f) four people in mir-
rored face-to-face con-
ﬁguration

Figure 2: Three Conﬁgurations.

Side-by-side
The Side-by-side Conﬁguration is based on whiteboard brain-
storming scenarios. In this conﬁguration, all the participants
have the same vision on the contents and the other participants.

Mirrored Face-to-face
The Mirrored Face-to-face Conﬁguration comes from daily
communication. We are used to looking at each other to
receive feedback from others and make gestures as part of
our explanations during a discussion. For this conﬁguration,
the users are face-to-face in the virtual environment. The
interactive content board is placed between them, so each
user sees the others on the opposite side of the content board,
left-right reversed as if reﬂected in a mirror. The challenge
is ensuring all the content is consistent for everyone on each
side of the board. Mirror reversal allows, for example, text to
be readable and asymmetric objects to appear correct for each
participant. ClearBoard [9] implemented "mirror reversal"
via video capture and projection techniques to solve a similar
problem for 2D displays. Inspired by that, we implemented a
3D immersive mirror reversal for our MR conﬁguration. We
place the users physically on the same side of the content board
and mirror all other users (from one user’s perspective) to the
other side. This way, information such as gaze and gesture
direction is preserved, so participants can know where each
other is looking and pointing. When multiple content-boards
are active, an individual user will see the other users mirror
reversed over the speciﬁc content board they are looking at.
Users have face-to-face interactions in this multiple board
scenario if they look at the same board (see ﬁgure 2f).

Conﬁgurations
Conﬁgurations refer to the placement of participants and digi-
tal content in the immersive environment. The three Conﬁg-
urations are inspired by daily experience and previous work,
see ﬁgure 1. Users can switch between them freely.

Eyes-free
The Eyes-free Conﬁguration provides two duplicate boards
where in the other conﬁgurations there would be one board.
One board is vertical like a whiteboard and the other is horizon-
tal like the surface of a table. The horizontal surface appears

(a) Immersive Telepathy

(b) Windowed Telepathy

(c) Choosing the Observee

(d) Observing the Observee

Figure 3: telepathy mode. (a) Shows how immersive telepathy
works. After choosing the observee, the observer (the dotted
outline avatar) will disappear from his/her original location
in the world and move to the observee’s position. (b) Shows
how windowed telepathy looks. A semi-transparent telepathy
window will be placed relative to where the observer is, so
it is visible in the corner during telepathy. (c) and (d) show
how it looks. In (d) we can see that the shapes are no longer
blocked from view.

only for the person working at a particular board and can be
scaled to allow the user to draw with varying precision. The
design allows users to draw on a horizontal surface, which
leads to less fatigue over the course of long-term activity. We
render the drawings on the vertical board for all users to see
together, as well as on the smaller horizontal board. There
is potential for less fatigue because a user can draw with the
hand on the scaled-down horizontal board over a shorter dis-
tance than would be required with the other conﬁgurations.
Unlike in the other conﬁgurations, which have the user draw
on a vertical board, it is unnecessary to move the whole arm
to draw. In this Conﬁguration, users are free to look down
at the surface as if they were drawing on a piece of paper.
Alternatively, they may choose to look straight forward at the
vertical board while drawing on the horizontal board using for-
ward/backward movements mapped to up/down movements,
as if using a mouse and computer display. Content on the
horizontal drawing board is projected down to be ﬂat so 3D
content does not obscure the view of the vertical board, but the
same content is simultaneously displayed in 3D on the vertical
board for viewing of the ﬁnal result of the drawing.

• Immersive Telepathy. The observer will be teleported to
the observee’s position and see the world from his/her view-
point. At that time, the observer is free to look around, so
the observer and observee can guide each other to look at
whatever is of interest. We have ﬁrst person perspective
and third person perspective options for this alternative (see
ﬁgure 3a).

• Windowed Telepathy. The observer can see the observee’s
ﬁrst-person view displayed on a small window overlay
placed on the observer’s periphery, (see ﬁgure 3b).

telepathy mode became more complex to implement for the
Mirrored Face-to-face Conﬁguration and Eyes-free Conﬁg-
urations than for the Side-by-side Conﬁguration. Since we
are not streaming rendering results from each participant to
the rest, telepathy mode is implemented locally using other
participants’ position and rotation to place and orient the local
representations of remote participants. For the Mirrored Face-
to-face Conﬁguration, originally the observer (the local user)
is the only participant who is not mirror reversed to the other
side of the content board. The other participants, including the
potential observee, will be mirror reversed over the content
board they are working on. When telepathy mode is on, the
environment will be rendered in the observee’s view, so the
observee is then placed at the original side of the board in
order to give the observer a correct view of the board from the
observee’s perspective. For the windowed telepathy mode, we
need to change the positions and rotations for the main view
and the observer view.

3DSketch
The term 3DSketch comes from the Sketch objects in Chalk-
talk [20], which will be brieﬂy introduced in section 4.1. A
Sketch is a combination of interactive graphical elements. We
designed 3DSketch to provide three-dimensional manipulation
of Sketches. To enable quick demonstrations and accommo-
date changing ideas, we support necessary operations which
are accessible via a pie menu that appears when a user selects
a 3DSketch. Operations include copying, scaling, and rotation
of the 3DSketch. To translate a 3DSketch, the user moves it
directly with the hand. Users are free to copy the items on
one board to another board and work on their own version.
Also, each participant is able to work on different parts of the
3DSketches and then integrate them into one digital object.

COLLABVR IMPLEMENTATION
CollabVR is a VR/MR compatible system that supports draw-
ing interactive content and provides a shared-space environ-
ment for local or distributed group communication and collab-
oration. To implement the whole system, we need a content
creation server to provide elements to display and interact with.
It also requires network frameworks to transmit the data from
the content creation server to each client.

Telepathy Mode
We created an telepathy mode to give people the ability to see
the environment from another person’s point-of-view. Among
other use cases, it is to help people follow the content and
the person who is drawing, as well as see content that may be
blocked from another angle, see ﬁgure 3c.

Chalktalk
Chalktalk is a web browser-based 3D presentation and com-
munication tool written in JavaScript, in which the user draws
interactive Sketches for presentation. It extends the functional-
ity of a slide-show, allowing the user to draw interactive and
combinable objects with a mouse.

of the system and each conﬁguration. We disabled the ability
to switch between conﬁgurations so we could run a separate
experiment per individual conﬁguration. We are particularly
interested in whether different conﬁgurations have different
impacts on communication and how this system improves
communication.

Participants
12 participants (5 female and 1 left-handed) aged from 20 to
30 (mean = 23.58, sd = 3.45) were recruited via email and
word-of-mouth to evaluate CollabVR. Most participants were
students or staff concentrating in the area of Computer Science.
However, not all the participants had rich VR experience. The
CollabVR experience and interviews were recorded and all
participants were informed. Each participant gave consent.

Figure 5: Network Diagram for CollabVR. 1) Sketch data are
serialized on the Chalktalk client side every frame and 2) sent
as a data array to the Chalktalk server, 3) to the Holojam relay,
and then 4) to all Unity clients, where 5) the data are rendered
on content board(s). 6) MR user input is sent back through the
pipeline to the Chalktalk client and 7) translated into HTML
canvas mouse events. 8) Avatar synchronization data are also
sent between clients using the Holojam relay.

(a) a cube 3DSketch has been
selected and a pie menu is
shown

(b) the user moves the piece
menu cursor to the copy opera-
tion

(c) the user has moved the copy
bounding box to the desired lo-
cation

(d) the copy operation is com-
mitted, and the cube is copied
to the ﬁnal location.

Figure 4: Upon selection of a 3DSketch, the user is shown a
pie menu which can be used to manipulate the object. The
supported operations (going counterclockwise) are deletion,
moving the sketch away in 3D, copying the sketch, scaling,
rotating and moving the sketch. Operations can be chained to-
gether. For example, the user can copy a 3DSketch repeatedly
or rotate and scale in sequence without deselecting.

Network
We used two network frameworks for this system: Holojam
and Holodeck. Holojam [19] is a shared space network frame-
work, written in Node.js and C#. It synchronizes data across
devices and supports custom data formats. For this system,
we customize the data protocol to send points and 3D meshes
needed for our system. Chalktalk sends the data to the server,
which broadcasts to all the clients. The clients send their
user-speciﬁc data in the reverse direction. (See ﬁgure 5 for
a detailed data pipeline diagram.) Holodeck is a real-time
network framework written in Node.js. We use Holodeck to
support audio synchronization.

USER STUDY

Internal telepathy mode Tests
For simplicity, we decided to use only one of the two ver-
sions of telepathy mode for the subsequent user study, and
we conducted internal tests to choose. We found that Immer-
sive Telepathy caused those less familiar with movement in
VR to have a sense of disorientation when viewing the world
from others’ perspective. Some did not have this feeling. So
as not to introduce this additional variability and limit the
candidate pool for our user study, we opted for Windowed
Telepathy. We believe that Immersive Telepathy mode requires
more development and testing.

Main User Study
We conducted a user evaluation with groups of four people at
a time to gain feedback about the usefulness and effectiveness

Apparatus
CollabVR was implemented in Unity Engine on desktop com-
puters with Nvidia GTX 1080 cards. We used Oculus Rift

CV1 HMDs with two Oculus Touch controllers, which we
paired with one of four computers during the experiments. We
connected the four computers through Holojam and Holodeck
with Ethernet cables.

Procedure
The user study session contained the following steps:

Introduction and Training (30-40 minutes)
Participants were ﬁrst given an introduction to the user study.
Then they were given a 10 minute lecture through a large
monitor on how to use Chalktalk. We described how to do
freehand drawing, how to create pre-deﬁned 3D objects, and
how to change the color of objects. Then for 10 minutes
participants were given a live demo on how to use CollabVR.
One experimenter put on the headset and described how to
use each controller button and the functionality in the system,
including getting permission to draw, manipulating drawings
and objects in 3D and using telepathy mode. After that, each
participant was moved to separate virtual rooms. They learned
how to use CollabVR individually for 10 minutes. Then they
were moved to the same shared virtual room to learn how to
observe other people.

Experiment with Three Conﬁgurations (35-45 minutes)
All the groups were asked to experience three 10-minute ses-
sions. The conﬁguration was changed for each session. We
counterbalanced the order of the conﬁgurations for each group
using Latin Square. For each session, the participants were
asked to design a living room containing only three items: one
table, one chair and one sofa. The steps were:

1. Each participant wrote down which item they picked, the de-
tails of the design they expected to create and the placement
they envisioned for the three items

2. Each joined the VR experience to share what was in their
minds using our system. To reduce the learning curve, we
drew the entire dictionary of pre-deﬁned 3D objects on one
board for them to copy and use as they wanted. Participants
could choose to stand or sit.

3. Each participant exited the VR experience and wrote down
their ﬁnal decisions for the design of the living room.

Because we only provided three items for the group (four
people), more than one person was guaranteed to pick the
same item. They needed to resolve conﬂicts and come up with
a ﬁnal decision for the design of living room.

Questionnaire and Interview (10-15 minutes)
We collected participants’ feedback during the user study with
a questionnaire and interview. One conﬁguration-focused
questionnaire was provided to participants after each session.
The questionnaire contained 7-point Likert scale questions
to gather participants’ opinions on how they expressed and
perceived ideas with the given conﬁguration. One general
questionnaire and a group interview was conducted after all
the sessions were completed to gather feedback on the three
conﬁgurations and how well CollabVR helped the participants
communicate.

Questions for Each Conﬁguration

Q1 How would you rate the conﬁguration?
Q2 How hard/easy was it to use the conﬁguration?
Q3 How unhelpful/helpful was the conﬁguration for

completing tasks?

Q4 How hard/easy was it to follow the content being

created?

Q5 How hard/easy was it to follow the project partner

who is drawing?

Q6 How unhelpful/helpful was this conﬁguration for fol-

lowing other people’s ideas?

Table 1: Questions for Each Conﬁguration

Questions for VR Experience

Q7 The telepathy mode helped you to have the same idea

with your project partners.

Q8 The tool helped you show/express to your project

Q9

partners what you were thinking.
I would use this tool to collaborate on my own
projects.

Table 2: Questions for VR Experience

Results
We asked each participant for their opinions on the importance
of (1)keeping the content in the view, (2) keeping in the view
or being aware of the presence of the person who is drawing
(7 = extremely important). For (1), everyone agreed it was
more than moderately important to keep the content in the
view (M = 6.00, SD = 0.60). For (2), 2 of them had a neutral
opinion and P11(M) thought it was somewhat important to be
aware of the person who is drawing (M = 5.50, SD = 1.17).

Side-by-side Mirrored Face-to-face
M
M
6.08
5.42
6.00
5.67
6.17
5.17
6.00
5.17
5.67
5.25
5.58
5.42

SD
0.79
1.04
0.72
1.28
1.44
1.16

SD
0.99
0.98
1.03
1.34
1.54
1.51

Eyes-free
M SD
1.56
4.42
1.71
4.00
1.38
4.50
1.31
4.42
1.30
4.33
1.34
4.17

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6

Table 3: Results for Each Conﬁguration

For each conﬁguration, participants were asked about the feel-
ing, the usability, the effectiveness of that conﬁguration with
respect to multiple factors. See the full questions and results
in table 2 and table 3. We conducted a repeated measures
MANOVA model on the quantitative results. From the statisti-
cal results, there is no signiﬁcant difference (p<0.005 means
signiﬁcant) among different conﬁgurations with respect to all
the questions. That means all the conﬁgurations are acceptable
to some extent.

General Feedback for Each Conﬁguration
We asked each participant to rank the three conﬁgurations
after they tried all of them. 7 ranked mirrored face-to-face, 3
ranked side-by-side, and 2 ranked eyes-free as their favorite
conﬁguration.

We can see from Q1 to Q3 that participants responded very
positively to mirrored face-to-face conﬁguration. Participants
agreed that mirrored face-to-face helped them to focus on
the board, both when drawing and watching others. P3(F)
commented that participants “can just communicate with you
because I feel that you’re just in front of me. I don’t need
to ﬁnd where you are”. Participants who liked the mirrored
face-to-face conﬁguration most linked the conﬁguration with
collaboration and productivity.

The second one, mirror, was my favorite, because it al-
most felt like we were working on a project together, and
everyone’s leveled and everyone’s working on the same
board because you see everyone across from you. I think
for that one we made the best stuff.(P9, F)

P5(M) also said: “I think I was most productive because I
could see both the board and the people and they wouldn’t
block my view.“. Furthermore, P10(M) felt that “In the mirror
you can easily see who is drawing and also for communication
I think it’s a little bit easier, intuitive to know who is talking.“
Most participants found mirrored face-to-face created the illu-
sion of a large space and reacted positively to having room to
move around. “When ... facing others [in Mirrored face-to-
face] I think my space is kind of free and clean.“P3(F). One
participant(P7, F) felt the physical separation between avatars
and the open space made her feel distant from her peers. “I
felt so alone because I was far away from my partners”.

From side-by-side conﬁguration, participants responded pos-
itively with respect to Q1 to Q3. P5(M) found side-by-side
“encouraged more conversation because we were next to each
other” even if it is “a little more cluttered”. 2 participants
(P1, M and P2, M) who ranked side-by-side as their favorite
conﬁguration shared a similar opinion that “the real world is
more similar to Side-by-side.”, and both of them were new
to VR (only tried VR for less than 1 hour). The side-by-side
conﬁguration seems to be more beginner-friendly than the
other two.

Only 2 participants (P7, F and P10, M) prefer the eyes-free
conﬁguration and they responded diverged for the eyes-free
conﬁguration. They stated, eyes-free “allows drawing on the
table, which is more intuitive to draw”(P7, F) and “I felt like
I had more control over what I was drawing”(P10, M). In
their view, eyes-free works better for detailed and long-term
drawing. P2(M) found it hard to use because of the mapping
between the surface board and vertical board, “It is very hard
to track what we are drawing.”. P7(F) thought it was easy
to work on because “I was using it to draw in front of me
as if I were at a desk”. For P11(M), although he rated this
conﬁguration with a lower score, he did foresee potential.

I think this conﬁguration has a great deal of potential if
you had haptic feedback or other controller types (a pen
and some surface to draw upon). I didn’t think it affected

my ability to sync up with my partners, but I was trying to
remap the axes that my mind expected vs the orientation
of the table (P11, M).

Some participants found it easiest and more enjoyable to look
down at the horizontal drawing surface instead of at the vertical
board as expected in the eyes-free conﬁguration. P10(M)
commented, “If you look at the table then there’s no mapping
of the axes. Is the same. At the very beginning I can’t draw
the circle when I’m looking at the board, but it’s very easy
when I look at the table.” This indicates that the eyes-free
conﬁguration has a greater learning curve than the others, as
users sometimes used the horizontal surface naturally to avoid
remapping the axes of the controls.

Following the Content in Each Conﬁguration
From the results (Q4 and Q5), we can see participants re-
sponded positively to both mirrored face-to-face and side-by-
side conﬁgurations, and neutrally to the eyes-free conﬁgura-
tion. P7(F) felt “their heads and hands blocked my view of
the board” in the side-by-side conﬁguration. In contrast, par-
ticipants think mirrored face-to-face helped them express the
ideas. “I think this was ideal if you wanted to show someone
your idea”(P11,M). And it helped with understanding ideas
too. “I was able to see them and the drawings at the same
time, which was great” and “very in sync because no one’s
avatar was in my way” (P6,F). Similarly,

In side-by-side, people block you a lot and it is hard to
move around to ﬁnd a comfortable place to go, and it’s
also hard to ﬁnd who’s doing what. In the mirror you can
easily see who is drawing and also for communication
it’s a little bit easier, intuitive to know who is talking(P10,
M).

From the results and interview, we can tell that mirrored face-
to-face has a better effect on helping follow the content. We
noted that people behaved differently depending on whether
they chose to stand or sit during the experience. When partic-
ipants (like P8, M) sat (i.e. could not move around as much
as when they were standing), they seemed to ﬁnd mirrored
face-to-face more helpful for keeping track of the content and
the other participants, whereas for side-by-side,

Telepathy Mode
We asked participants for their thoughts on telepathy mode
(Q7). They responded somewhat positively to this mode
(M = 4.67, SD = 1.23). P6(M) pointed out it could be helpful
for a presentation scenario, “Maybe if someone was teaching
or talking, and [you could] observe them while they write.”
P8(M) agreed that he “observed people who were drawing.
It is easier to see what they were doing.” P1(M), P4(M) and
P10(M) did not try telepathy mode and P9(F) found it “dis-
tracting.” P12(F) emphasized that telepathy mode would likely
make the most sense in larger spaces in which people are more
distant from each other.

Some participants found telepathy mode entertaining. P5(M)
“was observing the person next to me and sticking my head
in their face.” and P7(F) found “it’s just funny. I just liked
having the window up.”. telepathy mode is designed to pro-
vide more alternatives for seeing the world when the view of

the participants or content is blocked. For participants who
experienced it for serious reasons, it had positive inﬂuence
during communication. We anticipated the mode could also
be entertaining.

Communication Effectiveness
For Q8, participants responded with positive feedback indicat-
ing that the system helped them with communication (M = .75,
SD = 0.87). P3(F) described using the system’s 3DSketches
to communicate to P2(M) what type of chair she wanted to
draw. She and P2(M) reached a ﬁnal decision for the design
together:

I think when P2(M) draws the legs [of the chair], I quickly
get his idea about the design of the legs, so he doesn’t
need to say what kind of legs he wants. I just say maybe
we can try a round surface, and then we have it. And
he shows me the shape .... so we choose a round shape
quickly.

For Q9, we received widely distributed answers (see ﬁgure ??).
P2(M) and P10(M) strongly disagreed that they would use the
system on their own projects. VR was new to both of them, so
the learning curve of the new platform and interactions likely
inﬂuenced their opinions strongly. Meanwhile, 3 participants
agreed and 3 participants somewhat agreed that they would
use the system to collaborate on projects with others. P8(M),
a digital artist and 3D animator, said:

I’d use this for my own work. It’s like a more –not quite
as artsy – business tool. I would use it to get my ideas
across to people.

This suggests that the system may be appealing for sharing
ideas as part of professional work.

Summary and Other Findings
Participants reﬂected on the importance of using visual rep-
resentations of ideas for communication, and generally ex-
pressed what they wanted using drawings in addition to verbal
communication. For example, P8(M) said “Just being able to
draw it is enough because it’s a visual representation of what
you want to say.”. Most people agreed that the system shows
promise as a prototyping, ideation, and brainstorming tool that
would be used to show concepts and do early designs, or to
show things to each other (P3, F, and P2, M and P8 M for ex-
ample). Participants, such as P8(M) and P11(M) commented
on how the system could be used for business and practical
applications. Others like P7(F) and P9(F) seemed to base their
opinions on how entertaining the system was. P9(F) preferred
the conﬁgurations in which she could draw on the vertical
board, as “because it’s more fun–it’s like grafﬁti almost–cause
I could take a tablet and write normally but it’s more fun when
you get it right on the wall.”. The overall feedback suggests
that the CollabVR system has multiple audiences: those inter-
ested in prototyping/drafting or presenting/showing ideas as
part of professional content creation work, teaching, or busi-
ness, as well as those who want to communicate ideas casually
and in a fun way with one another.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
For future work, we ﬁrst wish to reﬁne the conﬁgurations and
telepathy mode and to explore how they scale to larger spaces.
We intend to try alternative implementations, controls and use
cases for eyes-free conﬁguration as well. One possibility for
improving how comfortable it is to draw in Eyes-free is to
have users sit at a mobile desk on which they can draw using
a pen-like device and rotate themselves to work at multiple
virtual content boards, while using one physical surface. As
indicated in the user study, eyes-free seems to have a steeper
learning curve than the others, but may have potential given
additional development and alterations. One limitation of
our study was the fairly small maximum tracking spaces and
mobility constraints of the Oculus Rift device. Recently an-
nounced tetherless VR technologies promise greater mobility
and larger tracking spaces that would allow for larger groups
and environments, which we expect would change the dynam-
ics of communication in our system. Improving telepathy
mode is related to exploring larger spaces, in which users be-
lieved the mode would ﬁnd more use. We will go more deeply
into alternative designs for telepathy mode, which were not the
focus of this paper. We anticipate combining the advantages
of the immersive and windowed implementations. In addition,
we are interested in investigating how communication and
collaboration are affected when users are permitted to switch
conﬁgurations at their discretion.

CONCLUSION
We have presented CollabVR, a multi-user VR collaboration
environment for communication, with three different conﬁgu-
rations of participants and content (3DSketches). The conﬁg-
urations are 1) side-by-side, 2) mirrored face-to-face and 3)
eyes-free. We ran a user study to compare the three conﬁgu-
rations and gauge users’ opinion on them and the system as a
whole. User study participants suggested that CollabVR has
potential to be a prototyping tool for design work and ideation,
as well as for recreation. Side-by-side appealed most to those
without prior experience with VR, as it was closest to a white-
boarding environment in real life. The mirrored face-to-face
conﬁguration was the favorite conﬁguration–most users felt
it facilitated collaboration and productivity, and made it easy
to tell who was speaking at a given moment. Users felt that
the eyes-free conﬁguration had merit despite its steep learning
curve, and preferred to look down at the conﬁguration’s hor-
izontal drawing board rather than the vertical board. We are
interested in exploring variations of this conﬁguration further.
Telepathy mode, which allowed users to see from each other’s
perspectives, was designed to help people understand ideas
and see content that would otherwise be blocked. Based on
the study, this mode also has potential to be explored in future
iterations. Overall, our study indicates that CollabVR has the
potential to be a useful tool for communication.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the volunteers for participating in our experiments
and video shoots.

REFERENCES FORMAT

REFERENCES
1. Hrvoje Benko, Andrew D Wilson, and Federico Zannier.
2014. Dyadic projected spatial augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology. ACM, 645–655.

2. Mauro Cherubini, Gina Venolia, Rob DeLine, and

Andrew J Ko. 2007. Let’s go to the whiteboard: how and
why software developers use drawings. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 557–566.

3. Martin Feick, Anthony Tang, and Scott Bateman. 2018.

Mixed-Reality for Object-Focused Remote Collaboration.
In The 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology Adjunct Proceedings. ACM,
63–65.

4. Sean Follmer, Daniel Leithinger, Alex Olwal, Akimitsu
Hogge, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2013. inFORM: dynamic
physical affordances and constraints through shape and
object actuation.. In Uist, Vol. 13. 417–426.

5. Jan Gugenheimer, Evgeny Stemasov, Julian Frommel,
and Enrico Rukzio. 2017. Sharevr: Enabling co-located
experiences for virtual reality between hmd and non-hmd
users. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
4021–4033.

6. Raja Gumienny, Lutz Gericke, Matthias Quasthoff,
Christian Willems, and Christoph Meinel. 2011.
Tele-board: Enabling efﬁcient collaboration in digital
design spaces. In Proceedings of the 2011 15th
International Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD). IEEE, 47–54.

7. Ke Huo, Tianyi Wang, Luis Paredes, Ana M Villanueva,
Yuanzhi Cao, and Karthik Ramani. 2018. SynchronizAR:
Instant Synchronization for Spontaneous and Spatial
Collaborations in Augmented Reality. In The 31st Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology. ACM, 19–30.

8. Hiroshi Ishii and Minoru Kobayashi. 1992. ClearBoard: a
seamless medium for shared drawing and conversation
with eye contact. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 525–532.

9. Hiroshi Ishii, Minoru Kobayashi, and Jonathan Grudin.
1993. Integration of interpersonal space and shared
workspace: ClearBoard design and experiments. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 11, 4 (1993),
349–375.

10. André Kunert, Alexander Kulik, Stephan Beck, and

Bernd Froehlich. 2014. Photoportals: shared references in
space and time. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 1388–1399.

11. David Lakatos, Matthew Blackshaw, Alex Olwal,

Zachary Barryte, Ken Perlin, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2014. T

(ether): spatially-aware handhelds, gestures and
proprioception for multi-user 3D modeling and animation.
In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM symposium on Spatial
user interaction. ACM, 90–93.

12. Daniel Leithinger, Sean Follmer, Alex Olwal, and

Hiroshi Ishii. 2014. Physical telepresence: shape capture
and display for embodied, computer-mediated remote
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 461–470.

13. Ken Nakagaki, Daniel Fitzgerald, Zhiyao John Ma, Luke
Vink, Daniel Levine, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2019. inFORCE:
Bi-directionalForce’Shape Display for Haptic Interaction.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction. ACM, 615–623.

14. Ohan Oda, Carmine Elvezio, Mengu Sukan, Steven

Feiner, and Barbara Tversky. 2015. Virtual replicas for
remote assistance in virtual and augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on
UIST. ACM, 405–415.

15. Kenton O’hara, Jesper Kjeldskov, and Jeni Paay. 2011.

Blended interaction spaces for distributed team
collaboration. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 18, 1 (2011), 3.

16. Sergio Orts-Escolano, Christoph Rhemann, Sean Fanello,
Wayne Chang, Adarsh Kowdle, Yury Degtyarev, David
Kim, Philip L Davidson, Sameh Khamis, Mingsong Dou,
and others. 2016. Holoportation: Virtual 3d teleportation
in real-time. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
ACM, 741–754.

17. Kazuhiro Otsuka. 2016. MMSpace:

Kinetically-augmented telepresence for small
group-to-group conversations. In Virtual Reality (VR),
2016 IEEE. IEEE, 19–28.

18. Mai Otsuki, Kenji Sugihara, Asako Kimura, Fumihisa
Shibata, and Hideyuki Tamura. 2010. MAI painting
brush: an interactive device that realizes the feeling of
real painting. In Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 97–100.

19. Ken Perlin. 2016. Future Reality: How emerging

technologies will change language itself. IEEE computer
graphics and applications 36, 3 (2016), 84–89.

20. Ken Perlin, Zhenyi He, and Karl Rosenberg. 2018.
Chalktalk: A Visualization and Communication
Language–As a Tool in the Domain of Computer Science
Education. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.07166 (2018).

21. Ramesh Raskar, Greg Welch, Matt Cutts, Adam Lake,

Lev Stesin, and Henry Fuchs. 1998. The ofﬁce of the
future: A uniﬁed approach to image-based modeling and
spatially immersive displays. In Proceedings of the 25th
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. ACM, 179–188.

22. Holger Regenbrecht and Tobias Langlotz. 2015. Mutual
Gaze Support in Videoconferencing Reviewed. CAIS 37
(2015), 45.

23. Derek F Reilly, Hafez Rouzati, Andy Wu, Jee Yeon

Hwang, Jeremy Brudvik, and W Keith Edwards. 2010.
TwinSpace: an infrastructure for cross-reality team
spaces. In Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 119–128.

24. Eckard Riedenklau, Thomas Hermann, and Helge Ritter.

2012. An integrated multi-modal actuated tangible user
interface for distributed collaborative planning. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction. ACM,
169–174.

25. Misha Sra, Aske Mottelson, and Pattie Maes. 2018. Your
Place and Mine: Designing a Shared VR Experience for
Remotely Located Users. In Proceedings of the 2018
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’18).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 85–97. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196788

26. Misha Sra and Chris Schmandt. 2015. Metaspace:

27. Kar-Han Tan, Dan Gelb, Ramin Samadani, Ian Robinson,
Bruce Culbertson, and John Apostolopoulos. 2010. Gaze
Awareness and Interaction Support in Presentations. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference
on Multimedia (MM ’10). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
643–646. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1873951.1874041

28. Anthony Tang, Michel Pahud, Kori Inkpen, Hrvoje

Benko, John C Tang, and Bill Buxton. 2010. Three’s
company: understanding communication channels in
three-way distributed collaboration. In Proceedings of the
2010 ACM conference on Computer supported
cooperative work. ACM, 271–280.

29. Jerald Thomas, Raghav Bashyal, Samantha Goldstein,
and Evan Suma. 2014. MuVR: A multi-user virtual
reality platform. In 2014 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR).
IEEE, 115–116.

30. B Tversky, M Suwa, MHJCS Agrawala, P Hanrahan, D
Phan, J Klingner, M Daniel, P Lee, and J Haymaker.
2003. Human behavior in design: Individuals, teams,
tools. Sketches for Design and Design of Sketches (2003),
79–86.

Full-body tracking for immersive multiperson virtual
reality. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology.
ACM, 47–48.

31. Haijun Xia, Sebastian Herscher, Ken Perlin, and Daniel
Wigdor. 2018. Spacetime: Enabling Fluid Individual and
Collaborative Editing in Virtual Reality. In The 31st
Annual ACM Symposium on UIST. ACM, 853–866.

