Feature Extraction in Augmented Reality

Jekishan K. Parmar
Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
Babaria Institute of Technology,
Vadodara
Email: jekishan@aol.in

Ankit Desai
IQM Corporation &
School of Engineering & Applied Science,
Ahmedabad University, Ahmedabad
Email: desaiankitb@gmail.com

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
9

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
1
9
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Augmented Reality (AR) is used for various applica-
tions associated with the real world. In this paper, ﬁrst, describe
characteristics and essential services of AR. Brief history on
Virtual Reality (VR) and AR is also mentioned in the intro-
ductory section. Then, AR Technologies along with its workﬂow
is depicted, which includes the complete AR Process consisting
of the stages of Image Acquisition, Feature Extraction, Feature
Matching, Geometric Veriﬁcation, and Associated Information
Retrieval. Feature extraction is the essence of AR hence its details
are furnished in the paper.

I. INTRODUCTION

The term Augmented Reality holds multiple deﬁnitions
but one of the most popular and the one that still holds is
Augmented reality is a ﬁeld in which 3D virtual objects are
integrated into a 3-D real environment in real time [1]. Though,
AR can be looked from the point of view of enhancement to
reality, it can be deﬁned as AR is use of computers to enhance
the richness of the real world [2]. It can also be simply called
user interaction in 3D environment [3]. When it is perceived
as an interaction between humans and virtual objects, it can
also deﬁne it as combining the real and the virtual in order
to assist the user in performing a task in a physical setting is
called Augmented Reality [4]. According to [5], Augmented
Reality supports context-aware computing. For an AR user,
the real world and virtual objects coexist on the same view.
For example, in a museum there is Mona Lisa, when this
picture of Mona Lisa is looked through an augmented reality
smartphone, the information of Mona Lisa will be imposed on
top. In addition, it may include information like the artist, da
Vinci, as well as the year that it was estimated that this picture
was drawn. Figure 1, shows one such example of augmented
reality camera with the Taj Mahal. It can be seen in the ﬁgure
1 that as the camera is acquiring the Taj in its lenses and
displaying to its user, information related to the Taj is also
being displayed to the user.

Next section compares AR and VR with deep insights
into current advancements and research challenges, section
III depicts various technologies involved in AR, then, details
about Feature Extraction is furnished in section IV and ﬁnally,
section V concludes the paper.

II. AUGMENTED REALITY AND VIRTUAL REALITY

Jaron Lanier coined the phrase Virtual Reality, in 1989 [6]
and Thomas Caudell deﬁned Augmented Reality in 1990 [7].
Hence, these concepts are quite old. Though, its complete

implementation has become possible only recently and that
too, with full reliability.

A. Reasons for Recent advancements in Augmented Reality

• High resolution cameras, which enables accurate image
and object identiﬁcation, are only available since recent
times. They are also available in smart devices.

• Recent availability of very high performing Central Pro-
cessing Units and Graphical Process Units due to this
fast and reliable image processing along with feature
extraction can be done, which is necessary for Augmented
Reality.

• Cheap availability of large amount of memory and faster
input/output access which is useful to store object infor-
mation and quickly access it, which is highly essential
for AR.

• Sharp virtual text, and sharp images, superimposed on
smart devices in a very elegant, and yet, easy-on-the-eye
fashion has become possible only due to availability of
High Deﬁnition displays on these devices.

• Information needs to be retrieved speedily and brought
to the device from AR servers and databases so that it
can be displayed on this device for the user to be able
to see quickly, which is recently possible due to advent
of high-speed broadband, wireless and wired networking
technologies.

Due to all these advancements, AR is going to become better
and quicker. In spite of all these technological advancements
there are some challenges in AR that needs to be worked on
and requires proper study as well as research in order to get
more from AR.

B. Research Challenges in Augmented Reality

Despite the growing interests and development

in AR,
following are the challenges that exists in the ﬁeld which has
very wide scope of research.

• A precise, fast, and robust registration between synthetic
augmentations and the real environment is one of the
most important challenge [8].

• AR system needs to deal with vast amount of information
that exists in the real world which requires very quick and
portable hardware [9].

• Highly efﬁcient energy consumption from AR devices is

desired due to their limited battery life [9].

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Augmented Reality camera example1

contents in the real world. Therefore the virtual contents
are superimposed onto the real world image that
is seen
by the user. The augmented reality user can distinguish the
superimposed virtual objects and hence able to turn on or
turn off selected AR functions, which may be related to
certain objects. In other words, if a user is only interested
in objects, and not in locations. In that case, user will go
and adjust augmented reality functions such that
location
information does not pop up, on their user screen and only
gets object information. Things like that are controllable in
futuristic systems. In comparison to virtual reality, augmented
reality users commonly feel less separated from the real world,
because basically the foundation of their view is exactly the
real world. Things are just superimposed on the real world
view of that user. So fantasies and illusions can be created
and superimposed on the real world view.

Some of the deﬁnitions of AR has already been described,
but its deﬁnition in context of virtual reality can be formed
and compared with the deﬁnition of virtual reality itself. The
comparison is shown in ﬁgure 2.

It can be seen in ﬁgure 2, that on one side there is the real
environment and on the other side is the virtual environment,
then these two combine into a mixed reality, where the
augmented reality is virtually based on reality that is based
on virtuality and augmented virtuality is based on virtuality
which in turn is based on reality. Hence, augmented reality
is based on reality where virtual information and images are
overlapped and superimposed in the right position.

Fig. 2. Augmented Reality (AR) versus Virtual Reality (VR)

III. AUGMENTED REALITY: TECHNOLOGY

• High network dependency is also a challenge as there

may not be network coverage in some areas [10].

• AR assumes everything to be static while real world
is very dynamic, as there are many things that keep
on changing like people passing by, weather conditions,
color of buildings as they may be repainted over a gap
of few years. Thus, inability of AR to lack dynamism is
also a challenge [10].

C. Comparison of Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality

A virtual reality user will be fully immersed in animated
environment. This is like the game playing space that
is
commonly used. A user or a game player will commonly use
an avatar to exist and interact inside the virtual space. The
view of the user in virtual reality is different from the real
environment and fantasies and illusions surrounding the avatar
are easy to create in the virtual world. Whereas, augmented
reality is a mixture of real life and virtual reality [11]. This
is how, it differs from virtual reality. So, augmented reality
combines information and does various things, but its basis is
real life, what the user actually sees [12].

An augmented reality user is able to obtain useful informa-
tion about location or objects and can interact with virtual

1http://www.arlab.com/img/content/products/matching01.jpg

Figure 3 shows technological components present in aug-
mented reality. On the left, there is content provider server
which contains contents viz. 3D geographical assets, ge-
ographical
images, movies and point of
interest information. On the other side there are three major
units to make augmented reality possible and this includes
detection and tracking engines, a rendering system, and also
interaction devices.

information,

text,

Detection and Tracking uses computer vision,

tracking
sensors, camera API and markers and features in order to
carry out its task of Recognition. Necessary visualization is
provided to the user by using computer graphics API, video
composition and depth composition in order to render images.
Then, interaction is provided to the user by picking up
gestures, voice, haptics and providing a UI. Thus, these three
are the combination of software framework and application
programming, including browser access, as shown in ﬁgure 3.

A. Workﬂow of AR

Fig 4 shows, the user sends an input, and it is detected by
the interaction unit, then the interaction unit sends information
to the rendering device. Now, the rendering device will take
combined input from the detection and tracking unit. In
addition, the contents needs to be streamed together and this,
combined together by the rendering unit which will send back
visual feedback to the user.

• Feature Extraction: It is based on an initial set of mea-
sured data. The extraction process generates informative
non redundant values to cilitate the subsequent feature
learning and generalization steps. As depicted in ﬁgure
5, part 2), there are redundant red circles on top of the
image, which denotes extraction of features. Once the
feature is extracted, these feature extracted points will be
used to identify and learn what this object is.

• Feature Matching: This is a process of computing ab-
stractions of image information and to make a local
decision if there is an image feature or not and this
is conducted for all image points. In order to identify
extracted points, other features are needed to be matched,
which is performed in this step and the matched objects
are sent for veriﬁcation in next step.

• Geometric Veriﬁcation: This is an identiﬁcation process
of ﬁnding geometrically related images in the image
data set. The image data set is a subset of the overall
augmented reality image database. Matched objects in
previous step are veriﬁed in this step by comparing it with
objects in the database and are further sent for retrieval
in next step.

• Associated Information Retrieval: This process is to
text, and content-based
search and retrieve metadata,
indexing information of the identiﬁed image or object.
Associated information is used for display on the aug-
mented reality screen near the corresponding image or
object. As shown in the ﬁgure 5, in the middle lower
part, there is Leaning Tower of Pisa and its information
is superimposed on top of the image that is used on the
Smartphone.

IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION PROCESS IN AUGMENTED
REALITY
Feature Extraction is the second step in AR Process, though
it composes of six stages as shown in ﬁgure 6. This section
will discuss it in detail.

• Grayscale Image Generation (GIG): Here, the original im-
age captured by the augmented reality device is changed
into a grayscale value image in order to make it robust
to colour modiﬁcations.

• Integral Image Generation (IIG): This is a process of
building an integral image from the grayscale image. This
procedure enables fast calculation of summations over
image sub-regions.

• Response Map Generation (RMG): In order to detect
Interest Points (IPs)using the determinant of the Hessian
Matrix of image, the RMG Process constructs the scale-
space of the image. Only after having IPs, various op-
erations can be done which leads close to actual feature
extraction.

• Interest Point Detection (IPD): Based on the generated
scaled response maps, the maxima and minima are de-
tected and used as the Interest Points.

• Orientation Assignment (OA): Here, each detected Inter-
est Point, is assigned a reproducible orientation to provide

Fig. 3. Technological Components in Augmented Reality

Fig. 4. AR Workﬂow

B. AR Process

AR Process is divided into ﬁve steps, which can be de-

scribed by an example.

• Image Acquisition: In this step, the image is retrieved
from the augmented reality camera. In our example i.e.
the picture which is shown in ﬁgure 5, is at the image
acquisition stage and it is the Leaning Tower of Pisa in
the middle of the device display.

Fig. 5. Augmented Reality Process Example

Fig. 6. Augmented Reality Process Example

rotation invariance. Rotation invariance means invariance
to image rotation.

• Descriptor Extraction (DE): This is a process of uniquely
identifying an interest point such that it is distinguished
from other Interest Points.

A. Feature Extraction with an Example

The feature extraction process is about ﬁnding the Interest
Points from the image or the video, detecting the descriptors,
from the interest point and then compare the descriptors with
the data in the database. As shown in ﬁgure 7. Here, ﬁrst is
the original image, then gray scale image, which is processed
into the interest points, and as shown,
there are certain
locations, where some speciﬁc characteristics are identiﬁed
and marked. Then in the next processing stage and based
on some color coordination, the descriptors are found. With
these descriptors database can be queried and ﬁnd matching
information of what this object is. As shown here in ﬁgure 7,
in order to have accurate descriptors, keen and sharp image is
needed. Therefore, now with new enhanced cameras on smart
devices, more accurate descriptors are found and therefore, the
augmented reality information is more reliable, and there are
less errors, and also it is processed much more quickly.

B. Blob Detection

Feature extraction is a combination where qualiﬁcation
for descriptors is needed in a very accurate way. Therefore,
invariability from noise, scale, and rotation needs to be kept.
In addition, there are various kinds of descriptors, e.g. corner
descriptors, blob descriptors and region descriptors. In this
section, describes blob detection with the help of an example.

Fig. 7. Feature Extraction Example

A blob is a region of an image that has constant or
approximately constant image properties. All the points in a

Fig. 8. Blob Detection Example

blob are considered to be similar to each other. These image
properties, which include brightness and color, are used in the
comparison process to surrounding regions [13].

C. Algorithm for Blob Detection

Following are the steps are needed to be follow for Blob
Detection [14]. Figure 9, shows an image with its blobs
detected.

• Start from the ﬁrst line of the image and ﬁnd groups of
one or more white (or black) pixels, known as lineblobs.
• Find X, Y co-ordinates of each those blob and number

each of these groups.

• Repeat this sequence on next line.
• While collecting the lineblobs, check whether all
lineblobs are collected and whether they overlap or not.
• If lineblobs are overlapping then merge these lineblobs
by using there X and Y co-ordinates to one blob and
treat it as a whole blob. Repeat this for every line and
you have a collection of blobs.

D. Other Feature Extraction Techniques

Following are some feature extraction techniques:
• Haar [15]
• Scalable Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [16]
• Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) [17]
• Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) [18]
• Oriented FAST and rotated BRIEF (ORB) [19]

SIFT and SURF will be described in detail in this section.
SIFT is the most widely used feature extraction algorithm.
It extracts features from images accurately and efﬁciently. It
overcomes the various adverse effects of extraction, such as
transformation, noise, and lightness. Following is the four step
SIFT algorithm.

• Step 1. Scale space extreme detection
• Step 2. Key point localization and ﬁltering,
• Step 3. Orientation assignment,
• Step 4. Descriptor construction
SURF is an improvement over SIFT from the aspect of
speed. Its algorithm is based on the same algorithmic principle
as SIFT, but uses procedures that require less computation
to enhance the processing speed. Therefore, SURF made it
possible to carry out feature extraction in a near real-time or
a real-time manner. Following is the three step algorithm of
SURF:

• Step 1. Interest Point Detection, which is about high-

speed detection of interest points.

• Step 2. Local Neighbourhood Description, which is about

descriptors using response of the Haar-wavelet.

• Step 3. Matching Process, where faster matching algo-

rithm is applied by using a Laplacian operator.

V. CONCLUSION

Looking at the recent advancements in AR Technologies
viz. accurate cameras and smart devices, it is bound that more
and more AR based devices and applications are going to
capture its market share. As a pillar to that, the core component
of AR i.e. Feature Extraction is going to be technologically
challenging. For the same, SIFT and SURF, presented in this
paper, are ready to be used as feature extraction algorithms.
Apart from that, some more insight can be given into other
feature extraction techniques that are described in the previous
section. Though, emphasis on accuracy of the feature extrac-
tion and matching process is still a ﬁeld of research which can
be worked on by using new machine learning techniques and
algorithms.

REFERENCES

[1] Ronald Azuma, ”A survey of augmented reality.” MIT Press, Presence

6.4 (1997): 355-385.

[2] B.B. Bederson, Audio Augmented Reality: A Prototype Automated Tour
Guide. In Conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 21011. CHI ?95. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1995.

[3] Carey, Rick, Tony Fields, Andries van Dam, and Dan Venolia. Why Is
3-D Interaction So Hard and What Can We Really Do About It? In
Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques, 49293. SIGGRAPH ?94. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 1994.

[4] Dnser, Andreas, and Eva Hornecker. Lessons from an AR Book Study.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Tangible and
Embedded Interaction, 17982. TEI ?07. New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2007.

[5] J. Grubert, T. Langlotz, S. Zollmann and H. Regenbrecht, ”Towards Per-
vasive Augmented Reality: Context-Awareness in Augmented Reality.”
IEEE Trans Vis Comput Graph. March, 2016.

[6] C. Conn, J. Lanier, M. Minsky, S. Fisher, and A. Druin. 1989. Virtual
environments and interactivity: windows to the future. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 89 Panel Proceedings (SIGGRAPH ’89). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 7-18. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/77276.77278

[7] Digital

Trends.

¡http://www.digitaltrends.com/features/what-is-

augmented-reality-iphone-apps-games-ﬂash-yelp-android-ar-software-
and-more/¿

[8] M. Mallem, ”Augmented Reality: Issues, Trends and Challenges” In Pro-
ceedings of 2nd IEEE Internationcal Conference on Image Processing
Theory Tools and Applications (IPTA), 2010.

[9] M. Mekni and A. Lemieux, ”Augmented Reality: Applications, Chal-
lenges and Future Trends”, In Proc. of the 13th International Conference
on Applied Computer and Applied Computational Science (ACACOS),
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, April 23-25, 2014.

[10] C. Arth and D. Schmalstieg, ”Challenges of Large-Scale Augmented
Reality on Smartphones”, Graz University of Technology, Graz, 2011.
[11] P. Milgram and F. Kishino, ”A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Visual
Displays” IEICE Trans. on Information Systems, Vol. E77-D, No. 12,
December 1994.

[12] J.M. Harley, E.G. Poitras and A. Jarrell,.”Comparing virtual and
location-based augmented reality mobile learning: emotions and
learning outcomes” Education Tech Research Dev (2016) 64: 359.
doi:10.1007/s11423-015-9420-7

[13] Chao Du, Yen-Lin Chen, Mao Ye and Liu Ren, ”Edge Snapping-Based
Depth Enhancement for Dynamic Occlusion Handling in Augmented
Reality”, In Proc. of 15th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR) , Mexico, 2016.

[14] S.S.Vanjire, E. Khan, P. Mahamulkar, S. Kohli and P. Kedar, ”Imple-
mentation of Augmented Reality using Hand Gesture Recognition”,
International Journal of Technical Research and Applications, Vol 3.
Issue 2, pp. 253-256, April 2015.

[15] Papageorgiou, Oren and Poggio, ”A general framework for object
detection”, In Proc. of 6th IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, India, 1998.

[16] D. G. Lowe, ”Method and apparatus for identifying scale invariant
features in an image and use of same for locating an object in an image”,
U.S. Patent 6 711 293, March 23, 2004.

[17] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, ”Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection”, In Proc. of 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), San Diego, CA, 2005.

[18] H. Bay, A. Ess, T. Tuytelaars and L. V. Gool, ”Speeded-Up Robust
Features (SURF)”, Computer Vision and Understanding, Vol 110, Issue
3, pp. 346-359, June 2008.

[19] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige and G. Bradski, ”ORB: An efﬁcient
alternative to SIFT or SURF”, In Proc. of 13th IEEE Int. Conf. on
Computer Vision, Spain 2011.

