Safe Walking In VR using Augmented Virtuality

Maurício Sousa, Daniel Mendes, and Joaquim Jorge
INESC-ID Lisboa, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa
{antonio.sousa, danielmendes, jorgej}@tecnico.ulisboa.pt

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
9
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
0
3
1
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
New technologies allow ordinary people to access Virtual Re-
ality at affordable prices in their homes. One of the most
important tasks when interacting with immersive Virtual Real-
ity is to navigate the virtual environments (VEs). Arguably, the
best methods to accomplish this use direct control interfaces.
Among those, natural walking (NW) makes for an enjoyable
user experience. However, common techniques to support
direct control interfaces in VEs feature constraints that make it
difﬁcult to use those methods in cramped home environments.
Indeed, NW requires unobstructed and open space, to allow
users to roam around without fear of stumbling on obstacles
while immersed in a virtual world.

To approach this problem, we propose a new virtual locomo-
tion technique, which we call Combined Walking in Place
(CWIP). CWIP allows people to take advantage of the avail-
able physical space and empowers them to use NW to navigate
in the virtual world. For longer distances, we adopt Walking
in Place (WIP) to enable them to move in the virtual world
beyond the conﬁnes of a cramped real room.

However, roaming in an immersive alternate reality, while
moving in the conﬁnes of a cluttered environment can lead
people to stumble and fall. To approach these problems we de-
veloped a technique called Augmented Virtual Reality (AVR),
to inform users about real world hazards, such as chairs, draw-
ers, walls via proxies and signs placed in the virtual world.
We propose thus Combined Walking in Place in Augmented
Virtual Reality (CWIP-AVR) as a way to safely explore VR in
the cramped conﬁnes of your own home. To our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst approach to combined different locomotion
modalities in a safe manner. We assessed its effectiveness in a
user study with 20 participants to validate their ability to navi-
gate a virtual world while walking in a conﬁned and cluttered
real space. Our results show that CWIP-AVR allows people
to navigate VR safely, while switching between locomotion
modes ﬂexibly and maintaining a good degree of immersion.

Author Keywords
Virtual locomotion interfaces, Conﬁned and cluttered spaces,
Natural Walking, Walking in Place, Affordable Virtual
Reality, Augmented Virtual Reality

INTRODUCTION
New devices powered by the latest surge in VR ventures such
as the Samsung GearVR, Oculus Rift and Steam VR to name
a few, allow ordinary users to access and enjoy affordable
Virtual Reality in their homes. Prior to these recent advances,
only a select few working in well-funded research laboratories
and private companies could afford such experiences.

Figure 1. To achieve safe walking in VR, our approach combines
Walking-In-Place locomotion technique with Natural Walking and vir-
tual proximity indicators for obstacles and room boundaries.

Navigation is one of the most common and important tasks
that people perform while interacting with VEs. This allows
users to control their position when roaming VEs. Even when
Navigation is not the main focus of the experience in a VE, it
is surely an essential support task to the main goal [3].

Among the many possible ways to accomplish locomotion in
VR, the technique that best conveys the sense of presence in the
virtual world is Natural Walking(NW). Walking in Place(WIP)
is the best alternative [33]. However, current approaches to
walking in VR entail requirements that preclude their adoption
in common settings. Chief among these, is need for large
unencumbered areas that can be dedicated exclusively to navi-
gating the virtual world. Indeed, the current technology fosters
and encourages immersion in cramped and conﬁned environ-
ments such as living rooms, dorms and other home settings.
NW while immersed becomes a recipe for disaster, as peo-
ple become blissfully unaware of their surroundings. While
gamer-like contraptions such as joysticks and driving seats,
obviate the problem, they change the experience in unnatu-
ral ways, especially when exploring the VE calls for natural
locomotion, instead of vehicular displacement.

To approach this issue, we propose a new navigation method,
illustrated in Figure 1. Our Technique, that we call Combined
Walking in Place CWIP combines NW with WIP with seamless
transitions between the two using commodity depth sensors.
Though this technique people can access places in the VE that
lie beyond the conﬁnes of the physical room available via WIP.
They can naturally switch to NW when the point of interest in
the VE is within the range of the physical space available.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Our navigation technique as typical of walking frees the hands
to interacting with the VEs under the desired conditions. How-
ever, walking still poses the problem of how to inform the per-
son on how to avoid going beyond the limits of the available
space or hitting obstacles. This is because the person wearing
an Head-Mounted Display (HMD) has no information about
their position in the real world or on the obstacles in their path.
To solve these problems and thus allow safe locomotion in VR
via CWIP we developed a Warning System to assist people
when navigating VEs. Our approach uses Visual Indicators
to inform the person of the existence and relative location of
real-world obstacles to be avoided, such as the physical limits
of the area available to move and other encumbrances, as de-
picted in Figure 1Additionally, to increase people awareness of
those obstacles we also implemented visual and audio signals
to direct their attention to the augmented Visual Indicators.
We named these techniques Augmented Virtual Reality (AVR)
since they augment the VE with virtual objects superimposed
to the visualization of the virtual world to convey information
in a similar vein to Augmented Reality [1].Thus we call our
combined approach CWIP-AVR resulting from combining
CWIP navigation with AVR to implement collision Warnings.

The work described in the present paper aims to prove that
CWIP-AVR enables people to walk immersive VEs within
conﬁned and obstructed physical spaces. Furthermore, we
conducted a user study to show that AVR provides for safe
walking by keeping the user within limits and avoid obstacles
in a less obtrusive manner than similar approaches. Indeed
informal comments reported by subjects, indicate that our
approach presents a good trade-off between immersion and
safety while providing safer locomotion.

RELATED WORK
The interfaces used for locomotion in VEs can be divided
into two main categories: direct and indirect [18]. Direct
control interfaces use the movement of body parts (such as
head, arms, hands, torso, legs and feet, among others) [37,
31] to control displacement in the VE. Indirect interaction
techniques use physical control devices to accomplish this
task. Notable examples include keyboards, mouses, joysticks
and gamepads. While these can be both effective, affordable,
convenient and do not require much space, they do not provide
an adequate sense of presence in the virtual world, outside
of vehicular displacement (e.g. driving a car or piloting a
spaceship among others), so we will will not delve into their
particulars as we are interesting in the myriad applications
where walking provides the most appropriate, elegant and apt
metaphor to exploring the virtual reality.

Past research [33] shows that direct control interfaces convey
the greatest sense of presence in the virtual world to humans.
Among the techniques that implement direct control interfaces
NW [22, 12, 39, 16, 13, 28, 7, 2, 8] and WIP [25, 5, 4, 34, 9, 32]
are some of the most relevant to the present research. When
using NW, a person can walk both naturally and freely in a
physical space and their position and orientation are replicated
in the VE. Indeed, WIP allows the user to move forward in the
VE by performing steps without moving expressively her or
his position on the physical ﬂoor. While this technique can

convey a strong sense of presence in the VE this sense is not
as strong as that afforded by NW approaches [33, 21, 38].

While NW is the technique that best conveys a sense of pres-
ence in the virtual world, current implementations have re-
quirements that the ordinary person can not meet. Example of
these include the access to large open areas without obstacles
that can be dedicated exclusively to navigating the VE.

The technique Redirected Walking [21, 30, 19, 11] is an ex-
ample of an inadequate approach to NW given the common
limitations of most residential homes. This approach consists
in guiding a person by subtly changing the positioning of the
VE at each step taken, so that he or she walks in cycles within
the available area without noticing. The main problem with
this technique is the size of free space required ( 22m [29])
so that the human subject does not realize that he/she is not
walking in a straight line. While there are alternatives that do
not necessitate such free space, those require the user to stop
moving in the virtual world to reposition herself in the real
world [36, 10].

Using specialized apparatus such as the Omnidirectional
Treadmill [23, 26, 27] could provide a solution to this prob-
lem because these devices allow the user to walk freely in all
directions without leaving the same place and some even can
convey a sensation similar to NW. However, for reasons of
cost and encumbrance this apparatus is not accessible to or
affordable by everyday users on common living quarters.

As we can see from the above, current methods do not allow
the average person to conveniently and safely navigate physi-
cally in VEs or to have the best possible experience. This is
particularly true of home settings, where it is impractical to
dedicate large unencumbered spaces to the fruition of VEs.
This and a domestic limited budget makes Omnidirectional
Treadmills largely inconvenient, while Redirected Walking is
either unfeasible or disruptive to the experience and NW is
limited to the existing physical space. WIP allows the phys-
ical navigation of VEs in a limited space but it affords less
presence than NW. What we need is therefore a technique that
can combine the scalability of WIP and secondly to allow NW
within the limits of a conﬁned environment, to match the char-
acteristics of most consumers’ homes. Finally, we need some
way to allow people to safely avoid room walls and obstacles
such as furniture, ﬁxtures or pets while navigating immersive
VEs, given that HMDs isolate the wearer from the outside
environment.

OUR APPROACH
As we seen previously, current navigation techniques and
methods do not provide a natural or affordable counterpart to
the commodity VR displays that have mushroomed in recent
years. We present an approach that allows people to safely
experience immersive VR by walking in the comfort of their
homes. Our approach features a network of commodity depth
sensors to detect the person’s position and combines Walking
in Place with Natural Walking in novel manners to achieve
more ﬂexible and powerful ways to support locomotion within
domestic settings. Furthermore, our approach adopts Aug-

mented Virtual Reality to make it possible to roam VEs safely
within the conﬁnes of household dwellings.

CWIP - Combined Walking in Place
Our approach to navigation CWIP allows people to seamlessly
and automatically alternate between two different locomotion
techniques in the virtual world. NW is useful for within-reach
displacements, especially circular movements around small
objects of interest, in that it replicates the real world movement
into the virtual world in that a person’s steps map into their
avatar in the VE. WIP is more suitable for far-reaching loco-
motion that cannot be readily accommodated within a small
physical space, in that it induces virtual forward movement by
simulating steps while marching in the same place in the real
world. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is novel in
combining these two modalities in a natural manner. To this
end, we determine which of the two techniques should be used
at a given time according to the current state of a CWIP State
Machine, according to three possible states: Stationary, NW or
WIP. The state transitions are determined by two factors. First,
whether the person is in motion. Second, if not in motion,
whether or not they are simulating steps. If the system deter-
mines that the user is in motion (See Section 4.2) the current
state of the CWIP state machine, whose diagram is depicted in
Figure 4), is set to NW. As the name indicates, the movement
of the avatar in the virtual world directly corresponds to their
physical motion.

If the person is not walking and is not marching in place, the
system is in the Stationary state. In this state the avatar is
at rest in virtual world, in a fashion similar to the behavior
of the NW state, in that the avatar follows the locomotion /
immobility of the person.

If the user is not moving but is simulating steps, the system
should be the WIP state. In this state, the movement of the
avatar in the VE is determined by the locomotion technique
WIP (See Section 4.2).

AVR - Augmented Virtual Reality
While CWIP allows for ﬂexible locomotion, AVR is responsi-
ble for informing the person about the physical space limits
and obstacles in their path,during their navigation in the vir-
tual world. To accomplish this, we are augmenting the Virtual
World representation using three distinct elements: Visual
Indicators, Visual Markers and Sound Alerts. The Visual Indi-
cators adds synthetic Objects to the Virtual World, that behave
independently of it and have a distinct visual appearance. They
serve to signal the location of hazards and obstacles to progres-
sion in the real world. These indicators can be divided into
two Groups: Limits are represented by translucent planes that
depict the limits of the space available for physical in front
that the person; Obstacles, rendered as solid parallelepipeds,
indicate the location of obstacles in the Real world, such as
chairs, tables, beds and other pieces of furniture, that lie in the
path of the user.

An Indicator’s, color and transparency, depends on its distance
to the person. Distinct areas where the Indicator has a similar
behavior are called Zones according to proximity. There are

Figure 2. Rendering a Visual Indicator of a limit in different zones (from
left to right: Pre-Warning, Warning, Danger)

four of these: Normal Zone, Pre-Warning Zone, Warning Zone
and Danger Zone, as depicted in Figure 2.

These Zones can be divided into two subgroups: Constant,
where the aspect of the indicator is always the same regardless
of the exact distance to the user, and Dynamic, where the
aspect linearly depends on the distance the user is between an
upper and lower limit speciﬁc to that Zone

There are distinct behaviours for each Zone. Within the Nor-
mal Zone the Visual Indicators are invisible. Within the Pre-
Warning Zone the Visual Indicator behaves Dynamically from
being transparent and white in the upper limit to linearly pro-
gressing to yellow and Semitransparent once its lower limit is
reached. Inside the Warning Zone the Visual Indicator behaves
Dynamically from being yellow and semitransparent at the
upper limit, and linearly changing until it becomes red and
almost opaque in the lower limit.

When in the Danger Zone the Visual Indicator features a
Constant behavior being rendered as red and almost opaque.

Visual Markers inform the person of real-world hazards. How-
ever, if the user not looking in their direction there is no way
for Visual Indicators to inform on the state of the real world.
To approach this problem, we included two types of Warning
Signs that direct the user’s attention to the Visual Indicators.
Visual Signs (see the Figure 3), are red arrows depicted on
the side of the FoV, to indicate the direction of obstacles that
may be visible nearby in the virtual world but out of the per-
son’s sight. Sound Signals are audible alarms that alert the
user that they about to enter the Danger Zone of an obstacle
outside their ﬁeld of view. These alarms can stop in one of
two situations. Either the person leaves the Danger Zone of
the hazard or they look directly at the corresponding Visual

Figure 3. Rendering a visual indicator of obstacle in different zones. The
red Visual Marker indicates the presence of another obstacle to the left
of the user (from left to right: Pre-Warning, Warning, Danger)

Indicator, thus showing that they are aware of the existence of
the obstacle.

IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we describe our proof of concept prototype, us-
ing an array of depth cameras. Occlusion free body tracking is
done via an in house open-source toolkit that is described else-
where as an accepted publication at an ACM conference [28].

Apparatus
As said above, our system uses an array of evenly spaced depth
sensors to track a personÂt’s (or people) position and body
joints. To function correctly our CWIP-AVR approach requires
a steady stream of information about the person including
information on their body joint locations and motion within
the tracking area. To meet this requirement, it is necessary
that the sensors are arranged so as to ensure that in the entire
interaction area, at least one sensor is able to capture the points
of interest (aka skeleton) of the user, notably the Knees, Chest
and Head. Our prototype implementation uses ﬁve MS Kinect
One cameras, placed in the vertices of an irregular pentagon
around the tracking area. The information captured by these
sensors is processed by a Tracker program using the above-
mentioned toolkit [28] to produce information about the points
of interest, selected from the most reliable sensor at any given
time.

We chose Kinect because of their affordable price and most
importantly because they do not require special markers, as is
the case of competing setups such as Optitrack which require
optical markers and come at a higher price point. We did
not use controllers, such as the HTC Vive, since the existing
implementations require active markers and they did not allow
tracking enough points of interest to implement our approach.
Using commodity depth cameras, however, comes at the cost
of less precision when compared to optical tracking systems,
and by nature the data are more affected by noise. However,
our approach does not require highly precise data and the
toolkit provides a good compromise between smooth temporal
ﬁltering and lag. As a result, our setup can reliably track up
to four people over an area voluntarily restricted to 3mx3m,
where all the relevant body joints can be reliably tracked by at
least one the ﬁve cameras regardless of obstacles, and where a
person has enough free space to walk three to four steps in a
straight line, modulo the furniture.

As for immersive visualization, we used a Gear Vr apparatus
to visualize the virtual world because it does not need power
cables or an external desktop computer, unlike Oculus Rift
or HTC Vive. This avoids many potential problems with NW,
such the person tripping on the cable ot it becoming entangled
on the obstacles. The depth cameras operate over a local net-
work and of course obstacle information has to be transmitted
over wi-ﬁ. The setup features also less computational power
and less autonomy than a desktop setup, due to its dependence
on a smartphone battery. Due to these limitations, we relied
on precomputed scans of the real environment, instead of us-
ing real-time cellphone-based reconstructions of the physical
environment, which would have killed real-time performance.
While our precomputed setup may lack a bit of ﬂexibility, this

is not central to or detrimental of our key contributions. In the
future, we plan to add real-time reconstruction to our toolkit,
in a setup reminiscent of RoomAlive [14] wrt capturing the
geometry of the room, which will then be parsed for obstacles,
such as ﬁxtures, furniture, other people or pets. However, the
current prototype is well-suited to illustrate the virtues of our
approach to locomotion in VR. This scenario also ﬁts well
with current visions of future domestic VR setups.

The prototype was implemented on top of the Unity3D graph-
ical engine because this framework provides a ready-made
toolbox to support virtual reality projects for common setups
such as the Oculus Rift or Gear Vr apparatuses.

CWIP - Combined Walking in Place
As we have seen above, CWIP relies on a state machine fed
by sensor information to determine whether the person is
moving and whether they are either marching in place or
naturally moving. We determine heuristically the rate of speed
by measuring the variation of the horizontal position of the
person’s Chest, as communicated by the depth sensors. We
chose the Chest because it is the most reliably captured joint
by the depth sensors and because it is the most stable point of
the body during WIP. We discussed at length how to determine
the threshold which causes the state machine to move to NW
state. We chose this value as an average step per second,
a distance of (0, 70 − 0, 75m) for an average-height person
walking at a leisurely place. Due to the inaccuracy and noise
of depth sensor data and the tracker used we found it necessary
to introduce an experimentally determined safety margin to
minimize situations of WIP being recognized as NW and vice-
versa. We found out that we achieved a recognition rate of
90% to 93% which seemed comfortable to subjects during
experimental evaluation.

To compute the speed limit, we observed over a dozen people
walking under experimental conditions (see the evaluation
section below) and used a Boxplot [6, 17] to identify the
outliers caused by the imprecision of the system and by the
participants inadvertently wandering forward when they were
instructed to exercise the WIP movement.

The upper speed threshold thus obtained (0, 78m/s) represents
94.60% of the accumulated percentage of the speed frequency
distribution. Thus, for added stability we chose a threshold
of Vt = 0, 80m/s for the CWIP state machine to trigger the
transition between states.

Our technique builds on the motion state machine WIP devel-
oped by Bruno et al. [4] who used a singe depth camera to
detect the steps taken while stepping in place in front of a TV
screen. Based on the pace and maximum height of the knee
joints during the steps the WIP state machine determines the
corresponding virtual speed. This is then used to compute the
forward movement of the person’s avatar in the virtual world.

We have extended this approach further to allow people to alter-
nate between WIP and NW once the above threshold velocity
Vt is crossed by the person who is navigating the virtual world.
We acquire the height of the knee joints via the same Tracker
data used to estimate the position of the chest to compute the
virtual speed when WIP.

Figure 4. CWIP State Machine

Figure 5. Normal Zone

To deal with the imprecision and noise problems mentioned
above, the captured instantaneous position values of the user’s
body joints are smoothed using a Kalman [15] ﬁlter.

AVR - Augmented Virtual Reality
For the above approach to work, we need expeditious ways
to make people aware of real world boundaries and obstacles
when they are immersed in the Virtual World. As we described
earlier, AVR conveys this information as unobtrusively as
possible by encoding proximity and line-of-sight information
and synthetic virtual objects and markers. Proximity relies on
several parameters that relate to body proportions and reach
of subjects when they walk around in a closed space. The
parametric distances that deﬁne the size of each zone were
empirically determined in relation to the size of a step (about
70cm) taken by an average person.

Due to the same noise and ﬂicker problems mentioned in the
section 4.2 we added a safety margin of 20cm empirically
validated.

The upper limit of the Danger Zone is then based on distance
covered by a half-step. This distance, including the safety
margin is equal to 0.40m, as depicted in Figure 8.

We deﬁned the upper limit of the Warning Zone based on the
distance covered by an average step as 0.80m, as shown in
Figure 7.

We deﬁned the Pre-Warning Zone using the distance corre-
sponding to a step and a half or 1.20m, as exempliﬁed in
Figure 6. Above this distance the user is in the Normal Zone,
as illustrated by Figure 5.

EVALUATION
To validate the CWIP-AVR approach and evaluate its perfor-
mance we carried out a user study featuring 20 participants
(16 men and four women) with ages between 17 and 58, most
of them in the 25-36 year age group (55%). The user test
was carried out on our lab due to logistics although not all the
subjects were graduate students.

The study consisted a series of three identical tests (with an ex-
tra free form initial training session) in which each participant
had to accomplish a task in a virtual world using the proposed

Figure 6. Pre-Warning Zone

Figure 7. Warning Zone

Figure 8. Danger Zone

Figure 9. Virtual environment used in the test task. (Seen from above),
A - Starting point of the Test , B - End point of the Test

approach, using ours and a baseline approach, chosen at ran-
dom. The task consisted of navigating a VE (see Figure 9),
featuring a virtual art gallery twenty meters long up to a 90
degree curve followed by another twenty-meter long gallery
leading to a podium with an object on top. In this podium
there was a random number that the participant had to say
aloud to ﬁnish the test (See Figure 10).

All participants were able to complete the proposed challenges,
while alternating at will between WIP and NW which demon-
strates the validity of our approach. To evaluate the perfor-
mance of our proposed Warning System AVR, series of identi-
cal tests were performed using the proposed CWIP navigation
approach against the baseline System, called Passthrough (see
Figure 11). We chose pass-through video since it is readily
available on our development framework and it allowed a
direct comparison to our technique, since the goals are the
same (allowing people to safely walk in immersive VEs). This
System consists of a translucent plane at ground level where
the image captured by the Gear Vr camera is mapped. This
system allows participants to check for themselves whether
they are in risk of colliding with real world obstacles during
navigation. This approach is an adaptation of Steam Vr’s Chap-
erone system to Gear Vr. The Chaperone system transmits
the image captured by the Steam Vr camera to a plane next to
the controller. As Gear Vr has no equivalent controllers we
placed the plane at a ﬁxed position below the user’s waistline,

Figure 11. Baseline Implementation Examples

as a compromise between being readily accessible and not
interfering too much with navigating the virtual world.

Evaluation Metrics
The two approaches were evaluated according to user prefer-
ences and different task performance metrics.

To assess user preferences, we had the participants answer a
questionnaire after completing each series of tests for either
approach. The questionnaires were presented using a Likert
scale with six values. This served to determine the unambigu-
ous participants’ opinion on the effect each technique had on

Figure 10. Example Task Goal

ABthe perception of the real-world vs the Virtual World. The
questionnaire consisted of ﬁve questions related to the ease of
identifying certain elements of the task (participant’s position
in the real and virtual world, the position of the walls and the
obstacles (chairs), and the ease of achieving the task goal).
We included also two questions about the effects of using the
system (tiredness and discomfort).

We assessed Task Performance according to the values
recorded during the execution of each test using three rel-
evant metrics: task time, the number of exits from the limits
of the tracking area (note that we set this a little behind the
physical lab walls for safety), and the number of obstacles hit.

We measured the time that each subject took to complete the
task. To reduce the effect of habituation to the approach in
the result, tests were randomized and the value used in the
analysis was the mean value of the three tests performed.

We also noted the number of boundary crossings (wrt tracking
area). This was the number of times the participant during
the execution of the task in the virtual world inadvertently
left the tracking area While this does not account for actual
wall collisions in that situation one time off the limits could
mean the end of the experience. To take this into account, we
decomposed this metric into two: the total number of tests
where at least once the participant went beyond the limits and
the number of times the participant left and re-entered the
limits of the tracking area.

Finally, we also counted Obstacles hit, every time that a par-
ticipant during the experiment hit one obstacle, in this case
chairs, in the real world. Because the obstacles used were
padded light chairs, hitting them did not seemingly bother the
participant too much (except for the element of surprise) so
is possible to hit a chair and continue without stopping the
experience which might not be true of collisions with heavier
non-padded furniture or pets or even other people. We also
decomposed this metric into two: The total number of tests
where a crash occurred and the total number of crashes that
occurred in all tests.

In addition to these metrics, we also recorded all instantaneous
speed data during the training runs, to empirically compute
the Vt threshold value used by CWIP to determine whether
the user naturally moving vs standing or walking in place. To
this end, we analysed the users’ speed values during a part of
the test run where they were told to use WIP (In the ﬁgure 9,
between point A and the bend).

Results
All participants were able to learn and use the CWIP loco-
motion technique and all were able to complete every test.
This demonstrates the feasibility and appropriateness of our
contribution.

To analyze the questionnaires, we applied the Wilcoxon Signed-
Rank [35] test to determine whether the differences in the
results were statistically signiﬁcant. From this analysis, we
conclude that only the ﬁrst question ("During the Task was it
easy to understand what was my position in the Real World")
presents a statistically signiﬁcant result (p − value = 0.044).

According to the user responses, we can conclude that the
Passthrough approach was preferred to the AVR as to the
ability of subjects to perceive their position in the real world,
which does not come out as surprising given the explicit video
information they were given. The values of the remaining
responses do not present statistically signiﬁcant differences
for either approach. We can only surmise that participants
considered that in both approaches it was easy for them to
determine the location of the boundaries and obstacles of the
real world, while maintaining the perception of their position
in the virtual world and perform the intended task.

When evaluating task performance for each approach, the
value of the task time metric, used to determine the efﬁciency
of each technique, is the average duration of the three tests
that participants performed for each method. Our results in-
dicate 102.006s (Std dev (SD) 44.61) seconds for the AVR
approach and 70.290s (SD 32.77) seconds for the Passthrough
approach). The large SD values illustrate the wide variability
in results, which is symptomatic of the widely different skills,
familiarity and backgrounds in our subject population.

We applied a Shapiro-Wilk [24, 20] normality test to these
two samples. The statistical results (p − value = 0.039 for
the approach AVR and p − value = 0.004 for the Passthrough
approach) show that neither sample is normally distributed.

We then performed a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank statistic test. The
test result (Z = −2.987, p − value = 0.003) shows that there
is a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the times mea-
sured on the two approaches. It means that the Passthrough
approach takes less time than the AVR approach to perform
the task.

In comparing both techniques for
failures (AVR and
Passthrough) we observed that participants collided with real-
world obstacles in four tests. However the total number of
hits observed across all tests were four times with AVR and
ﬁve times when using Passthrough. This means that both
approaches allow users to achieve comparable performance
when avoiding obstacles. However, during informal post-test
questionnaires, many participants complained about feeling
less present when using video Passthrough than when experi-
encing AVR.

The total number of boundary crossings however, stakes three
occurrences with the AVR condition against 13 incidents under
the Passthrough condition. Moreover, the total number of
times participants left the tracking area across all tests total
six times with the AVR approach against 46 times under the
Passthrough condition.

Because the AVR method was responsible for a considerably
smaller number of exits of the designated area, relative to the
number of occurrences and the total number of tests, it can
be concluded that the AVR approach works best in keeping
participants safe and within the interaction area.

CONCLUSIONS
As we can observe from test results, all participants were able
to master the Combined Walking in Place technique with little
effort. This establishes our approach as an effective way to

navigate virtual environments,using commodity depth sensors.
The results of the questionnaires and the task time metric
indicate that the Passthrough technique is more efﬁcient and
the best to communicate the position of the person in the real
world. however, this was judged by participants as breaking
the sense of presence in the VE. One participant likened this
approach to "PIP TV without the joystick".

Although the participants had gotten the impression that with
the Passthrough approach they had a better perception of their
position in the real world, using the Passthrough approach
resulted in a considerably greater number of exits from the
designated area. Furthermore, the results of collisions with
the boundaries of the tracking area consolidate the perception
of Passthrough as the unsafer method. Indeed, each exit could
have resulted in the participant hitting the wall if there were no
safety distance between the limits of the tracking area and the
physical lab walls. Had the test been more stringent, that is if
leaving the limits stopped the test, this would have resulted in
13 failed tests with the Passthrough and 3 with AVR conditions
respectively.

We have identiﬁed a trade-off between the better safety of the
AVR approach versus the greater efﬁciency of the Passthrough
approach. However, users might have difﬁculty taking ad-
vantage of the greater efﬁciency the Passthrough approach
because of the danger of crashing into the wall of the room
thus interrupting the experience in the VE. This makes AVR
the better approach.

We have proposed CWIP-AVR, a new approach to navigating
VEs using consumer-grade hardware in domestic settings by
unsophisticated users. From our user test results, we conclude
that our technique can be applied to navigate safely in conﬁned
and obstructed physical spaces without signiﬁcantly limiting
the user experience and presence in the virtual world.

We believe that there is still much work to be done, regarding
navigation and interaction with VEs in domestic and everyday
scenarios, if the new technologies are to take hold in consumer
domains. Indeed, our toolkit can and should be extended to
include real-time acquisition and reconstruction of cluttered
room settings. Also, further user testing and enhanced state
machines can improve the user experience with AVR. We
also plan to experiment with different AVR techniques to ﬁnd
out more effective reality awareness techniques. With the
ever expanding offers for immersive and affordable HMD
apparatus, VR and AR will further expand their reach and
implantation as new media in the years to come, if research
continues to further develop novel, effective and natural ways
to interact with the new content.

REFERENCES
1. Ronald T Azuma and others. 1997. A survey of

augmented reality. Presence 6, 4 (1997), 355–385.
2. M. M. Blattner, E. P. Glinert, J. A. Jorge, and G. R.
Ormsby. 1992. Metawidgets: towards a theory of
multimodal interface design. In [1992] Proceedings. The
Sixteenth Annual International Computer Software and
Applications Conference. 115–120. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CMPSAC.1992.217593

3. Doug Bowman, Ernst Kruijff, Joseph J LaViola Jr, and
Ivan Poupyrev. 2004. 3D User Interfaces: Theory and
Practice, CourseSmart eTextbook. Addison-Wesley.

4. Luís Bruno, Maurício Sousa, Alfredo Ferreira,

João Madeiras Pereira, and Joaquim Jorge. 2017.
Hip-directed walking-in-place using a single depth
camera. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 105, March (2017), 1–11. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2017.03.006

5. Luís Carlos da Silva Bruno, João Pereira, and Joaquim
Jorge. 2013. A New Approach to Walking in Place.
Human-Computer Interaction â ˘A¸S INTERACT 8119
(2013), 370–387.

6. John M. Chambers, William S. Cleveland, Beat Kleiner,
and Paul A. Tukey. 1983. Graphical Methods for Data
Analysis. Wadsworth.

7. Manuel Contero, Ferran Naya, Joaquim Jorge, and Julián

Conesa. 2003. CIGRO: A Minimal Instruction Set
Calligraphic Interface for Sketch-Based Modeling. In
Computational Science and Its Applications — ICCSA
2003, Vipin Kumar, Marina L. Gavrilova, Chih
Jeng Kenneth Tan, and Pierre L’Ecuyer (Eds.). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 549–558.

8. Nuno Correia, Luís Alves, Helder Correia, Luis Romero,
Carmen Morgado, Luís Soares, José C. Cunha, Teresa
Romão, A. Eduardo Dias, and Joaquim A. Jorge. 2005.
InStory: A System for Mobile Information Access,
Storytelling and Gaming Activities in Physical Spaces. In
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment
Technology (ACE ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
102–109. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1178477.1178491

9. Jeff Feasel, Mary C. Whitton, and Jeremy D. Wendt.

2008. LLCM-WIP: Low-Latency, Continuous-Motion
Walking-in-Place. 2008 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (2008), 97–104. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/3DUI.2008.4476598

10. Sebastian Freitag, Dominik Rausch, and Torsten Kuhlen.

2014. Reorientation in virtual environments using
interactive portals. In 3D User Interfaces (3DUI), 2014
IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, 119–122.

11. Timofey Grechkin, Jerald Thomas, Mahdi Azmandian,

Mark Bolas, and Evan Suma. 2016. Revisiting Detection
Thresholds for Redirected Walking: Combining
Translation and Curvature Gains. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Applied Perception (SAP ’16). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 113–120. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2931002.2931018

12. Matthias Heintz. 2009. Real walking in virtual learning
environments: Beyond the advantage of naturalness. In
European Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning.
Springer, 584–595.

13. Omar Janeh, Eike Langbehn, Frank Steinicke, Gerd

23. Roy A Ruddle, Ekaterina Volkova, and Heinrich H

Bruder, Alessandro Gulberti, and Monika Poetter-Nerger.
2017. Walking in Virtual Reality: Effects of Manipulated
Visual Self-Motion on Walking Biomechanics. ACM
Trans. Appl. Percept. 14, 2, Article 12 (Jan. 2017), 15
pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3022731

14. Brett Jones, Rajinder Sodhi, Michael Murdock, Ravish

Mehra, Hrvoje Benko, Andrew Wilson, Eyal Ofek, Blair
MacIntyre, Nikunj Raghuvanshi, and Lior Shapira. 2014.
RoomAlive: Magical Experiences Enabled by Scalable,
Adaptive Projector-camera Units. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (UIST ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
637–644. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2642918.2647383

15. R. E. Kalman. 1960. A New Approach to Linear Filtering

and Prediction Problems. Journal of Basic Engineering
82, 1 (1960), 35. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.3662552

16. Wong Lai Kuan and Chee Yam San. 2003. Constructivist
physics learning in an immersive, multi-user hot air
balloon simulation program (iHABS). In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2003 Educators Program. ACM, 1–4.

17. Robert McGill, John W Tukey, and Wayne A Larsen.

1978. Variations of box plots. The American Statistician
32, 1 (1978), 12–16.

18. M. Mine. 1995. Virtual environment interaction
techniques. UNC Chapel Hill Computer Science
Technical Report (1995), 1–18. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1.1.38.1750

19. Nguyen Thi Anh Ngoc, Yannick Rothacher, Peter

Brugger, Bigna Lenggenhager, and Andreas Kunz. 2016.
Estimation of Individual Redirected Walking Thresholds
Using Standard Perception Tests. In Proceedings of the
22Nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality Software and
Technology (VRST ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
329–330. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2993369.2996304

20. Nornadiah Mohd Razali, Yap Bee Wah, and others. 2011.

Power comparisons of shapiro-wilk,
kolmogorov-smirnov, lilliefors and anderson-darling tests.
Journal of statistical modeling and analytics 2, 1 (2011),
21–33.

21. Sharif Razzaque, David Swapp, Mel Slater, Mary C.

Whitton, and Anthony Steed. 2002. Redirected walking
in place. Proceedings of the workshop on Virtual
environments (2002), 123–130.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=509709.509729

22. Roy A Ruddle and Simon Lessels. 2009. The beneﬁts of

using a walking interface to navigate virtual
environments. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 16, 1 (2009), 5.

Bülthoff. 2011. Walking improves your cognitive map in
environments that are large-scale and large in extent.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI) 18, 2 (2011), 10.

24. Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin B Wilk. 1965. An
analysis of variance test for normality (complete
samples). Biometrika 52, 3-4 (1965), 591–611.

25. Mel Slater, Martin Usoh, and Anthony Steed. 1995.

Taking Steps: The Inﬂuence of a Walking Technique on
Presence in Virtual Reality. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 2, 3 (Sept. 1995), 201–219. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/210079.210084

26. Jan L Souman, P Robuffo Giordano, M Schwaiger, Ilja
Frissen, Thomas Thümmel, Heinz Ulbrich, A De Luca,
Heinrich H Bülthoff, and Marc O Ernst. 2011.
CyberWalk: Enabling unconstrained omnidirectional
walking through virtual environments. ACM Transactions
on Applied Perception (TAP) 8, 4 (2011), 25.

27. Jan L. A N L Souman, Paolo Robuffo Giordano, La

Sapienza, Alessandro De E Luca, Marc O Ernst, and Ilja
Frissen. 2010. Making Virtual Walking Real : Perceptual
Evaluation of a New Treadmill Control Algorithm. ACM
Transactions on Applied Perception 7, 2 (2010), 1–14.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145//1670671.1670675

28. Maurício Sousa, Daniel Mendes, Rafael Kuffner Dos
Anjos, Daniel Medeiros, Alfredo Ferreira, Alberto
Raposo, João Madeiras Pereira, and Joaquim Jorge. 2017.
Creepy Tracker Toolkit for Context-aware Interfaces.
(2017), 191–200. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3132272.3134113

29. Frank Steinicke, Gerd Bruder, Klaus H Hinrichs, Jason
Jerald, Harald Frenz, and Markus Lappe. 2009. Real
Walking through Virtual Environments by Redirection
Techniques. Journal of Virtual Reality and Broadcasting
6, 2 (2009), 999–1004. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jmri.21947

30. Frank Steinicke, Gerd Bruder, Jason Jerald, Harald Frenz,
and Markus Lappe. 2008. Analyses of human sensitivity
to redirected walking. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
symposium on Virtual reality software and technology.
ACM, 149–156.

31. Sam Tregillus, Majed Al Zayer, and Eelke Folmer. 2017.

Handsfree Omnidirectional VR Navigation Using Head
Tilt. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4063–4068. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025521

32. Sam Tregillus and Eelke Folmer. 2016. VR-STEP:

Walking-in-Place using Inertial Sensing for Hands Free
Navigation in Mobile VR Environments. Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI ’16 (2016), 1250–1255. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858084

33. Martin Usoh, Kevin Arthur, Mary Whitton C., Rui

Bastos, Anthony Steed, Mel Slater, and Frederick Brooks
P. 1999. Walking > Walking-in-Place > Flying, in
Virtual Environments. SIGGRAPH ’99 Proceedings of the
26th annual conference on Computer graphics and
interactive techniques (1999), 359–364. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/311535.311589

34. Jeremy D Wendt, Mary C Whitton, and Frederick P
Brooks. 2010. Gud wip: Gait-understanding-driven
walking-in-place. In Virtual Reality Conference (VR),
2010 IEEE. IEEE, 51–58.

35. Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by

ranking methods. Biometrics bulletin 1, 6 (1945), 80–83.

36. Betsy Williams, Gayathri Narasimham, Bjoern Rump,

Timothy P McNamara, Thomas H Carr, John Rieser, and
Bobby Bodenheimer. 2007. Exploring large virtual
environments with an HMD when physical space is
limited. In Proceedings of the 4th symposium on Applied
perception in graphics and visualization. ACM, 41–48.

37. Preston Tunnell Wilson, William Kalescky, Ansel
MacLaughlin, and Betsy Williams. 2016. VR
Locomotion: Walking / Walking in Place / Arm Swinging.
In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference
on Virtual-Reality Continuum and Its Applications in
Industry - Volume 1 (VRCAI ’16). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 243–249. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3013971.3014010

38. L Yan, RS Allison, and SK Rushton. 2004. New simple

virtual walking method-walking on the spot. In
Proceedings of the IPT Symposium. Citeseer, 1–7.

39. Catherine A Zanbaka, Benjamin C Lok, Sabarish V Babu,
Amy Catherine Ulinski, and Larry F Hodges. 2005.
Comparison of path visualizations and cognitive
measures relative to travel technique in a virtual
environment. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 11, 6 (2005), 694–705.

