9
1
0
2

v
o
N
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
4
0
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

VR with Older Adults:
Participatory Design of a Virtual
ATM Training Simulation

Wies(cid:32)law Kope´c ∗ Marcin Wichrowski ∗ Krzysztof Kalinowski ∗
Anna Jaskulska ∗∗∗ Kinga Skorupska ∗ Daniel Cnotkowski ∗
Jakub Tyszka ∗ Agata Popieluch ∗ Anna Voitenkova ∗
Rafa(cid:32)l Mas(cid:32)lyk ∗ Piotr Gago ∗ Maciej Krzywicki ∗
Monika Kornacka † Cezary Biele ∗∗ Pawe(cid:32)l Kobyli´nski ∗∗
Jaros(cid:32)law Kowalski ∗∗ Katarzyna Abramczuk ∗∗
Aldona Zdrodowska ∗∗ Grzegorz Pochwatko ∗∗∗∗
Jakub Mo˙zaryn ‡ Krzysztof Marasek ∗

∗ Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology,
Warsaw, Poland (e-mail: kopec@pja.edu.pl)
∗∗ National Information Processing Institute, Warsaw, Poland
∗∗∗ Kobo Association, Warsaw, Poland
∗∗∗∗ Institute of Psychology Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland
† SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities,
Warsaw, Poland
‡ Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland

Abstract: In this paper we report on a study conducted with a group of older adults in
which they engaged in participatory design workshops to create a VR ATM training simulation.
Based on observation, recordings and the developed VR application we present the results of the
workshops and oﬀer considerations and recommendations for organizing opportunities for end
users, in this case older adults, to directly engage in co-creation of cutting-edge ICT solutions.
These include co-designing interfaces and interaction schemes for emerging technologies like VR
and AR. We discuss such aspects as user engagement and hardware and software tools suitable
for participatory prototyping of VR applications. Finally, we present ideas for further research
in the area of VR participatory prototyping with users of various proﬁciency levels, taking steps
towards developing a uniﬁed framework for co-design in AR and VR.

Keywords: older adults, virtual reality, participatory design, rapid prototyping, ATM, training
simulation, design framework

1. INTRODUCTION

Virtual reality, despite its long history, only recently be-
came commercially viable as more manufacturers have
taken up the challenge of creating their own solutions and
gear. In consequence, multiple sectors started to explore
the applications of VR, from the gaming industry, through
architecture and even the medical world and industry, for
example in machine or car manufacturing. VR, apart from
entertainment, is used for interior design, product proto-
typing or even exposure therapy for treating phobias, as in
Sch¨afer et al. (2015) or coping with emotions, pointed to
by Kornacka and Douilliez (2016). With the VR solutions
becoming more widespread it is important to engage all
stakeholders, in particular end users, in their design. In
this study we directly engage older adults, whose inclusion
in co-design, in light of the recent demographic trends, is
very important.

The data from Eurostat (2017) shows that people aged
65+ already comprise about one ﬁfth of the entire EU-

Fig. 1. To empower our participants, they were given an
opportunity to fully immerse in VR in 360. A game
to play in VR in which they could move around and
interact with surrounding environment, among other
things, use a bow to shoot at targets.

 
 
 
 
 
 
28 population (19.2% in 2016). Moreover, in most of the
western societies the share of older adults is increasing, e.g.
in the United States by 2050 it is projected to reach 20%
of the society according to Ortman et al. (2014). Thus, in
this paper we present our preliminary ﬁndings concerning
the tools and techniques for involving users of varying
ICT-proﬁciency levels, in our case older adults, in the
participatory design process for developing VR solutions.
First, we provide an overview of the state of the art. Next,
we describe our methods and ﬁndings. This section is
followed by a discussion listing our preliminary set of best
practices for engaging older adults in participatory design
of VR solutions. Finally, we summarize our conclusions
and propose promising future work areas, in particular
the development of a uniﬁed comprehensive framework for
mixed reality (including VR and AR) co-creation with end
users as important actors in the process.

2. RELATED WORK

Companies,
individual developers and researchers have
been exploring the potential of VR in diﬀerent markets,
be it online retailing where it is used to supplement the
clients’ shopping experience as in Bonetti et al. (2018), or
human learning, explored by Roman-Ibanez et al. (2018),
and many others. Moreover, as Busch et al. (2014) con-
clude ”virtual environments can be an alternative to real
environments for user experience studies, when a high
presence is achieved.” and as such, they can be used to
simulate real experiences and facilitate learning, some-
times referred to as simulation learning, or s-learning.
These solutions may be useful for end users, such as older
adults, who often are in danger of being stereotyped, but in
reality are just as grateful for novel modes of interaction.
According to Aula (2004) many older adults value what
ICT proﬁciency can oﬀer them, especially in terms of
personal beneﬁts, as shown by Djoub (2013). However
there exist multiple barriers to their use of computer-
enabled ICT solutions, noted by Sandhu et al. (2013),
hence, they are an interesting demographic for promising
studies in VR as novel modes of interaction may prove to
mitigate some of these existing barriers. To avoid the use
of stereotypes in research and design, which were explored
by Vines et al. (2015), it is important to involve the users,
as in Sanders (2002) and engage them in participatory
development processes, as postulated by Lindsay et al.
(2012) and Davidson and Jensen (2013). Research endeav-
ours ought to provide positive examples of engaging older
adults, for example in online crowdsourcing, explored by
Skorupska et al. (2018) or oﬄine volunteering, described
by Carroll et al. (2012). Such solutions allow older adults’
to build on their experience, as explored by Balcerzak et al.
(2017), while at the same time encouraging them to stay
active. For this reason, it is important to get older adults
acquainted with technology, and encourage them either
with games, as shown by Kope´c et al. (2017), intergen-
erational interaction explored by Orzeszek et al. (2017)
in the context of participatory design and hackathons, as
shown by Kope´c et al. (2018a) allowing them to even build
up to being able to join development teams, according to
Kope´c et al. (2018b). Nowadays, this practice should be
an industry standard, especially that unexpected insights
stemming from user involvement can help avoid business

Fig. 2. As the ﬁrst step to develop the VR environment
the participants were shown diﬀerent areas in Google
Streetview and could comment on their convenience
and security.

risks according to Pallot et al. (2010). This becomes even
more important in the context of recent trends such as
digital economy and Industry 4.0 related to e.g. EU Digital
Single Market policy. Those concepts are connected to
numerous emerging aspects that have been already the
subject of the study, including by our interdisciplinary
team who explored various modes of interaction between
humans, machines, systems and interfaces such as VR, as
explored by Kobylinski et al. (2019), VA, as in Kowalski
et al. (2019) and Biele et al. (2019), or personal and
industry robots,
intelligent or smart homes, cities and
workplaces as in Pi¸carra et al. (2016).

Thus, since seniors as a user group may be underrepre-
sented when it comes to ICT solution development, espe-
cially cutting-edge, such as VR, it is especially important
to directly engage them in participatory design, or as
Ladner (2015) states, even Design for User Empowerment,
where users could themselves become designers. However,
this would require extensive training, which is a resource-
intensive process, so another approach is needed, one that
would enable them to participate without these limita-
tions.

3. METHODS

3.1 Scenario

We designed our study to simulate the lean startup envi-
ronment in which the team works on a real product. This
setup allowed us to examine the eﬀectiveness of the applied
VR prototyping methods, tools and techniques in the pres-
ence of potential users, programmers and researchers in
double roles as designers and product owners. The end goal
of the development process informed by the workshops,
that is the VR cash machine training simulation, was
an actual product to be exhibited during Warsaw Senior
Days. The scenario of the two VR co-design workshops
consisted of multiple steps listed below:

Workshop 1 - Introduction and Engagement

(1) Discussion of the Workshop Goals
(2) Empowerment in VR (Immersion in available VR

solutions)

(3) VR Development: Environment (Google Street View

and discussion to substitute sketching)

An important insight was the need for controlled immer-
sion in VR: starting with just viewing, without the need to
perform complex actions, and with the help of the team.
The materials we have chosen for this phase, that is Star
Wars and The Jungle Book short VR movies were well
received by our participants because of their high quality
and immersive experience.

A signiﬁcant observation relates to our participants’ strong
need to clearly understand both the purpose and the pro-
cess of developing the VR solution. Our participants’ huge
interest was reﬂected in their preferred use of language and
visible in their eagerness to replace unfamiliar words such
as ”virtual” with familiar terminology, like ”simulated”
when referring to the solution being developed to enable
them to fully participate in the process.

The participants had almost no issues with getting used
to VR headset and its controllers. While some of the
more unusual concepts were confusing at ﬁrst after 1-
2 minutes of using the headset everybody had fun and
was fairly comfortable with the controls, as shown in Fig.
1. Both the stationary (seated) and room scale (some
movement around) VR experiences were treated as novelty
by our participants, all of them agreed that room-scale
experiences felt more impressive and polished. However,
at the same time P3 and P4 concluded that cardboards
are better for beginners.

Image and videos in 360, such as the ones in Google Earth
VR Street View gave our participants the starting point for
the discussion of their preferred environment, which was
crucial to allow us to keep later changes to bare minimum.
The discussion inspired by Street View in 3D and depicted
in Fig. 2 was not limited to the parts of town, or areas
in the neighborhood where it is beneﬁcial to place an
ATM, but it also included other people who may appear
in the virtual space (and some participants dreaded the
idea of somebody standing behind them in VR). All of
the participants agreed that diﬀerent environments can
be useful for the purposes of the simulation in order
to practice diﬀerent aspects of security and safety when
withdrawing money, including any devices that may be
attached to ATMs as well as suspicious people lurking in
the neighborhood.

After having viewed the VR ATM simulation depicted in
Fig. 3 the participants postulated numerous improvements
to the UX ﬂow of the UI to improve clarity and speed of
interaction, which they deemed as a critical aspect of their
ATM experience. One such suggestion was the need for
a multi-level interface which hides options, that are not
popular with every users to improve the ﬂow for everyday
transactions.

When it came to the VR 3D object prototyping, depicted
in Fig. 4, the participants commented on its placement in
space, as well as the scale and placement of the elements
such as the card reader or a printer, which they discussed
before. Another aspect of the play-space setup was the
existence of virtual walls in the VR prototype, as P3
said that a new VR user should start their adventure
while sitting down, as they may accidentally want to lean
against a non-existent wall. All in all, the need for physical
feedback (e.g. with a use of workaround, such as a plank
or other props) was often highlighted.

Fig. 3. The mock-up in Proto.io’s VR prototyping tool

allowed us to test the UX in a virtual environment.

Workshop 2 - Prototyping and Testing

(1) UX Prototyping in VR (UI mockup tests in VR)
(2) VR Object Prototyping (environment tests in VR)
(3) Discussion of the most important conclusions

3.2 Software and Hardware Setup

We conducted the initial presentation of VR using Disney
Movies VR featuring 360◦ videos, to showcase the range
of interactions possible in VR we used the NVIDIA VR
Funhouse application. VR UX prototypes were created
with the new Proto.io VR Prototyping functionality
allowing us to make functional mock-ups of the ATM
screen.

For scale testing and general testing we used Epic
Game’s Unreal Engine and due to ease of quick proto-
typing in it, while the whole project is using Unity Game
Engine. We chose HTC Vive as the VR platformas it
has better future ability to expand to make use of the
only eye tracking solution for VR available to us at the
moment. For presenting VR mock-ups from Proto.io as
well as Street View in Google Earth VR we used mid-range
smartphones which were then inserted into Mattel View-
Master Viewers, to allow the users to interact with the
screen by clicking a button on the side of the device.

3.3 Participants

Our study participants were a group of four retired older
adults: two females and two males from our Living Lab
(elaborated on in Kope´c et al. (2017)). The participants
(P1-P4) were selected based on their engagement with the
VR technology during our preliminary VR showcase. All
of them live in Warsaw, Poland, and they are native Polish
speakers. There was a 25 year age span: the youngest
participant was 65 years old and the oldest one was 90,
with a mean age of 74,55.

4. RESULTS

Here we present the results of our participatory design
workshops. Although the participants were engaged in a
development process of an ATM VR Simulation, below we
list only the insights which are related to the implemen-
tation and execution of the workshops, and not the ATM
solution itself.

as some elements may not appear as clearly when viewed
on smartphone screens.

The methods and tools we have chosen are listed below:

• Brainstorming with mind-mapping
• Aﬃnity diagramming
• Rating diﬀerent aspects of presented locations
• Cardboard 360 movies and experiences, VR experi-

ences

• Commercial VR games and applications, which dis-
play diﬀerent aspects of VR and the range of possible
interactions

• 360 photos with Google Earth VR Street View in

diﬀerent locations

• Proto.io for UX tests on the initial UI
• Unreal Engine as a quick means of creating simple

VR project

While most of the methods we have initially chosen did
make their way into the workshops due to time constraints
we decided not to add another level of complexity of VR
Sketching with Older Adults. Instead, we performed this
activity descriptively, agreeing that the development team
can create sketches themselves at a later time if needed.
In general, the more time is granted to free discussion the
more insights can be gathered for UI, UX, models and
functionalities, as long as the facilitators aid the users in
staying on track by presenting additional elements up for
trying out and discussion.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Our research is an important voice in the participatory
design landscape, especially that it directly involves end
users as co-designers of cutting-edge technologies such as
VR. In this study we worked with older adults, who are
often underrepresented and aﬀected by stereotypes. We
found that engaging them in VR prototyping workshops
is a very eﬀective way to directly gain valuable design
insights and create,
in our case, a useful VR training
simulation or in general, any other product. We plan to
conduct further research involving end users to facilitate
the creation of best VR experiences and to inform the
development of a uniﬁed and comprehensive co-design
framework aimed to deepen the users’ participation in
the co-design process, especially of mixed reality training
simulations. Such framework, having been tested with vul-
nerable groups, could easily extend to other contexts where
stakeholder participation to increase the value proposi-
tion is critical, including civil engagement, industry and
workplace empowerment. Hence, we are really excited
about the prospects of resulting interdisciplinary follow-
up discussion on user empowerment and co-creation in VR,
especially for s-learning and industry applications.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank older adults from our Living Lab,
those aﬃliated with Kobo Association who participated in
this study and all interdisciplinary experts involved with
the HASE Lab group (Human Aspects in Science and
Engineering).

Fig. 4. 3D model of the ATM was created, to test the

dimensions with the participants.

5. DISCUSSION: CONSIDERATIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

5.1 Participants

In participatory design high motivation and engagement
are crucial, so it is important to assemble the team
and user groups who enjoy working together. We found
that granting older adults access to technology, which
may otherwise be out of their reach is a very good way
to guarantee engagement, and usually it is enough to
convince them to participate in the development process.
Additionally, the whole team and the users alike need
to feel that their insights are appreciated and valued, so
it is key to schedule the meetings with enough time for
digression and extensive questions about the technology
or the project itself.

5.2 Software and Hardware

Some participants concluded that cardboards may be a
better option as an introduction to VR, as they allow users
to stay in control, are easy and intuitive to manage (P1)
and can be taken oﬀ if such need arises (P3). Overall, our
participants noticed that immersion is fuller when using
the stationary VR headset (P2 enjoyed it especially, as
they found it to be the most comfortable one). In terms of
interactivity, they were divided - as half of them preferred
selecting options with a gaze pointer solution, while the
others preferred to use controllers. The moment of entry
and exit to VR was especially prominent in the standalone
VR headset, so the assistance of a facilitator was very
welcome. Common suggestion from our participants was to
start using VR when sitting down, to avoid the danger of
bumping into real things or leaning against virtual objects.

5.3 Methods and Tools

All of our software choices met our expectations, and we
can especially recommend Google Earth VR Street View
with cardboards - some older adults were even curious
about how to recreate this experience for themselves later,
which also increased their engagement. Proto.io’s VR
tool was also very eﬀective, however in this case it is
important to be aware of the choice of colors and scale,

REFERENCES

Aula, A. (2004). Learning to use computers at a later
age. In HCI and the Older Population, 3–5. University
of Glasgow, Leeds, UK.

Balcerzak, B., Kope´c, W., Nielek, R., Kruk, S., Warpe-
chowski, K., Wasik, M., and W egrzyn, M. (2017). Press
f1 for help: participatory design for dealing with on-line
and real life security of older adults.
In CSIT, 2017
12th International Scientiﬁc and Technical Conference
on, volume 1, 240–243. IEEE.

Biele, C., Jaskulska, A., Kopec, W., Kowalski, J., Skorup-
ska, K., and Zdrodowska, A. (2019). How might voice
assistants raise our children? In Intern. Conf. on Intel-
ligent Human Systems Integration, 162–167. Springer.
Bonetti, F., Warnaby, G., and Quinn, L. (2018). Aug-
mented reality and virtual reality in physical and online
retailing: A review, synthesis and research agenda. Aug-
mented Reality and Virtual Reality, 119–132.

Busch, M., Lorenz, M., Tscheligi, M., Hochleitner, C.,
and Schulz, T. (2014). Being there for real presence
in real and virtual environments and its relation to
usability. In Proceedings of the NordiCHI 2014: The 8th
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Fun, Fast, Foundational.

Carroll, J., Convertino, G., Farooq, U., and Rosson, M.B.
(2012). The ﬁrekeepers: Aging considered as a resource.
Universal Access in the Information Society, 11(1), 7–
15. doi:10.1007/s10209-011-0229-9.

Davidson, J.L. and Jensen, C. (2013). Participatory design
with older adults: an analysis of creativity in the design
of mobile healthcare applications.
In Proc. of the 9th
ACM Conf. on Creativity & Cognition, 114–123. ACM.
Djoub, Z. (2013). ICT education and motivating elderly
In Ariadna; cultura, educacin y tecnologa,

people.
volume 1, 88–92. doi:10.6035/Ariadna.2013.1.15.

Eurostat

(2017).

Population structure and ageing.

http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/.

Kobylinski, P., Pochwatko, G., and Biele, C. (2019). Vr
experience from data science point of view: How to
measure inter-subject dependence in visual attention
and spatial behavior. In International Conference on In-
telligent Human Systems Integration, 393–399. Springer.
Kope´c, W., Abramczuk, K., Balcerzak, B., Ju´zwin, M.,
Gniadzik, K., Kowalik, G., and Nielek, R. (2017). A
location-based game for two generations: Teaching mo-
bile technology to the elderly with the support of young
volunteers.
doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-49655-9 12.

In eHealth 360, 84–91. Springer.

Kope´c, W., Balcerzak, B., Nielek, R., Kowalik, G.,
Wierzbicki, A., and Casati, F. (2018a). Older adults
and hackathons: A qualitative study. Empirical Software
Engineering, 23(4), 1895–1930. doi:10.1007/s10664-017-
9565-6.

Kope´c, W., Nielek, R., and Wierzbicki, A. (2018b). Guide-
lines towards better participation of older adults in soft-
ware development processes using a new spiral method
and participatory approach.
In Proceedings of the
CHASE’18: International Workshop on Cooperative and
Human Aspects of Software, ICSE ’18. ACM, New York,
NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3195836.3195840.

Kope´c, W., Skorupska, K., Jaskulska, A., Abramczuk,
K., Nielek, R., and Wierzbicki, A. (2017). Livinglab
pjait: Towards better urban participation of seniors.

In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web
Intelligence, WI ’17, 1085–1092. ACM, New York, NY,
USA. doi:10.1145/3106426.3109040.

Kornacka, M. and Douilliez, C. (2016). Steer away from
rumination? the impact of repetitive negative thinking
on attentional disengagement. International Journal of
Psychology, 51, 632.

Kowalski, J., Jaskulska, A., Skorupska, K., Abramczuk,
K., Biele, C., Kope´c, W., and Marasek, K. (2019).
Older adults and voice interaction: A pilot study with
In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI
google home.
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI EA ’19, 187:1–187:6. ACM, New York, NY, USA.
doi:10.1145/3290607.3312973.

Ladner, R.E. (2015). Design for user empowerment.

interactions, 22(2), 24–29.

Lindsay, S., Jackson, D., Schoﬁeld, G., and Olivier, P.
(2012). Engaging older people using participatory de-
sign. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, 1199–1208. ACM.
Ortman, J.M., Velkoﬀ, V.A., Hogan, H., et al. (2014). An
aging nation: the older population in the united states.
Washington, DC: US Census Bureau, 25–1140.

Orzeszek, D., Kopec, W., Wichrowski, M., Nielek, R.,
Balcerzak, B., Kowalik, G., and Puchalska-Kaminska,
M. (2017). Beyond participatory design: Towards a
model for teaching seniors application design. CEUR
Workshop Proceed.

Pallot, M., Trousse, B., Senach, B., and Scapin, D. (2010).
Living lab research landscape: From user centred design
and user experience towards user cocreation. In First
European Summer School” Living Labs”.

Pi¸carra, N., Giger, J.C., Pochwatko, G., and Mo˙zaryn,
J. (2016). Designing social robots for interaction at
work: Socio-cognitive factors underlying intention to
work with social robots. Journal of Automation Mobile
Robotics and Intelligent Systems, 10.

Roman-Ibanez, V., Pujol-Lopez, F.A., Mora-Mora, H.,
Pertegal-Felices, M.L., and Jimeno-Morenilla, A. (2018).
A low-cost immersive virtual reality system for teaching
robotic manipulators programming. Sustainab., 10(4).
Sanders, E.B.N. (2002). From user-centered to participa-
tory design approaches. Design and the social sciences:
Making connections, 1–8.

Sandhu, J., Damodaran, L., and Ramondt, L. (2013).
Ict skills acquisition by older people: Motivations for
International
learning and barriers to progression.
Journal of Education and Ageing, 3(1), 25–42.

Sch¨afer, P., Koller, M., Diemer, J., and Meixner, G.
(2015). Development and evaluation of a virtual reality-
system with integrated tracking of extremities under the
aspect of acrophobia. In 2015 SAI Intelligent Systems
Conference (IntelliSys), 408–417. IEEE.

Skorupska, K., N´u˜nez, M., Kope´c, W., and Nielek, R.
(2018). Older adults and crowdsourcing: Android tv app
for evaluating tedx subtitle quality. In Proceedings of the
2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooper-
ative Work and Social Computing, 286–296. ACM.

Vines, J., Pritchard, G., Wright, P., Olivier, P., and
Brittain, K. (2015). An age-old problem: Examining
the discourses of ageing in hci and strategies for future
research. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., 22(1),
2:1–2:27. doi:10.1145/2696867.

