9
1
0
2

v
o
N
8
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
0
4
7
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Development of MirrorShape: High Fidelity Large-Scale Shape
Rendering Framework for Virtual Reality

Aleksey Fedoseev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
aleksey.fedoseev@skoltech.ru

Nikita Chernyadev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
nikita.chernyadev@skoltech.ru

Dzmitry Tsetserukou
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
d.tsetserukou@skoltech.ru

Figure 1: (a) Human-robot interaction, (b) User approaching the virtual object, (c) User scene with real-time simulation.

ABSTRACT
Today there is a high variety of haptic devices capable of providing
tactile feedback. Although most of existing designs are aimed at
realistic simulation of the surface properties, their capabilities are
limited in attempts of displaying shape and position of virtual
objects.

This paper suggests a new concept of distributed haptic display
for realistic interaction with virtual object of complex shape by a
collaborative robot with shape display end-effector. MirrorShape
renders the 3D object in virtual reality (VR) system by contacting
the user hands with the robot end-effector at the calculated point in
real-time. Our proposed system makes it possible to synchronously
merge the position of contact point in VR and end-effector in real
world. This feature provides presentation of different shapes, and
at the same time expands the working area comparing to desktop
solutions.

The preliminary user study revealed that MirrorShape was effec-
tive at reducing positional error in VR interactions. Potentially this
approach can be used in the virtual systems for rendering versatile
VR objects with wide range of sizes with high fidelity large-scale
shape experience.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
VRST ’19, November 12–15, 2019, Parramatta, NSW, Australia
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7001-1/19/11.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Virtual reality; • Haptic de-
vices; • Computer systems organization → Robotics;

KEYWORDS
3D interaction, collaborative technologies, haptics, interaction tech-
nologies, robotics, shape-changing interfaces, virtual reality

ACM Reference Format:
Aleksey Fedoseev, Nikita Chernyadev, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou. 2019. De-
velopment of MirrorShape: High Fidelity Large-Scale Shape Rendering
Framework for Virtual Reality. In 25th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology (VRST ’19), November 12–15, 2019, Parramatta, NSW,
Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages.

1 INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, there was a significant development in the
scientific field of haptic devices. Still, much attention in modern
research is focused on the tactile simulation in tasks of manipulating
with small objects. In order to improve the haptic feedback, the
developed devices usually take the form of wearable actuated gloves
[5], exoskeletons [4] or handheld controllers, which allows them
to reach greater mobility, but limits the actual positional feedback.
Some works in this area, such as NormalTouch and TextureTouch,
developed by Benko’s research group [2] and Mediate developed
by Fitzgerald’s research group [3] are aiming to use a pin matrix
that is driven by linear actuators to create the shape of the surface.
However, these solutions with high mobility allow to simulate the
normal contact force or the shape of an object without combining

 
 
 
 
 
 
VRST ’19, November 12–15, 2019, Parramatta, NSW, Australia

Fedoseev, Chernyadev and Tsetserukou

these parameters. Additionally, they can generate sensation only in
the narrow area, which is not the case in large-scaled VR systems.
Separate attempts to render large objects of complex shape were
made, e.g., Snake Charmer developed by the research group of the
Toronto University [1]. Their article presents a novel idea of using
manipulator to achieve haptic feedback with an efficient algorithm
for rendering large objects of simple shapes. The resolution of this
display still remains too low to simulate a change in the surface
shape. To transmit both shape and a positional feedback in real
time the MirrorShape design aims to use robotic arm along with
shape feedback in the contact surface.

2 PRINCIPLE AND TECHNOLOGIES
The MirrorShape system software consists of four modules (Figure
2), which includes Hand tracking module, VR environment, Robot
controller and end-effector haptic display MirrorGlide.

Figure 3: The MirrorGlide display architecture.

3 APPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
When rendering interactions with VR surfaces, a large role is played
by positional desynchronization of visual and tactile feedback. Ex-
periments on precision were conducted in this study (Figure 4)
where 6 participants were asked to measure the platforms of differ-
ent length.

Figure 2: The MirrorShape (a) software and (b) hardware
architecture

The system hardware consists of a 6 DOF Universal robot UR3,
PC with control framework, tracking system, and shape-forming
end-effector (Figure 3) as haptic display. User wears HTC Vive Pro
headset with Leap Motion camera to detect the position of the
hands. The design of inverted five bar linkage mechanism allows
MirrorGlide to define the position of 3 contact points independently,
achieving a fairly wide range of the working area. The generation of
3 contact points combined with silicone display provides interaction
with various shapes only with 3 DOF device instead of using large
number of pins and actuators.

In order to improve the experience of human-robot interaction,
a full digital robot twin with 6 DOF was developed and rendered
within the Unity Engine as well as the remote control framework for
UR robot, which allows the adaptive surface simulation in real-time.
The hand position is tracked by Leap Motion Module to determine
the coordinates of the user’s fingertips. Smoothing algorithm was
implemented for tracking data, which allowed to make a calibration
of the real robot position in the virtual space environment.

When user approaches simulated objects, a field of approximate
contact with the surface is determined in VR environment, after
which the real robot as well as digital twin begins its movement to
a predetermined position, in order to be at the same point as the
normal vector to the fingertip touching the surface. Depending on
the type of the investigated surface and the curvature of the object
shape between the hand and the display plane, the end-effector
performs forming of various shapes.

Figure 4: The experimental results.

The each participant had to track two events: the beginning and
the end of the interaction with the surface, while moving their
hand along the objects. The results of the estimated size errors
showed that the MirrorShape allows to decrease positional error in
large-scale interactions and potentially can be used for rendering
versatile VR objects.

REFERENCES
[1] Bruno Araujo, Ricardo Jota, Varun Perumal, Jia Xian Yao, Karan Singh, and
Daniel Wigdor. 2016. Snake Charmer: Physically Enabling Virtual Objects. In
Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 218–226. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2839484

[2] Hrvoje Benko, Christian Holz, Mike Sinclair, and Eyal Ofek. 2016. NormalTouch
and TextureTouch: High-fidelity 3D Haptic Shape Rendering on Handheld Virtual
Reality Controllers. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (UIST ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 717–728. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984526

[3] Daniel Fitzgerald and Hiroshi Ishii. 2018. Mediate: A Spatial Tangible Interface
for Mixed Reality. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
LBW625, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188472

[4] Dzmitry Tsetserukou, Katsunari Sato, and Susumu Tachi. 2010. ExoInterfaces:
novel exosceleton haptic interfaces for virtual reality, augmented sport and
rehabilitation. 1. https://doi.org/10.1145/1785455.1785456

[5] Vibol Yem and Hiroyuki Kajimoto. 2017. Wearable tactile device using mechanical
and electrical stimulation for fingertip interaction with virtual world. 99–104.
https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2017.7892236

