Inattentional Blindness for Redirected Walking Using Dynamic Foveated
Rendering

Yashas Joshi

Charalambos Poullis *

Immersive and Creative Technologies Lab
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Concordia University

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
7
2

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
2
3
2
1
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Left: Orientation-based redirection using dynamic-foveated rendering which leverages the effect of inattentional
blindness induced by a cognitive task. The blending (e.g. parallax of green alien) in the transition zone between the rotated virtual
environment (VE) (non-foveal) and the non-rotated VE (foveal) is imperceptible by the users due to inattentional blindness. Right:
The path walked in physical tracked space (PTS) up to that point is shown in orange color. The corresponding path in the VE is
shown in blue color. The cyan-colored box indicates the 4 × 4m2 available PTS and the camera icon inside the box indicates the
location of the user w.r.t. the PTS. Even with room-scale PTS such as the one used, the users were able to walk distances in the
virtual environment (VE) which are up to almost 18× orders of magnitude higher than the longest distance in the PTS; maximum
recorded in experiments was 103.9m. Angular gain for the frame shown is at its maximum i.e. 13.5◦.

ABSTRACT

Redirected walking is a Virtual Reality(VR) locomotion technique
which enables users to navigate virtual environments (VEs) that are
spatially larger than the available physical tracked space.

In this work we present a novel technique for redirected walking
in VR based on the psychological phenomenon of inattentional
blindness. Based on the user’s visual ﬁxation points we divide
the user’s view into zones. Spatially-varying rotations are applied
according to the zone’s importance and are rendered using foveated
rendering. Our technique is real-time and applicable to small and
large physical spaces. Furthermore, the proposed technique does
not require the use of stimulated saccades but rather takes advantage
of naturally occurring saccades and blinks for a complete refresh
of the framebuffer. We performed extensive testing and present
the analysis of the results of three user studies conducted for the
evaluation.

Index Terms:

[Computing methodologies]: Virtual reality—

1 INTRODUCTION

Since the early days of virtual reality researchers have been inves-
tigating ways of navigating virtual environments that are spatially
larger than the available physical tracked space. A number of loco-
motion techniques relying on pointing devices or walking in-place
were proposed which have since become customary in VR applica-
tions [8]; but as could be expected, users ﬁnd these methods rather
cumbersome and unnatural. The concept of redirected walking was

*e-mail:charalambos@poullis.org

then introduced circa 2000 [27] as a more natural way of navigat-
ing VEs, albeit with many restrictions on the shape and size of the
physical and virtual spaces.

A number of approaches have since been proposed for imple-
menting redirected walking. Hardware-based techniques e.g. omni-
directional treadmills [45], virtusphere [26], are not only an expen-
sive solution to this problem but also fail to provide inertial force
feedback equivalent to natural walking [7].

In contrast, software-based techniques are more cost effective and
typically involve applying perceptually subtle rotations to the VE
causing the users’ to unknowingly change their walking direction.
Applying these rotations to the VE, however subtle, can negatively
impact the sense of immersion of the user. The reason for this is
because these techniques either employ warping which introduces
visual artifacts and distortions in the VE or even simulation sickness
[10], or rely on forcing the user to look away by stimulating saccades
in order to update the environment during a rapid eye movement as
in [50].

In this work, we address the problem of redirected walking and
present a novel technique based on the psychological phenomenon of
inattentional blindness. Inattentional blindness refers to the inability
of an individual to see a salient object in plain sight, due to lack
of attention. The phenomenon was popularized in a world-famous
awareness test described in [44] 1 in which participants were asked
to watch a video and count the number of times a basketball is
passed between the 6 people shown in the video wearing a white
shirt. During the video a person dressed as a gorilla walks from right
side of the screen to the left, passing through the people playing
basketball, and at one point stopping to beat its chest. At the end
of the experiment participants were asked to state the number of
passes, and whether they noticed anything different in the video; the

1Video of the test can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=vJG698U2Mvo

 
 
 
 
 
 
majority of which reported that they hadn’t noticed anything out of
the ordinary i.e. the gorilla walking and beating its chest.

We exploit this phenomenon and further strengthen its effect with
foveated rendering. Foveated rendering is a rendering technique
whose primary objective is to reduce the rendering workload. Using
eye tracking the user’s eyes are tracked within the VR headset in
real-time. The zone in the image corresponding to the foveal vision,
i.e. the zone gazed by the fovea which provides sharp and detailed
vision, is then rendered at very high quality. On the other hand, the
zone in the image corresponding to the peripheral vision is rendered
at a much lower quality since peripheral vision lacks acuity albeit it
has a wider ﬁeld of view. This process is performed without causing
any perceptual change to the user. Nowadays, foveated rendering
is supported by hardware such as NVIDIA’s RTX graphics card
series which allows for real-time ray-tracing and hence, real-time
performance.

Our proposed technique applies spatially-varying rotations to the
VE according to the zone’s importance using foveated rendering
to strengthen the effect of inattentional blindness. We present the
results of three user-studies. The ﬁrst user study was conducted in
order to determine the maximum rotation angle and ﬁeld-of-view
for which participants do not perceive a change. The objective of
the second user study was to conﬁrm the results of the ﬁrst and also
verify using only in-situ gaze redirection that a rotation of the VE
results in an equivalent rotation of the participant in the PTS. Lastly,
the third user study was conducted to evaluate redirected walking
using dynamic foveated rendering during inattentional blindness in
a small PTS.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the state-of-
the-art in the areas of redirected walking and foveated rendering. In
Section 3 we provide a technical overview of the proposed technique.
The user-study for determining the maximum rotation angle and the
ﬁeld-of-view of the foveal zone for which change is imperceptible
to a user is presented in Section 4. In Section 6 we present the
results and analysis of our third and ﬁnal user-study for evaluating
the technique for redirected walking in VR.

2 RELATED WORK

Over the recent years many techniques have been proposed relating
to interaction in VR and in particular, navigation. Below we present
a brief overview of the state-of-the-art most relevant to our proposed
technique. The related work is categorized in terms of (a) redirection
and VR, (b) steering algorithms, resetting phase and natural visual
suppressions, and (c) dynamic foveated rendering.

2.1 Redirection and VR

One of the most important forms of interaction in VR is locomotion.
Natural walking is the most preferred (and natural) technique primar-
ily because it provides an increased sense of presence in the VE [52]
and improved spatial understanding [33, 42, 43] while reducing the
signs of VR sickness [24]. However, the main difﬁculty of using
natural walking as a locomotion technique in VR is the requirement
that the size of the physical tracked space (PTS) is comparable in
size with the VE, which is often not the case; especially for simula-
tions involving large-scale environments [34]. To this day it remains
a very active area of research with a particular focus on locomotion
techniques which do not carry, in any degree, the spatial constraints
imposed by the physical space over to the theoretically boundless
virtual space.

In 2001, Razzaque et al. [36] proposed the concept of ’Redirected
Walking’ for the ﬁrst time. By making subtle rotations to the VE
the users were tricked into walking on a curved path in the PTS
while maintaining a straight path in the VE. These subtle rotations
applied to the VE were enough to convince the users that they had
explored a comparatively larger virtual area than the actual available
play space.

Since the original concept of redirected walking, a number of
attempts were made to achieve the same effect based on software
and/or hardware. Some researchers even tried to achieve this by
incorporating physical props [6] or manipulating the entire physical
environment [48, 49]. However, these type of solutions failed to gain
the mainstream attention due to their many dependencies on factors
other than the actions of the user himself.

Hardware-based approaches were also explored to resolve this
problem such as the omnidirectional treadmill [45], suspended walk-
ing [55], low-friction surfaces [18], walking in a giant Hamster
Ball [26], etc. Souman et al [45] proposed a technique using an
omnidirectional treadmill algorithm to improve the perception of
life-like walking in the VE. A position-based controller was used
to determine the speed of the user’s movements in the VE and to
rotate the treadmill accordingly. Several other attempts were also
made to create a perfect omnidirectional treadmill [9, 15, 17, 28]
but they are not considered cost-effective solutions primarily due to
the heavy and expensive equipment involved. Following a similar
hardware-based approach, a giant hamster-ball-like structure was
proposed by Fernandes et al in [11] where the user was placed in a
human-sized hollow sphere which could spin in any direction. An-
other similar prototype was proposed by Medina et al in [26]. These
prototypes, although they are possible solutions to the problem of
inﬁnite walking in VR, they all lack inertial force feedback. For this
reason natural walking is considered to be the most preferred and
natural way for locomotion in VR [7]. Moreover, the multimodal na-
ture of natural walking allows free user movements such as jumping
or crouching.

Software-based techniques have also been proposed for achiev-
ing the same effect by solely manipulating the VE. These can be
divided into two groups: (a) techniques that use the user’s head
rotations and translations for scaling the VE dynamically based on
the scenario as in [1, 36, 38], and (b) techniques that partially or
fully warp the virtual environment [10, 51]. Due to the dominance
of the visual sense over the other human senses, these techniques
focus mainly on reducing the effect of subtle visual distractions
resulting from repeated redirection. These visual distractions are
mainly created during the naturally occurring or stimulated visual
suppressions such as a blink or a saccade. Langbehn et al in one
of their recent studies [23] proposed a redirection technique which
leverages the naturally occurring blinks to redirect the user. The
authors performed extensive experiments to determine the thresholds
of rotational and translational gains that can be introduced during the
blink. Concurrently, Sun et al in [50] leveraged the perceptual blind-
ness occurring before, during, and after the saccades to update the
environment quickly over several frames. A common disadvantage
of these techniques is the fact that they are disruptive to the cognitive
task at hand, since they rely on stimulating saccades by introducing
artifacts in the rendered image to distract the user’s attention.

2.2 Steering Algorithms, Resetting Phase and Natural

Visual Suppressions

Steering Algorithms: In order to calculate the amount of redirection,
two parameters are required: the target direction of the user (a) in
the VE, and (b) in the PTS. There are many methods for predicting
the target direction in VE ranging from using the user’s past walking
direction [57], to head rotations [46], and gaze direction [58]. As
there are spatial constraints in terms of the available PTS, the user
must be steered away from the boundaries of the PTS i.e. typically
walls. To locate the user’s target direction in PTS, Razzaque pro-
posed a number of related agorithms in [37], namely steer-to-center,
steer-to-orbit, and steer-to-multiple-targets: (i) steer-to-center steers
the users towards the center of the PTS; (ii) steer-to-orbit steers them
towards an orbit around the center of the PTS; and (iii) steer-to-
multiple-targets steers the users towards several assigned waypoints
in the PTS. In [13], Hodgson et al proposed the steer-to-multiple-

centers algorithm which is essentially an extension of steer-to-center
algorithm. In this case, the steer-to-center algorithm proved to be
working better than this extension. Another experiment performed
by Hodgson et al in [14] showed that the steer-to-orbit algorithm
worked better in the setting where the directions of walking were
limited by virtual objects in the VE. In all of the above cases, the
user’s direction of movement is constantly changing which implies
that the amount of redirection must also be constantly computed.

Recently, Langbehn et al [22] proposed a redirected walking tech-
nique using predeﬁned curved paths in the VE. In this experiment,
users were instructed to follow the predeﬁned curves inside the VE
and were allowed to change their direction of walking only when
they reached the intersection of their current curve with another
predeﬁned curve. Since the curves were mapped within the PTS,
this eliminated the possibility of crossing over a boundary as long as
the user followed the predeﬁned path. In our work, we employ the
steer-to-center algorithm for redirecting the user towards the center
of the PTS when a collision is predicted to occur.

Resetting Phase: The resetting phase is one of the most important
aspects of all redirected walking techniques because there is always
a small possibility of the user crossing over the boundary of the PTS.
If this occurs, the user has to be stopped and their position has to be
reset before starting to walk again.

Several solutions were proposed to address this problem with the
most common being in [56]: (i) Freeze-Turn is the method where
the ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) of the user remains unchanged while she
turns towards the empty space in the PTS, (ii) Freeze-Back-up is the
method where the FoV remains unchanged while the user backs-up
from the boundary making enough room for walking, and (iii) 2:1
Turn is the method where twice the rotational gain is applied to the
user’s head rotations, i.e. if the user turns by 180◦, a rotation of
360◦ is applied so that the user is again facing the same direction
that she was facing before. Visual effects which may result from
the resetting can be addressed with the use of visual distractors as
proposed by Peck et al in [33].

Furthermore, most of the redirected walking techniques (e.g.
Redirected Walking Toolkit [1]) follow the stop-and-go paradigm
where if the user crosses over a boundary, and before she starts
walking again, she will have to perform an in-situ rotation towards a
direction where there is no obstacle. We follow the same paradigm
in our work.

Natural Visual Suppressions: The human visual system is not
perfect. Due to several very frequent involuntary actions, humans
face temporary blindness for short periods of time [31,40,41]. These
involuntary actions are called visual suppressions. Saccades, eye-
blinks, the phase of nystagmus, and vergence movements are some of
the involuntary visual suppressions [53]. Saccades are the brief rapid
eye movements that occur when we quickly glance from one object
to another; eye-blink is a rapid opening and closing of the eyelids -
these eye movement can occur either voluntarily, involuntarily or as
a reﬂex; the phase of nystagmus is a condition where uncontrolled
rapid eye movements occur from side-to-side, top-to-bottom or in
circular motion; vergence movement occurs to focus on the objects
with different depths, one after the other [53]. In the following, we
review only techniques employing saccades and eye-blinks since our
proposed technique only utilizes these.

Saccades are extremely unpredictable, rapid, and ballistic eye
movements that occur when we abruptly shift our ﬁxation point
from one object to the other [2]. The visual suppression occurs
before, during, and after the saccadic movement [5] and could last
for 20-200ms while the speed of these saccadic movements can
reach up to 900◦/s [2]. Researchers are still trying to identify an
exact reasoning behind this involuntary human behavior [5, 16]. A
saccade occurs very frequently and can last for several frames [23]
which makes it possible to render the updated VE without the user
noticing.

In contrast to the saccades, blinks occur much less frequently
and are much slower which gives more ﬂexibility for reorientation
due to the longer induced change blindness [31]. Depending upon
the scenario, one blink can give the users a temporary blindness
of 100-400 ms which is much longer than a saccade [35]. This
makes them easier to detect even with readily available off-the-
shelf eye trackers. Similar to saccades, our visual perception is
also suppressed before, during, and after the opening and closing
movements of the eyelids [53,54]. A study performed by Bentivoglio
in [3] showed that an average person blinks at an average rate of 17
times per minute.

In our work, we leverage this physiological phenomenon to re-
fresh the foveal zone render and therefore redirect the user multiple
times per minute during blinks. Furthermore, we leverage infor-
mation reported in recent studies for determining the maximum
rotational and translational thresholds for VR during blinks and sac-
cades [4, 21, 23, 50] to update the VE and refresh the render without
the user perceiving anything.

2.3 Dynamic Foveated Rendering

The concept of foveated rendering was ﬁrst introduced by Reder in
1973 [39]. This is a technique which drastically reduces the overall
GPU workload while providing the same VR experiences as before.
Foveated rendering leverages the fact that small changes occurring
in our peripheral vision are imperceptible to humans. Thus, the area
of the image corresponding to the peripheral vision can be rendered
at a much lower resolution while the area of the image corresponding
to the foveal vision is rendered at full resolution [32].

Although in recent years researchers have proposed many
software-based techniques for simulating perceptually-guided
foveated rendering e.g. [12, 32, 47, 50], it was until the very recent
introduction of Nvidia’s Variable Rate Shading [29] that foveated
rendering was supported in hardware and integrated into the render-
ing pipeline. This integration has reduced latency and aliasing effects
close to zero as it was demonstrated by the real-time visualization
platform called ZeroLight [30].

In our work we employ Nvidia’s VRS not only for reducing
the overall GPU workload but also for blending foveal and non-
foveal (peripheral) zones rendered from two co-located cameras,
respectively.

3 TECHNICAL OVERVIEW

Figure 2 shows the pipeline of the proposed technique. Two co-
located cameras Cam f oveal,Camnon− f oveal render the VE. Based on
the results of the ﬁrst user study we have determined that the ﬁeld-
of-view for Cam f oveal is δ = 60◦, and the rotation angle applied
to the VE and rendered from Camnon− f oveal is 13.5◦ > θ > 0◦. A
mask corresponding to δ = 60◦ is applied on the rendered image
of Cam f oveal, and the inverse of the same mask is applied on the
rendered image of Camnon− f oveal. The resulting masked renders
are then composited into the ﬁnal render displayed to the user. As
demonstrated by the results of the user studies #2 and #3, the users
fail to perceive any visual distractions or artifacts in the ﬁnal compos-
ite render while they are preoccupied with a cognitive task; which is
almost always the case in VR applications.

4 USER STUDY #1: DETERMINING MAXIMUM ROTATION

ANGLE AND FIELD-OF-VIEW OF FOVEAL ZONE

The efﬁcacy of redirected walking is tightly coupled with the user’s
perception of the redirection taking place. In our ﬁrst user-study
we determine the maximum angle for which the rotation of the non-
foveal zone (i.e. the area in the rendered image corresponding to the
peripheral vision) remains imperceptible by the user.

Figure 2: The pipeline of the proposed technique involves rendering the VE from two co-located cameras Cam f oveal with ﬁeld-of-view δ = 60◦
and Camnon− f oveal with rotation angle 13.5◦ > θ > 0◦. As demonstrated by the results of user study #2 the users fail to perceive any visual
distractions or artifacts in the ﬁnal composite render while they are preoccupied with a cognitive task; which is almost always the case with VR
applications.

tracker. For rendering, this zone must have the highest quality
since this is where the user’s foveal vision is focused. Thus,
pixels in the foveal zone are rendered with a 1:1 sampling.

2. Non-foveal zone: The non-foveal zone is the area in the ren-
dered image (complementary to the foveal zone) which cor-
responds to the peripheral vision. This zone is of lower im-
portance than the foveal zone since it is not the main focus
of the user’s vision. Hence, pixels in the non-foveal zone are
rendered with a 16:1 sampling.

3. Transition zone: The transition zone is the overlapping area
of the foveal and non-foveal zones. This zone was introduced
after initial experiments had shown that having only the foveal
and non-foveal zones results in sharp boundary edges on the
circular area separating them which are immediately perceived
by the user. Pixels in the transition zone are rendered with a
4:1 sampling.

Figure 3 shows a frame 2 from the application with the three zones
annotated. The foveal zone corresponding to a ﬁeld-of-view of
δ f oveal = 60◦ is marked with an orange circle and is rendered at the
highest quality with 1:1 sampling and no rotation. The non-foveal
zone is rendered at a lower resolution with 16:1 sampling and a
rotation of θnon− f oveal = 6◦.

rendered with 4:1 sampling.

The transition zone is also shown as the green ring around
This indi-
the foveal zone,
cates the overlapping area between the foveal and non-foveal
zones for which alpha-blending is performed at each pixel with
Cblended = α f oveal × C f oveal + βnon− f oveal × Cnon− f oveal where
βnon− f oveal = 1.0 − α f oveal, Cblended is the resulting blended color,
and C f oveal,Cnon− f oveal are the foveal and non-foveal colors at a

2The visible frame in VR is panoramic and considerably larger than the
one shown here. We are showing only the part of the frame relevant to the
discussion.

Figure 3: User’s perspective during the user study #1. The foveal
zone marked with the orange circle is rendered at the high quality
(1:1 sampling). The non-foveal zone is the complement of the foveal
zone and is rendered at a lower resolution (16:1 sampling)

4.1 Application
We designed an immersive VR application using the HTC Vive Pro
Eye HMD with an integrated Tobii Eye Tracker. The application
depicted a serene urban city environment in which red spheres were
hidden at random locations. The environment was developed in
Unity3D and foveated rendering was supported using an NVIDIA
RTX 2080Ti graphics card. Three zones were speciﬁed for the
foveated rendering:

1. Foveal zone: The foveal zone is the circular area in the ren-
dered image centered at the ﬁxation point captured by the eye

pixel, respectively. This requires two co-located cameras (with dif-
ferent rotations) in order to render the foveal and non-foveal frames
from which the color values C f oveal and Cnon− f oveal are retrieved.
The boundary values [0.0, 1.0] for α f oveal and βnon− f oveal are also
shown in this ﬁgure. These coincide with the boundaries of the
transition zone. The ﬁeld-of-view δtransition corresponding to the
transition zone is deﬁned empirically as an offset to the ﬁeld-of-view
δ f oveal of the foveal zone, given by δtransition = δ f oveal + 40◦.

4.2 Procedure

The premise of our hypothesis is inattentional blindness which im-
plies that the user’s attention must be directed towards another cog-
nitive task. Thus, we instructed the participants to perform a target-
retrieval task. More speciﬁcally, the participants were asked to
search and count red spheres hidden in the VE. At each iteration of
the experiment, the red spheres were hidden at random locations.
This was done in order to eliminate the possible bias that may be
introduced by memorizing the locations between iterations.

The ﬁrst user study involved 11 participants (2 females, 18.2%).
Average age was 24.64 with a SD of 2.8. Median of their reported
experiences with using VR devices was 3, and the median of their
experiences with using an eye tracking device was also 3 on a 5-
point Likert scale, with 1 being least familiar, and 5 being most
familiar. The participants performed this task from a seated po-
sition and were only allowed to rotate their chair in-place. The
participants were instructed to press the trigger button on the Vive
controller if and when they noticed a visual distortion or felt nau-
sea due to simulator sickness. During the experiment, the rota-
tion angle θ of the non-foveal zone was gradually increased and
grouped by increasing order of the ﬁeld-of-view δ of the foveal zone
i.e. ([(δ1, θ1), (δ1, θ2), . . . , (δ1, θn), (δ2, θ1), . . . , (δ2, θn), . . .]). Each
time the trigger was pressed, the pair of (δi, θi) was recorded, and
then the experiment continued with the now increased ﬁeld-of-view
δi+1 and a reinitialized rotation angle θ1.

The range of values for the ﬁeld-of-view was 20◦ to 60◦. The
step of each increment was 10◦ after the completion of one cycle of
the rotation angle, or until triggered by the user. During a cycle, the
rotation angle ranged from 0◦ to 15◦ and the step of each increment
was 1◦ per second.

Preliminary experiments during the design of the application had
shown that repeated increments of the ﬁeld-of-view of the foveal
zone can lead to nausea and severe dizziness. For this reason, the
participants were instructed to take a short break after each cycle
of increments of the ﬁeld-of-view. Furthermore, the sequence of
the cycles i.e. the ﬁeld-of-view values, was randomized for each
participant in order to eliminate any bias. Figure 3 shows the view
from the user’s perspective during the experiment.

4.3 Analysis of results
The results are shown in Figure 4. A cycle of the rotation angle θ ∈
[0◦, 15◦] was performed for each ﬁeld-of-view δ ∈ [20◦, 60◦]. The
results show that as the ﬁeld-of-view δ increases the tolerance for
higher rotation angle θ also increases, which can also be conﬁrmed
by the exponential trendlines shown for each participant. For the
reasons mentioned above, we select the smallest rotation angle for
which users did not perceive a change associated with the largest
ﬁeld-of-view for which the majority of the users did not perceive
a change (i.e. 9 out of 11). Thus, the ideal pair values for (δ , θ ) is
determined to be (60◦, 13.5◦); where 13.5◦ is the maximum allowed
rotation angle.

4.3.1 Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ)

Upon completing the experiment all participants were asked to com-
plete Kennedy Lane’s Simulation Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ).
The Total Severity (TS) and the sub-scales Nausea, Oculomotor,
and Disorientation were calculated using the formulas from [20].

Figure 4: Participants’ responses for pairs of (δ , θ ). We select the
smallest rotation angle for which users did not perceive a change
associated with the largest ﬁeld-of-view for which the majority of
the users did not perceive a change (i.e. 9 out of 11). Thus, the
optimal pair values for (δ , θ ) is determined to be (60◦, 13.5◦). The
exponential trendlines are also shown which conﬁrm that as the
ﬁeld-of-view δ increases, the tolerance for higher rotation angle θ
also increases.

Based on the SSQ categorization provided by Kennedy et al. in [19],
55% of the participants reported no signs (TS=0) or minimal signs
(TS< 10) of simulator sickness. All the participants completed the
test, with 0 dropouts. Upon further analysis, the disorientation sub-
scale had the highest average score of 29.11 with a maximum score
of 139.2. This was expected, considering the fact that the rotation
angle was constantly increasing and thus the VE rendered in the
HMD induces conﬂicts between the vestibular and visual signals,
leading to vestibular disturbances such as vertigo or dizziness. The
results from SSQ responses are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 5.

Table 1: Results from the responses of SSQ. The Total Severity
(TS) and the corresponding sub-scales such as Nausea, Oculomotor,
and Disorientation were calculated using the formulas from [20].
The majority (55%) of the participants reported no signs (TS=0)
or minimal signs (TS< 10) of simulator sickness. Highest average
score for disorientation as expected.

Scores
Nausea (N)
Oculomotor (O)
Disorientation (D)
Total Score (TS)

Mean Median
11.27
19.29
29.11
21.76

9.54
15.16
0
7.48

SD Min Max
38.16
0
14.67
83.38
0
24.06
139.2
0
45.09
93.5
0
28.47

4.4 Discussion

The design of the application of user study #1 involved making a
decision on the range of values for (a) the ﬁeld-of-view δ for the
foveal zone, and (b) the rotation angle θ of the non-foveal zone:

• Range of δ : Humans have a maximum horizontal ﬁeld-of-
view of about 210◦. This is further reduced to 110◦ by the
hardware i.e. maximum ﬁeld-of-view for HTC Vive Pro.

The foveal and non-foveal zones are by deﬁnition complemen-
tary to each other. Thus, there is a tradeoff between the sizes of
the foveal and non-foveal zones. If δ is large, then the foveal
zone is large, and the non-foveal zone is small. Having a
small non-foveal zone means that only a small area of the ﬁnal

disappeared as soon as the gaze direction intersected their bound-
ing box. The positions of the targets were randomized for each
participant.

The duration of the experiment was 60 seconds. Unbeknownst to
the participants, in the ﬁrst 30 seconds there was no redirection ap-
plied i.e. θCamnon− f oveal = 0. This served as a baseline for participants
who had little to no experience in using HMDs. Once accustomed
to the VE, during the following 30 seconds the rotation angle of the
VE was increased at a rate of 6◦/s.

Hence, the hypothesis is that after 30 seconds of a constant smooth
rotation of the VE at a moderate rate of 6◦/s the participant should
face 180◦ away from their initial orientation i.e. the opposite di-
rection. To prove this, the initial (i.e. at time = 0s) and the ﬁnal
(i.e. at time = 60s) gaze directions of each participant were recorded.
Additionally, before each participant removed the HMD at the end of
the experiment they were asked to face towards what they believed
to be their initial directions in the PTS using visual landmarks from
within the VE to orient themselves.

5.2 Analysis of Results
The study involved 11 participants (2 females: 18.2%, average age
of 26.27 ± 3.13). Based on a 5-point Likert scale the medians of
their experience with using VR or any other eye tracking devices
were 3. Five of the participants had not taken part in user study #1
(Participants #2, #3, #6, #9, #11). After the experiment, the partic-
ipants completed the SSQ. The angle between the initial and ﬁnal
gaze directions was calculated for each participant. The average
deviation was 171.26◦ (4.77 SD) which means that the participants
thought that their initial orientation was towards the opposite direc-
tion. In fact, all participants reported that they did not perceive the
redirection and were surprised by how off their ’sensed’ orientations
were.

5.2.1 Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ)
Based on the scores reported by the participants in the post-test SSQ,
the majority of the participants (55%) showed no signs (TS=0) or
minimal signs (TS< 10) of simulator sickness. The highest score
and average was reported for the sub-scale disorientation although
reduced by a factor of 2 from user study #1. This was anticipated
since the rotation angle was less than the maximum determined from
user study #1. As it can be seen from Figure 6, one of the participants
(#2) had no previous experience with VR and reported perceptual
anomalies including difﬁculty concentrating, fullness of head and
difﬁculty focusing. The results for the SSQ are summarized in Table
2.

Table 2: Results from the responses of SSQ for user study #2.

Scores
Nausea (N)
Oculomotor (O)
Disorientation (D)
Total Score (TS)

Mean Median
10.41
8.27
11.39
11.22

0
0
0
7.48

SD Min Max
47.7
0
15.06
37.9
0
12.43
55.68
0
17.41
52.36
0
15.78

6 USER STUDY #3: REDIRECTED WALKING USING DY-

NAMIC FOVEATED RENDERING

The objective of the third user study is to evaluate the efﬁcacy of
redirected walking during inattentional blindness using dynamic
foveated rendering.

6.1 Application
As previously explained, inattentional blindness refers to the inability
of an individual to see a salient object in plain sight due to lack of
attention. This is true for the majority of the VR applications where

Figure 5: Results from the SSQ scores (Left to right: Nausea, Ocu-
lomotor, Disorientation and Total Severity). The Total Severity and
sub-scales such as Nausea, Oculomotor, and Disorientation were
calculated based on the formulas in [20]

composite image will be rendered from the non-foveal cam-
era Camnon− f oveal, as shown in Figure 2, leading to smaller
possible redirections. When δ = 60◦ the foveal zone occu-
pies 54.55% of the ﬁnal composite render, and the non-foveal
zone occupies 45.45% (including a transition zone of 35.45%).
Similarly, if δ = 90◦ the foveal zone occupies 90.91% of the
ﬁnal composite render which does not leave much for the non-
foveal zone. In contrast, if δ is small, then the foveal zone is
small and the non-foveal zone is large. Although this allows
for larger redirections, we have found in our preliminary tests
that when δ < 20◦ it can cause severe nausea and simulation
sickness.

For these reasons we have selected the range of values δ ∈
[20◦, 60◦] which balances the sizes of the foveal and non-foveal
zones, and is large enough that it does not cause user discom-
fort.

• Range of θ : Recent experiments reported in [50] have shown
that users cannot tolerate a rotational angle of more than 12.6◦
in their ﬁeld-of-view during a saccade having a velocity of
180◦/sec. Based on this, we have selected the range θ ∈
[0◦, 15◦].

5 USER STUDY #2:

IN-SITU GAZE REDIRECTION USING

DYNAMIC FOVEATED RENDERING

The objective of the second user study is twofold:

1. Firstly, to determine whether a rotation of the VE by an angle
below the maximum (i.e. θ < 13.5◦) is indeed imperceptible
and does not cause simulation sickness.

2. Secondly, to experimentally prove with quantitative measures
that using the proposed redirection technique with gaze-only
(and without walking) the rotation of the VE results in the
equivalent redirection of the participant in the PTS.

5.1 Application and Procedure
An experiment was devised similar to the one in Section 4. In con-
trast to the user study #1, the participants were only allowed to
spin in-situ from a standing position. This change from a seated
to a standing position eliminates the possibility of the participants
perceiving any orientation and navigation cues coming from the ori-
entation of the chair. The participants were given a target-retrieval
task and instructed to retrieve, by directing their gaze to, as many
virtual targets (i.e. orange pumpkins) as possible. The virtual targets

the median of their experiences using VR headsets or any other eye
tracking devices was 3.

Before the experiment, participants were briefed on their objec-
tive. Instructions were also given on how the resetting mechanism
works in case they are prompted with an out-of-bounds warning
and are required to reset their orientation. Moreover, they were in-
structed to walk at a normal pace which will allow them to complete
the task along the way. Once both the objectives were completed,
participants were also asked to complete the SSQ [20]. Furthermore,
for the experimental condition, at the end of the ﬁrst experiment the
participants were asked ”Did you feel the redirection or any other
scene or camera modulation during the experience?”.

6.3 Analysis of Results
A one-way between groups ANOVA (α = 0.05) with repeated mea-
sures was performed to compare the effects of with- and without-
using the redirection on the dependent variables: (a) number of
resets, (b) distance traveled in PTS, (c) total time taken, and (d)
scores. We used partial eta squared (η 2
p) to report the obtained effect
sizes for each variable.

Based on the results of Levene’s test [25], it was found that
the outcomes for the number of resets (F(2.14) = 375.710, p >
0.05), distance traveled (F(1.176) = 0.348, p > 0.05) and total time
taken (F(0.971) = 1.001, p > 0.05) were normally distributed and
hence equal variances were assumed. However, the outcome for
scores (F(4.103) = 0.054, p < 0.05) showed the opposite. As scores
violated the homogeneity of variances assumption, the variable was
omitted during the ANOVA analysis.

The results from ANOVA showed a statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ence between the number of resets when the game was played with-
and without- using the proposed redirection technique (F(1, 48) =
375.710, p < 0.001) with η 2
p = 0.887. Nonetheless, these results
also showed a statistically insigniﬁcant effect of redirection on dis-
tance traveled (F(1, 48) = 0.384, p > 0.05; η 2
p = 0.008), and total
time taken (F(1, 48) = 1.001, p > 0.05; η 2
p values
shows that 88.7% of the variability in the required number of resets
is accounted for by our independent variable i.e.- redirection. How-
ever, the effects on distance traveled and total time taken remains
negligible. The results from this test can be seen in Figure 9. The
error bars in the graphs shows a conﬁdence interval of 95%.

p = 0.020). The η 2

Besides this, results of the ﬁrst experiment also showed that the
system applied an average of 1547.55◦ (SD = 152.26◦) of absolute
angular gain to each participant’s orientation during the entire test.
An average of 3.15◦ of absolute angular gain was applied per redi-
rection with an average of 1.73 redirections/s. As the participants
were cognitively preoccupied with the task of zapping aliens, they
were unaware of this angular gain. Furthermore, since this is a real-
time technique and thus the frames were rendered without additional
lagging other than what is typically imposed by the hardware, none
of the participants reported perceiving any scene nor camera manip-
ulation. In the post-study questionnaire, one of the participant stated
that ”I felt like I was walking straight. I was completely unaware of
my actual movements.”.

6.3.1 Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ)

After completing the experiment, participants were asked to ﬁll out
an SSQ. Based on the scores reported, the majority of the participants
(80%) showed no signs (TS = 0) or minimal signs (TS < 10) of
simulator sickness, and only 8% of the participants reported TS >
12. The highest score and mean were reported for the disorientation
sub-scale even though the rotation angle was at all times well within
the limits of tolerance as determined by user study #1. This can be
attributed to the fact that the cognitive workload of the task involved
in this user study was more demanding than in the previous user
studies. Although this caused an increase in the highest score for
disorientation, the mean decreased when compared to that of user

Figure 6: Results from the SSQ scores (Left to right: Nausea, Ocu-
lomotor, Disorientation and Total Severity). The Total Severity and
sub-scales such as Nausea, Oculomotor, and Disorientation were
calculated based on the formulas in [20]

the user is actively engaged and preoccupied with a cognitive task
e.g. games, training simulations, etc. Thus, for the purposes of this
user study, we designed a ﬁrst-person VR game where the objective
is to stop an alien invasion. To achieve this the user has to walk
through a deserted urban city to a predeﬁned location indicated
by a large purple orb and destroy the alien-mothership (appearing
in the form of a giant brain) while zapping green aliens along the
way. Zapping one alien will award one score point to the player.
The green alien enemies are randomly spawned (and are therefore
independent of the orientation of the current redirection) only within
the ﬁeld-of-view of the user while also making a sound effect. An
example of in-game gameplay is shown in Figure 8.

The shortest distance the participants had to travel in the VE was
42m while the available PTS has a size of 4×4m2. The PTS is shown
as the cyan-colored box in Figure 7 and the position of the user w.r.t.
the PTS is indicated with the camera icon. For safety reasons, a
resetting mechanism of 2:1 was implemented. In cases where the
game predicts that the user is about to cross over a boundary of the
PTS, it would pause and prompt the user to rotate in-situ by 180◦.
During the user’s rotation, the VE was also rotated by the same angle
but in the opposite direction. The user was then allowed to proceed
with playing the game.

Redirection was primarily performed by blending in real-time
the foveal and non-foveal renders. Furthermore, redirection was
also performed during the tracked naturally occurring blinks and
saccades. In contrast to the state-of-the-art [50], our approach does
not stimulate saccades nor blinks since these are disruptive to the
cognitive task at hand.

6.2 Procedure

In order to evaluate the efﬁcacy of our technique, a controlled exper-
iment is conducted where the independent variable being tested is
the proposed redirection technique. The participants were instructed
to complete the objective of the game twice: the ﬁrst time with the
experimental condition i.e. with redirected walking, and after a short
break a second time with the control condition i.e. without redirected
walking. For the experiment with the control condition, participants
had to navigate themselves to the destination by relying solely on
the resetting mechanism every time they went out-of-bounds from
the available 4 × 4m2 PTS.

A sample size estimation with an effect size of 0.25 showed that
a total of 25 participants were required for the experiment. All the
participants were randomly chosen (12% female, average age of
25.88 years with a SD of 3.06). Based on a 5-point Likert Scale,

Figure 7: Examples from two participants’ tests of the experimental condition of user study #3. The path walked in PTS up to that point is
shown in orange color. The corresponding path in the VE is shown in blue color. The cyan-colored box indicates the 4 × 4m2 available PTS
and the camera icon inside the box indicates the location of the user w.r.t. the PTS. Statistics are shown at the top left corner about the current
redirection (measured in degrees), distance traveled in PTS (measured in meters), number of resets required, and the score at that point in time.
For safety reasons the resetting mechanism of 2:1 was implemented. Steer-to-center algorithm was used for redirecting.

Table 3: Results from the SSQ responses for user study #3. 80% of
the participants reported no (TS = 0) to minimal (T S < 10) signs of
simulator sickness

Scores
Nausea (N)
Oculomotor (O)
Disorientation (D)
Total Score (TS)

Mean Median
2.29
6.67
8.35
6.43

0
7.58
0
3.74

SD Min Max
19.08
0
5.7
37.9
0
9.1
69.6
0
17.05
44.88
0
10.04

Figure 8: The game designed for user study #3. The objective is
to stop an alien invasion by walking to a predeﬁned location in the
VE and destroying the alien-mothership (appearing in the form of a
giant brain) while shooting aliens along the way.

Figure 9: Left to right: ANOVA results for (a) Number of Resets,
(b) Distance traveled in PTS, and (c) Total Time Taken. Conﬁdence
Interval = 95%

study #2. The median values for all sub-scales, as before, were
reported as 0. Table 3 summarizes the results from this SSQ. As it is
evident, the mean scores were dropped signiﬁcantly from user study
#1 and #2.

7 DISCUSSION

The results of the user study #3 are indicative of the efﬁcacy of
the proposed technique in VR applications where the cognitive
workload on the user is moderate. Examples of such applications
are immersive games, training simulations, cinematic VR, etc.

Further to exploiting inattentional blindness, and unlike other
state-of-the-art techinques, our technique relies only on naturally

occurring saccades and blinks, and not stimulated. This is distinct
from other reported work in the literature and an important advan-
tage since stimulating saccades is both, disruptive to the cognitive
task at hand and increases the effects of VR sickness. For example,
in [50] saccades are stimulated by introducing orbs of light in image-
and object-space to forcefully divert the user’s attention in order
to perform the redirection. In contrast to this, and based on the
psychological effect of inattentional blindness, rather than divert
the user’s attention we exploit the fact that the user is ﬁxated on a
particular task leading to ”tunnel-vision”-like focus. This allows us
to constantly update in real-time the non-foveal (peripheral) zone
without the user perceiving a change. Metaphorically speaking,
the foveal vision/zone acts as an update-brush of the framebuffer:
whenever it moves, based on the tracking of the user’s eyes, every-
thing within the foveal zone is rendered from the Cam f oveal without
any rotations being applied, and everything outside i.e.
the non-
foveal zone, is rendered from the Camnon− f oveal with a rotation
0 < θCamnon− f oveal < 13.5◦ applied to the VE calculated in real-time
based on the required redirection.

The experiment in user-study #3 used a PTS of 4 × 4m2. The
results show that even with room-scale PTS such as the one used,
the users were able to walk distances in the VE which are up to
almost 18× orders of magnitude higher than the longest distance in
32). The maximum recorded distance
the PTS (i.e. diagonal of
in our experiments was 103.9m with no resets. Furthermore, the
traveled distance can include long straight walks as shown in Figure
1 and Figure 7.

√

8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work we presented a rotation-based redirection technique
using dynamic-foveated rendering which leverages the effect of
inattentional blindness induced by a cognitive task. The technique

uses natural visual suppressions such as eye blinks and saccades
(without any artiﬁcial stimuli) to make subtle rotations to the VE
without the user’s knowledge. Furthermore, we conducted extensive
tests and presented the results of three user studies. The results
conﬁrmed that the technique is indeed effective and can handle long-
straight walks. This allows the users to freely explore open world
VEs.

Currently, our technique only uses rotational gains for redirection.
In the future work, we plan to incorporate translational gains while
maintaining the current real-time performance.

Lastly, there is an ample amount of research opportunities in
enhancing the redirected walking systems which include saccade
prediction algorithms and using other forms of visual suppression
e.g. phase of nystagmus, etc.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Grants DG-N01670 (Discovery Grant).

REFERENCES

[1] M. Azmandian, T. Grechkin, and E. S. Rosenberg. An evaluationof
strategies for two-user redirected walking in shared physical spaces.
IEEE Virtual Reality, pp. 91–98, 2017.

[2] A. T. Bahill, M. R. Clark, and L. Stark. The main sequence, a tool
for studying human eye movements. Mathematical biosciences, 24(3-
4):191–204, 1975.

[3] A. R. Bentivoglio, S. B. Bressman, E. Cassetta, D. Carretta, P. Tonali,
and A. Albanese. Analysis of blink rate patterns in normal subjects.
Movement Disorder, 12:1028–1034, 1997.

[4] B. Bolte and M. Lappe. Subliminal reorientation and repositioning
in immersive virtual environments using saccadic suppression. IEEE
Transactions of Visualization and Computer Graphics, 21(4):545–552,
2015.

[5] D. C. Burr, M. C. Morrone, and J. Ross. Selective suppression of the
magnocellular visual pathway during saccadic eye movements. Nature,
371(6497):511–513, 1994.

[6] L.-P. Cheng, T. Roumen, H. Rantzsch, S. K¨ohler, P. Schmidt, R. Kovacs,
J. Jasper, J. Kemper, and P. Baudisch. Turkdeck: Physical virtual reality
based on people. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software & Technology, pp. 417–426. ACM, 2015.
[7] R. R. Christensen, J. M. Hollerbach, Y. Xu, and S. G. Meek. Inertial-
force feedback for the treadport locomotion interface. Presence: Tele-
operators & Virtual Environments, 9(1):1–14, 2000.

[8] C. Christou, A. Tzanavari, K. Herakleous, and C. Poullis. Navigation
in virtual reality: Comparison of gaze-directed and pointing motion
In 2016 18th Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conference
control.
(MELECON), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2016.

[9] C. W. Darken, R. P. and D. Carmein. The omni-directional treadmill:
A locomotion device for virtual worlds. In Proceedings of the 10th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
pp. 213–221. ACM, New York, 1997.

[10] Z.-C. Dong, X.-M. Fu, C. Zhang, K. Wu, and L. Liu. Smooth assembled
mappings for large-scale real walking. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 36(6):211, 2017.

[11] K. J. Fernandes, V. Raja, and J. Eyre. Cybersphere: The fully immersive
spherical projection system. Communications of the ACM, 46(9):141–
146, 2003.

[12] Y. He, Y. Gu, and K. Fatahalian. Extending the graphics pipeline with
adaptive, multi-rate shading. ACM Trans. Graph., 33(4):142:1–142:12,
July 2014. doi: 10.1145/2601097.2601105

[13] E. Hodgson and E. Bachmann. Comparing four approaches to gen-
IEEE
eralized redirected walking: Simulation and live user data.
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 19:634–643,
2013.

[14] E. Hodgson, E. Bachmann, and T. Thrash. Performance of redirected
walking algorithms in a constrained virtual world. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, 20:579–587, 2014.

[15] J. Y. Huang. An omnidirectional stroll-based virtual reality interface
and its application on overhead crane training. IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia, 5(1):39–51, 2003.

[16] M. R. Ibbotson and S. L. Cloherty. Visual perception: Saccadic
Current Biology,

omission- suppression or temporal masking?
19(12):R493–R496, 2009.

[17] H. Iwata. Walking about virtual environments on an innite oor. IEEE

Virtual Reality, pp. 286–293, 1999.

[18] H. Iwata and T. Fujii. Virtual perambulator: a novel interface device for
locomotion in virtual environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE 1996
Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium, pp. 60–65. IEEE,
1996.

[19] R. Kennedy, J. Drexler, D. Compton, K. Stanney, D. Lanham, and
D. Harm. Conﬁgural scoring of simulator sickness, cybersickness
and space adaptation syndrome: Similarities and differences. Virtual
and Adaptive Environments: Applications, implications and human
performance issues, p. 247, 2003.

[20] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilienthal.
Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology,
3:203–220, 1993.

[21] E. Langbehn, G. Bruder, and F. Steinicke. Subliminal re-orientation
and re-positioning in virtual reality during eye blinks. pp. 213–213,
2016.

[22] E. Langbehn, P. Lubos, G. Bruder, and F. Steinicke. Application of
redirected walking in room-scale vr. in virtual reality. IEEE Virtual
Reality, 2017.

[23] E. Langbehn and F. Steinicke.

In the blink of an eye - leveraging
blink-induced suppression for imperceptible position and orientation
redirection in virtual reality. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 37:1–11,
2018.

[24] J. J. LaViola Jr. A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments.

ACM SIGCHI, 32(1):47–56, 2000.

[25] H. Levene. Robust testes for equality of variances. Contributions to

Probability and Statistics, pp. 278–292, 1960.

[26] E. Medina, R. Fruland, and S. Weghorst. Virtusphere: Walking in a
human size vr hamster ball. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 52, pp. 2102–2106. SAGE
Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2008.

[27] M. Moshell. Inﬁnite virtual walk. In Personal Communication, 1999.
[28] A. Nagamori, K. Wakabayashi, and M. Ito. The ball array treadmill: A
locomotion interface for virtual worlds. IEEE Virtual Reality, pp. 3–6,
2005.
[29] NVIDIA.

VRWorks

Variable

Shading.

Rate

-

https://developer.nvidia.com/vrworks/graphics/variablerateshading
(last accessed 4th Nov. 2019), 2018.
ZeroLight

[30] O’Connor, Chris.

uct Visualisation Quality
https://developer.nvidia.com/vrworks/graphics/variablerateshading
(last accessed 4th Nov. 2019), 2018.

and

Improves Automotive Prod-
Performance with VRS.

[31] J. K. ORegan, H. Deubel, J. J. Clark, and R. A. Rensink. Picture
changes during blinks: Looking without seeing and seeing without
looking. Visual cognition, 7:191–211, 2000.

[32] A. Patney, J. Kim, M. Salvi, A. Kaplanyan, C. Wyman, N. Benty,
A. Lefohn, and D. Luebke. Perceptually-based foveated virtual reality.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2016 Emerging Technologies, SIGGRAPH ’16, pp.
17:1–17:2. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2929464.
2929472

[33] T. Peck, H. Fuchs, and M. Whitton. An evaluation of navigational abil-
ity comparing redirected free exploration with distractors to walking-
in-place and joystick locomotion interfaces. pp. 56–62. IEEE, 2011.

[34] C. Poullis and S. You. Automatic creation of massive virtual cities. In
2009 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, pp. 199–202. IEEE, 2009.

[35] Ramot, Daniel.

blink.
https://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/bionumber.aspx?id=100706&ver=0
(last accessed 1st Nov. 2019).

duration

Average

single

of

a

[36] S. Razzaque, Z. Kohn, and M. C. Whitton. Redirected walking. Pro-

ceedings of Eurographics, 9:105–106, 2001.

[37] S. Razzaque, Z. Kohn, and M. C. Whitton. Redirected walking. Citeseer,

2005.

[38] S. Razzaque, D. Swapp, M. Slater, M. C. Whitton, and A. Steed.
Redirected walking in place. Eurographics Symposium on Virtual
Environments, pp. 123–130, 2002.

[39] S. M. Reder. On-line monitoring of eye-position signals in contin-
gent and noncontingent paradigms. Behavior Research Methods &
Instrumentation, 5:218–228, 1973.

[40] R. A. Rensink. Change detection. Annual review of psychology, 53:245–

277, 2002.

[41] R. A. Rensink, J. K. ORegan, and J. J. Clark. To see or not to see:the
need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological science,
8:368–373, 1997.

[42] R. Ruddle and S. Lessels. Walking interface to navigate virtual envi-
ronments. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 16:5:1–
5:18, 2009.

[43] R. A. Ruddle, E. P. Volkova, and H. H. Bulthoff. Walking improves
your cognitive map in environments that are large-scale and large in
extent. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 18:10:1–
10:22, 2011.

[44] D. J. Simons and C. F. Chabris. Gorillas in our midst: Sustained
inattentional blindness for dynamic events. perception, 28(9):1059–
1074, 1999.

[45] J. L. Souman, P. R. Giordano, I. Frissen, A. D. Luca, and M. O. Ernst.
Making virtual walking real: Perceptual evaluation of a new treadmill
control algorithm. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP),
7(2):11, 2010.

[46] F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, L. Kohli, J. Jerald, and K. Hinrichs. Taxonomy
and implementation of redirection techniques for ubiquitous passive
haptic feedback. pp. 217–223. IEEE, 2008.

[47] M. Stengel, S. Grogorick, M. Eisemann, and M. Magnor. Adap-
tive Image-Space Sampling for Gaze-Contingent Real-time Rendering.
Computer Graphics Forum, 2016. doi: 10.1111/cgf.12956

[48] E. A. Suma, S. Clark, D. Krum, S. Finkelstein, M. Bolas, and Z. Warte.
Leveraging change blindness for redirection in virtual environments.
In 2011 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, pp. 159–166. IEEE, 2011.

[49] E. A. Suma, Z. Lipps, S. Finkelstein, D. M. Krum, and M. Bolas. Im-
possible spaces: Maximizing natural walking in virtual environments
with self-overlapping architecture. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 18(4):555–564, 2012.

[50] Q. Sun, A. Patney, L.-Y. Wei, O. Shapira, J. Lu, P. Asente, S. Zhu,
M. Mcguire, D. Luebke, and A. Kaufman. Towards virtual reality
inﬁnite walking: dynamic saccadic redirection. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 37(4):67, 2018.

[51] Q. Sun, L.-Y. Wei, and A. Kaufman. Mapping virtual and physical
reality. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 35(4):64, 2016.
[52] M. Usoh, K. Arthur, M. C. Whitton, R. Bastos, A. Steed, M. Slater, and
J. Frederick P. Brooks. Walking ¿ walking-in-place ¿ ﬂying, in virtual
environments. pp. 359–364. ACM, 1999.

[53] F. C. Volkmann. Human visual suppressions. Vision Research, 26:1401–

1416, 1986.

[54] F. C. Volkmann, L. A. Riggs, and R. K. Moore. Eyeblinks and visual

suppression. Science, 207(4433):900–902, 1980.

[55] B. Walther-Franks, D. Wenig, J. Smeddinck, and R. Malaka. Sus-
pended walking: A physical locomotion interface for virtual reality. In
International Conference on Entertainment Computing, pp. 185–188.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.

[56] B. Williams, G. Narasimham, B. Rump, T. P. McNamara, T. H. Carr,
J. Rieser, and B. Bodenheimer. Exploring large virtual environments
with an hmd when physical space is limited. pp. 41–48. ACM, 2007.
[57] M. Zank and A. Kun. Using locomotion models for estimating walking

targets in immersive virtual environments. IEEE, 2015.

[58] M. Zank and A. Kun. Eye tracking for locomotion prediction in
redirected walking. IEEE, 2016.

