A Comparative Analysis of Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Display
Systems

Arian Mehrfard, Javad Fotouhi, Giacomo Taylor, Tess Forster, Nassir Navab, and Bernhard Fuerst

9
1
0
2
c
e
D
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
1
9
2
0
.
2
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Overview of the VR metrics

Abstract— With recent advances of Virtual Reality (VR) technology, the deployment of such will dramatically increase in non-
entertainment environments, such as professional education and training, manufacturing, service, or low frequency/high risk scenarios.
Clinical education is an area that especially stands to beneﬁt from VR technology due to the complexity, high cost, and difﬁcult logistics.
The effectiveness of the deployment of VR systems, is subject to factors that may not be necessarily considered for devices targeting
the entertainment market. In this work, we systematically compare a wide range of VR Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs) technologies
and designs by deﬁning a new set of metrics that are 1) relevant to most generic VR solutions and 2) are of paramount importance for
VR-based education and training. We evaluated ten HMDs based on various criteria, including neck strain, heat development, and
color accuracy. Other metrics such as text readability, comfort, and contrast perception were evaluated in a multi-user study on three
selected HMDs, namely Oculus Rift S, HTC Vive Pro and Samsung Odyssey+. Results indicate that the HTC Vive Pro performs best
with regards to comfort, display quality and compatibility with glasses.

Index Terms—Virtual reality, Head-mounted display, Enterprise VR use

1 INTRODUCTION

Beneﬁts of virtual reality (VR) systems were recognized as early as the
1960s, and systems have been deployed in professional settings since

• Arian Mehrfard, Javad Fotouhi, and Nassir Navab are with the Laboratory
for Computational Sensing and Robotics, at The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States. E-mail: {mehrfard, javad.fotouhi,
nassir.navab}@jhu.edu

• Giacomo Taylor, Tess Forster, and Bernhard Fuerst are with Verb Surgical
Inc., Mountain View, California, United States. E-mail: {giacomotaylor,
tessforster, benfuerst}@verbsurgical.com

then. However, these early systems were very task-speciﬁc and costly,
preventing wide-scale adoption. In [19], Sutherland discusses his early
tracked 3D head-mounted display (HMD) and reports the favorable
responses of users. Sutherland’s early prototype was the ﬁrst device that
resembles current, immersive VR headsets, and many consider his work
the foundation of modern VR and augmented reality. Since then, there
have been many scientiﬁc works investigating the properties and the
feasibility of VR for different applications. Psotka (1995) discusses the
beneﬁts of VR and many of the cognitive factors that affect immersion
in virtual environments in [15]. In [23], Youngblut (1998) reports on
past VR applications involving general education of students.

Mazuryk and Gervautz (1999) give a detailed perspective on VR,
deﬁning its beneﬁts and challenges, and outline possible applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
the technology allows for. At its core, VR constitutes a human computer
interface that allows users to interact with a virtual environment through
natural, real world motions. Utilizing this interface allows for ﬁner
control required in modeling and design applications, as well as intuitive
collaboration in interactive, virtual environments [12, 14]. VR can
also allow for quick prototyping of designs or visualization of large
amounts of data such as architectural walk-throughs or design of large
machines such as airplanes. In [14], Mujber states that the introduction
of VR into manufacturing processes leads to an improved development
pipeline. Deﬁnition, modeling, and veriﬁcation can be done in an
virtual environment which generates information about the structure
and behaviour of objects, improving the product design and saving
costs.

The ﬁrst instance of VR training is described in [3], where VR was
developed for military simulations and telepresence training. Since
then VR has been deployed in astronautics, ﬂight training, medicine
and other civilian ﬁelds [8, 9].

In [22] Yavrucuk describes a helicopter simulator using a VR HMD,
and cited the beneﬁts of a 360°view in the cockpit, intuitive interac-
tion with the control and the substantially lower cost compared to
conventional ﬂight simulators.

VR technologies have also been applied to general education in
tertiary, and in rare cases also secondary education, as reported by
Freina and Ott in [6]. They state that VR was used in university and pre-
university teaching for scientiﬁc subjects where a virtual world is used
to visualize complex physical and chemical concepts. In [8] Hoffman
suggests using the same concepts for medical training at the university
level. Another large beneﬁt of VR is its ability to be used in professional
training that can be logistically difﬁcult or hazardous to conduct in the
real world. Two examples of this are corrosion prevention and control
training for the U.S. Army [21]; and rehabilitation of people with
intellectual disabilities where the safe and accessible environment of
VR offers desirable beneﬁts to the real world [18]. Another example
can be found in [16], where VR is utilized to improve construction
safety training by simulating hazardous conditions. The results of
this study suggest that the VR based training results in an increase in
workers’ attention and increased engagement, ultimately leading to
better training outcomes.

Furthermore, VR’s natural interface can be utilized to teleoperate
robots, allowing for human dexterity and decision making in hazardous
remote environments without operator endangerment. Similarly, telep-
resence can also be used for observation or mentoring in cases where
the remote location might be too hazardous, far away or unreachable
for a human [9].

Many examples of VR applications for training come from medicine.
Surgical training in particular represents an area that is high risk and
cost ineffective, where patient safety and difﬁcult other logistics pose
signiﬁcant obstacles. In [1], Alaker conducts a systematic review on
VR training in laparoscopic surgery evaluating VR training against con-
ventional trainers and ﬁnds that VR training can be signiﬁcantly more
effective than video training and comparable to more sophisticated box
trainers. In [7], Gallagher discusses the employment of VR in surgical
skills training stating that VR improves the state of training for mini-
mally invasive surgery but that it has to be thoughtfully implemented in
the education program in order to be successful.

VR training is particularly effective for high risk or hazardous en-
vironments, or in scenarios where accurate reproduction of complex
stimuli is difﬁcult. In these cases, VR-based training and visualization
is often superior to other training methods, offering improved immer-
sion, presence, and spatial awareness. In teleoperation tasks, these
beneﬁts have been shown to facilitate more intuitive and dexterous
control, leading to safer and more efﬁcient outcomes. For training, VR
simulation can lead to higher engagement of students and knowledge
retention [6, 16].

According to [12, 14], much of the VR technologies discussed above
have historically been prohibitively expensive, ranging from $800 for
low quality devices to $1 million for military HMDs. It is only recently
that advances in VR HMD technology that high quality and usable
HMDs are commercially and economically accessible by the general

Fig. 2. Strategy to deﬁne metrics and evaluete HMDs

public, and therefore available for research, professional and large scale
enterprise deployment [6, 9, 17]. In 2016, Anthes et al. overview the
state of VR technology, comparing various types of VR HMDs and their
limitations. The authors describe recent advances in VR technology as
”the second wave of VR”, and most notably compare wired HMDs and
mobile HMDs [2].

Due to the limited computing power and diversity in current mobile
VR HMDs, we are only aware of various HMDs that use an inserted
phone as a display and the Oculus Quest, we only consider wired HMDs
in our work.

Most commercially available VR devices today are predominantly
designed for the entertainment market. VR HMDs designed for gaming
and entertainment ultimately prioritize a set of factors different from
those for a professional market. For commercial applications then, it
is increasingly challenging to select the appropriate VR HMD from
the number of commercially available VR systems. In this work we
deﬁne a new set of metrics relevant to most VR applications, but
speciﬁcally crucial for VR-based education and training. We then
choose and systematically evaluate three commercially available VR
HMDs according to these metrics, our approach is shown in Fig. 2.

2 METHOD

We deﬁne the evaluation metrics based on the following fundamental
properties required for VR solutions:

Image quality correlates with the level of details that the user
perceives and impacts immersion and presence which are the core
concepts of VR that give users the impression of being in a virtual
environment. In a skill training VR solution, the quality of the visual
experience and level of immersion widely associate with the transfer of
skills to the real world and are therefore of utmost importance [4, 6, 16].

User comfort

is inﬂuenced by the weight and balance of HMD
on the user’s head, heat development, and tracking stability among
others. Discomfort can result in user dissatisfaction, hence reduce the
skill transfer and overall willingness to use VR.

Secondary features encompass many features of the VR design
which do not necessarily fall into the the above categories, but inﬂuence
the usability of the HMD. The main considerations here are the VR
HMD integrated audio, connections ports, setup complexity, setup time,
and its hygiene.

Depending on the measuring approach, each metric is assigned to
one of the following three categories. The ﬁrst category includes the

Researching relevant properties of VR HMDsDeﬁning metrics and measurement strategiesEvaluating lab-measurementsSelecting top three HMDs Conducting multi-user study on selected devicesEvaluating results and determining best performersEvaluating data sheet metricsinformation taken from the data-sheet and facts provided by the man-
ufacturer that establish a comparative baseline. The second category
are measurements, properties of the HMD that were measured through
various instruments and devices. The third category is the user study,
which is evaluated through a multi-user study and is quantiﬁed based
on users’ performance and feedback.

We chose ten VR HMD technologies which encompass most com-
mercially available VR HMDs in May 2019, and evaluated them against
the metrics in categories one and two. Following this evaluation, the
three best performing devices were selected for in-depth evaluation
through a multi-user study.

2.1 Data sheet

Field of view (image quality): Field of View (FoV) describes
the extent of the virtual environment that is visible through the HMD,
i.e.
the angle of view from the users eye to the lens. HigherFoVis
associated with higher immersion as the user is able to perceive more
of the virtual world [4, 11]. This measure is not constant for HMDs that
allow users to change the distance between the eye and lens.

Resolution (image quality): Resolution is a measure of the
amount of pixels in the display. Higher resolution correlates directly
with the quality of the visual perception, immersion, and the level of
details [4, 24]. Higher display resolutions also associate with improved
text readability in virtual environments.

Interpupillary distance adjustablity (image quality and comfort):
The quality of the stereo vision is contingent on the correct alignment
of the lenses of the HMD with the pupils of the user. In humans, the av-
erage adult interpupillary distance (IPD) is 63 mm, with the majority of
adults having IPDs between 50 mm and 75 mm [5]. Misalignment leads
to decreased quality stereo vision, diffuses the rendered image, and
can result in cyber sickness or headache. Considering the deployment
of the HMDs across a broad range of the population, it is critical that
modern HMD systems become equipped with variable IPD [10, 13].

Integrated audio (secondary features): An integrated audio
system eliminates the effort for mounting a peripheral audio device
such as headphones. External headphones require additional cables and
can interfere with the ergonomic head-strap, if they do not optimally ﬁt
on the HMD, user comfort can be signiﬁcantly decreased. Integrated
audio technologies are further sub-categorized to 1) earpieces that
block substantial amount of background sound, and 2) open sound
systems that do not block any real-world sounds. For the evaluation in
this manuscript, we only considered the sole availability of the audio
system, as there is not enough research present to characterize the
beneﬁts and drawbacks of different audio technologies in VR devices.

Connectivity (secondary features): The effort of setting up a
VR system is associated with the amount of cables and the special ports
that are required.

2.2 Measurements

Brightness and color accuracy (image quality): A brighter
screen is associated with a higher quality display and viewing experi-
ence. The measured unit for brightness is nits, where nit is expressed
as candle per square meter cd
m2 . The color accuracy is measured as
the distance between the intended and the true displayed color ∆ e in
the CIELAB color space. These two metrics were measured with
Datacolor SpyderX Elite (Datacolor, Luzern) display calibration device.
To perform the measurements on the VR systems, we mirrored the
computer desktop to the HMD using SteamVR (Valve Corporation,
Bellevue, WA, US) software, enabling us to employ the calibration on
the HMD displays. For each measurement, the calibration device was
ﬁxated onto one of the lenses of the HMD at an orientation such that
the virtual camera is continuously pointed at the calibration area.

Heat management (comfort): Excessive heat development on
the device can lead to severe discomfort. We measure the surface heat of
the VR headset with FLIR TG165 (FLIR, Wilsonville) thermal camera,
and we target the hottest areas around the facial interface. In order to
measure consistently among all devices, each HMD was ﬁrst turned

Fig. 3. Setup to measure the torque applied to the neck

off and disconnected for at least 30 minutes. Next, we mounted each
HMD on a mannequin’s head and let a VR environment run, conﬁrming
that the proximity sensor is engaged and the displays are turned on.
Consequently, we measured the hottest areas of the HMD using the
thermal camera.

Total weight (comfort): Heavier HMDs exert more stress on the
head of the wearer, factoring into higher discomfort and exhaustion.
The weights of all HMDs were measured and compared using a digital
scale.

Neck strain (comfort): Corresponding to the HMD’s total weight,
the device applies extra force to the front of the face, thereby creates
torque around the neck. Fig.3 illustrates the setup that we designed to
approximate the torque around the neck.

τ = F × r,

(1)

where F is the force vector pushing the HMD down, and r is the distance
vector between the chin and the axis of rotation. We approximated the
angle between the two vectors to be 90° in our setup, hence resulting
in a simpliﬁed formula τ = |F| |r|.

Hygiene (secondary features): Cleanability is an important prop-
erty to consider for any HMD that is to be deployed in a large scale.
Due to the direct contact between the facial interface and the users’
skin, it is of paramount importance in applications that the device is
shared among various users that each person receives the device in a
clean and sanitary state. The device can either be disinfected, or the
facial interface replaced. Therefore, we consider two factors in our
analysis, 1) if the material repels liquids thus being wipeable, and 2)
the replaceability of the facial interface or availability of third party
covers.

2.3 Multi-user study

Text readability (image quality): Written instructions are one
of the major media of communication to users in VR, therefore it is
important that virtual text content appear well readable. To characterize
this property, we designed a virtual environment (VE) in which the user

Fig. 4. The readability test, with the text in the center and font size
displayed at the top right

of head mounting affects the time it takes each wearer to mount the
HMD, hence it is of great relevance when multiple people need to wear
the device successively. To asses this property, the users receive verbal
instructions on the proper way to wear and adjust the HMD, wearing
time is measured from the moment they hold the HMD to the time they
report the completion of the step.

Compatibility with glasses (comfort): Approximately 64% of
the United States population wear eyeglasses [20]. Therefore, the com-
patibility of any VR HMD that is considered for large scale deployment
with optical glasses is necessary. In a questionnaire, users are asked to
report the comfort of the HMD with their glasses.

3 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND EVALUATION

The experiment is designed so that we exclude certain HMDs from
the tests based on the results from the previous category or test. This
allows us to consider a broader mass of HMDs at the beginning and
reducing the number for the more detailed tests.

The evaluated HMDs include: HTC Vive (HTC Corporation,
Taoyuan, Taiwan), HTC Vive Pro (HTC Corporation, Taoyuan, Taiwan),
Oculus Rift S (Facebook, Menlo Park, CA, US), Samsung Odyssey, Sam-
sung Odyssey+ (Samsung, Seoul, South Korea), HP WMR headset (HP
Inc., Palo Alto, CA, US), Acer WMR headset (Acer Inc. New Taipei,
Taiwan), Lenovo Explorer (Lenovo Group Limited, Beijing, China),
Dell Visor (Dell, Round Rock, TX, US), and Pimax 5k (Pimax, Shang-
hai, China). In the following evaluation we strictly rely on the metrics
introduced in Sec. 2 to evaluate the HMDs. Other information that
are available about the HMDs are, if at all, only used as additional
discussion to our results.

3.1 Data sheet

The measurements associated to the metrics of this category are pre-
sented in Table 1. Oculus Rift S has a digital IPD adjuster as it uses
only one display instead of two separate displays. While the physical
IPD adjuster moves the lenses closer to each other or farther apart, the
digital one only translates the two images on the plane of display to-
wards the edges or closer to each other. Since the distance of the lenses
remain constant, digital IPD adjustment results in a diminished effect.
It is important to note that since all HMDs require a USB 3.0 port,
therefore it is excluded from the list under the Connectivity column.

Fig. 5. View of the contrast test, a) shapes rendered with an α value of
30, b) 20, and c) 10.

3.2 Measurements

3.2.1 Neck strain & total weight

stands a ﬁxed distance away from a given text, and is asked to read
the text content out loud. The text consists of four random characters
containing upper and lower case letters and digits (Fig. 4). The users
are tasked with reading out the characters and reducing the font size, in
decrements of 0.05, until they are unable to read them or misread them.
Due to the random component, each user repeats the test three times.
In this setting, a lower font size indicates better text readability in the
HMD.

Perceived contrast (image quality): The ability to differentiate
between various levels of gray is particularly applicable to the medi-
cal setting where images such as slices from MRI and CT scans are
visualized in grayscales. Similar to the previous metric, the users are
positioned at a ﬁxed distance away from the virtual test material. The
test contains four shapes with distinctive rotations (up, down, right, and
left) and the users are tasked with reducing the visibility of the shapes
until they are not able to discern their rotation. Increasing transparency
is achieved by reducing the alpha channel value of the shapes materials
as shown in Fig. 5 for three different alpha channel values: a) at 15, b)
at 10 and c) at 6.

Head mounting ease (secondary features): This feature is
primarily inﬂuenced by the amount of adjustable parts. The complexity

We measured the torque around the neck for all HMDs. The torque
measurements are presented in Table 1. The ﬁfth column in the lower
half of the table represents gram per Newton-meter, i. e.
the ratio
between the weight and torque. A higher value refers to a lower torque
to weight ratio. While the absolute torque applied around the neck is an
important measure related to the user comfort, the weight to torque ratio
allows us to compare the ergonomic design across different HMDs.

3.2.2 Brightness & Color accuracy

The result of the display calibration are shown in Table 1. For bright-
ness, a higher value is more desirable, while for the color deviation a
lower ∆ e is associates with more accurate color representation, hence
is more desirable.

3.2.3 Heat management

In Fig. 6, 7, and 8 we show the measurements from the hottest spots
inside and outside the VR devices. For consistent evaluation among all
devices, we measured the hottest spot at the center of the HMD, and
listed all measurements in Table 1. We also encountered spots with
higher temperature away from the center of the device, e.g. from the
HTC Vive Pro we recorded a temperature of 40.2°located at the top of
the HMD, and from the top left of the Oculus Rift S we recorded the
temperature 36.0°.

a)b)c)Table 1. Overview of metrics that were taken from the data sheet and measurements

HMD

Samsung Odyssey+
HTC Vive Pro
Oculus Rift S
Pimax 5k
HTC Vive
Samsung Odyssey
Lenovo Explorer
Dell Visor
Acer WMR
HP WMR

Resolution
(per eye)

1440 × 1600
1440 × 1600
1280 × 1440
2560 × 1440
1080 × 1200
1440 × 1600
1440 × 1440
1440 × 1440
1440 × 1440
1440 × 1440

Field of View IPD

Integrated
audio

Connectivity

110◦
110◦
> 110◦3
170◦
110◦
110◦
110◦
110◦
100◦
95◦

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Digital Yes2
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

No
Yes1
Yes
No
No
No
No

HDMI
Display Port, 3x power outlet
Displayport or mini displayport
Displayport, 3x power outlet
HDMI, 3x power outlet
HDMI, Bluetooth
HDMI, Bluetooth
HDMI, Bluetooth
HDMI, Bluetooth
HDMI, Bluetooth

Heat
measurement
(◦C)

Torque
on neck (Nm)

Weight Weight to
(g)

Samsung Odyssey+
HTC Vive Pro
Oculus Rift S
Pimax 5k
HTC Vive
Samsung Odyssey
Lenovo Explorer
Dell Visor
Acer WMR
HP WMR

31.4
37.4
32.3
28.6
27.6
30.8
37.6
32.2
35.2
33.8

0.708
0.777
0.737
0.902
0.8661
0.837
0.502
0.635
0.494
0.647

610
814
584
593
7321
662
419
613
464
530

torque ratio
( g
Nm )
861.6
1047.6
792.4
657.4
845.3
790.8
834.6
965.4
939.3
819.2

Hygiene

Replacable
Replacable
-
Replacable
Replacable
Wipeable, replacable
Replacable
Replacable
Replacable
Replacable

Brightness
( cd
m2 )

Color
accuracy
(∆ e)

127.5
133.3
80.5
44.4
190.5
126.5
88.7
76.2
76.6
101

11.8
6.5
11.7
8.1
8.9
7.1
15.5
7.7
28.6
16.6

1 With the Deluxe Audio Strap
2 The speakers are open, the people in the environment also hear the audio
3 Diagonal FoV, horizontal ﬁeld of view was measured to be 94◦: http://doc-ok.org/?p=1414

Table 2. Readability test outcome, where values indicate the smallest
font size that was readable by users

HMD

Samsung Odyssey+
Oculus Rift S
HTC Vive Pro

Avg

1.19
1.01
1.17

Stdev Min Max Med

0.16
0.21
0.19

0.85
0.7
0.85

1.5
1.5
1.5

1.2
0.95
1.15

ﬁll out a questionnaire. The user experiments were only conducted on
the three best performer HMDs given the criteria evaluated based on
their datasheet and lab measurements. These devices include Samsung
Odyssey+, HTC Vive Pro, and Oculus Rift S. To counteract the learning
bias, the order in which the users wore the HMDs was randomized.

The space dedicated to the VR environment was 2 × 3 m2 in size,
users could move freely within this area. We turned off the HTC
Lightouse boxes when they were not used to prevent interference with
the tracking of the other HMDs. The VR environment ran on an
Alienware (Dell, Round Rock, TX, US) laptop with an Intel i7-7700HQ k
cpu, NVIDIA GTX 1070 graphics card, and a 16 GB RAM.

3.3.1 Text readability
The font sizes reported by users are shown in the plot in Fig. 9, with a
more detailed overview in Table 2. Oculus Rift S demonstrated a lower
average, median and minimum font size compared to the other two
HMDs.

3.3.2 Contrast
Samsung Odyssey+ exhibited an average contrast of 3.385 with a stan-
dard deviation of 0.913. This is the lowest perceivable contrast among
the other HMDs. HTC Vive Pro ranked second with an average contrast
of 5.115 and a standard deviation of 0.526. Finally, the Oculus Rift

Fig. 6. Samsung Odyssey+, (a, b) showing the hottest spot on the lens-
side of the HMD, and (c) the hottest spot on the front side of the HMD.
The corresponding views of the heat images are shown in (d, e).

3.2.4 Hygiene
Samsung Odyssey is the only HMD that is identiﬁed as wipeable (Ta-
ble 1). All HMDs except Oculus Rift S have replaceable facial inter-
faces.

3.3 Multi-user study
In the multi user study, 27 users were invited to evaluate readability
and contrast perception inside a VR application, and were asked to

Fig. 7. Oculus Rift S, (a) showing the hottest spot on the ’face-side’ of the
HMD, (b) the heat image from between the lenses, and (c) the hottest
spot on the front side of the HMD. The corresponding views are shown
in (d, e).

Table 3. The time it took the users to mount each HMD in seconds

HMD

Avg

Stdev Min Max Med

Samsung Odyssey+
Oculus Rift S
HTC Vive Pro

50.85
114.58
112.27

23.69
75.04
68.29

16
25
53

126
356
297

52
95.5
91

S yielded an average contrast of 6.038 with the standard deviation of
0.445.

3.3.3 HMD wearing time

Each participant received verbal introduction for wearing each HMD.
These instructions included every component that needed adjustment,
optimal position of the device on the face, and the correct usage of the
controllers. Subsequently, the study proctor measured the required time
for each participant to wear the HMD.

The results are shown in Fig. 10. The Samsung Odyssey+ took the
shortest time to wear. The other two HMDs exhibited very similar
outcomes, with the HTC Vive Pro being slightly faster.

3.3.4 Compatibility with glasses

Out of the 27 users, 11 wore glasses. The results for these participants
are reported in Table 4. HTC Vive Pro was characterized as the most
compatible HMD with glasses. Oculus Rift S differed by only one user
which perceived it as incompatible and uncomfortable. The Samsung
Odyssey+ was perceived considerably more uncomfortable.

Table 4. Users wearing glasses report how comfortable they experienced
each HMD

HMD

Comfortable Okay Uncomfortable

HTC Vive Pro
Oculus Rift S
Samsung Odyssey+

9
8
4

1
1
3

1
2
4

3.3.5 Comfort

Fig. 11 are results of the user-questionnaires. Within the question-
naires, we evaluated the properties relevant to user comfort and satisfac-
tion for each HMD. To gather information about comfort, participants
responded whether they experienced VR sickness, headache, or eye
discomfort. The data shows only minor discrepancy across different

Fig. 8. HTC Vive Pro, (a) showing the hottest spot in the center and
above the lenses, b) a spot with higher temperature that is acquired from
a small cavity on the top side, therefore excluded from the measurements,
and (c) the hottest spot on the front side of the HMD. The corresponding
views are shown in (d, e).

HMDs. Among the three VR devices, HTC Vive Pro has the least
number of participants reporting any sort of the aforementioned dis-
comforts.

4 DISCUSSION
As aforementioned we choose the top three HMDs based on their
datasheet and lab-measurements. The last four devices as shown in
Table 1 are excluded solely due to their lack of an adjustable IPD.
Furthermore our results show that Samsung Odyssey+ and HTC Vive
Pro are overall improvements on the Samsung Odyssey and HTC Vive,
which is why we only consider the former devices for the multi-user
study. The Pimax 5k was excluded as a direct result of the extreme
neck-strain it exerted, in addition it had the lowest g
Nm ratio, from all
measured HMDs. This is reasonable when looking at the head strap of
the Pimax 5k, where most HMDs have sophisticated ergonomic head
mounts that distribute the weight over the whole head, it consists of
simple elastic bands. For an in-depth analysis, we mostly limit the
discussion in this section to the top three HMD devices that were used
during the multi-user study.

4.1 Data sheet
The upper half of Table 1 highlights the HMDs that performed best
given the following criteria.

The Samsung Odyssey+ has a horizontalFoVof 110◦, uses two
AMOLED displays with a resolution of 1440 × 1600 pixels per eye,
and connects to the computer via an HDMI and USB cable. The HTC
Vive Pro has the same FoV, uses two OLED displays with the same
resolution per eye, however it connects to the computer through display-
port and USB cable and requires three power sockets. The Oculus Rift
S has a diagonalFoVof 110°, uses one LCD display with a lower reso-
lution of 1280 × 1440 pixels per eye, and connects to the computer via
a display-port and USB cable. TheFoV speciﬁcation given by Oculus
only states a diagonal FoV that is supposedly slightly larger than 110°.
No standardized procedure to measure FoV is established, the FoV the
user conceives substantially depends on the distance and correct align-
ment between eye and lens and is therefore inﬂuenced by the shape
of the users face and even the correct IPD adjustment. These factors
aggravate the direct comparison of FoV stated by the manufacturer.

Similar to the Samsung Odyssey+, the Oculus Rift S uses a Simul-
taneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)-based tracking, therefore
estimates its pose in 3D-space without relying on an external tracking
system, the Samsung Odyssey+ however employs two RGB cameras
whereas the Oculus Rift S utilizes ﬁve RGB cameras thus laying a
foundation for a more stable tracking system.

Fig. 9. Violinplot showing the results of the readability test, where lower
font size is related to better readability. Oculus Rift S outperformed the
other devices in text readability. The other two HMDs performed similarly,
with the HTC Vive Pro demonstrating readability at slightly lower font
sizes.

Relying merely on Bluetooth as an external factor is undesirable,
since not all computers have Bluetooth capabilities. Furthermore, in-
compatible Bluetooth adapters can cause interruptions and affect the
performance. Both HMDs from HTC as well as the Pimax 5k require
three additional power connections, where one is to power the HMD
itself, and the other two are for the HTC Lighthouse tracking system
that consists of two boxes that are placed at the two corners of the
VR space. While this is generally considered as superior in terms of
tracking stability, the external setup drastically impacts the usability
of the system, especially when compared to the HMDs which use an
inside-out marker-less SLAM strategy for tracking.

4.2 Measurements

The HTC Vive Pro is the heaviest device and has the best weight to
torque ratio, which advocates a good ergonomic headband design;
notwithstanding, from all three devices, it exerts the highest force on
the neck.

The Samsung Odyssey+, ranked second in weight and weight to
torque ratio however measured the best results in neck-strain. Oculus
Rift S has the lowest weight but ranks second in terms of neck-strain
and has consequently the lowest weight to torque ratio.

The HTC Vive Pro has the highest brightness with the lowest ∆ e,
while the Samsung Odyssey+ and the Oculus Rift S have a comparable
color accuracy, the latter has a lower brightness.

The HTC Vive Pro has the brightest display with 133.3 nits and most
accurate color representation, ∆ e of 6.5. Samsung Odyssey+ has a
slightly lower brightness measurement of 127.5 nits and a substantially
higher - and therefore worse - ∆ e of 11.8, whereas Oculus Rift S has a
similar ∆ e of 11.7, but a considerably lower brightness of 80.5nits. In
regards to brightness and color accuracy, the HTC Vive Pro performs
best, indicating superior display quality.

Our results indicate the Samsung Odyssey+ has the least heat de-
velopment inside the HMD, with the hottest measurement being 31.4◦.
The Oculus Rift S has a marginally higher measurement of 32.3◦ and
the HTC Vive Pro has highest measurement with 37.4◦. As mentioned
above the latter two HMDs had hotter areas, facilitating our decision
against using them as they were either on the edge of the facial interface

Fig. 10. Violinplots showing the measured time to wear each HMD

or underneath another layer of cover. The differences between the ﬁrst
two HMDs are negligible, only the HTC Vive Pro has a substantially
higher measurement.

Since none of the ﬁnal three HMDs we tested had a wipeable facial
interface, it is important that the interface can be switched out for a
new one. Likewise, covers for the facial interface that are new or user-
speciﬁc can be used as well. HTC Vive Pro and Samsung Odyssey+ have
replaceable interfaces, while the Oculus Rift S has a non-replaceable
facial interface.

4.3 Multi-user study

Considering that the Oculus Rift S has the lowest resolution and per-
formed worst in the brightness and color accuracy test it is very sur-
prising that it scored the distinctly best readability result in this test. It
has the lowest average, lowest minimal and median value, as shown in
table 2, while the distribution can be seen in ﬁgure 9. The other two
HMDs have a similar performance, with the HTC Vive Pro performing
slightly better.

As described in section 3.3.2 the Samsung Odyssey+ had the best
perceivable contrast, allowing users to discern shapes at an alpha value
of 3.385, whereas the HTC Vive Pro has an average value of 5.115
and the Oculus Rift S 6.038. The results for the latter device might
be justiﬁed by the LCD screen, which are known to have an inferior
contrast to OLED displays.

HMD mounting-time reﬂects on the general usability of the HMD
and convenience for the wearer. It was hypothesized that the Samsung
Odyssey+ performs best in this category, as it has the least adjustable
components when mounting the HMD. Table 3 shows that on average,
compared to the other two HMDs, users were twice as fast when
mounting and adjusting the device. The HTC Vive Pro is the bulkiest
from all HMDs and requires many adjustments before using, so it was
to be expected that users took longer to mount the device. The Oculus
Rift S, on the other hand, requires a substantial amount of time to be put
on as users have to digitally adjust the IPD in the software menu. In this
study, prior to use of the Oculus Rift S, the proctor handed the HMD
to the users with the IPD menu already opened. It has to be taken into
account that new users need more time to adjust the HMD than seasoned
users of VR, which explains the high standard deviation. Nonetheless,
we believe that the trend that manifests itself in our data will remain
as users gain experience with the devices, especially considering the
interaction with the software in the Oculus Rift S.

Rift SVive ProOdyssey+0.70.80.911.11.21.31.41.51.6Font sizeReadability testRift SVive ProOdyssey+050100150200250300350400Time in sTime to put on HMD(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 11. Charts (a), (b), and (c) illustrate the distribution of users who reported VR sickness, headache, and eye discomfort respectively; blue
denotes a user who reported no complaints, orange for a user with mild or minor discomfort, and yellow users who experienced major discomfort.

Users found the HTC Vive Pro as the most compatible HMD with
glasses, followed by the Oculus Rift S and Samsung Odyssey+. This
outcome was not surprising as the former two devices allow users to
adjust the distance between the lenses and their eyes, thereby increasing
space for glasses.

The results from the questionnaires in Fig. 11 show that the majority
of the users did not experience VR sickness, headache, or eye discomfort.
Nonetheless, a slight trend is discernible and is henceforth discussed.
Regarding VR sickness, for the HTC Vive Pro, 23 users reported none,
3 minor, and 0 users major VR sickness. For the Samsung Odyssey+,
22 users reported none, 4 minor, and 0 major VR sickness. Lastly,
for the Oculus Rift S, 21 reported none, 4 minor, and 1 major VR
sickness. The discernible trend shows that users found the HTC Vive
Pro slightly more comfortable than the other two HMDs. The same
trend is visible in Fig. 11 (b) and (c), where users report more headache
and eye discomfort on the other two HMDs, with the Samsung Odyssey+
performing worse than the Oculus Rift S. We hypothesize that for the
latter HMD, the digital IPD adjustment inﬂuenced the comfort for a
subset of users, as the misaligned lenses cause severe discomfort for
people whose IPD are far outside the average.

The additional users’ remarks align with the results of the multi-user
study and provide further insight into the discomfort that users expe-
rienced with the Samsung Odyssey+. The most prominent note from
users’ feedback is the pressure on the face and head they experienced
while wearing Samsung Odyssey+, leading to major dissatisfaction
and slight pain. Furthermore, users reported that the edges inside the
Samsung Odyssey+ have a noticeable aliasing effect, especially when
tilting the head. Another visual artifact was noted that occurred during
fast movement of the head, where the shadow of the objects shown on
the screen lagged behind. Lastly, a ﬂickering of the letters during the
readability test was reported. The tracking of the Samsung Odyssey+
was reported as the least stable, followed by the Oculus Rift S and then
the HTC Vive Pro. The instability was particularly noticeable when the
users translated their heads to the side. When examining the HMDs
ourselves, we were able to conﬁrm most of the aforementioned reports.

5 CONCLUSION

In this work, we presented metrics that are relevant for the evaluation
and assessment of VR HMDs for use in different applications. We
categorized, measured, and systematically evaluated various VR de-
signs and technologies. Each HMD manifested its own strengths and
weaknesses. Despite the average performance in the readability and
contrast perception tests, we found the HTC Vive Pro to overall excel,

especially in regard to ergonomics and comfort. We observed that
several metrics that were measured in this work had direct inﬂuence on
user comfort, these include: image quality, heat development, tracking
stability, weight, and compatibility with glasses.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Alaker, G. R. Wynn, and T. Arulampalam. Virtual reality training in
laparoscopic surgery: a systematic review & meta-analysis. International
Journal of Surgery, 29:85–94, 2016.

[2] C. Anthes, R. J. Garc´ıa-Hern´andez, M. Wiedemann, and D. Kranzlm¨uller.
State of the art of virtual reality technology. In 2016 IEEE Aerospace
Conference, pp. 1–19. IEEE, 2016.

[3] J. Baumann. Military applications of virtual reality. see http://www. hitl.

washington. edu/scivw/EVE/II. G. Military. html, 1993.

[4] D. A. Bowman and R. P. McMahan. Virtual reality: how much immersion

is enough? Computer, 40(7):36–43, 2007.

[5] N. A. Dodgson. Variation and extrema of human interpupillary distance.
In Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems XI, vol. 5291, pp.
36–46. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2004.

[6] L. Freina and M. Ott. A literature review on immersive virtual reality in
education: state of the art and perspectives. In The International Scientiﬁc
Conference eLearning and Software for Education, vol. 1, p. 133. ” Carol
I” National Defence University, 2015.

[7] A. G. Gallagher, E. M. Ritter, H. Champion, G. Higgins, M. P. Fried,
G. Moses, C. D. Smith, and R. M. Satava. Virtual reality simulation for the
operating room: proﬁciency-based training as a paradigm shift in surgical
skills training. Annals of surgery, 241(2):364, 2005.

[8] H. Hoffman and D. Vu. Virtual reality: teaching tool of the twenty-ﬁrst
century? Academic medicine: journal of the Association of American
Medical Colleges, 72(12):1076–1081, 1997.

[9] W. S. Khor, B. Baker, K. Amin, A. Chan, K. Patel, and J. Wong. Aug-
mented and virtual reality in surgerythe digital surgical environment: ap-
plications, limitations and legal pitfalls. Annals of translational medicine,
4(23), 2016.

[10] F. L. Kooi and A. Toet. Visual comfort of binocular and 3d displays.

Displays, 25(2-3):99–108, 2004.

[11] J.-W. Lin, H. B.-L. Duh, D. E. Parker, H. Abi-Rached, and T. A. Furness.
Effects of ﬁeld of view on presence, enjoyment, memory, and simulator
sickness in a virtual environment. In Proceedings ieee virtual reality 2002,
pp. 164–171. IEEE, 2002.

[12] T. Mazuryk and M. Gervautz. Virtual reality - history, applications, tech-

nology and future.

[13] M. Mon-Williams, J. P. Warm, and S. Rushton. Binocular vision in a
virtual world: visual deﬁcits following the wearing of a head-mounted
display. Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics, 13(4):387–391, 1993.

VR sickness reported by usersOdyssey+Rift SVive Pro051015202530UsersNoneMinorMajorHeadache reported by usersOdyssey+Rift SVive Pro051015202530UsersNoneMinorMajorEye discomfort reported by usersOdyssey+Rift SVive Pro051015202530UsersNoneMinorMajor[14] T. S. Mujber, T. Szecsi, and M. S. Hashmi. Virtual reality applications
in manufacturing process simulation. Journal of materials processing
technology, 155:1834–1838, 2004.

[15] J. Psotka. Immersive training systems: Virtual reality and education and

training. Instructional science, 23(5-6):405–431, 1995.

[16] R. Sacks, A. Perlman, and R. Barak. Construction safety training using
immersive virtual reality. Construction Management and Economics,
31(9):1005–1017, 2013.

[17] M. Slater and M. V. Sanchez-Vives. Enhancing our lives with immersive

virtual reality. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:74, 2016.

[18] P. J. Standen and D. J. Brown. Virtual reality in the rehabilitation of people
with intellectual disabilities. Cyberpsychology & behavior, 8(3):272–282,
2005.

[19] I. E. Sutherland. A head-mounted three dimensional display. In Proceed-
ings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I,
pp. 757–764. ACM, 1968.

[20] T. vision council Steve Kodey. Us optical overview and outlook december

2015.

[21] R. D. Webster et al. Corrosion prevention and control training in an im-
mersive virtual learning environment. PhD thesis, University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Graduate School, 2014.

[22] I. Yavrucuk, E. Kubali, and O. Tarimci. A low cost ﬂight simulator using
virtual reality tools. IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine,
26(4):10–14, 2011.

[23] C. Youngblut. Educational uses of virtual reality technology. Technical
report, INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES ALEXANDRIA VA,
1998.

[24] M. Zieﬂe. Effects of display resolution on visual performance. Human

factors, 40(4):554–568, 1998.

