Advancing	Astronomy	for	All:	ASP	2018		
ASP	Conference	Series,	Vol.	524	
Schultz,	Barnes,	and	Shore,	eds.	
	2019	Astronomical	Society	of	the	Pacific	

Lessons Learned from Teaching Astronomy with Virtual Reality  

Philip Blanco1,2, Gur Windmiller2, William Welsh2, and Sean Hauze2 

1Grossmont College, 8800 Grossmont College Drive, El Cajon, CA 92020 

2San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182 

Abstract  We  report  on  the  initial  phase  of  an  ongoing,  multi-stage  investigation  of 
how to incorporate Virtual Reality (VR) technology in teaching introductory astrono-
my concepts Our goal was to compare the efficacy of VR vs. conventional teaching 
methods using one specific topic - Moon phases and eclipses. After teaching this topic 
to an ASTRO-101 lecture class, students were placed into 3 groups to experience one 
of three additional activities: supplemental lecture, “hands-on” activity, or VR experi-
ence. All students were tested before and after their learning activity. Although prelim-
inary, our results can serve as a useful guide to expanding the role of VR in the astron-
omy classroom  

1.  Virtual Reality for Astronomy Education 

Many  topics  in  astronomy  are  difficult  for  students  to  grasp  because  of  their  vast 
scales and complex relationships in space and time. The recent proliferation and re-
duced cost of immersive technologies such as Virtual Reality (VR) may provide as-
tronomy educators with new opportunities for effectively conveying these concepts.  

VR technology not only allows the display of astronomical scenarios in 3-D, but 
also immerses the student in them, allowing each student to take control and explore 
ideas by interacting with objects and changing their viewpoints. 

1.1.  Potential Advantages 

An  appealing  aspect  of  VR  is  the  possibility  of  unstructured  "play"  learning. 
Students  can  move  around the  virtual  environment  and  take  part  in  unscripted  con-
structivist discovery, with immediate feedback for "What if...?" questions. This mod-
els the scientific method in addition to providing memorable experiences, which can 
be drawn upon when the student is tested. 

1.2.  Potential Concerns 

Our major concern was the time cost involved, for our students and ourselves. 
We  knew  we  would  have  to  develop  our  own  training  materials  for  use  of  the  VR 
hardware, and for the astronomical topic. Students would have to first learn how to 
use the system, and then work through the VR "scenario" that we had developed. In 
contrast to teaching a lecture to students "in parallel", we were limited by staff and 

159 

 
 
 
 
160 

Blanco, Windmiller, Welsh, and Hauze 

hardware to working with a few students at a time, "in series". A related concern was 
that  the  technology  itself  would  become  a  distraction for  students,  and  inhibit  their 
learning of the material.  

A final concern to be addressed is how to effectively assess whether tasks were 
completed, and learning occurred, in the VR environment. For example, is it fair to 
give a multiple-choice test in "flat-land", when a student has demonstrated their spa-
tial and temporal understanding in a 3-d immersive environment? 

2.  Our Investigation 

To explore the efficacy of immersive technology in the classroom, in 2018 Spring we 
tested VR vs. traditional teaching methods in an ASTRO 101 class at San Diego State 
University. Since no "package" of VR astronomy lessons existed, we developed our 
own interactive VR activity for one topic: Moon phases and eclipses. This topic lends 
itself well to 3-dimensional (3D) visualization and interaction, and yet can be prob-
lematic for students to learn (Chastenay 2016, and references therein). 

Since we did not know whether the VR activity would put students at a disad-
vantage  when  it  came  to  exams,  we  taught  all  students  an  initial  lecture  on  Moon 
phases and eclipses; students also had access to the textbook's treatment of this topic. 
After  this  standard  lecture,  the  class  was  divided  into  three  cohorts  (one  "VR"  and 
two  "control")  for  further  activities  with  the  purpose  of  strengthening  their  under-
standing of the topic. 

2.1.  The VR Activity 

We used the Universe Sandbox 2 software package to develop our own VR activity 
to teach Moon phases and eclipses. This software allowed us to create some precur-
sor tasks for the student to get used to the VR goggles and controllers, and then pro-
vide  them  with  an  interactive  scenario  that  modeled  the  Sun,  Earth  and  Moon.  The 
student  would  interact  with  these  objects  to  perform  tasks  and  answer  a  series  of 
questions. 

In an attempt to reduce time overhead, and to provide some guidance, we adopt-
ed a "buddy system" strategy from another "immersive" technology - SCUBA diving 
- with students working in pairs. One student puts on the VR head-mounted display 
(HMD), while the other reads instructions and observes on a flat screen what the VR 
student is seeing. Then each student switches places. The total time using the HMD 
was limited to 20 minutes. 

2.2.  Control Activities 

Two  cohorts  of  students  provided  control  groups  for  our  investigation.  One  group 
received a 20-minute additional lecture with new diagrams and animations. The other 
control group participated in a "hands-on" activity, using a light source in the class-
room  to  model  sunlight,  and  foam  balls  to  represent  the  Moon.  This  activity  was 
based on that provided in The Universe at your Fingertips guide developed for Pro-
ject ASTRO (Fraknoi 2011) The activity was also limited to 20 minutes, so that stu-
dents in all three cohorts were given the same amount of instruction time. 

 
Teaching Astronomy with Virtual Reality 

161 

2.3.  Assessment 

All  students  were  tested  pre-  and  post-activity  using  multiple-choice  questions  on 
Moon  phases  and  eclipses,  drawn  primarily  from  the  Astronomy  Diagnostic  Test 
(Zeilik  2002)  Private  Universe,  and  University  of  Nebraska,  Lincoln  ClassAction 
question banks (Lee 2010).  The questions were chosen to be in the "difficult" cate-
gory, requiring students to apply their spatial and temporal reasoning. We also asked 
students to provide feedback on the VR activity using both Likert scale and freeform 
survey questions, adapted from John Keller’s Instructional Materials Motivation Sur-
vey (IMMS) measuring student motivation to learn through the lens of the attention, 
relevance, confidence, and satisfaction (ARCS) model (Keller 1987).  

3.  Tentative Results 

We consider our results as tentative because, in hindsight, we realized that the com-
position of our student cohorts was not uniform. The largest source of bias resulted 
from allowing students to volunteer for the VR activity. We also did not track sepa-
rately those students who were taking a separate astronomy laboratory course, which 
possibly (but not necessarily) included a laboratory activity devoted to lunar cycles. 
The  pre-  and  post-activity  scores  of  the  three  cohorts  are  shown  in  Figure  1. 
With the caveats above, we conclude that VR seemed to be at least as effective as the 
other additional activities. In other words, VR did not "hurt" the students' understand-
ing of Moon phases and eclipses, as tested in a multiple-choice exam. 

Moon	phases/eclipses:	average	quiz	scores	

Pre	Ac8vity	

Post	Ac8vity	

)
0
1
f
o
t
u
o
(
e
r
o
c
S
z
i
u
Q

10	

8	

6	

4	

2	

0	

Lecture	

Foam	ball	

VR	

Figure 1. Pre- and post- activity quiz scores for the three supplemental activities. 

We were also interested in which students found the VR activity most helpful, 
so  despite  the  small  sample  sizes,  we  split  each  cohort  into  two  groups  by  course 
grade.  From  this  we  tentatively  conclude  that  the  students  who  benefitted  the  most 
were in the VR cohort and in the upper 50% of the class. 

From the survey questions, we found that most students reacted positively to the 
VR  experience  and  felt  that  it  contributed  to  their  learning.  However,  even  "tech-
savvy" students appreciated the need for clear and concise instructions on the use of 
the VR system. 

 
 
 
 
	
	
	
	
	
	
162 

Blanco, Windmiller, Welsh, and Hauze 

Average	improvement	in	quiz	score	(10	points	total)	

above	median	course	grade	

below	median	course	grade	

Lecture	

Foam	ball	

VR	

0	

0.5	

1	

1.5	

2	

2.5	

3	

Change	in	Quiz	Score	(post-ac5vity	minus	pre-ac5vity)	

Figure 2.  Comparison of score improvements for those students above (purple) or 
below (green) the median overall course grade. 

4.  Next steps 

From this pilot study, we are now confident that we can use VR as the primary in-
struction method for this topic, and in the near future we shall test its efficacy against 
control groups without the prior "traditional" lecture. The overhead of training can be 
reduced  in  a  lecture  or  laboratory  class  by  offering  more  VR  activities,  which  we 
would  like  to  develop  using  Universe  Sandbox  2  or  other  software.  Possible  topics 
amenable  to  VR  include  parallax,  binary  stars,  Hubble  expansion,  and  the  Doppler 
effect. A major limitation is the time needed to develop these VR scenarios, even be-
fore writing a "scripted" lesson plan. We anticipate that these tasks will become easi-
er as user-friendly software for creating virtual scenarios is developed. 

References 

Chastenay, P. 2016, "From geocentrism to allocentrism: teaching phases of the Moon 

in a digital full-dome planetarium," Research in Science Education., 46, 43 

Keller, J. M. 1987, "Development and use of the ARCS model of instructional de-

sign," Journal of Instructional Development, 10, 2 

Lee, K. 2010, "A multi-institution study on the effectiveness of ClassAction to pro-

mote student understanding in Astro 101," Bulletin of the American Astronom-
ical Society, 42, 415 

The Universe at Your Fingertips 2.0 DVD-ROM. A. Fraknoi (ed). Astronomical So-

ciety of the Pacific (San Francisco, CA, 2011).    

Zeilik, M. 2002, "Birth of the Astronomy Diagnostic Test: prototest evolution," As-

tronomy Education Review, 1, 46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
