A New Terrain in HCI: Emotion Recognition Interface
using Biometric Data for an Immersive VR Experience

Jaehyun Nam
Looxid Labs

Hyesun Chung
Seoul National University

Young ah Seong ∗
The University of Tokyo

Honggu Lee
Looxid Labs

9
1
0
2
c
e
D
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
1
1
0
.
2
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Emotion recognition technology is crucial in providing a per-
sonalized user experience. It is especially important in virtual
reality(VR) to assess the user’s emotions to enhance their sense
of immersion. We propose an emotion recognition interface
that incorporates the user’s biometric data with machine learn-
ing technology for increasing user engagement in VR. Our
key technologies include brainwave sensors and eye-tracking
cameras embedded in a VR headset, which seamlessly ac-
quire physiological signals, and secondly, an attractiveness
recognition algorithm that uses bio-signals to predict the user’s
attraction on visual stimuli. We conducted experiments to test
the performance of the system, and also interviewed experts
and participants to acquire opinions on the system. This study
demonstrated the technical feasibility of our system with high
accuracy and usability. Interviewees expected that the inter-
face will be actively used in the context of various applications.
Our proposed interface could contribute to an immersive VR
experience design.

Author Keywords
emotion recognition interface; virtual reality; seamless
sensing system; EEG; eye-tracking

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Human computer inter-
action (HCI); Virtual reality; User studies;

INTRODUCTION
A key component of human-computer interaction (HCI) is the
ability of a computer to understand scenes or items to which
a person ﬁnds appealing. Currently, the most widely used ap-
proach that is employed to achieve this is by giving an explicit
rating, which is a self-assessment method in which a person
directly evaluates a product or a service. Because most people
do not explicitly appraise content as they are viewed, recently
there have been efforts to develop implicit rating methods to
infer persons’ assessments [10, 11, 33]. Through advances
in big-data and machine learning technologies, users’ assess-
ments of attractiveness can be predicted using a variety of data
without having to refer to the users. Using log data, users’

*Contact authour: yabird@gmail.com

ACM ISBN X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX.

interests are obtained about the main information that they
access, and their personal preferences are analyzed by track-
ing major activity areas using the global positioning system
(GPS) feature of their smartphones [22, 29, 16]. The analyzed
information enables the interaction to recommend products or
services in which they would be more interested.

Various emotion recognition technologies have been developed
to understand human emotion with less conscious processing.
Facial recognition analyzes emotions using human facial ex-
pressions, and voice recognition analyzes them using various
voice features such as intonation, volume, and speed [45, 18,
46, 27, 42, 2]. Text mining is another emotion recognition tech-
nology that utilizes the words or context used in writing [44].
Because data such as facial expressions, voice and text are
types of information that can be collected naturally during in-
teractions between humans and computers, not only is the data
collection process simple, but the use of analytical information
is also valuable. However, these data still comprise ﬁltered
information according to the situation or environment rather
than raw expression of human emotion [35].

In recent times, an emotion-recognition method that utilizes
bio-sensing data has attracted newfound attention. Bio-signals
show excellent data consistency for emotion analysis be-
cause they represent unﬁltered and immediate responses to
human emotions. The emotional status can be analyzed by di-
rectly monitoring their brain activity using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalogram (EEG),
as well as biometric data including galvanic skin response
(GSR), photo-plethysmography (PPG) and electromyography
(EMG) [40, 43, 31, 6]. It is important that the biometric data
be acquired naturally in the real world for the technology to
be widely accessible.

Head-mounted displays (HMDs) are an interesting digital plat-
form for the virtual reality (VR) environment. HMDs are
optimal digital platforms for easily and naturally collecting
biometric data because they have direct contact with individ-
In particular, the forehead area on which the
uals’ faces.
head-foam cushion makes physical contact is in front of the
area of the brain responsible for human cognition and emo-
tion, namely the prefrontal cortex, so it is possible to obtain
information on changing brain activity according to different
emotions [9, 14]. Moreover, it is more important to under-
stand a user’s emotions in a VR environment than in other
digital platforms. In order to make the VR more real, HCI
that is based on emotional status rather than conventional I/O
interaction is necessary [34].

In this paper, we propose a new emotion recognition inter-
face that predicts users’ evaluations of attractiveness using

 
 
 
 
 
 
biometric data acquired from a self-developed VR sensing sys-
tem. We focus on attraction or preference only in particular,
as a stepping stone to see if inferring other human emotions
from biometric data can be possible. We designed and built
a VR accessory with EEG sensors and eye-tracking cameras
embedded into a VR headset. The proposed system seam-
lessly measure users’ brain activity and eye movement in a
VR environment. Then, we developed a machine learning
model that analyzes attractiveness using biometric data, and
we conducted experiments to verify the feasibility of the sys-
tem. Finally, we considered the prospects, advantages and
limitations of how our proposed system will contribute to the
development of HCI in the future by performing interviews
with participants and experts in various ﬁelds including VR,
AI, and brain engineering. We considered:

A new emotion recognition interface in VR that allows a seam-
less measurement and prediction of the user’s attraction state
by the use of unobtrusive EEG sensors and eye-tracking tech-
nology.

A guideline for how the interface contribute to enchiching user
experience in VR applications.

RELATED WORK

Emotion detection using biometric data in HCI
With the development of wearable EEG headsets, studies on
the brain-computer interface (BCI) have begun to vary outside
the laboratory environment [23, 4]. In particular, advances in
EEG wearability have signiﬁcantly assisted HCI researchers.
In Nick et al [25]’s study, developers in Silicon Valley pro-
posed that the continued evolution of BCI technology would
enable interactions that involve the reading users’ minds to be
fully accepted and utilized by users. However, EEG headsets
have fewer sensors than conventional EEGs, so the amount of
data is smaller, and data quality from the headset is poor owing
to the use of dry electrodes. Numerous studies have attempted
to achieve higher accuracy in this environment, but there are
clear limitations with respect to the system conﬁguration.

There are various research directions that can remedy the limi-
tations of the BCI system. The ﬁrst method is a multi-modal
system that uses a variety of biological signals simultaneously
to increase the amount of information. If bio-signals that have
already been proven to be correlated with emotion, such as the
heart rate or GSR, are used in the study together with, they can
compensate for the lack of information in the BCI system [40,
36]. In a multi-modal system, it is important to increase the
analysis accuracy by controlling each signal from the different
modality at different sampling rates. Other studies are attempt-
ing to improve accuracy using machine learning techniques.
Various methods such as texts, voice, and facial expressions
have been proposed as the most prominent machine learning
techniques in emotion recognition technology [12, 37, 26, 21].
There are increasing number of studies that apply machine
learning techniques to biometric data. However, there is no set
of classiﬁcation for raw bio-signals the way facial expressions
do for their corresponding emotions. Based on these techni-
cal considerations, we designed our attractiveness prediction
algorithm in accordance.

Importance of emotion detection in VR
In the new digital platform of VR, it is important for users to
feel that they are actually present in the environment. Sense
of presence is greatly inﬂuenced by how naturally a user in-
teracts with the character or environment in the content. In
particular, because a VR user exists as a participant in the three-
dimensional (3D) world and not as a third-person observer
with a limited perspective like in other digital platforms, the
interaction of users and content in VR is much more important
than elsewhere.

In order to design how interactions between users and content
should occur, we need to understand interactions with each
other in the real world. According to Albert’s study [24], the
three most important elements of message delivery in commu-
nication are suggested to be word, tone, and body language,
which account for 7%, 38% and 55% of messages, respec-
tively. (the 7%-38%-55% rule) Words with explicit meaning
have only a 7% signiﬁcance, while interactions with implicit
language have an impact of 93%. That is, communicating via
emotional interaction rather than through explicit I/O systems
is a much more important component of immersive interaction.
This principle should also be applied to the HCI method in
VR environments.

Early studies on VR interaction have focused on increasing the
sense of immersion by providing users with sensory feedback
such as visual and haptic feedback, or by developing an interac-
tion method based on physical activity such as motion capture
and treadmills [20]. Recently, researchers have recognized the
importance of emotion-based interaction, and several attempts
are being made to achieve this. In addition to utilizing the
mental activity of users through BCI technology [1, 17], they
are also attempting to form an emotional connection between
the user and characters by way of content-based techniques
such as creating eye-contact and animal snifﬁng them. VR
content companies proposed that while a physical I/O system
is also important for immersion, the emotional connection
with the characters is when users feel the sense of presence.
However, because the content cannot take into account the
user’s emotions continuously, there is an increased need for a
more technical approach. Keeping this in mind, we would like
to examine in this study aims to examine how our systems can
contribute to HCI in the VR ﬁeld.

EMOTION RECOGNITION INTERFACE

System overview
Our proposed system as shown in Figure 1, which consists of
a VR headset with embedded EEG sensors and eye-tracking
cameras, as well as time-synchronizing data acquisition sys-
tem, was designed to achieve two main goals. First, we tried to
develop a framework to seamlessly and naturally measure the
user’s physiological signals when it looks at various contents
in a virtual environment. Second, the system aims to easily
ﬁnd and analyze EEG- or eye movement-related data of the
exact moment in which researchers are interested using time
synchronization [13] between different bio-signals and events.

In general, EEG devices and most of the other prevalent bio-
metric equipment are too bulky and cumbersome to wear.

Therefore, the use of those devices provides users with un-
pleasant experience with respect to wearing it and following
the directions in an experimental setting. To address the us-
ability issue, we embedded a light-weight, dry-electrode EEG
sensor in the HTC Vive headset, especially where the head-
set and the user’s forehead touch each other. In addition, we
installed cameras in the lower part of the lens to measure the
user’s pupil dilation and eye movement. With this transformed
hardware interface, the users’ brainwave and eye movement
data can be easily acquired while they ordinarily wear HMDs.

Sensors
Based on the neuroscience research that the brain’s prefrontal
region contains information in that deals with emotion [5, 41,
38, 3, 7], we have located EEG sensors on the user’s forehead
corresponding to this area. The speciﬁc points (Fp1, Fp2, AF3,
AF4, AF7, and AF8) were selected following the International
10-20 system [19]. The 1mm-thick EEG sensor is tin plated
with gold, and is printed on a ﬂexible printed circuit board
(FPCB)(Figure 1). The greatest advantage of this approach is
the high ﬂexibility that allows a comfortable ﬁt regardless of
different forehead shapes. The raw EEG signals are recorded
at a sampling rate of 250 or 500 Hz.

Two eye-tracking cameras are located at 45 degree below
the horizontal line of the users’ eyes when looking for-
ward(Figure 1). The angle was calculated in order to obtain a
clear recording of each eye’s contour, and to achieve a suitable
pupil detection function. The eye movement is stored both in
a video format and as time-variant feature data, at a sampling
rate of 60 Hz. The acquired gaze information is mainly used
to track what the user exactly stares at inside a virtual environ-
ment. Other important data include the dilation and moving
speed of the pupil which can be used to infer several emotions
such as stress or fear [39]. The speciﬁcations of each sensor
are described in Table 1.

Time Synchronization
When analyzing biometric data, it is very important to know
the exact times at which the stimuli occur, and to match them to
the corresponding bio-signals [8]. Each sensor that is included
in our system has a different sampling rate, and events that
represent the change of contents or the user’s expected reaction
always happen arbitrarily. Therefore, in this multi-modal
sensing environment, it is critical to synchronize the acquired
data according to the events. Our system has realized it well
such that the output brainwave and eye movement data are
arranged according to the time-stamp of any single event.

Attractiveness recognition model
In this work, we designed a multi-modal attractiveness recog-
nition framework that enables the recognition of the user’s
attraction using brainwave and eye movement data that are
acquired from the hardware described above. As attraction is
a highly complicated and personal emotion, a single feature
from a single modality is insufﬁcient to correctly evaluate
it. Besides, the inﬂuence of the features varies depending
on the user. Therefore, we have developed technology that
improves the accuracy of attractiveness recognition by pro-
cessing numerous features from the multi-modal system and

Figure 1: HTC Vive headset equipped with a seamless sensing
system.

Figure 2: Emotion recognition interface framework.

designing the machine learning algorithm (preprocessing - fea-
ture extraction and selection - classiﬁcation) to facilitate an
individualized analysis (Figure 2).

Preprocessing
In general, the electrical signals from brainwaves are sensitive
to noise such as eye movement or interference with electri-
cal devices. Therefore, in order to reduce it and improve the
quality of the signal, the raw EEG data go through two pre-
processing steps. First, EEG data are digitally ﬁltered with a
band-pass ﬁlter between 0.01 and 120 Hz, and a stop ﬁlter at
60 Hz to reduce power line noise. Then, by independent com-
ponent analysis (ICA) and applying a modiﬁed brain wavelet
method [30], ocular artifacts and headset slip artifacts are
removed. In fact, this preprocessing signiﬁcantly helps to
remove EEG noise caused by user movement.

With respect of eye-tracking data, the pupil diameter is not
only determined by the user’s emotion but also by luminance.
Therefore, preprocessing is also required to properly extract
emotion-related features. We applied the pupillary light reﬂex
removal method proposed in [36].

Table 1: Speciﬁcations of EEG sensor and eye-tracking camera in the system.

EEG Sensor

Eye-tracking Camera

Number of channels
Location of channels Fp1, Fp2, AF3, AF4, AF7, AF8

6

Sampling rate
Resolution
CMRR
Input-referred noise

250, 500 Hz
24bit
> 100dB
< 1.5 uVpp (EXT)

Number of channels
Location of channels
Sampling rate
Resolution
Gaze coordination accuracy
Data output

2
Left and right eye
60 Hz
640*400
0.3 degree
Relative pupil position,
size and gaze coordination

Feature extraction and selection
After preprocessing, the system extracts numerous features
that are known to be relevant to brainwave analysis. In the case
of EEG, ﬁve primary features are extracted, and there are about
300 feature dimensions. The features consist of time-domain
features (non-stationary index (NSI), fractal dimension (FD),
higher-order crossings (HOCs)), frequency-domain features
(ﬁve frequency bands: delta (1-4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha
(8-14 Hz), beta (14-31 Hz), and gamma (31-50 Hz)), and
time-frequency-domain features (discrete wavelet transform
(DWT)). In the case of the eye data, mainly ﬁve features are
used, and there are totally 12 feature dimensions. This includes
the mean, standard deviation, power spectral density (PSD)
of four frequency bands (0-0.2 Hz, 0.2-0.4 Hz, 0.4-0.6 Hz,
and 0.6-1 Hz), ﬁxation duration, and frequency calculated
according to the pupil dilation.

However, even though each feature described above contains
important information, it is inefﬁcient to apply all of them to
the machine learning algorithm because of the computational
workload, and the somewhat distract learning owing to high
redundancy. Therefore, only the most relevant features are
required to properly measure the user’s attraction level. Our
system applies the inﬁnite latent feature selection (ILFS) [32]
for feature selection.

Classiﬁcation
In order to perform a attractiveness classiﬁcation, the polyno-
mial kernel function is used in standard support vector ma-
chine(SVM), which is optimal when classifying data with a
high dimensional feature space. To enhance the reliability
of learning and avoid over-ﬁtting, we applied 10-fold cross
validation method. That is, dividing the entire feature dataset
into ten subsets, where an SVM classiﬁer learns nine subsets
and uses the remaining subset as a test set. We aim to test
the whole dataset, and thus the process will be iterated for
ten times. Finally, the accuracy of the attractiveness recogni-
tion algorithm is calculated as the average of each test set’s
accuracy.

EXPERIMENT
We conducted two kinds of experiments to demonstrate the
technical feasibility of our proposed attractiveness recognition
system. First, to demonstrate the performance of the systems,
we performed various analyses using biometric data obtained
when participants presented different types of images. Second,
we constructed an application that could show participants the

Figure 3: Image of face, clothes, color and a combination of
the three.

results of the attractiveness recognition in real time to receive
their feedback on an interface understanding human emotion.

In this study, 13 healthy participants (seven males and six
females), who were aged between 22 and 34 years, were
recruited to take part in the experiment. They wore HTC Vive
equipped with sensors, and viewed various kinds of images.
The system automatically stores the users’ brainwave and eye
movement data. First, the experiments started with brainwave
and eye-movement calibration in order to set the baseline for
their individual bio-signals. After a calibration session, they
completed two different sessions and then ﬁlled out surveys
on the experiment.

For the ﬁrst session, we prepared 144 images with four dif-
ferent categories: human face with neutral expression (30),
clothes (30), color (30) and a combination of the three (54).
There are mainly two reasons for the image-set selection: as
most of interactive VR contents include human-related stimuli,
we tried to use it to verify the system; we aimed to check
whether we can properly observe the degree to which the user
appreciates each image containing various elements, and thus
prepared the composite image set comprising different combi-
nations of the face, clothes, and color, as shown in Figure 3. A
number of images of faces were ﬁrst collected by taking upper
body photos of 30 models (15 males and 15 females) who we
recruited, and who agreed on the use of their photos for the ex-
periment. We created 54 composite images by selecting three
images of faces, three images of clothes, and three images of
colors for men and women, respectively, from among a total of
90 images of faces, clothes, and colors. Each participant was
instructed to stare at the image for 2 s, and had to give a rating
on a discrete seven-point scale to indicate the degree of attrac-
tion to the image. The second session was conducted to assess
the rating of the image, and then to immediately compare the
system’s prediction with respect to the facial attractiveness.
With respect to the real-time attractiveness recognition sys-

Table 2: System accuracy for each dataset.

Face Cloth Color Composite

All

0.644

0.645

0.605

0.744

0.692

Figure 4: Screenshot of a comparison between a user selection
and the result of the attractiveness recognition algorithm.

tem, the application consists of two phases: (1) training and
(2) prediction. In the training phase, participants looked at
30 different human face images randomly selected from the
image set of a total of 200 pictures that are publicly available
on the web, and they evaluated those images individually by
simply answering whether he or she likes or dislikes each
image. For the prediction phase, we chose the pre-deﬁned
set of features for which the performance was proven by our
previous experiments to present the result of our attractiveness
recognition algorithm in real-time. Speciﬁcally, HOG (EEG
feature) and ﬁxation frequency (eye feature) were selected, and
the polynomial kernel order of the SVM was set to 4. During a
total of 10 trials of the prediction comparison result phase, we
adopted the incremental SVM classiﬁer so that at every third,
sixth, and ninth trial, the SVM classiﬁer is updated to include
all of the newly acquired data. The system provided a result
with the posterior probability value as well as the participant’s
selection, as shown in Figure 4.

The survey, which was conducted after the VR session, was
designed to later acquire feedback about the system. The ques-
tions mainly aimed to determine their opinions and concerns
about a system that could interact with users by understanding
their emotions.

RESULTS

System accuracy
We ﬁrstly veriﬁed the accuracy of the attractiveness recogni-
tion algorithm. A 10-fold cross-validation method was applied
to the data acquired from the ﬁrst session of the experiment.
For example, 27 images were randomly selected and used as
a training set, and the remaining three images were used as
a test set for face, clothes, and color images. We used 49
randomly selected images as a training set, and the remaining
ﬁve images were used as a test set for composite images. A
model created using the training set was applied to the test set
to calculate the posterior probability of the degree to which
the participant is attracted to an image in the test set. If the
probability exceeds 0.5, we determine that the participant is
attracted to the image, and if it is lower than 0.5, the image is
not attractive. The prediction results were compared with the
user’s assessments of the image to analyze the accuracy of our
proposed algorithm. The mean and standard deviation of the

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Comparison of accuracy using (a) different sensor
modality and (b) different sized training set (right).

accuracy obtained by repeating the above process 10 times are
shown in Table 2.

In general, the results were statistically signiﬁcant in that the
system recognized the participants’ attraction. The accuracy
of the composite images was 0.744, which was the highest,
and that of the color images was 0.605, which was the lowest.
While we tried to organize data into which people could clearly
feel an attraction for face, color, and composite images, it was
difﬁcult to make clear to feel attracted in the case of color
images. We found higher system accuracies with datasets
that had more robust attraction. We present a more in-depth
analysis of this topic section 7.

We checked one more result during the process of determining
the system accuracy.
It is known that the uniformity and
robustness of the data to be learned are important for the
machine-learning model. Thus, there were inferences that the
same type of visual stimuli should be used. To consider the
hypothesis, we operated the system utilizing all 144 images,
including face, clothes, color, and composite images. As
with the above analysis process, we used a randomly selected
proportion of 90%, i.e., 130 images, as a training set, and the
remaining 14 images as a test set. The accuracy is lower than
the result obtained when using only the composite images,
but it is higher than the result obtained when using only face,
clothes, and color images, as shown in the last graph in Table
2. We hypothesize that this is because the system recognizes
attractiveness using biometric data when attraction occurs
regardless of the type of visual stimuli.

We performed additional analysis on factors that could affect
the system accuracy using data on the composite images that
had the highest accuracy. Figure 5 shows a comparison of the
accuracy for the combination photos between different sensor
modalities. The accuracy when both the EEG and eye data
are processed is higher than when only one of the two is used.
In other words, in terms of prediction accuracy, it is better to
design the attractiveness recognition model to be multi-modal.

Figure 6: Gaze ratio of face, clothes, and color areas in the
composite image (a) Male watching male images (b) Male
watching female images (c) Female watching male images (d)
Female watching female images.

Figure 7: Pearson correlation between predicted attraction on
the composite image and on face, clothes, and color images
comprising the image (a) Male watching male images (b) Male
watching female images (c) Female watching male images (d)
Female watching female images.

From the experiment, we further investigated a way of im-
proving the accuracy for our future work. Within our acquired
dataset, we tested whether the accuracy changes as the size of
the training data increases. As the characteristics of the stimuli
should be constant to make a justiﬁable comparison, the com-
bination image set was chosen for the additional analysis. As
illustrated in Figure 5, the difference is not sufﬁciently signiﬁ-
cant to explicitly state that the greater the accuracy, the larger
the size of the training set. Nevertheless, we would continue a
similar investigation to improve the system performance.

Example of practical use: Factor analysis
As one example of how the system could be put into prac-
tice, we performed a factor analysis on composite images to
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed system. Several
studies have been conducted to analyze the factors that affect
users when rating images or videos. For example, if someone
gave 4-stars on a YouTube video after watching, marketers
would seek to obtain information about which scene or which
item had the greatest impact on this judgment. The most rep-
resentative method is the gaze-point analysis to assess how
long factors have been watched using eye-tracking technol-
ogy. In this study, we compared the gaze-point analysis and
the correlation analysis using the results of our attractiveness
recognition algorithm for the three components of the compos-
ite image, namely the face, clothes, and background color.

We set the face, clothes, and background color areas in the
composite image to different regions of interests (ROIs), and
we obtained the amount of gaze data with a sampling rate of 60
Hz, which means that 60 gaze points were collected per second
in each ROI. Then, in Figure 6, we compared the results for
male and female participants when watching images of men
and women, respectively. The gaze ratio of the background
color was the highest for male participants, while the female
participants watched the face area the longest. With these
results, it remains unknown whether we can assume that the
background color had the greatest inﬂuence on men, while the
face had the greatest inﬂuence on women.

Next, we analyzed the correlation between the attraction on the
composite image and that on each factor of the image using our
proposed algorithm. We calculated the posterior probability

of attractiveness for every face, clothes, color, and composite
image through a model built using all 144 images. We obtained
the Pearson correlation of the probability results for all images,
including between the composite images and the respective
face images, clothes images, and background color images
that made up the composites. As with gaze-point analysis, we
compared the results of male and female participants when
they viewed male and female images, respectively, as shown
in Figure 7. In all cases, the image of the faces had the highest
Pearson correlation, and this was shown to be higher overall
for males than for female participants. Only the facial factor
showed a moderate positive relationship in the results for male
participants, and all other factors showed a weak relationship.

The results of the correlation analysis using our proposed sys-
tem are more reasonable than the results of the gaze-point
analysis compared with the previous studies on factors that
men and women consider important when evaluating the at-
traction of others. It shows the limitation of being difﬁcult to
understand the intent of why participants look at the point us-
ing only eye-tracking technology. However, the attractiveness
recognition model using biometric data can be expected to be
more useful in ﬁnding the most important factors in an image
or video.

Participant interview
Participants gave positive feedback on the system after experi-
encing the interaction that shows the results of the system in
real-time in the second session. They believed that the system
was more accurate and efﬁcient than other emotion recogni-
tion technologies because they recognized our system utilizes
directly brain activity even though they didn’t understand how
the algorithm works.

"I know that emotion is a result of diverse activities.
Therefore, it makes sense to classify emotion by different
brain wave patterns."

We engaged in brainstorming to hear various opinions from
participants regarding how they wish for our system to be
utilized. Many thoughts were shared, including a content
recommendation system, dating application, entertainment

utilities, education assistive technology system, mental-care
solution, crime analysis, virtual counsellor or friend, among
others.

"I can enjoy my mealtime if I can talk to AI who deﬁnitely
knows a lot about me. I would feel less lonely being
together with it. Like movie Her"

"The system will be able to recommend my ideal type in
the dating application."

However, some persons were doubtful about the possibility
and also expressed some concerns. Therefore, the system
should be developed to not only meet persons’ expectations,
but also to prevent any possible side effects such as invasion
of privacy or deprivation of human roles.

"If individual attraction becomes one of personal infor-
mation, some people will feel uncomfortable."

IN-DEPTH DISCUSSION WITH EXPERTS
In our approach, we combined multidisciplinary technologies
such as neuroscience, biology, data science, machine learning
and human interaction. Therefore, the professional knowledge
from diverse ﬁelds are indispensable to evaluate the emotion
recognition system and discuss its applicability and capabili-
ties. Therefore, we had in-depth talks with four experts from
different domains.

During an individual interview lasted for about an hour or
up to four hours, we ﬁrst talked about their expertise and
the signiﬁcance of the emotion recognition interface in their
ﬁeld. Second, we brieﬂy introduced our system framework
and results of both the experiment and the preliminary user
interaction study, and they provided feedback about those. Fi-
nally, we led an intensive discussion about the future work of
the system. Throughout the interview, very much meaningful
feedback was exchanged, and interesting as well as practi-
cal directions in which the system should be developed and
applied were discussed.

Four experts included a neuroscientist (N), an AI research
scientist (A), a VR movie director (D) and a CEO of a startup
developing an emotional robot (E). All of them are disinter-
ested parties of our work, so we had them indirectly experience
the system. All of them have shown their proﬁciency on their
job.

Evaluation of the system and experiment
The experts evaluated the system and the experiment, and
proposed how they could be improved.

System framework
In recent years, EEG-based interfaces have had different
shapes and incorporated a number of sensors. N mentioned
that the emotion recognition depends on the interface speciﬁ-
cations. With respect to our system, it is highly promising that
both EEG and eye tracking are used.

"The eyes, in particular, contains much signiﬁcant in-
formation such as the user’s interest and concentration.
Thus it is one of the most actively studied subjects in the
ﬁeld of neuro-biology." (N)

Owing mainly to hardware issues, the measurement accuracy
of the eye gaze remains insufﬁcient. In this system, better post-
processing would be possible when eye movement information
is analyzed together with EEG. In the case of the EEG, the
sensor position and quantity are critical to ensure accurate
data capture and analysis. However, bulky EEG equipment
has less usability. Therefore, he appreciated the placement of
sensors in our system from the perspective of the efﬁciency of
the position relative to the prefrontal region.

"As each brain region is not clearly divided according to
different functions, in the case of EEG, it would be best
to capture brainwave data from the whole hemisphere.
In this system, focusing on prefrontal region was a good
decision as every information in our brain is collected
and processed in the frontal lobe at the end." (N)

Prediction model and experimental design
It is recognized that data selection is very important when de-
veloping a prediction model. Strictly classiﬁed images could
improve the system validity. Therefore, stimuli should be cho-
sen very carefully. However, in our experimental design, for
more general use outside the laboratory, we used three kinds
of stimuli, namely face, cloth, color, and their combination.
These stimuli are related to both the biological attraction and
desire of purchase. More complicated biological reactions can
be included compared with signals with simple stimuli, and
effective learning may be more difﬁcult. However, as men-
tioned by N with respect to scene processing, if our system is
sufﬁciently accurate, the method could be efﬁciently adaptive
in many research ﬁelds.

"About the experiment design itself, it seems like the
images contained a bit too complex information. How-
ever, what is most interesting in this experiment is that
it tracked individual’s scene processing along with cor-
responding physiological signals. The observation of
reciprocal interactions between contents, attraction level,
eyes and brain activities are itself extremely meaningful.
Therefore, if it is revealed that an accurate measurement
of human’s attraction on complex objects through ma-
chine learning is possible, the study will have a huge
signiﬁcance in the ﬁeld of neuroscience." (N)

Our next question pertains to the standard having sufﬁcient
accuracy. The AI research scientist referred to the amount
of data. A lot more data should be acquired to obtain more
meaningful information.

"The number of accumulated data has to be big enough
to mathematically explain how the system has improved
through a continuous learning." (A)

This means that it is necessary to prove what is deﬁned as
an efﬁcient accuracy with more data by performing experi-
ments for the next step. In addition, if our proposed system
is designed to offer individualized service, it is important to
encourage users to keep their answers until the system reaches
an optimal training session point.

Need for continuous and seamless sensing
The experts reported that our proposed system is well suited
to overcome limitations of conventional attractiveness evalua-
tion methodologies from the perspectives of continuous and
seamless measurement. In a recommendation system where
persons’ attraction information is very important, the users’ ac-
tion log and self-assessment result work as the main guideline
in building up a prediction model. However, the conventional
method fails to obtain detailed information about the various
elements that are included in the scene. It is also necessary to
force the users to evaluate many things. Recently, there have
been attempts to read users’ emotions by investigating their
facial expressions or voice tones. However, it also has limita-
tions in terms of detecting more complex emotions. Experts
conﬁrmed the signiﬁcance and applicability of our proposed
system in that it allows an unobtrusive and detailed measure-
ment of users’ reactions and attraction to various content.

"Users generally skip answering thus it is hard to collect
enough data. I think the best thing about this system is
that it allows a seamless measurement of users’ attrac-
tion on even a very speciﬁc part of the contents without
bothering them." (A)

"Facial expression, in particular, is a clear, universal
and consistent method which can easily be sensed with a
camera. However, more complex and subtle emotions are
not caught in facial expressions, and it is hard to acquire
enough data to classify those according to attractiveness
of varying objects. Therefore, collecting physiological
data using a VR platform would be a better in conducting
lots of different experiments." (D)

Expectation of emotion recognition interface
In the preliminary user interaction study, general users’ various
ideas about how they wish our system to be used were shared.
Each of the professionals elaborated on those ideas based on
their expertise, suggesting many more concrete application
scenarios. Even though they are from varying ﬁelds, their
stories were closely related based on the goal of the system:
to realize an interactive design that combines attractiveness
evaluation with corresponding cognitive changes.

Interactive design
The experts all agreed that the application of an emotion recog-
nition interface should be useful for designing a strong emo-
tional connection between humans and technology. Emotional
connection with characters is very important in VR utilities,
scenario design, game design, and a virtual assistant because it
will help the users to become more immersed. In a VR-based
movie, for the main characters to sympathize with the user
and react properly, an attractive recognition model is required.

"Recently, interactive storytelling techniques based on
the dynamic object structure, where the scenario goes
differently according to user’s certain response, are re-
ceiving much attention. If this system is adapted to the
interactive storytelling and controls the dynamic path
in the multi scenario structure, we can provide a more
personalized and immersive experience." (D)

In the case where a voice agent is adapted in VR, if it is to be
designed to take good care of the users, it is very important
to develop a system that correctly recognizes their moods and
reacts to jokes or surroundings. Furthermore, in the study of
robot interaction, tests involving a prototype of the VR robot
are useful for researching human reaction.

"I think the system can do much to achieve interaction
design. Even if it is not about VR, any kinds of robot-
human interactions will be much easily tested with your
system. The analysis of the users’ attraction then can be
applied when making a real robot." (E)

DISCUSSION
In the ﬁrst session of the experiment, we measured the ac-
curacy of our attractiveness recognition model. The experts
evaluated the system as being sufﬁciently accurate. In general,
the loss of data should be considered negligible in order to
improve wearability of the headset. Major factors that led to
favorable results include a sensing system that can reliably
measure bio-signals, a time-synchronization algorithm and an
attractiveness recognition algorithm that utilizes both brain
engineering and machine learning technologies.

One of the greatest achievements found in the accuracy analy-
sis process was that the results were shown without combining
the different types of visual stimuli. Many neuroscience stud-
ies have combined the dataset into the same type when design-
ing experiments, fearing that using different types of datasets
will activate different areas of the brain [28]. However, the
results show that the biometric pattern does not vary much for
different types of datasets when the user experiences attrac-
tion. If further research proves this hypothesis, our interface
can recognize the user’s attraction with only the bio-signals
that we measured, regardless of the type of stimuli in any
environment.

The experiment results provided a number of ways we can
improve the accuracy of an algorithm. First, more accurate
results can be obtained when using a data set that has a clear
attraction to the user. When we look at the accuracy according
to the type of dataset, the accuracy is the lowest for the types
of data that people typically don’t clearly distinguish their
likes and dislikes (e.g. color) . With data types with higher
accuracy (e.g. face, clothes) using a composite image, where
all elements were added and people’s tastes could be reliably
reﬂected, led to the highest accuracy. It is expected that when a
person likes an object, there are clear characteristics of the bio-
signal that indicate attraction. Therefore, well-designed data
collection will help improve accuracy. In addition, if we add
a category such as "neutral" instead of simply discriminating
whether a person likes or dislikes stimuli, a more reasonable
system will be designed. The second factor is the usefulness of
the multi-modal system. The accuracy associated with simulta-
neously using both EEG and eye-tracking data was higher than
the accuracy of using data acquired from a single modality,
but the difference was not signiﬁcant. There is a lack of proof
of our hypothesis that the more abundant the data, the better
the results. Further studies are needed to develop a learning
model that can generate synergies when combining various
sensor modalities. Third, as with the modality comparison,

the accuracy did not increase signiﬁcantly as the sample size
of the training set increased. When implementing a general
machine learning model, the the larger number of data samples
had better performance [15]. However, increasing the number
of data samples by a factor of 10 did not result in signiﬁcantly
improved results in each case. In future work, we need to see
how much improvement in model accuracy can be achieved
by using more data.

The results of the factor analysis showed that this system has a
variety of possibilities for practical use. When a user observes
a car design in a VR environment, the factor analysis results
can be used to determine which elements of the car have had
a signiﬁcant impact on the car’s attractiveness or the user’s
purchase decision. We can investigate what factors affect the
user’s attraction while they experience the space such as a
retail store or an airport built in a VR environment. However,
in this study, factor analysis was not performed in one image
owing to limitations of the model currently being developed.
In a strict sense, factor analysis should compare factors in
one image as in the gaze-point analysis. However, it is not
currently possible to perform strict factor analysis using our
algorithm because it recognizes the attractiveness of the entire
visual stimuli being watched by the user. Therefore, in this
study, we obtained the correlation using the obtained results
after showing the factors that make up a single image. We
plan to develop a model that can recognize attractiveness for
each factor within a single scene. We have the capabilities
to develop an advanced model that allows us to analyze how
much attraction was felt when observing speciﬁc factors be-
cause eye-tracking technology is employed in addition to the
attractiveness recognition algorithm.

In interviews with participants and experts, there was some
concern about privacy, but overall, there are many expectations
about the use of this system. There are many interesting ideas
about potential uses, such as psychological analysis, criminal
analysis, and utilization in dating services. Among them,
examples of applying the emotion recognition interface to
AI have led to the expectation that innovative HCI can be
developed. If AI that is capable of speaking in a manner similar
to that of Apple’s Siri can recognize the users’ emotions, the
world of the ﬁlm "Her" could become a reality. Because the
VR environment has characteristics that are different from
existing digital environments, AI technology and interactive
storytelling can be actively utilized. In this environment, if
the AI reacts or the story of the contents changes based on
the attractiveness, a more immersive VR world can be built.
Our proposed system will contribute to the HCI ﬁeld as a new
interface that emotionally connects a user and computer in
these diverse applications.

CONCLUSION
Our proposed emotion recognition interface showed high ac-
curacy with seamless sensors in the experiment and interviews.
We built a continuously sensing system using the characteris-
tics of HMDs, and developed a machine-learning model that
can recognize the user’s attraction using the data obtained
from the sensors. The system has two advantages because it
utilizes biometric data. First, the genuine emotion can be rec-

ognized by analyzing the bio-response that occurs instantly as
the user’s emotion changes. Second, the system continues to
measure bio-signals and monitor the attractiveness information
in a time-series while the user utilizes the content.

This interface has good potential for use various applications,
such as in the various cases presented by experts in our in-
terviews. Using the interface, a computer understands which
object, character, or item a user is interested in, and recom-
mends personalized content, provides interactive storytelling,
or responds through AI. The proposed system is expected to
be used as a new tool for HCI by improving the accuracy and
advancing algorithms in further studies.

REFERENCES

[1] Hamdi Ben Abdessalem and Claude Frasson. 2017.
Real-time Brain Assessment for Adaptive Virtual
Reality Game: A Neurofeedback Approach. In
International Conference on Brain Function Assessment
in Learning. Springer, 133–143.

[2] Christos-Nikolaos Anagnostopoulos, Theodoros Iliou,
and Ioannis Giannoukos. 2015. Features and classiﬁers
for emotion recognition from speech: a survey from
2000 to 2011. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review 43, 2 (2015),
155–177.

[3] Dan Ariely and Gregory S Berns. 2010.

Neuromarketing: the hope and hype of neuroimaging in
business. Nature reviews neuroscience 11, 4 (2010), 284.

[4] John Atkinson and Daniel Campos. 2016. Improving

BCI-based emotion recognition by combining EEG
feature selection and kernel classiﬁers. Expert Systems
with Applications 47 (2016), 35–41.

[5] David Badre and Anthony D Wagner. 2004. Selection,

integration, and conﬂict monitoring: assessing the nature
and generality of prefrontal cognitive control
mechanisms. Neuron 41, 3 (2004), 473–487.

[6] Moshe Bar and Maital Neta. 2007. Visual elements of

subjective preference modulate amygdala activation.
Neuropsychologia 45, 10 (2007), 2191–2200.

[7] Maarten AS Boksem and Ale Smidts. 2015. Brain
responses to movie trailers predict individual
preferences for movies and their population-wide
commercial success. Journal of Marketing Research 52,
4 (2015), 482–492.

[8] Niko A Busch, Julien Dubois, and Ruﬁn VanRullen.

2009. The phase of ongoing EEG oscillations predicts
visual perception. Journal of Neuroscience 29, 24
(2009), 7869–7876.

[9] Rudolf N Cardinal, John A Parkinson, Jeremy Hall, and
Barry J Everitt. 2002. Emotion and motivation: the role
of the amygdala, ventral striatum, and prefrontal cortex.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 26, 3 (2002),
321–352.

[10] Keunho Choi, Donghee Yoo, Gunwoo Kim, and

Yongmoo Suh. 2012. A hybrid online-product

recommendation system: Combining implicit
rating-based collaborative ﬁltering and sequential
pattern analysis. Electronic Commerce Research and
Applications 11, 4 (2012), 309–317.

[23] Yisi Liu, Olga Sourina, and Minh Khoa Nguyen. 2010b.

Real-time EEG-based human emotion recognition and
visualization. In 2010 international conference on
cyberworlds. IEEE, 262–269.

[11] Mark Claypool, Phong Le, Makoto Wased, and David

[24] Albert Mehrabian. 2009. " Silent Messages"-A Wealth

Brown. 2001. Implicit interest indicators. In
Proceedings of the 6th international conference on
Intelligent user interfaces. ACM, 33–40.

of Information About Nonverbal Communication (Body
Language). http://www. kaaj. com/psych/smorder. html
(2009).

[12] Roddy Cowie, Ellen Douglas-Cowie, Nicolas

Tsapatsoulis, George Votsis, Stefanos Kollias, Winfried
Fellenz, and John G Taylor. 2001. Emotion recognition
in human-computer interaction. IEEE Signal processing
magazine 18, 1 (2001), 32–80.

[25] Nick Merrill and John Chuang. 2018. From Scanning
Brains to Reading Minds: Talking to Engineers about
Brain-Computer Interface. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 323.

[13] John Eidson and Kang Lee. 2002. IEEE 1588 standard
for a precision clock synchronization protocol for
networked measurement and control systems. In Sensors
for Industry Conference, 2002. 2nd ISA/IEEE. Ieee,
98–105.

[26] Kamlesh Mistry, Li Zhang, Siew Chin Neoh, Chee Peng

Lim, and Ben Fielding. 2017. A micro-GA embedded
PSO feature selection approach to intelligent facial
emotion recognition. IEEE transactions on cybernetics
47, 6 (2017), 1496–1509.

[14] Amit Etkin, Tobias Egner, and Raffael Kalisch. 2011.
Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial
prefrontal cortex. Trends in cognitive sciences 15, 2
(2011), 85–93.

[15] Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani.
2001. The elements of statistical learning. Vol. 1.
Springer series in statistics New York, NY, USA:.

[16] Anindya Ghose and Sang Pil Han. 2011. An empirical
analysis of user content generation and usage behavior
on the mobile Internet. Management Science 57, 9
(2011), 1671–1691.

[17] Guibing Guo and Mohamed Elgendi. 2013. A new
recommender system for 3D e-commerce: an EEG
based approach. Journal of Advanced Management
Science 1, 1 (2013), 61–65.

[18] SL Happy and Aurobinda Routray. 2015. Automatic
facial expression recognition using features of salient
facial patches. IEEE transactions on Affective
Computing 6, 1 (2015), 1–12.

[19] Richard W Homan, John Herman, and Phillip Purdy.
1987. Cerebral location of international 10–20 system
electrode placement. Electroencephalography and
clinical neurophysiology 66, 4 (1987), 376–382.

[20] Anatole Lécuyer. 2010. Using eyes, hands, and brain for

3D interaction with virtual environments: A
perception-based approach. University of Rennes 1
(2010).

[21] Yitong Li, Kafui Dzirasa, Lawrence Carin, David E
Carlson, and others. 2017. Targeting EEG/LFP
Synchrony with Neural Nets. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 4620–4630.

[22] Jiahui Liu, Peter Dolan, and Elin Rønby Pedersen.

2010a. Personalized news recommendation based on
click behavior. In Proceedings of the 15th international
conference on Intelligent user interfaces. ACM, 31–40.

[27] Ali Mollahosseini, David Chan, and Mohammad H

Mahoor. 2016. Going deeper in facial expression
recognition using deep neural networks. In Applications
of Computer Vision (WACV), 2016 IEEE Winter
Conference on. IEEE, 1–10.

[28] Kevin N Ochsner and James J Gross. 2008. Cognitive
emotion regulation: Insights from social cognitive and
affective neuroscience. Current directions in
psychological science 17, 2 (2008), 153–158.

[29] Moon-Hee Park, Jin-Hyuk Hong, and Sung-Bae Cho.
2007. Location-based recommendation system using
bayesian userâ ˘A ´Zs preference model in mobile devices.
In International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence
and Computing. Springer, 1130–1139.

[30] Ameera X Patel and Edward T Bullmore. 2016. A

wavelet-based estimator of the degrees of freedom in
denoised fMRI time series for probabilistic testing of
functional connectivity and brain graphs. NeuroImage
142 (2016), 14â ˘A ¸S26. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.052

[31] Martin P Paulus and Lawrence R Frank. 2003.

Ventromedial prefrontal cortex activation is critical for
preference judgments. Neuroreport 14, 10 (2003),
1311–1315.

[32] Giorgio Roffo, Simone Melzi, Umberto Castellani, and
Alessandro Vinciarelli. Inﬁnite latent feature selection:
A probabilistic latent graph-based ranking approach.

[33] Andrew I Schein, Alexandrin Popescul, Lyle H Ungar,
and David M Pennock. 2002. Methods and metrics for
cold-start recommendations. In Proceedings of the 25th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval.
ACM, 253–260.

[34] Martijn J Schuemie, Peter Van Der Straaten, Merel

Krijn, and Charles APG Van Der Mast. 2001. Research
on presence in virtual reality: A survey.
CyberPsychology & Behavior 4, 2 (2001), 183–201.

[35] Ryan Smith and Richard D Lane. 2015. The neural basis
of one’s own conscious and unconscious emotional
states. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 57
(2015), 1–29.

[36] Mohammad Soleymani, Maja Pantic, and Thierry Pun.

2012. Multimodal emotion recognition in response to
videos. IEEE transactions on affective computing 3, 2
(2012), 211–223.

[37] George Trigeorgis, Fabien Ringeval, Raymond

Brueckner, Erik Marchi, Mihalis A Nicolaou, Björn
Schuller, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2016. Adieu features?
end-to-end speech emotion recognition using a deep
convolutional recurrent network. In Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE, 5200–5204.

[38] Toru Tsujimoto, Hideki Shimazu, and Yoshikazu

Isomura. 2006. Direct recording of theta oscillations in
primate prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices.
Journal of Neurophysiology 95, 5 (2006), 2987–3000.

[39] David PG van den Berg, Paul AJM de Bont, Berber M
van der Vleugel, Carlijn de Roos, Ad de Jongh, Agnes
Van Minnen, and Mark van der Gaag. 2015. Prolonged
exposure vs eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing vs waiting list for posttraumatic stress
disorder in patients with a psychotic disorder: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA psychiatry 72, 3 (2015),
259–267.

[40] Giovanni Vecchiato, Laura Astolﬁ, Fabrizio De Vico

Fallani, Febo Cincotti, Donatella Mattia, Serenella
Salinari, Ramon Soranzo, and Fabio Babiloni. 2010.
Changes in brain activity during the observation of TV

commercials by using EEG, GSR and HR
measurements. Brain topography 23, 2 (2010), 165–179.

[41] Jonathan D Wallis and Earl K Miller. 2003. Neuronal
activity in primate dorsolateral and orbital prefrontal
cortex during performance of a reward preference task.
European Journal of Neuroscience 18, 7 (2003),
2069–2081.

[42] Kunxia Wang, Ning An, Bing Nan Li, Yanyong Zhang,

and Lian Li. 2015. Speech emotion recognition using
Fourier parameters. IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing 6, 1 (2015), 69–75.

[43] Mahendra Yadava, Pradeep Kumar, Rajkumar Saini,

Partha Pratim Roy, and Debi Prosad Dogra. 2017.
Analysis of EEG signals and its application to
neuromarketing. Multimedia Tools and Applications 76,
18 (2017), 19087–19111.

[44] Ali Yadollahi, Ameneh Gholipour Shahraki, and

Osmar R Zaiane. 2017. Current state of text sentiment
analysis from opinion to emotion mining. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR) 50, 2 (2017), 25.

[45] Zhiding Yu and Cha Zhang. 2015. Image based static

facial expression recognition with multiple deep network
learning. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction.
ACM, 435–442.

[46] Yu-Dong Zhang, Zhang-Jing Yang, Hui-Min Lu,

Xing-Xing Zhou, Preetha Phillips, Qing-Ming Liu, and
Shui-Hua Wang. 2016. Facial emotion recognition based
on biorthogonal wavelet entropy, fuzzy support vector
machine, and stratiﬁed cross validation. IEEE Access 4
(2016), 8375–8385.

