Conceptual Design and Preliminary Results of a VR-based Radiation 
Safety Training System for Interventional Radiologists  
Yi Guo1, Li Mao2, Gongsen Zhang1, Zhi Chen1, Xi Pei1,*, X. George Xu1,2,* 
1 Department of Engineering and Applied Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 
230026, China 
2 Nuclear Engineering Program, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA 

Abstract.  Recent studies have reported an  increased risk of developing brain and neck tumors, as well as cataracts, in 
practitioners  in  interventional  radiology  (IR).  Occupational  radiation  protection  in  IR  has  been  a  top  concern  for 
regulatory agencies and professional societies. To help minimize occupational radiation exposure in IR, we conceptualized 
a virtual reality (VR) based radiation safety training system to help operators understand complex radiation fields and to 
avoid  high  radiation  areas  through  game-like  interactive  simulations.  The  preliminary  development  of  the  system  has 
yielded  results  suggesting  that  the  training  system  can  calculate  and  report  the  radiation  exposure  after  each  training 
session based on a database precalculated from computational phantoms and Monte Carlo simulations and the position 
information  provided  in  real-time  by  the  MS  Hololens  headset  worn  by  trainee.  In  addition,  real-time  dose  rate  and 
cumulative dose will be displayed to the trainee by MS Hololens to help them adjust their practice. This paper presents the 
conceptual design of the overall hardware and software design, as well as preliminary results to combine MS HoloLens 
headset  and  complex  3D  X-ray field  spatial  distribution  data  to  create a  mixed  reality  environment  for safety  training 
purpose in IR. 

INTRODUCTION 

radiation 

protection 

radiation  physics  and  safety 

Each  year  over  10  million  fluoroscopically  guided 
interventional  (FGI)  procedures  are  performed  for 
diagnostic  or  therapeutic  purposes  [1].  Physicians, 
technologists,  and  nurses  are  inevitably  exposed  to  a 
high level of ionization radiation during FGI procedures 
due to scattered X-ray from the patient. The cumulative 
dose  over  an  operator’s  career  can  be  substantial 
especially with the increasing workload as a result of the 
rapidly maturing field. An alarming number of brain and 
neck tumors, as well as cataracts, have been reported for 
FGI  operators  who  are  found  to  have  insufficient 
[2-8]. 
training  of 
Occupational 
during  FGI 
procedures  has  been  a  top  concern  for  regulatory 
agencies, professional societies, and radiologists [9-13]. 
ICRP  has  recently  recommended  a  drastically  more 
restrictive annual dose limit of 20 mSv for the lens of the 
eye from the previous limit of 150 mSv [14]. In 2011, 
about  40%  of  FGI  physicians  from  a  high-volume 
medical institution in the U.S. received an estimated eye 
lens dose equal or greater than the new ICRP limit [15]. 
There  is  an  urgent  need  for  research  about  radiation 
protection of FGI operators [16]. 
Previous studies showed that radiation doses to the eye 
lens  and brain  depended  heavily  on  operator’s posture 
and protective equipment [11,15]. It is worth noting that 
the X-ray field is invisible to the interventionist who is 
occupied with the surgical procedure, thus often failing 
to minimize radiation exposure. Literature surveys show 

*Yi Guo and Li Mao contributed equally to this work 

1 

that:  (1)  Factors  contributing  to  operator  radiation 
exposure are not well quantified, (2) The few available 
computational studies were based on human models that 
are not anatomically realistic, (3) There is no computer-
based  dose-feedback  training  system  to  help  FGI 
operators to practice radiation safety. 
This  paper  describes 
the  conceptual  design  and 
preliminary development of a virtual-reality (VR) based 
X-ray safety training system for radiologists and nurses 
in  FGI  using  Microsoft  HoloLens  glasses  and 
precalculated  radiation  field  data  base.  A  set  of 
deformable 
anatomical 
three-dimensional  human 
phantoms and a Monte Carlo radiation dose computing 
code  were  used  to  generate  a  database  of  X-ray  field 
under various exposure scenarios. The X-ray field data 
were  then  incorporated  into  MS  Hololens  to  provide 
real-time  feedback  of  dose  rate  and  cumulative  dose 
according to the position information of the trainee. 

METHOD 

The framework of the VR training system 

The framework of the VR training system is shown in 
Figure  1.  The  system  consists  mainly  of 
three 
components:  the  PC,  Mixed  Reality  headset  MS 
Hololens,  and  the  trainee.  The  software  on  the  PC 
provides  functions  including  graphical  user  interfaces, 
radiation  field  database  and  dose  reporting,  training 
management, and learning assessment. Figure 2 shows 
the  interfaces  of  the  training  management  system.  For 
each  training  session,  the  administrator  will  specify 
parameters  that  are  related  to  the  radiation  exposure, 

suitable for deformation and adjustment. One can easily 
perform  a  series  of  geometric  operations  on  BREP 
phantoms,  including  stretching,  chamfering,  mixing, 
dislocation, peeling and torsion. In this study, we used 
deformable  RPI-Adult  Male  and  Female  [18]  BREP 
phantoms  for  radiation  field  calculations.  Figure  3 
shows  RPI  phantoms  (Figure  3a),  as  well  as  3D 
rendering of the FGI suite including an operator and a 
patient (Figure 3b). 

training, 

including  X-ray  tube  voltage,  filtration,  field  of  view, 
KAP per minute. These parameters will be used to fetch 
the 
the  corresponding  radiation  field  data  from 
precalculated 
the 
database.  During 
administrator will turn on the real-time visual feedback 
assistance to help trainee adjust their practice. The real-
time  visual  feedback  feature  of  the  training  system  is 
designed to display the radiation field to the trainee via 
see-through Hololens, and provides visible dose rate and 
cumulative  dose  readings  to  the  trainee  in  real-time. 
After  each  training  session,  the  training  system  can 
calculate and report the radiation exposure based on the 
radiation field data and position information provided by 
the Hololens headset worn by trainee during the training. 
The  training  data  of  each  trainee  is  managed  by  the 
training management system.   In addition, the training 
system  also  provides  support  for  learning  assessment 
which allows the evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
training system. 

(a) 

Figure 1. Framework of the VR training system 

(b) 
Figure 3. Deformable computational phantoms used to perform 
Monte Carlo simulations of  radiation field. (a) RPI-Adult Male 
and  Female  phantoms.  (b)  The  radiation  field  simulation 
showing 3D rendering of the FGI suite. 

Radiation data calculation 

Using  deformed  phantoms  described  earlier  and  the 
Monte Carlo methods [19], we created a database of the 
X-ray  field  data  under  different  exposure  scenarios  in 
FGIs. 
To obtain the radiation field in FGI suite, we calculated 
the  dose  distribution  on  a  rectangular  grid  overlaid on 
top of the FGI suite model, with  5 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm 
cube as mesh cell. The obtained dose is averaged over 
each mesh cell. In the simulation, X-ray is emitted from 
an X-ray source below the patient's body and detected 
by a detector above the patient, as shown in the Figure 
4. We calculated the radiation field under different tube 

Figure  2.  The  preliminary  graphical  user  interfaces  of 
the VR training management system 

Computational human phantoms 

In order to accurately calculate the radiation fields and 
organ doses in the FGI suite, we used deformable whole-
body  computational  human  phantoms  to  simulate  the 
patient  who  are  exposed  to  X-rays  during  the  FGI 
procedure.  Existing  computational  phantoms  can  be 
classified into three categories: stylized phantoms, voxel 
phantoms  and  boundary 
(BREP) 
phantoms [17]. Among them, BREP phantoms are more 

representation 

2 

 
 
 
distance-camera, can provide real-time visual and sound 
alarms to the trainee when he or she is involved in a high 
exposure  location  or  posture  with  radiation  exposure 
rate exceeding a pre-defined threshold.  
The  radiation  dose  information  during  the  mock 
procedure is calculated using the position of the trainee 
and duration in that position, the pre-calculated radiation 
field, and  the KAP specified by the  user. The position 
information  is  obtained  from  Hololens  positional 
tracking  system  which  utilizes  depth  sensor  and  RGB 
cameras,  gyroscope  and  accelerometer.  The  calculated 
dose  can  be  displayed  in  real-time  to  trainee  via 
Hololens, and be saved in the training system for future 
analysis. 
A  conversion  factor  is  used  to  covert  the  KAP  value 
specified  by  user  into  dose  information  for  each 
exposure scenario: 

𝐶𝐹 =  

𝐷𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
𝐾𝐴𝑃𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑

, 

where  Dsimulated  is  the  dose  simulated  by  Monte  Carlo 
method  under  a  specific  exposure  scenario  and 
𝐾𝐴𝑃𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑  is  the  Kerma  air  product  simulated  by 
Monte Carlo method under the same exposure scenario.  

RESULTS 

We use different colors to represent different radiation 
intensities, as shown in Figure 5a. It can be seen that the 
intensity  of  radiation  field  varies  greatly  in  different 
regions.  In  addition,  the  user  can  use  buttons  at  the 
bottom of the training system interface to turn on or turn 
off the visible X-ray radiation field. When the user clicks 
on  the  Dose_Hide  button  during  the  radiation  safety 
training,  the  X-ray  radiation  field  in  the  training 
environment  will  disappear  and  when  the  Dose_Show 
button is pressed, the radiation field will become visible 
to the trainee. Figure 5b shows the training environment 
without visible X-ray radiation field. 

voltages (80 kVp,90 kVp) and different X-ray  field of 
view (FOV)(10 × 10 cm2, 20 × 20 cm2, 30 × 30 cm2, 40 
× 40 cm2). 

(a) 

(b) 
Figure 4. Patient phantom and X-ray under different views. (a) 
Top view. (b) Side view. 

Visualization of the radiation field 

the 

real 

After  obtaining  the  distribution  of  the  X-ray  field,  the 
data needs to be processed and converted into a format 
that can be read by the VR program. At the same time, 
couch, patient and operators also need to be modeled to 
simulate 
interventional  procedures.  We 
developed a visual program based on OpenGL to display 
the  radiation  field  and  save  it  in  FBX  format.  The 
radiation field data are converted into text files, and then 
processed by the developed program. The color coding 
of  the  radiation  field  is  according  to  the  radiation 
intensity  of  each  mesh  cell.  Different  colors  represent 
regions  with  different  radiation  level  -  red  represents 
high  radiation  area  and  blue  represents  low  radiation 
area. After completing the radiation field modeling, the 
operators, couch, patient and X-ray source are modeled 
respectively by using 3D Studio Max and Unity3D, and 
then saved in FBX format.  

Visual real-time feedback 

To help the trainee better understand the radiation field, 
the  training  system  is  designed  to  offer  real-time 
intuitive  and  interactive  visualization  to  trainees.    The 
see-through view glasses allow a trainee to visualize the 
radiation  fields  that  are  superimposed  on  the  actual 
surrounding  in  the  FGI  suit.  The  Hololens,  which  is  a 

3 

(a) 

 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. Training environment. (a) With X-ray radiation field. 
(b) Without X-ray radiation field. 

Figure 6 shows the dose feedback of the radiation safety 
training system. The calculated results are shown in the 
upper-right corner of the training system interface. The 
total dose is the cumulative dose received by the trainee 
during the training session. In addition, when the dose 
rate  exceeding  a  pre-defined  threshold,  the  safety 
training system gives audible alarm as shown in Figure 
6b. 

(a) 

Figure 6. Dose feedback of the radiation safety training 
system. The trainee standing in high radiation area and 
the system give a warning. 

Figure 7 shows the images on HoloLens glasses mapped 
onto a computer screen and a user manipulates the eye 
view by gesturing. 

4 

(b) 
Figure  7.  Functional  VR  system.  (a)  The  IR  suite  is 
displayed  in  a  computer  screen.  (b)  The  wearer  of  the 
head-mounted  HoloLens  system  manipulates  the  eye 
view by gesturing. 

DISCUSSION 

retrograde 

literature  data 

information  with 

To  verify  our  computational  methods,  we  compared 
staff  dose 
for 
measurement by Huda et. al [20]. In that study, Huda et 
al. used the computational framework developed at RPI 
to  evaluate  doses  to  several  staff  members  in  an 
endoscopic 
  cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)  procedure.  The  staff  personnel  doses  were 
obtained using thermoluminescent (TL) dosemeters. To 
compare  results  with  our  study,  we  considered  the 
similar  staff  and  patient  FGI  environment  which  is 
illustrated in Figure 3b (in reference to Figure 3 in Huda. 
et al.).  For a simulated training session with the same 
KAP  rate  and  Fluoroscopy  time  as  reported  in  the 
referred study, we found that the accumulated eye dose 
to the staff members reported by our training system was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risks  of  Acquiring  a  Brain  Tumor”.  American  Journal  of 
Roentgenology 209:6, W403-W403 (2017). 

9.  National  Council 

on  Radiation 

and 
Protection 
Measurements.  Radiation  Dose  Management 
for 
Fluoroscopically-guided Interventional Medical Procedures. 
NCRP  Report  No.  168  (National  Council  on  Radiation 
Protection  and  Measurements,  Bethesda,  3899  Maryland) 
(2010). 

10.Kim,  K.P.,  Miller,  D.L.,  de  Gonzalez,  A.B.,  et  al. 
Occupational  radiation  doses  to  operators  performing 
fluoroscopically-guided  procedures.  Health  Phys.  103(1), 
80 (2012). 

11.Balter,  S.  Stray  radiation  in  the  cardiac  catheterization 
laboratory. Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 94(1–2), 183–188 (2001). 
12.Vano,  E.,  Gonzalez,  L.,  Guibelalde,  E.,  Fernandez,  J.M., 
to  medical  staff 
in 
radiology.  Br  J  Radiol, 

Ten,  J.I.  Radiation  exposure 
interventional  and  cardiac 
71(849):954–960 (1998). 

13.Koukorava, C.,  Carinou, E.,  Simantirakis, G.,  Vrachliotis, 
T.G., Archontakis, E., Tierris, C., et al. Doses to operators 
during  interventional  radiology  procedures:  focus  on  eye 
lens and extremity dosimetry. RadiatProt Dosimetry, 144(1–
4):482–486 (2011). 

14.Stewart,  F.A.,  Akleyev,  A.V.,  Hauer-Jensen,  M.,  Hendry, 
J.H., Kleiman, N.J., Macvittie, T.J. et al. ICRP publication 
118: ICRP statement on tissue reactions and early and late 
effects of radiation in normal tissues and organs—threshold 
doses for tissue reactions in a radiation protection context. 
Ann ICRP 41(1–2): 1–322 (2012). 

15.Dauer,  L.T.  Exposed  medical  staff:  challenges,  available 
tools,  and  opportunities  for  improvement.  Health  Physics, 
106(2):217-224 (2014). 

16.Dauer, L.T., et al. Status of NCRP Scientific Committee 1-
23 Commentary on Guidance on Radiation Dose Limits for 
the Lens of the Eye. Health Physics, 110(2):182-184 (2016). 
17.Xu, X.G. An exponential growth of computational phantom 
research in radiation protection, imaging, and radiotherapy: 
a review of the fifty-year history. Phys Med Biol. 59:R233-
R302 (2014). 

18.Zhang, J., Na, Y.H., Caracappa, P.F., Xu, X.G. RPI-AM and 
RPI-AF,  a  pair  of  mesh-based,  size-adjustable  adult  male 
and  female  computational  phantoms  using  ICRP-89 
parameters  and  their  calculations  for  organ  doses  from 
monoenergetic  photon  beams.  Phys  Med  Biol.  54:5885-
5908 (2009). 

19.Goorley,  T.  MCNP6.  1.1-beta  release  notes.  Los  Alamos 

National Laboratory Technical Report. (2014). 

20.Huda, A., Garzón, W. J., Filho, G.C.L., Vieira, B., Kramer, 
R., Xu, X.G., Gao, Y., and Khoury, H. J. Evaluation of staff, 
patient  and  foetal  radiation  doses  due  to  endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) procedures in 
a  pregnant  patient.  Radiation  protection  dosimetry 
168(3):401-407(2015). 

0.02  mSv,  which  is  in  a  good  agreement  with  data 
reported by Huda et. al. 

CONCLUSION 

A preliminary VR-based radiation safety training system 
for  operators  in  interventional  radiology  using  the  MS 
HoloLens  headset  device  has  been  conceptualized.  
Preliminary  development  used  the  deformable  whole-
body computational human phantoms (RPI-Adult Male 
and Female) and Monte Carlo methods to calculate the 
X-ray field in interventional radiology. A C++ program 
was  developed  to  import  radiation  field  data,  render 
three-dimensional  models  with  different  colors  and 
export  them  to  FBX  format  files.  Differentiating  the 
radiation intensity by different colors allowed operators 
to better understand the radiation field and to learn how 
to  more  effectively  avoid  high  radiation  areas  during 
procedures.  In  addition,  we  mocked  the  FGI  suite 
environment  with  3D  models  of  operators,  couch, 
patient  and  X-ray  source  using  3D  Studio  Max  and 
unity3D. The preliminary results suggest that, using MS 
HoloLens  glasses,  the  training  system  enables  the 
trainees to visualize the radiation field in the FGI suite 
intuitively and effectively. With the help of the real-time 
dose feedback assistance, the trainees could learn how 
to avoid the high radiation areas actively or adjust their 
in  FGI 
to  minimize  radiation  exposure 
postures 
procedures. 

REFERENCES 

1.  Balter,  S.  Interventional  fluoroscopy:  physics,  technology, 

safety. Wiley-Liss (2001). 

3.  Organization 

2.  Kitahara, C.M., Linet, M.S., Balter, S., et al. Occupational 
radiation  exposure  and  deaths  from  malignant  intracranial 
neoplasms  of  the  brain  and  CNS  in  U.S.  radiologic 
technologists, 1983–2012. AJR, 208:1278–1284 (2017). 
for  Occupational  Radiation  Safety 

in 
Interventional  Fluoroscopy.  Invisible  impact:  the  risk  of 
ionizing 
staff. 
on 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=rXgt0bF3GJM&feature=yout
u.be. Accessed January 23 (2018). 

radiation 

cath 

lab 

4.  Roguin,  A.,  Bartal,  G.  Radiation  and  your  brain. 

Endovascular Today, 15:63–65 (2016). 

5.  Miller,  D.L.,  Vañó,  E.,  Bartal,  G.,  et  al.  Occupational 
radiation  protection  in  interventional  radiology:  a  joint 
guideline  of 
Interventional 
the  Cardiovascular  and 
the  Society  of 
Radiology  Society  of  Europe  and 
Interventional  Radiology.  J  VascIntervRadiol, 21:607–615 
(2010). 

6.  Roguin, A., Goldstein, J., Bar, O., Goldstein, J.A. Brain and 
neck  tumors  among  physicians  performing  interventional 
procedures. Am J Cardiol. May 1;111(9):1368-72 (2013). 

7.  Morillo,  A.J.  Occupational  Radiation  Exposure 

in 
Interventional Radiology and the Risks of Acquiring a Brain 
Tumor. American Journal of Roentgenology 209:6, W402-
W402 (2017). 

8.  Kitahara,  C.M.,  Miller,  D.L.  Reply  to  “Occupational 
Radiation  Exposure  in  Interventional  Radiology  and  the 

5 

 
