Exploring an Application of Virtual Reality for Early 

Detection of Dementia 

Yiming Zhong, Yuan Tian, Mira Park, Soonja Yeom 

Centre of Digital Technologies Education Research (CODER) 

ICT, School of Technology, Environments & Design 

University of Tasmania, Australia 

mira.park@utas.edu.au 

Abstract 

Facing the severe global dementia problem, an exploration was conducted adopting the technology of 
virtual  reality  (VR).  This  report  lays  a  technical  foundation  for  further  research  project  “Early 
Detection of Dementia Using Testing Tools in VR/AR Environment”, which illustrates the process of 
developing a VR application using Unity 3D software on Oculus Go. This preliminary exploration is 
composed  of  three  steps,  including  3D  virtual  scene  construction,  VR  interaction  design  and 
monitoring. The exploration was recorded to provide basic technical guidance and detailed method for 
subsequent research. 

Keywords: dementia, early detection, dementia diagnosis, virtual reality, future directions, Oculus Go, 

Unity. 

1. Introduction 

The number of people enduring dementia in the world is 46 million nowadays, and it is expected to 
soar to 131.5 million by 2050 (Hayhurst, 2017). This data shows that dementia has become an issue 
that  cannot  be  ignored.  In  regarding  to Australia,  over  400,000 Australians  currently  suffer  from 
dementia, and by 2058, the number is estimated to be 1 million (Australia, 2019). With the continuous 
improvement and development of VR technology, it is expected to play an active role in the field of 
dementia. This article illustrates the conduction of a preliminary technical exploration for the early 
detection and diagnosis of dementia. After a brief literature review, a VR prototype was designed and 
developed with different 3D scenes. In addition, the contribution of this exploration and subsequent 
work are illustrated in this report.   

 
 
 
2. Literature Review 

Symptoms that occur when the brain is affected by certain diseases or conditions are named dementia 
(Hayhurst, 2017). The main symptoms of dementia are attention reduction, memory loss, increasing 
difficulties  in  planning  and  performing  tasks,  and  changes  of  emotion  and  personality,  which  will 
greatly affect the quality of daily life of people suffering from dementia (Hayhurst, 2017).   

The main areas where technology can play a positive role in the field of dementia are as follows: "(i) 
diagnosis, assessment and monitoring, (ii) maintenance of functioning, (iii) leisure and activity, (iv) 
caregiving and management" (Astell et al., 2019).   

Amongst the different utilized technologies, VR is an example, since VR cognitive training has been 
proven to be a positive approach to improve subjects' attention and memory functions (Gamito et al., 
2015). VR is a three-dimensional-environment simulation generated by computer, and with the help 
of  virtual  reality  equipment,  such  as  VR  gloves  and  head-mounted  displays,  people  can  achieve 
interaction with the simulated environment (Hodge et al. 2018). In addition, VR technology currently 
has been applied to explore different stages of Alzheimer disease and related cognitive disorders with 
various interaction types, different methodology types and distinct immersion types (see Figure 1 ). 

Figure 1    Categorization of VR technology applications for AD. (García-Betances et al., 2015) 

Rooted  in  the  succinct  review  of  literature,  with  the  rapid  development  of  VR  technology,  VR 
technology is actively applied to several aspects in the field of dementia, including early diagnosis, 
maintenance  of  dementia,  and  training  of  caregivers  and  so  on.  Moreover,  it  is  estimated  that VR 
technology  will  be  useful  and  helpful  in  the  diagnosis  and  maintenance  of  dementia.  Because VR 
technology not only has advantages in creating highly immersive three-dimensional scenes, but also 
provides rich interactions between human and computers which can fulfill different customized tasks 
in various scenarios.   

 
 
 
 
3. Prototype Design and Implementation 

This section consists of prototype design and prototype implementation, which elaborates the process 
of developing a prototype from selection of hardware and software to the accomplishment of four 3D 
VR models. Meanwhile, the interaction between the users and the devices and how to monitor the 
whole interaction process are illustrated. 

3.1. 

Prototype Design 

During the stage of prototype design, two problems should be solved. One is to select out a VR device. 
In addition, the other is to choose an appropriate software. In this exploration, Oculus Go and Unity 
were utilized as the hardware and the main software platform respectively. 

3.1.1.  Hardware Selection 

VR technology needs to be implemented through Head-mounted displays (HMDs), and users need to 
wear VR headsets for head and eye tracking, image or video projection, sound playback, etc. According 
to a data report released by Strategy Analytics in 2018, the mainstream VR device brands on the market 
are Sony, Oculus series, HTC, Google, and Samsung (shown in Figure 2). 

Figure 2 2018 VR Headset Revenue Vendor Global Market Share (Strategy Analytics, 2018) 

The basic technical specifications of VR equipment include headset type, connection, and resolution, 
refresh rate (per eye), degree of freedom (DOF), controls, hardware platform, and software platform. 
On  the  basis  of  current  mainstream  VR  headsets,  these  eight  aspects  are  compared  against  five 
mainstream headsets including Sony PlayStation, Oculus Go, Oculus Quest, Oculus Rift 5, and HTC 
Vive. As can be seen from the comparison below presented in Table 1, Oculus Go has advantages in 
portability and image display. Although it cannot achieve complex VR interactions such as walking, 
jumping  and  crouching,  it  can  meet  basic  interaction  requirements  such  as  moving  the  head  to 
experience  a  360-degree  virtual  space  and  using  the  controller  to  achieve  movement  and  other 
interactions in VR space.   

 
 
Table 1 Comparison of mainstream devices in the VR market (Greenwald, 2019) 

Sony 

Oculus Go  Oculus Quest  Oculus Rift 5  HTC Vive 

PlayStation 

VR 

Headset Type 

Tethered 

Standalone 

Standalone 

Tethered 

Tethered 

Connection 

HDMI,  USB 

None 

None 

DisplayPort, 

HDMI,  USB 

2.0 

USB 3.0 

3.0 

Resolution 

960 * 1080 

1280 * 1440 

1440 * 1600 

1280 * 1440 

1080 * 1200 

(per eye) 

Refresh Rate (Hz) 

120 

72 

72 

Degree-of-Freedom 

6DoF 

3DoF 

6DoF 

80 

6DoF 

90 

6DoF 

(DOF) 

Controls 

DualShock  4, 

Oculus  Go 

Oculus Touch  Oculus Touch 

HTC 

Vive 

PlayStation 

Controller 

Move 

Motion 

Controller 

Hardware Platform 

PlayStation 4 

Android 

Android 

PC 

PC 

Software Platform 

PlayStation 4 

Oculus 

Oculus 

Oculus 

SteamVR 

For further prototype development, a hardware should be selected based on the requirements of the 
research project. Considering that the main user group of the application is the middle-aged and 
elderly people who may or already have dementia, the ease of use should be one of the criteria, 
which is also crucial. Moreover, the controllability and comfort of devices are important, which 
introduces another criterion Light-weighted standalone device. As for the display quality and 
interactive functions, it only needs to meet the basic requirements. Hence, a system of hardware 
criteria was established for this exploration, which is presented in Table 2. 

Table 2 Hardware Criteria 

Index 

Hardware Criteria 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Easy to use, especially for people who are new to VR 

Light-weighted standalone device 

Normal resolution which can display simple scenes smoothly 

Normal tracking which can track the basic position of head 

With  the  existence  of  aforementioned  comparison  between  different  devices  and  hardware  criteria, 
Oculus Go was chosen as the hardware to assist further development. Here are some reasons to select 

 
it out. Firstly, it (shown in Figure 3) is a standalone headset which means it does not require additional 
equipment such as a computer and can run independently. Moreover, it is able to achieve 3DoF which 
is front-back, up-down, and left-right tracking (Oculus.com, 2019). Although the functions of pitch, 
yaw, and roll are missing compared to 6DoF, many simple VR interactions can be achieved. In addition, 
as an entry-level VR device, easy operation is the main advantage of Oculus Go. In addition, it is also 
very friendly to users who has never been exposed to VR devices.   

Figure 3 Oculus Go (www.oculus.com/go) 

3.1.2.  Software Selection 

The development of VR technology requires professional software technology and platforms, which 
is  able  to  adapt  to  the  headset,  and  provides  corresponding  resources  and  plug-ins  to  support 
development. It also needs to have the ability to develop 3D models and support programming for 
interaction. Hence, the criteria to select out an appropriate software was demonstrated in Table 3. 

Table 3 Software Criteria 

Index 

Software Criteria 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Mature development environment 

Capable to build 3D models 

Able to program basic VR interaction 

Competent to collect performance data of users 

Available of supporting resources, like plugins 

Unity  was  selected  as  the  main  development  platform.  Firstly,  it  is  a  game  development  tool  that 
supports multiple platforms and is easy to operate. Moreover, it also has a powerful engine and fully 
integrated professional application technology (Unity.com, 2019). Furthermore, Unity has become the 
mainstream VR development software on the market, with its own strong development ecosystem. For 
instance, it has rich plugins and resource support. Apart from Unity, some other development platforms 
and  software  technologies  were  selected  out  for  this  prototype. All  of  the  software  utilized  in  the 
prototype implementation process and their respective functions were presented in Table 4.   

 
Table 4 Software Utilized in the Prototype Implementation Process 

Name 

Unity 

Function 

Providing  a  platform  for  VR  application  development,  and  supporting  various  VR 

headsets including Oculus Go 

OVR Utilities Plugin 

Achieving convenient connection between Oculus headsets and Unity 

ProBuild 

VReasy 

Simplifying the processes of model building 

Containing  basic VR  interaction  code,  for  example,  click,  trigger  animation,  pop-up 

window and controller settings 

Sketch 

Facilitating the graphic and icon design 

Additionally,  Figure  4  also  shows  the  key  software  and  hardware  platform  on  which  the  entire 
prototype is based. The entire application is primarily built on the Unity 3D platform, and uses the 
resources  of  the  Unity  app  store  to  build  models  and  interactions. After  the  application  is  released 
through the Oculus platform, users can run it directly on Oculus Go. 

Figure 4 Key Components of the Prototype 

3.2. 

Prototype Implementation 

During the stage of prototype implementation, three steps were conducted, which were modelling VR 
scenarios, interacting with VR equipment and monitoring the interaction between the users and the VR 
device. 
In addition, three-dimensional virtual environment can bring users a sense of immersion. In order to 
enhance the feeling, the specific model settings are mainly based on daily life scenarios, including 
common  indoor  and  outdoor  scenes.  Furthermore,  because  of  the  immersive  interaction,  these 
scenarios could be utilized to assess the navigational skills of people with dementia. By monitoring 
and recording the user's behavior in the virtual environments, a meaningful collection of data could be 
provided for the diagnosis of dementia. 

Step 1. Modelling VR Scenarios 

Some daily scenes were set up in this step, including four different scenarios, which are office rooms 
(shown in Figure 5), wooden houses (shown in Figure 6), modern interiors (shown in Figure 7) and 
parks.  The  model  is  mainly  imported  from  the  Unity  asset  store  and  use  ProBuild  to  make  some 

 
customizations. The scenes take a 1: 1 ratio, and the purpose is to simulate a real world as much as 
possible. The camera settings also use a first-person perspective to deepen the user's immersion. 

Figure 5 Model 1 Common Office Room and Interior Settings 

Figure 6 Model 2 Retro Interior Cottage 

Figure 7 Model 3 Modern Interior 

 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 8 Modern 4 Outdoor Park 

Step 2. Interacting with VR Equipment 

After developing some VR 3D scenes, next step is to achieve the function of interaction between users 
and the VR equipment. In this prototype, users can perform a series of basic interactions with the help 
of the Oculus Go controller. Firstly, when the users wear a VR headset, they can enter a 360-degree 
3D  scene.  Oculus  Go  can  track  the  user's  head  in  three  degrees,  as  aforementioned  in  Section  3.1. 
Therefore, the users can intuitively feel a three-dimensional space by moving the head. Secondly, the 
users  can  activate  the  controller  by  holding  down  the  controller's  front  button. After  pressing  and 
holding for 3 seconds, the user can select the virtual button set in the scene and trigger some events. 
For example, users can press and hold to drag, rotate, and throw specific objects. Thirdly, the user can 
touch the pad on the controller to control the forward, backward, left and right movement. These main 
interaction modes are also presented in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 Main Interaction Modes 

Moreover, Figure 10 shows nine specific interactions with the VR scenarios, such as long press the 
front  button  of  the  controller  to  change  scenes  or  enable  a  pop-up  menu.  With  the  help  of  these 

 
 
interactions,  the  capability  of  users’  navigation  skills  is  likely  to  be  assessed  and  evaluated,  which 
plays a significant role for the following research project about early detection of dementia. 

Figure 10 Specific interactions 

Step 3. Monitoring the interactions of users 

In order to assess the performance of the users, a process of monitoring the interaction is necessary, 
which  has  the  potential  to  help  general  practitioners  and  specialists  to  diagnosis  dementia.  This 
prototype justifies the technical feasibility.   

As shown in Figure 11, observers can connect to the Oculus headset via an external device such as a 
desktop computer or a tablet. This allows the observer to monitor the user's activities in the virtual 
space and obtain real-time data such as the time the user completed the task and the specific difficulties 
they encounter. Meanwhile, Oculus's dashboard backend can collect application usage data, such as 
the time the user spends at each level. Therefore, the observer can evaluate the user's performance in 
a specific scene. This will expand the evaluation method set and enrich quantitative data, while also 
avoiding certain risks. For example, subjects can be tested in highly simulated virtual scenarios without 
accomplishing similar tasks in real-world scenarios. For patients with a severe dementia, this is a safe 
and reliable method. 

 
Figure 11 Monitoring the Interaction between the User and the VR Device 

4. Contribution 

This exploration mainly attempts to apply VR technology for further dementia research project. In 
addition, a highly detailed record was provided by this technical report, in order to outline a basic 
technical model. Three primary contributions of this exploration are listed below: 

l 

l 

l 

It  was  demonstrated  that VR  technology  was  feasible  to  be  applied  to  assess  and  evaluate  the 
performance of participants. 

It  was  demonstrated  that VR  technology  has  the  potential  to  be  utilized  for  early  detection  of 
dementia, which could also avoid the security risks of testing in real-life scenarios. 

It was demonstrated that VR technology was likely to get more participants from culturally and 
linguistically diverse backgrounds involved in the dementia research. 

5. Future work 

Since this project only focuses on the basic exploration from the technical perspective, the subsequent 
research project will be conducted under the guidance of specialists of neuroscience, with involvement 
of  participants.  Moreover,  all  models  and  interactions  should  be  tested  rigorously,  additionally, 
thorough evaluation on the models and interactions should be accomplished, in order to ensure that it 
can play a positive role in dementia diagnosis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Astell, A., Bouranis, N., Hoey, J., Lindauer, A., Mihailidis, A., Nugent, C. and Robillard, J. (2019). 
Technology and Dementia: The Future is Now. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 47(3), 
pp.131-139. 

Australia, H. 2019. How technology is helping people with dementia. 

Gamito, P., Oliveira, J., Coelho, C., Morais, D., Lopes, P., Pacheco, J., Brito, R., Soares, F., Santos, N. 
and  Barata,  A.  (2015).  Cognitive  training  on  stroke  patients  via  virtual  reality-based  serious 
games. Disability and Rehabilitation, 39(4), pp.385-388. 

Greenwald,  W.  (2019).  The  Best  VR  Headsets  for  2019.  [online]  PCMag Australia. Available  at: 
https://au.pcmag.com/virtual-reality-1/42713/the-best-vr-headsets [Accessed 17 Dec. 2019]. 

Hayhurst, J. (2017). How Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality is Being Used to Support People 
Living  with  Dementia—Design  Challenges  and  Future  Directions. Augmented  Reality  and  Virtual 
Reality, pp.295-305. 

Hodge, J., Balaam, M., Hastings, S. & Morrissey, K. 2018. Exploring the Design of Tailored Virtual 
Reality Experiences for People with Dementia. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '18. 

Low,  L.  F.,  Barcenilla-Wong, A.  L.  &  Brijnath,  B.  2019.  Including  ethnic  and  cultural  diversity  in 
dementia research. Med J Aust, 211, 345-346 e1. 

Oculus.com.  (2019).  Oculus  Go:  Standalone  VR  Headset  |  Oculus.  [online]  Available  at: 
https://www.oculus.com/go/ [Accessed 17 Dec. 2019]. 

Unity.com. (2019). [online] Available at: https://unity.com/ [Accessed 17 Dec. 2019]. 

 
