City Planning with Augmented Reality

Catherine Angelini*
Florida International University
Newton D’Souza¶
Florida International University

Adam S. Williams†
Colorado State University
Naphtali D. Rishe||
Florida International University

Mathew Kress‡
Florida International University
Joseph Medina**
Florida International University

Edgar Ramos Vieira§
Florida International University
Francisco Ortega††
Colorado State University

0
2
0
2

n
a
J

8
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
7
5
6
0
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

We present an early study designed to analyze how city planning and
the health of senior citizens can beneﬁt from the use of augmented
reality (AR) using Microsoft’s HoloLens. We also explore whether
AR and VR can be used to help city planners receive real-time
feedback from citizens, such as the elderly, on virtual plans, allowing
for informed decisions to be made before any construction begins.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visualization—Visu-
alization techniques—Treemaps; Human-centered computing—
Visualization—Visualization design and evaluation methods

1 INTRODUCTION

We present an early study designed to analyze how city planning
will beneﬁt from the use of AR and VR, making it more efﬁcient and
accurate in catering to the needs of people such as senior citizens.
In the study, AR and VR are used to help understand what elements
would make the participants more willing to exercise in a speciﬁc
area of Miami. This area is referred to as the “M-path,” which is
an underutilized zone in Miami, FL, that lies under Miami’s ele-
vated Metro-rail transit system and passes through several inner-city
neighborhoods, where a large population of senior citizens is located
and is known for its heavy vehicular trafﬁc. This study introduces
a novel way to address this issue by introducing a groundbreaking
technology to enhance a city’s planning efforts.

2 RELATED WORK

Due to how recently the AR technology has been adopted, limited
research has supported city viewing or planning in this way. For
example, Zhang et al. used the Microsoft HoloLens to visualize the
City of Toronto, Canada [3]. Even though the visualization was of a
miniature model on top of a table, it shed light on the potential of
applying AR to city planning as entire buildings, roads, parks and
more could be visualized and modiﬁed before construction begins.
On the other hand, Claes and Moore used AR to increase awareness
about local issues around a city [2]. There have also been studies to
improve health and safety using AR. For example, HybridPlay used
AR technology to increase outside physical activity [1]. With this
application, users could attach a sensor to playground equipment to
be able to use the equipment as an input to their phone to complete
mini-games. They found that the use of such games increases the
likelihood of users going to a park or outside to exercise.

*e-mail:c.angelini10@gmail.com
†e-mail:AdamWil@csu.edu
‡e-mail:mkres006@ﬁu.edu
§e-mail:evieira@ﬁu.edu
¶e-mail:ndsouza@ﬁu.edu
||e-mail:NDR@acm.org
**e-mail:jmedi145@ﬁu.edu
††e-mail:fortega@colostate.edu

3 SYSTEM DESIGN
In order to understand what future elements would take for senior
citizens to exercise in this area, we decided to analyze how AR
could be used for them to see the changes superimposed directly
on the site, using the Microsoft HoloLens headset and Unity Game
Engine to create the environment, and give real-time feedback on
those changes. The virtual environment was based upon actual
measurements collected on site and the problem areas that were
identiﬁed by the city and researchers, which included the following:
lack of places to sit, lack of safety, noise from the highway, no clear
path for walking or cycling, darkness at night, no nearby places to
use the restroom, and the overall unsafe atmosphere of the area.

As a result, we decided to focus on receiving feedback on three
separate scenes, each including lamp posts, separate pedestrian and
cyclist lanes, signage/way ﬁnding, either a small wall, a tall wall, or
a glass wall to separate and minimize highway noise, benches, and
bathroom pods. However, we also received positive feedback regard-
ing the HoloLens itself. All of the distances and positioning of the
elements relative to each other were accurate to the measurements
we took. Objects remained ﬁxed in their spatial location as the par-
ticipants moved around and walked by them. The ﬁnal environment
can be seen in Figure 1. Note that the wall seems to be ﬂoating
above the ground. The HoloLens image capture uses a different
perspective than the headset’s wearer sees. To the participants the
objects appeared in their correct locations. Hence, it was evident
that the use of AR allowed the participants to walk through, see and
experience the site with all the virtual modiﬁcations, giving them a
detailed look at how the environment could look in the future.

Figure 1: Environment in AR showing the glass wall scene

4 EXPERIMENT DESIGN
For this study, 10 elderly adults who live within 2 miles of the “M-
path” near the [City] Metro-rail Station participated. The participants
were required to be at least 60 years old, be English or Spanish
speakers, be able to walk independently without any walking aids,
have no lower limb surgery or injuries from falls during the previous
6 months, and pass the Mini-Cog test1. All participants received an
explanation about the study’s goals and procedures and were given

1See https://mini-cog.com/.

 
 
 
 
 
 
the opportunity to ask and receive answers to any questions they
had. After the explanations, they were asked to read and sign the
informed consent form in their preferred language and were given
$30 for their participation.

4.1 Preparation
The participants were ﬁtted with Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs),
from the MTw Awinda system from Xsens Technologies, to assess
their gait and balance during testing. This was done to ensure the AR
or VR headsets would not have a negative impact on their mobility.
During testing, the participants walked along the existing path on the
site with the equipment. A control experiment was also conducted
as a simple walk-through without the headsets. The ﬁrst part of
the experiment involved assessing their balance while standing still
and getting accustomed to the AR and VR experience. Hence,
after conﬁrming that the IMUs were not disrupting the participants
mobility, they were asked to stand on a force plate for 30 seconds
to measure their balance, cross-referencing the force plate with
the MTw Awinda system for calibration. The HoloLens was then
placed on the subject powered off and their balance was measured
for 30 seconds. Then the HoloLens was turned on and prepared for
the participant with the scene with the tall wall and their balance
was taken again. Then an HTC Vive was used with the participant
standing to allow them to ﬁrst fully see the entire virtual environment
with no external distractions. This way they would know what new
elements were going to appear on the AR environment mixed in
with the real world.

4.2 Walk-through
After the previous steps mentioned above were completed, the partic-
ipant walked four times in the given path using the HoloLens headset
with someone following right behind them for safety purposes. It
was of particular importance to maintain a natural walking condition
while having someone close to the subjects in case they fell due to
loss of balance. The experiment began with the HoloLens placed on
participant’s head while turned off, followed by it being turned on
and including the short wall, tall wall, and glass wall scenes, with
each condition being randomized.

4.3 Participant Response
At the end of the experiment, the participants were asked to rate how
much the street furniture contributed to the environment on a Likert
scale (1-5). Most responses about the virtual objects were favorable.
The results should be taken as a simple guide., but it is noteworthy
that to share that the participants felt that those objects were well
placed for this particular part of the city. For instance, when asked
which wall they preferred, 18.2% wanted the small wall, 27.3%
liked the tall wall, and 54.5% liked the glass wall. The average likert
responses (0-5) to how much people enjoyed different aspects of the
environment were as follows: lamp post 4.7, Cycle lane 4.8, signs
4.1, benches 4.7, bathrooms 4.625, small wall 3.6, tall wall 3.3, glass
wall 4.4.

5 DISCUSSION
AR made a difference in their understanding of how the area could
look in the near future. Several of the participants had attended
previous city meetings where there were talks about the “M-path”
and pictures were shown of how it could potentially look. However,
the subjects still had questioned whether themselves or other people
in their community would actually use the park. Informally, we
were told by the participants that it was not until they saw and ex-
perienced the actual virtual environment while using the HoloLens
that they were able to internalize the changes proposed by the city.
Implying that being able to personally experience a virtual design su-
perimposed onto a real location would increase the quality of future
designs due to the real-time feedback city planners can receive.

The participants felt that the holograms that they saw around them
of the benches, lampposts, and other street furniture, immersed them

into a world where the unsafe and isolated park they were familiar
with was transformed into a safe, modern, and elderly-friendly park
that motivated them to be go outside and be active.

6 DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
We analyzed how AR and VR can work outside to re-imagine areas
by blending the real and virtual world together to create an immersive
and realistic experience for users. We also examined how AR and
VR can make an impact in the architecture and health. There is an
up and coming reality where the construction of a home for a family
could take place with a virtual model being shown to them through
AR to gauge their response. They could walk through the house in
scale and make decisions on each element before any of it has even
been constructed. d. Similarly, city planners and architects will be
able to build shopping centers, buildings, and anything that they can
think of.

After conducting this study we have some recommendations on
designing these types of virtual spaces. The 3D space should be
built with bright and light colors otherwise they will appear less
transparent when rendering. Due to the HoloLens’ low ﬁeld of view
of 35 degrees in the current version, the use of the Vive VR headset,
with its larger ﬁeld of view of 110 degrees allowed the users to see
the entire area without having to move their head or walk around.
Another important consideration is to try to rely on applications that
don’t need internet connectivity.

The implications that this research may have for city planning and
health promotion have direct impacts in architecture, construction,
and other areas. There are cases, such as the one presented in
this work, where constructing different options is either unfeasible
or economically counterproductive. We have shown how virtual
environments such as those made possible through AR headsets can
have an impact in making these decisions easier. AR can make city
planning extremely intuitive and integrated with the general public,
especially in an area as critical as our elderly and their health.

7 FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION
After taking into consideration the participants’ requests or concerns
for street furniture outside of what they had seen on the AR and VR
headsets and their choice of wall, we will share our results with the
City of Miami and add the suggested models to the applications to
create a ﬁnal AR environment with the participants’ choices included.
This design will be used to build the actual “M-path” park in 2019.
Ideally, we are planning to conduct a larger experiment with over 30
participants with the new recommendations.

While more research is needed, there are indications that this
technology can provide a real beneﬁt to accessible city planning and
improve the health of senior citizens. The participants expressed
great satisfaction and enthusiasm with respect to wearing the AR
headset and how immersive the experience felt for them. We have
also shown that this technology can be safely and easily used by
even senior citizens, proving it to be an accessible and powerful
technology. With this technology, cities can cater to the needs of
their citizens by being able to see and analyze in advance when
planning for smarter, better and more accessible environments.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Boj, D. J. D´ıaz, C. Portal´es, and S. Casas. Video games and out-
door physical activity for the elderly: Applications of the HybridPLAY
technology. NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. E Appl. Sci., 8(10):1912, Oct.
2018.

[2] S. Claes and A. Vande Moere. Street infographics: Raising awareness of
local issues through a situated urban visualization. In Proceedings of the
2Nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays, PerDis ’13,
pp. 133–138. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2013. doi: 10.1145/2491568.
2491597

[3] L. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Dong, and A. E. Saddik. Visualizing toronto city
data with hololens: Using augmented reality for a city model. IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine, 7(3):73–80, May 2018. doi: 10.1109/
MCE.2018.2797658

