Task-space Synergies for Reaching using
Upper-limb Prostheses

Ricardo Garcia-Rosas, Denny Oetomo, Chris Manzie, Ying Tan, and Peter Choong

1

0
2
0
2

v
o
N
3

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
1
0
8
0
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Synergistic prostheses enable the coordinated move-
ment of the human-prosthetic arm, as required by activities
of daily living. This is achieved by coupling the motion of
the prosthesis to the human command, such as the residual
limb movement in motion-based interfaces. Previous studies
demonstrated that developing human-prosthetic synergies in
joint-space must consider individual motor behaviour and the
intended task to be performed, requiring personalisation and task
calibration. In this work, an alternative synergy-based strategy,
utilising a synergistic relationship expressed in task-space,
is
proposed. This task-space synergy has the potential to replace
the need for personalisation and task calibration with a model-
based approach requiring knowledge of the individual user’s arm
kinematics, the anticipated hand motion during the task and
voluntary information from the prosthetic user. The proposed
method is compared with surface electromyography-based and
joint-space synergy-based prosthetic interfaces in a study of
motor behaviour and task performance on able-bodied subjects
using a VR-based transhumeral prosthesis. Experimental results
showed that for a set of forward reaching tasks the proposed task-
space synergy achieves comparable performance to joint-space
synergies without the need to rely on time-consuming calibration
processes or human motor learning. Case study results with
an amputee subject motivate the further development of the
proposed task-space synergy method.

I. INTRODUCTION

Synergy-based interfaces in prosthetics enable the coordi-
nated motion of multiple degrees of freedom in the human-
prosthetic arm as needed by many activities of daily living
(ADLs) [1]. The term “synergy” in the context of this work is
used to refer to the coordination between multiple degrees of
freedom in the human, and prosthetic, limb to achieve a task
[2], [3]. Speciﬁcally, kinematic synergies relate the movement
of the prosthetic device to the movement of the residual limb
[4], e.g. regulating the movement of an elbow prosthesis as
a function of the movement of the shoulder joint (residual
limb) in a transhumeral amputation. However, the kinematic
synergies investigated in the literature to date have been found
to be dependent on individual motor behaviour and the task,
making them difﬁcult to generalise and implement practically
[5], [6], [7], [8].

Kinematic synergies are typically realised by a joint-space
relationship, such that movements of the joints in the residual
limb correspond to movements of the joints in the prosthesis
[4], [6], [8], [9], [10], [1], [11]. So far, two approaches to

This project is funded by the Valma Angliss Trust.
R. Garcia-Rosas, D. Oetomo, C. Manzie, and Y. Tan are with the
School of Electrical, Mechanical and Infrastructure Engineering, and
P. Choong with the Department of Surgery, The University of Mel-
bourne, VIC 3010, Australia. ricardog@student.unimelb.edu.au;
{doetomo,manziec,yingt,pchoong}@unimelb.edu.au.

realise joint-space kinematic synergies have been reported in
the transhumeral prostheses literature: postural [4], [9] and
differential synergies [6], [8], [10], [1], [11]. Postural synergies
deﬁne the human-prosthesis relationship in terms of joint
displacements; i.e. for a given task and combination of joint
displacements in the residual limb, there will be a resultant
prosthesis joint displacement. Differential synergies deﬁne the
human-prosthesis relationship in terms of joint velocities. As
such, at any given position, the movement of the prosthesis
is a function of only the movement of the residual limb in
both cases of kinematic synergies. Therefore, this relationship
is dependent on the initial limb position and the task used to
calibrate the synergy. Both types of synergies require extensive
calibration, and have been found to be dependent on individual
motor behaviour and the task to be performed [4], [5], [6], [7],
[9]. While recent results have demonstrated that differential
kinematic synergies can be personalised to their user during
task execution [8], a library of task-speciﬁc and individually
personalised synergies would be needed to provide the large
range of movements required by ADLs [12].

The dependency of synergies on human individuality and
the task performed is an unavoidable challenge to their appli-
cation in ﬁelds such as prosthetics. Current methods do not
utilise task information, such as the location of the target, as
it is challenging to obtain it in a prosthetic setting. However,
using this information may be beneﬁcial in improving the
robustness and performance of synergistic interfaces, and avert
the need of generating a library of task speciﬁc synergies.
While obtaining this information may be a challenge with cur-
rent methods, this may be overcome with future technologies
or interface modalities that assist with determining reaching
intention and direction [13].

It is therefore necessary to develop and evaluate alternative
strategies capable of explicitly using task information in the
design of synergistic prosthetic interfaces. This serves to over-
come task dependency and human motor behaviour variations
while maintaining voluntary user control and involvement. In
this work, an alternative synergy-based strategy, utilising a
synergistic relationship expressed in task-space, is proposed.
This method has the potential to replace the need for per-
sonalisation and task calibration with a model-based approach
requiring knowledge of the individual user’s arm kinematics,
the anticipated hand motion during the task and voluntary
information from the prosthetic user. Using classic robotics
tools, the proposed task-space synergy can be generated using
the manipulator’s Jacobian [14], [15], under the assumption
that knowledge of the initial conditions and the desired end-
effector (hand) motion is available. Here, a simpliﬁed case

 
 
 
 
 
 
of such formulation under constrained motion is proposed.
Location of the target is explicitly speciﬁed by the human user
prior to the reaching motion, thus overcoming the assumption
of the knowledge of the target location.

This paper presents the concept of task-space kinematic
synergies in the context of forward reaching tasks with an
elbow prosthesis. The performance of the resulting coordinated
motion is compared against
that produced in able-bodied
motion, with a conventional sEMG interface, and a joint-
space synergy [11]. Experiments were carried out in a Virtual
Reality Environment to allow the emulation of prosthesis use
in able-bodied subjects. The outcomes show that, for a set
of forward reaching tasks, the proposed task-space synergy
achieved better performance than conventional sEMG and
comparable performance to a joint-space synergy interface
[11] in terms of the closeness to able-bodied motor behaviour
and task performance. The results achieved from a case study
with an amputee subject motivate the further development of
the proposed task-space synergy method.

II. A TASK-SPACE KINEMATIC SYNERGY

The objective of a task-space kinematic synergy is to
determine the motion of the prosthesis given the motion of the
residual limb and the desired hand path. However, knowing
the exact desired hand path before execution of the task
is a challenge as information on the desired target is only
known to the prosthesis user. While there exist methods to
obtain this information through other interfaces (e.g. gaze-
tracking [13]); here, a path-constraint approach is taken to
allow the prosthetic user to convey the information of the
target prior to commencing the reaching motion. This is done
by the user aligning an imaginary straight line between the
shoulder point, the target, and end effector (Figure 1a) prior
to a forward reaching motion. This determines the path of the
hand reaching motion, described by the vector rSH (Figure
1b). The path rSH can be thought of as the radial direction of
a spherical coordinate centered at the shoulder point S. Once
determined, the reaching motion, which is now constrained
to move only along rSH , can be produced through coupling
the elbow prosthesis ﬂexion-extension to the user’s shoulder
ﬂexion-extension. This stage of the user aligning the hand
along the target and the shoulder in a straight line will be
referred to in this paper as the “aiming” stage, used to provide
in the proposed Task Space
the information of the target
synergy approach.

The protocol for the user to determine the constrained path
rSH is presented as follows. Let v ∈ R3 be the hand velocity
in task-space. qs and ˙qs are the residual limb joint angular
displacement and velocity respectively (Figure 1c). In the
transhumeral amputation case under consideration, qs ∈ R3
and ˙qs ∈ R3. qe and ˙qe represent prosthesis joint angular
displacement and velocity respectively (Figure 1c), for the
elbow prosthesis case qe ∈ R and ˙qe ∈ R.

The reference frame {R} has its origin at the center of
the shoulder joint and is attached to the shoulder with its x-
axis pointing forward and the y-axis upwards w.r.t. the upper
body. There are two reasons for the choice of the location

2

of {R}. First, in practice, measurement of limb motion are
obtained from IMUs and require a reference IMU to determine
the limb’s relative motion to the body. This IMU is typically
placed on the upper-body. Second, to allow changes in the
direction of motion with respect to the world coordinates.
Since the motion of the arm is deﬁned with respect to the
trunk, any motion of the trunk (or rest of the body) allows the
user to correct for initial errors in the direction of motion.

The coordinate frame {D} has its origin at the shoulder
joint and is attached to the direction of reach. The shoulder
angle qs is given by the angle between the upper-arm (SE)
and the direction of reach (SH). The frame {H} has its origin
at the centre of the hand (end-effector) with xh aligned to xd.
Initially, the length of the upper arm (dSE) and lower arm
(dEH ) are measured and determined. Once the aiming process
is completed, the following is carried out:

A. A coordinate frame {D} is deﬁned with its x-axis (xd)
aligned with the direction of reaching rSH and on the
plane formed by the shoulder (S), elbow (E), and hand
(H) joints.

B. The frame transformation (D

RR) is determined in order to
express shoulder and elbow joint angular displacements
with reference to frame {D}.

C. The Jacobian matrix J (qs, qe) is obtained to relate
the incremental movement of the hand (end-effector) to
the incremental joint displacement of the shoulder and
elbow, taking into account the reaching path the hand
motion is constrained to (D ˙xh).
˙qe is solved as a function of qs, qe, and ˙qs to determine
the elbow motion reference that satisﬁes the desired task-
space synergy.

D.

These four steps are elaborated in the subsections below. The
following assumption is used:

Assumption 1. The angular position and velocities of the
residual limb are measurable.

Remark 1. Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)-based measure-
ments of residual limb motion have been demonstrated for
synergistic elbow prostheses in [11], [16].

A. Direction of Motion Reference Frame

The direction of motion frame {D} determines the direction
of the forward reaching task as exempliﬁed in Figure 1, and
is deﬁned w.r.t. the reference frame as follows:

Rp
(cid:107) Rp(cid:107)2

The xd-axis is deﬁned by the unit vector given in the
direction from the shoulder joint center to the initial hand
position Rp, as Rxd =
. The zd-axis is deﬁned by
the unit vector perpendicular to the plane given by the S-E-H
triangle in the direction of zr, as Rzd =
, where
RrSE is the vector from the origin of the shoulder frame {S}
to the origin of the elbow frame {E}. The yd-axis follows the
right hand rule.

RrSE ×Rxd
(cid:107) RrSE ×Rxd(cid:107)2

With this the direction of motion reference frame {D} is
deﬁned and motion of the arm and hand can be expressed with
it as reference. This concludes step A.

3

(a) Target reaching example. The green
dotted line shows the shortest path to
target. The orange dotted line represents
the forward straight reaching path. The
reference frame {R} has its origin at the
shoulder joint and is attached to the shoul-
der.

(b) Simpliﬁed geometry for a reaching
task by re-positioning the hand. The hand
slides across the forward reaching path,
deﬁned by the vector (rSH ) given from
the shoulder {S} to the hand {H} frame
origins.

(c) Deﬁnition of the direction of motion
({D}) and hand ({H}) frames that de-
termine the forward reaching motion. The
direction frame is deﬁned by the triangle
created by the shoulder (S), elbow (E), and
hand (H) joints and it has its origin at the
shoulder joint.

Fig. 1: Formulation of the forward reaching task and reference motion for the task-space synergy.

B. Frame Transformation

Assuming that measured data is obtained in frame {R}
then it is necessary to transform these angles to the task
frame {D}. This assumption arises from the common use
of relative measurements from two IMUs to produce residual
limb pose measurements [11], [16]. This transformation can
be performed through the Euler angles (α, β, γ) in a Y-X-
Z sequence. The transformation angles can be obtained as
follows:
The ﬁrst rotation (α) is along the yr-axis. α can be obtained
from Rxd, and is deﬁned as α = tan−1 (cid:16) Rxd,x
, where Rxd,x
and Rxd,z are the x and z components of Rxd. The second
rotation (β) is along the xr-axis. β can be obtained from Rzd,
and is deﬁned as β = tan−1 (cid:16) Rzd,y
. The last rotation (γ) is
along the zr-axis. γ can be obtained from Rxd, and is deﬁned
as γ = tan−1 (cid:16) Rxd,y

.
The transformation is therefore given by:

Rxd,x

Rxd,z

Rzd,z

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

D
RR = Ry(α)Rx(β)Rz(γ),

(1)

where Rx(α) is an x-axis standard rotation of the given angle
α. Thus it is possible to transform arm motion data from the
reference frame {R} to the task frame {D}. This concludes
step B.

C. Arm Jacobian

By performing the adequate transformations, as previously
presented, the forward reaching task can be simpliﬁed to a
2D task on the x − y plane of the {D} frame. This simpliﬁes
the kinematics required for the synergy to those of a 2-DOF
planar arm. The differential kinematics of the simpliﬁed arm
are well known and given by [15]:
(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)D ˙xh
D ˙yh

=

(cid:20)−(cid:96)uSs − (cid:96)lSse −(cid:96)lSse
(cid:96)lCse

(cid:96)uCs + (cid:96)lCse

(cid:21) (cid:20) ˙qs
˙qe

.

(2)

¯v =

where Cs = cos (¯qs), Ss = sin (¯qs), Cse = cos (¯qs + ¯qe),
Sse = sin (¯qs + ¯qe), ¯qs = Dqs, and ¯qe = Dqe. (cid:96)uand (cid:96)l

are the lengths of the upper and lower arm respectively. This
concludes step C.

D. Elbow Motion Reference

As previously discussed, through the simpliﬁcation of the
task only forward reaching motion is required along the
direction of motion plane, i.e. only motion along the xd-axis.
This means that it is desired to satisfy the constraint D ˙yh = 0.
With this constraint in consideration, it is possible to solve for
the desired elbow velocity ˙qe from (2), such that

˙qe = −

(cid:96)uCs + (cid:96)lCse
(cid:96)lCse

˙qs.

(3)

It is important to note that an elbow singularity occurs when
¯qs + ¯qe = nπ, n = 0, 2, 4, · · · [17]. This happens when the
arm is at full extension or folded back into itself. The ﬁrst
conﬁguration can be avoided by limiting the range of motion
of the elbow such that (cid:107)qe(cid:107) > (cid:15)q, where (cid:15)q is a positive
non-zero constant. The second conﬁguration is not physically
possible. This concludes step D.

III. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
An experiment was designed to analyse the performance
of the proposed task-space synergy method when used in
a basic prosthetic elbow. The resultant behaviour with the
proposed task-space synergy-based prosthetic interface was
compared with able-bodied behaviour, a traditional sEMG-
based prosthetic interface, and a basic joint-space synergy-
based prosthetic interface. The experiment was performed
in a Head Mounted Display-based (HMD) Virtual Reality
Environment (VRE) on able-bodied subjects (Figure 2d). The
use of a VRE allowed the gathering of data from able-bodied
subjects for both able-bodied and prosthetic cases by virtually
removing their lower arm and ﬁtting them with a virtual
prosthesis. The case study with an amputee subject used the
same VRE-based methodology. A video description of the
VR platform used for the experiment can be accessed from
https://youtu.be/vvq4tjShdB4.

4

(a) Side view of the task. The object
start position and target locations were
normalised to the subject’s height and
arm length.

(b) Subject point of view of the task. Only
one target location was presented per repe-
tition of the task. Subjects were required to
place the virtual hand on the orange circle
before the start of the task.

(c) Amputee subject with mo-
tion tracking sensors. Sensors were
placed on C7 vertebrae, shoulder
acromion, and upper arm.

(d) Subject with motion tracking sensors,
elbow brace, and VR headset. Sensors
were placed on C7 vertebrae, shoulder
acromion, upper arm, forearm, and hand.
An elbow immobiliser was used for the
virtual prosthetic cases. In the EMG case,
two sEMG sensors were placed on the
subject’s forearm.

(e) Able-bodied VR avatar. Motion
trackers determine the motion of the
forearm and hand avatars, and the
white markers. The elbow immobiliser
was inactive to allow the subject to
perform the task naturally.

(f) Prosthetic VR avatar. The upper
arm motion tracker was used to create
a “residual limb” avatar to which the
virtual prosthesis was attached. The
rest of the trackers were presented as
white markers. The elbow immobiliser
was engaged, and forearm and hand
tracking was disabled.

Fig. 2: Experimental platform and task set-up. (a) presents the side view of the task and (b) the subject point of view in VR.
(c) and (d) show the motion tracking sensor placement, and (e) and (f) the VR avatars for the able-bodied and prosthetic cases,
respectively.

A. Experiment Task and Set-up

TABLE I: Object start and target positions.

The task required subjects to pick and place an object in
3D space in the forward direction from a standing position
without stepping. The execution of the task is considered
as one iteration from the moment the object was grasped
until the object was placed. To ensure repeatability of the
task, canonical examples containing ﬁxed start and target
position were posed. The choice of start (elbow at 90◦) and
target positions (four different targets) was done to focus the
experiment on the reaching phase of motion, which is critical
in the use of above-elbow prostheses. One object start position
and four target positions were used and were placed at a
location relative to each subject’s height (h) and arm length
((cid:96)). The target location details are presented in Table I, these
locations are relative to the subject’s initial standing position.
Figure 2a shows the start and target locations in the VRE from
a side view, while Figure 2b shows them from a subject point
of view.

Four different experiment cases were used, one able-bodied

Target
Start

x(m)
0.5(cid:96)

y(m)
0.5h

z(m)
0

Close

0.75(cid:96)

0.65h

0.12

Mid

Far

1.0(cid:96)

0.65h

-0.12

1.5(cid:96)

0.65h

High

1.0(cid:96)

0.9h

0

0

Comment
Reachable from a neutral, relaxed
position with the upper-arm down
and elbow bent 90 deg.
Reachable with upper-body mo-
tion only.
Reachable with either upper-body
motion or arm extension only.
Reachable with both upper-body
motion and arm extension only.
Reachable with both upper-body
motion and arm extension only.

and three transhumeral prosthetic.

A. AB (Able-bodied): This case was used to determine the
benchmark motor behaviour and task performance for
each subject.

B. EP (sEMG Proportional): A standard dual-site differen-
tial surface EMG proportional prosthetic interface was
used to command the prosthetic elbow’s joint velocity

[18]. The rectiﬁed and thresholded sEMG signals from
two antagonistic muscles were used to determine the
direction and angular velocity of the prosthetic elbow
joint. This case was used as the traditional prosthetic
interface for comparison.

C. TS (Task-space Synergy): The proposed task-space syn-

ergy method as described in equation (3).

D. JS (Joint-space Synergy): A Joint-space synergy method
(JS) given by a shoulder-elbow ﬂexion synergy was
used as the synergistic prosthetic interface case for
comparison.

The range of motion of the elbow was limited to 5◦ ≤ qe ≤
140◦ to avoid singularities. The JS was given by ˙qe = θ ˙qs;
where ˙qe is the prosthetic elbow velocity,
˙qs the shoulder
extension velocity, and θ = 1 the synergy parameter. This
joint-space synergy, based on [11], was chosen because it
is the closest to the proposed task-space synergy as it does
not require training or calibration by allowing the user to
compensate for the synergy by choosing when in the reach
to enable it.

Subjects were ﬁtted with an elbow orthosis with two motion
tracking sensors attached to it, one for the lower-arm and one
for the upper-arm. Two additional motion tracking sensors
were placed on the C7 vertebrae (trunk motion), the shoulder
acromion (shoulder motion), and the hand (see Figure 2d). The
elbow orthosis allowed to immobilise the subject’s elbow in
the prosthetic cases to better represent muscle conditions in
amputees, as done in [11]. The amputee subject was ﬁtted as
able-bodied on his right arm for the AB case, while for the
prosthetic cases he had the upper-arm sensor strapped to his
left upper arm (see Figure 2c).

In the AB case, motion of the upper-body, the whole arm
and hand was directly mapped to the VRE through a virtual
avatar as shown in Figure 2e. For the case study with the
subject with limb difference, his able-bodied (right) arm was
used for the AB case. In the prosthetic cases, transhumeral
amputation was emulated in able-bodied subjects in the VRE
by using the data from the upper-arm motion tracker to
determine the motion of the virtual residual limb. A virtual
prosthetic elbow, forearm, and hand were attached to the
virtual residual limb as seen in Figure 2f. For the case study
with the subject with limb difference, his arm with limb
difference (left) was used for the prosthetic cases. Only the
virtual prosthetic elbow was actuated, while the forearm and
hand were ﬁxed.

Muscle activation was gathered using sEMG electrodes
placed on the forearm as the elbow orthosis interfered with
the biceps/triceps electrode placement typically used in tran-
shumeral amputees. While the forearm electrode position does
not reﬂect the physiological placement of sEMG sensors for
transhumeral prostheses, it can provide comparable functional
capabilities in able-bodied subjects as observed in [11].

The following prosthetic interface simpliﬁcations were done
to reduce the cognitive load on the subjects and to focus the
experiment on the motor behaviour aspect of prosthesis use.
Firstly, the functionality of the prosthetic elbow was enabled
in a toggle fashion by a press of the centre button (thumb) of
the Vive controller (Figure 2d), which was held in the able-

5

bodied hand of the amputee subject. This was done to avoid
relying on complex sEMG switching commands, which are
a major issue with active prostheses to date [19]. Secondly,
grasping and releasing of the object were done automatically
when the hand stopped moving and was touching the object
(grasp) or within the target area (release), avoiding the need
to switch between elbow and hand control.

B. Hardware Set-up

The experiment was performed on an HTC Vive Pro HMD
with the application developed in Unity3D. The experimental
platform runs on an Intel Core i7-8700K processor at 3.7GHz,
with 32GB RAM, and an Gigabyte GeForce GTX 1080Ti
video card with 11GB GDDR5. HTC Vive Trackers were
used for motion tracking, except for hand motion tracking
where an HTC Vive Controller was used (HTC Vive system
tracking capabilities can be found in [20]). The C7 and
shoulder acromion Vive Trackers were attached directly to the
subject’s body using medical tape. Data gathering, and VR
update were performed at 90Hz. Myoware sensors were used
for sEMG data gathering with Ag-AgCl electrodes. The VR
platform used for the experiment can be downloaded from
https://github.com/Rigaro/VRProEP.

C. Experimental Protocol

The experiment was performed on 15 able-bodied subjects,
six female and nine male. The age range was [22, 34] and the
median age 28. The amputee case study was performed on a
single male subject aged 23. The subject has a congenital limb
difference in his left forearm as seen in Figure 2c. He is not
a prosthesis user and does not use his left arm in daily tasks
relevant to the task tested in this experiment. The experiment
was performed in two sessions lasting two hours each, on two
different days not more than a week apart. Each session tested
two cases. The ﬁrst case tested for all subjects was AB which
was used as the benchmark for individual motor behaviour.
The order of the following cases was randomly selected from
the three cases representing prosthetic-use (EP, TS or JS) to
minimise the bias introduced by the effects of learning on the
data gathered. The session procedure is presented in Table II.

TABLE II: Experiment session protocol.

Step
Introduction
Sensor placement
Case 1
Break
Case 2

Time (minutes)
5
15
50
5
50

VR/No-VR
No-VR
No-VR
VR
No-VR
VR

Each block of case testing consisted of 120 iterations of the
task separated into three sets of 40 iterations, the procedure
is presented in Table III. During the Training block of the
experiment, subjects were instructed outside the VRE on how
to use the prosthetic interface and were allowed to familiarise
themselves with it. This was done by presenting a third person
view of the virtual residual limb and prosthetic device on
a screen. The procedure was approved by the University

of Melbourne Human Research Ethics Committee, project
number 1750711.2. Informed consent was received from all
subjects in the study.

TABLE III: Case testing block protocol.

Step
Training
Practice
Set 1
Break
Set 2
Break
Set 3

Task iterations per target
-
5
10
-
10
-
10

Time (minutes)
5
-
-
1
-
1
-

VR/No-VR
No-VR
VR
VR
VR
VR
VR
VR

D. Data Gathering and Analysis

The data gathered from motion tracking sensors and the
VRE was used to analyse the performance of subjects in
terms of the task, quality of motion, and the resulting motor
behaviour. Given that target locations were personalised to
each subject, hand trajectories were normalised to the sub-
ject’s arm length for all cases and targets. This was done
by applying a spatial normalisation to all
the trajectories.
The resulting normalised reaching paths had starting position
coordinates (0, 0), target position coordinates (1, 0), and the
trajectories occurred on a plane. The normalised trajectories
were uniformly resampled to 200 samples to isolate the spatial
and temporal components of the trajectories. An FIR anti-
aliasing low-pass ﬁlter of order ﬁve with a Kaiser window
of 20 and linear interpolation were used for resampling. The
normalisation procedure follows the methods described in
[21]. The metrics used for data analysis are presented next.

Two metrics of task performance were used: completion
time and reach terminal error. The median task completion
time (tµ
f ) over iterations of the task is used to determine the
effects of prosthetic interfaces on the time required to complete
the task. As this metric is commonly used in the literature, it is
used to compare the performance of the synergistic interfaces
in this paper to other studies in the literature. The mean of
the reach terminal error (δµ) over iterations of the task is used
to verify that the task is being performed adequately. Reach
terminal error is calculated as δµ = (cid:107)pi(tf ) − pi
d(cid:107)2, where
pi(tf ) is the hand position at the end of the reach and pi
d is
the desired hand position for the given target.

Two metrics of quality of motion were used: path smooth-
ness and variability. Continuous, well coordinated movements
are characteristic of trained and healthy motor behaviour. Hand
and joint path smoothness are well documented and accepted
measures of the quality of upper-limb motion [22], [23], [24].
Here Spectral Arc Length (SAL), represented by (η), is used
as the metric for smoothness [25] due to its characteristics
which include sensitivity to changes in motor characteristics,
robustness to measurement noise, and dimensionless mono-
tonic response. SAL measures the arc length of the curve
generated by the Fourier magnitude spectrum of the velocity
trajectory to quantify movement smoothness [25]. Low path
variability, both of the hand and joints, is characteristic of
trained and healthy motor behaviour [23], [26]. Here the mean
standard deviation of the hand and joint paths across the time

6

domain (σµ), is used as the metric for path variability. The
standard deviation of the paths for each subject, modality and
target is calculated at sample across the time domain using
the normalised paths, and the mean over time of the standard
deviation is used as the metric σµ.

Two metrics of motor behaviour were used: hand/joint path
difference and upper-body displacement. The ﬁrst metric of
motor behaviour is path difference (∆µ). This metric evaluates
the difference between the mean able-bodied hand/joint path
and the mean prosthetic hand/joint path. It is used to determine
the closeness of the resultant prosthetic motor behaviour to
the individual’s natural able-bodied motor behaviour. Let the
mean hand/joint path for the able-bodied case (AB) be given
by xµ
AB(nts) and the mean path for the prosthetic case (P C)
given by xµ
P C(nts), where ts is the sampling time and n ∈
N. The resampled normalised paths are used to calculate the
mean paths xAB and xP C, such that both AB and P C cases
have the same normalised start and end positions, and sample
length. The path difference (∆µ) is deﬁned as the sum of the
Euclidean distances between the mean paths across the time
domain as follows:

∆µ =

N
(cid:88)

n=0

(cid:107)xµ

AB(nts) − xµ

P C(nts)(cid:107)2.

(4)

The second metric of motor behaviour is upper-body dis-
placement (φµ). Upper-body displacement is calculated as the
Euclidean distance between in initial and ﬁnal positions of the
C7 and shoulder sensors. This metric evaluates the amount of
upper-body motion used for the task. When a prosthetic device
is not used effectively or is not adequate for the task this
metric represents compensation motion. Some level of upper-
body motion is also part of natural able-bodied motion during
reaching tasks.

Statistical analyses of the of these metrics were performed
in Minitab 19. The last 10 data-points from each modality and
target (last set of task iterations) were chosen for the analyses
in order to minimise the effects of human motor learning
on the results. The data for all metrics, except smoothness
and shoulder displacement, was transformed to a logarithmic
scale to satisfy the assumptions of the general linear model,
in particular,
the constant variance for the random error.
The data was ﬁtted to a general linear model using both
the subjects and modalities as model factors. The metrics
presented previously were used as the dependent variables. The
general linear model was used to perform two-way analyses
of variance (two-way ANOVA) and comparisons between the
modalities with a conﬁdence level of 95% (p < 0.05) after
adjustment for multiple comparisons using Tukey’s method.
The analyses were used to determine whether statistically
signiﬁcant differences exist between the modalities in terms
of the evaluation metrics. Statistical analyses were performed
in consultation of the University of Melbourne Statistical
Consulting Platform.

IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION

Results for the experiment with able-bodied subjects and the
case study with an amputee subject are presented next. The

data-set of the results (raw and processed) can be downloaded
from https://github.com/Rigaro/TaskSpaceSynergyData2020.

A. Experiment with Able-bodied Subjects

The results for the hand path difference over iterations of the
task are presented in Figure 3, where the population median
of the hand path difference for each iteration of the task is
presented for each target.

7

Fig. 4: Population median experimental results for task com-
pletion time (tµ

f ) over iterations of the task for each target.

Moreover, no statistically signiﬁcant difference between TS
and JS was found. This suggests that TS may be as effective
as JS in reducing the time required to perform reaching
tasks. While in [11] it was reported that JS had a signiﬁcant
advantage over EP in terms of completion time, from the
results there it was not possible to conclude whether it was
because of the motion-based prosthetic joint-switching mech-
anism proposed therein or the synergy (JS) itself. The results
presented herein suggest that the signiﬁcant difference between
EP and JS reported in [11] may be due to the switching
mechanism, as a major difference is only observed for the
reaching task that requires more joints to be coordinated.

There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the
results for the reach terminal error metric (δµ) across all targets
and modalities, with the subject’s hand end position being
within 4cm of the desired target position. This veriﬁes that
subjects were capable of performing the task adequately and
with similar ﬁnal position error through the experiment.

Given that the results for the Far target show the most
signiﬁcant difference between modalities, the hand and joint
path analysis will focus on that target. The mean and standard
deviation hand paths and joint angles of the last 10 iterations
(steady-state) of the Far target for a representative subject are
presented in Figure 5. Figure 6 presents the population mean
hand path and joint path variation, hand path and joint-space
smoothness, and trunk and shoulder displacement results.

1) Reaching Motion Variability and Smoothness: The hand
path in Figure 5a was normalised between zero and one,
representing the start of the movement and the target location,
respectively. From the TS results, the initial aiming movement
can be identiﬁed from the low variability part of the reach,
as this is only performed with the residual limb (shoulder)
and thus is less variable. This is followed by the straight
hand forward movement generated by the synergy, which has
higher variability. The aiming phase can also be seen in the
joint movement, as shown in Figure 5b, where the mean and

Fig. 3: Population median experimental results for hand path
difference from AB (∆µ) over iterations of the task for each
target.

From these results, it can be seen that as subjects repeat
the task the difference between their able-bodied hand path
and the prosthesis hand path is reduced. In general, it can be
observed that there was a gradual reduction of the difference
over the ﬁrst 10 iterations after which the progress slowed
down.

The reduction in the path difference over iterations suggests
individuals try to reproduce able-bodied motion with
that
leading to an improvement on their
the prostheses. Thus,
performance. The clear difference from the AB path shows
that despite their best effort, the introduction of limb loss and
the artiﬁcial limb inherently changes the dynamics of reaching.
This means that the natural/dynamically optimal motion when
using a prosthesis is different from one’s AB motion. The
comparisons test showed no statistically signiﬁcant perfor-
mance differences across the three modalities. These results
suggest that even if the hand paths followed by each prosthetic
modality have their differences, the total difference to the able-
bodied hand path is similar.

The improvement in task performance can be observed in
the task completion time, shown in Figure 4, which is reduced
over iterations of the task.

The statistical analysis showed that there were signiﬁcant
differences between the synergistic interfaces (TS and JS) and
EP. Synergistic interfaces had on average a 20% shorter task
completion time than sEMG for the Far target, which requires
more joints to be coordinated (upper-body and upper-arm).

                   7 D U J H W   & O R V H ( 3 7 6 - 6                   7 D U J H W   0 L G       , W H U D W L R Q             7 D U J H W   ) D U       , W H U D W L R Q             7 D U J H W   + L J K 7 R W D O  G L I I H U H Q F H  I U R P  $ %  S D W K   F P            7 D U J H W   & O R V H $ % ( 3 7 6 - 6           7 D U J H W   0 L G       , W H U D W L R Q     7 D U J H W   ) D U       , W H U D W L R Q     7 D U J H W   + L J K & R P S O H W L R Q  W L P H   V 8

(a) Mean and standard deviation hand paths.

(b) Mean and standard deviation joint paths.

Fig. 5: Mean and standard deviation hand paths and joint angles of the last 10 iterations (steady-state) of the Far target for a
representative subject

(a) Population hand path variability (σµ).

(b) Population joint path variability (σµ).

(c) Population hand path smoothness (η).
The less negative the smoother the path.

(d) Population joint path smoothness (η).
The less negative the smoother the path.

(e) Population C7 displacement (φµ).

(f) Population shoulder acromion dis-
placement (φµ).

Fig. 6: Population experimental results for the Quality of Motion and Motor Behaviour metrics for the last 10 iterations per
target. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between modalities (p < 0.05) are shown by asterisks (*).

standard deviation of shoulder and elbow angles are presented.
The TS movement starts with a shoulder-only aiming motion,
followed by a smooth curve. This is further corroborated by
the variability and smoothness results, presented in Figure 6.

EP, though it was not statistically signiﬁcant. However, no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant difference was found between TS and JS.
All other targets showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference
between the prosthetic modalities for both variability metrics.

JS showed statistically signiﬁcant lower hand path vari-
ability over EP for the Far target (31%) while showing no
statistically signiﬁcant difference to AB. While TS showed
a 16% reduction in variability over EP, this difference was
not statistically signiﬁcant. Similarly, JS showed a statistically
signiﬁcant reduction of 31% in joint path variability over EP
for the Far target. TS saw and average reduction of 20% over

In terms of hand path smoothness the JS interface shows
a statistically signiﬁcant improvement of 10% for the Far
target with respect to EP. No statistically signiﬁcant difference
between JS, and EP and TS was found. This may be attributed
to the need with TS to pre-position the hand before executing
the movement, which affects the resultant smoothness metric.
On the other hand, joint motion smoothness for the JS case

 & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W          6 W D Q G D U G  G H Y L D W L R Q             + D Q G  3 D W K  9 D U L D W L R Q & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W                6 W D Q G D U G  G H Y L D W L R Q              - R L Q W  3 D W K  9 D U L D W L R Q & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W     6 S H F W U D O  D U F  O H Q J W K              + D Q G  3 D W K  6 P R R W K Q H V V & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W     6 S H F W U D O  D U F  O H Q J W K             - R L Q W  3 D W K  6 P R R W K Q H V V & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W          ' L V S O D F H P H Q W   P           &   0 H D Q  ' L V S O D F H P H Q W $ % ( 3 7 6 - 6 & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W       ' L V S O D F H P H Q W   P    6 K R X O G H U  0 H D Q  ' L V S O D F H P H Q Wwas found statistically signiﬁcantly improved over EP by 18%,
24%, and 15% for the Mid, Far, and High targets, respectively;
while no statistically signiﬁcant difference to AB was found.
On the other hand, the TS case only shows a statistically
signiﬁcant improvement in joint smoothness of 17% for the Far
target with respect to EP. No statistically signiﬁcant difference
between TS and JS was found for the Mid, Far, and High
targets.

The results for hand path difference, variation, and smooth-
ness suggest that even though the difference between able-
bodied and prosthetic hand paths is similar across all modali-
ties, these paths have different qualities. These results suggest
that synergistic modalities improve the prosthetic hand trajec-
tories; however, further exploration of the differences between
able-bodied and prosthetic hand trajectories may provide fur-
ther insights into the advantages synergistic modalities, and
what aspects require further improvement.

The joint path of subjects with the EP interface, in Figure
5b, shows a mostly horizontal line representing the initial
shoulder only movement, followed by a combined elbow and
shoulder movement where subjects use EMG to extend the
elbow while using the shoulder to do the ﬁne adjustments of
hand position. Lastly, JS shows a mostly smooth curve as it
was identiﬁed that subjects learned the timing to activate the
synergistic movement to minimise the error at the end of the
motion. Interestingly, this resulted in more natural and joint
paths, further demonstrating the capabilities of human motor
learning and adaptation. Overall, it appears that regardless of
the type of synergy humans will adapt to the best of their
capabilities to use the synergy effectively.

2) Joint Range and Trunk Movement: Another important
feature that arises from Figure 5b is the range of joint angles
used. It can be observed that out of all cases, TS utilises
a wider range of arm joint angles suggesting more arm
utilisation. This is corroborated with the trunk and shoulder
displacement metrics, shown in Figures 6e and 6f, which show
that TS has the lowest trunk and shoulder forward displace-
ments. While neither TS nor JS were found to be statistically
signiﬁcantly different to EP in terms of compensation motion,
no statistically signiﬁcant difference between TS and AB was
found for the Mid, Far, and High targets. Nevertheless, trunk
displacement for the TS case shows a 60% and 45% reduction
over EP and JS, respectively, for the Mid target; while a 60%
reduction over EP and JS for the Far target. These results agree
with those reported in [5], which present a fully calibrated
synergy, where a reduction in trunk compensation motion was
reported with a JS method over EP, suggesting that TS may
further reduce compensatory movement at the expense of a
less natural movement (point and reach). However, this is
due to the constraint imposed on the reaching path. If the
location of the reaching target is known in the formulation
of the task-space synergy, then it may be possible to gener-
ate a human-prosthesis motion that closely resembles able-
bodied behaviour, while retaining the user’s control over the
movement. More importantly, as the task-space synergy is
based on the arm kinematics, no time consuming individual
synergy training or personalisation is required, and achieves
comparable performance to a joint-space synergy. Moreover,

9

task-space synergies could be generalised to any point-to-point
reaching task. Therefore, this scenario will be explored in
future studies.

B. Case Study with Amputee Subject

Results for the case study are presented in Figures 7, 8, 9,
and 10. Given the limited dataset for the case study, statistical
signiﬁcance cannot be obtained for the results. The results for
the subject’s hand path difference over iterations of the task
are presented in Figure 7. Moreover, the subject did not show
a signiﬁcant change in reaching strategy over iterations of the
task, regardless of the interface modality. This may be due
to reaching motion being new to the subject as he had never
done this type of coordinated motion with his left arm.

Fig. 7: Case study experimental results for hand path differ-
ence from AB (∆µ) over iterations of the task for each target.

The results for task completion time over iterations of
the task are presented in Figure 8. Similarly to hand path
difference, there is no apparent improvement in time over
iterations of the task. This may be a result of the short time
allowed for the experiment and the novelty of the experience
for the subject. As he had never used a prosthetic device nor
performed the type of tasks in the experiment with his left
arm, the duration of the experiment may not be sufﬁcient to
see signiﬁcant improvement in his performance.

Similarly to the able-bodied subjects experimental results,
the results for hand and joint paths are presented only for the
Far target. Hand path results are presented in 9a while joint
path results are presented in 9b. For this subject, the TS case is
the one that observes the lowest hand path variability (Figure
9a), which is supported by the results in Figure 10a, except
for the High target. However, in terms of the closeness to the
AB hand path, all three prosthetic cases perform similarly. On
the other hand, the experimental results suggested that the JS
modality achieved the lowest variability.

Regarding the joint path, the case study results in Figure 9b
are closer to the experimental results in Figure 5b in terms of

                   7 D U J H W   & O R V H ( 3 7 6 - 6                   7 D U J H W   0 L G       , W H U D W L R Q             7 D U J H W   ) D U       , W H U D W L R Q             7 D U J H W   + L J K 7 R W D O  G L I I H U H Q F H  I U R P  $ %  S D W K   F P 10

of the closeness to able-bodied motor behaviour and task
performance. These results show that the proposed task-space
synergy method provides the advantage of personalisation
without relying on time-consuming calibration processes or
leaving it to the human to learn. Future studies will investigate
the application of task-space synergies to higher complexity
tasks and multi-degree-of-freedom prosthetic devices, and the
case when full information on the reaching target is available.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Prof. Ian Gordon of the
University of Melbourne Statistical Consulting Platform for
his contribution to the statistical analysis of the results in this
paper.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Merad, A. Roby-Brami, and N. Jarrasse, “Towards the Imple-
mentation of Natural Prosthetic Elbow Motion Using Upper Limb
Joint Coordination,” in IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot.
Biomechatronics, pp. 821–826, 2016.

[2] M. L. Latash, J. P. Scholz, and G. Sch¨oner, “Toward a New Theory of
Motor Synergies,” Motor Control, vol. 11, pp. 276–308, jul 2007.
[3] M. Santello, G. Baud-Bovy, and H. J¨orntell, “Neural bases of hand

synergies,” Front. Comput. Neurosci., vol. 7, 2013.

[4] R. R. Kaliki, R. Davoodi, and G. E. Loeb, “Evaluation of a noninvasive
command scheme for upper-limb prostheses in a virtual reality reach
and grasp task,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 792–802,
2013.

[5] M. Merad, ´E. de Montalivet, A. Touillet, N. Martinet, A. Roby-Brami,
and N. Jarrass´e, “Can we achieve intuitive prosthetic elbow control based
on healthy upper limb motor strategies?,” Front. Neurorobot., vol. 12,
2018.

[6] M. Legrand, M. Merad, E. de Montalivet, A. Roby-Brami, and N. Jar-
rass´e, “Movement-based control for upper-limb prosthetics: Is the re-
gression technique the key to a robust and accurate control?,” Front.
Neurorobot., vol. 12, 2018.

[7] R. Garcia-Rosas, D. Oetomo, C. Manzie, Y. Tan, and P. Choong, “On the
relationship between human motor control performance and kinematic
synergies in upper limb prosthetics,” in Eng. Med. Biol. Conf., pp. 3194
– 3197, 2018.

[8] R. Garcia-Rosas, Y. Tan, D. Oetomo, C. Manzie, and P. Choong,
“Personalized Online Adaptation of Kinematic Synergies for Human-
Prosthesis Interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., pp. 1–15, 2019.

[9] A. Akhtar, N. Aghasadeghi, L. Hargrove, and T. Bretl, “Estimation
of distal arm joint angles from EMG and shoulder orientation for
transhumeral prostheses,” J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol., vol. 35, pp. 86–
94, 2017.

[10] D. Blana, T. Kyriacou, J. M. Lambrecht, and E. K. Chadwick, “Feasibil-
ity of using combined EMG and kinematic signals for prosthesis control:
A simulation study using a virtual reality environment,” J. Electromyogr.
Kinesiol., vol. 29, pp. 21–27, 2016.

[11] N. A. Alshammary, D. A. Bennett, and M. Goldfarb, “Synergistic elbow
control for a myoelectric transhumeral prosthesis,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 468–476, 2018.

[12] D. H. Gates, L. S. Walters, J. Cowley, J. M. Wilken, and L. Resnik,
“Range of Motion Requirements for Upper-Limb Activities of Daily
Living,” Am. J. Occup. Ther., vol. 70, no. 1, p. 7001350010p1, 2015.

[13] S. Li, X. Zhang, and J. D. Webb, “3-D-Gaze-Based Robotic Grasping
Through Mimicking Human Visuomotor Function for People with Mo-
tion Impairments,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 2824–
2835, 2017.

[14] D. Whitney, “Resolved Motion Rate Control of Manipulators and Human
Prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Man Mach. Syst., vol. 10, pp. 47–53, jun 1969.
[15] R. M. Murray, Z. Li, and S. S. Sastry, A Mathematical Introduction to

Robotic Manipulation, vol. 29. CRC Press, 1994.

[16] M. Merad, E. de Montalivet, A. Roby-Brami, and N. Jarrasse, “Intuitive
prosthetic control using upper limb inter-joint coordinations and IMU-
based shoulder angles measurement: A pilot study,” in Int. Conf. Intell.
Robot. Syst., pp. 5677–5682, 2016.

Fig. 8: Case study experimental results for task completion
time (tµ

f ) over iterations of the task for each target.

their shape. While the amputee subject showed smaller joint-
range utilisation, similar features highlighting the interface use
strategy arise. For instance, the EP strategy shows the same
straight line shapes characteristic of sequential motion, while
both TS and JS show curves. In the TS case, it can be seen that
the amputee subject also followed the aim-and-extend strategy
as seen by the horizontal line segment with lower variability.
In general, both TS and JS outperform EP in terms of joint
path variability as shown in Figure 10b.

Lastly, results for hand and joint path smoothness (Figures
10c and 10d), and trunk and shoulder displacement (Figures
10e and 10f) show no signiﬁcant difference between the three
prosthetic cases.

These results highlight human-to-human variation, where
preference to different interface modalities may arise. More-
over, the type of amputation, or in this case limb difference,
may affect the subject’s preference towards an interface modal-
ity. Anecdotally, the subject stated a preference towards the TS
modality as he found it easier to use because of the point-and-
extend strategy. This motivates further studies with subjects
with different amputations and limb differences that focus on
the human aspect of the human-prosthetic interface.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper a realisation of a task-space synergy
for motion-based human-prosthetic interfaces was presented
which allows the prosthesis to be controlled in task-space
through the anticipated path of the prosthetic hand. Such type
of synergistic interface has the potential to be generalisable
to any reaching task, is personalised through the use of a
kinematic model of the user’s arm, and may prove useful
in complex tasks that require the coordination of multiple
degrees of freedom. An experimental study with able-bodied
subjects and a case study with an amputee subject showed
the proposed task-space synergy achieves comparable
that
performance to joint-space synergistic interfaces in terms

           7 D U J H W   & O R V H $ % ( 3 7 6 - 6           7 D U J H W   0 L G       , W H U D W L R Q     7 D U J H W   ) D U       , W H U D W L R Q     7 D U J H W   + L J K & R P S O H W L R Q  W L P H   V 11

(a) Mean and standard deviation hand paths.

(b) Mean and standard deviation joint paths.

Fig. 9: Mean and standard deviation hand paths and joint angles of the last 10 iterations (steady-state) of the Far target for the
amputee subject

[17] D. Oetomo and M. H. Ang, “Singularity robust algorithm in serial
manipulators,” Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf., vol. 25, pp. 122–134,
feb 2009.

[18] A. Fougner, O. Stavdahl, P. J. Kyberd, Y. G. Losier, and P. A. Parker,
“Control of upper limb prostheses: Terminology and proportional my-
oelectric control - A review,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 663–677, 2012.

[19] E. A. Biddiss and T. T. Chau, “Upper limb prosthesis use and aban-
donment: A survey of the last 25 years,” Prosthet. Orthot. Int., vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 236–257, 2007.

[20] D. C. Niehorster, L. Li, and M. Lappe, “The accuracy and precision of
position and orientation tracking in the HTC vive virtual reality system
for scientiﬁc research,” Iperception., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1–23, 2017.
[21] N. Yang, M. Zhang, C. Huang, and D. Jin, “Synergic analysis of upper
limb target reaching movements,” J. Biomech., vol. 35, pp. 739–746,
2002.

[22] D. A. Kistemaker, J. D. Wong, and P. L. Gribble, “The cost of moving
optimally: kinematic path selection,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 112, no. 8,
pp. 1815–1824, 2014.

[23] S. Balasubramanian, R. Colombo, I. Sterpi, V. Sanguineti, and E. Burdet,
“Robotic assessment of upper limb motor function after stroke,” 2012.
[24] A. De Los Reyes-Guzm´an, I. Dimbwadyo-Terrer, F. Trincado-Alonso,
F. Monasterio-Huelin, D. Torricelli, and A. Gil-Agudo, “Quantitative
assessment based on kinematic measures of functional
impairments
during upper extremity movements: A review,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 29,
no. 7, pp. 719–727, 2014.

[25] S. Balasubramanian, A. Melendez-Calderon, and E. Burdet, “A robust
and sensitive metric for quantifying movement smoothness,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 2126–2136, 2012.

[26] W. G. Darling and J. D. Cooke, “Changes in the variability of movement
trajectories with practice,” J. Mot. Behav., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 291–309,
1987.

12

(a) Amputee subject hand path variability
(σµ) over the last 10 iterations.

(b) Amputee subject joint path variability
(σµ) over the last 10 iterations.

(c) Amputee subject hand path smooth-
ness (η). The less negative the smoother
the path.

(d) Amputee subject joint path smooth-
ness (η). The less negative the smoother
the path.

(e) Amputee subject C7 displacement
(φµ).

(f) Amputee subject shoulder acromion
displacement (φµ).

Fig. 10: Case study experimental results for the Quality of Motion and Motor Behaviour metrics for the last 10 iterations per
target.

 & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W                 6 W D Q G D U G  G H Y L D W L R Q + D Q G  3 D W K  9 D U L D W L R Q & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W                6 W D Q G D U G  G H Y L D W L R Q - R L Q W  3 D W K  9 D U L D W L R Q & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W     6 S H F W U D O  D U F  O H Q J W K + D Q G  3 D W K  6 P R R W K Q H V V & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W     6 S H F W U D O  D U F  O H Q J W K - R L Q W  3 D W K  6 P R R W K Q H V V & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W             ' L V S O D F H P H Q W   P  &   0 H D Q  ' L V S O D F H P H Q W $ % ( 3 7 6 - 6 & O R V H 0 L G ) D U + L J K 7 D U J H W                 ' L V S O D F H P H Q W   P  6 K R X O G H U  0 H D Q  ' L V S O D F H P H Q W