Isness: Using Multi-Person VR to Design Peak Mystical-Type  
Experiences Comparable to Psychedelics 

David R. Glowacki,1,2,3,4* Mark D. Wonnacott,1,3 Rachel Freire,1,4,5 Becca R. Glowacki,1,6                  
Ella M. Gale,1,3 James E. Pike,4 Tiu de Haan,4 Mike Chatziapostolou,4 Oussama Metatla1,2 

1Intangible Realities Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; 2Dept. of Computer Science, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, UK; 3Centre for Computational Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; 4ArtSci Interna-

tional Foundation, Bristol, UK;  5Rachel Freire Studio, London, UK;  6Department of Design, Goldsmiths        

College, University of London, London, UK 

ABSTRACT 
Studies  combining  psychotherapy  with  psychedelic  drugs 
(YDs)  have  demonstrated  positive  outcomes  that  are  often 
associated with YDs’ ability to induce ‘mystical-type’ expe-
riences (MTEs) – i.e., subjective experiences whose charac-
teristics  include  a  sense  of  connectedness,  transcendence, 
and ineffability. We suggest that both YDs and virtual reality 
can be situated on a broader spectrum of psychedelic tech-
nologies. To test this hypothesis, we used concepts, methods, 
and analysis strategies from YD research to design and eval-
uate ‘Isness’, a multi-person VR journey where participants 
experience the collective emergence, fluctuation, and dissi-
pation of their bodies as energetic essences. A study (N=57) 
analyzing participant responses to a commonly used YD ex-
perience questionnaire (MEQ30) indicates that Isness partic-
ipants reported MTEs comparable to those reported in dou-
ble-blind  clinical  studies  after  high  doses  of  psilocybin  & 
LSD. Within a supportive setting and conceptual framework, 
VR phenomenology can create the conditions for MTEs from 
which participants derive insight and meaning. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
In The Doors of Perception, Aldous Huxley recounted taking 
mescaline under the guidance of psychiatrist Humphrey Os-
mond. In a vase of flowers, Huxley reported seeing “the mir-
acle, moment by moment, of naked existence… flowers shin-
ing with their own inner light and all but quivering under the 
pressure of the significance with which they were charged.” 
He recalled how even “the folds of my grey flannel trousers 
were charged with is-ness.”[36] The word ‘psychedelic’ was 
coined by Osmond in correspondence with Huxley in 1956. 
[61] Derived from the combination of the Greek words psy-
che (yuch, translated ‘soul’ or ‘mind’) and delein (dhlein, 
‘to reveal’, ‘to make visible’, or ‘to manifest’), ‘psychedelic’ 
is often translated as ‘mind-manifesting’ or ‘mind-revealed’. 
[12, 40] Crucially, we highlight that the word’s roots are ag-
nostic to the particular form of technology used in order to 
achieve ‘mind-manifesting’. 

*drglowacki@gmail.com 

In what follows, we investigate the extent to which im-
mersive technologies (specifically multi-person VR) enable 
purer  forms  of  awareness  which  are  undistracted  by  ego  – 
enabling  people  to  tune  into  the  ‘is-ness’  to  which  Huxley 
alluded. Evaluating such experiences is fraught with difficul-
ties,  because  they  are  notoriously  difficult  to  capture  in 
words and metrics. To guide our efforts, we look to the re-
surgent field of psychedelic drug (YD) research, marked by 
Griffiths  et  al.’s  influential  2006  article,  “Psilocybin  can 
occasion  mystical-type  experiences  having  substantial  and 
sustained personal meaning and spiritual significance”. [22] 
In the intervening years, Griffiths and co-workers have accu-
mulated  evidence  that  YD  efficacy  in  treating  depression, 
addiction, and end-of-life anxiety correlates with their ability 
to occasion ‘mystical-type experiences’ (MTEs) which par-
ticipants recount as being profoundly meaningful. [40] 

Our  attempts  to  understand  whether  the  perceptual  af-
fordances of multi-person VR enable phenomenological ex-
periences that create the conditions for MTEs which partici-
pants  perceive  as  insightful  and  meaningful  follows  recent 
calls within human-computer-interaction (HCI) to focus on 
designing tools that enable experiences of meaning. For ex-
ample,  Mekler  and  Hornbaek  [56]  defined  a  conceptual 
framework for what constitutes an experience of ‘meaning’ 
in HCI. Three of their concepts – connectedness, resonance, 
and significance – have strong overlaps with concepts used 
to evaluate psychedelic drug experiences (YDEs) – namely, 
connectedness, ineffability, and noetic quality. [1] Light et al 
[50, 51] outlined concepts for technology makers to adopt in 
order to stimulate alternative narratives and visions, urging 
designers  to  focus  on  making  moral  progress  at  a  time  of 
emerging crisis and instability. They emphasize that ‘signif-
icance’ and ‘meaning’ must acknowledge human mutability 
and  mortality  within  interconnected  ecological  systems. 
Kaptelinin [43, 44] has made calls for HCI to deal directly 
with the fundamental ‘givens’ of human existence (e.g., mor-
tality, identity, isolation, meaning, etc.), in order to make our 
lives more ‘authentic’ and ‘meaningful’.  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
 
The  question  of  meaning  is  important  right  now.  With 
worsening climate predictions and an unprecedented rate of 
extinction within the biosphere, [50, 51] there is a growing 
sense that our every action must be balanced with awareness, 
including how we design and use technology. [43, 50, 51, 59] 
As the discourse of extinction enters into our collective psy-
chological landscape, so does a sort of end-of-life anxiety as 
we struggle to shake our addiction to unsustainable growth 
paradigms. The ACM ‘computing within limits’ community 
has explicitly acknowledged this problem, pointing out that 
most  computing  work  depends  on  industrial  civilization’s 
default worldview that ongoing economic growth is achiev-
able and desirable, with a vision for the future ‘very much 
like the present, but even more so’ [59], which fails to recog-
nize global material and ecological limits.  

To date, calls for meaning-making within HCI lack em-
pirical demonstrations showing how the proposed concepts 
and theoretical paradigms can be practically applied to ena-
ble experiences which participants find meaningful. In what 
follows, we directly address this knowledge gap. We show 
how immersive forms of computing can be used to cultivate 
awareness, ego-dissolution, and a sense of connectedness (to 
oneself, to others, and to the world-out-there) – all concepts 
with  the  potential  to  foster  awareness  and help  us  imagine 
our  way  out  of  the  damaging  and  addictive  paradigms  in 
which our culture is stuck. To inspire our approach, we have 
turned to the YD research literature, because it is concerned 
with how to practically enable meaningful participant expe-
riences that facilitate positive therapeutic outcomes. We out-
line how we have applied phenomenology from YD research 
to design the Isness multi-person VR experience, and present 
quantitative and qualitative evidence that Isness leads to peak 
experiences which occasion MTEs to which participants at-
tribute significant personal meaning and insight, comparable 
to the MTEs that arise with moderate to strong YD doses.  

2. BACKGROUND 

YD Technologies 
The ‘classical YDs’ include LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, and 
DMT. Phenomenologically, they produce non-ordinary and 
variable  forms  of  consciousness  which  (compared  to  ordi-
nary waking consciousness) are less centered on one’s nor-
mal sense of egoic self, [8, 62] instead producing senses of 
unity and connectedness. [11] While the classical YDs  were 
of prominent interest within psychiatry and neuroscience re-
search in the 1950s and 60s, their recreational use and their 
association to counterculture prompted an end to their use in 
human  research  in  the  early  1970s.  [61]  However,  the  last 
decade has seen a resurgence in research studies carried out 
to evaluate their utility for promoting positive psychological 
health in both clinical and non-clinical settings. Double-blind 
trials [22, 23] and neuroimaging studies [7, 10] indicate that 
classical YDs hold strong potential as therapeutics for treat-
ing depression, addiction, and end-of-life anxiety associated 
with terminal illness. [40, 68] Johnson et al. discuss the in-
sufficiency  of  the  term  hallucinogen’  in  referring  to  YDs 

because it suggests effects limited primarily to visual percep-
tion. [40] Given that classical YDs do not typically produce 
stark  hallucinations  and  are  instead  associated  with  effects 
on human consciousness and sense of self, the term “psyche-
delic” has re-emerged within the scientific literature. [61]  

to 

those  who  had 

YDs and MTEs 
Early  researchers  identified  the  ability  of YDs  to  facilitate 
powerful MTEs for participants, [28, 47, 65, 66] highlighting 
the correlation between subjective MTEs and the efficacy of 
YDs in treating addiction and dealing with end-of-life anxi-
ety. The 2006 Griffiths et al study showed that participants 
who  had  taken  psilocybin  reported  greater  psychological 
well-being  compared 
ingested 
methylphenidate placebo. 67% of the study participants iden-
tified their psilocybin experience amongst the most person-
ally  meaningful  experiences  of  their  lives,  and  analysis  of 
their subjective reports showed that many had MTEs. These 
studies utilized a ‘psychedelic psychotherapy’ approach [15, 
54], where the goal is to administer a high drug dose in order 
to occasion a MTE (sometimes called ‘peak experience’ or 
‘ego  dissolution’)  and  inspire  subsequent  behavior  change 
(this contrasts with ‘psycholytic’ approaches that use lower 
YD doses). The intervening years have seen a number of ad-
ditional studies, where psilocybin has been administered to 
healthy  volunteers;  [24,  26]  patients  with  life-threatening 
cancer  diagnoses;  [25,  67]  people  dealing  with  addiction; 
[18, 38, 39] and those afflicted with treatment-resistant de-
pression [13]. Several of these studies reaffirm the fact that 
participants’ subjective reports of  MTEs following  YD in-
gestion offers a good predictor of positive therapeutic out-
comes.  

Characterizing MTEs 

The most definitive review of features that can be used to 
identify a subjective experience as mystical was compiled by 
Stace  [71]  who  distilled  phenomenological  descriptions  of 
MTEs  from  a  variety  of  sources.  Building  on  the  work  of 
William James, [37] he identified a sense of unity (becoming 
one with all that exists) as the defining feature of the MTE. 
Other dimensions of MTE which Stace identified include: (1) 
ineffability (i.e., it cannot be encapsulated in words ); (2) no-
etic quality (i.e., insight into the depths of some fundamental 
truth or ultimate reality which transcends the discursive in-
tellect, as captured by the Huxley quote at the beginning of 
this article ); (3) sacredness (i.e., a sense that what is encoun-
tered is holy or sacred); (4) positive mood (i.e., joy, ecstasy, 
blessedness,  peace,  tenderness,  gentleness,  tranquility,  and 
awe); and (5) transcendence of time and space (i.e., conven-
tional experiences of time and space seem to fall away).  

The majority of empirical studies which have sought to 
measure MTEs utilize the Hood Mysticism Scale (M Scale).  
[35] Based on Stace’s work, this scale was originally devel-
oped to measure naturally occurring (i.e., non-drug) MTEs, 
but Griffiths et al showed that high doses of psilocybin could 
reliably occasion salient MTEs in healthy participants, [22, 
23,  26]  and  moreover  that  the  strength  of  the  MTE  could 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

predict positive outcomes for YD therapies. To specifically 
measure MTEs occasioned by YDs, Griffiths and co-work-
ers developed and validated the Mystical Experience Ques-
tionnaire  (MEQ30),  [1,  52]  which  avoids  reference  to 
whether  participants  feel  they  have  engaged  with  another 
sentience (e.g. God). It is designed to capture a participant’s 
feeling that their experience: (1) is ineffable; (2) transcends 
typical experiences of space and time; (3) is mystical (i.e., 
produces  senses  of  internal/external  unity,  connectedness, 
sacredness, and noetic qualities); and (4) produces a positive 
mood. The MEQ30 has been thoroughly tested: at the time 
of  writing,  the  literature  contains  results  from  26  previous 
experiments on 540 total participants, detailed in the Table 1 
and 2 in the Supplemental Material (SM). 

YD Phenomenology and Immersive Technology 

Grof wrote that YDs, “used responsibly and with proper 
caution, would be for psychiatry what the microscope is for 
biology  and  medicine  or  the  telescope  is  for  astronomy… 
[making] it possible to study important processes that under 
normal  circumstances  are  not  available  for  direct  observa-
tion” [29] It is difficult to precisely characterize the phenom-
enological  effects  whereby  YD  neurochemistry  leads  to 
MTEs, in part because YDs have multiple physiological ef-
fects, not all of which are likely relevant to generating altered 
perceptual phenomenology. A further question concerns the 
mechanism  whereby  phenomenological  changes  to  sense 
perception arise during YDEs. For example, it has been ob-
served that hallucinations [55] and altered perception of time 
[19] can arise in non-drug contexts, e.g., by placing partici-
pants in altered sensory environments. This raises an inter-
esting question: is the ‘psychedelic experience’ primarily a 
result of ‘top-down’ changes in a participant’s brain? Or can 
it also arise from ‘bottom-up’ changes to perceptual sensory 
inputs? If YDs offer a kind of microscope for understanding 
brain  function,  then  immersive  technology  which  achieves 
comparable subjective effects may have the potential to serve 
as a kind of microscope to unravel the subjective phenome-
nological threads which combine to construct MTEs. 

Practically, MTEs occasioned using immersive technol-
ogy might sometimes be preferable to those which arise from 
ingestion of YDs. For example, YDs remain subject to a host 
of regulatory challenges, which makes them a challenge to 
work  with  in  scientific  contexts.  Moreover,  high  doses  of 
classic YDs can result in an anxious, dysphoric, confusing, 
and (less commonly) delusional acute reaction (a “bad trip” 
colloquially).  [40]  Given  that  classical  YDEs  can  last  any-
where from 6 – 12 hours, being alert to deal with ‘bad trips’ 
in case they arise requires sustained attention from the facil-
itators.  Finally,  ingestion  of  classical  YDs  often  leads  to 
short-term  physiological  effects,  including  elevated  blood 
pressure and heart rate, psychological discomfort (e.g., anx-
ious or dysphoric reactions), and physical distress (e.g., nau-
sea, vomiting, and headache). [40] 

There are relatively few rigorous empirical studies ana-
lysing technological approaches to understand altered states. 
A  number  of  VR  experiences  strive  to  give  participants  a 

glimpse  of  the  ‘trippy’  visuals  often  associated  with  YDs 
(swirling geometric fractals, kaleidoscopic light trails, tech-
nicolor  textures,  etc.,  see  e.g.,  [16]),  some  of  which  have 
been criticized as ‘elaborate screensavers”. [48] Kitson et al 
have outlined ways in which VR might be used to simulate 
the experience of lucid dreaming,  [46] and Gullapalli et al 
have carried out studies evaluating the use of wearable tech-
nologies to measure drug use. [30] To date, we are aware of 
only one empirical study of a framework designed to simu-
late YD phenomenology: the ‘hallucination machine’ which 
Suzuki et al. designed to simulate altered visuals of the sort 
which  participants  might  experience  during  YDEs.  Using 
panoramic  360  videos  (derived  from  Google’s  deep  dream 
convolutional  neural  nets)  which  individuals  could  watch 
whilst wearing a VR headset, [73, 74] their results (N = 12) 
suggest  that  it  is  possible  to  induce  visual  phenomenology 
similar to psilocybin; however, they were unable to evoke in 
participants  the  temporal  distortion  commonly  associated 
with altered states.  

Our work represents a significant departure from previ-
ous approaches like that of Suzuki et al.: rather than simulate 
YD visuals, our focus is on how immersive technology might 
be  used  to  construct  MTEs  comparable  to  those  that  arise 
during YDEs. Recent work by Griffiths et al [27] comparing 
MTEs that arise from YDs to those that arise naturally (i.e., 
non drug-induced) highlights the fact that MTEs per se are 
powerful  predictors  of  lasting  changes  in  psychological 
health regardless of their origins. Inspired by this insight, the 
remainder of this paper outlines our efforts to design and an-
alyze Isness, a multi-person VR experience which we show 
is able to occasion MTEs similar to those which arise from 
large  YD  doses.  The  structure  of  this  paper  is  as  follows: 
First we outline the overall structure of the three-stage Isness 
experience, prefaced by a description of the participants and 
the technological components we used to build Isness. Then, 
we highlight specific concepts from YD research used to in-
form  the  design  of  Isness,  describing  how  these  concepts 
were woven into each of the 3 Isness stages. Finally, we pre-
sent our results, followed by a discussion and conclusions. 

3. THE ISNESS EXPERIENCE 

Participants 
64 healthy adults participated in Isness, where it formed part 
of the art installation program at a biennial psychedelics and 
consciousness conference held in 2019 at the University of 
Greenwich (London). Isness took  place in two rooms on a 
low traffic corridor off the main conference lobby. All par-
ticipants were at least 18 years old, were made aware of the 
potential risks associated with VR, and gave both written and 
verbal  consent  to  their  data  being  gathered  and  published. 
Over three days, Isness ran 16 times, with 64 total partici-
pants. Each group was led by one of three trained guides. To 
minimize participant risk, we adopted VR guidelines in line 
with  those  recommended  by  Madary  and  Metzinger.  [53]  
The  video  available  at  vimeo.com/386402891  illustrates  a 
few different aspects of the Isness experience, which are dis-
cussed further in what follows. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

GPU-accelerated servers. [21, 63, 64] The client/server ar-
chitecture illustrated in Fig 1A provides each VR client ac-
cess to global position data of all other participants, enabling 
each participant to see through their headset a co-located vis-
ual representation of all the other participants (e.g, Fig 1B). 
We designed Isness to accommodate 4 participants wearing 
HTC Vive Pro headsets, each locally connected via LAN ca-
bles to the server (Fig 1A). 

Using  Narupa,  we  designed MTEs  by  defining  a  set  of 
‘aesthetic hyperparameters’, each of which controls some as-
pect  of  the  participants’  phenomenological  experience  and 
which can be precisely varied using the interface shown in 
Fig 1C. We defined a phenomenological ‘state’ as a given set 
of aesthetic hyperparameter values. The overall Isness ‘jour-
ney’ is comprised of a set of states, each of which has some 
specified time duration. This approach ensures reproducibil-
ity because it enables rigorous definition of the hyperparam-
eter values used to design the Isness journey. The progres-
sion through the Isness journey was synchronized with a nar-
rated  soundtrack,  which  was  played  through  a  4-channel 
sound system with one speaker mounted at each of the four 
corners of the VR space, as shown in Fig 1A. The complete 
Isness journey (comprised of 13 states) involved varying 25 
different aesthetic hyperparameters, including for example: 
the color, distribution, density, and latency of the light bod-
ies; the size of the heart center light; the rendering options 
for the energetic thread shown in Fig 1B; options for setting 
interactive forces to achieve different effects; the scene du-
ration, and the global light levels. Our decisions on how to 
set the aesthetic hyperparameters were grounded in the de-
sign concepts discussed in section 4.   

Mudra Gloves 

The ‘mudra pose’ plays an important role during the Is-
ness experience. Participants adopt a ‘mudra pose’ by bring-
ing the tip of their thumb in contact with the tip of either their 
forefinger or middle finger (Fig 1D). Within Isness, partici-
pants could use this gesture to generate light. The light-gen-
erating mudra pose was possible using custom-made ‘mudra 
gloves’  constructed  using  four-way  stretch  technical  knit 
fabric, a sewing machine, soldering iron, and conductive fab-
rics.  The  resulting  gloves  fit  a  range  of  participant  hand 
shapes, as shown in Fig 1E. The mudra glove design achieves 
absolute  position  tracking  using  an  HTC  Vive  tracker 
mounted on a 3d printed connector attached to the glove on 
the back of the hand. [20] Woven into each glove is a circuit 
made from copper electronic textile fabric which participants 
can close by making a mudra pose. [20] Because the mudra 
gloves require no calibration and have no moving parts, they 
can  be  quickly  and  comfortably  slipped  onto  users’  hands 
without interrupting the flow of the broader Isness journey.  

Set and Setting 
The YDE is sensitive to a number of non-pharmacological 
contextual factors, often described as ‘set’ and ‘setting’. [33, 
34, 57, 72] ‘Set’ refers to the preparation of the participants, 
their  prior  psychological  traits,  personality  structure,  and 
their  state  of  mind  at  the  time  of  the  experience.  ‘Setting’ 

Figure 1: (A) Isness multi-person VR setup; (B) In-world view 
of an Isness state; (C) Interface screen for tuning aesthetic hy-
perparameters,  showing  a  top-down  view  of  4  participants  as 
they manipulate an energetic thread; (D) Introvertive explora-
tion with a participant in a mudra pose; (E) Extrovertive explo-
ration, as participants join in a circle to merge fields 

Multi-person VR setup 
We  developed  Isness  as  a  fork  of  the  open-source  Narupa 
project, [64] a multi-person room-scale VR framework (Fig 
1A) [60] originally designed to enable groups of people to 
simultaneously cohabit real-time scientific simulation envi-
ronments where they can reach out and touch molecular ob-
jects,  manipulating  rigorous  real-time  simulations  of  their 
dynamics,  made  possible  by  mounting  the  simulation  on 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
refers to the specific physical, social, and cultural environ-
ment in which the experience unfolds, and also the broader 
cultural  and  media  discourse  in  which  the  participants  are 
embedded. [14, 34, 78]  Set and setting influence the psycho-
logical  effects  of  any  psychotropic  substance  (including 
common drugs like alcohol and nicotine), but YDs are par-
ticularly sensitive to these conditions. [72] A number of stud-
ies have shown that participants enter into a kind of ‘hyper-
suggestable state’ during YDEs [41] – i.e., the impacts of set 
and setting amplify their susceptibility and responsiveness to 
suggestions, which have the potential to alter the contents of 
consciousness,  magnifying  whatever  meaning  participants 
bring  to  the  experience,  and  influencing  their  perception, 
sensation, cognition, emotion, and behavior. [9] During Is-
ness, we assumed that suggestibility would play a similarly 
important  role,  and  therefore  paid  special  attention  to  both 
set and setting as part of our design process. To establish a 
supportive  set  and  setting,  Isness  was  designed  as  a  three-
phase journey.  

Phase 1: Preparation 
The introductory session lasted 15 – 20 mins. Designed by a 
trained drama therapist, the aim was to build rapport and trust 
between  participants  and  the  guide  who  would  lead  their 
journey, mimicking the strategies used in YD studies to min-
imize adverse reactions. [22] The intro began by addressing 
a  number  of  practical  issues  (phones  off,  toilet  locations, 
placing possessions in a safe place). The guide asked partic-
ipants about any health issues that might pose a risk to their 
participation  (e.g.,  epilepsy,  light  sensitivity,  medications, 
psychological  diagnoses,  communicable  infections  that 
could be spread through the VR equipment, or drugs influ-
encing  participants  at  present).  Participants  were  informed 
what  Isness  would  involve,  made  aware  of  potential  risks 
(nausea, headaches, disorientation, emotional distress), and 
informed that they could withdraw at any point. Once they 
gave written and verbal consent, they took their shoes off and 
rubbed their hands with sanitizing lotion. The guide then ex-
plained  the  matter/energy  framework  underpinning  Isness 
(described below), and led them through some gentle move-
ment  and  breath  sequences  in  order  to  draw  awareness  to 
their own embodied perception. They were invited to prac-
tice the aforementioned mudra pose, and to imagine the mu-
dra pose as representing a coalescence between  'individual 
consciousness’  (represented  by  the  finger)  and  'collective 
consciousness'  (represented  by  the  thumb).  They  were  in-
vited to build rapport with their fellow participants through a 
short exercise where they touched the palms of their hands to 
those of the other participants. They were then blindfolded 
and led by the guide into the VR room. Upon entering, they 
felt underfoot a soft mat. They were told that they would be 
safe throughout so long as they stayed on the mat. The guide 
then  gently  moved  each  person  to  a  separate  corner  of  the 
mat, inviting them to sit or kneel (Fig 1A). 

Phase 2: Multi-person VR Session 
Once  the  participants  were  comfortably  knelt  or  sat  at  the 
four corners of the mat, the guide gently slipped the mudra 

gloves  onto  their  hands,  and  initiated  a  35-minute  pre-rec-
orded narrative soundtrack played on a four-channel sound 
system.  The  narrative  guided  participants  through  a  short 
meditation, inviting them to imagine their breath as radiant 
light concentrated at their heart center. Each participant then 
removed their blindfold and was fitted with a VR headset, at 
which point the guide initiated the Isness VR journey, mov-
ing  through  15  prespecified  states,  each  composed  from  a 
different combination of aesthetic hyperparameters. The nar-
rative journey was designed to balance moments of individ-
ual introvertive exploration (Fig 1D) with collective extro-
vertive exploration (Fig 1E). Building on evidence that YDs 
amplify the emotional impact of music, [4, 42] we accompa-
nied the narrative by a soundtrack chosen to broadly reflect 
the arc of the journey. 

Phase 3: Integration 
At end of the Isness VR journey, participants were invited to 
go back to a kneeling or sitting pose and close their eyes. The 
guide  removed  their  headsets,  and  they  were  invited  to  lie 
down, noticing what remained in their conscious awareness, 
and attending to their senses. They were guided on a breath 
meditation similar to that in Phase 1, and invited to imagine 
what might happen if they carried awareness of the intrinsic 
luminosity  (they  had  just  experienced  in  VR)  out  into  the 
wider world – i.e., their daily reality. They were then guided 
to open their eyes, notice the space around them, sit up, join 
their  palms  again  with  their  fellow  participants,  and  make 
one last mudra pose. They were then greeted by their guide, 
who invited them to share in a 10-15 min facilitated discus-
sion, after which they were provided a blank piece of paper 
for reflective writing, along with a blank MEQ30. 

4. CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS 
The design of Isness is grounded in the following concepts 
that have been highlighted in the YD research literature:  

Matter as Energy 
Relationships  between  matter  and  energy  often  emerge  in 
subjective accounts of YDEs, with material objects radiating 
energy and significance (e.g., Huxley’s ‘is-ness’ quote). The 
Isness narrative consistently referred to the idea that matter 
and energy are interconvertible essences which exist on the 
same continuum, with participants told ‘It’s not just you that 
is made of pure energy; it’s all matter, all of the molecules 
and atoms that interact to create all that your world contains’. 
The depth and rigor of this matter-energy narrative was rein-
forced  by  the  fact  that  the  molecular  object  which  partici-
pants experienced in the Isness virtual environment as a kind 
of  fluctuating  dynamical  organism  (referred  to  at  various 
points  in  the  narrative  as  a  ‘molecular  organism’  or  ‘ener-
getic thread’) was more than some arbitrary animation; ra-
ther its dynamics are calculated in real-time using a state-of-
the-art  GPU-accelerated  computational  biophysics  engine. 
[17]  This  sophistication  anchored  the  Isness  narrative  in 
physical and scientific reality, encouraging participants to re-
flect on the fact that everyday material objects are actually 
constructed from the dynamical choreography of molecular 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

organisms whose essences are fundamentally energetic. [21] 
The sense of continuity between energy and matter was rein-
forced  also  by  dissolving  the  bodies  of  Isness  participants 
into energetic essences (Fig 1B), and by describing the mu-
dras as ‘symbolic poses which amplify energy.’ As shown in 
Fig 1B, the mudra light enabled participants to connect with 
and sculpt the dynamics of the energetic thread, and partici-
pants were asked ‘how does it feel to touch pure energy?’ 

Connectedness 
Connectedness is an important characteristic of MTEs, [11] 
which  emerges  quite  naturally  from  reimagining  conven-
tional matter in terms of a common energetic essence. The 
mudra motif was an important mechanism for facilitating a 
sense  of  connection.  For  example,  there  were  a  number  of 
points during the Isness narrative where participants were en-
couraged to make contact between their mudras and those of 
the other participants (Fig 1E), in an effort to enable them to 
experience the energetic merging that arose in moments of 
touch. In a number of the Isness states, the participants’ en-
ergetic bodies are rendered in a similar way as the energetic 
thread (Fig 1B), so that the thread is continuous with the en-
ergetic essence of the participants themselves, at which point 
participants were asked ‘How is it to be connected to every-
thing? To everyone?’ 

Unity 
Stace defined unity as a state of pure awareness uninterrupted 
by  the  brain’s  default  tendency  to  construct  egoic  identity. 
[71]  During  introvertive  (internal)  unity  experiences,  the 
sense of separation of oneself and a transcendent reality is 
overcome, whilst during extrovertive (external) unity expe-
riences the boundary between oneself and the world around 
them is dissolved. Invitations to cultivate a sense of external 
unity  occurred  during  phase  2  of  Isness.  For  example,  we 
represented the energetic essence of each participant in the 
same way, anonymizing their respective identities, and im-
plicitly  encouraging  them  to  recognize  their  common  es-
sence. We also encouraged a choreography whereby partici-
pants came into proximity with one another, so they could 
experience the fluidity of their energetic bodies merging with 
the other bodies in the space. Invitations to cultivate a sense 
of internal unity were primarily carried out in phase 1 and 3, 
where for example participants were guided through a short 
breath meditation, and encouraged to visualize their breath 
as light radiating from their heart center, similar to what they 
saw  when  they  ‘awoke’  into  Isness  VR,  where  their  heart 
centers were illuminated as shown in Fig 1B.  

Ego-dissolution 
YDEs are characterized by a reduction in the self-referential 
awareness  of  normal  waking  consciousness  (ego  ‘death’, 
‘loss’, ‘disintegration’, or ‘dissolution’). [62] We sought to 
encourage a sense of ego-dissolution in two ways. First, we 
designed the journey around a loose arc of energetic emer-
gence, fluctuation, and eventual dissipation, encouraging re-
flection on transience and ‘mutability’. [50] Each Isness par-
ticipant materialized in VR as three shining lights (Fig 1B): 

one located at the heart center, and the others at the origin of 
the mudra pose (Fig 1B). Over the next 25 mins, their ener-
getic light bodies gradually intensified, leaving distinct resi-
dues as they moved through the space. Eventually their es-
sences dissipated, leaving only blackness. Second, we recog-
nized that the HMD acts like a kind of blindfold which re-
places participants’ visual sensory inputs with different in-
puts. [75] We sought to encourage a sense of ego-dissolution 
by  inviting  participants  to  focus  less  on  their  own  internal 
ego narrative and engage in embodied forms of sensing. For 
example, participants were invited to ‘move toward one an-
other and form a circle, and place the palms of your hands 
together’ (Fig 1E). Such moments of contact required tuning 
into non-visual senses (kinaesthetic, proprioceptive, and tac-
tile), diverting attention away from internal ego narratives.  

Transcendence of Space and Time 
VR is particularly well suited to exploring alterations in our 
experience of space and time. [31, 32] Isness included spe-
cific states that challenged participants’ conventional under-
standings of space and time. For example, as they sculpted 
the dynamics of the energetic thread, they were invited to be-
come aware that whilst their own bodies were subject to nor-
mal space constraints and unable to pass through the floor, 
the same was not true for the energetic essences cohabiting 
the simulated VR space with them. Over the arc of the VR 
journey, the states gradually evolve to a point where partici-
pants can simultaneously perceive both the past and present, 
and they are asked ‘what is it like to see the past?’  

Noetic Quality 
Noetic quality is often associated with a subjective experi-
ence of something greater than oneself. For example, encour-
aging participants to think about themselves, and everything 
around them as having a fundamental energetic essence was 
an  invitation  for  them  to  imagine  themselves  as  part  of  a 
larger energetic unfolding. They were reminded that ‘you are 
simply energy in motion’, a sense which was reaffirmed by 
the simulated dynamics of the ‘energetic thread’. At various 
points during the Isness narrative, participants were encour-
aged  to  engage  with  the  energetic  organism,  and  actively 
sculpt  its  dynamics.  These  active  moments  of  engagement 
were balanced by moments of stillness, with participants en-
couraged to ‘Explore the feeling of both stillness and motion. 
Of being and doing. Notice what happens if you do nothing.’ 
In doing nothing, participants discovered that the energetic 
organism carried on, following its own intrinsic choreogra-
phy,  creating  the  sense  of  an  object  with  a  sort  of  other-
worldly intelligence – whose ‘is-ness’ is manifest as a kind 
of perpetual motion which follows a different logic. 

5. ANALYSIS 
Each of the 64 participants completed all three Isness phases, 
and made comments during group discussion. There was one 
report of a participant who experienced a brief period of nau-
sea. 50 participants carried out reflective writing, and 57 an-
swered the MEQ30 afterward. For the 7 participants who did 
not answer the MEQ30, one was an expert who we judged to 
be  too  familiar  with  the  methodology.  At  least  two  others 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Figure 2: Comparison of the avg Isness factor scores to previously published YD research studies where the MEQ30 has been 
utilized (Bar ’18 [69], Griff ’11 [26], Grif ’18 [27], Nich ’18 [70], Grif ’16 [28], Carb ’18 [71], Lie ’17 [72], and Vlis ’18 [74]). The 
SM contains further details on the design of these studies. Panel (A) shows studies with at least 2 M, P, and T scores statistically 
distinguishable from Isness; (B) shows studies which are statistically indistinguishable from Isness; and (C) shows the distribution 
of the Isness MEQ30 results for each of the four factor scores. *M/S practice = ‘Meditation & Spiritual’ practice 

indicated that they preferred not to answer quantitative ques-
tions in their post-Isness emotional state.  

Quantitative Analysis 
The MEQ30 (available in ref [1]) asks participants to rate the 
intensity with which they experienced 30 items on a 6-point 
scale [from “0 = none; not at all” to “5 = extreme (more than 
ever before in my life and stronger than 4)”], with three ques-
tions to capture ineffability I, fifteen mystical M [capturing 
unitive experiences, noetic quality, and sacredness], six pos-
itive mood P, and six transcendence of time/space T. Partic-
ipant responses within each factor (I, M, P, T) are then aver-
aged, and reported as a percentage of the maximum score. 
Fig 2A-B compares the Isness MEQ30 factor scores to the 
26 previous studies in the altered states database [70] where 
the MEQ30 has been used to analyse both YD and non-YD 
altered states. Fig 2A-B shows that the MEQ30 can distin-
guish dose dependent effects of YDs. Tabulated data for Fig 
2A-B is available in Table SM2.  

Fig  2C  shows  the  distribution  of  the  Isness  MEQ30 
scores  for  each  factor  with  a  histogram  bin  width  of  5%. 
Compared to the normally distributed M, P, and T scores, I 
is  much  noisier  (see  further  analysis  in  Table  SM3),  and 
lower than might be expected. This may result from the fact 
that, by the time participants were given the MEQ30, they 
had undertaken 10 – 15 mins group discussion and reflective 

writing. So participants unable to find words in the immedi-
ate  wake  of  their  Isness  ‘peak  experience’  (i.e.,  a  high  I 
score) had ample opportunities to articulate their experience 
by the time they were given the MEQ30. Given these issues 
with the I scores we have restricted statements of statistical 
significance to the M, P, and T results.  

In the absence of an experimental control group, we un-
dertook comparative analysis of Isness to the previously pub-
lished  psychedelic  studies  in  Fig  2A-B  using  independent 
sample  t-tests  with  a  =  0.05,  following  the  approach  Bar-
suglia et al. [3] used to analyze MEQ30 results obtained dur-
ing uncontrolled MeO-DMT field tests. Fig 2 and Table SM2 
show results of 26 different independent-sample t-tests, com-
paring the Isness MEQ30 results to each of the studies in Fig 
2A-B.  Despite  its  simplicity,  the  independent  sample  t-test 
gives results that are broadly aligned with more sophisticated 
statistical analyses described in Table SM3 & SM4. To make 
Fig 2, we classified a study as statistically indistinguishable 
from Isness if it at least two of its M, P, or T factor scores 
were  statistically  indistinguishable  from  the  corresponding 
Isness factor scores. Compared to Isness, Fig 2 depicts:  
•  3 published studies which are more intense. These in-
clude:  (1)  a  MeO-DMT  study;  (2)  a  30  mg  psilocybin 
study; and (3) a  2018 study by Griffiths et al [26] where 
participants in a program offering high levels of support  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme (N statements) 

Indicative Quotations 

Positive Emotions (42) 

Connectedness (40) 

Ego-dissolution (35) 

Embodied perceptual 
awareness (35) 

Reflection on Death 
(28) 

Supportive Setting 
(25) 
Noetic Quality (20) 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time (20) 

Insights for everyday 
life (19) 

Sense of Beauty (18) 

Comparison to Other 
Altered States (15) 

-  [I] cried quite a bit, beginning [when] we all turned red… peaking when the lights went out and we laid down… beautiful 
-  [Isness is] calming, and it’s relaxing, and it’s transfixing 
-  [Isness] took me away from all of my horrible issues that I’m having at the moment. 
-  A beautiful way to connect… not really connecting with anyone’s stories or anyone’s appearance… just the simple pure presence of 

another being… very touching. 

-  [Isness] made me think about our connection with all living beings including plants and animals. quite a paradigm shift 
-  Not knowing who the person [was] next to me allowed me to connect without any pre-judgment…  I no longer saw others through the 

lens of beauty, social structure, age, etc… Rather, it was a pure joy of just being and connecting through light. 

-  You become all anonymous, just beings of light. It allows you to let go of your own sense of ego  
-  One of the ways you become less self-conscious is to be conscious of your senses. this makes you really conscious of your senses. 
-  Felt so light [weightless] during the experience, and heavy afterwards  
-  I feel fully in my body & waves of energy coming over me. I feel the light in my body & I feel present with the other light beings in my 

environment. 

-  The end felt like a peaceful death. The darkness & stillness at the end felt so peaceful  
-  Thought [about] my own death… the energy you give out to the world will always be there 
-  Felt connected to my dad who died 4 years ago 
-  I’ve been very gently guided through a journey of light, stillness and silence 
-  Found the preparation very effective. Its ceremonial quality helped tune into the experience. Super important. 
-  Felt so real. More real than real at times…  a felt experience of the [knowledge] I already had of the light inside people and beings 
-  First sensation was a huge familiarity and I felt like crying…Peace… Feeling of coming home. 
-  really did make my heart burn with appreciation for the simple fact that I exist 
-  Time runs differently in there. 
-  The vastness of space, the non-linear time, care and gentleness to other humans in this experience, and the self-love, helped push 

away the torture of existential anxiety 

-  You can radiate light out. And l liked the fact that it was the pressure that made it radiate. Sometimes when things are hard you need 

to add more pressure to be more light. 

-  The light of the mudra will stay with me for a long while. 
-  Beautiful, gentle and heart opening. 
-  A wonderful and magical experience. 
-  Similar to a 5-MEO-DMT experience… pure energy, pure being, with no reference to physical space 
-  Transporting and illuminating… like the quiet point of an acid trip where calm beauty settles in 
-  Reminds me of mescaline… like a pandora’s box has been opened and the universe revealed in its true form, rather than the virtual 

model created in our own heads. You’re seeing a deeper form & fundamental truth  

Ineffability (9) 

-  Ok. Words. Huh. I know some words. Huh. 
-  [I] feel moved, touched, quite quiet, words are hard to muster – I appreciate that because it indicates that I’ve been brought into my 

body, into my heart/energetic being. 

Childlike enchant-
ment (7) 
Metaphors for every-
day life (4) 

-  [I had a] Beautiful joyous innocent but also intimate feeling I don’t remember feeling since I was a child. 
-  We were like children again, exploring and no judgement or anything. 
-  Playing with the [energetic thread] seemed like we were in control, but when [we stopped], the [thread] did its own stuff. It was an 
acceptance of the co-creation of environment and selves. It was astonishingly calm when we relaxed at the end… a powerful step 
down of need to control. 

Figure 3: themes which emerged from inductive analysis as described in the text, along with indicative quotations. The themes are 
ranked according to the number of participant statements, N, which could be assigned to each theme

in  carrying  out  meditation  and  spiritual  (M/S)  practice 
were given 20-30 mg psilocybin. 

•  7 published studies which are indistinguishable. All of 
these  studies  involved  participants  being  administered 
moderate to large doses (20-42 mg) of psilocybin. In one 
of these studies, Griffiths et al. [26] gave 20-30 mg psil-
ocybin  to  participants  involved  in  a  program  offering 
M/S practice support.  

•  16  published  studies  which  are  less  intense.  Amongst 
these, 6 were baseline studies, and 10 were drug-admin-
istration studies. The baseline studies included: 4 placebo 
studies; a 2016 study where Griffiths et al. gave partici-
pants sub-perceptual (1-3 mg) doses of psilocybin [25]; 
and  a  2018  study  where  Griffiths  et  al  [26]  gave  1  mg 
psilocybin  to  participants  in  a  program  offering  M/S 
practice support. The ten drug-administration studies in-
vestigated: MDMA [49, 69]; methylphenidate [49, 69]; 
ketamine [77]; dextromethorphan [6]; psilocybin [6, 24], 
and LSD [49]. 

Griffiths and co-workers identify an MEQ30 respondent as 
having had a ‘complete MTE’ when each of the I, M, P, T 
factor scores are ≥60% of the maximum. [40] In general, the 
fraction of participants reporting a complete MTE is propor-
tional  to  the  YD  dose.  Barrett  and  Griffiths  [2]  reported  a 
meta-analysis of high dose (30 mg/70 kg) psilocybin studies 
in  119  healthy  volunteers  [22,  24,  26],  and  observed  that 
57% of participants had ‘complete’ MTEs. Recent studies on 
5-MeO-DMT (Fig 2C) [3] reported 75% of MEQ30 partici-
pants  having  a  complete  MTE.  Analysis  of  the  Isness 
MEQ30 data indicates that 44% of participants qualified as 
having a complete MTE. For comparison, Table SM1 shows 
complete MTE rates for those studies where it was reported.  

Qualitative Analysis 
To  better  understand  the  quantitative  data,  we  carried  out 
qualitative analysis of participants’: (1) group discussions af-
ter exiting VR, and (2) reflective writing. The group discus-
sions  were  intended  to  enable  maximum  conversation 
amongst  the  participants,  with  the  guide’s  role  that  of  an 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

active listener. The format of these group discussions was not 
rigidly prescribed; instead the emphasis was on the guide en-
abling conversation amongst the group. In many groups, par-
ticipants did not immediately wish to speak. In such cases, 
the guide asked a simple question to initiate the conversation 
–  e.g.,  ‘How  are  you?’;  ‘How  did  that  feel?’;  ‘What  re-
mains?’; ‘How did you feel when the light faded?’ Qualita-
tive  data  analysis  involved  transcribing  into  digital  format 
~150  mins  of  recorded  conversations  (~14,000  words)  and 
~3,600  words  of  reflective  handwriting.  We  then  analysed 
this data by carrying out inductive thematic analysis, as out-
lined by Braun and Clarke. [5] The 14 themes outlined in Fig 
3 were broadly similar across both the interviews and reflec-
tive  writing,  and  enabled  us  to  classify  ~95%  of  the  tran-
scribed text. The themes in Fig 3 are ranked in order of how 
many  participant  statements  could  be  attributed  to  each, 
along with some indicative quotations which correspond to 
each theme. The entire classification is available in the SM. 

6. DISCUSSION 
In devising Isness, we imagined VR as a form of psychedelic 
technology, investigating whether it could be used as a tool 
for eliciting subjective accounts of MTEs. To guide our de-
sign process for constructing the multi-person VR phenome-
nology,  we  looked  to  concepts  which  characterize  MTEs. 
Quantitative analysis shows that, given a supportive setting, 
Isness produced ‘peak experience’ MTEs which are statisti-
cally indistinguishable from the MTEs observed in previous 
studies  administering  moderate  to  high  doses  of  classical 
YDs. The qualitative analysis helps to rationalize the quanti-
tative  MEQ30  scores,  providing  insight  into  the  subjective 
experiences and themes which arose. The group aspect of Is-
ness appears to have amplified participants’ sense of ego-dis-
solution, releasing them from the projections associated with 
typical social interactions, enabling them to ‘connect without 
any  pre-judgment…  no  longer  [seeing]  others  through  the 
lens of beauty, social structure, age, etc’. The resultant state 
was  ‘like  [we  were]  children  again,  exploring  [without] 
judgement  or  anything’.  This  encouraged  a  form  of  ‘pure 
presence’,  making  participants  ‘really  conscious  of  their 
senses’  and  giving  them  space  to  ‘just  be’.  By  focusing 
awareness on ‘the light in my body and [feeling] present with 
the other light beings’, Isness left participants calm, relaxed, 
‘moved, touched, and quiet’.  

The dissolution of ego is the loss of what makes our per-
sonality  distinct,  and  represents  a  kind  of  experience  of 
death, [41, 76] likely explaining participants’ comments that 
‘the end felt like a really peaceful death’, and observations 
that ‘It’s just a physical body, the energy will remain [after 
dying],  and  it  will  stay  in  a  connection  even  though  this 
[body]  is  gone’.  Comments  like  these  are  aligned  with  in-
sights from Timmerman et al., [76] who identified a correla-
tion between near-death experiences and the sense of ego dis-
solution  which  arise  for  participants  in  DMT  experiences. 
Broadly speaking, digital technologies struggle to deal with 
the existential phenomenology of death; [43, 44, 50, 51] in-
stead focusing on digital heirloom logistics (e.g., managing 

social media accounts for the deceased). The ego-dissolution 
achieved in Isness is an interesting contrast to social media, 
which enables connection, but encourages individuals to am-
plify their individual identity, often producing anxiety.  

Comments like ‘I’ve been very gently guided through a 
journey of light, stillness and silence’ draw attention to the 
significance of set and setting for thinking about how partic-
ipants in VR experiences attribute meaning to an experience 
like Isness. Clearly, subjective attributions of meaning to Is-
ness (and within HCI more broadly) depend on the support-
iveness  of  the  context  framing  the  experience,  and  the 
broader conceptual framework in which it is embedded. The 
importance of set and setting is aligned with the idea that VR 
participants enter into a sort of ‘hyper-suggestable’ state. 

The  features  which  characterize  MTEs  provide  a  rich 
cross-disciplinary conceptual framework for thinking about 
meaning in HCI. The empirical study presented herein shows 
how these concepts can be practically implemented so as to 
design  the  kinds  of  meaning-making  experiences  that  HCI 
workers like Mekler and Hornbaek, [56] Light et al, [50, 51] 
and Kaptelinin [43, 44] have outlined theoretically. Fig 3 and 
the SM provide a glimpse of the meaning and insight which 
participants attributed to their experiences. They reported ‘a 
felt sense of [the] knowledge [I] already had’, and felt they 
saw  ‘the  universe  revealed  in  its  true  form…  this  absolute 
truth  that  we  are  made  of  light’.  Several  participants  cited 
insights and practices which they intended to carry into the 
world ‘out-there’, stating for example ‘I will be using mudras 
more in my daily life’, expressing their intentions to ‘remem-
ber this [experience], and in difficult situations connect back 
to [the] feeling of being able to create and connect’ with the 
luminosity  of  the  material  world,  and  observing  how  ‘the 
pressure  made  [the  mudras]  radiate…  Sometimes  when 
things are hard you need to add more pressure to be more 
light’. Several participants said they cried; one remarked ‘I 
hate meditating but you make me want to try.’ 

Isness differs from psychedelic psychotherapy studies in 
some important ways. For example, Isness preparation lasted 
~15 mins for a group of four, far less than the preparation for 
studies carried out by Griffiths et al (see Table SM2) which 
typically include a total of 4 – 8 individual sessions (occur-
ring before and after drug administration). Additionally, Is-
ness’s three phases last a total of ~70 minutes, considerably 
shorter than typical psilocybin and LSD experiences, which 
last anywhere from 6 – 14 hours. This may account for par-
ticipants’ comparisons to DMT, which usually lasts less than 
30 mins. Finally, Isness was constructed as a group experi-
ence, whereas most YD studies are individual experiences. 

Compared to other YD studies in Fig 2 (and Table SM1 
and SM2), the N=57 Isness sample size was relatively large; 
however, this study had a number of limitations. For exam-
ple, given that we did not carry out a control experiment, we 
are unable at this stage to make clear statements about the 
extent to which sample selection bias may have influenced 
our results. Our ability to make meaningful comparisons with 
previous studies depends on the assumption that the baseline 
MEQ30  responses  of  our  participant  sample  are  not 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

anomalously high, and within the range spanned by 6 previ-
ously  published  baseline  studies.  Fig  2A  shows  that  these 
baseline  studies  have  a  broad  MEQ30  score  distribution; 
however,  our  comparative  statistical  analyses  (Fig  2B  and 
Table S2) show that the Isness results are more intense (p < 
1E-12)  than  all  of  them,  including  for  example  the  2018 
study where Griffiths et al [26] gave 1 mg psilocybin to par-
ticipants who were engaged in a supportive program of med-
itation and spiritual practice. At this stage, it is unclear how 
exactly to define a placebo for an experience like Isness, but 
this is an issue we will investigate in future work. We note 
that participants may have been more willing to provide mys-
tical-type responses during group discussion, reflective writ-
ing, and during the MEQ30 analysis because of their belief 
(whether accurate or not) that we wanted such responses. On 
the other hand, because participants were drawn from a psy-
chedelic conference, they were able to compare Isness to pre-
vious YDEs. For example, some participants specifically in-
dicated that they were unable to rate the MTE occasioned by 
Isness as highly as previous YDEs. We also cannot rule out 
that  the  results  reported  herein  are  subject  to  the  so-called 
‘winner's curse’ [68] where effect sizes observed in trials of 
new treatments are inflated due to a variety of subtle effects. 
The design of Isness as a group experience suggests that the 
individual data may be correlated. In future studies we wish 
to investigate the correlation of the results obtained for par-
ticipants within specific groups, and compare intra-group re-
sults to inter-group results.  

Interesting questions arise concerning the ‘authenticity’ 
of a VR-occasioned MTE like that which arose during Isness. 
The term ‘virtual reality’ per se almost trivializes any MTE 
that emerges. Interestingly, the question of ‘authenticity’ has 
similarly been raised with respect to YDEs – i.e., there is a 
critique that YDs represent a sort of virtual form of MTE, 
lacking ‘authenticity’ compared to those which arise without 
drugs. [45] In a recent paper designed to evaluate this ques-
tion  through  analysis  of  questionnaires  from  2000  partici-
pants, Griffiths et al [27] showed that whilst mystical ‘God 
encounter’  experiences  occasioned  with  and  without  YDs 
have some differences, the descriptive details, interpretation, 
and consequences of these experiences are markedly similar. 
Because  MTEs  occasioned  by  YDs  are  so  similar  to  non-
drug MTEs, Griffiths et al argue that it is problematic to as-
sert that one is virtual and the other is not. This logic, com-
bined with our evidence that VR can occasion MTEs, sug-
gests that ‘virtual reality’ may be a concept best understood 
from  a  wider  vantage  point,  where  head  mounted  displays 
(HMDs) simply represent one kind of ‘virtual reality’ tech-
nology  amongst  a  broader  continuum  of  VR  technologies, 
which include for example YDs, mythologies, rituals, medi-
tation practices, lucid dreaming, [46] etc. By comparing the 
MTEs arising with VR and YD ‘technologies’, we can begin 
to understand where each sits within the broader spectrum of 
psychedelic technologies and VR technologies.  

The approach outlined herein, where aesthetic hyperpa-
rameters  defining  a  particular  journey  can  be  precisely 

defined, offers an interesting complement to ongoing YD re-
search, opening up a range of further research directions. [58] 
It  will  be  interesting  to  explore  how  Isness  variants,  con-
structed by exploring different domains of the aesthetic hy-
perparameter  space,  compare  to  different  YDEs.  Enabling 
new  phenomenological  experiences  by  designing  new  YD 
molecules is difficult, and clinical research efforts therefore 
focus primarily on tuning set and setting. Isness enables di-
rect tuning of aspects of the participants’ phenomenological 
experience,  and  different  classes  of  experience  almost  cer-
tainly exist within the hyperparameter space. This idea has 
some  analogy  with  proposals  by  Carhart-Harris  et  al.,  [8] 
who suggested that consciousness can access an ensemble of 
different metastable brain states, each of which uniquely in-
fluences  aspects  of  perception.  In  future  work,  we  hope  to 
analyze Isness peak experience using a wider range of psy-
chometrics (beyond MEQ30), and also to carry out longer-
term  follow-ups  to  better  understand  its  impact.  We  also 
hope  to  understand  how  the  neurophysiological  impacts  of 
Isness relate to EEG and fMRI observations during YDEs. 

7. CONCLUSIONS  
Within a supportive setting and conceptual framework, we 
have presented evidence suggesting that it is possible to de-
sign phenomenological experiences using multi-person VR 
which  create  the  conditions  for  MTEs  from  which  partici-
pants derive insight and meaning. Given that colloquial us-
age of the term ‘psychedelic’ is linked to drugs, we have im-
agined different words  for describing a technology like Is-
ness. Inspired by the Latin numen (‘arousing spiritual or re-
ligious emotion; mysterious or awe-inspiring’) and the Greek 
pneuma  (‘breath’,  ‘spirit’,  or  ‘soul’),  perhaps  technologies 
like Isness may be described as numedelic (‘spirit-manifest-
ing’,  or  ‘spirit-revealing’).  Analogous  to  psychedelic  psy-
chotherapy,  we  may  imagine  Isness  as  a  tool  enabling 
numedelic psychotherapy. Much YD research aims to help 
patients deal with addictions and end-of-life anxiety, individ-
ual conditions which represent the broader problems facing 
our  culture  right  now.  In  a  supportive  therapeutic  context, 
numedelic technologies like Isness may offer an opportunity 
for a digital culture which is addicted to unhealthy economic 
growth narratives to meditate on its own mortality. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
DRG  is  supported  by  the  Leverhulme  Trust  (Philip  Lever-
hulme  Prize),  Royal  Society  (URF/R/180033)  and  EPSRC 
(institutional sponsorship award & EP/P021123/1); OM by 
EPSRC  (EP/N00616X/2);  MW  by  the  Royal  Society 
(RGF/EA/181075) and BBSRC (BB/R00661X/1); and JEP, 
MW, & TdH by the ArtSci International Foundation. People 
who  provided  support  and  useful  conversations  at  various 
stages include: David Luke, Aimee Tollan, Andy Milns, Jae 
Levy, Chris Timmerman, Michael B. O’Connor, Alexander 
Jamieson-Binnie,  Jonathan  Barnoud,  Helen  Deeks,  Alex 
Jones,  Becca  Walters,  Rhosyln  Roebuck-Williams,  Joseph 
Hyde, Thomas Mitchell, Lisa Thomas, the Arts Council Eng-
land  Figuring  team,  Hester  Jones,  Michael  Hoezl,  &  the 
Breaking Convention attendees who participated. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

REFERENCES 
[1] Barrett, F. S., Johnson, M. W. and Griffiths, R. R. 
Validation of the revised Mystical Experience 
Questionnaire in experimental sessions with psilocybin. J 
Psychopharmacol, 29, 11 (2015), 1182-1190. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881115609019 
[2] Barrett, F. S. and Griffiths, R. R. Classic Hallucinogens 
and Mystical Experiences: Phenomenology and Neural 
Correlates. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2017_474 
[3] Barsuglia, J., Davis, A. K., Palmer, R., Lancelotta, R., 
Windham-Herman, A.-M., Peterson, K., Polanco, M., 
Grant, R. and Griffiths, R. R. Intensity of Mystical 
Experiences Occasioned by 5-MeO-DMT and Comparison 
With a Prior Psilocybin Study. Front. Psychol., 9, 2459 
(2018). 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.024
59 
[4] Bonny, H. L. and Pahnke, W. N. The use of music in 
psychedelic (LSD) psychotherapy. Journal of Music 
Therapy, 9, 2 (1972), 64–87. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jmt/9.2.64 
[5] Braun, V. and Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in 
psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3, 2 
(2006), 77-101. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1191/1478088706
qp063oa 
[6] Carbonaro, T. M., Johnson, M. W., Hurwitz, E. and 
Griffiths, R. R. Double-blind comparison of the two 
hallucinogens psilocybin and dextromethorphan: 
similarities and differences in subjective experiences. 
Psychopharmacology, 235, 2 (2018), 521-534. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-017-4769-4 
[7] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Williams, T., Stone, 
J. M., Reed, L. J., Colasanti, A., Tyacke, R. J., Leech, R., 
Malizia, A. L., Murphy, K., Hobden, P., Evans, J., Feilding, 
A., Wise, R. G. and Nutt, D. J. Neural correlates of the 
psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with 
psilocybin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 109, 6 (2012), 2138-
2143. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1119598109 
[8] Carhart-Harris, R. L. The entropic brain: a theory of 
conscious states informed by neuroimaging research with 
psychedelic drugs (2014), 1-22. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00
020/full 
[9] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Kaelen, M., Whalley, M. G., 
Bolstridge, M., Feilding, A. and Nutt, D. J. LSD enhances 
suggestibility in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology, 
232, 4 (2015), 785-794. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-
014-3714-z 
[10] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., 
Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Droog, W., Murphy, K., 
Tagliazucchi, E., Schenberg, E. E., Nest, T., Orban, C., 
Leech, R., Williams, L. T., Williams, T. M., Bolstridge, M., 
Sessa, B., McGonigle, J., Sereno, M. I., Nichols, D., 
Hellyer, P. J., Hobden, P., Evans, J., Singh, K. D., Wise, R. 
G., Curran, H. V., Feilding, A. and Nutt, D. J. Neural 

correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal 
neuroimaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 113, 17 
(2016), 4853-4858. 
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.1518377113 
[11] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Erritzoe, D., Haijen, E., Kaelen, 
M. and Watts, R. Psychedelics and connectedness. 
Psychopharmacology, 235, 2 (2017), 547-550. 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00213-017-4701-y 
[12] Carhart-Harris, R. L. and Goodwin, G. M. The 
Therapeutic Potential of Psychedelic Drugs: Past, Present, 
and Future. Neuropsychopharmacology, 42 (2017), 2105–
2113. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2017.84 
[13] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Bolstridge, M., Day, C. M. J., 
Rucker, J., Watts, R., Erritzoe, D. E., Kaelen, M., Giribaldi, 
B., Bloomfield, M., Pilling, S., Rickard, J. A., Forbes, B., 
Feilding, A., Taylor, D., Curran, H. V. and Nutt, D. J. 
Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-
resistant depression: six-month follow-up. 
Psychopharmacology, 235 (2018), 399–408. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-017-4771-x 
[14] Carhart-Harris, R. L., Roseman, L., Haijen, E., 
Erritzoe, D., Watts, R., Branchi, I. and Kaelen, M. 
Psychedelics and the essential importance of context. J 
Psychopharmacol, 32, 7 (2018), 725-731. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881118754710 
[15] Chwelos, N., Blewett, D., Smith, C. and Hoffer, A. 
Use of d-lysergic acid diethylamide in the treatment of 
alcoholism. Quarterly journal of studies on alcohol, 20 
(1959), 577-590.  
[16] Denton, J. Can Virtual Reality Replace Psychedelic 
Drugs? https://psmag.com/social-justice/can-virtual-reality-
replace-psychedelic-drugs Pacific Standard (2019).  
[17] Eastman, P., Friedrichs, M. S., Chodera, J. D., Radmer, 
R. J., Bruns, C. M., Ku, J. P., Beauchamp, K. A., Lane, T. 
J., Wang, L.-P., Shukla, D., Tye, T., Houston, M., Stich, T., 
Klein, C., Shirts, M. R. and Pande, V. S. OpenMM 4: A 
Reusable, Extensible, Hardware Independent Library for 
High Performance Molecular Simulation. J. Chem. Theory 
Comput., 9, 1 (2013), 461-469. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ct300857j 
[18] Garcia-Romeu, A., R Griffiths, R. and W Johnson, M. 
Psilocybin-occasioned mystical experiences in the treatment 
of tobacco addiction. Current drug abuse reviews, 7, 3 
(2014), 157-164. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1874473708666150107121331 
[19] Glicksohn, J., Berkovich-Ohana, A., Mauro, F. and 
Ben-Soussan, T. D. Time Perception and the Experience of 
Time When Immersed in an Altered Sensory Environment. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 11, 487 (2017). 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00
487 
[20] Glowacki, B. R., Freire, R., Thomas, L. M., O’Connor, 
M. B., Jamieson-Binnie, A. and Glowacki, D. R. An open 
source Etextile VR glove for real-time manipulation of 
molecular simulations. arXiv:1901.03532 (2019). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.03532 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

[21] Glowacki, D. R. Perceptions at the nanoscale. Nature 
Nanotechnology, 14, 5 (2019), 403-403. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0452-8 
[22] Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., McCann, U. and 
Jesse, R. Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences 
having substantial and sustained personal meaning and 
spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology, 187, 3 (2006), 
268-283. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00213-006-
0457-5 
[23] Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., Johnson, M. W., 
McCann, U. D. and Jesse, R. Mystical-type experiences 
occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribution of personal 
meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. 
Psychopharmacology, 187, 3 (2008), 268-283. 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/026988110809430
0 
[24] Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., 
Richards, B. D., McCann, U. and Jesse, R. Psilocybin 
occasioned mystical-type experiences: immediate and 
persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacology, 218, 4 
(2011), 649-665. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-011-2358-
5 
[25] Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M. W., Carducci, M. A., 
Umbricht, A., Richards, W. A., Richards, B. D., Cosimano, 
M. P. and Klinedinst, M. A. Psilocybin produces substantial 
and sustained decreases in depression and anxiety in 
patients with life-threatening cancer: A randomized double-
blind trial. J Psychopharmacol, 30, 12 (2016), 1181-1197. 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/026988111667551
3 
[26] Griffiths, R. R., Johnson, M. W., Richards, W. A., 
Richards, B. D., Jesse, R., MacLean, K. A., Barrett, F. S., 
Cosimano, M. P. and Klinedinst, M. A. Psilocybin-
occasioned mystical-type experience in combination with 
meditation and other spiritual practices produces enduring 
positive changes in psychological functioning and in trait 
measures of prosocial attitudes and behaviors. J 
Psychopharmacol, 32, 1 (2018), 49-69. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881117731279 
[27] Griffiths, R. R., Hurwitz, E. S., Davis, A. K., Johnson, 
M. W. and Jesse, R. Survey of subjective "God encounter 
experiences": Comparisons among naturally occurring 
experiences and those occasioned by the classic 
psychedelics psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca, or DMT. PLoS 
ONE, 14, 4 (2019), e0214377. 
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214377.s003 
[28] Grof, S., Goodman, L. E., Richards, W. A. and 
Kurland, A. LSD-assisted psychotherapy in patients with 
terminal cancer. International pharmacopsychiatry, 8 
(1973), 129-144.  
[29] Grof, S. LSD psychotherapy. Hunter House Pomona, 
CA, 1980 
[30] Gullapalli, B. T., Natarajan, A., Angarita, G. A., 
Malison, R. T., Ganesan, D. and Rahman, T. On-body 
Sensing of Cocaine Craving, Euphoria and Drug-Seeking 
Behavior Using Cardiac and Respiratory Signals. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable 

and Ubiquitous Technologies, 3, 2 (2019), 1-31. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3328917 
[31] Hart, V., Hawksley, A., Matsumoto, E. A. and 
Segerman, H. Non-euclidean virtual reality I: explorations 
of H3. arXiv:1702.04004 (2017). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.04004 
[32] Hart, V., Hawksley, A., Matsumoto, E. A. and 
Segerman, H. Non-euclidean virtual reality II: explorations 
of H2 x E. arXiv:1702.04862 (2017). 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.04862 
[33] Hartogsohn, I. Set and setting, psychedelics and the 
placebo response: An extra-pharmacological perspective on 
psychopharmacology. J Psychopharmacol, 30, 12 
(2016/12/01 2016), 1259-1267. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881116677852 
[34] Hartogsohn, I. Constructing drug effects: A history of 
set and setting. Drug Science, Policy and Law, 3, 0 (2017), 
1-17. https://doi.org/10.1177/2050324516683325 
[35] Hood, J. R. W., Ghorbani, N., Watson, P. J., 
Ghramaleki, A. F., Bing, M. N., Davison, H. K., Morris, R. 
J. and Williamson, W. P. Dimensions of the Mysticism 
Scale: Confirming the Three-Factor Structure in the United 
States and Iran. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 
40, 4 (2001), 691-705. https://doi.org/10.1111/0021-
8294.00085 
[36] Huxley, A. The doors of perception and Heaven and 
hell. Harper & Row, New York, 1963. 
https://search.library.wisc.edu/catalog/999606461202121 
[37] James, W. The varieties of religious experience: a 
study in human nature. New American Library, New York, 
1958. 
https://search.library.wisc.edu/catalog/999774039202121 
[38] Johnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M. P. 
and Griffiths, R. R. Pilot study of the 5-HT 2AR agonist 
psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco addiction. J 
Psychopharmacol, 28, 11 (2014), 983-992. 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/026988111454829
6 
[39] Johnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A. and Griffiths, R. R. 
Long-term follow-up of psilocybin-facilitated smoking 
cessation. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol 
Abuse, 43, 1 (2017), 55-60. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/00952990.2016.1170135 
[40] Johnson, M. W., Hendricks, P. S., Barrett, F. S. and 
Griffiths, R. R. Classic psychedelics: An integrative review 
of epidemiology, therapeutics, mystical experience, and 
brain network function. Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
197 (2019), 83-102. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.11.010 
[41] Jones, R. H. Limitations on the Scientific Study of 
Drug-Enabled Mystical Experiences. Zygon, 54, 3 (2019), 
756-792. https://doi.org/10.1111/zygo.12546 
[42] Kaelen, M., Barrett, F. S., Roseman, L., Lorenz, R., 
Family, N., Bolstridge, M., Curran, H. V., Feilding, A., 
Nutt, D. J. and Carhart-Harris, R. L. LSD enhances the 
emotional response to music. Psychopharmacology, 232, 19 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

(2015), 3607-3614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-015-
4014-y 
[43] Kaptelinin, V. Making the Case for an Existential 
Perspective in HCI Research on Mortality and Death. 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2016), 
352-364. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892585 
[44] Kaptelinin, V. Technology and the Givens of 
Existence: Toward an Existential Inquiry Framework in 
HCI Research. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (2018), 1-14. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173844 
[45] Kellenberger, J. Mysticism and Drugs. Religious 
Studies, 14, 2 (1978), 175-191.  
[46] Kitson, A., DiPaola, S. and Riecke, B. E. Lucid Loop: 
A Virtual Deep Learning Biofeedback System for Lucid 
Dreaming Practice. 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (2019), LBW1322: 1321-
1326. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312952 
[47] Kurland, A., Savage, C., Pahnke, W. N., Grof, S. and 
Olsson, J. E. LSD in the treatment of alcoholics. 
Pharmacopsychiatry, 4, 02 (1971), 83-94.  
[48] Lhooq, M. We tried VR ayahuasca so you don’t have 
to: https://theface.com/life/we-tried-vr-ayahuasca-so-you-
dont-have-to. The Face (2019).  
[49] Liechti, M. E., Dolder, P. C. and Schmid, Y. 
Alterations of consciousness and mystical-type experiences 
after acute LSD in humans. Psychopharmacology, 234, 9 
(2017), 1499-1510. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-016-
4453-0 
[50] Light, A., Powell, A. and Shklovski, I. Design for 
Existential Crisis in the Anthropocene Age. Proceedings of 
the 8th International Conference on Communities and 
Technologies (2017), 270-279. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3083671.3083688 
[51] Light, A., Shklovski, I. and Powell, A. Design for 
Existential Crisis. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (2017), 722-734. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3052760 
[52] MacLean, K. A., Leoutsakos, J.-M. S., Johnson, M. W. 
and Griffiths, R. R. Factor Analysis of the Mystical 
Experience Questionnaire: A Study of Experiences 
Occasioned by the Hallucinogen Psilocybin. Journal for the 
Scientific Study of Religion, 51, 4 (2012), 721-737. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5906.2012.01685.x 
[53] Madary, M. and Metzinger, T. K. Real Virtuality: A 
Code of Ethical Conduct. Recommendations for Good 
Scientific Practice and the Consumers of VR-Technology. 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3, 3 (2016). 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frobt.2016.0000
3 
[54] Majić, T., Schmidt, T. T. and Gallinat, J. Peak 
experiences and the afterglow phenomenon: When and how 
do therapeutic effects of hallucinogens depend on 
psychedelic experiences? J Psychopharmacol, 29, 3 (2015), 
241-253. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881114568040 

[55] Mason, O. J. and Brady, F. The psychotomimetic 
effects of short-term sensory deprivation. The Journal of 
nervous and mental disease, 197, 10 (2009), 783-785. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0b013e3181b9760b 
[56] Mekler, E. D. and Hornbæk, K. A Framework for the 
Experience of Meaning in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (2019), 1-15. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3290605.3300455 
[57] Metzner, R., Litwin, G. and Weil, G. The relation of 
expectation and mood to psilocybin reactions: a 
questionnaire study. Psychedelic Review, 5 (1965), 3-39.  
[58] Moroz, M. and Carhart-Harris, R. L. Employing 
Synergistic Interactions of Virtual Reality and Psychedelics 
in Neuropsychopharmacology. 2018 IEEE Workshop on 
Augmented and Virtual Realities for Good (VAR4Good), 
https://doi.org/10.1109/VAR4GOOD.2018.8576882 (2018).  
[59] Nardi, B., Tomlinson, B., Patterson, D. J., Chen, J., 
Pargman, D., Raghavan, B. and Penzenstadler, B. 
Computing within limits. Communications of the ACM, 61, 
10 (2018), 86-93. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3281635.3183582 
[60] Narupa-Isness 
https://gitlab.com/intangiblerealities/narupa-
applications/isness/tree/legacy. The Intangible Realities 
Laboratory (2019).  
[61] Nichols, D. E. Psychedelics. Pharmacological 
Reviews, 68, 2 (2016), 264-355. 
http://pharmrev.aspetjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1124/pr.115.01
1478 
[62] Nour, M. M., Evans, L., Nutt, D. and Carhart-Harris, 
R. L. Ego-Dissolution and Psychedelics: Validation of the 
Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI). Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 10, 269 (2016). 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00
269 
[63] O’Connor, M., Deeks, H. M., Dawn, E., Metatla, O., 
Roudaut, A., Sutton, M., Thomas, L. M., Glowacki, B. R., 
Sage, R. and Tew, P. Sampling molecular conformations 
and dynamics in a multiuser virtual reality framework. 
Science advances, 4, 6 (2018), eaat2731. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat2731 
[64] O’Connor, M. B., Bennie, S. J., Deeks, H. M., 
Jamieson-Binnie, A., Jones, A. J., Shannon, R. J., Walters, 
R., Mitchell, T. J., Mulholland, A. J. and Glowacki, D. R. 
Interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality from 
quantum chemistry to drug binding: An open-source multi-
person framework. The Journal of chemical physics, 150, 
22 (2019), 220901. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5092590 
[65] Pahnke, W. N. and Richards, W. A. Implications of 
LSD and experimental mysticism. Journal of Religion and 
Health, 5, 3 (1966), 175-208.  
[66] Pahnke, W. N., Kurland, A. A., Unger, S., Savage, C. 
and Grof, S. The experimental use of psychedelic (LSD) 
psychotherapy. Jama, 212, 11 (1970), 1856-1863.  
[67] Ross, S., Bossis, A., Guss, J., Agin-Liebes, G., 
Malone, T., Cohen, B., Mennenga, S. E., Belser, A., 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

58-69. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1959.03590010074009 

Kalliontzi, K., Babb, J., Su, Z., Corby, P. and Schmidt, B. 
L. Rapid and sustained symptom reduction following 
psilocybin treatment for anxiety and depression in patients 
with life-threatening cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J 
Psychopharmacol, 30, 12 (2016), 1181-1197. 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/026988111667551
3 
[68] Rucker, J. J. H., Iliff, J. and Nutt, D. J. Psychiatry and 
the psychedelic drugs. Past, present, and future. 
Neuropharmacology, 142 (2018), 200-218. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.12.040 
[69] Schmid, Y., Hysek, C. M., Simmler, L. D., Crockett, 
M. J., Quednow, B. B. and Liechti, M. E. Differential 
effects of MDMA and methylphenidate on social cognition. 
J Psychopharmacol, 28, 9 (2014), 847-856.  
[70] Schmidt, T. T. and Berkemeyer, H. The Altered States 
Database: Psychometric Data of Altered States of 
Consciousness. Front. Psychol., 9, 1028 (2018), 1-5. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.010
28 
[71] Stace, W. T. Mysticism and Philosophy. Lippincott, 
Philadelphia, 1960 
[72] Studerus, E., Gamma, A., Kometer, M. and 
Vollenweider, F. X. Prediction of psilocybin response in 
healthy volunteers. PLoS ONE, 7, 2 (2012), e30800. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030800 
[73] Suzuki, K., Roseboom, W., Schwartzman, D. J. and 
Seth, A. K. A deep-dream virtual reality platform for 
studying altered perceptual phenomenology. Scientific 
reports, 7, 1 (2017), 15982. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-16316-2 
[74] Suzuki, K., Roseboom, W., Schwartzman, D. J. and 
Seth, A. K. Hallucination Machine: Simulating Altered 
Perceptual Phenomenology with a Deep-Dream Virtual 
Reality platform. Artificial Life Conference Proceedings 
(2018), 111-112. https://doi.org/10.1162/isal_a_00029 
[75] Thomas, L. M. and Glowacki, D. R. Seeing and feeling 
in VR: bodily perception in the gaps between layered 
realities. International Journal of Performance Arts and 
Digital Media, 14, 2 (2018), 145-168. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14794713.2018.1499387 
[76] Timmermann, C., Roseman, L., Williams, L., Erritzoe, 
D., Martial, C., Cassol, H., Laureys, S., Nutt, D. and 
Carhart-Harris, R. DMT Models the Near-Death 
Experience. Front. Psychol., 9 (2018), 1. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.014
24/full 
[77] Vlisides, P. E., Bel-Bahar, T., Nelson, A., Chilton, K., 
Smith, E., Janke, E., Tarnal, V., Picton, P., Harris, R. E. and 
Mashour, G. A. Subanaesthetic ketamine and altered states 
of consciousness in humans. British Journal of Anaesthesia, 
121, 1 (2018/07/01/ 2018), 249-259. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007091
218302381 
[78] Wallace, A. F. C. Cultural Determinants of Response 
to Hallucinatory Experience. JAMA Psychiatry, 1, 1 (1959), 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL (SM) 

This SM includes: 
(1)  Table SM1, which outlines the experimental conditions and results of previously published YD studies 
(2)  Table SM2, which outlines the results of the independent sample t-tests which we carried out comparing Isness to each 

of the 26 previously published YD studies outlined in Fig 2A-B, and SI Table 1 

(3)  Table SM3, the results from normality tests carried out analyzing the distribution of the Isness factor scores 
(4)  Table SM4, the results obtained from hypothesis testing comparing Isness with previously published MEQ30 studies 

using methods which are more sophisticated than the independent sample t-test results in Table SM2, and which do not 
require the assumption of a normal distribution 

(5)  Table SM5, the raw MEQ30 I, M, P, and T scores obtained from Isness participants 
(6)  The full list of statements (obtained from transcribed group discussions and reflective writing) which were assigned to 
each of the respective themes in Figure 3 of the main text. Statements from group discussions are in normal text. State-
ments from reflective writing are in italics. 

Author 

Setting/context 

Participants 

Substances Tested (dose) 

% complete ME 

Nicholas 2018 
(Nich ’18) 

Aesthetic living-room environment 
(ALRE); 4 sessions with guides be-
fore; integration meeting afterward 

Healthy 

Standard hospital patient room, with 
regular blood samples taken 

Healthy 

Liechti 2017 
(Lie ’17) 

Standard hospital patient room, with 
i.v. for regular blood sampling 

Healthy 

Embedded in 6– 8 psychotherapy 
sessions 

Terminal illness 

Carbonaro 2018 
(Carb ’18) 

ALRE; meet session monitor twice 
beforehand & twice afterward 

Healthy 

Two drug sessions, embedded in a 
6-8 month support program com-
bining meditation & spiritual prac-
tice 

Healthy 

1.  psilocybin (21 mg/70 kg) 
2.  psilocybin (31.5mg/70kg) 
3.  psilocybin (42 mg/70 kg) 

1.  Placebo (gelatin capsule) 
2.  LSD (200 µg)  

1.  MDMA (75 mg) 
2.  Methylphenidate (MPD) (40 mg) 

1.  Placebo LSD dose (25 µg) 
2.  LSD (200 µg)  

1.  Placebo (lactose or crystalline cellu-

lose) 

2.  Dextromethorphan (400 mg/70kg)  
3.  psilocybin (10 mg/70 kg)  
4.  psilocybin (20 mg/70 kg)  
5.  psilocybin (30 mg/70 kg)  
1.  Low Dose psilocybin (1 mg/70 kg) + 

Standard M/S practice support 
2.  High Dose psilocybin (20-30 mg/70 
kg) + Standard M/S practice support 
3.  High Dose psilocybin (20-30 mg/70 
kg) + High M/S practice support	

psychospiritual retreat 

Healthy 

MeO-DMT (5 – 7 mg) 

ALRE; four 2-hour sessions with 
guides beforehand; one 2-hour ses-
sion afterward 

Healthy 

ALRE; embedded in ~8 meetings 
with supportive session monitors  

End-of-life cancer 
diagnoses 

1.  Placebo (0 mg/70 kg psilocybin) 
2.  psilocybin (5 mg/70 kg)  
3.  psilocybin (10 mg/70 kg) 
4.  psilocybin (20 mg/70 kg) 
5.  psilocybin (30 mg/70 kg) 

1.  psilocybin (1 – 3 mg/70 kg) 
2.  psilocybin (22 – 30 mg/70 kg) 

Hospital Room, connected to i.v. 
and monitored using EEG 

Healthy 

Ketamine (0.5 mg/kg via i.v. over 40 min)  N/A 

Griffiths 2018 
(Grif ’18) 

Barsuglia 2018 
(Bar ’18) 

Griffiths 2011 
(Grif ’11) 

Griffiths 2016 
(Grif ’16) 

Vlisides 2018 
(Vlis ’18) 

N/A 

1.  N/A 
2. 

12.5% 

N/A 

1.  N/A 
2. 
17% 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

1. 
2. 
3. 

0% 
0% 
0% 
20% 
40% 

0%, 4% 
48%, 50% 
44%, 52% 

75% 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

6% 
11% 
17% 
61% 
67% 

N/A 

Table SM1:  details outlining the study protocols and complete mystical experience results for the 26 previously published YD studies 
outlined in Fig 2A-B, and Table SM2    

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
Isness 
Bar '18, MeO-DMT 
Grif '11, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + high 
M/S practice 
Grif '11, psilo (20mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (42mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + stand-
ard M/S practice 
Nich '18, psilo (31.5mg) 
Grif '16, psilo (22-30mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (21mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (20mg) 
Grif '11, psilo (10mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg) 
Grif '11, psilo (5mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg)-A 
Carb '18, psilo (10mg) 
Carb '18, dextromethorphan 
Grif '16, psilo (1-3mg) 
Grif '11, Placebo (0mg psilo) 
Grif '18, psilo (1 mg) + standard 
M/S practice 
Carb '18, Placebo 
Lie '17, MDMA (75mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo (25µg LSD) 
Lie '17, methylphenidate (40mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo 
Vlis '18, ketamine 

Ineffability* 

Mystical 

Positive Emotions 

n  mean 
63.9 
57 
88.7 
20 
85.0 
18 

std dev 
20.4 
12.6 
25.0 

p value  mean 
61.5 
79.3 
73.0 

n/a 
1.3E-06 
0.00026 

std dev 
16.5 
18.4 
25.0 

p value  mean 
72.5 
88.7 
79.0 

n/a 
0.00007 
0.01318 

std dev 
11.4 
11.7 
21.0 

25 

18 
12 
20 

25 

11 
50 
10 
20 
18 
11 
18 
16 
20 
20 
50 
18 

25 

20 
30 
4 
30 
16 
15 

76.3 

79.0 
81.0 
72.0 

74.4 

78.0 
74.5 
73.0 
66.3 
66.0 
49.0 
57.0 
83.0 
45.7 
59.0 
30.8 
23.0 

20.1 

4.7 
16.0 
3.0 
7.0 
0.0 
6.5 

19.5 

25.0 
26.0 
18.8 

31.5 

26.0 
26.0 
27.2 
23.3 
25.0 
26.5 
30.0 
12.0 
19.4 
18.0 
31.7 
21.0 

20.5 

9.0 
16.4 
0.0 
16.4 
0.0 
2.6 

0.00591 

71.8 

0.00566 
0.00706 
0.06083 

67.0 
65.0 
61.3 

0.03695 

60.5 

0.02413 
0.00998 
0.10923 
0.32742 
0.35723 
0.01952 
0.13670 
0.00032 
0.00042 
0.17416 
1.5E-09 
1.1E-10 

60.0 
59.6 
53.0 
48.5 
48.0 
44.0 
43.0 
40.0 
34.8 
29.7 
24.3 
19.0 

6.0E-14 

13.9 

2.4E-20 
1.7E-18 
8.7E-08 
1.5E-22 
7.5E-20 
7.1E-17 

6.5 
5.0 
4.0 
1.0 
1.0 
n/a 

18.0 

21.0 
35.0 
21.0 

36.5 

35.0 
29.8 
37.0 
28.0 
25.0 
26.5 
21.0 
24.0 
19.8 
21.0 
27.1 
21.0 

17.5 

9.3 
32.8 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
n/a 

0.00650 

79.8 

0.12501 
0.29655 
0.48258 

72.0 
72.0 
66.3 

0.43395 

74.5 

0.41360 
0.34037 
0.11708 
0.00735 
0.00494 
0.00090 
0.00012 
0.00025 
4.7E-08 
7.1E-10 
2.7E-14 
1.4E-13 

64.0 
69.8 
68.0 
60.5 
63.0 
58.0 
55.0 
65.0 
49.3 
46.3 
35.8 
33.0 

1.6E-19 

30.0 

4.2E-23 
9.4E-18 
1.8E-09 
2.9E-34 
2.2E-23 
n/a 

15.8 
18.0 
9.0 
11.0 
3.0 
n/a 

19.0 

25.0 
28.0 
20.0 

21.5 

29.0 
27.0 
28.0 
24.0 
25.0 
26.5 
30.0 
16.0 
18.0 
22.1 
28.3 
21.0 

18.0 

11.7 
21.9 
8.0 
21.9 
0.0 
n/a 

p value 
n/a 
3.4E-07 
0.04736 

0.01691 

0.45454 
0.46065 
0.04847 

0.29056 

0.04977 
0.24917 
0.19088 
0.00207 
0.01408 
0.00198 
0.00022 
0.01905 
2.1E-09 
1.3E-09 
5.6E-15 
4.2E-16 

1.5E-21 

1.2E-30 
2.0E-26 
4.6E-16 
8.0E-30 
2.3E-36 
n/a 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time 
std dev 
13.4 
13.8 
25.0 

p value 
n/a 
1.6E-07 
0.00146 

mean 
66.0 
85.7 
80.0 

70.6 

69.0 
73.0 
59.8 

66.6 

65.0 
62.1 
54.0 
51.5 
47.0 
48.0 
44.0 
60.0 
35.2 
49.0 
22.4 
21.0 

22.3 

6.3 
9.0 
5.0 
4.0 
2.0 
6.6 

18.5 

30.0 
31.0 
17.0 

28.0 

31.0 
23.9 
33.0 
21.0 
25.0 
23.2 
30.0 
20.0 
16.2 
21.2 
20.5 
30.0 

20.5 

9.8 
27.3 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
2.1 

0.10320 

0.27552 
0.10615 
0.05220 

0.44621 

0.43172 
0.14629 
0.02488 
0.00033 
0.00004 
0.00034 
0.00002 
0.08208 
1.2E-12 
0.00004 
2.8E-24 
1.3E-13 

7.0E-19 

1.3E-29 
2.2E-22 
5.2E-13 
1.4E-41 
7.5E-30 
7.1E-27 

Table SM2: p-values from independent sample t-tests results comparing the Isness MEQ30 I, M, P, and T factor scores to the 26 previously published YD studies given in 
Fig 2A-B and Table S1, along with the data used to carry out these tests. Fields in bold text indicate factor scores which are statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.05) from the 
corresponding Isness factor score. Studies highlighted in grey are those for which at least two of the M, P, or T scores are statistically indistinguishable from Isness. Studies 
highlighted in blue are previously published baseline studies, which are outlined in detail in the text. *The I factor score results are included here for the sake of completeness, 
but we did not include a discussion of their statistical significance in the main text, given their noisy distribution. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
Testing the normality of the Isness I, M, P, and T factor score distributions. Table SM3 outlines tests which we performed on the Isness I, M, P, and T factor 
scores to evaluate whether the data was characteristic of a normal distribution. These tests were carried out in Mathematica using the command ‘DistributionFitTest’ 
with a statistical significance level of p > 0.05. This command runs all appropriate statistical tests for normality and returns a p value and conclusion.  

Test 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

Positive Emotions 

Anderson-Darling 
Baringhaus-Henze 
Cramer-von Mises 
Jarque-Bera ALM 
Mardia Combined 
Mardia Kurtosis 
Mardia Skewness 
Pearson chi-squared 
Shapiro-Wilk 

0.00071 
0.00680 
0.00134 
0.04780 
0.04780 
0.91112 
0.01230 
0.00325 
0.00194 

0.11383 
0.10440 
0.23670 
0.07582 
0.07582 
0.65614 
0.03858 
0.63544 
0.05635 

0.11338 
0.20458 
0.08265 
0.28772 
0.28772 
0.52726 
0.31322 
0.00778 
0.31441 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time 
0.02928 
0.06777 
0.04626 
0.11715 
0.11715 
0.40964 
0.13949 
0.19484 
0.04670 

Table SM3: Results (p values) from various normality tests for the datasets. Where the test would not reject the null hypothesis (that the data is a normal distribution) at the 
p>0.05 level the p values are in bold. The results clearly shown that the I dataset fails nearly all of the tests, whereas the M, P, and T scores pass most tests. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
Comparing the Isness I, M, P, and T factor scores to previously published studies. Table SM4 shows the results of statistical hypothesis tests evaluating whether 
the Isness I, M, P, and T factor scores were statistically indistinguishable from previous MEQ30 studies. We carried these tests out using the Mathematica command 
‘LocationTest’ on the data measured Isness factor score μ (ineffability (I), mystical (M), positive emotion (P), and transcendence of space and time (T)). We compared 
to μ to μ0, where μ0 was taken as the mean of the respective literature factor scores in Table SM2. For any given factor score, the null hypothesis was that ! = !#, i.e. 
the Isness factor score is statistically indistinguishable from a literature factor score. The alternative hypothesis was that ! ≠ !#, i.e. that there was a statistically 
significant difference between the Isness factor score and the literature factor score. To carry out these tests, we utilized the complete set of Isness factor scores given 
in Table SM5, and allowed Mathematica to choose the most appropriate test. For the I, P and T data, Mathematica selected the Sign test, which compares the respective 
medians of two datasets. The Sign test does not assume the Isness data is normally distributed and is thus more appropriate for dealing with datasets that include 
outliers. Because we did not have the individual scores from previous studies (i.e., the equivalent to the data in Table SM5), we assumed that scores obtained in 
previous studies were normally distributed, with a median value close to the mean. Mathematica determined that the M dataset was sufficiently normal to use the t-
test, which compares the respective means of each dataset. 

Ineffability  Mystical 

Positive Emotions 

Isness 
Bar '18, MeO-DMT 
Grif '11, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + high M/S practice 
Grif '11, psilo (20mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (42mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + standard M/S practice 
Nich '18, psilo (31.5mg) 
Grif '16, psilo (22-30mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (21mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (20mg) 
Grif '11, psilo (10mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg) 
Grif '11, psilo (5mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg)-A 
Carb '18, psilo (10mg) 
Carb '18, dextromethorphan 
Grif '16, psilo (1-3mg) 
Grif '11, Placebo (0mg psilo) 
Grif '18, psilo (1 mg) + standard M/S practice 
Carb '18, Placebo 
Lie '17, MDMA (75mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo (25µg LSD) 
Lie '17, methylphenidate (40mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo 
Vlis '18, ketamine 

n 
57 
20 
18 
25 
18 
12 
20 
25 
11 
50 
10 
20 
18 
11 
18 
16 
20 
20 
50 
18 
25 
20 
30 
4 
30 
16 
15 

p value 
n/a 
2.3E-14 
4.2E-09 
0.01635 
0.01635 
4.2E-09 
0.59664 
0.01635 
0.01635 
0.01635 
0.59664 
0.11116 
0.11116 
0.00001 
0.01635 
4.2E-09 
1.5E-7 
0.01635 
6.4E-11 
5.9E-12 
5.9E-12 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 

p value 
n/a 
4.5E-11 
2.3E-06 
0.00002 
0.01501 
0.11682 
0.91868 
0.64079 
0.48791 
0.38179 
0.00025 
1.7E-07 
7.2E-8 
6.9E-11 
1.2E-11 
7.5E-14 
1.8E-17 
1.0E-20 
7.7E-24 
1.3E-26 
4.6E-29 
3.0E-32 
7.4E-33 
3.0E-33 
2.1E-34 
2.1E-34 
n/a 

p value 
n/a 
4.3E-13 
0.00126 
0.00126 
0.59664 
0.59664 
0.00001 
0.79137 
0.00001 
0.00320 
0.00320 
7.5E-07 
3.3E-06 
5.7E-10 
5.9E-12 
0.00001 
2.3E-14 
8.0E-16 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
n/a 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time 
p value 
n/a 
4.3E-13 
7.1E-10 
0.06274 
0.59664 
0.06274 
0.00001 
1.0 
0.89395 
0.00320 
2.7E-08 
5.7E-10 
5.7E-10 
5.7E-10 
5.7E-10 
0.00013 
4.3E-13 
5.7E-10 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 
1.4E-17 

Table SM4: p-values obtained from compares the Isness MEQ30 I, M, P, and T factor scores to the 26 previously published YD studies given in Fig 2A-B and Table SM1. 
Fields in bold text indicate factor scores which are statistically indistinguishable (p > 0.05) from the corresponding Isness factor score. Studies highlighted in grey are those 
for which at least two of the M, P, or T scores are statistically indistinguishable from Isness. Studies highlighted in blue are previously published baseline studies, which are 
outlined in detail in the text.  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
Participant 
number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time 
63.33 
63.33 
96.67 
33.33 
70.00 
60.00 
60.00 
76.67 
63.33 
70.00 
73.33 
63.33 
53.33 
63.33 
60.00 
73.33 
70.00 
56.67 
66.67 
43.33 
80.00 
73.33 
70.00 
65.00 
73.33 
56.67 
63.33 
73.33 
76.67 
63.33 
56.67 
85.00 
33.33 
83.33 
86.67 
66.67 
56.67 
63.33 
60.00 
80.00 
33.33 
73.33 
73.33 
63.33 
43.33 
92.00 
53.33 
80.00 
60.00 
43.33 
66.67 
80.00 
63.33 
73.33 
73.33 
76.67 
70.00 

Positive 
Emotions 
70.00 
70.00 
83.33 
63.33 
60.00 
76.67 
76.67 
83.33 
70.00 
50.00 
83.33 
66.67 
66.67 
80.00 
60.00 
76.67 
66.67 
76.67 
73.33 
56.67 
86.67 
80.00 
73.33 
76.67 
80.00 
66.67 
70.00 
70.00 
83.33 
78.33 
70.00 
76.67 
56.67 
90.00 
83.33 
66.67 
70.00 
53.33 
60.00 
83.33 
46.67 
76.67 
80.00 
80.00 
73.33 
86.67 
41.67 
70.00 
61.67 
60.00 
73.33 
100.00 
70.00 
76.67 
76.67 
76.67 
96.67 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

60.00 
53.33 
86.67 
33.33 
53.33 
66.67 
20.00 
66.67 
40.00 
26.67 
80.00 
40.00 
66.67 
66.67 
60.00 
73.33 
66.67 
66.67 
60.00 
40.00 
80.00 
80.00 
73.33 
80.00 
46.67 
73.33 
73.33 
66.67 
86.67 
80.00 
66.67 
93.33 
13.33 
86.67 
86.67 
53.33 
80.00 
53.33 
53.33 
86.67 
20.00 
80.00 
80.00 
73.33 
46.67 
73.33 
13.33 
66.67 
53.33 
46.67 
53.33 
100.00 
73.33 
80.00 
80.00 
80.00 
80.00 

64.00 
61.33 
86.67 
30.67 
65.33 
46.67 
69.33 
68.00 
60.00 
44.00 
71.43 
68.00 
54.67 
68.00 
56.00 
58.57 
50.67 
73.33 
62.67 
41.33 
82.00 
54.67 
74.67 
67.14 
69.33 
56.00 
61.33 
58.67 
78.67 
73.71 
48.00 
66.67 
20.00 
76.00 
78.67 
50.67 
48.00 
33.33 
54.67 
81.33 
22.67 
81.33 
50.67 
77.33 
44.00 
81.33 
19.33 
61.33 
58.67 
52.00 
68.00 
81.33 
58.67 
74.67 
72.00 
74.67 
94.67 

Table SM5: Raw factor scores obtained from the Isness MEQ30 questionnaires 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme: Positive Emotions 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

It’s very meditative.  
I found it quite moving. 
Sense of calm. 
It was nice – I made a mudra at someone and waved at someone and they waved back. 
Yeah I’d like to live there. [laughing] Like to have one of these would be so calming you could just go into this other 
world. It’s very calming. 

[participants spontaneously hug one another] 
Yeah it certainly opens the heart. My heart feels really warm and really open. 
It was very gentle, wasn’t it. Very delicate.  
Soft. 
[feeling] Wonderful.  

6.  Well it’s calming, and it’s relaxing, and it’s transfixing. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12.  Calm. 
13. 
14. 
15.  Yeah. quite touched. 
16. 
17. 

So calm. 
I feel quite emotional actually.  

18. 

Sense of calm. But also just… hard to put to words. Like very connected to my breath.  
it made we want to laugh, I don’t know why. I think that’s just my joy isn’t it by seeing these things. It probably just 
evokes some sense of excitement and laughter in me. 
[Isness] for me took me away from all of my horrible issues that I’m having at the moment. So that I thought it was a 
real beauty and I just really wanted to experience it.  
[the lights fading felt] Sad. That made me feel really sad because I was loving it so much. 
It’s such a strange and beautiful… very different to what we know in the real world. in this world. 

19. 
20. 
21.  Yeah very symbolic also. With the light, and stepping into the circle. And being together in the light. And you look 

outside and it’s dark. It was a good feeling.  
I felt like I was going with everyone else. It just felt like a flow.  
it brought a tear to my eye. 

Everything is still vibrating a little bit. I can still feel that. But at a much higher frequency.  
Feelings of happiness afterwards. 
An uplifting, immersive experience exploring us as the light and energy we are. 
I definitely cried. 
All in all really enjoyed the experience. 
A moving and desirable experience. 
I felt a little scared before because I didn’t know what to expect. As the experience continued I relaxed a lot more and 
felt barriers break down between me and the others. I guess that’s what it’s all about. 
32.  Not knowing where you are and losing control is not [maybe ‘bit’] scary (like psychedelics) 
33. 
Some mood swings going into the darkness and debts [sic – maybe they meant death?] 
34.  Delight at being able to make shapes and movement with the lines and waves and spheres provided. [maybe spaces, 

35. 
36. 
37. 

not spheres?] 
I felt totally absorbed and then touching other peoples’ light hands was such a happy feeling. 
Being slow and gentle and tentative made me come out of it with a real sense of calm and big smile on my face.  
The end, when the light goes off is interesting too, I was wondering if it would make me sad or scared, but it was 
peaceful and relaxing. 
Feeling in general relaxed and was easy to surrender to it. After [the experience finished I was] feeling a little dizzy. 
It felt light (i.e. not heave) and soft and warm 
Sense input is calming. I was moved at times. Actually to tears. 

38. 
39. 
40. 
41.  Not gonna lie: I cried quite a bit, beginning with the moment we all turned red… peaking when the lights went out and 

42. 

we laid down… beautiful.  
At first I was getting claustrophobic with the blindfold and the muggy air and I was worried about this but the headset 
didn’t seem so much. More because of the wider sense of space I think. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

22. 
23. 
24.  Very calm.  
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 

Theme: Connectedness  

It was lovely that you didn’t know who’s who. And it didn’t matter. We’re all the same. 

1. 
2.  That’s what I liked about it. Everybody is the same. Not having any judgements. 
3.  That’s a good place to start. It’s very levelling. Everybody is equal in it. You’re using these representations where 

you’re all represented in the same way. That was really beautiful. 

4.  There was definitely a few emotions in that felt presence of connectivity. Ummm… Yeah quite powerful. 
5. 

I loved the web of connection between us. And manipulating it and seeing how even if we’re across the room from one 
another, my impact impacts all the way over there. And we have this like shared web that we’re all populating with each 
other.  

6.  And like figure out how we can all take our piece of the web, and together in a unified way move it together. Yeah. 
7.  And just all the way through, to get to this idea of just being light as this core thing shared between everybody. That’s 

nicely done. It works.  

8.  So it just obviously shifted my worldview into this like we’re all connected, and we all come from this one pure light 

9. 

source that we’re all attached to and its feeding us and it’s animating us 
It’s a very nice perception that we’re all absolutely the same and undifferentiable in some way and yet different in some 
other way. It’s fun. 

10.  It felt very emotional in a good way when we juts came in and we saw everyone’s lights come on. It was so beautiful. 

Like so gentle and loving to see everyone and their lights and all the oher lights, and just this feeling of connection.  
11.  And the music, it just felt so loving, and that feeling of connection and beyond the material, and that connection which I 

feel in my heart to be true, but it brings it back in that sense of the felt perception of it. Little cosmic strands. 

12.  Yeah I liked the connection between my effect and the effect of everything. Like kind of like I was dealing with how 

much I can affect, and how much I can create and how much is created by the others. And everything. And it was really 
calming. I feel very relaxed, yeah very meditative. I felt like it was easy to go into that space, to just get taken away with 
it. Yeah really enjoyed it. 

13.  I thought it was easier to connect cuz we’re all the same. So I like the willingness there. 
14.  Incredible seeing the different energies move. Like yourself connecting with the others. Amazing. 
15.  I feel really calm as well. I think it was was really amazing to feel so connected. For me the connection really came out 

of it. It made me think of how everything’s connected. And it was cool to see that visually and experience it.  

16.  No I could. I was smiling a lot. I just felt a connectedness to these, I know it’s silly to make everything humanistic, but 

even the energy. I felt like the vibrations, I don’t know 

17.  It’s just a beautiful way to connect. And we’re not really connecting with anyone’s stories or anyone’s appearance. It’s 
just the simple pure presence of another being. And there’s something very touching about that. It’s very sweet. 

18.  I wanted to see if the light and the power came stronger together. 
19.  I think after I got over the fascination of “me”, I wanted to draw everyone together. So I found myself sort of wanting to 
get all the – obviously I’m aware that it’s hands that are creating the lights – I wanted to get all the hands to come to-
gether, and make something beautiful out of all the lights. Together. So that was quite emotional for me because it was 
like let’s bring everything together.  

20.  I loved watching what I could do with the shapes, and now i had it before, but I have an even greater sense of love and 
empathy especially for you guys… But we just had a really strong connection there. When it went over my eyes, it was 
just like I love you, your beautiful, I love you, you’re beautiful, I love you you’re beautiful. 

21.  So with the index finger mudra you could control things, but with the middle finger you were a bit more passive and the 
world’s happening around you. And then you stop moving and you undo the mudra and then you realize that everything 
just continues around you. And then you can join in again at any point and just become actively connected 

22.  I loved the web. In the beginning the web that was connecting everything. And on the ground. 
23.  I felt joy at the feeling of unity achieved with total strangers, free of the cultural constraints that are usually present in 

most day-to-day interactions with other fellow human beings 

24.  Very connected to others in that we were one brain/being 
25.  I enjoyed the interactive aspect how we connect with each other as pure energy instead of solid state 
26.  It was the cutest way to connect with people sans judgment and the usual [might be ‘visual’] things that get in the way 

of connection.  

27.  Loved the feeling of connection and that everyone was the same. 
28.  I’m left with a sense of connectedness. 
29.  I felt very connected with my fellow light beings and touched by the innocent and tender dance we shared. 
30.  It was really beautiful and it made me think about our connection with all living beings including plants and animals. It 

was quite a paradigm shift. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

31.  Connecting and beautiful. Feel connected to breath and remarkable to think of life and Self + others as light flowing 

through. 

32.  We were all the same. 
33.  The connection I felt to the other “beings” in the space was amazing and without the “veil” that is often over us in daily 

life 

34.  Sense of connection with other participants built very rapidly 
35.  Soft journey, wholesome – sense of oneness and wholeness. Both as an individual and as a group. 
36.  A real feeling of connectedness + compassion for the people in my group  
37.  I appreciated the subtlety and calm of the VR; the cords connecting us in the physical added an element of care for the 

others and made me want to hold each of them after we took off the headsets. 

38.  DEEP SENSE OF CALM AND CONNECTION TO NATURE. 
39.  I particularly enjoyed the possibility to connect with others via a very basic/fundamental concept, the theme of intercon-

nectedness was prevalent throughout. 

40.  This was an exquisite experience of connection. I feel fully in my body & waves of energy coming over me. I feel the 

light in my body & I feel present with the other light beings in my environment. This technology feels nourishing, awak-
ening, enlivening, and calming all at once. To manipulate the web of building blocks of creation, the primordial ele-
ments that animate life coming together, and seeing how interconnected all life is, and how every action we take impacts 
the space we share… Powerful.  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
Theme: Ego dissolution 

In general, lots of forgetting & trying to figure out who was who (eg Sun 15.00, Sat 14.00) 

1. 
2.  Yeah you had no feeling of self-consciousness really, because of the way you were represented anonymously. It’s just 

freeing.  

3.  No social anxiety is a weird feeling. A nice break from the normal default.  
4.  You kind of had no tendency to show off or anything like that… Ego sort of dissolution. It’s a collaborative thing. Each 

one trying to do the best for the group. 

5.  Yeah you want to group to have the best experience. And yeah if you can show someone something they’re not quite 

getting, but there’s no tendency to show off at all.  
It’s more a curiosity isn’t it of seeing how it was and how it is. 

6. 
7.  Curiousity and playfulness for your own benefit, but then yeah trying to also create something beautiful to share with 

everyone else, but not in a grandiose I’m better way. 

8.  No. and there’s no way to really attack the other people or make them have a negative experience, is there. There’s no 
way you can annoy people in it. It’s a very very positive collaboration. There’s no competition element in there or any-
thing like that. Or I want to get them all to myself.  
Just seeing each other as pure full energetic beings and not knowing who was who in the space. I think I figured it out 
eventually. But I just not knowing that and being in that purity with each other in this expansive darkness. 

9. 

10.  I guess the preparation of stripping down everything. Like leaving whatever of the day behind. And this whole getting 

rid of your… even who you are. [identity] 

11.  And you didn’t know who you were interacting with, there was no projections. You can’t see, you don’t know who 

you’re interacting with. 

12.  [After Isness] The projections come back… There’s more shyness. There’s more a questioning of how you’re perceived. 

Yeah. It’s slightly less safe. 

13.  More assumptions. All your assumptions come back. 
14.  In there it’s just light, no assumptions.  
15.  I think not knowing who you’re touching in the space as well, you know, when you come back. 
16.  I think one of my favorite parts of the experience was when I could look down and not see myself, and just see the 

abyss. I really liked that, just looking up and seeing the heavens. So I quite liked the fact that I couldn’t see my own 
light but I could see other people’s. so I didn’t feel the loss of my own light, because I couldn’t see it anyway. I like that 
experience of just being nothingness and just being part of what I think was nature. But I think seeing everyone else’s 
light and just seeing people as light and not as people I quite liked that and what the voice was saying about now imag-
ine carrying that light around. I liked that. But I liked not being able to see myself and just be floating. That was really 
wonderful. 

17.  I didn’t know who anybody was, just like all beings of light. 
18.  I loved we were all the same as well. The light heads and light hands. So pretty. Dancing together. 
19.  I’m very conscious of how people react to me, and how I react to them. And being freed from that self consciousness 

enabled me to act in a way that’s much more playful than I would normally feel comfortable with.  

20.  I was happy that we were all the same. 
21.  For people who didn’t do psychedelics... If people are scared, then have this experience, that could really help them to 

look at the world differently and let go of issues, boundaries, thoughts, beliefs. 

22.  Extraordinary sense of dissolution. Maybe. But in a very gentle way. Very nice feeling. 
23.  And just light. Not male, female, old, fat, young. There was nothing to make a judgement about. It was quite, quite lib-

erating.  

24.  It’s amazing also how you can have this contact, no? that is so intimate also with people that you don’t know. That 

you’ve never met. And you interact. It’s very primal. ..Yeah I don’t think I could do that if I could see. So awkward. 

25.  And I like the way the lights anonymized us all. 
26.  You know we know each other, but then in this space you become all anonymous, just beings of light. It allows you to 

let go of your own sense of ego as well.  

27.  And I guess maybe in another scenario you would feel self conscious about flailing around. But I didn’t feel any con-

sciousness. 

28.  A very special experience to feel and see each other and ourselves as only light. Brilliant and beautiful one and all – 

nothing to judge or feel as different. Very liberating, playful – each movement creating threads, the interconnected web. 
29.  Beautiful to experience being in flow with others – this is something I feel I would find it very difficult/impossible to get 

into ordinarily due to awkwardness) with the exception of if psychedelics were involved!) 

30.  Liberating – no sense of who others are – only that we are light. Felt power of Self – and freeing to just see as a light. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

31.  Sense of unselfconsciousness which enables playfulness without social anxiety. Liberation from normal social con-

structs/biases eg: race, sex etc. 

32.  Really enjoyed being disembodied and relieved of projections about others. 
33.  Not knowing who the person next to me has allowed me to connect without any pre-judgment. Could it be seen as clear 
connection? Removal of the body was immense. I no longer saw others through the lens of beauty, social structure, age, 
etc… Rather, it was a pure joy of just being and connecting through light. I hope that as many people can experience 
this moment… especially those who do not like each other. 

34.  The seeing others as pure energy was something that created an equality too – no judgments on any physical appear-

ances or any preconceptions. Also removing your own anxiety and self consciousness that is all too often hindering con-
nections with others in the material world. 

35.  The experience was strange. Very anonymising. Just light and energy. I was not concerned at all with who was who 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
Theme: Embodied Awareness 

It would have been nice not to have a body, because then there would be no bumping.  

1.  The disembodiment is remarkable actually. Really. 
2. 
3.  Even the carpet actually, feeling different textures under my feet.  
4.  Felt weightless… Especially because when we looked down, we didn’t see the body, but you could see movement. So it 

felt like floating. 
I noticed no one made a sound. No one laughed. No one said anything. It was all quiet. 

5. 
6.  But that’s kind of cool. It’s feels a bit like sense deprivation in a way. Because you are deprived of some senses. You’re 
primarily visual, you’re limited. But you can really focus on the small things that you still have. And you kind of realize 
that it’s also a lot. And that is one way to switch away from others. It’s interesting. 

7.  But maybe you are less yourself. You are more egoless in that space. Cuz you are, one of the ways in which you become 
less self conscious is to be conscious of your senses. So this makes you really conscious of your senses. Cuz you are 
disorientated you are much more embodied. If you know what I mean. So maybe it does shut down the default mode 
network in some ways. Because you are kind of just groping around in your senses. So you are more embodied. 
I’m aware of myself as tall. So when we had to connect, what’s hand level for me isn’t hand level for everyone else. So 
that immediately starts to embody other people around me. So shoulder height for me is not shoulder height for every-
one else. So it’s a change of mindset when you make contact. 
I found it easier to touch because I didn’t know who I was touching 

9. 
10.  I was aware of that when I was playing a little bit. I was like hang on. I knew I was reaching somebody’s hand. I was 

8. 

very careful. cuz you could see where their hands were, yeah, but then I suddenly thought well hang on is this ok? So I 
was aware well everyone’s got different tolerances for contact. And I wanted contact. But it’s good you know where the 
hands are. 

11.  You don’t necessarily think of it as a hand. You just think of it as a light. It’s just slightly different. 
12.  But I did wonder should I hold someone’s hand? Or should I just make contact?  
13.  It would be good I think if everyone agrees there will be some contact. Then you know that everyone here is ok. I was 

slightly worried, wanting to play and explore, but wanting to not annoy or… 

14.  I think that the corporeality, what that did for me was – I tried moving my legs and I couldn’t see them and that was 

great because I felt weightless. But as soon as we had to make contact I had a sense of scale again. So I think that’s the 
effect. Cuz I know my own dimensions and my own weight and where things are in relation to me. But until then it’s 
just floating, and you know it tracks the movement of your hands and head but not the rest of your body, and the scale 
was sometimes quite huge and sometimes quite small. But as soon as you have physical contact, I’m just aware of how 
things are again. 

15.  I agree, being aware of the thread actually is part of the experience….It made it more about that kind of interaction and 

being delicate. The delicateness of it is so kind of lovely.   

16.  Great when it went through the floor. That was good, it like’s oh there’s a whole.. You really felt like you were disem-

bodied at that point. kind of oh right there’s no floor either. I certainly can’t see my feet. But you have a sense of where 
the floor is, and then that suddenly goes. Which is really nice. 

17.  The fact that I was with people I know specially menas there was freedom to go in and be more tactile. That was nice, 

we had some nice moments.  

18.  Yeah I feel like def a little dizzy now. But when I had it on, I didn’t feel dizzy at all. More now, when it stopped.  
19.  I felt a bit disappointed when the light went out. The brightness was kind of calming in the darkness. So there was a lot 

sensation there. In the beauty of the light. 

20.  It was surprisingly real… [in the sense that] in the ordinary waking reality we know that it’s not real. It’s called virtual 
reality for a reason, right? But it feels… you can connect with the experience and treat it as you would any other experi-
ence. You can accept it like you can accept any other experience. And it feels real in that way. 

21.  At one point I thought I was surrounded by smoke [and started coughing]… when it was purple it was ok. But when it 

got grey, and then it was like I don’t know, as if I was suffocating or I don’t know what it was. But there was no real 
smoke. But that’s I think because it was grey and really dense and all around me.  
22.  When I started coughing I noticed that yes I was separate from [the rendered smoke]. 
23.  I actually smelled the smoke 
24.  You just felt like it was moving through me, which sounds a bit weird. But it was just amazing to not be in a body and 

to have things just floating. So yeah. Sounds a bit strange but. 

25.  And you feel a great sense of lightness, almost weightlessness… Right now I feel very heavy. And when I was shaping 

the volumes and space in front of me I wasn’t aware a lot of my limbs.  

26.  It’s [quite freeing]. And also to not see your own body is really amazing as well. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

27.  Like for me [as a man] I almost forgot that there were three women. You were just like light. I don’t know, it was very 

cozy being close together.  

28.  And once we’d like made the initial joining [our mudras together] it felt like a progression to me. I was like why would 

I go back from that? Back to just having my two lights [on my own].  

29.  It’s kind of amazing how little time it takes for your brain to accept what it’s seeing there as reality. 
30.  Felt so light during the experience, and heavy afterwards. 
31.  I feel very peaceful in my body, empty of thoughts. 
32.  The cables are a bit disturbing but the gloves and the mask were very comfortable. 
33.  Sometimes I felt constrained by the cables and gloves, as it reminded me of normal [?] “reality” 
34.  Brought me to my senses, and therefore less in myself but more so. 
35.  The coloured fog/aura gave bulk, which helped as I kept bonking into headsets before this manifested. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme: Reflection on Death 

It really hit me, the lights are fading.  

1. 
2.  Yeah, the sadness & the loneliness when the light went out was definitely a very sudden like – sigh – loneliness. 
3.  And I meditate on death almost every day. But this like what happens or where do we go or where do our spirits go, I’ve 
had this vision of just like light balls communicating with each other… I definitely felt like this whole experience could 
have been a death experience. 

4.  Yeah when it faded I don’t know. I think it was good. I was feeling a bit almost like alright I want to go back now. I had 

5. 

6. 

a bit this anxiety of coming back really. But I think the transition was effective. 
I kind of in my head I made a story that this is how you die. But in a nice way. When you’ve lived your little life with 
your stuff, and now it’s done. And this was very meditative for me. It was a perfect kind of setup to finish and now 
there’s nothing. So the short few minutes we did of breathing was great to meditate after. So your energy builds. Then 
gone. cool. 
I thought a bit about death, like my own death as well. As in like the energy that you give out to the world will always 
be there. In your life. Like this stuff you put out is always going to be there. And when you die, it doesn’t really matter, 
cuz it’s there, it’s done. you’ve done it. I don’t know, dispersed. 

7.  Yeah it definitely for me drew to my heart people I’ve lost in the material. And that feeling of connection and being 

8. 

with them. 
[when the light faded] it did it in a gentle… it wasn’t a jumping out of it. So it was… I don’t know what word I’d use, 
but it was a gentle movement. 
[when the light went out] I would have liked the light to continue just a little bit longer 

9. 
10.  I wondered where the light went, I guess. 
11.  I also thought it would an amazing thing to give to dying people. That would make dying a lot less scary I think… the 

physical body. It’s just a physical body, the energy will remain, and it will stay in a connection even though this is gone. 
I think. It’s beautiful. 

12.  If I was a terminal cancer patient or something I would find that a very reassuring experience. 
13.  Towards the end, I got rather a sad reflection about my wife’s been ill. Stress breakdown five years ago. It was all to do 
with menopause and other things. And she hasn’t ever come back as the same person. And she’s become alcohol ad-
dicted. Which has been very hard. And it just alarmed me that she’s 20 years younger, but she’s on a sort of decline path 
where she hardly exercises. But when the lights were all there, there was a kind of horizon, which was a treeline. To me 
it was a specific place a campsite we regularly used to go to as kids up in Norfolk, stiffquay. We have tried to talk about 
funerals, and she wants her ashes scattered up there. So I think I was in rather a sad place for a little while. But not over-
whelming. But I couldn’t help seeing these trees as the horizon of the salt marshes. And I’m dreadfully afraid. She’s 
kind of half lost the will to live you know. Her energy is just…. But recently and with my daughter coming. After 
awhile I’m away… this is the first time I’ve been away for quite awhile, 2 or 3 years, since the last conference is the last 
time, and she’s walked the dog, and she’s been shopping with the daughter, and so forth. So we’re hopeful. But that was 
just a very personal point. that the treeline as I saw it behind the lights reminded me of it. Set me off on a sad pathway… 
Maybe it was the parting company with it that set me off. Cuz then looking at the horizon… sort of sad to leave it.  

14.  [when the lights faded] the darkness was actually really peaceful. Yeah…. 
15.  [when the lights faded] It was like dying… It just felt like a really peaceful ideal death.  
16.  Yeah I could hang out in the darkness… Just there, with the slow fading [of the lights]. Now I have a sense that if I feel 
alone, or remote, or parted from [loved ones].. It’s rest, isn’t it? It’s rest. All that responsibility is gone. Peace. It’s very 
peaceful. It wasn’t anxious at all. It was very peaceful. 

17.  Before that, before losing the individual light, when all the patterns and things disappeared, I was like ‘oh my god this is 

what dying is like’ or something like that. I felt sad then… It wasn’t scary. I really really love darkness.  

18.  [the lights fading] felt natural to me. It was very much flowing. I don’t know. Going dark it felt like it’s what it has to 

be. I don’t know. 

19.  It was quite bittersweet in a way. The way when we got together in the circle with our hands like that. I don’t know if 
james was next to me or opposite me but I was kind of looking opposite as if it was James and thinking… it was like 
when we pass into the next life, this is what you’re going to look like to me, and this how we’re going to experience 
each other in the afterlife 

20.  I feel really present. It really felt like a journey. And I felt sad at the end. That that journey was at and end, so to speak. 
Made me feel, made me think about life. And the journey of that. Although that felt sad, that was ok. Because I felt 
there. And present.  

21.  It made me feel that I know what loved ones in the afterlife would manifest/appear to me as. 
22.  The end felt like a peaceful death. The darkness & stillness at the end felt so peaceful. 
23.  Perfect for people who do not want to do psychedelics but have a similar experience 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

24.  Dying people, accept that after leaving the physical body there is still everything (and more) 
25.  Sense of death, and knowing that the energy you have put out to the world/space will always be there. 
26.  I also felt connected to my dad who died 4 years ago – such gratitude to you all for that. 
27.  This whole experience was the liminal space between life and death, with light as the feedback loop, transferring energy 
to and from the field of reality. Many times I imagined us as telepathic clouds of spirits greeting one another in the after 
life. 

28.  As humans, we questions ourselves about what happens after death – I am afraid of this, but experiences in nature, po-
ems, art and awe experience alleviate this fear greatly… this experience is no exception. Thank you for helping make 
the “unknown” a little more friendly. Thank you from the bottom of my heart. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
Theme: Supportive Setting 

1. 

In a lot of VR experiences I’ve had you’re very aware of the person standing next to you who is the controller, and he’s 
maybe pushing you know… I don’t know. This felt like because so much happened with very minimal movement you 
know I didn’t feel the need – and you were guided through it in a very gentle way – it alleviated the stress I’ve previ-
ously felt in other VR situations, of like what am I doing, am I doing it right? 

2.  And I totally understand why you led us in blindfolded and stuff like that… It really makes you feel like you’re in that 

space. You know the transition is so much more gentle than being aware of this person standing next to you in a hall full 
of people, which is normally what happens. 

3.  Considering this is the first time you’ve ever done it properly, it’s amazing how harmonious it is. So carefully thought 

out.  
I think it’s really well curated actually. 
Seeking connection – feeling safe and curious in the space. 

4. 
5. 
6.  Very well conceived, designed, organised and performed. I was struck by the sensitive coming together of technology 

7. 
8. 
9. 

and holistic spirituality. I enjoyed sharing and trusting in the group. 
I also thought the intro and aftermath was really well done. 
I feel like I’ve been very gently guided through a journey of light, stillness and silence. 
I appreciated the careful use of ritual for creating the arc of the experience, preparing for, and then closing the experi-
ence, it felt smooth, the use of music, the calm yet authoritative voice of the guide, the tips on how to explore the bound-
aries/possibilities of the space, the changing visuals & the sense of agency in exploring those, and the combination of a 
shared + also individual experience. I’m surprised at how profound it was. A good contrast to the ‘headiness’ of the 
talks.  

10.  Voice guidance was perfect 
11.  Appreciated gentleness and “heldness” of space & interactions with the people putting on gloves, headsets etc 
12.  The guiding voice and music was very soothing and calming. 
13.  Being brought in blindfolded made the world we were brought into feel way more real – the size and the air con felt like 

they were the real dimensions and gases floating in the room. 

14.  I have found the preparation very effective. Its ceremonial quality helped to tune into the experience. I think that was 

super important.  

15.  A real feeling of connectedness + compassion for the people in my group and the people also making the experience 
possible – almost like the feeling of being in ceremony, or breathwork, with people caring for you on your journey + 
healing. 

16.  I loved the music + the feminine voice, the combination of such a delicate, gentleness with the tech/masculine to 

heighten my empathy + feeling state– in my body (where tech can of course be linked with more masculine + the mind) 

17.  I was happy for the voice guiding us and helping us explore our environment 
18.  I am partially sighted with limited vision in one eye so I don’t expect VR to be something I could access. But it was 

great! Really immersive. The headsets were not too heavy and fit comfortably over my eyeglasses. The gloves were light 
and flexible, so it was very comfortable. The voiceover, music and sound effects and cool breeze all added to the experi-
ence. I feel as if it was floating in outer space. The team handled my health consideration really well. 

19.  A very nice way of preparing me/us to get into the space and into the experience. It was a very strong potential for inte-
gration + preparation for other experiences being those therapeutic or for other altered states of consciousness. 
20.  Soundtrack was beautiful. Noise outside was distracting at start. The instructions to collaborate worked well. More 

guided collaborations would be great. 

21.  I enjoyed the visuals and means of interactions with them you have chosen and especially during the group tasks with 

working together, which everyone did in a way that was wishing to create the best experience not just for themselves but 
for others. 

22.  Could be more exploratory and less directive, although having direction is also good for creating the communal experi-

ence. Music beautifully curated/created. Blindfolding + journey really good. Very safe + held + fun. Good storyline. 
23.  One consequence of the limited range of phenomena was that I didn’t feel rushed in experiencing things as has hap-
pened in some other VR programs where there is so much happening and one doesn’t want to miss out on anything 
that’s zipping by.  

24.  Would love to meditate a little bit more at the end, because having this switched off from real world experience made it 

easier at the end not to think about real world.  

25.  Well I think even us being led through we kind of gained that trust, and it felt safe. So already we’re in that sort of head-
space. Much like a shaman whose facilitating something. Yeah I think context… it was really amazing. Thank you.  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
Theme: Noetic Quality 

1.  At one point there was strong kind of waves of emotional feeling, just kind of pulsing through the body. But It was kind 

of a short episode. But I wasn’t expecting that actually. TBH. 

2.  You made me cry - I think my most profound moment was I thought they should take the VR glasses off me cuz I’m 

3. 

going to ruin the electrics with my tears.  
I also quite like the bit when it just becomes red and you’re no longer manipulating things and it’s just an aura. Cuz the 
manipulating things was fun, but that was quite profound, and that’s when I started to cry. 

4.  There was one point that I turned away from everything that was being created, and you could see the mountains in the 
distance and just recognizing the ironic light that all of us are in this expansive space. And yeah, it’s very beautiful. 
5.  And this, what you’ve produced, was even further than that because it was this absolute truth that we are made of light. 

And being able to see that at that level and jump into that was profound. 

6.  Absolutely profound. Incredible. 
7. 

8. 

I love the bit when you get quite excited where you can move it all around. And then there’s the guidance to just be. 
And then all the radiation of the red, and just being and being, and that just being one of the most beautiful bits. And 
you could see everyone just being. That was so lovely. There were so many lovely parts. I got quite obsessed with just 
looking out. At the void.  It’s quite me. Like turning around and being like whoa. 
[when the light went out] I had a bit of reverse kind of… I felt like I was in the matrix kind of thing. Like not there, so it 
was kind of a blank unconstructed space of what is, of our reality, if that makes sense. Like somewhere in between that 
world and this world. 
It feels profound. Very deep. 

9. 
10.  In a weird sense it felt very natural… Not virtual at all… And You completely lose a sense of frontier. Like material 

frontier. You can choose to just get real close but not touching, merging without touching. With skin you have your at-
oms, you know [slapping her skin], they won’t merge with each other. And you can completely choose to merge very 
gently and take in your energy or smoke or whatever. And it felt very natural after all, this [the real world] almost feels 
unnatural.  

11.  wonderful to have a glimpse of what it would be like to see beyond appearances/the surface/the material.  
12.  It felt so real. More real than real at times. This has given me a felt experience of the cognitive knowing I already had of 

the light inside people and beings.  

13.  Seeing the essence of energy… myself… and others. 
14.  OVERWHELMING FEELING: “IT WAS MOVING THROUGH ME”; LIGHT, LIGHT HEARTEDNESS, LAUGHTER, 

VIBRATIONS. CONNECTION 
15.  Joy, wonderment, amazement 
16.  First sensation was a huge familiarity and I felt like crying. Felt in peace and a bit emotional in the beginning. Feeling 

of coming home. 

17.  Such a feeling of beauty, tenderness and connection – I leave the experience with a heightened perception of life, the 

love beneath, within all ‘things’ and the feeling of the infinite nature of ‘being’.  

18.  What can I say, it was far more beautiful and inspired than I had anticipated… it really did make my heart burn with 
appreciation for the simple fact that I exist… I’m a biologist, a bit of a materialist, quantum physics does my head in, 
and I find meditating infuriating and it makes me impatient. This really did make me feel all the ideas from “sacred tra-
ditions” and various strands of philosophy that I normally never “get”. 

19.  Technology and awareness held in matrimony. To generate the self “out-of-time’ [can’t read last word ?] and into the 

shared heart of selves, if just for a moment, can inspire feeling. A feeling that there is more, and that unknown is simpler 
than we imagine. It is our own intellectualization,[?] rationalization and judgment that gets in the way. To be [can’t 
read this word…?] out of the way and into a new world that lives ever-present around us, is to be [can’t read the word] 
towards a more heartful understanding of life in situ. I am grateful for the work, for its application would catalyse a 
much needed growth of heart and communion. Too much of secular mindfulness is individual. Shared experience is sub-
stantial. 

20.  This was a profound experience of finding out of how it is to just ‘be’ 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme: Transcendence of Space & Time 

1.  And the manipulation of space felt a little bit telekinetic in a way. I have the power!  
2. 

I think my most profound moment was when I went to the floor, and then I could see it shooting into the floor, and I felt 
like I had broken into a 4d space, like this hypercube, and uhhh.. I felt like I had broken out of the moment into a paral-
lel moment, and had double consciousness. 

3.  Yeah, one moment that really struck me was this idea see into your past. Because you can see the trajectory of the mark 

that you’re leaving. And that was like an expansive moment, that realization that we’re so connected to the movement 
and to the simple just concrete things that were happening. But that had this big significance you know like the trajec-
tory you are leaving behind. 

4.  The space felt huge. I’m surprised to see how physically close we are to each other. The perception of where we were in 

5. 

relation to each other was vast. 
It also made me think about time, and not being linear, and just right now, and what you leave behind you as you move, 
does stay behind and trail. 

6.  Yeah, I feel like I did. It was like the bits I could see on the floor, when I got to the floor, I was then in that pattern, and 
then I was down there and it was around me. So it felt like I was underneath the pattern, or in the pattern which was on 
the floor previously. I don’t know if that’s what you mean. 
I’m annoyed at how normal this room is. 
It feels like we really were in another world. Coming into such a big room. It’s so different. 
I think like I was quite curious how it would feel just to be in this very dark space where you can sense the space 
around. It’s not entirely dark. There’s no motion no light, nothing. And just wait in there. I felt it was quite peaceful. It 
was a bit… like you think is it a million years passed, or just a second? Cuz there’s no stimulation, nothing happened.  

7. 
8. 
9. 

10.  A real sense of opening up actually. Like the space opened up around me I think. Even though it was quite focused. And 

that’s what I was left with actually 

11.  Yeah it was a bit of shock seeing the screens and the lighting, and – The room was a bit surprising. I totally forget I was 

in a room in university. 

12.  Yeah one minute I thought I could actually go through [the ground] 
13.  You know you’re in a room, but it just blankets it out in that space instead of actually in the room. 
14.  And I suppose we’ve got no preconceived idea of what the room looked like. So essentially you were just coming in to 

that space.  

15.  Yeah that was the space.. 
16.  I had no idea – the room didn’t feel this big. It felt like it was a small space and then you could see off into the back-
ground. It didn’t feel like it was much bigger than – in fact the mat’s a lot bigger than I thought the mat was.  

17.  Time runs differently in there. 
18.  Cable slightly distracted from the feeling of being in the room 
19.  I was totally disorientated by the room when I opened my eyes. 
20.  The vastlessness [sic] of space, the non-linear time, care and gentleness to other humans in this experience, and the 

self-love, helped push away the torture of existential anxiety. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
Theme: Insights to carry into everyday life 

1. 
2. 

It’s all energy. It’s all light. 
I definitely feel an excitement and optimism for the future to have technology like this so that everyone could experi-
ence it. Like how that would change people’s dynamics together as a society and how it could bring them together to 
work in a more harmonious way. It would be really quite something. 

3.  Well I hate meditating but now you make me want to try it. 
4.  Didn’t you feel like [the light] would stay with you anyway? Like now you’ve got the knowledge of it, it’s almost like a 
light has shown through. And like oh, we are like this, and we do have this light inside us. And we can look at each 
other, you know strangers on the bus, people, tourists that get on your way in Greenwich, and not hate them. And re-
spect each other.  
It’s a little silly, my cat is ill at home and I’ve been feeding her all kinds of medicine in the past week and really worry-
ing about her. And now I kind of feel like I should bring a mudra to her, and share my light. I was given this hippy book 
about natural care for cats and this stuff. Herbs and crystals for your animals. But now I’m feeling like ok maybe I’ll 
play with this. It can’t harm. 

5. 

6.  Yeah and just that feeling that you do radiate out. Like you were saying. You can radiate light out. And l liked the fact 
that it was the pressure that made it radiate. Sometimes when things are hard you need to add more pressure to be more 
light. It felt like that. Yeah, it felt like that. 
[the light] is there all the time, you just can’t see it. 

7. 
8.  Another thing I noticed is when the final gong went, I could still see the energy thing [even though the light was gone]. 

9. 

So I still had a closed eye visual of the thing we were playing with. 
It really stays with you this experience I think. I don’t know who was the voice, but that was also really good. With the 
voice – you know take it and remember. 

10.  …we are all the same. And sometimes we forget… just the limitations of our senses. I think I will remember this, and in 

difficult situations connect back to it. To this feeling of being able to create and connect.  

11.  This experience is stored somewhere in yourself. And if you look at someone you can recall this experience as a kind of 

a connection. And if you visualize that, it’s a beautiful thing. In the real world. To connect.  

12.  She said [at the end of the narration] ‘what are you left with?’. I was thinking about that. I’m left with a sense of a focus 
but also of an enlarged-ness. Do you know what I mean? When I go outside now I think that’s what I’m left with. A 
kind of connectedness. But also a focus. Just that having the hands and the lights. That was like, I was like wow.  
13.  I think what you were saying at the end about treating everyone as equals – and what you were saying as well – that 

we’re all, it’s all just all light. That’s a thing to take away isn’t it. 

14.  And I loved it when people just became smoky…Oh the smoky beings. Oh you were so holy. Smoky light beings. 

That’s how I’m gonna see everyone from now on.  

15.  So I’m gonna take this with me – the sense of – even if it’s dark it’s just the light, you might not see it, but it’s there in a 

way. 

16.  Bit sad [when the lights faded]. But then you’re internalizing it [all]. So you sort of hope that it’s still there even though 

you can’t see it. 

17.  The light of the mudra will stay with me for a long while. 
18.  I will be using mudras more in my daily life. 
19.  I loved the music + the feminine voice, the combination of such a delicate, gentleness with the tech/masculine to 

heighten my empathy + feeling state – in my body (where tech can of course be linked with more masculine + the mind) 
this takes you to the feeling place which is what the world needs as we move through this paradigm shift + from one 
pattern to the next 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme: Sense of Beauty 

1.  Yeah, the sadness & the loneliness when the light went out was definitely a very sudden like – sigh – loneliness. 
2.  That was incredible.  
3.  Exquisite. 
4.  Holy Shit. 
5.  Oh my god [crying]. 
6.  Yeah I really really liked it. It was great. it was very beautiful. Just really beautiful. 
7.  Beautiful voice. Beautiful voice. 
8.  And lovely words. 
9. 

It’s so beautiful all that light. I was trying to work out the differences, what moved when I changed mudras and what 
didn’t. 

10.  Intense. Yeah. Really beautiful actually. 
11.  I really enjoyed the sense of wonder in this. Loving this. 
12.  That’s really amazing. 
13.  Brilliant. Brilliant. 
14.  That was beautiful, gentle and heart opening. 
15.  This was a wonderful and magical experience. 
16.  Beautiful experience visualising the connections 
17.  Looking up triggered a sense of awe at the size of the dark sky and the calmness of the molecules suspended in it, like a 

different type of atmosphere in a foreign world. 

18.  Beautiful aesthetic. Refreshing to see restraint. No need for colourful fireworks or more of an environment! 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
Theme: Comparison to Other Altered States 

1. 

2. 

It’s kind of a bit like, it reminds me of a mescaline trip. It’s almost like a pandora’s box has been opened and the uni-
verse has been revealed. in its true form, rather than the virtual model that’s created in our own heads. You’re seeing a 
deeper form and fundamental truth. And the feeling that you then, once you’ve seen it you can’t go back. [laughing] 
It reminded me of a journey I went on at a party… and I was experimenting with a dissociative. And I didn’t’ mention 
to anyone else that I was gonna take a dissociative. And I took the dissociative. And unfortunately for the party. There 
was about 18, 20 people at the dinner party. And they all thought I’d gone insane. Right cuz they had no warning that I 
had taken anything. And I had taken such a miniscule dose. But it was because of the red wine interaction. But what 
happened was I went into a different dimension. I went into a 5th dimension where everyone had these pods, and every-
one who was in the party was also in the 5th dimension with me in these pods and they were all, like 18 pods, spherical, 
completely incredibly technologically advanced, and every single person had everyone else’s thoughts, like it was com-
pletely telepathic. Everyone knew everything. 

3.  My first mushroom trip, if you’ll appease me with the story. I saw – I was walking around the streets of boston, I took 
like 3.5 grams, I thought that’s how much you were supposed to take. For the first like 10 trips I did, I didn’t know you 
could take less. So the first thing is I saw this light beam coming up from the center of everybody going up into the sky, 
like an umbilical cord. And every single person I passed had it.  

4.  Little bit. Yeah I’ve experienced similar realms but I’ve played with them less with my hands. So its normally been like 
very much I’m being still and it’s going on around me. So in that sense this was more interactive. I’ve definitely been in 
realms full of shapes an prisms like we’re flying through.  So that felt familiar. But not to be playing with one’s hands. 
5.  For me it had quite a lot of overlap with a DMT experience, where there’s the sense of a reality that interpenetrates our 

6. 

7. 

reality, which isn’t sensed directly. And that in your inner eye, in the same way as you can still see this experience if 
you look inwards, you can still perceive the DMT or psychedelic experience if you look inwards. It has the same quality 
as kind of being seen but not seen. 
It’s like my ayahuasca background. It was disconcertingly similar. It was like, is that there, or is it in my head… Lots of 
ayahuasca visions with lots of empty plains and mountains in the background. 
I would like to have that visual all the time. It reminded me a lot of a particular ayahuasca experience I had, where I had 
like 7 hours of weeee, I’m a magician! And I was thinking this is the way it is really all the time, I just don’t see all this 
energy coming from my hands. All the time, I have to remember that. So this was like a really great re-experiencing of 
that. A little bit less colorful but it was the same. And then the communal part of it like the untangling of the circle and 
then turning around and seeing the circle from the inside, it was like ‘waaaaaaa’.  
Similar to aspects of Ayahuasca 

8. 
9.  The experience was similar to a 5-MEO-DMT experience in that both explore the realization of pure energy, pure be-

ing, with no reference to physical space. 

10.  It was very much like an ayahuasca experience I had once. 
11.  Similar in some ways to aya experience in the past 
12.  although it felt very strong and powerful, my psilocybin experience was beyond any of what I lived in my life in sense of 

awe, dissolution, joy, timelessness.  

13.  I once had a ‘God trip’ and voyaged to outer space on LSD. This was reminiscent. 
14.  Crossover with DMT experiences - inter-penetrating reality 
15.  It was truly transporting and illuminating, like the quiet point of an acid trip where extreme sensory experience ends 

and calm beauty settles in. 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
Theme: Ineffability 

1.  Yeah, it certainly takes you somewhere. A different place. Yeah. It’s quite hard to verbalize it. Almost like it’s difficult 

to describe a trip. It’s… It’s… The words are still forming in my head. 

I can’t. I don’t have any words yet. 
I felt touched by this. I thought it was very sweet. I couldn’t necessarily pinpoint and label an emotion as such. 

2.  Uhhhhh…. Ok. Words. Huh. I know some words… huh. 
3. 
4. 
5.  Yeah I’ve got no words. 
6.  That was a wonderful unusual experience. Words seem inadequate 
7.  Feel moved, touched, quite quiet, words are hard to muster – I appreciate that because it indicates that I’ve been 

8. 
9. 

brought into my body, into my heart/energetic being. 
It’s hard to describe, or think of where to begin describing this experience.  
I wish I could find the words to really explain more than above but my mind is pretty overwhelmed right now (in a good 
way!). Thank you.  

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
Theme: Child-like enchantment 

1. 

It’s like this really beautiful joyous innocent but also intimate feeling that I don’t remember feeling since I was a child. 
Which was amazing. 

3. 

2.  Yeah. It’s almost like that sense of awe as well, like I would get the sense of awe as a child, that it was that sort of play-
ful innocence with interacting with others. You put up a lot of walls as you age, because of shit that’s happened to you 
and trauma you’ve taken on. So to have that all dissolved, and just see it. It’s quite emotional actually. 
I like the dance of it…The sort of patterns and moving around other people’s patterns. Like Sparklers…. like moving 
sparklers…Fizzy light… there’s something very enchanting about that experience as a child. 
I really like the childish feeling. That we were like children again, exploring and no judgement or anything. Everyone 
was sort of – I just felt really connected to people I didn’t know. So it was just… incredible. And yeah that childlike 
wonder.  

4. 

5.  We miss out on that kind of child play in the everyday world, and it’s really important. Liberating, freeing.  
6.  The sense of connection and openness to the other members of the group was a very moving thing that was able to bring 
forth such positive emotions that were reminiscent of how one once felt as a child when interacting with other beings. 

7.  Was fascinated by the movement and development of the forms from the mudra – the different manifestation. It seems to 
me, at one point, that the more fluid forms began with the straight line, kind of molecule forms and then became the 
more fluid form. When Being was suggested, holding still, the slight movements generated little straight line shapes 
which I found particularly fascinating. That they were almost generated by the inevitable, slight natural movements of 
the hands. The red mist added a whole other element to it 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

Theme: Metaphors for day-to-day life 

1. 

It was profoundly lonely when everyone’s light disappeared as well. It’s like that cutting off, of either giving out your 
own light or refusing to see it in other people is kind of like a really very crystallized example of what that’s like. 
2.  The gradual changes from full molecules to gassy ones to swirling worms felt like a journey, some sort of evolution – an 

3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

expectation about where we were going. 
I was most taken with how playing with the grids seemed like we were in control, but when asked to stop the [molecular 
organism] did [its] own stuff. It was an acceptance of the co-creation of environment and selves. It was astonishingly 
calm when we relaxed at the end. It was as if a powerful step down of need to control.  
It’s interesting, people kind of work out how it works, and then they start interacting. I guess that’s how life works in 
general. Like oh I can do stuff, I can wave to this other person, ooohh, the light waves back, it’s fascinating. 
[not knowing the boundaries of acceptable contact] is kind of like real life. 
I was like I would really like to move around now but I can’t because there’s a cord, or is there a cord? I don’t really 
know. Maybe there’s a person behind me that I don’t really know about. Can I just go across the room now? So there 
was all these [questions], which is also kind of a spiritual [question], like the VR experience becomes sort of like, is 
there a cord in real life? Can I do what I want? Do I have to hold myself back now? Am I ruining it for everyone else? 

© Authors, Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 (www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
