Familiarization tours for first-time users of highly automated cars: 
Comparing the effects of virtual environments with different levels of 
interaction fidelity1 

Mahdi Ebnali,1, Richard Lamb,2, Razieh Fathi,3 
1.  Industrial Engineering Department, University at Buffalo 
2.  Neurocognition Science Laboratory, University at Buffalo 
3.  Department of Computer Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology 

          Abstract 

Research in aviation and driving has highlighted the importance of training as an effective 
approach to reduce the costs associated with the supervisory role of the human in automated 
systems. However, only a few studies have investigated the effect of pre-trip familiarization 
tours  on  highly  automated  driving.  In  the  present  study,  a  driving  simulator  experiment 
compared  the  effectiveness  of  four  familiarization  groups  –  control,  video,  low-fidelity 
virtual reality (VR), and high-fidelity VR – on automation trust and driving performance in 
several critical and non-critical transition tasks. The results revealed the positive impact of 
familiarization  tours  on  trust,  takeover,  and  handback  performance  at  the  first  time  of 
measurement. Takeover quality only improved when practice was presented in high-fidelity 
VR. After three times of exposure to transition requests, trust and transition performance of 
all  groups  converged  to  those  of  the  high-fidelity  VR  group,  demonstrating  that:  a) 
experiencing automation failures during the training may reduce costs associated with first 
failures in highly automated driving; b) the VR tour with high level of interaction fidelity is 
superior to other types of familiarization tour; and c) uneducated and less-educated drivers 
learn about automation by experiencing it. Knowledge resulting from this research could help 
develop cost-effective familiarization tours for highly automated vehicles in dealerships and 
car rental centers.  

Keywords:  Virtual  Reality,  Interaction  Fidelity,  Training,  Trust,  Takeover,  Highly 
Automated Driving 

1.  Introduction  

1.1  Automated driving: opportunities and challenges 

Advanced  driver  assistant  systems  (ADASs)  have  been  introduced  to  the  market  to  increase  road 
transportation safety, improve the quality of travel, and optimize fuel efficiency. Autonomous vehicles are 
also expected to relieve traffic congestion and help to optimize spacing and density of driveways[1]. 

1 Under review in Journal of Applied Ergonomics,  corresponding author email: mahdiebn@buffalo.edu 

 
These  technologies,  which  had  been  optional  and  deluxe  features  in  the  past,  are  included  as  standard 
equipment in today’s cars. In the near future, highly automated vehicles, which will take full control of the 
car in some driving situations (e.g., designated highways), are also expected to be made available on the 
market.  This  technology  provides  longitudinal  and  lateral  control  in  certain  driving  conditions  and 
environments. It allows drivers to switch from an active controlling role to that of a supervisory controller, 
such that they do not have to control and monitor the road and can engage in non-driving-related tasks 
(NDRTs). However, due to technology limitations, infrastructure boundaries, and the dynamic nature of 
driving, the driver is called to engage in driving tasks and take manual control when the system surpasses 
the technical limits or when a takeover is scheduled [2]. Transitions between different modes are considered 
to be challenging tasks in automated driving and are associated with several human factor issues, such as 
erratic workload [3], complacency [4], and loss of situational awareness [5], leading to unsafe interaction 
and impaired takeover performance [6].  

Although  deploying  appropriate  automation  logics  and  designing  user-centered  HMIs  could  facilitate 
drivers’ interaction with automated systems, inappropriate and inaccurate mental models of the system have 
been considered underlying reasons for most of the aforementioned challenges. Studies have warned that 
uneducated drivers and those who have not been exposed to the limitations of assistive systems on the road 
tend to make false assumptions about the systems’ functionality [7-9]. For example, a lack of understanding 
of the system’s limitations may increase the driver’s expectations of the automation functionality and result 
in overtrust and complacency. On the other hand, insufficient mental models of the system or encountering 
unexpected situations can lead drivers to underestimate the system’s capabilities and discourage them from 
reaping the benefits of automated driving (distrust) [7, 9].   

1.2  Importance of training 

Several  years  of  experience  and  practices  in  human  factors  have  highlighted  the  importance  of  users’ 
education as a necessary step in their successful and efficient cooperation with automated systems [6, 10-
13]. Direct and indirect effects of training have been reflected in the reduction of catastrophic failures and 
incidents and improvement in the quality of human-automation interaction [14]. Considering these facts, 
car manufacturers are required to provide additional information in the owner’s manual outlining how to 
operate automated features  [15, 16]. Available manuals, however, suffer from several limitations which 
may  reduce  the  quality  of  knowledge  acquisition.  First,  they  are  mostly  limited  to  basic  operational 
information  and  do  not  cover  the  full  range  of  scenarios  a  drive  may  encounter  on  the  roads.  Second, 
according to skill acquisition theories [17, 18], providing only rules as text-based instructions may result in 
limited learning outcomes, which are focused on declarative knowledge acquisition and do not encompass 
higher-order cognitive and procedural skills [19-21]. Third, while manuals are easy-to-access references, 
they are lengthy, and it is less likely that owners will read them thoroughly [9, 22]. Finally, compared to 
learning  in  the  context,  details  memorized  through  texts  are  more  likely  to  be  misinterpreted, 
misremembered, or forgotten.  

These limitations have motivated experts in human factors to explore other approaches, such as training 
drivers  via  simulators  or  in  driving  schools,  where  they  have  more  chances  to  interact  with  automated 
systems and practice several possible scenarios to develop knowledge and procedural skills as well [23-25]. 
Although the findings are encouraging, these approaches suffer from major limitations; for example, it takes 

time  to  implement  these  types  of  training  programs,  and  they  require  costly  equipment  or  professional 
instructors, which may not be available to individuals.  

Educating owners in dealership centers or car rental offices is a potential training method that is expected 
to increase drivers’ knowledge of automated systems and could improve safety for first-time users [11, 26-
28]. Currently, most automotive dealerships offer training or pre-trip demos before or after delivering cars 
to their owners. While interviews with owners revealed that drivers prefer to learn about their new cars in 
dealership centers, a recent study cast doubt on the quality and potency of such an approach.  [29], in an 
investigation  of  how  dealerships  provide  training  and  information  regarding  ADASs,  reported  that  the 
effectiveness of training at the point of sale greatly varied depending on who delivered the training and 
what and how information was presented. Poorly delivered information (due to delivery methods, untrained 
salespersons,  and  low-quality  explanations)  and  lack  of  standard  materials  are  two  main  causes  that 
significantly  reduce  the  quality  of  learning  through  this  approach  and  keep  owners  underinformed  or 
misinformed about automated vehicles. The present study aims to bridge these gaps and explore the possible 
ways to improve the quality of pre-trip education programs for first-time users of highly automated cars. 

The recent improvement in the quality of visual rendering and interaction fidelity, as well as the affordable 
expense of head-mounted display (HMD) VR, has encouraged researchers and companies to employ this 
technology  for  widespread  use  in  training  and  education  [30-34].  Despite  the  growing  number  of  VR 
applications being developed for training in various domains, little research has been conducted to explore 
the effects of such technology in automated driving training. [23, 35], for example, used an HMD VR to 
examine its application in the acquisition of skills required for automated driving. Their results highlight 
the effectiveness of this training approach on reaction time (transition time from automated mode to manual 
mode)  and  users’  self-reported  measures  (e.g.  trust,  acceptance,  ease  of  use,  understanding,  and 
pleasantness). The results are encouraging, but they are scant, and the researchers did not employ a well-
defined training protocol to cover essential educational requirements. Considering the availability of VR as 
a low-cost learning tool, further exploration and research are necessary to understand the affordances and 
efficacy of HMD VR as an immersive medium to prepare owners for automated driving upon the delivery 
of  the  car.  Moreover,  several  studies  have  documented  the  benefits  of  interactive  practices  for  training 
quality and educational outcomes. The critical question is; how does the interaction fidelity of a VR tour 
impacts first-time users’ learning experiences and outcomes related to highly automated driving? This study 
aims to address the outstanding challenge of developing drivers’ training paradigms by contrasting possible 
training  approaches (video,  VR  with  low-fidelity  interaction,  and  VR  with  high-fidelity  interaction)  for 
highly automated driving.  

1.3  What do first-time drivers need to learn about automation? 

Although the available literature highlights the importance of drivers’ familiarity with automation, little is 
known about content and best practices that effectively prepare the driver for highly automated driving. To 
select appropriate content and authentic tasks as the precursor and backbones of a training protocol, it is 
first  important  to  understand  what  first-time  users  need to  learn  before  driving  a  highly  automated  car. 
Validity and relevancy of the materials to the transfer task are highly correlated with desirable transfer, in 
which the responses learners have are consistent from the training to the real-world environment[36-38]. 

Based on lessons learned from the aviation industry, [11] outlined a set of knowledge standards for drivers 
of partially automated cars. Knowledge about the automation (information about functions, engineering 
logic, limitations, and equipment), drivers (maintaining awareness and responding to abnormal events), and 
new driving tasks are three essential kinds of knowledge that drivers should possess before they operate an 
automated  car.  An  experimental  study  in  partially  automated  driving  [39],  also  covered  parts  of  these 
educational requirements in an owner’s manual to explore potential impacts of the training on automated 
driving  safety.  Their  curriculums  included  knowledge  about  automated  systems,  physical  equipment, 
working  range  of  detection  equipment,  and  requirements  for  optimal  performance.  Considering  the 
minimum driver’s training standards outlined for partially automated cars by [11], we extended each set of 
knowledge for highly automated driving (Figure 1).  

Beyond the essential knowledge required of drivers regarding the features of an automated system, they 
also  need  to  learn  about  and  experience  the  tasks  required  for  automated  driving.  A  growing  body  of 
literature  in  human  factors  has  identified  transitions  between  different  automation  modes  as  the  most 
challenging tasks the driver needs to perform safely [40, 41]. This concern is particularly more complicated 
for highly automated driving, where there is a wider avenue for problems associated with out-of-the-loop 
(OOTL)  performance.  This  makes  transitions  to  and  from  automated  modes  even  more  demanding, 
resulting in higher situation awareness (SA) loss and misunderstanding of what corrective actions need to 
be taken.  

According to Gold, Naujoks [42] and the suggestion of existing evidence, we considered covering three 
types of tasks in the training protocol: 1) Critical takeover tasks (critical): These takeover tasks constitute 
the  most  crucial  part  of  the challenges  associated  with highly  automated  driving,  and  it  is  necessary  to 
prepare the driver for such circumstances before the initial exposure to real driving. 2) Non-critical takeover 
tasks  (non-critical):  Non-critical  takeover  tasks  have  also  been  discussed  as  important  activities  in 
automated driving [43, 44]. Compared to critical takeover events, these scenarios have less criticality and 
urgency or are predictable, though familiarizing the driver with these kinds of non-critical system-initiated 
transitions could be essential to a pre-trip training program. 3) Handback tasks (non-critical): Some recent 
studies have also noted the importance of human-initiated transitions as everyday tasks in which the driver 
engages in automated driving [45]. In these cases, top-down processing is triggered based on an existing 
schema and prior information, and the driver, at a tactical level, evaluates the situation, anticipates, and 
finally  relinquishes  control  to  the  automated  system.  There  is  still  a  limited  understanding  of  drivers’ 
behavior in these types of transitions, as well as how prior familiarization influences their performance. 

Covering non-critical transition tasks in a familiarization tour has two potential benefits. First, non-critical 
transitions  are  common  tasks  and  comprise  the  majority  of  interaction  with  an  automated  car.  Second, 
learning how to appropriately use the automation in normal situations, for example, understanding how and 
when to relinquish control to the automation, helps drivers build richer mental models of the automation 
functionality. 

Automation Knowledge 

Driver Knowledge  

Task Knowledge 

• Automated  systems  and 

• How engaging in secondary 

equipment 

• Capabilities of the system 
• Limitations of the system 
• HMIs 

tasks impacts SA. 

• How  overtrust  and  distrust 
in  highly 

impact  driving 
automated cars. 

• Activation and deactivation 
• Handback tasks 
• Non-critical takeover tasks 
• Critical takeover tasks 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Materials covered in the familiarization tours, based on the minimum training standards proposed by [11] 
and regulations proposed for automated driving systems by [16] 

According to the aforementioned training requirements (Figure 1), we designed three different types of 
familiarization tours: video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR. All the tours shared the same content 
(automation knowledge, driver knowledge, and task knowledge) but differed in the delivery method and 
level of interactivity. Details of each tour are presented in Section 2.2. In a driving simulator experiment, 
we compared the effectiveness of the familiarization tours on automation trust and driving performance in 
critical and non-critical transition tasks. 

2.  Methods 

2.1.  Participants 

Ninety-seven  volunteers  were recruited  from  three colleges  with  approximately  5,600  students  and  450 
employees using flyers and student social groups on Facebook. After screening, 84 of those volunteers were 
eligible  to  participate  in  the  experiment  and  were  randomly  assigned  to  one  of  the  four  groups  (no 
familiarization, video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR), with 21 participants in each group. Female 
participants  comprised  45.2%  of  the  participants,  and  the  mean  age  was  24.18  years  (SD  =  8.3).  As 
recruiting criteria, all the participants had no or little familiarity with highly automated cars and had no or 
little experience with VR. All participants completed the experiment, but data on a few transition tasks 
missed for three participants.  

2.2.  Familiarization tours 

As illustrated in Table 1, participants in the video group received a tour using a monitor. In the low-fidelity 
VR group, the familiarization tour was delivered through an HMD VR where information was presented in 
an Oculus Go headset, and participants were able to interact with the virtual environment using a handheld 
game  controller.  This  controller  allowed  them  to  manually  drive  the  car  and  engage  or  disengage  the 
automated mode using a reserved button. Participants in the high-fidelity VR tour instead interacted with 
the  virtual  environment  using  a  steering  wheel  and  pedal  system.  To  control  the  level  of  fidelity  and 
immersion in VR groups, participants used the same VR headsets and received identical materials with the 
same level of visual realism and spatial layouts. Though the training materials and scenarios and transition 
tasks were the same in all three tours (Figure 1), participants in the video group read the explanation and 
watched the videos displayed on the monitor, and participants in VR groups received this information in an 
interactive VR environment.  

The materials in the video tour were made using Microsoft PowerPoint and Animaker. The VR tour was 
created using Unity v5 (Unity Technologies) and was integrated into Oculus headsets using Oculus VR 
SDK. Oculus VR SDK for Unity is a package provided by Oculus to integrate VR environments built in 
Unity  with  Oculus  VR  headsets. We  used  their  rendering  features,  interface  for  controlling  VR  camera 

 
 
behavior, a first-person control prefab, and the unified input API for controllers. A 3-D model of Tesla S 
P100D was used, and the models of road environments (e.g., urban area, highways, rural road, road objects) 
were imported from the EasyRoad package and edited and assessed for accuracy and visibility in the virtual 
environment. The Oculus Go device was run on a machine with a CORE i7 CPU @ 3.30GHz, 8GB RAM 
with OS/Windows 10 x64 operating system. 

Table 1. Specifics of the familiarization tours (video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR) 

Tour 

Video 

Low-fidelity interaction VR 

High-fidelity interaction VR 

Display 
Screen 
resolution 

Flat screen  
2560 x 1080 34"1080p 

Oculus Go, HMD 
2560×1440  5.5"  (538ppi)  fast-
switching  LCD  with  standard 
60Hz refresh, "overclocked" 72Hz 
refresh 

Oculus Go, HMD 
2560×1440  5.5"  (538ppi)  fast-
switching  LCD  with  standard 
60Hz refresh, "overclocked" 72Hz 
refresh 

Input 
device 
movement 
Training 
paradigm 

Pre-trip 
tour 
process 

No input, no interaction 

Logitech Dual Action GamePad 

Logitech  Driving  Force  G29 
Racing Wheel with Pedals 

Automation,  driver,  task 
knowledge  (video  +  texts 
explanation on a monitor) 

driver, 

task 
Automation, 
knowledge  and  practice  (video  + 
texts  explanation  +  interactive 
practices) 

driver, 

task 
Automation, 
knowledge  and  practice  (video  + 
text  explanation  + 
interactive 
practices) 

2 slides (text + 

2 slides (text + 

• 
3 slides (text + 
video) for automation 
system features (ACC 
and LKA) 
• 
video) for physical 
equipment (camera, 
radar, ultrasonic sensor, 
GPS sensor) 
• 
video) for driver’s 
knowledge 
• 
about three types of 
transitions and use cases 
(3 use cases for critical 
takeover, 2 use cases for 
a non-critical takeover, 
and 2 use cases for 
handback tasks) 

30-minute video 

• 
7 minutes (on average) 
interactive explanation (text + 
video) for automation system 
features (ACC, LKA) 
• 
10-minute (on average) 
walkaround the car to observe 
physical equipment (camera, 
radar, ultrasonic sensor, GPS 
sensor) 
• 
10 minutes (text + 
video) for driver’s knowledge 
• 
30-minute (on average) 
practices and explanation of 
three types of transitions and 
use cases (3 use cases for 
critical takeover, 2 use cases 
for non-critical takeover, and 2 
use cases for handback tasks) 
using a hand-held game 
controller  

• 
7 minutes (on average) 
interactive explanation text + 
video) for automation system 
features (ACC, LKA) 
• 
10-minute (on average) 
walkaround the car to observe 
physical equipment (camera, 
radar, ultrasonic sensor, GPS 
sensor) 
• 
for driver’s knowledge 
• 
practices and explanation of 
three types of transitions and 
use cases (3 use cases for 
critical takeover, 2 use cases for 
non-critical takeover, and 2 use 
cases for handback tasks) using 
a steering wheel and pedals 

30-minute (on average) 

10 minutes (text + video) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Video 

Low-fidelity interaction VR 

High-fidelity interaction VR 

Figure 2. The familiarization tours: video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR 

2.3.  Driving simulator  

This  experiment  was  performed  using  a  fixed-based  simulator,  which  was  designed  in  the  Unity  game 
engine and operated on Dell Optiplex 7010 (Intel Quad-Core i7-3470 3.2GHz, 16GB RAM) workstation 
running Windows 10. Three widescreen displays showed the visual simulation imagery, rendered at 60 Hz. 
The  simulator  was able  to  provide  two  driving  modes:  level  3,  or conditionally  automated  driving,  and 
manual driving. Based on the features outlined for level 3 automation in SAE J2016, the automated mode 
supported  simultaneous  longitudinal  and  lateral  control  and  enabled  the  car  to  detect  objects,  execute 
independent  lane-change  maneuvers,  and  request  a  takeover  when  necessary.  Participants  were  able  to 
engage and disengage automaton by pressing the same button located on the right side of the steering wheel. 
Disengagement  was  also  possible  through  pressing  the  brake  (>  10%  of  braking  length)  or  turning  the 
steering wheel more than (> 7 degrees). A takeover request (TOR) was also issued in an auditory format 
with a high-pitched tone (“In the next ten seconds, take over the control”) through two speakers placed near 
the participant. Ten seconds is suggested as an appropriate length of time in which drivers can safely switch 
to manual mode [46]. All TORs had identical features with regard to format and wording, with the only 
difference being the respective cause and action. Table 2 depicts the visual symbols of HMIs used to display 
the  status  of  automation  mode.  These  visual  symbols  were  displayed  on  the  right-bottom  corner  of  the 
middle display. 

Table 2. Visual symbols of HMI showing the status of automation mode 

Automation is 
running 

Automation is 
ready to use 

Takeover is 
required (TOR is 
issued) 

Automation is 
disengaged 

2.4.  Design of experiment  

This study employed a mixed between-within design, with the type of familiarization (no familiarization, 
video,  low-fidelity  VR,  high-fidelity  VR) as  the  between-subjects  factor,  as  well  as  transition  scenarios 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(critical  takeover,  non-critical  takeover,  and  handback)  and  time  of  measurement  as  within-subjects 
variables. Participants in the no familiarization, or control group (n = 21), were introduced to the drive test 
without receiving any form of a familiarization tour. Before the drive tests, participants in the video group 
(n  =  21),  low-fidelity  VR  (n  =  21),  and  high-fidelity  VR  (n  =  21)  were  familiarized  with  the  highly 
automated driving using a screen, a low-fidelity interaction, and a high-fidelity interaction VR, respectively. 
In the drive tests, participants in all groups were exposed to the same simulator, driving environment, and 
scenarios.  Moreover,  all  participants  were  assigned  to  engage  in  an  identical  secondary  task  (watching 
video). They experienced three types of transitions – critical takeover, non-critical takeover, and handback 
(Table 3) – three times in different blocks. The sequence of these scenarios in each block was randomly 
specified to avoid learning effects. 

Table 3. Three types of transition: critical takeover, non-critical takeover, and handback 
Critical TOR scenario 

Non-critical TOR scenario 

Handback scenario 

The  red  car  has  blocked  the  right 
lane,  and  the  subject  car  (green) 
issues a TOR with a time budget of 
10s,  stating  that  the  lane  is  blocked 
and takeover is necessary.  

2.5.  Procedure 

The subject car (green) issues a TOR 
with a time budget of 10s, stating that 
a scheduled exit is ahead.  

The subject car  issues  a  handback 
message stating that automation is 
available.  

Each  participant  was  individually  welcomed  into  the experiment  room and received  a  written  informed 
consent with a notice that they could end the experiment at any time without providing a reason and without 
negative consequences. After having signed the informed consent documents, each participant read 
the instructions to complete the experimental task. The participants were then asked to complete the 
demographic questionnaire. After completing the questionnaires, participants briefed on the simulator. In 
the next step, participants who were assigned to take the video tour received a one-hour tour involving text 
and video covering the previously described content (Figure 1 and Table 1) to familiarize themselves with 
automated driving. In VR groups, participants received the tour for approximately one hour, then moved to 
the drive test. Before starting the drive test, all participants were asked to take the knowledge tests; further, 
participants  in  training  groups  were  also  asked  to  complete  a  set  of  questionnaires:  presence  and  VR 
sickness questionnaires. Before beginning the drive test, participants were given the option to take a 30-
minute break. The drive tests contained three blocks; each one covered three types of transitions (critical 
takeover, non-critical takeover, and handback). In each block, participants were presented with an urban 
section that included intersections, pedestrians, and a single and dual carriageway with heavy traffic. They 
were then directed to a highway section, representing three-lane roads with ramps and traffic signs. At the 
end of each block, participants were administered the trust questionnaire (Figure 3). When the automated 
mode was active, participants were required to watch a video of the Our Planet series on Netflix, which was 
displayed  on  a  tablet  mounted  to  the  dashboard.  After  finishing  the  experiment,  the  participants  were 
debriefed and thanked for their time.  

 
 
 
Figure 3. Experiment procedure; Note 1: Participants in the control group skipped the familiarization tour and its 
questionnaires; Note 2: Q denotes a questionnaire and a T denotes a test 

2.6.  Measures 

Two sets of variables associated with learning outcomes and learning experiences were measured to answer 
the research questions.  

2.6.1  Learning outcomes 

Takeover time (TOT) in critical and non-critical scenarios: Takeover time was measured from the moment 
a TOR was issued until the participant took control of the car using the steering wheel, acceleration pedal, 
or brake pedal. 
Handback time (HBT): Handback time measured the time it took for a participant to relinquish control to 
the automation when he or she was informed that the automation was available to control the car.  
Takeover quality was evaluated by minimum time to collision (TTC) and SD of lane position (SDLP) during 
one mile of the manual driving period after the TOR. 
Trust:  A  12-item  questionnaire  proposed  by  [47]  was  used  to  measure  self-reported  trust.  Mean  self-
reported trust was calculated for each participant by averaging individual values.  
Verbal  knowledge:  A  questionnaire  was  used  to  measure  participants’  verbal  knowledge  of  highly 
automated driving. 

2.6.2  Learning experience 

Presence: The Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) [48] was used to measure self-reported presence (sense 
of  “being  there”)  in  four  areas  –  sense  of  being  there,  spatial  presence,  involvement,  and  experienced 
realism – on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from 0 to 6 for each item.  

VR sickness: The general items of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) [49] were used to measure 
the level of adverse health effects of the VR tour. The general items of this tool consisted of nine questions 
with a 4-point scale (“none”, “slight”, “moderate”, or “severe”).   

2.7.  Hypotheses 

H1: a) Takeover time in both critical and non-critical scenarios will be shorter in familiarization groups, 
particularly in VR tours. b) Throughout the experiment, takeover time will decrease and finally stabilize. 

H2:  a)  Takeover  quality  is  more  likely  to  be  higher  (longer  minimum  TTC  and  smaller  SDLP)  among 
educated  participants.  b)  In  particular,  increasing  the  level  of  interaction  fidelity  in  VR  will  improve 
takeover quality.  
H3: a) Handback time will decrease as a result of the familiarization tours. b) This improvement will be 
higher in interactive familiarization tours. c) Over the course of the experiment, handback time will decrease 
and finally stabilize. 
H4: a) Participants in training groups are more likely to report higher automation trust after experiencing 
failures compared to the control group. b) Self-reported automation trust will increase and finally stabilize 
after several exposures to TORs.  
H5: a) Verbal knowledge score will be higher when participants receive a familiarization tour. b) VR tours 
will help participants attain more knowledge. 
H6: High-fidelity VR increases the level of presence.  

3.  Results 
3.1.  Reaction performance  

TOT of critical scenarios: An ANOVA test revealed a significant effect of the type of familiarization tour 
on TOT of critical scenarios at the first failure, F(3, 68) = 5.29, p < 0.01, M control = 4.63 s (2.23), M 
video = 3.72 s (1.35), M low-fidelity VR = 2.94 s (0.53), and M high-fidelity VR = 2.83 s (0.95). According 
to the post-hoc test, aside from the comparison between low-fidelity VR and high-fidelity VR, the rest of 
the comparisons were significant. No statistically meaningful difference was observed in TOT between tour 
groups at the second and third times of measurement. A significant interaction between familiarization tour 
and time of measurement (F [4, 205] = 5.08, p < 0.05) effect was observed in TOT of critical scenarios. 
As demonstrated in Figure 4, TOT of the control and video groups was significantly shorter at the third 
failure than at the first and second. The difference between the second and third failures was not significant 
in any group.  

TOT non-critical scenarios: TOT in non-critical scenarios was also meaningfully affected by the type of 
familiarization tour at the first failure, F (3, 68) = 4.89, p < 0.05  (Figure 5). Compared to the control group 
(M = 4.17 s, SD = 2.13), participants in the high-fidelity VR group demonstrated significantly shorter TOT 
(M = 2.97 s, SD = 1.03). No difference was found in TOT between groups at the second and third failures. 
Time of measurement had a main effect on the control group such that TOT significantly decreased from 
the first failure (M = 4.17 s, SD = 2.13) to the third (M = 2.81 s, SD = 0.94). Time of measurement had no 
significant impact on the TOT of participants who received a familiarization tour.  

Figure 4. Average TOT in critical scenarios (± 
SE) in different times of measurement for four 
familiarization tours (control, video, low fidelity 
[LF] VR, and high-fidelity [HF] VR) 

Figure 5. Average TOT in non-critical scenarios 
(± SE) in different times of measurement for four 
familiarization tours (control, video, low-fidelity 
[LF] VR, and high-fidelity [HF] VR) 

HBT: The ANOVA test confirmed a significant effect of familiarization tour (F [3, 65] = 8.46, p = 0.001) 
at the first block, as well as time of measurement (F [2, 51] = 4.33, p = 0.02) for the control group (Figure 
6). Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni-corrected adjustments revealed a meaningfully longer takeover 
time only in the control group at the first block. Moreover, pairwise comparisons revealed a significant 
difference  between  the  first  handback  scenarios  and  the  second  (p  <  0.05)  and  third  (p  <  0.01), 
demonstrating a longer mean takeover time at the first handback events. No significant effect was observed 
either between the second and third exposure to handback requests or between tour groups (video, low-
fidelity, and high-fidelity VRs) at any time of measurement.  

3.2.  Takeover quality 

TTC:  Type  of  familiarization  tour  had  no  significant  impact  on  longitudinal  vehicle  control  in  critical 
takeover scenarios, F (3, 209) = 1.82, p = 0.103; however, when the measurement time and type of tour 
were taken into account, a significant interaction effect was found in TTC. Compared to the first failure, 
TTC of participants in the control and video groups significantly increased at the third failure (control: F 
(2, 56) = 5.72, p < 0.01; video: F (2, 56) = 4.85, p < 0.05). Other contrasts between the second and third 
failures across familiarization groups did not reveal any significant relationship.  

SDLP:  Type  of  tour  had a  significant  main effect  on  lateral  vehicle control  within  one  mile  after  TOR 
(SDLP: F [3, 210] = 6.71, p < 0.01). A Tukey post-hoc test revealed that participants in the high-fidelity 
VR group showed significantly smaller SDLP (M = 38 cm, SD = 13.1, p < 0.01) compared to the other 
three  groups.  This  effect,  however,  disappeared  after  the  second  critical  takeover  scenario.  SDLP  was 
affected by the time of measurement, F (2, 210) = 5.03, p < 0.05. All participants at the last measurement 
demonstrated a smaller deviation in lateral position; however, this change was not significant in the high-
fidelity VR group (p = 0.061). 

 
 
3.3.  Automation trust 

A Kruskal-Wallis test revealed a main effect of familiarization tours (χ2(3) = 14.21, p < 0.01) and time of 
measurement (χ2(2) = 11.499, p < 0.01) on self-report automation trust (Figure 7). While no significant 
change was observed in participants in VR groups across all three blocks, trust rating among participants 
in the control and video groups significantly increased from block 1 (M control = 3.73[1.34], M video = 
4.13[1.33]) to block 3 (M control = 5.18[1.20], M video= 5.39 [1.46]). Another noteworthy finding is that, 
at the end of the third block, no significant difference was observed between distinct groups. Regarding the 
effects of the block, the paired exact Wilcoxon test revealed that there were significant differences only 
between the first and third blocks (Z = 3.09, p < 0.01); p > 0.09 for all other differences. Trust rating at the 
end of the third block was significantly higher than in the first block in the control and video groups. A 
post-hoc bilateral Mann–Whitney U test also only revealed a meaningful difference when comparing the 
control group with low-fidelity VR (p < 0.05) and high-fidelity VR (p < 0.05).  

Figure 6. Average HBT (± SE) in different times 
of measurement for the four familiarization tour 
groups (control, video, low-fidelity [LF] VR, and 
high-fidelity [HF] VR). 

 Figure 7. Average trust (± SE) in different times 
of measurement for the four familiarization tour 
groups (control, video, low-fidelity [LF] VR, and 
high-fidelity [HF] VR). 

3.4.  Knowledge test 

After completing the tours and before the drive test, participants in all groups were given a 15-question test 
measuring their level of knowledge. The control group received a mean score of 31.7% (9.39), video group 
46.1% (6.1), low-fidelity VR 63% (14.8), and high-fidelity VR 65.8% (12.4). The difference in test scores 
between  the  control  and  participants  who  received  one  of  the  familiarization  tours  was  found  to  be 
significant  (p  <  0.01).  Compared  to  the  video  group,  participants  in  VR  groups  also  achieved a  higher 
knowledge score (p < 0.05); however, there was no main effect of the type of VR (interaction fidelity) tour 
on knowledge test scores (p = 0.21).  

3.5.   Presence 

 
 
 
As shown in Figure 8, the level of presence (total score) was significantly higher in the high-fidelity VR 
(M = 3.59, SD = 0.58) and low-fidelity VR (M = 2.91, SD = 0.86) than in the video tour (M = 2.05, SD = 
0.47) (χ2 (2) = 94.5, p <0.01). A Mann-Whitney post-hoc test additionally revealed that all comparisons 
were statistically significant (p < 0.01). Comparing VR tours in each item indicated that participants in the 
high-fidelity VR group experienced significantly higher involvement (p < 0.05) and spatial immersion (p 
< 0.05). No other significant difference was observed in the other two items of IPQ between VR tours. 

As  depicted  in  Table  4.,  both  virtual  reality  tours  resulted  in  similar  symptom  experiences  during  the 
training;  however,  the  severity  of  dizziness  (p  <  0.05)  and  disorientation  (p  <  0.01)  were  significantly 
higher among participants in the high-fidelity VR group. In general, compared to the low-fidelity VR group 
(M total score = 5.3, SD = 1.31), the total score was higher in the high-fidelity VR group (M total score = 
6.81, SD = 2.06); however, it was not statistically significant (p = 0.13).  

Figure 8. Average score of IPQ (± SE) for familiarization tours (video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR) 

Table 4. Percentage of participants reporting severe or moderate levels for each item in SSQ 

Symptoms 
General discomfort 
Fatigue 
Boredom 
Drowsiness 
Headache 
Dizziness 
Nausea 
Disorientation 

Low-fidelity VR (%) 
8 
10 
0 
8 
12 
23 
17 
19 

High-fidelity VR (%) 
5 
7 
0 
0 
15 
38 
21 
43 

p value 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
* 
- 
** 

Mann–Whitney U test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 

 
4.  Discussion 

Through a driving simulator experiment with 84 participants, the current study investigated how different 
types of familiarization tour (video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR) affect trust, transition time and 
quality in takeover (critical and non-critical) and handback situations.  

4.1.  Impact of familiarization tours on takeover time 

The results partially support our hypothesis regarding TOT in both critical and non-critical scenarios (H1a), 
in that all three familiarization tours significantly improved TOT. However, this effect was only significant 
at the first critical and non-critical TOR events; takeover performance in subsequent situations converged 
to the high-fidelity VR group (Figures 3 and 4). This is line with [50], who showed that prior familiarization 
with highly automated driving had more positive effects on TOT at the first takeover situation than the 
subsequent events. The results also indicated a positive impact of the use of VR and interactive practices 
on takeover time in both critical and non-critical situations. Similarly, [23, 35] revealed a faster takeover 
time as a result of training with VR. It seems that VR with interactive takeover tasks is an effective delivery 
method to educate first-time users to respond faster upon receiving TORs.  

Our findings also indicate that participants in the video tour performed faster than those in the control group. 
This may imply that explaining the automation features within the use cases helps first-time users build 
more  accurate  mental  models  of  how  the  automation  works  and  consequently  react  faster  to  TORs. 
However,  the  results  related  to  the  effectiveness  of  non-interactive  training,  for  example,  text-based  or 
video-based presentation of the automation features, such as what manufactures provide in owner manuals, 
is  controversial.  While  written  description  of  automation  features,  as  demonstrated  by  [50],  or  showing 
takeover use cases, such as in [24], have been found to improve performance, [51] found that the written 
system information did not support the participants in building sufficient mental models of the system and 
making  correct  decisions  on  whether  takeover  was  necessary.  These  inconsistencies  stem  from  several 
sources of variation observed in training protocols, methodology, design of experiment, drive tests, and 
metrics. Training protocols, for example, share only a few common elements in feature explanation, use 
cases, or delivery methods, which makes it difficult to reach conclusive findings.  

Congruent with [50], time of measurement was also an influential factor in TOT of critical and non-critical 
takeover  situations  (H1b).  As  illustrated  in  Figures  3  and  4,  takeover  time  tended  to  decrease  over  the 
driving sessions and finally stabilize. [52] suggests that the driver’s behavioral measures in transition tasks 
follow the power law of practice, such that there is an increase in takeover performance at the beginning of 
the experience and stabilization after about three trials. However, this pattern was only observed in the 
control and video groups in the critical takeover scenario (Figure 4) and the control group in the non-critical 
takeover task (Figure 5). One potential explanation is that participants in VR groups were exposed to several 
interactive  takeover  practices  before  the  drive  test.  They  may  have  reaped  the  benefits  of  behavioral 
improvement offered in training sessions and were close to the stabilization phase.  

4.2.  Impact of familiarization tours on takeover quality 

In  contrast  to  part  of  our  hypothesis (H3 a and  b),  there  was  no  main  effect  of  familiarization  tours  on 
minimum TTC, though a significant interaction effect between the type of tour and time of measurement 
was observed in minimum TTC data. This finding is consistent with that of [50], who reported a similar 
interaction effect between the time of measurement and type of training. According to their results, the 
minimum TTC of no-familiarization and experience groups was significantly lower at the first than at the 
second time of measurement; compared to prior experience, prior description of transition tasks had a more 
positive impact on takeover performance in first failures. Our findings, however, are not fully consistent 
with their results. Participants in the video group who had just received a description of the automation 
system  did  not  perform  better  than  the  control  group  in  the  first  failure,  and  instead  experienced  a 
meaningful  improvement  in  the  second and  third failures.  Differences  in  descriptions  provided  in  these 
studies could be a source of this conflict.  

The results partially support our hypothesis regarding the effectiveness of the familiarization tour on SDLP 
(H3  a).  Only  participants  who  practiced  takeover  situations  using  VR  with  high-fidelity  interaction 
exhibited smaller SDLP at the first failure. It seems that improving the fidelity of interaction in a VR tour 
could help novice drivers complete the takeover process smoother than those who did not practice the tasks 
with steering wheel and pedals before facing the first failure. Likewise, [53] found higher stability of control 
recovery  in  semi-automated  driving  as  a  result  of  improving  interaction  fidelity  from  two  handheld 
controllers  to  a  steering  wheel  and  pedals.  There  are  two  potential  explanations  for  this  finding.  First, 
improving interaction fidelity [54, 55] and controller naturalness [56, 57] increases the level of immersion 
in virtual environments, resulting in a higher sense of spatial presence (Figure 8). Being more immersed in 
the learning environment may help the learner achieve higher learning transferability in sensory-motoric 
levels. Second, when the movements are similar to reality, more opportunities are provided to transfer motor 
skills [58] by developing operational behavior in skill-based level performance, which requires a high level 
of sensory-motoric coordination. The similarity of body movements (steering wheel and pedals) in the high-
fidelity interaction VR tour with drive tasks refines the takeover quality and leads to less erratic deviation 
from the center of the lane after regaining manual control.  

In general, the findings regarding takeover performance demonstrate the positive impact of exposing the 
driver  to  interactive  practices,  especially  when  they  are  presented  in  high-fidelity  interaction  VR.  This 
finding is supported by earlier research in automated driving and other domains indicating the influential 
role  of  practice  trials  on  facilitating  the  learning  process  and  developing  procedural  skills.  Though 
mastering the sensory-motoric skills required for a smooth and efficient takeover performance demands an 
extensive amount of repetition, engaging drivers in a few simulated takeover events prior to the first trip 
may  resemble  the  associative  stage  [17],  where  strategies  are  formulated  and  drivers  are  able  to  build 
extensive mental models of the automation. In these intermediate stages of skill acquisition, the resources 
needed  for  cognitive  processes  decrease,  and  the  quality  (speed and  accuracy)  of  takeover  performance 
increases. Receiving extensive and continuous exposure to a task is expected to refine skills learned in the 
previous  phase  and  make  behavior  more  automatic  and  unconscious  with  further  use  (autonomous  or 
procedural stage). In highly automated driving, however, considering the low frequency of critical takeover 
situations, it is less likely that one can quickly move to the autonomous stage and develop psychometric 
skills  at  the  autonomic  level.  Beyond  the  prior  familiarization  tour,  periodic  training  in  forms  of  in-car 
tutoring or driving schools could refresh stored rules and activate knowledge of sequences of interrelated 
actions and reactions that are expected to occur in critical takeover situations. 

4.3.  Impact of familiarization tours on handback time 

Familiarization tours were found to contribute to decreasing handback time (H4 a). Educated participants 
relinquished control to the automation in a shorter time; however, like the patterns observed in TOT data, 
this was only found at the first handback request (Figure 6). The transition from manual to automated modes 
has not been the topic of many studies thus far and seems less complex, though it raises more ethical and 
legal issues, particularly in the system-initiated handback tasks [59]. In the current study, however, we only 
considered  a  human-initiated  handback  situation.  In  these  scenarios,  participants  were  told  to  delegate 
control to the automation by pressing a button on the steering wheel as soon as they received handback 
requests as auditory  and  visual feedback  (Table  2, “Automation  is  ready  to  use”). Such a  task  may  not 
realistically simulate some of the common handback activities on real roads, for example, when the driver 
is not forced to relinquish manual control, and the transition to the automated mode is more of a top-down 
decision-making process, rather than bottom-up processing.  

Impact of familiarization tours on automation trust 

Compared to the control and video groups, participants who received VR-based and interactive practices 
reported  higher  automation  trust  after  the  first  failure;  moreover,  their  level  of  trust  did  not  change 
significantly  from  the  first  failure  to  the  last  failure,  indicating  more  consistent  and  calibrated  trust.  In 
support of this finding, [60] demonstrated the influential impact of practice trials to mitigate the adverse 
effects  of  overtrust.  Later,  [25]  additionally  observed  more  frequent  glances  to  the  road  –  indicating 
distrustful behavior – among participants who only received simple training (text and video explanation). 
It seems that when drivers clearly understand how the automation works, they are more likely to build a 
more calibrated level of automation trust. As suggested by [61], our findings confirm that when training 
provides information regarding the purpose, process, and performance of automation in interactive contexts, 
the appropriateness of trust increases.  

In line with previous studies [62], our results revealed a significant main effect of time of measurement on 
self-reported automation trust rating. Automation trust increased during the driving session. However, this 
pattern was significantly affected by familiarization group, such that only participants in the control and 
video groups exhibited this pattern, while participants in VR groups reported a relatively similar level of 
trust  in  all  three  measurements.  Interaction  of  time  of  measurement  and  level  of  familiarity  with  the 
automation features was also reported [63]. In lower levels of automation, [8] also found the trust to ACC 
tended to stabilize and calibrate after several experiences with the system (five trips). Observing the system 
behavior [61] and accumulating the knowledge of underlying processes from interactions [64] advance the 
human mental models of automation and establish more calibrated trust.  

4.4.  Impact of familiarization tours on knowledge and presence 

Regardless  of  the  type  of  familiarization,  participants  who  received  a  tour  gained  knowledge  of  the 
automation.  However,  knowledge acquisition  was  meaningfully  higher  when  the  content  was  delivered 
through VR. This finding is congruent with a large body of existing evidence suggesting VR-based learning 
as a more effective method of knowledge acquisition and retention compared to traditional methods [65]. 
Higher  affordances  of  VR  in  presenting  information  more  intuitively  leads  higher  immersion  and  may 

increase the trainee’s motivation to learn.  Moreover, our findings indicate that participants who received 
the  VR  tour  with  higher-level  interaction  fidelity  (high-fidelity  VR)  did  not  achieve  higher  knowledge 
scores.  It  seems  that,  although  delivering  content  using  VR  can  interactively  improve  knowledge 
acquisition, interaction fidelity does not matter in this case.  

Despite the results of previous studies indicating a positive association between the level of immersion and 
knowledge acquisition [66-68], our findings failed to demonstrate a fully consistent positive relationship 
between level of immersion and knowledge score. Although improving the level of immersion from the 
video tour to low-fidelity VR led a higher sense of presence and a consequently higher knowledge score, 
increasing the level of immersion in high-fidelity VR only heightened the sense of presence and did not 
lead to more learning. Recent findings in immersive VR learning [69-72] suggest that increasing the level 
of  immersion  (and  presence)  in  virtual  environments  (VEs)  does  not  necessarily  increase  knowledge 
acquisition;  further,  even  in  some  highly  immersive  VEs,  due  to  redundancy  of  irrelevant  information, 
learning outcomes are fewer than in VEs with lower immersion. One of the shortcomings in immersive 
learning  is  that  there  are  still  insufficient  and  inconclusive  studies  on  which  technical  aspects  of  a  VR 
environment, and to what extent, contribute to presence to support knowledge and skill acquisition.  

5.  Limitations and future directions 

The results of this study need to be interpreted in consideration of several limitations. As discussed by [62] 
and [7], when participants expect and are aware of failures in a short period, the level of trust does not 
decrease.  Even  when  we  randomized  the  events  and  distributed  them  at  different  time  intervals,  it  was 
evident that they expected some failures. In reality, however, failures do not occur with such frequency. 
Further simulated and real-road studies are necessary to explore this association in longer driving sessions 
with less frequent failures. Moreover, type of secondary tasks has been shown as an important factor in 
level of disengagement from driving loop [73]. Future studies are required to the effectiveness of training 
programs while participants are engaged in different secondary tasks.  

We adopted the training requirements outlined by [11], which focused on partially automated driving. Since 
the driver’s role in highly automated driving is significantly different from in a lower level of automation, 
future  research  should  explore  a comprehensive  training  protocol  for  highly  automated  driving.  Such  a 
protocol not only needs to focus on materials and appropriate delivery methods; it also needs to encompass 
testing scenarios and appropriate metrics to measure and compare learning outcomes systematically.  

One may expect that, due to the higher urgency of critical scenarios, TOT in such events would be shorter 
than in the non-critical TOR situations; however, our findings did not reveal such a meaningful difference. 
We  did  not  measure  the  subjective  criticality  of  the  situations  and  are  not  able  to  confirm  whether 
participants perceived a comparable level of criticality for non-critical and critical events. Future studies 
should consider subjective criticality (e.g., [50, 74]) to compare the driver’s perception of different takeover 
scenarios and evaluate the effectiveness of training on driver risk perception. 

We recruited participants who were not familiar with highly automated driving. In reality, however, people 
may have acquired prior knowledge from friends, family, and other information sources (word of mouth) 
and  built  initial  trust  and  opinions  about  the  system.  [61,  75]  argue  that  rumors  and  gossip  can  have 

detrimental effects on trust regarding system capabilities; therefore, these factors should be considered in 
training and retraining operators. Moreover, perceived usefulness was reported as a strong predictor of user 
intention in highly automated driving [76, 77]. Future research should explore the effects of training and 
misinformation on technology acceptance and driving performance in highly automated driving.  

Moreover, the performance of a driver with a high level of experience with manual driving (but who is a 
novice in automated driving) differs from that of a driver with no or little manual driving experience.  An 
experienced  driver  is  equipped  with  an  extensive  mental  model  of  various  traffic  environments,  the 
dynamicity of roads, and other vehicles’ behavior (rules and knowledge), which helps him or her maintain 
a better SA [78]. Moreover, a novice driver does not enjoy the level of proficiency that an experienced 
driver  has  with  sensory-motoric  behavior,  such  as  smooth  braking  and  steering  in  a  lane  change  task. 
Previous  studies  also  have  shown  that  users’  socio-demographics,  cultural,  and  experience  affect  their 
behavioral pattern in using technologies [79, 80]. Future studies should consider these potentially mediating 
factors in drivers behavior and their experiences in self-driving vehicles.  

6.  Conclusion 

Although numerous works have studied highly automated driving, only a few studies have been carried out 
on  training  and  educating  first-time  users  of  highly  automated  cars.  In  this  study,  three  types  of 
familiarization tour (video, low-fidelity VR, and high-fidelity VR) were examined in a driving simulator 
experiment.  Our  findings  contribute  to  the  existing  knowledge  on  educating  first-time  users  of  highly 
automated  vehicles  in  several  ways.  First,  familiarizing  first-time  users  with  highly  automated  driving, 
particularly  when  interactive  practice  trials  are  provided,  positively  affected  trust  and  transition 
performance. Second,  VR  tours,  especially  when  presented  in  higher  interaction  fidelity,  had a  positive 
impact  on  takeover  performance  and  trust.  Third,  regardless  of  the  type  of  transition,  participants’ 
performance at the first time measurement significantly differed from the subsequent situations, indicating 
higher costs associated with first time takeover for uneducated and less-educated users. This necessitates 
that policy makers focus on assembling regulations and standards related to training curriculum and issuing 
licenses for automated driving. Based on these findings, further research is necessary to examine how these 
results can be replicated in real driving conditions.  

7.  Acknowledgment  

The authors would like to thank all people that have been involved in the designing VR programs 
and implementation of the study. In particular, we would like to thank Amanda Seccia, Dave Song, 
and Hamid Salmani for their contributions in the study. This project did not receive any specific 
grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or non-profit sectors. 

8.  References 

1. 

Mousavi,  S.M.,  O.A.  Osman,  and  D.  Lord.  Impact  of  Urban  Arterial  Traffic  LOS  on  the  Vehicle 
Density  of  Different  Lanes  of  the  Arterial  in  Proximity  of  an  Unsignalized  Intersection  for 
Autonomous  Vehicle  vs.  Conventional  Vehicle  Environments.  in  International  Conference  on 

Transportation and Development 2019: Smarter and Safer Mobility and Cities. 2019. American 
Society of Civil Engineers Reston, VA. 

Boggs,  A.M.,  R.  Arvin,  and  A.J.  Khattak,  Exploring  the  who,  what,  when,  where,  and  why  of 
automated vehicle disengagements. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 2020. 136: p. 105406. 

Banks,  V.A.  and  N.  Stanton,  Keep  the  driver  in  control:  Automating  automobiles  of  the  future. 
Applied Ergonomics, 2016. 53: p. 389-395. 

Banks, V.A., et al., Is partially automated driving a bad idea? Observations from an on-road study. 
Applied Ergonomics, 2018. 68: p. 138-145. 

Lu, Z., X. Coster, and J. de Winter, How much time do drivers need to obtain situation awareness? 
A laboratory-based study of automated driving. Applied ergonomics, 2017. 60: p. 293-304. 

Körber, M., E. Baseler, and K. Bengler, Introduction matters: Manipulating trust in automation and 
reliance in automated driving. Applied ergonomics, 2018. 66: p. 18-31. 

Beggiato, M., J.F. Krems, and behaviour, The evolution of mental model, trust and acceptance of 
adaptive cruise control in relation to initial information. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology, 2013. 18: p. 47-57. 

Beggiato, M., et al., Learning and development of trust, acceptance and the mental model of ACC. 
A longitudinal on-road study. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology, 2015. 35: p. 75-
84. 

Viktorová, L. and M. Šucha, Learning about advanced driver assistance systems–The case of ACC 
and  FCW  in  a  sample  of  Czech  drivers.  Transportation  research  part  F:  traffic  psychology 
behaviour, 2019. 65: p. 576-583. 

Sauer, J., A. Chavaillaz, and D. Wastell, Experience of automation failures in training: effects on 
trust, automation bias, complacency and performance. Ergonomics, 2016. 59(6): p. 767-780. 

Casner, S.M. and E.L. Hutchins, What Do We Tell the Drivers? Toward Minimum Driver Training 
Standards for Partially Automated Cars. Journal of Cognitive Engineering Decision Making, 2019. 
13(2): p. 55-66. 

Krampell, M., I. Solís-Marcos, and M. Hjälmdahl, Driving automation state-of-mind: Using training 
to instigate rapid mental model development. Applied ergonomics, 2020. 83: p. 102986. 

Zahabi,  M.,  et  al.,  Evaluating  advanced  driver-assistance  system  trainings  using  driver 
performance, attention allocation, and neural efficiency measures. Applied Ergonomics, 2020. 84: 
p. 103036. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

Azimi,  G.,  et  al.,  Severity  analysis  for  large  truck  rollover  crashes  using  a  random  parameter 
ordered logit model. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 2020. 135: p. 105355. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

NHTSA,  P.F.A.V.,  Accelerating  the  Next  Revolution  in  Roadway  Safety,  NHTSA,  US  Dept.  2016, 
NHTSA. 

Nowakowski, C., et al., Development of California regulations to govern testing and operation of 
automated driving systems. Transportation Research Record, 2015. 2489(1): p. 137-144. 

Fitts, P.M., Perceptual-motor skill learning, in Categories of human learning. 1964, Elsevier. p. 243-
285. 

Anderson, J.R., Skill acquisition: Compilation of weak-method problem situations. Psychological 
review, 1987. 94(2): p. 192. 

Lamb, R.L. and E. Etopio, Virtual Reality Simulations and Writing: a Neuroimaging Study in Science 
Education. Journal of Science Education Technology, 2019: p. 1-11. 

Rajendra, I.M. and I.M. Sudana. The Influence of Interactive Multimedia Technology to Enhance 
Achievement  Students  on  Practice  Skills  in  Mechanical  Technology.  in  Journal  of  Physics: 
Conference Series. 2018. IOP Publishing. 

Reychav,  I.  and  D.  Wu,  Mobile  collaborative  learning:  The  role  of  individual  learning  in  groups 
through text and video content delivery in tablets. Computers in Human Behavior, 2015.  50: p. 
520-534. 

Sullivan,  J.M.,  et  al., Literature  review  of  behavioral adaptations  to  advanced driver assistance 
systems. 2016. 

Sportillo, D., A. Paljic, and L. Ojeda, Get ready for automated driving using Virtual Reality. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 2018. 118: p. 102-113. 

Ebnali, M., et al., How does training effect users’ attitudes and skills needed for highly automated 
driving? Transportation research part F: traffic psychology behaviour, 2019. 66: p. 184-195. 

Payre, W., et al., Impact of training and in-vehicle task performance on manual control recovery 
in an automated car. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology behaviour, 2017. 46: p. 
216-227. 

Abraham, H., et al. Autonomous vehicles and alternatives to driving: trust, preferences, and effects 
of age. in Proceedings of the Transportation Research Board 96th Annual Meeting (TRB'17). 2017. 

Payre, W., J. Cestac, and P. Delhomme, Fully automated driving: Impact of trust and practice on 
manual control recovery. Human factors, 2016. 58(2): p. 229-241. 

Abraham,  H.,  B.  Reimer,  and  B.  Mehler.  Learning  to  use  in-vehicle  technologies:  consumer 
preferences and effects on understanding. in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting. 2018. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

Abraham,  H., et al., Case study of today’s automotive dealerships: Introduction and delivery of 
advanced driver assistance systems. Transportation research record, 2017. 2660(1): p. 7-14. 

Aromaa,  S.  and  K.  Väänänen,  Suitability  of  virtual  prototypes  to  support  human 
factors/ergonomics evaluation during the design. Applied  Ergonomics, 2016. 56: p. 11-18. 

Alshaer, A., H. Regenbrecht, and D. O’Hare, Immersion factors affecting perception and behaviour 
in a virtual reality power wheelchair simulator. Applied ergonomics, 2017. 58: p. 1-12. 

Lawson, G., et al., The use of virtual reality and physical tools in the development and validation 
of ease of entry and exit in passenger vehicles. Applied ergonomics, 2015. 48: p. 240-251. 

Yu,  M.,  et  al.,  An  evaluation  for  VR  glasses  system  user  experience:  The  influence  factors  of 
interactive operation and motion sickness. Applied ergonomics, 2019. 74: p. 206-213. 

Nabiyouni,  M.,  et  al.  Comparing  the  performance  of  natural,  semi-natural,  and  non-natural 
locomotion techniques in virtual reality. in 2015 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). 
2015. IEEE. 

Ebnali, M., et al. User Experience in Immersive VR-Based Serious Game: An Application in Highly 
Automated  Driving  Training.  in  International  Conference  on  Applied  Human  Factors  and 
Ergonomics. 2019. Springer. 

Lamb,  R.,  et  al.,  Comparison  of  virtual  reality  and  hands  on  activities  in  science  education  via 
functional near infrared spectroscopy. Computers & Education, 2018. 124: p. 14-26. 

Schindler, L.A. and G.J. Burkholder, A mixed methods examination of the influence of dimensions 
of support on training transfer. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 2016. 10(3): p. 292-310. 

Bertram, J., J. Moskaliuk, and U. Cress, Virtual training: Making reality work? Computers in Human 
Behavior, 2015. 43: p. 284-292. 

Boelhouwer, A., et al., Should I take over? Does system knowledge help drivers in making take-
over  decisions  while  driving a partially  automated  car? Transportation  Research  Part  F:  Traffic 
Psychology, 2019. 60: p. 669-684. 

Vagia,  M.,  A.A.  Transeth,  and  S.A.  Fjerdingen,  A  literature  review  on  the  levels  of  automation 
during  the  years.  What  are  the  different  taxonomies  that  have  been  proposed?  Applied 
ergonomics, 2016. 53: p. 190-202. 

Gold,  C.,  et  al.  “Take  over!”  How  long  does  it  take  to  get  the  driver  back  into  the  loop?  in 
Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society  Annual  Meeting.  2013.  SAGE 
Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 

42. 

Gold,  C.,  et  al.  Testing  scenarios  for  human  factors  research  in  level  3  automated  vehicles.  in 
International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics. 2017. Springer. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

Dogan, E., et al., Effects of non-driving-related tasks on takeover performance in different takeover 
situations in conditionally automated driving. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology 
behaviour, 2019. 62: p. 494-504. 

Brandenburg, S., L. Chuang, and Behaviour, Take-over requests during highly automated driving: 
How should they be presented and under what conditions? Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology, 2019. 66: p. 214-225. 

Eriksson, A. and N.A. Stanton, Takeover time in highly automated vehicles: noncritical transitions 
to and from manual control. Human factors, 2017. 59(4): p. 689-705. 

Melcher, V., et al., Take-over requests for automated driving. Procedia Manufacturing, 2015. 3: p. 
2867-2873. 

Jian, J.-Y., A.M. Bisantz, and C.G. Drury, Foundations for an empirically determined scale of trust 
in automated systems. International Journal of Cognitive Ergonomics, 2000. 4(1): p. 53-71. 

Schubert,  T.,  F.  Friedmann,  and  H.  Regenbrecht,  The  experience  of  presence:  Factor  analytic 
insights. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 2001. 10(3): p. 266-281. 

Kennedy,  R.S.,  et  al.,  Simulator  sickness  questionnaire:  An  enhanced  method  for  quantifying 
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation psychology, 1993. 3(3): p. 203-220. 

Hergeth, S., L. Lorenz, and J.F. Krems, Prior familiarization with takeover requests affects drivers’ 
takeover performance and automation trust. Human factors, 2017. 59(3): p. 457-470. 

Boelhouwer, A., et al., Should I take over? Does system knowledge help drivers in making take-
over  decisions  while  driving  a  partially  automated  car?  Transportation  research  part  F:  traffic 
psychology and behaviour, 2019. 60: p. 669-684. 

Forster, Y., et al., Learning to use automation: Behavioral changes in interaction with automated 
driving systems. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 2019.  62: p. 
599-614. 

Sportillo, D., et al. An immersive Virtual Reality system for semi-autonomous driving simulation: a 
comparison between realistic and 6-DoF controller-based interaction. in Proceedings of the 9th 
International Conference on Computer and Automation Engineering. 2017. ACM. 

McMahan, R.P., et al., Evaluating display fidelity and interaction fidelity in a virtual reality game. 
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 2012. 18(4): p. 626-633. 

Ke,  F.,  S.  Lee,  and  X.  Xu,  Teaching training  in  a  mixed-reality  integrated  learning  environment. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 2016. 62: p. 212-220. 

Seibert,  J.  and  D.M.  Shafer,  Control  mapping  in  virtual reality:  effects  on  spatial presence  and 
controller naturalness. Virtual Reality, 2018. 22(1): p. 79-88. 

57. 

McGloin, R., K.M. Farrar, and M. Krcmar, The impact of controller naturalness on spatial presence, 
gamer  enjoyment,  and  perceived  realism  in  a  tennis  simulation  video  game.  Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 2011. 20(4): p. 309-324. 

58. 

Schmidt, R.A. and D.E. Young, Transfer of movement control in motor skill learning, in Transfer of 
learning. 1987, Elsevier. p. 47-79. 

59.  Wintersberger, P., P. Green, and A. Riener, Am I driving or are you or are we both? A taxonomy 

for handover and handback in automated driving. 2017. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

Payre, W., J. Cestac, and P. Delhomme, Fully automated driving: Impact of trust and practice on 
manual control recovery. Human factors, 2016. 58(2): p. 229-241. 

Lee, J.D. and K.A. See,  Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance. Human factors, 
2004. 46(1): p. 50-80. 

Hergeth, S., et al., Effects of take-over requests and cultural background on automation trust in 
highly automated driving. 2015. 

Tenhundfeld,  N.L.,  et  al.,  Calibrating  Trust  in  Automation  Through  Familiarity  With  the 
Autoparking Feature of a Tesla Model X. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, 
2019: p. 1555343419869083. 

64. 

Holmes, J.G., Trust and the appraisal process in close relationships. 1991. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 

Narasimha,  S.,  et  al.,  An  empirical  study  to  investigate  the  efficacy  of  collaborative  immersive 
virtual  reality  systems  for  designing  information  architecture  of  software  systems.  Applied 
Ergonomics, 2019. 80: p. 175-186. 

Georgiou,  Y.  and  E.A.  Kyza,  Relations  between  student  motivation,  immersion  and  learning 
outcomes in location-based augmented reality settings. Computers in Human Behavior, 2018. 89: 
p. 173-181. 

Olmos-Raya, E., et al., Mobile virtual reality as an educational platform: A pilot study on the impact 
of  immersion  and  positive  emotion  induction  in  the  learning  process.  Eurasia  Journal  of 
Mathematics Science and Technology Education, 2018. 14(6): p. 2045-2057. 

Coulter, R., et al., The effect of degree of immersion upon learning performance in virtual reality 
simulations for medical education. InMedicine Meets Virtual Reality, 2007. 15: p. 155. 

Makransky, G., T.S. Terkildsen, and R.E. Mayer, Adding immersive virtual reality to a science lab 
simulation causes more presence but less learning. Learning & Instruction, 2017. 

Parong,  J.  and  R.E.  Mayer,  Learning  science  in  immersive  virtual  reality.  Journal  of  Educational 
Psychology, 2018. 110(6): p. 785. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

Makransky, G. and G.B. Petersen, Investigating the process of learning with desktop virtual reality: 
A structural equation modeling approach. Computers & Education, 2019. 134: p. 15-30. 

Sun,  H.-M.,  et  al.,  The  effect  of user's perceived presence  and  promotion  focus  on usability  for 
interacting in virtual environments. Applied Ergonomics, 2015. 50: p. 126-132. 

Abhari,  M.,  et  al.,  The  Effect  of  Playing  Video  Advertisement  Inside  a  Car  on  Driver  Visual 
Distraction. Civil Engineering Journal, 2018. 4(8): p. 1888-1896. 

Jeihani,  M.,  et  al.,  Investigating  the  Impact  of  Distracted  Driving  Among  Different  Socio-
Demographic Groups. 2019. 

Jones, G.R. and J.M. George, The experience and evolution of trust: Implications for cooperation 
and teamwork. Academy of management review, 1998. 23(3): p. 531-546. 

Motamedi,  S.,  et  al.,  Acceptance  of  full  driving  automation:  personally  owned  and  shared-use 
concepts. Human factors, 2019: p. 0018720819870658. 

Motamedi,  S.,  P.  Wang,  and  C.-Y.  Chan,  User  Acceptance  and  Public  Policy  Implications  for 
Deployment of Automated Driving Systems. 2018. 

Baee, S., et al., EyeCar: Modeling the Visual Attention Allocation of Drivers in Semi-Autonomous 
Vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07773, 2019. 

Rahimi,  E.,  et  al.,  Analysis  of  transit  users’  waiting  tolerance  in  response  to  unplanned  service 
disruptions. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2019. 77: p. 639-653. 

Nickkar, A., H.-S. Shin, and A. Farkas, Analysis of Ownership and Travel Behavior of Women Who 
Drive Electric Vehicles: The case of Maryland. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03943, 2019. 

 
