Human Perception-Optimized Planning
for Comfortable VR-Based Telepresence

Israel Becerra1,2, Markku Suomalainen3, Eliezer Lozano1, Katherine J. Mimnaugh3,
Rafael Murrieta-Cid1 and Steven M. LaValle3

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
4

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
9
6
0
1
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— This paper introduces an emerging motion plan-
ning problem by considering a human that is immersed into
the viewing perspective of a remote robot. The challenge is
to make the experience both effective (such as delivering a
sense of presence) and comfortable (such as avoiding adverse
sickness symptoms, including nausea). We refer this challenging
new area as human perception-optimized planning and propose
a general multiobjective optimization framework that can be
instantiated in many envisioned scenarios. We then consider a
speciﬁc VR telepresence task as a case of human perception-
optimized planning, in which we simulate a robot that sends
360 video to a remote user to be viewed through a head-
mounted display. In this particular task, we plan trajectories
that minimize VR sickness (and thereby maximize comfort). An
A* type method is used to create a Pareto-optimal collection of
piecewise linear trajectories while taking into account criteria
that improve comfort. We conducted a study with human
subjects touring a virtual museum, in which paths computed
by our algorithm are compared against a reference RRT-based
trajectory. Generally, users suffered less from VR sickness and
preferred the paths created by the presented algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION

In the last few years,

the arrival of consumer Virtual
Reality (VR) products has enhanced the level of immersion
that most people can experience through a robotic platform.
This is an unprecedented opportunity to make people feel
present in a remote or artiﬁcial environment along with the
actuation provided by robotic platforms (see Fig. 1). This
allows people to interact with each other over distances as
more than a face on a screen, in so-called mobile robotic
telepresence, which has been shown to be a superior means
of communication over simple videoconferencing [18], [25];
possible use cases include attending conferences or business
meetings, and elderly care [1]. This highly immersive mode
of human-robot interaction brings challenging new motion
planning aspects.

We ﬁrst present a mathematical framework for human
perception-optimized planning, in which unprecedented level

1I. Becerra, E. Lozano and R. Murrieta-Cid are with Centro de
Investigaci´on en Matem´aticas (CIMAT), 36023 Guanajuato, M´exico,
{israelb, eliezer.lozano, murrieta}@cimat.mx

2I. Becerra is with Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa, CONA-

CyT, 03940 Mexico City, M´exico

3M. Suomalainen, K. J. Mimnaugh and S. M. LaValle are with Center of
Ubiquitous Computing, Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland. {Markku.Suomalainen,
Katherine.Mimnaugh, Steven.Lavalle}@oulu.fi

This work was supported by Business Finland project HUMORcc
6926/31/2018, Academy of Finland project PERCEPT, 322637, US National
Science Foundation grants 035345, 1328018, and Secretar´ıa de Inno-
vaci´on, Ciencia Y Educaci´on Superior SICES grant SICES/CONV/250/2019
CIMAT.

Fig. 1. An illustration of telepresence in which the robot is equipped with
a 360 camera and the user with an HMD. The left picture was taken during
our user study.

of human factors must be considered in the motion planning
problem. In this framework one of the most challenging
problems is to guarantee user comfort as several of the
user’s senses are stimulated with artiﬁcial or remote ex-
periences, while also taking into account classic motion
planning criteria and other people in the presence of the
robot. We propose a general and formal deﬁnition of such
framework, formulated as a Multi-Objective Optimization
(MOO) problem, which can be instantiated in a variety of
tasks.

We then present a concrete VR telepresence task as an
instance of human perception-optimized planning, in which
we simulate a robot that streams 360 video to a user’s head-
mounted display (HMD). Although the use of an HMD may
bring on adverse side effects such as VR sickness [14], it
has been shown superior in some contexts such as search-
and-rescue operations requiring detailed object identiﬁcation
and depth perception [20], collaborative assembly tasks [12],
and increased stability while teleoperating a wheelchair [7].
This makes HMD-based teleoperation an appealing research
direction. Because the susceptibility to VR sickness varies
greatly within a population [27], applying the sickness re-
duction techniques to all users should not be considered.
Thus, in this work we consider ﬁnding the Pareto front of
the MOO problem, which means the set of all solutions for
which there are none better in terms of all criteria.

This paper has two main parts. The ﬁrst one is to deﬁne the
general framework for human perception-optimized planning
as a MOO problem with a Pareto front, which allows mul-
tiple future research directions and usage with any motion
planning method. This is done by deﬁning four classes of

 
 
 
 
 
 
criteria to help researchers make sure they have taken all of
the required parts of a problem into account. The second part
is to use the framework to deﬁne a VR telepresence task as a
concrete instance of human perception-optimized planning.
For this particular instance, as a locomotion method, we
propose computing piecewise-linear trajectories in conjunc-
tion to reducing the number of segments comprising them,
which is motivated by falling in line with the sensory conﬂict
theory [26] of motion sickness.

Finally, in preliminary experiments, we show with trials
on human subjects that the Pareto trajectories designed by
the presented algorithm are preferred over trajectories created
by a typical motion planning algorithm, the RRT [16] (even
when selecting an optimized trajectory). In such trials, the
remote video streaming performed by the robot is simulated,
allowing us to have control over the experimentation. The
actual tests with a physical robot are left for future work,
where issues such as communication delays, feedback con-
trol, and robot localization must be considered. Nonetheless,
the simulation study in this paper is an important step toward
validation of the planning methods.

The main contributions of the present work are summa-
rized as follows: (1) Formally deﬁne the general framework
for human perception-optimized planning. (2) Elaborate on
the VR telepresence task to exemplify the proposed frame-
work. (3) Based on a human perception-optimized planning
perspective, propose a locomotion method for VR-based
telepresence. (4) Evaluate the framework through human
subjects experimentation.

Previous work

MOO issues arise often in robotics because of common
tradeoffs between safety and task efﬁciency. However, this is
typically solved by simply choosing the weights, or priorities,
beforehand. In contrast, Pareto optimization ﬁnds all possible
solutions, often called the Pareto front, in which one criterion
cannot be improved without degrading another one. Many
Pareto-optimization works appear in robotics [15], [35], [36].
Pareto optimization is a natural choice for human perception-
optimized planning because the prioritizing or weighting of
the criteria can vary heavily due to the high variance of
susceptibility to cybersickness in population.

In this paper, we consider a VR telepresence task. In
the area of robotics, the human telepresence task has been
addressed in works such as [17], [24], with the goal to
achieve the remote presence of a human in a physical space.
Whereas most works in telepresence consider only a 2-D
screen, there are few works who consider using an HMD as
well. Oh et al. [23] considered using a telepresence robot
streaming video from 360 camera to an HMD on a facility
tour. Heshmat et al. [8] compared telepresence between a 2-
D screen and an HMD, and found that people prefer the
ability to look around with the HMD. Zhang et al. [37]
researched the use of redirected walking when using an HMD
for teleoperation, and Stotko et al. [30] built a model from
the environment to be observed by the user while the robot
moved. However, in [30], [37] the issue of VR sickness was

avoided by using less scalable user interfaces, and in [8],
[23] it was not considered at all.

The term VR sickness, often also called cybersickness, is
used to refer to Visually Induced Motion Sickness (VIMS) in
the context of Virtual Reality [5], [22]. To be more speciﬁc,
VIMS is a particular type of Motion sickness (MS) that
may occur without the person physically moving but while
they are observing motion. VIMS can appear under visual
stimulation present in movie theatres [28], virtual simula-
tors [6] and video games. It can result in symptoms such as
cold sweat, dizziness, headaches, nausea, and even vomiting.
Since MS and VIMS share many common characteristics,
classical MS theories that incorporate visual components can
be used to try to explain and address VIMS, and therefore,
VR sickness. One theory is that the origin of MS is a negative
reinforcement system to avoid postural instability [2]. Other
works as [29] explain MS as a function of the vestibular
detection of stimuli that would be disruptive to digestion.
Some theories even suggest that MS serves as a mechanism
to avoid poisoning [31]. Nevertheless, the most accepted
and cited MS theory is the sensory conﬂict theory [4], [26].
This theory attributes MS to the mismatch between optical
ﬂow perceived by the eyes, the vestibular system, and/or the
somatosensory senses (non-vestibular proprioceptive senses
of skin, muscles, and joints). This last theory is the one we
adopt in the presented work.

Consider then our scenario, in which a stationary human
user is wearing an HMD, and a remote robot is used to stream
360 video to the user through the HMD. The main potential
discomfort in such a system comes from the symptoms of VR
sickness. More precisely, assume that the user is seated wear-
ing the HMD; when the robot moves and transmits views
from changing viewpoints, the vestibular system reports that
the user is motionless, but the user’s vision system reports to
his brain that they are moving, which might yield vection.
Vection is the illusion of self motion when no movement
is taking place, and is believed to be an important cause
for VR sickness, as vection involves an intrinsic sensorial
conﬂict that might result in symptoms such as dizziness,
nausea, and even vomiting. Several factors affect vection
sensitivity [14]. Some examples include the distance from
the center view, spatial frequency of the displayed images,
prior knowledge (knowing beforehand what kind of motion
should be perceived), and exposure time to the optical ﬂow.

II. HUMAN PERCEPTION-OPTIMIZED PLANNING

We deﬁne human perception-optimized planning as the
generation of a collision-free trajectory for a sensing-system
that generates a perceptual stimulus to an interfaced user,
while ensuring user’s comfort. If the sensing system is
attached to a mobile robot platform, both the sensor and
the platform may have separate Degree of Freedoms (DoFs);
consider, for example, a camera attached to a pan-tilt-unit,
or even a robot arm, on top of a wheeled platform. This
decoupling allows assigning different requirements for each
set of DoFs; it has been shown that decoupling the viewing
angle and motion of the vehicle improves teleoperation [9].

Human perception-optimized planning can be considered
as an upper layer to a motion planning task; the perceptual
stimuli is planned to optimize a set of criteria. Inherited by
the motion planning aspect of the task, the path itself can
be required to optimize certain aspects of the movement,
for example, the travelled distance. However, these criteria
may be contradicting and depend on personal preferences,
and thus care must be taken on how to prioritize the criteria,
naturally leading to the formulation of Pareto optimization.

To formalize the human perception-optimized planning
problem, we proceed to introduce some notation and basic
concepts. The physical system consists of a mobile robot
base B and a (possibly actuated) sensor E attached to the
base, with both moving in the Euclidean workspace W . Let
O ⊂ W be the obstacle region, CE the conﬁguration space
of E and CB the conﬁguration space of B, thus making
the conﬁguration space of the whole system C = CE × CB.
Finally, Cobst is the set of conﬁgurations in which the interior
of the system geometric model, placed at conﬁguration q ∈
Cobst, intersects O.

Let X denote the state space, which is formed as the
Cartesian product of C and a compact space that covers
time derivatives of conﬁguration. Let Xobst = {x ∈ X | q ∈
Cobst}, and Xvalid = X \Xobst. Furthermore, let σ ∈ Σvalid
be a continuous, collision-free trajectory, with σ : [0, T ] →
Xvalid, in which σ(0) is the initial state xinit, and σ(T ) is the
goal state xgoal. Let Σvalid denote the set all such trajectories
(assuming xinit and xgoal are ﬁxed). In some cases, Σvalid
may be further constrained to include only trajectories that
satisfy a control model of the form ˙x = f (x, u), with input
u drawn from a compact set U .

A trajectory that solves the human perception-optimized
planning will be required to optimize certain criteria. For a
better classiﬁcation of the problem, we deﬁne four classes,
JP , JC, JR and JO, which group the criteria belonging to
different aspects of the problem. This classiﬁcation can be
used to, for example, make sure that no aspect of the problem
is ignored or overemphasized. Each individual criterion is
: Σvalid → R>0. First,
deﬁned as a cost functional Ji
the class JP includes criteria deﬁning the performance,
which depends on the application and refers to keeping
the intended functionality of the system. In a telepresence
scenario, this could correspond to the user retaining spatial
orientation and the sense of presence. JC measures the
comfort of the interfaced user while exposed to the stimulus
obtained from the system, while moving via σ; in the case
of an HMD, this would correspond to criteria mitigating VR
sickness. JR is a function that considers the robot motion;
this includes mainly traditional motion planning criteria, such
as path length, distance to objects, power consumption, etc.
Lastly, JO considers others, for instance, other humans or
moving bodies in the vicinity. These criteria can be related to
the human-aware motion planning [13], in which behaviors
such as not walking between two conversing people are
considered. Thus, the task is to compute some σ ∈ Σvalid
that simultaneously minimizes the multiple criteria given by

the vector of costs:

J(σ) = (JP (σ), JC(σ), JR(σ), JO(σ))

= (J1(σ), J2(σ), . . . , Jk(σ)),

cover all

in which J1 . . . Jk
individual criteria from
JP , JC, JR and JO. The classes can be thought of as a
manner to organize the costs, hence, the classes are vectors
themselves. We note that this classiﬁcation of criteria is
meant
to clarify the deﬁnition of a problem, and make
sure that researchers and engineers who design human-based
motions consider all aspects of the problem: criteria such as
the distance to objects can be considered both as safety (JR)
or performance (JP ); with a 360 camera, the performance
deteriorates heavily if the camera is too close to an object.
Usually in a MOO problem a single solution is found by
weighting the criteria according to their importance. How-
ever, when individual human physiology can have a strong
impact on a desired weighting, scalarization of the problem
too early should be avoided. This is especially important
for the telepresence application because it has been shown
that VR sickness and presence have a negative correlation
[33], and thus degrading the presence for people who do not
suffer from VR sickness severely deteriorates their situational
awareness and communication ability. A natural solution is to
ﬁnd the Pareto front [3], in other words, solutions that cannot
be improved in any of the objectives without degrading
at least one of the other objectives. Mathematically, this
is deﬁned through the concept of (Pareto) dominance: a
trajectory σ1 dominates trajectory σ2, denoted as σ1 (cid:22) σ2, if
Ji(σ1) ≤ Ji(σ2) ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}, and ∃ j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , k}
such that Jj(σ1) < Jj(σ2). Finally, based on the previous
concepts, the general problem formulation is given next.
Human perception-optimized planning: Given the general
motion planning formulation above, and a cost functional
J(σ) = (JP (σ), JC(σ), JR(σ), JO(σ)), ﬁnd a set of all
trajectories (up to cost-vector equivalence):

{σ∗ ∈ Σvalid | (cid:64) σ ∈ Σvalid for which σ (cid:22) σ∗}.

(1)

Note that this formulation does not consider a single trajec-
tory to be a solution. This could be accomplished by simply
formulating and optimizing a scalar, linear combination of
all of the objectives; however, we want to present the set
of Pareto-optimal solutions so that the system, together with
users, could select particular trajectories dynamically during
execution. It is important to offer this because to the high
variability of human subject sensitivities and environmental
conditions that arise during execution.

The next sections apply this formulation to an illustrative

VR telepresence task.

III. CASE STUDY: VR TELEPRESENCE

The concept of telepresence is attributed to Marvin Min-
sky, pioneer of artiﬁcial intelligence [21]. In the present
work, we refer to VR telepresence as the set of technologies
that allow human users interfaced with VR equipment to
feel as they were present in a remote location, and even
location through the use
in that
allow them to interact

of teleoperated robots. Particularly, we will consider that
there is a robot in a remote location equipped with a 360
camera, and that it is streaming video to an HMD worn
by a human user at a different location (see Fig. 1). It
is assumed that the user has control over the robot’s goal
(essentially, any location in Xvalid), but that a motion planner
computes the trajectories to reach the goal; therefore, solving
a human perception-optimized planning problem. In the next
subsections we present the speciﬁcs for this case study.

A. System model

The considered system consists of a robotic base moving
on a plane with a 360 camera mounted on top of it, streaming
video to an HMD worn by a user. The robotic base is a
differential drive robot (DDR). The camera will be ﬁxed on
top of the DDR, hence, the conﬁguration space of the whole
system will be the one of the robotic base, namely, C = CB.
Considering extra degrees of freedom (CE) for an actuated
or ﬁltered omnidirectional camera is left for future work.

B. Modeling of user comfort cost functional

A critical aspect on the VR telepresence task is the user’s
comfort, which is mainly affected by the experienced VIMS.
Nonetheless, other performance issues need to be addressed;
with a 360 camera, the performance deteriorates heavily if
the camera is too close to an object. In the present work,
to compute solution trajectories for the human-perception-
planning problem in the context of VR telepresence, we
will mainly focus on the performance and user’s comfort
aspects of the problem; therefore, the cost functional will be
of the form J(σ) = (JP (σ), JC(σ)). This allows a controlled
experiment that concentrates on the sickness and preference;
new criteria must be thoroughly controlled and researched,
before they are accepted as a part of a complete human
perception-optimized planning.

Regarding the performance costs JP , due to the 360
camera requirements, it is desirable to keep a ball of radius
r around the 360 camera unobstructed (the value of r is
usually provided by the camera manufacturer). Consequently,
we deﬁne a function ϕ(p(t)) that measures the obstructed
percentage of such a ball centered at the camera position
p(t). Eq. (2) deﬁnes ϕ(p(t)), in which for a measurable
set A ⊂ R3, µ(A) is the volume of A, S(p(t), r) is a ball
centered at p(t) with radius r, and O is the obstacle region
in W :

ϕ(p(t)) =

µ(S(p(t), r) ∩ O)
µ(S(p(t), r))

.

(2)

Using function ϕ(p(t)), we deﬁne the function V (σ) as in
Eq. (3), which is an average over all trajectory σ : [0, T ] →
Xvalid of the percentage of obstructed volume of a ball of
radius r around the 360 camera:
(cid:90) T

V(σ) =

ϕ(p(t))dt.

(3)

0
This functional is aimed at preferring trajectories in which
the ball around the 360 camera is not cluttered, allowing
proper functioning of the camera. Concerning user’s com-
fort JC, from a sensory conﬂict
the

theory perspective,

1
T

experienced VIMS comes from the conﬂict between the
user’s vision and vestibular system. The vestibular system
is composed of two main organs, the otoliths and the semi-
circular canals. The otoliths sense linear acceleration and the
semicircular canals angular acceleration. Under that premise,
presenting the visual stimuli corresponding to following a
curved path would evoke potential sensory conﬂict with
the otoliths, due to the presence of linear accelerations
(for instance, the components of centripetal acceleration).
Moreover, visual stimuli resulting from rotational movement
can also evoke sensory conﬂict with the semicircular canals.
Under that rationale, in the present work, we propose to
move along piecewise linear paths, in addition to reducing
the number of line segments comprising them. The DDR will
be required to apply straight line motions with its heading
pointing tangentially to the line segments, and apply rotations
in place at line segment transitions to redirect its heading
with regard to the next segment. Note that following line
segments, the total time of conﬂict with the otoliths can
be reduced; as shown in [34], performing a ﬁxed amount
of rotation with greater speed can be beneﬁcial in prevent-
ing VR sickness, as it reduces the total time of conﬂict.
Additionally, reducing the number of segments reduces the
number of poses at which conﬂict with the semicircular
canals takes place. Indeed, the number of transitions between
line segments, N (σ), is set to be part of our cost functional
associated to user comfort. Even more, there is evidence that
rotational motion is the most evocative of VR sickness [10].
Additionally, it is also desirable to minimize the length
of the path (see Eq. (4)) because there is a direct relation
between the path length and the time of exposure to potential
sensory conﬂict due to motion. Thus, the user’s comfort class
is set as JC(σ) = (N (σ), D(σ)), and

D(σ) =

(cid:90) T

0

(cid:112) ˙x2(t) + ˙y2(t)dt.

The resulting cost vector is deﬁned as

J(σ) = (V(σ), N (σ), D(σ)).

(4)

(5)

C. Motion planner

trajectories,

We present a planner that addresses the human perception-
optimized planning problem formulated in Section II. Al-
though that covers general
there are several
advantages for the telepresence setup in restricting the search
space to piecewise linear paths: reduction of VR sickness,
planning simplicity, and potential for improved retaining of
spatial orientation. The piecewise-linear path requirement
makes it suitable to consider a regular grid representation
of the conﬁguration space C = SE(2). Considering a grid
will naturally result in paths composed of linear segments.
The regular grid is modeled as a directed graph, G =
(V, E), in which each node, vp,θ ∈ V , is labeled with a
position p = (x, y) on the plane, and a given orientation θ.
The positions p are equally spaced throughout the x and y
coordinates of the plane using a step δ, and the orientations
θ lie in the set {0◦, 45◦, ..., 270◦, 315◦}, to preserve eight-
neighbor connectivity in the plane (see Fig. 2). Transition

between elements in the grid are deﬁned through the fol-
lowing edge deﬁnition. First, let e(vp,θvp(cid:48),θ(cid:48)) denote an edge
from node vp,θ toward vp(cid:48),θ(cid:48)–the arguments of e(vp,θvp(cid:48),θ(cid:48))
will be dropped when convenient. Such edge will exist if
p(cid:48) = p and θ(cid:48) (cid:54)= θ (refer to them as Type-A edges); or if
θ(cid:48) = θ and vp(cid:48),θ(cid:48) is a neighbor of vp,θ under an 8-connectivity
in the plane (refer to them as Type-B edges). See Fig. 2 for
examples of Type-A and Type-B edges.

Each edge, e(vp,θ, vp(cid:48),θ(cid:48)), will have associated to it a non-
negative cost vector, w(e) = (w1(e), w2(e), w3(e)) ∈ R3.
Its ﬁrst element, w1(e), is associated to the cost V that
evaluates the obstructions around the 360 camera, and it
is simply set as w1(e) = ϕ(p(cid:48)); the average of obstructed
volume in a trajectory is computed averaging such weights.
The cost w2(e) is associated to N , the number of turns
performed by the DDR. It is set as w2(e) = 1 for Type-
A edges, and as w2(e) = 0 for Type-B edges. The last
element, w3(e), is associated to D, the traveled distance.
For Type-A edges w3(e) = 0. For Type-B edges, w3(e) = δ
if θ ∈ {0◦, 90◦, 180◦, 270◦}, and w3(e) =
2δ if θ ∈
{45◦, 135◦, 235◦, 315◦}. See Fig. 2 for cost vector examples.
The past procedure corresponds to Line 1 of Algorithm 1,
in which representations of the workspace (for example, a
blueprint) and the geometric model, M , of the system are
used to generate the weighted directed graph G.

√

Fig. 2.
Examples of the connectivity and edge weighting of the graph
G = (V, E) modeling C. Examples of Type-A and Type-B edges are
shown, along with their respective cost vectors. Type-A edges correspond
to the DDR applying rotations in place, and Type-B edges correspond to
the DDR applying straight line motions.

To compute the actual Pareto optimal trajectories, σ∗, we
use the multiobjective variant of the A* algorithm presented
in [19], hereinafter referred to as MOA*-PS. For a given
directed graph and set of edges’ costs, MOA*-PS computes
the set of all non-dominated solutions whenever this set
is ﬁnite and nonempty (see [19] for details). Once G has

been generated, in Line 2 of Algorithm 1, MOA*-PS is
invoked to compute the set of Pareto optimal trajectories
{σ∗}. Fig. 3 shows some sample trajectories that we were
able to compute with the aforementioned algorithm for our
problem modeling. Lastly, based on the ﬁndings from [34] to
reduce VR sicknes, the DDR is required to follow the path
with constant speed; hence, accelerations only take place at
the beginning and at the end of the straight line motions and
rotations in place.

Algorithm 1 Pareto Optimal Trajectories Computation
Input: W , M ; //Workspace and System Geometric Model
Output: {σ∗}; //Set of non-dominated trajectories

1: G ← computeW eightedDirectedGraph(W, M );
2: {σ∗} ← MOA*-PS(G);

IV. EXPERIMENTS

A. Experimental setup

We performed a user study in a laboratory using a com-
pletely virtual museum environment built with Unity 3D (see
Fig. 4). The simulated system is a DDR controlled through
the right and left wheels’ translational accelerations. We ﬁrst
ran the planner from Section III-C on a 2D projection of
the museum environment. From the set of Pareto-optimal
trajectories, we hand-picked two: one that minimizes the
number of rotations, and another that reduces the distance
traveled. The RRT trajectory was selected from 1000 solu-
tions produced by RRT reruns, preferring the one with the
least number of curvature sign changes. (Note that the RRT
provides a baseline comparison with a non piecewise-linear
path; moreover, there is evidence that people perceive RRT
paths as human-like [32].) The three chosen trajectories are
shown in Fig. 4. A 360 video recording of a mobile robot
traversing each of these trajectories in the environment was
created in Unity, so that the subjects could rotate their heads
and look around in the environment (as they would in a
real setting), but could not control the robot’s trajectory.
the trajectories, we
To compare how subjects felt about
performed a within-subject user study with 36 participants.
The study took place in a research lab at the University
of Oulu (Fig. 1, left picture). The subjects were equally
balanced by gender with 18 females and 18 males. Their
ages ranged from 20 to 44 with a mean age of 28.25
years. The presentation of each of the three videos was fully
counterbalanced to counteract any potential ordering effects;
therefore, three females and three males each saw one of the
six combinations of video presentation orders.

Subjects were ﬁrst asked to sign a consent form and ﬁll in
the baseline Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) [11].
The SSQ asks subjects to rate how much at that moment
including
they are experiencing a number of symptoms,
nausea, dizziness, and fatigue. A weighted score is calculated
from the Likert-type scale responses (none, slight, moderate,
severe) with higher numbers indicating a greater amount
of negative symptoms. The baseline SSQ was administered

Fig. 3. Three Pareto optimal solutions σi for the VR telepresence problem
are shown. The associated costs J(σi) = (V(σi), N (σi), D(σi)) are
also displayed. The solutions were computed considering r = 2 for the
360 camera. In the start and goal conﬁgurations, the robot’s heading is
aligned with the positive direction of the x-axis. Path σ1 passes through the
upper part of the environment maintaining the ball around the 360 camera
completely unobstructed, but at the cost of generating a long path requiring 8
rotations in place. Path σ3 passes through the narrow passage in the middle
greatly deteriorating clearance around the 360 camera, but generates the
shortest path to reach the goal while not needing rotations. Path σ2 is in a
middle ground in terms of cost.

upon arrival before any paths were seen to screen out subjects
who reported severe symptoms before the experiment began,
as well as to provide a pre-test measurement from which to
compare the changes in symptoms after watching the video
of each path. After ﬁlling out the baseline SSQ, instructions
were given and the ﬁrst video was played. Subjects were
instructed not to pay attention to the pieces of art they saw
on the path (as there were two different homotopy classes, as
shown on Fig. 4). After each of the three videos, the subjects
were asked to ﬁll
in an SSQ and another questionnaire
with 6-point Likert scale questions regarding their comfort,
retention of sense of orientation, and perception of closeness
to walls and objects. Finally, after the last video, subjects
were asked to select which of the three videos they preferred
and which was the most comfortable. Each video lasted
between 1min and 1min 30s.

The visual features in the Pareto least turns path were
different in the second half of the video from the features
shown in the second half of the Pareto shortest path and
the RRT (see Fig. 4 top-view mini-map). The Pareto least
turns path passed through a hallway with blank walls, while
the other paths passed through a room ﬁlled with sculptures.
Despite this difference, the three paths were constructed to
take the user from the same initial state xinit to the same
goal state xgoal.

B. Results

All tests were run with a 95% conﬁdence interval and two-
tailed signiﬁcance levels set to 0.05. Shapiro-Wilk tests found
a departure from normality for the response distributions,
so non-parametric tests were used. Signiﬁcance values were
adjusted with Bonferroni correction for multiple tests.

A Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test indicated that the Pareto
least turns path did not result in a statistically signiﬁcant
increase in SSQ scores from the baseline (Mdn = 5.61) to
the post-test (Mdn = 9.35), Z = -0.501, p = .616. The Pareto

Fig. 4.
A screenshot from the museum environment used in the user
study. A top-down view of the museum is also shown along with three
tested trajectories. Pareto trajectory that minimizes the number of rotations
is labeled as A. Pareto trajectory that focus on reducing distance is labeled
as B. The tested RRT trajectory is labeled as C.

shortest path also did not result in a signiﬁcant increase in
SSQ scores from the baseline to the post-test (Mdn = 14.96),
Z = -1.931, p = .054. However, the RRT path resulted in a
statistically highly signiﬁcant increase in SSQ scores from
the baseline to the post-test (Mdn = 20.57), Z = -3.328, p =
.001.

A Kruskal-Wallis H test was performed to compare the
post-treatment mean SSQ scores for each of the paths.
A statistically signiﬁcant difference was found, χ2(2) =
9.035, p = .011. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons revealed a
statistically signiﬁcant difference between the Pareto least
turns path and the RRT (p = .008). The Pareto least turns
and Pareto shortest path were not signiﬁcantly different, (p
= .566), and the Pareto shortest path was not signiﬁcantly
different from the RRT (p = .277).

Figs. 5 and 6 show the distribution of responses regarding
users’ comfort and preference based on answers obtained
from the questionnaire asking them to select one of the three
paths. Fig. 7 presents the total weighted SSQ scores recorded
after watching the video of each of the paths. Only the Pareto
least turns and the RRT paths had a statistically signiﬁcant
difference.

C. Discussion

The results of this study show that the most comfortable
path is the Pareto least turns path. Viewing the video of
this path resulted in only a small increase in the SSQ total
weighted symptom scores from the baseline pre-test to the
post-test, which was not a statistically signiﬁcant difference.
turns path was also signiﬁcantly more
The Pareto least
comfortable than the RRT path. This supports our hypothesis
that the number of turns plays an important role in the users’
comfort when viewing these paths in a virtual reality headset.
This ﬁnding is consistent with the results from a previous

GoalStartGoalStartFig. 5. Responses to the question: Of the three paths, which one was the
most comfortable?

Fig. 6. Responses to the question: Of the three paths, which one did you
prefer?

study [10], where it was found that rotational movement is
the most evocative of VR sickness.

Concerning the Pareto shortest path, our results found that
this path was more comfortable than the RRT path but less
comfortable than the Pareto least turns path. The median
SSQ total weighted score at the baseline pre-test was 5.61
and the median scores after watching each video (see Fig. 7)
were 9.35 for the Pareto least turns, 14.96 for the Pareto
shortest path and 20.57 for the RRT. From the Wilcoxon
test results, we can see that viewing the Pareto shortest path
did not result in a statistically signiﬁcant increase in SSQ
total weighted scores from the baseline to the post-test. The
RRT, however, did result in a statistically highly signiﬁcant
increase in SSQ scores from the baseline to the post-test.
As larger scores indicate that more sickness symptoms were
experienced, these tests conﬁrm that the Pareto shortest path
was the second most comfortable and the RRT was the
least comfortable. The comfort comparison questionnaire
(Fig. 5) also supports that trend. The Pareto least turns path
was selected by the most number of subjects as the most
comfortable, followed by the Pareto shortest path, and ﬁnally
the RRT path.

Surprisingly, the preference answers (Fig. 6) provide a
different ranking. The Pareto shortest path was the most
preferable, followed by the Pareto least turns, and the RRT
path last. This is an interesting ﬁnding worthy of further

Fig. 7.
Comparison of total weighted SSQ scores after watching each
path video. Higher scores indicate more sickness symptoms. The black lines
through the center of the boxes delineate the median total scores. The circles
are outliers and the star is an extreme outlier.

investigation: that users may not always prefer the most
comfortable trajectories. This might be related to the same
issue pointed out above; the ﬁnal part of the Pareto least turns
path passes through a hallway, which could be perceived
by the users as less interesting compared to the other paths
that traversed through a gallery with sculptures. Because this
occurred despite the fact that subjects were explicitly told not
to pay attention to the pieces of art, additional criteria may
need to be added in the cost functional to evaluate the user’s
preference for certain visual features or depending upon the
task or environment.

V. CONCLUSION

In the present work, the formal deﬁnition of the framework
of the human perception-optimized planning was provided,
based on a multi objective optimization formulation. That
framework is general in the sense that it allows modelling
of motion planning problems where the human user is a
key element within a robotic system, guaranteeing important
aspects such as the users comfort. The framework was further
illustrated by making use of the task of VR telepresence–
although other case studies such as telemanipulation will
be considered in the future. The VR telepresence task is
modelled to guarantee users comfort and performance of
key components of the system, for example, the 360 camera
performance. Solution trajectories were computed with a
Pareto variant of the A* algorithm. Those Pareto solutions
were compared against a trajectory obtained with a standard
motion planning technique, which does not focus on guaran-
teeing any user oriented aspect. Through experimentation on
human subjects, it was validated that a solution designed to
address the human perception-optimized planning problem
can result in trajectories that are more comfortable for the
users, or trajectories that they might prefer for other reasons.
Even though the human subjects experiments were carried
out in a simulated VR telepresence system, we believe that
our ﬁndings justify human perception-optimized planning

and apply to VR telepresence. Experimentation in VR-based
telepresence systems with physical robots and 360 cameras
is left for future work.

Besides user studies with a real robot, there are many other
research directions to explore. First, the user’s method of
choosing the destination (such as a minimap, or choosing
a point in the ﬁeld of view), must be researched. Then,
there are multiple potential criteria that should be studied.
Consider user’s wayﬁnding capabilities: for example, should
other rotation angles besides multiples of 45 degrees be
allowed through another planner, or can we show through
experiments the intuition that the current planner helps users
retain their sense of direction? Additionally, users often look
for certain objects in an environment, for example pieces of
art in the museum, faces in a cocktail party, or exit signs at
an airport. If there is a criterion that would allow users to see
more of this sort of important objects, it would be a valuable
ﬁnding. Furthermore, can we predict
the weighting and
prioritizing of criteria from prior information of users, such
as age, event type or gaming experience? This could be done
using machine learning techniques on data obtained through
human subjects experimentation. Finally, we are interested
in ﬁnding additional means to reduce the experienced VR
sickness, such as compensating for the 360 camera motion
by adding degrees of freedom.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Boissy, H. Corriveau, F. Michaud, D. Labont´e, and M.-P. Royer.
A qualitative study of in-home robotic telepresence for home care
of community-living elderly subjects. Journal of telemedicine and
telecare, 13(2):79–84, 2007.

[2] B. Bowins. Motion sickness: A negative reinforcement model. Brain

research bulletin, 81(1):7–11, 2010.

[3] A. Chinchuluun, P. M. Pardalos, A. Migdalas, and L. Pitsoulis. Pareto

optimality, game theory and equilibria. Springer, 2008.

[4] C. A. Claremont. The psychology of seasickness. Psyche, 11:86–90,

1931.

[5] S. V. G. Cobb, S. Nichols, A. Ramsey, and J. R. Wilson. Virtual
reality-induced symptoms and effects (vrise). Presence: Teleoperators
& Virtual Environments, 8(2):169–186, 1999.

[6] N. I. Durlach and A. S. Mavor.

Virtual reality: scientiﬁc and

technological challenges. National Academies Press, 1995.

[7] S. Hashizume, I. Suzuki, K. Takazawa, R. Sasaki, and Y. Ochiai.
Telewheelchair: the remote controllable electric wheelchair system
combined human and machine intelligence. In Proceedings of the 9th
Augmented Human International Conference, page 7. ACM, 2018.
[8] Y. Heshmat, B. Jones, X. Xiong, C. Neustaedter, A. Tang, B. E. Riecke,
and L. Yang. Geocaching with a beam: Shared outdoor activities
through a telepresence robot with 360 degree viewing. In Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 1–13, 2018.

[9] S. Hughes, J. Manojlovich, M. Lewis, and J. Gennari. Camera control
In SMC’03 Conference
and decoupled motion for teleoperation.
Proceedings. 2003 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man
and Cybernetics. Conference Theme-System Security and Assurance
(Cat. No. 03CH37483), volume 2, pages 1339–1344. IEEE, 2003.
[10] A. Kemeny, P. George, F. M´erienne, and F. Colombet. New VR
navigation techniques to reduce cybersickness. Electronic Imaging,
2017(3):48–53, 2017.

[11] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilienthal.
Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation psychology,
3(3):203–220, 1993.

[12] S. Kratz and F. R. Ferriera. Immersed remotely: Evaluating the use of
head mounted devices for remote collaboration in robotic telepresence.
In 2016 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), pages 638–645. IEEE, 2016.

[13] T. Kruse, A. K. Pandey, R. Alami, and A. Kirsch. Human-aware
Robotics and Autonomous Systems,

robot navigation: A survey.
61(12):1726–1743, 2013.

[14] S. M. LaValle. Virtual reality. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
[15] S. M. LaValle and S. A. Hutchinson. Optimal motion planning for
multiple robots having independent goals. IEEE Trans. on Robotics
and Automation, 14(6):912–925, December 1998.

[16] S. M. LaValle and J. J. Kuffner Jr. Randomized kinodynamic planning.
The international journal of robotics research, 20(5):378–400, 2001.
[17] D. A. Lazewatsky and W. D. Smart. An inexpensive robot platform
In 2011 IEEE International
for teleoperation and experimentation.
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 1211–1216. IEEE,
2011.

[18] M. K. Lee and L. Takayama. Now, i have a body: Uses and social
norms for mobile remote presence in the workplace. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems,
pages 33–42. ACM, 2011.

[19] L. Mandow and J. L. P´erez De la Cruz. A new approach to
multiobjective A* search. In IJCAI, volume 8. Citeseer, 2005.
[20] H. Martins and R. Ventura. Immersive 3-D teleoperation of a search
In 2009 IEEE
and rescue robot using a head-mounted display.
Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation, pages
1–8. IEEE, 2009.

[21] M. Minsky. Telepresence. Omni Magazine, 38(4):217230Murray,

1980.

[22] S. Nichols and H. Patel. Health and safety implications of virtual re-
ality: a review of empirical evidence. Applied ergonomics, 33(3):251–
271, 2002.

[23] Y. Oh, R. Parasuraman, T. McGraw, and B.-C. Min. 360 VR based
robot teleoperation interface for virtual tour. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed Reality for
HRI (VAM-HRI), 2018.

[24] E. Paulos and J. Canny.

Social

tele-embodiment: Understanding

presence. Autonomous Robots, 11(1):87–95, 2001.

[25] I. Rae, B. Mutlu, and L. Takayama. Bodies in motion: mobility,
presence, and task awareness in telepresence. In Proceedings of the
32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 2153–2162. ACM, 2014.

[26] J. T. Reason and J. J. Brand. Motion sickness. Academic press, 1975.
[27] L. Rebenitsch and C. Owen. Individual variation in susceptibility to
cybersickness. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology, pages 309–317, 2014.
[28] W. Robinett. Synthetic experience: A proposed taxonomy. Presence:

Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 1(2):229–247, 1992.

[29] A. H. Rupert. Motion sickness etiology: An alternative to treismans
In Spatial Orientation Symposium in Honor of
evolutionary theory.
Fred Guedry, Institute of Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola,
FL., 2010.

[30] P. Stotko, S. Krumpen, M. Schwarz, C. Lenz, S. Behnke, R. Klein,
and M. Weinmann. A VR system for immersive teleoperation and live
exploration with a mobile robot. preprint arXiv:1908.02949, 2019.

[31] M. Treisman. Motion sickness: an evolutionary hypothesis. Science,

197(4302):493–495, 1977.

[32] Annemarie Turnwald and Dirk Wollherr. Human-like motion planning
International Journal of

based on game theoretic decision making.
Social Robotics, 11(1):151–170, 2019.

[33] S. Weech, S. Kenny, and M. Barnett-Cowan. Presence and cybersick-
ness in virtual reality are negatively related: a review. Frontiers in
psychology, 10:158, 2019.

[34] C. Widdowson, I. Becerra, C. Merrill, R. F. Wang, and S. LaValle.
Assessing postural instability and cybersickness through linear and
angular displacement. Human factors, 2019.

[35] D. Yi, M. A. Goodrich, and K. D. Seppi. MORRF*: Sampling-based
multi-objective motion planning. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.

[36] J. Yu and S. M. LaValle. Structure and intractability of optimal multi-
robot path planning on graphs. In Twenty-Seventh AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2013.

[37] J. Zhang, E. Langbehn, D. Krupke, N. Katzakis, and F. Steinicke.
Detection thresholds for rotation and translation gains in 360 video-
based telepresence systems. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, 24(4):1671–1680, 2018.

