GAZE-SENSING LEDS FOR HEAD MOUNTED DISPLAYS

A PREPRINT

Kaan Ak¸sit∗
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, CA 95050
kaksit@nvidia.com

Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, CA 95050
jkautz@nvidia.com

David Luebke
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, CA 95050
dluebke@nvidia.com

March 20, 2020

ABSTRACT

We introduce a new gaze tracker for Head Mounted Displays (HMDs). We modify two off-the-shelf
HMDs to be gaze-aware using Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs). Our key contribution is to exploit the
sensing capability of LEDs to create low-power gaze tracker for virtual reality (VR) applications.
This yields a simple approach using minimal hardware to achieve good accuracy and low latency
using light-weight supervised Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) running on a mobile device. With
our hardware, we show that Minkowski distance measure based GPR implementation outperforms
the commonly used radial basis function-based support vector regression (SVR) without the need
to precisely determine free parameters. We show that our gaze estimation method does not require
complex dimension reduction techniques, feature extraction, or distortion corrections due to off-axis
optical paths. We demonstrate two complete HMD prototypes with a sample eye-tracked application,
and report on a series of subjective tests using our prototypes.

Keywords gaze trackers; supervised learning; light emitting diodes

0
2
0
2

r
a

M
8
1

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
9
4
8
0
.
3
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Adding gaze tracking to Head Mounted Displays (HMDs) by exploiting sensing capability of Light Emitting
Diodes (LEDs): An off-the-shelf HMD system is modiﬁed to demonstrate gaze tracking support only with LEDs (left).
LEDs are placed in front of a human subject’s eyes for sensing and illumination. The prototype comprises only a
smartphone, two microcontrollers, and a low number of LEDs with a supervised adaptive pattern recognition algorithm.
The overall system estimates the gaze direction of a human subject in real-time over a smartphone screen seen through
a pair of magniﬁer lenses.

∗Website: kaanaksit.com

DSDisdImageMagnierHead Mounted Display prototypeA human eye 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

1

Introduction

Head Mounted Displays use a variety of sensors to provide immersive interaction with engaging virtual reality
experiences. Emerging consumer HMDs for VR use gyroscopes, accelerometers, various optical sensors, and so on,
either embedded in the headset or grouped into an external unit. These sensors track head orientation, user motions,
whether or not a user is wearing the device, to provide user controls, and in short to enhance the user’s experience in a
virtual world.

Using gaze as an input modality [1, 2] can be natural, fast, and has the potential to enhance the user experience in an
HMD system. While decoupled non-mouse input modalities as a pointing mechanism for large displays has proven
awkward, gaze-supported target acquisition has been found fast and natural [3, 4, 5, 6]. Hence, industry has been
pushing towards employing gaze tracking as a key part of future HMD systems. Current prototype solutions are typically
expensive (e.g., FoveVR, Tobii-Starbreeze, SMI’s HMD upgrade for Oculus Rift), but there is also a growing interest
towards low-cost gaze trackers with some promising results [7, 8, 9, 10].

We believe major challenges remain for conventional gaze tracking hardware and software:

1. Conventional gaze trackers rely on imaging techniques, which have relatively high power demands and may

not be truly suitable for low-power mobile solutions;

2. Imaging equipment typically introduces complexity in the software, adding an extra image processing block in

the pipeline; and,

3. Conventional gaze trackers work with high-dimensional inputs (high-resolution images) and thus introduce
latency at multiple stages, including the capture hardware, communication protocols, and image processing-
based gaze estimation pipeline.

We are motivated to address these issues by decreasing hardware and software complexity, seeking the simplest possible
solution that provides useful-quality eye tracking. We use Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) as the core of our gaze tracking
hardware design. Commonly used as illumination devices, LEDs in fact have well-known bi-directional characteristics
[11, 12] with the ability to sense and emit light. Since they are also inexpensive, can perform color selective sensing,
can illuminate and sense from the same physical location, and are easily controlled without a dedicated custom circuitry,
LEDs constitute a good choice as a hardware solution.

In this paper, we describe how to take advantage of LED’s bi-directional characteristics to allow both light capture
and illumination. We position an array of LEDs in front of a human subject’s eyes for the task of gaze estimation, in
the context of an HMD system. As a human subject observes a scene projected at a ﬁxed virtual plane, we illuminate
the subject’s eye with infrared (IR) light from different perspectives in a time multiplexed fashion. We capture and
digitize the intensities of IR light reﬂecting off the eye from different perspectives with high refresh rates. Using our
supervised adaptive pattern recognition implementation, we accurately estimate the gaze location of the human subject
at the virtual image plane.

1.1 Contributions

All-in-one Sensor Technology: The core item in our design, an LED, can be used as an illuminator or as a sensor for
integrating light intensity over a certain ﬁeld of view (FOV) and exposure interval. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
time that LEDs are used in a gaze tracker both for capture and illumination.

Less Hardware and Lower Cost: Our design employs fewer components. To our knowledge, our design has the
simplest electronics design yet demonstrated. We believe that our hardware design leads the category of ultra-low cost
gaze tracker. While decreasing cost, we show that accuracy and sampling rates can match existing devices.

Supervised Adaptive Gaze Estimation Algorithm: We use a supervised adaptive pattern recognition algorithm with
our sensor technology. We show that our method has low computational demands and runs fast enough on a conventional
mobile platform. We compare against the most common methods from the literature, and demonstrate equivalent or
better accuracy with a much simpler hardware.

Complete Prototype: We demonstrate two different complete custom HMD systems, created by modifying off-the-
shelf items. We also demonstrate example eye tracked applications with our prototype, and provide results of an
informal subjective test with human subjects.

2

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

1.2 Beneﬁts and Limitations

Beneﬁts: Today’s HMD manufacturers are competing to create the least bulky HMD. One way to achieve this goal is to
reduce the bulk caused by each component of the system. Off-the-shelf LEDs are lighter and smaller than off-the-shelf
cameras. Thus, our proposed method uses less volume and less weight than an alternative using single or multiple
camera(s).

LEDs also offer an advantage in power consumption over camera based solutions. Possible heat dissipation related
issues caused by cameras are also avoided with our low power consuming system. Additionally, our gaze estimation
pipeline is computationally light-weight. Thus, our proposed technique is a good match for battery operated applications.
Since we only employ a small number of sensors, compared to camera-based solutions (which have millions of sensing
pixels), latency within the hardware and software is reduced and results in higher sensing rates.
Our method offers good accuracy. We show that mean angular error can be as low as 1.1o with a median angular error
of 0.7o.

Limitations: While providing sufﬁcient accuracy for a variety of VR applications, due to their poor sensing char-
acteristics compared to photodiodes LEDs may not be suitable choice for applications requiring very high accuracy
(error < 0.5o), such as in psychological, neurological and reading research [13].

Our proposal requires a larger amount of calibration data than conventional imaging based gaze tracking systems, thus
the initial phase of calibration is comparably longer.

Conventional HMDs can shift slightly on a subject’s face, commonly due to fast head movements. In turn, this causes
the sensing hardware to shift relative to the subject’s eyes. Using the original calibration data makes gaze estimates less
reliable. We share this common problem with other gaze trackers. We choose to recalibrate in such cases, which can be
burdensome to users.

2 Related Work

Sensing with LEDs: LEDs are known to be reliable light sensors, and have been used in other bi-directional
systems such as visible light communication (VLC) systems [14, 15], temperature and pressure sensing systems [16],
bidirectional reﬂectance distribution function (BRDF) measurement systems [17], color sensing and illumination
mimicking applications [18, 19], and human shape sensing with VLC [20, 21].

To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time LEDs are used as sensors in a gaze tracker application.

Gaze Tracker Hardware: The foundation of any gaze tracker is the hardware used to capture the raw data. The
"scleral search coil," for instance, requires the user to wear a contact lens with copper coils on top while exposed to an
alternating magnetic ﬁeld [22]. The scleral search coil is reported to provide 15 arc seconds of angular resolution with
1000 Hz sampling capabilities. Despite this impressive accuracy, the scleral search coil fails to to provide a comfortable
user experience and is not an option for consumer products. Another common methodology is electro-oculography
(EOG) [23], which uses electrodes placed around the eye along the horizontal and the vertical axes. However, the
technique is generally known to suffer from resolution limitations, and shares the same discomfort problem with a
scleral search coil.

Gaze trackers using light are categorized as imaging and non-imaging optical devices. Relatively few imaging gaze
trackers have explicitly tackled the problem related to power-consumption and computation-intensity: iShadow [24],
an imaging system, reported a 70 mW power consumption and 30 Hz estimation rate with an angular resolution of 3
degrees. OLED-on-CMOS technology [25] has been demonstrated for capturing an eye’s images from a large spectrum
of light (600 − 900 nm) and displaying those images, however, in its current state, the technology’s display resolution
is very limited, and negatively effecting a display’s ﬁll factor.

Non-imaging gaze trackers provide another approach. Naugle and Hoskinson [26] demonstrated two different methods
using binary gaze tracking with a pair of LEDs and a photodiode for a low ﬁeld-of-view (FOV) (< 20o) HMD. While
this setup reduces the power consumption of the display by over 75 %, it only provides limited information on whether
the user is actively wearing the display or not.

More closely related to our proposal, Topal et al. [27] demonstrate a low-computational overhead, non-imaging gaze
tracker based on IR light-emitting diodes and IR sensors around an eyeglasses frame. Another similar non-imaging
gaze tracker [28] contains a ring of LED emitters that are stimulated in sequence. Unlike our proposal, the tracker
contains photodiode sensors, which are measured for each LED stimulation. These systems, however, require head
pose to be completely ﬁxed or stabilitized with a mechanism such as a bite-bar. In contrast, our prototype hardware
does not depend on ﬁxed head pose, does not use photodiodes nor sophisticated or custom light-sensing circuits, and

3

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

is embedded in an HMD context without producing occlusion in front of the eye. Our algorithmic approach is also
simpler and less demanding on the hardware, using Gaussian Regression Processes (GPR) [29] for gaze estimation
rather than a model-based linear or non-linear mapping — thus avoiding tuning of algorithm parameters.

We believe our solution provides the simplest hardware design yet for a gaze tracker embedded inside an HMD.

Adaptive Gaze Estimation Algorithms: Because each human subject introduces multiple differences for the input
of a non-imaging gaze tracker, we believe that the task of gaze estimation, in this case, is a better match for an
adaptive supervised pattern recognition technique rather than ﬁnding a good model for noisy sensor input. Traditionally,
supervision of such pattern recognition techniques in gaze trackers has been incorporated into a calibration procedure.

Within the realm of imaging gaze trackers, the relevance vector regression (RVR) [30] method was found to be more
effective than support vector regression (SVR). RVR shares the same functional form as SVR. Unlike SVR, however,
RVR tries to ﬁnd the weights of the regressor from training data. We have experimented with SVR with radial basis
function (RBF) as the kernel, and we found that GPR with a non-parametric similarity measure provides an accurate
result without the comptuational burden of ﬁnding the correct weights using RVR. This is important since ﬁnding
correct weights online may not be a feasible task for limited processing power on mobile devices.

Noris et al. [31] show that imaging gaze trackers can beneﬁt from GPR for calibration-free operation. Their implemen-
tation used principle component analysis (PCA) for feature dimension reduction. As our technique depends on a low
number of sensory inputs, we did not ﬁnd dimension reduction necessary for our gaze estimation algorithm, and instead
we use GPR directly for the task of gaze estimation.

Using cost effective hardware (albeit with a relatively power hungry imaging gaze tracker), Sewell and Komogortsev [32]
demonstrated effective usage of a neural network for ofﬂine training, and demonstrated a relatively low error (< 3.68o).
Our method achieves a much lower error, and we also demonstrate that in speciﬁc applications, online training can be
enabled.

3 System Overview

Gaze tracking devices for HMDs estimate where a user is gazing relative to a virtual image plane as seen through the
HMD’s lenses. The task of gaze estimation is a layered problem that requires the integration of sensors, optical design,
image/signal processing, and electronics design. The following sections describe our approach in addressing each of
these tasks.

3.1 Sensing with LEDs

At the core of our design, LEDs are used to capture light and to illuminate the eye. LEDs with infrared light emission
are typically used in HMD gaze tracker hardware, since humans are insensitive to IR illumination [33]. A human eye’s
cornea has similar absorption and reﬂection characteristics in the near IR as in visible light [34]. Furthermore, IR LEDs
have a narrow bandwidth (typically ∼ 50 nm), avoiding cross-talk with other wavelengths.

LEDs provide illumination when a forward voltage is applied to their two electrical terminals. However, LEDs can also
act as photodetectors [11] by following three steps: 1 Apply a reverse voltage pulse for a short time duration. 2
Discharge LED’s capacitance immediately afterwards. 3 Measure the voltage across LED to determine how much
discharge of capacitance took place after a certain time. Figure 2 illustrates each of the explained steps.

These steps can be easily implemented by wiring the LED to a microcontroller for full control over charge, discharge,
and measure. The microcontroller is controlled by and relays measurements to a host. Typically, LEDs are most
sensitive to wavelengths λin that are shorter than their emission spectrum (so λin < λout) [16]. Thus, larger exposure
times are required if LEDs with the same emission spectrum are used. To achieve lowest possible latency with a given
conﬁguration, we choose to use different LEDs that have intersecting emission and sensing spectra in the IR range.

Eye safety is also important when a user is exposed to infrared radiation; ∆texp and maximum irradiance of an LED
must be considered according to safety regulations for infrared light sources [35].

Positioning of LEDs: To use LEDs for capture and illumination, LEDs must be placed at speciﬁc locations in front of
an eye, or optical path must be relayed to have the same effect. Currently the most common conﬁguration for the optics
of a commercial HMD, as shown in Figure 3, uses a pair of magniﬁer lenses placed in front of a display to create a
virtual image at some distance in front of a user. Such an HMD setting typically includes a distance from eye, called
eye relief drelief of 25 − 30 mm, and an additional spacing dobject of 35 − 50 mm between the magniﬁer lens and
display, which is determined by the focal length of the magniﬁer lens. This leaves two obvious options of where to
place the LEDs – between the lens and the eye or between the magniﬁer lens and the display.

4

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

Figure 2: Illustration of different modes of a bi-directional LED (from left to right): (1) applying a forward voltage
of VDC, in which the LED emits light with a wavelength of λout and an emission cone angle, ΘF OV ; (2) applying a
reverse voltage pulse, Vreverse, for a short time duration, discharging LED with incoming light that has a wavelength
of λin for a speciﬁc time, ∆texp, with an reception cone angle of ΘF OV ; and (3) measuring a voltage, Vmeasurement,
from the LED.

Figure 3: A sketch showing our proposed conﬁguration within a conventional HMD.

From the stand point of integrating our solution, the easiest place to put the LEDs would be directly in front of the
user’s eyes, as shown in Figure 3. This arrangement also has the advantage that it minimizes light loss due to scattering
off the other optical elements of the HMD. However, LEDs positioned on-axis in front of an eye would occlude parts of
the image. Placing LEDs in an off-axis arrangement avoids such occlusions.

We rely on the experimental study from Nguyen et al. [36] to determine the best positions. A maximal amount of
corneal and pupil reﬂection can be achieved, when the sensing LEDs are close to the illuminating LEDs. We thus place
LEDs side-by-side in a ring around the magniﬁer lens. Front view in Figure 5 shows a layout for positioning of LEDs
in our prototype. We arrange the LEDs as groups of two sensing LEDs with an illuminating LED in between.

5

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

3.2 Estimation Using Captured Data

Our capture hardware hosts a ﬁxed number M of sensing LEDs. The capture hardware transmits a data capture vector
to the host (PC, smartphones, and etc.). This vector contains measured data as

s(t) = [s0(t), s1(t), . . . , sM (t)],

(1)

where each sm(t) represents the output of the m-th LED connected to the capture hardware. We construct a calibration
matrix that represents the relation between a captured vector and the gaze locations as follows. First, pre-deﬁned
locations are highlighted on the virtual image plane in random order, and users are asked to dwell on each of the
highlighted locations for a certain duration ∆tﬁx. During this time, we sample s multiple times at ﬁxed intervals ∆tv,
and store the mean of the measurements as ¯cp = (cid:80)
t s(t) for each predeﬁned location p. To ensure a meaningful
calibration, we check that the variance of all the measurements for a location p is below a certain threshold, otherwise
we discard the measurements for that location. Figure 4 summarizes the procedure for creation of a calibration matrix.

Figure 4: A sketch showing construction of a calibration matrix in a simpliﬁed way. A user gazes at a certain point at a
virtual image plane for a time period of ∆tﬁx. During that time data is captured, and the arithmetic mean value of the
capture, ¯cp is stored at a corresponding row of the calibration matrix.

The pre-deﬁned calibration points can be at any location. Typically, we use a grid of 2 × 2 to 5 × 5 evenly spaced
locations. Starting from this small number of calibration points, we need to derive the gaze location given a set of
new measurements s(t). At a later stage, calibration data is enlarged online through a gaming application, in which a
user’s task is to gaze and destroy opponents. Using collected data, we have evaluated two different regression methods:
support vector regression (commonly used in prior research), and gaussian process regression (our choice).

Support Vector Regression: SVR has a generalized form as

(cid:21)

(cid:20)ex
ey

= kT

(cid:21)T

(cid:20)ux
uy

,

(2)

where ex and ey represents estimated gaze position along x and y, kT represents a vector that contains the similarity
measures between the captured s(t), and the calibration vectors ¯cp. Finally, ux and uy represent vectors that correspond
to the x and y position of each ¯cp.

A regression technique depends on a distance measure, that indicates how similar the captured data is to the stored
calibration data. Such a comparison using any method will provide a similarity vector as in

k =






κ(s(t), ¯c1)
...
κ(s(t), ¯cP )




 ,

(3)

where κ(a, b) donates the used distance function to determine similarity in between vector a and b, k represents the
distance vector. Our choice of distance measure for SVR calculations is the commonly used radial basis function (RBF)
[30, 31].

Gaussian Process Regression: Through our experiments, we found GPR to be a robust and accurate regression method.
GPR takes the following general form:

(cid:21)

(cid:20)ex
ey

= kT C −1

(cid:21)T

(cid:20)ux
uy

,

6

(4)

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

with variables as described above. The covariance matrix C is calculated as

C =






κ( ¯c0, ¯c0)
...
κ( ¯cp, ¯c0)

. . .

κ( ¯c0, ¯cp)

. . .

κ( ¯cp, ¯cp)




 .

(5)

Figure 5: Left: A pair of photographs showing top and front view of our ﬁrst prototype. Zoomed region in top view
shows a microcontroller. Zoomed region in front view shows three LEDs, center one that is highlighted in red is used
in illumination source mode, and neighbouring two that are highlighted in green are in receiver mode in our driving
scenario. Note that all LEDs in our prototype can switch to both modes upon request. Right: A pair of photographs
showing top and front view of our second prototype. Zoomed region in front view highlights six LEDs that are used for
both sensing and illumination.

Distance Measures: Comparing a vector with another vector can be accomplished in multiple ways. Although, we
have evaluated multiple different distance measures (Cosine, Minkowski, Manhattan, Canberra) [37, 38, 29], we found
the Minkowski distance measure to be the most effective to be used with the GPR algorithm:

κ(a, b) =

(cid:33)1/m

wi |ai − bi|m

,

(cid:32) n
(cid:88)

i=1

(6)

where a and b are two vectors to be compared, wi is the weighting factor for a certain channel in the captured data, m is
the degree of the norm, and i is the index of the element. We ﬁnd m = 2 and setting wi = 1 to yield good results; more
details will be presented in Section 5.

For the SVR algorithm, we employed the RBF kernel:

κ(a, b) = e− ||a−b||

2σ2

,

(7)

in which σ represents a free parameter. We use a grid-search to ﬁnd the optimal σ.

4

Implementation

Two different off-the-shelf HMDs are transformed into a gaze sensing HMD using our methodology. In this section, we
introduce both design choices with practical aspects. Our prototypes are shown in Figure 5.

Our ﬁrst prototype consists of 3 LEDs per eye functioning as light sources, 6 LEDs per eye functioning as light sensors,
a smartphone, an Arduino Nano microcontroller (uC) per eye, a controller, and a VR headset as a housing. Our gaze
tracking algorithm runs on a smartphone in synchronism with two uCs driving LEDs.

Our second prototype consists of 6 LEDs per eye functioning as both light sensors and light sources, an Arduino Nano
microcontroller (uC) per eye, a HDMI supported 2K resolution display, a controller, and a VR headset as housing. This
time, our gaze tracking algorithm runs on a desktop computer.

Optics: Our both prototypes use a pair of magniﬁer lenses in front of a display, as shown in Figure 3. Considering the
magniﬁcation of the lens, and the distances between LCD, lenses, and eyes, and the display’s pixel density, each pixel
corresponds to a visual angle of 0.12 degrees in our both prototypes.

Sensing Electronics: LEDs are hooked to the two uCs for both prototypes, so that they can be programmed accordingly.
In the case of our ﬁrst prototype, illuminator LEDs are attached to digital input/output (IO) pins, and the sensing LEDs’

7

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

anodes were attached to digital IOs, and their cathodes were attached to Analog-to-Digital (ADC) pins of the uC. In
the case of our second prototype, LEDs are only attached in the same way as the sensing LEDs in our ﬁrst prototype.
Each time a LED is requested to sense, it follows the pattern of 1 - 2 - 3 from Section 3.1 and Figure 2. LEDs have a
soft-coded mechanism that adjust ∆texp per LED basis, so that saturation caused by varying light conditions can be
avoided for each LED.

Identical two LEDs typically have a limited overlap in their emission-sensing spectra. Thus, leading to low resolution
capture with less sampling frequency when identical LEDs are used. In our ﬁrst prototype, we choose to dedicate two
different LEDs to speciﬁc tasks to maintain good resolution. However, with our second prototype, we also evaluated a
conﬁguration that uses the identical LEDs for illumination and sensing.

In our ﬁrst prototype, an illuminator LED is turned on shortly before taking a measurement from its pair of neighbouring
sensing LEDs. In our second prototype, all the remaining LEDs are illuminating the scene at the time of a capture from
a LED. In our prototypes, used uC only allows a time multiplexed capture routine -one capture from a single LED at
a time-. However, a simultaneous capture from different LEDs can be achieved with a different uC that has discrete
ADCs for each analog pin. Thus, the effective sampling rate would increase signiﬁcantly and latency would reduce
even further.

User-interface application: The uC works hand-in-hand with the user-interface application using a USB connection.
Our application deals with a number of predeﬁned tasks: (1) collecting measurements from each LED by requesting
them from the two uCs, (2) updating the user interface, (3) producing the actual gaze estimation using GPR, and (4)
keeping logs related to captured data (event time stamps, and so forth).

Figure 6: Top row shows angular positions of a target on a screen along X axis in red color among with the outputs of
GPR with Minkowski and SVR with RBF in green and blue color respectively. Middle row shows angular positions of
a target on a screen along Y axis in red color among with the outputs of GPR with Minkowski and SVR with RBF in
green and blue color respectively. Both in top and middle rows, Regions highlighted with Magenta color shows blink
events, and regions highlighted with yellow color shows Saccadic Reaction Time (SRT) with a gaze transition (saccade).
Bottom row shows normalized histograms of angular errors for GPR with Minkowski and SVR with RBF in green and
blue color respectively. There are 82 calibration points in this sample dataset (16 from calibration grid, 66 from VR
gaming). Captured data used in making is from our ﬁrst prototype.

5 Evaluation

Success of a regression algorithm for the task of gaze estimation is heavily affected by a number of factors, such as
noise levels in the captured signal, positioning of LEDs in front of an eye, the used distance measures, and the number
of stored points in a calibration matrix. We evaluate our method with respect to each factor.

Our ﬁrst prototype uses 18 illuminating LED and 12 sensing LED in total. Our ﬁrst prototype is supplied by a voltage
source with galvanic isolation (smartphone’s battery), thus leading to more reliable analogue to digital conversions. On
the other hand, our second prototype uses 12 LEDs in total for both illumination and capture. Our second prototype
interfaces with a personal computer that is typically known to suffer more from noise caused by electromechanical
parts, power-supply and supply-line. Noises can propagate through data and power lines. Thus, it requires more
levels of ﬁltering in circuitry and in digital means, which are causing latency both in digital estimation and analogue
signal. We try to tackle noise problems at most with an additional layer of ﬁrst order Inﬁnite Impulse Response (IIR)

8

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

digital low-pass ﬁlters, and a physical USB isolator. At extreme, a custom dedicated circuitry for analogue to digital
conversions can outperform other options.

We report our ﬁndings on accuracy, and number of calibration data using our ﬁrst prototype. We extend our subjective
tests using our second prototype. Thus, we also report on practicality, and inter-intra personal differences using the
second prototype. We also share our ﬁndings on sampling rates of both prototypes. Our evaluation method depends on
the experimental procedure summarized in Table 1. We have conducted a series of subjective tests using this procedure,
and recorded each session for analysis.

Instructions, levels and hints for a session

L1 User wears the headset.
L2 User starts the application by pressing "X" button in the

controller.

L3 User is verbally asked about image quality. If not satisfac-
tory, session is terminated. Otherwise user continues with
the session.

L4 Application shows a visual containing a rabbit character
together with a text that states press "X" button and follow
the rabbit.

L5 Rabbit on the screen stops after a while, a text in the visual
appears, which commands a user to gaze at the rabbit
constantly until it disappears.

L6 Another visual appears with an instruction, which com-
mands a user to gaze at a red dot constantly, press "X"
button on controller, and gaze constantly until red dot turns
to green. Once it is green, another red dot appears at a
different location, and user repeat his previous actions until
there is no more red dot in the screen.

L7 User follows the instructions from L6 for each event ob-

jects.

L8 Another visual appears with a new instruction, which states
that there will be a ghost character among with multiple
characters in the next screen. Task is to destroy ghost, the
user has to gaze at it for a certain time period. If user is
gazing at the ghost, the ghost turns blue or other objects
are changing colors; the user is asked to keep on gazing at
the ghost and press "X" button on the controller.

L9 As the user is gazing at each object, the calibration data
is augmented with the new incoming measurements from
each failure case.

Table 1: Our experimental procedure, including the guidance provided to our participants.

Accuracy: The accuracy of a gaze tracker system refers to the difference between the true and the measured gaze
direction. Given a set of sample input data, we estimate the gaze locations using both GPR with Minkowski distances
and SVR with RBF as the regressor. We show the angular locations of the target gaze locations along with the estimates
from both methods in Figure 6. Our error metric here is visual angular errors, which is calculated using Euclidean
distances in between output of estimations and gaze targets. Figure 6 contains histograms of visual angular errors
recorded over a ﬁxed time duration for both techniques using a set of captured data from our ﬁrst prototype. We have
conducted a comparison of multiple different distance measures using GPR and SVR, a detailed analysis of these can
be found in the supplementary material.

We point out that regions highlighted with magenta color in Figure 6 show blinks, which lead the estimated gaze
direction to have sharp jumps. Regions highlighted with yellow color in Figure 6 show regions, where a gaze target
changes position in space. Humans are known to have a response time before an event of gaze change (Saccade) [39],
which is known as Saccadic Reaction Time (SRT). SRT may vary from individual to individual, affected by biological
factors such as age and health conditions. Angular errors have been calculated by excluding highlighted regions. We
have performed a user study among 5 subjects with varying age, and eye prescription. Using GPR with Minkowski
distances, we report our ﬁndings for each subject in terms of accuracy in Table 2.

9

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

Subject 1
Subject 2
Subject 3
Subject 4
Subject 5
Total Mean

Mean Median
1.34
2.10
1.90
1.40
1.10
1.57

0.83
1.23
1.84
1.04
0.66
1.12

Standard Deviation
2.49
2.80
1.43
1.10
2.14
2.00

Table 2: Mean, median, and Standard Deviation values of each subjects using data collected from each subject. Angular
errors are reported only for the case of using GPR with Minkowski distances.

Commercial gaze trackers (SMI, FOVE VR, etc.) for HMDs claim to have an accuracy ranging from 0.2o − 1.5o in
a controlled laboratory environment. We show that our mean angular accuracy can be as low as 1.10o with a much
simpler hardware setup in casual use case. We believe that our approach is a promising alternative to existing methods.

Number of calibration points and LEDs: The number of calibration points and LEDs are other important variables
in our design space. Thus, we investigate the resulting angular error when varying their number. Given a small number
of calibration points, we have started our evaluation using only four channels with the highest variation in digital signals
and have iteratively increased the number of channels. We have repeated this evaluation utilizing an increasing number
of calibration points. Our ﬁndings suggest that smaller numbers of LEDs can produce similar angular accuracy levels.
Adding more LEDs seem to only marginally enhance accuracy. However, we would like to highlight that an LED’s
contribution to the gaze estimate depends on its physical location and direction relative to a particular subject. I.e.,
depending on a subject’s physiognomy (smaller vs. larger eyes, distance between eyes, and so forth), a particular
sensing LED may contribute more or less. Thus, a larger number of LEDs compensate for such differences and add
robustness.

Practicality and inter-intra personal differences: We extended our experiments using our second prototype. Total
number of independent different subjects are 10 males and 4 females. At each experiment, a subject has to complete
four independent sessions, in which a user takes brakes and wears the HMD at the beginning of each session. A subject
typically complete four sessions within 45 − 60 minutes in total. First two sessions follow the usual routine from
Table 1 with a task of choosing a predeﬁned target object from multiple choices (varying randomly from three to eight
choices). At each task, a target object appears at a new random location chosen from uniformly distributed sample
locations. Total number of target selection task in a single session is 50. Deﬁnition of success at a task is being able to
choose the target object by gazing at the target object at least for 3 seconds. On the other hand, deﬁnition of a failure
case can be expressed as follows: If our system fails to detect the case of gazing correctly, user continuously gaze at
the target, and push a button to give a feedback to the system. System uses this as an online training data, and takes
advantage of the new data for the upcoming tasks within a session. Third and fourth sessions follows the same routine
as in ﬁrst two sessions. However, those sessions does not go through the calibration phase. A third session is initiated
with the calibration data captured from the same user during a second session. A fourth session is initiated with the
captured data from an another subject during an another session in the past. Figure 7 summarizes results of our early
extended experiments.

According to our early investigation in Table 7, task of choosing by gazing at a target is likely to be more successful
with a calibration phase at the beginning of a session. We also observed that system can be initiated with a calibration
data from a previous session with lower success rations. Thus, requiring further online training during usage. At the
extreme, our ﬁndings suggest that it is possible to initiate the system with a calibration data from a different person with
least amount of success rations and maximum amount of online training during usage.

Sampling Rates and latency: Given our current hardware and uC, we are able to sample up to 250 Hz with our ﬁrst
prototype coupled to a mini computer (Raspberry Pi model B). On the other hand, our second prototype coupled to a
personal computer samples at 100 Hz. A better uC with a dedicated ADC for each analogue pin can sample all channels
simultaneously, thus such a uC can increase sampling rates up to kHz range. We observe that the smartphone’s USB
does not provide a reliable serial communication at 250 Hz. Thus, we intentionally use only a 100 Hz sampling rates
with our ﬁrst prototype. Our GPR implementation can easily run at above 100 Hz even on the smartphone (our datasets
all contain less than 100 calibration points).

10

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

Figure 7: Violin-box diagrams showing distribution of success rations from different scenarios. Small and large red
vertical lines indicates mean, and median values respectively. Dashed bars indicates 1.5 times interquartile range (IQR),
and the blue boxes indicates ﬁrst and third quartiles from a distribution.

6 Discussion

We believe that gaze tracking is a critical feature that will contribute to the success of HMDs in the consumer market.
We propose a new sensor technology that enables gaze tracking at low cost and in a small form factor, ideal for the
HMD use case.

Feedback from subjects: In informal feedback, subjects found our system to be accurate for the given tasks shown
during a subjective test.

One common problem reported by the subjects was sudden jumps in gaze estimation after and during a blink. Similarly,
slightly closing an eye lid was found to cause a shift in the gaze estimation. In the future work we plan to address these
problems by detecting blinks from the LED inputs as well as predicting the eye lid status. Some subjects experienced
lower spatial accuracy in certain regions within the screen. We believe this to be due to differences in eye sizes, relative
eye locations, and eye distances. Simply adding more channels to each eye should help to address this problem. Finally,
the initial calibration phase with a four-by-four grid was found to be cumbersome, and we will continue to investigate
on how to further decrease the number of calibration points. Self-calibration through saliency maps [40] may be an
option.

Future Work: Kalman ﬁltering is a common method to enhance accuracy (but may add latency), as are visual anchors
[41]. Expanding the subject pool can also help us in clustering subjects for estimating a good initial calibration data
for each person. We will evaluate these methods in the near future. An analogy from coded aperture optics is an
inspiring direction for our future work: merging our technique with backlights of Spatial Light Modulators (SLMs)
could potentially provide an interesting all-in-one solution for sensing and illumination, similar to bi-directional
displays [42, 25].

Our subject pool contains subjects with and without eye prescriptions. During a subjective test, subjects with eye
prescriptions were asked to take off their glasses and wear contact lenses instead. If our technique was to be used in a
non-HMD scenario, corrective glasses would need to be supported.

In a near future, VR users may also beneﬁt from wearable facial recognition techniques using photo-reﬂective sensors
[43] or from vital sign monitoring, such as heart-rate and blood oxygenation, which have been estimated remotely using
photodiodes [44] in the past. A similar methodology using LEDs could be explored through simple changes in our
circuitry. Thus, those methodologies may allow us to improve in accuracy by considering effects of facial changes due
to mood, respiration or heart-rate. Saccadic reaction times (SRTs) are well explored by the medical community as a
basis for health condition prediction techniques [39]. Our current prototype can also be trained to detect SRTs (yellow
regions in Figure 6) in the future. Rogers et al. [45] recently demonstrated that blinks and head movements captured

11

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

using infrared, accelerometer, and gyroscope sensors in a HMD can be used for the task of user identiﬁcation. All these
sensors are readily available in our prototypes. User identiﬁcation dimension can be added to our demonstration by
merging [45]’s ﬁndings with our proposal.

7 Conclusion

Gaze sensing HMDs promise to provide a dataset for a set of useful tasks: foveated rendering, predicting a user’s mood
and health, predicting visual saliency at a personal level, and providing a VR experience that is unique, that is a natural
ﬁt for you.

We describe a novel gaze tracker methodology using only LEDs. Our proposal’s main contribution is exploiting the
sensing capability of LEDs with a GPR implementation using Minkowski distances inside a HMD system. We provide
a detailed description of our algorithms and our hardware, which we believe is the simplest gaze-detecting design to
date. We have shown two unique prototypes that validates our proposal in the context of a traditional off-the-shelf
HMD. As gaze-sensing HMDs are poised to enter the market, we hope to inspire more research on simple, low-power
non-imaging approaches such as ours.

Acknowledgements

We thank the reviewers for insightful feedback, and also Duygu Ceylan, Ward Lopes, Fu-Chung Huang, Joohwan Kim,
and Orazio Gallo for the fruitful discussions, and also to our subjects for participating to our subjective experiments.

References

[1] RJ Jacob and Keith S Karn. Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research: Ready to deliver

the promises. Mind, 2(3):4, 2003.

[2] Päivi Majaranta and Andreas Bulling. Eye tracking and eye-based human–computer interaction. In Advances in

Physiological Computing, pages 39–65. 2014.

[3] Javier San Agustin, John Paulin Hansen, and Martin Tall. Gaze-based interaction with public displays using
off-the-shelf components. In ACM International Conference Adjunct Papers on Ubiquitous Computing, pages
377–378, 2010.

[4] Sophie Stellmach and Raimund Dachselt. Look & touch: gaze-supported target acquisition. In ACM CHI, pages

2981–2990, 2012.

[5] Jayson Turner, Jason Alexander, Andreas Bulling, Dominik Schmidt, and Hans Gellersen. Eye pull, eye push:
Moving objects between large screens and personal devices with gaze and touch. In Human-Computer Interaction
– INTERACT 2013, pages 170–186. 2013.

[6] Jayson Turner, Andreas Bulling, Jason Alexander, and Hans Gellersen. Cross-device gaze-supported point-to-point

content transfer. In Symp. on Eye Tracking Research and Appl., pages 19–26, 2014.

[7] Javier San Agustin, Henrik Skovsgaard, John Paulin Hansen, and Dan Witzner Hansen. Low-cost gaze interaction:

ready to deliver the promises. In ACM CHI, pages 4453–4458, 2009.

[8] Javier San Agustin, Henrik Skovsgaard, Emilie Mollenbach, Maria Barret, Martin Tall, Dan Witzner Hansen, and
John Paulin Hansen. Evaluation of a low-cost open-source gaze tracker. In Symposium on Eye-Tracking Research
& Applications, pages 77–80, 2010.

[9] Sune Alstrup Johansen, Javier San Agustin, Henrik Skovsgaard, John Paulin Hansen, and Martin Tall. Low-cost

vs. high-end eye tracking for usability testing. In ACM CHI, pages 1177–1182, 2011.

[10] Radosław Mantiuk, Michał Kowalik, Adam Nowosielski, and Bartosz Bazyluk. Do-it-yourself eye tracker:

Low-cost pupil-based eye tracker for computer graphics applications. Springer, 2012.

[11] Paul Dietz, William Yerazunis, and Darren Leigh. Very low-cost sensing and communication using bidirectional

LEDs. In UbiComp, pages 175–191, 2003.

[12] Henry J Round. A note on carborundum. Electrical World, 49(6):309, 1907.

[13] Kenneth Holmqvist, Marcus Nyström, and Fiona Mulvey. Eye tracker data quality: what it is and how to measure

it. In Symp. on Eye Tracking Research and Applications, pages 45–52, 2012.

12

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

[14] G. Corbellini, K. Aksit, S. Schmid, S. Mangold, and T. Gross. Connecting networks of toys and smartphones with

visible light communication. IEEE Communications Magazine, 52(7):72–78, 2014.

[15] Stefan Schmid, Josef Ziegler, Thomas R Gross, Manuela Hitz, Afroditi Psarra, Giorgio Corbellini, and Stefan
Mangold. (in)visible light communication: combining illumination and communication. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2014 Emerging Technologies, page 13, 2014.

[16] V Lange, F Lima, and D Kühlke. Multicolour led in luminescence sensing application. Sensors and Actuators A:

Physical, 169(1):43–48, 2011.

[17] Moshe Ben-Ezra, Jiaping Wang, Bennett Wilburn, Xiaoyang Li, and Le Ma. An led-only brdf measurement device.

In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1–8, 2008.

[18] Shuai Li and Ashish Pandharipande. Color sensing and illumination with led lamps. In IEEE International

Conference on Consumer Electronics, pages 1–2, 2014.

[19] Shuai Li and Ashish Pandharipande. LED-based color sensing and control. IEEE Sensors Journal, 15(11):6116–

6124, 2015.

[20] Tianxing Li, Chuankai An, Zhao Tian, Andrew T Campbell, and Xia Zhou. Human sensing using visible light

communication. In Int. Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking, pages 331–344, 2015.

[21] Chuankai An, Tianxing Li, Zhao Tian, Andrew T Campbell, and Xia Zhou. Visible light knows who you are. In

International Workshop on Visible Light Communications Systems, pages 39–44, 2015.

[22] David Robinson et al. A method of measuring eye movemnent using a scieral search coil in a magnetic ﬁeld.

Bio-medical Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, 10(4):137–145, 1963.

[23] Elwin Marg. Development of electro-oculography: Standing potential of the eye in registration of eye movement.

AMA Archives of Ophthalmology, 45(2):169–185, 1951.

[24] Addison Mayberry, Pan Hu, Benjamin Marlin, Christopher Salthouse, and Deepak Ganesan. ishadow: Design of a

wearable, real-time mobile gaze tracker. In MobiSys, pages 82–94. ACM, 2014.

[25] Uwe Vogel, Daniel Kreye, Bernd Richter, Gerd Bunk, Sven Reckziegel, Rigo Herold, Michael Scholles, Michael
Törker, Christiane Grillberger, Jörg Amelung, Sven-Thomas Graupner, Sebastian Pannasch, Michael Heubner, and
Boris Mitrofanovich Velichkovsky. 8.2: Bi-directional OLED microdisplay for interactive HMD. SID Symposium
Digest of Technical Papers, 39(1):81–84, 2008.

[26] Etienne Naugle and Reynald Hoskinson. Two gaze-detection methods for power reduction in near-to eye displays

for wearable computing. In Int. Conf. on Wireless and Mobile Comp., Net. and Comm., pages 675–680, 2013.

[27] Cihan Topal, Serkan Gunal, Onur Koçdeviren, Atakan Dogan, and Omer Nezih Gerek. A low-computational

approach on gaze estimation with eye touch system. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 44(2):228–239, 2014.

[28] D Grover, T Delbruck, and M King. An eye tracking system using multiple near-infrared channels with special
application to efﬁcient eyebased communication. In European Conference on Eye Movement, pages 36–39, 2005.

[29] Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning. MIT Press, 2006.

[30] F. Martinez, A. Carbone, and E. Pissaloux. Gaze estimation using local features and non-linear regression. In

IEEE Int. Conf. on Image Processing, pages 1961–1964, 2012.

[31] Basilio Noris, Karim Benmachiche, and Aude Billard. Calibration-free eye gaze direction detection with gaussian

processes. In VISAPP, pages 611–616, 2008.

[32] Weston Sewell and Oleg Komogortsev. Real-time eye gaze tracking with an unmodiﬁed commodity webcam

employing a neural network. In ACM CHI, pages 3739–3744, 2010.

[33] Bartosz Kunka and Bozena Kostek. Non-intrusive infrared-free eye tracking method. In Signal Processing

Algorithms, Architectures, Arrangements, and Applications, pages 105–109, 2009.

[34] Thomas JTP van den Berg and Henk Spekreijse. Near infrared light absorption in the human eye media. Vision

Research, 37(2):249–253, 1997.

[35] AC Boucouvalas. IEC 825-1 eye safety classiﬁcation of some consumer electronic products. IEE Colloquium on

Optical Free Space Communication Links, pages 13:1–13:6, 1996.

[36] Karlene Nguyen, Cindy Wagner, David Koons, and Myron Flickner. Differences in the infrared bright pupil

response of human eyes. In Symp. on Eye Tracking Research & Appl., pages 133–138, 2002.

[37] J Roger Bray and John T Curtis. An ordination of the upland forest communities of southern Wisconsin. Ecological

Monographs, 27(4):325–349, 1957.

13

Gaze-Sensing LEDs for Head Mounted Displays

A PREPRINT

[38] GN Lance and WT Williams. Computer programs for hierarchical polythetic classiﬁcation (“similarity analyses”).

The Computer Journal, 9(1):60–64, 1966.

[39] Deepmala Mazumdar, JJ M Pel, Manish Panday, Rashima Asokan, Lingam Vijaya, B Shantha, Ronnie George,
and J Van Der Steen. Comparison of saccadic reaction time between normal and glaucoma using an eye movement
perimeter. Indian journal of ophthalmology, 62(1):55, 2014.

[40] Yusuke Sugano and Andreas Bulling. Self-calibrating head-mounted eye trackers using egocentric visual saliency.

In ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology, pages 363–372, 2015.

[41] Manu Kumar, Jeff Klingner, Rohan Puranik, Terry Winograd, and Andreas Paepcke. Improving the accuracy of

gaze input for interaction. In Symp. on Eye Tracking Research Appl., pages 65–68, 2008.

[42] Matthew Hirsch, Douglas Lanman, Henry Holtzman, and Ramesh Raskar. BiDi screen: a thin, depth-sensing

LCD for 3D interaction using light ﬁelds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 28(5), 2009.

[43] Katsutoshi Masai, Yuta Sugiura, Katsuhiro Suzuki, Sho Shimamura, Kai Kunze, Masa Ogata, Masahiko Inami,
and Maki Sugimoto. Affectivewear: towards recognizing affect in real life. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
International Symposium on Wearable Computers, pages 357–360. ACM, 2015.

[44] Giovanni Cennini, Jeremie Arguel, Kaan Ak¸sit, and Arno van Leest. Heart rate monitoring via remote photo-

plethysmography with motion artifacts reduction. Optics Express, 18(5):4867–4875, 2010.

[45] Cynthia E Rogers, Alexander W Witt, Alexander D Solomon, and Krishna K Venkatasubramanian. An approach
for user identiﬁcation for head-mounted displays. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Symposium on
Wearable Computers, pages 143–146, 2015.

14

