0
2
0
2

r
a

M
3

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
4
5
1
0
.
3
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Effectiveness of Virtual Reality-based Training for Robotic Setup

Arian Mehrfard∗,1, Javad Fotouhi∗,1,
Tess Forster2, Giacomo Taylor2, Danyal Fer2,
Deborah Nagle3, Nassir Navab1, and Bernhard Fuerst2
∗ joint ﬁrst authors

Abstract— Virtual Reality (VR) is rapidly increasing in pop-
ularity as a teaching tool. It allows for the creation of a highly
immersive, three-dimensional virtual environment intended to
simulate real-life environments. With more robots saturating
the industry - from manufacturing to healthcare, there is a
need to train end-users on how to set up, operate, tear down,
and troubleshoot the robot. Even though VR has become widely
used in training surgeons on the psychomotor skills associated
with operating the robot, little research has been done to see
how the beneﬁts of VR could translate to teaching the bedside
staff, tasked with supporting the robot during the full end-to-
end surgical procedure. We trained 30 participants on how to
set up a robotic arm in an environment mimicking clinical
setup. We divided these participants equally into 3 groups
with one group trained with paper-based instructions, one with
video-based instructions and one with VR-based instructions.
We then compared and contrasted these three different training
methods. VR and paper-based were highly favored training
mediums over video-based. VR-trained participants achieved
slightly higher ﬁdelity of individual robotic joint angles, sug-
gesting better comprehension of the spatial awareness skills
necessary to achieve desired arm positioning. In addition, VR
resulted in higher reproducibility of setup ﬁdelity and more
consistency in user conﬁdence levels as compared to paper and
video-based training.

I. INTRODUCTION

Robotics

has majorly

impacted minimally-invasive
surgery. The introduction of this machine into the everyday
Operating Room (OR) requires not just the surgeon to be
competently trained, but also all the OR support staff. The
OR staff is typically trained on how to set up, operate,
troubleshoot, and tear down the robotic system.

The current methods for robotic training include a com-
bination of online (e-learning) and instructor-led hands-
on training conducted by the manufacturer. Topics covered
include system basics, draping the robotic system, patient-
focused instructions, and port placement [1].

Several studies investigated the effectiveness of Virtual
Reality (VR) training for psychomotor skills in both la-
paroscopic and robotic surgery [2]. Proﬁciency-based VR
is known to increase the skill level for novice laparoscopic

∗A. Mehrfard and J. Fotouhi are regarded as joint ﬁrst authors.
This work was partially supported by Verb Surgical Inc.
1A. Mehrfard, J. Fotouhi, N. Navab, etc. are with the Laboratory
for Computational Sensing and Robotics, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. Corresponding author is Arian Mehrfard at
amehrfa1@jhu.edu

2T. Forster, G. Taylor, D. Fer, and B. Fuerst are with Verb Surgical Inc.,

Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.

3D. Nagle was with Ethicon Inc., Cincinnati, OH 45242, USA

surgeons [3], [4]. VR to OR laparoscopic skill transfer has
also been studied and validated [5]–[7]. In regards to surgical
robotic skills, VR simulators improve technical psychomotor
performance [8]; these technical skills, however, are only
applicable for the surgeon. Pertaining to the OR staff, there
is a relative lack of research identifying the effects of VR
training on the non-technical perioperative skills such as
system set-up, draping, and docking.

Recent literature has investigated the use of Augmented
Reality (AR) for various surgical robotic tasks [9]. Though
the majority of the recent research is focused on employing
AR as an advanced visualization medium to fuse multi-modal
data and promote situation awareness, few works have also
discussed the applicability of AR for intra-operative guidance
during robot-assisted surgeries. AR was used to project skin
landmarks and provide overlay for port placement [10]–
[12]. Qian et al. proposed ARssist to enhance the hand-eye
coordination of the patient-side assistant for tool placement
and instrument exchange tasks [13]. ARssist is enabled by
rendering the viewing frustum of the laparoscopic camera
inside the patient’s abdomen. Fotouhi et al. suggested AR
support for setting up the robotic arms, assuming a desired
joint conﬁguration is known based on the robot’s kinem-
taics [14].

Surgical robotic systems have a steep learning curve for
draping, manual alignment of robotic arms to the patient
ports, and docking [15]. These tasks can be a signiﬁcant fac-
tor affecting the overall operation time and experience [16].
It has been established that the poor placement of ports and
robotic components leads to a frustrating experience [17],
which may result in collisions, singularities, and an increase
in operation time [18].

Current training programs still rely heavily on paper-based
instructions and e-learning modules. Given these training
platforms, the uncertainty and the lack of standardization
around the patient positioning relative to the robotic sys-
tem remain largely unaddressed. To characterize the robotic
staff performances given different training tools, an agnostic
robotic arm can be used as a surrogate for a surgical robotic
platform. To this end, we used an off-the-shelf seven degree
of freedom KUKA iiwa (KUKA AG, Augsburg, Germany).
We tasked participants with moving the robotic arm into a
predetermined conﬁguration in relation to a manikin. Three
training mediums were used: two conventional methods of
training, namely paper- and video-based, as well as an
immersive VR experience.

 
 
 
 
 
 
application. The VR training included both a passive element
of watching the steps play out, with an explanation of the
steps, followed by additional guided and unguided steps,
comprising the interactive portion of the experience. During
the guided component, the users received audio instructions
and visual cues on what action they should perform, whereas
the unguided component had the users complete the steps
without any assistance. The video was a recording of the
passive phase of the VR application that was acquired by
placing a second virtual camera into the virtual environment.
The paper document was based on frame captures from the
video and a printed transcript of the audio instructions. The
recommended approach was broken down into eight steps,
with Fig. 3 depicting the intended end-state of the patient
and robotic arm.

Fig. 2 visualizes the following 8 steps, which were in-

cluded in all three training materials:

• Step 1: Position the patient in relation to a ﬁxed point
on the KUKA arm. The participant must position the
patient such that the ﬂange F is in line with the base
link B on the KUKA arm: F × B = 0.

• Step 2: Rotate the patient to 45°, relative to the table.
This is done to ensure the manikin’s head is close to
the base link of the KUKA arm.

• Step 3: Engage gravity-compensation mode, which
resists the joint torques, hence counteracts the effects
of gravity

• Step 4: Pull the KUKA arm directly over the patient
• Step 5: Tilt the end-effector in preparation for docking

to the ﬂange

• Step 6: Flatten the arm to ensure it is parallel to the
manikin’s center-line and in position to align and dock
the ﬂange to the end-effector.

• Step 7: Rotate the last robot link and the end-effector
simultaneously, to align the male and female connectors
for the ﬁnal docking

• Step 8: Dock the male connector of the ﬂange into the

end-effector

During the training phase, each participant absolved pre-
cisely one form of training, with a maximum of 20 minutes to
consume the training content. Each participant was required
to go through the assigned training content at least twice. The
number of times each participant went through the training
content, and the total duration of training were recorded.

This study was reviewed and approved by the Johns Hop-
kins University Institutional Review Board under the IRB
number HIRB00008902. The users were initially screened
on whether they are comfortable with wearable technologies.
All three groups of subjects were compensated for their
voluntary participation.

D. Execution and Metrics

Regardless of the training method, every participant en-
countered an execution phase following the training phase.
During the execution step, they were asked to perform the
steps outlined in training with the KUKA arm, the ﬂange

Fig. 1. This image shows the initial setup of the experiment, modeled in
the virtual world, as each participant ﬁnds it at the beginning of the study.

Each participant was asked to complete a training phase,
followed by a task execution phase. We compared how
each of the training methods impacted the participant’s
ability to achieve a pre-deﬁned position with optimal robot
conﬁguration and patient clearance. Our hypothesis was that
VR is an effective, potentially superior, method for teaching
the spatial skills associated with setting up a seven degree
of freedom robot.

II. METHODS

A. Materials

To keep this study agnostic of surgical robotics supplier,
we used a seven degree of freedom industrial robot with
seven joints manufactured by the KUKA Robotics Corpora-
tion. To simulate the patient in relation to the robotic arm,
we used a manikin. As shown in Fig. 1, both the manikin
and KUKA arm were on separate surfaces. We attached a
3D printed ﬂange to the patient with a male interface while
the KUKA arm had a 3D printed female interface on an
end-effector. The goal was to dock the ﬂange into the end-
effector by following a safe robot trajectory shown in the
training phase and avoiding collision with the patient.

B. System Setup

Video material was shown to the users on a 24” display. To
deliver the immersive VR training, we used the HTC Vive Pro
with a dedicated area of 2 × 3 m2 in which the participants
could move freely. The VR simulation was executed on an
Alienware (Dell, Round Rock, TX, US) laptop with an Intel
i7-7700HQ k CPU, NVIDIA GTX 1070 graphics card, and
16 GB RAM.

C. Training Approach

The three mediums used for training the participants
were paper-based training, video-based training, and VR-
based training. To maintain consistency, all three mediums
contained content based on the same step-wise approach
for setting up the KUKA robot. To this end,
the video
and paper training materials were derived from the VR

Fig. 2. This image shows the initial setup of the experiment, modeled in the virtual world, as each participant ﬁnds it at the beginning of the study.

Fig. 3.
This ﬁgure demonstrates the desired end-state of patient and
robotic arm. The yellow dotted line depicts the patient center-line, while
the highlighted joints are shown as parallel to the patient center-line -
ensuring the Robot Fidelity Error is 0° in this exemplary state. Note that
any deviation from this desired end-state are measured in Patient Angle
(45° in this state), Robot Fidelity Error, and Robot Joint Angles.

interfaces, and the manikin. It is noteworthy that the point
of this study was not to ensure the memorization of the
steps during execution, as this is quite rarely required in
real-life applications. Therefore, all participants had access
to the paper guides, which were displayed on a monitor in the
execution room. The performance of the setup, completion
of the tasks, and correct alignment of the robot, ﬂange,
and patient were evaluated. The metrics and measurements
included the following items: the frequency in which the
participants looked at the instructions, angle of the patient
to the back of the robot base-link, ﬁdelity of robot arm to
patient center-line, and robot joint angles for 6 relevant joints
of the KUKA arm.

• The Execution Time was measured from the start until
the participant decided that s/he ﬁnished the setup: T =
tend − tstart. The measurements were taken regardless of
the completion or correctness of the setup steps.

• The order, completion, and correctness of each Step was
noted by the proctor. The study execution was not halted
in case a step was missed or completed incorrectly.
• The Patient Angle Error describes the angle between
the robot base and the midline of the patient model:

Fig. 4. Participant aligns robot with patient after receiving paper training.

Θp = |θrobot −θpatient|. It was measured by the protractor
after each participant completed the setup. In our setup,
the desired patient angle was deﬁned as 45°.

• The Robot Fidelity Error represents the quality of the
setup and the misalignment of the desired robot/patient
setup. The proctor obtained this error by measuring
the angle between the projection of the second to last
robot link (shown in yellow in Fig. 3) onto the patient’s
surface and the patient center-line: Θr = |θlink −θpatient|.
Regardless of the patient angle, the optimal robot/patient
alignment can be achieved, yielding a robot ﬁdelity error
of zero. A perfect robot/patient alignment is illustrated
in Fig. 3.

• The six relevant Robot Joint Angles were acquired by
interfacing the robot via the MATLAB® KUKA Sunrise
Toolbox. The seventh joint angle was ignored as it
represents the rotation of the end-effector, which did
not affect docking. The difference between the angles
in training modules and execution were compared to
indicate the correctness of the conﬁguration: Θerror =
|θexecuted − θplanned|, where Θerror ∈ R6.

Participants Training
Time (s)

Execution
Time (s)

Robot Fidelity
Error (°)

Patient Angle
Error (°)

Joint Angle
Error (°)

Paper
Video
VR

10
10
10

657.8 ± 333.2
484.5 ± 75.4
602.0 ± 389.5

235.7 ± 84.3
211.3 ± 128.6
306.3 ± 137.5

15.0 ± 13.8
25.6 ± 20.9
11.4 ± 16.0

2.6 ± 2.3
7.6 ± 6.3
5 ± 3.5

39.1 ± 55.9
25.4 ± 40.4
28.1 ± 51.3

TABLE I: Mean and standard deviation values for each group. Paper and VR-trained participants spent a similar amount of
time training and were highly variable, while the video group consistently spent less time training. While execution time was
comparable across all groups, video-trained participants achieved worse alignment in both robot ﬁdelity and patient angle.

Execution

Training
Time (s) Time (s)
582
450
667.5

207
181.5
155.5

Paper
Video
VR

Patient Angle

Fidelity
Error (°) Error (°)
11
22
4.5

2
9
40

TABLE II: Median values for each training group are pre-
sented in the table. Results indicate improved robot align-
ment for the VR group, and also exhibit a lower median
value in ragers to the execution time.

III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

The study population comprised of 30 participants from
the students and staff of the Johns Hopkins Whiting School
of Engineering. The user subjects had no prior background
in performing surgical robot set up. The participants were
divided into three equal groups, which determined what train-
ing material they were given: paper-based training, video-
based training, or VR-based training.

Before the training phase, each participant ﬁlled out a
questionnaire to ensure his or her aptitude for participation
and provided consent to have their initial skill level evaluated.
While training, we measured the time that each participant
was engaged with the training material. For the paper-based
training group, our measurement associated with the time
they read through the document, for the video-based training
group we recorded the time they spent watching the material,
and for the VR-based training group we started to measure
the time from the moment they picked up the Head-Mounted
Display (HMD). The time for the VR group included the
time it took them to properly mount the HMD on their head
until they completed the training application. Even though
each participant had to read an instruction document on
how to mount the HMD, we did not include this phase in
our overall time measurement, as it will become obsolete
when people become familiar with the VR HMDs. After the
training was completed, the participants scored their own
conﬁdence going into the execution phase.

During the execution phase, the execution time, patient
angle error, robot ﬁdelity error, robot joint angles, and the
correct execution of each step was noted by the proctor.
Lastly, a questionnaire was ﬁlled out by the participants
giving additional feedback and reﬂecting on their conﬁdence
score before the execution.

The means and standard deviations (STD) are reported in
Tab. I. The average time spent in the training phase of the

Training Execution Robot
Error
Time
Time
0.19
0.99
0.097

Patient
Angle
0.051

Joint
Angles
0.15

P-
value

TABLE III: The P-values are reported from a one-way
ANOVA test on the three participant groups. While there is a
trend visible for the VR group to have a better alignment of
the robot, it is revealed that the ﬁndings are not statistically
signiﬁcant.

study for each group was: 658 sec for paper (STD: 333 sec),
484 sec for video (STD: 75 sec), and 602 sec (STD: 390 sec)
for VR. The average times recorded for the execution phase
were: 235 sec (STD: 84 sec) for paper, 211 sec for video
(STD: 129 sec), and 306 sec (STD: 138 sec) for VR.

We set the target patient angle to 45° in relation to the
base. In the evaluation of the patient angle, the paper group
performed best with an average error of 2.6°, with VR next
at 5°, and video coming in worst with an average error of
7.6°.

The robot ﬁdelity error represents the quality of alignment
between the robot orientation and the patient center-line, as
depicted in Fig. 3. Fig. 5 summarizes the ﬁdelity errors to
the pre-deﬁned end-state for each participants’ ﬁnal execu-
tion result grouped by the training method. On the whole,
participants with VR-based training performed slightly better
than the paper-based training, with the video-based group
achieving the worst outcome.

The plot in Fig. 6 illustrates the errors between the robot
joint angles in the training material and the executed joint an-
gles for paper-, video-, and VR-based training, respectively.
Additionally Fig. 7-9 give a comparison of each joint angle,
for each training group separately. There is a trend towards
VR-trained participants performing better than the other two
groups. Tab. I details further results.

In addition to the mean values, Tab. II presents the median
values for each category. For the training time, the video
group had the lowest median of 450 sec, which includes the
time it took the participants to watch the training video twice.
Regarding the execution time and robot ﬁdelity error, the VR
group had the lowest median of respectively 155.5 sec, and
8.5°. Tab. III lists the p-values from a one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) for the measured metrics, between the
three training groups. With this ANOVA we compare the
three groups VR, paper and video, and determine if there

Fig. 5.
Fidelity error of robotic arm to patient center-line (see Fig. 3
for desired end-state); A participant who achieves highest adherence to this
end-state would achieve a robot ﬁdelity error of 0.

Fig. 6. This graph shows the error in each of the six relevant KUKA joint
angles for the three groups. These angles were recorded at the end of the
execution phase for each participant and compared to the desired end-state.

is a statistically signiﬁcant difference between their means.
Training time has a p-value of 0.097, execution time has
0.99, robot ﬁdelity error 0.19, and patient angle error a p-
value of 0.051, neither of which are statistically signiﬁcant.
Fig. 10 shows the conﬁdence score that each participant
gave themselves after conduction the training, but before
starting the execution phase and Fig. 11 is based on the self-
reﬂective accuracy score on that conﬁdence, that each user
gave themselves after the execution phase.

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Training Time

The video material had a set length of 3 minutes and
30 sec. Participants were asked to watch the entire video,
and only two users watched it more than the required two
times. In the VR application, users took between 5 to 8 min
for the guided and 1.50 to 4 minutes for the unguided run.
Both these media dictated the pace in which they were
consumed, with VR giving the user the option to take longer.
In regards to the paper instructions, however, the participants
decided on the pace at which they read and comprehended
the instructions. This explains the high spread that is visible
in the time for paper training. Ignoring the two outliers, the
time for VR training is generally narrower and on the lower
end compared to paper. Video has the lowest training time;
however, as depicted in the ﬁgure, it also exhibits the worst
results among all three groups.

B. Execution Time

During the execution time, all users had access to the
paper instructions. It is worth considering that the group of
participants who trained with the paper instructions took less

time to familiarize themselves with the paper instructions in
front of them during the execution phase. While VR yielded
the highest mean, it also had the highest STD and low-
est median (VR=155.5 sec, Video=181.5 sec, Paper=213 sec)
which suggests that after disregarding extreme outliers, the
VR training had a positive effect on execution time; however,
it is not statistically signiﬁcant (p=0.99).

C. Patient Angle

All training methods instructed the participants to align
the patient at a 45° angle. The paper group consistently
came closest to this goal (Paper=2.6°, Video=7.6°, VR=5°).
Participants with VR training performed well, particularly
when compared to the video group. It should to be noted
that these values were not statistically signiﬁcant (p=0.051).

D. Fidelity of Robot Arm to Patient Center-Line

The end objective presented to the participants was to align
the robotic arm to the patient’s center-line. The measurement
of the ﬁdelity of the robot arm to the patient’s center-line,
therefore, shows how close the participants achieved this
goal. A smaller angle indicates a more accurate alignment
and a greater understanding of the end goal.

The user group receiving VR training had a con-
sistently lower angle, as indicated by both the mean
(VR=11.4°, Video=25.6°, Paper=15°) and the median
(VR=8.5°, Video=22°, Paper=11°) values. This suggests that
VR training leads to a drastically better alignment of the
robot arm and, therefore, a higher adherence to the end goal
of the task. However, these ﬁndings were not statistically
signiﬁcant (p=0.19).

PaperVideoVR01020304050607080Robot FidelityRobot Fidelity with different training methodsPaperVideoVR0102030405060708090100Joint error in degreeJoint angles errorFig. 7.
omitted, as it is merely the rotation of the end effector.

The robot joint angle errors of the VR group. The 7th joint is

Fig. 8. The robot joint angle errors of the video group. The 7th joint is
omitted, as it is merely the rotation of the end effector.

E. Fidelity Error of Robotic Arm Joint Angles

As presented in Fig. 6, after disregarding the outliers, the
VR group had the most consistently accurate alignment of
the robot joints, supported by the median values (VR=7.3°,
Video=10.7°, Paper=18.4°). The mean values (VR=28.1°,
Video=25.3°, Paper=39.1°) also show a good performance
of the VR group. However, it is surprising that the paper
group performed much worse, while the video group has,
contrary to the previous data, a proper alignment. One reason
for this may be that both VR and the video training depict
the movement required by the participant in each step, that
is, what motion is required to get the objects (either manikin
or robot) from the starting position indicated in each step to
the ﬁnal position of each step. Figs. 7-9 provide a detailed
joint-speciﬁc representation of the joint angle errors for the
VR, video, and the paper groups. They reveal that the joints
A1 - A3 were the most susceptible to deﬁcient alignment.
It has to be considered that an error of ∼ 180° in these
joints suggests that the user rotated the joint in the wrong
direction, implying that the symmetry in the links mislead
the participants.

F. User Questionnaire

In Fig. 10, the conﬁdence ratings show that the VR training
group were more consistently conﬁdent after training. Fig. 11
suggests that these participants considered their prediction
to be mostly accurate. These claims are supported by free-
text remarks that participants made after the execution phase.
Most remarks from the paper group revolved around ambi-
guity and vagueness in the instructions, where participants
report to have had trouble understanding speciﬁc terms or
poses; suggestions were to include a visualization of the
robot or to see a video of it moving. From the video group,

the users noted the desire for ”more visuals”, ”close up of
different angles”, and hands-on experience, which are all
made available or approximated through the VR application.
Participants of the VR group mostly remarked about the
inverse kinematics (IK); they noted that the restricted IK
simpliﬁed the robot and led to unexpected behavior of the
real robot. We believe that the full implementation of the
IK would allow for an improved skill transfer from the VR
application to the real robot.

G. Study Limitations

The ﬁrst limitation of this study is related to the implemen-
tation of the kinematics for the virtual KUKA robot. To move
the arm between states, system-deﬁned touchpoints anchored
to the virtual robot model, were grasped by the participant
using the VR controllers, and a kinematics backend then
solved for joint angles that moved the touchpoint to match
the new positioning in real-time. Instead of using a full
inverse kinematics model, joints were constrained to only
allow for motion along the pre-deﬁned, correct trajectory
between waypoints. We can describe this formally, letting
q ∈ R7 denoting the joint space conﬁguration of the robot,
p(q) as the forward kinematic cartesian position of the
touchpoint, with user-controlled goal position p∗. A full IK
model would then move the robot joints in real time to q∗
as found by:

q∗ = argmin

(cid:107)p∗ − p(q)(cid:107),

q

subject to joint limits on q. In contrast, our implementation
solved for joint conﬁguration q∗ between two known way-
points q1, q2 as q∗ = q1 + (q2 − q1)t∗ for

t∗ = argmin

(cid:107)p∗ − p (q1 + (q2 − q1)t) (cid:107).

t

A1A2A3A4A5A6050100150200250Joint error in degreeJoint angles error VRA1A2A3A4A5A6050100150200250Joint error in degreeJoint angles error videoFig. 9. The robot joint angle errors of the paper group. The 7th joint is
omitted, as it is merely the rotation of the end effector.

Fig. 10.
Conﬁdence Rating on a scale of 1-5. 1 represents the lowest
conﬁdence and 5 represents the highest. We asked participants to reﬂect
on the accuracy of the conﬁdence score they gave themselves before the
execution phase.

The touchpoint was thus constrained to move along a linearly
interpolated (in joint space) path between the two waypoints
while being dragged. This limitation led to multiple VR-
trained subjects to expect the real robot to move similarly
between steps. The under-constrained nature of the real
robot motion was,
therefore, unexpected to a participant
and promoted the potential for a negative training effect. A
future study should incorporate a full IK model, and possibly
incorporate two touchpoints.

Another limitation that may lead to a negative training
effect is the lack of haptic feedback in the VR storyline.
The haptic forces a participant would encounter on the actual
KUKA robotic arm are noticeable, and yet non-existent in
the virtual experience. Some studies have highlighted that
haptics inconsistent with real life can lead to a negative
effect on trainees [19]–[21]. More work needs to be done
to determine the extent to which haptics could and should
be incorporated into VR training.

Our participant pool consisted of engineering students and
staff who did not have a healthcare background. Those with
healthcare backgrounds, particularly the OR staff, are likely
to understand the context of the task better and therefore be
more diligent in following the directions. For example, an
OR staff member might better comprehend the implications
of, and therefore better perform, patient positioning (as
measured in this study by patient angle). A larger participant
pool with more relevant background could provide a more
fair and holistic comparison between the training methods.
Last but not least, the crucial challenge in conducting such
a study was the new and unfamiliar VR environment for
the participants that did not have experience with immersive
technologies. Future studies should consider the learning
curve and train users in multiple sessions (maybe weeks

apart), such that they get comfortable with the study material.

V. CONCLUSIONS

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that sys-
tematically compared training technologies for critical tasks
performed by OR staff. Although fundamentally different in
nature, we have built paper-, video-, and VR-based training
materials containing the same information, and observed a
surprising difference in training outcome.

Our training goals were deliberately deﬁned to transfer
knowledge of spatial awareness and physical actions. The
results and conclusions did not directly translate to training
goals that pertain to clinical knowledge or psychomotor skills
(e.g., surgical tasks). The deployment of novel technologies,
such as VR, for training and education, needs to be carefully
evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

VR- and paper-based training have performed similarly,
while video-based training yielded the most inaccurate align-
ment. The most accurate joint angles were achieved by VR-
trained participants, indicating that VR is a suitable tool to
train spatial awareness. Furthermore, the self-reported conﬁ-
dence levels prior to task execution were more reproducible
with VR training and are likely to be increased through
further improvements of a VR experience. Several studies
have ascertained that the increased conﬁdence as a result of
effective training leads to trainees that are more likely to
transfer what they have learned to occupational tasks [22]–
[25].

When combining our observations of a more consistent
self-reported conﬁdence and the desire of the paper-based
learners for videos or interactive material to supplement the
paper-based experience, we can conclude that VR represents

A1A2A3A4A5A6050100150200250Joint error in degreeJoint angles error paperPaperVideoVR22.533.544.55ConfidenceConfidence before execution[10]

[9] Long Qian, Jie Ying Wu, Simon DiMaio, Nassir Navab, and Peter
Kazanzides. A review of augmented reality in robotic-assisted surgery.
IEEE Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics, 2019.
`Eve Coste-Mani`ere, Loua¨ı Adhami, Fabien Mourgues, and Olivier
Bantiche. Optimal planning of robotically assisted heart surgery:
First results on the transfer precision in the operating room. The
International Journal of Robotics Research, 23(4-5):539–548, 2004.
[11] Volkmar Falk, Fabien Mourgues, Loua¨ı Adhami, Stefan Jacobs, Holger
Thiele, Stefan Nitzsche, Friedrich W Mohr, and `Eve Coste-Mani`ere.
Cardio navigation: planning, simulation, and augmented reality in
robotic assisted endoscopic bypass grafting. The Annals of thoracic
surgery, 79(6):2040–2047, 2005.

[12] Manuel Simoes and Caroline GL Cao. Leonardo: a ﬁrst step towards
an interactive decision aid for port-placement in robotic surgery. In
2013 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernet-
ics, pages 491–496. IEEE, 2013.

[13] Long Qian, Anton Deguet, and Peter Kazanzides. Arssist: augmented
reality on a head-mounted display for the ﬁrst assistant in robotic
surgery. Healthcare technology letters, 5(5):194–200, 2018.

[14] Javad Fotouhi, Tianyu Song, Arian Mehrfard, Giacomo Taylor,
Qiaochu Wang, Fengfan Xian, Alejandro Martin-Gomez, Bernhard
Fuerst, Mehran Armand, Mathias Unberath, et al. Reﬁective-ar
display: An interaction methodology for virtual-to-real alignment in
medical robotics. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2020.

[15] Pouya Iranmanesh, Philippe Morel, Oliver Wagner,

Ihsan Inan,
Franc¸ois Pugin, and Monika Hagen. Set-up and docking of the da
vinci® surgical system: Prospective analysis of initial experience. The
international journal of medical robotics + computer assisted surgery
: MRCAS, 6:57–60, 03 2010.

[16] Charlotte Green Carlsen, Karen Lindorff-Larsen, Peter Funch-Jensen,
Lars Lund, Anne Mette Morcke, Merete Ipsen, and Peder Charles.
Is current surgical training efﬁcient? a national survey. Journal of
surgical education, 71(3):367–374, 2014.

[17] Ashok K Hemal, D Eun, Ashutosh Tewari, and Mani Menon. Nuances
in the optimum placement of ports in pelvic and upper urinary tract
surgery using the da vinci robot. Urologic Clinics, 31(4):683–692,
2004.

[18] Heli Liu, Takahiro Kinoshita, Akiko Tonouchi, Akio Kaito, and
Masanori Tokunaga. What are the reasons for a longer operation time
in robotic gastrectomy than in laparoscopic gastrectomy for stomach
cancer? Surgical endoscopy, 33(1):192–198, 2019.

[19] Cecilie V˚apenstad, Erlend Fagertun Hofstad, Lars Eirik Bø, Esther
Kuhry, Gjermund Johnsen, Ronald M˚arvik, Thomas Langø, and To-
ril Nagelhus Hernes. Lack of transfer of skills after virtual reality
simulator training with haptic feedback. Minimally Invasive Therapy
& Allied Technologies, 26(6):346–354, 2017.

[20] NJ Hogle, L Chang, VEM Strong, AOU Welcome, M Sinaan, R Bailey,
and DL Fowler. Validation of laparoscopic surgical skills training out-
side the operating room: a long road. Surgical endoscopy, 23(7):1476–
1482, 2009.

[21] Eleanora P Westebring-van der Putten, Richard HM Goossens, Jack J
Jakimowicz, and Jenny Dankelman. Haptics in minimally invasive
surgery–a review. Minimally Invasive Therapy & Allied Technologies,
17(1):3–16, 2008.

[22] Schwoerer Catherine Rosen Benson Gist, Marilyn E. Effects of alter-
native training methods on self-efﬁcacy and performance in computer
software training”. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74(6):884–891,
1989.

[23] Scott Tannenbaum, John Mathieu, Eduardo Salas, and Janis Cannon-
Bowers. Meeting trainees’ expectations: The inﬂuence of training
fulﬁllment on the development of commitment, self-efﬁcacy, and
motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76:759–769, 12 1991.

[24] Alex Stajkovic and Fred Luthans. Self-efﬁcacy and work-related
performance: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 124:240–261,
09 1998.

[25] Lisa Burke-Smalley and Holly Hutchins.

Training transfer: An
integrative literature review. Human Resource Development Review,
6:263–296, 09 2007.

Fig. 11. Self reﬂective accuracy rating on a scale of 1-5. 1 represents the
lowest conﬁdence and 5 represents the highest. We asked participants to
rank their initial conﬁdence scores after the execution phase.

a more engaging and entertaining experience over traditional
training. Ultimately,
this is a crucial aspect, noting that
continued engagement with training materials tends to yield
a better education outcome.

REFERENCES

[1] Courtney A Green, Hueylan Chern, and Patricia S O’Sullivan. Current
robotic curricula for surgery residents: a need for additional cog-
nitive and psychomotor focus. The American Journal of Surgery,
215(2):277–281, 2018.

[2] Amanjot S Sethi, William J Peine, Yousef Mohammadi, and Chandru P
Sundaram. Validation of a novel virtual reality robotic simulator.
Journal of endourology, 23(3):503–508, 2009.

[3] Christian R Larsen, Jette L Soerensen, Teodor P Grantcharov, Torur
Dalsgaard, Lars Schouenborg, Christian Ottosen, Torben V Schroeder,
and Bent S Ottesen. Effect of virtual reality training on laparoscopic
surgery: randomised controlled trial. Bmj, 338:b1802, 2009.

[4] Baoquan Xin, Guanghui Chen, Yang Wang, Guangjian Bai, Xin Gao,
Jianjun Chu, Jianru Xiao, and Tielong Liu. The efﬁcacy of immersive
virtual reality surgical simulator training for pedicle screw placement:
a randomized double-blind controlled trial. World neurosurgery,
124:e324–e330, 2019.

[5] Neal E Seymour, Anthony G Gallagher, Sanziana A Roman,
Michael K O’brien, Vipin K Bansal, Dana K Andersen, and Richard M
Satava. Virtual reality training improves operating room performance:
results of a randomized, double-blinded study. Annals of surgery,
236(4):458, 2002.

[6] Teodor P Grantcharov, VB Kristiansen, Jørgen Bendix, L Bardram,
J Rosenberg, and Peter Funch-Jensen. Randomized clinical trial of
virtual reality simulation for laparoscopic skills training. British
journal of surgery, 91(2):146–150, 2004.

[7] Kai S Lehmann, Joerg P Ritz, Heiko Maass, Hueseyin K C¸ akmak,
Uwe G Kuehnapfel, Christoph T Germer, Georg Bretthauer, and
Heinz J Buhr. A prospective randomized study to test the transfer
of basic psychomotor skills from virtual reality to physical reality in
a comparable training setting. Annals of surgery, 241(3):442, 2005.

[8] Michelle Lerner, Mikias Ayalew, William Peine, and Chandru Sun-
daram. Does training on a virtual reality robotic simulator improve
performance on the da vinci (r) surgical system? Journal of endourol-
ogy / Endourological Society, 24:467–72, 03 2010.

PaperVideoVR11.522.533.544.55AccuracyHow accurate was your prediction of confidence