Impact of Tactile and Visual Feedback on Breathing
Rhythm and User Experience in VR Exergaming

Robert Greinacher1, Tanja Koji´c1, Luis Meier1,
Rudresha Gulaganjihalli Parameshappa1, Sebastian M¨oller1,2, Jan-Niklas Voigt-Antons1,2
1Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin, Germany
2German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI), Berlin, Germany

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
5
5
1
0
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Combining interconnected wearables provides fas-
cinating opportunities like augmenting exergaming with virtual
coaches, feedback on the execution of sports activities, or how to
improve on them. Breathing rhythm is a particularly interesting
physiological dimension since it
is easy and unobtrusive to
measure and gained data provide valuable insights regarding
the correct execution of movements, especially when analyzed
together with additional movement data in real-time. In this work,
we focus on indoor rowing since it is a popular sport that’s often
done alone without extensive instructions. We compare a visual
breathing indication with haptic guidance in order for athletes
to maintain a correct, efﬁcient, and healthy breathing-movement-
synchronicity (BMS) while working out. Also, user experience and
acceptance of the different modalities were measured. The results
show a positive and statistically signiﬁcant impact of purely
verbal instructions and purely tactile feedback on BMS and no
signiﬁcant impact of visual feedback. Interestingly, the subjective
ratings indicate a strong preference for the visual modality and
even an aversion for the haptic feedback, although objectively
the performance beneﬁted most from using the latter.

Keywords—Virtual Reality, Exergaming, Haptic Guidance, User

Interface, Breathing Biofeedback

I.

INTRODUCTION
A repetitive, monotonous movement is likely to affect the
rhythm of breathing [1], which in return affects the exercise
performance of the whole organism, e.g., [2], [3]. For adjust-
ing the breathing pattern to a given exercise, the breathing-
moving-synchronicity (BMS) is an interesting measure to
quantify since it is cost-efﬁcient and feasible to record mobile.
Generally, wearables providing instant feedback are a promis-
ing research area. As a consequence of advances in technology,
feedback systems are designed to provide speciﬁc information
to assist during and after exercise. The appropriate feedback
helps coaches and athletes to improve their performance and
even accelerate recovery phases [4]. For creating automated
feedback systems, the respiratory rate is an interesting measure
for multiple reasons: ﬁrst, it is tightly coupled with sportive
performance, stress level, and the rhythm of a repetitive
movement [5]. Also, it helps to adapt to stressful situations and
to reduce stress levels [6]. Second, wearable sensors allow us
to measure it even during movement, which makes it feasible
to use as a dependent variable. Finally, breathing patterns can
be communicated effectively in verbatim, visual animations,
or tactile impulses [7].

Although there are two known useful forms of breathing
techniques for rowing, one is predominantly used for non-
professional rowers: one exhale, and one inhale during one

rowing stroke [8]. Since the ideal respiration is tightly coupled
to the rowing strokes, the breathing pattern can be monitored
and facilitated using an ergometer measuring the handlebar
position and a breathing sensor worn by the athletes. The
synchronicity between rowing and respiration, therefore, is
an objective measure of how well the athlete maintained the
correct breathing pattern. Furthermore, the ideal point in time
can be derived to cue the athlete to breathe in or out.

Apart from optimizing breathing patterns of athletes during
exercise, we want to couple the gained insights with another
technology aiming to increase the attractiveness, experience,
and success of personal training. The combination of sport
exercise and gaming (exergaming), is deﬁned as the activity
of playing video games that are combined with physical
movements that include strength, balance, and ﬂexibility [9].
The potential of VR exergaming lies in creating an effective
training environment [10] and assisting training e.g., in the
absence of coaches [11]. By using multisensory feedback
combined with VR exergaming, we aim to make personal
training healthier and more effective.

While audio-visual stimuli come with the potential dis-
advantaged of disturbing nearby users and possess privacy
concerns [12], haptic guidance is limited to the user wearing
the interface. However, the literature still lacks evidence of a
positive impact of the combination of haptic feedback for res-
piration together with VR exergaming. To our knowledge, this
is the ﬁrst study aiming to do so. We demonstrate how haptic
impulses as feedback on the respiration rhythm during training
helps to maintain a synchronous breathing-movement pattern
and how a visual stimulation might be less suitable to do so -
although the acceptance of participants indicates the contrary.
Additionally, we present evidence for the independence of the
VR exergaming environment on the effect of haptic feedback,
suggesting the use of haptic feedback even outside the VR
exergaming realm.

A. Related work

Sensory experience (SE) describes enhancing user Quality
of Experience (QoE) of traditional audio-visual media systems
by augmenting content with tactile or olfactory information,
ambient light, or blowing air [13], [14]. For SE of augmented
audio and video content, a great body of research demonstrates
[15], [16]. The present paper aims to
increased QoE, e.g.,
investigate SE in a VR environment, dynamically supporting
a learning task. Pioneering work regarding learning in virtual
environments suggests a positive impact of non-visual sensory
cues on presence, spatial memory, and SE [17].

©2012 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. This paper has been accepted for publication in the 2020 Twelfth International Conference
on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).

 
 
 
 
 
 
The literature agrees about the positive impact of multi-
modal feedback on motor learning, as outlined in the review
by Sigrist et al. [18]. For example, haptic guidance [19]
helps novices to quickly learn movements in a safe and self-
explanatory way [20], while it can offer in-depth teaching
aspects for advanced learners or athletes [18]. However, apart
from position control feedback, the literature generally lacks
haptic guidance investigations.

Multiple meta-analyses attested a favorable impact on
reaction time and performance through multisensory feed-
back modalities [21], [22]. Both reviews concluded visual-
tactile feedback decreases workload, which is in line with the
Multiple Resource Theory [23], proposing different cognitive
resources for processing different modalities of stimuli. These
systems handle different chunks of information simultaneously.
Hence, augmenting the rowing experience with an additional
feedback modality should improve the rower’s performance
regarding BMS.

To increase the popularity of physical activity, motiva-
tion theory, which considers psychological needs and self-
determination theory (SDT), has been investigated in the ﬁeld
of exergames by Peng et al. [24]. Results showed that with the
introduction of different gamiﬁed elements, motivation, and en-
gagement of players increased. Using a virtual environment as
a medium for sports motivation has already been investigated
with several sports activities such as biking [25] or rowing [26].
Using VR environments combined with rowing results in an
increased feeling of ﬂow and presence and even better overall
user experience (UX) [27].

A. Participants

II. METHODS

Thirty-two participants took part

in the study (12 fe-
male, aged 21-35 years, M = 27, SD = 3.88). Fifteen
participants have had prior experiences with VR and stated
they spend, on average, about 25.2min per week using it
(SD = 1.09h). We hypothesize the most signiﬁcant impact
of a technical intervention on supporting BMS in novices.
Hence, a sample with little to no experience was chosen: 14
participants have used a rowing ergometer before, all without
professional instructions. On average, they spent 7.8min per
week (SD = 25.2min). Following the Declaration of Helsinki
the local ethics committee of the Faculty IV of the Technische
Universitt Berlin granted an ethics approval for this study
(reference FR 2019 01).

B. Apparatus

In order to compute synchronicity between breath and
movement on the rowing machine, the setup involved a variety
of components: As an ergometer, the indoor rowing machine
Augletics Eight Pro [28] was used. Its data was queried using a
built-in REST API accessed over the integrated WiFi interface.
To compare the participants’ breathing rhythm while rowing,
the SweetZpot FLOW [29] breathing sensor was used to record
the data. The participants were wearing the breathing sensor
around the chest, as depicted in Figure 2. The sensor measures
expansion and contraction of inspiratory muscles and provides
updates via Bluetooth at a rate of 10Hz, each containing a
chunk of seven records. The virtual environment was created
in Unity and displayed on an HTC Vive [30] head-mounted
display (HMD). The environment consisted of a red boat with

Figure 1: VR environment simulating a rowing boat. The
lungs pictogram shows the fully inhaled state of the visual
breathing feedback (the ﬁlling of the symbol moves up and
down synchronous to the ideal chest expansion).

oars in the middle of a lake and, depending on the given
condition, an animation of human lungs (Figure 1). The rowing
oars moved synchronously with the rowing machine handle. As
participants started rowing, the boat in the virtual environment
propelled accordingly. The lungs pictogram provided visual
breathing feedback using a gradually rising and declining
virtual horizon, based on the participants’ rowing movement
and updated in real-time. The breathing actuator provided by
GHOST - feel it. GmbH provided a haptic impulse whenever
athletes should start breathing out. This belt contained eight
low-intensity vibration motors (3.3V , type ERM, arranged in
a 4×2 matrix). Master electronics consisted of a C, Bluetooth,
and WiFi modules as well as a battery. The belt was strapped
around the participants’ waist, having the actuators stimulating
the participants’ lower back. Impulses were created through
the simultaneous activation of all actuators for 200ms. This
feedback was timed right before the drive phase to stimulate
exhalation. The orchestration of signals, environment, and ac-
tuators (via a REST API) was done in the Unity 3D application
(see section II-C for more details). Apart from creating the lake
scene [27], Unity was used to collect the sensor data and to
compute the correct timing for the next breathing impulse for
the actuators given the current stretch of the lungs and the
rowing handlebar position.

Figure 2: Breathing sensor and actuator setup, a) depicts the
setup from the front, including the breathing sensor. b) shows
the setup from the back together with the computer controlling
the eight actuators used to provide haptic feedback.

C. Operationalization of Synchronicity

The handlebar position of the ergometer, together with
respiration movements measured through chest expansion, is
used to compute a synchronicity value for each rowing stroke
(see Figure 3). The wave visualizing the handlebar movement
consists of four phases: catch, drive, recovery, and the ﬁnishing
phase.

The rising part of the curve represents the drive phase
in which participants are pulling the handle with their hands
and are pushing themselves away from the starting position
with their legs while keeping the back straight. Similarly,
the falling part of the curve represents the recovery phase
in which participants are leaning towards the front of the
rowing machine and having the legs tucked. In Figure 3, the
wave trough of the rowing data represents the catch phase.
Likewise, the wave peak of the rowing data represents the
ﬁnishing phase. Concerning breathing data, the rise represents
the inhalation phase, and fall represents the exhalation phase,
respectively. Using the breathing data, we computed a syn-
chronicity value for each interval or stroke (see the highlighted
points in Figure 3). A peak detection library [31] identiﬁed
local extrema. Subsequently, the deviation of the breathing
maximum from the ideal center between two neighboring
rowing maxima was computed. This deviation, represented as
a percentage value, encodes the breathing synchronicity of one
rowing cycle. It is optimal when the inhalation peaks while the
handlebar arrives at the closest point to the machine. Figure 3
provides some examples of the synchronicity computation. For
the statistical analysis, all the synchronicity values within one
condition were averaged, resulting in one value per condition
and participant.

Figure 3: Synchronicity computation at the example of four
single rowing cycles. Ideal synchronicity is achieved when the
inhalation peak is at the center of two handle bar peaks while
deviations cause the synchronicity to drop.

D. Procedure

Every participant started with condition one (see Table I)
in which rowing strokes and breathing rhythm were recorded

without any instructions regarding a correct breathing pattern.
This ﬁrst conditions acted like a naive, non-informed baseline.
the haptic impulse actuator belt was set up
Subsequently,
around participants’ lower back, and they were informed about
the haptic and visual feedback which they would receive in
the following conditions. Also, they were instructed on the
correct breathing patterns for rowing (inhale in the recovery
phase, exhale in the drive phase). Then conditions two to
seven were run in a randomized order. After each condition,
participants were asked to ﬁll out two questionnaires on a
tablet: Participants’ perception of ﬂow (full immersion, feeling
of focus and involvement in an activity) was measured using
the Flow Short Scale [32] (discrete 5-point Likert scale).
The AttrakDiff Mini [33] (discrete 7-point Likert scale) was
used in order to measure differences in received attractiveness
of the different conditions. It comprehends four dimensions:
pragmatic quality (perceived usability), hedonic quality - stim-
ulation (perceived novelty and interestingness), hedonic quality
- identity (perceived identiﬁcation with the product), and
attractiveness (perceived quality). Before each VR condition,
participants were asked to put on the HMD. At the end of the
experiment, participants rated which feedback modality they
liked best and which they found the most helpful by ordering
photos from best to worst.

E. Experimental Design

Table I outlines the set of conditions used. It is important to
highlight that condition one and two differ in the instructions
provided. Visual feedback was only provided through the VR
system, which is why the design is not fully factorial.

Condition

Virtual Reality

Visual Feedback

Haptic Feedback

1 (baseline)
2
3
4
5
6
7

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table I: Experimental conditions comparing the two different
feedback modalities in VR and without VR. All participants
started with condition 1, the order of the remaining conditions
was randomized.

III. RESULTS
A. Instruction and the VR Environment

A Wilcoxon signed-rank test indicated that there was a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence of verbal instruction on the synchronicity
(V = 95, p < .001). For this, the synchronicity was compared
between the baseline (condition 1, without instruction) and
condition 2 (with instruction). See Table II for details.

Assessing the impact of the virtual environment on the
BMS, data from condition two and three, both without any
feedback modalities but with and without the virtual envi-
ronment was compared. On a descriptive level,
the mean
synchronicity without VR and without any kind of feedback
(condition 2) was 57.392% (SD = 31.9%), while using VR
gained 57.442% (SD = 31.9%, condition 3). Since the data
was not normally distributed, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test
was conducted, showing no signiﬁcant differences between the

two groups (V = 301, p = .5). Therefore, the hypothesis
regarding a difference purely based on the VR environment is
not supported.

B. Effects on Synchronicity

A repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
employed to compare the two independent variables (IV)
haptic and visual feedback on their impact on the dependent
variable (DV) BMS. Both IVs included two levels each, using
the feedback modality or not. A random factor for the partici-
pants was taken into account. On a descriptive level using only
visual feedback increased the synchronicity by 2.911% while
haptic feedback gained 7.123%. Both modalities combined
yielded an increase of 8.839% compared to no feedback at
all (compare Table II).

the haptic

A signiﬁcant main effect of

feedback
(F (1, 31) = 7.122, p = .012), no signiﬁcant main effect for
the visual feedback (F (1, 31) = 1.915, p = .176) and a sig-
niﬁcant interaction effect between haptic and visual feedback
(F (1, 31) = 4.164, p = .049) were found (see Figure 4).
These results support the hypothesis that haptic feedback does
increase the synchronicity, whereas there is no evidence for a
positive inﬂuence of the visual feedback.

Figure 4: Bar plot comparing the impact of instruction, the two
main factors haptic and visual feedback, as well as the impact
of the VR system on the mean synchronicity. The difference
between the two levels of instruction and haptic feedback are
both statistically signiﬁcant, while the visual feedback and the
impact of VR are not. Whiskers depict the SEM.

C. Effects on UX

Similarly, repeated measures ANOVAs with the same IVs
but using the questionnaires’ scores as the DV were conducted
to study the subjective measurements (see Figure 5).

Flow: A signiﬁcant main effect of haptic feedback
(F (1, 31) = 4.561, p = .041) on the perception of ﬂow
was found. Using haptic feedback signiﬁcantly decreased the
perceived ﬂow from M = 4.268 (SD = .692) to M = 4.143
(SD = .682). Visual feedback had no effect on participants’
perception of ﬂow (F (1, 31) = .015, p = .904), with a change
from M = 4.202 (SD = .673) not using it to M = 4.212
(SD = .723) using visual feedback.

Variable

naive
instructed

haptic on
haptic off

visual on
visual off

VR on
VR off

N

32
32

96
96

64
128

32
32

Mean

SD

95% CI

signif.

34.534
57.393

66.706
59.582

65.085
62.174

57.393
57.442

30.894
31.9

28.731
30.411

27.97
30.619

31.9
31.889

23.396 - 45.673
45.892 - 68.894

60.884 - 72.527
53.421 - 65.744

58.098 - 72.072
56.818 - 67.529

45.892 - 68.894
45.945 - 68.939

p ≤ .001

p ≤ .05

—

—

N = observations, SD = standard deviation, CI = conﬁdence interval

Table II: Impact on BMS; variables naive and instructed
describe the comparisons of condition 1 and 2 only, the initial
one without oral instructions on how to breath correctly during
rowing and a comparison later on in the experiment with no
assistance but after the instructions. Likewise, the impact of
the VR system was investigated by comparing condition 2 and
3 only. The variables haptic and visual depict the grand mean
of conditions 2 to 7 combined, equally to the data used for the
ANOVA. Hence, the difference of observation counts.

Pragmatic Quality: Concerning pragmatic quality, a sig-
niﬁcant main effect of haptic feedback was found (F (1, 31) =
5.873, p = .021). Similarly to the ﬂow ratings, participants
preferred conditions without the feedback modality. Ratings
decreased from M = 5.448 (SD = 1.024) not using haptic
feedback to M = 4.212 (SD = .723) when using it.
Visual feedback had no signiﬁcant impact (F (1, 31) = 2.577,
p = .119), changing the ratings from M = 5.258 (SD = 1.19)
not using it to M = 5.438 (SD = .98) with the modality.

Hedonic Quality - Stimulation: Both, haptic feedback
(F (1, 31) = 5.642, p = .024) and visual feedback (F (1, 31) =
11.38, p = .002) have had a signiﬁcant, positive effect on the
stimulation aspect of the hedonic quality dimension. Haptic
feedback increased the ratings from M = 4.849 (SD = 1.234)
to M = 5.068 (SD = 1.142), visual feedback increased
the ratings from M = 4.832 (SD = 1.243) to M = 5.211
(SD = 1.042).

Hedonic Quality - Identity: Regarding the identity aspect
of hedonic quality, a signiﬁcant main effect of the visual
feedback was found (F (1, 31) = 13.5, p < .001; mean
values changed from M = 4.758, SD = 1.081 without to
M = 5.117, SD = 1.034 with visual feedback). Furthermore,
the statistical analysis revealed an interaction effect between
haptic and visual feedback (F (1, 31) = 5.001, p = .033).
However, haptic feedback alone did not signiﬁcantly alter the
ratings (F (1, 31) = .046, p = .832; mean values changed from
M = 4.87, SD = 1.086 without to M = 4.885, SD = 1.072
with haptic feedback).

Attractiveness: The haptic feedback modality did not
cause a signiﬁcant difference in the attractiveness ratings
(F (1, 31) = 3.135, p = .08), decreasing the ratings slightly
from M = 5.427, SD = 0.968 without haptic feedback to
M = 5.291, SD = 1.0122 with haptic feedback. However,
the visual condition did impose a signiﬁcant difference on the
ratings (F (1, 31) = 14.96, p < .001) and improved them
from M = 5.23, SD = 1.019 without visual feedback to
M = 5.617, SD = 0.881.

For assessing the preference of participants for the three
different interfaces (haptic, visual, and both), Friedman’s Two-

the (virtual) environment. This VR independence is somewhat
surprising since previous, similar studies - although using
different measurements - have found a signiﬁcant difference
in breath counts using a similar VR environment compared
to not using it [34]. Hence, we similarly expected inﬂuence
on the breath that impacts the synchronicity. However, this
independence of the environment opens up many possibilities
of assisting novices to intermediately skilled rowers in both
VR exergames as traditional workouts.

Augmenting audiovisual information with tactile stimuli
can increase the perceived QoE, although the overall liking
seems to be dependent on the users’ expectations (e.g., [15],
[35]). Contrastingly, our participants did not favor the haptic
feedback conditions (dimensions ﬂow, and perceived usability).
This might be an artifact of the haptic interface used rather
than of the modality itself. The relatively large belt might be
uncomfortable to wear while performing physically demanding
rowing movements. Therefore, future work should consider
different approaches to delivering tactile feedback.

Regarding the visual feedback, our data reveals some
interesting discrepancies between subjective perception and
objective measurement. Although our hypothesis of a positive
impact of the visual feedback could not be statistically sup-
ported, it was the visual feedback modality that participants
rated best. This is true for the rank task regarding helpfulness
and preferability, but also attractiveness and both aspects of
hedonic quality. Moreover, while the visual feedback did not
score signiﬁcantly higher on the pragmatic quality and ﬂow
scale, the opposite is given; the haptic condition was sig-
niﬁcantly downrated in these two dimensions. Consequently,
the visual feedback was accepted better - without actually
improving performance, while haptic feedback did indeed.

A surprising ﬁnding of this work concerns the signiﬁ-
cant interaction between the two feedback modalities. The
synchronicity peaked when using the haptic modality alone;
resulting in a reduction of performance when the haptic
feedback was used simultaneously with the visual feedback
(although not statistically signiﬁcant). There are two possible
explanations for this ﬁnding. First, the two stimuli are not
only different in their modality, but also in their perception:
one is a constant animation (visual) while the other is only a
short impulse (haptic). This difference might render the two
incomparable and should be investigated further. Second, the
difference might be an artifact of the experimental design.
Since the visual feedback was bound to the VR environment,
the design is not fully crossed. Therefore, the two extrema of
the interaction (no haptic but visual feedback as well as both
together) are averages from only one condition each (no. 4 &
no. 5 respectively), resulting in 32 observations. Both other
cases of the interaction consist of 64 observations. Thus, the
cause of the interaction could be a result of our experimental
design, which should be considered in future work.

V. CONCLUSION

The present work involved analyzing the effect of breathing
feedback on the BMS. We contrasted haptic sensations and
visual animations as feedback modalities together with or
without a VR environment and further tested the impact of
simple, verbal instruction. Breathing feedback was provided
by analyzing the rowing movement pattern together with a
high-frequency sampling of the participants’ respiration.

Figure 5: Statistically signiﬁcant differences of the two feed-
back modalities on UX. FFS = Flow Short Scale, PQ = prag-
matic quality, HQS = hedonic quality stimulation, ATT = at-
tractiveness, HQI = hedonic quality identity. Whiskers depict
the SEM.

Way Analysis was conducted for the two variables likability
rank and helpfulness rank between the interfaces in VR.

For both rankings likability (χ2(2) = 29.74, p < .001, &
df = 3, N = 32) and helpfulness (χ2(2) = 20.51, p < .001,
& df = 3, N = 32) statistical analyses have shown signif-
icant differences. Additionally, in order to ﬁnd out pairwise
signiﬁcance, the posthoc test was done. Results show that the
interface with no feedback (M = 3.31, SD = 1.06) was
rated signiﬁcantly less likable compared to the condition with
visual feedback (M = 1.66, SD = .86) and in comparison to
feedback with both haptic and visual (M = 2.22, SD = .94).
Further on, only visual feedback was liked signiﬁcantly better
by participants compared to only haptic feedback (M = 2.81,
SD = .89). Similarly, helpfulness of no feedback (M = 3.25,
SD = 1.02) was ranked to be signiﬁcantly lower compared to
visual feedback (M = 1.91, SD = .96) and compared to both
haptic and visual feedback (M = 1.91, SD = .96).

IV. DISCUSSION

The ﬁrst statistical

test conﬁrmed our hypothesis of a
positive impact of instructions provided before using a rowing
ergometer. Even a quick explanation drastically improved the
BMS. This simple fact is a particularly valuable result since
it emphasizes the importance of a simple introduction. This is
especially true for low-end ﬁtness centers where users do not
get any guidance or training before a workout.

The main goal of the present work was to investigate the
impact of the visual and haptic feedback modalities. Although
the hypothesis of a main effect of visual feedback did not hold,
a signiﬁcant main effect of the haptic feedback conﬁrmed the
corresponding hypothesis. Therefore, using haptic impulses to
improve BMS is a feasible measure, and as the comparison
between two conditions both with haptic feedback but with
and without VR demonstrated, this effect is independent of

All participants’ mean synchronicity increased after receiv-
ing verbal guidance. The results indicated that the breathing
feedback presented had a signiﬁcant impact on the BMS when
delivered via a haptic impulse. Interestingly, although our
visual feedback did not increase the synchronicity, it was rated
higher in almost all assessed UX dimensions and favored over
the haptic feedback, which was partly even downgraded in the
UX related ratings.

Improving the BMS helps athletes to enhance health and
performance [3]. This work contributes to the body of research
not only how beneﬁcial a quick introduction can be, but also
evidence for a positive impact of a pure feedback sensation
on performance - with or without a VR environment. Further
research should investigate the impact of an improved BMS
on plain rowing performance in terms of speed and endurance.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Bechbache and J. Dufﬁn, “The entrainment of breathing frequency
by exercise rhythm.” The Journal of physiology, vol. 272, no. 3, pp.
553–561, 1977.

[2] T. Durmic, B. Lazovic, M. Djelic, J. S. Lazic, D. Zikic, V. Zugic,
M. Dekleva, and S. Mazic, “Sport-speciﬁc inﬂuences on respiratory
patterns in elite athletes,” Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia, vol. 41,
no. 6, pp. 516–522, 2015.

[3] Y. Ramacharaka, Science of breath: A complete manual of the oriental
breathing philosophy of physical, mental, psychic and spiritual devel-
opment. Book Tree, 2007.
J. Broker and J. Crawley, “Advanced sport technologies: enhancing
olympic performance,” in ISBS-Conference Proceedings Archive, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2001.

[4]

[5] C. Gilbert, “Clinical applications of breathing regulation: Beyond anx-
iety management,” Behavior modiﬁcation, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 692–709,
2003.

[6] R. Gevirtz, “Resonant frequency training to restore homeostasis for
treatment of psychophysiological disorders,” Biofeedback, vol. 27, pp.
7–9, 2000.

[7] B. Yu, L. Feijs, M. Funk, and J. Hu, “Breathe with touch: a tactile
interface for breathing assistance system,” in IFIP Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2015, pp. 45–52.
J. M. Steinacker, M. Both, and B. Whipp, “Pulmonary mechanics and
entrainment of respiration and stroke rate during rowing,” International
journal of sports medicine, vol. 14, no. S 1, pp. S15–S19, 1993.
[9] Y. Oh and S. Yang, “Deﬁning exergames & exergaming,” Proceedings

[8]

of Meaningful Play, pp. 1–17, 2010.

[10] T. Kojic, U. Sirotina, S. M¨oller, and J.-N. Voigt-Antons, “Inﬂuence of ui
complexity and positioning on user experience during vr exergames,”
in 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Quality of Multimedia
Experience (QoMEX).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[11] L. Ting, “Application of virtual reality technology to sports,” in 2015
AASRI International Conference on Circuits and Systems (CAS 2015).
Atlantis Press, 2015.

[12] M. Janidarmian, A. R. Fekr, K. Radecka, and Z. Zilic, “Haptic feedback
and human performance in a wearable sensor system,” in 2016 IEEE-
EMBS International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics
(BHI).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 620–624.

[13] C. Timmerer, M. Waltl, B. Rainer, and N. Murray, “Sensory experience:
Quality of experience beyond audio-visual,” in Quality of Experience.
Springer, 2014, pp. 351–365.

[14] M. Waltl, C. Timmerer, and H. Hellwagner, “Improving the quality
of multimedia experience through sensory effects,” in 2010 Second
International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 124–129.

[15] F. Giroux, J. Boasen, S. S´en´ecal, M. Fredette, A. Q. Tchanou, J.-
F. M´enard, M. Paquette, and P.-M. L´eger, “Haptic stimulation with
high ﬁdelity vibro-kinetic technology psychophysiologically enhances
seated active music listening experience,” in 2019 IEEE World Haptics
Conference (WHC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 151–156.

[16]

J. Donley, C. Ritz, and M. Shujau, “Analysing the quality of experience
of multisensory media from measurements of physiological responses,”
in 2014 Sixth International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Expe-
rience (QoMEX).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 286–291.
[17] H. Q. Dinh, N. Walker, L. F. Hodges, C. Song, and A. Kobayashi,
“Evaluating the importance of multi-sensory input on memory and the
sense of presence in virtual environments,” in Proceedings IEEE Virtual
Reality (Cat. No. 99CB36316).

IEEE, 1999, pp. 222–228.

[18] R. Sigrist, G. Rauter, R. Riener, and P. Wolf, “Augmented visual,
auditory, haptic, and multimodal feedback in motor learning: a review,”
Psychonomic bulletin & review, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 21–53, 2013.
[19] D. Feygin, M. Keehner, and R. Tendick, “Haptic guidance: Experi-
mental evaluation of a haptic training method for a perceptual motor
skill,” in Proceedings 10th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems. HAPTICS 2002.
IEEE, 2002,
pp. 40–47.

[21]

[20] D. Powell and M. K. O’Malley, “The task-dependent efﬁcacy of shared-
control haptic guidance paradigms,” IEEE transactions on haptics,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 208–219, 2012.
J. L. Burke, M. S. Prewett, A. A. Gray, L. Yang, F. R. Stilson,
M. D. Coovert, L. R. Elliot, and E. Redden, “Comparing the effects
of visual-auditory and visual-tactile feedback on user performance: a
meta-analysis,” in Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
Multimodal interfaces, 2006, pp. 108–117.

[22] M. S. Prewett, L. Yang, F. R. Stilson, A. A. Gray, M. D. Coovert,
J. Burke, E. Redden, and L. R. Elliot, “The beneﬁts of multimodal
information: a meta-analysis comparing visual and visual-tactile feed-
back,” in Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Multimodal
interfaces, 2006, pp. 333–338.

[23] C. D. Wickens, “Multiple resources and performance prediction,” The-
oretical issues in ergonomics science, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 159–177, 2002.
[24] W. Peng, J.-H. Lin, K. A. Pfeiffer, and B. Winn, “Need satisfaction
supportive game features as motivational determinants: An experimental
study of a self-determination theory guided exergame,” Media Psychol-
ogy, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 175–196, 2012.
J. Bolton, M. Lambert, D. Lirette, and B. Unsworth, “Paperdude: a
virtual reality cycling exergame,” in CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2014, pp. 475–478.

[25]

[26] T. Koji´c, J.-N. Voigt-Antons, S. Schmidt, L. Tetzlaff, B. Kortowski,
U. Sirotina, and S. M¨oller, “Inﬂuence of virtual environments and con-
versations on user engagement during multiplayer exergames,” in 2018
Tenth International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience
(QoMEX).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–3.

[27] S. Schmidt, P. Ehrenbrink, B. Weiss, J.-N. Voigt-Antons, T. Kojic,
A. Johnston, and S. M¨oller, “Impact of virtual environments on moti-
vation and engagement during exergames,” in 2018 Tenth International
Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–6.

[28] AUGLETICS-GmbH, “Augletics eight pro,” 2019, https://augletics.de/

rudergeraet/augletics-eight-pro/, accessed 2019-08-26.

[29] FLOW, “Flow sweetzpot,” 2019, https://www.sweetzpot.com/ﬂow, ac-

cessed 2019-03-28.

[30] HTC, “Htc.com - vive — discover virtual reality,” https://www.vive.

com/eu/, accessed 2019-03-28.

[31] E. Billauer, “peakdet: Peak detection using matlab,” http://billauer.co.

il/peakdet.html, accessed 2019-10-07.

[32] S. Jackson, R. Eklund, and A. J. Martin, “The ﬂow manual,” California:

Mind Garden Inc, 2010.

[33] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and F. Koller, “Attrakdiff: Ein frage-
bogen zur messung wahrgenommener hedonischer und pragmatischer
qualit¨at,” in Mensch & computer 2003. Springer, 2003, pp. 187–196,
http://www.attrakdiff.de, accessed 2019-04-1.

[34] S. Arndt, A. Perkis, and J.-N. Voigt-Antons, “Using virtual reality and
head-mounted displays to increase performance in rowing workouts,” in
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Multimedia Content
Analysis in Sports. ACM, 2018, pp. 45–50.

[35] E. Maggioni, E. Agostinelli, and M. Obrist, “Measuring the added value
of haptic feedback,” in 2017 Ninth International Conference on Quality
of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

