Wireless VR/Haptic Open Platform for Multimodal
Teleoperation

Tae Hun Jung∗, Hanju Yoo∗, Yuna Jin†, Chae Eun Rhee†, and Chan-Byoung Chae∗
∗School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Korea
{taehun.jung, hanju.yoo, cbchae}@yonsei.ac.kr
†Department of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University, Korea
yn-j@inha.edu, chae.rhee@inha.ac.kr

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
4
5
2
1
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With emerging trends in the ﬁfth generation and
robotics, the Internet of Skills will enable us to deliver skills or
expertise anywhere over the Internet. In this paper, we propose
a wireless connected virtual reality and haptic communication
open platform to show the proof of concept for multimodal
teleoperation systems in real-time. We focus on a practical
implementation with commercial products to facilitate the access
and modiﬁcation of the system. The performance of the system
is measured in terms of system latency and user-centric metrics.

Index Terms—Internet of Skills, remote control, multimodal

teleoperation, virtual reality, haptic communication.

I. INTRODUCTION

The Internet of Skills (IoS) is one of the most promising use
cases of the ﬁfth generation (5G) wireless communications.
The concept of the IoS is a process of technology that can help
people to access skills and expertise over the Internet regard-
less of the physical distance between them even on a global
scale. By deploying the properly dedicated machines in certain
areas, such as smart home service, industrial manufacturing,
medical assistance, and even space exploration, users are able
to not only share their skills but also beneﬁt in terms of low
costs and risks [1].

To enable these applications, a powerful platform for the re-
mote control of machines, also known as teleoperation, should
be built on the wireless communication infrastructure. The
platform needs to be capable of exchanging haptic information
as well as visual and auditory data between operators and
teleoperators at the same time to enable users to experience
fully immersive services [2]. Thanks to the development of
5G systems, especially the Tactile Internet service, several
teleoperation demonstrations have been shown to the public
by global telecommunication corporations [3] (see Fig. 1).
However, the current communication systems still have a few
limitations such as the optimal network framework, end-to-end
latency, and multimodal multiplexing, which make it difﬁcult
to fully support wireless teleoperation.

To solve these problems, we propose a ”Wireless VR/Haptic
Open Platform for Multimodal Teleoperation” in this paper.
The main contribution of our work is to provide a wireless
teleoperation platform integrating virtual reality (VR), haptic
communication and software-deﬁned radio (SDR) implemen-
tation. Notably, we investigate the system latency with the

Fig. 1. A description of a general scenario of the Internet of Skills

Fig. 2. Structure of Wireless VR/Haptic Open Platform for Multimodal
Teleoperation

proposed latency reducing techniques and evaluate its perfor-
mance.

II. SYSTEM SETUP

A. Scenario description

The system structure of the proposed platform is shown in
Fig. 2. When the operator manipulates the master robot arm,
the slave robot arm copies the movements at the teleoperator
side. The camera captures and streams the view of the teleoper-
ator’s surroundings in real-time to help the operator perform
the assigned task without colliding with obstacles. If there
is an unexpected situation like a collision, the operator can

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Experimental setup (left) and screenshot of the graphical user interface of host PC (right).

feel haptic feedback and adjust the movements using visual
feedback.

B. Hardware setup

The operator part consists of a VR head-mounted display
(HMD) and a six degree-of-freedom (DoF) robot arm, which
are the interfaces for providing visual/auditory feedback and
generating haptic motion data respectively. To collect
the
visual/auditory information of the surroundings at the tele-
operator side, the teleoperator part uses a 360-degree camera
providing a full range of the vision to the operator side. The
captured video data is encoded by the embedded computing
device and packetized at the host PC to be sent over the
wireless link. Moreover, the haptic motion data which is the
three-dimensional position of the tips of the robot arms, is
exchanged over the wireless link bi-directionally to provide the
operator haptic feedback. The wireless communication system
is implemented using LabVIEW system design software and
the USRP SDR platform. The host PC performs some com-
putational tasks and displays a graphical user interface. More
detailed information on all equipment is provided in Fig. 3.

C. System latency

The system loop consists of several delays. Each modality
input needs to be encoded into the compressed data or,
inversely,
incur the encoding or decoding delay. The en-
coded data is sent and received via the Internet in a User
Datagram Protocol (UDP) data stream, causing a network
delay. Moreover, the real-time video and the movement of
the robot should be multiplexed to be sent through the same
communication link, causing a multiplexing depending on the
multiplexing scheme. On USRP, a physical delay is presented
by transmitting an RF signal according to its transmission
scheme.

For video data, the camera input image is divided into
tiles, and the tiles are dynamically allocated to multiple
encoders/decoders in consideration of computation time ac-
cording to importance. Our system assumes that the haptic
motion region is a quality- and latency-sensitive region of

interest (ROI) from the user’s perspective. On the encoder
side, more encoder resources are allocated to the ROI tile
than other tiles so that they can be encoded with sufﬁcient
time. Therefore, various conﬁgurations are attempted to ﬁnd
the optimal encoding mode to have a higher image quality
with the same bitrate. The decoder side allocates more decoder
resources to the ROI tile so that it can be decoded preferen-
tially over the other tiles. Thus, latency-sensitive areas can be
updated without delay on the user’s display.

III. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented the multimodal teleoperation
system combined with wireless communications on the SDR
platform. The VR interface and the kinesthetic robot interface
were used for exchanging video/audio and haptic data, respec-
tively. This work showed the feasibility and accessibility of
our platform as well as the novel techniques to reduce the
system latency, which causes severe performance degradation.
We expect our open platform to be utilized for prototyping and
evaluating key technologies in 5G teleoperation scenarios.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was supported by the MSIT(Ministry of
Science and ICT), Korea, under the ICT Consilience Cre-
ative Program (IITP-2019-2017-0-01015) supervised by the
IITP(Institute for Information & communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation) and Institute for Information & com-
munications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant
funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.2018-0-00170,
Virtual Presence in Moving Objects through 5G)

REFERENCES

[1] M. Dohler, T. Mahmoodi, M. A. Lema, M. Condoluci, F. Sardis, K. An-
tonakoglou, and H. Aghvami, “Internet of skills, where robotics meets
ai, 5g and the tactile internet,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun., Jun
2017, pp. 1–5.

[2] B. Cizmeci, X. Xu, R. Chaudhari, C. Bachhuber, N. Alt, and E. Steinbach,
teleoperation,” ACM Trans.

“A multiplexing scheme for multimodal
Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl., vol. 13, no. 2, p. 21, Apr 2017.

[3] M. A. Lema, K. Antonakoglou, F. Sardis, N. Sornkarn, M. Condoluci,
T. Mahmoodi, and M. Dohler, “5g case study of internet of skills: Slicing
the human senses,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun., Jun 2017, pp.
1–6.

