User Experience of Reading in Virtual Reality -
Finding Values for Text Distance, Size and Contrast

Tanja Koji´c1, Danish Ali1, Robert Greinacher1, Sebastian M¨oller1,2, Jan-Niklas Voigt-Antons1,2
1Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin, Germany
2German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI), Berlin, Germany

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
3

]

M
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
5
4
5
1
0
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Virtual Reality (VR) has an increasing impact on
the market in many ﬁelds, from education and medicine to
engineering and entertainment, by creating different applications
that replicate or in the case of augmentation enhance real-
life scenarios. Intending to present realistic environments, VR
applications are including text that we are surrounded by every
day. However, text can only add value to the virtual environment
if it is designed and created in such a way that users can
comfortably read it. With the aim to explore what values for text
parameters users ﬁnd comfortable while reading in virtual reality,
a study was conducted allowing participants to manipulate text
parameters such as font size, distance, and contrast. Therefore
two different standalone virtual reality devices were used, Oculus
Go and Quest, together with three different text samples: Short
(2 words), medium (21 words), and long (51 words). Participants
had the task of setting text parameters to the best and worst
possible value. Additionally, participants were asked to rate their
experience of reading in virtual reality. Results report mean
values for angular size (the combination of distance and font size)
and color contrast depending on the different device used as well
as the varying text length, for both tasks. Signiﬁcant differences
were found for values of angular size, depending on the length
of the displayed text. However, different device types had no
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on text parameters but on the experiences
reported using the self-assessment manikin (SAM) scale.

Keywords—Virtual Reality, Readability, User Experience, Text

Parameters

I.

INTRODUCTION

The number of Virtual reality (VR) applications is rapidly
growing, and nowadays, virtual environments are used in
various ﬁelds such as medicine, engineering, education, design,
training, and entertainment [1], [2]. In all those sectors, every-
day work entails reading a lot of text [3], and by replicating
parts of this work environments into virtual reality should as
well include it. There are many use cases where text could be
used inside of virtual reality. To create better realism while
replicating the real world or only to create additional value
on top where it would not be possible in real life. However,
reading in virtual reality is not yet focus of activities in industry
and research as much as it is creating realistic models and
environments. Still, it is hard to imagine a real-world without
text, and poor readability in virtual reality might also lead to
the bad overall quality of experience, similarly as it is the case
for web or mobile interfaces [4]. When it comes to deﬁning
good or bad experience of readability in virtual reality, there is
to our knowledge little research done so far. Guidelines for how
best to display text are not yet established and are based on
recommendations published by companies such as Google or
Unity, but standardized recommendations are not yet available.

A. Related work

Readability as a term is used within different domains so
that it can be referred to as the accuracy of reading [5]; as the
ability to understand the text with taking into account the speed
of reading [6]; or to the visual representation of the characters
themselves [7]. In each of these applications, the reader must
be able to read and understand the text. One of the essential
prerequisites for a good user experience of reading text from
a screen is that visual information is designed and displayed
clearly and comfortably [8]. That property of allowing sen-
tences to be read from a given material, regardless of their
meaning, is crucial for readability. Efﬁcient readability requires
excellent legibility of the displayed text, where legibility refers
to the visual properties, meaning how easy it is to recognize a
character or a symbol [9]. That is why concerning readability
in virtual reality, the ﬁrst step is to focus on legibility and
visual representation of text.

Visual representation of text is equally important in digital
solutions, as it is in printed forms, and a lot of standardization
and research was done in this area when it comes to desktop
website [10] or mobile [11] content. One of the most prominent
standards, when it comes to ensuring the accessibility of
website contents, is WCAG2.0 [12]. The idea behind this
standardization is to ensure that users can understand, browse
and interact with websites. Among other suggestions that are
proposed by WCAG2.0, there is an indication for contrast ratio
between text color and background color depending on the text
size. WCAG2.0 Level A means that the website information is
accessible to all users and that the conforming alternate version
is available. Level AA requires a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1
for standard text and 3:1 for large text. Large text is deﬁned
as minimally 18 points or 14 points bold. Level AAA requires
a contrast ratio of at least 7:1 for standard text and 4.5:1 for
large text.

the screen size is not

One of the characteristics of the user interface (UI) in
virtual reality is that
limited [13].
Therefore, VR brings the advantage when it comes to space for
representing information in all directions. However, apart from
ability to present more information, it is important to deﬁne
the position of elements around the user so that the user can
comfortably comprehend information. In order to achieve that,
three zones are deﬁned for the user interface in VR: content
zone is comfortable 140◦-wide angle in front of the user; the
peripheral zone is left and right to the user between 70◦ and
105◦ angle; and everything else that is behind the user is named
as curiosity zone [14]. Also, three zones are deﬁned for the
distance between user and interface, where information should
not be placed closer than 0.5m and beyond 20m.

c(cid:13)2012 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. This paper has been accepted for publication in the 2020 Twelfth International Conference
on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).

 
 
 
 
 
 
As for displaying text in virtual reality, not only the font
size of characters is important, but also the distance in which
this text is displayed. Google has proposed a new font size unit
named distance independent millimeter - dmm. It is deﬁned
as height of the character of 1mm on the distance of 1m.
That was proposed as angular size had no standardized unit
so far in virtual reality, and it is giving a consistent view on
any screen at any distance. Therefore, the unit was quickly
adopted and is used by both industries and in research. One
of the research studies that is reporting in dmm is a study
that explored basic parameters to measure text box size, text
size, and speciﬁc preferences [15]. The results are reporting
that the angular size of the text should be 41dmm +/- 14
dmm. Additionally, participants reported preference of having
white text on black background over black text on a white
background and displaying text in sans-serif type font (Arial)
over serif (Times New Roman). However, in this study, only
Oculus Rift as a head-mounted display (HMD) was connected
to a personal computer and providing high resolution, but not
different resolutions or standalone HMDs were considered.
Another study that was conducted regarding readability in VR
explored performing daily routine work in VR. Instead of text
applications, they created static images and asked the user to
read the text and interact, like with a web browser or emails.
Additionally, the performance was measured by reading speed
and accuracy [16]. Results show that distance to imaginary
representation is important in VR and that permanent head
movement helps to improve readability. However, in this study,
participants had no possibility of adjusting font parameters by
themselves.

B. Objectives

In order to explore what are the text parameters for com-
fortable reading and displaying text in virtual reality, a study
was designed, allowing participants to set up their preferred
settings. The focus of the study was on three main parameters:
the size of text, the distance between user and text, and the
color contrast of text and background. Although research has
already been done in the area of readability for web [17], there
had been little focus on how those standards apply for text
inside of virtual reality, especially for standalone VR devices.
Differentiation of conditions for a study has been created by
using different text lengths (short tittle, medium and longer
paragraph), as well as different HMD devices with different
screen resolutions. The remaining sections of the present paper
explain the process of creating the application for reading and
study, as well as the test set up with the aim to answer these
questions:

• What are the text parameters that users choose as the
best and the worst for reading in virtual reality?

•

•

Are selected text parameters signiﬁcantly different
depending on text length?

Are selected text parameters signiﬁcantly different
depending on virtual reality HMD devices?

• What inﬂuence do device type and text length have
on reported user experience while reading in virtual
reality?

II. METHODS

A. Test setup

The study was conducted in a separate university’s lab
room equipped with two different head-mounted displays
(HMD) - Oculus Go and Oculus Quest, as they have different
speciﬁcations [18]. The resolution of Oculus Go is 1280x1440
LCD, while Oculus Quest has a resolution of 1440x1600
OLED. Difference between devices is also in degrees of
freedom, and for Oculus Go it is only 3, while Oculus Quest
has 6 degrees of freedom. As a virtual environment, the Unity
application had been created with a simplistic empty environ-
ment, where text could be in focus. The virtual environment
had three different stages of adjusting text distance, font size
and contrast of text and background. In order not to inﬂuence
participants with any other text in the virtual environment, as
guidance though stages just colored objects and sounds were
used. Further on, there were different types of text displaying
depending on the number of words: short (2 words), medium
(21 words) and long (51 words). The font used for displaying
text was Arial, with regular weight and default spacing. In
application, it was possible to manipulate with text settings in
order to set distance of text (between 0 and 10000mm), font
size (from 5pt to 40pt) and contrast ratio (from 1:1 to 21:1). All
manipulations were done by using controllers connected with
head-mounted displays, and the same gestures were used in
each stage to simplify gameplay for participants who are not
experienced with virtual reality. Even though in each stage
participant could set up only one value, it was possible to
switch and move between stages in order to create ﬁnal results
as wanted. With the aim to ﬁnd out what font settings are
preferred, participants had to set the best and the worst possible
combination of distance, size and contrast of each text on both
devices. Once when participants selected settings, all values
were saved in a log ﬁle of the application. The order of text
and devices was balanced across participants.

Figure 1: Examples of user interface inside of VR application
where user could use controllers to manipulate text parameters
(text size, distance and color contrast).

C. Participants

A complete set of 22 participants (54.5% male and 45.5%
female) was participating in the study. The average age of
the participants was 28.41 years (SD = 9.56 , min = 19,
max = 62). The majority of participants had some experience
with virtual environments (86.4%), while only 3 participants
(16.6%) never tried virtual reality before, and nobody was an
expert with virtual reality. Additionally, participants reported
that on average, the majority reads between 2 and 4 hours
a day (77.3%). Less than 1 hour of a day reads 13.6% of
participants, while only 9.1% reads between 5 and 7 hours
a day. Lastly, participants reported if they have any eyesight
improvements while participating in a study. Eye lenses were
worn 3 participants (13.6%), 6 participants (27.3%) were
using glasses, and 13 other participants (59.1%) did not need
eyesight improvement.

III. RESULTS

A repeated measure Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was
performed to determine statistically signiﬁcant differences. An
overview of all signiﬁcant effects that will be explained in the
following sections is given with table II. Additionally, table
I is showing for all conditions mean values that participants
have selected as the best settings of text parameters of size,
distance and color contrast.

Table I: Mean values of angular size and contrast ration over all
conditions for the best settings of text parameters. Difference
in conditions was by changing length of text - 2 words (short),
21 words (medium), 51 words (long) and device (Oculus Go
and Quest).

Parameter

Text Lenght

Device

Mean

SD

Short
Short
Medium
Medium
Long
Long
Short
Short

Angular size
Angular size
Angular size
Angular size
Angular size
Angular size
Contrast ratio
Contrast ratio
Contrast ratio Medium
Contrast ratio Medium
Contrast ratio
Contrast ratio

Long
Long

Go
Quest
Go
Quest
Go
Quest
Go
Quest
Go
Quest
Go
Quest

27.48
32.06
17.17
16.18
16.01
17.87
11.89
10.12
10.47
8.71
11.02
9.37

9.86
18.75
4.90
5.25
9.25
24.52
6.68
7.32
7.52
5.94
7.73
5.75

Table II: Effects of different HMD devices (Device) and text
length (Length) on angular size (dmm) as combination of
font size and distance and SAM dimension of dominance
(SAM D), in different tasks where users had to select the best
text settings (Pos) and the worst (Neg).

Effect

Parameter

Cond

dfn

dmm
SAM D

Lenght
Lenght+Device

Pos
Neg

1
1

dfd

22
22

F

9.89
6.14

p

.005
.022

η2
G

0.32
0.22

Figure 2: Graphical explanation of possibilities of manipu-
lations with text parameters: text size, distance and contrast
between text and background

B. Procedure

Participants were invited to the lab room at university,
each at different separated time slot in order to take part in
the experiment alone. At the beginning, the participant was
welcomed by a moderator and presented with an introduction
of the study. After signing a consent, a participant was given a
pre-questionnaire asking about demographic information, their
previous experience with virtual reality, and daily habits in
reading as well as if they have any kind of eyesight improve-
ments such as glasses or lenses. Additionally, participants were
asked to ﬁll in the Afﬁnity for Technology Interaction (ATI)
Scale questionnaire [19] in order to ﬁnd out their tendency
to actively engage in intensive technology interaction. Next
step was that participant was given in the introduction to
each of Oculus devices, controllers and interactions needed for
the experiment. As part of the introduction, each participant
tried to use both devices with a training application that had
the same interactions. However, no data was saved so that
the participant could explore all possibilities and options of
application and interactions with controllers. Also, at
this
stage, participants could change settings of HMD that ﬁt them
with the best comfort. Participants with glasses could also
wear their classes below the head-mounted display as Oculus
is providing enough space for it.

After training was done,

the participant had to set up
text parameters for each condition. Altogether, there were six
conditions, as all combinations of two Oculus devices (Go and
Quest) and three different lengths of text (2, 21 and 51 words).
For each condition, a participant had to set up text parameters
- distance, font size and contrast of text. A participant was
asked to do two tasks: one was to set up text parameters that
readability of the text is the best possible, and the second was
to set up parameters of text to the worst possible readability.
Those tasks were randomized, as well as conditions of the
study. After each task, a participant was ﬁlling in the Self-
Assessment Manikin (SAM) [20] as an emotion assessment
tool
that uses graphic scales, depicting cartoon characters
expressing three emotion elements: pleasure, arousal and domi-
nance. Finally, after settings text parameters for all conditions,
the participant was asked to rate the usability of reading in
virtual reality with the System Usability Scale (SUS) [21]. The
ﬁnal questionnaire was asking participants to evaluate general
readability in virtual reality when they were using their best
text settings and to leave any additional comments.

A. Angular size

B. Contrast ratio

Contrast ratio was calculated between the color of text
and the color of the background of a virtual environment,
and all mean values are reported in table I for settings that
participants have selected as preferred ones for reading in
VR and shown with ﬁgure 5. Even though text length and
device type had no signiﬁcant inﬂuence, mean values when
it comes to the negative example of reading in VR are
interestingly different for both devices. Oculus Go showing
short (M=6.65, SD=8.24), medium (M=6.8677, SD=8.05033)
and long text (M=8.59, SD=9.19) or Oculus Quest and short
(M=7.48, SD=7.85), medium (M=6.45, SD=7.06) and long
(M=6.04, SD=7.02) text. A comparison of contrast ratio and
how frequently it was selected in each task is shown with
ﬁgure 6.

Text parameters of font size and text distances have been
combined and calculated to represent one value named an-
gular size. Angular size is described using Google’s unit for
angular size called distance-independent millimeter (dmm),
where 1dmm equals 1mm height at 1m viewing distance.
The main effect found for the task where participants had to
select the best text parameters is about text length signiﬁcantly
inﬂuencing the preferred angular size of the text. This result
is represented by ﬁgure 3 and all mean values are shown in
table I. Results show that for short text length, angular size
is signiﬁcantly bigger compared with when the text that was
displayed as medium or long. It can also be seen that this effect
is valid for both devices equally, and that device type had no
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on angular size. When it comes to the task
where participants had to choose settings of text parameters to
create the worst experience of reading in VR, no signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuences were found with the inﬂuence of device or text length.
However, values for each condition are signiﬁcantly higher
compared to positive task (ﬁgure 4) for both Oculus Go with
short (M=297.1191 SD=691.48351), medium (M=203.5112
SD=389.74864) and long text (M=203.5112 SD=389.74864);
as well as
(M=404.5926
for Oculus Quest with short
SD=866.13453), medium (M=253.1436 SD=365.15349) and
long (M=169.5190 SD=235.94466) text.

Figure 5: Mean value of contrast ratio between color of text
and background for task of choosing the best text parameters
for reading in VR, in relation to length of text display and type
of VR device used.

Figure 3: Mean value of angular size (in dmm) for task of
choosing the best text parameters for reading in VR, in relation
to length of text display and type of VR device used.

Figure 4: Mean values of angular size (in dmm) for both
tasks, choosing the best (positive) and the worst (negative)
text parameters for reading in VR.

Figure 6: Frequency of choosing values of contrast ratio
between color of text and background for both tasks, choosing
the best (positive) and the worst (negative) text parameters for
reading in VR.

C. SAM

For the task where participants had to set up parameters
to the worst representation of text,
it can be observed in
ﬁgure 7 that length of the text and device type inﬂuenced how
users have rated SAM dimension dominance. While seeing
bad examples for longer text, participants have rated that
feel signiﬁcantly more in control while using device Oculus
Quest (M=3.13, SD=1.52) compared to the same long text
while using device Oculus Go (M=2.50, SD=1.40). However,
rated feeling of dominance was signiﬁcantly higher with
device Oculus Go for short (M=2.95, SD=1.58) and medium
text (M=3.18, SD=1.56) compared to using Oculus Quest
with same short (M=2.18, SD=1.36) and medium (M=2.50,
SD=1.50) text.

Figure 7: Mean value of SAM dominance dimension for the
task of choosing the worst text parameters considering reading
in VR, in relation to the type of VR device used.

IV. DISCUSSION

This study intended to explore comfortable reading settings
of text parameters for users, with different lengths of text and
using different devices. Therefore participants were asked to
select the best possible setting in order to create the most
comfortable user experience of reading for them. Additionally,
the task was also to set text parameters to create a negative
experience of reading by choosing the worst parameters.
Accordingly, the results of the study are showing mean values
of text size, distance (combined as angular size) and color
contrast between text and background that users prefer.

The difference in mean values of angular size between
two tasks is as assumed signiﬁcantly different. However, it
is interesting to notice how in the negative condition mean
values were in general much higher 4. Users were asked to
set the worst combination of text size and distance, and were
not anyhow inﬂuenced by what to choose - the option of very
small or big text. However, as results show, many participants
have decided on creating the option with very big angular size
with choosing text font to be the biggest possible at a very
close distance. Even though standards such as WCAG2.0 [12]
usually suggest font size for normal text to be larger than a
speciﬁc value, it might be important to ﬁnd and deﬁne as well
the maximum value.

When it comes to the task of setting the best possible
settings for angular size, results show that the length of text
is signiﬁcantly inﬂuencing preferred font size and distance. A
short text that was only 2 words in this study, and might have
been comprehended by some participants as a title resulted
in signiﬁcantly larger angular size compared to values for
medium (21 words) and long (51 words) text. Even though
it was not told to participants to think of as title or paragraph,
mean values of short text for both Oculus Go (M=27.48dmm)
and Oculus Quest (M=32.06dmm) are close by values to
the ones that Google guidelines are suggesting for headlines
(40dmm) or titles (32dmm). Likewise, medium or long text
mean values are just a little bit below the proposed Google
guidelines values for body or caption text.

Further on, contrast ration was calculated for each condi-
tion between colors of text and background. Ratio 1:1 repre-
sents a situation where the same color of the text is represented
on the background of that color and therefore looks invisible.
On the other side ratio 21:1 is representing the highest possible
contrast, for example, black text on a white background or
white text on black background. The mean results of contrast
ratio for the task where participants had to select the best
possible text settings are not signiﬁcantly different for different
text lengths or devices, but in all conditions are at least 7:1,
that requires WCAG2.0 Level AAA. However, even though
the WCAG2.0 standard is suggesting guidelines by providing
a ratio that has to be minimally fulﬁlled, interesting results
were reported about the ratio that is closer to maximal values.

For the task where participants had to set the text pa-
rameters to create a negative reading experience, the maximal
contrast ratio of 21 was selected as the worst by around 1/3 of
cases. Therefore creating the design guidelines with only the
minimum value required for contrast ratio might not always be
the right solution for representations of text in virtual reality.
Especially while designing an environment where background
is very bright, as a screen of virtual reality is so close to the
eye that bright color might feel like too much light in the eye
and overall experience would be perceived as rather a negative
one. However, results from this study are just indicating this
trend but are not yet able to deﬁne the values at which this
effect would start happening. Reading only the mean values
for the contrast ratio of the task with setting text parameters to
create a negative reading experience is not enough. Moreover,
it is important to notice that the arrangement of data is rather
on very low or very high contrast ratio value.

Finally, when it comes to user experience of reading in
virtual reality and how people have perceived it, both together
device type and text length had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on results.
Participants have reported that the feeling of being in control,
measured by SAM dimension of dominance, is higher for
longer text while using Oculus Quest compared to the Oculus
Go where participant reporter higher feeling on control for
shorter text when text was set by the worst parameters. It
might be due to the different resolutions of screens between
devices, as well as different degrees of freedom that devices
are providing. Interestingly, devices had an inﬂuence when it
comes to reading with the negatively set text parameters, even
though no signiﬁcant difference was found when choosing the
best possible text settings.

V. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

This paper is presenting the values selected by participants
as the best settings of text parameters of size, distance and
color contrast, as well as the values for the worst settings
concerning reading text in virtual reality on standalone head-
sets. With the aim to investigate the relation between user
experience and reading in virtual reality, this paper is pre-
senting values for basic text parameters - angular size and
color contrast ratio. Results are presenting user preferences
as well as what users deﬁned as a negative experience of
reading in virtual reality. With a task to select the best and the
worst possible settings of text parameters, there are signiﬁcant
differences between those two, as well as the inﬂuence of text
length and different standalone HMD devices. In summary,
this paper is presenting which experience, positive or negative,
can be expected when setting basic text parameters to speciﬁc
values.

It is interesting to observe that so far guidelines have been
proposing values for contrast ratio and text size as minimal
required. It is not only the minimum value that is important,
but the guidelines should also consider proposing maximal
values to which users feel comfortable when it comes to
angular size and contrast ratio for reading in virtual reality.
Angular size was rater signiﬁcantly higher by participants in
task with setting the worst parameters, compared to the task
with choosing the best font size and distance for reading in
virtual reality. Even though virtual reality is providing bigger
space to represent content, when it comes to text, having
bigger font, just because the display and virtual environment
are allowing it, was not preferred by users. Similarly, the
contrast ratio that had maximal values was also not preferred
by users and was rated by some users as the worst set of text
parameters. However, when considering the contrast ratio, it is
also important to address the question of what color is being
used in background and how bright is the virtual environment.
Those two questions are not addressed by results in this paper
and are an exciting aspect that can be researched in future
work.

Study task about choosing the best set of text parameters
resulted in values that can be used as guidelines for angular
size and contrast ratio. Results can be used for designing a
reading experience in virtual reality, especially while designing
an experience for standalone HMD device. Even though no
signiﬁcant difference was found when it comes to the device
types, it might be taken into consideration that the difference
between them could have been bigger. However, when it comes
to the length of text, results have shown that the angular size
for short text, such as title, is set by participants as signiﬁcantly
higher compared to the angular size for medium or long text.

All the reported values are showing the set up of the best
of the worst settings of text parameters (size, distance and
contrast) for reading in virtual reality but are not reporting
on minimal and maximal values that would be acceptable
without destroying the user experience. Therefore, this would
be needed future work, which could lead to better deﬁning
not only minimal requirements for angular size and contrast
ration, but also their maximal limits. Further on, more text
parameters could be included, such as different font families,
different canvas types, or different spacing between letters and
words.

[1] M. O. Onyesolu and F. U. Eze, “Understanding virtual reality technol-
ogy: advances and applications,” Adv. Comput. Sci. Eng, pp. 53–70,
2011.
J. Mart´ın-Guti´errez, C. E. Mora, B. A˜norbe-D´ıaz, and A. Gonz´alez-
Marrero, “Virtual technologies trends in education,” EURASIA Journal
of Mathematics Science and Technology Education, vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
469–486, 2017.

[2]

[3] N. S. A. Karim and A. Hasan, “Reading habits and attitude in the digital

age,” The Electronic Library, 2007.

[4] R. H. Hall and P. Hanna, “The impact of web page text-background
colour combinations on readability, retention, aesthetics and behavioural
intention,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 183–
195, 2004.

[5] S. P. Ardoin, S. M. Suldo, J. Witt, S. Aldrich, and E. McDonald,
“Accuracy of readability estimates’ predictions of cbm performance.”
School Psychology Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 1, 2005.
J. J. Pikulski, “Readability,” Retrieved September, vol. 20, p. 2014,
2002.

[6]

[7] A. Z. M. Ali, R. Wahid, K. Samsudin, and M. Z. Idris, “Reading on the
computer screen: Does font type have effects on web text readability?.”
International Education Studies, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 26–35, 2013.
J. A. Roufs and M. C. Boschman, “Text quality metrics for visual
display units:: I. methodological aspects,” Displays, vol. 18, no. 1, pp.
37–43, 1997.

[8]

[9] S. Zufﬁ, C. Brambilla, G. Beretta, and P. Scala, “Human computer
interaction: Legibility and contrast,” in 14th International Conference
on Image Analysis and Processing (ICIAP 2007).
IEEE, 2007, pp.
241–246.

[10] K.-P. L. Vu, R. W. Proctor, and F. P. Garcia, “Web site design and
evaluation,” Handbook of human factors and ergonomics, pp. 1323–
1353, 2006.

[11] R. Bandeira, R. Lopes, and L. Carric¸o, “Towards mobile web acces-
sibility evaluation,” Free and Open Source Software for Accessible
Mainstream Applications (FOSS-AMA), colocated with ETAPS, pp. 27–
28, 2010.

[12] R. Yates, “Web site accessibility and usability: towards more functional

sites for all,” Campus-wide Information systems, 2005.

[13] E. Bastug, M. Bennis, M. M´edard, and M. Debbah, “Toward intercon-
nected virtual reality: Opportunities, challenges, and enablers,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 110–117, 2017.

[14] M.

Alger,

reality,”
com/vr/VisualDesignMethodsforVR MikeAlger. pdf, 2015.

“Visual
Ravensbourne.

design

methods

virtual
for
http://aperturesciencellc.

[15] T. Dingler, K. Kunze, and B. Outram, “Vr reading uis: Assessing text
parameters for reading in vr,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2018, p.
LBW094.

[16] C. Grout, W. Rogers, M. Apperley, and S. Jones, “Reading text in
an immersive head-mounted display: An investigation into displaying
desktop interfaces in a 3d virtual environment,” in Proceedings of the
15th New Zealand Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. ACM,
2015, pp. 9–16.

[17] B. Caldwell, M. Cooper, L. G. Reid, and G. Vanderheiden, “Web content
accessibility guidelines (wcag) 2.0,” WWW Consortium (W3C), 2008.
[18] C. Hillmann, “Comparing the gear vr, oculus go, and oculus quest,” in
Unreal for Mobile and Standalone VR. Springer, 2019, pp. 141–167.
[19] T. Franke, C. Attig, and D. Wessel, “A personal resource for technology
interaction: development and validation of the afﬁnity for technology
interaction (ati) scale,” International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 456–467, 2019.

[20] M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Measuring emotion: the self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential,” Journal of behavior therapy and
experimental psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 49–59, 1994.
J. Brooke et al., “Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability
evaluation in industry, vol. 189, no. 194, pp. 4–7, 1996.

[21]

