Inﬂuence of Hand Tracking as a way of Interaction
in Virtual Reality on User Experience

Jan-Niklas Voigt-Antons1,2, Tanja Kojic1, Danish Ali1, Sebastian M¨oller1,2
1Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin, Germany
2German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI), Berlin, Germany

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
4
6
2
1
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the rising interest in Virtual Reality and the
fast development and improvement of available devices, new
features of interactions are becoming available. One of them
that is becoming very popular is hand tracking, as the idea
to replace controllers for interactions in virtual worlds. This
experiment aims to compare different interaction types in VR
using either controllers or hand tracking. Participants had to
play two simple VR games with various types of tasks in those
games - grabbing objects or typing numbers. While playing, they
were using interactions with different visualizations of hands
and controllers. The focus of this study was to investigate user
experience of varying interactions (controller vs. hand tracking)
for those two simple tasks. Results show that different interac-
tion types statistically signiﬁcantly inﬂuence reported emotions
with Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM), where for hand tracking
participants were feeling higher valence, but lower arousal and
dominance. Additionally, task type of grabbing was reported
to be more realistic, and participants experienced a higher
presence. Surprisingly, participants rated the interaction type
with controllers where both where hands and controllers were
visualized as statistically most preferred. Finally, hand tracking
for both tasks was rated with the System Usability Scale (SUS)
scale, and hand tracking for the task typing was rated as
statistically signiﬁcantly more usable. These results can drive
further research and, in the long term, contribute to help selecting
the most matching interaction modality for a task.

Keywords—Virtual Reality, Hand tracking interactions, User

experience, Oculus Quest, Interaction type

I.

INTRODUCTION & RELATED WORK

The recent popularity of Virtual Reality (VR) is resulting
not only in many new applications available on the market but
also in many new improvements and new features of head-
mounted displays (HMD). One of the features of virtual expe-
riences is to immerse users into other worlds [1]. Any contact
with the real world such as sensors or controllers can break
this feeling [2]. Therefore, new HMDs are allowing features
of interacting via hand tracking to replace interactions with
controllers.1 This new possibility can lead to very interesting
use cases in virtual reality in the ﬁeld of gaming, but also in
others ﬁelds where virtual reality is used for serious games.
Virtual reality is already being widely used in learning [3],
more particularly in medicine [4] or manufacturing [5]. Those
ﬁelds are traditionally associated with precision, as well as
hand movements are important. However, it is also important
to ensure good quality and user experience to achieve good
simulations and results. Based on the recent release of the

1https://www.oculus.com/blog/thumbs-up-hand-tracking-now-available-on-

oculus-quest

build-in hand tracking technology by the company Oculus
for their HMD Quest and the fact that there is still little to
no scientiﬁc studies performed to test for inﬂuences on user
experience, this paper aims to investigate following questions:
1) How do different interaction types (such as hand tracking
or interaction via controllers) in virtual reality inﬂuence user
experience?, and 2) Do different task types (such as grabbing
or typing) for those interaction types have an inﬂuence on
user experience? The feeling of presence and immersion are
critical factors when it comes to simulations in VR, and a lot
of research has been done already about it [6], [7]. An essential
element in the user experience of virtual reality is to accurately
represent the user’s hand in the virtual environment [8], [9].
This not only related to virtual reality but has already been
researched in the ﬁeld of gaming with other types of virtual
environments [10], putting in focus in particular algorithms
on how to achieve precise hand tracking via various sensors
[11], [12]. There is a study reporting on hand tracking and
visualization in a virtual reality simulation where a design had
been developed offering to track the ﬁngers and palm [13]. The
study was focusing on experiments where participants had to
mimic particular hand positions and reports on performance in
terms of completion time. However, little work has been done
with the focus on user experience with hand tracking in virtual
reality. To the best of our knowledge, there is none research
done with build-in hand tracking in HMD focusing on user
experience with different interaction types.

II. METHODS

The study was conducted in a separate university’s lab
room equipped with Oculus Quest head-mounted display
(HMD). This device was used in this study as it is supporting
interactions using hand tracking as well as interactions with
controllers. For this study, two Unity game applications had
been created to test two different types of tasks - grabbing and
typing. The ﬁrst application was a game with a goal to sort ﬁve
red and ﬁve blue balls by grabbing them and putting them to
the correct box, as shown in Figure 1. The second application
was a game where the player had to retype displayed number
sequences on a virtual numerical keyboard, as shown in Figure
1, and repeat it for ﬁve courses. Both games had a strong
focus to be played with hands, depending on the type of the
game to grab or to type, and both games had the same four
possible types of interactions: 1) Visualized controllers and
hands, 2) Visualized controllers, but no visualization of hands,
3) Visualized hands, but no visualization of controllers, 4)
Visualized hands while using hand tracking. All visualizations,
for both interaction types with controllers and with hand
tracking, are shown in Figure 1.

c(cid:13)2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. This paper has been accepted for publication in the 2020 Twelfth International Conference
on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX).

 
 
 
 
 
 
years (SD = 12.74, min = 19, max = 62). When it comes to
previous experience with VR technologies, 4 participants had
no experience, while the others tried VR before, but nobody
reported to be an expert. Further on, 9 participants reported
having no experience at all with hand tracking for interactions,
while others had little or some experience, and nobody was
an expert with hand tracking. Data collection was conducted
following ethical principles for medical research involving
human subjects.

III. RESULTS

A repeated measure Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was
performed to determine statistically signiﬁcant differences to
investigate the effects between conditions with different task
types and interaction types. The two tasks in the application
were grabbing and typing, which had to be fulﬁlled using dif-
ferent interaction types (using controllers with visualization of
only controllers, controllers with visualization of only hands,
controllers with visualization of hands and controllers or using
hand tracking). Further on, the Friedman’s Two-Way Analysis
was done to ﬁnd out signiﬁcant differences in preference of
interaction types. Table I and II provide an overview of the
statistically signiﬁcant results of the Friedman and the repeated
measure ANOVA tests.

Table I: Effects of both task types (grabbing and typing), and
all interaction types (hand tracking or controllers with different
visualizations of hands and controllers) on arousal (SAM A),
valence (SAM V) and dominance (SAM D) measured with
SAM, and feeling of presence (PRES) and realism (REAL)
measured with IPQ.

Parameter

Effect

dfn

dfd

F

p

Task
Task
Task
Interaction
Interaction
Interaction

SAM A
PRES
REAL
SAM A
SAM V
SAM D

1
1
1
3
3
3

20
20
20
20
20
20

.005
10.35
.033
5.30
.039
4.90
5.25
.003
20.08 < .001
11.43 < .001

η2
G

0.35
0.22
0.21
0.22
0.51
0.38

Table II: Post hoc analysis with Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
for signiﬁcantly different effects of ranking for all interaction
types: Controllers with visualization of both hands and con-
trollers (C H), controllers with only visualizations of hands
(C OnlyH), controllers with visualizations of only controllers
(C noH) and hand tracking (HTrack).

Interaction

C H and C OnlyH
C H and C noH
C H and HTrack

dfn

3
3
3

dfd

20
20
20

Z

−3.079
−3.162
−2.844

p

.002
.002
.004

There were statistically signiﬁcant differences due to the
conditions on perceived arousal, presence, and realism (see
Table I and Figure 2). For the different conditions where
participants had different task types, either grabbing or typing,
it can be observed that it inﬂuenced how the users have rated
SAM dimension arousal. For the typing task, arousal was rater
as signiﬁcantly higher (M = 3.83, SE = 0.21) compared to the
grabbing task (M = 3.54, SE = 0.22). Further on, participants
have reported feeling signiﬁcantly higher sense of presence

Figure 1: Left: Preview of typing task (upper) and preview of
grabbing task (below); Right (top to bottom): interaction with
visualization of both controllers and hands, visualization of
only controllers, visualization of only hands, and interaction
with hand tracking.

At

the beginning of the experiment, participants were
welcomed. As part of the introduction to participants, it was
explained that the assignment is to play two VR games with
different tasks, using controllers and hand tracking as types
of interaction. Participants also signed a consent form, and
before any VR condition, they were given a questionnaire
asking about demographics, their previous experience with
virtual reality, and hand tracking. Also, participants were asked
about their tendency to actively engage in intensive technology
interaction by Afﬁnity for Technology Interaction (ATI) Scale
questionnaire [14]. As part of the introduction to virtual reality
and interactions, participants were explained how to use con-
trollers and hand tracking for interaction, and they were given
a chance to familiarize themselves with virtual environments
of both games. After they conﬁrmed to the moderator that
they feel comfortable with learned interactions, the moderator
could start the experiment. Each participant was playing two
games with different task types grabbing or typing four times
with each of the interaction types, which means that each
participant overall participated in 8 conditions. The moderator
asked the participants to observe the visualization and behavior
of the interaction at the beginning of each condition. After
each condition, participants were asked to ﬁll in the Self-
Assessment Manikin (SAM) [15] as an emotion assessment
tool that uses graphic scales. Additionally, after each condition,
participants were also rating feeling of presence and realism
using a standardized measurement of perceived presence with
a subjective scale: the Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ)
[16]. After all conditions, the participants were asked to rate
the usability of reading in virtual reality with the System
Usability Scale (SUS) [17] for hand tracking separately for
both grabbing and typing task. Finally, at the end, participants
were asked to ﬁll in a ﬁnal questionnaire asking to rank the
four different interactions in their experience from best to
worse. In total, there were 20 participants, eight female, and
12 male, with the average age of the participants was 30.20

Ranking of the preferred way of interaction types, where
participants had to order from best (4) interaction type to
worst (1), resulted in statistically signiﬁcant differences (see
Table II). A side corrected pairwise comparison showed that
interaction type with controllers where both where hands
and controllers were visualized (M = 3.30, SE = 0.47) were
assigned a signiﬁcantly higher rank compared to all other
conditions: controllers with visualizations of only controllers
(M = 2.35, SE = 0.93), of only hands (M = 2.25, SE = 1.16), and
using hand tracking (M = 2.10, SE = 1.37). A paired-samples
t-test was conducted to compare average SUS scale values
in hand tracking for grabbing (M = 56.50, SE = 18.09), and
hand tracking for typing (M = 75.62, SE = 20.96). There was a
signiﬁcant difference in the scores; t(19) = 3.01, p = 0.007.

IV. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION

The type of task (grabbing vs. typing) had an impact on
how participants experienced the experimental condition. Dur-
ing the grabbing task, participants experienced lower arousal,
higher presence, and higher realism. This result can be as-
signed to the fact that a grabbing task is more natural, therefore
resulting in a higher realism and presence experience. The
higher arousal of participants during the typing task could be
due to higher demand during the more unnatural task. The type
of interaction (controllers visualized as both controllers and
hands, the controller only, the controller only hands, and hand
tracking) did not inﬂuence the experience of presence and re-
alism. Nevertheless, there was an inﬂuence of interaction type
on all SAM dimensions (valence, arousal, and dominance). It
can be seen that participants felt less aroused, have a more
positive experience (higher valence), and felt less dominant
during the experimental condition hand tracking compared to
all interaction types involving controllers. The higher valence
for hand tracking can be addressed to the fact that users like
the experience better. The lower arousal values could also be
due to reduced demand due to the interactions imposed on
the participants. The lower dominance experience could be to
the fact that interacting with hand tracking leads to a lower
feeling of control/precision and, therefore, also to a lower
dominance rating. Finally, participants ranked the interaction
type, including controllers visualized as both controllers and
hands, as being more preferred than all other interaction types.
The latter effect could be a combination of being used to
interact with controllers and that most tasks are currently rather
developed for typing selecting with a controller. Users still
seem, when it comes to a visualization, preferred that not only
the controller but also the hands are visualized. Finally, hand
tracking for typing was rated statistically signiﬁcantly more
usable as hand tracking for the task grabbing on the SUS
scale. This effect could be due to the fact that users are still
more used to controller interaction and, therefore, also rate this
experience a being more usable. This study showed that user
experience using pure hand tracking interaction lead to a more
positive and less arousing experience while reducing the sense
of dominance/control. These results can drive further research
and, in the long term, contribute to help selecting the most
matching interaction modality for a task.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Zahorik and R. L. Jenison, “Presence as being-in-the-world,” Pres-

ence, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 78–89, 1998.

Figure 2: Mean values of SAM arousal dimension (SAM A),
presence (PRES), and realism (REAL) over all participants for
both tasks grabbing and typing. Whiskers denote 95 percent
conﬁdence intervals.

Figure 3: Mean values of the SAM dimensions: arousal
(SAM A),valence (SAM V), and dominance (SAM D) over
all participants for all interaction types with controllers (vi-
sualised as both controllers and hands, only controller, only
hands) and hand tracking. Whiskers denote 95 percent conﬁ-
dence intervals.

while playing the task where they had to grab the balls
(M = 4.00, SE = 0.15) compared to the task where they were
typing (M = 3.70, SE = 0.17). Similarly, the feeling of realism
was signiﬁcantly higher for grabbing task (M = 2.88, SE = 0.14)
compared to the typing task (M = 2.69, SE = 0.14). Comparing
inﬂuences that were caused by different interaction types (with
controllers or hand tracking), for all three dimensions of SAM
questionnaire, statistically signiﬁcant differences were found
(see Table I and Figure 3). SAM dimension of arousal was
rated signiﬁcantly higher for interaction type using only hand
tracking (M = 3.38, SE = 0.21) compared to the interaction with
the controller where only hands were visualized (M = 3.83,
SE = 0.21). Similarly, the dimension of valence was for hand
tracking (M = 2.40, SE = 0.20) signiﬁcantly higher compared to
all other interaction types with controllers visualizes either as
only controllers (M = 1.65, SE = 0.14), only hands (M = 1.48,
SE = 0.12), or with visualization of both (M = 1.58, SE = 0.16).
Interestingly, the dimension of dominance was reported to
be signiﬁcantly lower for hand tracking (M = 3.13, SE = 0.16)
compared to all other conditions with visualization of both
controllers and hands (M = 3.85, SE = 0.14), visualization of
only controllers (M = 3.75, SE = 0.16), or visualization of only
hands (M = 3.70, SE = 0.14).

[2] R. McGloin, K. Farrar, and M. Krcmar, “Video games, immersion, and
cognitive aggression: does the controller matter?” Media psychology,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 65–87, 2013.

[4]

[3] T. Monahan, G. McArdle, and M. Bertolotto, “Virtual reality for
collaborative e-learning,” Computers & Education, vol. 50, no. 4, pp.
1339–1353, 2008.
J. L. McGrath, J. M. Taekman, P. Dev, D. R. Danforth, D. Mohan,
N. Kman, A. Crichlow, W. F. Bond, S. Riker, A. Lemheney et al.,
“Using virtual reality simulation environments to assess competence for
emergency medicine learners,” Academic Emergency Medicine, vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 186–195, 2018.

[5] A. Y. Nee and S.-K. Ong, “Virtual and augmented reality applications in
manufacturing,” IFAC proceedings volumes, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 15–26,
2013.

[6] K. Mania and A. Chalmers, “The effects of levels of immersion
on memory and presence in virtual environments: A reality centered
approach,” CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 247–264,
2001.

[7] F. P. Brooks, “What’s real about virtual reality?” IEEE Computer

graphics and applications, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 16–27, 1999.

[8] C. Manresa, J. Varona, R. Mas, and F. J. Perales, “Hand tracking
and gesture recognition for human-computer interaction,” ELCVIA
Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis, vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 96–104, 2005.
J. Gratch, J. Rickel, E. Andr´e, J. Cassell, E. Petajan, and N. Badler,
“Creating interactive virtual humans: Some assembly required,” IEEE
Intelligent systems, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 54–63, 2002.

[9]

[10] R. Y. Wang and J. Popovi´c, “Real-time hand-tracking with a color
glove,” ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–
8, 2009.

[12]

[11] B. Penelle and O. Debeir, “Multi-sensor data fusion for hand tracking
using kinect and leap motion,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Virtual
Reality International Conference, 2014, pp. 1–7.
J. Taylor, L. Bordeaux, T. Cashman, B. Corish, C. Keskin, T. Sharp,
E. Soto, D. Sweeney, J. Valentin, B. Luff et al., “Efﬁcient and precise
interactive hand tracking through joint, continuous optimization of pose
and correspondences,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2016.

[13] C. R. Cameron, L. W. DiValentin, R. Manaktala, A. C. McElhaney,
C. H. Nostrand, O. J. Quinlan, L. N. Sharpe, A. C. Slagle, C. D. Wood,
Y. Y. Zheng et al., “Hand tracking and visualization in a virtual reality
simulation,” in 2011 IEEE systems and information engineering design
symposium.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 127–132.

[14] T. Franke, C. Attig, and D. Wessel, “A personal resource for technology
interaction: development and validation of the afﬁnity for technology
interaction (ati) scale,” International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 456–467, 2019.

[15] M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Measuring emotion: the self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential,” Journal of behavior therapy and
experimental psychiatry, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 49–59, 1994.

[16] T. Schubert, F. Friedmann, and H. Regenbrecht, “The experience of
presence: Factor analytic insights,” Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 266–281, 2001.
J. Brooke et al., “Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability
evaluation in industry, vol. 189, no. 194, pp. 4–7, 1996.

[17]

