Using Photo Modeling Based 3DGRSL to Promote 
the Sustainability of Geo-Education, a case study 
from China. 

Xuejia Sang1, Linfu Xue2, Xiaopeng Leng3, Xiaoshun Li1,*, Jianping Zhou4 

1  School of Environment Science and Spatial Informatics, China University of Mining and Technology, 

Xuzhou 221116, China; sangxj@cumt.edu.cn (X.S.), lixiaoshun1983@sohu.com (X.L.) 

2  College of Earth Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130061, China; xuelf@jlu.edu.cn (X.L.) 
3  College of Information Sciences and Technology, Chengdu University of Technology, Chengdu 610059, 

China 

4  University of Göttingen, Geoscience Center, Department of Sedimentology and Environmental Geology, 

Goldschmidtstrasse 3, D-37077, Germany; jzhou1@uni-goettingen.de (Z.J.) 

*  Correspondence: lixiaoshun1983@sohu.com; Tel.: +86-132-580-03887 

Abstract: In earth science education, observation of field geological phenomena is very important. 
Due to China's huge student population, it is difficult to guarantee education fairness and teaching 
quality  in  field  teaching.  Specimens  are  indispensable  geo-education  resources.  However,  the 
specimen  cabinet  or  picture  specimen  library  has  many  limitations  and  it is  difficult  to  meet  the 
internet-spirit  or  geo-teaching  needs.  Based  on  photo  modeling,  this  research  builds  a  3D  Geo-
Resource  Sharing  Library  (3DGRSL)  for  Geo-Education.  It  uses  the  Cesium  engine  and  data-
oriented distributed architecture to provide the educational resources to many universities. With 
Browser/Server (B/S) architecture, the system can realize multi-terminal and multi-scenario access 
of mobile phones, tablets, VR, PC, indoor, outdoor, field, providing a flexible and convenient way 
for preserving and sharing scientific information about geo-resources. This makes sense to students 
who cannot accept field teaching in under-funded colleges, and the ones with mobility problems. 
Tests  and  scoring  results  show  that  3DGRSL  is  a  suitable  solution  for  displaying  and  sharing 
geological  specimens.  Which  is  of  great  significance  for  the  sustainable  use  and  protection  of 
geoscience teaching resources, the maintenance of the right to fair education, and the construction 
of virtual simulation solutions in the future.   

Keywords: Geo-Resource Sharing Library; Photographic modeling; Virtual Lab 

0. Introduction 

In Earth science, many field educational resources are so important rare and non-transportable 
resources that many universities offer rich field practice courses [1-2]. Examples include the Colorado 
School of Mines, New York University, and the University of Alberta  [3-5]. The British Geological 
Society recommends that a minimum field practice period for undergraduate education in geology 
as  105  days  [6].  However,  China’s  special  problems  have  made  most  geo-practical  courses  time-
critical and under-quality. How to resolve the conflict between quantity and quality has always been 
a  difficult  problem  for  field  geo-education.  Virtual  visualization  looks  like  a  solution.  However, 
modeling  of  real  rocks  has  always  been  very  time-consuming  and  laborious,  and  rough  and  false 
virtual rocks, outcrops, and terrain have severely restricted their application in geosciences. Therefore, 
the reproduction technology of real field environment is the core issue of virtual geoscience research, 
and it is also an important issue for the open and sharing of geo-education resources to promote the 
sustainability and equity of geoscience education.   

1. Problems of Geo-Educational Resources in China 

1.1 Restriction for geo-education 

 
 
 
 
 
2 of 13 

China  has  the  largest  group  of  young  students  in  the  world.  It  is  difficult  to  manage  field 
activities  and  safety  issues  are  frequent.  The  geo-educational  resources  are  often  located  in 
inaccessible terrains such as steep cliffs and deep valleys. Even with thoughtful considerations, field-
teaching  activities  are  highly  risky.  In  2018,  a  tutor  and  four  students  from  Southwest  Petroleum 
University  and  Jilin  University  died  during  field  geological  survey;  a  graduate  student  of  China 
University of Geosciences fell off a cliff in 2015.   

Apart from the safety issues, summer field practices are often delayed or cancel by continuous 
rain in Eastern China. There are many more restrictions, just like Corona Virus Disease 2019, which 
has stopped classroom teaching and field teaching activities in almost all Chinese universities since 
the Chinese New Year. Field activities are facing so many restrictions that many schools have begun 
to  reduce  field  courses,  and  some  underfunded  schools  have  directly  canceled  them.  This  has 
seriously affected the quality of geo-education in China [3,6]. 

1.2. Lack of protection for geo-education resources 

The  real-world  teaching  resources  often  face  the  risk  of  being  destroyed.  For  example,  many 
geological  samples  have  been  destroyed  during  civil  construction.  Many  non-renewable  fossils, 
minerals, and crystals have been destroyed or transferred to traditional specimen rooms (Figure 3). 
There is a geological practice base in the Jilin University in Xingcheng City. Compared with the 
other seven practice bases in China, the Xingcheng base has better infrastructure and classic strata 
and structural outcrops. However, in 2018, to prevent landslides and falling rocks (Figure 1), the local 
government  protected  the  exposed  rock  mass  on  the  roadside,  thus  it  is  no  longer  available  for 
teaching. In other words, this classic field geo-teaching resource has lost. 

In another example, in Linyi City, China, footprint fossils were reported by Xing [7], evidencing 
that the Deinonychosauria lived in groups. However, these were destroyed by thieves in less than a 
year, leaving only gravel on the ground (Figure 2). 

A 

B 

Figure 1. A geological site that was "damaged" while protecting the safety of citizens. A) Sandstone 

outcrop in Xingcheng City, China, photo taken on June 11, 2017. B) The outcrop was completely 

covered by cement, photo taken on September 11, 2018. 

A 

B 

 
 
 
3 of 13 

Figure 2. Geological sites in nature are not effectively protected. A) Dinosaur footprint fossil in 

Linyi City, China, photo taken on June 1, 2018. B) Dinosaur footprint fossils were destroyed, photo 

taken on April 26, 2019. 

1.3. The inconvenience of specimens storing 

First,  there  are  huge  specimens  that  cannot  be  collected  in  nature,  such  as  mountains,  rivers, 
valleys,  cliffs,  and  boulders.  They  are  important  rare  and  non-transportable  resources  for  geo-
education.  Second,  the  collection  and  sharing  of  even  a  small  geoscience  specimen  are  difficult. 
Classic specimens are often considered an exclusive collection.  At the same time, many specimens 
were locked in the cabinet, making it difficult to observe freely (Figure 3).  Moreover, many under-
funded  geoscience  colleges  are  unable  to  provide  students  with  appropriate  geo-specimens  or 
practical  courses.  Therefore,  preservation  and  utilization  of  these  specimens  have  always  been  a 
problem.   

A 

B 

. 

Figure 3. The traditional method for storing geo-specimens A) A dusty specimen display case. B) A 

locked specimen display case to prevent theft but it also prevents the students from observing it. 

1.4. Inappropriateness of Geo-image database 

In order to facilitate the view and digitization of specimens, many specimen databases have been 
created, such as the National Specimen Information Infrastructure (NSII) [8], National Infrastructure 
of Mineral, Rock and Fossil Resources for Science and Technology (NIMRFRST) [9]. However, most 
of these databases store the data in the form of images and texts (Figure 4). These databases merely 
offer directory or indexing of resources. These images and texts are often boring to students. A user 
cannot see the three-dimensional shape of the specimen, the spatial shape before the collection, and 
the macroscopic relationship between the specimen and the environment. Therefore, these databases 
are not conducive to the user to develop a whole way of geo-thinking. 

A 

B 

Figure 4. A typical Image geo-database uses pictures and text to describe specimens. A) Typical online 
specimen picture database named NSII. B) Database index for NIMRFRST. 

 
 
 
 
4 of 13 

2. Original Intention of 3DGRSL 

Skibba [10], Jones [11] and Owens [12] believe that 3D and VR Technologies can be a solution to 
STEM education like geology, geomorphology or topography [13]. Carbonell found that the aid of 
3D visualization can greatly improve the teaching in geoscience [14, 15]. Meyer believes that virtual 
reality technology allows students to explore the earth while sitting in a classroom [16]. The virtual 
lab  has  been  proven  to  be  the  right  way  to  promote  effective  teaching.  However,  the  teaching  of 
geosciences needs special attention. Since the knowledge of geology comes from nature, the virtual 
environment used in geology education must be realistic. Geology, geomorphology, and geography 
education require real surface-morphology relationships; structural analysis requires a rigorous and 
accurate surface model; lithology analysis requires detailed model texture. These natural phenomena 
should not be fabricated. Because, after all, the ability to interpret natural phenomena is to be verified 
in the actual work of students in the future. 

The game map editor (GME) is not the right tool for creating virtual environments directly [11]. 
Traditional  workflow  with  GME  usually  depends  on  the  Digital  Elevation  Model  (DEM)  and  use 
satellite image as a ground-texture. The virtual terrain and the textural fineness are limited by the 
resolution of the DEM and the satellite image, respectively. Unfortunately, this method cannot meet 
the observing needs of geoscience at the outcrop and specimen scale. Figure 5 gives the process of 
producing terrain. First, the DEM data (Figure 5B) is used to stretch out the 3D surface, and then the 
satellite  image  texture  (Figure  5A)  is  attached  to  the  3D  surface.  However,  the  resolution  of  the 
satellite image is too low and can only be manually replenished with texture information. Figure 5C 
is the final model and Figure 5D is the close-up view of the model. In Figure 5D, it can be observed 
that the terrain lacks details and the texture was repeated and false. Limited to GME, many virtual 
geosciences teaching systems cannot provide real terrain and rock models (Figure 6) [17].   

A 

B 

C 

D 

Figure  5.  The  traditional  work  process  of  establishing  a  ground-model  based  on  DEM  data  and 
satellite images. A) Satellite image. B) Digital Elevation Model (DEM).  C) Ground-model made by 
game map editor (GME). D) Detail of ground-model. 

 
 
5 of 13 

Figure 6. Fake terrain and outcrops commonly used in a virtual education system. 

Fake terrain and stretched texture are not problematic in video games, but they cause a severe 
problem in geoscience education or libraries. The real models based on true geoscience knowledge 
are critical for both digital archiving and education. Therefore, the difficulty of modeling complex 
and realistic 3D models is an important issue that needs to be solved during the construction of 3D 
Geo-Resource Sharing Library. 

Figure 7. Design ideas for some features of 3DGRSL. 

Therefore, this study puts forward the idea of building 3DGRSL (Figure 7) which can be used to 

show realistic geoscience 3D models. The ideal 3DGRSL should have some obvious advantages: 

1. The real three-dimensional model can be directly observed in geoscience.   
2.  Shared  and  open  design,  which  is  convenient  for  researchers  to  maintain,  update  and 

communicate.   

3. Efficient 3D display mode to meet the needs of 3D display efficiency and hardware.   
In view of the above, new methods need to be applied. Next, we introduce several methods for 

targeted problem solving in 3DGRSL. 

3. Methodology 

3.1. Photo modeling 

The  photo  modeling  method  with  core  algorithms  such  as  structure  from  motion  (SFM)  and 
multi-view stereo (MVS) [18] provides high-precision 3D data comparable to laser scanning while 
offering portability, low power consumption, and fast data collection. Because of these advantages, 
photo modeling technology has been applied rapidly in geosciences in the past four years [18-23], 

 
 
 
6 of 13 

and  there  is  a  trend  to  replace  ground  laser  scanning  modeling.  They  are  considered  important 
methods for solving problem about producing complex 3D model [22, 24]. 

The first step in photo modeling is the feature matching of the SFM algorithm (Figure 8). The 
SFM looks for the corresponding features of images in a set and uses the resulting matching points 
to calculate the relative position of each camera. It simultaneously determines the camera position at 
the time of each image capture and the spatial coordinates of each matching feature point [18]. 

This  algorithm  typically  uses  an  incremental  approach  that  combines  more  images  in  each 
successive iteration. These matching feature points constitute a feature point cloud that represents 
the  structure  of  the  target  surface  defined  within  the  local  coordinate  system.  After  obtaining  the 
attitude information of the known camera, a multi-view stereo algorithm is used to generate a dense 
point cloud for the surface of the object (Figure 9). 

Figure 8. Schematic diagram of Structure from Motion (SFM) algorithm. 

The MVS algorithm identifies the best match between the images by systematic search on the 
pixel grid. It improves the  matching precision and obtains more 3D point clouds known as dense 
point  clouds  [19].  There  is  no  technical  problem  in  using  triangulation  or  mesh  interpolation  to 
generate a digital elevation model (DEM) or a 3D model of any selected direction from these dense 
point clouds. The 3D model or DEM can be used to correct the ground undulation and derive the 
orthophoto [23]. In addition, the 3D model can be formatted into a common 3D format, like 3D tiles 
for visualization and sharing [25]. 

Figure 9. Using SFM to restore 3D form with high resolution. 

3.2. Cesium Engine 

Cesium Engine is an open-source JavaScript library that has been widely used in world-class 3D 
rendering  and  map  hosting  solutions.  It  creates  maps  or  3D  globes  based  on  static  and  dynamic 
geographic  information  data.  Cesium  has  advanced  3DTiles  technology  that  can  improve  the 
transmission  and  display  efficiency  of  3D  model  resources.  The  3D  Tiles  format  is  a  common  3D 

 
 
 
7 of 13 

model transmission and presentation solution for platforms such as Cesium. Its tile-set is a collection 
of tiles organized by a tree-shaped spatial data structure. Each tile has a virtual box that contains its 
inner  structure  completely.  Its  structure  has  spatial  coherence,  and  the  content  of  the  sub-tile  is 
entirely contained within the virtual range of the parent tile giving it the  flexibility of hierarchical, 
sub-regional, and multi-threaded loading, greatly improving the speed and efficiency of the model 
display (Figure 10). In February 2019, 3D Tiles became the OGC Community Standard for Streaming 
Massive 3D Geospatial Content [29]. 

The complicated 3D model generated by photographic modeling needs to be simplified in order 
to reduce resource expenditure as it has excessive detail and unnecessary illumination information 
even with 3DTiles. The Instant Mesh software or Simplygon can  be used to simplify the mesh and 
then  3DsMax  can  be  used  to  clean  up  the  redundant  vertices  [26,  27].  According  to  previous 
experiments, the model can be reduced by 70% of surfaces without any loss of visual effects. 

The models produced by photo modeling come with light and shadows information and must 
be removed. Black curtains, shadowless lamps, etc., can be used to eliminate shadow in the modeling 
process of smaller specimens. However, there are no shadowless-lights that can cover the cliff. The 
delighting tool can be used to remove shadows after modeling. It developed by Unity French team 
for generating the final unlit diffuse texture, and it is open-sourced on Github [28]. 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

Figure 10. Fine-scale 3D specimens. A) Maroon feldspar sandstone B) Granite syenite C) 
Conformable contact between limestone and fuchsia shale D) Diabase vein invading granitic gneiss. 
E) Chalcopyrite. 

3.3. Distributed construction 

Distributed  design  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  3DGRSL.  Several  distributed  data  nodes 
support the platform data, the existing and future added data are uniformly registered then managed 
by  the  Data  Registration  Center.  "Data"  was  separated  from  "functions"  from  the  perspective  of 
design and deployment. This not only facilitates data sharing and independent management of all 
units  but  also  facilitates  the  development  of  “data-oriented”  software  and  systems  in  the  future, 
saving development costs and time. The platform is initially established with three  service nodes, 
including China University of Mining and Technology, Jilin University, and Chengdu University of 
Technology, and the unique geo-resources of each unit are integrated (Figure 11). 

 
 
8 of 13 

Figure 11. Schematic diagram of the 3DGRSL. 

Basemap of 3DGRSL like terrain, vectors, and annotated web map tile service (WMTS) provided 
by the Tianditu Server [30]. Additional drones and aerial data are accessed in areas with severe cloud 
coverage. With GeoServer, other vector geological map data can also be added as required (Figure 
11). The system can view and extract the attributes of a geological map to support the understanding 
of the regional geological background. 

A 

B 

Figure  12.  A  system  producing  the  geological  background  of  a  target  area  by  displaying  vector 
geological maps (A) or large-scale 3D models (B). 

The model with a high-resolution map can clearly distinguish the gravel and shell on the surface; 
in the three-dimensional shape, it can be clearly seen that the vein is cut by fault (Figure 12). Users 
can learn about spatial distributions, scales, contact relationships, texture, and other characteristics 
of the field geology phenomena online. 

A 

B 

Figure 12. Outcrop-scale 3D models (A) and a vein in it (B). 

In addition to the digital geological phenomena, the teaching resources in the form of graphic 
multimedia must also be provided. The system provides a multi-tag view for users to switch between 

 
 
 
 
 
9 of 13 

the phenomenon tag and the data tag. The teaching materials are collected and  placed around the 
typical phenomena of the target, with pictures and texts. 

4. Evaluation 

Twenty  teachers  and  ten  students  with  field  geology  experience  (after  obtaining  informed 
consent)  were  selected  to  use  the  Geo-Resource  Sharing  Library  and  score  the  system  using  a 
questionnaire. The scoring was mainly based on the following criteria: 

1. Ease of use: Users can easily browse through the functions of the virtual system. 

2. Comfort: Users can use and learn in a system comfortably. 

3. Interactivity: it indicates the possibility of interaction. 

4. Visual effects: it indicates the degree of satisfaction of the user's Geo-observation. 

5. Fluency: it indicates the performance requirements of the device when the system is running. 

6. Sharing convenience: it indicates the ease of sharing data or physical objects. 

7. Geoinformation content: it indicates the amount of original information carried by the data or 

the physical object. 

8. Storage cost: it indicates the cost of storage of data or physical objects. 

Table 1. Questionnaire score and description 

Score 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Description 

Very inconvenient 

Some difficulties, but they can be overcome. 

The advantages and disadvantages are equally obvious 

Although inconvenient, it still meets the requirements of geosciences teaching 

Very suitable for geoscience teaching 

Table 2. Reliability statistics and scale statistics 

Method 

Cronbach's α 

Cronbach's Alpha Based on 

Standardized Items 

3D 

Pic 

Spec 

.898 

.630 

.714 

.909 

.639 

.703 

Mean 

Variance 

36.70 

33.90 

26.6667 

10.355 

4.990 

3.402 

Std. 

Deviation 

3.218 

2.234 

1.84453 

 
 
10 of 13 

Figure 14. Comparison of three geo-database scores, including 3D model, picture, and specimen 
storage. 

The  specimen  method  is  the  most  mature  method,  but  its  shortcomings  include  difficulty  in 
sharing  and  storage.  It  can  also  be  seen  from  Table  2  that  the  variance  of  the  Spec  score  is  small, 
indicating that most opinions tend to be concentrated. Cronbach's Alpha of Pic and Spec have a large 
score (α = 0.639 & 0.703). It seems that due to the different perceptions of the advantages by the raters. 
The scores of the 3D method seem largely, this may indicates that users are still skeptical about new 
technologies, and this situation needs time to improve. 

As shown in Figure 14, physical specimens impede academic exchange, and specimens require 
large space for storage. Collecting information  in the  form of  photographs is the  most convenient 
method. The data size is small and transmission is easy. However, this method loses a lot of original 
information, and is not suitable for the specimen library. 

5. Discussion 

Solving field teaching difficulties and sharing geological specimens online are very important to 
improve the quality of geoscience teaching and promote the right to a fair education. How to tap the 
potential of digital resources for field geoscience phenomena and reduce the cost of repeated data 
collection is a problem that must be faced in the future construction of geoscience virtual teaching 
laboratories and simulation environments. The resource sharing library provides a good solution to 
this  problem  in  an  open,  co-constructed,  distributed  and  shared  manner.  Working  with  more 
geological colleges to share and digitize the characteristic geo-resources for geo-education is forward-
looking for the future. This will not only preserve the geo-phenomena but will also allow students 
and researchers from all over the world to observe the phenomena and exchange ideas in the virtual 
geo-space. 

Since the establishment of geosciences, the understanding of geology has been limited by their 
field-work experience. However, the idea of 3DGRSL may change the research and communication 
methods of the geoscience. People can tell a geological story by sending a URL instead of a bunch of 
static pictures or tens of pounds of stones. 

With  the  development  of  the  network  and  storage  media,  the  data  size  will  no  longer  be  a 
problem.  People  will  pay  more  attention  to  user  experiences  such  as  visualization  effects  and 
convenience.  With  Browser/Server  (B/S)  architecture,  the  system  can  realize  multi-terminal  and 
multi-scenario access of mobile phones, tablets, VR, PC, indoor, outdoor, field, providing a flexible 
and convenient way for preserving and sharing scientific information about geo-resources [31-33]. 

 
 
11 of 13 

Taking  geography  education  as  an  example,  more  intuitive  and  realistic  display  effects  often 
lead to better education quality, which has been proven by many researchers [10-16]. We believe that 
this system can provide important ideas that construct new digital specimen libraries, improves the 
learning quality in the uneven education area, and guarantees a fair and sustainable development of 
geoscience education. 

6. Conclusion 

In  this  work,  a  new  type  of  geo-specimen  library,  photo  modeling  based  3D  Geo-Resource 
Sharing Library (3DGRSL) was built. From the statistical results, 3DGRSL is more intuitive and can 
render richer information than the image database. 3DGRSL has a display effect similar to the actual 
specimen, which greatly reduces the specimen storage cost and makes the sharing of specimens more 
convenient.   

3DGRSL provides a solution of sharing to the characteristic geo-education resources for many 
universities.  Resource  integration  of  the  three  universities  has  been  achieved  in  this  study.  This 
experiment  proved  the  importance  of  photo  modeling  for  online  specimen  libraries,  especially 
geological specimens. The platform provides important and open data support for  the sustainable 
use and protection of geoscience teaching resources, the maintenance of the right to fair education, 
and the construction of virtual simulation solutions in the future.   

Acknowledgments: Thanks to Jianxiong Ma and other members of Digital Geoscience Research Center, College 
of Earth Sciences, Jilin University.   

Author  Contributions:  Resources,  Linfu  Xue;  Funding  acquisition,  Xiaoshun  Li;  Software,  Xiaopeng  Leng; 
Writing –  original  draft,  Xuejia  Sang;  Writing  –  review  &  editing,  Jianping  Zhou.  All authors  have  read and 
agreed to the published version of the manuscript 

Funding:  The  Project  supported  by  “the  Fundamental  Research  Funds  for  the  Central  Universities”  (No: 
2020QN16). 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

 
 
 
 
12 of 13 

References 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Forcino  F  L.  The  importance  of  a  laboratory  section  on  student  learning  outcomes  in  a  university 
introductory earth science course. Journal of Geoscience Education, 2013, 61, 213-221. 
Petcovic,  Heather  L,  Libarkin,  Julie  C,  Baker,  Kathleen  M. An  Empirical  Methodology  for  Investigating 
Geocognition in the Field. Journal of Geoscience Education, 2009, 57, 316-328. 
Tan Chengpeng, Zhao Xiaoming, Liao Jijia. Characteristics and Enlightenment of Graduate Education in 
the  Department  of  Geology  and  Geological  Engineering,  Colorado  School  of  Mines,  China.  Geological 
Education of China, 2018, 27, 91-95. (In Chinese) 

4.  Dykas M J, Valentino D W. Predicting Performance in an Advanced Undergraduate Geological Field Camp 

Experience. Journal of Geoscience Education, 2016, 64, 314-322. 

5.  Waldron J W, Locock A. Geoscience Garden: an outdoor teaching installation at the University of Alberta. 

6. 

7. 

Agu Spring Meeting. 2009. 
Zhang Xiaobo, Wang Xiuhua. Research on the Construction of Graduate Field Practice Bases of Chinese 
Academy of Geological Sciences. China Geological Education, 2012, 21, 129-131. (In Chinese) 
Xing L, Lockley M G, Zhang J, et al. A diversified vertebrate ichnite fauna from the Dasheng Group (Lower 
Cretaceous) of southeast Shandong Province, China. Historical Biology, 2017, 1-10. 

8.  National  Specimen  Information  Infrastructure.  http://www.nsii.org.cn/2017/home.php.  (Accessed  on 

January 11, 2020). 

9.  National  Infrastructure  of  Mineral,  Rock  and  Fossil  Resources  for  Science  and  Technology. 

http://www.nimrf.cugb.edu.cn/. (Accessed on January 11, 2020).   
10.  Skibba Ramin. Virtual reality comes of age. Nature, 2018, 553, 402-403. 
11.  Nicola Jones. Simulated labs are booming. Nature 2018, 562 ,S5–S7 
12.  Brian Owens. Science and technology education. Nature 2018, 562 , S1–S1 
13.  Haluck  R  S,  Krummel  T  M.  Computers  and  Virtual  Reality  for  Surgical  Education  in  the  21st  Century. 

Archives of Surgery, 2000, 135, 786. 

14.  Carlos  C  C,  Bogdan  V  A,  Elena  L  C,  Lucia  D  &  Simona  C A.  Map-Reading  Skill  Development  with  3D 

Technologies, Journal of Geography, 2017,116, 197-205 

15.  Carlos  C  C,  Stephany  H  M.  Interactive  Visualization  Software  to  Improve  Relief  Interpretation  Skills: 
Spatial Data Infrastructure Geoportal versus Augmented Reality. The Professional Geographer  2019, 71, 
725-737. 

16.  Meyer, L. Students explore the earth and beyond with virtual field trips. THE J. 2016, 43, 22–25. 
17.  Cheng  Dan,  Cui  Jin,  Wang  Qingya,  et  al.  Construction  and  Application  of  Botany  Virtual  Experiment 

Platform. Laboratory Research and Exploration, 2016, 2, 62-66. (In Chinese) 

18.  Brook M. Structure from motion in the geosciences. New Zealand Geographer, 2017, 73. 145-146. 
19.  Abdullah,  Q.,  Bethel,  J.,  Hussain,  M.,  Munjy,  R.  Photogrammetric  project  and  mission  planning.  In: 
McGlone,  J.C.  (Ed.),  Manual  of  Photogrammetry.  American  Society  for  Photogrammetry  and  Remote 
Sensing, 2013, 1187-1220. 

20.  Bemis S P, Micklethwaite S, Turner D, et al. Ground-based and UAV-Based photogrammetry: A multi-scale, 
high-resolution mapping tool for structural geology and paleoseismology. Journal of Structural Geology, 
2014, 69, 163-178. 

21.  Birdseye, C.H. Stereoscopic Phototopographic mapping. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 1940, 30, 1-24.   
22.  Eisenbeiss H. A Model Helicopter over Pinchango Alto  – Comparison of Terrestrial Laser Scanning and 

Aerial Photogrammetry. 2009, 339-358. 

23.  Gomez C, Hayakawa Y, Obanawa H. A study of Japanese landscapes using structure from motion derived 
DSMs and DEMs based on historical aerial photographs: New opportunities for vegetation monitoring and 
diachronic geomorphology. Geomorphology, 2015, 242, 11-20. 

24.  Hodgetts, D., 2013. Laser scanning and digital outcrop geology in the petroleum industry: a review. Mar. 

Pet. Geol.2013, 46, 335-354.   

25.  Murshed,  Syed,  Al-Hyari,  Ayah,  Wendel,  Jochen,  et  al.  Design  and  Implementation  of  a  4D  Web 
Application for Analytical Visualization of Smart City Applications. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
Information, 2018, 7. 
Instant Meshes. Available online: https://github.com/wjakob/instant-meshes. (Accessed on Jan 11, 2020). 

26. 

 
 
13 of 13 

27.  Simplygon. https://www.simplygon.com/. (Accessed on January 11, 2020). 
28.  Delightingtool. https://github.com/unity-technologies/delightingtool. (Accessed on January 11, 2020). 
29.  3DTiles. https://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/3DTiles. (Accessed on January 11, 2020). 
30.  Tianditu. http://lbs.tianditu.gov.cn/server/MapService.html. (Accessed on January 11, 2020 & In Chinese). 
31.  Okada  Y,  Haga  A,  Wei  S,  et  al.  E-Learning  Material  Development  Framework  Supporting  360VR 
Images/Videos Based on Linked Data for IoT Security Education. International Conference on Emerging 
Internetworking, Data & Web Technologies. 2019. 148-160 

32.  Kim S, Heo R, Chung Y , et al. Virtual Reality Visualization Model (VRVM) of the Tricarboxylic Acid (TCA) 
Cycle of Carbohydrate Metabolism for Medical Biochemistry Education. Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 2019, 11. 602–612 

33.  Lamb R L, Etopio E. Virtual Reality Simulations and Writing: a Neuroimaging Study in Science Education. 

Journal of Science Education and Technology, 2019(5). 542–552 

 
