Subtle Sensing: Detecting Differences 
in the Flexibility of Virtually Simulated 
Molecular Objects

Rhoslyn Roebuck Williams 
Intangible Realities Laboratory, 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
rhoslyn.roebuckwilliams@bristol.ac.uk 

Ella M. Gale 
Intangible Realities Laboratory, 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
ella.gale@bristol.ac.uk 

Xan Varcoe 
Intangible Realities Laboratory, 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
xan@varcoe.com 

Alexander Jamieson-Binnie 
Intangible Realities Laboratory, 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
alexander.jamieson-binnie@bristol.ac.uk 

Becca R. Glowacki 
Goldsmiths College,  
University of London 
b.glowacki@gold.ac.uk 

David R. Glowacki 
Intangible Realities Laboratory, 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
glowacki@bristol.ac.uk 

© 2020 Copyright owner/author(s). 
Licensed under Creative Commons BY-SA 4.0 
www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ 

Abstract 
During VR demos we have performed over last few 
years, many participants (in the absence of any haptic 
feedback) have commented on their perceived ability to 
‘feel’ differences between simulated molecular objects. 
The mechanisms for such ‘feeling’ are not entirely 
clear: observing from outside VR, one can see that 
there is nothing physical for participants to ‘feel’. Here 
we outline exploratory user studies designed to 
evaluate the extent to which participants can 
distinguish quantitative differences in the flexibility of 
VR-simulated molecular objects. The results suggest 
that an individual’s capacity to detect differences in 
molecular flexibility is enhanced when they can interact 
with and manipulate the molecules, as opposed to 
merely observing the same interaction. Building on 
these results, we intend to carry out further studies 
investigating humans’ ability to sense quantitative 
properties of VR simulations without haptic technology.  

Author Keywords 
Molecular simulation; virtual reality; sensing. 

CSS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing~Human computer 
interaction (HCI); Haptic devices; User studies;  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Figure 1: Manipulating molecular 
structures using Narupa: (a) C60 
molecules, (b) nanotube and 
methane, (c) a protein string, and 
(d) a drug bound to a protein. 
Hyperlinks to videos (a)–(d): 
vimeo.com/382823399 
vimeo.com/382823867 
vimeo.com/382823683 
vimeo.com/382824155 

Haptic Design in VR 
Increasingly, virtual reality (VR) [16] and other 
immersive technologies are being used across a range 
of domains, including manufacturing [5,10], surgical 
training [1,13] and education [3,6]. This paper explores 
the application of VR to the domain of scientific 
visualization, and molecular simulation more 
specifically. Fred Brooks [4] and Kent Wilson [2] were 
among the first to explore whether immersive forms of 
HCI could be used to go beyond the rigid, physical 3d 
molecular models often found in laboratories and 
classrooms. They sought to create interactive, flexible 
and dynamic molecular models, whose atoms the user 
could touch and move, and whose physical and 
mechanical responses were simulated using rigorous 
laws of physics. Over the last few decades, increased 
computational power alongside technological advances 
in VR mean that molecules can be simulated at 
interactive speeds, a recent modelling paradigm that 
we call interactive molecular dynamics in VR (iMD-VR).  

With the development of immersive simulation 
environments like VR, certain applications have sought 
to integrate haptic actuators to create experiences that 
allow participants to reach out and ‘feel’ force feedback 
from virtual objects. Surgical simulations are amongst 
the most successful scientific domains where haptics 
have been integrated with VR [1,9,17], e.g. replicating 
the resistance of human tissue against a surgical 
needle. For surgical simulators, where the intent is to 
mimic a well-defined ‘real-world’ experience as closely 
as possible, it is possible to carry out detailed 
comparisons of the extent to which the virtually 
simulated haptic forces mimic real-world forces, and 
the accuracy of the virtual experience can be carefully 
and iteratively refined. For applications like 

manipulating the nanoscale dynamics of flexible 
molecular objects such as those shown in Fig 1, there is 
no equivalent well-defined design reference. This is 
because molecular manipulation represents a class of 
experience for which there is no real-world sensory 
analogue for detailed comparisons of the real-to-virtual 
mapping. In such cases, it is far less clear how haptic 
technology should be applied.  

Further difficulty often arises from the fact that haptics 
represent costly non-commodity pieces of equipment 
that require significant hardware, software, and driver 
maintenance. As such, their technological cost and 
sophistication can outweigh their benefits. Moreover, 
haptic technologies face fundamental limitations owing 
to the fact that there are no generalized solutions in the 
form of a single device that enables participants of a VR 
environment to feel anything (e.g., in the same way 
that visual or auditory display can be programmed to 
display anything). As a result, VR pioneers like Mel 
Slater argue that a generalized haptic solution is likely 
only possible in the form of a direct brain interface – 
i.e., as a form of applied neuroscience [12]. 

“Subtle Sensing” in VR 
Given the inherent difficulties of applying haptic 
technologies to domains like molecular simulation, we 
have begun to investigate the extent to which human 
sensory systems are able to detect haptic sensations in 
the absence of haptic actuators. Such sensing is more 
“subtle” than that which occurs with haptic motors. It is 
grounded in somatic (bodily) sensitivity, proprioception 
(our non-visual understanding of the position of our 
body in space), and careful attention to movement. 
Such ‘subtle-sensing’ methods have already been 

 
 
 
 
 
observed to accentuate participants’ somatic awareness 
– e.g., in the somaesthetic approach recently discussed 
by Höök et al. [8]. The ability of subtle methods to alter 
perception has similarly been highlighted in the field of 
pseudo-haptics. For example, Pusch et al. [14] 
investigated creating the perception of force feedback 
in VR by breaking proprioception. Users placed their 
hand into a virtual force field and attempted to keep it 
in the same position by counteracting the force, after 
which most participants reported feeling a ‘pushing’ 
sensation on their hands. Other examples combine the 
breaking of proprioception with vibrational feedback to 
give both tactile feedback and emulate kinesthetic 
feedback (e.g., Rietzler et al. [15]).  

“Subtle Sensing” of Molecular Properties 
Over the last several years, we have developed an 
open source software framework called Narupa [18], a 
VR simulation environment which allows multiple users 
to co-habit the same virtual environment and interact 
with molecules in real-time, which is finding use in both 
scientific research [12] and education [3]. Introducing 
haptic tools to simulate force feedback is difficult not 
only for the reasons mentioned above, but also because 
Narupa tends to be used with multiple participants in 
the same virtual space, as shown in Fig 1a. For this 
reason, we have begun to explore the more subtle 
aspects of perception highlighted in the pseudo-haptics 
and somatics literature. During demonstrations 
performed in our lab over the last couple years, many 
participants report ‘feeling’ differences between 
molecules, despite the lack of haptic actuators. 
Interestingly, participants consistently give similar 
descriptions of each type of molecule. For example, 
participants often describe the respective buckminster 
fullerene (C60) and nanotube molecules shown in Figs 

1a and 1b as ‘rigid’ and the protein shown in Fig 1c as 
‘soft’ or ‘floppy’. 

The ability to carry out ‘subtle sensing’ by tuning into 
more subtle aspects of our perception through pseudo-
haptic approaches (e.g., to detect the flexibility or 
rigidity of simulated molecular structures) would allow 
participants to carry out scientific tasks in VR more 
effectively. This will have utility in both educational and 
scientific contexts because it furnishes insight into the 
function, design, and interactions that characterize 
molecules. One such example is drug design (Fig 1d), 
where the participant must gently place the drug into 
the active site of a protein, whilst only minimally 
perturbing the protein’s structure. The more effectively 
a human can sense subtle interactions between the 
drug and protein, the more likely they are to find viable 
low-energy binding pathways and design better drugs.  

Pilot User Study Design 
In what follows, we present preliminary work we have 
undertaken to understand the extent to which 
participants could correctly detect differences in the 
flexibility and rigidity of simulated virtual molecular 
objects. We used virtual molecules to carry out this 
study for three main reasons: (1) it is straightforward 
to tune molecular flexibility and rigidity using the 
physics simulation engine available within Narupa; (2) 
molecules are unfamiliar to most people, thereby 
avoiding familiarity bias; and (3) there is a large range 
of molecules available for use in Narupa.  

Each experiment involved two participants, each 
wearing an HTC-Vive headset. As shown in Fig 3, one 
participant (the ‘handler’) was given a set of handheld 
HTC Vive VR controllers, and the other participant (the 

Figure 2: Showing the three virtual 
C60 molecules (left) and strings 
(right), in order of rigidity.

 
 
 
Table 1: Showing the coefficients of 
the angle force constants of the bonds 
in the three C60 molecules. 

Rigidity 

Least 

Middle 

Most 

Force 
constant 

coefficient 

1 

3 

9 

Table 2: Showing the coefficients of 
the bond force constants of the 
bonds in the backbone of the three 
polypeptide strings. 

Stretchiness 

Force 
constant 
coefficient 

Least 

Middle 

Most 

3 

1 

1/3 

‘observer’) was not. We compared the ability of both 
participants to correctly rank the mechanical properties 
of three virtual molecular objects within the virtual 
environment. The objects differed only in their 
elasticity/rigidity and their colors (Fig 2). Tests were 
performed for two types of molecules, whose physics 
were simulated in real-time using Narupa. 

Since we wished to understand whether participants 
could interpret the mechanical properties of the virtual 
objects, it made sense to use ones that had some 
resemblance to real-world objects. We settled on two 
simulations: (1) a ‘ball’ shaped C60 molecule (or 
‘buckyball’) and (2) a short, ‘string’ shaped 
polypeptide. 

The next challenge was to decide which mechanical 
properties of the virtual objects to change. We wished 
to emulate changes in the softness or rigidity of the C60 
molecules, and the stretchiness or elasticity of the 
strings, since these are intuitive descriptions of 
mechanical properties that have some mapping onto 
real-world balls and strings. Narupa models interatomic 
bonds and angles as anharmonic springs, each 
characterised by a force constant. Modification of these 
force constants causes mechanical changes in 
molecular flexibility and rigidity. We experimented with 
a range of force constant modifications to evaluate how 
different modifications were sensed by the participants. 
For the C60, it became clear that modifying the angle 
force constants allowed us to change how easy it was 
for the participant to deform the ‘roundness’ of the 
buckyball. For the strings, the bond force constants 
caused a change in perceived elasticity. We decided to 
only change the force constants of the bonds in the 

Figure 3: the experimental setup with two participants (an 
observer on the left and a handler on the right) with three 
C60 molecules (top) and with three strings (bottom). 

backbone of the polypeptide string, since the backbone 
defines the main structure of the string. 

Determining the force constant values 
To decide which values of the force constant 
coefficients should be used during our pilot user study, 
we ran a small, iterative exploratory study. This study 
was run with one handler and one observer cohabiting 
the Narupa environment, whilst we iteratively adjusted 
the force constants of each of the three objects (either 
C60 molecules or strings) based on live feedback from 
the participants. For each pair of observers, once the 
observer indicated that they could not sense a 
difference between the flexibility/rigidity of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
molecules and the handler indicated that they could 
sense a difference, we recorded the corresponding set 
of force constant values for each of the three C60 
molecules and strings [Table 1 and Table 2]. We then 
took an average over all the sets of force constants and 
chose these for our pilot user study. The representation 
of the objects was identical apart from the colours, 
which were varied as shown in Fig 2, in order that the 
participants could distinguish between different 
molecules. 

Pilot User Study: Experimental Details 
Having determined the force constants, we ran a pilot 
user study using a separate cohort (N=20). Seven 
participants had some experience in VR, whilst five had 
moderate experience. Of the remaining participants, 
two had no experience and two considered themselves 
very experienced. Most participants had a degree in 
higher education, and many were affiliated with the 
University of Bristol. There were approximately equal 
numbers of men (n=11) and women (n=9). 

In each experiment, both participants were first 
presented with a nanotube simulation, enabling them to 
familiarize themselves with molecular manipulation in 
Narupa. They then transitioned into a second 
environment, which contained each of the three C60 
molecules (shown in Fig 2 and 3). Taking note of the 
colors, the observer was invited to watch as the 
following instructions were directed to the handler: 

1.  Hold onto either side/end of each object in turn, 
and move it around in front of you. Feel free to 
play with it as you wish. 

2.  Gently “pull the molecules apart” by moving your 

hands apart and then bringing them close together. 

3.  Push the two ends of each object towards one 

another by bringing your hands close together, 
then bring your hands apart again.  

The participants then exited VR and were presented 
with pictures of the three differently-colored virtual 
objects. They were asked to write down any 
observations they had about the objects. Once finished, 
they were invited back into a VR simulation containing 
the three colored strings, where they were taken 
through the same sequence as before. Upon finishing 
the tasks, they were taken out of VR and asked to write 
down any observations they had about the strings. 
Finally, they were provided with a questionnaire that 
asked: (1) Did you notice a difference in the elasticity 
of any of the C60 molecules? (2) Did you notice a 
difference in the elasticity of any of the three strings? 
(3) If so, for both object types please rank them in 
terms of their elasticities. For each question, pictures of 
the differently colored objects were provided. Each 
study was performed by reading off a script to control 
the information provided to the participants. Although 
sections of the script were directed at either the 
handler or observer specifically, for each experiment 
both participants were present in the same room and 
heard the entirety of the script. The force constants 
were kept the same across the experiments. 

Results and Discussion 
The results show that more handlers than observers 
noticed a difference between the three objects for both 
the C60 molecules and strings (Fig 4a). In addition, 
more handlers also correctly ranked the elasticities of 
the three objects than the observers (Fig 4b). Taking 

Figure 4: For the C60 molecules 
and strings separately, the 
number of handlers (10 total) 
and observers (10 total) who (a) 
noticed a difference between the 
three objects, and (b) correctly 
ranked all three objects.  

 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Showing the p-values 
calculated using Fisher’s exact test. 

Fisher’s test 

p-value 

Balls 

Strings 

0.248 

0.325 

0.150 

0.146 

Noticed a 
difference 

Correct 
ranking 

Acknowledgements 
DRG recognizes funding from the 
Leverhulme Trust (Philip 
Leverhulme Prize) and Royal 
Society (URF/R/180033); AJB 
and RRW are supported by the 
EPSRC TMCS CDT 
(EP/L015722/1); Ella M. Gale is 
supported by EPSRC grant 
EP/S024107/1. Support and 
insight at various stages came 
from Alex Jones, Michael B. 
O’Connor, Lisa Thomas, Helen 
Deeks, Oussama Metatla, and 
Thomas Mitchell.  

the null hypotheses to be that all participants were 
equally capable of (1) noticing a difference between the 
three objects and (2) correctly ranking the three 
objects, we used the Fisher’s exact test to calculate 
significance (Table 3). Although these results are not 
below a significant value of p=0.05, owing to the very 
small number of participants, there were consistently 
more correct answers from the handlers than the 
observers. Using a binary outcome superiority trial [19] 
on the number of correct rankings, we determined the 
number of participants required in future studies to 
achieve a typical significance level (0.05) and statistical 
power (0.8). Assuming similar results to those 
observed in the relatively small sample results shown in 
Fig 4, our analysis suggests that the C60 molecules 
require 36 user studies (N=72), and the strings require 
40 user studies (N=80). These will be used as a rough 
estimate for the number of participants required for 
future studies. However, these numbers may require 
some adjustment pending changes to the experimental 
protocol as we refine our methods.  

Qualitatively, some interesting observations arose 
which we believe will inform future studies. When asked 
to describe their interaction with the C60 molecules, one 
handler noted that the “pink [ball, which was the most 
elastic] felt ‘fat’ and ‘heavy’ whilst the grey [ball, which 
was the most rigid] had a higher frequency, quicker 
feel to it”. When asked about their interaction with the 
strings, the same participant said “it felt that the chains 
had different lengths rather than elasticity”. This 
participant correctly ranked the buckyballs, however, 
answered that all three strings had identical elasticities. 
This indicates that more participants than recorded may 
have noticed differences between the objects but that 
the study and questionaire design did not accurately 

capture their impressions. A number of participants 
also indicated to us that, upon exiting VR to fill out the 
questionnaire and rank the objects’ relative elasiticies, 
they were unable to remember ‘which color was which’. 
Moving forward, we intend to design the study so as to 
reduce questionnaire ambiguity and also to minimize 
potential memory effects. 

Conclusions and Further work 
This study presents preliminary data suggesting that 
VR participants may be able to utilize ‘subtle sensing’ 
methods to distinguish the mechanical properties of 
virtual molecular objects. The fact that the observers 
(who could rely only on vision) were unable to make 
determinations that were as accurate as the handlers 
(who could rely on vision, movement, and 
proprioception) suggests that ‘subtle sensing’ in VR 
may involve mechanisms that go beyond the purely 
visual. Several improvements will be made to future 
studies, including: (1) randomizing the object colors to 
diminish potential association of mechanical features 
with colors, and (2) randomizing the order in which the 
objects are presented to participants to account for 
potential practice and/or learning effects [11] and 
varying ability to recall information presented at the 
beginning, end, and middle of the experiment. We also 
wish to gauge the quantitative limit of subtle sensing 
mechanisms – i.e., to quantitatively determine whether 
there is a point at which users are no longer able to 
resolve differences. We also intend to explore whether 
handlers wearing recently developed VR gloves [7] 
influences their ability to correctly rank the mechanical 
properties of the objects. This further work will enable 
us to better understand the degree to which ‘subtle 
sensing’ mechanisms might be extended to other 
domains of scientific simulation and visualization.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
[1]  Medhat Alaker, Greg R. Wynn, and Tan 

Arulampalam. 2016. Virtual reality training in 
laparoscopic surgery: A systematic review & 
meta-analysis. Int. J. Surg., 29, 85-94. 

[2]  William D. Atkinson, et al. 1977. Computing with 

feeling. Comput. Graph., 2, 2: 97-103. 

[3]  Simon J. Bennie, et al. 2019. Teaching Enzyme 

Catalysis Using Interactive Molecular Dynamics in 
Virtual Reality. J. Chem. Educ., 96: 2488-2496. 

[4]  Frederick P. Brooks Jr, et al. 1990. Project 

GROPEHaptic displays for scientific visualization. 
In ACM SIGGraph computer graphics, 177-185. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/97879.97899.  

[5]  Sangsu Choi, Kiwook Jung, and Sang D. Noh. 

2015. Virtual reality applications in manufacturing 
industries: Past research, present findings, and 
future directions. CONCURRENT ENG-RES A., 23, 
1: 40-63. 

[6]  Laura Freina and Michela Ott. 2015. A Literature 

Review on Immersive Virtual Reality in Education: 
State of the Art and Perspectives. ELEARN SOFTW 
EDUC, 133-141. 

[7]  Becca R. Glowacki, et al. 2019. An open source 
Etextile VR glove for real-time manipulation of 
molecular simulations. CoRR, abs/1901.03532. 

[8]  Kristina Höök, et al. 2016. Somaesthetic 

Appreciation Design. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '16), 3131-3142. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2858036.2858583.  

[9]  Julian Kreimeier, et al. 2019. Evaluation of 

different types of haptic feedback influencing the 
task-based presence and performance in virtual 
reality. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM 
International Conference on PErvasive 
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments 
(PETRA '15), 289-298.  

[10]  Glyn Lawson, Davide Salanitri, and Brian 

Waterfield. 2016. Future directions for the 
development of virtual reality within an 
automotive manufacturer. Appl. Ergon., 53, 323-
330. 

[11]  Scott MacKenzie. 2013. Human-Computer 

Interaction: An Empirical Research Perspective. 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Waltham, MA, 
USA, 157-187. 

[12]  Michael B. O’Connor, et al. 2019. Interactive 

molecular dynamics in virtual reality from 
quantum chemistry to drug binding: An open-
source multi-person framework. J. Chem. Phys., 
150, 22: 220901. 

[13]  Yeshwanth Pulijala, et al. 2018. Effectiveness of 
Immersive Virtual Reality in Surgical Training-A 
Randomized Control Trial. J. Oral and Maxillof. 
Surg., 76, 5: 1065-1072. 

[14]  Andreas Pusch, Olivier Martin, and Sabine 

Coquillart. 2009. HEMP—hand-displacement-based 
pseudo-haptics: A study of a force field application 
and a behavioural analysis. Int. J. Hum-Comput. 
St., 67, 3: 256-268. 

[15]  Michael Rietzler, et al. 2018. Conveying the 
Perception of Kinesthetic Feedback in Virtual 
Reality using State-of-the-Art Hardware. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18), 
1-13. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3173574.3174034.  

[16]  M. Slater and M. V. Sanchez-Vives. 2016. 

Enhancing Our Lives with Immersive Virtual 
Reality. Front. Robot. AI., 3. 

[17]  Neil Vaughan, et al. 2016. A review of virtual 

reality based training simulators for orthopaedic 
surgery. Med. Eng Phys., 38, 2: 59-71. 

[18]  Narupa. Retrieved from: 

https://gitlab.com/intangiblerealities. 

 
[19]  Sealed Envelope Ltd. 2012. Power calculator for 
binary outcome superiority trial. Retrieved 
December 19, 2019 from: 
https://www.sealedenvelope.com/power/binary-
superiority/. 

 
