0
2
0
2

y
a
M
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
8
1
1
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

MAGES 3.0: Tying the knot of medical VR

George Papagiannakis
University of Crete, ICS - FORTH,
ORamaVR
george.papagiannakis@oramavr.com

Steve Kateros
ORamaVR
steve@oramavr.com

Paul Zikas
ORamaVR
paul@oramavr.com

Mike Kentros
ORamaVR
mike@oramavr.com

Nick Lydatakis
ORamaVR
nick@oramavr.com

Efstratios Geronikolakis
ORamaVR
stratos@oramavr.com

Manos Kamarianakis
ORamaVR
manos.kamarianakis@oramavr.com

Ioanna Kartsonaki
ORamaVR
ioanna.kartsonaki@oramavr.com

Giannis Evangelou
ORamaVR
giannis.evangelou@oramavr.com

ABSTRACT
In this work, we present MAGES 3.0, a novel Virtual Reality (VR)-
based authoring SDK platform for accelerated surgical training and
assessment. The MAGES Software Development Kit (SDK) allows
code-free prototyping of any VR psychomotor simulation of medi-
cal operations by medical professionals, who urgently need a tool
to solve the issue of outdated medical training. Our platform encap-
sulates the following novel algorithmic techniques: a) collaborative
networking layer with Geometric Algebra (GA) interpolation en-
gine b) supervised machine learning analytics module for real-time
recommendations and user profiling c) GA deformable cutting and
tearing algorithm d) on-the-go configurable soft body simulation
for deformable surfaces.

ACM Reference Format:
George Papagiannakis, Paul Zikas, Nick Lydatakis, Steve Kateros, Mike
Kentros, Efstratios Geronikolakis, Manos Kamarianakis, Ioanna Kartsonaki,
and Giannis Evangelou. 2020. MAGES 3.0: Tying the knot of medical VR.
In SIGGRAPH ’20, July 19–23, 2020, Washington, DC. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
There is a growing lack of medical professionals globally and not
enough already are trained today for future needs [3]. The number
of new surgeons trained per year has not changed in the last 30
years, whereas the population has doubled. There is an urgent need
for a paradigm shift in medical training to overcome the challenges.
Previously we have proven that MAGES [2] makes medical train-
ing more efficient. In a revolutionary clinical study [1] in coopera-
tion with New York University that established - for the first time
in the medical bibliography - skill transfer and skill generalisation

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SIGGRAPH ’20, July 19–23, 2020, Washington, DC
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

from VR to the real Operating Room in a quantifiable, measurable
ROI.

Utilizing the new advances in MAGES 3.0, we released four
new medical VR training modules: a dental implant placement, an
endotracheal intubation, a series of emergency medical scenarios
and a REBOA operation.

2 THE MAGES 3.0 TECHNOLOGY
In the following sections we showcase our MAGES 3.0 innovations.

2.1 Multiplayer with GA interpolation (M)
Our networking layer proposes a low bandwidth and high visual
fidelity collaborative module, featuring multiple users based on
our proprietary virtual character interpolation engine. We deploy
a unique representation of the 3D deformable meshes in our Geo-
metric Algebra (GA) framework that allows 4x improvement on
reduced data network transfer and lower CPU/GPU usage for this
task. This allows for a high number of multiple concurrent users in
the same collaborative virtual environment.

Participants can join the same virtual OR to communicate and
interact while completing the training scenario. Even non-medical
related users are able to learn and perform basic surgical steps while
assisted from our personalized recommendation system.

2.2 Analytics based on ML agent with

recommendations (A)

In medical training it is crucial to provide a user assessment capable
of reflecting the educational impact of the used methodology. We
designed an analytics system to fulfil this need. Our analytics en-
gine features a Machine Learning (ML) agent, facilitating a virtual
surgeon supervising the training session, collecting surgical errors,
user decisions and time intervals. We train our ML agent from
medical experts, constructing a unique trainee profile to propose
real-time suggestions to users according to their level of experience.
Each surgical action is segmented into individual parts to identify
interactions such as tool handling and proper usage of medical
equipment. Our supervised ML model is capable to understand the
validity of each action and decide whether to offer assistance with
additional audio-visual guidance.

 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGGRAPH ’20, July 19–23, 2020, Washington, DC

George Papagiannakis, et al.

for non-VR experts to develop new surgical modules/scenarios or
modify existing ones, increasing the platform’s possibilities.

2.5 Semantically annotated soft bodies (S)
In the core of MAGES lies an advanced mathematical algorithm
for physics-based visual techniques to allow the 3D representa-
tion of deformable soft body objects (skin, tissue, etc.), essential
for VR surgical training. Since surgical training is all about cut-
ting and suturing soft body objects, collision detection (touching)
and handling of soft bodies with other objects becomes crucial for
high-realism VR. The soft deformation algorithm is based on shape
matching techniques and particle-based soft body simulations. Our
methodology differs from the state of the art since it provides on-
the-go control of the particles as physical objects and a centre point,
which controls the entire soft body. Velocity based interaction can
be applied directly to the corresponding particles while interacting
with the environment as objects. In addition we synchronize the
deformable objects over network utilizing our GA interpolation
engine to improve interaction with concurrent users.

Finally, we extended our physics engine to support interaction
with ropes and even giving user the ability to perform knots and
sutures in VR. In combination with our soft body mechanics we
developed a bowel anastomosis operation where users can interact
with the virtual sutures and soft tissue.

3 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we presented the main innovations of MAGES 3.0 fea-
turing a VR authoring solution for medical training. By improving
medical training and access to high-quality medical care, MAGES
apps have the potential to improve treatment outcomes globally.
Through efficient and affordable training of medical professionals,
we can significantly increase the number of people with access to
medical care, saving lives, costs, time.

We are currently working with edge computing resources to
cover more geographies and users, thus truly enabling collaborative
training that will benefit from 5G advancements.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agree-
ment No 871793 (ACCORDION) and No727585 (STARS-PCP) and
supported by Greek national funds (projects VRADA and vipGPU).

REFERENCES
[1] Jessica Hooper, Eleftherios Tsiridis, James E. Feng, Ran Schwarzkopf, Daniel Waren,
William J. Long, Lazaros Poultsides, William Macaulay, George Papagiannakis, Eu-
stathios Kenanidis, Eduardo D. Rodriguez, James Slover, Kenneth A. Egol, Donna P.
Phillips, Scott Friedlander, and Michael Collins. 2019. Virtual Reality Simulation
Facilitates Resident Training in Total Hip Arthroplasty: A Randomized Controlled
Trial. The Journal of Arthroplasty (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arth.2019.04.002
[2] George Papagiannakis, Nick Lydatakis, Steve Kateros, Stelios Georgiou, and Paul
Zikas. 2018. Transforming Medical Education and Training with VR Using
M.A.G.E.S.. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2018 Posters (Tokyo, Japan) (SA âĂŹ18). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Article 83, 2 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3283289.3283291

[3] George Papagiannakis, Panos Trahanias, Eustathios Kenanidis, and Eleftherios
Tsiridis. 2017. Psychomotor Surgical Training in Virtual Reality. Master Case Series
& Techniques: Adult Hip (07 2017), 827–830. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
64177-5_41

Figure 1: A cooperative REBOA training scenario in easy
mode where users can visualize the patient’s arteries.

2.3 Geometric Algebra deformable animation,

cutting and tearing (G)

Our work focuses in enhancing the state-of-the-art in skinning and
handling of models. The use of quaternions and dual quaternions
yielded fast results, free of interpolation problems or other geomet-
ric artifacts. Another step towards that direction is the introduction
of Conformal Geometric Algebra (CGA). In a CGA framework, all
points (P), translations (T), rotations (R) and dilations (D) are de-
scribed as a single entity, called multivectors. Since the interpolation
of two multivectors of type A ∈ {P,T , R, D} yields a multivector of
the same type, we acquire an easier to understand and implement
interpolation algorithm without the need to constantly transmute
objects of two worlds such as in the case of quaternion-matrices.
The CGA framework we implemented converts the original

skinning equation to a multivector-only equivalent:

Ck [m] = (cid:213)
n ∈Im

wm,n (Mn,k Bn )c[m](Mn,k Bn )⋆

(1)

where Bn amounts to an offset matrix, c[m] is the image of the m-th
vertex of the model in CGA, wm,n is the influence of the n-th bone
on the m-th vertex, Mn,k
is the transformation of the n-th bone
at time k, Im is the list of bones influencing the m-th vertex and
Ck [m] is the image of the m-th vertex of the final model at time k.
The latter implementation yields animations close to the former
method, while also enabling us to perform character deformable
cutting and tearing. Furthermore, our engine performs animations
with less intermediate keyframes, reducing bandwidth.

2.4 Editor in VR (E)
Our SDK encapsulates a VR editor capable of generating VR training
scenarios following our modular Rapid Prototyping architecture.
We designed our system as a collection of authoring tools combin-
ing a visual scripting system and an embedded VR editor forming
a bridge from product conceptualization to product realization and
development in a reasonably fast manner without the fuss of com-
plex programming and fixtures. MAGES SDK platform is designed
for any programmer or doctor to make the development of various
surgical scenarios rapid and simple. Therefore the platform allows

