Levitation Simulator: Prototyping Ultrasonic Levitation
Interfaces in Virtual Reality

Viktorija Paneva

Myroslav Bachynskyi

Jörg Müller

University of Bayreuth, Germany
{viktorija.paneva, myroslav.bachynskyi, joerg.mueller}@uni-bayreuth.de

0
2
0
2

y
a
M
3
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
9
2
6
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: The Levitation Simulator allows to simulate interaction with a levitation interface in VR. Two user studies, comparing
the real prototype (left) with the VR simulator (right), show that the VR simulation provides a good approximation of the
interaction with the levitating particle in the real prototype. We share our Levitation Simulator as Open Source (www.ai8.uni-
bayreuth.de/en/projects/Levisim), thereby democratizing levitation research and facilitating the design of applications for levitation
interfaces, without the need for a levitation apparatus.

ABSTRACT
We present the Levitation Simulator, a system that enables
researchers and designers to iteratively develop and prototype
levitation interface ideas in Virtual Reality. This includes user
tests and formal experiments. We derive a model of the move-
ment of a levitating particle in such an interface. Based on this,
we develop an interactive simulation of the levitation interface
in VR, which exhibits the dynamical properties of the real
interface. The results of a Fittsâ ˘A ´Z Law pointing study show
that the Levitation Simulator enables performance, compara-
ble to the real prototype. We developed the ﬁrst two interactive
games, dedicated for levitation interfaces: LeviShooter and
BeadBounce, in the Levitation Simulator, and then imple-
mented them on the real interface. Our results indicate that
participants experienced similar levels of user engagement
when playing the games, in the two environments. We share
our Levitation Simulator as Open Source, thereby democra-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI’20, April 25–30, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6708-0/20/04.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376409

tizing levitation research, without the need for a levitation
apparatus.

Author Keywords
Modeling; Simulation; Virtual Prototyping; Ultrasonic
Levitation; VR.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Virtual reality;

INTRODUCTION
Ultrasonic Levitation Interfaces promise a future in which the
computer can control the existence of matter in our environ-
ment, truly merging real and virtual worlds. This is similar
to approaches such as Programmable Matter [8] and Radical
Atoms [13]. However, with Ultrasonic Levition, power sup-
ply, actuation, and computation are placed in the environment
making the individual atoms simpler and cheaper.

Despite the potential of such interfaces and the accumulated
body of research [12, 17, 16, 6, 19, 2], not many applications
for levitation interfaces have been developed thus far. Among
the few examples are a two-platform jump game [21], and
augmented static objects (e.g. volcano) [5]. The main reason
that so few applications exist is that it is difﬁcult for designers,
artists, game developers and even researchers to work with
ultrasonic levitation interfaces.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Building and maintaining an interactive levitation interface,
requires time, resources and very speciﬁc technical expertise.
The underlying physics are nontrivial. The interface requires
microsecond synchronization of all ultrasonic transducers to
ensure a correct sound ﬁeld. It also requires exact calibration
of all physical parts. Such systems are also difﬁcult to debug.
In case of problems, the only observable effects are usually
the levitating particle dropping or shooting out in an uncon-
trolled way. The sources of such problems can be various. It
could be a bug in the software calculating the phase shift for
each transducer. It could be a bug in the underlying libraries,
ﬁrmware or hardware controlling the ultrasonic transducers.
Finally, it could be physical effects such as reﬂections of sound
waves off neighboring surfaces. The physical and technical
challenges potentially lead to a lack of applications, progress
and replication.

Further, when developing such systems, it is uncertain how far
one is from the performance ceiling. If one would invest in
higher framerates, better synchronization, better transducers
etc., how much would user performance improve? Would
there be a noticeable improvement in the user experience
when interacting with the upgraded interface? Lack of this
knowledge leads to missed opportunities in some areas and
futile iteration in others.

To address these problems, we present the Levitation Simula-
tor, a prototyping tool aiming to facilitate levitation research
and content creation for levitating interfaces. Instead of having
to build an ultrasonic levitation apparatus, designers, artists,
software developers and researchers can develop applications
and interaction techniques, and perform evaluations and user
studies in Virtual Reality (VR). The volumetric nature of levi-
tation interfaces is preserved in VR, so a comparable visual
experience can be provided to the user. Only after the devel-
opment has converged, the resulting system can be validated
using a real levitation apparatus, possibly built by another
group.

We derive a model of a particle levitating in an ultrasonic ﬁeld
from ﬁrst principles. Thus the Levitation Simulator is able
to physically accurately simulate the dynamics of levitating
particles. We validate the Levitation Simulator through a
series of two user studies. First we conduct a Fitts’ Law -
type pointing study in the Levitation Simulator and on the real
prototype, to obtain a quantitative measure of the pointing
performance that can be achieved with both systems. Next, we
develop two levitation minigames in the Levitation Simulator,
which are then implemented on the real prototype. In the
second user study, User Engagement levels when playing the
games on the real and virtual interface, are compared. With
this study, we want to better understand how users engage in
the interaction with levitating matter in the simulator and in
the physical world, and what are the most frequently observed
differences and similarities.

In summary, the contributions of this paper are:

• A model that describes the dynamics of movement of a

levitating particle in an acoustic ﬁeld.

• An interactive simulation of the levitating interface in Vir-
tual Reality which exhibits the dynamical properties of the
real interface - the Levitation Simulator.

• A Fitts’ Law pointing study involving aimed movements of
a 3D levitating particle between two spherical 3D targets,
on the real prototype and in the Levitation Simulator.

• A user experience study comparing user engagement lev-
els when playing interactive levitation games, on the real
prototype and in the Levitation Simulator.

More generally, we believe that the Levitation Simulator is a
good example to promote modelling and simulation of user
interfaces (UIs) in HCI. Nowadays, the dominant method to
develop user interfaces is (physical) prototyping. Physical
prototyping , however, can be difﬁcult, time-consuming, and
expensive to build, limiting the number of design iterations.
In these cases, modelling and simulation of the UI can help to
increase the number of design iterations at lower costs.

RELATED WORK

Acoustic Levitation
Ultrasonic levitation interfaces use acoustic radiation force
to counteract gravity and trap small objects in mid-air. This
effect can be achieved by using phased arrays of ultrasonic
transducers emitting the appropriate phase to create acoustic
nodes in mid-air, where the objects are trapped. Typically,
these traps are generated by creating an acoustic focus. To
create the focus, the phases for each transducer are computed,
such that, all acoustic waves constructively interfere at the
position, where the levitation trap should be generated.

Even though most research focuses on the technical implemen-
tation, several concepts concerning applications for levitating
interfaces have been introduced. For example, a game where
acoustically transparent structures (e.g. tubes made of metallic
mesh) are passed around a particle levitating in a standing
wave levitator, similar to BigLev [14], is presented in [15].
Floating Charts [20] is a modular display, where levitating
particles are used to encode data points on a dynamic chart
in mid-air. An example of a levitating particle being used
to trace hiking routes and annotate summits across a model
of a mountain range, is shown in [5]. The Pixie Dust [19]
system proposed using levitating particles in combination with
a projector to form 2D graphics. The system can be employed
to create raster and vector graphics in mid-air (e.g. logos), as
well as to animate physical objects (e.g. products in a store
window). LeviProps [17] are tangible structures composed
of an acoustically transparent lightweight fabric and levitat-
ing beads as anchors. LeviProps can be used as free-form
interactive elements and as projection surfaces. A volumetric
acoustophoretic display, where a levitated particle is rapidly
displaced, while being illuminated to create 3D shapes, is
presented in [7]. Hirayama et al. [12] propose a levitating
volumetric display that can simultaneously deliver visual, au-
ditory and tactile content, using acoustophoresis as the single
operating principle.

Recently, new interaction techniques allowing users to manip-
ulate levitating particles almost in real time, using gestures,

have been developed. With the Point-and-Shake [6] method,
users are able to select levitating objects by pointing their
ﬁnger at them. Visual feedback is provided in the form of a
continuous side-to-side (shake) movement. LeviCursor [2] is
a method for interactively moving a levitating, physical cur-
sor in 3D with high agility. The user controls the levitating
cursor with ﬁnger gestures. Freeman et al. [5] propose employ-
ing these techniques to use the levitating particle as the user
representation in interactive applications, such as, to explore
landmarks in a miniature model.

VR Prototyping
Prototyping in Virtual Reality is a standard practice in many
industries, in particular automotive and aerospace. A recent
survey of the use of Virtual Prototyping in industry is provided
by Berg and Vance [3]. Gomes de Sa and Zachmann [1]
explore Virtual Prototyping in the Automotive Industry. Seth et
al. [22] provide a comprehensive review of Virtual Prototyping
techniques for assembly processes. From the HCI perspective,
comparably less studies involving Virtual Prototyping have
been conducted. Aromaa and Väänänen [24] conducted a
comparative study of AR vs. VR prototyping for ergonomics
evaluation of a maintanance panel of a rock crusher machine.

Summary
In general, the number of applications that have been devel-
oped for ultrasonic levitation interfaces has been very limited.
To our knowledge, no interactive content involving complex
actions and information, tailored for levitation displays has
been developed. We are also not aware of formal studies in-
vestigating how users interact with more complex content or
applications. With our virtual prototyping tool for levitation,
the Levitation Simulator, we hope to bridge this gap and make
prototyping, testing and evaluation of levitation applications
accessible to a much wider audience.

REAL PROTOTYPE
Our physical ultrasonic levitation system generates the acous-
tic ﬁeld that applies forces to a particle, which levitate and
move it. A motion capture system provides real-time feedback
concerning the position of the particle in the levitation volume,
the position of the users’ ﬁngertip and any optical markers in
the observable volume (e.g., the ones deﬁning a rigid body of
a controller).

The system uses two rectangular arrays of 14 × 9 ultrasonic
transducers each. The arrays oppose each other and generate a
sound ﬁeld in a levitation volume of 14 cm × 9 cm × 10.6 cm.
Controller boards and transducer arrays are manufactured by
Ultraleap Ltd. We wrote an application in C, which receives in-
put from the motion capture system. The application generates
the new levitation trap position, as well as runs the experiment.

MODEL OF THE MOVEMENT OF A LEVITATING PARTICLE
In this section, we present a model of the movement of a levi-
tating particle in an ultrasound ﬁeld. We obtain a description
of the force acting on the levitating particle by adopting the
description by Marzo et al. [16]. That model is based on
a theory from acoustoﬂuidics, which describes the acoustic

Figure 2: Decomposition of the acoustic force in each spa-
tial dimension. Linear approximation in the vicinity of the
levitation trap (dashed green and yellow line).

force acting on small particles in an ultrasound ﬁeld using the
Gor’kov potential [4].

Figure 2 shows the individual force components, in each spa-
tial dimension. We observe strong acoustic force vectors in
the y-direction, pushing the particle from above and below
towards the center of the trap. Also in the vicinity of the
levitation trap, in all three directions, the force proﬁle is of
a sinusoidal shape, meaning that the acoustic force acts as a
restoring force, pushing the particle towards the center of the
trap, while air friction dampens its motion. The force proﬁles
indicate the maximal distance we can push a particle away
from the trap center and it would still be pulled back at its
original (equilibrium) position, i.e. the trap size (ellipsoid with
diameters dx ≈ 16 mm, dy ≈ 5 mm and dz ≈ 20 mm). The max-
imal force in the x-direction is 4.4 × 10−5 N, 2.2 × 10−4 N in
the y and 3.5 × 10−5 N in the z-direction. The maximal force
that the acoustic ﬁeld can exert to the levitating particle sets
the physical limit for its velocity and acceleration.

Note that the acoustic force in the y-direction is an order of
magnitude higher than the two horizontal forces, implying that
the levitating particle can achieve higher accelerations and ve-
locities in this direction compared to the other two directions.
This result can have implications for performing pointing tasks
in 3D on the levitating display. While in pointing we often
assume homogeneity of movement in all directions, this as-
sumption is clearly violated for ultrasonic levitation.

Let us denote the displacement of the levitating particle from
the trap by x. The balance of forces using Newton’s second
law gives

F = ma = Fext + Fa − Fdrag,

(1)

where F is the net force acting on the particle, Fext is the
external force, e.g., from gravity or wind; Fa is the acoustic

force, produced by the ultrasonic transducers; Fdrag is the air
resistance, m denotes the mass of the levitating particle and
a its acceleration. We assume that when the particle moves
through air, there is no turbulence (i.e. low Reynolds number),
so the drag force can be modeled to be proportional to the
velocity. We set Fdrag = c dx
dt , where c is the drag constant,
that describes the decay of oscillations after the particle has
been disturbed. The gravitational force acting on the levitating
particle is two to three orders of magnitude, depending on
the particle size, smaller than the acoustic force, so it can be
neglected in the model. In addition, we make the assumption
that no other external force acts on the system, i.e. Fext = 0.
Hence, we obtain F = ma = Fa − c dx
dt , which by setting v = dx
dt ,
can be rewritten into the system of equations

˙x = v

˙v =

Fa − cv
m

.

(2)

(3)

The theory of the acoustic radiation force, stemming from
the scattering of acoustic waves on a small particle, has been
extensively discussed in [4]. Without going in detail, here we
only present the fundamental acoustic force expression

Fa = −∇U = −Ux −Uy −Uz,

(4)

where the force is described as a gradient of the Gor’kov
potential U [9], which in turn is dependent on the complex
acoustic pressure and its spatial derivatives.

We note that the analytical expression of the acoustic force
(Eq. 4) is too complex for our modeling purposes, so we
approximate it, in the neighborhood of the trap, by a lin-
ear function i.e. Fa = bx (see Figure 2). We use Tay-
lor series expansion, to identify the vector of coefﬁcients
b = [0.016, 0.26, 0.011].

The diameter of the levitating particle is measured to be d =
0.002 m and the material density of expanded polystyrene is
estimated to be ρEPS = 25 kg m−3, thus we obtain a particle
mass of m ≈ 1.05 × 10−7 kg. The linear drag constant c ≈
9.42 kg s−1 was empirically obtained.

According to our experiences, the particle movement in VR
appears to be indistinguishable from the particle movement in
the real prototype. A comparison of simulated particle move-
ments to measured data from the real prototype is provided in
Figure 3.

THE LEVITATION SIMULATOR
The Levitation Simulator consists of an interaction and a sim-
ulation module. The interaction module is implemented in
C# within the Unity Game engine. Users can interact with
the simulated levitation interface either via a motion capture
system or via a VR controller. The levitated particles move
realistically, as they would with a physical levitation system.

Figure 3: Comparison of output data of the Levitation Simula-
tor to the measured data from the real prototype.

the VR controller. It transforms the input, e.g., by applying
C:D gain, and sends the new trap position via UDP to the
simulation module. It receives the new particle position via
UDP from the simulation module and renders the scene. The
entire system runs at 90 FPS, synchronized with the update
rate of the HMD.

Figure 4: Model of the dynamics of the levitating particle in
Simulink.

The simulation module (Figure 4) is implemented in the Mat-
lab Simulink environment. It reads the new trap position from
a UDP socket. It maintains the velocity and position of levi-
tated particles in two integrators. From the new position of the
trap and the current position of the particle, it calculates the
force that is acting on the particle. To calculate the force, it
uses the model described above. It then simulates the effect of
that force on the particle. The new particle position is transmit-
ted to the interaction module via UDP. In order to minimize
latency, we use no UDP buffers. We use a variable-step solver
(Runge-Kutta (4,5)).

We currently use an HTC Vive Pro HMD and Optitrack Motion
Capture System with Prime 13 cameras.

This design makes the Levitation Simulator ﬂexible and easy-
to-operate, and makes changes to the underlying model trivial
to implement. In particular, we can swap models of particle
behavior to simulate different levitation apparatuses, differ-
ent levitated particles, or different techniques to generate the
sound ﬁeld. In addition, it allows us to simulate and test appli-
cation ideas that would take months to implement on the real
prototype, such as the Levitating Piano (see Figure 5).

Applications and experiments can be implemented through
Unity scripts. One script we provide, records the details of the
movement, including particle and ﬁnger position per frame
with timestamps, to a CSV ﬁle. Another script reads the input,
e.g., from the OptiTrack Streaming Client via NatNet or from

The Levitation Simulator is simple to use, if one does not
want to change interface or simulation. Extending it might
require some expertise in Unity and/or Simulink, depending
whether one wants to change the interface or the simulation.
As such skills are available in the HCI community, we believe

of the auditory feedback and the individual aimed movement
durations.

Participants
Twelve healthy participants (4 females), aged between 20
and 39 (mean 27.25, SD 5.15), were recruited for the exper-
iment. They all had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
All preferred to control the levitating particle with their right
hand. Before the experiment, they were provided with basic
information about the study and signed a consent form. The
experiment was approved by the Ethical Committee of the
University of Bayreuth and followed the ethical standards of
the Helsinki Declaration. All participants received monetary
reimbursement for their participation.

Apparatus
In the experiment, we have used the real prototype and the
Levitation Simulator, described in the previous sections, as the
basis for control of the levitating particle. The experimental
setup is illustrated in Figure 6. The targets for the Fitts’ law
tasks were implemented as thin pointy black sticks, placed
between the transducer arrays, to reduce interference with the
acoustic ﬁeld and the optical tracking system. In the Levitation
Simulator, equivalent sticks were placed in the scene. Inter-
nally, in both systems, the targets were represented as spheres
of three different sizes, centered at the tips of the sticks. While
the actual spheres were invisible, the system produced an au-
ditory feedback as soon as the levitating particle entered the
target sphere. Both applications processed and recorded the
motion capture data describing the movement of the ﬁnger
and the position of the (real or simulated) levitated particle.
Participants could control the particle motion in 3D with their
ﬁngertip, using a control-to-display ratio of 3.

Figure 6: Real acoustic levitation interface (left) and Levitation
Simulator (right). For orientation, the green sphere indicates
the position of the user’s ﬁngertip.

Procedure
Before beginning the experiment, the participants read basic
information about the study and a description of the tasks. The
experimenter provided clariﬁcations, if the participants had
any questions. The participants sat on a chair in front of the ap-
paratus. In the VR condition, they were asked to wear the HTC
Vive Pro and adjust it according to their comfort. They were
asked to take a comfortable position, adjust the chair height
and location to ensure good visibility of the targets both in the
Levitation Simulator and the real prototype. A retroreﬂective
marker of 9 mm diameter was attached to the ﬁngertip of the

Figure 5: The “Levitating Piano” is an application devel-
oped in the Levitation Simulator. The user has a 3 mm wide
retroreﬂective marker placed on their ﬁngernail. With their
ﬁnger (green sphere), they control the levitating particle (white
sphere) in the levitating display. In this way, they can play
a virtual levitating piano, made of acoustically transparent
fabric. Whenever the levitating particle touches the fabric, the
corresponding piano tone sounds (see accompanying video).

that the Levitation Simulator will be easy to work with and
extend for research groups in the HCI community. For users
that do not wish to experiment with different models of the
movement dynamics, we provide a stand-alone Unity version
of the Levitation Simulator, where the model in Figure 4 is
integrated into the Unity environment.

POINTING STUDY
We are interested in how far the interaction with the real and
virtual prototype enables similar pointing performance, and if
not, what the differences are. Further, we want to investigate
whether the control of a levitating cursor with the real and
virtual prototype, is perceived similarly by users. Thus we
evaluate the performance achieved by interacting with the
Levitation Simulator, compared to the real prototype, in a
Fitts’ Law type repetitive pointing study.

Experimental Design
Participants performed repetitive aimed mid-air movements
between two three-dimensional, spherical targets of varying
size. We used a within subjects experimental design with two
interface conditions (real and VR), two movement directional-
ity conditions (left-right and front-back), and three index of
difﬁculty conditions (target amplitude 5 cm and three target
diameters: 4 , 8 and 16 mm). The indices of difﬁculty cov-
ered in the experiment are 2.04, 2.85 and 3.75. The range of
possible indices was constrained by the properties of the real
prototype: the distance between the targets was constrained
by the sound ﬁeld region allowing stable levitation and agile
control, the target size was limited by the size of the cursor and
the persistent oscillations of the particle within the trap. The
participants performed a set of equivalent Fitts’ law reciprocal
pointing tasks, both on the real prototype and in the Levitation
Simulator. The order of interfaces was counterbalanced by ran-
domization, and the order of conditions on each interface was
fully counterbalanced by a Latin square. The participants per-
formed 70 aimed movements for each condition. We recorded
both, the position of the ﬁngertip marker and the levitating
particle, on a frame-by-frame basis, as well as the timings

index ﬁnger of the dominant hand of each participant. In the
real condition, the experimenter placed a white polystyrene
particle into the levitation volume. We started with an explo-
ration phase, in which the participants explored the interaction
with the interface and moved the levitating particle in different
directions for approximately 30 s. We asked the participants to
place the particle at each of the tips of the target indicators, as
accurately as possible. We then calibrated the target locations
according to the participants’ individual perception of the tar-
get. Next, we conducted a training phase for each condition.
The participants were instructed to move between the targets
as quickly and accurately as possible, for 20 repetitions. In the
experiment, participants were asked to perform 70 repetitions
for each condition. During the experiment, our software was
continuously recording the time-stamped 3D position of the
levitated particle at each frame. We also recorded the time
stamps when the user reached each target and was notiﬁed by
the sound. After each condition, the participants were asked
to take a short break. After the completion of all tasks in the
ﬁrst interface condition, the participant was moved to another
room to continue with the other condition. Subsequent to com-
pleting all pointing tasks in each environment, the participants
ﬁlled in the NASA Task Load Index questionnaire [11]. At
the end, we performed a semi-structured interview with each
participant.

Analysis
We performed two types of analyses on the collected data.
We used Fitts’ law modeling for comparing the performance
achieved on the real prototype and in the Levitation Simulator.
We used statistical analysis for the impact of conditions on
movement time, as well as for the NASA TLX data.

As preprocessing, we average the movement time values per
condition. The movement times were not normally distributed
according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (p > 0.05), so we
opted for a non-parametric statistical analysis. We performed
a Friedman test to compare movement times between the
interfaces and IDs. We use a Wilcoxon signed-rank test to
analyze the NASA TLX data.

The Fitts’ law modeling was performed according to the com-
mon HCI practice [23]. While the pointing tasks and the
targets were represented in 3D space and multivariate Fitts’
law models could be applied [10], with spherical targets they
are equivalent to the application of Fitts’ law in the Shannon
formulation:

ID = log2

(cid:18) D
W

(cid:19)

+ 1

MT = a + b × ID

T P =

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

1
y

y
∑
i=1

1
x

x
∑
j=1

ID
MT

(5)

(6)

(7)

where ID is index of difﬁculty, D and W are the movement
amplitude and target width respectively, MT is movement
time, a and b are regression coefﬁcients, and T P is information
throughput. In the preprocessing step, we discard the ﬁrst 20
movements from each trial, as the participants were adjusting

to the new size of the invisible target. We then compute ID and
average MT for each trial. Before ﬁtting the regression lines,
we group all trials according to the ID and compute average
MT and ID for each group. Similarly, we use the group values
to compute the movement performance T P.

Results
Pointing performance
The results of the Friedman test show no signiﬁcant differences
in movement times between the conditions. We can however
observe some trends in the data, which we describe in the fol-
lowing. We can see a trend, according to which with increase
in index of difﬁculty, the movement time increases faster in
the VR condition than in the real condition. For increasing
IDs of 2.04, 2.85, and 3.75 bits, the average movement time
in the real condition is 0.665, 0.823, and 1.028 s, respectively,
compared to the respective movement times of 0.679, 0.876,
and 1.253 s, in the VR condition.

When considering the effect of movement direction, we ob-
serve another trend. With increasing index of difﬁculty, the
movement time increases faster in the left-right condition than
in the front-back condition, in the Levitation Simulator. For
the same increasing sequence of IDs as above, the average
movement times in the front-back condition are 0.686, 0.863,
and 1.206 s. In the left-right condition, the movement times
are 0.671, 0.890, and 1.301 s.

We can see no such trend in the real condition. Both left-right
and front-back movements exhibit almost the same movement
times for each index of difﬁculty. There is only a small con-
stant difference. For the same increasing sequence of IDs as
above, the average movement times in the front-back condition
are 0.674, 0.814, and 1.038 s. In the left-right condition the
movement times are 0.656, 0.830, and 1.019 s.

Figure 7: Fitts’ law models for Levitation Simulator vs. phys-
ical apparatus conditions. The circles represent the average
MT corresponding to the three IDs, in each condition.

We computed Fitts’ law models for the different interfaces,
and further considered the effects of movement direction for
the whole data. The Fitts’ law models comparing the real
and VR condition are shown in Figure 7. Models in both the
Levitation Simulator and real prototype conditions, as well
as for all four condition combinations provided a good ﬁt for

Figure 8: Fitts’ law models for each combination of interface
and direction conditions. The circles represent the average
MT corresponding to the three IDs, in each condition.

the data with R2 > 0.97. The models reﬂect the trends in the
movement time between conditions described in the previous
paragraph. We can see that both conditions are characterized
by similar movement times and similar throughput, with the
throughput of the real prototype being slightly higher.
In
the VR condition, the throughput is 3.08 bits/s. In the real
condition, the throughput is 3.41 bits/s. The regression line of
the Levitation Simulator condition is steeper (b = 337) than
for the real condition (b = 212). Movement time increases
faster in the VR than in the real condition.

Figure 8 shows the Fitts’ law analysis, split by interface and
direction. We can observe that movement direction does not
affect the movement times in the real prototype condition
(slope b = 211 in left-right condition and b = 213 in front-
back condition). It does however affect the movement times
in the Levitation Simulator condition. The movement times of
the left-right movements in the VR condition grow faster with
increasing index of difﬁculty, than the movement time of the
front-back movements (b = 369 for left-right vs. b = 305 for
front-back conditions).

Task Load Index (TLX)
The results of the NASA TLX questionnaire are shown in
Figure 9. Overall, the workload in VR was reported as slightly
higher (mean=10.5), compared to the workload in the physi-
cal environment (mean=9.0). The Wilcoxon signed-rank did
not show any signiﬁcant difference in the mental demand
(p = 0.066), physical demand(p = 0.92), temporal demand
(p = 0.089), performance (p = 0.12), effort (p = 0.37) and
frustration (p = 0.15) scores, for the real and VR conditions.

Observations and Interviews
During the experiment, we observed different strategies to
In tasks with a low index of
complete the pointing task.
difﬁculty, the participants relied more on the visual cues when
trying to hit the target. With a high index of difﬁculty, the exact
depth of the target was difﬁcult to see, so some participants
relied more on their muscle memory. They tried to memorize
and reproduce the gesture that produced a successful target hit.
Some participants reported to have used the collision of the
levitating particle with the target indicators, in both the VR and

Figure 9: Boxplot of the scores on the NASA TLX factors for
the Fitt’s Law pointing task, in the real and VR condition.

the real condition, as a visual cue. On the physical apparatus,
some participants also used the increase in oscillations of
the particle around the physical targets as additional visual
feedback. These oscillations occur as the target indicators
slightly disturb the sound ﬁeld. We did not model this effect
in the Levitation Simulator yet.

Almost all participants reported in the interviews, that the inter-
action felt very similar in both conditions. In both conditions,
they felt high control over the levitating particle. There was
an interesting difference between participants who had experi-
ence in VR and those who had not. Those who had previous
VR experience, were very impressed by the physically realistic
movement of the particle in the Levitation Simulator. They had
not had such a realistic experience in VR before. In contrast,
those who had not experienced VR before, were rather under-
whelmed by the overall realism of the Levitation Simulator
experience. Apparently, they had much higher expectations of
the realism of VR experiences in general.

On the real levitation interface, all participants showed amaze-
ment over real levitation. They expressed this with phrases
such as that when they controlled the particle with their ﬁnger
they felt as a wizard with a magic wand. This might be due
to the fact that none of our participants have experienced a
levitation interface before. This amazement was not expressed
with the Levitation Simulator.

The most frequent criticism of the Levitation Simulator was
the limited quality of the depth cues in VR. When performing
the experimental task, participants clearly had difﬁculty judg-
ing the depth of the levitating particle relative to the targets.
This was the case particularly for the left-right movements.
Participants found this particularly frustrating when they com-
pared it with the real prototype, which provided all natural
depth cues perfectly. Some participants also complained about
the quality of the resolution of the HMD Vive Pro headset.

In both conditions, the participants reported that they felt they
could perform the task better if the targets were visible. Par-
ticipants made further suggestions to increase the levitation
volume, to add visible targets and to improve the depth per-
ception in VR.

USER ENGAGEMENT STUDY
The objective of our second user study was to investigate dif-
ferences and similarities in the way users engage and interact
with the same applications, presented in the Levitation Simu-
lator and on a physical levitation apparatus. For this purpose,
two different games for levitation interfaces, a ball-and-racket
game and a ﬁrst person shooter, were developed in the Levita-
tion Simulator, and then implemented on the real prototype.
The ideas for the games were generated in a brainstorming
session. The exact game design and movement parameters
were determined in the Levitation Simulator in an iterative
testing process with pilot participants. The biggest challenge
was to ﬁnd the optimal bead velocity, such that the game is
challenging enough for the player, but not too difﬁcult so they
become frustrated and quit. With the Levitation Simulator it
was possible to efﬁciently test many velocities and collect user
responses.

Figure 10: In the BeadBounce game, the player has to pre-
vent the levitating particle (marked with a green circle) from
bouncing off into the danger zone (red arrow), by hitting it
with the racket.

The ﬁrst game developed was BeadBounce. The goal of the
game is to prevent the levitating particle from going into the
’danger zone’. The game is played in the left half of the levita-
tion interface. The right half is the danger zone. The entrance
to the danger zone is marked by a black pole, positioned at the
back of the levitation volume, to allow for free movement of
the racket. During the game, the levitating particle moves in
a straight 3D line and bounces off the walls of the levitating
volume. When the particle starts moving towards the danger
zone, the player has to hit it with the racket controller, so that
it bounces back to the left (see Figure 10). Initially the particle
starts moving with 0.09 m/s. When the particle is hit, part of
the racket momentum transfers to the levitating particle, hence
the particle moves with varying velocity, during the course of
the game. Audio feedback is given whenever the levitating
particle bounces off the wall or the racket.

Figure 11: In the LeviShooter game, the player aims at the lev-
itating particle (marked with a green circle), using a lasergun.
The goal is to successfully hit the particle, as often as possible,
while with every hit, the particle velocity increases.

The second game was LeviShooter. In this game, the player
shoots at a levitating particle with a laser gun controller (see
Figure 11). The levitating particle moves in a straight 3D
line, with an initial velocity of 0.05 m/s. The player needs to
aim at it accurately. Visual feedback that the gun controller is
aiming correctly, is given by the reﬂection of the laser beam
from the particle. When the particle is successfully hit, the
player has to wait 2 s until they can shoot again. With every
hit, the difﬁculty of the game increases, by increasing the
velocity of the particle, by an increment of 0.001 m/s. After
ten misses, the levitating particle lowers its velocity again.
Audio feedback is given whenever the lasergun is ﬁred, and
when the particle is successfully hit.

Experimental Design
The user study consisted of a within-groups experimental de-
sign, with two interface conditions (real and VR), for each of
the two games. The order of conditions was fully counterbal-
anced by a Latin square.

To measure user engagement levels, we adopted the long ver-
sion of the User Engagement Scale (UES) [18]. The scale uses
four dimension identiﬁers: Focused Attention - measures the
degree of being absorbed in the experience and losing track
of time, Perceived Usability - evaluates interface usability,
level of control and how demanding the experience was, Aes-
thetic Appeal - appeal of the interface to the visual senses, and
Reward - assesses whether the experience was fun, reward-
ing and worthwhile. The UES questionnaire consists of 30
items, where each is answered on a ﬁve-point rating scale. We
randomized the order of items prior to administering.

We also measured how long participants played the games,
and conducted semistructured interviews with them.

Participants
Twenty four participants (10 females and 14 males) aged be-
tween 19 and 32 (mean 24.17, SD 3.95), were recruited for
the experiment. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision
and no previous experience with levitating interfaces. Before
the experiment started, the participants read basic informa-
tion about the study and signed a consent form. The study
was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of
Bayreuth. All participants received a monetary reimbursement
for their participation.

Apparatus
The study was conducted using the Levitation Simulator and
the real prototype, as previously described. For the Bead-
Bounce game on the physical apparatus, we designed and 3D
printed a racket that can interact directly with the levitating
particle within the levitating volume, without disturbing the
acoustic ﬁeld and that can be tracked by the motion capture
system. The racket head is hollow, with a diameter of 3 cm
and frame thickness of 1 mm. The racket handle is 40 cm
long with thickness of 6 mm. We attached ﬁve 3 mm wide
retroreﬂective markers to the racket handle, to enable optical
motion tracking. In the LeviShooter game, the input device
consisted of a 3D printed laser-gun-shaped casing. We placed
a laser pointer and a trigger inside of the casing, and mounted
ﬁve 9 mm wide retroreﬂective markers on top.

Procedure
Upon arrival, participants were given basic information about
the study and the rules of the levitation games were explained
to them, by the experimenter. They were asked to take a
comfortable position, either standing up or sitting down, that
allowed them a good overview over the levitation volume. In
the VR condition, participants were asked to adjust the HTC
Vive Pro headset to their comfort. Then they were given either
a racket or a lasergun controller and started playing Bead-
Bounce, or respectively LeviShooter. The participants were
instructed to play the games as long as they liked. We recorded
the gameplay duration and the score. If the gameplay exceeded
5 minutes, we asked them to move to the next condition. After
each condition, the participants took a short break and ﬁlled
in the UES questionnaire. At the end of the experiment, we
conducted a semi-structured interview, where we asked partic-
ipants about their game experience in the Levitation Simulator
and on the real prototype.

Analysis
The UES questionnaire data and the gameplay times were sta-
tistically analyzed. The normality assumption of the UES data
was conﬁrmed by performing a Shapiro-Wilk test (p>0.05).
We analyze the data using a paired t-test. Using a Shapiro-
Wilk test, we also checked the normality of the distribution
of gameplay times data. According to the test, we cannot
assume normality for the data obtained in the VR condition
of the BeadBounce game (W = 0.75, p < 0.01) and in the VR
condition of LeviShooter (W = 0.78, p < 0.01). Thus we opt
for non-parametric statistical analysis and perform a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test.

Results
User Engagement
The UES scores obtained for the BeadBounce game, in each
subscale, are shown in Figure 12. There was a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in the Reward scores for the real (M=4.20, SD=0.56)
and VR (M=3.89, SD=0.70) conditions; (t(23) = 4.05, p <
0.001). No signiﬁcant difference was found in the Focused
Attention (p = 0.17), Perceived Usability (p = 0.32) and Aes-
thetic Appeal (p = 0.80) scores, for the real and VR condi-
tions.

Figure 13: Scores for the LeviShooter game on the physical
apparatus and in the Levitation Simulator, in each subscale of
the UES Questionnaire.

The scores in each UES subscale, for the LeviShooter game,
are presented in Figure 13. There was a signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the Aesthetic Appeal scores for the real (M=3.15,
SD=0.84) and VR (M=3.61, SD=0.82) conditions; (t(23) =
−3.0731, p = 0.005). No signiﬁcant difference was found
in the Focused Attention (p = 0.85), Perceived Usability
(p = 0.29) and Reward (p = 0.40) scores, for the real and
VR conditions.

Gameplay Times
Means and standard deviations for the gameplay times in
each condition, are shown in Table 1. A Wilcoxon signed-
rank test indicates that participants spent signiﬁcantly more
time playing the BeadBounce game in the VR (Mdn= 302.5),
compared to the real condition (Mdn= 235); (p < 0.001). The
scores are presented in Figure 14. No signiﬁcant difference
was found for the gameplay times in the LeviShooter game
(p = 0.39).

Game
Interface
Condition
Mean
Playtime

BeadBounce

LeviShooter

real

VR

real

VR

236.92(±47.34)

269.96(±58.29)

255.60(±54.99)

268.16(±54.79)

Table 1: Means and standard deviations of the times partici-
pants spent playing the two games on the physical apparatus
and in the Levitation Simulator.

Figure 12: Scores for the BeadBounce game on the physical
apparatus and in the Levitation Simulator, in each subscale of
the UES Questionnaire.

Figure 14: Boxplot for the gameplay times per game and
interface condition.

Observations and Interviews
When we asked participants which game and in which setting
they liked the most, there was no clear preference regarding
the game. Most of the participants, however, preferred the
interaction with the real prototype. Namely, nine participants
preferred BeadBounce in the real condition, seven participants
preferred LeviShooter in the real condition, and both games
in the VR condition were preferred by four participants each.
Participants used words like new and fun to describe the game
experience with the real prototype, and cool and immersive
for the Levitation Simulator. Almost all participants stated
that the real and the virtual environment looked very similar,
and in both cases they had a strong feeling of control. Few
participants noted that even though the experience was very
similar, they had a ’different feeling’ when playing the game
in the real world and in VR - the interaction with the real
prototype felt more intuitive to them. Similarly as in the
pointing user study, participants most frequently criticized the
depth cues in VR and the resolution of the HMD, and reacted
with more amazement when observing real levitation.

DISCUSSION
Overall, the two user studies yielded similar results for the
interaction in the Levitation Simulator and with the real proto-
type. The overall results indicate that if a levitation user study
is conducted in the Levitation Simulator, and then validated
on the real prototype, there is a high probability that similar
results will be obtained.

Certainly, differences might become signiﬁcant with a larger
sample size. It is more important, however, to look at the
effective sizes. In the pointing study, for example, the aver-
age movement times and throughputs are relatively similar.
Thus we are quite conﬁdent, that any differences between the
interfaces will not be very large in magnitude.

In both studies, we experienced two main limitations of the
virtual environment. These are important to keep in mind
when developing or evaluating levitation applications in the
Levitation Simulator.

First, the quality of the depth cues with current VR headsets
is still far from the depth cues one can perceive in a real user
interface. This effect is visible in the Fitts’ law analysis and
in the interview data of both user studies. It might explain
the trend in the pointing data, where smaller targets lead to
a higher increase of movement times in the Levitation Sim-
ulator compared to the real condition (Fig. 7). In the User
Engagement study, this phenomenon was more prominent in
the BeadBounce game, where the levitating particle and the
head of the racket need to be at the same depth, for a hit to
be registered. We also observed that in the Levitation Simu-
lator the increase in the movement time was steeper in the
left-right direction, compared to front-back (Fig. 8). One pos-
sible explanation is that because of the lacking depth cues in
VR, participants relied less on visual, and more on propriocep-
tive cues to complete the task. After identifying the correct
target depth, in subsequent trials, they tried to reproduce the
movement that resulted in a target hit the ﬁrst time. From
biomechanics perspective, however, it is easier to reproduce
the front-back, then the left-right movement, since there are

fewer joints involved (i.e. wrist in front-back, wrist and elbow
or shoulder in left-right).

There are three ways to deal with the depth perception prob-
lem. First, for tasks that require accurate depth perception,
it is important to realize that performance in the Levitation
Simulator might underestimate the performance that might
be achieved with a real prototype. Second, when evaluating
virtual prototypes, it might be beneﬁcial to choose tasks which
do not rely as much on accurate depth perception. This can be
done by using larger targets overall, or by using targets which
are larger in the depth dimension. Third, we might hope that
future VR headsets will provide improved depth perception.

The second shortcoming of the virtual prototype is that the
“wow effect” seems to be gone. The interview results and study
observations indicate that the thrilling experience of interact-
ing with a levitation interface, for the ﬁrst time, cannot be
replicated in VR. This effect needs to be considered when esti-
mating the user experience of a real levitation interface from
a virtual prototype. The novelty appeal of physical levitation
might partially explain the result that participants found the
experience of playing the BeadBounce in the real condition
more rewarding, compared to the VR condition (Fig. 12). This
result, however, was not obtained for the LeviShooter game.
One possible reason might be a greater sense of involvement,
through direct interaction in BeadBounce. Participants de-
scribed the experience of reaching into the levitation volume
with the racket and interacting with the levitating particle as
unique and exciting, which possibly made the overall experi-
ence more rewarding and worthwhile.

Even though, in the interviews, the majority of the participants
reported that they preferred playing the levitation games in
the real condition, on average, they spent more time playing
in VR (mean playtime = 270 s for BeadBounce, 268 s for
LeviShooter). The immersion property of VR, as well as the
blocking of distractions, might be a possible explanation for
this result. Thus it should be taken into consideration that the
Levitation Simulator might overestimate the gameplay times,
that would be obtained with the real prototype.

However, overall, the participants considered the interaction
with the Levitation Simulator as highly realistic when compar-
ing it to the real prototype. We believe that, when accounted
for differences in depth perception, immersion and the “wow
effect”, a virtual prototype can provide a very good prediction
of the interaction performance and experience that would be
achieved with a real prototype.

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented the Levitation Simulator. We
derived a model of the movement of a levitated particle in
a sound ﬁeld from ﬁrst principles. This makes the virtual
levitating particle behave seemingly identical to a real particle.
Our user studies show that the Levitation Simulator provides
performance as well as levels of user engagement and user
experience comparable to the real levitation apparatus. Here
we demonstrated how virtual prototyping can be helpful in the
design of user interfaces. With this, we hope to inspire future

research in modelling, simulation, and virtual prototyping of
UIs in HCI.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement #737087 (Levitate).

REFERENCES
[1] Antonino Gomes de Sá and Gabriel Zachmann. 1999.

Virtual reality as a tool for veriﬁcation of assembly and
maintenance processes. Computers & Graphics 23, 3
(1999), 389 – 403. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0097-8493(99)00047-3

[2] Myroslav Bachynskyi, Viktorija Paneva, and Jörg

Müller. 2018. LeviCursor: Dexterous Interaction with a
Levitating Object. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and
Spaces (ISS ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 253–262.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3279778.3279802

[3] Leif P. Berg and Judy M. Vance. 2017. Industry use of
virtual reality in product design and manufacturing: a
survey. Virtual Reality 21, 1 (01 Mar 2017), 1–17. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10055-016-0293-9

[4] Henrik Bruus. 2012. Acoustoﬂuidics 7: The Acoustic

Radiation Force on Small Particles. Lab on a Chip 12, 6
(2012), 1014–1021.

[5] Euan Freeman, Asier Marzo, Praxitelis B. Kourtelos,
Julie R. Williamson, and Stephen Brewster. 2019.
Enhancing Physical Objects with Actuated Levitating
Particles. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International
Symposium on Pervasive Displays (PerDis ’19). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 7 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3321335.3324939

[6] Euan Freeman, Julie Williamson, Sriram Subramanian,
and Stephen Brewster. 2018. Point-and-Shake: Selecting
from Levitating Object Displays. In Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
18, 10 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173592

[7] Tatsuki Fushimi, Asier Marzo, Bruce W. Drinkwater,

and Thomas L. Hill. 2019. Acoustophoretic volumetric
displays using a fast-moving levitated particle. Applied
Physics Letters 115, 6 (2019), 064101. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.5113467

[8] Seth Copen Goldstein, Jason Campbell, and Todd C.
Mowry. 2005. Programmable matter. Computer 38, 6
(May 2005), 99–101. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2005.198

[9] Lev Petrovich Gor’kov. 1962. On the forces acting on a
small particle placed int an acoustic ﬁeld in an ideal
liquid. Sov. Phys. Dokl. 6, 9 (1962), 773.

[10] Tovi Grossman and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2004. Pointing

at Trivariate Targets in 3D Environments. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’04). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 447–454. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/985692.985749

[11] Sandra G. Hart and Lowell E. Staveland. 1988.

Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index):
Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research. In
Human Mental Workload, Peter A. Hancock and
Najmedin Meshkati (Eds.). Advances in Psychology,
Vol. 52. North-Holland, 139 – 183. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9

[12] Ryuji Hirayama, Diego Martinez Plasencia, Nobuyuki
Masuda, and Sriram Subramanian. 2019. A volumetric
display for visual, tactile and audio presentation using
acoustic trapping. Nature 575, 7782 (2019), 320–323.

[13] Hiroshi Ishii, Dávid Lakatos, Leonardo Bonanni, and
Jean-Baptiste Labrune. 2012. Radical Atoms: Beyond
Tangible Bits, Toward Transformable Materials.
interactions 19, 1 (Jan. 2012), 38–51. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2065327.2065337

[14] Asier Marzo, Adrian Barnes, and Bruce W. Drinkwater.
2017. TinyLev: A multi-emitter single-axis acoustic
levitator. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 88, 8 (2017),
085105. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4989995

[15] Asier Marzo, Steven Kockaya, Euan Freeman, and Julie
Williamson. 2019. Tangible Interactions with Acoustic
Levitation. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article
INT005, 4 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3313265

[16] Asier Marzo, Sue Ann Seah, Bruce W. Drinkwater,
Deepak Ranjan Sahoo, Benjamin Long, and Sriram
Subramanian. 2015. Holographic Acoustic Elements for
Manipulation of Levitated Objects. Nature
communications 6 (Oct. 2015), 8661.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9661

[17] Rafael Morales, Asier Marzo, Sriram Subramanian, and
Diego Martínez. 2019. LeviProps: Animating Levitated
Optimized Fabric Structures Using Holographic
Acoustic Tweezers. In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
651–661. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347882

[18] Heather L. Oâ ˘A ´ZBrien, Paul Cairns, and Mark Hall.
2018. A practical approach to measuring user
engagement with the reﬁned user engagement scale
(UES) and new UES short form. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies 112 (2018), 28 – 39. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.01.004

[19] Yoichi Ochiai, Takayuki Hoshi, and Jun Rekimoto. 2014.
Pixie Dust: Graphics Generated by Levitated and
Animated Objects in Computational Acoustic-potential
Field. ACM Trans. Graph. 33, 4, Article 85 (July 2014),
13 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2601097.2601118

[20] Themis Omirou, Marzo Asier Perez, Sriram

Subramanian, and Anne Roudaut. 2016. Floating charts:
Data plotting using free-ﬂoating acoustically levitated
representations. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI). 187–190. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/3DUI.2016.7460051

[21] Deepak Ranjan Sahoo, Takuto Nakamura, Asier Marzo,
Themis Omirou, Michihiro Asakawa, and Sriram
Subramanian. 2016. JOLED: A Mid-air Display Based
on Electrostatic Rotation of Levitated Janus Objects. In
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’16). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 437–448. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984549

[22] Abhishek Seth, Judy M. Vance, and James H. Oliver.

2011. Virtual reality for assembly methods prototyping:
a review. Virtual Reality 15, 1 (01 Mar 2011), 5–20.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10055-009-0153-y

[23] R. William Soukoreff and I. Scott MacKenzie. 2004.

Towards a standard for pointing device evaluation,
perspectives on 27 years of Fitts’ law research in HCI.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 61, 6
(2004), 751 – 789. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2004.09.001 Fitts’ law 50
years later: applications and contributions from
human-computer interaction.

[24] Susanna Aromaa and Kaisa Väänänen. 2016. Suitability

of virtual prototypes to support human
factors/ergonomics evaluation during the design.
Applied Ergonomics 56 (2016), 11 – 18. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.02.015

