0
2
0
2

l
u
J

5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
6
6
3
1
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

TeslaMirror: Multistimulus Encounter-Type Haptic Display for
Shape and Texture Rendering in VR

Aleksey Fedoseev
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
aleksey.fedoseev@skoltech.ru

Akerke Tleugazy
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
akerke.tleugazy@skoltech.ru

Luiza Labazanova
Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU)
Kowloon, Hong Kong
luiza.labazanova@connect.polyu.hk

Dzmitry Tsetserukou
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
Moscow, Russia
d.tsetserukou@skoltech.ru

Figure 1: (a) TeslaMirror architecture. (b) User approaching the virtual surface. (c) Real-time simulation by haptic display.

ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a novel concept of a hybrid tactile display
with multistimulus feedback, allowing the real-time experience
of the position, shape, and texture of the virtual object. The key
technology of the TeslaMirror is that we can deliver the sensation
of object parameters (pressure, vibration, and shear force feedback)
without any wearable haptic devices. We developed the full digital
twin of the 6 DOF UR robot in the virtual reality (VR) environment,
allowing the adaptive surface simulation and control of the hybrid
display in real-time.

The preliminary user study was conducted to evaluate the abil-
ity of TeslaMirror to reproduce shape sensations with the under-
actuated end-effector. The results revealed that potentially this
approach can be used in the virtual systems for rendering versatile
VR shapes with high fidelity haptic experience.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGGRAPH ’20 Emerging Technologies, August 17, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7967-0/20/08.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Virtual reality; • Hardware
→ Haptic devices; • Computer systems organization → Ro-
botics.

KEYWORDS
3D interaction, collaborative technologies, haptics, interaction tech-
nologies, robotics, shape-changing interfaces, virtual reality

ACM Reference Format:
Aleksey Fedoseev, Akerke Tleugazy, Luiza Labazanova, and Dzmitry Tset-
serukou. 2020. TeslaMirror: Multistimulus Encounter-Type Haptic Display
for Shape and Texture Rendering in VR. In Special Interest Group on Com-
puter Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Emerging Technologies
(SIGGRAPH ’20 Emerging Technologies), August 17, 2020. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2 pages.

1 INTRODUCTION
The ability to touch and feel virtual objects is essential in the train-
ing and entertainment industry, therefore, the importance of realis-
tic object sensation is extremely high. The solution with a robotic
display was proposed by Bruno Araujo et al., the design of Snake
Charmer encounter-type display allows the realistic presentation of
the positional and texture feedback of the VR surface [1]. However,
the requirements for hardware replacement of the texture sample

 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGGRAPH ’20 Emerging Technologies, August 17, 2020, Virtual Event, USA

Fedoseev, Tleugazy, Labazanova and Tsetserukou

makes it impossible to use such display for continuous contact
with any complex shape. For more realistic rendering, researchers
reproduced vibration and friction that occur when interacting with
objects. They developed devices based on the stylus controller,
touchscreen, or wearable haptic glove to sense objects in the virtual
environment [2]. Although existing solutions showed good results
in textures recognition and perceptual similarity, they require the
use of additional tools.

2 MECHANICAL IMPACT: GROSS

ROUGHNESS AND POSITION FEEDBACK
We designed a proof-of-concept prototype based on the combina-
tion of a TeslaMirror system and a haptic texture sensation device.
The developed MirrorShape framework consists of a 6 DOF Univer-
sal robot UR3, PC with control framework, tracking system, and
shape-forming end-effector as haptic display [3]. When the user’s
hand approaches an object in VR the framework estimates the po-
sition and orientation of the end-effector as normal to the palm
orientation (Figure 2).

different virtual shapes simulated by 3 contact points of TeslaMirror.
For this study 7 right-handed subjects was chosen with the age 22
to 30. Four different shapes were chosen: sphere, cube, pyramid,
and edge. Each of them was rendered by the VR framework and
evaluated by the subject total 20 times in random order (Figure 3).

Figure 3: User study setup.

The ANOVA results of the evaluation (Table 1) showed a sta-
tistically significant difference in recognition rates for different
rendered shapes (F (3, 21) = 8.11, p = 7.48 · 10−4 < 0.05). The least
recognizable was the difference between spherical and pyramid
shapes.

Table 1: Confusion matrix of different virtual shapes.

Figure 2: (a) Calculation of the collision point, (b) TeslaMir-
ror performing surface simulation

The design of an inverted five-bar linkage mechanism allows
TeslaMirror to define the position of 3 contact points independently
and combined with a flexible display that provides interaction with
various shapes only with 3 DOF devices instead of using a large
number of pins and actuators.

3 VIBROTACTILE AND ELECTROTACTILE
IMPACT: TEXTURE ROUGHNESS AND
DIRECTION FEEDBACK

Our texture display device is based on the electro-vibration system
of Yem and Kajimoto [4] that merge mechanical and electrical stim-
ulation of skin mechanoreceptors. The electrical stimulation is used
to provide low-frequency vibration and sensation of direction. The
device consists of a 4x5 electrode array film and controller board. Vi-
bration motors were used to simulate high-frequency vibration and
skin deformation. We have attached two ERM vibrotactile actuators
and electrode array to the board.

4 USER STUDY
To evaluate the performance under-actuated design developed for
the fine shape display we investigated the user’s perception of

5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Professor Hiroyuki Kajimoto and Professor Vibol
Yem for developing and providing the electrotactile device.

REFERENCES
[1] Bruno Araujo, Ricardo Jota, Varun Perumal, Jia Xian Yao, Karan Singh, and Daniel
Wigdor. 2016. Snake Charmer: Physically Enabling Virtual Objects. In Proceedings
of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction (TEI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 218–226. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2839462.2839484

[2] Olivier Bau, Ivan Poupyrev, Ali Israr, and Chris Harrison. 2010. TeslaTouch: Elec-
trovibration for Touch Surfaces. In Proceedings of the 23nd Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST âĂŹ10). Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 283âĂŞ292. https://doi.org/10.1145/1866029.
1866074

[3] Aleksey Fedoseev, Nikita Chernyadev, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou. 2019. Develop-
ment of MirrorShape: High Fidelity Large-Scale Shape Rendering Framework for
Virtual Reality. In 25th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology
(VRST âĂŹ19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
Article 105, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359996.3365049

[4] Vibol Yem and Hiroyuki Kajimoto. 2017. Wearable tactile device using mechanical
and electrical stimulation for fingertip interaction with virtual world. 99–104.
https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2017.7892236

