Title:  
Metabolomic  measures  of  altered  energy  metabolism  mediate  the  relationship  of  inflammatory 
miRNAs to motor control in collegiate football athletes 

Running Title: 
Integrating miRNA, metabolomics, and behavior 

Nicole  L.  Vike1,9,  Sumra  Bari1,9,  Khrystyna  Stetsiv1,  Linda  Papa2,10,  Eric  A.  Nauman3,4,5,10, 
Thomas M. Talavage3,6,10, Semyon Slobounov7,10*, Hans C. Breiter1,8,9* 

1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA 
	Department of Emergency Medicine, Orlando Regional Medical Center, Orlando, FL, USA 
2
3Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA  
4School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA  
5Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA  
6School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA  
7Department  of  Kinesiology,  Pennsylvania  State  University,  University  Park,  PA,  USA; 
8Laboratory  of  Neuroimaging  and  Genetics,  Department  of  Psychiatry,  Massachusetts  General 
Hospital and Harvard School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA 

9,10 indicate co-equal authorship  

* Corresponding Authors:  
For project design, management and data collection: Semyon Slobounov (sms18@psu.edu) 
For hypotheses and conceptual framework, data analysis and paper development: Hans Breiter 
(h-breiter@northwestern.edu)  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

Recent research has shown there can be detrimental neurological effects of short- and long-term 

exposure  to  contact  sports.  In  the  present  study,  metabolomic  profiling  was  combined  with 

inflammatory miRNA quantification, computational behavior with virtual reality (VR) testing of 

motor control, and head collision event monitoring to explore trans-omic and collision effects on 

human behavior across a season of players on a collegiate American football team. We integrated 

permutation-based  statistics  with  mediation  analyses  to  test  complex,  directional  relationships 

between  miRNAs,  metabolites,  and  VR  task  performance.  Fourteen  significant  mediations 

(metabolite  =  mediator;  miRNA  =  independent  variable;  VR  score  =  dependent  variable)  were 

discovered at preseason (N=6) and across season (N=8) with Sobel p-values ≤ 0.05 and with total 

effects at or exceeding 50%. The majority of mediation findings involved long to medium chain 

fatty acids (2-HG, 8-HOA, UND, sebacate, suberate, and heptanoate). In parallel, TCA metabolites 

were found to be significantly decreased at postseason relative to preseason. HAEs were associated 

with  metabolomic  measures  and  miRNA  levels  across-season.  Together,  these  observations 

suggest a state of chronic HAE-induced neuroinflammation (as evidence by elevated miRNAs) 

and mitochondrial dysfunction (as observed by abnormal FAs and TCA metabolites) that together 

produce subtle changes in neurological function (as observed by impaired motor control behavior). 

These findings point to a shift in mitochondrial metabolism, away from mitochondria function, 

consistent  with  other  illnesses  classified  as  mitochondrial  disorders,  suggesting  a  plausible 

mechanism underlying HAEs in contact sports and potential avenue for treatment intervention.  

2 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  

Sports-related  concussion  remains  one  of  the  most  common  causes  of    traumatic  brain 

injuries (TBIs), with approximately 1.6-3.8 million occurrences annually [1, 2]. Despite the high 

incidence of concussive injuries in contact sports, the molecular mechanisms of these injuries are 

not well understood, making development of targeted pharmaceutical interventions challenging. 

Additionally, subconcussive injuries (i.e., head impacts yielding minimal diagnosable cognitive or 

behavioral  deficits)  have  also  been  linked  with  significant  neurophysiological  and  biochemical 

changes in youth, collegiate, and professional football athletes [3–7]. Due to the lack of observable 

subconcussive-related symptoms, research has sought to identify biomarkers based on advanced 

imaging and omics (e.g., transcriptomics, proteomics) [7–15].  

Previous research by Papa and colleagues, and Bhomia and colleagues, elucidated a panel 

of potential miRNA biomarkers of football-related injury (miR-20a, miR-505, miR-92a, miR-195, 

miR-93p, miR-30d, miR-486, miR-3623p, and miR-151-5p) [16, 17]. This set of miRNAs was not 

only elevated at the end of the football season but was also found to be elevated prior to the season 

when compared to non-athletes reporting to the emergency room with potential concussion [16]. 

Findings  from  these  studies  support  an  inflammatory  hypothesis,  although  we  still  know  little 

about the molecular targets of these miRNAs. Inflammation is energy intensive, suggesting there 

may  be  alterations  in  metabolism  and  energy-related  metabolites  concurrent  with  miRNA 

increases. Indeed, MRS studies support this hypothesis [7, 18–21]. Furthermore, metabolomics 

appear to be important in the context of the diffuse axonal injury (DAI) model of mild TBI (mTBI), 

which models how shock-waves affect axons and their structure, which would suggest there may 

be significant effects on a broad array of fatty acids (FAs) involved with axonal function.  

3 

 
Metabolomics allows investigation of metabolic fluctuations following an experimental or 

observational perturbation, such as a season of contact sports participation. A number of molecular 

pathways  have  been  studied  in  animal  models  and  have  been  observed  to  be  altered  by  head 

impacts [22–29]. Across animal and human studies of head impacts, mitochondrial dysfunction 

has  been  consistently  observed  [30–36].  Dubbed  the  powerhouse  of  the  cell,  mitochondria  are 

critically  important  for  energy  production  and  cellular  respiration  [37,  38].  Damage  to  these 

organelles can thus result in serious cellular, and potentially systems-level, dysfunction. 

One  major  role  of  the  mitochondria  is  the  oxidation  of  fatty  acids  into  functional 

metabolites that can then fuel the TCA cycle and downstream energy production [39–41]. Long 

and medium chain fatty acids are first processed in peroxisomes, small organelles that oxidize fatty 

acids via alpha, omega, and beta oxidation [42–44]. Omega oxidation replaces the methyl terminus 

with a hydroxy group (now referred to as a monohydroxy fatty acid) which is then further oxidized 

into a carboxy group (dicarboxylic fatty acid). Once in dicarboxylic form, the fatty acid can then 

be  further  processed  via  beta  oxidation  in  both  the  peroxisome  and  mitochondria  [45,  46]. 

Depending on the length and processing location of the fatty acid, different sets of enzymes are 

utilized to metabolize it into a smaller, functional metabolite – acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA then enters 

the TCA cycle to produce energy (GTP) and energy-storing (NADH and FADH2) metabolites [47]. 

NADH  and  FADH2  are  then  used  in  the  electron  transport  chain  to  ultimately  produce  large 

amounts  of  ATP  –  the  most  fundamental  source  of  energy.  However,  if  mitochondrial  damage 

occurs from repeated head acceleration events (HAEs) – either associated with direct impacts or 

whiplash motions resulting from collisions elsewhere on the body – metabolites involved in fatty 

acid  oxidation  (e.g.  sebacate)  and  the  TCA  cycle  (e.g.  citrate)  may  be  altered.  Additionally, 

mitochondrial  distress  can  result  in  oxidative  stress  and  increased  reactive  oxygen  species 

4 

 
 
  
production [48–51]. Therefore, finding a set of metabolites to highlight potential mitochondrial 

dysfunction,  while  also  showing  relationships  to  neurological  function/dysfunction  and 

neuroinflammatory miRNAs, is a promising and novel biomarker. 

While the discovery of blood biomarkers is the ultimate clinical goal, it is first necessary 

to establish if biomarkers have relationships with neurological function or dysfunction. Numerous 

studies have attempted to uncover behavioral changes in contact sport athletes, but many tests are 

insensitive to subtle changes in behavior [52–56]. Alexander Luria observed a set of behavioral 

abnormalities in individuals with mTBI that can imply a non-obvious alteration in biology [57–

60]. These observations led to development of computational behavior tasks using virtual reality 

technology  that  can  quantify  abnormalities  in  motor  control  and  are  sensitive  to  motor  control 

changes following TBI that may be missed in clinical examination [61–65].  

This  study  specifically  evaluated  the  hypothesis  that  an  integrated  system  of  omic 

measures, from the transcriptome (miRNA) and metabolome (individualized biochemistry), would 

form three-way associations with computational behavior measures prior to the season (preseason) 

or across the season (i.e., pre- vs. postseason) for a collegiate football team. We predicted these 

trans-omic and behavioral measures would show mediation relationships that were consistent (i.e., 

highly specific) in terms of the category of independent variable (IV), mediator variable (M), and 

dependent  variable  (DV),  and  that  computational  behavior  measures  would  always  be  the  DV. 

Given the large number of associations needing testing for this mediation analysis, we integrated 

permutation-based statistics with mediation analyses in a novel framework to address the issue of 

multiple comparisons. For behavioral tasks, we focused on motor control and spatial memory that 

were described by Luria as being abnormal without obvious head trauma [58]. For miRNA, we 

focused  on  a  panel  of  miRNAs  that  had  previously  been  shown  to  be  abnormal  relative  to 

5 

 
 
emergency room controls in the pre-season, and across-season for football players, and that were 

known to be involved in the control of inflammation [16]. To restrict the number of biochemical 

compounds identified with metabolomics, we focused only on metabolomic measures that were 

significantly different after correction for multiple comparisons across the season, and were (i) 

fatty  acids  and/or  compounds  involved  with  energy  metabolism,  (ii)  compounds  involved  with 

stress/inflammatory responses, or (iii) exogenous compounds related to consumption. The focus 

of  this  trans-omics  study  was  to  determine  if  any  metabolic  pathway  and  its  compounds  was 

consistently observed in the majority of mediation relationships to be involved with abnormalities 

in  inflammatory  miRNAs  and  Luria-based  behaviors.  If  such  a  pathway  were  found,  it  would 

present  a  potential  unifying  construct  for  head  impact/concussion  research  and  clinical 

intervention.  

Following this approach, we identified a consistent abnormality in fatty acid compounds 

related  to  mitochondrial  β-oxidation  and  downstream  abnormalities  in  TCA  metabolites. 

Alterations in four of the six metabolomic compounds were consistent with a dysfunction in β-

oxidation and showed mediation relationships linking abnormalities in inflammatory miRNAs to 

abnormalities in Luria behaviors. A fifth compound observed in these mediation relationships (i.e., 

2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG)) was a known oncometabolite that has been implicated in altering the 

balance  of  oxidative  metabolism  with  mitochondria  in  cancer  cells.  The  sixth  compound  (i.e., 

adenosine)  represents  a  fundamental  ATP  component.  The  majority  of  these  metabolomic 

compounds were associated with head acceleration events (HAEs). Altogether, these trans-omic 

findings connecting two types of omic measures with quantitative variables from a well-controlled 

and  ethologically  grounded  behavior,  supports  a  hypothesis  that  repetitive  HAEs  produce  a 

syndrome of abnormal mitochondrial metabolism. 

6 

 
 
MATERIALS/METHODS 

Subjects and data collection 

Twenty-four male collegiate American football players (mean age = 21 ±	2 years) were 

recruited for this study. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject in accordance 

with  the  Penn  State  University  Institutional  Review  Board.  Demographic  information  was 

obtained  from  each  subject  and  confirmed  by  a  team  physician:  age,  years  of  play  experience 

(YoE),  player  position,  and  history  of  diagnosed  concussion  (HoC;  reported  as  the  number  of 

previous concussions). Blood samples were taken prior to any contact practices (preseason) and 

within one week of the last game (postseason). None of the subjects had a diagnosed concussion 

in the nine months preceding preseason data collection. Blood samples were prepared and sent out 

for miRNA quantification and metabolomic analysis. Due to missing miRNA data, the number of 

subjects decreased from 24 to between 21-23 depending on the miRNA of interest. Concurrent 

with blood collection, players also underwent virtual reality (VR) testing.  

Serum extraction 

Five mL of blood were collected from each subject at pre- and postseason. Samples were 

placed in a serum separator tube, allowed to clot at room temperature, and then centrifuged. Serum 

was extracted from each tube and pipetted into bar-coded aliquot tubes. Serum samples were stored 

at -70°C until they were transported to 1) a central laboratory for blinded miRNA batch analysis 

and 2) Metabolon (Morrisville, NC, USA) for blinded metabolite analysis.  

Virtual reality testing 

7 

 
 
 
Virtual reality testing was conducted using a 3D TV system, head-mounted accelerometer, 

and  interactive  joystick  device  from  Head  Rehab  LLC  (Chicago,  IL,  USA).  There  were  three 

separate  VR  tests:  1)  balance  (Bal),  2)  whole-body  reaction  time  (RT),  and  3)  spatial  memory 

(SM). The scores from each test were combined to produce a comprehensive score (Comp). These 

tests were based off initial findings from Dr. Alexander Luria and have been validated to detect 

functional abnormalities following mild traumatic brain injury [57–59, 65, 66]. The Bal module 

tested subjects’ abilities to maintain posture with a changing virtual environment. Subjects were 

instructed to hold a tandem Romberg position on a pressure plate for each trial [67]. The first trial 

collected  baseline  pressure  data  and  the  subsequent  six  trials  tested  performance.  The  virtual 

environment shifted in a different direction for each performance trial and deviances from baseline 

pressure points were reported. The RT module tested the time it took for subjects to adjust their 

posture in the direction of an altered virtual environment. Subjects stood shoulder-width apart with 

their  hands  on  their  hips  and  were  instructed  to  move  their  hips  in  the  direction  of  the  virtual 

environment. Results were recorded using the pressure plate and reported as latency to shift the 

body. The SM module tested a subject’s ability to recall a virtual pathway by first viewing and 

then recalling and navigating the pathway with the joystick; results were reported as the accuracy 

of correct responses relative to errors. More detailed descriptions of the tasks have been previously 

reported [68]. VR tests were conducted concurrent with blood sampling.   

miRNA quantification  

Serum samples collected at pre- and postseason were used to isolate and quantify levels of 

RNA. 100 𝜇L of serum was aliquoted, and RNA was isolated using a serum/plasma isolation kit 

8 

 
 
(Qiagen Inc., Venlo, Netherlands) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was eluted in 20	𝜇L 

of DNAse/RNAse-free water and stored at -80°C until further use.  

Droplet  digital  PCR  (ddPCR;  Bio-Rad  Inc.,  Hercules,  CA,  USA)  was  used  to  quantify 

absolute  levels  of  nine  miRNA  (miR-20a,  miR-505,  miR-3623p,  miR-30d,  miR-92a,  miR-486, 

miR-195,  miR-93p,  miR-151-5p)  [16].  Prior  to  ddPCR  analysis,  RNA  was  checked  for  quality 

using a bioanalyzer assay with a small RNA assay. After quality confirmation, 10 ng of RNA was 

reverse  transcribed  using  specific  miRNA  TaqMan  assays  as  per  the  manufacturer’s  protocol 

(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Protocol details can be found in [16]. The 

final PCR product was analyzed using a droplet reader (Bio-Rad Inc., Hercules, CA, USA). Total 

positive and negative droplets were quantified, and from this, the concentration of miRNA/𝜇L of 

the PCR reaction was reported. All reactions were performed in duplicate. 

Metabolomic analysis  

The  remaining  serum  was  sent  to  Metabolon  (Morrisville,  NC,  USA)  for  metabolomic 

quantification.  Upon  arrival,  samples  were  assigned  a  unique  identifier  via  an  automated 

laboratory system and stored at -80°C. Samples were prepared for subsequent analyses using an 

automated  MicroLab  STAR®  system  (Hamilton  Company,  Reno,  NV,  USA).  Proteins  were 

precipitated out of each sample using methanol and a shaker (Glen Mills GenoGrinder 2000), and 

then centrifuged. The resulting extract was then divided into five fractions for various analyses: 1) 

two  fractions  for  analysis  by  two  separate  reverse  phase  (RP)/UPLC-MS/MS  methods  with 

positive ion mode electrospray ionization (ESI), 2) one for analysis by RP/UPLC-MS/MS with 

negative ion mode ESI, 3) one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC-MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI, 

9 

 
 
and  4)  one  reserved  for  backup.  To  remove  organic  solvent,  samples  were  briefly  placed  on  a 

TurboVap® (Zymark); samples were then stored under nitrogen overnight prior to analyses.  

Serum metabolites were quantified using Ultrahigh Performance Liquid Chromatography-

Tandem Mass Spectroscopy (UPLC-MS/MS). All methods utilized a Waters ACQUITY UPLC 

and a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive high resolution/accurate mass spectrometer interfaced with a 

heated  electrospray  ionization  (HESI-II)  source  and  Orbitrap  mass  analyzer  operated  at  35,000 

mass resolution. The sample extract was dried and reconstituted in solvents compatible to each of 

the  listed  analyses.  Each  reconstitution  solvent  contained  a  series  of  standards  at  fixed 

concentrations  to  ensure  injection  and  chromatographic  consistency.  One  aliquot  was  analyzed 

using  acidic  positive  ion  conditions,  chromatographically  optimized  for  more  hydrophilic 

compounds. In this method, the extract was gradient eluted from a C18 column (Waters UPLC 

BEH C18-2.1x100 mm, 1.7 µm) using water and methanol, containing 0.05% perfluoropentanoic 

acid (PFPA) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Another aliquot was also analyzed using acidic positive 

ion conditions; however, it was chromatographically optimized for more hydrophobic compounds. 

In this method, the extract was gradient eluted from the same afore mentioned C18 column using 

methanol, acetonitrile, water, 0.05% PFPA and 0.01% FA and was operated at an overall higher 

organic content. Another aliquot was analyzed using basic negative ion optimized conditions using 

a separate dedicated C18 column. The basic extracts were gradient eluted from the column using 

methanol and water, however with 6.5mM Ammonium Bicarbonate at pH 8. The fourth aliquot 

was analyzed via negative ionization following elution from a HILIC column (Waters UPLC BEH 

Amide  2.1x150  mm,  1.7  µm)  using  a  gradient  consisting  of  water  and  acetonitrile  with  10mM 

Ammonium Formate, pH 10.8. The MS analysis alternated between MS and data-dependent MSn 

10 

 
 
scans using dynamic exclusion. The scan range varied slighted between methods but covered 70-

1000 m/z.   

Peak analysis was conducted using a bioinformatics system which consisted of four major 

components:  1)  the  Laboratory  Information  Management  System  (LIMS  -  a  system  used  to 

automate  sample  accession  and  preparation,  instrumental  analysis  and  reporting,  and  data 

analysis),  2)  the  data  extraction  and  peak-identification  software,  3)  data  processing  tools  for 

quality control and compound identification, and 4) a collection of information interpretation and 

visualization tools.  

Raw data were extracted, peak-identified, and QC processed using Metabolon’s hardware 

and software. Compounds were identified by comparison to library entries of purified standards. 

Biochemical identifications were based on three criteria: 1) retention index (RI) within a narrow 

RI window of the proposed identification, 2) accurate mass match to the library (+/- 10 ppm), and 

3) the MS/MS forward and reverse scores between the experimental data and authentic standards. 

The MS/MS scores were based on a comparison of the ions present in the experimental spectrum 

to the ions present in the library spectrum. While there may have be similarities between these 

molecules based on one of these factors, the use of all three data points was utilized to distinguish 

and differentiate more than 3,300 registered biochemicals.  

Peaks  were  quantified  using  area-under-the-curve.  A  data  normalization  step  was 

performed to correct variation resulting from instrument inter-day tuning differences (i.e. variation 

between  pre  and  postseason  analyses).  Specifically,  each  compound  was  corrected  in  run-day 

blocks  by  registering  the  medians  to  equal  one  (1.00)  and  normalizing  each  data  point 

proportionately.  Data  were  then  log-transformed.  Of  the  3,300+  potential  biochemicals,  968 

metabolites  were  analyzed  at  pre  and  postseason.  Of  these,  161  showed  significant,  FDR-

11 

 
 
corrected, increases or decreases between the pre and postseason (q-value < 0.05). Of those 161 

metabolites, 40 were selected based on the following criteria: 1) they appeared in the random forest 

plot (20 of the 40 studied here) (Figure 1) and 2) they were in biochemical pathways which have 

been  implicated  to  change  following  head  impact  events  [69–73].  Based  on  these  criteria,  six 

macromolecule  categories  were  defined:  lipids  (19/40),  energy-related  metabolites  (5/40), 

xenobiotics (10/40), amino acids (3/40), carbohydrates (2/40), and nucleotides (1/40) (Table 1). 

All 40 metabolites listed in Table 1 were used in all subsequent analyses. 

Figure 1. Random forest plot of metabolite importance. The mean decrease accuracy (MDA) is a measure 
of model performance when a particular metabolite was excluded from the analysis. As MDA increased, 
the more important that metabolite was to distinguish pre- versus post-season data. The metabolite with the 
highest MDA, and therefore, highest predictive power, was 2-hydroxyglutarate, a fatty acid. The majority 
of metabolites in the plot were lipids (55%). 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Metabolite changes across season. Metabolite levels between pre- and post-season were assessed 
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, a nonparametric t-test for paired samples. Metabolites were grouped 
by super pathway and FDR corrected by the number of variables in each group (e.g. 19 lipid metabolites). 
Metabolites with significant q-values were reported. Negative z-scores indicate an increase from pre- to 
post-season and positive z-scores indicate a decrease from pre- to post-season. * indicates metabolites that 
also appeared in the random forest plot. 

Statistical analysis 

All statistical analyses were performed in STATA (College Station, TX, USA) apart from 

the random forest analysis which was performed by Metabolon.  

13 

 
 
 
 
Random Forest analysis: Random forest is an unsupervised classification technique based on an 

ensemble of decision trees; here, it was used to assess the importance ranking of biochemicals (i.e., 

how well can a given metabolite be used to distinguish preseason from postseason) [74]. For a 

given  decision  tree,  a  random  subset  of  the  data,  with  identifying  true  class  information,  was 

selected to build the tree (“bootstrap sample” or “training set”), and then the remaining data, the 

“out-of-bag”  (OOB)  variables,  were  passed  down  the  tree  to  obtain  a  class  prediction  for  each 

sample. This process was repeated thousands of times to produce the forest. The final classification 

of each sample was determined by computing the class prediction frequency for the OOB variables 

over the whole forest. When the full forest was grown, the class predictions were compared to the 

true  classes,  generating  the  “OOB  error  rate”  as  a  measure  of  prediction  accuracy.  Thus,  the 

prediction accuracy was an unbiased estimate of how well a sample class was predicted in a new 

data set. To determine which biochemicals made the largest contribution to the classification, a 

variable  importance  measure,  Mean  Decrease  Accuracy  (MDA),  was  computed.  MDA  was 

determined by randomly permuting a variable, running the observed values through the trees, and 

then reassessing the prediction accuracy. If a variable was not important, the procedure produced 

little change in the accuracy of the class prediction (permuting random noise gave random noise). 

By contrast, if a variable was important to the classification, the prediction accuracy dropped; this 

was recorded as the MDA. 

Wilcoxon signed-rank test for across-season miRNA, metabolite, and VR score analysis: Data were 

first  tested  for  normality  and  equal  variances  using  the  Shapiro-Wilks  test  and  Bartlett’s  test, 

respectively. Because 1) data were not normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilks test; p ≥ 0.05) and/or 

14 

 
 
 
data did not have equal variances (Bartlett’s test; p ≥	0.05) and 2) data were paired by subject 

across-season, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was utilized to assess across-season changes. Changes 

were analyzed at a significance level of 0.05. If p-value < 0.05, metabolites were then grouped 

based on super pathway and FDR-corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method for multiple 

comparisons (Table 1). Changes were considered significant if q-value ≤ 0.05.  

Linear regression analyses: Linear regressions were conducted to assess significant interactions 

between VR scores and miRNAs, miRNAs and metabolites, and VR scores and metabolites, where 

VR score (i.e., behavior) was always the dependent variable (Y). When regressing miRNA and 

metabolite, metabolite was the designated as the dependent variable; this decision was based on 

previous findings where miRNA levels were elevated in this cohort at preseason when compared 

to controls [16]. After each initial regression analysis, Cook’s distance was calculated to reveal 

outliers which drastically influenced the regression (i.e., large shift in β) [75, 76]. Outliers were 

removed  if  Cook’s  distance  >  4/n  and  regressions  were  then  re-run  [77].  Regressions  were 

considered significant if p-value < 0.05 and standardized beta coefficients (Std. β) and adjusted R2 

values (R!"#.

%

) were also reported. 

Permutation-based mediation analysis: Based on results from the linear regression analyses, data 

were prepared for mediation analysis by first assessing three-way associations. To be included in 

mediation  analysis,  all  paths  must  have  met  significance  (p-value  <  0.05)  to  form  a  three-way 

association. Paths were as follows: A) miRNA (X) à metabolite (Y), B) metabolite (Y) à VR 

score (Z), and C) miRNA (X) à VR score (Z). Cook’s outliers were removed across all regressions 

to achieve the same set of subjects, and regressions were re-run with common subjects. Mediation 

15 

 
 
 
seeks  to  clarify  the  causal  relationship  between  the  independent  variable  (X)  and  dependent 

variable (Y) with the inclusion of a third variable mediator (M). The mediation model proposes 

that  instead  of  a  direct  causal  relationship  between  X  and  Y,  the  X  influences  M  which  then 

influences  the  Y.  Beta  coefficients  (β)  and  standard  error  (se)  terms  from  the  following  linear 

regression equations are used to calculate the Sobel p-value and mediation effect percentage (Teff): 

𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝	1	(𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ	𝐴): 𝑀 = 𝛽& + 	𝛽’((𝑋) + 𝜖( 

𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝	2	(𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ	𝐵): 𝑌 = 𝛽& + 	𝛽’)(𝑀) + 𝜖) 

																		𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝	3	(𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ	𝐶, 	𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙	1): 	𝑌 = 	𝛽& + 	𝛽’,’+(𝑋) + 𝜖’+ 

																																															𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝	4	(𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ	𝐶, 	𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙	2): 	𝑌 = 	𝛽& + 	𝛽’,%+(𝑋) + 	𝛽%,%+(𝑀) + 𝜖%+	 

Sobel’s test was then used to test if 𝛽’,%+ was significantly lower than 𝛽’,’+ using the following 

equation: 

(3)	𝑆𝑜𝑏𝑒𝑙	𝑧 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 	

(𝛽’,’+ − 𝛽’,%+)

LMN𝛽%,%+O

%

(𝜖’()%P + [(𝛽’()%(𝜖%+)%]	

Using  a  standard  2-tail  z-score  table,  the  Sobel  p-value  was  determined  from  Sobel  z-score. 

Mediation effect percentage (Teff) was calculated using the following equation: 

(4)	𝑇-.. = 100 ∗

N𝛽’( ∗ 𝛽%,%+O
N𝛽’( ∗ 𝛽%,%+O + V𝛽’,’+ − N𝛽’( ∗ 𝛽%,%+OW

In order to control for the occurrence of false positives due to multiple hypotheses testing, 

permutation-based mediation analysis was utilized. Permutation tests re-sample observations from 

the original data multiple times to build empirical estimates of the null distribution for the test 

statistic being studied [78, 79]. Permutation-based tests are especially well-suited for studies with 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
small sample sizes as they estimate the statistical significance directly from the data being analyzed 

rather than making assumptions about the underlying distribution. First, the test statistic is obtained 

from  the  original  data  set,  then  the  data  is  randomly  permuted  multiple  (S)  times  and  the  test 

statistic  is  computed  on  each  permutated  data  set.  The  statistical  significance  is  computed  by 

counting (K) the number of times the statistic value obtained in the original data set was more 

extreme than the statistic value obtained from the permuted data sets, and dividing that value by 

the number of random permutations (K/S) [78]. 

Directed mediation analysis was performed with VR score always acting as the dependent 

variable (DV/Y); this a priori hypothesis has been observed in previous studies [80]. Secondly, 

for  the  hypothesis-directed  mediation  analyses,  miRNA  was  always  the  independent  variable 

(IV/X) and metabolite was always the mediator (M): 

𝑉𝑅	𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 	 𝛽& + 	𝛽’,’+(𝑚𝑖𝑅𝑁𝐴) + 𝜖’+ 

𝑉𝑅	𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 	𝛽& + 	𝛽’,%+(𝑚𝑖𝑅𝑁𝐴) + 	𝛽%,%+(𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑒) + 𝜖%+	 

The selection for IV was based off work by Papa et al. (2019) where miRNA levels were observed 

to be elevated in collegiate football athletes, compared to controls, at both pre- and postseason 

[16]. Therefore, metabolites, which can change dynamically, were hypothesized to mediate the 

relationship between elevated miRNAs and VR task performance. For control mediation analyses, 

VR score was DV, miRNA was M, and metabolite was IV: 

𝑉𝑅	𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 	 𝛽& + 	𝛽’,’+(𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑒) + 𝜖’+ 

𝑉𝑅	𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 	𝛽& + 	𝛽’,%+(𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑒) + 	𝛽%,%+(𝑚𝑖𝑅𝑁𝐴) + 𝜖%+	 

The measurement matrices 𝑋/, 𝑌/, 𝑀/	defined below schematize the variables used, miRNAs, VR 

scores, and metabolites respectively. 

17 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
𝑋/ = \

𝑥/,’,’
⋮
𝑥/,’,0

…

𝑥/,1,’
⋮
𝑥/,1,0

‘, 𝑌/ = \

𝑦/,’,’
⋮
𝑦/,’,0

…

𝑦/,2,’
⋮
𝑦/,2,0

‘, 𝑀/ = \

𝑚/,’,’
⋮
𝑚/,’,0

…

𝑚/,3,’
⋮
𝑚/,3,0

‘ 

where P is the total number of variables in matrix 𝑋/ (i.e. the total number of miRNAs) Q and R 

are  the  total  number  of  variables  for  matrices  𝑌/	and	𝑀/	respectively.  N  denotes  the  number  of 

participants and the matrices were measured at two time points with 𝑡 = 1 representing pre- and 

𝑡 = 2 representing postseason measurements.  

Across-season measures for miRNAs, VR scores, and metabolites were calculated as  

∆𝑋 = 	𝑋% − 𝑋’	
∆𝑌 = 	𝑌% − 𝑌’ 
∆𝑀 = 	𝑀% − 𝑀’ 

For  this  study,  permutation-based  mediation  analysis  was  performed  for  all  three-way 

associations following the steps listed below: 

1.  Mediation analysis was performed by assigning the original data variables ∆𝒙𝒊, ∆𝒚𝒋, ∆𝒎𝒌 

as  independent,  dependent,  and  mediator  variables,  respectively,  to  obtain  reference  the 

Sobel  z-score  (𝑧&).  Only  variables  that  formed  three-way  associations  were  considered. 

(For pre-season analysis, 𝒙𝟏,𝒊, 𝒚𝟏,𝒋, 𝒎𝟏,𝒌 were used to obtain the reference Sobel z-score 

(𝑧&)). 

9
2.  Data permutation: values were randomly selected from 𝒙𝟏,𝒊 and 𝒙𝟐,𝒊 to assign to 𝒙𝟏,𝒊

 and 

9
𝒙𝟐,𝒊

9
. (For pre-season analysis, values from 𝒙𝟏,𝒊 were shuffled to get 𝒙𝟏,𝒊

.) 

3.  Across-season  measures  were  computed  from  the  permuted  dataset  ∆𝒙𝒊

9 = 𝒙𝟐,𝒊

9
9 − 𝒙𝟏,𝒊

.. 

(Note that for pre-season analysis, the difference was not computed.) 

4.  Similarly,  ∆𝒚𝒋

9  and  ∆𝒎𝒌

9
9   were  computed.  (For  pre-season  analysis,  𝒚𝟏,𝒋

9
,𝒎𝟏,𝒌

  were 

computed by randomly shuffling values in 𝒚𝟏,𝒋, 𝒎𝟏,𝒌.) 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Mediation  analysis  was  performed  on  the  permuted  dataset  ∆𝒙𝒊

9,  ∆𝒚𝒋

9,  ∆𝒎𝒌

9   and  the  test 

statistics  (𝑧:

9)  was  obtained.  (For  pre-season  analysis,  mediation  was  performed  on  the 

9
permuted data set 𝒙𝟏,𝒊

9
, 𝒚𝟏,𝒋

9
, 𝒎𝟏,𝒌

 and 𝑧:

9 was obtained.) 

6.  The counter variable 𝐾 was incremented by one if the absolute value of 𝑧& was greater than 

9. 
the absolute value of  𝑧:

7.  Steps 2-6 were repeated: 𝑠 = 1,2, 	 ⋯ , 𝑆 times. 

8.  Permutation-based p-value (𝑝;<=>?

@>AB) was calculated as the proportion of 𝑧:

9 values that were 

as extreme or more extreme than 𝑧&	(i.e. 𝐾/𝑆	). 

Hypothesis-directed mediation results were considered significant if 𝑝CDE-F

G-HI < 0.05, Teff was > 50%, 

and Teff for the control mediation was < 30%.  

Head acceleration event (HAE) monitoring 

HAEs were monitored at all contact practice sessions (max = 53) using the BodiTrak sensor 

system from The Head Health Network  [81]. Sensors were mounted in each active player’s helmet 

prior to contact practice (no games were monitored). Sensor outputs included peak translational 

acceleration  (PTA;  G-units)  and  impact  location.  HAEs  were  quantified  as  1)  cumulative  hits 

exceeding 25G and 80G (cHAE25G and cHAE80G; Eq. 1) and 2) cumulative hits exceeding 25G 

and 80G normalized to the total number of sessions per player (aHAE25G and aHAE80G; Eq.2). The 

G-unit thresholds (Th) were selected based on previous reports of impacts related to brain health 

and injury [82, 83].  

19 

 
 
 
 
0
(1)	𝑐𝐻𝐴𝐸JK,L = 	 l 𝑢N𝑃𝑇𝐴M,L − 𝑇ℎO	
MN’

𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒	𝑢(𝑥) = o

1	𝑖𝑓	𝑥 > 0
0	𝑖𝑓	𝑥	 ≤ 0

(2)	𝑎𝐻𝐴𝐸JK,L =

𝑐𝐻𝐴𝐸JK,L
𝑠𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠L

RESULTS  

Random forest plot revealed biochemically important metabolites 

Of the 1300+ metabolites analyzed, 20 metabolites with the highest predictive power to 

distinguish  between  pre-  and  postseason  (i.e.  importance)  were  plotted  (Figure  1).  Of  these 

metabolites  11/20  (55%)  were  lipids,  3/20  (15%)  were  amino  acids,  2/20  (10%)  were 

carbohydrates, 3/20 (15%) were xenobiotics, and 1/20 (5%) was an amino acid. The metabolite 

with the highest predictive power was 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), followed by three other lipids. 

All 20 metabolites from the random forest plot were included in additional analyses. 

Wilcoxon signed-rank analyses revealed significant across-season metabolite changes  

Wilcoxon signed-rank tests were conducted to determine which miRNA, metabolites, and 

VR scores significantly fluctuated between pre- and postseason. There were no significant (p-value 

>  0.05)  changes  in  miRNA  levels  and  VR  scores  between  pre-  and  postseason.  Of  the  968 

metabolites analyzed, 259 significantly increased or decreased (p-value ≤ 0.05) between pre- and 

postseason. Following FDR correction, 161 significantly increased or decreased (q-value ≤ 0.05). 

Of those 161 metabolites, 40 were selected based on the criteria described in Metabolomic analysis 

(Figure 1). Of the 40 metabolites, 26 significantly increased (negative z-score) and 14 decreased 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
	 
 
 
(negative z-score) (Table 1). 48% of the metabolites were lipids and 52% fell in another category 

(12.5% energy-related, 25% xanthine, 7.5% amino acid, 5% carbohydrate, and 2.5% nucleic acid). 

Of the lipids, 74% were fatty acids (FAs) and 26% were other lipid types. Overall, 35% of the 

metabolites were FAs and 65% fell in another category. Of the FAs, 79% significantly increased 

from  pre-  to  postseason.  Additionally,  all  TCA-related  metabolites  (𝛼-ketoglutarate,  citrate, 

aconitate, and fumarate) decreased from pre- to postseason and all of the xanthine metabolites (e.g. 

paraxanthine) increased.  

Summary of preseason and across-season interactions between miRNAs, metabolites, and 

VR scores  

Linear regressions were conducted to assess interactions between four VR scores (Bal, RT, 

SM, and  Comp), nine  miRNAs  (miR-20a, miR-505,  miR-3623p, miR-30d,  miR-92a,  miR-486, 

miR-92a, miR-93p, and miR-151-5p), five HAE metrics (sessions, cHAE25G, aHAE25G, cHAE80G, 

and  aHAE80G),  and  40  metabolites  (Supplemental  Table  1).  At  preseason,  there  were  nine 

significant interactions between VR scores and miRNAs, 15 between VR scores and metabolites, 

and 36 between miRNAs and metabolites (p ≤ 0.05 following Cook’s outlier removal) (Figure 2). 

Across-season (postseason−preseason), there were 12 significant interactions between VR scores 

and miRNAs, 20 between VR scores and metabolites, and 31 between miRNAs and metabolites 

(p ≤ 0.05 following Cook’s outlier removal) (Figure 3). In general, both pre- and across-season 

analyses  revealed  negative  relationships  between  VR  scores  and  miRNAs  and  positive 

relationships  between  VR  scores  and  metabolites 

(exceptions:  cortoloneglucuronide, 

corticosterone, adenosine, and tridecenedioate). Relationships between miRNAs and metabolites 

varied with the majority being negative (79%).  

21 

 
 
%

Figure 2: Preseason linear regression results. Cook’s outliers were removed prior to regression analysis 
and the number of outliers removed in each regression is listed as the ratio of outliers to the total n. Adjusted 
R2 (R!"#.
) is reported for each regression and relays the amount of variance in Y that can be explained by 
X. p-Values are reported at a significance level of 0.05. (A) Significant interactions between VR scores and 
miRNA  levels.  (B)  Significant  interactions  between  VR  scores  and  metabolite  levels.  (C)  Significant 
interactions between miRNA and metabolite levels.   

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%

Figure  3:  Across-season  linear  regression  results.  Variables  are  expressed  as  the  difference  between 
postseason and preseason values (post-pre = ∆). Cook’s outliers were removed prior to regression analysis 
and the number of outliers removed in each regression is listed as the ratio of outliers to the total n. Adjusted 
R2 (R!"#.
) is reported for each regression and relays the amount of variance in Y that can be explained by 
X. p-Values are reported at a significance level of 0.05. (A) Significant interactions between ∆VR scores 
and  ∆miRNA  levels  (IV). (B)  Significant  interactions  between  ∆VR  scores  and  ∆metabolite  levels.  (C) 
Significant interactions between ∆miRNA and ∆metabolite levels.   

Three-way  associations  between  miRNAs,  metabolites,  and  VR  scores  at  preseason  and 

across-season 

As  a  prerequisite  for  mediation  analysis,  only  regressions  which  formed  three-way 

associations were considered (e.g. significant interactions between X à Y, Y à Z, and X à Z; 

see below). 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Path A 
p < 0.05 

Y 

Path B 
p < 0.05 

X                 Z 
Path C 
p < 0.05 

In total, there were 50 potential three-way associations – 18 at preseason and 32 across-

season. The majority of three-way associations included Comp behavior (70%) and 88% of three-

way associations included a FA metabolomic measure. Following Cook’s outlier removal across 

all regressions, 11/18 preseason three-way associations met significance (p-value < 0.05) for all 

pathways (A, B, and C). Across-season, 14/32 associations met a p-value < 0.05 threshold. Of the 

25 significant three-way associations, 92% included a FA metabolomic measure and 88% included 

Comp  behavior.  There  were  six  miRNAs  involved  in  pre-  and  across-season  three-way 

associations: miR-20a, miR-505, miR-92a, miR-151-5p, miR-195, and miR-30d (five at preseason 

and five across-season). 

Mediation analyses revealed causal mediations at preseason and across-season  

Mediation analyses were performed to assess the causal influence of metabolites on the 

relationship between miRNAs and VR scores and contrasted against a control mediation analyses 

that switched the roles of metabolites and mRNAs. Specifically, the hypothesized mediation was 

directed so miRNA was the independent variable, metabolite was the mediator, and VR score was 

the  dependent  variable.  Of  the  18  preseason  three-way  associations,  11  survived  following 

combined removal of Cook’s outliers across all paths (A, B, and C) – ensuring the same set of 

subjects were being analyzed. Mediation analysis revealed six significant preseason mediations 

(Sobel p-value < 0.05, Teff ≥ 50%; Table 2, bolded and italicized rows). Figure 4 depicts each 

significant mediation, including the directionality and significance of each regression interaction. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The graphs illustrate the slopes of linear models 1 (IV à DV) versus 2 (IV + M à DV). In each 

case,  the  slope  of  model  1  was  larger  than  that  of  model  2,  indicating  that  the  metabolite  (M) 

significantly  impacted  the  relationship  between  the  miRNA  (IV)  and  VR  score  (DV).  The 

directionality of the linear regression relationships was common across all preseason mediations 

– negative between miRNA and metabolite, negative between miRNA and VR score, and positive 

between metabolite and VR score. No control mediations met both a significant p-value and a Teff 

greater than 50% when metabolite was the IV, miRNA was the M, and VR score was the DV (p-

value > 0.048, Teff ≤ 30%). 

Table 2: Permutation-based preseason mediation results. The a priori hypothesis assumed that miRNA was 
the IV, metabolite was the M, and VR score was the DV. Control mediations were run with metabolite as 
the IV, miRNA as the M, and VR score as the DV. Beta coefficients and standard error terms from Table 1 
were  used  to  calculate  permutation-based  Sobel  p-values  (significance  level  =  0.05)  and  total  effect 
+),-) ≥ 0.05 and % ≥ 
mediated (Teff; expressed as %). Results with permutation-based Sobel p-values (𝑝&’()*
50 were considered significant. Of the 11 three-way associations, six showed a significant mediation effect 
(bolded and italicized rows).  

25 

 
 
 
%

Figure 4: Significant preseason mediation results. In all analyses, miRNA was the independent variable,  
metabolite  was  the  mediator,  and  VR  score  was  the  dependent  variable.  Cook’s  distance  outliers  were 
removed prior to analyses, VR terms were reported as standardized values, Adjusted R2 (R!"#.
) values were 
reported for each regression, and all p-values were reported at a significance level 0.05. (A) There was a 
negative interaction between miR-20a and 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), a positive interaction between 2-
HG and VR composite score (Comp), and a negative interaction between miR-20a and Comp. When 2-HG 
was added to the regression model, the relationship between miR-20a and Comp no longer existed (p-value 
> 0.05); therefore, 2-HG significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.002, Teff = 52%). The 
graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between 
miR-20a  and  Comp,  and  model  2,  which  plots  the  slope  term  for  the  interaction  between  miR-20a  and 
Comp when 2-HG was included in the regression model. (B) There was a negative interaction between 
miR-20a  and  8-hydroxyoctanoate  (8-HOA),  a  positive  interaction  between  8-HOA  and  Comp,  and  a 
negative interaction between miR-20a and Comp. When 8-HOA was added to the regression model, the 
relationship between miR-20a and Comp no longer existed (p-value > 0.05); therefore, 8-HOA significantly 
mediated  the  relationship  (Sobel  p-value  =  0.005,  Teff  =  59%).  The  graph  depicts  the  change  in  slope 
between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between miR-20a and Comp, and model 2, 
which plots the slope term for the interaction between miR-20a and Comp when 8-HOA was included in 

26 

 
 
the  regression  model.  (C)  There  was  a  significant  negative  interaction  between  miR-505  and  2-HG,  a 
significant positive interaction between 2-HG and Comp, and a significant negative interaction between 
miR-505 and Comp. When 2-HG was added to the regression model, the relationship between miR-505 
and Comp no longer existed (p-value > 0.05); therefore, 2-HG significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel 
p-value = 0.00006, Teff = 90%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the 
slope term for the interaction between miR-505 and Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the 
interaction between miR-505 and Comp when 2-HG was included in the regression model. (D) There was 
a negative interaction between miR-92a and 8-HOA, a positive interaction between 8-HOA and Comp, and 
a negative interaction between miR-92a and Comp. When 8-HOA was added to the regression model, the 
relationship between miR-92a and Comp no longer existed (p-value > 0.05); therefore, 8-HOA significantly 
mediated  the  relationship  (Sobel  p-value  =  0.001,  Teff  =  78%).  The  graph  depicts  the  change  in  slope 
between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between miR-92a and Comp, and model 2, 
which plots the slope term for the interaction between miR-92a and Comp when 8-HOA was included in 
the regression model. (E) There was a negative interaction between miR-151-5p and 8-HOA, a positive 
interaction between 8-HOA and Comp, and a negative interaction between miR-151-5p and Comp. When 
8-HOA  was  added  to  the  regression  model,  the  relationship  between  miR-151-5p  and  Comp  no  longer 
existed (p-value > 0.05); therefore, 8-HOA significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.004, 
Teff = 50%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the 
interaction between miR-151-5p and Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the interaction 
between  miR-151-5p  and  Comp  when  8-HOA  was  included  in  the  regression  model.  (F)  There  was  a 
negative interaction between miR-151-5p and undecanedioate (UND), a positive interaction between UND 
and Bal, and a negative interaction between miR-151-5p and Bal. When UND was added to the regression 
model, the relationship between miR-151-5p and Bal no longer existed (p-value > 0.05); therefore, UND 
significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.001, Teff = 63%). The graph depicts the change 
in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between miR-151-5p and Bal, and 
model  2,  which  plots  the  slope  term  for  the  interaction  between  miR-151-5p  and  Bal  when  UND  was 
included in the regression model. 

Across-season mediation analysis revealed eight mediations meeting our thresholds (Sobel 

p-value < 0.05; Teff > 50%; Table 3, bolded and italicized rows). Figure 5A-H visualizes each 

across-season  mediation,  including  the  directionality  of  each  interaction.  The  plots  depict  the 

slopes of linear models 1 (IV à DV) versus 2 (IV + M à DV). In each case, the slope of model 

1 was larger than that of model 2. Mediations depicted in Figures 5A-C and 5F-H share the same 

directionality  across  regressions:  negative  between  miRNA  and  metabolite,  positive  between 

metabolite and VR score, and negative between miRNA and VR score. In 5D-E, the interactions 

between  miRNA  (miR-30d)  and  metabolite  (adenosine),  as  well  as  metabolite  and  VR  score 

(Comp), were opposite of those depicted in 5A-C. Only one control mediation met threshold when 

metabolite was the IV, miRNA was the M, and VR score was the DV (p-value = 0.011, Teff = 

27 

 
 
68%);  in  this  case  the  hypothesized  mediation  also  had  a  significant  Sobel  p-value  (p-value  = 

0.047), indicating a mixed mediation model. 

Table  3:  Permutation-based  across-season  mediation  results.  The  a  priori  hypothesis  assumed  that 
∆miRNA was the IV, ∆metabolite was the M, and ∆VR score was the DV. Control mediations were run 
with ∆metabolite as the IV, ∆miRNA as the M, and ∆VR score as the DV. Beta coefficients and standard 
error terms from Table 1 were used to calculate permutation-based Sobel p-values (significance level = 
0.05)  and  total  effect  mediated  (Teff;  expressed  as  %).  Results  with  permutation-based  Sobel  p-values 
+),-) ≥ 0.05 and % ≥ 50 were considered significant. Of the 14 three-way associations, eight showed a 
(𝑝&’()*
significant mediation effect (bolded and italicized rows).  

28 

 
 
 
 
29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%

all 

5A-H: 

Significant 
Figure 
mediation 
across-season 
results. 
analyses, 
In 
∆miRNA  was  the  independent 
variable,  ∆metabolite  was  the 
mediator,  and  ∆VR  score  was 
the dependent variable. Cook’s 
distance outliers were removed 
prior  to  analyses,  ∆VR  terms 
were  reported  as  standardized 
values,  Adjusted  R2  (R!"#.
) 
values  were  reported  for  each 
regression,  and  all  p-values 
were  reported  at  a  significance 
level  0.05.  (A)  There  was  a 
negative 
interaction  between 
∆miR-505  and  ∆sebacate,  a 
positive 
interaction  between 
∆sebacate  and  ∆Comp,  and  a 
interaction  between 
negative 
∆miR-505  and  ∆Comp.  When  ∆sebacate  was  added  to  the  regression  model,  the  relationship  between 
∆miR-505 and ∆Comp no longer existed; therefore, sebacate significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel 
p-value = 0.008, Teff = 50%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope 
term for the interaction between ∆miR-505 and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the 
interaction between ∆miR-505 and ∆Comp when ∆sebacate was included in the regression model. (B) There 
was a negative interaction between ∆miR-505 and ∆8-hydroxyoctanoate (∆8-HOA), a positive interaction 
between ∆8-HOA and ∆Comp, and a negative interaction between ∆miR-505 and ∆Comp. When ∆8-HOA 
was  added  to  the  regression  model,  the  relationship  between  ∆miR-505  and  ∆Comp  no  longer  existed; 
therefore, 8-HOA significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.007, Teff = 59%). The graph 
depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-
505 and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-505 and ∆Comp 
when ∆8-HOA was included in the regression model. (C) There was a negative interaction between ∆miR-
195 and ∆heptanoate, a positive interaction between ∆heptanoate and ∆Comp, and a negative interaction 
between ∆miR-195 and ∆Comp. When ∆heptanoate was added to the regression model, the relationship 
between  ∆miR-195  and  ∆Comp  no  longer  existed;  therefore,  heptanoate  significantly  mediated  the 
relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.029, Teff = 50%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, 
which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-195 and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the 
slope  term  for  the  interaction  between  ∆miR-195  and  ∆Comp  when  ∆heptanoate  was  included  in  the 
regression  model.  (D)  There  was  a  positive  interaction  between  ∆miR-30d  and  ∆adenosine,  a  negative 
interaction between ∆adenosine and ∆Comp, and a negative interaction between ∆miR-30d and ∆Comp. 
When ∆adenosine was added to the regression model, the relationship between ∆miR-30d and ∆Comp no 
longer existed; therefore, adenosine significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.001, Teff = 
60%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction 
between ∆miR-30d and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-
30d  and  ∆Comp  when  ∆adenosine  was  included  in  the  regression  model.  (E)  There  was  a  positive 
interaction between ∆miR-30d and ∆adenosine, a negative interaction between ∆adenosine and ∆RT, and a 
negative interaction between ∆miR-30d and ∆RT. When ∆adenosine was added to the regression model, 
the relationship between ∆miR-30d and ∆RT no longer existed; therefore, adenosine significantly mediated 
the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.001, Teff = 58%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 

30 

 
 
1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-30d and ∆RT, and model 2, which plots the 
slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-30d and ∆RT when ∆adenosine was included in the regression 
model. (F) There was a negative interaction between ∆miR-151-5p and ∆8-HOA, a positive interaction 
between ∆8-HOA and ∆Comp, and a negative interaction between ∆miR-151-5p and ∆Comp. When ∆8-
HOA was added to the regression model, the relationship between ∆miR-151-5p and ∆Comp no longer 
existed; therefore, 8-HOA significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.007, Teff = 55%). The 
graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between 
∆miR-151-5p and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-1951-
5p and ∆Comp when ∆8-HOA was included in the regression model. (G) There was a negative interaction 
between ∆miR-92a and ∆suberate, a positive interaction between ∆suberate and ∆Comp, and a negative 
interaction  between  ∆miR-92a  and  ∆Comp.  When  ∆suberate  was  added  to  the  regression  model,  the 
relationship between ∆miR-92a and ∆Comp no longer existed; therefore, suberate significantly mediated 
the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.004, Teff = 68%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 
1, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-92a and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots 
the  slope  term  for  the  interaction  between  ∆miR-92a  and  ∆Comp  when  ∆suberate  was  included  in  the 
regression  model.  (H)  There  was  a  negative  interaction  between ∆miR-92a  and  ∆heptanoate,  a  positive 
interaction between ∆heptanoate and ∆Comp, and a negative interaction between ∆miR-92a and ∆Comp. 
When ∆heptanoate was added to the regression model, the relationship between ∆miR-92a and ∆Comp no 
longer existed; therefore, heptanoate significantly mediated the relationship (Sobel p-value = 0.006, Teff = 
50%). The graph depicts the change in slope between model 1, which plots the slope term for the interaction 
between ∆miR-92a and ∆Comp, and model 2, which plots the slope term for the interaction between ∆miR-
92a and ∆Comp when ∆heptanoate was included in the regression model. 

In total, there were 14 significant hypothesized mediations (Sobel p-value < 0.05, Teff > 

50%)  comprised  of  seven  metabolites  (2-HG,  8-HOA,  UND,  sebacate,  suberate,  heptanoate, 

adenosine), six miRNAs (miR-20a, miR-505, miR-92a, miR-151-5p, miR-195, and miR-30d), and 

three VR scores (Comp, Bal, and RT). Of the seven metabolites, six were FAs. Five of the six FAs 

(2-HG,  8-HOA,  UND,  sebacate,  and  suberate)  significantly  increased  from  pre-  to  postseason, 

while  heptanoate  and  adenosine,  a  nucleoside,  significantly  decreased  (Figure  6).  Interestingly, 

these five measures - Comp, 8-HOA, miR-505, miR-92a, and miR-151-5p - were observed in both 

pre- and across-season mediations. 

31 

 
 
Figure  6:  Box  plots  of  mediation-related  metabolites  across  season.  (A)  Metabolites  associated  with 
significant preseason mediations. 2-HG, 8-HOA, and UND significantly increased (q-value < 0.05) from 
pre- to post-season. (B)  Metabolites associated with significant across-season mediations. Sebacate and 
suberate significantly increased (q-value < 0.05) while adenosine and heptanoate decreased from pre- to 
post-season. 

Summary of HAE interactions  

Two methods were used to assess HAE interactions: 1) extrapolation of subject-specific 

HAEs to predict preseason VR scores, miRNA levels, and metabolite levels (note: this analysis is 

purely exploratory and should only be considered as setting up hypotheses for future analyses), 2) 

assessment  of  how  HAEs  may  impact  across-season  changes  in  VR  scores,  miRNA,  and 

metabolites.  

32 

 
 
 
At  preseason,  there  were  six  significant  interactions  between  HAEs  and  miRNAs  (5/6 

related to HAEs above 80G) and two interactions between HAEs and metabolites (2/2 related to 

HAEs above 25G) (Table 4). Across-season, there were two significant interactions between HAEs 

and miRNAs (both positive; +𝛽), as well as four interactions between HAEs and metabolites (all 

positive; +𝛽) (Table 4). Interactions with miRNA were related to normalized HAEs (i.e. aHAE25G 

and aHAE80G) while interactions with metabolites (sebacate and suberate) were related to HAEs 

exceeding 25G (cHAE25G and aHAE25G). Significant HAE regressions were plotted in Figure 7 

and their interaction terms with significant across-season mediations can be seen in Figure 2A-I.  

Table 4: Across-season interactions with head acceleration events (HAEs). Four postseason HAE metrics 
(cHAE25G, cHAE80G, aHAE25G, and aHAE80G) were regressed against mediation-related VR scores, miRNA 
levels, and metabolite levels. Cook’s outliers were removed prior to analyses. Results were presented if p-
value  <  0.05.  Adjusted  R2  (R!"#.
)  and  standardized  beta  coefficients  (Std.  β)  were  reported  for  each 
significant regression. 

%

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: HAE-related across-season regression plots. Significant regressions from Supplemental Table 2 
were  graphed.  Standardized  beta  coefficients  (β;  slope),  p-values,  and  correlation  coefficients  (r)  were 
reported for each plot. Relationships between HAEs and miRNA, or metabolite, were all positive (+β). 

DISCUSSION 

This  study  tested  the  hypothesis  that  contact  athletes,  who  experience  repetitive  HAEs, 

would  exhibit  three-way  associations  between  inflammatory-related  miRNAs,  metabolomic 

compounds,  and  behaviors  implicated  by  Luria  with  mTBI  [57,  59,  60].  We  focused  on 

metabolomic  measures  that  were  both  abnormal  across  a  season  of  play  and  (i)  FAs  and/or 

compounds involved with energy metabolism, (ii) compounds involved with stress/inflammatory 

responses, or (iii) exogenous compounds related to consumption. We expected these three-way 

associations to show statistical mediation which was consistent (i.e., highly specific) in terms of 

the category of independent variable (IV), mediator variable (M), and dependent variable (DV), 

and  that  computational  behavior  measures  would  always  be  the  DV.  This  hypothesis  was 

confirmed  with  five  general  findings.  First,  across-season  metabolomic  analysis  identified  40 

34 

 
 
 
 
compounds that were significantly different across-season for three categories of focus [i.e., (i) – 

(iii)  above],  including  a  broad  array  of  xanthines  that  were  increased  at  the  end  of  the  season. 

Second, 14 mediation relationships were observed, six with preseason data, and eight with across-

season data. In the all cases, except one, miRNAs were the IVs, metabolomic compounds were the 

mediators, and Comp or Bal behavior were the DVs. There was only one case where miRNA was 

the  mediator  of  these  relationships;  however,  the  hypothesis-directed  mediation  was  also 

significant indicating a mixed mediation model. In the majority of cases, biochemical processes 

carried  the  relationship  between  inflammatory  miRNA  and  Luria  behavior.  Third,  three  of  the 

miRNAs showed relationships both preseason and across-season (miR-505, miR-92a, and miR-

151-5p),  and  12  of  the  14  mediations  involved  a  comprehensive  measure  of  Luria  behavior 

(Comp). For one metabolite, 8-HOA, we observed that it significantly mediated miRNA-behavior 

relationships both preseason and across-season. Fourth, all seven of the metabolomic compounds 

mediating relationships between inflammatory miRNA and Luria behavior were those involved 

with some aspect of energy metabolism. Specifically, five of the seven are involved in fatty acid 

oxidation,  a  sixth  compound  is  involved  with  diminishing  mitochondrial  respiration  and 

respiration-coupled ATP production in cancer cells (i.e., 2-HG), and a seventh is a core structural 

unit  of  ATP  (i.e.,  adenosine).  It  should  be  noted  that  altogether,  these  findings  point  to  a  shift 

mitochondria  metabolism,  away  from  mitochondria  function,  consistent  with  other  illnesses 

classified as mitochondrial disorders [84–90].  

Metabolite changes indicative of mitochondrial dysfunction and altered metabolism 

Metabolites of the TCA cycle consistently decreased across-season while monohydroxy 

and  dicarboxylic  FAs  increased.  This  observation  points  to  dysfunctional  energy  metabolism, 

35 

 
 
specifically related to 𝛽-oxidation. In functional mitochondria, 𝛽-oxidation breaks down FAs into 

acetyl-CoA which is then fed into the TCA cycle for further cellular respiration. However, several 

studies indicate that mitochondria are dysfunctional following mild to severe TBI [29, 31, 32, 35, 

36, 91–94]. Because mitochondria are the predominate site of energy production, their dysfunction 

creates a state of energetic crisis and metabolism thus shifts onto other organelles. Peroxisomes 

are  small,  dynamic  organelles  that  oxidize  FAs  using  𝛼-,  𝛽-,  and  𝜔-oxidative  processes.  𝜔-

oxidation transforms very long, long, medium, and short-chain FAs into dicarboxylic FAs which 

are then 𝛽-oxidized into acetyl-CoA. However, the reported data demonstrate an accumulation of 

medium-chain monohydroxy (7-HOA, 8-HOA) and dicarboxylic (suberate, sebacate, UND) FAs 

and a decrease in TCA metabolites, suggesting that the carboxylic FAs cannot be further oxidized 

into  acetyl-CoA  for  normal  TCA  cycle  respiration  (Figure  8).  This  observation  suggests  an 

impairment in 𝛽-oxidative processes, a resulting build-up of monohydroxy and dicarboxylic FAs, 

incomplete  oxidation  of  these  FAs  into  acetyl-CoA,  and  a  resulting  decrease  in  TCA-related 

metabolites  leading  to  increased  metabolic  demand.  Intriguingly,  increased  serum  levels  of  7-

HOA, 8-HOA, suberate, and sebacate have been observed in patients with medium-chain acyl-

CoA  dehydrogenase  deficiency  (MCADD)  –  a  genetic  mitochondrial  disorder  caused  by  a 

mutation in the ACADM gene [95–97]. Interestingly, another feature of this disorder is increased 

serum levels of acyl-carnitine derivatives with 6, 8, and 10 carbons. Indeed, these metabolites were 

increased in our cohort; however, most p-values were only trending (p-value > 0.05) and a larger 

cohort  must  be  studied  to  further  validate  this  observation  (Table  5).  The  last  FA  observed  in 

across-season mediation relationships was heptanoate. Heptanoate is a monohydroxy carboxylic 

fatty acid that decreased across the season of football – opposite of what was observed for the other 

monohydroxy  and  dicarboxylic  fatty  acids.  Interestingly,  increased  levels  of  heptanoate,  via 

36 

 
metabolism of triheptanoin, has been marked as beneficial in the treatment of 𝛽-oxidation related 

metabolic disorders [98–100]. Therefore, an observed decrease in heptanoate could be detrimental. 

In  relation  to  brain  injury,  one  study  observed  increased  neuronal  cell  loss  with  the 

accumulation of free FAs in rat models of TBI [101]. Taken together, the observed increase in 

medium-chain  monohydroxy  and  dicarboxylic  FAs,  decrease  in  heptanoate,  and  concurrent 

decrease in TCA metabolites suggest an impairment in 𝛽-oxidation stemming from injury-induced 

mitochondrial dysfunction, which has been reported in several TBI-related studies [34, 102].  

Figure  8:  Synopsis  figure  summarizing  the  observed  shift  in  metabolism  and  its  relationship  to 
inflammatory  miRNAs  and  complex  behavior.  There  were  significant  increases  in  medium-chain 
monohydroxy and dicarboxylic fatty acids (FAs) (suberate, sebacate, UND, and 8-HOA) from pre- to post-
season.  Increases  in  these  FAs  have  been  associated  with  genetic  disorders  related  to  impaired  beta-
oxidation. Impairment of this critical process can result in an accumulation of medium-chain FAs which 
cannot  be  further  oxidized  into  smaller,  functional,  metabolites,  such  as  acetyl-CoA.  Acetyl-CoA  is  a 
critical starting-point metabolite for the TCA cycle, a major source of energy-rich molecules that are fed 

37 

 
 
 
into  further  energy-producing  processes  (e.g.,  electron  chain  transport  system).  Here,  TCA-related 
metabolites (citrate, aconitate, 𝛼-KG, fumarate, and malate) were all observed to decrease, suggesting a 
problem with the initial step of the cycle (i.e. lack of acetyl-CoA). Additionally, there were alterations in 
energy-rich  molecules  such  as  adenine,  adenosine,  nicotinamide,  and  phosphate,  suggesting  a  state  of 
energy imbalance. Lastly, 2-HG, a known oncometabolite, was observed to increase. Regardless of its role 
as an oncometabolite, its increase suggests a state of oxidative stress. Taken together, it is suggested that 
there  are  dysfunctional  beta-oxidative  processes  in  this  cohort  of  collegiate  football  players  leading  to 
subsequent issues with energy production.  

Table  5:  Changes  in  acyl-carnitine  derivatives.  The  number  of  carbons  in  each  metabolite  is  noted  in 
parentheses. Cook’s outliers were removed prior to regression analysis and the number of outliers removed 
in each regression is listed as the ratio of outliers to the total n. p-Values were reported at a significance 
level of 0.05 and a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction was applied to obtain q-values and. Negative z-
scores confer an increase from pre- to post-season.  

Additionally, 2-HG, a known oncometabolite, increased from pre- to postseason. 2-HG is 

dicarboxylic fatty acid generated from 𝛼-ketoglutarate (i.e., oxoglutaric acid), a component of the 

TCA cycle, via the mutated IDH gene [103, 104]. 2-HG can exist in two enantiomeric forms (L 

and D) and both have been implicated in tumor suppressor inactivation and oncogenic activation 

[105–107]. In addition to its oncogenic function, 2-HG is an established marker of oxidative stress 

and has been associated with poorer outcomes following brain injury [108, 109]. Interestingly, L-

2-HG  structurally  resembles  glutamate  and  thus  may  affect  neurotransmission  [110].  Here,  an 

increase in 2-HG is likely linked to oxidative stress resulting from repetitive HAEs and may even 

alter neurotransmission and subsequent network connectivity [111–115].  

In this study, we observed adenosine to be decreased at postseason. Adenosine is a potent 

vasodilator  that  increases  regional  cerebral  blood  flow  (rCBF),  thereby  decreasing  energy 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demands. It is also implicated as a robust neuroprotector and has been reported to suppress ATP 

release [116]. Further, dysregulation of adenosine levels has been reported following TBI and is 

linked with numerous TBI-related pathologies and comorbidities [117]. In particular, severe TBI 

in  humans  was  associated  with  increased  adenosine  levels,  which  was  hypothesized  to  play  a 

neuroprotective role and act to uncouple rCBF from oxidative metabolism [118]. In rats, adenosine 

agonists administered 10 minutes post-TBI reduced injury severity following fluid-percussion TBI 

[119]. However, adenosine has also been reported to decrease 24 hours following TBI in rats [116],  

and decreases in extracellular adenosine have been associated with a loss of neuroprotection during 

states  of  hypoxia  and  ischemia  [120].  These,  and  other,  findings  suggest  an  interplay  between 

protective effects of adenosine receptors A1 and A2A, and further research is required to elucidate 

time  course  effect  of  adenosine  across  the  full  spectrum  of  TBI.  Taken  together,  our  findings 

suggest  that  exposure  to  repetitive  subconcussive  HAEs  may  trigger  a  detrimental  decrease  in 

adenosine and subsequent neuroprotective dysfunction.  

Another  energy-related  metabolite,  phosphate,  was  found  to  increase  in  the  absence  of 

mediation relationships. This observation may be associated with reduced ATP synthesis, ATP 

depletion,  and/or  ATP  hydrolysis.  In  cases  of  ischemia,  mitochondria  hydrolyzed  ATP  more 

frequently [121] and ATP synthesis was impaired in animals of brain injury [122]. Impaired ATP 

synthesis  may  be  related  to  depleted  energy  stores  and  a  subsequent  lack  of  energy  sources. 

Contrary to these observations, serum phosphate levels were shown to decrease in patients with 

severe  TBI  [123,  124],  yet  football  athletes  experience  repetitive  subconcussive  HAEs.  More 

research is required to elucidate the role of phosphate in the full spectrum of TBI.  

Lastly,  all  xanthine  metabolites  were  increased  at  postseason  suggesting  either  1)  an 

increase in caffeine consumption [35, 125–128], 2) activation of xanthine oxidases [129–132], or 

39 

 
 
3)  a  combination  of  both  [29].  Caffeine  is  an  exogenous  compound  shown  to  have  anti-

inflammatory and neuroprotective effects, especially in the context of neurodegenerative disease 

and TBI [133]. In human studies, caffeine levels were correlated with better outcomes in patients 

with  severe  TBI  [134];  this  finding  may  be  related  to  caffeine-induced  neuroprotection  via 

blockage of the adenosine receptor, A2A [135, 136]. Additionally, caffeine consumption reduced 

cognitive decline in older women [137], has been suggested to reduce the likelihood of developing 

Alzheimer’s disease [138], and has been linked to improving psychiatric disorder symptoms [139]. 

Moreover,  numerous  animal  studies  have  demonstrated  neuroprotective  effects  of  caffeine 

following TBI [140–142]. However, the timing of caffeine administration may be critical, as was 

seen  in  a  study  where  caffeine  administered  prior  to  TBI  was  beneficial  while  caffeine 

administered post-TBI was detrimental [143]. Increased caffeine consumption in this cohort could 

be the result of 1) school-related stress and lack of sleep, 2) compensation for HAE-induced brain 

damage and metabolic dysfunction, or 3) a combination of both. Given the current data, it is not 

possible to identify the exact reason for the increased levels of xanthines and further research is 

required. It should be noted though that previous studies have reported caffeine consumption in 

contact athletes with the main motive being regaining energy lost during exercise [144, 145]. 

Metabolite changes mediate the relationship between inflammatory miRNA and Luria behavior 

Previous studies have reported increased levels of inflammatory miRNAs prior to contact 

play  and  therefore,  no  changes  observed  across  the  season  [16,  80].  Additionally,  behavioral 

changes alone are rarely observed and difficult to replicate in studies of contact athletes without 

diagnosed concussion [13, 146–149]. However, research points to significant neuroimaging (i.e. 

fMRI,  rs-fMRI,  DTI,  MRS,  CVR,  rCBF)  and  biochemical  changes  in  this  population  across  a 

40 

 
 
season of sports participation [3–5, 14, 81, 150–152]; however, behavior is not commonly shown 

to correlate with these changes [3, 13, 149, 153]. Therefore, it was hypothesized that metabolomic 

changes would mediate the relationship between elevated miRNA and potentially subtle changes 

in behavior that could be quantified using virtual reality technology. 

At preseason, there were six significant hypothesis-directed mediations. The metabolites 

mediating the relationship between chronically elevated miRNA and behavior were monohydroxy 

(8-HOA) and dicarboxylic FAs (2-HG and UND). According to the literature, these types of FAs 

were  elevated  in  patients  with  defective  𝛽-oxidative  metabolism  [85,  87,  90,  154–156].  The 

accumulation of these specific FAs suggests a state of chronic metabolic dysregulation related to 

ineffective 𝛽-oxidation in mitochondria and peroxisomes. Ultimately, this dysfunction may result 

in an energy crisis as FAs cannot be fully oxidized into acetyl-CoA for normal cellular respiration. 

In fact, decreased levels of acetyl-CoA, as well as increased phosphate and decreased ATP, have 

been observed in rats exposed to repetitive mTBI [29, 32]. The fact that these FAs are mediating 

the  miRNA-behavior  relationship  suggests  that  dysfunctional  𝛽-oxidation  may  underlie  subtle 

changes in behavior. Moreover, the fact that these relationships were observed prior to contact 

practice  and  play  suggests  chronic  metabolic  dysregulation  and  neuroinflammation  that  may 

persist long after season commencement and affect neurological function (Figure 9). 

41 

 
Figure  9:  Repetitive  exposure  to  subconcussive  head  impacts  (or  HAEs)  has  been  shown  to  produce 
significant changes in brain homeostasis, such as increased neuroinflammation [7, 15, 157–163]. Here, we 
observed changes indicative of mitochondrial distress as evidenced from both the accumulation of medium-
chain FAs and the subsequent decreases in TCA-related metabolites. Mitochondrial dysfunction can lead 
to numerous physiological disturbances, some of which were observed in the present study: 1) oxidative 
stress (i.e., increased levels of 2-HG), 2) impairment in beta-oxidative processes (i.e., increased levels of 
medium-chain  FAs),  and  3)  increased  metabolic  demands  (i.e.,  decreased  TCA  and  energy-related 
metabolites).  Together,  these  neuroinflammatory  processes  may  be  related  to  the  observed  elevation  in 
inflammatory-related miRNA molecules (specifically miR-20a, miR-505, miR-151-5p, miR-30d, miR-92a, 
and miR-195). In fact, these miRNAs were significantly correlated with the metabolites shown in 3A. In 
addition,  the  metabolites  were  shown  to  mediate  the  relationship  between  elevated  miRNA  levels  and 
complex  Luria  behavior  (i.e.,  computation  virtual  reality  tasks).  Together,  the  mediating  effect of  these 
energy-related  metabolites  are  critical  when  defining  the  relationship  between  elevated  miRNAs  and 
behavioral  outcomes.  This  complex  relationship  may  explain  why  obvious  behavioral  changes  in 
subconcussed athletes have not been routinely observed, but how repetitive, long-term exposure to HAEs, 
chronic elevation of inflammatory-miRNAs, and acute, but deleterious changes in energy metabolites could 
result in behavioral disturbances later in life.  

Across-season,  there  were  eight  significant  hypothesis-directed  mediations.  Again,  the 

majority of mediating metabolites were FAs that were increased across the season and may be 

42 

 
 
  
related to dysfunctional mitochondrial β-oxidation. However, heptanoate and adenosine were also 

observed  in  mediation  relationships,  as  discussed  in  the  previous  section.  The  observation  of 

significant mediations using change measures across the season indicate that chronically elevated 

miRNAs, as observed in [16], and dynamic metabolic disruption appear to impact neurological 

function. Interestingly, three miRNAs (miR-505, miR-92a, and miR-151-5p) and one metabolite 

(8-HOA) were involved in both pre- and across-season mediations and 12 of the 14 mediations 

involved the comprehensive measure of Luria-based behavior. 

Together,  all  seven  of  the  metabolomic  compounds  mediating  relationships  between 

inflammatory miRNAs and Luria behavior were involved in some aspect of energy metabolism. 

Additionally, other metabolites that were not observed in mediation relationships, but are involved 

in  energy  metabolism,  were  observed  to  change  (e.g.,  citrate,  phosphate;  Figure  3A).  These 

observations  strongly  argue  for  a  state  of  metabolic  dysregulation,  potentially  related  to 

dysfunctional mitochondria and subsequent dysfunction in cellular respiration (i.e., TCA cycle and 

downstream energy-producing processes).  

HAEs were associated with changes in metabolites and miRNA 

The observed relationships between miRNAs, metabolites, and behavior were related to 

HAE exposures throughout the football season (Table 4). Specifically, across-season measures of 

miRNAs 505 and 92a were significantly related to cumulative and average HAEs exceeding 25G 

and  80G.  Additionally,  across-season  measures  of  the  metabolites  sebacate  and  suberate  were 

associated with HAEs exceeding 25G. All across-season relationships were positive, indicating 

that increased HAE exposure was related to larger increases in neuroinflammatory miRNA levels 

and  increased  metabolomic  measures  (sebacate  and  suberate).  Preseason  results  indicate  an 

43 

 
 
 
opposite trend where higher extrapolated HAEs were associated with lower levels of miRNA. This 

is interesting, as it suggests that lower levels of inflammatory-related miRNA may be associated 

with more HAE exposures from the previous season of play. However, these results are purely 

explorative  as  previous  HAEs  were  not  recorded  and  should  only  be  considered  as  setting  up 

hypotheses for future investigation.  

Previous research, specifically in the neuroimaging field, has demonstrated the role HAEs 

play  in  neurophysiological  changes  such  as  altered  connectivity  (rs-fMRI  and  fMRI), 

neurochemical  alterations  (MRS),  altered  cerebral  blood  flow  (perfusion  imaging),  and  axonal 

injury (DTI) [4, 7, 168, 13, 15, 80, 151, 164–167]. Here, we present blood biomarkers (metabolites 

and miRNAs) that also correspond to HAE exposure. Interestingly, no behaviors were associated 

with HAEs. This absence of association may be due to inherent limitations of the sensors, a small 

sample size, and/or the fact that competition-related HAEs were not recorded.  

Other limitations of this study include the time course of sample collection and a lack of 

age-matched, non-contact athlete controls.  Blood collections and VR tests were only conducted 

twice – once prior to contact practice and once following the competition season. To observe more 

transient changes in these metrics, it would be beneficial to collect data at more time points during 

and after the season. Additionally, this study lacked age- and gender-matched, non-contact athlete 

controls. Previous reports of miRNA elevations in football athletes utilized healthy, non-age- and 

gender-matched controls [16]. Future studies should incorporate age- and gender-match controls 

that also participate in competitive, non-contact athletics. Lastly, while the sample size was small, 

a rigorous permutation-based statistical approach was applied to account for this limitation while 

controlling for false positives and false negatives.  

44 

 
 
CONCLUSION 

The  presented  study  evaluated  the  relationships  between  energy-related  metabolites, 

inflammatory-related  miRNAs,  and  Luria-based  computational  behavior  at  the  preseason  and 

across the season. Specifically, metabolites were hypothesized to mediate the relationship between 

elevated miRNAs and VR task performance. The majority of mediation findings involved a fatty 

acid (2-HG, 8-HOA, UND, sebacate, suberate, and heptanoate) and in addition, TCA metabolites 

were found to be significantly decreased at postseason relative to preseason. Lastly, HAEs were 

associated  with  metabolomic  measures  and  miRNA  levels  across-season.  Together,  these 

observations suggest a state of chronic HAE-induced neuroinflammation (as evidence by elevated 

miRNA, [16]) and mitochondrial dysfunction (as observed by altered metabolomic measures) that 

together produce subtle changes in neurological function (as observed by behavioral relationships) 

(Figure  9).  Additionally,  these  complex,  multi-scale  observations  were  discovered  using  an 

integration  of  permutation-based  statistics  with  mediation  analysis;  this  method  may  provide  a 

technique for other human-focused studies of functional brain illness in lieu of, or in parallel with, 

animal  studies.  These  findings  provide  preliminary  evidence  that  14  metabolites,  related  to 

potential mitochondrial distress, have complex relationships to neuroinflammation and subsequent 

neurological  alterations.  Therefore,  this  set  of  metabolites  1)  supports  the  hypothesis  of 

mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction in subconcussed contact-sport athletes and 2) may serve 

as  a  promising  set  of  biomarkers  for  HAE-related  neurological  change  that  does  not  produce 

obvious behavioral deficits. 

45 

 
 
 
 
CONFLICT(S) OF INTEREST 

The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.  

REFERENCES 
1.  

Langlois JA, Rutland-Brown W, Wald MM. The Epidemiology and Impact of Traumatic 
Brain Injury A Brief Overview. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2006;21:375–378. 

2.   Daneshvar DH, Nowinski CJ, McKee AC, Cantu RC. The Epidemiology of Sport-Related 

3.  

Concussion. Clin Sports Med. 2011;30:1–17. 
Breedlove KM, Breedlove EL, Robinson M, Poole VN, King JR, Rosenberger P, et al. 
Detecting Neurocognitive and Neurophysiological Changes as a Result of Subconcussive 
Blows Among High School Football Athletes. Athl Train Sport Heal Care. 2014;6:119–
127. 

4.   Abbas K, Shenk TE, Poole VN, Breedlove EL, Leverenz LJ, Nauman EA, et al. Alteration 

of default mode network in high school football athletes due to repetitive subconcussive 
mild traumatic brain injury: A resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study. 
Brain Connect. 2015;5:91–101. 
Breedlove EL, Robinson M, Talavage TM, Morigaki KE, Yoruk U, O’Keefe K, et al. 
Biomechanical correlates of symptomatic and asymptomatic neurophysiological 
impairment in high school football. J Biomech. 2012;45:1265–1272. 

5.  

6.   Kawata K, Rubin LH, Takahagi M, Lee JH, Sim T, Szwanki V, et al. Subconcussive 
Impact-Dependent Increase in Plasma S100β Levels in Collegiate Football Players. J 
Neurotrauma. 2017;34:2254–2260. 
Bari S, Svaldi DO, Jang I, Shenk TE, Poole VN, Lee T, et al. Dependence on 
subconcussive impacts of brain metabolism in collision sport athletes: an MR 
spectroscopic study. Brain Imaging Behav. 2019;13:735–749. 

7.  

8.   Walter A, Herrold AA, Gallagher VT, Lee R, Scaramuzzo M, Bream T, et al. KIAA0319 
Genotype Predicts the Number of Past Concussions in a Division I Football Team: A Pilot 
Study. J Neurotrauma. 2019;36:1115–1124. 

9.   Wang KKW, Ottens A, Haskins W, Liu MC, Kobeissy F, Denslow N, et al. Proteomics 

studies of traumatic brain injury. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2004;61:215–240. 
10.   Di Pietro V, Amin D, Pernagallo S, Lazzarino G, Tavazzi B, Vagnozzi R, et al. 

Transcriptomics of traumatic brain injury: Gene expression and molecular pathways of 
different grades of insult in a rat organotypic hippocampal culture model. J Neurotrauma. 
2010;27:349–359. 

11.   Posti JP, Dickens AM, Orešic M, Hyötyläinen T, Tenovuo O. Metabolomics profiling as a 

diagnostic tool in severe traumatic brain injury. Front Neurol. 2017;8:398. 

12.   Hogan SR, Phan JH, Alvarado-Velez M, Wang MD, Bellamkonda R V., Fernández FM, et 
al. Discovery of Lipidome Alterations Following Traumatic Brain Injury via High-
Resolution Metabolomics. J Proteome Res. 2018;17:2131–2143. 

13.   Talavage TM, Nauman EA, Breedlove EL, Yoruk U, Dye AE, Morigaki KE, et al. 
Functionally-detected cognitive impairment in high school football players without 
clinically-diagnosed concussion. J Neurotrauma. 2014;31:327–338. 

14.   Poole VN, Breedlove EL, Shenk TE, Abbas K, Robinson ME, Leverenz LJ, et al. Sub-

concussive hit characteristics predict deviant brain metabolism in football athletes. Dev 

46 

 
 
 
 
15.  

Neuropsychol. 2015;40:12–17. 
Jang I, Chun IY, Brosch JR, Bari S, Zou Y, Cummiskey BR, et al. Every hit matters: 
White matter diffusivity changes in high school football athletes are correlated with 
repetitive head acceleration event exposure. NeuroImage Clin. 2019;24:101930. 

16.   Papa L, Slobounov SM, Breiter HC, Walter A, Bream T, Seidenberg P, et al. Elevations in 

MicroRNA Biomarkers in Serum Are Associated with Measures of Concussion, 
Neurocognitive Function, and Subconcussive Trauma over a Single National Collegiate 
Athletic Association Division I Season in Collegiate Football Players. J Neurotrauma. 
2019;36:1343–1351. 

17.   Bhomia M, Balakathiresan NS, Wang KK, Papa L, Maheshwari RK. A Panel of Serum 
MiRNA Biomarkers for the Diagnosis of Severe to Mild Traumatic Brain Injury in 
Humans. Sci Rep. 2016;6. 

18.   Xiong K lin, Zhu Y shan, Zhang W guo. Diffusion tensor imaging and magnetic 

resonance spectroscopy in traumatic brain injury: a review of recent literature. Brain 
Imaging Behav. 2014;8:487–496. 

19.   Brooks WM, Friedman SD, Gasparovic C. Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in 

Traumatic Brain Injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 1986;16:149–164. 

20.   Cecil KM, Hills EC, Sandel ME, Smith DH, McIntosh TK, Mannon LJ, et al. Proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy for detection of axonal injury in the splenium of the 
corpus callosum of brain-injured patients. J Neurosurg. 1998;88:795–801. 
21.   Yeo RA, Phillips JP, Jung RE, Brown AJ, Campbell RC, Brooks WM. Magnetic 

Resonance Spectroscopy Detects Brain Injury and Predicts Cognitive Functioning in 
Children with Brain Injuries. J Neurotrauma. 2006;23:1427–1435. 

22.   Nizamutdinov D, Shapiro LA. Overview of Traumatic Brain Injury: An Immunological 

Context. Brain Sci. 2017;7. 

23.   Shao C, Roberts KN, Markesbery WR, Scheff SW, Lovell MA. Oxidative stress in head 

trauma in aging. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006;41:77–85. 

24.   Blennow K, Hardy J, Zetterberg H. The Neuropathology and Neurobiology of Traumatic 

Brain Injury. Neuron. 2012;76:886–899. 

25.   Elder GA, Gama Sosa MA, De Gasperi R, Stone JR, Dickstein DL, Haghighi F, et al. 

Vascular and inflammatory factors in the pathophysiology of blast-induced brain injury. 
Front Neurol. 2015;6:1–22. 

26.   Woodcock T, Morganti-Kossmann MC. The role of markers of inflammation in traumatic 

brain injury. Front Neurol. 2013;4:1–18. 

27.   Chiu C-C, Liao Y-E, Yang L-Y, Wang J-Y, Tweedie D, Karnati HK, et al. 

Neuroinflammation in animal models of traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci Methods. 
2016;272:38–49. 

28.   Signoretti S, Lazzarino G, Tavazzi B, Vagnozzi R. The pathophysiology of concussion. 

PM R J Inj Funct Rehabil. 2011;3:S359-368. 

29.   Signoretti S, Vagnozzi R, Tavazza B, Lazzarino G. Biochemical and neurochemical 

sequelae following mild traumatic brain injury: summary of experimental data and clinical 
implications. J Neurosurg. 2010;29:E1. 

30.   Shao C. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in traumatic brain injury in aging. 

Univ Kentucky Dr Diss. 2007;533. 

31.   Hiebert JB, Shen Q, Thimmesch AR, Pierce JD. Traumatic Brain Injury and 

Mitochondrial Dysfunction. Am J Med Sci. 2015;350:132–138. 

47 

 
32.   Vagnozzi R, Marmarou A, Tavazzi B, Signoretti S, Di Pierro D, Del Bolgia FD, et al. 
Changes of cerebral energy metabolism and lipid peroxidation in rats leading to 
mitochondrial dysfunction after diffuse brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 1999;16:903–913. 
33.   Verweij BH, Muizelaar P, Vinas FC, Peterson PL, Xiong Y, Lee CP. Impaired cerebral 

mitochondrial function after traumatic brain injury in humans. J Neurosurg. 2000;93:815–
820. 

34.   González-Domínguez R. Medium-chain Fatty Acids as Biomarkers of Mitochondrial 

Dysfunction in Traumatic Brain Injury. EBioMedicine. 2016;12:8–9. 

35.   Robertson CL, Saraswati M, Fiskum G. Mitochondrial dysfunction early after traumatic 

brain injury in immature rats. J Neurochem. 2007;101:1248–1257. 

36.   Xiong Y, Gu Q, Peterson PL, Muizelaar JP, Lee CP. Mitochondrial dysfunction and 

calcium perturbation induced by traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma. 1997;14:23–34. 

37.   Siekevitz P. Powerhouse of the cell. Sci Am. 1957;197:131–144. 
38.   Wisnovsky S, Lei EK, Jean SR, Kelley SO. Mitochondrial Chemical Biology: New Probes 

Elucidate the Secrets of the Powerhouse of the Cell. Cell Chem Biol. 2016;23:917–927. 

39.   Wanders RJA, Ruiter JPN, Ijlst L, Waterham HR, Houten SM. The enzymology of 
mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation and its application to follow-up analysis of 
positive neonatal screening results. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2010;33:479–494. 
40.   Kunau WH, Dommes V, Schulz H. β-Oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria, 

peroxisomes, and bacteria: A century of continued progress. Prog Lipid Res. 
1995;34:267–342. 

41.   Schulz H. Beta oxidation of fatty acids. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)/Lipids Lipid 

Metab. 1991;1081:109–120. 

42.   Titorenko VI, Terlecky SR. Peroxisome Metabolism and Cellular Aging. Traffic. 

2011;12:252–259. 

43.   Wanders RJA, Waterham HR, Ferdinandusse S. Metabolic interplay between peroxisomes 

and other subcellular organelles including mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Front Cell Dev Biol. 2016;3:83. 

44.   Lodhi IJ, Semenkovich CF. Peroxisomes: A nexus for lipid metabolism and cellular 

signaling. Cell Metab. 2014;19:380–392. 

45.   Eaton S, Bartlett K, Pourfarzam M. Mammalian mitochondrial β-oxidation. Biochem J. 

1996;320:345–357. 

46.   Bartlett K, Eaton S. Mitochondrial β-oxidation. Eur J Biochem. 2004;271:462–469. 
47.   Fernie AR, Carrari F, Sweetlove LJ. Respiratory metabolism: Glycolysis, the TCA cycle 

and mitochondrial electron transport. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2004;7:254–261. 
48.   Bhatti JS, Bhatti GK, Reddy PH. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in 

metabolic disorders — A step towards mitochondria based therapeutic strategies. Biochim 
Biophys Acta - Mol Basis Dis. 2017;1863:1066–1077. 

49.   Bhat AH, Dar KB, Anees S, Zargar MA, Masood A, Sofi MA, et al. Oxidative stress, 

mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegenerative diseases; a mechanistic insight. Biomed 
Pharmacother. 2015;74:101–110. 

50.   Wang CH, Wu SB, Wu YT, Wei YH. Oxidative stress response elicited by mitochondrial 
dysfunction: Implication in the pathophysiology of aging. Exp Biol Med. 2013;238:450–
460. 
Ježek J, Cooper KF, Strich R. Reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial dynamics: The 
yin and yang of mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer progression. Antioxidants. 2018;7. 

51.  

48 

 
52.   Eckner JT, Kutcher JS, Richardson JK. Pilot evaluation of a novel clinical test of reaction 
time in National Collegiate Athletic Association Division i football players. J Athl Train. 
2010;45:327–332. 

53.   Tarazi A, Tator CH, Wennberg R, Ebraheem A, Green REA, Collela B, et al. Motor 

Function in Former Professional Football Players with History of Multiple Concussions. J 
Neurotrauma. 2018;35:1003–1007. 

54.   Ellemberg D, Henry LC, Macciocchi SN, Guskiewicz KM, Broglio SP. Advances in sport 
concussion assessment: from behavioral to brain imaging measures. J Neurotrauma. 
2009;26:2365–2382. 

55.   Martini DN, Broglio SP. Long-term effects of sport concussion on cognitive and motor 

performance: A review. Int J Psychophysiol. 2018;132:25–30. 

56.   Dessy AM, Yuk FJ, Maniya AY, Gometz A, Rasouli JJ, Lovell MR, et al. Review of 

Assessment Scales for Diagnosing and Monitoring Sports-related Concussion. Cureus. 
2017;9. 

57.   Luria AR. Recovery of brain functions after military traumasMoscow: Moscow State 

University Publisher; 1948. 

58.   Luria AR. Higher cortical functions and its deficits after local brain traumas.Moscow: 

Moscow University Publisher; 1962. 

59.   Luria AR. Foundation of Neuropsychology.Moscow: Moscow University Publisher; 1973. 
60.   Luria AR. Higher cortical functions in human.St. Peterrsburg Publisher; 2008. 
61.   Slobounov S, Sebastianelli W, Moss R. Alteration of posture-related cortical potentials in 

mild traumatic brain injury. Neurosci Lett. 2005;383:251–255. 

62.   Slobounov S, Slobounov E, Newell K. Application of virtual reality graphics in 

assessment of concussion. Cyberpsychology Behav Impact Internet, Multimed Virtual 
Real Behav Soc. 2006;9:188–191. 

63.   Slobounov S, Sebastianelli W, Newell KM. Incorporating virtual reality graphics with 
brain imaging for assessment of sport-related concussions. Conf Proc . Annu Int Conf 
IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc Annu Conf. 2011;2011:1383–1386. 

64.   Slobounov SM, Sebastianelli W. Feasibility of Virtual Reality for assessment of 

neurocognitive, executive and motor functions in concussion. Concussion Athl. from 
Brain to Behav., . 1st ed.New York: Springer; 2014. p. 419. 

65.   Teel EF, Slobounov SM. Validation of a virtual reality balance module for use in clinical 

concussion assessment and management. Clin J Sport Med Off J Can Acad Sport Med. 
2015;25:144–148. 

66.   Slobounov SM, Zhang · K, Pennell · D, Ray · W, Johnson · B, Sebastianelli · W. 

Functional abnormalities in normally appearing athletes following mild traumatic brain 
injury: a functional MRI study. Exp Brain Res. 2010;202:341–354. 

67.   Romberg MH. A Manual of the Nervous Diseases of Man. 2nd ed. London: C. and J. 

Adlard; 1853. 

68.   Teel E, Gay M, Johnson B, Slobounov S. Determining sensitivity/specificity of virtual 

reality-based neuropsychological tool for detecting residual abnormalities following sport-
related concussion. Neuropsychology. 2016;30:474–483. 

69.   Lozano D, Gonzales-Portillo GS, Acosta S, de la Pena I, Tajiri N, Kaneko Y, et al. 

Neuroinflammatory responses to traumatic brain injury: Etiology, Clinical consequences, 
And therapeutic opportunities. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2015;11:97–106. 

70.   Kumar A, Loane DJ. Neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury: Opportunities for 

49 

 
therapeutic intervention. Brain Behav Immun. 2012;26:1191–1201. 

71.   Cornelius C, Crupi R, Calabrese V, Graziano A, Milone P, Pennisi G, et al. Traumatic 
brain injury: Oxidative stress and neuroprotection. Antioxidants Redox Signal. 
2013;19:836–853. 

72.   Abdul-Muneer PM, Chandra N, Haorah J. Interactions of Oxidative Stress and 

Neurovascular Inflammation in the Pathogenesis of Traumatic Brain Injury. Mol 
Neurobiol. 2015;51:966–979. 

73.   Rodriguez-Rodriguez A, Jose Egea-Guerrero J, Murillo-Cabezas F, Carrillo-Vico A. 

Oxidative Stress in Traumatic Brain Injury. 

74.   Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45:5–32. 
75.   Cook RD. Detection of influential observations in linear regression. Technometrics. 

1977;22:494–508. 

76.   Cook RD. Influential observations in linear regression. J Am Stat Assoc. 1979;74:169–

174. 

77.   Altman N, Krzywinski M. Points of Significance: Analyzing outliers: Influential or 

nuisance? Nat Methods. 2016;13:281–282. 

78.   Camargo A, Azuaje F, Wang H, Zheng H. Permutation - Based statistical tests for 

multiple hypotheses. Source Code Biol Med. 2008;3:15. 

79.   Belmonte M, Yurgelun-Todd D. Permutation testing made practical for functional 
magnetic resonance image analysis. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2001;20:243–248. 
80.   Chen Y, Herrold AA, Martinovich Z, Blood AJ, Vike N, Walter AE, et al. Brain perfusion 
mediates the relationship between miRNA levels and postural control. 2019. 5 December 
2019. 

81.   Slobounov SM, Walter A, Breiter HC, Zhu DC, Bai X, Bream T, et al. The effect of 

repetitive subconcussive collisions on brain integrity in collegiate football players over a 
single football seasonA multi-modal neuroimaging study. NeuroImage Clin. 2017;14:708–
718. 

82.   McCuen E, Svaldi D, Breedlove K, Kraz N, Cummiskey B, Breedlove EL, et al. 

Collegiate women’s soccer players suffer greater cumulative head impacts than their high 
school counterparts. J Biomech. 2015;48:3720–3723. 

83.   Broglio SP, Schnebel B, Sosnoff JJ, Shin S, Fend X, He X, et al. Biomechanical properties 
of concussions in high school football. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010;42:2064–2071. 

84.   Fromenty B, Pessayre D. Inhibition of mitochondrial beta-oxidation as a mechanism of 

hepatotoxicity. Pharmacol Ther. 1995;67:101–154. 

85.   Wajner M, Amaral AU. Mitochondrial dysfunction in fatty acid oxidation disorders: 

Insights from human and animal studies. Biosci Rep. 2016;36:e00281. 

86.   Longo N, Frigeni M, Pasquali M. Carnitine transport and fatty acid oxidation. Biochim 

Biophys Acta - Mol Cell Res. 2016;1863:2422–2435. 

87.   Wanders RJA, Komen J, Kemp S. Fatty acid omega-oxidation as a rescue pathway for 

fatty acid oxidation disorders in humans. FEBS J. 2011;278:182–194. 

88.   Vockley J, Whiteman DAH. Defects of mitochondrial β-oxidation: A growing group of 

disorders. Neuromuscul Disord. 2002;12:235–246. 

89.   Vishwanath VA. Fatty Acid Beta-Oxidation Disorders: A Brief Review. Ann Neurosci. 

2016;23:51–55. 

90.   Schuck PF, Ferreira GC, Moura AP, Busanello ENB, Tonin AM, Dutra-Filho CS, et al. 

Medium-chain fatty acids accumulating in MCAD deficiency elicit lipid and protein 

50 

 
oxidative damage and decrease non-enzymatic antioxidant defenses in rat brain. 
Neurochem Int. 2009;54:519–525. 

91.   Sullivan PG, Thompson MB, Scheff SW. Cyclosporin A attenuates acute mitochondrial 

dysfunction following traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol. 1999;160:226–234. 
92.   Verweij BH, Muizelaar JP, Vinas FC, Peterson PL, Xiong Y, Lee CP. Mitochondrial 
dysfunction after experimental and human brain injury and its possible reversal with a 
selective N-type calcium channel antagonist (SNX-111). Neurol Res. 1997;19:334–339. 

93.   Fischer TD, Hylin MJ, Zhao J, Moore AN, Waxham MN, Dash PK. Altered 

Mitochondrial Dynamics and TBI Pathophysiology. Front Syst Neurosci. 2016;10:29. 

94.   Sauerbeck A, Gao J, Readnower R, Liu M, Pauly JR, Bing G, et al. Pioglitazone 

attenuates mitochondrial dysfunction, cognitive impairment, cortical tissue loss, and 
inflammation following traumatic brain injury. Exp Neurol. 2011;227:128–135. 
95.   Lee PJ, Harrison EL, Jones MG, Jones S, Leonard J V., Chalmers RA. L-Carnitine and 
exercise tolerance in medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) 
deficiency: A pilot study. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28:141–152. 

96.   Bodman M, Smith D, Nyhan WL, Naviaux RK. Medium-chain acyl coenzyme A 

dehydrogenase deficiency: Occurrence in an infant and his father. Arch Neurol. 
2001;58:811–814. 

97.   Merritt JL, Chang IJ. Medium-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency. 

University of Washington, Seattle; 1993. 

98.   Marin-Valencia I, Good LB, Ma Q, Malloy CR, Pascual JM. Heptanoate as a neural fuel: 

energetic and neurotransmitter precursors in normal and glucose transporter I-deficient 
(G1D) brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013;33:175–182. 

99.   Adanyeguh IM, Rinaldi D, Henry PG, Caillet S, Valabregue R, Durr A, et al. Triheptanoin 
improves brain energy metabolism in patients with Huntington disease. Neurology. 
2015;84:490–495. 

100.   White H, Kruger P, Venkatesh B. Novel Metabolic Substrates for Feeding the Injured 

BrainSpringer, Cham; 2017. p. 329–341. 

101.   Moore IMK, Miketova P, Hockenberry M, Krull K, Pasvogel A, Carey M, et al. 

Methotrexate-induced alterations in beta-oxidation correlate with cognitive abilities in 
children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Biol Res Nurs. 2008;9:311–319. 

102.   Anthonymuthu TS, Kenny EM, Amoscato AA, Lewis J, Kochanek PM, Kagan VE, et al. 

Global assessment of oxidized free fatty acids in brain reveals an enzymatic predominance 
to oxidative signaling after trauma. Biochim Biophys Acta - Mol Basis Dis. 
2017;1863:2601–2613. 

103.   Schulze A, Harris AL. How cancer metabolism is tuned for proliferation and vulnerable to 

disruption. 2012. 2012. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11706. 

104.   Ye D, Guan KL, Xiong Y. Metabolism, Activity, and Targeting of D- and L-2-

Hydroxyglutarates. Trends in Cancer. 2018;4:151–165. 

105.   Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, et al. Cancer-
associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature. 2009;462:739–744. 

106.   Gross S, Cairns RA, Minden MD, Driggers EM, Bittinger MA, Jang HG, et al. Cancer-
associated metabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate accumulates in acute myelogenous leukemia 
with isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mutations. J Exp Med. 2010;207:339–344. 
107.   Intlekofer AM, DeMatteo RG, Venneti S, Finley LWS, Lu C, Judkins AR, et al. Hypoxia 

Induces Production of L-2-Hydroxyglutarate. Cell Metab. 2015;22:304–311. 

51 

 
108.   Magalhães RC, Moreira JM, Lauar AO, da Silva AAS, Teixeira AL, e Silva ACS. 

Inflammatory biomarkers in children with cerebral palsy: A systematic review. Res Dev 
Disabil. 2019;95:103508. 

109.   Latini A, Scussiato K, Rosa RB, Llesuy S, Belló-Klein A, Dutra-Filho CS, et al. D-2-

hydroxyglutaric acid induces oxidative stress in cerebral cortex of young rats. Eur J 
Neurosci. 2003;17:2017–2022. 

110.   Farias FHG, Zeng R, Johnson GS, Shelton GD, Paquette D, O’Brien DP. A L2HGDH 

initiator methionine codon mutation in a Yorkshire terrier with L-2-hydroxyglutaric 
aciduria. BMC Vet Res. 2012;8:124. 

111.   Militana AR, Donahue MJ, Sills AK, Solomon GS, Gregory AJ, Strother MK, et al. 

Alterations in default-mode network connectivity may be influenced by cerebrovascular 
changes within 1 week of sports related concussion in college varsity athletes: a pilot 
study. Brain Imaging Behav. 2016;10:559–568. 

112.   Messé A, Caplain S, Pélégrini-Issac M, Blancho S, Lévy R, Aghakhani N, et al. Specific 

and Evolving Resting-State Network Alterations in Post-Concussion Syndrome Following 
Mild Traumatic Brain Injury. PLoS One. 2013;8. 

113.   Manning KY, Schranz A, Bartha R, Dekaban GA, Barreira C, Brown A, et al. 

Multiparametric MRI changes persist beyond recovery in concussed adolescent hockey 
players. Neurology. 2017;89:2157–2166. 

114.   Han K, Mac Donald CL, Johnson AM, Barnes Y, Wierzechowski L, Zonies D, et al. 

Disrupted modular organization of resting-state cortical functional connectivity in U.S. 
military personnel following concussive ‘mild’ blast-related traumatic brain injury. 
Neuroimage. 2014;84:76–96. 

115.   Zhu DC, Covassin T, Nogle S, Doyle S, Russell D, Pearson RL, et al. A potential 

biomarker in sports-related concussion: Brain functional connectivity alteration of the 
default-mode network measured with longitudinal resting-state fMRI over thirty days. J 
Neurotrauma. 2015;32:327–341. 

116.   Laketa D, Savić J, Bjelobaba I, Lavrnja I, Vasić V, Stojiljković M, et al. Brain Injury 

Alters Ectonucleotidase Activities and Adenine Nucleotide Levels in Rat Serum. J Med 
Biochem. 2015;34:215–222. 

117.   Lusardi T. Adenosine Neuromodulation and Traumatic Brain Injury. Curr 

Neuropharmacol. 2009;7:228–237. 

118.   Clark RSB, Carcillo JA, Kochanek PM, Obrist WD, Jackson EK, Mi Z, et al. 

Cerebrospinal Fluid Adenosine Concentration and Uncoupling of Cerebral Blood Flow 
and Oxidative Metabolism after Severe Head Injury in Humans. Neurosurgery. 
1997;41:1284–1292. 

119.   Headrick JP, Bendall MR, Faden AI, Vink R. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and 

Metabolism Dissociation of Adenosine Levels from Bioenergetic State in Experimental 
Brain Trauma: Potential Role in Secondary Injury. 1994. 

120.   Cui M, Bai X, Li T, Chen F, Dong Q, Zhao Y, et al. Decreased Extracellular Adenosine 

Levels Lead to Loss of Hypoxia-Induced Neuroprotection after Repeated Episodes of 
Exposure to Hypoxia. PLoS One. 2013;8. 

121.   Classen JB, Mergner WJ, Costa M. ATP hydrolysis by ischemic Mitochondria. J Cell 

Physiol. 1989;141:53–59. 

122.   Pandya JD, Leung LY, Yang X, Flerlage WJ, Gilsdorf JS, Deng-Bryant Y, et al. 

Comprehensive Profile of Acute Mitochondrial Dysfunction in a Preclinical Model of 

52 

 
Severe Penetrating TBI. Front Neurol. 2019;10:605. 

123.   Gadisseux P, Sica DA, Ward JD, Becker DP. Severe Hypophosphatemia after Head 

Injury. Neurosurgery. 1985;17:35–40. 

124.   Porter C, Sousse LE, Irick R, Schryver E, Klein GL. Interactions of Phosphate 
Metabolism With Serious Injury, Including Burns. JBMR Plus. 2017;1:59–65. 

125.   Rybak ME, Pao CI, Pfeiffer CM. Determination of urine caffeine and its metabolites by 
use of high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry: Estimating 
dietary caffeine exposure and metabolic phenotyping in population studies. Anal Bioanal 
Chem. 2014;406:771–784. 

126.   Callahan MM, Robertson RS, Arnaud MJ, Branfman AR, McComish MF, Yesair DW. 
Human metabolism of [1-methyl-14C]- and [2-14C]caffeine after oral administration. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 1982;10:417–423. 

127.   Bruce M, Scott N, Lader M, Marks V. The psychopharmacological and 

electrophysiological effects of single doses of caffeine in healthy human subjects. Br J 
Clin Pharmacol. 1986;22:81–87. 

128.   Bonati M, Latini R, Galletti F, Young JF, Tognoni G, Garattini S. Caffeine disposition 

after oral doses. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1982;32:98–106. 

129.   Viña, Amparo Gimeno, Juan S J. Mechanism of Free Radical Production in Exhaustive 
Exercise in Humans and Rats; Role of Xanthine Oxidase and Protection by Allopurinol. 
IUBMB Life (International Union Biochem Mol Biol Life). 2000;49:539–544. 

130.   Hellsten Y, Frandsen U, Ørthenblad N, Sjødin B, Richter EA. Xanthine oxidase in human 

skeletal muscle following eccentric exercise: A role in inflammation. J Physiol. 
1997;498:239–248. 

131.   Miesel R, Zuber M. Elevated levels of xanthine oxidase in serum of patients with 

inflammatory and autoimmune rheumatic diseases. Inflammation. 1993;17:551–561. 
132.   Solaroglu I, Okutan O, Kaptanoglu E, Beskonakli E, Kilinc K. Increased xanthine oxidase 

activity after traumatic brain injury in rats. J Clin Neurosci. 2005;12:273–275. 

133.   Petraglia AL, Winkler EA, Bailes JE. Stuck at the bench: Potential natural neuroprotective 

compounds for concussion. Surg Neurol Int. 2011;2:146. 

134.   Sachse KT, Jackson EK, Wisniewski SR, Gillespie DG, Puccio AM, Clark RSB, et al. 

Increases in cerebrospinal fluid caffeine concentration are associated with favorable 
outcome after severe traumatic brain injury in humans. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
2008;28:395–401. 

135.   Chen JF, Xu K, Petzer JP, Staal R, Xu YH, Beilstein M, et al. Neuroprotection by caffeine 
and A(2A) adenosine receptor inactivation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci. 
2001;21:RC143–RC143. 

136.   Kalda A, Yu L, Oztas E, Chen JF. Novel neuroprotection by caffeine and adenosine A2A 

receptor antagonists in animal models of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Sci. 2006;248:9–
15. 

137.   Ritchie K, Carrière I, De Mendonça A, Portet F, Dartigues JF, Rouaud O, et al. The 

neuroprotective effects of caffeine: A prospective population study (the Three City Study). 
Neurology. 2007;69:536–545. 

138.   Rosso A, Mossey J, Lippa CF. Caffeine: Neuroprotective functions in cognition and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2008;23:417–422. 

139.   Lara DR. Caffeine, mental health, and psychiatric disorders. J. Alzheimer’s Dis., vol. 20, 

IOS Press; 2010. p. S239-48. 

53 

 
140.   Lusardi TA, Lytle NK, Szybala C, Boison D. Caffeine prevents acute mortality after TBI 

in rats without increased morbidity. Exp Neurol. 2012;234:161–168. 

141.   Li W, Dai S, An J, Li P, Chen X, Xiong R, et al. Chronic but not acute treatment with 
caffeine attenuates traumatic brain injury in the mouse cortical impact model. 
Neuroscience. 2008;151:1198–1207. 

142.   Dash PK, Moore AN, Moody MR, Treadwell R, Felix JL, Clifton GL. Post-Trauma 
Administration of Caffeine Plus Ethanol Reduces Contusion Volume and Improves 
Working Memory in Rats. J Neurotrauma. 2004;21:1573–1583. 

143.   Boison D, Lusardi TA. Survival and injury outcome after TBI: Influence of pre- and post-

exposure to caffeine. Portland; 2012. 

144.   Badaam KM. A Study Of Energy Drinks Consumption Practices Among Football Players 

In Aurangabad District Of Maharashtra In India. IOSR J Dent Med Sci. 2013;4:24–27. 

145.   Bonci L. ‘Energy’ Drinks: Help, Harm or Hype? Sport Sci Exch. 2002;84. 
146.   Benedict C, Parker TM. Baseline Concussion Testing:  A Comparison between Collision, 

Contact, and Non-Contact Sports. 2014. 

147.   Eckner JT, Wang J, Nelson LD, Bancroft R, Pohorence M, He X, et al. Effect of Routine 

Sport Participation on Short-Term Clinical Neurological Outcomes: A Comparison of 
Non-Contact, Contact, and Collision Sport Athletes. Sport Med. 2020;50:1027–1038. 

148.   Mrazik M, Naidu D, Manning DE, Brooks BL. Does game participation impact cognition 

and symptoms in elite football players? Clin J Sport Med. 2016;26:432–434. 
149.   Bailes JE, Petraglia AL, Omalu BI, Nauman E, Talavage T. Role of subconcussion in 
repetitive mild traumatic brain injury in: Journal of Neurosurgery Volume 119 Issue 5 
(2013). J Neurosurg . 2013:1235–1245. 

150.   Gajawelli N, Lao Y, Apuzzo MLJ, Romano R, Liu C, Tsao S, et al. Neuroimaging 

changes in the brain in contact versus noncontact sport athletes using diffusion tensor 
imaging. World Neurosurg. 2013;80:824–828. 

151.   Chun IY, Mao X, Breedlove EL, Leverenz LJ, Nauman EA, Talavage TM. DTI Detection 

of Longitudinal WM Abnormalities Due to Accumulated Head Impacts. Dev 
Neuropsychol. 2015;40:92–97. 

152.   HOFFMAN JR, KANG J, RATAMESS NA, FAIGENBAUM AD. Biochemical and 

Hormonal Responses during an Intercollegiate Football Season. Med Sci Sport Exerc. 
2005;37:1237–1241. 

153.   Nauman EA, Breedlove KM, Breedlove EL, Talavage TM, Robinson ME, Leverenz LJ. 

Post-Season Neurophysiological Deficits Assessed by ImPACT and fMRI in Athletes 
Competing in American Football. Dev Neuropsychol. 2015;40:85–91. 

154.   Sanders JL, Han Y, Urbina MF, Systrom DM, Waxman AB. Metabolomics of exercise 
pulmonary hypertension are intermediate between controls and patients with pulmonary 
arterial hypertension. https://doi.org/10.1177/2045894019882623. 

155.   Gaugg MT, Bruderer T, Nowak N, Eiffert L, Martinez-Lozano Sinues P, Kohler M, et al. 
Mass-Spectrometric Detection of Omega-Oxidation Products of Aliphatic Fatty Acids in 
Exhaled Breath. Anal Chem. 2017;89:10329–10334. 

156.   Rocchiccioli F, Cartier PH, Aubourg P, Bougnères PF. Mass spectrometric identification 

of 2-hydroxy-sebacic acid in the urines of patients with neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy 
and zellweger syndrome. Biol Mass Spectrom. 1986;13:315–318. 

157.   Johnson B, Neuberger T, Gay M, Hallett M, Slobounov S. Effects of subconcussive head 

trauma on the default mode network of the brain. J Neurotrauma. 2014;31:1907–1913. 

54 

 
158.   Shultz SR, MacFabe DF, Foley KA, Taylor R, Cain DP. Sub-concussive brain injury in 
the Long-Evans rat induces acute neuroinflammation in the absence of behavioral 
impairments. Behav Brain Res. 2012;229:145–152. 

159.   Gavett BE, Stern RA, McKee AC. Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy: A Potential Late 
Effect of Sport-Related Concussive and Subconcussive Head Trauma. Clin Sports Med. 
2011;30:179–188. 

160.   Winston CN, Noël A, Neustadtl A, Parsadanian M, Barton DJ, Chellappa D, et al. 

Dendritic spine loss and chronic white matter inflammation in a mouse model of highly 
repetitive head trauma. Am J Pathol. 2016;186:552–567. 

161.   Shohami E, Gati I, Beit-Yannai E, Trembovler V, Kohen R. Closed head injury in the rat 
induces whole body oxidative stress: Overall reducing antioxidant profile. J Neurotrauma. 
1999;16:365–376. 

162.   Fischer TD, Hylin MJ, Zhao J, Moore AN, Waxham MN, Dash PK. Altered 

Mitochondrial Dynamics and TBI Pathophysiology. Front Syst Neurosci. 2016;10:29. 
163.   Xiong Y, Mahmood A, Chopp M. Current understanding of neuroinflammation after 
traumatic brain injury and cell-based therapeutic opportunities. Chinese J Traumatol - 
English Ed. 2018;21:137–151. 

164.   Svaldi DO, Joshi C, Robinson ME, Shenk TE, Abbas K, Nauman EA, et al. 

Cerebrovascular Reactivity Alterations in Asymptomatic High School Football Players. 
Dev Neuropsychol. 2015;40:80–84. 

165.   Svaldi DO, Joshi C, McCuen EC, Music JP, Hannemann R, Leverenz LJ, et al. 

Accumulation of high magnitude acceleration events predicts cerebrovascular reactivity 
changes in female high school soccer athletes. Brain Imaging Behav. 2018. 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-018-9983-0. 

166.   Poole VN, Abbas K, Shenk TE, Breedlove EL, Breedlove KM, Robinson ME, et al. MR 

Spectroscopic Evidence of Brain Injury in the Non-Diagnosed Collision Sport Athlete. 
Dev Neuropsychol. 2014;39:459–473. 

167.   Robinson ME, Shenk TE, Breedlove EL, Leverenz LJ, Nauman EA, Talavage TM. The 

role of location of subconcussive head impacts in fMRI brain activation change. Dev 
Neuropsychol. 2015;40:74–79. 

168.   Shenk TE, Robinson ME, Svaldi DO, Abbas K, Breedlove KM, Leverenz LJ, et al. fMRI 
of Visual Working Memory in High School Football Players. Dev Neuropsychol. 
2015;40:63–68. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
