A Virtual Obstacle Course within Diverse Sensory Environments

Zhu Wang
New York University

Anat Lubetzky
New York University

Charles Hendee
Tactonic
Technologies

Marta
Gospodarek
New York University

Ken Perlin
New York University

0
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
1
4
0
0
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
We developed a novel assessment platform with untethered virtual
reality, 3-dimensional sounds, and pressure sensing floor mat to
help assess the walking balance and negotiation of obstacles given
diverse sensory load and/or cognitive load. The platform provides
an immersive 3D city-like scene with anticipated/unanticipated
virtual obstacles. Participants negotiate the obstacles with perturba-
tions of: auditory load by spatial audio, cognitive load by a memory
task, and visual flow by generated by avatars movements at various
amounts and speeds. A VR headset displays the scenes while provid-
ing real-time position and orientation of the participant’s head. A
pressure-sensing walkway senses foot pressure and visualizes it in
a heatmap. The system helps to assess walking balance via pressure
dynamics per foot, success rate of crossing obstacles, available re-
sponse time as well as head kinematics in response to obstacles and
multitasking. Based on the assessment, specific balance training
and fall prevention program can be prescribed.

KEYWORDS
pressure sensor, obstacle, multitasking, walking balance, 3D audio

1 INTRODUCTION
Tripping over an obstacle and multitasking are two common causes
of falls, and they are particularly challenging for aging adults[2,
3]. Often, aging adults fall while stepping onto a curb or over an
obstacle either because they did not notice the obstacle or could not
clear it safely. Aging adults may also have difficulty walking safely
when engaged in a secondary task such as memorizing words[5].
Immersive VR environments can simulate real-life scenarios and
help clinicians assess participants’ balance conditions under con-
trolled functional contexts[6].The functional contexts include dif-
ferent environments in which aging adults can experience sensory
overload, such as a busy street. Difficulty in complex environments
may prevent aging adults from participating in social activities. In a
laboratory VR setup, participants can practice in a safe environment
with no fear of actually experiencing a fall. Highly controllable and
repeatable tasks in VR scenarios, together with the ability to create
sensory load and cognitive load, may become a viable assessment
of fall risk. Our system aims at assessing subjects’ gait and ability
to clear obstacles.

2 SYSTEM DESIGN AND ASSESSMENT
We use the HTC Vive Pro with a wireless adapter to accomplish the
untethered experience. With Vive trackers attached to the ankles,
the system can track the participants’ feet and detect if the feet
collide with the virtual obstacles. Participants’ feet are represented
by human foot graphic models in VR. Thus, the participants will
see that the foot models substitute their own feet. (see Figure 1)

Figure 1: Front view and side view of the system setup, first
persion view in VR, and visualization for pressure.

The VR scene is a city-like scene which contains urban blocks
with vehicles moving around, randomly generated buildings, virtual
people on the street walking from one side of a sidewalk to the other
side, and virtual obstacles generated on the sidewalk. Participants
can cross virtual obstacles while walk along the virtual sidewalk
during a 60-second session. We have tested the length of the walk-
way from 5 meters up to 15 meters due to the space requirement for
a reasonable range of walking and the tracking capacity of the VR
system. During the experiments, real-time position/orientation of
the head and ankles, and pressure variances are obtained by the VR
headset, Vive trackers, and the floor sensors respectively, so that we
can further compare the head kinematics, foot clearance, obstacle
negotiation strategy, success rate of crossing, and weight shifting
under different intensity levels during participants’ walking such
as empty/busy street, and silent/bustling sound.

2.1 Virtual Obstacles
We assess subjects’ balance when the subjects are instructed to
cross the anticipated or unanticipated obstacles in the scene with
auditory and visual stimuli. Clinicians can adjust the height of the

 
 
 
 
 
 
obstacles among 25mm, 50mm, 75mm, 100mm, 125mm, 150mm,
and 190mm. We chose 190mm to be the maximum height, because
it is considered a standard stair based on the Stairbuilders and
Manufacturers Association. The Vive trackers, which are mounted
on the outside of the ankles, measure foot clearance in real-time.
The system provides the participants with auditory feedback for
success or failure of clearing obstacles.

In the anticipated obstacles experiments, all the obstacles are
generated with selected height at the start of the scene. Participants
can have enough time to plan the obstacle negotiation strategy. In
the unanticipated obstacles experiments, all the obstacles are gener-
ated with selected height but at random time. Participants will not
be able to predict how far or when an obstacle will appear in front
of them. They have constrained time to respond to the suddenly
appeared obstacles by adapting immediately to a new strategy and
executing it to avoid tripping over and maintain a balanced gait
pattern. In the unanticipated obstacle condition, we also quantify
the available response time (ART)[4], which is the interval between
the presence of obstacles and before the participant reaching it.
The ART is correlated with the participant’s walking speed and
distance of presence in front of the participant. People with better
walking balance ability usually have less ART, so we can use ART
as a metric to quantify the walking balance ability.

2.2 Multitasking
In daily living, it is common that people do more than one task at the
same time. We walk and talk, walk and try to remember something,
walk and text, etc. Maintaining a stable gait while dual-tasking be-
comes more challenging for aging adults[5]. Cognitive interference
while walking was found to reduce gait speed and increase gait
variability (i.e. stride to stride fluctuations) in older adults and indi-
viduals with neurological deficits. Moreover, a correlation between
increased risk of falls and changes in attention-demands designated
to walking was found in older adults’ walking while talking [1, 8].
Our system has a dual-task paradigm where participants are
asked to walk and cross the obstacles while listening to a list of
sentences containing numbers. The participants need to remember
the numbers at the end of a 60-second walk. During each of the 60-
second session, participants will hear 7 sentences randomly selected
from 45 pre-recorded sentences. We can then quantify changes in
gait parameters and obstacle-clearing under the dual-task condition.

3 PRESSURE SENSING AND SOUND
The Tactonic Technologies (TT) sensor system is a force sensing
matrix with sensing nodes distributed at regular 0.5 inch intervals
across the grid. Each sensing node-distributed over the aforemen-
tioned 0.5 inch intervals-senses 12 bits of pressure from 50g of
pressure up to 10kg of pressure. Each sensor system is 24 inches
by 16.5 inches of active sensing area. Multiple sensor systems can
be arranged together to become a pressure sensing walkway. The
pressure-sensing walkway allow us to look at balance parameters
for each cycle of gait between heel contact and toe off- center of
force, force distribution between feet, step length/width, stride
length, and foot angle. When comparing to motion capture sys-
tems such as widely used passive optical MoCap system, pressure
sensing technology has several unique advantages. It quantifies

the forces between the foot and ground during the stance phase by
measuring the center of force and force distribution over time. The
lower cost and easier setup further increase the potential outreach.
The implementation of sounds enhances the realism of the envi-
ronments and the sense of immersion[7], and allows to examine if
participants’ performance deteriorates with the presence of com-
plex sounds. Soundscapes were designed using 3D audio technology,
particularly dynamic binaural rendering and Ambisonics to enable
natural sound changes depending on the position of the participant
in the scene. They consist of two layers: ambience (background)
sounds, providing general information about the environment the
participant is in; and sound effects representing each moving object.
Soundscapes were designed in 3D using HRTF rendering and/or
Ambisonics technology to enable natural sound changes depending
on the position of the participant in the scene. We have two levels
of complexity/intensity. The levels vary in the number of sound
sources in the scene, loudness, and spectral content.

4 CONTRIBUTION
This novel system combines head-mounted display, 3D audio, head
kinematics tracking, ankle tracking, and foot pressure sensing. The
systems can be used to detect difficulty in obstacle-clearing when
the obstacles are anticipated or unanticipated. We can then assess
whether changes in performance are observed with: visual load, au-
ditory load and/or cognitive load. This specific assessment can then
guide fall prevention programs individualized to the participant’s
needs. The low cost of our platform will increase the outreach
to communities that otherwise have limited access to such tech-
nology. A gap exists in the availability of ecologically valid but
low-cost technology that can be widely available for assessment
and treatment of participants with balance problems and fall risk.
Our platform offers a unique solution to this problem.

REFERENCES
[1] Olivier Beauchet, C Annweiler, Véronique Dubost, Gilles Allali, RW Kressig, S
Bridenbaugh, G Berrut, Frédéric Assal, and Francois Richard Herrmann. 2009.
Stops walking when talking: a predictor of falls in older adults? European journal
of neurology 16, 7 (2009), 786–795.

[2] Astrid Bergland, Anne Marie Pettersen, and Knut Laake. 1998. Falls reported
among elderly Norwegians living at home. Physiotherapy Research International 3,
3 (1998), 164–174.

[3] Bastiaan R Bloem, Vibeke V Valkenburg, Mathilde Slabbekoorn, and Mirjam D
Willemsen. 2001. The Multiple Tasks Test: development and normal strategies.
Gait & posture 14, 3 (2001), 191–202.

[4] Shlomit Eyal, Ilan Kurz, Anat Mirelman, Inbal Maidan, Nir Giladi, and Jeffrey M
Hausdorff. 2019. Successful Negotiation of Anticipated and Unanticipated Ob-
stacles in Young and Older Adults: Not All Is as Expected. Gerontology (2019),
1–10.

[5] Ulman Lindenberger, Michael Marsiske, and Paul B Baltes. 2000. Memorizing while
walking: increase in dual-task costs from young adulthood to old age. Psychology
and aging 15, 3 (2000), 417.

[6] Dara Meldrum, Susan Herdman, Roisin Vance, Deirdre Murray, Kareena Malone,
Douglas Duffy, Aine Glennon, and Rory McConn-Walsh. 2015. Effectiveness
of Conventional Versus Virtual Reality–Based Balance Exercises in Vestibular
Rehabilitation for Unilateral Peripheral Vestibular Loss: Results of a Randomized
Controlled Trial. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 96, 7 (2015),
1319–1328.

[7] Rolf Nordahl and Niels Christian Nilsson. 2014. The sound of being there: presence
and interactive audio in immersive virtual reality. In Oxford Handbook of Interactive
Audio. Oxford University Press.

[8] Shmuel Springer, Nir Giladi, Chava Peretz, Galit Yogev, Ely S Simon, and Jeffrey M
Hausdorff. 2006. Dual-tasking effects on gait variability: The role of aging, falls,
and executive function. Movement disorders: official journal of the Movement
Disorder Society 21, 7 (2006), 950–957.

