Deep Learning for Wireless Communications: An
Emerging Interdisciplinary Paradigm

Linglong Dai, Ruicheng Jiao, Fumiyuki Adachi, H. Vincent Poor, and Lajos Hanzo

1

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

2
1

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
2
5
9
5
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Wireless communications are envisioned to bring
about dramatic changes in the future, with a variety of emerging
applications, such as virtual reality (VR), Internet of things (IoT),
etc., becoming a reality. However, these compelling applications
have imposed many new challenges, including unknown channel
models, low-latency requirement in large-scale super-dense net-
works, etc. The amazing success of deep learning (DL) in various
ﬁelds, particularly in computer science, has recently stimulated
increasing interest in applying it to address those challenges.
Hence, in this review, a pair of dominant methodologies of using
DL for wireless communications are investigated. The ﬁrst one is
DL-based architecture design, which breaks the classical model-
based block design rule of wireless communications in the past
decades. The second one is DL-based algorithm design, which
will be illustrated by several examples in a series of typical
techniques conceived for 5G and beyond. Their principles, key
features, and performance gains will be discussed. Furthermore,
open problems and future research opportunities will also be
pointed out, highlighting the interplay between DL and wireless
communications. We expect that this review can stimulate more
novel
ideas and exciting contributions for intelligent wireless
communications.

I. INTRODUCTION

The way we live and work has been fundamentally changed
by wireless communications over the past few decades. Thanks
to the rapid development of the mobile Internet, billions of
people all over the world are wirelessly connected through
mobile phones for a wide range of daily activities, including
social networking, information searching, etc. Historically, the
prosperity of wireless communications has relied on its own
model-based design paradigms, where accurate mathematical
models and expert knowledge are required. However,
the
demanding requirements of the emerging applications, such
as communicating under excessively complex scenarios with
unknown channel models, low-latency requirement in large-
scale super-dense networks [1], etc., are hard to be addressed
by the traditional model-based wireless techniques. To be

L. Dai and R. Jiao are with the Beijing National Research Center for
Information Science and Technology (BNRist) as well as the Department of
Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China (E-mails:
daill@tsinghua.edu.cn, jiaors16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).

F. Adachi is with the Research Organization of Electrical Communication,

Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan (E-mail: adachi@ecei.tohoku.ac.jp).

H. V. Poor is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton
University, Princeton, 08544 New Jersey, USA (E-mail: poor@princeton.edu).
L. Hanzo is with the School of Electronics and Computer Sci-
ence, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ Southampton, UK (E-mail:
lh@ecs.soton.ac.uk).

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China for Outstanding Young Scholars (Grant No. 61722109), the Royal
Academy of Engineering through the UK-China Industry Academia Partner-
ship Programme Scheme (Grant No. UK-CIAPP\49), and the U.S. National
Science Foundation under Grant ECCS-1647198. L. Hanzo would also like
to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the European Research Council’s
Advanced Fellow Grant.

more speciﬁc, when the communication scenario cannot be
readily described mathematically, either due to the excessively
complex environment such as the underwater environment,
or owing to the non-linearity imposed by the unavoidable
hardware impairments [2],
the mathematical model based
communication blocks, such as channel estimation, channel
equalization, etc., will fail to accurately model the reality.
Moreover, as emerging large-scale communication schemes
(massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) relying on a
large number of antennas at the base station, massive Internet
of things (IoT) scenarios connecting numerous users/devices,
etc.) become more popular [1], the escalating complexity of
their signal processing algorithms may preclude achieving low
latency. Thus, new paradigms have to be introduced to address
the above-mentioned challenges.

Deep learning (DL), mainly realized by deep neural net-
works (DNNs), has achieved impressive success with excel-
lent results in diverse ﬁelds, such as image recognition [3],
mastering complex games like Go [4], etc. This success has
stimulated increasing interest
in the application of DL in
wireless communications. Speciﬁcally, DL is a powerful tool
capable of learning the intricate inter-relationships of variables,
especially those that are hard to accurately describe using
mathematical models [3]. This enables us to design wireless
communication systems without the knowledge of accurate
mathematical models, which is impossible in the context of
existing wireless design principles. Moreover, for the family
of light-weight DNNs having limited size, passing the inputs
through them only requires a limited number of operations,
which makes the DL methods computationally efﬁcient. Even
for highly complex DNNs which may be required for solving
large-scale communication problems, the distributed parallel
architectures and the accelerating tools of DL [3] are expected
to result in a high computational efﬁciency. Thus, DNNs are
attractive for solving large-scale wireless problems associated
with numerous antennas/users/devices.

Inspired by the advantages mentioned above, DL has been
widely used for wireless communications. For instance, the
state-of-the-arts in utilizing DL for physical layer communi-
cations are summarized in [5]. Moreover, [6] and [7] compre-
hensively survey the applications of DL in designing IoT and
5G cellular networks at various layers of the protocol stack,
respectively. In contrast to the above reviews which eloquently
survey the relevant literatures, we provide guidance on how to
apply DL for wireless communications by inducing a pair of
design methodologies, namely DL-based architecture design
and DL-based algorithm design. Particularly, DL-based archi-
tecture design utilizes DL to reformulate the traditional block-
based communication design principle. This methodology is

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

TABLE I
FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN WIRELESS TRANSMISSION AND DL

Wireless transmission

Mathematical model

Needs accurate mathematical model

Design approach

Interpretation
Generalization ability
Key challenges

Optimizing each module separately
using mathematical derivation
Intuitive
Widely applicable
Unrealistic assumptions

DL
Does not rely on accurate
mathematical model
Training the parameters
of the DNN as a whole
Non-intuitive
Application-speciﬁc
Too many parameters

ﬁrstly exempliﬁed by DL-based receiver design, followed by
the more revolutionary DL-based joint
transceiver design.
Moreover, DL-based algorithm design utilizes DL to speed
up the algorithmic processing at a guaranteed performance.
To further explain it, DL-based transmission algorithm design
and DL-based optimization algorithm design are illustrated
by several 5G-style examples. Their principles, key features,
and performance gains will be discussed to shed light on
these methodologies. More importantly, the intricate interplay
between DL and wireless communications is highlighted.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
brieﬂy summarizes the relationship between wireless commu-
nications and DL. Sections III and IV detailedly investigate
the intricacies of DL-based architecture design and DL-based
algorithm design, respectively. Open problems and future
research opportunities are provided in Section V, where the
interplay between DL and wireless communications is further
augmented. Finally, tangible conclusions and the further im-
plications are offered in Section VI.

II. DIFFERENT PARADIGMS OF WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS AND DL

Although there is an explosive proliferation of utilizing DL
in wireless communications, DL is very different from wireless
communications, especially from wireless transmission, which
is summarized in Table I. Speciﬁcally, wireless transmission
relies on accurate (but often simpliﬁed) mathematical models,
such as the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel
model, to design channel estimation algorithms or channel
feedback schemes, etc. However, DL usually does not rely
on such mathematical models of its tasks, and is particularly
beneﬁcial in the absence of the accurate mathematical models.
Moreover, traditional wireless transmission tends to design
each module of the communication system separately using
mathematical derivations, while DL usually trains all
the
parameters of the DNN as a whole. As a beneﬁt of their
mathematical models, classic methods of wireless transmission
are often intuitive with plausible explanations and are widely
those of DL are sometimes non-
applicable. By contrast,
intuitive, may even be hard to interpret, and application-
speciﬁc, which means that different neural networks have to
be trained for different tasks. Besides, wireless transmission
often relies on idealized and simpliﬁed assumptions in their
mathematical model, while DL may have an excessive number
of parameters, making its training process time-consuming.

Despite the signiﬁcant differences between wireless trans-
mission and DL, in this paper we focus on intrinsically amal-
gamating their beneﬁt, while circumventing their weaknesses

by portraying their profound interplay in the following sec-
tions. Speciﬁcally, in Section III we show that DL is capable
of developing a new design paradigm for wireless transmission
systems by introducing [8]. Furthermore, in Section IV we
demonstrate based on [9] that the expert knowledge from
wireless transmission can in turn help the development of DL
techniques.

III. DL-BASED ARCHITECTURE DESIGN FOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS

In this section, we focus on DL-based architecture design
for intelligent wireless communication systems. Following the
order spanning from designing the receiver to designing the
whole system, we ﬁrstly introduce the DL-based receiver
design, and then present the more revolutionary DL-based joint
transceiver design. Particularly, DL-based receiver design in-
vokes DL for jointly optimizing several blocks of the receiver,
which shows a beneﬁcial performance gain in terms of the
bit error rate (BER) when non-linear effects are encountered.
By contrast, DL-based joint transceiver design optimizes the
entire point-to-point communication system as an end-to-end
autoencoder, which results in a block error rate (BLER) that
is lower than that of the traditional system using binary phase
shift keying (BPSK).

A. DL-Based Receiver Design

For several decades, the block-based design principle has
dominated wireless communication system design, where the
communication system can be split into several independent
functional blocks, including source coding, channel coding,
etc., as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Each block is optimized with
the aid of mathematical model and expert knowledge, such as
the optimal design of channel estimation which heavily relies
on channel model and estimation theory. This block-based
structure provides convenience for system building, but
it
cannot cope with excessively complex scenario when channel
model is unknown.

To deal with the unknown channel model when non-linear
noise is introduced, a DL-based orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing (OFDM) receiver is proposed in [2] to learn the
channel behaviors and decode the signals. Moreover, channel
estimation, channel equalization, and channel decoding are
jointly designed in the receiver using DNN, which yields an
architectural revolution for wireless communication systems.
To be more speciﬁc, for OFDM systems suffering from a
high peak-to-average-power-ratio (PAPR), peak-clipping and
ﬁltering are usually used to alleviate the impact of PAPR.
However, non-linear clipping noise will be introduced, which

3

Fig. 1. From the traditional communication system to the DNN-based communication system: a) classic communication system consisting of many blocks;
b) DNN-based communication system relying on one single block.

makes the equivalent channel more difﬁcult to describe mathe-
matically. Thus, mathematical model based channel estimation
and equalization may become inaccurate, which imposes a
certain performance loss during signal detection. To solve this
problem, a fully connected DNN is embedded into an OFDM
receiver for signal detection in [2], where the ReLU function
is used as the activation function in the hidden layers, and the
sigmoid function is utilized in the last layer to map the result
to the interval of [0,1]. In the training process, the original
frequency-domain bit streams and their contaminated versions
received after passing through the channel are used as labels
and inputs, respectively. After that, the bit streams comprising
the unknown frequency-domain signals are fed into the trained
DNN, and a threshold is applied to ﬁnally reconstruct the
transmitted bits. Simulation results show that once the non-
linear effects have been introduced by clipping,
the DL-
based OFDM receiver exhibits a beneﬁcial performance gain,
provided that the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) is in excess of
15 dB [2].

B. DL-Based Transceiver Design

In contrast to the DL-based receiver design which only opti-
mizes the receiver using DNN, a more revolutionary paradigm
has been proposed recently to jointly design the whole point-
to-point communication system (including both the transmitter
and the receiver) as a single end-to-end autoencoder under
the DL framework [8], which is completely different from
the classic block-based design principle. This completely
new paradigm of DNN-based communication system design
is inspired by the resemblance of wireless communication
systems and the autoencoder, both of which aim at equating
the input message s and the output message s(cid:48). The DNN-
based communication system is shown in Fig. 1 (b), where the
transmitted signal s corresponds to one of the k-bit symbols
from an alphabet, which is encoded as an M-dimensional one-

Fig. 2. Block error rate (BLER) comparison between the block-based
communication system and the DNN-based communication system.

hot vector (M = 2k) and used as the input of the autoencoder.
After passing through the transmitter composed of a series
of hidden layers and a normalization layer for meeting the
energy constraint, an n-dimensional vector x is generated as
the encoded signal. Then, a Gaussian noise layer serves as
the AWGN channel to contaminate the original signal x to
become y, which will be fed into the receiver having multiple
hidden layers and terminated by a softmax layer to output the
reconstruction probabilities of all possible symbols. Finally,
the symbol associated with the highest probability will be
chosen as the recovered signal s(cid:48). As illustrated in Fig. 2,
simulation results generated using Tensorﬂow [3] show that the
DNN-based communication system outperforms the traditional
system using BPSK in terms of its BLER [8], because the new
scheme is capable of jointly optimizing the communication

Source codingChannel codingModulationSource decodingChannel decodingDe-modulationChannel estimationChannel equlizationS'SS'S(a)(b)Channel Traditional transceiver−2024681010−510−410−310−210−1100Eb/N0 (dB)BLER  Classical communication systemDNN−based communication system4

Fig. 3. The t t h layer of the neural network utilized for DL-based AMP algorithm.

system as a whole rather than optimizing individual blocks in
Fig. 1 (a) in isolation. This new design paradigm allows us to
possibly replace all baseband components of the block-based
communication system of Fig. 1 (a) by a single DNN of Fig. 1
(b) , which can be trained by exploiting the seemingly inﬁnite
computation and storage resources of the cloud.

IV. DL-BASED ALGORITHM DESIGN FOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS

Due to its convenient implementation relying on parallel
architectures and the powerful learning capability, DL can also
be used to speed up the algorithmic processing at a potentially
improved performance and reduced latency. In this section, we
will introduce the methodology of DL-based algorithm design
for wireless communications, which will be illustrated from
two aspects, i.e., DL-based transmission algorithm design and
DL-based optimization algorithm design, using several typical
techniques conceived for 5G and beyond, including mmWave
massive MIMO, LDPC, NOMA, and UDN.

A. DL-Based Transmission Algorithm Design

Since reliable transmission is one of the most important
tasks in wireless communications, we will introduce DL-based
transmission algorithm design in this part. Following the order
of signal processing, i.e., steps commencing from the inner
receiver to the outer receiver, channel estimation is carried out
before channel decoding. Therefore, we investigate DL-based
sparse channel estimation for mmWave massive MIMO ﬁrst,
and then introduce DL-based belief propagation for LDPC
decoding, both of which constitute typical 5G-style techniques.
1) DL-Based Sparse Channel Estimation for MmWave Mas-
sive MIMO: MmWave massive MIMO is one of the most
promising techniques in 5G conceived for largely increasing
the data rates [10], [11]. It requires accurate CSI to real-
ize multi-user precoding, decoding, etc. Since the mmWave
channel is sparse in the angular domain [10], [11], compres-
sive sensing algorithms have been widely used for sparse
mmWave channel estimation, such as approximate message
passing (AMP). However, AMP requires many iterations of
linear residual updating and non-linear shrinkage operation to
converge, which makes it difﬁcult to guarantee both reliable
performance and reduced latency at the same time.

To address this issue, a DL-based AMP algorithm has
been proposed in [9] to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of
iterations required under a speciﬁc performance constraint.
As shown in Fig. 3, each iteration of the AMP algorithm
is unfolded to a single layer of the DNN, where the linear
residual updating is accurately modeled by the linear opera-
tions of the DNN, and the non-linear shrinkage operation is
realized by the activation function in the DNN. Additionally,
unlike the classical AMP algorithm which ﬁxes the parameters
of the shrinkage operation in advance, the DL-based AMP
actually learns those parameters during the training process.
It has been shown by simulation results that the DL-based
AMP converges faster and outperforms both the AMP and
the iterative shrinkage/threshold algorithm (ISTA) in terms
of its average normalized mean square error (NMSE). The
improved performance is partly attributed to the introduction
of the Onsager correction into AMP [9], and partly contributed
by the DNN-aided learning of optimal shrinkage parameters.
Thus, expert knowledge gleaned from other ﬁelds may in
turn help to enhance the DL performance. More importantly,
the authors of [9] revealed basic principles of designing new
DNN architectures suitable for wireless communications by
unfolding the iterations of the existing algorithms into layers
of a DNN. This is especially useful when the complexity
of the existing iterative algorithms is excessive for practical
implementation of massive communications with large-scale
signal processing.

2) DL-Based Belief Propagation for LDPC Decoding:
In 2017, low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding has been
chosen to replace the 4G turbo coding as the new channel
coding scheme in the most important broadband mode of the
5G standard. This can be attributed to the excellent perfor-
mance of LDPC coding operating close to the Shannon limit
in AWGN channels. However, due to the detection effect of
ﬁltering, oversampling, and multi-user interference in practical
systems [12], the received signals may become contaminated
by colored noise, which is hard to mathematically model and
would impose an obvious performance loss on the LDPC
decoding performance.

To solve this problem, Liang et al. [12] modiﬁed the
widely used belief propagation (BP) algorithm by cascading
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to the standard BP

txtvtr1tb+tBFully connected layer(Weight:     )22ttcMa=tvtAFully connected layer(Weight:     )Activation function(;)ttfcr-tB1t+x1t+vyydecoder, which succeeds in outputting a more accurate noise
estimate from the decoding result of the BP decoder. In the
BP-CNN decoder, the received signal y will ﬁrstly be fed
into the standard BP decoder to obtain an initial estimate of
the transmitted signal ˆx, which will then be subtracted from
y to obtain the estimated noise ˆn = y − ˆx. The following
trained CNN exploits this estimated noise ˆn and outputs a
more accurate noise estimate ˜n, which will be fed back to the
BP decoder and then subtracted from the received signal y to
obtain a more “pure signal” ˜y. A new round of operations will
be applied to the newly generated ˜y, and iterating between BP
and CNN as mentioned above can ﬁnally achieve an improved
LDPC decoding performance, which mitigates the adverse
effects imported by the colored noise.
As for the simulation results,

the total number of BP
iterations is set to 50 in [12] for both the standard BP and
the improved BP-CNN, and the latter outperforms the former
in terms of its BER. Therefore, to achieve the same BER
performance, the BP-CNN requires a much lower number of
iterations than the standard BP, indicating a reduced latency
for channel decoding. Moreover, since the improved BP-
CNN does not rely on any speciﬁc channel coding scheme
or channel model, its design principle may also be applied
to other codes, such as turbo codes and BCH codes, which
suggests that the physical layer can be quite ﬂexibly designed.

B. DL-Based Optimization Algorithm Design

Optimization plays an important role in wireless communi-
cation systems to realize efﬁcient exploitation of limited radio
resources. However, many optimization algorithms require
a large number of iterations to converge, which results in
both high complexity and high latency, especially when the
problem’s scale is very large. In this part, we will show that DL
can be used to speed up processing while maintaining reliable
performance by introducing two works. Particularly, following
the order spanning from deterministic networks to random
networks, DL-based sum rate maximization for NOMA with
predetermined transceivers is introduced ﬁrst, followed by the
introduction of the DL-based energy consumption minimiza-
tion for UDN, where the transceivers are randomly paired
according to the distance, link quality, etc. The two above-
mentioned solutions also constitute typical 5G technologies.

1) DL-Based Sum Rate Maximization for NOMA: Power
allocation plays an essential role in the emerging 5G NOMA
solutions [13], and it has attracted extensive attention in
recent years. To solve this problem, a series of optimization
algorithms have been proposed, among which the weighted
minimum mean square error (WMMSE) is quite popular [13].
However, since optimization algorithms like WMMSE usually
require a large number of iterations to converge, it is difﬁcult
for them to achieve the requirement of low-latency.

To deal with this challenge, a DL-based optimization
to accelerate processing,
approach is proposed in [14]
while maintaining reliable performance in an interference-
contaminated wireless scenario supporting K single-antenna
transceiver pairs. Furthermore, the power of each pair of the
transceivers is limited by a certain constraint, and accordingly
a sum rate optimization problem is formulated under this

5

constraint. To solve this optimization problem faster, Sun
et al. [14] interpreted the complex WMMSE algorithm as
an unknown non-linear mapping between its inputs (system
parameters) and outputs (power allocation results), and used
a DNN having multiple hidden layers to mimic the WMMSE
algorithm as accurately as possible, exploiting its high com-
putational efﬁciency in its testing process for promptly ﬁnding
a beneﬁcial power allocation solution. Furthermore, the ReLU
function [3] is used as the activation function, and the MMSE
is calculated as the loss function. The channel coefﬁcients
obeying the classic Rayleigh distribution and the power al-
location results generated by WMMSE are adopted as data
and labels to train the DNN. Moreover, the simulation time
comparison of the standard WMMSE algorithm and the DL-
based optimization method is presented in [14]. All simulation
codes of these two methods are written in Python and run on
the same computer. It is observed that the DL-based method is
capable of reducing the execution time by a factor of several
hundreds compared to the standard WMMSE algorithm, while
maintaining a similar sum rate performance. For example,
97.92% of the max sum rate can be achieved when supporting
10 users. Moreover, as the number of users increases from 10
to 30, the execution time of the standard WMMSE method
increased from 12.32s to 78.06s, while that of the DL-based
method grows steadily from 0.04s to 0.09s, which shows a
modest complexity increase of the DL-based method for large-
scale problems.

2) DL-Based Energy Consumption Minimization for UDN:
UDN is another promising technology for 5G communication
systems, where a large number of access points (APs) are
used to provide high data rates. Each AP can set up a
transmission link to another one within its transmission range,
where minimizing the energy consumption of dozens of APs
while satisfying the ﬂow demand is very important.

In order to cope with the associated large-scale optimization
problem, diverse methods have been proposed to reduce the
complexity, but very few approaches have been designed for
directly reducing the problem scale. To this end, a DL-based
algorithm is proposed in [15] to reduce the problem scale,
while the optimality of the solution can be maintained at the
same time. Since there are always a number of transmission
links with no ﬂow passing through in the optimal case, a
DNN with multiple hidden layers is utilized to predict those
“deactivated links” and eliminate them from the original large-
scale optimization problem, thus directly reducing the problem
scale. To be more speciﬁc, the ﬂow demand vectors are used
as input, and the ﬂows of the links calculated by the so-
called delay column generation (DCG) [15] applied to the
original optimization problem are used as labels to train
the DNN. In the testing stage, after obtaining the values of
ﬂows passing through the links, a threshold is applied to
eliminate “deactivated links” in preparation for the problem
reformulation. Finally, the DCG will then be used again for the
scale-reduced optimization problem to obtain the ﬁnal results.
The simulation results of [15] show that the prediction is
quite accurate, and the optimization problem can be solved
within at most half of the original time, while the performance
difference between the original large-scale problem and the

scale-reduced one is not larger than 3%.

It should be pointed out that the idea of the elimination-
based method advocated in [15] does not rely on any speciﬁc
scenario or algorithm, hence it can also be extended to reduce
the scale of other optimization problems by excluding zero
variables.

V. CHALLENGES AND RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

Although DL-based methods proposed for wireless com-
munications in the previous two sections have shown en-
couraging advantages over their classic counterparts, they are
still in their infancy, and there are many challenging issues
remaining for further study. In this section, we underline
the important challenges in this emerging area from four
perspectives, namely theoretical challenges, data-related chal-
lenges, algorithmic challenges, and implementation-oriented
challenges. The corresponding potential solutions and research
opportunities are also highlighted. Furthermore, we believe
that the study of DL-based wireless communications can also
help to promote the development of DL itself by addressing
these challenges.

A. Theoretical Challenges

1) Performance Analysis: In contrast to the classical meth-
ods of wireless communications under the umbrella of Shan-
non’s information theory, DL-based methods lack solid math-
ematical foundations in terms of theoretical analysis, which
is however desired to guide the practical design of DL-
based wireless communications and provide insights into their
performance limits. Provided that
the training data obeys
a certain distribution, Shannon information theory may still
contribute to the theoretical basis of DL. But again, this is an
open problem requiring further exploration.

2) Interpretability: The mathematical or physical interpre-
tation of DL-based methods is in its infancy. For instance, the
selection of training strategies remains somewhat haphazard
without clear physical explanation, and we cannot easily
make plausible why a certain network structure attains a
good performance. Since the training process itself is actually
an optimization problem, advanced optimization theory is
expected to help us ﬁnd the most appropriate loss function
and training strategy. Moreover, as indicated by the DL-
based AMP algorithm of [9], the expert knowledge gleaned
from other ﬁelds (such as wireless communications) may in
turn help the design of more efﬁcient DNN architectures for
wireless communications.

B. Data-Related Challenges

The amount and quality of training data are essential for
the ﬁnal performance of DL. However, acquiring sufﬁciently
high-quality data for training in real wireless communication
systems is not as straightforward as in data-oriented appli-
cations, which is mainly due to the following two reasons.
Firstly, how to generate a large amount of data remains a
challenge. For example, transmitting a large packet of pilots
as labeled data is very difﬁcult in wireless environments due
to high spectrum efﬁciency requirement. Secondly, data in
wireless communications are usually high-dimensional (e.g.,

6

massive MIMO channels) and highly heterogeneous (since
diverse services associated with signiﬁcantly different quality
of service requirements have to be supported). Hence, pre-
processing and cleaning of the available data will be challeng-
ing. Thus, a mature data processing ﬂow should be developed
from data collection to pre-processing. Moreover, as DL is
known to be inherently data-driven, different data sets used
for training and testing may result in different performance.
To ensure fair comparison, a promising solution is to build
some widely accepted and low-cost data sets to test different
DL-based algorithms for wireless communications.

C. Algorithmic Challenges

Communication scenarios are rather complicated and usu-
ally time-varying. Thus, the data collected may not be able
to cover all situations, or to reﬂect all changes in a timely
manner. For instance, DL is not directly suitable for deal-
ing with time-varying environments. To be more speciﬁc, if
the wireless channel changes rapidly, the DL-based wireless
systems may have to be frequently and completely re-trained
from scratch to maintain their performance over time, which is
time consuming and computationally expensive. Thus, DNN-
based methods have to be robust and versatile in similar but
hitherto uncovered situations, and new learning algorithms
should be designed. For example, transfer learning [3] may
be a possible solution, which enable DNN to learn from
similar cases so as to be also applicable to new scenarios, thus
achieving better environmental adaptability and robustness.
We believe that the study of DL for such scenarios may
also promote its development in terms of both theory and
algorithmic innovation.

D. Implementation-Oriented Challenges

Apart from the challenges listed above, deploying DL-
based methods in real communication systems will face
implementation-oriented challenges. Firstly, most of the com-
munication infrastructure, such as the base stations, are only
equipped with radio frequency (RF) and signal processing
functionality. To implement DL-based methods, a cloud server
should be deployed based on the existing infrastructure. Sec-
ondly, since the classic communication methodologies may not
be completely replaced by the DL-based techniques in a short
time, a soft switching scheme is needed to switch between
the DL-based methods and the non DL-based methods. We
may need a new architecture to support the harmonious co-
existence of DL-based methods and the classic non DL-based
methods.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this review, we have revealed a pair of dominant method-
ologies for the applications of DL in wireless communications,
namely DL-based architecture design and DL-based algorithm
design. We have also analyzed their design principles, key
features, as well as performance gains, and demonstrated that
DL is indeed capable of supporting communication systems
in complex operating scenarios and speeding up large-scale
processing with guaranteed performance. Moreover, we have
pointed out some challenges and research opportunities in this

emerging area. In summary, we believe that further study of
this area can also help to promote the development of DL
itself in theory and algorithmic innovation.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Boccardi, R. W. Heath, A. Lozano, T. L. Marzetta, and P. Popovski,
“Five disruptive technology directions for 5G,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 74–80, Feb. 2014.

[2] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B. H. Juang, “Power of deep learning for channel
estimation and signal detection in OFDM systems,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 114–117, Feb. 2018.

[3] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press,

2016.

[4] D. Silver et al., “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks

and tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, Jan. 2016.

[5] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B. F. Juang, “Deep learning in physical layer
communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 93–99,
Apr. 2019.

[6] J. Jagannath, N. Polosky, A. Jagannath, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia,
“Machine learning for wireless communications in the Internet of
Things: A comprehensive survey,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 93, 2019, Art.
no. 101913.

[7] R. Li et al., “Intelligent 5G: When cellular networks meet artiﬁcial
intelligence,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 175–183, Oct.
2017.

[8] T. J. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the
physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
563–575, Dec. 2017.

[9] M. Borgerding, P. Schniter, and S. Rangan, “AMP-inspired deep net-
works for sparse linear inverse problems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 65, no. 16, pp. 4293–4308, Aug. 2017.

[10] X. Gao, L. Dai, Y. Sun, S. Han, and I. Chih-Lin, “Machine learning
inspired energy-efﬁcient hybrid precoding for mmWave massive MIMO
systems,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2017, Paris, France, May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[11] X. Wei, C. Hu, and L. Dai, “Deep learning for beamspace channel
estimation in millimeter-wave massive MIMO systems,” to appear in
IEEE Trans. Commun., 2020.

[12] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for
channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 144-159, Feb. 2018.

[13] B. Wang, L. Dai, Z. Wang, N. Ge, and S. Zhou, “Spectrum and energy-
efﬁcient beamspace MIMO-NOMA for millimeter-wave communica-
tions using lens antenna array,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 35,
no. 10, pp. 2370–2382, Oct. 2017.

[14] H. Sun, X. Chen, Q. Shi, M. Hong, X. Fu, and N. D. Sidiropoulos,
“Learning to optimize: Training deep neural networks for wireless
resource management,” in Proc. IEEE SPAWC’17, Sapporo, Japan, Jul.
2017, pp. 1–6.

[15] L. Liu, Y. Cheng, L. Cai, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Deep learning based
optimization in wireless network,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2017, Paris,
France, May 2017, pp. 1–6.

7

Ruicheng Jiao (S’19) received his B.S. degree in
Physics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
in 2016. He is currently working towards the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Electronic Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His research
interests are in mmWave communications, new mul-
tiple access techniques, and deep learning for future
wireless communications.

H. Vincent Poor (S’72-M’77-SM’82-F’87) is the
Michael Henry Strater University Professor at
Princeton University. His interests lie in the areas of
information theory, machine learning and network
science, and their applications in wireless networks,
energy systems and related ﬁelds. A member of
the U.S. National Academies of Engineering and
Sciences, he has received the IEEE Communication
Societyâ ˘A ´Zs Marconi (2008), Armstrong (2009),
Hertz (2018) and Ellersick (2020) Awards, as well
as the IEEE Bell Medal (2017).

Fumiyuki Adachi (IEEE LFâ ˘A ´Z16, IEICE F’07)
received the B.S. and Dr. Eng. degrees in electrical
engineering from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan,
in 1973 and 1984, respectively. In April 1973, he
joined the Electrical Communications Laboratories
of Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corporation (now
NTT) and conducted research on digital cellular mo-
bile communications. From July 1992 to December
1999, he was with NTT DOCOMO, where he led
a research group on wideband/broadband wireless
access for 3G and beyond. He contributed to the
development of 3G air interface standard, known as W-CDMA. Since January
2000, he has been with Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. He was a full
professor at
the Dept. of Communications Engineering of the Graduate
School of Engineering until he retired from the university in March 2016.
Currently, he is a Specially Appointed Professor for Research at the Research
Organization of Electrical Communication (ROEC), Tohoku University and
is leading a wireless signal processing research group aiming at beyond 5G
systems.

Linglong Dai (Mâ ˘A ´Z11, SMâ ˘A ´Z14) received the
Ph.D. degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 2011. He is currently an associate pro-
fessor at Tsinghua University. His current
re-
search interests include massive MIMO, millimeter-
wave/THz communications, reconﬁgurable intelli-
gent surface, multiple access, and sparse signal
processing. He has received ﬁve IEEE conference
best paper awards, the Electronics Letters Best Paper
Award in 2016, the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China for Outstanding Young Scholars in
2017, the IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Young Researcher Award
in 2017, the 7th IEEE ComSoc Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Paper Award in
2018, the China Communications Best Paper Award in 2019, and the IEEE
Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize in 2020.

Lajos Hanzo (https://www-mobile.ecs.soton.ac.uk,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lajos_Hanzo),
FIEEE’04, Fellow of
the Royal Academy of
Engineering F(REng), of the IET and of EURASIP,
received his Master degree and Doctorate in
1976 and 1983, respectively from the Technical
University (TU) of Budapest. He was also awarded
the Doctor of Sciences
(DSc) degree by the
University of Southampton (2004) and Honorary
Doctorates by the TU of Budapest (2009) and by
the University of Edinburgh (2015). He is a Foreign
Member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and a former Editor-in-Chief
of the IEEE Press. He has served several terms as Governor of both IEEE
ComSoc and of VTS. He has published 1900+ contributions at IEEE Xplore,
19 Wiley-IEEE Press books and has helped the fast-track career of 123 PhD
students. Over 40 of them are Professors at various stages of their careers in
academia and many of them are leading scientists in the wireless industry.

