0
2
0
2

p
e
S
4
1

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

3
v
6
0
3
5
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Control Hardware-in-the-loop for Voltage Controlled
Inverters with Unbalanced and Non-linear Loads in
Stand-alone Photovoltaic (PV) Islanded Microgrids

Mehmet Emin Akdogan, Sara Ahmed
Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
m.eminakdogan@gmail.com, sara.ahmed@utsa.edu

Abstract—Unbalanced and nonlinear loads connected to micro
grids (MG) with local distributed energy resources (DERs) are
two of the leading causes of power quality problems. Nonlinear
loads introduce voltage and current harmonics, and single phase
loads can cause voltage and current imbalances in a three phase
network. This paper presents a hierarchical control scheme for
voltage controlled photovoltaic (PV) inverters with unbalanced
and nonlinear loads in micro-grids. The hierarchical control
consists of primary control, voltage compensation control (VCC)
and a DC voltage regulator (VR). The primary control scheme
controls active and reactive power sharing and the VCC regulates
the unbalanced voltage and harmonics distortion. The effective-
ness of the scheme is veriﬁed using Opal-RT real-time simula-
tion and experimentally using control hardware-in-the-loop. The
voltage distortion at point of common coupling (PCC) decreased
from 6.38 percent to 1.91 percent after compensation, while the
unbalanced and harmonic load are shared proportionally among
the DG units.

Index Terms—Unbalanced and harmonic compensation, dis-
tributed generations, PV islanded, voltage controlled inverters,
microgrid, power quality.

I. INTRODUCTION

In recent years, signiﬁcant amount of renewable distributed
energy resources (DERs) has been recently integrated into both
bulk power transmission and distribution power systems to
improve the sustainability of electric power systems. Unlike
traditional grids, renewable distributed generations (DG) can
be installed in every location and require little maintenance
effort and also operate locally through power electronics
interface converter [1], [2]. The increasing penetration of
these inverter-based inertia-less DERs is rapidly changing the
dynamics of large-scale power systems and causing several
challenges such as inverse power ﬂow, voltage deviation, and
voltage ﬂuctuation. To reduce the impact of high intermittent
DER penetration, a micro grid (MG) is proposed [3]–[7]. MG
is a local grid that integrates multiple parallel DG units, energy
storage and backup generators to improve the reliability of
power system operation [3], [8]. A MG can become isolated
from the grid during faults, which is called islanding mode
[4], [5].

PV-DGs in microgrids provide a clean and cost-effective
solution for remote areas with no access to the utility grid such

as, rural areas, marine, avionics and automotive. However, due
to the intermittency of the PV systems, energy storage units
are usually added to fulﬁll the immediate need for additional
power to keep the system stable. However, integrating more
PV units with the appropriate control could eliminate these
storage units [6], [7], [9].

The control structure for PV-DGs usually consists of a
primary controller [5], [10]–[13]. This controller comprises of
a power droop controller, virtual impedance and current and
voltage controllers. Every DG unit should operate indepen-
dently while in parallel without communication due to long
distance between DGs. Therefore, the droop control approach
has been implemented widely in order to control the active
and reactive power among the inverters and generate inverter
reference voltage and frequency for PV-DGs [5], [10], [11].
However, droop control is unable to share reactive power
and harmonic current properly,
impedance is
implemented to enhance the operation of multiple parallel DGs
units [11], [14]–[16].

thus virtual

When PV-DGs feed unbalanced and nonlinear loads, the
loads generate unbalanced voltage and voltage harmonic dis-
tortion respectively. They cause over voltage, overheating
and deterioration of power quality on electrical equipment.
Those power quality problems on power systems need to be
improved. However, primary controllers are not enough to
compensate for the power quality problems. Multiple micro
grid control approaches are adopted to DG interface inverters
in the literatures [3], [7], [12]–[14], [17]–[24].

Some work has been proposed to reduce unbalanced voltage
and harmonics distortion using active power ﬁlters (APF)
in [17], [18]. APFs inject compensating harmonic current
in opposite phase to cancel voltage harmonics of the APF
installation point. However, the initial and operational costs of
the power-electronic-based active power ﬁlter are very high.
Some control methods regulate power quality problems
and reduce harmonic distortion for sensitive load bus (SLB)
under unbalanced and nonlinear loads [3], [14], [19]–[21],
[25]. In [3],
the authors discussed the negative and zero
sequence current compensating controllers in islanded micro
grids operating under unbalanced conditions but did not use

 
 
 
 
 
 
power, a DC voltage regulator controller in [4] is applied to
a dc/dc converter to avoid an increase in the DC link voltage
by curtailing PV output power.

The impact of DC link voltage control combined with
unbalanced distortion compensation based on voltage-source
inverter has not been fully investigated in stand-alone systems.
this paper presents a complete control scheme
Therefore,
combining voltage compensation controller with a DC voltage
regulator controller under both unbalanced and nonlinear loads
for voltage-controlled inverter based islanded PV systems with
no storage units. The proposed hierarchical control includes
primary controllers regulating inverter voltage and voltage
compensating controller (VCC). While droop control regulates
the active and reactive power of the PV DGs considering
their rated power capacities, virtual impedance is considered
to achieve better power sharing of reactive, unbalance and
harmonic powers in the primary level. The VCC is proposed
to compensate negative sequences of fundamental and main
harmonics voltage at PCC. Also a DC voltage regulator con-
troller is adopted in power stage of the DG unit. The proposed
control method is veriﬁed using Opal-RT real-time simulation
of an IEEE-14 bus distribution system and experimentally
using control hardware-in-the-loop.

The remaining parts of the paper are presented as follows:
in Section II, the system description and proposed hierarchical
control scheme, including the primary controller and the VCC,
are presented. Section III is dedicated to present the simulation
and experimental results and ﬁnally, this paper is concluded
in Section IV.

II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND PROPOSED HIERARCHICAL
CONTROL SCHEME

Fig. 1 shows the single-line diagram of the system under
study. The system consists of an IEEE-14 bus distribution
network with two parallel PV-DG units with different power
ratings and feeding unbalanced and nonlinear loads.

The power stage of the PV-DG and the proposed hierarchi-
cal control scheme block diagram are demonstrated in Fig. 2.
The proposed hierarchical control consists of two control
levels, the primary control level and the VCC level. The power
stage of each DG unit in Fig. 2 includes PV solar panels
connected to a boost dc/dc converter feeding a voltage source
inverter with a LC ﬁlter. The primary control is responsible
for power sharing between DGs. It comprises of power droop
controller, virtual impedance, and proportional resonant (PR)
controllers. The VCC is for PCC voltage quality improvement.
The DGs feed multiple loads, for example, unbalanced and
nonlinear loads.

For facilitation, only DG1 details are shown in details in
Fig. 2. The detailed control loops will be discussed in this
section.

A. PV DC/DC Converter Controller

The boost dc/dc converter controller has two modes of
operation, i.e. a maximum power point tracking (MPPT) mode
and a DC voltage regulation (VR) mode (i.e, PI controller).

Fig. 1: Single line diagram of the IEEE 14 node distribution
system with parallel PV-DG units.

negative sequences compensation of the PCC voltage to im-
prove sharing of the unbalance voltage of the islanded micro
grid. The approach presented in [19] is based on applying
a secondary control to provide better voltage quality. Unbal-
anced harmonic compensation (UHC) is adopted to reduce
unbalanced harmonic voltage at SLB. A hierarchical control
scheme is proposed to improve power sharing and to perform
voltage compensation of multi DERs micro grids including
non-linear and unbalanced loads using radial basis function
neural network-based harmonic power-ﬂow calculations in
[20]. Power sharing enhancement control method in [14]
and also a fast harmonics suppression strategy in [21] have
been proposed to improve current sharing and to compensate
reactive, unbalance and harmonic power sharing problems in
an islanded ac micro grid. Although power quality at the
selected bus can be improved, unbalance of PCC voltage is
not compensated to generate compensation reference in the
compensation effort controller.

There are two types of PV-DGs that can be classiﬁed into
current source inverters (CSI) and voltage source inverter
(VSI) [6], [10], [26]. CSIs are expected to inject maximum
PV power into the grid or directly supply the loads. In [22],
a voltage detection based harmonic compensator (HC) was
proposed for CSIs based on the discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) to better regulate the system harmonics. In [23], the
authors presented a CSI under unbalanced and nonlinear loads
in a grid connected PV-MG. However, a PV-DG in the islanded
mode is not capable of providing AC voltage and frequency
regulation through CSI [7], [27]. In addition, a harmonic load
compensation scheme in [24] is presented based on the voltage
control method and a coordinated control of CSI and VSI units
is proposed for reactive power sharing and voltage harmonics
compensation in [12]. These literature [12], [22], [24] only
considered harmonic compensation and not voltage unbalance.
In addition, while PV inverters can behave as voltage
sources to supply unbalanced harmonic loads in islanded mode
to regulate inverter output voltage, DC link voltage cannot
be controlled by the PV inverter [4], [28]. If the generated
power from the PV modules is higher than the demanded

Fig. 2: Block diagram of hierarchical control scheme for one distributed generation in the proposed islanded Micro Grid.

1) MPPT:

In this mode, the controller uses incremental
conductance technique to output maximum power of the PV
array if the maximum PV power is equal to the demand power
load. However, if the generated power from the PV modules
is grater than the load demand, the PV output power has to
be curtailed since the system is in islanded mode. This will
prevent an increase in the DC link voltage (vdc). In this case,
the VR controller is activated to control the DC link voltage.
2) VR: The VR is activated automatically, when the vdc
exceeds the reference of the DC link voltage (v∗
dc) [3], [6]. The
VR controller generates a reference duty cycle (D) as shown
in (1) where kpdc and kidc are the control parameters of the
proportional integral (PI) of the DC link voltage, respectively.

D = kpdc(v∗

dc − vdc)) + kidc

(cid:90)

(v∗

dc − vdc))dt

(1)

B. Voltage Source Inverter Primary Controller

The detailed structure of the DG inverter primary controller
is depicted in Fig. 2. The primary controller is responsible
for power sharing between DGs, regulating the frequency and
amplitude of the DG output voltage reference through the
following:

1) Power Calculation: The three phase instantaneous ac-
tive power (p) and reactive power (q) are calculated using
measured output voltage (voαβ) and output current (ioαβ) in
αβ reference frame. The power equations are shown in (2) as

p =

q =

3
2
3
2

(voα.ioα + voβ.ioβ)

(2)

(voβ.ioα − voα.ioβ).

p and q are passed through ﬁrst order low pass ﬁlters (LPF)
with 2 Hz cut-off frequency to extract fundamental positive
sequence active (P +) and reactive (Q+) power respectively
[5], [14]. In other words, P + and Q+ are the average values
of instantaneous active and reactive power.

2) Droop Control: The droop control regulates the active
and reactive power. In addition, it controls the power sharing
between DGs based on each DG unit power rating and the
total load demand without communication between DGs [5],
[10], [11]. The droop control characteristics are deﬁned as:

Wref = W ∗ − (P +)mp
Vref = V ∗ − (Q+)np

(3)

TABLE I: Power stage and Control Parameters

System Parameter
Switching frequency, v∗

dc,wf

PV Power
Power Control Parameter
mp, np
V ∗, W ∗
V U Fref HDh
ref
v , L1+
v ,R1−
R1+
v , R−5

v
v , R−11

R+3

v

v , R+7
VCC PI Control Parameter
Fundamental negative sequence
3rd Harmonic positive sequence
5th Harmonic negative sequence
7th Harmonic positive sequence
11th Harmonic negative sequence

Value (DG1/DG2)
10 kHz, 600 V, 370 rad/s
3000/6000 W
Value (DG1/DG2)
12e-4/6e-4, 1e-/0.5e-3
120 rms V, 370 rad/s
0.2%, 0.2%,
0.3, 0.4/0.15,0.2 Ω 0.5/0.25 H
3, 1, 1, 0.5/0.15, 0.5, 0.5, 0.25 Ω
Proportional/ Integral Value
0.1/1.5
0.2/2
5/30
5/25
0.1/1

where V ∗ and W ∗ represent the amplitude and frequency of
the output phase voltage reference and mp and np represent
active and reactive power proportional coefﬁcient respectively.
In addition, the ratio of power sharing among DGs are given
by:

P +
1
P +
i
Q+
1
Q+
i

=

=

mp1
mpi
np1
npi

(4)

where the number of sufﬁxes demonstrate the number of each
DG. It should be noted that
the DG units in the system
under study have different capacities. DG2 unit is double
the power capacity of DG1 so droop control parameters of
DG1 are double that of DG2 parameters as shown in Table I.
Afterwards, the reference of the droop control (vref ) in Fig. 2
is generated and transformed to αβ reference frame to inject
for DG voltage controller.

3) Virtual Impedance Controller: The droop control
is
unable to share reactive power and harmonic current pro-
impedance method is
portionally and therefore the virtual
implemented to improve the reactive power sharing among
DGs and also to share unbalanced and harmonic load current
among DGs. [11], [14]–[16].

The second-order general integrator (SOGI) is designed to
extract the positive and negative sequences of the fundamental
and harmonic components of the distorted inverter current
using phase locked loop (PLL) algorithm and the detail of
the SOGI is presented in [29], [30].

Virtual impedance comprises of three loops, virtual positive
sequence impedance (VPI) that is designed to improve the
real and reactive power sharing, virtual negative sequence
impedance (VNI) implemented to reduce effectiveness of the
fundamental negative sequence current among DGs and virtual
variable harmonics impedance (VVHI) that is also used for
sharing harmonic power properly among DG units [14], [19].
VPI, VNI and VVHI loops in αβ reference frame are

v1−
vα = R1−
v1−
vβ = R1−
vvα,h = Rh
vvβ,h = Rh

v .i1−
oα
v .i1−
oβ
v .ih
oα
v .ih
oβ

(6)

(7)

v

and L1+

where i1∓
oαβ represents the output current for fundamental pos-
itive and negative sequences in αβ frame. Furthermore, ih
oαβ
is the hth harmonic sequence of output current in αβ frame
and h denotes dominant harmonic components. In addition,
R1+
are the virtual resistance and inductance for
v
fundamental positive components, R1−
represents the virtual
resistance for fundamental negative components. Also Rh
v is
virtual resistance and for hth main harmonic components.
Finally, wf represents the system fundamental frequencies
[14], [19]. As shown in Fig. 2, all three impedance loops
added together to generate the voltage reference of the virtual
impedance Vvr−αβ as follows:
vβ + v1−

vβ + vvα,h + vvβ,h

vvα,h = v1+

vα + v1−

vα + v1+

(8)

v

vαβ and v1−

where v1+
vαβ are virtual voltage for fundamental
positive and negative sequences in αβ frame. Furthermore,
vvαβ,h is the virtual hth harmonic sequence in αβ frame.

4) Proportional Resonant Controller: Current and voltage
controllers are designed to regulate ﬁlter capacitor voltage and
induct current in the stationary reference frame. Compared
with PI control, PR voltage and current control can provide
larger gain at the fundamental component and no phase shift
which will help eliminate the steady-state error [31]. PR
voltage and current controllers are shown in (9) as

GV (s) = kpV +

GI (s) = kpI +

(cid:88)

(
k=1,3,5,7
(cid:88)

k=1,3,5,7

2.krV k.wcV .s
s2 + 2.wcV .s + (k.wo)2 )
2.krIk.wcI .s
s2 + 2.wcI .s + (k.wo)2 )

(

(9)

where kpV and kpI are the proportional coefﬁcient of the
voltage and current controller and krV k and krIk are the
kth harmonic (including fundamental component as ﬁrst har-
monic) resonant coefﬁcient of the voltage and current con-
troller. kpV and kpI terms are chosen to meet the controller
dynamics requirements, i.e., bandwidth, phase and gain mar-
gins. wcV and wcI are the cut-off frequency of the voltage
and current controllers respectively. In addition, multiple har-
monic compensation regulators at desired harmonic sequences
(3th, 5th, 7th) are added in parallel to the main PR controller
to suppress voltage harmonics and to track harmonic current
and voltage.

The reference of the DG output voltage in αβ frame
(V ∗
αβ) is provided by reference signals of the droop controller
(vαβ), the virtual impedance loop (Vvr−αβ) and the voltage
compensation controller compensation (Vc). The reference of
the DG output voltage is given by:

derived respectively in (5), (6) and (7)
oα − L1+
oβ + L1+

v1+
vα = R1+
v1+
vβ = R1+

v .i1+
v .i1+

v .wf .i1+
oβ
v .wf .i1+
oα

V ∗
αβ = vαβ − Vvr−αβ + Vc.
Instantaneous output voltage (voabc) is measured and trans-
αβ is compared with voαβ.

formed to αβ frame (voαβ). Then, V ∗

(10)

(5)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3: Output Voltage of PCC before (a) and after (b) Proposed Method.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: THD of PCC Voltage before (a) and after (b) the Compensation Method.

The error is received by PR voltage controller to generate the
reference current ( iαβ). The LC ﬁlter inductor current (iLabc)
is transformed to αβ frame (iLαβ) and is compared with iαβ
to be controlled by the current controller. The output of the
controller is transformed back to abc frame to produce three
phase voltage reference for the pulse width modulator (PWM)
block. Finally, the PWM controls the switching of the inverter
based on this reference.

C. Voltage Compensating Controller (VCC)

Nonlinear and unbalanced loads introduce harmonics and
unbalance into the system voltage and current. The proposed
VCC controller compensates for this voltage at PCC. Dq
extraction block and the VCC are depicted in Fig. 2.

The load voltage (Vpcc) is extracted by the dq extraction
block. Signs of +, - and h represent positive and nega-
tive sequence of fundamental component and hth harmonic
component, respectively. For example, v1−
is the negative
dq
sequence of the fundamental voltage in dq frame. The PLL
block is used to detect voltage frequency and angular fre-
quency (w) of the system. w is multiplied by positive and
negative sequence of the fundamental component and selected
hth harmonic component gain which represent 1, -1, +h, -h
respectively. The park transformation is used to transform the
Vpcc from abc to dq frames. Then, second-order low-pass ﬁlter
is applied with a cutoff frequency of 5 Hz and damping ratio
of 2.5 to extract positive and negative sequences of the PCC
voltage fundamental and main harmonic components in Fig. 2.
Extracted components are received by the VCC in Fig. 2 to

reduce unbalanced voltage and harmonic distortion. The values
of voltage unbalance factor (V U F ) and positive and negative
harmonic distortion indices (HDh) are calculated as

%V U F =

%HDh =

(cid:113)

(V −1

dq )2

dq )2

(cid:113)

(V +1
(cid:113)
(
(cid:113)

(V h

dq)2

(V +1

dq )2

∗ 100

∗ 100

(11)

dq

and V h

dq , V +1

where V −1
dq represent the magnitude of the
negative and positive sequence of the fundamental voltage, and
the main harmonic voltage in dq frame at PCC respectively
[14], [19].

V U Fref and HDh

ref in Fig. 2 are the reference of V U F
and hth HD for the PCC voltage. The references are compared
with V U F , HDh. Note that if the unbalanced factor and
harmonic references are less than PCC voltage distortion
(V U F and HDh), saturation block must be used to not affect
the stability of the control system. The errors are fed to
a PI controller to reduce voltage unbalanced and harmonic
distortion. Then each output of the PI controller of the negative
sequence of the fundamental component and selected hth
harmonic component is multiplied by V −1
dq respec-
dq
tively. Then, the signals are transformed from dq frame to αβ
reference frame and added. The angular frequency generated
by the active power controller is set to −Wref and h ∗ Wref
for the negative sequence of the fundamental component and

and V h

(a) PV-DG1 Power during Step Load.

(b) DC link Voltage.

Fig. 5: The performance of PV-DG1 power and DC link voltage.

Fig. 6: Sharing Performance
between PV-DGs for Active Power.

Fig. 7: Sharing Performance
between PV-DGs for Reactive Power.

Fig. 8: DG1 and DG2 current sharing.

III. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method,
simulation and experimental results are presented using MAT-
LAB/ Simulink and control hardware-in-the-loop (CHIL) re-
spectively. The test system of the proposed islanded micro-grid
shown in Fig. 2 consisting of the two parallel connected PV-
DG units with unbalanced and nonlinear loads and connected
to an IEEE 14 node distribution network is simulated. DG2
unit is chosen to have double the power capacity of DG1. In
addition, the power stage and control parameters are listed in
Table I. The effectiveness of the proposed control scheme is
tested under unbalanced and nonlinear loads.

A. Simulation Results

This section presents the simulation results of the test

system in Fig. 2 using MATLAB/ Simulink.

1) Performance of VCC: Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 depict the PCC
output voltage and the frequency spectrum before and after
compensation respectively. Fig. 3(a) shows the performance
of the conventional micro-grid, with no the virtual impedance
or VCC controller. The PCC output voltage is unbalanced
and highly distorted before compensation. In addition, the har-
monic distortion (HD) is high especially, the main harmonics
(3rd, 5th, 7th, and 11th) as depicted in Fig. 4(a). Voltage
quality of the PCC is improved after compensation as shown in
Fig. 3(b). Furthermore, the total harmonic distortion (THD) is
reduced as shown in Fig. 4(b) from 6.38% to 1.91%, which is
less than 5% maximum THD in compliance with the IEEE-519
standards [15]. The voltage unbalanced factor (V U F ) of PCC
terminal was reduced from 5.8% to 0.2% with compensation.
2) Performance of VR controller: The performance of the
VR controller was veriﬁed by applying a load step drop in
the load at 4 seconds. It can be seen from Fig. 5 that PV

Fig. 9: Control Hardware in the loop in Real Time Simulation.

selected hth harmonic component, respectively. The references
for voltage compensation (Vc) is generated as follows

Vc = (((V U Fref − V U F ).P I.V −1
dq )+
Po,i
k Po,k

ref − HDh).P I.V h

((HDh

dq)))

(cid:80)n

(12)

(cid:88)

h=3,−5,+7,−11

where n is the number of DGs. The ratio of DGi rated power
(Po,i) and the total power of the DG units ((cid:80)n
k Po,k) is needed
to send the proper reference signal to all DG primary con-
trollers considering their power capacities. Vc is transmitted to
each primary local control to mitigate PCC distortion. In the
control scheme, the VCC manages compensation of negative
sequence of fundamental and main harmonic components.

(a)

(b)

(c) DG1 and DG2 current sharing.

Fig. 10: Output Voltage of PCC in experimental study before (a) and after (b) compensation and (c) DG1 and DG2 current
sharing.

demonstrate the proper sharing of unbalanced and harmonic
load current among the DGs after compensation.

B. CHIL Experimental Validation

This section demonstrates the results of the CHIL real-time
simulation of the proposed system and controllers and using
OPAL-RT as shown in Fig. 9. The power stage including
the DGs, inverters and loads are located in Mat-lab/Simulink.
The proposed controllers are implemented using Compact Rio-
9024 by National Instruments(NI) as the control hardware. The
controller algorithm is coded in LabVIEW-FPGA. The exper-
imental results of the CHIL simulation are shown in Fig. 10-
12. It can be observed that the results of the experimental
study also demonstrate a noticeable improvement in the power
quality and sharing. Furthermore, the system is stable under
load step change.

IV. CONCLUSION

A novel voltage source inverter controller is proposed
for PV islanded micro-grid under unbalanced and non-linear
loads. The proposed controller performance is veriﬁed with
simulation as the PCC voltage distortion is decreased by
70%, while the load power-sharing is achieved among the PV
inverters. In addition, ﬁxing the DC link voltage is achieved
by the DC voltage regulator controller. The effectiveness of
the proposed control scheme is validated using Opal-RT real-
time simulation of an IEEE-14 bus distribution system and
experimentally using control hardware-in-the-loop.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Mohammad Khatibi and
Reynaldo Gonzalez for their assistance and useful suggestions
throughout this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] X. Wang, J. M. Guerrero, F. Blaabjerg, and Z. Chen, “Secondary voltage
control for harmonics suppression in islanded microgrids,” in 2011 IEEE
Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2011, pp. 1–8.

[2] A. A. Khan, M. Q. Khan, S. G. Satti, and M. Adil, “Robust control
of hybrid distributed generation for frequency regulation,” in 2017 14th
International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology
(IBCAST), 2017, pp. 285–290.

Fig. 11: The performance of DC link voltage and DG Power
during Step Load.

Fig. 12: The performance of Power Sharing between DGs.

power reached to maximum power between 4 and 20 seconds
operating at the MPPT mode. Then when the load is dropped
at 20 seconds, the VR controller became active and the DC
link voltage was regulated to 600 V by curtailing the PV-DG
power. It should be noted that, only 4% of maximum output
power of the PV array is curtailed in this case.

3) Performance of the load power sharing: Active and
reactive power shared proportionally between different rated
PV-DGs are presented after compensation as shown in Fig. 6
and Fig. 7 respectively and it should be noted that proper
power sharing between DGs demonstrates the effectiveness of
the droop controllers and the virtual impedance loop. Also
output currents of DG1 and DG2 are presented in Fig. 8 to

egy for current-controlled converters,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 2616–2627, 2018.

[23] S. Anand, B. G. Fernandes, and J. Guerrero, “Distributed control to
load sharing and improve voltage regulation in
ensure proportional
low-voltage dc microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1900–1913, 2013.

[24] J. He, Y. W. Li, and M. S. Munir, “A ﬂexible harmonic control approach
through voltage-controlled dggrid interfacing converters,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 444–455, 2012.

[25] M. E. Akdogan et al., “Advanced power sharing scheme under unbal-
anced and nonlinear loads in an islanding microgrid,” Ph.D. dissertation,
2017.

[26] A. R. Sadat, S. Ahmadian, and N. Vosoughi, “A novel torque ripple
reduction of switched reluctance motor based on dtc-svm method,” in
2018 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[27] M. Jedari, S. H. Fathi, and S. S. Dobakhshari, “An investigation on
harmonics compensation under highly unbalanced non-linear loads in
3p4w distribution network for pv application,” in IECON 2017 - 43rd
Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2017, pp.
810–816.

[28] A. Askarian, M. Baranwal, and S. Salapaka, “Dc bus voltage regulation
using photovoltaic module: A non-iterative method,” in 2017 American
Control Conference (ACC), 2017, pp. 4099–4104.

[29] Q. Huang and K. Rajashekara, “An inverter-current-feedback based
reactive power sharing method for parallel inverters in microgrid,” in
2016 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2016,
pp. 1–7.

[30] P. Rodrguez, A. Luna, I. Candela, R. Mujal, R. Teodorescu, and F. Blaab-
jerg, “Multiresonant frequency-locked loop for grid synchronization of
power converters under distorted grid conditions,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 127–138, 2011.

[31] C. Bao, X. Ruan, X. Wang, W. Li, D. Pan, and K. Weng,
“Step-by-step controller design for lcl-type grid-connected inverter
with capacitorcurrent-feedback active-damping,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1239–1253, 2014.

[3] F. Najaﬁ, M. Hamzeh, and M. Fripp, “Unbalanced current sharing
control in islanded low voltage microgrids,” vol. 11, no. 10. Multi-
disciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2018, p. 2776.

[4] L. Qin, S. Xie, M. Hu, and C. Yang, “Stable operating area of
photovoltaic cells feeding dcdc converter in output voltage regulation
mode,” vol. 9, no. 8, 2015, pp. 970–981.

[5] J. M. Guerrero, J. C. Vasquez, J. Matas, L. G. de Vicuna, and M. Castilla,
“Hierarchical control of droop-controlled ac and dc microgridsa general
approach toward standardization,” vol. 58, no. 1, 2011, pp. 158–172.
[6] A. Elmitwally and M. Rashed, “Flexible operation strategy for an
isolated pv-diesel microgrid without energy storage,” vol. 26, no. 1,
2011, pp. 235–244.

[7] R. Al Badwawi, W. R. Issa, T. K. Mallick, and M. Abusara, “Supervisory
control for power management of an islanded ac microgrid using a
frequency signalling-based fuzzy logic controller,” vol. 10, no. 1, 2019,
pp. 94–104.

[8] S. Ahmadian, H. Malki, and A. R. Sadat, “Modeling time of use pricing
for load aggregators using new mathematical programming with equality
constraints,” in 2018 5th International Conference on Control, Decision
and Information Technologies (CoDIT), 2018, pp. 38–44.

[9] C. Shah and R. Wies, “Algorithms for optimal power ﬂow in isolated
distribution networks using different battery energy storage models,” in
2020 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[10] W. Cao, H. Su, J. Cao, J. Sun, and D. Yang, “Improved droop
control method in microgrid and its small signal stability analysis,”
in 2014 International Conference on Renewable Energy Research and
Application (ICRERA).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 197–202.

[11] M.Savaghebi, J.C.Vasquez, A.Jalilian, J. M.Guerrero, and T.Lee, “Se-
lective harmonic virtual impedance for voltage source inverters with lcl
ﬁlter in microgrids,” in 2012 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and
Exposition (ECCE), 2012, pp. 1960–1965.

[12] S. Y. Mousazadeh Mousavi, A. Jalilian, M. Savaghebi, and J. M.
Guerrero, “Autonomous control of current- and voltage-controlled dg
interface inverters for reactive power sharing and harmonics compensa-
tion in islanded microgrids,” vol. 33, no. 11, 2018, pp. 9375–9386.
[13] J. He, Y. W. Li, and F. Blaabjerg, “An enhanced islanding microgrid
reactive power, imbalance power, and harmonic power sharing scheme,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 3389–3401,
2015.

[14] Y. Han, P. Shen, X. Zhao, and J. M. Guerrero, “An enhanced power
sharing scheme for voltage unbalance and harmonics compensation in
an islanded ac microgrid,” vol. 31, no. 3, 2016, pp. 1037–1050.
[15] J. M. Guerrero, L. G. de Vicuna, J. Matas, M. Castilla, and J. Miret, “A
wireless controller to enhance dynamic performance of parallel inverters
in distributed generation systems,” vol. 19, no. 5, 2004, pp. 1205–1213.
[16] Y. Sun, X. Hou, J. Yang, H. Han, M. Su, and J. M. Guerrero, “New
perspectives on droop control in ac microgrid,” vol. 64, no. 7, 2017, pp.
5741–5745.

[17] M. M. Hashempour, M. Savaghebi, J. C. Vasquez, and J. M. Guerrero,
“A control architecture to coordinate distributed generators and active
power ﬁlters coexisting in a microgrid,” vol. 7, no. 5, 2016, pp. 2325–
2336.

[18] M. M. Hashempour, M. Savaghebi, J. C. Vasquez, and J. M. Guer-
rero, “Voltage unbalance and harmonic compensation in microgrids
by cooperation of distributed generators and active power ﬁlters,” in
2016 7th Power Electronics and Drive Systems Technologies Conference
(PEDSTC).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 646–651.

[19] M. Savaghebi, A. Jalilian, J. C. Vasquez, and J. M. Guerrero, “Sec-
ondary control for voltage quality enhancement in microgrids,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1893–1902, 2012.
[20] H. R. Baghaee, M. Mirsalim, G. B. Gharehpetian, and H. A. Talebi,
“Unbalanced harmonic power sharing and voltage compensation of
microgrids using radial basis function neural network-based harmonic
power-ﬂow calculations for distributed and decentralised control struc-
tures,” IET Generation, Transmission Distribution, vol. 12, no. 7, pp.
1518–1530, 2018.

[21] B. Wang, F. Yang, C. Lu, Y. Feng, C. Xiao, X. Ning, and Y. Han,
“A control strategy for islanded three-phase inverter with nonlinear and
unbalanced loads,” in 2019 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies -
Asia (ISGT Asia), 2019, pp. 2276–2281.

[22] X. Zhao, L. Meng, C. Xie, J. M. Guerrero, X. Wu, J. C. Vasquez, and
M. Savaghebi, “A voltage feedback based harmonic compensation strat-

