0
2
0
2

l
u
J

6

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
8
8
2
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Augment Yourself: Mixed Reality Self-Augmentation Using Optical
See-through Head-mounted Displays and Physical Mirrors

Mathias Unberath, Kevin Yu, Roghayeh Barmaki, Alex Johnson, and Nassir Navab

Abstract— Optical see-though head-mounted displays (OST HMDs) are one of the key technologies for merging virtual objects and
physical scenes to provide an immersive mixed reality (MR) environment to its user. A fundamental limitation of HMDs is, that the user
itself cannot be augmented conveniently as, in casual posture, only the distal upper extremities are within the ﬁeld of view of the HMD.
Consequently, most MR applications that are centered around the user, such as virtual dressing rooms or learning of body movements,
cannot be realized with HMDs.
In this paper, we propose a novel concept and prototype system that combines OST HMDs and physical mirrors to enable self-
augmentation and provide an immersive MR environment centered around the user. Our system, to the best of our knowledge the ﬁrst
of its kind, estimates the user’s pose in the virtual image generated by the mirror using an RGBD camera attached to the HMD and
anchors virtual objects to the reﬂection rather than the user directly.
We evaluate our system quantitatively with respect to calibration accuracy and infrared signal degradation effects due to the mirror, and
show its potential in applications where large mirrors are already an integral part of the facility. Particularly, we demonstrate its use for
virtual ﬁtting rooms, gaming applications, anatomy learning, and personal ﬁtness.
In contrast to competing devices such as LCD-equipped smart mirrors, the proposed system consists of only an HMD with RGBD
camera and, thus, does not require a prepared environment making it very ﬂexible and generic. In future work, we will aim to investigate
how the system can be optimally used for physical rehabilitation and personal training as a promising application.

Index Terms— Half-silvered Mirror, Smart Mirror, Rehabilitation, Kinect, HoloLens, Virtual Fitting Room.

1 INTRODUCTION

1.1 Background

Mixed reality (MR) is receiving increasing attention in many different
applications ranging from entertainment [2,5,33], education [12,29,55],
to medicine [12, 16, 43, 48]. It is considered as one of the strategic tech-
nological trends [6, 47]. In the MR context, optical see-through head-
mounted displays (OST HMDs) are particularly promising as they are
mobile and enable merging of virtual views with physical scenes [31]
providing a fully immersive MR environment to the user. This positive
development is propelled forward as more and more consumer grade
devices, such as the Microsoft HoloLens (Microsoft Corporation, Red-
mond, WA) or the Meta 2 (Meta Company, San Mateo, CA), become
available to the general public.
One of the most straightforward concepts of MR is the augmentation
of real, physical items by placing virtual objects such that they remain
in a certain spatial relation to them, for example a virtual vase on top
of a real table. This type of augmentation is enabled by simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms [14, 22, 27, 36]. Based
on the depth and RGB sensor data, the HMD incrementally generates a
spatial map of its surrounding, local environment while continuously
estimating its pose therein. Therefore, virtual objects can be placed
with respect to the spatial map (also referred to as anchoring) that
remains largely constant over time and are only displayed when they
enter the ﬁeld of view of the HMD. Although some aspects of anchor-
ing virtual objects to a static scene are still subject to ongoing research,
such as the interaction of virtual and real objects [41], or the estima-
tion of lighting conditions for realistic rendering [45], the most crucial
problem of SLAM, despite room for improvement, can be considered
well addressed.
Aforementioned concept of positioning virtual objects in a certain
spatial relation to the physical world can be extended rather straightfor-

• M. Unberath and K. Yu have contributed equally.
• M. Unberath, K. Yu, R. Barmaki, A. Johnson, and N. Navab were with Johns

Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

• A. Johnson was with Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD.
• Send correspondence to unberath@ jhu.edu.

This manuscript was initially submitted to IEEE VR TVCG 2018 on November
22, 2017.

wardly to anchoring to dynamic objects, such as humans. In this case,
more sophisticated tracking solutions are required that employ dense or
sparse methods, such as deformable SLAM [24, 40] or human skeleton
tracking [56, 57]. Methods devised for human skeleton tracking paired
with SLAM and OST HMDs allow for the augmentation of persons in
the local environment, for instance by anchoring a deformable avatar
to their skeleton.
Despite the impressive performance of modern OST HMDs that, paired
with novel tracking algorithms, provide convincing MR environments,
a fundamental problem remains unaddressed: the user wearing the OST
HMD himself, cannot conveniently be augmented. The reason seems
straightforward: at usual, relaxed head poses and body postures the user
does not occupy much of the HMD’s ﬁeld of view, only the distal upper
extremities (forearms and hands) are visible. While not problematic for
some applications, this limitation substantially impedes the use of OST
HMDs for all applications that augment the user itself rather than the
environment. Prominent examples of such applications include virtual
ﬁtting rooms [42, 50], learning of full body movements for dancing
or personal training [4], or entertainment. Virtual models that could
augment the user in aforementioned scenarios are shown in Figure 1.
In this work, we address this problem and propose a proof-of-principle
system consisting of an OST HMD that is used together with a physical
mirror to create an MR environment centered around the user of the
HMD. Augmentation of the user is achieved indirectly by anchoring
mirrored versions of virtual objects to the skeleton of the user’s reﬂec-
tion that is tracked using an RGBD camera rigidly mounted on the
HMD. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst effort in combining
OST HMDs and mirrors to enable MR augmentation of reﬂections and,
thus, the user. We believe this setup to bear enormous potential in all
the scenarios above where large mirrors are already an integral part
of the establishment, e. g. in department stores, ﬁtness studios, and
potentially at home.

1.2 Related Work

As the combination of HMDs and mirrors has not yet been studied,
we limit the review of prior work to systems that either use physical
or virtual mirrors to provide an MR environment for the user or use
HMDs to directly augment the user.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Other approaches replace real with virtual mirrors that are realized as
video screens paired with optical cameras. Such systems have been
used, e g., for cosmetic products [25, 44] but also in the medical context
for anatomy education [7, 11, 12].
If the virtual content is to be displayed in relation to the user, as is the
case for most aforementioned systems, tracking solutions are required.
Sato et al. [46] use stereo RGB cameras to track a hand-held marker
in 3D, while Rahman et al. [44] rely on a single IR camera to track an
active IR emitters to estimate the distance of the user from the display.
However, most approaches make use of human pose estimation algo-
rithms that track the skeleton of the user over time [4, 8, 12, 35]. In this
case, many conﬁgurations rely on the Microsoft Kinect solutions [56] as
they are affordable and, in most cases, sufﬁciently accurate. It is worth
mentioning that, contingent on their design, all of the aforementioned
solutions are non-portable and unaffordable.

Self-Augmentation Using HMDs Compared to real or virtual
mirror-based systems, designs based on HMDs do not necessarily re-
quire a prepared environment as the tracking sensors, such as the Leap
Motion [54], can be integrated with the HMD and are thus located on
the user rather than in its environment. Nevertheless, self-augmentation
has not yet received much attention in the context of HMDs, particu-
larly not when OST HMDs are considered.
Virtual reality (VR) headsets, such as the Oculus Rift (Oculus VR,
Menlo Park, CA), employ concepts similar to self-augmentation in
order to transfer the user’s hands into the VR environment [1]. These
applications are user focused and, in principle, allow for the augmenta-
tion of the tracked extremities with virtual content when the HMD is
operated in video see-through mode.
Although in a very different context, namely for touch-less interaction,
Lv et al. [32] consider MR gaming environments in which the user’s
hands or feet are tracked to interact with the MR environment that is
provided by Google Glass (Google, Mountain View, CA). Finally, the
most relevant work was reported as a part of the LINDSAY Virtual
Human project [51]. In their anARtomy application, they use the Meta
1 OST HMD (Meta Company, San Mateo, CA) and track the user’s
hands using the HMD’s optical camera and self-encoded markers that
are attached to the front and back of both hands. The hands and fore-
arms of the user are then augmented with anatomical models of the
distal extremities [3].

2 METHODS
2.1 System Overview
We propose an HMD-based system that enables self-augmentation of
the user in quasi-unprepared environments; its working principle is
illustrated schematically in Figure 2. In this context, quasi-unprepared
refers to the fact that no display or motion capture system has to be
installed and calibrated within the environment, yet, a sufﬁciently large
mirror needs to be available. The proposed system comprises of

• a device or software solution for human pose estimation, i. e.

skeleton tracking (Section 2.3), and

• a self-encoded marker (Section 2.3.1)

that are both tightly integrated with or rigidly attached to an OST HMD
(Section 2.2) and thus move with the user. We elaborate on design
considerations and implementation details in the remainder of this
manuscript and provide a picture of our proof-of-principle prototype in
Figure 3.

2.2 Head mounted display
An OST HMD is an MR wearable display for the head. Virtual content
is projected into the users eyes using either holographic [39] or ﬁxed
focus displays [10, 37]. While holographic displays are able to ren-
der virtual content in the correct focal plane, stereoscopic ﬁxed focus
displays are more common and appropriate for several applications.
Moreover, calibration of these devices is alleviated as the focal plane
of the virtual render camera remains constant.
Within this work, we have selected the Microsoft’s HoloLens as the

Fig. 1. Listed from top to bottom, we show virtual models that could
be used in personal ﬁtness (arm muscles), anatomy learning (skeleton),
virtual dressing rooms (jacket and hat), and entertainment (Ironman suit),
respectively.

Mirrors in MR Half-silvered mirrors, also referred to as beam-
splitters, have been used in combination with bright display devices
that are located on the side opposing the user [9]. Ushida et al. [53]
and Anderson et al. [4] use rear-mounted projectors that illuminate the
back of large half-silvered mirrors. A more compact realization of this
type of smart mirror is achieved by attaching a ﬂat-panel LCD screen
to the back of the half-silvered mirror [8, 18, 46, 52]. These systems
are thin and can be wall-mounted, yet, they require very large LCD dis-
plays if the complete mirror surface is desired for augmentation. These
methods are comparably inexpensive but display the virtual content is
not displayed in the focal plane of the reﬂection, making it impossible
to focus on both the augmentations and the reﬂection at the same time.
One way of addressing this problem is by using very large displays
that are placed on the rear side of the mirror with a distance equal to
one of the users to the mirror [13, 35]. Despite the obvious advantage
of displaying virtual objects in the same focal plane as the reﬂection,
the design has two considerable disadvantages: ﬁrst, it requires a large
conﬁguration space and second, the user is required to maintain a ﬁxed
distance to the reﬂective surface. While these drawbacks may not be of
particular importance in Walt Disney World’s Haunted Mansion [13],
it substantially limits the system’s applicability in most real world sce-
narios where users move freely and space is constrained.

Fig. 2. Schematic of the working principle of the proposed system: the mirror creates a virtual image of the user in reﬂection space. An RGBD
camera is used to track the skeleton of the user in the reﬂection space. Once the transformations WTC (estimated using a SLAM-based algorithm)
and CTR (computed from the skeleton tracking information) are known, holograms can be anchored to the tracked skeleton points. We illustrate this
relation by anchoring a star-shaped virtual object to the raised hand of the stick-ﬁgure in reﬂection space. In the MR environment provided to the
user, the virtual object appears to augment its raised hand due to the reﬂection at the mirror surface indicated as thin black lines. Note that the
coordinate system origins are offset to allow for a clearer visualization.

foundation for our prototype. The HoloLens is a stereoscopic ﬁxed
focus OST HMD that is equipped with inertial and depth sensors, as
well as a front facing RGB camera that combined enable accurate
SLAM [37]. Apart from the RGB camera, all sensory output is un-
available. However, the HoloLens continuously provides an estimate of
WTC describing its pose with respect to the world coordinate system.
The pose of the RGB camera can be derived from WTC, as the extrin-
sic parameters between the pose virtual render camera WTC and the
RGB camera on the HoloLens are provided by the manufacturer (see
calibration step (2) in Figure 3).
It is worth mentioning that for self-augmentation using a physical mir-
ror as described here it is not imperative to know the pose of the HMD
with respect to the environment. This is because the skeleton tracking
in the reﬂection as described in Section 2.3 is performed relative to the
current pose of the HMD. However, knowledge of WTC is beneﬁcial if
the virtual content is shared among multiple devices as described by
Microsoft [38].

2.3 Skeleton Tracking
We augment the user by anchoring virtual content to its body. To
this end, the pose of the user, commonly referred to as its skeleton,
must be tracked in the reﬂection. Skeleton tracking can be achieved
in many different ways, however, the system considered here imposes
some limitations as the device used for skeleton tracking a) must be
tightly integrated or rigidly attached to the HMD such that it can be
pre-calibrated to the HMD and b) must work on reﬂections. Both RGB
and RGBD cameras fulﬁll these criteria [21] and are, therefore, the
obvious choices. Considering that the HMD used here only allows
access to the RGB camera feed, a skeleton tracking method based on
monocular RGB images [30,57] would be ideal, as it would allow a fully
integrated prototype. Unfortunately, the execution of such methods
on the HoloLens is not yet possible due to questionable robustness of
these novel methods combined with hardware restrictions that would
impede its execution in real-time. For our prototype described here,
we decided to use an external RGBD sensor for skeleton tracking,
namely the Kinect v1 (Kinect 360), that is rigidly attached to the HMD.
This is achieved by attaching both the HoloLens and the Kinect v1
camera to a helmet as shown in Figure 3. While use of an additional,
non-integrated sensor requires additional calibration steps (kindly refer
to Figure 3), the convenience and reliability of the skeleton tracking
provided by the Microsoft Kinect SDK 1.8 outweighed the drawbacks
for this implementation. Figure 3 illustrates the prototype helmet and
the calibration steps in more detail.

Skeleton Tracking Using the Kinect v1 The Microsoft Kinect
cameras are consumer grade RGBD cameras that allow for image-based
skeleton tracking of one or multiple persons in real-time [56]. It uses
structured light to compute a depth image with a rather low resolution
of 320 × 240 pixels in real-time. This depth image is then used as input
to the Microsoft Kinect SDK 1.8 that estimates a 20-joint skeleton for
every detected person. The Kinect v1 was not designed to be used on
reﬂections; however, conventional mirrors have similar reﬂective prop-
erties in the infra-red and the visible spectrum [21], suggesting that the
Kinect will track the skeleton in the virtual image created by the mirror.
The skeleton tracking algorithm has no mechanism to infer whether the
current scene is a true or virtual, i. e. reﬂected, image. This introduces
ambiguity for self-augmentation: if the skeleton is tracked in a reﬂected
image, the association of skeleton joints with the left and right side of
the body must be inverted to guarantee correct overlay. To resolve this
ambiguity, a self-encoded marker is used (see Section 2.3.1).
It is worth mentioning that the Microsoft Kinect v2 is known to outper-
form its predecessor in all respects as it is using Time-of-Flight (ToF)
rather than structured light but was found inadequate for our use-case.
As the camera is rigidly attached to the HMD and, thus, the user’s head
it is constantly moving. The Kinect v2 has a constant and comparably
long integration time of the ToF signal in order to increase its signal-to-
noise ratio [19, 28], that in the presence of perpetual motion leads to a
substantially corrupted depth images impeding skeleton tracking.

Co-calibration The Kinect v1 camera needs to be calibrated to the
front facing RGB camera and, thus, the virtual render camera of the
HMD. As indicated in Figure 3, a total of three calibration steps are
required:

1. Kinect v1 internal: Depth sensor to RGB camera

This calibration is achieved using a stereo-camera calibration
using a checkerboard. It is needed since the co-calibration in step
3 retrieves the extrinsic calibration of the RGB camera of the
Kinect v1 with respect to the RGB camera of the HoloLens.

2. HoloLens internal: Front-facing RGB camera to the virtual render

camera
As mentioned in Section 2.2, the extrinsic parameters of the
virtual render camera acting as a display for the virtual content
and the RGB camera are dissimilar. Fortunately, this calibration
is readily provided by the HoloLens SDK.

3. Co-calibration: RGB camera of the Kinect to virtual render cam-

era of the HoloLens

Fig. 3. Illustration of our prototype device (left) together with the required calibration steps. (1) Kinect internal: Calibration of the depth sensors to
the RGB camera. (2) HoloLens internal: Calibration of the RGB camera to the virtual render camera. (3) Estimation of the extrinsic parameters
KinectTHMD to calibrate the Kinect v1 to the virtual render camera of the HoloLens using a single ARToolkit marker.

Once the individual devices are calibrated, co-calibration can be
performed via standard stereo-calibration using either a checker-
board or a simple ARToolKit marker. Stereo-calibration us-
ing checkerboard images yields more accurate results, but is
time consuming.
In the current prototype small changes in
KinectTHMD =HMD T−1
KinectTO cannot be excluded, we esti-
O
mate KinectTHMD using an ARToolKit marker that is detected and
tracked in the RGB cameras both on the Kinect and the HoloLens.
While this procedure is less accurate compared to traditional
checkerboard stereo-calibration, it allows for re-calibration if the
MR content appears displaced.

2.3.1 Self-encoded Marker for Mirror Recognition

As motivated in Section 2.3, the skeleton tracking algorithm works
similarly on images of humans and their reﬂections suggesting that,
from the human pose estimation alone, it is unclear whether the re-
trieved skeleton originates from a real person or the reﬂection of the
user. This is problematic for self-augmentation, as mirrors are reversing
such that the virtual content needs to be reverted as well to retain the
true orientation. To this end, a self-encoded marker is rigidly attached
to the front of the HMD as shown in Figure 3. Then, detection and
recognition of the self-encoded marker in the sensory feed of the HMD
are tantamount with mirror detection.
In our prototype system we use an ARToolKit marker that is glued to
the visor of the HoloLens. The ARToolKit software development kit
(SDK) [26] is used for recognition and tracking of the marker in the
real-time video stream provided by the HoloLens’ front-facing RGB
camera.
The ARToolKit SDK provides the 3D position of the detected marker
with respect to the RGB camera. Note, that this position lies behind
the reﬂective surface (denoted as reﬂection space as in Figure 2) as
the marker detection cannot distinguish between real and virtual im-
ages. We use this ambiguity to compute the position of the reﬂective
surface. The mirror is estimated as a plane located midway between
the RGB camera center and the midpoint of the marker obtained from
the ARToolKit SDK. This line is simultaneously used as the normal of
the estimated reﬂective plane.
Knowledge of the position and orientation of the reﬂective surface
allows for the deﬁnition of a 4 × 4 involutive isometric transformation
that describes a reﬂection with respect to the mirror plane [23]. This
transformation, in turn, can be used to associate the skeleton points

tracked in the reﬂection with their true position on the user. While this
is not of immediate importance for the use-case reported here, it may
prove useful in shared MR environments, particularly if WTC is known.

3D Models and Manipulation Most currently existing work uses
the skeleton to control a model with a constant scale, only using the
rotational component of the skeleton bones. For a correct and visually
pleasing overlay, however, the model has to be personalized to more
accurately reﬂect the body shape of the detected person to promote
immersion of the virtual model with the real scene. To this end, our
system measures the shoulder distance and torso height and maps these
distances onto the models to allow a perfect ﬁt onto the user’s body.
To allow for on-the-ﬂy deformation of the 3D models, they have to
be rigged as described as in [17]. That includes creating the armature
and assigning vertices to the bones of the armature. The armature can
be thought of a real skeleton to manipulate vertices which depend on
these bones on the skeleton. In our case, we designed the armature
of the models such that it resembles the skeleton of the user provided
by the Kinect. Once the armature is deﬁned, vertices of the model are
assigned to speciﬁc bones. The assignment is not binary but continuous:
a weight is computed for every vertex-bone pair that depends on the
anticipated effect of bone transformations onto the displacement of
the considered vertex. The assignment process is shown exemplary in
Figure 4, where blue and red colors correspond to low and high weights,
respectively.
The next step for the deformation is the transfer of the Kinect skeleton
onto the armature of the model. This is accomplished by aligning bones
of the tracked skeleton with the corresponding bone in the armature.
Additionally, the rotation along the bone, especially for the supination
and pronation rotation of the upper extremity is an important part for
immersion. The Kinect v1 skeleton does not provide a sophisticated
hand tracking by itself, however, the cross product of the upper arm
and lower arm facing towards the torso provides a good looking and
reasonable facing direction for each bone of the arm.
The ﬁnal and one of the most important steps for the self-augmentation,
is the positioning of the model itself in space such that it overlays with
the virtual image of the user created by the mirror. A single joint is
selected to serve as the anchor joint that strictly follows a certain 3D
point of the Kinect skeleton in space. This becomes necessary as all
other verices are displaced with respect to this anchor joint to enable
personalization. In our prototype system, we identiﬁed the middle
shoulder joint on the height of the larynx as the most stable choice and

(a) Model of a jacket with hat. Here the right upper sleeve is weighted
and assigned to the upper arm bone of the armature.

Fig. 5. Armature applied to the Ironman model. In the helmet area, two
additional armature bones for the mask animation were added.

calibration by computing the Euclidean distance from post-calibration
translations and rotational deviation compared to the initial calibration.
To this end, we collect 30 measurements over one minute after the
initial calibration and evaluate the error. This process is repeated 5
times where a new calibration is estimated each time.
We also determine an upper bound on the co-calibration accuracy using
an alternative method that uses a conventional checkerboard with the
size of 12 × 7 and a square side length of 4.5 cm. We simultaneously
take snapshots from both devices and create image pairs. Those serve
as input for a checkerboard detection algorithm such that the corner
points are known and the re-projection error can be calculated.

2.4.2 Depth Signal Degradation due to Reﬂection

Depending on their coating, mirrors exhibit different reﬂective proper-
ties for light in the visible and IR spectrum. In general, the reﬂectivity
in the IR spectrum is lower [21] suggesting that the intensity of the IR
pattern used for depth image estimation is lower in reﬂections com-
pared to real scenes. This degradation can affect the effective detection
range and depth estimation performance of the Kinect.
To quantify the degradation, we compare the intensity of the measured
IR pattern when a) looking at a person standing in front of the Kinect at
a particular distance, and b) looking at the reﬂection of the user standing
at exactly half the respective distance from a mirror. The experiments
are performed under artiﬁcial light. Moreover, in both experiments the
person wore the same clothes to guarantee the same scattering behavior
of the IR light during the experiment. We report the average IR image
intensity as a function of the distance from the Kinect camera.

2.4.3 Demonstrations

Since the system is highly portable, it enables MR self-augmentation in
various different scenarios and for numerous applications. We demon-
strate the feasibility of MR self-augmentation using physical mirror
in three different scenarios where large mirrors are commonly used
such that the proposed system could ﬁnd immediate application: virtual
ﬁtting rooms, anatomy learning and personal ﬁtness, and entertainment.

Virtual Fitting Room The most straightforward application of
the proposed system is the virtual ﬁtting room. This scenario was
considered in previous work but required prepared environments [42,
50] to track the user and display the virtual content. The virtual ﬁtting
room experience can be achieved by our system, that only requires
the proposed HMD and a body-sized mirror to be installed in the
environment of the user. The virtual ﬁtting room MR environment is
demonstrated using the jacket and hat model shown in Figure 1.

(b) Musculary model of an upper extremity.Here the left forearm is
weighted and assigned to the lower arm bone of the armature.

Fig. 4. Vertex painting was done in the 3D modeling software Blender.
The models have to be assigned to an armature which serves as an
skeleton for deformations of the mesh.

used it in all experiments.
Detailed animation of the models is done in the Unity engine that
powers our HoloLens app. This is beneﬁcial, as it allows us to directly
use all animation resources provided by Unity for our models. In our
demonstrations, only the Ironman suit is animated. This is achieved by
adding additional, artiﬁcial bones that allow for opening and closing of
the ventail. This is shown in Figure 5.
The preceding considerations hold true for animation of full body
models but also for models that are limited to a particular body part.
Without loss of generality, we limit the models considered here and
shown in Figure 1 to the upper torso and head. This has a practical
reason: Full body models do not ﬁt into the narrow ﬁeld of view of the
HoloLens such that full body models would not promote an improved
MR experience. On the contrary, the increased complexity of full body
models leads to performance decrease due to the limited compute power
of the HoloLens.

2.4 Experiments and Demonstrations

We seek to assess the appropriateness of our prototype system and
demonstrate its applicability to self-augmentation. To this end, we
ﬁrst quantitatively assess the calibration accuracy of the Kinect v1 to
the HoloLens, and the degradation of the IR pattern used for depth
perception that is associated with imperfect reﬂectivity of the mirror.

2.4.1 Calibration Repeatability and Accuracy

Using the AR-marker for co-calibrating the HoloLens and Kinect is
a very fast alternative to retrieve the extrinsic calibration but may be
of low quality. Therefore, we evaluate the repeatability of the co-

Anatomy Learning and Personal Fitness Similar to the Mag-
icMirror system [11, 12], the system ﬁnds applications in health-care
education, where anatomical structures such as bones are overlaid at
the correct position providing an interactive learning environment. For
personal ﬁtness applications, our prototype may act as a low-cost mo-
tion capture system [15] that provides real-time information on the
user’s joint dynamics. This information can be used to a) counting the
number of repetitions in weight lifting exercise and b) inform the user
on incorrectly performed movements via MR overlay of the correct
motion sequence. We believe that this real-time feedback could be of
particular beneﬁt in rehabilitation.

Entertainment and Gaming Self-augmentation with 3D models
of fantasy universes, such as the animated Ironman suit, demonstrates
the application of the proposed system for entertainment applications.
While we do not explicitly demonstrate the use of our system for gam-
ing, we believe its deployment for games such as the ones introduced
in conjunction with the EyeToy’s Kung-Foo [20, 34] to be relatively
straightforward.

3 RESULTS
3.1 Quantitative Assessment
3.1.1 Calibration Repeatability and Accuracy
The mean co-calibration error achieved when the simple marker-based
setup was used to estimate the rigid transformation between HoloLens
and Kinect is 2.78 ± 2.28 cm while the median error is 2.17 cm. More
importantly the rotational error is 1.35 ± 0.86 degrees and median error
of 1.15 degrees.
The alternative method for calibration using a checkerboard yields an
re-projection error of 1.66 pixels.

3.1.2 Depth Signal Degradation due to Reﬂection
From Figure 6 it becomes apparent that the user is visible in the IR
image of the Kinect acquired from the reﬂection. However, the IR
emitter is also imaged leading to substantial artifact. Yet, the Microsoft
Kinect SDK 1.8 is able to reliably detect and track the skeleton of the
upper torso.
Intensity curves of the IR pattern at various target distances from the
sensor are shown in Figure 7. Distances reported for the reﬂection con-
sider the distance of the Kinect to the virtual image (double the distance
to the mirror). Moreover, we show the asymptote that corresponds to
the case where no IR signal can be measured. While the IR pattern
intensity is considerably lower in reﬂected compared to real scenes, the
intensity is still well above the threshold used for out-of-range areas
indicated by the asymptote if the target of interest is sufﬁciently close
to the reﬂective surface. Based on these results, we position the user at
a distance of approximately 1.00 m to the mirror to ensure functionality
of the skeleton tracking.

3.2 Demonstrations
Self-augmentation with the models were perceived well. Skeleton
tracking as provided by the Kinect v1 and co-calibration performed
sufﬁciently well to enable credible immersion. The rendered models
exhibit high contrast and opaqueness which can be appreciated in Fig-
ure 8. Dark colors possess a low visibility since they are equivalent to
the transparency factor due to the nature of the additive color display
mechanism of the OST HMD.
The communication between the Kinect and the HoloLens on a single
dedicated wireless local network allows for reliable real-time commu-
nication with a delay of approximately 20 ms.

4 DISCUSSION
In summary, our proof-of-principle prototype system was able to pro-
vide convincing evidence that self-augmentation using OST HMDs and
reﬂections from physical mirrors is possible and potentially useful in
several applications. However, the proposed method and device could
substantially beneﬁt from future work.
The most obvious drawback of the current prototype is that skeleton
tracking in the reﬂection is not fully integrated with the HMD and

Fig. 6. Left: Raw IR image. Right: Processed and segmented depth
image. Direct reﬂection of the IR pattern saturates the infrared sensor
and obstructs the system from seeing the head in the depth image.

Fig. 7. Curve comparison of the intensity of the IR pattern as a function of
the distance to the person standing in front of the camera. The asymptote
indicates the intensity threshold below which skeleton tracking cannot be
performed reliably.

may, therefore, suffer from de-calibration over time. In such cases,
use of the outdated calibration results in an incorrect overlay of the
virtual content with the reﬂection. While our results suggest that the
accuracy of our simple online calibration using a simple ARToolKit
marker is acceptable in most cases, use of the HMD integrated sensors
would allow for very accurate ofﬂine calibration without the need for
frequent re-calibration. The authors believe that, as previously men-
tioned in the manuscript, human pose estimation methods that operate
on monocular RGB images [30, 57] would lend themselves well for
the considered use-case. In addition, methods that operate on RGB
rather than IR images could increase the ﬂexibility of the proposed
system. The reason is that the reﬂectivity of conventional mirrors is
much higher for the visible compared to the IR spectrum. This, in turn,
mitigates the effect observed in Figure 7, where limited reﬂectivity in
the IR spectrum substantially limited the distance of the user from the
mirror. However, as the proposed system is able to detect the mirror
using the self-encoded marker, the user can be directed towards the
mirror in cases when skeleton tracking fails.
It is worth mentioning that the proposed system is directly applicable to
tracking and augmentation of other persons in the user’s environment.
This emphasized the importance of reﬂection detection, as models used
for self-augmentation need to be ﬂipped for accurate overlay. In our
prototype, a self-encoded marker was used to detect reﬂections that
performed well, however, novel methods based on face detection and

During our experiments we noted misalignments of the deformed model
and the user that arise from de-synchronization. Considering the low
latency of our data transfer network of about 20 ms, the observed lag
results from the limited hardware resources of the HoloLens. The
processing power of the HMD is not sufﬁcient to accurately align and
deform the high resolution 3D models to the user’s skeleton provided
by the Kinect.
Improvements of OST HMDs will immediately beneﬁt the proposed
system, making us conﬁdent that the proposed concept of combining
OST HMDs with physical mirrors for self-augmentation will be found
useful. Applications in tele-rehabilitation and personal training may be
of particular interest, as real-time feedback overlaid directly with the
user can be a key advantage.

(a) Arm muscles

5 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed the concept of optical see-through head-
mounted display (OST HMD) based self-augmentation and a prototype
implementation. The system anchors virtual content displayed in the
HMD to the reﬂection of the user that is generated by a physical mirror.
Based on skeleton tracking in the reﬂection, we demonstrate the capa-
bilities of the system in augmenting the user with humanoid models.
Compared to existing systems, our system requires only an OST HMD
equipped with an RGBD camera making it highly portable. Therefore,
it can be used in any facility with pre-installed body-sized mirrors
including, but not limited to, applications in health-care, entertainment,
and personal ﬁtness.
The promising performance of our prototype device motivates fur-
ther reﬁnement of the system in order to explore its capabilities in
tele-rehabilitation, where we believe the system could be of particular
importance as it combines real-time motion capture with mixed reality
feedback directly overlaid with the user.

REFERENCES

[1] Oculus rift setup leap motion developer.
[2] Project-infrared, kinect and the hololens.
[3] anARtomy. LINDSAY Virtual Human, 2015.
[4] F. Anderson, T. Grossman, J. Matejka, and G. Fitzmaurice. Youmove:
enhancing movement training with an augmented reality mirror. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology, pp. 311–320. ACM, 2013.

[5] S. Aukstakalnis. Practical Augmented Reality: A Guide to the Technolo-
gies, Applications, and Human Factors for AR and VR. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2016.

[6] L. Avila and M. Bailey. Augment your reality. IEEE computer graphics

and applications, 36(1):6–7, 2016.

[7] A. Bauer, A.-H. Dicko, O. Palombi, F. Faure, and J. Troccaz. Living book
of anatomy (lba) project: see your insides in motion! In SIGGRAPH Asia
2015 Emerging Technologies, p. 16. ACM, 2015.

[8] D. Besserer, J. B¨aurle, A. Nikic, F. Honold, F. Sch¨ussel, and M. Weber.
Fitmirror: a smart mirror for positive affect in everyday user morning rou-
tines. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multimodal Analyses enabling
Artiﬁcial Agents in Human-Machine Interaction, pp. 48–55. ACM, 2016.
[9] O. Bimber and R. Raskar. Spatial augmented reality: merging real and

virtual worlds. CRC press, 2005.

[10] W. Birkfellner, M. Figl, C. Matula, J. Hummel, R. Hanel, H. Imhof, F. Wan-
schitz, A. Wagner, F. Watzinger, and H. Bergmann. Computer-enhanced
stereoscopic vision in a head-mounted operating binocular. Physics in
Medicine and Biology, 48(3):N49, 2003.

[11] T. Blum, V. Kleeberger, C. Bichlmeier, and N. Navab. mirracle: An
augmented reality magic mirror system for anatomy education. In Virtual
Reality Short Papers and Posters (VRW), 2012 IEEE, pp. 115–116. IEEE,
2012.

[12] F. Bork, R. Barmaki, U. Eck, P. Fallavolita, B. Fuerst, and N. Navab.
Exploring non-reversing magic mirrors for screen-based augmented reality
systems. In Proceedings - IEEE Virtual Reality, pp. 373–374. IEEE, 2017.
doi: 10.1109/VR.2017.7892332

[13] C. Doctorow. Haunted Mansion Hitchhiking Ghosts go digital, play

high-tech pranks on riders, 2011.

[14] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey. Simultaneous localization and mapping:
part i. IEEE robotics & automation magazine, 13(2):99–110, 2006.

(b) Skeleton

(c) Jacket and hat

(d) Hero suit

Fig. 8. Self-augmentation using the models. These images were
recorded using the HMD directly and strongly resemble the perception of
the user. Due to the skeleton tracking, the user can freely move in front
of the mirror while the augmentation with the 3D model is maintained
and adapted to match the current pose of the user’s upper extremities.

recognition could be deployed that would not require additional mark-
ers and may even work if the face is partly occluded by the visor of the
HMD [49].

[15] A. Fern’ndez-Baena, A. Sus´ın, and X. Lligadas. Biomechanical validation
of upper-body and lower-body joint movements of kinect motion capture
data for rehabilitation treatments. In Intelligent networking and collabora-
tive systems (INCoS), 2012 4th international conference on, pp. 656–661.
IEEE, 2012.

[16] M. Fischer, B. Fuerst, S. C. Lee, J. Fotouhi, S. Habert, S. Weidert, E. Euler,
G. Osgood, and N. Navab. Preclinical usability study of multiple aug-
mented reality concepts for k-wire placement. International journal of
computer assisted radiology and surgery, 11(6):1007–1014, 2016.
[17] L. Flavell. Basic Rigging and Animation, pp. 155–190. Apress, Berkeley,

CA, 2010. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4302-3127-1 7

[18] K. Fujinami, F. Kawsar, and T. Nakajima. Awaremirror: A personalized
display using a mirror. In Pervasive, pp. 315–332. Springer, 2005.
[19] P. F¨ursattel, S. Placht, M. Balda, C. Schaller, H. Hofmann, A. Maier, and
C. Riess. A comparative error analysis of current time-of-ﬂight sensors.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging, 2(1):27–41, 2016.

[20] Gamerevolution. EyeToy Review, 2003.
[21] S. Habert, J. Gardiazabal, P. Fallavollita, and N. Navab. Rgbdx: ﬁrst design
and experimental validation of a mirror-based rgbd x-ray imaging sys-
tem. In Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2015 IEEE International
Symposium on, pp. 13–18. IEEE, 2015.
[22] T. Holmdahl. Microsoft Devices Blog, 2015.
[23] A. S. Householder. Unitary triangularization of a nonsymmetric matrix.

[42] I. Pachoulakis and K. Kapetanakis. Augmented reality platforms for virtual
ﬁtting rooms. The International Journal of Multimedia & Its Applications,
4(4):35, 2012.

[43] L. Qian, M. Unberath, K. Yu, A. Johnson, B. Fuerst, N. Navab, and
G. Osgood. Technical note: Towards virtual monitors for image guided
interventions
real-time streaming to optical see-through head mounted displays. Medical
Physics, p. under review, 2017.

[44] A. M. Rahman, T. T. Tran, S. A. Hossain, and A. El Saddik. Augmented
rendering of makeup features in a smart interactive mirror system for
decision support in cosmetic products selection. In Distributed Simulation
and Real Time Applications (DS-RT), 2010 IEEE/ACM 14th International
Symposium on, pp. 203–206. IEEE, 2010.

[45] T. Richter-Trummer, D. Kalkofen, J. Park, and D. Schmalstieg. Instant
mixed reality lighting from casual scanning. In Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 27–36.
IEEE, 2016.

[46] H. Sato, I. Kitahara, and Y. Ohta. Mr-mirror: a complex of real and virtual
mirrors. In International Conference on Virtual and Mixed Reality, pp.
482–491. Springer, 2009.

[47] D. Schmalstieg and T. Hollerer. Augmented reality: principles and practice.

Addison-Wesley Professional, 2016.

[48] J. H. Shuhaiber. Augmented reality in surgery. Archives of surgery,

Journal of the ACM (JACM), 5(4):339–342, 1958.

139(2):170–174, 2004.

[49] A. Singh, D. Patil, G. M. Reddy, and S. Omkar. Disguised face identiﬁca-
tion (dﬁ) with facial keypoints using spatial fusion convolutional network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.09317, 2017.

[50] K. Srinivasan and S. Vivek. Implementation of virtual ﬁtting room using
image processing. In Computer, Communication and Signal Processing
(ICCCSP), 2017 International Conference on, pp. 1–3. IEEE, 2017.
[51] J. K. Tworek, H. A. Jamniczky, C. Jacob, B. Hallgr´ımsson, and B. Wright.
The lindsay virtual human project: An immersive approach to anatomy
and physiology. Anatomical sciences education, 6(1):19–28, 2013.

[52] S. UG. SOLOS mirrors, 2017.
[53] K. Ushida, Y. Tanaka, T. Naemura, and H. Harashima.

i-mirror: An
interaction/information environment based on a mirror metaphor aiming
to install into our life space. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality and Telexistence (ICAT2002), pp. 113–
118, 2002.

[54] F. Weichert, D. Bachmann, B. Rudak, and D. Fisseler. Analysis of the
accuracy and robustness of the leap motion controller. Sensors, 13(5):6380–
6393, 2013.

[55] H.-K. Wu, S. W.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Chang, and J.-C. Liang. Current status,
opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in education. Computers
& Education, 62:41–49, 2013.

[56] Z. Zhang. Microsoft kinect sensor and its effect.

IEEE multimedia,

19(2):4–10, 2012.

[57] X. Zhou, M. Zhu, S. Leonardos, K. G. Derpanis, and K. Daniilidis. Sparse-
ness meets deepness: 3d human pose estimation from monocular video.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 4966–4975, 2016.

[24] M. Innmann, M. Zollh¨ofer, M. Nießner, C. Theobalt, and M. Stamminger.
Volumedeform: Real-time volumetric non-rigid reconstruction. In Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 362–379. Springer, 2016.
[25] A. Javornik, Y. Rogers, A. M. Moutinho, and R. Freeman. Revealing the
shopper experience of using a” magic mirror” augmented reality make-up
application. In Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, vol. 2016,
pp. 871–882. Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2016.
[26] H. Kato and M. Billinghurst. Marker tracking and hmd calibration for
In Augmented
a video-based augmented reality conferencing system.
Reality, 1999.(IWAR’99) Proceedings. 2nd IEEE and ACM International
Workshop on, pp. 85–94. IEEE, 1999.

[27] B. C. Kress and W. J. Cummings. 11-1: Invited paper: Towards the
ultimate mixed reality experience: Hololens display architecture choices.
SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, 48(1):127–131, 2017.
[28] E. Lachat, H. Macher, M. Mittet, T. Landes, and P. Grussenmeyer. First
experiences with kinect v2 sensor for close range 3d modelling. The
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, 40(5):93, 2015.

[29] K. Lee. Augmented reality in education and training. TechTrends, 56(2):13–

21, 2012.

[30] S. Li and A. B. Chan. 3d human pose estimation from monocular images
with deep convolutional neural network. In Asian Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 332–347. Springer, 2014.

[31] S. Liu, D. Cheng, and H. Hua. An optical see-through head mounted
display with addressable focal planes. In Mixed and Augmented Reality,
2008. ISMAR 2008. 7th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on, pp. 33–
42. IEEE, 2008.

[32] Z. Lv, A. Halawani, S. Feng, S. Ur R´ehman, and H. Li. Touch-less inter-
active augmented reality game on vision-based wearable device. Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing, 19(3-4):551–567, 2015.

[33] M. Ma, A. Oikonomou, and L. C. Jain. Serious games and edutainment

applications. Springer, 2011.

[34] R. Marks. Eyetoy, innovation and beyond. Sony Computer Entertainment

America. Retrieved, pp. 12–01, 2010.

[35] Microsoft. Holoﬂector, 2012.
[36] Microsoft. Coordinate Systems, 2017.
[37] Microsoft. The leader in mixed reality technology, 2017.
[38] Microsoft. Shared experiences in mixed reality, 2017.
[39] E. Moon, M. Kim, J. Roh, H. Kim, and J. Hahn. Holographic head-
mounted display with rgb light emitting diode light source. Optics express,
22(6):6526–6534, 2014.

[40] R. A. Newcombe, D. Fox, and S. M. Seitz. Dynamicfusion: Reconstruction
and tracking of non-rigid scenes in real-time. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 343–352,
2015.

[41] B. Nuernberger, E. Ofek, H. Benko, and A. D. Wilson. Snaptoreality:
Aligning augmented reality to the real world. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1233–1244.
ACM, 2016.

