0
2
0
2

l
u
J

6

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
9
6
2
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Finally a Case for Collaborative VR?: The Need to Design for
Remote Multi-Party Conversations

Anna Bleakley
University College Dublin
anna.bleakley@ucdconnect.ie

Vincent Wade
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
vincent.wade@adaptcentre.ie

Benjamin R. Cowan
University College Dublin
benjamin.cowan@ucd.ie

ABSTRACT
Amid current social distancing measures requiring people to work
from home, there has been renewed interest on how to eﬀectively
converse and collaborate remotely utilizing currently available
technologies. On the surface, VR provides a perfect platform for
eﬀective remote communication. It can transfer contextual and
environmental cues and facilitate a shared perspective while also
allowing people to be virtually co-located. Yet we argue that cur-
rently VR is not adequately designed for such a communicative
purpose. In this paper, we outline three key barriers to using VR
for conversational activity : (1) variability of social immersion,
(2) unclear user roles, and (3) the need for eﬀective shared visual
reference. Based on this outline, key design topics are discussed
through a user experience design perspective for considerations
in a future collaborative design framework.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social
computing theory, concepts and paradigms; Virtual reality;
Collaborative interaction; User centered design;
KEYWORDS
collaboration; virtual reality; social VR; conversational user inter-
face

ACM Reference Format:
Anna Bleakley, Vincent Wade, and Benjamin R. Cowan. 2020. Finally a
Case for Collaborative VR?: The Need to Design for Remote Multi-Party
Conversations. In 2nd Conference on Conversational User Interfaces (CUI
’20), July 22–24, 2020, Bilbao, Spain. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3405755.3406144

1 INTRODUCTION
Amid the surge in remote working conditions due to current social
distancing measures, VR could be seen to provide much promise
as a tool to support multiparty communication. As early as the 90s
VR spaces have been built to facilitate collaboration [1, 2] encour-
aging a move towards multi-party virtual communication. More re-
cently VR platforms have facilitated a multitude of conversational
activities including conferences, social networking, and teleconfer-
encing. However, the technology is yet to be adopted on a larger

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CUI ’20, July 22–24, 2020, Bilbao, Spain
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7544-3/20/07.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3405755.3406144

scale due to shortcomings in facilitating multi-party collaborative
experiences.

Currently, there exists a shortage of studies that explore how
to better design collaborative VR platforms. This is essential in
order to identify concepts crucial to activities and conversations
that are a part of virtual collaborative experiences. In the litera-
ture, current design choices have been examined [6, 10, 11] but
focus mainly on single user experiences or an available platform’s
features. Some research has begun to study how design decisions
support multi-party social interaction [17, 18] but are not targeted
at creating design principles applicable for collaboration or in sup-
porting conversations that take place in various contexts. Deﬁn-
ing design requirements are necessary to ensure that VR designers
build eﬀective collaborative experiences that can extend to a multi-
tude of scenarios. In this provocation, we argue that clear insights
to inform the design of VR spaces for eﬀective conversation and
collaboration are currently lacking. Our paper highlights three key
issues needing to be addressed in collaborative VR research with
the hopes of laying the groundwork for future design research in
this domain.

2 KEY ISSUES
2.1 Variability of social immersion
Establishing a sense of presence is a common goal for VR appli-
cations and has regularly been used as a user experience measure
when assessing VR applications. In VR, users do tend to attain a
sense of social presence; a sense of being there or in groups and
being there together. Increasing social presence has the potential to
promote social cues common in face-to-face interactions such as
eye-contact, joint attention as well as non-verbal and verbal cues
relevant to a given context enhancing the eﬀectiveness of commu-
nicative activities [17]. Yet the level of social presence varies sig-
niﬁcantly depending on the type of VR application used [15].

The way avatars or environments are augmented also impact
co-presence. In a recent experiment, co-presence is shown to be
impacted by level detail of avatars as well as ﬁdelity of the back-
ground [7]. This suggests that multiple design variables are likely
to contribute to social immersion and even aﬀect emotional re-
sponse in users as demonstrated in [8]. Even though signiﬁcant
work has concentrated on this concept, we are still unclear what
aspects of the environment, social behaviors, and user appearance
impact levels of social presence systematically and how these play
out in multi-party contexts.

2.2 Unclear collaborative roles
Signals about one’s identity and role inﬂuence social interaction.
For example the way an avatar or agent is depicted in these virtual

 
 
 
 
 
 
environments is known to aﬀect emotional states and empathic
behaviour [9]. For multi-party collaboration, roles are dynamic,
with speakers taking on diﬀerent capacities such as speakers, ad-
dressees, by-standers, and overhearers during an interaction [14].
Depending on the context for multi-party conversation, the recog-
nition and appropriate signalling of these roles in VR is crucial
to consider. As clear conversational roles allow for eﬀective multi-
party interactions [14], the display of eﬀective conversational me-
chanics by avatars such as attentiveness and gaze behaviour as well
as mechanisms to signal roles within a conversation may lead to
more eﬀective turn-taking beyond deploying ’ﬂoor-control’ poli-
cies like tradition conferencing systems. What is more, as agents
also become communicative actors in VR spaces, taking on previ-
ously human roles such as a facilitators or guides, we must also be
cognisant of how their role in the conversation is communicated
and how their conversational capabilities can be more clearly sig-
nalled through design.

2.3 The need for an eﬀective shared visual

reference

Shared visual information on the state of the task as well as state
of a remote partner are integral for eﬀective remote collaboration
when designing virtual environments [19]. When performing tasks
in physical environments, a shared workspace has been shown to
assist users in eﬃciently collaborating when relying on visual in-
formation rather than verbally conﬁrming their actions [4]. Vari-
ous collaborative multi-party tasks require a shared object of inter-
est such as a Kanban board, whiteboard, or poster - that collabora-
tors refer to physically and verbally. In physical collaboration tasks,
speech and action have been shown to relate to mutual visual ref-
erences in the background that coordinate these actions through
non-verbal media [3]. This needs to be considered more eﬀectively
for VR based collaboration and contextualized for wider use.

To our knowledge studies on shared artifacts are limited on a
general level, and those available are speciﬁc to domains such as
human-data interaction [5], scientiﬁc communities [5],or architec-
tural design spaces [12] to name a few. In these studies much of
the emphasis has been on building virtual environments to accom-
modate speciﬁc tasks rather than conversations that take place in
reference to shared artifacts. Although some work has examined
collaboration on a general level [13, 16, 20], they mainly focus on
technological factors or are outdated with the release of new com-
mercial VR applications. Experiences are bound to diﬀer depend-
ing on diﬀerences in artifacts and settings in question as diﬀerent
contexts and tasks will have speciﬁc needs to shape the form of in-
teractions most eﬀective. For instance, a joint programming work-
ﬂow will require vastly diﬀerent shared coordination tools and vi-
sual reference artifacts in contrast with a joint learning context.
The design of visual references therefore need to be understood
with consideration to how mutual objects of reference as well as
the environment can support multiparty communicative goals.

3 CONCLUSION
Amid the current pandemic there has been growing interest in how
we can eﬀectively work and collaborate remotely. Although VR

seems like it should provide the perfect environment for such col-
laboration, we argue that currently VR is not adequately designed
for such multiparty communicative contexts. Here we highlight
how issues in social immersion, user roles and the design of eﬀec-
tive spaces to incorporate share referents need to be addressed to
ensure we improve the experience of VR users in such contexts.
The outlining of these issues aims to act as a foundation for what
to focus on when considering the design of multiparty VR spaces
for conversation and collaboration.

4 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was conducted with the ﬁnancial support of the Sci-
ence Foundation Ireland Centre for Research Training in Digitally-
Enhanced Reality (D-REAL) under Grant No. 18/CRT/6224 and
Science Foundation Ireland ADAPT Centre under Grant. No.
13/RC/2106.

REFERENCES
[1] David B Anderson, John W Barrus, John H Howard, Charles Rich, Chia Shen,
and Richard C Waters. 1995. Building multiuser interactive multimedia environ-
ments at MERL. IEEE MultiMedia 2, 4 (1995), 77–82.

[2] Steve Benford, John Bowers, Lennart E Fahlén, Chris Greenhalgh, and Dave
Snowdon. 1995. User embodiment in collaborative virtual environments. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. 242–
249.

[3] Nick V Flor. 1998. Side-by-side collaboration: A case study. International Journal

of Human-Computer Studies 49, 3 (1998), 201–222.

[4] Susan R Fussell, Robert E Kraut, and Jane Siegel. 2000. Coordination of commu-
nication: Eﬀects of shared visual context on collaborative work. In Proceedings
of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. 21–30.
[5] Arturo S García, Terrence Fernando, David J Roberts, Christian Bar, Michele
Cencetti, Wito Engelke, and Andreas Gerndt. 2019. Collaborative virtual reality
platform for visualizing space data and mission planning. Multimedia Tools and
Applications 78, 23 (2019), 33191–33220.

[6] Jason Jerald. 2015. The VR book: Human-centered design for virtual reality. Mor-

gan & Claypool.

[7] Dongsik Jo, Ki-Hong Kim, and Gerard Jounghyun Kim. 2016. Eﬀects of avatar
and background representation forms to co-presence in mixed reality (MR) tele-
conference systems. In SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016 Virtual Reality meets Physical Re-
ality: Modelling and Simulating Virtual Humans and Environments. 1–4.

[8] Dongsik Jo, Ki-Hong Kim, and Gerard Jounghyun Kim. 2017. Eﬀects of avatar
and background types on users’ co-presence and trust for mixed reality-based
teleconference systems. In In Proceedings the 30th Conference on Computer Ani-
mation and Social Agents. 27–36.

[9] Esperanza Johnson, Ramón Hervás, Carlos Gutiérrez López de la Franca, Tania
Mondéjar, Sergio F Ochoa, and Jesús Favela. 2018. Assessing empathy and man-
aging emotions through interactions with an aﬀective avatar. Health informatics
journal 24, 2 (2018), 182–193.

[10] Marcel Jonas, Steven Said, Daniel Yu, Chris Aiello, Nicholas Furlo, and Douglas
Zytko. 2019. Towards a Taxonomy of Social VR Application Design. In Extended
Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Com-
panion Extended Abstracts. 437–444.

[11] Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, Anya Kolesnichenko, and Katherine Isbister. 2019.
Shaping Pro-Social Interaction in VR: An Emerging Design Framework. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–12.

[12] Minh-Tu Nguyen, Hai-Khanh Nguyen, Khanh-Duy Vo-Lam, Xuan-Gieng
Nguyen, and Minh-Triet Tran. 2016. Applying virtual reality in city planning.
In International Conference on Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. Springer,
724–735.

[13] Oliver Otto, Dave Roberts, and Robin Wolﬀ. 2006. A review on eﬀective closely-
coupled collaboration using immersive CVE’s. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM
international conference on Virtual reality continuum and its applications. 145–
154.

[14] Tomislav Pejsa, Michael Gleicher, and Bilge Mutlu. 2017. Who, me? How vir-
tual agents can shape conversational footing in virtual reality. In International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents. Springer, 347–359.

[15] Iana Podkosova and Hannes Kaufmann. 2018. Co-presence and proxemics in
shared walkable virtual environments with mixed colocation. In Proceedings of
the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. 1–11.

[16] David Roberts, Robin Wolﬀ, Oliver Otto, Dieter Kranzlmueller, Christoph An-
thes, and Anthony Steed. 2004. Supporting social human communication be-
tween distributed walk-in displays. In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on
Virtual reality software and technology. 81–88.

[17] Daniel Roth, Constantin Klelnbeck, Tobias Feigl, Christopher Mutschler, and
Marc Erich Latoschik. 2018. Beyond replication: Augmenting social behaviors
in multi-user virtual realities. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D
User Interfaces (VR). IEEE, 215–222.

[18] Anthony Scavarelli, Ali Arya, and Robert J Teather. 2019. Towards a framework
on accessible and social VR in education. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR). IEEE, 1148–1149.

[19] Harrison Jesse Smith and Michael Neﬀ. 2018. Communication behavior in em-
bodied virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[20] Robin Wolﬀ, Dave J Roberts, Anthony Steed, and Oliver Otto. 2007. A review
of telecollaboration technologies with respect to closely coupled collaboration.
International Journal of Computer Applications in Technology 29, 1 (2007), 11–26.

