0
2
0
2

g
u
A
6

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
5
2
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach to
Watching Players in VR

Andrey Krekhov
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
andrey.krekhov@uni-due.de

Sebastian Cmentowski
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
sebastian.cmentowski@uni-due.de

Daniel Preuß
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
daniel.preuss@uni-due.de

Jens Kr¨uger
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
jens.krueger@uni-due.de

Figure 1: Our paper contributes a new spectatorship experience for virtual reality games. We blend the player’s reflection in
the virtual environment and provide a dynamic view frustum that allows viewers to explore the game world by themselves.

ABSTRACT
Watching others play is a key ingredient of digital games and an
important aspect of games user research. However, spectatorship
is not very popular in virtual reality, as such games strongly rely
on one’s feelings of presence. In other words, the head-mounted
display creates a barrier between the player and the audience. We
contribute an alternative watching approach consisting of two ma-
jor components: a dynamic view frustum that renders the game
scene from the current spectator position and a one-way mirror
in front of the screen. This mirror, together with our silhouetting

algorithm, allows seeing the player’s reflection at the correct posi-
tion in the virtual world. An exploratory survey emphasizes the
overall positive experience of the viewers in our setup. In partic-
ular, the participants enjoyed their ability to explore the virtual
surrounding via physical repositioning and to observe the blended
player during object manipulations. Apart from requesting a larger
screen, the participants expressed a strong need to interact with
the player. Consequently, we suggest utilizing our technology as a
foundation for novel playful experiences with the overarching goal
to transform the passive spectator into a collocated player.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI PLAY ’20, Virtual Event, Canada
© 2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
978-1-4503-8074-4/20/11. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.1145/3410404.3414247

CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; •Software
and its engineering → Interactive games; Virtual worlds soft-
ware;

KEYWORDS
Virtual Reality; Interactive Frustum; Spectator; Mirror; VR Games;
Watching Others Play; Player Reflection

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Krekhov et al.

ACM Reference format:
Andrey Krekhov, Daniel Preuß, Sebastian Cmentowski, and Jens Kr¨uger.
2020. Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach to Watch-
ing Players in VR. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the Annual Symposium
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play, Virtual Event, Canada, November
2–4, 2020 (CHI PLAY ’20), 11 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/3410404.3414247

1 INTRODUCTION
Looking over the player’s shoulder has always been a crucial part of
our digital gaming experience. There are manifold reasons to watch
others play, such as entertainment or learning game strategies [50].
Throughout history, the habit of observing players has evolved
from casual get-togethers in domestic settings to highly attended
live tournaments with thousands of on-site supporters and even
more remote viewers. Not only the competitive scene has evolved:
nowadays, many players share their daily gameplay sessions via
live streaming platforms like Twitch [2].

In virtual reality (VR), the head-mounted display (HMD) imposes
an artificial barrier between viewers and the player, and enjoying
the virtual world often remains a lonely experience. Although
current technologies allow us to see the virtual world through the
player’s eyes via local or remote live streaming, the unique selling
point of VR—namely the induced presence—remains unavailable to
the audience.

What we see at best are the player’s movements in the real-
world next to a screen with the corresponding first-person view. It
remains up to our imagination to merge these two perspectives and
to project the player into the virtual environment. Indeed, we can
automate this projection by utilizing a green screen setup [34], in
which case the audience can see the captured player at the correct
virtual position and scale. However, due to the inherent complexity
and expensiveness, such setups remain limited to high fidelity video
productions required for game teasers and advertising. No less
important issue of a green screen is the predefined camera position.
If something is happening right outside of the view frustum, the
audience will inevitably miss this event.

To summarize, observing someone playing in VR remains an
unsolved problem: On one hand, the first-person view fails to
convey the full-body interaction, which is a crucial component of
player experience in VR. On the other hand, green screen setups,
apart from being expensive and requiring lots of effort, work only
for a handful of games, such as Beat Saber[4], where we can predict
the optimal camera orientation for the whole game session.

This paper contributes to this topic by presenting a novel possi-
bility to watch players in VR. Our interactive approach displays the
player in the virtual environment similar to a green screen caption,
yet allowing the viewers to control the frustum via physical repo-
sitioning (cf. Figure 2). In this way, viewers perceive the visible
content as a window into the virtual world rather than a static
display—changing position relative to the screen offers different
perspectives and prevents missing out on exciting events.

The core idea revolves around the principle of one-sided mirrors.
Behind such a mirror, we place a screen that displays the virtual
world depending on the observer’s point of view. Our silhouetting
algorithm renders a dark overlay at the position of the player’s
reflection to trigger the mirroring property of this local area. As

Figure 2: The view frustum is rendered based on the viewer’s
and player’s positions. The viewer, equipped with an HTC
Vive Tracker, moves freely in the room to obtain the desired
perspective on the virtual environment.
In the example
above, the viewer moves forward and to the right. This tran-
sition increases the field of view, and, e.g., reveals a house in
the right corner.

a result, the observer sees the player’s mirror image “inside” the
virtual world, as shown in Figure 1.

To gather first impressions of this alternative watching experi-
ence, we conducted a qualitative evaluation using a VR adventure
game as a testbed. The outcomes reveal particular strengths of the
idea, such as the overall comprehensibility of the player’s actions
and the highly appreciated freedom of autonomous exploration.
The collected requests of the participants provide a ground for
follow-up research and outline possible application areas of our
collocated setup.

2 RELATED WORK
Games have always attracted a broad watching audience. In the
early days, video games were mostly limited to entertainment ma-
chines installed in amusement arcades and surrounded by crowds
of interested bystanders [38]. Today, spectating is no longer bound
to physical presence. Instead, viewers from all over the world can
watch their favorite players using video and streaming platforms,
e.g., YouTube [63] or Twitch [2].

Nowadays, spectator is not just a passive onlooker. For instance,
the game Drawful 2 [27] requires the spectators to guess the original
phrase based on the player’s hand-drawn image. This trend also
extends to VR, rendering the virtual experience more social and
inclusive. One recent game is Acron: Attack of the Squirrels! [23].
The non-VR spectators (or players) act as a team of squirrels and
attempt to steal the “Golden Acrons”, which are protected by the
VR player. In contrast, the two-player version of Carly and the
Reaperman: Escape from the Underworld [54] requires a close co-
operation between the VR player and the non-VR participant in
order to overcome the in-game obstacles.

Throughout the years, spectating games has been of ongoing
interest to the research community [14, 20, 22, 50, 51]. Especially
the recording and streaming of gameplay sessions using online
platforms has recently attracted attention due to its importance for
the growing esports community [12, 25, 42, 49]. Apart from these
distributed approaches using online media, a growing research

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

corpus has focused on the local spectator experience. In this area,
the differentiation between active player and passive audience [55]
is usually not applicable. Instead, the recent work broadens the
definition of spectators to active bystanders interacting with various
interfaces [56], often in the form of interactive displays [37, 40, 57].
Common assumptions tend to present gaming as a mostly soli-
tary activity being shared among the active players only. Contrary
to this popular belief, social activities, including spectating, are
essential components of play [59]. People like to watch others play
games for various reasons, such as being entertained, distracted, or
learning new game strategies [50]. These desires require a sufficient
understanding of the course of action and the players’ activities.
Reeves et al. [43] classify spectator interfaces based on this informa-
tion being given to or hidden from the audience. In particular, the
authors differentiate between the manipulations conducted by the
players and the effects in the game. Based on these two variables,
the authors derive four design strategies. For instance, a secretive
strategy is achieved if both the effects and the manipulations re-
main hidden. Revealing the effects but hiding the manipulations is
more suited for a magical interaction. Thus, most gaming activities
are better understood and watched with a high information level
on both - manipulations and effects.

In contrast to watching, for example, pre-recorded videos, local
spectatorship is usually a highly interactive process. Assisting the
players is commonly referred to as collocated gaming [17, 29, 60].
The grade of spectator participation can range from entirely passive
viewing to actively aiding the players in their task [35]. Downs et
al. [19] propose three durable roles: players, audience members,
and bystanders. However, the audience is not a static entity and
consists of spontaneous and rather ephemeral roles. Such roles
include, e.g., commentators, directors, coaches, and cheerleaders.
Another example of viewer interaction is responsive displays.
These interfaces can provide unique opportunities for the audience
to interact with the game, e.g., by altering their view on the game
or assisting the player. In their work, Maurer et al. [35] evaluated
how spectators could assist or interfere with the gameplay using
gaze tracking.

When using such responsive displays, most users start interact-
ing in a playful manner [58]. Instead of exploring the displayed
content, the viewers usually begin to experiment with the available
controls and play with their natural gestures. After satisfying their
curiosity, they will ultimately shift their focus to the content. This
behavior demonstrates the importance of supporting spontaneous
and natural interactions as part of the spectator experience. De-
signing responsive displays in such a user-centric manner can also
foster the well-known honeypot effect [62].

All of the previously covered aspects of spectatorship apply to
most games in general. However, the particular case of virtual
reality (VR) games introduces different and challenging conditions:
Players wear head-mounted displays (HMDs) to immerse fully into
a virtual world. These devices replace the traditional monitor and
hide the gameplay from the potential audience. At the same time,
VR games often rely heavily on full-body interactions that are
readily observable by bystanders. Therefore, typical VR devices can
be classified as ”suspenseful” interfaces according to the taxonomy
by Reeves et al. [43]: Manipulations are revealed, while effects tend
to stay hidden. These characteristics of VR setups do not provide

sufficient insights for potential spectators. Another limitation is
the social acceptability of HMDs, including AR and VR devices [1,
18, 30]. A spectator might be suspicious of being video-recorded,
which results in an underwhelming experience. Therefore, it is
crucial to provide the audience with a maximum amount of possible
information. Many VR games offer a mirrored view of the players’
sight, allowing bystanders to watch the action on a nearby display.
However, this perspective does not display the player’s full-body
actions in the virtual environment, resulting in a loss of information.
Another issue of the HMD-induced barrier is that the player
cannot see the audience. Nevertheless, the players are usually
still aware that onlookers are watching their full-body movements.
This self-consciousness might cause discomfort and induce the
feeling of insecurity [45]. On the other hand, such uncomfortable
or even embarrassing interactions [36] also have potential benefits.
Examples for this are entertainment and sociality, as discussed by
Benford et al. [5].

Other approaches provide the spectators with headsets them-
selves to achieve a shared technological basis. For instance, Larsson
et al. [32] evaluate the scenario of recorded VR presentations being
watched from the actor’s perspective using HMDs. Sra et al. [52]
emphasize the importance of equal experiences for all participants
in a shared VR space, even if the physical size and shape of the users’
individual space is significantly different. In particular, the authors
consider three different spatial mapping approaches to allow ev-
eryone to perform locomotion based on physical walking [53]. Re-
search on such topics, commonly referred to as collaborative virtual
environments (CVE) [6, 7, 15], mostly focuses on distributed [10]
or asymmetric [61] spectator experiences for specific purposes, e.g.,
visualizations [13] or education [41]. In our work, we specifically
target the case of non-VR viewers watching VR players.

Instead of moving the observers into the virtual reality, some
recent work has blended the elements from the virtual world into
the real environment. Zappi et al. [64] used stereoscopic shutter
glasses to present interactive virtual objects and real actors on the
same stage and achieve a hybrid-reality performance. Jonas et
al.’s RoomAlive [28] went one step further and turned the whole
room into a mixed reality environment shared among players and
observers using projector-camera systems. In their work, Hartmann
et al. [26] used Kinect cameras to blend the real surrounding into
the virtual environment. Similarly, they also integrated a spectator
mode projecting the virtual world onto the surrounding walls.

The third type of spectator interface extends the basic approach
of showing the players’ view on a display. Software solutions
such as LIV [34] use green screens and external cameras to blend
the real player into a third-person view of the game environment.
The result provides a better impression of the players’ experience.
Gugenheimer et al. [24] take this metaphor one step further. Their
ShareVR prototype uses a tracked handheld display to achieve a
mobile window into the virtual reality that can be moved freely by
the spectator. This approach is closely related to our work. With
our idea, we replace the handheld device with a very intuitive
mirror implementation that also achieves a blending of player and
environment.

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Krekhov et al.

Figure 3: An illustration of the proposed setup. The viewer looks at the screen and sees the player’s reflection at the correct
position in the game world. To achieve this, we render a silhouette-shaped overlay at this location. The dark silhouette triggers
the reflective property of the one-way mirror in front of the screen, blending the player’s reflection into VR.

3 THE INTERACTIVE MIRROR EXPERIENCE
VR attracts players with a high degree of immersion that such setups
offer. Unfortunately, there is no established way to transfer this
feeling of being in the virtual world to the audience—rather than
to equip the viewers with a VR HMD, of course [32]. As a result,
watching someone playing in VR is not very entertaining. First, we
cannot influence what we see, as the view is either predefined (green
screen setup) or controlled by the player (first-person view). Second,
it is hard for us to set the real-world motions and interactions of
the nearby player into the virtual context (first-person view).

This section describes an alternative solution that significantly
increases the interactivity on the viewer’s side and allows us to see
the real player in the virtual world without a green screen capturing
setup. By avoiding the impediments mentioned before, our goal
is to create a worthy and enjoyable watching experience for VR
games.

3.1 Overview
We recommend the readers to inspect Figure 3 to get a first impres-
sion of our technique. In short, we rely upon a one-sided mirror in
front of a screen to allow the viewer to see both the virtual world
and the player’s reflection at the correct virtual position. Hence, we
can subdivide our approach into two components: an interactive
frustum for the observer and a reflection-based visualization
of the player in the virtual world.

The interactive frustum renders the game scene based on the
observer’s position relative to the screen. Thus, stepping closer or
moving to the side allows the viewer to change the perspective
and witness a game event that would remain unnoticed otherwise.

For instance, by repositioning, the viewer might detect an enemy
approaching from the side. The viewer can even inform or warn the
player if such an interaction is desired. Hence, the screen is rather
deemed a window into the virtual world than a static display.

The concept of reflection-based visualization allows us to dis-
play the player’s physical body in the virtual environment. More
precisely, we see the reflection of the player at the correct posi-
tion in the game world. Therefore, we place a one-sided mirror in
front of the screen. Such semi-transparent mirrors are translucent
in case of a bright background, i.e., when the screen shows the
game content. However, if the screen is turned off (or black), the
installation behaves like an ordinary mirror. Hence, we render a
black overlay in the screen area where the observer would see the
player’s reflection. Seeing this reflection “inside” the virtual world
allows us to perceive the player’s actions in the gaming context,
which gets us closer to this immersive gaming experience.

The provided explanations together make up a top-level view
of our approach. In order to become operational, we need to solve
the particular problems associated with the described components:
First, we need to calculate and render the view frustum depending
on the observer’s point of view. Second, we have to compute the
position and size of the black overlay based on player and observer
locations relative to the mirror. The next sections tackle these two
challenges and contribute the respective solutions.

3.2 Interactive Frustum
The first crucial part of achieving an interactive, authentic experi-
ence is the view-dependent scene rendering on the screen behind
the mirror. The viewer must perceive the shown image as a correct
reflection of the virtual environment. Just like watching through a

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

2

(vx − sx )2 + vz
2
vz

=

2

(px − sx )2 + pz
2
pz

(3)

Further simplifying Equation 3 yields
2(pz
2) + 2sx (pxvz
sx
We have to differentiate between two cases. If pz equals vz ,

2 − vxpz

2 = 0 (4)

2) + vx

2 − vz

2 − px

2
vz

pz

2

Equation 4 is simplified to

2

2) + vx

2 − vxpy

2x(pxvy

py
We solve Equation 5 for sx and get
2 − vx
2
pz
2 − vxpz

2
vz
2(pxvz

sx = px

2

2)

2 − px

2
vy

2 = 0

(5)

If pz is not equal to vz , we apply the reduced quadratic formula

to Equation 4 and obtain

sx1, 2 = −

(cid:115)(cid:18) pxv2
z − vxp2
z
z − v2
p2
z
The desired solution sx is the one between px and vx , i.e., it

xv2
z − p2
xp2
v2
z
z − v2
p2
z

2
z − vxp
pxv
z − v2
p2
z

(cid:19)2

2
z

±

−

fulfills the following requirement:

min(vx , px ) ≤ sx ≤ max(vx , px ).

As mentioned before, we have to repeat this computation for the
yz-plane to get the vertical extent of the silhouette. To obtain the
top and bottom coordinates of S, we use the HMD position and the
location of the player’s feet as py , respectively.

Furthermore, we have to decide on the overall appearance of the
silhouette. The possibilities range from simple blobs to realistic 1:1
silhouettes. We postpone this discussion until Section 4, where we
outline the first impressions from such different silhouette repre-
sentations.

3.4 Hardware Prototype
We manufactured a small-scale prototype to validate our approach
and to have a testbed for qualitative evaluation. In a first step, we
carpentered a wooden frame to hold the one-sided mirror, as shown
in Figure 4. We then disassembled a 24-inch monitor and placed its
screen behind the mirror. Such installations are often referred to as

real mirror, the frustum is determined by the viewer’s perspective
and changes depending on the viewer’s movements.

Our solution follows the established mirror implementations
used in computer graphics literature [21]. However, we do not
apply the final texture to an object within the environment. Instead,
we render the texture on the display behind the mirror. This differ-
ence requires modifications to the usual approach. The complete
implementation consists of three consecutive steps:

(1) calculate the mirrored perspective
(2) render to texture
(3) display texture to the screen

In the first step, we calculate the matrices to render a correct
image of the reflection. Therefore, we place the scene’s camera at
the viewer’s position. The resulting model-view matrix is multi-
plied with the mirror’s reflection matrix to flip the scene. Next,
the camera renders to an intermediate texture. In the final step,
we display the texture on the whole screen using a blit operation
with the correct texture coordinates calculated from the viewer’s
position.

3.3 Reflection-Based Visualization
To bend the player’s reflection into the virtual world, we render a
black overlay at the estimated screen location. Let S = (sx , sy , sz )
denote this silhouette, as depicted in Figure 3. We define the co-
ordinate origin to be in the bottom left corner of the mirror, thus
setting sz = 0. Note that we can easily enforce this restriction by
translating the mirror.

S depends on the player’s position P = (px , py , pz ) and the
viewer’s position V = (vx , vy , vz ). We break this 3D problem
down into two 2D cases, as sx are sy independent of one another.
In the following paragraphs, we derive the solution for sx , which
applies analogously to sy .

We confine our analysis to the xz-plane with S = (sx , sz ), P =
(px , pz ) , and V = (vx , vz ). The normal of the mirror is given by the
vector n = (0, 1). By the law of reflection [33], the angles between
# »
# »
SV have to match.
PS and the outgoing vector
the incoming vector
By definition of the dot product [44], the following equation holds:

(V − S)
|V − S |

· n =

(P − S)
|P − S |

· n.

(1)

By inserting V , S, P, and n into Equation 1, we obtain:

1
(cid:112)(vx − sx )2 + vz

2

(cid:18) vx − sx
vz

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 0
1

·

=

1
(cid:112)(px − sx )2 + pz

2

(cid:18) px − sx
pz

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 0
1

·

Simplifying the equation above yields

vz
(cid:112)(vx − sx )2 + vz

2

=

pz
(cid:112)(px − sx )2 + pz

2

(2)

We invert and square Equation 2 to obtain

Figure 4: For our prototype, we placed a one-way mirror into
a frame and installed a 24-inch display at the back.

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Krekhov et al.

“smart mirrors”, and detailed assembly instructions can be obtained
on DIY platforms such as instructables [3].

To obtain the viewer’s position, we mounted a Vive Tracker [16]
on the backside of a cap (cf. Figure 1). Depending on particular
requirements, we suggest alternative solutions, such as marker-less
single-camera pose estimation [11]. Additionally, we attached a
tracker on top of the mirror to obtain its current location. This
optional add-in increases the overall portability of our setup, as it
allows for repositioning the mirror at any time.

4 EVALUATION
To our knowledge, the proposed approach is the first of its kind.
We therefore administered an evaluation to gather first impressions
of how potential viewers would perceive such technology. We
were particularly interested in the reception of the interactive view
frustum, the refection blending, and the overall impression left by
our concept.

4.1 Study Procedure
Due to the coronavirus outbreak at the moment of research, we
opted for a small-scale qualitative study to gather as many insights
as possible from a limited number of participants. The survey took
place in a large VR lab at the university to guarantee a sufficient
distance between the participant (i.e., the viewer) and the player
(i.e., the examiner). After being informed about the study procedure
and signing an informed consent, participants completed a ques-
tionnaire about their demographic data, gaming habits, and prior
VR experiences. Then, the examiner introduced the participants to
the operation of our setup (cf. Figure 3).

Figure 5: An overview of the study procedure.

The remainder of the survey consisted of four phases as out-
lined in Figure 5: Firstly, the examiner outlined and played the VR
testbed game described below. During this gaming session, the
participants acted as viewers and could freely move around the
room to adjust their view frustum. Secondly, we administered the
enjoyment subscale of the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) [46]
to assess the general enjoyment resulting from our approach, as
well as the Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) [47, 48] to measure
the feelings of presence. In particular, we utilized the IPQ subscales
spatial presence, involvement, experienced realism, and general
presence. We also posed some custom questions (abbreviated as
CQ, cf. Table 1) to assess how participants evaluated specific parts
of the installation, such as the view frustum and the player reflec-
tion. All administered questionnaire items had to be rated on a
unipolar scale ranging from 0 to 6 (“completely disagree” to “com-
pletely agree”). For IMI, we kept the original 7-point scale. The
original IPQ employs a 7-point scale and suggests ratings from -3 to
+3. We wanted to keep our questions uniform for the participants
and shifted the scale to 0-6. Thirdly, the examiner conducted a

Figure 6: The testbed adventure game. The left image depicts
the path taken by the player, i.e., the examiner. Two game
quests were interactions, such as sorting crates or collecting
wood (right). The two other quests focused on traveling.

semi-structured interview aimed at the identification of particular
strengths and weaknesses of our viewing technology. For instance,
we asked, “How did you perceive the interactions of the player
with the surrounding objects?” (see supplementary material for the
complete list of questions). Fourthly and finally, the participants
revisited the setup, where the examiner demonstrated our silhou-
ette variations (cf. Figure 7) in a randomized order. We presented
these alternatives to determine a possible sweet spot for future
applications. In particular, we varied the width and transparency
of the blob. Furthermore, we offered a silhouette that mimics the
player’s arm movements by repeating our silhouetting algorithm
for the two tracked controller coordinates. We assessed each sil-
houette’s perception by multiple questions, e.g., “Do you perceive
the player as part of the virtual environment?” (cf. supplementary
material). In the end, we asked the participants for final comments
and debriefed them.

4.1.1 Testbed Game. We used a medieval 3D adventure game
designed by Krekhov et al. [31] as our VR scenario (cf. Figure 6). In
this game, the player takes up the role of an herbalistfis apprentice
and solves four different quests. The first and third quest focus on
object interaction, i.e., relocating or arranging items. The second

Figure 7: We demonstrated a variety of silhouettes at the end
of the study. From left to right: default oval (used during the
gaming session), increased transparency, narrow oval, body-
shaped silhouette with tracked arms.

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Table 1: Mean scores (range 0-6) and standard deviations of the custom questions (CQ).

I understood what the player was doing in VR at any point during operation.

I could see well how the player interacted with the in-game objects.

I did not feel like I missed any essential game events.

I was able to control my perspective on the game world freely.

I could not see everything I wanted in the game world.

I was in the same world as the player.

I saw the virtual world as if I was there.

5.11 (0.78)

5.33 (0.71)

3.78 (1.64)

4.11 (1.27)

4.56 (1.59)

4.00 (1.12)

2.67 (0.87)

I enjoyed my ability to explore the virtual world via repositioning and head movements.

5.56 (0.53)

It was fascinating to see the virtual world through the mirror.

CQ1

CQ2

CQ3

CQ4

CQ5

CQ6

CQ7

CQ8

CQ9

CQ10

I would have liked to interact with the player.

CQ11

I was part of the game.

CQ12

I felt passive throughout the gaming session.

CQ13

I would have preferred a larger screen.

CQ14 The view frustum was too small for me.

5.22 (0.44)

4.67 (1.66)

2.22 (1.20)

5.00 (1.32)

5.78 (0.44)

5.22 (0.83)

and the fourth quest require the exploration of the surrounding via
point and teleport locomotion [8]. Hence, the participants experi-
enced local, player-oriented interactions as well as long-distance
travel in an open world.

The overall duration of the gaming session was approximately
15 minutes. To guarantee similar conditions for all participants,
we scripted the examiner’s gameplay. We neither restricted nor
encouraged the communication between the participants and the
examiner. However, the examiner was advised to ignore major
requests (e.g., going to a different location) to prevent significant
alterations in experienced gameplay.

4.2 Results and Discussion
Because of the pandemic situation, we limited the number of par-
ticipants to nine persons (three female, six male) with a mean age
of 27.8 years (SD = 7.66). Four of them were students, and the
others were employees. All participants reported playing digital
games regularly, and eight of them had prior experiences with VR
HMDs. An excerpt of our custom questions is outlined in Table 1,
and the outcomes of the IMI and the IPQ questionnaires can be
found in Table 2. To evaluate IMI, we followed the respective guide-
lines [46], i.e., we first computed the mean of all seven items for
each participant and used this data for further computations.

The interviews and the discussion on the silhouette shapes were
audio-recorded with the permission of the participants. We applied
the six-phase process of reflexive thematic analysis by Braun et
al. [9] to analyze the interview data, following a deductive approach.
As a result, we identified themes such as “player locomotion” or
“reflection/visibility.” In the following, we group all obtained results
and insights into respective thematic areas.

4.2.1 Overall Concept. The first questions of our semi-structured
interview targeted at the overall impression left by our setup. Seven

participants explicitly told us that they were positively surprised
of the overall experience, as they “didn’t think that it might be pos-
sible to exploit reflections in such a way” (P4) and described it as
an “unusual but refreshing solution” (P7). The high values for CQ8
(M = 5.56, SD = 0.53) and CQ9 (M = 5.22, SD = 0.44) expose the
overall excitement of the participants regarding the possibility to
control their view frustum via repositioning. One participant was
particularly impressed by the performance: “I expected some lags
and delays when I heard about the dynamic viewport. But then, it
was smooth, without flicker or lag, even during fast head movements”
(P4).

This positive overall impression is supported by the high values
of the IMI enjoyment/interest subscale (M = 4.51, SD = 0.53). This
outcome is even more conclusive under the circumstance that the
participants did not play the game themselves and were only in
an observer role. This initial appreciation could be due to the
innovative character of our setup. We suppose that this novelty
effect might wear off after a while. Nevertheless, the gathered
insights support our claim that the proposed technique leads to an
enjoyable experience and is worth further explorations.

4.2.2 Perception of the Player’s Reflection. Our motivation be-
hind the reflection utilization was to allow the viewer to see the

Table 2: Mean scores (range 0-6) and standard deviations of
the IMI and IPQ subscales.

IMI

Enjoyment/Interest

4.51 (0.53)

IPQ General

3.22 (1.20)
Spatial presence
3.56 (0.92)
2.94 (1.29)
Involvement
Experienced Realism 2.53 (0.48)

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Krekhov et al.

player inside the virtual world. We suggest that such a third-person
view enhances the comprehensibility of player’s actions due to the
additional context provided to the audience [43]. This assumption
is supported by the high values for CQ1 (M = 5.11, SD = 0.78) and
CQ2 (M = 5.33, SD = 0.71). These outcomes are in line with the
insights from our interviews, where participants reported to “un-
derstand what he [the examiner] was doing with the objects in front
of him” (P1). The participants also mentioned that “especially the
moments when the player engaged with an NPC were most interesting
to watch” (P8). Overall, the interaction aspect was perceived as
very immersive: “when he [the examiner] threw a crate, or the scroll
it felt like these objects will fly at me” (P5).

However, the fact that the viewer can see both the real player and
the reflection is also a potential source of confusion. For example,
one participant stated that “in situations where the player physically
approached me from behind, I had a strong need to turn around”
(P1). Another participant, in contrast, “did not perceive the real
player anymore and only looked at the VR mirror” (P3). Also, some
participants pointed out the depth ordering issue, as our silhouette
computation is currently limited to the screen space: “sometimes it
was hard to say whether an item was in front or behind the player,
particularly when it was covered by the dark blob” (P6). To fix the
depth order, we need to include the depth coordinate sz in our
future implementation in the same computational way as we did
with sx and sy .

4.2.3

Shape of the Silhouette. We can not derive a general trend
regarding the optimal appearance of the silhouette, as we received
controversial opinions on this topic. What we can say is that the
complex silhouette that included the player’s arms was disliked by
all participants. The reasons were manifold, e.g., four participants
complained that “the dark arm notches were too distractive and
occluded too much” (P2). Even worse, two participants “could not
see the reflected arms properly within the dark area” (P7). One
participant rated this silhouette as “unrealistic, resembling more this
skydancer or tube man thing” (P1).

Similarly, there was no common agreement regarding the width
of the silhouette. One participant strongly disliked the narrow rep-
resentation because “it was hard to see the player” (P3). Otherwise,
participants did not express any tendency toward the wider or
more narrow shape. Regarding transparency, only one participant
preferred a highly transparent or no silhouette at all. Six of the
remaining participants requested a transparency level depending
on the virtual surrounding, asking us to “make the silhouette darker
when the player is in a bright and feature-rich environment” (P9). In
contrast, dark areas barely require a silhouette to see the player’s
reflection.

4.2.4

Immersiveness of the Interactive Frustum. We designed the
dynamic frustum to lower the HMD-induced barrier between the
player and the viewer. CQ6 (M = 4.00, SD = 1.12) supports our
assumption, as participants felt like they are in the same world
as the player. We argue that this world is the physical realm and
not the virtual surrounding, as indicated by the low values for
CQ7 (M = 2.67, SD = 0.87). In other words, the frustum brings the
player into the living room, rather than the viewer into the virtual
environment. This explanation also aligns with the values for the

general (M = 3.22, SD = 1.20) and the spatial presence (M = 3.56,
SD = 0.92) subscales of the IPQ.

As indicated by CQ4 (M = 4.11, SD = 1.27), the participants had
no trouble to control the view frustum according to their wishes
and enjoyed such a possibility to explore the virtual world (CQ8;
M = 5.56, SD = 0.53). Three participants explicitly described the
experience as “if I would look out of a window and see the game world”
(P8). More importantly, they barely missed out on any important
events (CQ3; M = 3.78, SD = 1.27). However, the additional degree
of freedom provided by the frustum is hindering during player
locomotion. Seven participants mentioned a loss of orientation
during the teleportation procedure. The point and click teleport
was described as “instant and unpredictable jump that I could not
control and needed a while to find some reference points in the scene
to know where we [the participant and the examiner] arrived” (P2).
Two participants disclosed that they “tried to reposition the view
such that the teleport target and the player are both visible” (P5).
Hence, we assume that our setup has a notable drawback for games
that involve a large amount of player relocations, as the viewers
need a certain amount of time to reorient themselves in the virtual
world.

4.2.5 Limited Screen/Mirror Size. The major point of criticism
was the size of the view frustum. Nearly all participants requested
a bigger screen/mirror (CQ13; M = 5.78, SD = 0.44) and remarked
that the viewport was too limited (CQ14; M = 5.22, SD = 0.83).
Accordingly, the participants could not see everything that they
wanted to see (CQ5; M = 4.56, SD = 1.59). Three participants told
us that “sometimes, it was hard to find a proper angle that would
reveal the player and the area of interest in the game world” (P2).
Similarly, one participant explained: “it looks best when the player
entirely fits into the screen from head to foot, but this is hardly possible
because of the small screen size” (P9). This screen size issue was also
reflected in the viewers’ behavior during the gaming session—most
viewers stood close to the mirror, which results in a smaller player
silhouette and an increased field of view. Thus, we must conclude
that a 24-inch screen is definitively too small and suggest to utilize
a minimum of 50 inches in the future.

4.2.6 Missing Interaction with the Player. The lowered barrier
between the player and the viewer, combined with the feeling of
being in the same world, naturally evokes a need for interactivity.
Hence, we postulate that our setup is especially interesting for
collocated gaming purposes [17, 29, 60]. As indicated by CQ11
(M = 2.22, SD = 1.20), the participants did not perceive themselves
as a part of the game and felt rather passive (CQ12; M = 5.00,
SD = 1.32). Instead, they would have liked to interact with the
player (CQ10; M = 4.67, SD = 1.66).

We see this input as an important aspect of future research,
as our installation could lead to novel playful experiences that
transform the viewer from a passive spectator [19] to an equal
co-player. For instance, one participant proposed to “include game
objects that are visible only for the observer” (P4) or to “turn the
watcher into an early warning system for enemies sneaking up from
behind” (P4). Such an asymmetric information distribution would
upgrade the spectators from “witnesses” of the story to actors or
even “heroes” [39]. Another participant mentioned mixed reality
sports games as a possible application area: “it could be fun to play

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

some sort of tennis, me in front of the mirror and my opponent in VR”
(P2). For this purpose, one could blend the real surrounding into
VR, as proposed by Hartmann et al. [26], or even turn the room into
a shared mixed reality environment, as done by Jonas et al. [28].

5 LIMITATIONS
The outlined setup is the first of its kind. Hence, the method and
its evaluation come with weaknesses and limitations that have to
be discussed explicitly. This section is dedicated to a critical, retro-
spective assessment of the presented work, as we aim at providing
a comprehensive overview of the pros and cons of our system and
paving the way for meaningful future work in this direction.

5.1 Limitations of the Study
Due to the restrictions caused by the pandemic, we had to limit
our evaluations to a bare minimum. Having only nine participants
limits the conclusiveness of the gathered results. For instance, this
small sample does not allow us to draw general assumptions on
the optimal silhouette shape—instead, we consider such outcomes
as preliminary insights. Another issue is that eight out of nine
participants were already familiar with HMDs, which induces an
initial bias. For instance, inexperienced participants might rate the
spectatorship role less engaging, as they would be more interested
in a first-hand VR experience.

Furthermore, the study procedure consisted of multiple steps
(cf. Figure 5), and each participant underwent multiple evaluation
rounds, e.g., observing the gameplay, participating in an interview,
and returning to the game to rate various silhouettes. This com-
plexity could have caused fatigue and bias: for instance, seeing the
complete gameplay with one specific silhouette shape could have
impacted the final assessment of such shapes.

Our evaluation was limited to an explorative survey and aimed
at gathering first impressions left by the technique. Hence, at
this moment, we cannot provide meaningful comparisons to other
spectatorship techniques. This is an important limitation and needs
to be addressed in a follow-up quantitative study after the pandemic.
In particular, there is a need for a baseline comparison between our
mirror, a default first-person perspective, and different third-person
solutions (see future work section).

Another restriction of our study is the utilization of only one
testbed game. As we have seen in our case, the appreciation of the
technique depends on the game events. Teleportation and long-
distance navigation caused disorientation, rendering such events
rather unattractive for spectators. In contrast, local interactions,
e.g., picking up or moving objects, were perceived as engaging
and immersive. Hence, we have to consider a diverse set of games
before drawing overarching conclusions on our technique’s general
applicability.

Regarding the applied measures, two shortcomings have to be
mentioned. Firstly, we did not instruct the participants regarding
the interaction and communication with the player. Thus, despite
the outcomes of CQ10, there were no interaction attempts. We
argue that this behavior is due to the formal study atmosphere,
amplified by the pandemic influence. Secondly, we focused solely
on the viewer’s experience and ignored the player in our setup.
However, to become established, the technique needs to provide

an adequate player experience as well. For instance, the colocated
spectator could cause discomfort of the players, as, e.g., outlined
by Rogers et al. [45].

5.2 Restrictions of the One-Way Mirror Setup
The initial implementation of the one-way mirror idea comes with
inherent strengths and weaknesses and should not be considered
an all-round solution. In our version, the interactive frustum is
computed based on the viewer’s position. Hence, such a setup is
currently limited to one observer—an issue for, e.g., public spaces
with multiple interested persons.

Furthermore, the technique requires certain modifications to the
game (engine) to render two perspectives—one for the player and
one for the observer. This overhead also implies increased hardware
requirements. We point out that the observer’s perspective does
not require the same high refresh rates as the VR version. A further
hardware-related restriction is a need for additional components,
i.e., a one-way mirror and two default HTC Vive Trackers, limiting
the out-of-the-box applicability of the method.

Another critical design consideration is the visualization of the
player. In our case, we used the player’s reflection. Like a green
screen or RoomAlive [28], the viewer sees the real player, which fits
less well into the virtual environment compared to an avatar. This
break in the appeal can lead to a decrease in perceived presence.
On the other hand, only a few VR games provide a player model.
Although some green screen solutions, such as LIV [34], provide
fallback models, we argue that an inappropriate choice of the avatar
can hamper the immersion even further. Besides, we suggest that
seeing the real player could enhance the bond between player and
viewer and provide a refreshing experience compared to default
avatars.

6 FUTURE WORK
The mentioned limitations provide an outline for further research
on the one-way mirror idea. In a first step, we suggest an in-depth,
quantitative evaluation of our technique to understand how it per-
forms versus established solutions. We plan to conduct a baseline
comparison to the following candidates:

(1) first-person perspective: the viewer sees the player’s per-

spective; i.e., the default spectator scenario

(2) third-person perspective (player): a green screen is used to

inject the player into the virtual environment

(3) third-person perspective (avatar): again, we capture the
player’s movements, but the player is replaced by an avatar
in-game

Depending on the outcomes of (2) and (3), one might also consider
adding an avatar mode to our technique. Therefore we have to
disable the dark silhouette and render the avatar at the respective
position. Furthermore, we suggest assessing the player experience
in our setup. We hypothesize a slight discomfort [5, 45] caused by
the invisible, yet colocated spectator. In this case, our technique
could benefit from a minimalistic visualization of the viewer from
the player’s perspective.

One possible follow-up of our setup is its adaptation to a dis-
tributed scenario. This is especially viable in the times of the coron-
avirus pandemic, as it supports social distancing. A remote session

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

Krekhov et al.

in our case would even allow multiple spectators, each equipped
with an individual, dynamic view frustum, e.g., a tablet. Note that
this variation requires a video capturing device on the player’s side,
as we cannot rely on the direct reflection anymore.

Our evaluation results suggest that the display size needs to be
extended in future hardware iterations. The small screen forced the
viewers to stand very close to it, which restricts mobility and limits
the idea’s overall potential. Another point that can be improved
is a more sophisticated attenuation of player teleportation. In our
study, the viewers experienced a loss of orientation during fast
travel, which could be reduced by supporting VFX/SFX effects that
signal upcoming teleportation.

Finally, our study participants expressed a strong need to interact
with the player, be it verbally or playfully. We gathered some
preliminary suggestions, including sports games and games with
asymmetric information distribution. We suggest implementing
such testbed scenarios to increase the viability of the presented
setup. Ultimately, such games will pave the way to more inclusive,
engaging, and active spectatorship experiences.

7 CONCLUSION
Our work presented a novel possibility to watch players in VR.
Instead of looking at a static display, the spectator can change the
point of view by repositioning and changing the viewing angle. This
approach turns a common screen into a view-dependent window,
thus significantly increasing the autonomy of the viewer. The setup
is completed by a one-way mirror in front of the display. Together
with our silhouetting algorithm, this mirror allows the spectator to
see the player’s reflection at the correct position in the game world,
blending the player into the virtual environment. The result is sim-
ilar to a green screen caption, yet without the capturing overhead
and, most importantly, with a spectator-controlled viewport.

Our exploratory study underpins the overall positive appreci-
ation of our technique. The reflection-based player visualization
renders object and NPC interactions comprehensible and engaging.
The dynamic view frustum enables autonomous exploration of the
surroundings and prevents viewers from missing out on interesting
game events. Taken together, these two components of our system
lower the HMD-induced barrier between viewers and players, evok-
ing the feeling of being in the same world. Hence, our collocated
setup provides a solid foundation for novel playful experiences
that transform a passive spectator into an engaged, mixed-reality
co-player.

REFERENCES
[1] Fouad Alallah, Ali Neshati, Yumiko Sakamoto, Khalad Hasan, Edward Lank, An-
drea Bunt, and Pourang Irani. 2018. Performer vs. observer: whose comfort level
should we consider when examining the social acceptability of input modalities
for head-worn display?. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual
Reality Software and Technology. 1–9.
Inc. Amazon.com. 2020. Twitch. Website. Retrieved April 16, 2020 from
https://twitch.tv/.

[3] Autodesk, Inc. 2020. instructables. Website. Retrieved March 10, 2020 from

[2]

https://www.instructables.com.

[4] Beat Games. 2019. Beat Saber. VR Game [Windows]. Beat Games, Prague, Czech

Republic. Last played February 2020.

[5] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, Gabriella Giannachi, Brendan Walker, Joe
Marshall, and Tom Rodden. 2012. Uncomfortable Interactions. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI fi12).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2005fi?!2014. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208347

[13]

[6] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, and David Lloyd. 1997. Crowded collaborative
virtual environments. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human
factors in computing systems. 59–66.

[7] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, Tom Rodden, and James Pycock. 2001. Collab-

orative virtual environments. Commun. ACM 44, 7 (2001), 79–85.

[8] Evren Bozgeyikli, Andrew Raij, Srinivas Katkoori, and Rajiv Dubey. 2016. Point
& teleport locomotion technique for virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2016
Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. 205–216.

[9] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/
1478088706qp063oa

[10] Wolfgang Broll. 1995. Interacting in distributed collaborative virtual environ-
ments. In Proceedings Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium’95. IEEE,
148–155.

[11] Zhe Cao, Gines Hidalgo, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh. 2018.
OpenPose: realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using Part Affinity Fields.
In arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08008.

[12] Christian Carlsson and Alex Pelling. 2015. Designing Spectator Interfaces for

Competitive Video Games. Ph.D. Dissertation. Masterfis thesis, Report.
Jeffrey W Chastine, Jeremy C Brooks, Ying Zhu, G Scott Owen, Robert W Harri-
son, and Irene T Weber. 2005. AMMP-Vis: a collaborative virtual environment
for molecular modeling. In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality
software and technology. 8–15.

[14] Gifford Cheung and Jeff Huang. 2011. Starcraft from the stands: understanding
the game spectator. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 763–772.

[15] Elizabeth F Churchill, David N Snowdon, and Alan J Munro. 2012. Collaborative
virtual environments: digital places and spaces for interaction. Springer Science &
Business Media.

[16] HTC Corporation. 2020. HTC Vive Tracker. Website. Retrieved March 11, 2020

from https://www.vive.com/eu/vive-tracker/.

[17] Travis Cox, Marcus Carter, and Eduardo Velloso. 2016. Public DisPLAY: so-
cial games on interactive public screens. In Proceedings of the 28th Australian
Conference on Computer-Human Interaction. 371–380.

[18] Tamara Denning, Zakariya Dehlawi, and Tadayoshi Kohno. 2014. In situ with
bystanders of augmented reality glasses: Perspectives on recording and privacy-
mediating technologies. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2377–2386.
John Downs, Frank Vetere, and Wally Smith. 2015. Differentiated participation
in social videogaming. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian
Special Interest Group for Computer Human Interaction. 92–100.

[20] Steven Drucker, Li-wei He, Michael Cohen, Curtis Wong, and Anoop
Gupta. 2003.
Spectator Games: A New Entertainment Modality For
Technical Report MSR-TR-2003-105.
Networked Multiplayer Games.
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/spectator-games-a-
new-entertainment-modality-for-networked-multiplayer-games/

[19]

[21] Randima Fernando and Mark J Kilgard. 2003. The Cg Tutorial: The definitive guide
to programmable real-time graphics. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co.,
Inc.
Jonathan Frome and Aaron Smuts. 2004. Helpless spectators: Generating sus-
pense in videogames and film. TEXT technology 13 (2004), 13–34.

[23] Resolution Games. 2019. Acron: Attack of the Squirrels! Game [Oculus VR]. Last

[22]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

played July 2020.
Jan Gugenheimer, Evgeny Stemasov, Julian Frommel, and Enrico Rukzio. 2017.
Sharevr: Enabling co-located experiences for virtual reality between hmd and
non-hmd users. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 4021–4033.
Juho Hamari and Max Sj¨oblom. 2017. What is eSports and why do people watch
it? Internet research (2017).
Jeremy Hartmann, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D. Wilson. 2019.
RealityCheck: Blending Virtual Environments with Situated Physical Reality. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI fi19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
Paper 347, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300577
Inc. Jackbox Games. 2016. Drawful 2. Game [Windows, OS X, PlayStation 4,
Nintendo Switch, Xbox One]. Last played July 2020.

[28] Brett Jones, Rajinder Sodhi, Michael Murdock, Ravish Mehra, Hrvoje Benko,
Andrew Wilson, Eyal Ofek, Blair MacIntyre, Nikunj Raghuvanshi, and Lior
Shapira. 2014. RoomAlive: magical experiences enabled by scalable, adaptive
projector-camera units. In Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology. 637–644.

[29] Dennis L Kappen, Pejman Mirza-Babaei, Jens Johannsmeier, Daniel Buckstein,
James Robb, and Lennart E Nacke. 2014. Engaged by boos and cheers: the effect
of co-located game audiences on social player experience. In Proceedings of the
first ACM SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer-human interaction in play.
151–160.

[30] Marion Koelle, Matthias Kranz, and Andreas M¨oller. 2015. Don’t look at me that
way! Understanding User Attitudes Towards Data Glasses Usage. In Proceedings

Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach

CHI PLAY ’20, November 2–4, 2020, Virtual Event, Canada

of the 17th international conference on human-computer interaction with mobile
devices and services. 362–372.

[31] Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, Katharina Emmerich, Maic Masuch,
and Jens Kr¨uger. 2018. GulliVR: A Walking-Oriented Technique for Navigation
in Virtual Reality Games Based on Virtual Body Resizing. In Proceedings of the
2018 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI PLAY ’18).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 243–256. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242671.3242704
[32] Pontus Larsson, Daniel V¨astfj¨all, and Mendel Kleiner. 2001. The actor-observer
effect in virtual reality presentations. CyberPsychology & Behavior 4, 2 (2001),
239–246.
John Lekner. 2013. Theory of reflection of electromagnetic and particle waves.
Vol. 3. Springer Science & Business Media.

[33]

[37]

[34] LIV Inc. 2019. LIV. Software [Windows]. LIV Inc, Prague, Czech Republic.
[35] Bernhard Maurer, Ilhan Aslan, Martin Wuchse, Katja Neureiter, and Manfred
Tscheligi. 2015. Gaze-based onlooker integration: exploring the in-between of
active player and passive spectator in co-located gaming. In Proceedings of the
2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. 163–173.
[36] Robb Mitchell. 2015. Embarrassing To Collaborate. In Embarrassing Interactions:

A CHI 2015 Workshop.
J¨org M¨uller, Robert Walter, Gilles Bailly, Michael Nischt, and Florian Alt. 2012.
Looking glass: a field study on noticing interactivity of a shop window. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
297–306.
James A Newman. 2013. Videogames. Routledge.

[38]
[39] Dana Florentina Nicolae et al. 2018. Spectator Perspectives in Virtual Reality
Cinematography. The Witness, the Hero and the Impersonator. Ekphrasis. Images,
Cinema, Theory, Media 20, 2 (2018), 168–180.

[40] Kenton O’hara, Richard Harper, Helena Mentis, Abigail Sellen, and Alex Taylor.
2013. On the naturalness of touchless: Putting the fiinteractionfi back into NUI.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 20, 1 (2013), 1–25.
[41] Zhigeng Pan, Adrian David Cheok, Hongwei Yang, Jiejie Zhu, and Jiaoying
Shi. 2006. Virtual reality and mixed reality for virtual learning environments.
Computers & graphics 30, 1 (2006), 20–28.
Jana Rambusch, Anna-Sofia Alklind Taylor, and Tarja Susi. 2017. A pre-study
on spectatorship in eSports. In Spectating Play 13th Annual Game Research Lab
Spring Seminar, Tampere, Finland, April 24-25, 2017.

[43] Stuart Reeves, Steve Benford, Claire O’Malley, and Mike Fraser. 2005. Designing
the spectator experience. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems. 741–750.

[44] Kenneth Franklin Riley, Michael Paul Hobson, and Stephen John Bence. 2006.
Mathematical methods for physics and engineering: a comprehensive guide. Cam-
bridge university press.

[42]

[55] Nicholas Taylor. 2016. Play to the camera: Video ethnography, spectatorship,

and e-sports. Convergence 22, 2 (2016), 115–130.

[56] Burak S Tekin and Stuart Reeves. 2017. Ways of spectating: Unravelling spectator
participation in Kinect play. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1558–1570.

[57] Maurice Ten Koppel, Gilles Bailly, J¨org M¨uller, and Robert Walter. 2012. Chained
displays: configurations of public displays can be used to influence actor-,
audience-, and passer-by behavior. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 317–326.

[58] Martin Tomitsch, Christopher Ackad, Oliver Dawson, Luke Hespanhol, and Judy
Kay. 2014. Who cares about the content? An analysis of playful behaviour
at a public display. In Proceedings of The International Symposium on Pervasive
Displays. 160–165.

[59] Amy Voida and Saul Greenberg. 2009. Wii all play: the console game as a
computational meeting place. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 1559–1568.

[60] Rina R Wehbe and Lennart E Nacke. 2015. Towards understanding the impor-
tance of co-located gameplay. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play. 733–738.

[61] Finn Welsford-Ackroyd, Andrew Chalmers, Rafael Anjos, Daniel Medeiros, Hye-
jin Kim, and Taehyun Rhee. 2020. Asymmetric Interaction between HMD
Wearers and Spectators with a Large Display.
https://doi.org/10.13140/
RG.2.2.34994.56006 Unpublished Manuscript.

[62] Niels Wouters, John Downs, Mitchell Harrop, Travis Cox, Eduardo Oliveira,
Sarah Webber, Frank Vetere, and Andrew Vande Moere. 2016. Uncovering the
honeypot effect: How audiences engage with public interactive systems. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 5–16.
[63] LLC YouTube. 2020. YouTube. Website. Retrieved April 16, 2020 from https:

//youtube.com/.

[64] Victor Zappi, Dario Mazzanti, Andrea Brogni, and Darwin G Caldwell. 2011.
Design and Evaluation of a Hybrid Reality Performance. In NIME, Vol. 11. 355–
360.

[45] Katja Rogers, Jana Funke, Julian Frommel, Sven Stamm, and Michael Weber.
2019. Exploring Interaction Fidelity in Virtual Reality: Object Manipulation and
Whole-Body Movements. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI fi19). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1fi?!14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300644
[46] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. 2000. Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American
psychologist 55, 1 (2000), 68.

[47] Thomas Schubert, Holger Regenbrecht, and Frank Friedmann. 2018.

Igroup
Presence Questionnaire (IPQ). http://www.igroup.org/pq/ipq/download.php
[48] Thomas W. Schubert. 2003. The sense of presence in virtual environments: A
three-component scale measuring spatial presence, involvement, and realness.
Zeitschrift f¨ur Medienpsychologie 15, 2 (2003), 69–71. https://doi.org/10.1026/
/1617-6383.15.2.69

[49] Yuri Seo and Sang-Uk Jung. 2016. Beyond solitary play in computer games: The
social practices of eSports. Journal of Consumer Culture 16, 3 (2016), 635–655.
[50] Max Sj¨oblom and Juho Hamari. 2017. Why do people watch others play video
games? An empirical study on the motivations of Twitch users. Computers in
Human Behavior 75 (2017), 985–996.

[51] Thomas Smith, Marianna Obrist, and Peter Wright. 2013. Live-streaming changes
the (video) game. In Proceedings of the 11th european conference on Interactive TV
and video. 131–138.

[52] Misha Sra, Dhruv Jain, Arthur Pitzer Caetano, Andres Calvo, Erwin Hilton, and
Chris Schmandt. 2016. Resolving Spatial Variation And Allowing Spectator
Participation In Multiplayer VR. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST fi16 Adjunct). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 221fi?!222. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2984751.2984779

[53] Misha Sra, Aske Mottelson, and Pattie Maes. 2018. Your Place and Mine: De-
signing a Shared VR Experience for Remotely Located Users. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS fi18). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 85fi?!97. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3196709.3196788

[54] Odd Raven Studios. 2019. Carly and the Reaperman: Escape from the Underworld.

Game [PlayStation VR]. Last played July 2020.

