Mesh Processing Strategies and Fractals for Three Dimensional
Morphological Analysis of a Granitic Terrain using IRS LISS IV and
Carto DEM

K. Seshadri1 and M. Naresh Kumar2

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

5
1

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
7
1
1
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Virtual Reality (VR) enabled applications are
becoming very important to visualize the terrain features in 3D.
In general 3D dataset generated from high resolution satellites
and DEM occupy large volumes of data. However, light weight
datasets are required to create better user experiences on
VR platforms. So, the present study develops a methodology
to generate datasets compatible to VR using Indian Remote
Sensing satellite (IRS) sensors. A Linear Imaging Self-Scanning
System - IV (LISS IV) with 5.8 m spatial resolution and
Carto DEM are used for generating the 3D view using Arc
environment and then converted into virtual reality modeling
language (VRML) format. In order to reduce the volume of
VRML dataset a quadratic edge collapse decimation method is
applied which reduces the number of faces in the mesh while
preserving the boundary and/or normal. A granitic terrain in
the south-west part of Hyderabad comprising of dyke intrusion
is considered for generation of 3D VR dataset, as it has high
elevation differences thus rendering it most suitable for the
present study. Further, the enhanced geomorphological features
such as hills and valleys, geological structures such as fractures,
intrusive (dykes) are studied and found suitable for better
interpretation.

I. INTRODUCTION

The three-dimensional (3D) datasets generated from high
resolution remote sensing sensors and digital elevation model
reveal earths surface and expose its interiors thus making it
extremely useful in understanding earth system processes [1].
Virtual Reality (VR) Platforms such as Googles Daydream,
Oculus Rift, Sony PlayStation VR, Samsung Gear VR offer
a very good platform for realistic visualization. The Google
Earth VR (https://vr.google.com/earth/) provides new expe-
riences of urban environment in 3D. The VR applications
have been extensively used in predicting trafﬁc patterns [2],
Urban planning [3], understanding earth quakes [4], granitic
terrains [5]. Recent developments in virtual reality hardware
and software has resulted in shifting of focus from PC
based systems to light weight headgears providing a better
human computer interface. However, there is a strong need
to generate light weight 3D datasets which offer better user
experiences at reduced computational costs.

The elevation or z value plays a crucial role in generating
3D views. The elevation values are in general derived from

*ESRI User Conference, Hyderabad September 2018. This work is

supported by National Remote Sensing Centre (ISRO)

2M. Naresh Kumar is with Geoportals and WebGIS services Group,

National Remote Sensing Centre, India nareshm at ieee.org

1K. Seshadri is with the Geo-sciences group, Remote Sensing Appli-
cations Area, National Remote Sensing Centre, India seshadri k at
ieee.org

a stereo pair using a stereo strip triangulation method and
stored in digital elevation model (DEM) format. To get a
colored 3D image the texture information derived from a
multi spectral sensor is draped over the DEM. The DEM
used in the present study is generated from a 500 km stereo
pairs of Cartosat-1 which is available at 10m interval spacing
and high resolution dataset of Resoursat-2 LISS IV sensor is
used to get tone and texture variations. Esri ArcScene 10.5
environment is used to combine the DEM with the LISS IV
data to obtain the 3D view.

3D datasets are stored as Mesh consisting of vertices, faces
and texture. They are stored as VRML, X3D, ply, Wavefront
Obj etc formats. Using ArcScene VRML format is generated
for the present dataset to process further.

The size of a mesh is directly proportional

to sensor
the high resolution
resolution of the base dataset. Thus,
datasets have larger mesh sizes due to more dense points
(vertices and faces). Hence, mesh simpliﬁcation is required
to remove redundancies retaining the original quality.

Presently, 3D model of a granitic terrain covering
south of Ibrahimpatnam, Telangana is generated from IRS
LISS IV and Carto DEM. Further, a light weight ver-
sion is created using simpliﬁcation procedures given in
http://www.meshlab.net

II. METHODS

Esri ArcScene environment provides set of tools for gener-
ation and visualization of 3D [6]. Also, it provides interfaces
to navigate and interact with 3D features and raster data.
ArcScene provides relatively faster navigation of complex
3D features through in memory operations and OpenGL API.
Initially, the Resourcesat-2 LISS IV data and Carto DEM
are imported into ArcScene. Later, 3D view is generated
by setting base height of LISS IV image to DEM using
ﬂoating on custom surface option. Further, VRML format
is generated through export option in Arcscene.

The generated VRML is imported into Meshlab envi-
ronment for simpliﬁcation by applying a quadratic edge
collapse decimator approach. The parameters used in the
simpliﬁcation process include target numbers of faces, qual-
ity threshold, planar simpliﬁcation, preserving normal and
boundaries of the mesh. They help in constraining the sim-
pliﬁcation process, retaining shape of the triangles and mesh
boundaries. The 3D dataset is then converted to Wavefront
obj format for visualization in VR gadgets and applications.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Proposed Methodology

Fig. 2. Granitic terrain covering south of Ibrahimpatnam, (a) before and
(b) after compression

III. RESULTS
The 3D image of LISS IV covering 20 sq km is converted
to VRML using Carto DEM in ArcScene which occupies
9 MB of disk space having 322202 vertices and 632468
faces. After vertex compression the ﬁle size is reduced to
3 MB with 18042 vertices and 30116 faces. The original
and compressed images are shown in Figure 2. Around 5%
reduction is seen in the number of vertices and faces before
and after compression. Also, a 50% reduction in ﬁle sizes is
observed between VRML and obj formats. The results are
tabulated in Table I.

TABLE I
NUMBER OF FACES AND VERTICES BEFORE AND AFTER COMPRESSION

Dataset
Original
Compressed

Sizes (KB)
9331
3497

Vertices
322202
18042

Faces
632468
30116

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The ArcScene environment is useful for generating 3D
perspective views. However, due to lack of further processing

techniques generation of compressed formats suitable for
VR applications requires additional tools such as Meshlab.
The mesh simpliﬁcation has resulted in fewer number of
vertices and faces, thereby reducing the ﬁle sizes by 50%. It
is found that the 3D perspective views in VR apps has made
it possible to better interpret the granitic terrain.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors profusely thank Director, NRSC for his sup-
port. Thanks to Deputy Director, RSA and DPPA& WAA,
NRSC for their encouragement and support.

REFERENCES

[1] Patrick J. Kennelly, Creating Three-dimensional displays using Arc-
Scene, http://www.esri.com/news/arcuser/0103/ﬁles/3display.pdf
[2] Andreas Keler, Jukka M. Krisp and Linfang Ding(2017)Detecting
trajec-
Information Science,20:4,333-

vehicle trafﬁc patterns in urban environments using taxi
tory intersection points,Geo-spatial
344,DOI:10.1080/10095020.2017.1399672

[3] Olympia Koziatek, Suzana Dragievi,

iCity 3D: A geosimualtion
method and tool for three-dimensional modeling of vertical urban
development, Landscape and Urban Planning, Volume 167, 2017,
Pages 356-367

[4] Keith A. Labay and Peter J. Haeussler 3D Visualization of Earthquake
Focal Mechanisms Using ArcScene U.S. Geological Survey,Data
Series 241, https://pubs.usgs.gov/ds/2007/241/

[5] Naresh K. Mallenahalli and Kidambi Seshadri, 3D dataset of Granitic
Terrain in the parts of Hyderabad depicting hills and valleys topog-
raphy, India, using IRS LISS IV and Carto DEM, http://www.grss-
ieee.org/grss-vr-app/

[6] Bratt, S., and B. Booth. Using ArcGIS 3D Analyst, ESRI Press, 261

pp. 2002.

