Breaking the Screen: Interaction Across Touchscreen Boundaries in
Virtual Reality for Mobile Knowledge Workers

Verena Biener1

Daniel Schneider1

Travis Gesslein1

Alexander Otte1

Bastian Kuth1

Per Ola Kristensson3

Eyal Ofek2

Michel Pahud2

Jens Grubert1*

1Coburg University of Applied Sciences and Arts 2Microsoft Research
3University of Cambridge

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
1
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
5
4
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Mobile knowledge worker applications using a touchscreen in VR implemented in this paper. a: map navigation, b: window
manager, c: code version control, d: presentation editor, e-f: medical imaging, g-h: information visualization.

ABSTRACT

Virtual Reality (VR) has the potential to transform knowledge work.
One advantage of VR knowledge work is that it allows extending
2D displays into the third dimension, enabling new operations, such
as selecting overlapping objects or displaying additional layers of
information. On the other hand, mobile knowledge workers often
work on established mobile devices, such as tablets, limiting interac-
tion with those devices to a small input space. This challenge of a
constrained input space is intensiﬁed in situations when VR knowl-
edge work is situated in cramped environments, such as airplanes
and touchdown spaces.

In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of interacting jointly
between an immersive VR head-mounted display and a tablet within
the context of knowledge work. Speciﬁcally, we 1) design, imple-
ment and study how to interact with information that reaches beyond
a single physical touchscreen in VR; 2) design and evaluate a set of
interaction concepts; and 3) build example applications and gather
user feedback on those applications.

1 INTRODUCTION

Recent progress in virtual reality (VR) technology makes it possible
to provide knowledge workers with a portable virtual ofﬁce. This
ofﬁce can provide many potential advantages for mobile work, such
as 1) providing a well-illuminated, private environment with wide
display areas regardless of the physical surroundings; 2) enabling a
virtual recreation of a consistent spatial workspace; and 3) relieving
the user of physical limitations, using large and even distant displays
while the user is remaining seated and the hands are resting on a
table [39].

*contact author: jens.grubert@hs-coburg.de

The vision of a spatial user interface supporting knowledge work
has been investigated for many years (e.g. [91, 93]). However, the
recent emergence of consumer VR headsets now make it feasible to
explore the design of deployable user interface solutions.

However, while VR is promising for mobile ofﬁce work it also
brings its own additional challenges. For example, mobile workers
often work in front of touchscreens, such as tablets or laptops. Within
this work, we propose to extend the limited output and input space of
such conﬁgurations by utilizing VR head-mounted displays (HMDs).
Speciﬁcally, recent HMDs with inside out camera-based sensing
allow for pose tracking of the user’s head and hands. Through access
to HMDs cameras, spatial tracking of further objects, such as screens
or keyboards become feasible.

Given these opportunities, this paper explores how to leverage
the large display area and additional three-dimensional display vol-
ume around the user afforded by an HMD while using established
capacitive touch interfaces provided with tablets and some laptops.
This paper addresses this scenario with the following contribu-
tions. First, we explore and evaluate how to spatially arrange and
manipulate information within the joint interaction space of HMD-
tablet interaction. Second, we design, implement and evaluate six
applications (window manager, code version control, parallel coor-
dinates exploration, map navigation, volumetric image viewer, and a
virtual PowerPoint), see Figure 1.

2 RELATED WORK

The work in this paper is underpinned by the following research
areas: 1) mixed reality (MR) for knowledge work; 2) information
windows in spatial environments; and 3) spatial interaction.

2.1 Mixed Reality for Knowledge Work

Recent prior work has begun exploring how to support knowledge
work using MR [39, 44, 95]. Early work investigated the use of
projection systems to extend physical ofﬁce environments for inter-
action with physical documents (e.g., [54, 87, 93, 121]). VR and AR

 
 
 
 
 
 
HMDs have also been explored for interacting with physical docu-
ments (e.g., [36, 62]). Most prior work has focused on annotating
documents displayed on a 2D surface while this work investigates
the use of space surrounding a planar piece of information.

In addition to enhanced document interaction, prior work has
also explored remote presence applications (e.g., [82, 91]). There
is a number of publications investigating the use of VR in desktop-
based environments for tasks such as text entry (e.g., [41, 53, 70]),
system control [131, 132] and visual analytics [119]. B¨uschel et
al. [15] surveyed a wide range of immersive interaction techniques
for visual analytics. Previous research on productivity desktop-
based VR has concentrated on the use of physical keyboards [98],
controllers and hands [55, 132], and, recently, tablets [110]. The
closest work to this paper is by Surale et al. [110], which focuses on
spatial manipulation and creation of 3D objects. In contrast, we use
the tablet for information management on virtual displays.

Complementary to this prior research, this paper aims to support
mobile knowledge workers by extending commonly used tools such
as tablets and notebooks through HMDs.

2.2 Information Windows in Spatial Environments

In 1993, Feiner et al. [31] introduced head-surrounding and world
reference frames for positioning 3D windows in VR. In 1999, Mark
Billinghurst and Thad Starner [8] introduced the spatial display
metaphor, in which information windows are arranged on a virtual
cylinder around the user.

Since then, virtual information displays have been explored in
various reference systems, such as world-, object-, head-, body- or
device-referenced [57]. Speciﬁcally, interacting with windows in
body-centered reference systems [118] has attracted attention, for
instance to allow fast access to virtual items [19, 61], mobile multi-
tasking [27, 29] and visual analytics [28]. Gugenheimer et al. [43]
introduced face touch, which allows interacting with display-ﬁxed
user interfaces (using direct touch) and world-ﬁxed content (using
raycasting). Yu et al. [128] investigated the use of body motions for
switching interfaces in VR. Lee et al. [58] investigated positioning
a window in 3D space using a continuous hand gesture. Petford et
al. [83] compared the selection performance of mouse and raycast
pointing in full coverage displays (not in VR). Recently, Jetter et
al. [50] proposed to interactively design a space with various display
form factors in VR. Wagner et al. proposed a desk metaphor for
controlling visual analytics that reappropriates a physical desk in
VR [119].

Prior work has also explored how to support user interaction
across HMDs and mobile and wearable touch displays. Grubert et
al. [37] presented body-aligned, device-aligned, and side-by-side
modes for interacting between a touch display (smartphone or smart-
watch) and an optical see-through HMD. Similar explorations have
followed suit using video-see-through HMDs [80], an extended set
of interaction techniques [130], using smartwatches [66, 122, 125],
or with a focus on understanding smartphone-driven window man-
agement techniques for HMDs [94]. In a similar vein, prior work
has studied the interaction across HMDs and stationary displays,
such as tabletops [16, 92, 101].

Most prior work relate to the issue of ﬁeld of view, that is, how to
display and access more information by spreading it around the user
in multiple windows. In this research, we are additionally interested
in extending the information display in the depth direction. Such a
display is suited for displaying different views of information (or
layers) that are semantically connected by their 2D location. On the
other hand, we use a very limited input space: While most referred
prior work span all the angular range of the display as an input space,
we only use the interaction space on or near the tablet in order to
support interaction in constrained physical spaces [39, 71].

2.3 Spatial Interaction

A large number of techniques for selection, spatial manipulation,
navigation, and system control have been proposed to support spatial
user interfaces [57]. Regarding object selection, Argelaguet et al. [2]
presented a survey on 3D selection techniques. For a recent survey
on 3D virtual object manipulation, we refer to Mendes et al. [72].
Finally, recent surveys [14, 38] have extensively reviewed spatial
interaction across mobile devices, mostly in non-VR settings.

In addition to unimodal techniques the combination of touch
with mid-air has attracted attention from researchers. For example,
outside of VR, M¨uller et al. [75] investigated the use of touch and
mid-air interaction on public displays, Hilliges et al. [46] studied
tabletop settings. Several researchers have proposed to use handheld
touchscreens in spatial user interfaces for tasks such as sketching,
ideation and modeling (e.g., [3, 23, 25, 33, 48, 90]), navigation of
volumetric data [105], 3D data exploration [65] and system control
[10]. Spatial manipulation has mostly been studied in single-user
settings (e.g., [5, 51, 63, 68, 74, 110, 111]) but also in collaborative
settings [35].

Evolving from the magic lens [7] and tangible interaction con-
cepts [116], tangible magic lenses allow users to access and manip-
ulate otherwise hidden data in interactive spatial environments. A
wide variety of interaction concepts have been proposed within the
scope of information visualization (e.g., recent surveys [113, 114]).
Both rigid shapes (e.g., rectangular [106]) or circular [107] and
ﬂexible shapes (e.g., [108]) have been used, as well as various dis-
play media (e.g., projection on cardboard [17, 106]), transparent
props [12, 97], handheld touchscreens [40, 59], or virtual lenses
[64, 81]. In addition, the combination of eye-gaze with other modali-
ties such as touch [84, 85], mid-air gestures [86, 96, 100] and head-
movements [56, 102, 103] has been recently investigated for inter-
action in spatial user interfaces. For a recent survey on gaze-based
interaction in AR and VR, see Hirzle et al. [47].

We draw on these rich sources of interaction ideas and adopt tech-
niques in the context of VR interaction with touchscreens for mobile
knowledge workers. Our work complements multimodal techniques
combining touch and mid-air [46, 75], gaze-based techniques [84]
and ideas for combining HMDs with touchscreens [37, 80, 130]
through novel techniques for accessing virtual windows around or
behind a physical touchscreen.

3 DESIGN SPACE

Currently most knowledge workers’ applications are designed for
2D displays, which are the vast majority of displays in the world. VR
and AR displays enable mobile workers to take their displays with
them on the go. In addition, since HMDs are stereoscopic, they en-
able information presentation beyond the 2D display and the ability
to manipulate this information by spatial manipulation. Researchers
have already proposed various schemes for arranging (planar) infor-
mation in a spatial context relative to the user. Speciﬁcally, prior
work has proposed various reference systems, such as world-, object-
, head-, body- or device-referenced [9], spatial window layouts in
these reference frames, for example, scaffolding geometry such as
spheres or cylinders [27, 28], and input modalities to access and
manipulate information in these spaces (such as touch, gaze, mid-air
interaction or multimodal interaction, c.f. [15, 47, 118]).

The guiding principle in this paper is that an information touch-
screen display can break out of the screen in VR and transition
from 2D to 3D—yet still be controlled by manipulating the original
touchscreen. This is in part motivated by prior work reviewed in the
previous section and in part motivated by the fact that a touchscreen
allows the user to provide precise 2D input while displaying infor-
mation in an HMD provides the ability to display information in 3D.
This screen-centric manipulation using touch can be complemented
with additional modalities, such as gaze tracking.

Two important aspects arising in this context are how to spatially
arrange information relative to the touchscreen and how to map the
input from the physical touchscreen to the information in the virtual
world, given the joint input capabilities of 2D touch sensing (on the
screen) and 3D spatial manipulation (around the screen).

3.1 Spatial Arrangement

Prior work has investigated options on how to align multiple 2D
information windows around the user (e.g., [27, 29]). One com-
mon approach is to arrange windows on a scaffolding geometry,
such as spheres or cylinders [8](see Figure 2, b-d). In a spatially
unconstrained environment, accessing this information is often re-
alized using virtual hand or raycasting techniques. While using
such extended display areas is possible, we should be aware that in
constrained spaces, such as on an airplane or in touchdown spaces,
it may not be usable for interaction as ample spatial movements can
be unsuitable either due to social acceptability [1, 123] or simply
due to lack of physical space to operate [39, 71].

An alternative display option is extending information along with
the depth of the screen, extruding it into 3D (see Figure 2, a). This
extrusion might be speciﬁcally suitable for additional information
that is directly related to the document displayed on the physical
screen. This information is often semantically different and should
ideally be displayed separately from the main screen but with a
spatial relation (speciﬁcally with corresponding x- and y-coordinates)
to the document. For example, when reviewing a document, a
common task consists of inserting comments. However, there is
no natural space for the added comments within the document, and
adding them in place can disrupt the layout of the document. Adding
the comments in a separate layer, hovering in front of the main
document, maintains the contextual relevance while enabling the
user to focus on the layer of interest.

3.2 Input-Output Mapping

The touchscreen allows one layer of information at a time to align
with the surface of the screen. This layer enjoys the easiest and most
accurate input, as the screen supports the user’s hand and enables the
highest positional sensing, and, sometimes, pressure sensing. Next,
we discuss, how to access layers of information that break out of the
bounds of the physical screen.

3.2.1 Around the Screen Interaction

One challenge when interacting across screens is how to support
both ﬁne-grained selection on an active screen as well as efﬁcient
switching between screens. Naive implementations that use a ﬁxed
control-to-display gain (CD gain), such as stitching or pointer warp-
ing for bridging the space between displays [77, 120, 126], do not
scale well to large displays due to the required trade-off between
high precision pointing in a given region of interest on a display
and fast switching between multiple regions of interest [78]. Hence,
besides raycasting, prior work has proposed multiple strategies for
controlling a large output space using a small input space on a
touchscreen (e.g., [32, 69, 78, 79]).

Inspired by those techniques, we propose using a bimanual selec-
tion technique for allowing both precise input and efﬁcient switching
of the active window. This way, the user can move a cursor and
select or deselect items inside the active window by simply using
the tablet as a touchpad with a suitable CD gain for single screen
interaction, see Figure 2, b. If the user touches the bezel of the
touchscreen, which has a width of 2 cm, with their non-dominant
hand, a coarse CD gain is activated to enable ﬂuid switching between
multiple windows, see Figure 2, c.

The CD gain for single screen interaction is a one-to-one mapping
of the movement on the touchscreen. The CD gain for switching
between multiple windows is set in such a way that the user has to
move their ﬁnger 2 cm to switch to the next screen. We evaluated

this CD gain along with values of 1 cm and 3 cm in an informal user
study with ﬁve participants and found that 2 cm was the fastest and
preferred by three participants while the other two CD gains were
only preferred by one participant each.

As VR headsets also support head-pointing and partially eye-gaze
tracking we implemented a second technique: combined gaze and
touch interaction. Inspired by previous work on combining gaze
and manual pointing [84, 129], we devised a technique in which
the combined head and eye gaze provides the context for touch
interaction, see Figure 2, d. With this technique regions of interest
are discrete (the individual virtual screens). Hence, when a user
gazes at a speciﬁc window, the cursor is transferred to that new
screen, maintaining the same absolute position in the new screen as
in the old screen (i.e., the same (x, y) coordinate).

In order to avoid unwanted cursor movements it is possible to
use temporal thresholding (e.g., 200-300 ms [84, 129]), although we
did not use this in our evaluation in order to allow for faster task
completion times. To allow selection of items at the screen boundary,
we use spatial thresholding with an empirically determined threshold
of 5% of the window size in all directions. Speciﬁcally, to switch
from one screen to another, the user ﬁrst has to move their eyes
beyond the second display boundary by that threshold. While we did
not evaluate this threshold parameter in a formal user study, internal
testing revealed that this threshold circumvents unwanted display
switches and still allows for comfortable switching between display
boundaries.

For both techniques, interacting with the now active virtual dis-
play can either 1) happen at the original location of the display,
essentially turning the touchscreen into an indirect input device;
or 2) occur by aligning the virtual display with the physical touch-
screen. For example, dragging the ﬁnger on the bottom bezel of
the touchscreen (or using a two-ﬁnger swipe) can rotate virtual
windows around the x-axis of a scaffolding geometry (either display-
by-display in discrete steps or continuously).

3.2.2 Depth Interaction

Accessing virtual displays along the depth dimension of the touch-
screen can happen either in front, on, or behind the physical screen
(see Figure 2, a). For virtual displays in front of the screen, direct
mid-air selection might be used, but this may cause occlusion of
content at layers further away and hinder interaction on the physical
screen [13]. Accessing content behind the screen has to take into
account the physical presence of the touchscreen, preventing direct
access using virtual hand techniques. Users would either need to
grab behind the screen using a virtual hand or use raycasting tech-
niques that can handle object occlusion (e.g., [30]). Instead, we
propose to use the touchscreen to select a desired virtual display.
Depending on the number of virtual displays spread behind or in
front of the physical screen, different mappings can be appropri-
ate. We experimented with swiping along the bezel of the screen
and two-ﬁnger swipe gestures, commonly available on multi-touch
trackpads. Depending on the number of layers an absolute mapping
for quick random access to layers or a relative mapping for navigat-
ing between adjacent layers might be appropriate. In an informal
user study with three users, we found that swiping with two ﬁngers
outperformed bezel swipes and a relative mapping outperformed
an absolute mapping for four and ten layers. Hence, we used this
input mapping for the further development of the applications. We
used the same CD gain as for switching between individual screens
spread around the active screen, as described above.

While the input technique allows to quickly switch between layers
it does not completely resolve potential occlusion issues. Occlusion
can be mitigated (but not completely resolved) utilizing parallax if
the user moves the head. We experimented with two visualization
techniques to further mitigate potential occlusion. One option is
to amplify the parallax effect when moving the head to the side of

Figure 2: a: Virtual displays (grey) arranged relative to the physical screen (green): behind (1), with (2), in front of (3). b and c: Changing between
pointing on a single screen and switching between screens using a bimanual technique. b: If only a single ﬁnger is used on the touchscreen (ﬁlled
green rectangle), it controls the cursor on the active screen (green boundary) with a suitable control-display gain. c: The screens are switched
by pressing with a ﬁnger of the non-dominant hand on the bezel of the touchscreen and moving the ﬁnger of the dominant screen towards the
second screen (in this case the right screen) using a second CD-ratio. d: Changing between pointing on a single screen and switching between
screens using a combination of touch and gaze. The ﬁnger on the touch screen (ﬁlled green rectangle) controls the cursor on the active screen
(green boundary). Gaze provides the region of interest. If the user gazes to the side, up or down, the corresponding screen gets activated (with
appropriate temporal and spatial thresholds).

the screen, see Figure 7, f. Another option, inspired by explosion
diagrams, is to temporarily scatter virtual screens around the physi-
cal screen, see Figure 7, e. While the explosion diagram technique
allows the user to view all layers simultaneously and unoccluded,
the number of concurrently visible layers is constrained by the avail-
able screen space. Also for both techniques, potential dependencies
between layers are impacted (e.g., when there is a need for carefully
arranging multiple graphical elements into a composite image). An-
other limitation of the explosion diagram technique is the reduction
of the ability to associate different objects between different layers
based on their common 2D locations.

3.2.3 Single Screen Interaction

Even an individual layer that is aligned with the physical screen does
not need to retain its physical bounds. The ability to display the
view frustum according to the rotation of the user’s head enables a
virtual display that potentially spreads over a very large angular part
of the user’s ﬁeld of view. It enables the simulation of screens that
may be bigger than physical screens available to the user (see Figure
7, d). In this case, the mapping of the input space of the physical
touchscreen can become indirect. For example, it is possible to
use a different CD gain for absolute mapping of the physical ﬁnger
position to the virtual ﬁnger position (following ideas from haptic
retargeting [4, 20]), see Figure 7, or the touchscreen can be operated
using a relative mapping. In some cases, it might be desirable to
retain a direct mapping between the input and the output space. In
this case, only the portion co-located with the physical touchscreen
allows interactivity. Changing this active input area can either be
realized by two-ﬁnger swipes or input on the bezels of the screen
(analogous to implementations in desktop sharing applications, such
as TeamViewer) or by redeﬁning the active area by gaze (again
requiring an appropriate clutch mechanism).

4 EVALUATION OF DESIGN PARAMETERS

While we designed the techniques following an iterative approach
with multiple design iterations consisting of conceptualization, im-
plementation, and initial user tests (eating your own dog food)
[24, 117], we aimed to understand properties of the proposed in-
teraction space in this paper in more detail. Within the proposed
interactive space, users can both extend the display area around the
current display on a two-dimensional proxy geometry as well as
in-depth in front or behind the physical touch screen. For the eval-
uation, we investigated these two properties (around and in-depth)
separately.

To this end, we ﬁrst aimed at exploring, if using combined touch
and gaze interaction has beneﬁts over touch-only interaction when
interacting across multiple virtual screens arranged on a proxy ge-
ometry around the touchscreen. Second, we wanted to quantify the

Figure 3: Arrangements of the virtual screens for the CONTENT TRANS-
FER TASK. a: FOUR SCREENS: the blue dot can be acquired by the red
cursor in the upper left screen and is to be placed on the goal in the
lower right screen. b: FIFTEEN SCREENS: the green border indicates
the ﬁeld of view of the user.

beneﬁts of viewing multiple stacked information layers in-depth
behind a touchscreen compared to only showing a single layer at a
time as is common in many applications today. While adding depth
cues has been indicated to improve task performance in various
settings [6, 88, 89, 104], we aimed at quantifying any performance
improvement within the scope of the joint tablet-HMD interaction.
Hence, we investigated those two aspects in a user study. In the
ﬁrst part (subsequently called the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK), we
compared the performance of the bimanual selection technique with
the COMBINED GAZE AND TOUCH INTERACTION technique in a
content transfer task for a small and large number of screens.

In the second part (subsequently called the PUZZLE TASK), partic-
ipants were asked to solve a puzzle task where each puzzle piece was
displayed in an individual layer, mimicking tasks when composing
presentations using multiple shapes or images using multiple layers
in an image editing application. Note that we used the baseline
technique described in Section Depth Interaction without ampliﬁed
parallax or explosion diagram visualization due to the nature of
the task having strong spatial dependencies between the x- and y
position of the individual puzzle pieces.

For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, we followed a 2 × 2 within-
subjects design. The ﬁrst independent variable was INTERACTION
TECHNIQUE for selecting the screens, which was done either GAZE-
BASED or BIMANUAL as described above. The second indepen-
dent variable was NUMBER OF SCREENS presented to the partici-
pant which was either FOUR SCREENS (Figure 3, a) or FIFTEEN
SCREENS (Figure 3, b). We chose these conﬁgurations to better
understand the performance of the techniques in presence of a few
or many screens while still considering the ﬁeld of view that can be
comfortably covered when the user turns their head. This experimen-
tal design results in four different conditions, which are depicted in
Figure 3. Dependent variables included tasks completion time (the
duration from acquiring the content in one screen to placing it at the

marked spot in another screen), accuracy (measured as Euclidean
distance between the released item and the actual target location),
usability as measured by the System Usability Scale (SUS) [11],
workload as measured by NASA TLX (unweighted version) [45],
simulator sickness (SSQ) [52] as well as user preferences. We hy-
pothesized that the GAZE-BASED would outperform BIMANUAL in
terms of task completion time, usability and workload, but not in
terms of simulator sickness or accuracy (as the ﬁnal movements were
conducted with the ﬁnger of the dominant hand in both techniques).
For the PUZZLE TASK, we also followed a 2 × 2 within subjects
design. The independent variables were VISUALIZATION with two
levels: FLAT, a baseline condition in which all layers were displayed
at the same depth, see Figure 4, b and d, and DEPTH, where each
layer was displayed with increasing z-distance, see Figure 4, a and c.
The second independent variable was NUMBER OF LAYERS with
two levels: FOUR LAYERS with four layers displayed (Figure 4, a)
and TEN LAYERS in which ten layers were displayed (Figure 4, c).
This was done to investigate if an increasing number of layers has
an effect on the performance of the visualization techniques.

As can be seen in Figure 4, the active layer is highlighted with a
green frame, the user’s ﬁngertip is visualized with a turquoise sphere.
The target arrangement is shown above the puzzle’s layered display
as a ﬂat image. To the left of the layered display there is an overview
widget, inspired by similar views in image editing applications.
The eye symbol toggles the visibility of the respective layer (green:
visible) and the rectangles to the right of the eye symbol allow direct
selection of a layer (green: active layer, white: inactive layer). By
selecting a layer (pressing on the green square associated with it),
the system moved this layer to align with the screen depth and made
all layers in front of it transparent, thereby maximizing the current
layer visibility. Switching between two adjacent layers can also be
achieved by swiping vertically with two ﬁngers on the touchpad.
The button “Show All” collapses all layers into a single layer and
activates the visibility of all layers. The button “Next” switches to
the next task. The button “Close” was only visible during training
and allowed participants to end the training session when they felt
comfortable with conducting the task.

The dependent variables were, as in the CONTENT TRANSFER
TASK, task completion time, usability (SUS), workload (TLX) as
well as simulator sickness (SSQ). In addition, the system logged the
number of incorrectly placed puzzle items. While we hypothesized
that DEPTH would outperform FLAT in terms of task completion
time due to the added depth cues, we were speciﬁcally interested in
quantifying this difference. We also hypothesized that DEPTH would
lead to signiﬁcantly higher usability rating and lower workload
compared to FLAT with no difference in simulator sickness. We still
included SSQ to check if severe symptoms would occur.

4.1 Participants

We recruited 14 participants (5 female, 9 male, mean age 30.07
years, sd = 10.59, mean height 176.57 cm, sd = 8.54). All of them
indicated prior VR experience. Four participants used head mounted
VR devices very frequently, two often, four sometimes, three rarely
and one only once. One participant indicated she does not play video
games, two rarely, four participants sometimes, three participants
often and four participants very frequently. Seven participants wore
contact lenses or glasses with corrected to normal vision. Eleven
participants were right handed while three were left handed. All
but one used their dominant hand to control the cursor and their
non-dominant hand on the bezel. Thirteen participants used their
index ﬁnger on the touchscreen and one used her middle ﬁnger.

4.2 Apparatus

Figure 4: Conditions for the PUZZLE TASK. a: DEPTH with FOUR
LAYERS, b: FLAT with FOUR LAYERS, c: DEPTH with TEN LAYERS, d:
FLAT with TEN LAYERS.

was used as VR HMD with built-in eyetracking. For touch input a
Huawei Media Pad T5 was used (screen diagonal 10.1 inches, 16:10
aspect ratio). Velcro was attached to the left, right and bottom bezel
of the tablet to support participants in identifying the touchscreen
boundaries. The tablet was placed on a table in front of the partici-
pant in such a way that participants sitting in front of it on a chair
could comfortably use it. The system was implemented in Unity
2019.3 and deployed on a PC with windows 10, an AMD Ryzen
Threadripper 1950X 16-core processor with 3.4 Ghz, two Nvidia
GeForce RTX 2080 graphics cards and 64 GB RAM in Europe
and on a PC with Intel Core i9-9980HK 8-core processor, Nvidia
GeForce RTX 2080 graphics card, 16 GB RAM in the US.

An OptiTrack V120 Trio tracking system was used for spatial
tracking of index ﬁnger tips by using two rigid bodies with retro-
reﬂective markers attached to them. Note that motion trajectories
of the ﬁngers were logged for comparative analysis in future ex-
periments only, they were not analyzed within the scope of this
paper. The Vive Lighthouse tracking system was used to track the
VR HMD and the tablet. However, while the position of the tablet
could have been changed by the participants during the experiment,
no participant chose to do so. The study setup is shown in Figure 5.
For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, multiple screens were
placed around the participant’s head as shown in Figure 3, a and b.
The virtual screen size was 24 inches and virtual screens were ini-
tially placed at a distance of 90 cm around the participant’s head (if
the participant moved their head forwards or backwards this distance
changed). The horizontal angle spanned by the screens was at most
190 degrees and the vertical angle less than 30 degrees upwards and
less than 35 degrees downwards. This allowed the participant to
comfortably look at all screens. The cursor position was indicated as
a disc with a diameter of 2.5 cm. For the present study, we chose to
use no temporal threshold in order to obtain a comparable switching
effect between both techniques.

The PUZZLE TASK used the same screen size and the same dis-
tance to the participant. The individual layers were placed 2.5 cm
apart (this parameter was determined empirically).

The experiment took place in two locations: a laboratory environ-
ment in Europe and a home in the US. The study setup (except the
PC) was replicated in both environments. A HTC Vive Pro Eye

4.3 Tasks
For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK several windows were placed
in a circle around the participant’s head. Then they had to select a

Figure 5: The study setup. a: setup with motion tracked tablet,
ﬁducials for the ﬁngers and HTC Vive Pro Eye to the right. The
lighthouse systems were placed on the ceiling around the table and
the Optitrack system on a bar above the table. The monitor, keyboard
and mouse to the left were operated by the experimenter to start
individual conditions. b: Participant during the study.

disk with a diameter of about 4 cm on one screen to a target area
with the same diameter on another screen as shown in Figure 3 a.
The window with the next target area was randomly selected while
making sure that both small and longer distances were included
during the condition. The disk and the target area appeared at one
of eight randomly selected places around the center of a window.
Both INTERACTION TECHNIQUEs used the tablet as a touch pad to
control the cursor within the active screen and to grab and release
the dot via long-press. After successful placement of the disk onto
the target area (with at least a partial overlap of the two), the task
was repeated with a different arrangement of start and target areas.
For the PUZZLE TASK, participants were asked to arrange puzzle
pieces (5 × 5 cm) as indicated by a template image, see Figure 4.
Each puzzle piece was placed on a separate layer. The puzzle pieces
snapped into a predeﬁned 5 × 3 grid to facilitate accurate placement.
Participants were asked to advance to the next puzzle if they felt
they had completed the task. The task was then repeated with a
different template.

4.4 Procedure

After an introduction, participants were ﬁrst asked to ﬁll out a demo-
graphic questionnaire. Then the HTC Vive Pro Eye eye-calibration
procedure was performed to ensure a working eye-tracking calibra-
tion for each participant. Thereafter the participants either started
with the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK or the PUZZLE TASK (coun-
terbalanced). For both tasks, the conditions were ordered using a
balanced Latin square. This resulted in four permutations which
could not be equally distributed among 14 participants. However,
no signiﬁcant order effects were detected. For each condition in
the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, participants performed a train-
ing phase where they completed ten content transfers. After that,
they performed the actual task 32 times. The number of repetitions
was chosen so that each distance and orientation in the FIFTEEN
SCREENS condition appeared once (1–4 screens horizontally × 1–2
screens vertically × two directions each = 8 × 2 × 2 = 32). For
each condition in the PUZZLE TASK, participants also performed
a training phase where they completed puzzle tasks until they felt
comfortable (most users only conducted one practice task). There-
after, they performed the actual puzzle task ten times per condition.
In both tasks, after each condition, participants completed the SSQ,
SUS and NASA TLX questionnaires. At the end of each block they
also answered a questionnaire about their preferences and partici-
pated in a semi-structured interview. Finally, the participants were
thanked and compensated with voucher worth 10 Euro.

For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, we collected 32 repetitions
× 4 conditions × 14 users = 1792 data points for the performance
data and 4 conditions × 14 users = 56 data points for the subjective
feedback. For the PUZZLE TASK, we collected 10 repetitions × 4
conditions × 14 users = 560 data points for the performance data and
4 conditions × 14 users = 56 data points for the subjective feedback.

4.5 Results

Statistical signiﬁcance tests for log-transformed target acquisition
time was carried out using general linear model repeated mea-
sures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) with Holm-Bonferroni
adjustments for multiple comparisons at an initial signiﬁcance level
α = 0.05. We indicate effect sizes whenever feasible (η 2

p).

For subjective feedback, or data that did not follow a normal
distribution or could not be transformed to a normal distribution
using the log-transform (such as errors), we employed the Aligned
Rank Transform [124] before applying RM-ANOVAs.

The analysis of results did not reveal signiﬁcant differences be-
tween the participant pool in the US and the one in Europe. Hence,
we will solely report the joint results.

Due to logging errors in the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, we only
obtained data from 31 instead of 32 tasks. For one participant we
only received about half of the data in one GAZE-BASED condition
due to technical problems. Four values for the distance between
goal and disc were excluded, because they were much higher than
should be possible when successfully placing the disc. Note that
slightly fewer values for some participants should not affect the
overall results as we always used the mean performance for each
participant in each condition.

The results in the following sections can be summarized as fol-
lows: For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, participants acquired
targets signiﬁcantly faster with the GAZE-BASED method compared
to BIMANUAL (ca. 30%) and the GAZE-BASED resulted in signif-
icantly higher SUS ratings. No signiﬁcant differences regarding
accuracy, number of errors or simulator sickness ratings were de-
tected between conditions. All but one participant preferred the
GAZE-BASED technique.

For the PUZZLE TASK, participants performed the task signiﬁ-
cantly faster with DEPTH visualization compared to FLAT (approxi-
mately 15 %) but also made signiﬁcantly more errors. The DEPTH
visualization resulted in signiﬁcantly lower mental demand and re-
sulted in a signiﬁcantly higher usability rating compared to FLAT.

4.5.1 Performance

For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK there was a signiﬁcant main
effect of INTERACTION TECHNIQUE for task completion time, such
that the GAZE-BASED method (M = 3.70 s, SD = 0.98) resulted
in a shorter task completion time than the BIMANUAL method
(M = 5.49 s, SD = 2.33). As expected, the main effect of the
NUMBER OF SCREENS on the task completion time was also sig-
niﬁcant such that FOUR SCREENS (M = 3.66 s, SD = 1.20) re-
sulted in a shorter task completion time than FIFTEEN SCREENS
(M = 5.52 s, SD = 2.20). This was predictable because moving the
target across multiple columns and rows takes longer than moving it
only across two columns and rows. There was no signiﬁcant interac-
tion effect between INTERACTION TECHNIQUE and NUMBER OF
SCREENS with respect to task completion time. There was no sig-
niﬁcant differences between the conditions for accuracy in placing
the target on the goal. The performance results for the CONTENT
TRANSFER TASK can be seen in Figure 6 and the results of the
RM-ANOVA in Table 1.

For the PUZZLE TASK there was a signiﬁcant main effect of VI-
SUALIZATION for task completion time such that the DEPTH method
(M = 37.17 s, SD = 22.79) resulted in a shorter task completion time
than the FLAT method (M = 43.31 s, SD = 29.52). As expected, the
main effect of NUMBER OF LAYERS for task completion time was
signiﬁcant such that the FOUR LAYERS (M = 21.28 s, SD = 8.87)
resulted in a shorter task completion time than TEN LAYERS
(M = 59.19 s, SD = 24.23). No signiﬁcant interactions have been
found between NUMBER OF LAYERS and VISUALIZATION. Analy-
sis of the error data (using the total number of errors across all ten
repetitions) indicated that both the NUMBER OF LAYERS and the
VISUALIZATION method had a signiﬁcant impact on the number of

errors made. The conditions using the DEPTH method (M = 0.29,
SD = 0.6) had signiﬁcantly more errors than the conditions using the
FLAT method (M = 0.07, 0.26). Furthermore, conditions with FOUR
LAYERS (M = 0.04, SD = 0.19) resulted in signiﬁcantly fewer errors
than conditions with TEN LAYERS (M = 0.32, 0.61).

4.5.2 Simulator Sickness, Workload, Usability
For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK we found that the Total Severity
aspect of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire was signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the INTERACTION TECHNIQUE such that BIMANUAL
(M = 14.43, SD = 20.73) resulted in a higher total severity than
GAZE-BASED (M = 13.35, 20.57). Also the Oculo-motor aspect was
lower for the GAZE-BASED than for the BIMANUAL. However, the
values are very low and pairwise comparisons showed no signiﬁcant
differences. There was a signiﬁcant difference for the overall TLX
results, such that BIMANUAL resulted in a higher taskload than
GAZE-BASED. Also the mental, physical, effort and frustration
results of the TLX were signiﬁcantly higher for the BIMANUAL
conditions than for the GAZE-BASED conditions. The perceived
performance of the participants, however, was signiﬁcantly higher
for the BIMANUAL method (M = 27.14, SD = 19.31) compared
to the GAZE-BASED method (M = 21.79, SD = 21.65). This is in
contrast to the ﬁndings of the task completion time and distance to
goal shown above, where task completion time was signiﬁcantly
shorter for GAZE-BASED, and no signiﬁcant difference was found in
distance to the goal. Furthermore, INTERACTION TECHNIQUE had a
signiﬁcant impact on the SUS score in such a way that the usability of
the GAZE-BASED method (M = 88.75, SD = 10.26) was higher than
the usability of the BIMANUAL method (M = 72.59, SD = 13.63).
The main results of the three questionnaires are shown in Figure
6. Plots and detailed results on the further dimensions of simulator
sickness and task load can be found in the supplementary material.
For the PUZZLE TASK, the results of the simulator sickness ques-
tionnaire indicated that VISUALIZATION had a signiﬁcant impact
on the Total Severity such that it was signiﬁcantly lower for DEPTH
(M = 14.29, SD = 23.85) than for FLAT (M = 16.7, SD = 24.76).
This was also true for the Oculo-motor and disorientation aspect.
Also, the NUMBER OF LAYERS signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the disorien-
tation aspect, such that the FOUR LAYER had a signiﬁcantly lower
value than TEN LAYER. However, the values are again very low and
no signiﬁcant differences were found in pairwise comparisons. The
NASA TLX results indicated that the VISUALIZATION signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced the overall task load such that it was signiﬁcantly higher
for the FLAT visualization (M = 38.3, SD = 16.06) than for the
DEPTH visualization (M = 30.92, SD = 15.92). This was also the
case for the mental and physical task load, as well as the frustration
perceived by the participants. The perceived performance, however,
was signiﬁcantly higher for FLAT (M = 29.64, SD = 21.73) than for
DEPTH (M = 22.86, SD = 22.17) which again, is in contrast to the
results of the task completion time. In addition, we found that the
number of layers had a signiﬁcant impact on the overall task load
such that it was lower for FOUR LAYERS (M = 30.83, SD = 14.67)
than for TEN LAYERS (M = 38.39, SD = 17.17). The same was
observed for frustration, physical task load and the temporal aspect.
Also, we found that VISUALIZATION had a signiﬁcant impact on the
SUS results, in such a way that DEPTH (M = 80.09, SD = 14.05)
resulted in a higher usability than FLAT (M = 68.48, SD = 17.00).
The main results of the three questionnaires is shown in Figure 6
and Table 1. Plots and detailed results on the further dimensions of
simulator sickness and task load can be found in the supplementary
material.

4.5.3 Preference, Open Comments and Observations

For the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK, all but one participant pre-
ferred the GAZE-BASED method over the BIMANUAL, regardless
of the number of screens. However, when asked about their pref-
erence for each NUMBER OF SCREENS separately this participant

also liked GAZE-BASED more for FIFTEEN screens. When asked
which interaction method the participants perceived as faster, all
participants chose GAZE-BASED. When asked which method they
could interact with more precisely, all participants chose GAZE-
BASED for the conditions with FIFTEEN SCREENS. However, in
the condition with FOUR SCREENS, only four participants thought
that GAZE-BASED allowed for a more precise interaction and three
participants felt that BIMANUAL was more precise. This is also
supported by the objective measurements shown in Figure 6, even
though no signiﬁcant difference between conditions was indicated
for distance to the target. We conjecture that these differences are
due to the fact that in the GAZE-BASED method the selection of
the target screen, and moving to the target within the screen, can
happen concurrently. In contrast, in the BIMANUAL condition the
selection of the target screen is always separated by an explicit mode
switch (raising the ﬁnger of the non-dominant hand from the bezel)
from the subsequent phase of moving towards the target within that
screen. The lower precision in the BIMANUAL condition with FIF-
TEEN SCREENS compared to FOUR SCREENS might also be due
to higher fatigue when moving the item across more screens. The
participant who preferred BIMANUAL explained that it reminds him
of the keyboard (alt+tab). Most other participants explained their
preference for GAZE-BASED due to it being faster. One participant
found GAZE-BASED more intuitive, and another participant found
it less fatiguing. One participant suggested a hybrid solution where
GAZE-BASED is only enabled when touching the bezel.

For the PUZZLE TASK, all but one participant preferred the
DEPTH condition. However, one participant preferred FLAT. This
participant later mentioned having trouble focusing the right eye
and therefore found it more difﬁcult to match the 3D state with the
2D target. Two participants thought the FLAT visualization was
faster for FOUR LAYERS than the DEPTH visualization. All other
participants felt that DEPTH was faster. Regarding the DEPTH visu-
alization, participants also mentioned that “If you make a mistake it
is easier to ﬁnd the layer with the wrong element” (Participant P01),
“I can better see which puzzle piece is where” (P02), “you directly
see where the puzzle piece is” (P04) and that DEPTH “provides more
information” (P06).

Participants used different strategies to solve the puzzle task for
the FLAT conditions. Three participants mainly identiﬁed the ele-
ment belonging to the current layer by trial and error. They tried
to move the element and if it was not possible they tested the next
element until they found the element of that layer. Four participants
started using this strategy but then switched to a more efﬁcient one.
One participant used it sporadically in the condition with FOUR
LAYERS.

Some participants moved to the last layer (furthest away) at the
start of each puzzle and continued to the front. In the last layer, only
one element (the element of that layer) was visible, therefore the
participant did not have to guess the correct element. When moving
one layer, a new element appeared on the screen, and the participant
could identify the next element with ease. Nine participants mainly
used this strategy.

There were also participants who started from the front layer but
shortly switched to the next layer and back in order to detect the
active element as this element will then disappear and reappear. Two
participants switched to this strategy after ﬁrst using another strategy.
Also, this strategy was basically always used when participants
wanted to correct a mistake.

The fourth strategy observed was to click on the eye-symbols
in the menu at the left to deactivate and activate the current layer.
This would also show the user which element would disappear and
reappear and therefore was the element of the active layer. This
strategy was only used by one participant in his ﬁrst FLAT condition.
Thereafter he switched strategy. Two people also tried this strategy
during the training phase.

Content Transfer Task

Task Completion Time

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

F
63.66
99.41
.86

p
< .001
< .001
.37

η2
p
70.83
.88
.06

Accuracy
F
.79
.53
1.2

p
.39
.48
.29

d f2
13
13
13

d f1
1
1
1

η2
p
.06
.04
.08

d f1
1
1
1

I
S
I × S

TS-SS
F
11.11
.60
2.0

d f2
13
13
13
Puzzle Task

p
.005
.45
.18

η2
p
.46
.04
.13

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

Task Completion Time

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

F
5.32
1574.78
1.23

p
.04
< .001
.29

η2
p
.29
.99
.09

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

Errors
F
8.97
5.14
4.7

p
.04
.04
.05

η2
p
.28
.28
.03

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

TS-SS
F
12.45
4.04
1.86

p
.004
.07
.2

η2
p
.49
.24
.13

d f1
1
1
1

d f2
13
13
13

V
L
V × L

SUS
F
38.42
3.79
.87

p
< .001
.07
.37

SUS
F
10.39
.61
.08

p
.007
.45
.78

η2
p
.75
.23
.06

η2
p
.44
.04
.0

d f1
1
1
1

d f1
1
1
1

Overall Taskload

d f2
13
13
13

F
29.81
3.02
.14

p
< .001
.11
.72

η2
p
.7
.19
.01

Overall Taskload
F
12.34
15.4
.03

p
.004
.002
.86

d f2
13
13
13

η2
p
.49
.54
.0

Table 1: RM-ANOVA results for both tasks. Gray rows show signiﬁcant ﬁndings. I = INTERACTION TECHNIQUE, S = NUMBER OF SCREENS, V =
VISUALIZATION, L = NUMBER OF LAYERS. TS-SS: Total Severity Dimension of the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire. SUS: System Usability Scale
d f1 = d fe f f ect and d f2 = d ferror.

Figure 6: Results of the task completion time (TCT), the Total Severity aspect of the Simulator Sickenss Questionnaire (TS-SS), the System
Usability Scale (SUS) and the overall taskload (O-TL) for the CONTENT TRANSFER TASK and the PUZZLE TASK. Also for the CONTENT TRANSFER
TASK the distance between disc and goal in cm upon task completion is shown and for the PUZZLE TASK the mean number of total errors. On the
x-axis the digits indicates the NUMBER OF SCREENS (4 or 15) or the NUMBER OF LAYERS (4 or 10) as well as the INTERACTION TECHNIQUE G =
GAZE-BASED, B = BIMANUAL and the VISUALIZATION F = FLAT, D = DEPTH. The number of stars indicates the level of signiﬁcance between the
conditions (*** < 0.001 ** < 0.01 * < 0.05).

5 APPLICATIONS
Based on the insights presented in the previous sections, we imple-
mented six applications that we envision are applicable in mobile
knowledge worker scenarios.

Window Manager: We implemented a window manager that
allows the arrangement of multiple windows around the user (see
Figure 1, b). Interaction with those windows is supported by joint
spatial and touch interaction. For example, the active window is
selected by head gaze (indicated by a red border around the window
in Figure 7 a and b). The input space of the physical touchscreen
(depicted as a red rectangle in Figure 7, b) is then mapped to the
output space of the virtual window. Contrary to the content transfer
task in the evaluation of design parameters, for the window man-
ager, the selected window stays selected even if the user’s gaze is
switching to another window for as long as the user is touching
the physical touchscreen. This design lets the user glance at other
windows without losing the context of the task. Other clutching
mechanisms are also feasible, such as locking the gaze-selected
window on touch-down but then delaying the release on touch-up to
let the user interact with the touchscreen.

To switch depth layers, the user can either swipe along the bezel
or use a two-ﬁnger swipe, as described in the Section “Depth Interac-
tion”. Alternatively, to retrieve a temporary preview of the otherwise
hidden layers, the user can lean towards the virtual screen to peak
through (Figure 7, c). For interaction with virtual windows that
are larger than the physical touchscreen, retargeting can be used, as
described in the Section “Single Screen Interaction” (Figure 7, d).
Code Version Control: We implemented an interface for code
version control (Figure 1, c) that uses a spatial layout around the
physical screen, see Figure 1, c. Using on-screen pinches the user
can select different scopes of code changes (line, block, function,
class, ﬁle), swipe through the commits using the selected scope, and
swipe the desired commit down to the physical screen for further
editing.

Parallel Coordinates: Inspired by recent research in immersive
analytics [21, 22, 67, 112], we built a parallel coordinates plot that
is grounded on the tangible physical screen, see Figure 1, g, and h.
Subranges of variables can be selected using on-surface swipes for
the extent of the variable range and on-surface drags for the center

of the variable range. Individual variables are selected by touch.
Switching between coordinate axes (z, protruding the display, for the
variable range, y, along the height of the tablet, for the data items)
can be achieved explicitly using a mode switch (e.g., pressing a soft
button) or by mapping the swipe and drag along the x- and y-axis of
the touchscreen.

Map: In the map application, users can navigate on a single layer
without the map being cropped at the boundaries of the physical
screen, see Figure 1, a . Available alternative map layers can be
previewed by tilting the physical screen and be selected by swiping
along the bezel of the screen.

Medical Imaging: In the medical imaging application, users can
also swipe through different layers of information, see Figure 1,
e–f. Additionally, the image slices can be previewed when the user
moves their head to the side of the screen to look behind it.

PowerPoint: In the VR PowerPoint application users can arrange
graphical items on a canvas, see Figure 1, d. Each item is associated
with a separate layer. In the cases when items are occluded, they can
be quickly accessed by swiping through the layers.

6 MOBILE IMPLEMENTATION

The system was implemented using Unity 2019.3. We used a HTC
Vive Pro Eye as the HMD, which also enables hand tracking1 as
well as access to the camera streams2. While we used external
OptiTrack outside-in tracking systems due to superior hand tracking
accuracy compared to HMD-based inside out tracking [99] for our
evaluations, we also implemented a system to track the user’s screen
using the HMD cameras, see Figure 7, g-h. While it is possible to
build a computer vision algorithm to track the speciﬁc laptop model
used by users, we used a model-independent approach. Since the
laptop or tablet display screen is hidden from the user, wearing an
HMD, we can use the screen to display a standard tracking pattern,
such as ARUCO markers [76]. Displaying the pattern enables a
robust detection and orientation using multiple wide-ﬁeld-of view

1https://developer.vive.com/resources/knowledgebase/vive-hand-

tracking-sdk/ Last accessed April 24th, 2020.

2https://developer.vive.com/resources/knowledgebase/intro-vive-

srworks-sdk/ Last accessed April 24th, 2020.

Figure 7: a-d: Window Manager. a: An image is selected for movement to another window by head-gaze (selecting the window) + touch (selecting
the image inside the window). b: The image is released on a different window at a different layer. The grey sphere on the red rectangle indicates
the physical ﬁnger position. The blue sphere on the image depicts the projected ﬁnger position on the current window. c: The input on and above
the physical touchscreen (red transparent rectangle, ﬁngertip on touchscreen indicated by a white sphere) is retargeted to the virtual display
(indicated by a blue sphere). d: A user previews windows in a hidden layer by leaning forward. e-f: Options to temporarily rearrange information
layers. e: Virtual displays are temporarily arranged around the physical screen. f: If a user peeks behind the physical screen, virtual displays are
extruded to that side. g-h mobile implementation: g: user wearing an HTC Vive Eye Pro looking on a tablet PC, which displays an Aruco marker. h:
the user’s ﬁngers are spatially tracked with the HTC Vive Hand tracking SDK

cameras of the screen and information about the laptop dimension
are sufﬁcient to display a virtual model that can guide the user touch
gestures (see accompanying video). Other solutions, such as using
an external camera, such as a laptop camera, to track the HMD are
feasible but require additional instrumentation of the HMD [73].

the

To facilitate
of

interactions
development
and VR headsets, we make our
https://gitlab.com/mixedrealitylab/breakingthescreen.

community in further
between
code

joint

research and
touchscreens
available under

7 USER FEEDBACK ON APPLICATIONS
The purpose of this user study was to learn from initial user reactions
on the applications we previously introduced. To this end we demon-
strated individual experiences to the user instead of carrying out
task-based evaluations (following the approaches used in prior work,
e.g., [18, 98]). We recruited 17 participants (8 female, 9 male, mean
age 31.9 years, sd = 9.2, mean height 173.9 cm, sd = 6.8) from a
university campus with diverse study backgrounds. All participants
were familiar with touch-sensitive screens.

7.1 Apparatus, Procedure, and Task
The same apparatus as in the evaluation of the design space param-
eters were used with the following change: instead of the Android
tablet, a motion-tracked Surface Pro 4 tablet was used.

After an introduction, participants were asked to ﬁll out a demo-
graphic questionnaire. Thereafter, we ﬁxated OptiTrack trackers
on the index ﬁnger of the dominant hand and the thumb of the
other hand. Then individual applications were presented (counter-
balanced). After trying out the applications the users rated them
using a short three-item questionnaire capturing the user experience
dimensions of ease of use, utility, and enjoyment (in line with similar
approaches in prior work [18, 60]). After trying out the applications,
participants were asked to participate in a semi-structured interview.
Finally, the participants were compensated with a 10 Euro voucher.
The order of the applications was balanced across participants,
insofar as possible (a full permutation was not possible due to the
number of applications).

7.2 Results
Figure 8 shows user ratings on seven-item Likert scales for questions
on ease of use (“I found the application easy to use”), utility (“I found
the application to be useful”) and enjoyment (“I had fun interacting
with the application”). Note that we did not run null hypothesis sig-
niﬁcance tests on these ratings as they should serve as a descriptive
indication of these user experience dimensions only. Participants
were asked to comment on individual applications. We followed

Figure 8: Ease of Use, Utility and Enjoyment ratings for the evalu-
ated applications on a range of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree). MAP: Map Interaction, MED: MEDICAL, PP: POWERPOINT,
WM: WINDOWMANAGER, CVC: CODEVERSIONCONTROL, PC: PAR-
ALLELCOORDINATES. The y-axis depcits the number of participants in
percent (1.0 = 100% of participants).

top-down qualitative coding and structuring procedures to identify
the beneﬁts and drawbacks of the individual applications [109]. For
WINDOWMANAGER the participants appreciated that the need for
multiple physical monitors was mitigated (“Avoids the need of a
monitor wall.” participant P13) but also the layered view of the
virtual displays (“You can view dozens of documents.” P03) and it’s
ease of use (“It was easy to understand even for non-experts.” P04).
Regarding CODEVERSIONCONTROL, one participant mentioned
that she had an “overview like in a airport control tower.” P13 and
another one saw applicability to another domain: “I would like that
for functional subunits in engineering” P17. Similarly, for POWER-
POINT the participants saw a transfer to other domains with one
mentioning that “these layers could also be used in drawing tools like
Gimp or Photoshop” P14. Regarding, PARALLELCOORDINATES a
participant mentioned that “it is a more entertaining way to present
boring data” P06 and another participant, “The new visualization
was nice” P13. Regarding MAP a participant mentioned that “I could
need that for driving.” P09 and regarding MEDICAL participants
mentioned that “a 3D Model from the layers would be awesome”
P14 but also that “It would be cool to pick the layers directly” P04.

7.3 Discussion

Using immersive HMDs enables mobile knowledge workers to bring
their working environment with them everywhere they go [39]. Rela-
tive to the compact input and output space of today’s mobile devices,
the large ﬁeld of view of HMDs allows to substantially extend the
available display and increase privacy. Our design explorations and
evaluations, explored different dimensions of this extended display
space while focusing the input to the small area of a tablet screen.

The ﬁrst question we investigated was handling the large ﬁeld of
view of the virtual environment while using a very limited input
space. To handle the large scale ratio between input and display,
we tested two different techniques, One where we combined noisy
eye gaze for large scale motions and touch for ﬁne manipulation
and compared it with a multi-touch technique. The results of the
design parameter evaluation indicated that combination of gaze and
touch input on a tablet as realized in the GAZE-BASED input method
are beneﬁcial for interaction in virtual multi-window environments.
Speciﬁcally, the GAZE-BASED method outperformed the BIMAN-
UAL METHOD by approximately 30%. The second parameter we
studied was the use of the HMD’s depth display for interaction above
the touch screen. Using multiple layers has beneﬁts of extending
the amount of information that can be displayed and manipulated
using a 2D screen. On the other-hand depth parallax and occlusions
may hinder the user’s performance. Our second study was designed
to test it, by asking users to do a task both in 2D and in 3D. As
indicated by the results, the use of depth can be both efﬁcient and
usable when compared to a 2D touch interaction. However, we
were surprised by different strategies employed by some users to
compensate for the lack of the depth structure in FLAT visualization,
such as ordering their manipulations from back to front. Pairwise
comparisons showed no signiﬁcant differences between the condi-
tions with regard to errors and the overall number of errors was
low (5.7% for DEPTH and 1.4% for FLAT). During interviews with
participants, the ﬁve participants generating errors stated that they
did not use the option to show all layers at the end of the task using
the dedicated button shown in Figure 4. By design, the layers were
arranged behind the physical screen, allowing the user to navigate
them front to back. As previously noted, in the FLAT visualization
nine participants ﬁrst navigated to the last layer and then navigated to
the front layer by layer. When they reached the front layer, all layers
with all puzzle pieces were visible, hence there was no need to use
the “Show all” button. The user feedback on the developed applica-
tions indicated that the prototypes were usable and enjoyable. Users
could envision employing the prototypes in their work environments.
We envision mobile VR to become an important tool for work, as
it enables a large and private display on the go, regardless of the
worker environment. However the physical environment of the user
will not grow and the interactions should be designed accordingly.
The presented applications are just a small probe of the complex
design space encompassing all of the vast tasks information workers
carry out, and this area is ripe for further research and development.

7.3.1 Use of Augmented Reality HMDs

The proposed interaction concepts, while being considered in VR,
could be transferred to Augmented Reality (AR) and explored further.
In AR, current generation optical see-through HMDs typically have
a substantially smaller ﬁeld of view compared to immersive VR
HMDs. Hence, the proposed techniques might need adaptation.
Potentially, off-screen visualization techniques could be integrated
into an AR setting to compensate for this limited ﬁeld of view
[42]. Also, in AR displays without occlusion management, physical
objects, such as the tablet or the user’s hands are visible alongside
the virtual objects, typically at a different focus distance, which
can further lead to potential perceptual issues [26].
In contrast,
combining an AR HMD with a physical tablet could make use of the
potentially higher output resolution of the physical touch display and
open up further possibilities for novel overview + detail techniques.

7.3.2 Limitations

Our work focused on a subset of a possibly large design space.
While we foresee the combination of VR HMDs and tablets as one
potentially promising direction on how mobile knowledge workers
can be supported in the future, we are aware that it remains uncertain
if and when such potential combinations will become products due

to various factors such as technology, market, regulation, social ac-
ceptance and timing uncertainty [49]. For the CONTENT TRANSFER
TASK, we tested both a small and a large number of virtual screens.
However, other factors such as screen arrangement, screen size, or
parameters of the interaction methods could impact the results. Al-
though we foresee no substantial reversal of the effects indicated
in the study, it may be interesting, as a future work, to test the
limit of noisy eye gaze usage for very small screens and translation
distances, following [115]. For the PUZZLE TASK we empirically
determined the design parameters, such as distance between layers.
Future work should investigate the effects of layer distance on vari-
ous task types in more detail, as with increasing layer distance, the
association between individual (x, y) coordinates on a layer could
become harder for users to track. While we indicated the feasibility
of mobile implementations using our prototype, we still opted for
using an external tracking system for implementing our interaction
techniques due to the limited accuracy of generation HMD-based
hand tracking [99] at the time of the study. Newer technologies,
such as Oculus Quest hand tracking offer higher accuracy and may
enable sufﬁcient performance. It remains to be evaluated how robust
concurrent camera-based tracking of the hands, keyboard, the touch-
screen, and, potentially, a pen is in real-world usage scenarios. An
alternative approach may use a tablet to record the user’s in air hand
movement using a 45-degree mirror clipped above the tablet front
camera [127].

8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Our work explored the opportunities arising out of a joint interaction
space between VR HMDs and laptop/tablet capacitive touchscreens
for supporting mobile information workers. We have demonstrated
that such a joint interaction space is feasible to be implemented
using consumer-oriented hardware by tracking the touchscreen and
the user’s ﬁnger, which could be useful in small constrained en-
vironments such as on an airplane or in touchdown spaces. We
explored how to spatially arrange and interact with data within this
joint interaction space. We further implemented a set of six applica-
tions (window manager, code version control, parallel coordinates
exploration, map navigation, medical image viewer, and a virtual
PowerPoint) making use of this design space. In future work, these
interaction concepts should be studied in depth, such as recently done
for spreadsheet interaction [34], to allow us to better understand their
capabilities and limitations for supporting mobile knowledge work-
ers in real-world working contexts. Also, additional study designs,
e.g., for further investigations of the explosion diagram technique,
comparisons with non-VR baseline techniques, effects of physical
and virtual screen sizes, as well as the use of fully mobile imple-
mentations in real-world environments seem feasible. In particular,
we see the potential for further multimodal interaction techniques
that ﬁt this shallow 3D space spanned by the hands resting on a 2D
screen. One avenue of future work is to explore which particular
document semantics are the most suitable for display above the
documents (such as, for example, comments and other mark-up on
a text document, notes on a code review), and which mappings ﬁt
different contexts. In addition, another avenue is to explore how to
expand the interaction vocabulary with simultaneous pen and touch
techniques.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Ahlstr¨om, K. Hasan, and P. Irani. Are you comfortable doing
that?: acceptance studies of around-device gestures in and for public
In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on
settings.
Human-computer interaction with mobile devices & services, pp. 193–
202. ACM, 2014.

[2] F. Argelaguet and C. Andujar. A survey of 3d object selection tech-
niques for virtual environments. Computers & Graphics, 37(3):121–
136, 2013.

[3] R. Arora, R. Habib Kazi, T. Grossman, G. Fitzmaurice, and K. Singh.
Symbiosissketch: Combining 2d & 3d sketching for designing de-
tailed 3d objects in situ. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, p. 185. ACM, 2018.
[4] M. Azmandian, M. Hancock, H. Benko, E. Ofek, and A. D. Wilson.
Haptic retargeting: Dynamic repurposing of passive haptics for en-
hanced virtual reality experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016 chi
conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1968–1979.
ACM, 2016.

[5] T. Babic, H. Reiterer, and M. Haller. Pocket6: A 6dof controller based
on a simple smartphone application. In SUI’18: 6th ACM Symposium
on Spatial User Interaction, pp. 2–10, 2018.

[6] W. Barﬁeld, C. Hendrix, and K.-E. Bystrom. Effects of stereopsis
and head tracking on performance using desktop virtual environment
displays. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 8(2):237–
240, 1999.

[7] E. A. Bier, M. C. Stone, K. Pier, W. Buxton, and T. D. DeRose.
Toolglass and magic lenses: the see-through interface. In Proceedings
of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, pp. 73–80. ACM, 1993.

[8] M. Billinghurst and T. Starner. Wearable devices: new ways to

manage information. Computer, 32(1):57–64, 1999.

[9] D. Bowman, E. Kruijff, J. J. LaViola Jr, and I. P. Poupyrev. 3D User
interfaces: theory and practice, CourseSmart eTextbook. Addison-
Wesley, 2004.

[10] D. A. Bowman and C. A. Wingrave. Design and evaluation of menu
systems for immersive virtual environments. In Proceedings IEEE
Virtual Reality 2001, pp. 149–156. IEEE, 2001.

[11] J. Brooke et al. Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale. Usability

evaluation in industry, 189(194):4–7, 1996.

[12] L. D. Brown and H. Hua. Magic lenses for augmented virtual envi-
ronments. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 26(4):64–73,
2006.

[13] G. Bruder, F. Steinicke, and W. Sturzlinger. To touch or not to touch?:
comparing 2d touch and 3d mid-air interaction on stereoscopic table-
top surfaces. In Proceedings of the 1st symposium on Spatial user
interaction, pp. 9–16. ACM, 2013.

[14] F. Brudy, C. Holz, R. R¨adle, C.-J. Wu, S. Houben, C. N. Klokmose,
and N. Marquardt. Cross-device taxonomy: Survey, opportunities
and challenges of interactions spanning across multiple devices. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, p. 562. ACM, 2019.

[15] W. B¨uschel, J. Chen, R. Dachselt, S. Drucker, T. Dwyer, C. G¨org,
T. Isenberg, A. Kerren, C. North, and W. Stuerzlinger. Interaction for
immersive analytics. In Immersive Analytics, pp. 95–138. Springer,
2018.

[16] S. Butscher, S. Hubenschmid, J. M¨uller, J. Fuchs, and H. Reiterer.
Clusters, trends, and outliers: How immersive technologies can facili-
tate the collaborative analysis of multidimensional data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 1–12, 2018.

[17] L. K. Chan and H. Y. Lau. Magicpad: the projection based 3d user
interface. International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufac-
turing (IJIDeM), 6(2):75–81, 2012.

[18] X. Chen, T. Grossman, D. J. Wigdor, and G. Fitzmaurice. Duet:
exploring joint interactions on a smart phone and a smart watch.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pp. 159–168. ACM, 2014.

[19] X. A. Chen, N. Marquardt, A. Tang, S. Boring, and S. Greenberg.
Extending a mobile devices interaction space through body-centric
interaction. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on
Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services, pp.
151–160. ACM, 2012.

[20] L.-P. Cheng, E. Ofek, C. Holz, H. Benko, and A. D. Wilson. Sparse
haptic proxy: Touch feedback in virtual environments using a general
passive prop. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 3718–3728. ACM, 2017.

[21] M. Cordeil, B. Bach, A. Cunningham, B. Montoya, R. T. Smith, B. H.
Thomas, and T. Dwyer. Embodied axes: Tangible, actuated interaction
for 3d augmented reality data spaces. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2020.

[22] M. Cordeil, A. Cunningham, T. Dwyer, B. H. Thomas, and K. Marriott.
Imaxes: Immersive axes as embodied affordances for interactive
multivariate data visualisation. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp.
71–83. ACM, 2017.

[23] T. Dorta, G. Kinayoglu, and M. Hoffmann. Hyve-3d and the 3d cursor:
Architectural co-design with freedom in virtual reality. International
Journal of Architectural Computing, 14(2):87–102, 2016.

[24] A. Drachen, P. Mirza-Babaei, and L. E. Nacke. Games user research.

Oxford University Press, 2018.

[25] T. Drey, J. Gugenheimer, J. Karlbauer, M. Milo, and E. Rukzio. Vrs-
ketchin: Exploring the design space of pen and tablet interaction
for 3d sketching in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 2020.

[26] A. Eiberger, P. O. Kristensson, S. Mayr, M. Kranz, and J. Grubert.
Effects of depth layer switching between an optical see-through head-
mounted display and a body-proximate display. In Symposium on
Spatial User Interaction, pp. 1–9, 2019.

[27] B. Ens, J. D. Hincapi´e-Ramos, and P. Irani. Ethereal planes: a design
framework for 2d information space in 3d mixed reality environments.
In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM symposium on Spatial user interaction,
pp. 2–12. ACM, 2014.

[28] B. Ens and P. Irani. Spatial analytic interfaces: Spatial user interfaces
for in situ visual analytics. IEEE computer graphics and applications,
37(2):66–79, 2016.

[29] B. M. Ens, R. Finnegan, and P. P. Irani. The personal cockpit: a
spatial interface for effective task switching on head-worn displays.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pp. 3171–3180. ACM, 2014.

[30] A. O. S. Feiner. The ﬂexible pointer: An interaction technique for
In Proc. UIST’03, pp.

selection in augmented and virtual reality.
81–82, 2003.

[31] S. Feiner, B. MacIntyre, M. Haupt, and E. Solomon. Windows on the
world: 2 d windows for 3 d augmented reality. In ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 145–155, 1993.
[32] C. Forlines, D. Vogel, and R. Balakrishnan. Hybridpointing: ﬂuid
switching between absolute and relative pointing with a direct input
device. In Proceedings of the 19th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, pp. 211–220, 2006.

[33] D. Gasques, J. G. Johnson, T. Sharkey, and N. Weibel. Pintar: Sketch-
ing spatial experiences in augmented reality. In Companion Publica-
tion of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2019
Companion, pp. 17–20. ACM, 2019.

[34] T. Gesslein, V. Biener, P. Gagel, D. Schneider, E. Ofek, M. Pahud, P. O.
Kristensson, and J. Grubert. Pen-based interaction with spreadsheets
in mobile virtual reality. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2020.

[35] J. G. Grandi, H. G. Debarba, L. Nedel, and A. Maciel. Design and
evaluation of a handheld-based 3d user interface for collaborative
object manipulation. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 5881–5891. ACM, 2017.
[36] R. Grasset, A. Duenser, H. Seichter, and M. Billinghurst. The mixed
reality book: a new multimedia reading experience. In CHI’07 ex-
tended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 1953–
1958. ACM, 2007.

[37] J. Grubert, M. Heinisch, A. Quigley, and D. Schmalstieg. Multiﬁ:
Multi ﬁdelity interaction with displays on and around the body. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 3933–3942. ACM, 2015.

[38] J. Grubert, M. Kranz, and A. Quigley. Challenges in mobile multi-
device ecosystems. mUX: The Journal of Mobile User Experience,
5(1):5, 2016.

[39] J. Grubert, E. Ofek, M. Pahud, P. O. Kristensson, F. Steinicke, and
C. Sandor. The ofﬁce of the future: Virtual, portable, and global.
IEEE computer graphics and applications, 38(6):125–133, 2018.
[40] J. Grubert, M. Pahud, R. Grasset, D. Schmalstieg, and H. Seichter.
The utility of magic lens interfaces on handheld devices for touristic
map navigation. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 18:88–103, 2015.
[41] J. Grubert, L. Witzani, E. Ofek, M. Pahud, M. Kranz, and P. O.

Kristensson. Text entry in immersive head-mounted display-based
virtual reality using standard keyboards. In 2018 IEEE Conference
on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 159–166. IEEE,
2018.

[42] U. Gruenefeld, A. E. Ali, W. Heuten, and S. Boll. Visualizing out-of-
view objects in head-mounted augmented reality. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction
with Mobile Devices and Services, pp. 1–7, 2017.

[43] J. Gugenheimer, D. Dobbelstein, C. Winkler, G. Haas, and E. Rukzio.
Facetouch: Enabling touch interaction in display ﬁxed uis for mobile
virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, pp. 49–60. ACM, 2016.

[44] J. Guo, D. Weng, Z. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, and H. B.-L.
Duh. Mixed reality ofﬁce system based on maslows hierarchy of
needs: Towards the long-term immersion in virtual environments.
In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR), pp. 224–235. IEEE, 2019.

[45] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland. Development of nasa-tlx (task load
index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in
psychology, vol. 52, pp. 139–183. Elsevier, 1988.

[46] O. Hilliges, S. Izadi, A. D. Wilson, S. Hodges, A. Garcia-Mendoza,
and A. Butz. Interactions in the air: adding further depth to interactive
tabletops. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology, pp. 139–148. ACM, 2009.

[47] T. Hirzle, J. Gugenheimer, F. Geiselhart, A. Bulling, and E. Rukzio.
A design space for gaze interaction on head-mounted displays. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, p. 625. ACM, 2019.

[48] K. Huo, K. Ramani, et al. Window-shaping: 3d design ideation by
creating on, borrowing from, and looking at the physical world. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, pp. 37–45. ACM, 2017.
[49] H. Jalonen. The uncertainty of innovation: a systematic review of the

literature. Journal of Management Research, 4(1):1, 2012.

[50] H.-C. Jetter, R. R¨adle, T. Feuchtner, C. Anthes, J. Friedl, and C. N.
Klokmose. in vr, everything is possible!: Sketching and simulating
spatially-aware interactive spaces in virtual reality. In CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing SystemsACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing Machinery,
2020.

[51] N. Katzakis, R. J. Teather, K. Kiyokawa, and H. Takemura. Inspect:
extending plane-casting for 6-dof control. Human-centric Computing
and Information Sciences, 5(1):22, 2015.

[52] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilienthal. Sim-
ulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation psychology,
3(3):203–220, 1993.

[53] P. Knierim, V. Schwind, A. M. Feit, F. Nieuwenhuizen, and N. Henze.
Physical keyboards in virtual reality: Analysis of typing performance
and effects of avatar hands. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, p. 345. ACM, 2018.
[54] M. Kobayashi and H. Koike. Enhanceddesk: integrating paper doc-
In Proceedings. 3rd Asia Paciﬁc
uments and digital documents.
Computer Human Interaction (Cat. No. 98EX110), pp. 57–62. IEEE,
1998.

[55] P. G. Kry, A. Pihuit, A. Bernhardt, and M.-P. Cani. Handnavigator:
Hands-on interaction for desktop virtual reality. In Proceedings of the
2008 ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology, pp.
53–60. ACM, 2008.

[56] M. Kyt¨o, B. Ens, T. Piumsomboon, G. A. Lee, and M. Billinghurst.
Pinpointing: Precise head-and eye-based target selection for aug-
mented reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, p. 81. ACM, 2018.

[57] J. J. LaViola Jr, E. Kruijff, R. P. McMahan, D. Bowman, and I. P.
Poupyrev. 3D user interfaces: theory and practice. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2017.

[58] J. H. Lee, S.-G. An, Y. Kim, and S.-H. Bae. Projective windows:
Bringing windows in space to the ﬁngertip. In Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, p.
218. ACM, 2018.

[59] S.-w. Leigh, P. Schoessler, F. Heibeck, P. Maes, and H. Ishii. Thaw:
tangible interaction with see-through augmentation for smartphones
In Proceedings of the Ninth International
on computer screens.
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, pp.
89–96. ACM, 2015.

[60] J. R. Lewis. Psychometric evaluation of an after-scenario question-
naire for computer usability studies: the asq. ACM Sigchi Bulletin,
23(1):78–81, 1991.

[61] F. C. Y. Li, D. Dearman, and K. N. Truong. Virtual shelves: inter-
actions with orientation aware devices. In Proceedings of the 22nd
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology,
pp. 125–128. ACM, 2009.

[62] Z. Li, M. Annett, K. Hinckley, K. Singh, and D. Wigdor. Holodoc:
Enabling mixed reality workspaces that harness physical and digital
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
content.
Factors in Computing Systems, p. 687. ACM, 2019.

[63] H.-N. Liang, C. Williams, M. Semegen, W. Stuerzlinger, and P. Irani.
An investigation of suitable interactions for 3d manipulation of distant
objects through a mobile device. International Journal of Innovative
Computing, Information and Control, 9(12):4737–4752, 2013.
[64] J. Looser, R. Grasset, and M. Billinghurst. A 3d ﬂexible and tangible
magic lens in augmented reality. In 2007 6th IEEE and ACM Interna-
tional Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp. 51–54. IEEE,
2007.

[65] D. L´opez, L. Oehlberg, C. Doger, and T. Isenberg. Towards an un-
derstanding of mobile touch navigation in a stereoscopic viewing
environment for 3d data exploration. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 22(5):1616–1629, 2015.

[66] Z. Lu, Y. Hu, and J. Dai. Watchar: 6-dof tracked watch for ar interac-

tion. In IEEE ISMAR 2019 Demonstrations.

[67] K. Marriott, F. Schreiber, T. Dwyer, K. Klein, N. H. Riche, T. Itoh,
W. Stuerzlinger, and B. H. Thomas. Immersive Analytics, vol. 11190.
Springer, 2018.

[68] A. Marzo, B. Bossavit, and M. Hachet. Combining multi-touch input
and device movement for 3d manipulations in mobile augmented
reality environments. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM symposium on
Spatial user interaction, pp. 13–16. ACM, 2014.

[69] D. C. McCallum and P. Irani. Arc-pad: absolute+ relative cursor posi-
tioning for large displays with a mobile touchscreen. In Proceedings
of the 22nd annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology, pp. 153–156, 2009.

[70] M. McGill, D. Boland, R. Murray-Smith, and S. Brewster. A dose
of reality: Overcoming usability challenges in vr head-mounted dis-
plays. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2143–2152. ACM, 2015.

[71] M. McGill, J. Williamson, A. Ng, F. Pollick, and S. Brewster. Chal-
lenges in passenger use of mixed reality headsets in cars and other
transportation. Virtual Reality, pp. 1–21, 2019.

[72] D. Mendes, F. M. Caputo, A. Giachetti, A. Ferreira, and J. Jorge. A
survey on 3d virtual object manipulation: From the desktop to immer-
sive virtual environments. In Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 38, pp.
21–45. Wiley Online Library, 2019.

[73] P. Mohr, M. Tatzgern, T. Langlotz, A. Lang, D. Schmalstieg, and
D. Kalkofen. Trackcap: Enabling smartphones for 3d interaction
on mobile head-mounted displays. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, p. 585. ACM,
2019.

[74] A. Mossel, B. Venditti, and H. Kaufmann. 3dtouch and homer-s: intu-
itive manipulation techniques for one-handed handheld augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the Virtual Reality International Conference:
Laval Virtual, p. 12. ACM, 2013.

[75] J. M¨uller, G. Bailly, T. Bossuyt, and N. Hillgren. Mirrortouch: com-
bining touch and mid-air gestures for public displays. In Proceedings
of the 16th international conference on Human-computer interaction
with mobile devices & services, pp. 319–328. ACM, 2014.

[76] R. Munoz-Salinas. Aruco: a minimal library for augmented reality
applications based on opencv. Universidad de C´ordoba, 2012.
[77] M. A. Nacenta, R. L. Mandryk, and C. Gutwin. Targeting across
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on

displayless space.
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 777–786, 2008.

[78] M. Nancel, O. Chapuis, E. Pietriga, X.-D. Yang, P. P. Irani, and
M. Beaudouin-Lafon. High-precision pointing on large wall displays
using small handheld devices. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 831–840, 2013.
[79] M. Nancel, E. Pietriga, and M. Beaudouin-Lafon. Precision pointing

for ultra-high-resolution wall displays. 2011.

[80] E. Normand and M. J. McGufﬁn. Enlarging a smartphone with ar to
create a handheld vesad (virtually extended screen-aligned display).
In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR), pp. 123–133. IEEE, 2018.

[81] J.-y. Oh and H. Hua. User evaluations on form factors of tangible
magic lenses. In 2006 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality, pp. 23–32. IEEE, 2006.

[82] T. Pejsa, J. Kantor, H. Benko, E. Ofek, and A. Wilson. Room2room:
Enabling life-size telepresence in a projected augmented reality envi-
ronment. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer-
supported cooperative work & social computing, pp. 1716–1725.
ACM, 2016.

[83] J. Petford, M. A. Nacenta, and C. Gutwin. Pointing all around you:
selection performance of mouse and ray-cast pointing in full-coverage
displays. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, p. 533. ACM, 2018.

[84] K. Pfeuffer, J. Alexander, M. K. Chong, Y. Zhang, and H. Gellersen.
Gaze-shifting: Direct-indirect input with pen and touch modulated by
gaze. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software & Technology, pp. 373–383, 2015.

[85] K. Pfeuffer and H. Gellersen. Gaze and touch interaction on tablets.
In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, pp. 301–311, 2016.

[86] K. Pfeuffer, B. Mayer, D. Mardanbegi, and H. Gellersen. Gaze+ pinch
interaction in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on
Spatial User Interaction, pp. 99–108. ACM, 2017.

[87] C. Pinhanez. The everywhere displays projector: A device to cre-
ate ubiquitous graphical interfaces. In International conference on
ubiquitous computing, pp. 315–331. Springer, 2001.

[88] E. D. Ragan, R. Kopper, P. Schuchardt, and D. A. Bowman. Studying
the effects of stereo, head tracking, and ﬁeld of regard on a small-
scale spatial judgment task. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, 19(5):886–896, 2012.

[89] D. Raja, D. Bowman, J. Lucas, and C. North. Exploring the beneﬁts of
immersion in abstract information visualization. In Proc. Immersive
Projection Technology Workshop, pp. 61–69, 2004.

[90] D. Ramanujan, C. Piya, K. Ramani, et al. Mobisweep: Exploring
spatial design ideation using a smartphone as a hand-held reference
plane. In Proceedings of the TEI’16: Tenth International Conference
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, pp. 12–20. ACM,
2016.

[91] R. Raskar, G. Welch, M. Cutts, A. Lake, L. Stesin, and H. Fuchs.
The ofﬁce of the future: A uniﬁed approach to image-based modeling
and spatially immersive displays. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp.
179–188. ACM, 1998.

[92] P. Reipschl¨ager and R. Dachselt. Designar: Immersive 3d-modeling
combining augmented reality with interactive displays. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 ACM International Conference on Interactive Sur-
faces and Spaces, pp. 29–41, 2019.

[93] J. Rekimoto and M. Saitoh. Augmented surfaces: a spatially continu-
ous work space for hybrid computing environments. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 378–385. ACM, 1999.

[94] J. Ren, Y. Weng, C. Zhou, C. Yu, and Y. Shi. Understanding window
management interactions in ar headset+ smartphone interface. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts, pp. 1–8, 2020.

[95] A. Ruvimova, J. Kim, T. Fritz, M. Hancock, and D. C. Shepherd.
”transport me away”: Fostering ﬂow in open ofﬁces through virtual
reality. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. ACM, 2020.

[96] K. Ryu, J.-J. Lee, and J.-M. Park. Gg interaction: a gaze–grasp pose
interaction for 3d virtual object selection. Journal on Multimodal

User Interfaces, pp. 1–11, 2019.

[97] D. Schmalstieg, L. M. Encarnac¸ ˜ao, and Z. Szalav´ari. Using transpar-
ent props for interaction with the virtual table. SI3D, 99:147–153,
1999.

[98] D. Schneider, A. Otte, T. Gesslein, P. Gagel, B. Kuth, M. S. Damlakhi,
O. Dietz, E. Ofek, M. Pahud, P. O. Kristensson, et al. Reconviguration:
Reconﬁguring physical keyboards in virtual reality. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, 2019.

[99] D. Schneider, A. Otte, A. S. Kublin, P. O. Kristensson, E. Ofek,
M. Pahud, A. Martschenko, and J. Grubert. Accuracy of commodity
ﬁnger tracking systems for virtual reality head-mounted displays. In
IEEE VR 2020. IEEE, IEEE, March 2020.

[100] R. Schweigert, V. Schwind, and S. Mayer. Eyepointing: A gaze-based
selection technique. In Proceedings of Mensch und Computer 2019,
pp. 719–723. ACM, 2019.

[101] M. Serrano, B. Ens, X.-D. Yang, and P. Irani. Gluey: Developing
a head-worn display interface to unify the interaction experience in
distributed display environments. In Proceedings of the 17th Inter-
national Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services, pp. 161–171, 2015.

[102] L. Sidenmark and H. Gellersen. Eye&head: Synergetic eye and head
movement for gaze pointing and selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
pp. 1161–1174, 2019.

[103] L. Sidenmark, D. Mardanbegi, A. Ramirez Gomez, C. Clarke, and
H. Gellersen. Bimodalgaze: Seamlessly reﬁned pointing with gaze
and ﬁltered gestural head movement. In Proceedings of Eye Tracking
Research and Applications, 2020.

[104] R. L. Sollenberger and P. Milgram. Effects of stereoscopic and ro-
tational displays in a three-dimensional path-tracing task. Human
Factors, 35(3):483–499, 1993.

[105] P. Song, W. B. Goh, C.-W. Fu, Q. Meng, and P.-A. Heng. Wysiwyf:
exploring and annotating volume data with a tangible handheld de-
vice. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in
computing systems, pp. 1333–1342. ACM, 2011.

[106] M. Spindler and R. Dachselt. Paperlens: advanced magic lens inter-
action above the tabletop. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces, p. 7. ACM, 2009.
[107] M. Spindler, C. Tominski, H. Schumann, and R. Dachselt. Tangible
views for information visualization. In ACM International Conference
on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces, pp. 157–166. ACM, 2010.

[108] J. Steimle, A. Jordt, and P. Maes. Flexpad: highly ﬂexible bending
interactions for projected handheld displays. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
237–246. ACM, 2013.

[109] A. Strauss and J. Corbin. Basics of qualitative research. Sage publi-

cations, 1990.

[110] H. B. Surale, A. Gupta, M. Hancock, and D. Vogel. Tabletinvr:
Exploring the design space for using a multi-touch tablet in virtual
reality. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, p. 13. ACM, 2019.

[111] Z. Szalav´ari and M. Gervautz. The personal interaction panel–a two-
handed interface for augmented reality. In Computer graphics forum,
vol. 16, pp. C335–C346. Wiley Online Library, 1997.

[112] S. K. Tadeja, T. Kipouros, and P. O. Kristensson. Exploring parallel
In Extended Abstracts of the
coordinates plots in virtual reality.
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, p.
LBW2617. ACM, 2019.

[113] C. Tominski, S. Gladisch, U. Kister, R. Dachselt, and H. Schumann.
A survey on interactive lenses in visualization. In EuroVis (STARs).
Citeseer, 2014.

[114] C. Tominski, S. Gladisch, U. Kister, R. Dachselt, and H. Schumann.
Interactive lenses for visualization: An extended survey. In Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 36, pp. 173–200. Wiley Online Library, 2017.
[115] J. Turner, J. Alexander, A. Bulling, and H. Gellersen. Gaze + rst: inte-
grating gaze and multitouch for remote rotate-scale-translate tasks. In
Proceedings of 2015 CHI conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 4179–4188, 2015.

[116] B. Ullmer and H. Ishii. The metadesk: models and prototypes for tan-
gible user interfaces. In Proceedings of Symposium on User Interface

Software and Technology (UIST??? 97), ACM, 1997.

[117] R. Unger and C. Chandler. A Project Guide to UX Design: For user
experience designers in the ﬁeld or in the making. New Riders, 2012.
[118] J. Wagner, M. Nancel, S. G. Gustafson, S. Huot, and W. E. Mackay.
Body-centric design space for multi-surface interaction. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 1299–1308. ACM, 2013.

[119] J. A. Wagner Filho, C. M. D. S. Freitas, and L. Nedel. Virtualdesk:
a comfortable and efﬁcient immersive information visualization ap-
proach. In Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 37, pp. 415–426. Wiley
Online Library, 2018.

[120] M. Waldner, E. Kruijff, and D. Schmalstieg. Bridging gaps with
pointer warping in multi-display environments. In Proceedings of the
6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending
Boundaries, pp. 813–816, 2010.

[121] P. D. Wellner. Interacting with paper on the digitaldesk. Technical
report, University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, 1994.
[122] D. Wenig, J. Sch¨oning, A. Olwal, M. Oben, and R. Malaka. Watchthru:
Expanding smartwatch displays with mid-air visuals and wrist-worn
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 716–721, 2017.

[123] J. R. Williamson, M. McGill, and K. Outram. Planevr: social accept-
ability of virtual reality for aeroplane passengers. In Proceedings of
the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1–14, 2019.

[124] J. O. Wobbrock, L. Findlater, D. Gergle, and J. J. Higgins. The aligned
rank transform for nonparametric factorial analyses using only anova
procedures. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human
factors in computing systems, pp. 143–146, 2011.

[125] D. Wolf, J. J. Dudley, and P. O. Kristensson. Performance envelopes
of in-air direct and smartwatch indirect control for head-mounted

augmented reality. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and
3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 347–354. IEEE, 2018.

[126] R. Xiao, M. A. Nacenta, R. L. Mandryk, A. Cockburn, and C. Gutwin.
Ubiquitous cursor: a comparison of direct and indirect pointing feed-
In Proceedings of Graphics
back in multi-display environments.
Interface 2011, pp. 135–142. 2011.

[127] C. Yoo, I. Hwang, E. Rozner, Y. Gu, and R. F. Dickerson. Sym-
metrisense: Enabling near-surface interactivity on glossy surfaces
using a single commodity smartphone. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 16,
p. 51265137. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858286

[128] D. Yu, H.-N. Liang, X. Lu, T. Zhang, and W. Xu. Depthmove: Lever-
aging head motions in the depth dimension to interact with virtual
reality head-worn displays. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 103–114. IEEE, 2019.
[129] S. Zhai, C. Morimoto, and S. Ihde. Manual and gaze input cascaded
(magic) pointing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 246–253, 1999.

[130] F. Zhu and T. Grossman. Bishare: Exploring bidirectional inter-
actions between smartphones and head-mounted augmented reality.
In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 2020.

[131] D. Zielasko, M. Kr¨uger, B. Weyers, and T. W. Kuhlen. Menus on the
desk? system control in deskvr. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1287–1288. IEEE, 2019.

[132] D. Zielasko, M. Kr¨uger, B. Weyers, and T. W. Kuhlen. Passive haptic
menus for desk-based and hmd-projected virtual reality. In 2019 IEEE
5th Workshop on Everyday Virtual Reality (WEVR), pp. 1–6. IEEE,
2019.

