0
2
0
2

g
u
A
8
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
4
2
0
2
1
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Article
A survey on applications of augmented, mixed and
virtual reality for nature and environment

Jason Rambach 1,†*, Gergana Lilligreen 2,†, Alexander Schäfer 3,†, Ramya Bankanal 3, Alexander
Wiebel 2, and Didier Stricker1,3

1 German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Augmented Vision department, Kaiserslautern, Germany;

Jason.Rambach@dfki.de

2 Hochschule Worms, UX-Vis Group, Worms, Germany ; lilligreen@HS-Worms.DE
3 University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
* Correspondence: Jason.Rambach@dfki.de
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract: Augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR) and mixed reality (MR) are technologies of great
potential due to the engaging and enriching experiences they are capable of providing. Their use is
rapidly increasing in diverse ﬁelds such as medicine, manufacturing or entertainment. However, the
possibilities that AR, VR and MR offer in the area of environmental applications are not yet widely
explored. In this paper we present the outcome of a survey meant to discover and classify existing
AR/VR/MR applications that can beneﬁt the environment or increase awareness on environmental
issues. We performed an exhaustive search over several online publication access platforms and past
proceedings of major conferences in the ﬁelds of AR/VR/MR. Identiﬁed relevant papers were ﬁltered
based on novelty, technical soundness, impact and topic relevance, and classiﬁed into different categories.
Referring to the selected papers, we discuss how the applications of each category are contributing to
environmental protection, preservation and sensitization purposes. We further analyse these approaches
as well as possible future directions in the scope of existing and upcoming AR/VR/MR enabling
technologies.

Keywords: augmented reality; AR; virtual reality; VR; mixed reality; MR; nature; ecology; environment;
survey

1. Introduction

A healthy environment is vital for all living beings. Protecting and preserving our environment
is necessary as natural resources are limited. The need for a change in paradigm has become apparent
in the last years [1]. It is clear now that apart from the support of governments and industry, it is each
individual’s responsibility to make correct use of resources, conserve energy and adjust their lifestyle to
support sustainability.

In the last couple of decades we have witnessed a tremendous number of new technologies that
have made life easier and better. Augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR) and mixed reality (MR) are
technologies that either create fully virtual worlds (VR) or combine virtual elements with the real world
(AR, MR). The enhancement of the real world environment by superimposing virtual content has the
potential of providing enriching, interactive and captivating experiences. Highly interesting applications
at a level of proof of concept systems or even commercial applications have been introduced in many
diverse ﬁelds such as medicine and health care [2,3], education [4–6], entertainment [7,8], industrial
maintenance [9] and many more. In this survey we investigate the use of AR, VR and MR in applications
that relate to the preservation of the environment in a direct or indirect manner. It is apparent that such

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 of 20

ecological applications are currently few in number, making this a topic that has not been explored
extensively yet. Within this work we attempt to discover existing publications on the topic and classify
them in a meaningful way. We look into applications that have a direct connection to ecology, but also into
AR/VR/MR technologies that have the potential of contributing positively to the state of the environment
in an indirect way, such as e.g. through the reduction of transportation needs for business purposes.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst survey to cover the particular topic of AR/VR/MR for
ecology and nature. Apart from listing existing work in the ﬁeld, our survey investigates the topic and
uncovers the potential opportunities that come with it. We look at the current state of AR/VR/MR in terms
of existing technologies for tracking, display and scene understanding and make an initial evaluation
of how upcoming advancements in these areas can contribute to the success of ecological AR/VR/MR
topics. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We start by describing the exact methodology (i.e.
keywords, sources, selection criteria) we used for ﬁnding existing work relevant to this survey in Section
2. The classiﬁcation structure that we propose is presented in Section 3 and the respective categories are
explained. Statistics on the selected publications are provided in Section 4. In Section 5, we describe the
main points of the most prominent work from each of the categories. In Section 6, we summarize our
ﬁndings and also discuss the current state of AR/VR/MR and possible future developments. Concluding
remarks are given in Section 7.

2. Search Methodology

Figure 1. Examples of keyword combinations used in our search.

AR,VR,MR

Direct

Indirect

Environmental
monitoring

Ecological
awareness

Resource
efﬁciency

Environmental
education

Remote
collaboration

Remote
assistance

Remote
tourism

Simulation/
Training

Figure 2. Classiﬁcation of augmented, virtual and mixed reality environmental applications.

3 of 20

We adopted an extensive search approach to discover as many existing publications as possible on
the topics of interest. The search was performed using search queries in different data sources. Prominent
data sources were Scopus (https://www.scopus.com), Google Scholar (https://scholar.google.com/) and
IEEE Xplore (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/). Apart from searching these databases we also explored recent
proceedings of leading AR/VR/MR conferences such as ISMAR, IEEE VR, EuroVR. Since AR/VR/MR
are used in numerous and diverse ﬁelds, the challenge was to deﬁne a set of suitable keywords from
different domains relevant to the topic. The search was performed by combining keywords that relate to
AR/VR/MR ("augmented reality" OR "mixed reality" OR "virtual reality" OR "AR" OR "MR" OR "VR")
with keywords relating to speciﬁc environmental topics to form regular expressions. A list of several of
the keywords used is shown in Figure 1. All possible combinations of keywords from the left column with
keywords from the right column were tested. An initially short list of keywords was expanded by the
ﬁndings of the search. Through this iterative procedure, the search ﬁnally led to the initial identiﬁcation of
over 300 related publications. The literature search was performed between November 2019 and February
2020.

We decided to address the topic from both a more narrow and a broader perspective. Therefore the
results of the search contained publications that explicitly focus and mention environmental issues (direct
applications class; narrow) and publications that present applications that can have an environmental
impact (based on the opinion of the surveyors) which is however not explicitly stated by the authors of the
publication (indirect applications class; broad).

It became apparent at early stages of the search that topics covered in the indirect class have such a
large extent of related publications that each topic would require a dedicated survey. This exceeds the
scope of this survey. Thus, it has been decided to exhaustively search the direct area of environmental
applications (narrow) only. For the indirect applications area, we present some key publications which
from our point of view support the discussion on environmental perspectives. Therefore, the indirect
application part of this survey is based on a non-exhaustive (broad) search. The next step was the ﬁltering
of the search results in order to decide on the most inﬂuential papers for further study and to initiate the
classiﬁcation procedure. The main criteria for performing the ﬁltering step were:

• Relevance: We graded the papers based on how closely the proposed work is related to the speciﬁc

topic of environmental AR/VR/MR.

• Originality: In case of papers addressing similar topics with similar methodology, we kept the earlier
paper and discarded later ones, unless they present an important advancement to the state-of-the-art.
• Impact: When we found too many papers on the same topic, we took the number of times that a
paper was cited by subsequent publications as a measure of its impact. Additionally, the quality of
the conference or journal where the work appeared was taken into consideration.

The publications were graded individually by the three main surveyors (score 0-10) in each category based
on the paper title and abstract. The ﬁnal selection was done after a discussion round between all 3 main
surveyors. A threshold of an average score of 5.0 was set for selection. Additionally, a score below 2.5 in
one of the categories led to direct exclusion. For the direct area of environmental AR/VR/MR publications
this led to selecting 28 papers. Very few papers were excluded in the direct category, which shows that the
amount of work in the ﬁeld is still extremely limited. Each selected paper was read fully by at least one of
the main surveyors. The selected papers were classiﬁed into several categories as discussed in the next
section. Papers are discussed in more detail within the description of each classiﬁcation category.

3. Classiﬁcation

Our proposal for classiﬁcation of environmental AR/VR/MR applications is presented in Figure 2.
Publications were ﬁrst classiﬁed into the categories direct and indirect based on their type of relation

4 of 20

to environmental topics. The category direct encompasses all applications and methodologies that are
associated in a direct way with nature and ecology. On the other hand, the category indirect contains
applications and methodologies with a looser connection to environmental issues. Applications from
different domains that can have a clear impact on environmental issues like reduction of travel and
its subsequent reduction of emissions are covered here. These approaches might not engage with the
environment directly but help to reduce wasting of vital resources and pollution.

The category direct involves subcategories like environmental education and ecological awareness, in
which AR/VR/MR applications provide illustrations of characteristics and other related information about
species that exist around us. As they learn more about nature and its problems, people can be encouraged
to change their behavior and become more ecologically responsible. Environmental monitoring is another
major category here. This category covers applications that visualize and monitor data on climate-related
topics like air, water and soil. AR as an engaging tool, is capable of illustrating the negative inﬂuence of
pollution, climate change etc. in order to make their effects fully tangible by humans. Finally, AR/VR/MR
applications that support efﬁcient usage of resources are placed under the resource efﬁciency category.

The category indirect involves subcategories like remote collaboration, remote assistance and remote
tourism. In all applications from the subcategories there is an underlying potential of saving resources
through the reduction of the need to travel for professional or entertainment reasons. AR/VR/MR as
highly engaging techniques are able to create immersive remote experiences that help in achieving this. In
the next section we look into each one of the categories individually.

4. Statistical Analysis

Figure 3. Statistical analysis of publications cited in this survey in the direct environmental applications
category. Left: Distribution by application class. Right: Distribution by year.

A statistical analysis of the publications mentioned in this survey is relevant only for the direct
environmental application category which was researched in an exhaustive manner. A total number of
28 papers was selected in this category. In Figure 3, we show a pie-chart of the distribution of selected
papers over the four classiﬁcation categories of direct applications on the left side. On the right side, we
show the distribution of papers based on the year of publication. All years up to 2010 were summarized in
one category. For 2020 the result is only partial as the search for papers ended in February 2020. Of the
28 papers, 12 (42.9%) were published as journal articles and 18 (57.1%) in conference proceedings. It is
also worth mentioning that only 4 of the 28 publications were done in dedicated AR/VR/MR journals or
conferences.

We have also analyzed the number of citations of publications based on information from Google
Scholar (https://scholar.google.com/) in August 2020. The average number of citations over the 28
selected publications is 10.42. The 5 most cited publications are [10](73), [11](40), [12](35), [13](26), [14](23).
In citations per year the 5 most cited publications are: [10](24.33), [15](5.33), [11](5), [16](5), [12](3.5). The

average number of citations for each classiﬁcation category is as follows: environmental monitoring 9.86
(most cited [11](40)), ecological awareness 12.25 (most cited [10](73)), resource efﬁciency 10.83 (most cited
[12](35)), environmental education 3.66 (most cited [17,18](5)).

5 of 20

5. Main Survey Insights

5.1. Direct Ecological Applications

This section presents a state-of-the-art analysis of AR/VR/MR applications with a direct connection

to environment and nature for tasks such as monitoring, resource management or education.

5.1.1. Environmental Monitoring

Extreme changes in the environment fostered the development and usage of sensor networks for
environmental data. The visualization of such data is an important issue. For Veas et al.[11] environmental
monitoring is “the process of continuously observing and regularly measuring environmental parameters
of a speciﬁc area in order to understand a phenomenon”. The authors present a multilayer infrastructure
and a mobile AR platform that leverages visualization of geo-referenced sensor measurements and
simulation data in a seamless integrated view of the environment. The main components in the
infrastructure are sensor and acquisition components, as well as simulation and analysis components.
The mobile support is divided into deployment, providing infrastructure to access data and prepare it
for rendering, and a run-time client, providing visualization and interaction capabilities. Two scenarios
are chosen as case studies for the system - a snow science scenario in the context of snow avalanches
and a hydrology scenario in the context of watershed modeling. AR shows a major value for presenting
subsurface structures or different layers of "material" like soil, grass or snow. During workshops with
experts, the authors noted a higher preference for 3D visualization in general, especially in unfamiliar
environments. As an overall result the authors stated that on-site AR environmental monitoring can be
regarded as a promising ﬁeld.

Trees provide oxygen, conserve water, ameliorate quality of air by reducing amount of CO2 and also
preserve soil. Thus, reforesting helps in the ﬁght against global warming and natural disasters while
supporting wildlife as well. AR along with other technologies can be used for localization and monitoring
of forests. In this context, West et al. [19] present work on visualizing and monitoring the urban forests
using mobile AR. The authors’ main aim is to provide an enriching experience to users and encourage
the public to involve in tree planting and monitoring initiatives. They mention limitations of existing
mechanisms such as remote sensing and ﬁeld-based imaging and inventory and brief on how AR tries
to overcome them. The prototype they present allows users to calibrate the tree location then displays
the dashboard presenting the diameter at breast height (DBH), height and other parameters of tree. In
follow-up research [20] they investigate the integration of ground level rephotography with available
LiDAR data, for creating a dynamic view of the urban forest, and its changes across various spatial and
temporal scales. They explore the potential of overlaying augmentations within the picture taking process
in a smartphone app for guiding persons to guarantee consistency in measurements over growing seasons.
In the PAN project [21] AR is used for environmental monitoring with smartphones in a different
setting. Users located near points of interest (POI) can take photographs with an AR application and act
as citizen scientists. With an AR approach, they are navigated and guided to take a photo on a speciﬁc
point and in a speciﬁc direction. The photographs are processed to time-lapse videos and visualize the
environmental changes and can be used for long term documentation. In their project the AR application
is used in a limestone pit application case and for observing and documenting the progress of regularly

6 of 20

ﬂooded wetlands for the development of a valuable secondary biotope with many rare animal and plant
species.

Fan et al. [15] provide a solution to accurately estimate the tree position, diameter at breast height
(DBH) and height using a mobile phone with RGB-D-based Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
(SLAM). The measurements obtained are augmented on-screen using AR. This allows the users to easily
observe whether estimated measurements are close to actual ones. The authors conclude that estimation
of tree parameters with the proposed method gives accurate results.

A mobile AR application (PeakLens) for mountain exploration is discussed by Frajberg [22]. The
application can be used to crowd-source mountain images for environmental purposes, such as the analysis
of snow coverage for water availability prediction and the monitoring of plant diseases. Meta-data about
mountain peaks is overlaid on the phone screen in real-time over relevant objects. For the AR module a
computer vision algorithm, based on Deep Learning, is used for the extraction of the natural mountain
skyline from the camera view of the mobile phone: “. . . such skyline is aligned with the skyline extracted
from a virtual panorama, computed from the GPS position of the user, the orientation of the mobile phone
view, and a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of the Earth”[22]. The application can also handle occlusions,
so that peaks covered by an object in front of them (e.g., a bell tower, a person, or a tree) are not displayed.
A different viewpoint in the category environmental monitoring and AR is described by Studer
et al. [23]. The art and science project ﬂeabag uses data values from a biomonitoring system for river
water quality. The data is analyzed and then transformed artistically, using AR, to expand the human
perception through a sensually clear, visual and physical presence on the river side. For the visualization a
symbolically shaped big ’water drop’ is sculpted, offering an insight into the world of water ﬂeas. On the
back side of the transparent sculpture, a semi-transparent rear projection screen is embedded to project the
animation. With good water quality, the ’good water particles’ are ﬂoating and forming new patterns. The
’water ﬂeas’ (green colored) move in a ’relaxed’ way through the pattern. With worse water quality the
water ﬂeas are colored in red and try to escape from the “bad” water particles, some of them disappear.
Since art is used to attract the attention of people to water pollution level, this installation also raises
ecological awareness, which is discussed in the following section.

5.1.2. Ecological Awareness

In recent times we have seen quickly rising pollution levels in many areas. The World Health
Organisation states that "Between year 2030 and 2050, climate change is expected to cause approximately
250,000 additional deaths per year, from malnutrition, malaria, diarrhoea and heat stress" [24]. Emission of
green house gases and deforestation have, among other factors, resulted in increasing global warming.
Thus it is essential to provide climate change information and its adverse effects to people in an
understandable manner. Visualization of climate data with AR can be an effective approach due to
AR’s captivating nature. Such visualizations could have the ability to change the perception of the
situation and encourage a change in behavior.

The work of Ramachandran et al. [25] and Torres et al. [26] aims to contribute in this regard by
developing applications with AR that visualize pollutants present in the air. Santos et al. have developed
the application eVision [27]. In addition to gathering information about air quality, the application detects
environmental threats like cars or factories. The users can "wipe" over these objects and the app than
automatically displays objects that are environmental friendly, e.g. overlaying a car with a bicycle.

Environmental simulations allow a safe and easy way to acquire knowledge about hard-to-reach
habitats. Taulien et al.[28] presented a MR simulation that enables users to convert a place like their
living room into a maritime habitat, using the example of the Baltic Sea. The simulation system uses a
HMD (Microsoft HoloLens) and the users can explore a virtual underwater world by walking in the real

7 of 20

world. Animals, plants and stones are added and respond to users’ actions. Also, rearranging real world
objects causes the virtual world to change its look. Through voice-over, additional information is provided
when the users look at an object for a longer time, e.g. the oxygen production of a plant. A knowledge
questionnaire for two groups - users using text vs. mixed-reality application - showed that both groups
improved their knowledge, with a larger improvement using MR. Interestingly, some participants said
that they were so fascinated by the MR simulation that they forgot to listen to the voice-over. Additional
results show that the users of the mixed-reality application were more excited to experience the habitat.
To raise the awareness on energy consumption, a treasure hunt game where AR is used to visualize
effects of energy waste and saving, is presented by Buehling et al. in [29]. The game content, including
problem, solution, and clues, is presented through an AR phone application using markers. For example,
AR is used to visualize energetic effects like the loss of heat when cooking with an open pot. Red arrows
are overlaid on the open pot showing how energy is lost. In order to increase the motivation, the players’
performance is visually presented as dynamic virtual gardens that change from poor to good status
depending on the points collected in the quiz game. The use of markers generates serious restrictions for
such as an application.

An AR underground visualization application that uses a GPS system and image recognition
techniques to localize the user are explained in [14]. Geo-referenced information is used to augment
virtual underground objects and monitor the water quality or the subsoil structure to locate infrastructures
for public supply networks like water, sewage and telephone.

Botanical gardens preserve, protect and display a wide range of ﬂora species. An interactive learning
AR mobile application was developed for a botanical garden in [30]. A digital album allows the users to
ﬁnd the different species with their relevant information and visualized using AR (see Figure 4). Such
applications can unlock enthusiasm and bring people closer to nature.

Figure 4. Fern visualized using AR on a mobile device (left) and list of its plant characteristics (right). Picture
from [30] available via Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license (https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/3.0/).

Nim et al. [31] present a large-scale MR visualization of data about the Great Barrier Reef (GBR) and
explore the impact of individual factors on the coral reef ecosystem. The visualization combines tiled
displays and head-mounted displays, and dynamically presents individualized coral damage information
grounded on viewers’ footprint inputs. During a tour, users provide estimates of their water and carbon
footprint, based on their own typical household activities like air travel or water use. They then can see
an information of GBR bleaching and crown-of-thorn sea star (COTS) outbreak, supported by immersive
technologies. The authors underline that "The aim of such interactive visualization application is to
increase community understandings of the complex interplay of different factors for the reef’s health"[31].

8 of 20

While the above mentioned works focus on techniques using AR, VR has also been used to promote
ecological awareness. DeLeon and Berry [13] discuss an early (1998) attempt to create the illusion of
"being there" with a projection-based 140-degree panoramic display. The installation allows spectators to
navigate an airboat vehicle through a (at that time) highly realistic virtual landscape representation of the
Everglades national park. Two decades later, promoting ecological awareness using VR is still a current
topic as the discussion of immersive media for environmental awareness by McGinity [32] shows. Nelson
et al. [33] describe the usage of 3D HMDs for showing 360◦ ﬁlms about coral reefs and the importance of
protecting them vs. showing a unidirectional ﬁlm. They examine the effects of message framing (positive
vs. negative) and VR on conservation behavior and emotions. The participants’ behavior was measured
using donations to a conservation charity organization. The authors emphasize that VR has the potential
to raise ecological awareness and to attract more people to donate. Another current study [10] shows that
immersive ﬁeld trips into an underwater world, allowing users to experience the process and effects of
rising sea water acidity, facilitates learning about climate change.

5.1.3. Resource Efﬁciency

Non-renewable energies like fossil fuels, coal and natural gas are being reduced day-by-day. They
cannot be revitalized and their usage by-products and emissions are harmful to the environment. There is
a clear need to reduce usage of these resources and also to promote the use of renewable sources such as
bio fuels or solar and wind energy.

Informing people about their electrical power consumption can deﬁnitely make them more vigilant
as discussed in [34]. Here, authors present a proof-of-concept where sensor nodes are installed between
load and power socket supply. Electrical parameters from these sensor nodes are visualized in an AR
environment through the communication layer based on Internet of Things (IoT). This allows consumers
to visualize in AR the consumption of the appliances through the app, become aware of the situation and
make more efﬁcient use of this resource. Mylonas et al. [16] describe an IoT data AR energy visualization
interface system used by students in a school laboratory. Various types of information like energy
consumption, temperature, humidity and other real-time sensor data can be visualized. The authors claim
that this educational activity using AR helps creating awareness among children about energy efﬁciency
because it allows them to grasp it more easily.

Lu [35] presents a system which provides eco-feedback via smart interconnected devices to remind
users about their energy usage or waste. Their system synchronously visualizes the information of the
physical environment with the virtual environment by using IoT enabled technologies. A 3D pet raising
game rendered by a "Visualization Engine" module enables the continuous engagement of the users. The
pet (an avatar) synchronizes with the activity of the user. "According to the contexts in this environment,
an energy-gorging appliance will be incarnated by a monster to attack the pet. The player can turn off
the energy-gorging appliance by beating the monster via the "User Interface" or by manually switching it
off"[35]. Pre-processed sensor data make the system activity-aware. In a study, Lu found out that users
prefer graphical to text-based visualization because the information is more comprehensive and agreeable.
They also found game-based eco-feedback to be more motivating.

Chudikova et al. [36] reveal how VR and AR can help in planning, modelling and decision making in
the selection of heat sources during the construction of buildings. Simulation of different heat sources can
be evaluated against certain factors like price, lifespan etc. to decide upon it. Wind simulation in a 3D
software or a VR walk through a complex machine room can help in the decision-making process for a
suitable location for a wind turbine installation or for individual heating systems in a given space. The
authors conclude that by using VR/AR technologies the heat source placement process can become clearer,
easier and faster.

9 of 20

The production of renewable energy is getting more and more substantial around the world. For
distant and isolated areas, where a demand for electricity is an everyday problem, photovoltaic systems and
especially water pumping systems are a great value. Zenati et al.[37] propose a distributed e-maintenance
platform enriched with AR functions for a photovoltaic pumping system. A remote expert sees the scene
captured by the camera in the worker’s device and proposes a maintenance procedure. A corresponding
marker is identiﬁed by the AR system, and the local worker gets the information as a virtual annotation
that is overlayed on the marker through an HMD. The beneﬁts that AR brings for remote assistance are
further discussed in Section 5.2.2 of this paper.

All techniques supporting the construction of energy efﬁcient products can also be considered as
helping to reduce overall energy consumption. Construction tools, if designed for VR as presented
by Neugebauer et al. [12], can be especially effective for this task. The authors show how a tool for
understanding energy ﬂows in a machine tool can be implemented in VR.

5.1.4. Environmental Education

The goal of environmental education is to increase people’s understanding of nature and enabling
them to attain a more ecological way of life[38]. A person’s appreciation for nature seems relevant for
motivating the search for more information about nature and environmental systems and the other way
around: learning about environmental processes feeds into a person’s appreciation for nature and into
involvement in environmental protection. Every individual on this planet must be educated about the
different species that co-exist with us and AR/VR/MR can support that.

Theodorou et al. [39] develop an AR based mobile application intended for teaching school students
about climate change concepts and renewable energy resources. QR codes are scanned to view different
learning topics. The authors conducted a test to measure knowledge gained by students before and after
using the app to evaluate whether the use of the AR tool improves the learning experience. Results indicate
that the increase in knowledge after using AR tool was higher compared to traditional teaching methods.
Huang et al. [17], describe a system that translates data of an ecological model into a high-ﬁdelity 3D
model in VR. The application can serve as an educational tool and the students can achieve knowledge
about climate change in a virtual forest. Two climate scenarios can be experienced on different trees, as
the system retrieves the necessary information from a 3D tree database. The users can toggle different
species on and off and can use a slider to easily change viewing height from ground to higher perspectives.
The authors emphasize that ". . . creating an immersive experience of a future forest can shorten the
psychological distance and increase the understanding of complex scientiﬁc data".

As a part of the EcoMOBILE project Dede et al. have created a mobile-based AR game consisting
of multiple modules for students to use during their ﬁeld visits [40]. The Atom Tracker Module enables
students to follow a carbon or oxygen atom through their environment. It can help students better
understand the cycling of matter in ecosystems, such as the processes of photosynthesis and respiration.
Another AR module is the Water Quality Measurement AR experience, which invites students to explore a
real pond or stream. It leads students to pick up environmental probes by visiting a water measurement
“toolbox”. Observations were made to investigate how well students have learned basic concepts. Results
indicate better understanding while using the AR app. The main reason is increased engagement due to
the enriched experience that AR provides.

Srisuphab et al.[18] designed an application (ZooEduGuide) for motivating teenagers and children to
learn about animals and wildlife and to raise their awareness for environmental preservation. They tested
their application at a zoo. In the camera mode of the mobile phone, while using AR, points of interest
(POIs) are placed on a map in real-time and the app shows the distance from the current location to the
POI.

10 of 20

5.2. Indirect Application Areas

A large portion of the world-wide CO2 emissions (about 20%) is created by the transport sector
[41]. Apart from the transport of goods, these emissions are generated by people travelling either for
professional (e.g. business meetings) or for personal reasons (e.g. tourism). Systems based on AR or VR
that present the opportunity to do certain tasks remotely could have a positive impact in the reduction of
emissions and pollution due to travel while training simulations can save resources. In this section we
look deeper into some of these indirect ways in which AR/VR/MR can support the environment.

5.2.1. Remote Collaboration

Remote collaboration refers to working together, regardless of different geographic location. Remote
collaboration systems have several potential impact factors on the environment. They can reduce the
necessity of business travels and therefore help in a global reduction of carbon emissions. In addition,
employees can be encouraged to work from home, thus reducing the total ofﬁce space required, which in
turn reduces the companies’ environmental footprint. Various traditional video conferencing applications
have been popular among people since a few decades but they lack the personal presence of a physical
meeting. Advanced AR/VR/MR systems which create shared spaces that enable person embodiment and
haptic interaction could become a more convincing alternative to travelling to distant conferences and
meetings and help in reducing travel costs, time, carbon emissions and overall ofﬁce space required.

We identify three main components in remote collaboration systems based on AR/VR/MR:

Environment, Avatars and Interaction.

Environment. The virtual environment stimulates the sensory impressions of its users such as vision,
hearing, touch or smell. While older systems experimented with the stimulation of many sensory
impressions, more recent systems tend to rely on audiovisual stimuli only. As an example, Morton
Heilig created an environment which featured 3D visuals, stereo sound, seat vibration, wind from fans and
olfactory cues using aromas in the early sixties [42]. Marker based AR systems tend to have haptic feedback
with tangible interfaces such as turntables [43,44] or a pen [45]. However, marker based systems are
becoming obsolete due to the increasing maturity of AR tracking technology and therefore are developing
a trend to use only audiovisual stimuli. The authors of [46] use multiple static panorama images to create a
virtual meeting room where multiple people can participate simultaneously. It features simple presenting
tools such as a virtual projector or TV. A live panorama video stream is used by Lee et al. [47] to create a
wearable MR remote collaboration system.

Avatar. An avatar represents the user in virtual space (without necessarily resembling the appearance
of the user) and is key to enabling communication to other users in a collaborative virtual environment.
Monahan et al. [48] implemented a remote collaboration system for knowledge transfer, which allowed
online lectures and students having online group meetings. The system featured avatars which could use
gestures (e.g. raise hands) for communication besides audio and text chat. A system with an adaptive
avatar was created by Piumsomboon et al. which featured a miniature avatar which was able to transmit
nonverbal communication cues [49].

Interaction. The possibility to interact with the environment and other users is another important
component of remote collaboration systems. Systems developed for product design such as [45,50] usually
implement shared 3D object manipulation, including viewing, changing and annotation of 3D objects.
Remote collaboration systems are also popular in architectural design, where systems usually integrate the
viewing of houses, rooms and furniture while allowing the users to discuss either via audio or integrated
tools such as drawing in the virtual environment [51–53]. Many professional remote collaboration systems
such as [54–59] typically include screen sharing and media sharing as interaction possibilities.

11 of 20

Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, many events and conferences were held completely virtual. Some
events utilized professional VR remote collaboration systems such as the IEEE VR 2020 conference. The
organizing committee used a modiﬁed version of Mozilla Hubs [55] which is a professional social VR
platform. During this event, the platform featured virtual rooms with up to 20 persons simultaneously in
VR. Furthermore it enabled 3D placement of custom content such as posters and presentations. The poster
session of the event was held completely in VR.

Another example is the Laval Virtual, an event usually attended by around 10,000 participants and
150 speakers with content covering three days. Due to the special circumstances during the COVID-19
outbreak, the 2020 event was held in VR (See Figure 5), presumably preventing many business trips and
thus contributing to CO2 savings. The professional platform used here was VirBELA [54], a platform
specialized for large scale events in VR. The presenters shared their screen virtually to all attendees and
held the presentation with an avatar in a 3D environment. Each person in the VR event was visible as an
avatar and the presenter got in front of a podium just as it would be in the physical event. Each attendee
had his own avatar and was part of the virtual conference.

Additionally to the meeting and design use cases there are remote collaboration systems which are

used for remote assistance, which we address in the next section.

Figure 5. The Laval Virtual 2020 held completely in VR. One of the authors took this screenshot while
attending the event with the avatar that can be seen in the center of the image (nickname anonymized).

5.2.2. Remote Assistance

Remote assistance or remote support is one of the most heavily explored AR use-cases, especially in
industrial scenarios [60]. The core idea of such applications is that a live connection can be established
between an on-site user and a remote expert-maintainer. Using AR annotations and optionally audio or
text, the expert can guide the user into performing a challenging task. Such processes have the potential of
saving time and most importantly allow specialist maintainers of devices to avoid long-distance travel to
perform on-site repairs. Apart from industrial maintenance use-cases the idea is also of interest for general
customer support for home devices.

Several approaches addressing the topic have been introduced, from early research to commercial
systems. Early approaches relied on augmentations that are registered in 2D [61], but it soon became

12 of 20

apparent that 3D registration of the target is needed for such systems. 3D object tracking of the maintenance
target using an object model as reference is a viable option presented in [9]. Alternatively, the geometry
of the environment needs to be reconstructed in real-time by a SLAM-based system in order to place
annotations in 3D space [62].

Remote support is one of the most commercially advanced AR use-cases. Nowadays, several
companies offer such services, either for see-through AR on head mounted displays (HMDs) or video
see-through on mobile devices [63–65]. Despite the large investment, it is for now not clear to which extent
such systems are already used in practice in industrial maintenance.

Currently, the more challenging task seems to be the capturing of the knowledge of the remote expert
and its embedding in an intelligent system that is able to provide instructions for its maintenance or that
of other systems. In the work of Petersen et al. [66], the focus is placed on automating knowledge capture
from workﬂow videos, while Rambach et al. [67] present the idea of IoT objects that carry their own AR
content that can be shared presented upon connecting to the objects. Furthermore, hand tracking for
modelling the interaction of users with objects will be able to add value to maintenance applications [68],
as well as recognizing objects and estimating their pose at different states [69].

5.2.3. Remote Tourism

Tourism beyond attraction destinations and entertainment also contributes to economic growth
of a country by generating revenues, creating more employment opportunities and supporting the
development of infrastructure. As an example, the tourism industry in Europe had around 1.5 billion
nights spent at tourist accommodation establishments and over 200 billion euros spent by tourists in
2018 according to Eurostat [70]. The relationship of tourism and the environment is complicated. As
mentioned above it has positive effects, but it can also have a negative inﬂuence on the environment. It
can be the cause of depletion of water and land resources and a source of pollution. Thus, tourism can
gradually damage the environment which it depends on [71]. VR and AR technologies provide alternative
forms of visiting famous destinations by bringing out the sense of presence without impacting the natural
environment while also saving time, energy and costs.

In the work of Fritz et al. [72], authors illustrate a 3D visualization device developed using AR
technologies and the tourist binoculars concept. With the help of this device users can view a remote place
and obtain personalized multimedia information about it. Such devices can be used to get attractive and
educative information about historical buildings, museums, art galleries and national parks. Furthermore,
in national parks visitors can not only gain facts and information on the current site but also view fossil
remains and traces of living beings in distant and unreachable locations. Another recent example is the
work of [73] that offers a remote cultural heritage experience of the Jeju island in Korea through AR and
VR. According to Moiseeva et al. [74], remote tourism using AR provides opportunities to disabled people
to visit heritage sites, castles, museums and other inaccessible locations.

As an example, the Google Arts & Culture project [75] enables people from all over the world to
experience an immersive world in AR and VR based on real locations. Many museums and galleries are
already part of such projects and make their exhibited works available for preservation purposes. To
mention one, the Chauvet Cave in Ardèche, France, is home to some of the oldest cave drawings in the
world according to [76]. There are AR and VR applications to experience the cave in a completely virtual
way. In AR, objects can be placed in the augmented world, such as pictures or parts of the cave with
interesting wall paintings. A fully immersive experience in VR offers a full 3D reconstruction of the cave
with interactive elements such as a torch to illuminate the cave and points of interest (See Figure 6). Freely
available applications such as these, not only improve the preservation of cultural heritage but could also
be an effective environmental measure since travel is replaced by virtual tours.

13 of 20

Figure 6. VR scenario of Chauvet Cave in Ardèche, France. Instead of visiting the place physically, it can be
explored fully in VR [77]. Screenshot taken by one of the authors while using the VR application.

Although remote tourism can be a substitute for actual traveling, the work of Bogicevic et al. [78]
suggests tourism brands to create VR platforms as marketing strategies . This turns VR in tourism into a
double-edged sword. On the one hand, travel is prevented, but on the other hand the desire to travel can
be awakened [79]. During the current travel-ban that most people are experiencing due to the COVID-19
pandemic, remote tourism can also be an opportunity for creating some revenue for touristic attractions
that are not accessible.

5.2.4. Simulation/Training

Similarly to remote tourism, techniques that simulate certain environments and situations can also
allow saving resources and reducing travel and emissions. Examples thereof are VR simulations of driving
automobiles or aircrafts that can be used for training new drivers/pilots as in the work of Riegler et al.
[80] and Bruguera et al. [81]. Simulations for other forms of training such as complex machinery or even
training of personnel for critical situations is shown in the work of Gavish et al. [82] and Engelbrecht et al.
[83].

The level of success of such applications depends highly on the quality of the simulation. While
applications such as remote tourism mostly provide visualization with limited interaction, other
aforementioned simulation applications require much more detailed interaction and feedback mechanisms
that rely on fully understanding body motion and interaction as well as haptic feedback.

Another example is VR for high risk training in particularly dangerous environments. For example,
ﬁreﬁghters train in a nearly controlled environment, but those training conditions are still very dangerous
since they must prepare for dangerous real life situations. This training is not only life threating but also
facilitates the destruction of the environment. According to Evarts et al. [84] and Fahy et al. [85], there
are over 8380 injuries and ten deaths from training accidents in the United States in 2017. Unfortunately,
these dangerous training scenarios are still necessary today to train and educate ﬁreﬁghters. These
numbers promote virtual training scenarios since they do not include preparing and moving in dangerous
environments. There are companies that specialize in virtual training scenarios, e.g. Flaim Systems [86]
offers many realistic VR training scenarios for ﬁreﬁghters. In order to provide even more immersion,
special hardware is also used for such training scenarios. For example a combination of real equipment
like a ﬁreﬁghter suit, custom made hardware like a water hose trackable by VR and a heat west. Often

14 of 20

a portable computer is stowed in a backpack and is connected to the VR HMD to provide the necessary
mobility. The work of Engelbrecht et al. [83] gives a summary of VR training scenarios for ﬁreﬁghters.

Virtual training and simulation scenarios can also be used as marketing strategies whereby the
environment beneﬁts from these activities as well. In the home improvement sector, many people are not
conﬁdent enough to do advanced or even simple tasks. For this, Lowe (a large home improvement store in
the USA) created Holoroom How To [87] and offers VR training in stores. The VR training includes mixing
paint/cement, painting walls, tiling bathrooms and other use cases. Lowe uses this training to encourage
customers to try for themselves and therefore generate more revenue. Another example is Holoroom Test
Drive [88] which is used as a try-before-you-buy model to enable customers to try out dangerous products
like chainsaws or hedge trimmers in a safe, virtual space. It uses custom made hardware for a more
educational and immersive experience. Simulations such as these help reducing the number of returned
goods and thus also the ecological footprint.

The same applies to AR shopping apps. As an example, the IKEA Place app launched in September
2017 and has over 3.200 products in its portfolio according to Alves et al. [89]. One of the main advantages
for customers is that they can see the real dimensions of products they want to buy and thus avoid
unnecessary returns if the product does not ﬁt as expected. Studies from Alves et al.[89] and Dacko et
al. [90] have shown that users of AR placement apps feel greater conﬁdence and greater purchasing
convenience with an AR furniture placement app, which ultimately leads to less returned goods as well.
The mentioned applications are also reducing the emissions caused by transportation due to trips not
made if the products of interest have not convinced virtually.

6. Discussion

Examining the outcome of our search, we conﬁrm our initial notion that ecological applications
of AR/VR/MR are not yet widely researched or applied in products. Although this survey covers
a considerable part of the existing literature, it was only possible to give an overview of the topics
by focusing on important works and explaining their relevance to nature and the environment. For
example, remote collaboration generally has a positive impact on the environment, regardless of the actual
implementation details. To the best of our knowledge, there is no remote collaboration system which was
developed for the sake of a positive impact on the environment.

In the category direct we identiﬁed papers that explicitly discussed applications for environmental
education, monitoring, awareness and resource efﬁciency. Statistical analysis of these publications (Section
4) reveals some interesting insights even though the number of existing papers is limited to only 28. In
the classiﬁcation by topic (Figure 3), environmental awareness appears to be signiﬁcantly more popular
than other categories. It is surprising that only 3 publications were found in the category environmental
education when considering that education in general is arguably a heavily explored ﬁeld of AR/VR/MR
applications. The classiﬁcation of publications by year shows an almost complete absence of related
publications before 2011 as well as a possible developing trend in the last years (2018 and after). Finally,
the fact that most publications were not published in dedicated AR/VR/MR conferences and journals
shows that the topic has possibly not yet received signiﬁcant attention by the AR/VR/MR community.

Looking more in detail at the publications we can draw further insights. Some of these works try
to actively involve many users, as active participation is very important for learning, understanding,
and engagement. This results in applications using common hardware such as smartphones and tablets.
Therefore, many applications focus on technologies running on those devices. The usage of HMDs can be
found more in applications for experts and in the industry ﬁeld, which is also the main target group for
the latest HMDs (e.g. Microsoft Hololens [91]). Nevertheless, it should be noted that the use of AR only for
visualization or with limited interaction properties is a common pattern in this category. However, user

15 of 20

studies performed show increased immersion or educational results in these cases. Many approaches still
rely on tracking using markers as targets, a concept which is not fully scalable to all application scenarios.
Efﬁcient tracking and unknown scene understanding at a geometric as well as semantic level is still the
main challenge that has to be overcome in order to facilitate AR applications in all covered areas. Although
important steps in this direction have already been made in recent years (see for example Microsoft
Hololens [91]), signiﬁcant further advancement is expected in the future. Understanding dynamic scenes,
human motion and hand gestures is additionally a current topic of importance.

It is also important to mention that included publications mostly refer to augmenting the senses
of sight and hearing while the other three - the sense of touch, taste and smell, are not considered. For
example, the smell of ﬁre could be very interesting for forest ﬁre simulations as part of a climate change
and for achieving better immersion. Although there is a small niche for some commercial products, most
hardware for such applications is in a development phase, and the usage of our ﬁve senses in AR/VR/MR
applications could be seen as a direction for the far future.

Some ideas for use cases in everyday life are discussed by McGinity [32]. He describes the usage
of AR in a supermarket scenario for visually informing people about how far a product has travelled or
how the choice of recycled products like paper towels could help protecting the forests. For these cases
he suggests to visualize a forest regrow in AR. This type of AR usage is possible with the current state of
the art and could be developed in the near future, perhaps to complement some other applications for
products.

In the category indirect we covered the topics remote collaboration, remote assistance, remote tourism,
and training with their respective applications. These applications have a positive impact on nature and
the environment, but were developed and evaluated for other reasons. During the survey, we found
that these applications have achieved different readiness levels. For example, basic remote support
applications are less challenging and have been already integrated in commercial products, while remote
collaboration systems based on AR/VR/MR have larger challenges that they need to overcome and are
thus still at a research level. Especially during times when physical distancing is advised, the research in
remote collaboration systems with AR, VR or MR technology will focus more on transferring nonverbal
communication between users to substitute physical meetings.

During the COVID-19 outbreak which started in December 2019, a large part of the worldwide
population has been required to remain at home as a protective measure. All remote collaboration systems
and remote tourism scenarios thus have become even more important for the support of economies. This
should be seen as a great opportunity to show how much can be achieved remotely and to reduce travel
and emissions in the future and thus supporting the environment. Of course, not all human contact can or
should be replaced by these technologies. They can however provide viable alternatives to some travels.
Other possible environmental application areas are training scenarios, which help to reduce the
environmental destruction. An example described in section 5.2.4 is the training of ﬁreﬁghters, where
environmentally harmful resources are used by starting real ﬁres and extinguishing these ﬁres with
chemicals. Virtual training scenarios are already quite advanced and often use custom hardware to
support realism and immersion, making them a good substitute for real world training.

AR applications in the e-commerce sector can help the environment, reducing the ecological footprint
of companies by minimizing return of goods. There are already many applications which let the user place
objects (e.g. furniture in one’s own home) and check if the color ﬁts or measure the size of those objects to
avoid mispurchases.

16 of 20

7. Conclusion

This survey explores AR/VR/MR applications and concepts that have a relation to nature,
environment preservation and resource efﬁciency. Some work has been developed for direct impacts
on nature. Other areas have an indirect impact on nature, such as remote collaboration systems, which
are developed for the purpose of remote working or socializing together. These systems were primarily
developed for knowledge transfer or virtual meetings, but they have an indirect impact on nature by
reducing travel and ofﬁce space. Therefore, the survey results are classiﬁed into applications that have
a direct relation to ecology, and applications that can provide an indirect support on ecological goals.
To the best of our knowledge there is no comparable survey with similar goals. Results of the survey
conﬁrmed that there is only a limited amount of work in AR/VR/MR with a direct ecological relation.
After a further categorization, the beneﬁts of AR/VR/MR across a wide variety of domains like education,
energy consumption, ecological sensitization and remote collaboration are discussed. In retrospective, the
main purpose of this survey was to explore an AR/VR/MR application topic that is not often considered,
increase awareness in the scientiﬁc community, and create a direct reference to the existing work for the
future. Considering the indirect cases in the classiﬁcation, the search area has expanded considerably. This
serves as an indicator that there is a real potential for environmental protection in the use of AR/VR/MR.
For some applications this potential can be realized in the near future, while for others a signiﬁcant
advancement of enabling technologies is still required.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.R.; methodology, J.R., investigation, J.R.,G.L.,A.S. and R.B.; formal
analysis, J.R.,G.L.,A.S.; writing, J.R.,G.L.,A.S.,A.W. and R.B.; review and editing, J.R.,A.W.,D.S.; funding acquisition,
A.W.,D.S.; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: Parts of this work have been performed in the context of project SAARTE (Spatially-Aware Augmented
Reality in Teaching and Education). SAARTE is supported by the European Union (EU) in the ERDF program P1-SZ2-7
and by the German federal state Rhineland-Palatinate (Antr.-Nr. 84002945). This work was also supported by the
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) in the context of ODPfalz under Grant 03IHS075B

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the
results.

References

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

IPCC. Global Warming of 1.5◦C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5◦C above
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening
the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty.
Report, 2018.
Chen, L.; Day, T.W.; Tang, W.; John, N.W. Recent developments and future challenges in medical mixed reality.
IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR),. IEEE, 2017, pp. 123–135.
Qian, K.; Bai, J.; Yang, X.; Pan, J.; Zhang, J. Virtual reality based laparoscopic surgery simulation. ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, 2015, pp. 69–78.
Jensen, L.; Konradsen, F. A review of the use of virtual reality head-mounted displays in education and training.
Education and Information Technologies 2018, 23, 1515–1529.
Bower, M.; Howe, C.; McCredie, N.; Robinson, A.; Grover, D. Augmented Reality in education–cases, places
and potentials. Educational Media International 2014, 51, 1–15.
Lilligreen, G.; Keuchel, S.; Wiebel, A. Augmented Reality in Higher Education: An Active Learning Approach
for a Course in Audiovisual Production. EuroVR Conference, 2019.
Von Itzstein, G.S.; Billinghurst, M.; Smith, R.T.; Thomas, B.H. Augmented Reality Entertainment: Taking
Gaming Out of the Box. In Encyclopedia of Computer Graphics and Games; Springer, 2017; pp. 1–9.

17 of 20

9.

8.

12.

10.

13.

11.

14.

Liszio, S.; Masuch, M. Designing shared virtual reality gaming experiences in local multi-platform games.
International Conference on Entertainment Computing. Springer, 2016, pp. 235–240.
Rambach, J.; Pagani, A.; Schneider, M.; Artemenko, O.; Stricker, D. 6DoF object tracking based on 3D scans for
augmented reality remote live support. Computers 2018, 7, 6.
Markowitz, D.M.; Laha, R.; Perone, B.P.; Pea, R.D.; Bailenson, J.N. Immersive virtual reality ﬁeld trips facilitate
learning about climate change. Frontiers in Psychology 2018, 9, 2364.
Veas, E.; Grasset, R.; Ferencik, I.; Grünewald, T.; Schmalstieg, D. Mobile augmented reality for environmental
monitoring. Personal and ubiquitous computing 2013, 17, 1515–1531.
Neugebauer, R.; Wittstock, V.; Meyer, A.; Glänzel, J.; Pätzold, M.; Schumann, M. VR tools for the development
of energy-efﬁcient products. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 2011, 4, 208–215.
Deleon, V.J.; Berry, H.R. Virtual Florida Everglades. International Conference on Virtual System and Multimedia
VSSM98– FutureFusion Application Realities for Virtual Age, 1998, pp. 46–3.
Romão, T.; Dias, E.; Danado, J.; Correia, N.; Trabuco, A.; Santos, C.; Santos, R.; Nobre, E.; Câmara, A.; Romero,
L. Augmenting reality with geo-referenced information for environmental management. ACM international
symposium on Advances in geographic information systems, 2002, pp. 175–180.
Fan, Y.; Feng, Z.; Mannan, A.; Khan, T.U.; Shen, C.; Saeed, S. Estimating tree position, diameter at breast height,
and tree height in real-time using a mobile phone with RGB-D SLAM. Remote Sensing 2018, 10, 1845.
16. Mylonas, G.; Triantafyllis, C.; Amaxilatis, D. An augmented reality prototype for supporting IoT-based
educational activities for energy-efﬁcient school buildings. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 2019,
343, 89–101.
Huang, J.; Lucash, M.S.; Scheller, R.M.; Klippel, A. Visualizing Ecological Data in Virtual Reality.
Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1311–1312.
Srisuphab, A.; Silapachote, P.; Sirilertworakul, N.; Utara, Y. Integrated ZooEduGuide with multimedia and AR
from the largest living classrooms to wildlife conservation awareness. TENCON IEEE Region 10 Conference.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–4.

IEEE

18.

17.

15.

19. West, R.; Margolis, T.; O’Neil-Dunne, J.; Mendelowitz, E. MetaTree: augmented reality narrative explorations
of urban forests. The Engineering Reality of Virtual Reality. International Society for Optics and Photonics,
2012, Vol. 8289, p. 82890G.

21.

20. West, R.; Halley, A.; O’Neil-Dunne, J.; Gordon, D.; Pless, R. Collaborative imaging of urban forest dynamics:
augmenting re-photography to visualize changes over time. The Engineering Reality of Virtual Reality.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2013, Vol. 8649, p. 86490L.
Albers, B.; Fuhrmann, B.; Temmen, M. Das PAN Projekt – Umweltmonitoring mit Smartphones und Augmented
Reality. AGIT - Journal für Angewandte Geoinformatik 2017, 3-2017.
Frajberg, D.; Fraternali, P.; Torres, R.N. Heterogeneous information integration for mountain augmented reality
mobile apps. IEEE International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA). IEEE, 2017, pp.
313–322.
Studer, C.; Shave, J. Water in augmented space. 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality - Arts, Media, and Humanities, 2011, pp. 103–104.

23.

22.

24. WHO Facts, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-health, last access

25.

26.
27.

15.07.2020.
Ramachandran, G.S.; Bogosian, B.; Vasudeva, K.; Sriramaraju, S.I.; Patel, J.; Amidwar, S.; Malladi, L.; Shylaja,
R.D.; Kumar, N.R.B.; Krishnamachari, B. An Immersive Visualization of Micro-climatic Data using USC AiR.
International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, 2019, pp. 675–676.
Torres, N.G.; Campbell, P.E. Aire: visualize air quality. In ACM SIGGRAPH Appy Hour; ACM, 2019; pp. 1–2.
Santos, B.; Romão, T.; Dias, A.E.; Centieiro, P.; Teixeira, B. Changing environmental behaviors through
smartphone-based augmented experiences. International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment
Technology. Springer, 2012, pp. 553–556.

18 of 20

28.

29.

30.

31.

Taulien, A.; Paulsen, A.; Streland, T.; Jessen, B.; Wittke, S.; Teistler, M. A Mixed Reality Environmental
Simulation to Support Learning about Maritime Habitats: An Approach to Convey Educational Knowledge
With a Novel User Experience. In Mensch und Computer; ACM, 2019; pp. 921–925.
Bühling, R.; Obaid, M.; Hammer, S.; André, E. Mobile augmented reality and adaptive art: a game-based
motivation for energy saving. International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, 2012, pp. 1–2.
Rico-Bautista, D.; Barrientos-Avendaño, E.; Cuesta-Quintero, F.; Areniz-Arevalo, Y.; Coronel-Rojas, L.;
Londoño-Torrado, D.; Amaya-Amaya, E. Digital album with augmented reality: Francisco de Paula Santander
Ocaña University botanic garden “Jorge Enrique Quintero Arenas”. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. IOP
Publishing, 2019, Vol. 1257, p. 012009.
Nim, H.T.; Wang, M.; Zhu, Y.; Sommer, B.; Schreiber, F.; Boyd, S.E.; Wang, S.J. Communicating the effect of
human behaviour on the great barrier reef via mixed reality visualisation. Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.

32. McGinity, M. Immersive Media for Environmental Awareness. IEEE Workshop on Augmented and Virtual

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

Realities for Good (VAR4Good). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
Nelson, K.M.; Anggraini, E.; Schlüter, A. Virtual reality as a tool for environmental conservation and fundraising.
Plos one 2020, 15, e0223631.
Angrisani, L.; Bonavolontà, F.; Liccardo, A.; Schiano Lo Moriello, R.; Serino, F. Smart power meters in
augmented reality environment for electricity consumption awareness. Energies 2018, 11, 2303.
Lu, C.H. IoT-enhanced and bidirectionally interactive information visualization for context-aware home
energy savings. IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality-Media, Art, Social Science,
Humanities and Design. IEEE, 2015, pp. 15–20.
Chudikova, B.; Faltejsek, M. Advantages of using virtual reality and building information modelling when
IOP Conference Series:
assessing suitability of various heat sources, including renewable energy sources.
Materials Science and Engineering. IOP Publishing, 2019, Vol. 542, p. 012022.
Zenati, N.; Hamidia, M.; Bellarbi, A.; Benbelkacem, S. E-maintenance for photovoltaic power system in Algeria.
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), 2015, pp. 2594–2599.
Roczen, N.; Kaiser, F.G.; Bogner, F.X.; Wilson, M. A competence model for environmental education.
Environment and Behavior 2014, 46, 972–992.
Theodorou, P.; Kydonakis, P.; Botzori, M.; Skanavis, C. Augmented reality proves to be a breakthrough in
Environmental Education. Protection and Restoration of the Environment XIV, 2018.
(Ecosystems Mobile Outdoor
EcoMOBILE
https://pz.harvard.edu/projects/ecomobile, last access 15.07.2020.
Our world in data, https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-gas-emissions,
15.07.2020.
Sensorama simulator, 1962. US Patent 3,050,870.
Shen, Y.; Ong, S.; Nee, A. A framework for multiple-view product representation using Augmented Reality.
International Conference on Cyberworlds. IEEE, 2006, pp. 157–164.
Shen, Y.; Ong, S.K.; Nee, A.Y. Collaborative design in 3D space. ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on
Virtual-Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry, 2008, pp. 1–6.
Shen, Y.; Ong, S.K.; Nee, A.Y. Product information visualization and augmentation in collaborative design.
Computer-Aided Design 2008, 40, 963–974.
Schäfer, A.; Reis, G.; Stricker, D. Towards Collaborative Photorealistic VR Meeting Rooms. In Mensch und
Computer 2019; ACM, 2019; pp. 599–603.
Lee, G.A.; Teo, T.; Kim, S.; Billinghurst, M. Mixed reality collaboration through sharing a live panorama. In
SIGGRAPH Asia Mobile Graphics & Interactive Applications; ACM, 2017; pp. 1–4.

Environment),

last access

Immersive

Learning

Blended

48. Monahan, T.; McArdle, G.; Bertolotto, M. Virtual reality for collaborative e-learning. Computers & Education

2008, 50, 1339–1353.

19 of 20

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

Piumsomboon, T.; Lee, G.A.; Hart, J.D.; Ens, B.; Lindeman, R.W.; Thomas, B.H.; Billinghurst, M. Mini-me:
An adaptive avatar for mixed reality remote collaboration. CHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, 2018, pp. 1–13.
Shen, Y.; Ong, S.K.; Nee, A.Y. Augmented reality for collaborative product design and development. Design
Studies 2010, 31, 118–145.
Hsu, T.W.; Tsai, M.H.; Babu, S.V.; Hsu, P.H.; Chang, H.M.; Lin, W.C.; Chuang, J.H. Design and Initial Evaluation
of a VR based Immersive and Interactive Architectural Design Discussion System. 2020 IEEE Conference on
Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces. IEEE, 2020.
Chowdhury, S.; Schnabel, M.A. Laypeople’s Collaborative Immersive Virtual Reality Design Discourse in
Neighborhood Design. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 2019, 6, 97.
Hong, S.W.; El Antably, A.; Kalay, Y.E. Architectural design creativity in Multi-User Virtual Environment: A
comparative analysis between remote collaboration media. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and
City Science 2019, 46, 826–844.
VirBELA, The Future of Work, https://www.virbela.com/, last access 15.07.2020.
Hubs by Mozilla, https://hubs.mozilla.com/, last access 15.07.2020.
EngageVR: Communicate, Teach, Learn, https://engagevr.io/, last access 15.07.2020.

54.
55.
56.
57. MeetInVR, https://meetinvr.net/, last access 15.07.2020.
58.
59.
60.

62.

67.

63.
64.
65.
66.

Glue Universal Collaboration Platform, https://glue.work/, last access 15.07.2020.
Breakroom, The social hub for remote teams, http://sine.space/breakroom, last access 15.07.2020.
Gallala, A.; Hichri, B.; Plapper, P. Survey: The Evolution of the Usage of Augmented Reality in Industry 4.0.
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. IOP Publishing, 2019, Vol. 521, p. 012017.
61. Masoni, R.; Ferrise, F.; Bordegoni, M.; Gattullo, M.; Uva, A.E.; Fiorentino, M.; Carrabba, E.; Di Donato, M.
Supporting remote maintenance in industry 4.0 through augmented reality. Procedia manufacturing 2017,
11, 1296–1302.
Zillner, J.; Mendez, E.; Wagner, D. Augmented reality remote collaboration with dense reconstruction. IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct). IEEE, 2018, pp. 38–39.
ScopeAR, https://www.scopear.com/solutions/ar-remote-assistance/, last access 15.07.2020.
Vuforia Chalk, https://chalk.vuforia.com/, last access 15.07.2020.
Reﬂekt, https://www.re-ﬂekt.com/reﬂekt-remote, last access 15.07.2020.
Petersen, N.; Pagani, A.; Stricker, D. Real-time modeling and tracking manual workﬂows from ﬁrst-person
vision. IEEE International symposium on mixed and augmented reality (ISMAR). IEEE, 2013, pp. 117–124.
Rambach, J.; Pagani, A.; Stricker, D. Augmented Things: Enhancing AR Applications leveraging the Internet of
Things and Universal 3D Object Tracking. IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR). IEEE, 2017, pp. 103–108.
Hampali, S.; Rad, M.; Oberweger, M.; Lepetit, V. HOnnotate: A Method for 3D Annotation of Hand and Object
Poses. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp.
3196–3206.
Su, Y.; Rambach, J.; Minaskan, N.; Lesur, P.; Pagani, A.; Stricker, D. Deep Multi-state Object Pose Estimation for
Augmented Reality Assembly. IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct
(ISMAR-Adjunct). IEEE, 2019, pp. 222–227.
Eurostat annual data for tourism, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/tourism/data/database, last access
15.07.2020.
Sunlu, U.; others.
Méditerranéens 2003, 57, 263–270.
Fritz, F.; Susperregui, A.; Linaza, M.T. Enhancing cultural tourism experiences with augmented reality
technologies. International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage, 2005.
Jung, K.; Nguyen, V.T.; Piscarac, D.; Yoo, S.C. Meet the Virtual Jeju Dol Harubang—The Mixed VR/AR
Application for Cultural Immersion in Korea’s Main Heritage. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information
2020, 9, 367.

Environmental impacts of tourism. Options Méditerranéennes. Série A, Séminaires

70.

71.

69.

72.

73.

68.

20 of 20

74.

75.
76.

77.
78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.
85.

86.
87.
88.
89.

90.

Moiseeva, V.; Lavrentyeva, A.; Elokhina, A.; Moiseev, V. AR and VR technologies as a factor of developing an
accessible urban environment in tourism: Institutional limitations and opportunities. International Journal of
Engineering and Advanced Technology 2019, 8, 5313–5317.
Google Arts & Culture Project, https://artsandculture.google.com, last access 15.07.2020.
Chauvet, J.M.; Deschamps, E.B.; Hillaire, C. Chauvet cave: The discovery of the world’s oldest paintings; Thames
and Hudson, 1996.
Chauvet: The Dawn of Art, https://experiments.withgoogle.com/chauvet, last access 15.07.2020.
Bogicevic, V.; Seo, S.; Kandampully, J.A.; Liu, S.Q.; Rudd, N.A. Virtual reality presence as a preamble of tourism
experience: The role of mental imagery. Tourism Management 2019, 74, 55–64.
Drengner, J.; König, W.; Wiebel, A. Pervasive mobile Spiele und Virtual Reality als Instrumente der digitalen
Ansprache von Veranstaltungsbesuchern: Auf schaz-Suche beim Rheinland-Pfalz-Tag 2018. In Eventforschung;
Springer, 2019; pp. 227–245.
Riegler, A.; Riener, A.; Holzmann, C. AutoWSD: Virtual Reality Automated Driving Simulator for Rapid HCI
Prototyping. In Mensch und Computer 2019; Association for Computing Machinery, 2019; pp. 853–857.
Bruguera, M.B.; Ilk, V.; Ruber, S.; Ewald, R. Use of Virtual Reality for astronaut training in future space
missions-Spacecraft piloting for the Lunar Orbital Platform-Gateway (LOP-G). 70th International Astronautical
Congress, 2019.
Gavish, N.; Gutiérrez, T.; Webel, S.; Rodríguez, J.; Peveri, M.; Bockholt, U.; Tecchia, F. Evaluating virtual
reality and augmented reality training for industrial maintenance and assembly tasks. Interactive Learning
Environments 2015, 23, 778–798.
Engelbrecht, H.; Lindeman, R.; Hoermann, S. A SWOT Analysis of the Field of Virtual Reality for Fireﬁghter
Training. Front. Robot. AI 6: 101. 2019.
Evarts, B.; Molis, J. United States ﬁreﬁghter injuries 2017. National Fire Protection Association 2018.
Fahy, R.; LeBlanc, P.; Molis, J. Fireﬁghter fatalities in the United States-2017, Quincy. MA: National Fire Protection
Association 2018, pp. 1–33.
Flaim Systems, https://www.ﬂaimsystems.com/, last access 15.07.2020.
Holoroom How To, http://www.lowesinnovationlabs.com/holoroomhowto, last access 15.07.2020.
Holoroom Test Drive, http://www.lowesinnovationlabs.com/testdrive, last access 15.07.2020.
Alves, C.; Reis, J.L. The Intention to Use E-Commerce Using Augmented Reality-The Case of IKEA Place.
International Conference on Information Technology & Systems. Springer, 2020, pp. 114–123.
Dacko, S.G. Enabling smart retail settings via mobile augmented reality shopping apps. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change 2017, 124, 243–256.

91. Microsoft Hololens, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens/hardware, last access 15.07.2020.

