Technical Report
VR-TR-001

Motion Similarity Modeling
A State of the Art Report

Anna Sebernegg, Peter K´an, Hannes Kaufmann

Virtual and Augmented Reality Group
Institute of Visual Computing and Human-Centered Technology
Vienna University of Technology

August 14, 2020

Abstract

The analysis of human motion opens up a wide range of possibilities, such as realistic training
simulations or authentic motions in robotics or animation. One of the problems underlying motion
analysis is the meaningful comparison of actions based on similarity measures. Since the motion
analysis is application-dependent, it is essential to ﬁnd the appropriate motion similarity method for
the particular use case. This state of the art report provides an overview of human motion analysis
and different similarity modeling methods, while mainly focusing on approaches that work with
3D motion data. The survey summarises various similarity aspects and features of motion and
describes approaches to measuring the similarity between two actions.

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
3
1

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
7
8
5
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1

Introduction

2 Motion

2.1 Motion Capture Data .
2.2

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3D Skeleton Representation of MoCap Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

.

3 Similarity Aspects of Motion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1 Global Transformations .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
3.2 Content and Style .
3.3 Logical and Numerical Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Partial Similarity .

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1

2
2
3

4
4
4
5
5

4 Human Motion Features

4.1 Anthropometric Features .
.
4.2 Pose Features .

. .

.

.

.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Joint Angle Rotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.1
4.2.2 Distance-Based Pose Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.3 Relational Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Instantaneous Velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Instantaneous Acceleration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
7
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
4.3.1
4.3.2
9
4.3.3 Kinetic Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Silhouette-Based Pose Features
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

4.3 Transition Features .

4.4 Action Features .

5 Human Motion Comparison

5.1.1
5.1.2

5.2 Local Similarity Measures

11
5.1 Data Preprocessing - Dimensionality Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Principal Component Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Self Organizing Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2.1 Euclidean Distance between Euler Angles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2.2 Norm of the Difference of Quaternions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2.3
Inner Product of Unit Quaternions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2.4 Deviation from the Identity Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2.5 Geodesic on the Unit Sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.3 Global Similarity Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3.1 Temporal Alignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

i

Similarity Based on Curve Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.3.2
5.3.3 Rule Based Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.3.4 Other Mentionable Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

6 Conclusion

List of Acronyms

Bibliography

17

18

19

ii

Chapter 1

Introduction

Advances in motion capture technologies to digitize human motion have created a foundation for
motion analysis. One main underlying problem of motion analysis is the meaningful comparison
of motions by using similarity measures [R¨od06]. Similarity measures used for the detection and
analysis of human motion depend on the context and goal of the intended application [R¨od06].
Consequently, it is essential to consider which method and similarity model is suitable.

Related work in the area of motion similarity proposed different similarity models along with
algorithms for applications in various ﬁelds. In the medical ﬁeld, for instance, it can be utilized to
track and analyze the process of rehabilitation treatments more precisely and further to determine
their success [FBSL12, ZLER14, CLZ+12]. In Surveillance, the problem of human identiﬁcation
can be addressed by motion recognition. Wang et al. have adopted a spatial-temporal silhouette
analysis for gait recognition, which can identify people based on their way of walking [WTNH03].
The analysis of human motion also has its beneﬁts in the ﬁeld of sports. It can provide athletes
with more detailed feedback and gives insight into comparisons of their movements with other
athletes or with themselves. In Brodie et al., for example, two ski runs are compared through
fusion motion capture and force vector analysis [BWP08]. However, similarity modeling may also
be used for training purposes, as described by Chan et al. [CLTK07]. Motion similarity models are
also increasingly embedded in virtual environments to enable training or rehabilitation exercises
at home in a more immersive setting, as described by Chang et al. and Chua et al. [CLZ+12,
CCD+03]. Similarity models are also applied in robotics, for example, for kinematic mapping or
to examine the similarity between humanoid motion and real human motion [ZHPL04]. Motion
indexing and retrieval, motion synthesis, and motion blending are applications that are broadly
applied in the entertainment industry, for instance, to create realistic human motions [KTMW08].
In order to perform human motion analysis in such diverse ﬁelds, different requirements have to
be met – such as real-time tracking and calculations for virtual reality applications or large amount
of data acquisition for sports – and various approaches have already been developed [Rey16]. This
state of the art report aims to give an overview of several approaches and provides a summary of
the advantages and disadvantages of some methods.

Under Chapter 2, this paper provides essential information on the human motion as well as on
MoCap data. Chapter 3 describes similarity aspects that deﬁne when two motions are accounted as
similar. In Chapter 4, possible human motion features for similarity modeling are categorized, and
brief descriptions are given. Chapter 5 covers proposed methods and algorithms for the comparison
of human motion, and the ﬁnal Chapter 4 presents a brief conclusion and summarization of the
topic.

1

Chapter 2

Motion

Valˇc´ık deﬁnes motion as a set of trajectories or as a sequence of poses [Val16]. Natural human
motion depends on the three spatial dimensions as well as on time and is inﬂuenced by internal
and external factors [R¨od06]. The motion of the human skeleton can be described by the following
three types of rigid motion as described by Reyes [Rey16]:

• Linear

• Angular

• General

The linear motion describes a translation in a particular direction over time, while angular
motion describes a rotation around a single axis. The general motion is the combination of both
linear and angular motion.

2.1 Motion Capture Data

There are several different technologies for recording full-body motion in order to perform human
motion analysis, including inertial and optical sensors [Rey16, R¨od06]. Primarily appearance-
based and model-based approaches are used for the capturing of motion data, as described by
Valˇc´ık et al.
[Val16]. Appearance-based methods work directly with recorded sequences, like
video sequences from a single video camera, where it is possible to extract, for example, silhouettes
as data representations [Val16]. Appearance-based methods usually utilize heuristic assumptions
to establish feature correspondence between successive frames [AC99]. Model-based methods,
on the other hand, apply predeﬁned models such as skeleton models or volumetric models, which
makes it easier to establish feature correspondence and body structure recovery as the tracked data
only needs to be matched to the model [AC99]. Because of the complexity of human motion, due to
the vast number of degrees of freedom and the limited number of recordable points, the predeﬁned
models representing the human body are often simpliﬁed, typically by using a skeleton model
with restricted sets of joints connected by rigid bones [R¨od06]. The capturing of motion results
in motion capture data (MoCap data). MoCap data formats are not consistently standardized, and
thus, various formats, like the proprietary BVH or CSM ﬁles, exist [Val16].

2

2.2

3D Skeleton Representation of MoCap Data

Motion data can be ﬁtted into a skeletal model by transforming the data into a joint chain [Wan16].
As mentioned above, the 3D skeleton representation uses an additional abstraction over the recorded
data and provides position, view, and scale invariance due to the known perspective. However, cal-
culations based on skeleton data can be computationally intensive if, for example, all joints per
frame have to be traversed to derive more features [Val16]. The data representation may also lack
smoothness due to motion reconstruction. Therefore, ﬁltering techniques are used to reduce the
outlier and noise in motion data [Wan16]. The number of joints and limbs used in a 3D skeleton
data set is also dependent upon the application. Figure 2.1 shows one possible 3D skeleton data
structure.

Figure 2.1: 3D Skeletal kinematic chain model. The joints are represented as dots and labeled.
The lines connecting the joints represent rigid bones.

3

Chapter 3

Similarity Aspects of Motion

The comparison of similarity between human motions is derived from the context of the intended
application due to its ambiguous deﬁnition [R¨od06]. Various factors can play a role, whether a
motion is interpreted as similar to another or not. In some applications, only the rough course of
motion may be of interest, while in others, also subtle nuances are viewed as different. As a result,
a central task of motion comparison or analysis is the design of a suitable similarity model; for
instance, the selected or designed similarity model should be invariant to arbitrary or tampering
aspects [MR08]. Some of the following similarity aspects may inﬂuence the design decisions of a
similarity model.

3.1 Global Transformations

In many cases, transformations relative to the origin are not considered a factor of difference
in similarity models; accordingly, two motions are considered similar if the only differences are
global transformations such as absolute positions in time or space [R¨od06]. Global transformations
refer not only to translations in the global space but also to rotations about an axis of the global
coordinate system or the overall scale/speed of the actor [MR08].

3.2 Content and Style

Motion content and style are abstract terms that appear in literature in various forms. M¨uller et al.
refers to motion style as the person’s individual characteristics/personalized aspects of motion or
their performance and emotional expressiveness. In their paper, they give the example of different
walking styles: A walk can be performed in various ways, for example, by tiptoeing, limping,
or marching. Different moods can inﬂuence the performed motion as well, for example, a walk
can seem cheerful or angry. In contrast, motion content is only related to the semantics of motion
and thus is close to the raw data [MR08]. Lee and Elgammal deﬁne motion style in the context
of gait recognition as the “time-invariant personalized style of the gait which can be used for
identiﬁcation”, and motion contend as a “time-dependent factor representing different body poses
during the gait cycle” [LE04]. For some applications, it may be interesting to separate content and
style of the motion, e.g., if the aim is to identify related motions by content independent of motion
style. This then has to be taken into account in the process of designing the similarity model, for
example by utilizing concepts like logically similar motion detection where qualitative features are
used to cope with signiﬁcant numerical differences in 3D positions or joint angles that can arise

4

through different styles, as described by M¨uller et al. [MR08]. Lee and Elgammal separated the
gait style with a bilinear model to utilize it for gait recognition, and Davis and Gao presented an
approach for modeling and recognizing different action styles [LE04, DG03]. M¨uller et al. give a
further, more detailed overview of how the concepts of motion content and style are treated in the
literature [MR08].

3.3 Logical and Numerical Similarity

Logical and numerical similarity are similar concepts to motion content and style. Kovar et al. de-
ﬁne logical similarity of motions as “variations of the same action or sequence of actions” [KG04].
Therefore, logically similar motions share the same action pattern [CSLL12]. According to M¨uller
et al., the variation of logically similar actions can be inﬂuenced by the spatial and the temporal
domain. For example, two walking sequences can be logically similar, even when they contain
signiﬁcant spatial and temporal differences [MR08]. Logical similarity focuses on the content of
actions while masking out factors of the individual motion style [R¨od06]. As an example, different
variations of a walking action, resulting from the individual styles of the performers, can still be
perceived as logically similar in an application since all of them can be classiﬁed as locomotion.

Motions are numerically similar if the corresponding numerical values, such as skeleton poses,
are approximately the same [KG04]. Algorithms, which are developed for numerically similar
motion detection, are usually based on numerical/quantitative features that are semantically more
close to the raw MoCap data than qualitative descriptions [MR08].

It is important to note that logical and numerical similarity does not imply each other. Kover
et al., for example, states that action sequences, which are referred to as logically similar, perhaps
be numerically dissimilar and vice versa [KG04]. In their publication “Automated extraction and
parameterization of motions in large data sets”, there are also examples given to highlight this
concept.

3.4 Partial Similarity

Partial similarity is the case when certain body parts are moving similarly, while other parts of
the body move in different ways [R¨od06]. Sometimes partial similarities are more important than
the overall similarity of a motion.
Integrating extracted features from irrelevant body parts in
the similarity measure can then affect the results negatively [CSLL12]. M¨uller et al. use a set
of Boolean geometry features to express the relations between body parts [MRC05]. Chen et
al. describe a partial similarity motion retrieval based on geometric features [CSLL12]. As the
number of relative geometry features for human motion is vast, they utilized Adaboost for the
selection of effective features [CSLL12]. Jang et al. synthesize new human body motions by
combining different partial motions. They analyze the similarity of partial motions to choose the
most natural-looking combinations [JLLL08]. Rule-based approaches, as described by Zhao et al.,
could perhaps also be used to calculate partial similarity [ZLER14].

5

Chapter 4

Human Motion Features

Human motion features, as discussed by Valˇc´ık et al., describe different characteristics of human
motion and are an abstraction of MoCap data to enable further processing [Val16]. MoCap data
contains information about the position, orientation, and movement of a person in 3D space along
with noise. Depending on the problem deﬁnition and the similarity model, some of this information
may be irrelevant or even counterproductive for further calculations. For example, in cases where
semantic/logical similarity is required regardless of the actual global position or orientation of a
person. Therefore, human motion features are derived, which focus only on speciﬁc information
to leave out unsuitable or misleading data. The selection and combination of these features then
depend on the requirements of the given problem [Val16]. It should also be noted that each move-
ment that needs to be distinguished within an application requires an explicit representation by
the selected criteria [KSL+19]. Because distinguishing features may differ for individual actions,
accurate action classiﬁcation and similarity calculations can require case related consideration of
various features [MDSRK19]. Dynamic feature extraction instead of a predeﬁned feature space
produced by static feature selection can be of interest for application where various motion types
have to be recognized or compared [MDSRK19]. In static feature selection methods, the subset of
features for a feature vector is predeﬁned either manually or by machine learning algorithms and
is later not altered. Classifying an action as “walking” or “sitting” can, for example, be realized by
selecting the velocity of the center of mass of the person acting as a feature. However, if multiple
different actions, such as sitting activities and dynamic activities such as walking, have to be clas-
siﬁed, a simple feature selection may not be sufﬁcient. In the given example, the velocity of hip
motion in sitting activities would be of minor interest. In contrast, the classiﬁcation of dynamic
activities could potentially beneﬁt from the integration of the hip velocity in the feature vector
[MDSRK19]. In static feature selection, each selected feature adds to the dimensionality of the
feature space. In contrast, dynamic feature selection adds feature sequentially as needed, i.e., it
selects features on the ﬂy according to each new action to be classiﬁed [HDIE13, CSC18].

Valˇc´ık et al. categorizes human motion features into the following four groups: Anthropometric
Features, Pose Features, Transition Features and Action Features [Val16]. The following subsec-
tions describe these categories while mainly focusing on model-based features that concentrate on
speciﬁc joints.

6

4.1 Anthropometric Features

Anthropometric features are quantitative measurements that describe body dimensions of the recorded
person, for instance, body height and width, lengths of particular bones such as the arm-length, as
well as joint rotation limits and, therefore, are not corresponding to motion. Some anthropometric
information related to the human bone structure can be extracted from 3D skeleton MoCap-Data.
Anthropometric features have minimal use in appearance-based approaches, as opposed to skele-
ton models, where several features can be derived [Val16]. Subject-speciﬁc features may be helpful
in surveillance tasks, such as the recognition and identiﬁcation of humans, but can be misleading
in applications where only the similarity factor between two movements is required. In this case, it
is necessary to normalize the 3D skeleton data as addressed by [VW18]. As an example, the mass
of skeleton segments and their center of mass is used by Kr¨uger et al. together with translation
features for comparing motions [KTMW08].

4.2 Pose Features

Pose features describe characteristics of single poses and are extracted from each static posture or
single frame independently [ANK19]. Pose features are neither inﬂuenced by the speed of action
nor by its surrounding frames [Val16]. Their time invariance can make pose similarity calculations
(e.g., comparing individual key poses) less complicated than the analysis of the overall action,
which often involves the analysis of entire pose sequences or the additional use of extra features.
Pose features are used for action recognition tasks as described by Agahian et al. [ANK19], as
well as for motion-comparison tasks as outlined by Monash et al., where a user has to try to mimic
a recorded-gesture displayed on a screen [Mon12].

4.2.1 Joint Angle Rotations

Joint angle rotations are measured on each joint in a 3D skeleton model, and it is important to note
that their deﬁnition depends on the coordinate system used [Val16]. Typically local or absolute
rotations are used. Local rotations describe the rotation of an object relative to its parent. Absolute
rotations, on the other hand, describe the rotation of an object relative to the global coordinate
system or the coordinate system of the skeletal root. One can transform local rotations to absolute
rotations by hierarchically traversing the skeleton from the root and chaining the corresponding
rotations.
In other words, the local coordinate systems are aligned with the global coordinate
system in case of the absolute description and rotated relative to the parent in case of the local
variant [Val16]. Rotations can also have different mathematical representations, such as Euler
angles, quaternions, rotation matrices, and spherical coordinate systems, where each description
has its own distinct properties [Huy09]. Furthermore, not all skeleton models are represented by
joint rotations. Sometimes joint positions are used. Forward and inverse kinematics can be used
in such cases to convert between the two different systems [Val16]. One major drawback when
comparing motions, based only on relative joint rotations, is that rotations in some body parts have
a more signiﬁcant overall effect on a pose or action than others. For example, a small rotation in
the shoulder can lead to much larger changes as in the wrist [R¨od06].

7

4.2.2 Distance-Based Pose Features

Distance-based pose features are based on the joint positions and measure either the distance be-
tween two arbitrary joints or between a joint and a deﬁned edge or plane. The planes for the joint to
plane distances can be deﬁned both relative to the subject or absolute. Anthropometric features in-
ﬂuence distances between two joints. Therefore, normalized 3D skeletons usually are used in these
cases [Val16]. An example of joint to joint distance-based features as well as for joint to plane dis-
tance measurement – in this particular case, the global ﬂoor is used as an absolute plane – is given
by Ijjina et al., where the features are applied for action recognition [IM14]. Two examples for
joint to relative plane distances are given in M¨uller et al. and M¨uller and R¨oder [MRC05, MR06].

4.2.3 Relational Features

M¨uller et al. propose relational features as geometric relations between speciﬁed body parts or
points included in 3D skeleton data [MRC05]. They provide a semantic representation of motion
and are invariant “to various kinds of spatial deformations of poses” [R¨od06]. Previously discussed
features, such as joint position, are numerical, and thus a quantitative description of motion. Nu-
merical features can be sensitive towards pose deformations. For this reason, they are not always
suitable for logical similarity detection [TCKL13]. Relational features are, on the other hand, a
qualitative description that deﬁnes an individual or common sequential characteristics of logically
similar motions and have the – for logical similarity favorable – property of being invariant to lo-
cal deformations [MR08]. In M¨uller et al., a set of Boolean geometric features is used [MRC05].
Figure 4.1 shows some possible Boolean expressions, such as ‘Is the right foot in front of the left
foot?’ or ‘Is the left arm bending?’. In the paper “Efﬁcient motion search in large motion capture”
written by Yi, more generalized variations of relational features are described, where only features
of bones that count as dominant in a speciﬁc motion are considered [Yi06].

Figure 4.1: Examples of relational features as Boolean expressions, as described by R¨oder et al.
[R¨od06].

4.2.4 Silhouette-Based Pose Features

The extracted silhouettes from appearance-based models can directly be used as pose features,
either as the silhouettes region or its contour [Val16]. Phillips et al. proposed a baseline algorithm
for gait analysis that utilized silhouette as a feature [PSR+02]. The employment of spatio-temporal
silhouette analysis, described by Wang et al., is another example of a gait analysis [WTNH03].

8

Another feature representation by sequences of human silhouettes is discussed by Huang et al.
[HW10].

4.3 Transition Features

Transition features, as deﬁned by Valˇc´ık et al., describe characteristics of transformations/displacements
between two or more sequential poses, such as the displacement of joints. Just like pose features,
they are bound to one pose. However, precedent and subsequent poses in a sequence affect the
computations as well. A typical transition feature is the instantaneous velocity [Val16].

For transition features, it must be considered that joint motion can not only be triggered by
the joint itself but also by parented joints, as stated by Kamel et al. For example, our ﬁngers can
move separately from the rest of our bodies, but they can also move due to the movement of our
wrist, elbow, shoulder, or the whole body. When walking, each joint in our body moves along,
even if some parts of the body are held steady. Moreover, most transition features are not explicit.
For example, joint position trajectories do not hold information about the direction of movement
[KSL+19].

Just like joint rotations, joint motion can be distinguished by the applied coordinate system.
Kamel et al. describe a motion based on the descriptive coordinate system as local- or global-
motion. They describe the local motion of a joint as the displacement relative to a parental joint
while global motion describes the displacement according to a ﬁxed joint (root) or the global
coordinate system. The beneﬁt by using a local coordinate system is that it provides information
about the inﬂuence of the parent joints, and therefore it is possible to distinguish if a joint moved
by itself or was (partly) moved by one of its parents [KSL+19].

4.3.1 Instantaneous Velocity

Instantaneous velocity describes the change of joint position or joint rotation between two sample
points (i.e., movement of a joint between two frames). Both the absolute and relative velocity apply
as transition features, though only the relative velocity describes the relation between velocities of
the joints. Kamel et al. present a motion quantiﬁcation and subsequent similarity evaluation using
both translation and angular velocities from 3D skeletal data with the distinction between local and
global motion [KSL+19]. In Kr¨uger et al., the angular momentum of the body segments, together
with the acceleration of the center of mass, is used for comparing motions [KTMW08]. Both the
velocity and the acceleration are also used in Moencks et al. as features for action recognition on
a multi-modal dataset [MDSRK19]. Thanh et al. only utilized the absolute velocity to extract the
most active frames and body parts [TCKL13]. The velocity vector can also be a description of
direction [Val16]. Velocity usually needs to be derived from MoCap data. The applied discrete
derivation then ampliﬁes quick transition changes that can be caused by measuring errors or noise,
which often results in jittering of the skeleton joints. If no motion smoothing algorithms are applied
on the MoCap data, velocity features can lead to signiﬁcant distortion of the motion description
and possibly result in subsequent errors [Val16].

4.3.2 Instantaneous Acceleration

Another transition feature is the instantaneous joint acceleration. The acceleration is derived from
velocity and therefore has similar characteristics as velocity features. The quality of this feature

9

has, for example, a similar dependency on noise. In Kr¨uger et al., the acceleration of the center of
mass is used to detect so-called non-contact phases, since the acceleration then corresponds to the
acceleration due to gravity [KTMW08]. As mentioned above, acceleration is also a feature utilized
in Moencks et al. [MDSRK19].

4.3.3 Kinetic Properties

The mentioned transition features can be classiﬁed as kinematic properties. Kinetic properties,
like forces as used in combination with joint angles for measuring motion similarity by Yang et al.
[Y+08], can be utilized as well.

4.4 Action Features

Action features describe the characteristics of a complete semantic or logical action. Therefore,
the motion sequence has to be analyzed to extract actions beforehand. This extraction is either
done by user input or automatically based on other features [Val16]. For instance, an action could
be delimited by two key poses. Examples for action features are the duration of action, the total
displacement of joints, periodicity patterns such as walk cycles and rhythms of motion as well es
the average velocity and average acceleration [Val16].

The main difference to the instantaneous velocity described in Section 4.3 is that the average
velocity not only represents a short momentum between two frames but averages it over a whole
sequence or total action. The average velocity, therefore, is the total displacement divided by the
total time of the action.

In other publications, statistical descriptions, such as the mean, median, modus, standard de-
viation, or minimum or maximum values of, e.g., acquired joint angle velocity, are utilized as
action features [Val16]. An example is given by Ball et al., where the k-means algorithm is used
for gait recognition [BRRV12]. Other widely adopted features are trajectories in two- or three-
dimensional space [Rey16]. Trajectories describe how a coordinate or value evolves and can be
displayed graphically as a curve diagram. The typical joint trajectories, for example, represent the
path a joint follows through space as a function of time. Joint-angle trajectories, as utilized by
Zhao et al. as well as by Tanawongsuwan and Bobick, represent the change of joint-angles over
time [TB01, ZHD+04].

10

Chapter 5

Human Motion Comparison

Motion similarity analysis is application orientated, therefore different approaches where devel-
oped over the time to meet the particular requirements [TLKS08]. The similarity between poses
and actions can be measured by using distance metrics or learning methods [Gav99]. Additional
tasks that build on the measured similarity, such as action recognition, depend heavily on the ac-
curacy of the distance metric or learning process [Por04]. This section gives an overview of a
selection of approaches and focuses mainly on the different choices of feature vectors, preprocess-
ing of the data, and similarity measurements.

5.1 Data Preprocessing - Dimensionality Reduction

The analysis of human motion and the calculation of similarity are complicated by the high dimen-
sionality and complexity of the motion data [MBR17, WSP09]. Since it is not easy to work with
motion data in its raw form, different approaches are utilized for simplifying the data by dimen-
sionality reduction and ﬁltering [FF05]. Two popular methods, Principal Component Analysis and
Self Organizing Map are described below.

5.1.1 Principal Component Analysis

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a linear method to simplifying a multivariate dataset by
reducing data dimensionality [LC11]. The PCA and other projection methods attempt to ﬁnd the
best approximated subspace for the data set to which the data can be projected (typically in terms
of variance) [WSP09]. The execution of a PCA on a given dataset leads to a vector space of equal
dimensions where each axis in space represents a principal component vector. Points in space are
then weighted combination of principal components [FF05]. Data reduction is obtained by using
only a subset of its principal components [FF05, LC11]. Several authors such as R¨oder and Tido
[R¨od06], Agahian et al. [ANK19] or Witte et al. [WSP09] apply PCA before the comparison
of motion data to achieve dimensionality reduction. K. Forbes and E. Fiume used a weighted
PCA-based pose representation for pose-to-pose distance calculations to ﬁnd similar motions in a
database [FF05].

5.1.2 Self Organizing Map

A Self Organizing Map (SOM) is a neural network that is trained by unsupervised learning and
produces a low-dimensional and discrete representation of the input space. Therefore SOMs are

11

used for dimension reduction [HW10, SKK04]. Sakamoto et al. map large data sets onto a two-
dimensional discrete space by the help of SOMs [SKK04]. Huang and Wu also utilize this technol-
ogy for their human action recognition approach to reduce data dimensionality as well as to cluster
feature data [HW10]. They use sequences of human silhouettes as the primary feature and extract
key poses through the trained SOM. As a similarity measure, they utilize the Euclidean distance
and later the longest common subsequence (LCS) method for comparing trajectories [HW10].

5.2 Local Similarity Measures

Single frames can hold a lot of information if they contain an expressive pose, such as a kick or
hit of a tennis player. Local similarity measures compare such individual poses and, therefore,
do not take temporal aspect into account [R¨od06]. They can be used for comparing key-poses
or are incorporated into more complex, time-dependent similarity models. Popular pose distance
functions are for example the Manhattan distance (L1), Euclidean distance (L2) and the Cosine
distance [Val16]. Chan et al., for example, utilize the cosine similarity as a local similarity measure
for each pair of joint angles in a frame [CLTK07]. They proposed an immersive performance
training tool where trainees have to imitate the simulated trainer. Their movement was compared
and analyzed by posture matching, to be able to give the trainees feedback [CLTK07]. In addition
to the drawback of needing to deﬁne thresholds as error tolerance, this method also introduces the
problem of not being invariant to global rotations if absolute and not relative angles are used. Other
distance metrics for rotations can be utilized if joint rotations are represented as unit quaternions,
such as the total weighted quaternion distance or geodesic distance [R¨od06]. The following
distance functions for rotations are analyzed in more detail by Huynh [Huy09]:

5.2.1 Euclidean Distance between Euler Angles

The Euclidean distance applies the Pythagorean theorem to p dimensions. For 2D, this distance
measure can be interpreted as the length of the chord between two Euler angles on the unit circle.
Euler angles are not unique, i.e., several Euler angles can represent the same rotation. However,
their Euclidean distance may result in a non-zero value, which does not reﬂect the actual distance
between them. The Euclidean distance between Euler angles can also lead to large distance values
between nearby rotations, while two distant rotations may lead to smaller values. Therefore, the
paper does not recommend this metric for calculating the difference between the two rotations
[Huy09]. Switonski et al. stated that distance functions based on quaternions allow a more efﬁcient
assessment of rotation similarities, in comparison to Euler angles [SMJ+12].

5.2.2 Norm of the Difference of Quaternions

Unit quaternions give a more ﬂexible representation of rotations. Other than Euler angles, their
values do not dependent on the order of rotations about the three principal axes and do not suffer
the gimbal lock problem. They are well suited for interpolations as well [SMJ+12]. The norm of
the difference of quaternions is one of many distance functions deﬁned in quaternion space. This
metric Φ deﬁnes the distance between two rotations as the Euclidean distance between two unit
quaternions q1 and q2 as given in Equation 5.1 [Huy09]. As unit quaternions q and −q denote the
same rotation, the minimum operator is required [Hug14].

12

Φ(q1, q2) = min(||q1 − q2||, ||q1 + q2||).

(5.1)

5.2.3 Inner Product of Unit Quaternions

A similar metric for calculating the distance between unit quaternions is given by the inner product
as denoted in Equation 5.2 [Huy09]. This metric is, for example, used by Wunsch et al. for 3D
object pose estimation [WWH97].

Φ(q1, q2) = min(arccos(dot(q1, q2)), π − arccos(dot(q1, q2))).

(5.2)

The metric can alternatively be replaced by the following computationally more efﬁcient func-

tions:

Φ(q1, q2) = arccos(|dot(q1, q2)|).

Φ(q1, q2) = 1 − |dot(q1, q2)|.

(5.3)

(5.4)

5.2.4 Deviation from the Identity Matrix

Distance functions can be based of matrix representations as well. One drawback is however, that
they usually are more computationally expensive. The following metric given as Equation 5.5 tries
to ﬁnd the amount of rotation required to align a rotation matrix R1 with R2. Among the distance
metrics described by Huynh, this metric is the most computationally expensive metric. However,
the computation work can be signiﬁcantly reduced if unit quaternions instead of matrices are used
[Huy09].

Φ(R1, R2) = ||I − R1RT

2 ||F .

(5.5)

5.2.5 Geodesic on the Unit Sphere

This metric, as denoted in Equation 5.6, gives a geodesic on the unit sphere, which can be inter-
preted as the shortest curve between two rotations lying on the surface of the unit sphere. As shown
by Huynh, this metric has a linear relationship with Equation 5.3, and therefore can be calculated
more simply based on unit quaternions.

Φ(R1, R2) = ||log(R1RT

2 )||.

(5.6)

Arikan and Forsyth give a more complex example for the usage of a local similarity measure,
by utilizing multiple features like joint positions, velocities, and accelerations [AF02]. A lot of
similarity metrics, such as the one proposed by Arikan and Forsyth, utilize different joint weights
to control the relevance of different joints [YG05]. One major drawback of such metrics is the
need to deﬁne the optimal attribute weights for the given problem deﬁnitions and the dependence
of the quality of results on selected weights [YG05].

Kovar et al. employ a model based approach working on point clouds to measure the simi-
larity between two frames [KGP08]. The point cloud distance metric is deﬁned as the minimum
difference between two point sets (a squared form of L2 distance) [Val16]. Each point cloud is the
composition of smaller point clouds that represent the pose at each frame in a deﬁned window of
neighboring frames [KGP08]. Drawbacks of the point cloud approach described by Kovar et al.
are the coordinate-invariance and the efﬁciency [YG05].

13

5.3 Global Similarity Measures

5.3.1 Temporal Alignments

In image-based human pose comparison, the similarity can be assessed through conventional ap-
proaches such as measuring the distance between joint positions or rotations [CJTC+18]. These
approaches are well suited, for example, to determine the similarity between detected key-poses.
However, when human poses have to be compared over a time span, assessing the similarity be-
tween two poses or motions becomes a non-trivial problem [CJTC+18]. Humans tend to perform
movements slightly differently each time, which means that certain poses appear at different frames
in sequences that represent the same human motion [FF05, CJTC+18]. Such temporal changes
are subtle for a human observer. However, they can lead to an enormous numerical difference
when performing computer-aided motion analysis [FF05]. Nevertheless, two actions must often
be identiﬁed as similar motions, even if they are spatio-temporal variations of each other [MR08].
Therefore, different types of algorithms, such as dynamic time warping, are often used in motion
data processing to obtain a temporal match of the used motions. The result of a time warp de-
pends not only on the algorithm itself but also on the utilized distance function and the compared
features [KTMW08]. Dimensionality reduction allows for computational advantages. Similarity
models based on machine learning, for example, can achieve a shorter training time by reducing
the amount of data necessary to train [MPBA16].

Pose-to-pose comparison is also utilized in global similarity measures, for example, in com-
bination with time alignment methods. Forbes and Fiume give an example of a similarity model
based on both local and global distance measures [FF05]. They present a weighted-PCA based
pose representation in combination with Euclidean distance metric [FF05]. PCA trajectories are
then compared by using the Dynamic Time Warping (Dtw) distance [R¨od06]. A similar algo-
rithm for constructing a content-based human motion retrieval system is proposed by Chiu et al.
[CCW+04]. They compute the similarity between the query example and each candidate clip
through Dtw on SOM-based trajectory clusters [CCW+04, R¨od06].

Dynamic Time Warping

Dynamic Time Warping (Dtw) determines the optimal alignment between two given temporal
sequences and can be used for measuring similarity between them as it allows the comparison of
two time-series sequences with varying lengths and speeds [Rey16]. Given two time series X =
(x1, x2, ..., xN), N ∈ N and Y = (y1, y2, ..., yM), M ∈ N with equidistant points in time and sequence
sizes of N and M. To align both sequences, Dtw starts by calculating the local cost matrix C ∈
RNxM : ci, j = ||xi − y j||, i ∈ [1 : N], j ∈ [1 : M] that represents all pairwise distances between X
and Y [Sen08]. The algorithm then ﬁnds an alignment or warping path from the ﬁrst cell [1,1]
to the last cell [N, M], which runs through the low-cost areas on the local cost matrix. To ﬁnd
the optimal warping path Ω of the minimum total cost as shown in Figure 5.1, one would need to
test every warping path between X and Y , which would be computationally expensive. Therefore,
Dtw utilizes discrete dynamic programming to build an accumulated cost matrix D in a recursive
fashion where the warping path Ω can be found by following the greedy strategy. This optimization
leads to a total complexity of O(NM) [Sen08, FBM+18, YCWJ19]. The warping path can then
be employed to align the series in time. Similarity models using the default Dtw implementation
on high-dimensional data have, however, two main disadvantages: the quadratic complexity and
the limitation in capturing the semantic relationship between two sequences, by disregarding the

14

temporal context [CJTC+18]. Dtw is still a widely adopted solution for time alignment problems.
M¨uller and R¨oder, for example, employed Dtw in combination with template matching for action
recognition [MR06]. Kr¨uger et al. used an extended variant called ’Iterative multi-scale dynamic
time distortion’ (IMDTW), which, in contrast to the basic Dtw, does not require a quadratic runtime
and memory space [KTMW08]. Reyes refers to FastDTW as a less computationally intensive
alternative to Dtw as it is linear in both time and space complexity [Rey16]. Another methods
with linear complexity are Uniform Time Warping (UTW) and its extension named Interpolated
Uniform Time Warping (IUTW) [Val16]. Other examples for Dtw-based similarity models are
given by [CCW+04, FF05].

Figure 5.1: Dynamic time warping. Illustration by Yang et al. [YCWJ19].

Hidden Markov Models

Another method for matching time-varying data and action recognition are Hidden Markov Models
(HMM), which are statistical models that are based on hidden states that represent an activity
[AR11]. In contrast to Dtw, HMMs involve a training and classiﬁcation stage [Gav99]. HMMs also
disregard the temporal context by assuming that observations are temporally independent [Wan16].
HMM is used by Yamato et al. for the matching of human motion [YOI92] while Mandery et
al. utilized it for the reduction of feature space for whole-body human action recognition tasks
[MPBA16]. Porikli proposed HMM-based distance metrics to determine the similarity between
trajectories [Por04].

Dtw and HMM are widely adopted solutions for the analysis of time-varying data, but other
methods for time alignment are used as well. Valˇc´ık proposed Uniform Scaling (US), Scaled and
Warp Matching (combination of US and Dtw) and Move Split Merge [Val16]. D. M. Gavrila
referenced approaches based on Neural Networks (NN) and also mentioned the possibility to
disregard the time component of human motion data by using representations in different spaces
such as a phase-space [Gav99].
In “Content-based retrieval for human motion data” template
matching is discussed as a time-alignment method, where input patterns are compared with pre-
stored patterns in a database [CCW+04]. M¨uller et al. achieve spatio-temporal invariance in
their proposed concept by working with geometric features and adaptive-temporal segmentation
[MRC05].

5.3.2 Similarity Based on Curve Representations

Trajectory-based approaches interpret an activity as a set of space-time trajectories. The similar-
ity is then measured between the trajectories to archive motion analysis and action recognition

15

[AR11, ANK19]. Trajectories can be captured through motion capturing techniques with markers
or through the space-time movement of 3d skeleton data. The whole set of joint-trajectories then
represents the full-body motion [Rey16]. Several approaches use trajectories themselves as motion
representation or as further human motion features, as discussed in Section 4 [AR11].

Trajectory based approaches can achieve a detailed analysis of human motion and in many
cases are view-invariant [AR11]. However, they dependent on well reconstructed or captured data.
Trajectories can also be used to extract further features [Por04, AR11]. Reyes, for example, pro-
posed a human motion model where trajectories are mapped into chain codes by using orthogonal
changes of direction. Chain codes allow data reduction and the use of string matching algorithms
[Rey16].

A simple metric to compare a pair of trajectories is the mean of coordinate distances (Carte-
sian distance, L-norm, ...), which can be enhanced by further statistical values such as median,
variance, minimum, or maximum distance [Por04]. As mentioned by Porikli, these trajectory dis-
tance metrics have the disadvantage that they depend on mutual coordinate correspondences and
therefore are limited to compare only trajectories of equal duration (unless they are normalized)
[Por04]. In the paper, it is also noted that normalization destroys the temporal properties of the
trajectory. Porikli, therefore, proposed an HMM-based distance metric to compare trajectories of
different temporal properties [Por04]. Another action recognition problem solved by comparing
trajectory, as mentioned before, is proposed by Huang et al. [HW10].

5.3.3 Rule Based Approaches

Similarity models are often template-based and focus on gesture or action recognition. Rule-
based approaches, on the other hand, are primarily used to analyze the correctness of motion, for
example, in the context of rehabilitation exercise monitoring. Rule-based similarity models deﬁne
a ground-truth by a set of rules and compare the observed motion with them instead of comparing
it with a previously recorded reference motion. The usage of predeﬁned rules can simplify the
implementation of real-time feedback to the patient [ZLER14].

5.3.4 Other Mentionable Methods

There also exist approaches to measure the similarity of 3D models or single poses by compar-
ing skeleton graphs or other tree-based representations. Brennecke et al., for instance, employ
graph similarity for 3D shape matching while Chen et al. [BI04] proposed a novel skeleton tree
representation matching approach [CHL+17].

Kovar and Gleicher identiﬁed numerically similar motions based on a match web, which is a
DTW-based index structure [KG04]. Parisi et al. use self-organizing Growing When Required
networks (GWR) to achieve noise-tolerant action recognition in realtime [PWW15]. Nomm and
Buhhalko proposed a system for monitoring and supervising therapeutic exercises based on a neu-
ral network. The network is used for motion prediction and will interrupt an exercise if certain
predeﬁned thresholds are exceeded [NB13].

16

Chapter 6

Conclusion

This state of the art report provides a brief overview of multiple approaches for human motion
analysis and similarity modeling. It must be noted, however, that only a small insight into the vast
number of methods is given. In recent years, many papers on human motion analysis have been
released to address problems such as real-time action recognition, motion retrieval, or monitoring
the correct execution of an action. For all these tasks, the similarity between actions or at least indi-
vidual poses must be measured. The proposed approaches for similarity modeling are diverse and
focus on different aspects. They are based on various distinct deﬁnitions of similarity, depending
on their area of application, and utilize a different combination of features. What the models have
in common, however, is the high dimensional and spatiotemporal-varying MoCap-data on which
they are built. Multiple approaches, therefore, utilize techniques for dimensionality reduction and
time alignments such as the wide adopted Principal Component Analysis or Dynamic Time Warp-
ing. However, by employing such techniques, it must be ensured that they do not result in any
information loss or high runtime. As a consequence, numerous approaches adopt popular and
promising algorithms, such as Dynamic Time Warping, and modify them to their speciﬁc purpose.
Most of the discussed approaches are template-based, where an observed motion is compared
with a pre-recorded one. However, rule-based methods or the combination of both could also be
of interest for applications in which feedback is provided over the execution of an action.

17

List of acronyms

Dtw

HMM

Dynamic Time Warping

Hidden Markov Model

IMDTW

Iterative Multi-scale Dynamic Time Distortion

NN

PCA

SOM

US

UTW

IUTW

Neural Networks

Principal Component Analysis

Self Organizing Map

Uniform Scaling

Uniform Time Warping

Interpolat Uniform Time Warping

18

Bibliography

[AC99]

[AF02]

[ANK19]

[AR11]

[BI04]

Jake K Aggarwal and Quin Cai. Human motion analysis: A review. Computer vision
and image understanding, 73(3):428–440, 1999.

Okan Arikan and David A Forsyth. Interactive motion generation from examples.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 21(3):483–490, 2002.

Saeid Agahian, Farhood Negin, and Cemal K¨ose. An efﬁcient human action recog-
nition framework with pose-based spatiotemporal features. Engineering Science and
Technology, an International Journal, 2019.

Jake K Aggarwal and Michael S Ryoo. Human activity analysis: A review. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 43(3):1–43, 2011.

Angela Brennecke and Tobias Isenberg. 3d shape matching using skeleton graphs.
In SimVis, pages 299–310. Citeseer, 2004.

[BRRV12] Adrian Ball, David Rye, Fabio Ramos, and Mari Velonaki. Unsupervised cluster-
ing of people from’skeleton’data. In Proceedings of the seventh annual ACM/IEEE
international conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pages 225–226, 2012.

[BWP08]

[CCD+03]

Matthew Brodie, Alan Walmsley, and Wyatt Page. Fusion motion capture: a proto-
type system using inertial measurement units and gps for the biomechanical analysis
of ski racing. Sports Technology, 1(1):17–28, 2008.

Philo Tan Chua, Rebecca Crivella, Bo Daly, Ning Hu, Russ Schaaf, David Ventura,
Todd Camill, Jessica Hodgins, and Randy Pausch. Training for physical tasks in
virtual environments: Tai chi. In IEEE Virtual Reality, 2003. Proceedings., pages
87–94. IEEE, 2003.

[CCW+04] Chih-Yi Chiu, Shih-Pin Chao, Ming-Yang Wu, Shi-Nine Yang, and Hsin-Chih Lin.
Content-based retrieval for human motion data. Journal of visual communication
and image representation, 15(3):446–466, 2004.

[CHL+17] Xin Chen, Jingbin Hao, Hao Liu, Zhengtong Han, and Shengping Ye. Research on
similarity measurements of 3d models based on skeleton trees. Computers, 6(2):17,
2017.

[CJTC+18] Huseyin Coskun, David Joseph Tan, Sailesh Conjeti, Nassir Navab, and Federico
Tombari. Human motion analysis with deep metric learning. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 667–683, 2018.

19

[CLTK07]

[CLZ+12]

[CSC18]

[CSLL12]

[DG03]

Jacky Chan, Howard Leung, Kai Tai Tang, and Taku Komura. Immersive perfor-
mance training tools using motion capture technology. In Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Immersive Telecommunications, page 7. ICST (Insti-
tute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and ˆaC¦, 2007.

Chien-Yen Chang, Belinda Lange, Mi Zhang, Sebastian Koenig, Phil Requejo,
Noom Somboon, Alexander A Sawchuk, and Albert A Rizzo. Towards pervasive
physical rehabilitation using microsoft kinect. In 2012 6th international conference
on pervasive computing technologies for healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and work-
shops, pages 159–162. IEEE, 2012.

Rafael MO Cruz, Robert Sabourin, and George DC Cavalcanti. Dynamic classi-
ﬁer selection: Recent advances and perspectives. Information Fusion, 41:195–216,
2018.

Songle Chen, Zhengxing Sun, Yi Li, and Qian Li. Partial similarity human motion
retrieval based on relative geometry features. In 2012 Fourth International Confer-
ence on Digital Home, pages 298–303. IEEE, 2012.

James W Davis and Hui Gao. An expressive three-mode principal components
Image and Vision Computing, 21(11):1001–1016,
model of human action style.
2003.

[FBM+18] Duarte Folgado, Mar´ılia Barandas, Ricardo Matias, Rodrigo Martins, Miguel Car-
valho, and Hugo Gamboa. Time alignment measurement for time series. Pattern
Recognition, 81:268–279, 2018.

[FBSL12]

Adso Fern’ndez-Baena, Antonio Sus´ın, and Xavier Lligadas. Biomechanical valida-
tion of upper-body and lower-body joint movements of kinect motion capture data
for rehabilitation treatments. In 2012 fourth international conference on intelligent
networking and collaborative systems, pages 656–661. IEEE, 2012.

[FF05]

Kevin Forbes and Eugene Fiume. An efﬁcient search algorithm for motion data
In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
using weighted pca.
symposium on Computer animation, pages 67–76, 2005.

[Gav99]

Dariu M Gavrila. The visual analysis of human movement: A survey. Computer
vision and image understanding, 73(1):82–98, 1999.

[HDIE13]

[Hug14]

He He, Hal Daum´e III, and Jason Eisner. Dynamic feature selection for dependency
In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural
parsing.
language processing, pages 1455–1464, 2013.

David J Huggins. Comparing distance metrics for rotation using the k-nearest
neighbors algorithm for entropy estimation. Journal of computational chemistry,
35(5):377–385, 2014.

[Huy09]

Du Q Huynh. Metrics for 3d rotations: Comparison and analysis. Journal of Math-
ematical Imaging and Vision, 35(2):155–164, 2009.

20

[HW10]

[IM14]

Wei Huang and QM Jonathan Wu. Human action recognition based on self organiz-
ing map. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, pages 2130–2133. IEEE, 2010.

Earnest Paul Ijjina and C Krishna Mohan. Human action recognition based on mo-
cap information using convolution neural networks. In 2014 13th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning and Applications, pages 159–164. IEEE, 2014.

[JLLL08] Won-Seob Jang, Won-Kyu Lee, In-Kwon Lee, and Jehee Lee. Enriching a motion
database by analogous combination of partial human motions. The Visual Computer,
24(4):271–280, 2008.

[KG04]

Lucas Kovar and Michael Gleicher. Automated extraction and parameterization of
motions in large data sets. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 23(3):559–568,
2004.

[KGP08]

Lucas Kovar, Michael Gleicher, and Fr´ed´eric Pighin. Motion graphs. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2008 classes, pages 1–10. 2008.

[KSL+19]

Aouaidjia Kamel, Bin Sheng, Ping Li, Jinman Kim, and David Dagan Feng. Efﬁ-
cient body motion quantiﬁcation and similarity evaluation using 3-d joints skeleton
coordinates. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 2019.

[KTMW08] Bj¨orn Kr¨uger, Jochen Tautges, Meinard M¨uller, and Andreas Weber. Multi-mode
tensor representation of motion data. JVRB-Journal of Virtual Reality and Broad-
casting, 5(5), 2008.

[LC11]

[LE04]

Vittorio Lippi and Giacomo Ceccarelli. Can principal component analysis be applied
In BIO Web of
in real time to reduce the dimension of human motion signals?
Conferences, volume 1, page 00055. EDP Sciences, 2011.

Chan-Su Lee and Ahmed Elgammal. Gait style and gait content: bilinear models
for gait recognition using gait re-sampling. In Sixth IEEE International Conference
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, 2004. Proceedings., pages 147–152.
IEEE, 2004.

[MBR17]

Julieta Martinez, Michael J Black, and Javier Romero. On human motion predic-
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
tion using recurrent neural networks.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2891–2900, 2017.

[MDSRK19] Mirco Moencks, Varuna De Silva, Jamie Roche, and Ahmet Kondoz. Adaptive
feature processing for robust human activity recognition on a novel multi-modal
dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02858, 2019.

[Mon12]

H Ali Monash. Motion comparison using microsoft kinect.
project, MONASH UNIVERSITY, 2012.

computer science

[MPBA16] Christian Mandery, Matthias Plappert, J´ulia Borras, and Tamim Asfour. Dimension-
ality reduction for whole-body human motion recognition. In 2016 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION), pages 355–362. IEEE, 2016.

21

[MR06]

Meinard M¨uller and Tido R¨oder. Motion templates for automatic classiﬁcation
In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIG-
and retrieval of motion capture data.
GRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation, pages 137–146, 2006.

[MR08]

Meinard M¨uller and Tido R¨oder. A relational approach to content-based analysis of
motion capture data. In Human Motion, pages 477–506. Springer, 2008.

[MRC05]

Meinard M¨uller, Tido R¨oder, and Michael Clausen. Efﬁcient content-based retrieval
of motion capture data. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers, pages 677–685. 2005.

[NB13]

[Por04]

[PSR+02]

Sven Nomm and Kirill Buhhalko. Monitoring of the human motor functions reha-
bilitation by neural networks based system with kinect sensor. IFAC Proceedings
Volumes, 46(15):249–253, 2013.

Fatih Porikli. Trajectory distance metric using hidden markov model based rep-
resentation. In IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision, PETS Workshop,
volume 3. Citeseer, 2004.

P Jonathon Phillips, Sudeep Sarkar, Isidro Robledo, Patrick Grother, and Kevin
Bowyer. Baseline results for the challenge problem of humanid using gait analysis.
In Proceedings of Fifth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face Gesture
Recognition, pages 137–142. IEEE, 2002.

[PWW15]

German I Parisi, Cornelius Weber, and Stefan Wermter. Self-organizing neural in-
tegration of pose-motion features for human action recognition. Frontiers in neuro-
robotics, 9:3, 2015.

[Rey16]

[R¨od06]

[Sen08]

[SKK04]

[SMJ+12]

Francisco Javier Torres Reyes. Human motion: analysis of similarity and dissim-
ilarity using orthogonal changes of direction on given trajectories. University of
Colorado at Colorado Springs, 2016.

Tido R¨oder. Similarity, retrieval, and classiﬁcation of motion capture data. PhD
thesis, 2006.

Pavel Senin. Dynamic time warping algorithm review. Information and Computer
Science Department University of Hawaii at Manoa Honolulu, USA, 855(1-23):40,
2008.

Yasuhiko Sakamoto, Shigeru Kuriyama, and Toyohisa Kaneko. Motion map: image-
In Proceedings of the 2004
based retrieval and segmentation of motion data.
ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer animation, pages 259–
266, 2004.

Adam Switonski, Agnieszka Michalczuk, Henryk Josinski, Andrzej Polanski, and
Konrad Wojciechowski. Dynamic time warping in gait classiﬁcation of motion cap-
ture data. In Proceedings of World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technol-
ogy, number 71, page 53. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
(WASET), 2012.

22

[TB01]

[TCKL13]

[TLKS08]

Gait recognition from time-
Rawesak Tanawongsuwan and Aaron Bobick.
normalized joint-angle trajectories in the walking plane. In Proceedings of the 2001
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
CVPR 2001, volume 2, pages II–II. IEEE, 2001.

Tran Thang Thanh, Fan Chen, Kazunori Kotani, and Bac Le. Automatic extrac-
tion of semantic action features. In 2013 International Conference on Signal-Image
Technology & Internet-Based Systems, pages 148–155. IEEE, 2013.

Jeff KT Tang, Howard Leung, Taku Komura, and Hubert PH Shum. Emulating
human perception of motion similarity. Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds,
19(3-4):211–221, 2008.

[Val16]

Jakub Valˇc´ık. Similarity models for human motion data. Ph. D. dissertation, 2016.

[VW18]

[Wan16]

[WSP09]

Jan P Vox and Frank Wallhoff. Preprocessing and normalization of 3d-skeleton-data
for human motion recognition. In 2018 IEEE Life Sciences Conference (LSC), pages
279–282. IEEE, 2018.

Qifei Wang. A survey of visual analysis of human motion and its applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1608.00700, 2016.

K Witte, H Schobesberger, and C Peham. Motion pattern analysis of gait in horse-
back riding by means of principal component analysis. Human movement science,
28(3):394–405, 2009.

[WTNH03] Liang Wang, Tieniu Tan, Huazhong Ning, and Weiming Hu. Silhouette analysis-
based gait recognition for human identiﬁcation. IEEE transactions on pattern anal-
ysis and machine intelligence, 25(12):1505–1518, 2003.

[WWH97]

[Y+08]

Patrick Wunsch, Stefan Winkler, and Gerd Hirzinger. Real-time pose estimation of
3d objects from camera images using neural networks. In Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation, volume 4, pages 3232–3237. IEEE,
1997.

Yi-Ting Yang et al. Human recognition based on kinematics and kinetics of gait.
In The 13th International Conference on Biomedical Engineering Suntec Singapore
International Convention & Exhibi, Suntec, Singapore, 2008.

[YCWJ19] Chan-Yun Yang, Pei-Yu Chen, Te-Jen Wen, and Gene Eu Jan. Imu consensus ex-
ception detection with dynamic time warping – a comparative approach. Sensors,
19(10):2237, 2019.

[YG05]

[Yi06]

[YOI92]

Herb Yang and Tong Guan. Motion similarity analysis and evaluation of motion
capture data. 2005.

LT Yi. Efﬁcient motion search in large motion capture database. ISVC, pages 151–
160, 2006.

Junji Yamato, Jun Ohya, and Kenichiro Ishii. Recognizing human action in time-
sequential images using hidden markov model. In CVPR, volume 92, pages 379–
385, 1992.

23

[ZHD+04] Xiaojun Zhao, Qiang Huang, Peng Du, Dongming Wen, and Kejie Li. Humanoid
kinematics mapping and similarity evaluation based on human motion capture. In In-
ternational Conference on Information Acquisition, 2004. Proceedings., pages 426–
431. IEEE, 2004.

[ZHPL04]

Xiaojun Zhao, Qiang Huang, Zhaoqin Peng, and Kejie Li. Kinematics mapping and
similarity evaluation of humanoid motion based on human motion capture. In 2004
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)(IEEE
Cat. No. 04CH37566), volume 1, pages 840–845. IEEE, 2004.

[ZLER14] Wenbing Zhao, Roanna Lun, Deborah D Espy, and M Ann Reinthal. Rule based
realtime motion assessment for rehabilitation exercises. In 2014 IEEE Symposium
on Computational Intelligence in Healthcare and e-health (CICARE), pages 133–
140. IEEE, 2014.

24

