0
2
0
2

p
e
S
3
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
0
4
1
1
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

BALANCING SIMULATION AND GAMEPLAY - APPLYING GAMES
USER RESEARCH TO LEUKEMIASIM

Erin Brintnell
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
2500 University Dr NW
Calgary, AB, T2N 1N4
erin.brintnell@ucalgary.ca

Owen Brierley
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
2500 University Dr NW
Calgary, AB, T2N 1N4
owen.brierley@ucalgary.ca

Neil Christensen
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
2500 University Dr NW
Calgary, AB, T2N 1N4
neil.christensen1@ucalgary.ca

Christian Jacob
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
2500 University Dr NW
Calgary, AB, T2N 1N4
cjacob@ucalgary.ca

September 25, 2020

ABSTRACT

A bioinformatics researcher and a game design researcher walk into a lab... This paper shares
two case-studies of a collaboration between a bioinformatics researcher who is developing a set of
educational VR simulations for youth and a consultative game design researcher with a background in
Games User Research (GUR) techniques who assesses and iteratively improves the player experience
in the simulations. By introducing games-based player engagement strategies, the two researchers
improve the (re)playability of these VR simulations to encourage greater player engagement and
retention.

Keywords games user research, patient education, virtual reality

1

Introduction

"Have you heard the one about a bioinformatics researcher and a game design researcher walking into a lab?" Joking
aside, this rare situation actually happened. The bioinformatics researcher brought a virtual reality (VR) experience
they have been working on for the pediatric clinical setting. The game design researcher played the game and observed
a dichotomy between a strong educational foundation and a stark shortcoming in (re)playability. "Playability is a term
used in the design and analysis of video games that describes the quality of a video game in terms of its rules, mechanics,
goals and design. It refers to all the experiences that a player may feel when interacting with a game system." [1] We
have appended "(re)" to the playability term as our goal was to not only encourage initial player engagement, but we
also wanted to explore the player experience upon repeat plays of the games for our case studies. This dichotomy
lead to an observation that games for education requires a balance between simulation and gameplay. Discussion of
this observation provokes a redevelopment of the gaming experience which pulls from the game design researcher’s
knowledge of engaging the player and the bioinformatics researcher’s knowledge of the medical ﬁeld.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

2 Background

VR is a developing ﬁeld of technology which portrays a virtual space or collection of objects as an interactive world [2].
The technology immerses users in a virtual environment and provides sensory feedback to invoke a feeling that the
created environment is a real physical environment. The sensory feedback provided by VR empowers learners to be an
active participant in their education, making the tool ideal for scholarship [3, 4]. VR has been applied to many different
educational settings including pilot training [5], urban planning [3], physics education [6] and primary school math and
science education [7].

2.1 VR in a Clinical Setting

Recently, VR instruction expanded beyond the conventional curriculum to the clinical setting for use by both patients
and physicians [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In 2000, VR made its debut in health care when SnowWorldVR was developed to
act as an alternative analgesic for burn patients [13]. This original application of VR to medicine paved the way for
several more applications developed for pain treatment, physician education and patient education [11, 12, 14, 15].
Increased implementation of VR in a clinical setting has been shown to decrease patient anxiety by increasing patient
understanding and by acting as a distraction during painful procedures [9, 13, 15, 16]. While the technology was
originally applied to areas of general medicine, recent applications in pediatrics have shown similar effects, decreasing
patient anxiety and pain [15, 17].

Unfortunately, most VR applications developed for medicine focus fully on the gaming experience [14], giving them
little educational value, or are replications of medical procedures [9, 11, 12] making them boring for children . To our
knowledge, there has been no VR experience developed to educate young patients about their illness by combining both
simulation based education and the domain of Games User Research (GUR).

2.2 Games User Research

Games User Research (GUR) is a branch of the broader area of Games Research. GUR focuses on the use of research
methods drawn from Human Computer Interaction (HCI) research, while integrated with the games speciﬁc parameters.
For example, in HCI user experience studies do not rely as heavily on engagement or entertainment factors as much
as GUR do. Drachen, Mizra-Babaei, and Nacke, in their opening chapter to “Games User Research,” deﬁne GUR as
“an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of practice and research concerned with ensuring the optimal quality of usability and user
experience (UX) in video games.” [18]

The challenge with GUR is that “[if] game development were an ancient temple, the three biggest central pillars would
be design, art, and programming.” [18] Contributing to these central columns would be almost every other discipline
including sociology, psychology, biology, medicine, earth sciences, law studies, economics, and almost every other
form of research. GUR is like “a strong vibe that has its tendrils spread across the vast majority of columns, supporting
each of them at the same time. . . ” [18] Because of the breadth of analysis that is considered in GUR, there are a growing
number of research methods that researchers will use to devise an accurate and appropriate test of game playability. In
Chapter 7, “An Overview of GUR Methods,” Medlock discusses two approaches to curating speciﬁc GUR playability
tests: cookbook and structural. [18] For our purposes, we realized that because we were working with a completed
version of the game, we needed to consider post-launch GUR techniques. In his chapter on post-launch GUR, Ian
Livingston, introduces the use of Grounded Theory as a method for researching after the project has wrapped up [18].
"Grounded Theory is as systematic qualitative methodology where a theoretical framework is developed through the
analysis of a rich qualitative data source." [19]

In our case, we had a version of our game, LeukemiaSIM, that was ready for revision. The game, in its initial form,
aimed to educate pediatric leukemia patients and their families about leukemia physiology and pathophysiology. The
primary version of LeukemiaSIM consisted of a school environment where players could interact with nine unique
blood cell characters and play mini games that reﬂected the physiology of each cell. There was also a section where
players could experience unhealthy blood cell division under cancer pathophysiology and play mini games to "treat" the
cancer. For our revised edition of the game, we focused on the main gaming environment where players interacted
with the blood cell characters and the red blood cell oxygenation mini game, because we felt these two scenes were
applicable to the broadest audience and would have the largest impact on patient understanding of leukemia physiology.
Focusing on these game scenes also gave us a chance to take a reﬂective position on the research, while at the same
time, using these reﬂections to design and rationalize new creative directions for the use case games we examined
without having to examine the whole game.

2

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

3 Process

3.1 Overview

In this paper we explore two case studies that are part of a larger set of games and interactive experiences to help
children better understand Leukemia called LeukemiaSIM. The two case studies are mini-games that appear in the
context of LeukemiaSIM. This ﬁrst, the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game, was created to help the player better
understand how blood cells oxygenate as they move from the lungs to the heart before their journey on to the rest of the
body. The second, the Blood Cell Interaction Zone, was created to explore the cellular makeup of human blood by
anthropomorphising the various types of cells in context with the role they play. Each of these mini-games targeted
speciﬁc knowledge based learning outcomes identiﬁed by the research team. With both case studies, we review the
current state of the games, ask questions about the efﬁcacy of the interactions and gameplay, and devise improvements
that would serve to enhance gameplay engagement, encourage repeat playability, and continue to align with the learning
outcomes.

3.2 Case Study 1: Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game

The Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game was one of the ﬁrst mini games designed for LeukemiaSIM. The goal of
the game was to collect oxygen as you travelled through a blood vessel. In designing the game, we wanted users to
understand the role of red blood cells in oxygen transport and looked to provide a visual metaphor for the journey
taken by the red blood cell as it travels from one end of the heart to another. The original version of our Red Blood
Cell Oxygenation Game consisted of travelling through a continuous vessel in a magic school bus as an homage to the
famous series of books and animations called "The Magic School Bus". [20] The player’s goal was to collect as many
characters representing oxygen as possible before crashing into three obstacles that appeared at set intervals.

Starting point - since the game was already a well-planned, and implemented experience, our ﬁrst session was an
overview of the mini game and an exploration of what was working and what was not from the perspective of someone
who had never played the game before. We identiﬁed a few areas that were unclear or not effective. We also asked
the question, when is a visual metaphor appropriate and when is it better to use the real object (i.e. the red blood cell;
oxygen molecules)?

In game design and production, creative ideas reveal themselves or die off throughout the design and development
process. Authors refer to the “iterative design” process as a general knowledge concept and will typically outline this
process in similar ways. [21, 22] This process follows the basic cycle: come up with an idea, build it, playtest it, reject
or keep it, repeat.

We followed this iterative process and integrated some analysis to idea conception. During the ﬁrst meeting, the game
design researcher, suggested “returning back to basics” and began asking some questions about the game. These
questions aligned to analyses derived from the “10 Usability Heuristics Applied to Video Games” from the Nielsen
Norman Group [23]. Speciﬁcally, we addressed the following outcomes:

1. What is the demographic of the player?

2. What is the purpose of the game?

3. Why would the player want to play the game?

4. Why would the player want to play the game more than once?

Thoughts about these questions started a conversation that identiﬁed inconsistencies between the intention of the game
and the realized gameplay experience. We discovered the following challenges within the ﬁrst implementation (Figure
1):

• The concept of driving a bus in a blood cell to gather oxygen molecules was a big narrative stretch that required

signiﬁcant backstory and exposition.

• The gameplay was not very exciting. The sensation of movement was lacking in the gameworld and the

physics of driving a huge bus dragged on the whole experience.

• The learning outcomes were external to the gameplay rather than embedded in the interactions in the game.

We began to ask some speculative questions about how we could better address the players’ sense of fun and engagement.
Additionally, we wondered how we could ﬁnd authentic ways of embedding the learning outcomes into the gameplay.
We started asking:

3

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

Figure 1: The original Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game. a) The menu and instruction screen seen by the player when
they ﬁrst enter the game. b) A visualization of the blood vessel transport. c) Illustration of a player about to collect an
oxygenation character. d) The ﬁnishing screen viewed by the player once they reached the end of the level.

• What if we did not use a bus and instead the player was controlling a red blood cell to pick up the oxygen?

What would that feel like?

• What if we could make the movement through the blood vessel feel faster?
• What sort of gameplay mechanics are going to be the most interesting? A continuous play with items gradually

getting harder to gather, or a level by level with a beginning and ending?

• What if the goal was to oxygenate as many red blood cells as possible as you pass by the lungs on your way

back to the heart and into the rest of the body?

We also discussed a change to the playable dynamic. We noted that the idea of driving a bus down a blood vessel and
running over oxygen characters to pick them up seemed to have some potential unintended consequences (Figure 1b).
A bus is big and cumbersome. The act of driving over characters seems cruel. So, we decided to brainstorm some
ideas about what we could do to make the gameplay more exciting. The game designer, suggested a skating or surﬁng
metaphor. Being in the blood ﬂow, and guiding yourself to the oxygen seemed more action oriented. This resonated for
the bioinformatics researcher, who mentioned that surﬁng was one of the original ideas she had. Then we happened
upon the idea that the player could be surﬁng on a red blood cell. This meant we could also create a simulation of the
actual interaction between the oxygen and red blood cells binding. Now the game became a challenge to oxygenate as
many blood cells as possible. Each cell could only trap four oxygen molecules, so the player would jump from one cell
to another and rack up as many blood cells as possible in the trip from the lungs to the heart.

Our discussion resulted in a new set of gameplay rules, environment design choices, and character elements. First, we
modiﬁed the surroundings of the player to better reﬂect veritable red blood cell transport during oxygen collection. In

4

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

the original iteration of the game, the player was carried through a continuous forward facing tube that was generated at
runtime (Figure 1b,c). This surrounding was not representative of red blood cell locomotion because blood vessels
grow, shrink, wind and diverge [25]. We redesigned the play course to reﬂect a true blood vessel (Figure 2b) by
modifying a model of the human heart. In particular, we attached a mesh to the human heart model, connecting the
left pulmonary artery to the left pulmonary vein with a hollow surface the player could ride through. This new "blood
vessel" followed a winding pathway that was positioned around the heart model where the lungs would be located. The
vessel ended in a natural and physiologically relevant ﬁnal destination: the left ventricle of the heart which acts as a
pump passing oxygenated blood to the aorta (Figure 2e). The twists and turns of this new vessel were not only more
engaging for the player, but the ﬁnal destination gave a natural new objective: to collect all the characters representing
oxygen before reaching the ﬁnal destination: the left ventricle. This new objective allowed us to remove the obstacles,
further improving the anatomical correctness of the pathway.

Figure 2: The updated Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game. a) The menu and instruction screen seen by the player when
they ﬁrst enter the game. b) A visualization of the player riding the blood cell through the vessel. c) Illustration of a
player about to collect an oxygenation character. d) The mini map illustrating where the player is in the vessel. e) The
pause screen which allows a player to return to the main area. f) The ﬁnishing screen viewed by the player once they
reached the end of the level. Notice the player score is displayed.

We then changed the method of player transport to a red blood cell that the player could surf on as they went through
the vessel. We designed our red blood cell to have both a cartoon surface structure, shown in most red blood cell
representations, and a hemoglobin protein structure with four heme groups to attach oxygen to taken from an x-ray
crystallography study[26] (Figure 2b). This new outlet for grounding the player enhanced the learning outcomes of
the game by showing scientiﬁc representations of the red blood cell and by allowing for correct placement of oxygen
characters on the hemoglobin structure during gameplay. Additionally, the movement of the player on top of the red
blood cell gave a new feeling of motion that was more exciting and less claustrophobic then the original bus movement.

Next, we worked to improve the environment of the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game by modifying game materials
and textures (Figure 2). We began by changing the base of the vessel to a water texture coloured red. This water texture
refracted light from the skybox giving the appearance of a translucent and pliable duct rather than a sedentary tube. We
added a layer of ﬂowing red water to the bottom of the vessel to simulate natural liquid motion. We tried simulations in

5

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

which the player could dive under this water layer, however, the playability of the game was enhanced by having the
blood cell remain on top of the water. This grounded the player in a known environment and a feeling of movement,
invoked by the water texture, was sustained (this movement feeling was not as strong when the player went below the
surface of the water). We deliberately decided that playability was more important than the physiological correctness of
being in the blood liquid layer, and removed any abilities to go under the water. The texture of the skybox was also
modiﬁed to look like blood vessels to further exemplify the feeling of being in a human body.

We also modiﬁed the text interface, which outlined game rules and served as an access point for exiting the Red Blood
Cell Oxygenation Game, to make it more user friendly and straightforward. We reduced the original instruction text
(Figure 1a), which was long and confusing, to a single line (Figure 2a). Buttons were moved to the bottom of text
interfaces to reduce confusion and allow for a natural reading ﬂow. Lastly, all interactive screens were simpliﬁed by
reducing or removing images and limiting the number of elements that could be interacted with (Figure 2a,e,f).

3.3 Round Two! Further Iterations

Once, these changes to the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game were implemented, the bioinformatics researcher and
the game designer met again to discuss how the game could be further reﬁned. Our second round of discussions began
by asking open ended questions focused on describing the demographic and objectives of the game. This is a variation
of Game User Testing Heuristics [28] which was modiﬁed to ﬁt our conversation needs. The game designer asked the
bioinformatics researcher to take the whole thing back to the basics of why she built the game in the ﬁrst place. Our
discussion was not about justifying the choices made in the current version of the game, but more about reﬂecting on
the original motivations. We discussed who the game was made for? What the game was about and what we wanted the
player to remember about the game? Why a player would want to play this game? And, where the game would be
played? At home? At school? At the hospital?

The bioinformatics researcher explained that the entire LeukemiaSIM experience was developed for children aged 9 - 12
currently battling or in remission for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game would
also ﬁt this demographic. She described that the secondary audience for the game were interested family members who
wanted to become educated about acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The bioinformatics researcher saw the video game
being played primarily with the assistance of a child life specialist describing the learning outcomes according to their
professional training. Consequently, the game was to be generally distributed to and played in hospitals, but we also
saw potential for patients to play the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game in their own homes. The primary goal of the
game was education on red blood cell oxygen transport and anatomy. Literature has shown that enjoyment of learning
leads to greater retention, so we also aimed to make an enjoyable but challenging experience [24]. We concluded that
players would most likely be playing the game to distract themselves from chemotherapy treatments and the game
needed to be sculpted accordingly.

Our discussion led to thoughts about the types of games and the challenges that players expect to deal with. For example,
a game that has a beginning, middle, and end, like a Super Mario Bros. level, will have different design needs over an
inﬁnitely increasing difﬁculty game like Flappy Bird or Tetris, where you play until you gain the highest score or die.
We decided that a game with a beginning, middle, and end was most appropriate for our experience because red blood
cells have a limited amount of time to oxygenate as they pass through pulmonary arteries en route to the heart and opted
for a timed game to replicate this scenario.

To add challenges to our timed game we implemented a scoring mechanism based on the number of oxygen characters
collected en route to the heart and the amount of time it took the player to reach the heart (Figure 2f). We gave
players visual cues of their score along the way through a display with a clock and red blood cells that ﬁlled out as
characters were collected (Figure 2b). At the end of the game, we modiﬁed the closing screen to display a player’s
score, ultimately increasing replayability by giving a challenge for the next time around. Replayability was also
increased by incorporating two levels of difﬁculty which varied baseline speed and oxygen placement, allowing for
players to advance from one level to the next as their skills improve.

In this new iteration of gameplay we further incorporated a minimap (Figure 2d) to ground players in space and to
show an exterior view of the vessels. We designed the mini map to mirror anatomical drawings of the heart, further
increasing the educational value of the game. On the mini map the player was represented with a white dot on a ﬂat
ﬁgure showing the circulation. This ﬁgure transitioned from blue to red as oxygen was collected, just as anatomy ﬁgures
would be drawn in a textbook.

With this new and improved gameplay, our discussions began to naturally move from the major gameplay elements, to
ﬁne-tuning. We noticed that the ﬁgures meant to represent oxygen looked too much like snowmen (Figure 3a). Out
of concern for ambiguity and fear that children might think that red blood cells deliver snow rather than oxygen, we

6

redesigned the characters to have a side-by-side orientation in which two separate ﬁgures are holding hands (Figure
3b). We also tweaked some of the textures to further exemplify the feeling of movement through a vessel.

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

Figure 3: The oxygen character reﬁnement. a) The oxygen character in its original form which we noticed looked a lot
like a snowman. b) the updated oxygen character, reﬁned to remove ambiguity.

As further development opportunities present themselves, we can see a number of production quality enhancements that
will improve the experience. It is important to note that without correcting the major game design problems, reﬁning
artwork or enhancing frame rates would not have made the game more engaging and playable.

Part of having an effective iterative cycle of production is knowing what features need attention in what order of priority.
It’s a bit like carpentry. Putting in the cabinetry does not make much sense if the framing of the walls is not complete.
Knowing what ﬁxes should take precedence over others is key to a successful iterative production process.

With the crucial features implemented and a testable version of this game available, we moved on to the next case study
in order to take our fresh experience in our iterative production process and apply it to another interactive experience:
the Blood Cell Interaction Zone.

3.4 Case Study 2: Blood Cell Interaction Zone

To introduce players to the different kinds of blood cells and their role in leukemia, an area was set up within
LeukemiaSIM where players could interact with seven important blood cells (Figure 4). Originally, this environment
was designed as a school hallway where players could swing their remotes in a running action and walk up to characters
designed to represent the blood cells (Figure 4a). Once facing the characters, players could press a button on their
remote and listen to the characters speak metaphorically about their role in physiological processes including oxygen
transport, clotting and host-immunity (Figure 4b,c,d).

We decided to use this zone as our second case study because the environment lent itself well to more conventional forms
of instruction, which Wickens suggests are essential to learner retention of experiential learning in VR environments
[27]. Since changes to all levels could not be made at this stage, by ameliorating this environment, we felt we would
have the largest impact on player education. Additionally, the area acted as a home base where players could access
other mini games, including the aforementioned Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game.

We followed a similar iterative process to the one outlined in Case Study 1 when reﬁning this space. We started by
asking questions to answer who, what, why and where the interactive was going to be played. The game designer
again interviewed the bioinformatics researchers to derive the purpose of the interaction and what we were looking
at. Questions included who would be interacting with this environment? Where would the player be situated when

7

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

Figure 4: The original Blood Cell Interaction Zone. a) The main interaction hallway with the 7 blood cell characters.
b) Interaction with the red blood cell character. Shows interaction to interact with the red blood cell character. c)
Interaction with the megakaryocyte cell characters. d) Interaction with the red blood cell character.

interacting with the characters? Why should the player have this interaction? And, when would the interaction take
place?

The bioinformatics researcher explained that this interactive was developed to initiate player recognition of various
blood cells present in a drop of blood. We noticed the school hallway was a large narrative step as the environment
was not representative of blood. The game design researcher mused over the idea of making the surrounding more
realistic and actually moving through a blood drop. We discussed this idea, but noticed that gameplay navigation might
be a challenge because a natural drop of blood would have cells above the player which could be hard to reach. Then
the game design researcher suggested putting the blood sample on a slide which the player could interact with in two
dimensions.

This led to a conversation about changing the environment to a lab. We noticed that children have a lot of fun of
interacting with lab equipment such as microscopes and knew this idea would be more visually interesting than using
an already too familiar classroom setting. We discussed the gameplay of the environment and came up with a new
scenario where the player would interact with a microscope with zoom buttons. Once the player zoomed in several
times they would enter the microscope and begin to interact with the blood cell characters. We ended by pondering the
educational component of the interactive and the need to provide a way to get to the mini-games. In order to make this
a more playable level, we chose a “collect them all” approach to ﬁnding and identifying all of the types of cells in the
sample on the slide.

We began our modiﬁcations of this game with signiﬁcant changes to the setting (Figure 5). We found a model of a
typical biology lab online and adjusted the surroundings for our purposes. We isolated a microscope in the environment

8

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

Figure 5: The updated Blood Cell Interaction Zone. a) Interaction with the microscope object in the laboratory area. b)
Interaction with the zoom buttons of the microscope interaction. Computer screen shows zoomed in cells. c) Red Blood
Cell cell character description and interaction. d) Interaction with the "macro me" button and display of the character in
micro form. e) Computer screen displaying the plasma slide.

and attached an interactive computer screen which showed blood cells as various zoom distances (Figure 5a,b). We
created a model of a microscope slide with a blood droplet and placed it under the microscope. We mirrored this blood
droplet onto the computer screen and added zoom in and zoom out buttons. When the zoom in button was pressed, we
changed the image on the computer screen to a veritable blood microscopy sample. We added the capacity to zoom
into the blood a second time, to further amplify the images. Once the images were at full ampliﬁcation, we added
functionality for the player to enter the blood cell slide (Figure 5b,d).

Once the player was inside the blood cell slide, we instantiated a new interactive with the blood cell characters. In this
zone, a green highlight appeared on each of the characters when the player pointed towards them. The player could
then click on these characters to bring up the virtual information card (Figure 5c). On these cards we scribed the roles
of each blood cell using descriptions analogous to those on a playing card. Items included character names, abilities,
armour and aliases. Each of these descriptions mirrored true blood cell physiology. For example, the red blood cell card
had the name Ryth O’Cyte to represent erythrocyte (the scientiﬁc name for a red blood cell). The abilities on the card
were "Transports oxygen from the lungs to the muscles", the armour was hemoglobin and the alias was "Red Blood
Cell". We also added a button to the bottom of these interactive surfaces giving the ability to enter the mini game of the
character.

Once the lab environment had been created and interactions with the blood cell characters were established, we met
again to discuss how we could reﬁne the environment. In this meeting we focused on the playability of the environment,
asking questions such as will interacting with a computer screen make the microscope analogy confusing? How will
players know how many blood cells there are to collect? Is there a way to implement levels into our interaction for
younger players? What does locomotion within the gaming environment look like?

These questions led to a discussion about reﬁning elements of the play environment. We discussed moving the zoom
in and zoom out buttons from the computer screen to the microscope to illustrate that the player was interacting with

9

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

the miscroscope not the computer. The game design researcher, also suggested we might have multiple microscope
slides for different levels of play. This gave the bioinformatics researcher the idea of creating slides for the different
blood components. Often when researchers analyze blood samples they will centrifuge the samples to separate white
blood cells from red blood cells and plasma. The bioinformatics researcher saw this process as an ideal way to separate
out the less common white blood cells from the abundant red blood cells in a manner that was scientiﬁcally accurate.
Younger players could then select the white blood cell slides to ﬁnd these less common cell types if they were having a
hard time accessing the various characters in their initial experimentation with the common blood droplet.

We also discussed how integration of locomotion into the gaming environment could help players ﬁnd the blood
cell characters. The bioinformatics researcher was concerned with integrating locomotion because her experience
with children in VR environments suggested they did not understand typical VR movement actions. This led to a
conversation about other forms of locomotion and scientiﬁcally appropriate forms of locomotion in our micro-sized
simulated environment. The game designer had the idea of adding random player movements, much like random
molecular translational motion might occur on a blood slide.

These discussions led to a second iteration of the Blood Cell Interaction Zone. First, we moved the interactive zoom
in and zoom out buttons next to the microscope to illustrate that the player was interacting with the microscope not a
computer (Figure 5b). This re-positioning of the buttons, not only increased the playability of the environment but
also led to a happy accident. When we moved the buttons we kept them the same size in the blood cell interactive as
when the player was in the microscope talking to the blood cell characters. This change in scale led to giant buttons that
further conveyed the experience of being tiny (Figure 5d). The large microscope buttons (now used to exit the micro
environment), coupled with the giant laboratory equipment, exempliﬁed the pretense that the only thing that changed
size was the player.

In this iteration, we added slow random movement so that the player may see more of the environment when hunting
for characters. This gave the player multiple perspectives and increased the likelihood that the player would come in
contact with less common blood cell characters. We added a count to the bottom of the interaction screens to make the
player aware of the characters they had already found and how many more they needed to discover. Finally, we created
four different blood samples: pure blood, red blood cells, white blood cells and plasma, which could be exchanged to
change the number and types of blood cells in the environment (Figure 5e).

Once these new changes were implemented, we met a ﬁnal time to reﬁne the gaming experience. In this ﬁnal meeting
we talked over the artistic elements of the environment that would enhance the interactivity of the zone. Suggestions
included incorporating animations that mirrored the actions of the different blood cells into the environment and the
addition of voice commands to enhance instruction.

While our newest version of the gaming experience does not yet include voice commands, we did create animations to
reﬂect the abilities of each blood cell character. For example, the red blood cell character card now has an illustration of
the red blood cell character carrying the oxygen characters developed for the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation game.

Like in our reﬁnement of the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation game, we did not consider reﬁning artwork and other
production quality elements at this stage. We were focused on correcting major design elements, and knew that once
these elements were ﬁxed, production quality could easily be added to the gaming experience.

4 Results

Code for the original and updated versions of these two LeukemiaSIM case studies can be accessed from GitHub: https:
//github.com/ebrintn/LeukemiaSIM. To modify the programs Unity version 2019.1.12 (https://unity3d.
com/get-unity/download) and Steam VR (https://store.steampowered.com/app/250820/SteamVR/) are
required. Users will also require VR hardware including a Vive Pro headset and a computer with a graphics card with
DX10 capabilities. Once software and hardware requirements are met, players can run and modify the systems within the
Unity development kit by selecting either the "OriginalSimulation" or "UpdatedSimulation" folder in the game selection
window of Unity. Pre-compiled original and updated games can respectfully be accessed from https://ebrintn.
itch.io/leukemiasim-originalversion and https://ebrintn.itch.io/leukemiasim-updatedversion.
These compiled versions of the games are currently only for the a Windows PC environment.

When comparing the two gaming experiences players and developers will notice several key elements that increased the
playability and educational value of our VR experiences. Players should notice a reﬁnement of scientiﬁc concepts from
the original version of the LeukemiaSIM simulations to the updated version. Originally, when we were developing
LeukemiaSIM we used a lot of analogies that we thought would make the game more approachable for our young
audience. In the redesign process, we noticed that many of these analogies made the games confusing and drew attention
away from the main learning objectives we were trying to incorporate into the games. By returning to veriﬁed science,

10

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

our modiﬁcations not only made the games more applicable to future scientiﬁc inquiry but removed any ambiguity
invoked by misinterpretation of analogies. This was an issue originally brought to our attention by Child Life Specialists
who work directly with patients to help them understand their illnesses.

Similarly, the next major change that players will notice is the use of more authentic models in the updated version of
the LeukemiaSIM games. In our original version of LeukemiaSIM, we developed a gaming experience that mostly
drew from our own life-experiences, a phenomenon characterized by media theorist Marshall McLuhan as "rear-view
mirrorisms" [25]. It is the notion that we naturally gravitate to old ways of doing things when we encounter new
technologies. In our own life we had been to school and on a bus, and thought to incorporate these natural environments
into this new virtual surrounding. However, in VR there is a suspension of disbelief that allows us to enter environments
that we have yet to experience in reality. We are willing to suspend our disbelief because the VR environment is
inherently a magical space where normal rules don’t have to apply. In the new version of LeukemiaSIM we drew on this
suspension of disbelief to put the player inside a microscope and on a blood cell. In the new environment, players could
learn from their surroundings in addition to learning through interactions, increasing the playability and educational
outcomes of the game.

Finally, in redesigning the Blood Cell Oxygenation Game and the Blood Cell Interaction Zone we looked to implement
games that could be played multiple times. In the Blood Cell Oxygenation Game the replayability manifested itself as a
challenge to beat one’s high score. In the Blood Cell Interaction Zone, we added a gaming element of trying to ﬁnd
all the blood cells and created multiple blood slides that could be exchanged to make ﬁnding the characters harder or
easier.By making our environment and the mini-games replayable, learning outcomes could be reinforced with better
knowledge retention.

As a primary playtest for the updated LeukemiaSIM environment, one of our researchers who had seen the LeukemiaSIM
game but had never been in the experience entered the game. This researcher suggested that the modiﬁcations to the
game did make the experience more accessible and interesting. In particular, he really enjoyed the change from the bus
to the blood cell and was pleasantly surprised when he was put inside the laboratory environment. However, it was
suggested that gaming objectives were still ambiguous and verbal prompts telling the player what to do needed to be
implemented.

Future work, outside the scope of our summer project, is required to verify that our modiﬁcations to the gaming
environment enhanced the playability and learning objectives through Games User Research methods. We suggest using
a research approach with two groups of test subjects, each exploring a different version of the game. Game playability
should be assessed using a mixed approach with both quantitative and qualitative measurements that investigate the
effects of playing the game on a player’s understanding of blood cell physiology.

Future development, should also look to reﬁne elements within the game, including expansion of the axis of movement
on the microscope slide and in the blood vessel, which were restrained due to concerns about motion sickness in a VR
state and challenges with physics. In this development, ﬁne-tuning, including changes to frame rate and expansion to
other VR devices, should also be implemented to make the experience more accessible for patients. We also aim to
apply our iterative game design process to the remainder of the LeukemiaSIM mini-games to make a cohesive gaming
experience. Once developed, the full experience should touch on acute lymphoblastic leukemia pathophysiology and
physiology using realistic science concepts developed to enhance player engagement in VR.

5 Conclusion

As we move forward, it is important to reﬂect on the fact that virtual learning is independent of conventional learning
and needs to manifest itself to reﬂect the virtual space. Instead of implementing environments that mirror reality, game
developers should think outside of the box and create spaces that are otherwise inaccessible. These spaces should
reﬂect scientiﬁc concepts to enhance hands-on-learning, but should also incorporate learning environments that are
inaccessible outside of the virtual space. Every VR headset is a metaphorical Magic School Bus.

In our reﬁnement of the Red Blood Cell Oxygenation Game and the Blood Cell Interaction Zone, we redesigned the
virtual space to better reﬂect science and enable hands-on-learning by utilizing player engagement techniques. We
believe that our new games and simulations will provide memorable learning experiences for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia patients and their families, as they explore scientiﬁcally accurate representations of blood cells in a virtual
world.

11

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

References

[1] José Luis González Sánchez, Francisco Luis Gutiérrez Vela, Francisco Montero Simarro, and Natalia Padilla-Zea.
Playability: analysing user experience in video games. Behaviour & Information Technology, 31(10):1033–1054,
October 2012.

[2] William R. Sherman and Alan B. Craig. Chapter 1 - Introduction to Virtual Reality. In William R. Sherman
and Alan B. Craig, editors, Understanding Virtual Reality (Second Edition), The Morgan Kaufmann Series in
Computer Graphics, pages 4–58. Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, January 2019.

[3] Doug A. Bowman, Larry F. Hodges, Don Allison, and Jean Wineman. The Educational Value of an Information-
Rich Virtual Environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 8(3):317–331, June 1999. Publisher:
MIT Press.

[4] Veronica S. Pantelidis. Reasons to Use Virtual Reality in Education and Training Courses and a Model to
Determine When to Use Virtual Reality. Themes in Science and Technology Education, 2(1-2):59–70, October
2010. Number: 1-2.

[5] Ilkay Yavrucuk, Eser Kubali, and Onur Tarimci. A low cost ﬂight simulator using virtual reality tools. IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, 26(4):10–14, April 2011. Conference Name: IEEE Aerospace and
Electronic Systems Magazine.

[6] R. Loftin, M. Engleberg, and R. Benedetti. Applying virtual reality in education: A prototypical virtual physics
laboratory. In Proceedings of 1993 IEEE Research Properties in Virtual Reality Symposium, pages 67–74, San
Jose, California, USA, 1993. IEEE.

[7] A. Johnson, T. Moher, Y.J. Cho, Y.J. Lin, D. Haas, and J. Kim. Augmenting elementary school education with
VR. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 22(2):6–9, March 2002. Conference Name: IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications.

[8] Hsiu-Mei Huang, Ulrich Rauch, and Shu-Sheng Liaw. Investigating learners’ attitudes toward virtual reality
learning environments: Based on a constructivist approach. Computers & Education, 55(3):1171–1182, November
2010.

[9] Yobelli A. Jimenez, Steven Cumming, Wei Wang, Kirsty Stuart, David I. Thwaites, and Sarah J. Lewis. Patient
education using virtual reality increases knowledge and positive experience for breast cancer patients undergoing
radiation therapy. Supportive Care in Cancer, 26(8):2879–2888, August 2018.

[10] Vivek C Pandrangi, Brandon Gaston, Nital P Appelbaum, Francisco C Albuquerque Jr, Mark M Levy, and Robert A
Larson. The Application of Virtual Reality in Patient Education. Annals of Vascular Surgery, 59:184–189, August
2019. Publisher: Elsevier.

[11] Bridget M. Kuehn. Virtual and Augmented Reality Put a Twist on Medical Education. JAMA, 319(8):756–758,

February 2018.

[12] Martin Reznek, Phillip Harter, and Thomas Krummel. Virtual reality and simulation: training the future emergency
physician. Academic Emergency Medicine: Ofﬁcial Journal of the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine,
9(1):78–87, January 2002.

[13] H. G. Hoffman, D. R. Patterson, and G. J. Carrougher. Use of virtual reality for adjunctive treatment of adult burn
pain during physical therapy: a controlled study. The Clinical Journal of Pain, 16(3):244–250, September 2000.

[14] P. Bridge, R. M. Appleyard, J. W. Ward, R. Philips, and A. W. Beavis. The development and evaluation of a
virtual radiotherapy treatment machine using an immersive visualisation environment. Computers & Education,
49(2):481–494, September 2007. Publisher: Elsevier Ltd.

[15] Kathryn A. Birnie, Yalinie Kulandaivelu, Lindsay Jibb, Petra Hroch, Karyn Positano, Simon Robertson, Fiona
Campbell, Oussama Abla, and Jennifer Stinson. Usability Testing of an Interactive Virtual Reality Distraction
Intervention to Reduce Procedural Pain in Children and Adolescents With Cancer :. Journal of Pediatric Oncology
Nursing, 35(6):406–416, June 2018. Publisher: SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA.

[16] Hunter G. Hoffman, Gloria T. Chambers, Walter J. Meyer, Lisa L. Arceneaux, William J. Russell, Eric J. Seibel,
Todd L. Richards, Sam R. Sharar, and David R. Patterson. Virtual reality as an adjunctive non-pharmacologic
analgesic for acute burn pain during medical procedures. Annals of Behavioral Medicine: A Publication of the
Society of Behavioral Medicine, 41(2):183–191, April 2011.

[17] Barbara Atzori, Hunter G. Hoffman, Laura Vagnoli, David R. Patterson, Wadee Alhalabi, Andrea Messeri,
and Rosapia Lauro Grotto. Virtual Reality Analgesia During Venipuncture in Pediatric Patients With Onco-
Hematological Diseases. Frontiers in Psychology, 9:2508, 2018.

12

A PREPRINT - SEPTEMBER 25, 2020

[18] Anders Drachen, Pejman Mizra-Babei, and Lennart E. Nacke. GUR Book – The Games User Research Book.

Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 2018.

[19] Ian Livingston. Post-launch in Games User Research, volume 1. Oxford University Press, March 2018.
[20] Joanna Cole and Bruce Degen. The Magic School Bus | Books, Experiments, Printables, Apps | Scholastic Kids,

2020.

[21] Tracy Fullerton. Game Design Workshop: a Playcentric Approach to Creating Innovative Games, Third Edition.

CRC Press, Oakville, 2013. OCLC: 967110587.

[22] Mary Flanagan. Critical play radical game design. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2009. OCLC: 1162028111.
[23] Alita Joyce. 10 Usability Heuristics Applied to Video Games, May 2019. Library Catalog: www.nngroup.com.
[24] Michail N. Giannakos. Enjoy and learn with educational games: Examining factors affecting learning performance.

Computers & Education, 68:429–439, October 2013.

[25] Marshall McLuhan and Quentin. Fiore. War and peace in the global village; an inventory of some of the current

spastic situations that could be eliminated by more feedforward. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1968.

13

