© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

Data Visceralization: Enabling Deeper Understanding of Data
Using Virtual Reality

Benjamin Lee, Dave Brown, Bongshin Lee, Christophe Hurter, Steven Drucker, and Tim Dwyer

0
2
0
2

v
o
N
1
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
5
0
0
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Prototypes of data visceralizations in VR based on popular representations of physical measurements. (a) Scorecard of results
in seconds from Olympic Men’s 100 m. (b) Data visceralization equivalent to experience one-to-one scale of Olympic sprint speeds.
(c) Comparison diagram of tall skyscrapers (© Saggittarius A, CC BY-SA 4.0). (d) Data visceralization equivalent to experience and
compare true one-to-one scale of select skyscrapers.

Abstract— A fundamental part of data visualization is transforming data to map abstract information onto visual attributes. While this
abstraction is a powerful basis for data visualization, the connection between the representation and the original underlying data (i.e.,
what the quantities and measurements actually correspond with in reality) can be lost. On the other hand, virtual reality (VR) is being
increasingly used to represent real and abstract models as natural experiences to users. In this work, we explore the potential of using
VR to help restore the basic understanding of units and measures that are often abstracted away in data visualization in an approach
we call data visceralization. By building VR prototypes as design probes, we identify key themes and factors for data visceralization.
We do this ﬁrst through a critical reﬂection by the authors, then by involving external participants. We ﬁnd that data visceralization is an
engaging way of understanding the qualitative aspects of physical measures and their real-life form, which complements analytical and
quantitative understanding commonly gained from data visualization. However, data visceralization is most effective when there is a
one-to-one mapping between data and representation, with transformations such as scaling affecting this understanding. We conclude
with a discussion of future directions for data visceralization.

Index Terms—Data visceralization, virtual reality, exploratory study

1 INTRODUCTION

Communicating information using stories that employ data visualiza-
tion has been explored extensively in recent years [48,49]. A fundamen-
tal part of data visualization is processing and transforming raw data,
ultimately mapping this abstracted information into attributes repre-
sented in a visualization [11, 17]. This abstraction, while powerful and

• Benjamin Lee and Tim Dwyer are with Monash University. Email:

{benjamin.lee1,tim.dwyer}@monash.edu.

• Dave Brown, Bongshin Lee, and Steven Drucker are with Microsoft

Research. Email: {dave.brown,bongshin,sdrucker}@microsoft.com.

• Christophe Hurter is with ENAC, French Civil Aviation University. Email:

christophe.hurter@enac.fr.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

in many cases necessary, poses a limitation for data based on physical
properties, where the process of measurement causes the connection
between the visualization and the underlying ‘meaning’ of the data to
be lost (i.e., what the data truly represents in the real-world). While
techniques in data-driven storytelling (e.g., [52]) can help establish
context and resolve ambiguity in these cases, these techniques do little
to help people truly understand the underlying data itself. A common
approach used to help improve comprehension of these measures is by
using concrete scales [13]—the association of physical measurements
and quantities with more familiar objects. However, this often relies
on prior knowledge and requires cognitive effort to effectively envision
the desired mental imagery.

To complement these approaches in data visualization and story-
telling, we introduce data visceralization, which we deﬁne as a data-
driven experience which evokes visceral feelings within a user to facili-
tate intuitive understanding of physical measurements and quantities.
By visceral, we mean a “subjective sensation of being there in a scene
depicted by a medium, usually virtual in nature” [3,4]. To illustrate this

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 (Immersive) Data-Driven Storytelling
Segel and Heer [49] coined the term narrative visualization in 2010.
Since then, researchers have explored the design patterns of speciﬁc
genres of narrative visualizations, such as Amini et al. [1] with data
videos and Bach et al. [2] with data comics. In contrast, work by Stolper
et al. [52] characterized the range of recently emerging techniques used
in narrative visualization as a whole. With the increased use of VR and
augmented reality (AR) devices for the purposes of data visualization
and analytics (known as immersive analytics [38]) and for storytelling
in general [10], it is feasible to begin considering how these devices
can be used for immersive data-driven storytelling [25, 33]. Recent
work by Ren et al. [46] has investigated the creation of immersive data
stories, and work by Bastiras et al. [5] of their effectiveness, but these
resort to using simple 2D images in a VR environment rather than
taking full advantage of the device’s capabilities. A VR piece from the
Wall Street Journal [30] remains one of the few compelling examples
of an immersive data story, using a time series of the NASDAQ’s
price/earnings ratio over 21 years as a roller coaster track which the
reader then rides from one end to the other. The story particularly
focuses on the sudden fall in the index as the dot-com bubble began
to burst in 2000, having readers experience this metaphorical fall as a
literal roller coaster drop in VR. In this work, we examine the use of
immersive environments to achieve similar effects of transforming data
into visceral experiences, but in a complementary fashion to existing
data stories. That is, we focus on aiding the understanding of the
underlying data itself through the use of VR, while the narrative and
visualizations of the story set the context, background, and messaging.

2.2 Concrete Scales and Personalization
The use of concrete scales is a popular technique used to aid in com-
prehending unfamiliar units and extreme magnitudes by comparison
to more familiar objects. To formalize this technique, Chevalier et
al. [13] collected and analyzed over 300 graphic compositions found
online. They derived a taxonomy of object types and measure relations,
and identiﬁed common strategies such as using analogies of pairwise
comparison and juxtaposing multiples of smaller objects together. They
discussed the need and challenges of choosing good units, a prob-
lem which Hullman et al. [24] addressed by automatically generating
different re-expression units which may be more familiar to the user.
Concrete scales fundamentally assists in building mental models of
scale. In contrast, we use data visceralization to directly represent the
measure that is being conveyed to the user, effectively skipping this
process altogether.

2.3 Data Physicalization
As compared to information visualization which maps data into visual
marks and variables [11, 17], data physicalization explores how data
can be encoded and presented in tangible, physical artifacts through
its geometric and/or material properties [26, 27]. Although users can
directly experience data in a unique physicalized manner, it still funda-
mentally transforms and remaps abstract data into tangible experiences,
often in equivalents of common visualization types [15, 26, 53]. While
this tangibility may provide beneﬁts for memory or engagement, the
focus is on some higher level conceptual data rather than the physical
property or measure itself. Data physicalization could be well suited for
creating visceral experiences if attributes are represented without trans-
formation, as any physical phenomena can theoretically be fabricated
and subsequently experienced. However, this would be resource inten-
sive and heavily dependent on advances in technology. Indeed, many
museum exhibits construct one-to-one mappings of data phenomena so
that people can understand the underlying data in representation, but
such exhibits are expensive and also can only be experienced by visiting
them. Therefore technologies such as VR are well suited for visceral-
ization, overcoming barriers such as fabrication cost and physical space
restrictions through use of virtual locomotion techniques [32].

2.4 Immersion and Presence in VR
VR and immersive technologies as a whole have been available for
many decades, and have been extensively studied for their impact on

Fig. 2. Our conceptual data visceralization pipeline in relation to the
information visualization pipeline [11]. Both run in parallel to each other,
with data visceralization aimed at complementing data visualization.

concept, consider the scenarios depicted in Fig. 1(a,c). Many of us are
familiar with 100 m sprint times, but understanding the ‘ground truth’—
how fast they are actually running—is elusive. Similarly, images or
diagrams showcasing tall buildings such as skyscrapers are common,
but mentally envisioning what these actually look like without prior
knowledge is challenging. In these scenarios, only by seeing the ac-
tual sprinter or building will achieve this truth. In a sense, seeing—or
more generally, experiencing—is believing. With virtual reality (VR)
technology rapidly advancing and becoming more readily available, it
offers an unprecedented opportunity for achieving these visceral ex-
periences in a manner that is both cost effective and compelling. As
depicted in Fig. 1(b,d), we can now simulate what it’s like to have
Olympic sprinters run right past you, or the feeling of being next to
one of these skyscrapers. From these experiences, a thorough under-
standing of these measures and quantities may be achieved, with data
visualization and visceralization existing hand-in-hand to provide both
quantitative (i.e., analytical reasoning) and qualitative (i.e., the ground
truth) understanding of the data (Fig. 2).

In this work, we explore this concept of data visceralization. We
develop six VR prototypes as design probes based on existing data
stories and visualizations speciﬁcally chosen to explore a range of
different measures and phenomena. We critically reﬂect on these design
probes, identifying key themes and factors for data visceralization such
as: the appropriate types of measures and quantities; the ranges of
magnitudes of physical phenomena that are suitable; and the situations
where they are effective or not. We expand this reﬂection through
sessions with external participants to gain feedback on the value and
intricacies of data visceralization.We conclude by discussing multiple
aspects of data visceralizations, along with future work in the area.

In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:

• The introduction of the novel concept of data visceralization, and its
applications for understanding the data that underlies visualizations
• A set of prototype examples to demonstrate the concept and charac-

terize the experiences

• An exploration into the factors and considerations behind data viscer-
alization, through both a critical reﬂection by the authors and external
feedback from participants

2 RELATED WORK

While our work focuses on virtual reality (VR), the concept of data
visceralization can be applied much more broadly. There are other non-
VR oriented methods of helping people understand a unit or measure
such as scale models, immersive IMAX ﬁlms, museum exhibits [41], or
ﬁrst hand experiences. In this section, we discuss data visceralization
in the context of other related ﬁelds.

2

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

human perception. Core to these technologies are the notions of immer-
sion and presence, where immersion is a characteristic of the technology
that enables a vivid illusion of reality to the user, and presence is the
state of consciousness of being in the virtual environment [50,51]. Pres-
ence is a form of visceral communication that is primal but also difﬁcult
to describe [28]. This notion of presence and viscerally believing that
the virtual world is real is what we aim to leverage with visceraliza-
tion. VR devices have proven effective enough in doing this that they
have been used in applications such as psychological treatment [54],
journalism [14], and military training [34]. Moreover, VR and AR has
been used in scenarios where spatial representations of 3D objects are
necessary, such as in 3D modeling [39] and medical imaging [59].

2.5 Human Perceptual Psychology and Pyschophysics

The sense of presence within VR draws on principles of Gibsonian
psychology [19] which ties human perception and movement to the
overall comprehension of the environment. When the scene changes as
result of a change in our head position, we perceive that as movement
through an environment. Given the focus on the stimuli which simulate
the physical measurements and quantities in data visceralization, we
draw upon high level concepts from the extensive ﬁeld of psychophysics
[21], most notably the notion of human perceptual limits and how
this may impact the ranges of stimuli used. We use this notion to
systematically scope our design probes in the next section.

3 DESIGN PROBES INTO DATA VISCERALIZATION

To explore and better deﬁne the concept of data visceralization, we
developed a set of VR prototypes using the Unity3D game engine. We
critically reﬂect on these prototypes, with each prototype requiring
1 to 2 weeks to create, test, and critique. These design probes were
conducted using an ASUS Windows Mixed Reality Headset (HC102) in
an open space free of obstructions. Each prototype was adapted either
from existing stories published in online journals and news articles, or
from popular data-driven graphics/visualizations. We strove to test a
range of different scenarios to explore data visceralizations as much as
possible. In this section, we describe six of these design probes, which
we refer to as examples for simplicity and abbreviate as E1
, E2 ,
. The ﬁrst half focuses on scenarios
E3
with common types and scales of physical phenomena, not requiring
any scaling or transformation to be readily perceived in VR. The second
half investigates scenarios that required some form of transformation
into VR, such as scaling down extreme values and representing abstract
measures. While we describe, show pictures, and include video of these
examples, one needs to experience them in a VR setup to assess the
data visceralization experience. Therefore, we made these available in
the supplementary material and on a public GitHub repository1.

, and E6

, E4

, E5

E1

– Speed: Olympic Men’s 100 m

Usain Bolt holds the world record in the Olympics Men’s 100 m with
his performance at the 2012 London Olympic Games at a time of
9.63 seconds. One Race, Every Medalist Ever by the New York Times
[45] puts Bolt’s result into perspective by comparing it with those of all
other Olympic medalists since 1896. While this is commonly shown
on a tabular layout (Fig. 1a), the story shows the relative distance
away from the ﬁnish line each sprinter would be when Bolt ﬁnishes,
highlighting the wide margins between him and the competition. This
is shown in a video rendered with 3D computer generated graphics
(Fig. 3a) and an accompanying scatterplot-like visualization. This
relative distance helps to quantitatively compare how much faster Bolt
is than the rest. However, neither the visualization nor video give an
accurate notion of just how fast Olympic sprinters can run. While
watching it live in person may provide this, most people will not have
the opportunity to do so, let alone stand on the track during the event,
and it is impossible to resurrect runners from the last 100 years.

We based our prototype on the original story’s video in a virtual
environment at real-world scale (Fig. 3b). The user can play, pause,
and restart the race, causing each sprinter to run down the track at their

1https://github.com/benjaminchlee/Data-Visceralization-Prototypes

3

. (a) ‘Photo ﬁnish’ of Olympic sprinters
Fig. 3. Illustrative images of E1
(adapted from [45]). (b) Overview of sprinters running down the track at
real scale. (c) Same perspective but using human-sized cubes instead
of humanoid models. (d) Experiencing the race from the perspective of
the slowest sprinter. (e) Sprinters superimposed on top of one another.
(f) Floating labels above each sprinter providing quantitative measures
and values.

average speed. We initially used simple human-sized cubes for the
sprinters (Fig. 3c), later replacing them with anatomical 3D models.
We detail this notion later in Sec. 4.3. Thanks to the ﬂexibility of VR,
the race can be experienced from almost any perspective: standing at
any position on the track and watching them run past, ﬂoating above
the track, or even moving with the fastest/slowest sprinter (Fig. 3d),
which demonstrates the relative speed between sprinters and provides
a glimpse of what it might be like from their perspective. One clear
issue early on was that by copying the original story’s environment
and its open, endless void, it was challenging to properly assess the
speed of each sprinter. While it was still possible to make object-
relative judgments between sprinters [28], the lack of background
meant there was no clear frame of reference for the virtual environment
itself. We decided to add a stadium model around the track to resolve
this issue, which also aided in immersion and contextual information
to the experience. To further improve awareness, we also looked at
adding optional annotations of exact times and speeds above each
sprinter’s head (Fig. 3e), as well as experimenting with superimposing
all sprinters on top of one another (Fig. 3f). The latter was motivated
by there being more than 80 lanes in the track, making it difﬁcult to see
everything at once. Note that we only re-scaled the width of the entire
track for this, keeping the length of the track the same.

– Distance: Olympic Men’s Long Jump

E2
Unlike the progressively record breaking times of the Olympic Men’s
100 m into the new millennium, 1968 saw Bob Beamon get the world
record for the farthest long jump at 8.9 m (29 ft 2.5 in), and still holds
the Olympic record to this day—losing the world record to Mike Powell
in 1991 at 8.95 m (29 ft 4.25 in). Told in a similar fashion to the Men’s
100 m Sprint story with video and visualization [45], Bob Beamon’s
Long Olympic Shadow [44] highlights not only Beamon’s performance
relative to his peers, but also the sheer distance that these athletes
can jump to begin with: comparable to the distance of a basketball
3-point line (Fig. 4a). This comparison serves to put these distances
into perspective, but what if one hasn’t played basketball or even set
foot on a basketball court? Of course, it is possible to use a more
familiar anchor instead [24], but visualizing these distances at real-life
scales would allow users to experience them for themselves.

Fig. 4. Illustrative images of E2
. (a) Distances of long jumps compared
to a 3-point line (adapted from [44]). (b) Overview of long-jumpers at the
ﬁnal ‘freeze-frame’ when landing. (c) Experiencing the jump as it happens
from a close angle. (d) Long-jumpers represented as superimposed ﬂags
on the ground with labels on the furthest and closest jumps.

Our VR prototype shares much in common with E1

, the key
difference being the use of distance rather than speed. While the user
can still control the playback of the event, the focus is on the ﬁnal
‘freeze-frame’ of each long jumper at the end of their jump (Fig. 4b).
The user can change their viewpoint to any position to get a visceral
sense of the sheer distance of the long-jumpers (Fig. 4c), which is not
possible by just watching the video. As is the case with E1
, we also
superimpose all of the long-jumpers on top of one another for easier
comparison. Given the precision and ﬁne differences of the results in
long jump however, the long-jumpers can instead be viewed as planted
ﬂags to more closely judge distances between each other (Fig. 4d).

. (a) Looking at the Eiffel Tower, CN
Fig. 5. Illustrative images of E3
(b) Looking at
Tower, and Burj Khalifa at real-life scale from below.
the Space Needle from the top of the Statue of Liberty.
(c) Crowds
randomly walk around on the ground ﬂoor. (d) Shadows cast from one
building to another from a light source directed parallel to the ground.
(e) Miniaturized 3D version of comparison diagram with y-axis scale. (f)
Same setup but from a distant view.

E3

– Height: Comparison of Skyscrapers

E4

– Scale: Solar System

When comparing physical measurements of related objects or crea-
tures, one common visualization to use is a comparison diagram. This
juxtaposes each subject as 2D images or silhouettes, with the y-axis
usually showing height. One popular use of this is the comparison
of skyscrapers, such as the one shown in Fig. 1c. These are great for
understanding relative sizes between objects (e.g., that Mount Elbrus,
Kilimanjaro, and Denali are roughly equivalent in elevation), but not
the absolute size of each subject (i.e., what it feels like to be at the base
of a mountain roughly 6 km or 3.7 mi tall).

We decided to create a VR version of the skyscraper diagram seen in
Fig. 1c. We chose skyscrapers because their size can be overwhelming
to see and experience, but is still familiar to people living in cities with
tall skylines. Our prototype uses 3D models of famous skyscrapers
and landmarks (Statue of Liberty, Space Needle, Eiffel Tower, CN
Tower, and Burj Khalifa) positioned side-by-side in a similar fashion
to the original visualization. These models are scaled as accurately as
possible to their real-world counterparts. As with the prior examples,
it is possible to move around the environment in ways that are either
not available to most people, such as viewing from below (Fig. 5a) or
from the top of each skyscraper (Fig. 5b), or in ways that are physically
impossible, such as ﬂying around in a ‘Superman’-like fashion.We
also experimented with adding visual cues to aid in scale perception,
such as life-sized people randomly walking at ground-level (Fig. 5c)
to simulate the feeling of ‘seeing people as ants,’ and casting shadows
from skyscrapers to the ground (Fig. 5d) as an artiﬁcial ‘ruler.’ In
addition, we explored two alternative views of the scene. The ﬁrst
was to miniaturize the skyscrapers such that they were approximately
2 m (6 ft 7 in) in size and allowing the user to pick up and re-position
them (Fig. 5e). The second was to retain their real-world scale, but
position the user far away enough so that the skyscrapers still occupied
a similar space in the user’s ﬁeld of view (Fig. 5f). We elaborate on this
difference in Sec. 4.6.

4

Many graphics, visualizations, and videos exist to educate people on the
enormous scale of our solar system. One such example [43] (Fig. 6a)
focuses on the surprisingly large distance between the Earth and the
Moon. It does so by illustrating how all of the other planets can ﬁt
between the two when at their average distance apart. This presented a
challenge which we wanted to investigate: the effects of re-scaling and
transformation on viscerality in VR.

In our prototype (Fig. 6b), we chose a ratio of 1:40,000,000 (i.e.,
1 m in VR = 40,000 km in space), resulting in a real-world distance of
approximately 10 m between the Earth and Moon. This struck a balance
between being small enough to be able to see all planets reasonably
well, but large enough to still be at a reasonable size (Earth at roughly
30 cm (12 in) in diameter). As the intent is to see the other planets
comfortably ﬁtting between the Earth and Moon, the user can grab
and slide these planets as a group along a single axis to align them
all together. Note that for E4
, we detail these
, E5
challenges in transformation in Sec. 4.6.

and E6

Fig. 6. Illustrative images of E4
. (a) Reference scene that our proto-
type is based on (adapted from [43]). (b) Prototype version in VR at a
1:40,000,000 scale.

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

Illustrative images of E5

. (a) Birds-eye view of the protest
Fig. 7.
(adapted from [58]).
(c) Per-
spective from above while ﬂying in a helicopter-like fashion. (d) Crowd
represented as human-sized cubes.

(b) Perspective from inside the crowd.

E5
Protests

– Discrete Quantities (of Humans): Hong Kong

Protest marches on Hong Kong’s streets beginning in 2019 involved
over 2 million people. To help visualize the sheer scale of this event, the
New York Times stitched together several birds-eye view photographs
from June 16, 2019 to form a vertical composite image in a scrolling
format [58] (Fig. 7a). It combines both the small size of each individual
person with the seemingly never-ending photographs to accomplish
this. This begs the question, however, what is it actually like to be there
in person? Is it a noticeably different experience being able to walk
throughout a large crowd of people as compared to looking at photos
alone, and if so, can we perceive the extreme quantities on display?

Given the technical limitations of rendering upwards to a million
animated 3D humanoid models in VR, we recreate only a small section
of the protest using 10,000 models. The crowd and surrounding envi-
ronment are at a real-world scale, and it is possible to move through
the crowd to experience being surrounded by many people (Fig. 7b).
The user can also choose to ﬂy above the crowd in a similar way to
a helicopter, without any physical limitations (Fig. 7c). However, it
was clearly apparent that the idle nature of the protesters detracted a lot
from the experience, to the point where using static human-sized cubes
in place of the models worked just as well to convey quantities (Fig. 7d).
We suspect that much more varied models, animated movements, and
lighting would go a long way to provide a more visceral experience of
being at the protest.

Fig. 8. Illustrative images of E6
. (a) Reference scene that our proto-
type is based off (© Oto Godfrey, Demonocracy.info, used with permis-
sion). (b) Overview of the scene with the Statue of Liberty in the center.
(c) Looking down from the top of a stack. (d) Looking up from ground
level and at labels of stack and Statue height.

4 CRITICAL REFLECTION ON DESIGN PROBES

In this section, we go into detail of our observations and critiques of
the design probes described in the previous section.

4.1 Perception: Perceptual ‘Sweet-spots’

and E2

It is clear from E1
that VR experiences of human-scale
data fall into a perceptual sweet-spot for data visceralization. Given
that these directly relate to human performance in sport, measures such
as running speed and jump length can directly be experienced with
VR. E3
began to highlight some of these limits however, as all
skyscrapers simply appear to be tall beyond a certain height, requiring
special consideration to mitigate this (Sec. 4.2). However, a given
measure being within this sweet-spot did not automatically make it
easy to understand every detail of the data. For example, while E2
still conveyed the sense of distance, the values were very similar to
each other, making it difﬁcult to make comparisons between athletes.

E6

– Abstract Measures: US Debt Visualized

4.2 Virtuality: Manipulating the Scene to Facilitate Under-

In US Debt Visualized in $100 Bills [20], an incomprehensibly large
amount of money ($20+ trillion USD in 2017) is visualized using
concrete scales. Starting from single $100 bills and moving to pallets
of bills worth $100 million each, the piece culminates in comparing
stacks of these pallets with other large objects, such as the Statue of
Liberty as seen in Fig. 8a, putting into perspective the amount of debt.
However, the true scale of each stack is difﬁcult to properly grasp
from the image, let alone without having visited the Statue of Liberty
or stood under a construction crane. A similar concept was already
, but as money is inherently conceptual, would this
investigated in E3
transformation from abstract measure to physical measure (i.e., size of
$100 bills) inﬂuence viscerality?

Our VR prototype closely replicates the original piece, with stacks
of pallets of bills surrounding the Statue of Liberty (Fig. 8b) with
an updated total of $22+ trillion USD. Each stack is comprised of
10 × 10 × 100 = 10, 000 life-sized pallets of $100 bills, piling up to
approximately 114 m in height. Given both this and E3
primarily
convey height, they offer similar points of view, such as from the top
of a stack (Fig. 8c) or from the bottom of a stack (Fig. 8d). To try and
quantify some aspects of the experience however, we add annotations
of certain heights of the objects in the scene (Fig. 8d).

standing

and E2

Because we designed and implemented our prototypes using VR, the
virtual world allowed us to manipulate both the virtual objects and
the user’s viewpoint in ways not possible in real-life in order better
facilitate understanding of the chosen phenomena. One example of
manipulating objects was the positioning of athletes in E1
.
Perspective foreshortening can distort the relative perception of objects
in the environment, meaning that comparing athletes on either end of
the ≈80 m track was difﬁcult. In the original videos [44, 45] the use
of ﬁxed view points, lack of stereopsis, and orthogonal perspectives
avoided this issue. Conversely, the use of VR allowed us to manipulate
and play with the position of the athletes, superimposing them on top
of one another (Fig. 3f) to achieve a similar orthogonal view, there-
fore making this comparison easier. Likewise, we can manipulate the
position of the user and their viewpoint to make it easier to view and
understand the phenomena, as can be seen in E3
. Certain viewpoints
made it difﬁcult to accurately judge and/or make comparisons between
skyscrapers, such as when standing near the base of a skyscraper and
looking directly straight up, or when the skyscraper was self-occluding
(e.g., the Space Needle’s observation deck). However, we overcome
this by allowing the user to ﬂy and teleport around the scene, going to

5

the top of any skyscraper they wished. Doing so reduces the distance
and angle to the other skyscrapers, making it easier to see. A surprising
side effect this however, was that it provided more nuanced insights in
the data, such as in E1 where moving along with the fastest/slowest
sprinter grants both an experience of the speed that they were moving
at, but also to compare and contrast their speed directly with all the
others. More broadly, this concept of manipulation to facilitate under-
standing is prevalent throughout our design probes, such as juxtaposing
and moving all planets
skyscrapers from different continents in E3
closer together in E4
. However, if the goal is strictly to viscerally
understand the data in a manner as close to reality as possible, this may
negatively impact that understanding as these manipulations may be
deemed unrealistic and off-putting to users.

and E6

4.3 Realism: The Role of Photorealism and Abstraction
In all of our examples, we needed to add relevant contextual back-
grounds and visual aids, such as the stadium in E1
and E2 . The
lack of contextual cues in the environment detracted from the sense of
presence, and in certain cases made the data more challenging to under-
stand. In E1
, for example, moving along with a sprinter without any
background environment present removed all sense of absolute motion,
whereas in E3
, not having a ﬂoor made it difﬁcult to judge
overall height. We also explicitly manipulated the level of realism of
the physical phenomena in several of the examples, such as using cubes
instead of humans in E1
, as well as small ﬂags in E2 .
Surprisingly, this had little impact on the visceral feeling of the data—a
human-sized cube moving as fast as an Olympic sprinter still conveys
the speed in a similar manner. These observations aside, it is still un-
clear what role realism plays. A basic level of detail of background
environments may be necessary, but it does not need to be high-ﬁdelity.
More photorealistic rendering and simulation may be more engaging
and enjoyable, but conveying visceral senses of motion and distance
were achievable without highly sophisticated representations.

and E5

4.4 Annotation: The Use of Annotations and Distractions
While our senses are very good at judging relative sizes and speeds, we
are less well suited to determining absolute values—hence the need to
display exact measurements. In several examples, we experimented
with augmenting the direct experience with annotations to show sizes or
distances. We made sure these could be turned on and off, since we were
concerned that such augmentation might impact the realism and thus
the direct perception of the measures. However, as in more primitive
representations, we saw little detraction from the use of annotation.
This was moderately surprising since, as Bertin speciﬁes [7], reading
text can capture user attention and thus reduce the perception of other
stimuli, negatively impacting the visceral experience with the data.

4.5 Knowledge Transfer: Applying Knowledge and Experi-
ence from Visceralization into Real-Life Contexts
Data visualisations share information and insights in data. In contrast,
the physical nature of visceralizations may convey a different type of
understanding that is more grounded in reality. For instance, after hav-
, one may then be able to ‘transfer’ that
ing seen the skyscrapers in E3
knowledge to real-life skyscrapers in their day-to-day life, comparing
this new experience with the prior VR one. Likewise, one may see the
skyscrapers in VR and be reminded of previous real-life experiences.
While similar in premise to VR for tourism [22], the nature of visceral-
izations being more closely tied to data may aid users’ perception and
understanding of these physical phenomena in the wild.

4.6 Data Transformation
Given that many phenomena we wish to understand fall outside of
, and
the realm of direct perceptibly, parts of E3
E6
helped illuminate various pitfalls that may occur when scaling
large data into ranges more readily understandable by viewers, or when
remapping abstract measures into perceivable concrete units.
Miniaturization: Maintaining viscerality during scaling. We chose
as we considered them on the cusp of being
to use skyscrapers in E3
both perceivable but also somewhat too large to properly see. To this

, E4

, E5

Fig. 9. Illustration of the difference in perception when viewing an object
at two different scales and distances, such that the object ﬁlls the same
apparent size in the ﬁeld of view. Consider a given point on the object
which is projected onto a position of distance δ from the edge of the ﬁeld
of view of angle α. When the eye is moved by a distance ∆eye, this point
in the scale-down object is shifted by a distance ∆near=δ near−δ and for
the real-scale object ∆far= δ far–δ . ∆ far is much smaller than ∆ near.

end, we experimented with having: (1) a scaling transformation applied
to have a miniaturized view of the skyscrapers; and (2) a distant yet
visibly equivalent view of the skyscrapers, retaining absolute scales.
Despite appearing the same on a traditional monitor, they had very
noticeable differences in their visceral nature when in VR. The ﬁrst
instance produced a signiﬁcant perceptual mismatch, where motion
parallax (caused by the motion of our head or body) caused signiﬁcant
perceived motion of the scaled skyscrapers, but little perceived notion
in the second instance when far away (Fig. 9). While the latter looked
to be real skyscrapers from really far away, the former looked like
miniature 3D printed models which broke the illusion of being real
skyscrapers. Similarly, photographers have used perceptual mismatch
techniques to make real photographs look like miniature models by
adjusting angle and blur to simulate a limited focal length exposure in
tilt-shift photography.
Extreme Scales: Experiencing phenomena signiﬁcantly out of
range of perception. E4
explored a scenario where visualizing
the data at a one-to-one scale would be impossible through the size of
the planets. As a result of the scaling, much of the experience became
similar to the miniaturized skyscrapers, where they clearly looked like
scale models. Because of this, it was impossible to get any direct notion
of the true size of any of the planets. However, as the relative sizes be-
tween the planets and the relative distance between the Earth and Moon
were preserved, it was still possible to make comparisons between
the planets and the Earth–Moon gap—arguably the intention of the
original piece regardless. E5
instead explored very large quantities
of discrete objects, each one at a human perceptible scale (i.e. a large
crowd). While the intention was to be ‘lost’ in the ‘sea’ of people, what
we found was that the occlusion of nearby people made it challenging
to see long distances, and in cases where this was possible, perspective
foreshortening shrunk the heads of those further away. This resulted
in a metaphorical ‘bubble of perception’, where one could only see
and get a feel for the number of people within the bubble. Conversely,
density was quite simple to gauge as it only relied on estimation of
the immediate surroundings. For anything involving the larger crowd
as a whole (i.e.
tens of thousands), changing viewpoints to have a
vantage point above the rest is necessary, however at certain elevations
it becomes very similar to watching a news broadcast.
Abstract Values: Perceiving abstract values with data visceraliza-
tion. E6
explored the notion of requiring some transformation from
abstract concept to concrete object, in this case mapping money of the
US debt to $100 bills. While the sheer scale of the stacks of money
was present in a fashion similar to E3
, there was a level of cognitive
effort required to mentally translate the visceral understanding into the
abstract quantity, such that it was difﬁcult to get any sense of direct,
deep understanding of money. Since there was already a transformation
from quantity of dollars into stacks of bills, it is unclear whether the

6

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

VR representation gave any deeper understanding of said quantity more
than the original 2D illustration would. In a sense, while the visceral
experience of the concrete, physicalized representation was there, there
was no visceral understanding of the original quantity itself.

5 USER FEEDBACK

To further expand our critical reﬂection and minimise bias, we invited
external participants to try our prototypes and give feedback on the
concept of data visceralization. Since it remains a novel and somewhat
abstract concept, we chose not to formally measure and evaluate the
effectiveness of data visceralization, instead focusing on participants’
thoughts and opinions which will help us better deﬁne the concept.

5.1 Process

, E3

We recruited 12 participants (4 female
) who were
all university students with a range of different back-
grounds (majority computer science) and experience
with VR, as indicated to the right. They were not given any monetary
compensation for their time. We conducted the sessions in a large open
space free of obstructions using a HTC Vive Pro connected to a desk-
top PC with an Intel Core i7-7800X CPU (3.5 GHz, 6 cores), Nvidia
GeForce GTX 1080 (8 GB) GPU, and 32 GB of RAM. We limited the
,
scope to three of the six prototypes described in Sec. 3: E1
and E6
, conducted in that order from simplest to most complex,
however the lack of randomization may had inﬂuenced user preferences.
This was done due to time constraints, but still allowed us to obtain
feedback from a representative sample of measures: speed, scale, and
abstract quantities. For each prototype, participants were given both
the original source material and data visceralization to try (which we
now refer to as desktop version and VR version respectively). For
equivalency, we trimmed the desktop version to its relevant parts and
mute any sound and voiceover. Each was followed by a questionnaire
(with Likert scales from 1 (strongly agree) to 7 (strongly disagree))
asking for their thoughts and opinions between the two versions. Note
that the goal was not to measure which version was better, but to under-
stand their strengths, weaknesses, and characteristics. Sessions were
concluded with a semi-structured interview to elicit detailed responses
and opinions of data visceralization. This was loosely structured around
the topics discussed in Sec. 4, but was conducted in such a manner to
allow for broader discussion driven by the participants.

The questionnaire responses and de-identiﬁed transcripts are avail-
able in supplementary material. We combined interview notes and
qualitative analysis on the transcripts to identify common and interest-
ing themes. We include only the most relevant quotes below, labeled
by participant. Please refer to the transcripts for additional context.

5.2 Findings

We ﬁrst report on high-level results and metrics, followed by insights
categorized and contrasted against relevant topics that were described
in Sec. 4. We then discuss themes raised by our participants which
were not part of our reﬂection later in Sec. 6.

5.2.1 General Results

and E3

Each session lasted for an average 82.4 minutes
(Mdn = 85.5, SD = 13). Overall, all participants
preferred VR for E1
, but were
mixed between desktop (2 preferred), VR (6),
and no preference (4) for E6
. Similarly, they
reported to be more immersed in the ﬁrst two
prototypes, particularly due to the ‘unrealistic’
stacks of $100 bills being off-putting. Partici-
pants generally liked the greater freedom and
immersiveness of VR, but criticized the poor
communication of numerical values, speciﬁcally for E6
(discussed
later). Participants spent more time on average in VR than the desktop
version: 3.4 times the duration for E1
, and
. Cybersickness in VR was reported by a minor-
1.8 times for E6
ity of participants only when they used ﬂying locomotion techniques,

, 13.2 times for E3

whereby they were advised to use other techniques instead (i.e., telepor-
tation). Most participants chose to watch the desktop versions of E1
and E6
participants were familiar with E3

once (presented as videos) with a few watching it twice. All

(presented as an image).

5.2.2 Comparison to Critical Reﬂection

Virtuality: Freedom of changing viewpoint provides unique in-
sights but requires more time to do so. In Sec. 4.2 we considered how
the manipulation of the virtual environment can facilitate understanding
but negatively impact viscerality. While no participant speciﬁcally men-
tioned that this aided their understanding, three participants remarked
that having these types of environments is a core part of VR as it “Al-
lows you to do something that you otherwise would never see.” [P10].
In contrast, two other participants stated that being in these unrealistic
scenarios made them feel ‘out of place’, such as when ﬂying around
the environment. Neither participant said that this negatively impacted
their understanding of the phenomena, however one of them clariﬁed
that things still need to be “Presented in a way that hypothetically could
exist.” [P11], such as stacks of $100 bills technically being possible to
create if one had enough resources. In terms of the user’s viewpoint,
many of the beneﬁts we described were also identiﬁed by participants,
particularly the ability to view the data from any angle they wished.
This meant “Every angle I was at, I could take a different bit of data
from it.” [P9] and they could “Consume [the experience] in a way
that [had] more meaning.” [P7]. However, six participants commented
that they had to ﬁgure out the best viewpoints by themselves, meaning
that it took longer to gain the relevant information as compared to the
desktop version. We discuss this notion of reader control in Sec. 6.1.
Realism: Realism is not important to understand the underlying
data, but is still important for engagement. In accord with Sec. 4.3,
all participants agreed that more photorealistic rendering was not re-
quired to understand the underlying quantitative data, but that it made
the experience more enjoyable and engaging. In terms of using abstract
models (e.g., cubes instead of runners), participants agreed that the feel-
ing and perception of the data was the same, but some remarked that it
became easier to make comparisons such as “[Telling] the alignment of
each racer.” [P7], mitigating similar issues identiﬁed in Sec. 4.1. Many
others pointed out ﬂaws in these abstract models, such as them needing
to “Keep in mind that it was an abstracted representation of running.”
[P7], the inability to “Distinguish different people and separate them
[as] the blocks are all the same.” [P8], losing the sense of emotional
attachment to the phenomena as “A block is very abstract [which] you
can interpret as anything coming at you, whereas a person generates
some sort of emotion.” [P9], and that abstract looking models would be
boring to look at in contrast to more realistic ones.
Annotation: Annotations were useful to round out the experience
and were not distracting. In Sec. 4.4, we raised concerns of annota-
tions potentially being distracting. However, no participants reported
any distraction or annoyance caused by them. In fact, many complained
that they were either too difﬁcult to see or didn’t provide enough in-
formation. These participants thought annotations were important as
without them “You would walk away with an unﬁnished idea... once
you put the labels in, the information is more complete.” [P9]. Few
others thought they weren’t necessary, as “VR really makes me feel
the speed [and height] difference, and in that case the label doesn’t
really matter.” [P5]. However, none argued for the complete removal
of annotations, with all agreeing that they were at least nice to have.
Knowledge Transfer: The ability to apply experiences from
visceralizations is uncertain, but it is still valuable to have.
In Sec. 4.5 we discussed the ability to transfer
this deeper understanding from visceralizations
into reality. When asked if they thought they
could do so, participants subjectively rated an
average of 5.06 for relating to previous events
(Mdn = 6, SD = 1.79) and 5.14 for future events
(Mdn = 5, SD = 1.42) across all three prototypes,
with E6
being the lowest rated. Of note is
that many participants who gave low or neutral
scores clariﬁed that they didn’t have a prior ex-

7

perience to compare against (e.g., people run-
ning past), or that the presented scenario was
far too unlikely to ever see it in the future (e.g.,
stacks of $100 bills). That said, two participants
explicitly mentioned that it triggered previous
memories, such as P7 having been under the
actual Eiffel Tower or P8 with a speciﬁc tower
in her home country. A few were also very
adamant in their ability to do so, such as “It
feels I’ve been next to a building that’s that tall,
so I can compare [it to reality].” [P2] and “That was represented
really well and was really believable as compared to my [real life]
experiences.” [P7]. Our measures are very subjective however, as par-
ticipants were asked to hypothesize if it was possible. Most gave vague
responses during the interview, but agreed that this skill was valuable
to have. Regardless, we see this as a valuable means of measuring the
effectiveness of data visceralization in the future (Sec. 6.6).
Miniaturization: Only a few participants felt the miniaturized
phenomena to be unrealistic, with others not noticing or not car-
ing.. In Sec. 4.6 we noted differences between miniature vs distant
phenomena. We asked participants if they noticed any differences in
either one, making sure to be as vague as possible. Only three partici-
pants stated that the distant skyscrapers felt like real structures which
were “Easier to understand than having a miniature sculpture.” [P9].
However this was not due to motion parallax, but due to “The represen-
tation of the hills, the elevation, and the trees [giving] me more context
to the size, the scale, [and] the place.” [P7]. All other participants gave
varying responses: four saying they felt the same, one saying that the
distant felt unrealistic due to the gray background (Fig. 5f), and three
saying they were useful simply to get an overview of the data similar
to the original desktop version (Fig. 1c).
Abstract Values: Understanding exact magnitude of abstract val-
ues is difﬁcult, but does not have to be the goal of visceralization.
In Sec. 4.6 we noted difﬁculties of representing abstract concepts such
as money in VR, even in its physical form such as $100 bills. All par-
ticipants agreed that it was difﬁcult to understand the exact magnitude
of $20+ trillion. For some, it was the abstract nature of money being
difﬁcult to comprehend. For others, it was the lack of quantitative
information provided to them which caused them these issues. As both
the trimmed desktop and our VR versions did not specify how much
each stack of bills was worth, it meant that they “Just looked at towers
and was told it was worth trillions of dollars, which is not a number I
can really comprehend anyway.” [P10]. Interestingly, some participants
suggested solutions, such as showing incremental stages similar to the
original piece [20], or to group the $100 bills by more familiar units
such as “A block of a street, or a city.” [P6] in a similar vein to concrete
scales [13]. While we did not ask if they still thought the experience
was valuable, one participant commented that “It deﬁnitely gives a
good perspective... it’s good to know that $20+ trillion is that much
money.” [P4]. We discuss the validity of perspective/appreciation being
the goal of visceralizations in Sec. 6.1.

6 DISCUSSION

In this section we discuss the most interesting and relevant themes
which were raised by our participants which were not part of our critical
reﬂection. We then discuss broader aspects of data visceralization as
well as future research opportunities.

6.1 Insights from Participant Feedback

Viscerality is not required for data understanding but gives the ex-
perience more meaning. When asked about feelings of viscerality, a
few participants explicitly commented that it is not required for the
purposes of understanding the underlying numerical measurements, as
“Data and numbers are more rational, and you don’t need emotions to un-
derstand rational things.” [P11]. In contrast, many others concentrated
on how visceral sensations improved their qualitative understanding of
the phenomena as it made the experience feel more believable, and in
some cases “Added emotion to the data... it put meaning to it.” [P9].

8

When asked what types of visceral sensations they felt, common re-
sponses were the feeling of something running past you, fear of heights,
sense of awe/grandness, and some discomfort from ﬂying around in
). Overall, participants thought
the environment (particularly for E3
that visceral sensations improved the experience and understanding of
the physical phenomena by making it feel more believable, but was
otherwise not necessary for learning exact values and numbers.
Data understanding and the experience go hand in hand, but num-
bers are not everything. We have distinguished between the qualita-
tive and quantitative understanding of data, with participants valuing
each differently. All participants preferred VR as it provides a more
immersive experience and a better qualitative understanding of what
the phenomena are in reality (among other beneﬁts). In contrast, no par-
ticipants argued for quantitative understanding (i.e., knowing the exact
numerical values) being a fundamental takeaway of visceralization. In-
stead, it is there to further facilitate the qualitative understanding of the
phenomena, as “The combination of both [qualitative and quantitative],
they both support each other, one standing alone might be somewhat
useful but together they’re better.” [P10]. Three participants even
posited that trying to learn the exact numerical values was pointless, as
“Who will remember the values all the time, for everything, that’s crazy!?”
[P6]. In some ways, the focus on the qualitative aspects guided by
quantitative values is the intended purpose of data visceralization, as
we do not seek to replace conventional data visualization but instead
complement it. In this sense, an alternate way of phrasing the purpose
of data visceralization is to gain a ‘better perspective’ or ‘appreciation’
of data, as this appreciation is oftentimes missing in data visualization.
This notion highly relates to a recent viewpoint by Wang et al. [56],
which argues for the importance of emotion when considering the value
that data visualizations provide rather than only measuring analytic and
knowledge-generating value. As such, the perceived value of viscer-
alization by our participants leans into this—that it is more about the
experience and the emotions it generates rather than just the numbers.
A balance needs to be struck between letting the user explore and
guiding the user. As described earlier, the ability to control the view-
point was was useful to gain more nuanced insights by having more
agency to explore. However, more time is required to determine ap-
propriate viewing angles in VR compared to the ﬁxed angles on the
desktop, and the lack of guidance may cause users to miss important
information. Some participants argued for the use of predeﬁned view-
points tied to speciﬁc insights as a way to alleviate this, “If you have
some charts aligned to that, I can click of them and say this is the view
I was looking for, so this gives me more understanding [of where] I
should be going.” [P12]. This notion is similar to author-driven and
reader-driven stories [49] in determining how much guidance to pro-
vide to the user. We can reasonably say that a middle-ground would
be best suited in order to retain much of the user agency that deﬁnes
VR, but different considerations may be needed when used in a more
storytelling context such as in immersive journalism [14].
While making comparisons were common, there are opportunities
to highlight individual characteristics of standalone phenomena.
We noticed that participants almost always made comparisons between
objects in the scene, such as comparing the speeds of different runners
or the height of the Statue of Liberty against a stack of $100 bills.
Three participants explicitly stated that making these comparisons was
a core part of their experience, but gave mixed responses when asked
if this would still be the case when only a single object/phenomena
was shown. One said that it would only have the same impact “If
you’ve had prior experience of being on heights [or] doing a sprint.”
[P9], another that they can still gain insights by “[Going] to the top
or close to the base, or see the building from the bottom of it.” [P6].
More interestingly, P12 suggested that “If it gives me enough options
to explore, like climb the wall, climb the stairs, feel different textures...
the scenario is not attached to the height scenario [any more].” In
this circumstance, the data visceralization presents information beyond
just the quantitative measures, but to include other characteristics of
the chosen phenomena as well. While the hope is that visceraliza-
tion can assist with understanding individual phenomena without the
need for comparison, it is apparent there are alternative options for

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

communicating more information should the opportunity present itself.

6.6 Future Work

6.2 One-to-One Mapping from Data to Visceralization
Based on our critical reﬂection (Sec. 4.6) and external feedback sessions
(Sec. 5.2), it is clear that data visceralizations involving a one-to-one
translation from their ‘ground truth’ are ideal, as they most accurately
portray the underlying data. When a transformation is applied to the
data, this connection to the ground truth is broken. However, it is still
possible to understand comparisons between the transformed phenom-
ena. Moreover, many participants reported that they were still able to
gain an appreciation and perspective of the data—both speciﬁcally for
E6
and for data visceralizations as a whole. In this sense, despite
not being the original intention, data visceralization can still provide
value in instances where one-to-one mappings are not possible, either
by rescaling the data or using concrete scales [13]. This transforma-
tion needs to be done with care, however, as its misuse may result
in misleading or deceptive experiences. For example, a visceraliza-
tion which subtly re-scales data to exaggerate a certain effect may be
taken at face value to be true. There has been extensive discussion of
data visualizations potentially being deceptive, and special care needs
to likewise be taken since data visceralization is intended to give an
intuitive understanding of the data that is not misleading.

6.3 Visceral vs. Emotional Experiences
As reported by our participants, visceral sensations were tied to some
emotional reaction, such as fear when looking down from a great height,
or the feeling of awe when looking up at a large structure. For the
purposes of data visceralization however, it is important to differentiate
between emotions stemming from visceral sensations and those from
the storytelling context. That is, visceral sensations are part of the pre-
attentive sensory process when experiencing the presented phenomena,
in contrast to strong emotional reactions that are evoked through the
narrative such as sadness or anger (e.g., [23, 37]). By treating these
separately, we focus primarily on sensory ﬁdelity and instead let the
storytelling context convey any other desired emotion.

6.4 Application Domains
Since effective data visceralization may restrict transformation of data,
there are certain domains and experiences that are particularly well
suited for visceralization. We have already identiﬁed and demonstrated
two prototypes using sports visualization, and this space could be ex-
plored more extensively. Scale comparisons of other human endeavors
like architecture, engineering, and design are all enhanced by having a
deeper understanding of data. In particular, understanding the relative
sizes of objects while browsing online services has been often sug-
gested as a compelling use of immersive technology. Finally, there has
been captivating video examples (e.g., [12]) of the impact of weather
events like ﬂooding, where a one-to-one demonstration of the height
of the water, or the speed of windows being blown open, could help
viewers more deeply understand what happens during the event.

6.5 Limitations of Data Visceralization in VR
As our presented design probes were conducted in VR, any limitations
of VR directly affect the effectiveness of data visceralization. One issue
in particular is that egocentric distance estimations are compressed in
VR [36, 47], possibly resulting in perceptually misleading experiences.
To combat this, the use of a virtual self-avatar has been shown to
improve near distance estimation [16, 40]. It has also been shown that
the size of one’s virtual body inﬂuences perceived world size [55],
and the size of one’s virtual hand inﬂuences perceived size of nearby
objects [35] which can in turn help improve size estimation [29]. As
visceralizations are reliant on the accurate perception of virtual objects,
these techniques and others similar in the VR literature can be used.
Another limitation is the trade-off between visual ﬁdelity, dataset size
(if applicable), and performance. This was notably of concern in E5
,
as rendering thousands of objects with complex meshes resulted in poor
performance. While we refer to general VR development guidelines to
overcome these challenges (e.g., [18]), we note that graphical quality
may ultimately not be important for data visceralization (Sec. 5.2.1).

Evaluation. While responses from our participants supported the no-
tion that data visceralizations were engaging and impactful, their feed-
back was inherently subjective. We discussed several experimental
measures and factors which may be considered in future studies. These
include: users’ capability to perceive and comprehend the qualitative
‘ground-truth’, time until this comprehension is reached, the transfer-
ability and generalization of learnings into the real-world, and the
effects of numerous factors (e.g., transformation from data to visceral-
ization, number and types of annotations, level of realism) on under-
standing. By more formally considering and measuring these in future
user studies can we more thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness and
appropriate use of data visceralization—particularly in comparison to
similar techniques such as those in Sec. 2.
Data visceralization beyond VR. Advancements in immersive tech-
nologies opens many new opportunities for data visceralization. For
example, researchers have explored how non-visual senses can be
stimulated to convey data, such as olfaction (e.g., [42, 57]), gustation
(e.g., [31]), and haptic simulation (e.g., [6, 9]). AR also offers unique
opportunities and challenges, as the real-world acts as an anchor for all
measurements and scales. While this may improve relatability of the
data as the visceralization is in the context of the user’s environment,
it may restrict the scope of phenomena which can be represented—
particularly for large scale objects such as skyscrapers.
Combining narrative storytelling and data visceralization. As was
the original intention and reafﬁrmed by participants, data visceraliza-
tions can ﬁll in the ‘ground truth’ understanding oftentimes missing in
data visualization. As such, it is important to determine how to combine
the two without sacriﬁcing the accessibility and convenience of web-
based data stories. As described in Sec. 2, recent work has begun ex-
ploring the use of immersive experiences for data storytelling [5,25,46],
with some existing stories already doing so using mobile-based AR
(e.g., [8]). Data visceralization can both contribute to and utilize these
immersive data-driven storytelling techniques in the future.
Towards a general data visceralization pipeline. Development of
our VR prototypes required skills in design, 3D modeling, and pro-
gramming in specialized environments such as Unity3D. That said,
many pre-made assets were used to hasten development, resulting in
development times of around a week for each prototype (excluding
reﬂection/evaluation). During this process, we fell into similar devel-
opment patterns which we portray in Fig. 2. Sitting in parallel to the
visualization pipeline [11], we pass data into the data visceralization
pipeline and directly map it onto attributes of objects within the virtual
environment. This simulation may use animation to encode information
such as speed in E1
. After adding appropriate background imagery
to contextualize the simulated phenomena, we then render these at
the desired level of realism. Finally, we annotate the experience with
the original quantitative data to provide perspective and context to the
experience. The output is then experienced on a VR device—ideally
when complementing an existing data visualization or story. While
nothing is currently automated in this pipeline, the structure may help
teams organize where different contributions can occur.

7 CONCLUSION

We introduce and deﬁne the concept of data visceralizations as a com-
plement to data visualization and storytelling, in order to facilitate an
intuitive understanding of the underlying ‘ground-truth’ of data. We ex-
plore the concept through the iterative design and creation of six design
probes, which we critically reﬂect on as authors and gather external
feedback and opinions from participants. Through this, we identify
situations where data visceralization is effective, how transforming
the data or representing abstract data may be problematic for visceral
experiences, and considerations of many factors for data visceralization
as a whole. We also identify future opportunities, such as formally eval-
uating data visceralization in a user study, and how future technologies
can extend the concept. We hope that this work will spawn both future
experiences for understanding data as well as deeper investigation into
how to best create and more formally evaluate these experiences.

9

REFERENCES

[1] F. Amini, N. Henry Riche, B. Lee, C. Hurter, and P. Irani. Understanding
data videos: Looking at narrative visualization through the cinematography
lens. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, pp. 1459–1468. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702431

[2] B. Bach, M. Stefaner, J. Boy, S. Drucker, L. Bartram, J. Wood, P. Ciuc-
carelli, Y. Engelhardt, U. Koppen, and B. Tversky. Narrative Design
Patterns for Data-Driven Storytelling, chap. 5, pp. 107–133. Taylor Fran-
cis, March 2018.

[3] W. Barﬁeld and T. A. Furness, III, eds. Virtual Environments and Advanced
Interface Design. Oxford University Press, Inc., New York, NY, USA,
1995.

[4] W. Barﬁeld, D. Zeltzer, T. Sheridan, and M. Slater. Virtual environments
and advanced interface design. chap. Presence and Performance Within
Virtual Environments, pp. 473–513. Oxford University Press, Inc., New
York, NY, USA, 1995.

[5] J. Bastiras and B. H. Thomas. Combining virtual reality and narrative
visualisation to persuade. In 2017 International Symposium on Big Data
Visual Analytics (BDVA), pp. 1–8, Nov 2017. doi: 10.1109/BDVA.2017.
8114623

[6] J. J. Batter and J. F. P. Brooks. Grope-1: a computer display to the sense

of feel. Inf. Process.; (Netherlands), 71, Jan 1972.

[7] J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics. University of Wisconsin Press, 1983.
[8] J. Branch.

Augmented reality:

Four of

as you’ve never seen them -
//www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/02/05/sports/
olympics/ar-augmented-reality-olympic-athletes-ul.html,
2018. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

the new york times.

the best olympians,
https:

[9] F. P. Brooks, Jr., M. Ouh-Young, J. J. Batter, and P. Jerome Kilpatrick.
Project gropehaptic displays for scientiﬁc visualization. SIGGRAPH
Comput. Graph., 24(4):177–185, Sept. 1990. doi: 10.1145/97880.97899
[10] J. Bucher. Storytelling for virtual reality: Methods and principles for

crafting immersive narratives. 01 2017. doi: 10.4324/9781315210308

[11] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, eds. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.

[12] T. W. Channel. Storm surge like you’ve never experienced it before.
[Ac-

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q01vSb_B1o0, 2018.
cessed: 2020-07-23].

[13] F. Chevalier, R. Vuillemot, and G. Gali. Using concrete scales: A practical
IEEE
framework for effective visual depiction of complex measures.
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2426–2435,
Dec 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.210

[14] N. de la Pe˜na, P. Weil, J. Llobera, E. Giannopoulos, A. Pom´es, B. Spanlang,
D. Friedman, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, and M. Slater. Immersive journalism:
Immersive virtual reality for the ﬁrst-person experience of news. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 19(4):291–301, 2010. doi: 10.
1162/PRES a 00005

[15] P. Dragicevic and Y. Jansen. List of physical visualizations and related
artifacts. http://dataphys.org/list/, 2019. [Accessed: 2020-07-
23].

[16] E. Ebrahimi, L. S. Hartman, A. Robb, C. C. Pagano, and S. V. Babu.
Investigating the effects of anthropomorphic ﬁdelity of self-avatars on
near ﬁeld depth perception in immersive virtual environments. In 2018
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1–8,
March 2018. doi: 10.1109/VR.2018.8446539

[17] Ed Huai-Hsin Chi and J. T. Riedl. An operator interaction framework for
visualization systems. In Proceedings IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (Cat. No.98TB100258), pp. 63–70, Oct 1998. doi: 10.1109/
INFVIS.1998.729560

[18] L. Facebook Technologies. Guidelines for vr performance optimiza-
https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/native/

tion.
pc/dg-performance-guidelines/, 2020. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[19] J. Gibson. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Resources for

ecological psychology. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986.

[20] O. Godfrey. Us debt visualized: Stacked in $100 bills at 20+ trillion
usd for 2017. http://demonocracy.info/infographics/usa/us_
debt/us_debt.html, 2017. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[21] D. M. Green and J. A. Swets. Signal detection theory and psychophysics.

New York : Wiley, 1966.

[22] D. A. Guttentag. Virtual reality: Applications and implications for tourism.

Tourism Management, 31(5):637 – 651, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.
2009.07.003

[23] N. Halloran. The fallen of world war ii. https://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=DwKPFT-RioU, 2017. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[24] J. Hullman, Y.-S. Kim, F. Nguyen, L. Speers, and M. Agrawala. Improving
comprehension of measurements using concrete re-expression strategies.
In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI ’18, pp. 34:1–34:12. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3173608

[25] P. Isenberg, B. Lee, H. Qu, and M. Cordeil. Immersive Visual Data Stories,
pp. 165–184. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-030-01388-2 6

[26] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, and J.-D. Fekete. Evaluating the efﬁciency of
physical visualizations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13, pp. 2593–2602. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2013. doi: 10.1145/2470654.2481359

[27] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik, J. Kildal,
S. Subramanian, and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and challenges for data
physicalization. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, pp. 3227–3236. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702180

[28] J. Jerald. The VR Book: Human-Centered Design for Virtual Reality.
Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan & Claypool, New
York, NY, USA, 2016.

[29] S. Jung, G. Bruder, P. J. Wisniewski, C. Sandor, and C. E. Hughes. Over my
hand: Using a personalized hand in vr to improve object size estimation,
In Proceedings of the Symposium on
body ownership, and presence.
Spatial User Interaction, SUI ’18, pp. 60–68. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2018. doi: 10.1145/3267782.3267920

[30] R. Kenny and A. A. Becker.

Is the nasdaq in another bubble? a vir-
tual reality tour of the nasdaq - wsj.com. http://graphics.wsj.com/
3d-nasdaq, 2015. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[31] R. A. Khot, J. Lee, D. Aggarwal, L. Hjorth, and F. F. Mueller. Tastybeats:
Designing palatable representations of physical activity. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’15, pp. 2933–2942. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2015. doi:
10.1145/2702123.2702197

[32] J. LaViola, E. Kruijff, R. McMahan, D. Bowman, and I. Poupyrev. 3D
User Interfaces: Theory and Practice. Addison-Wesley usability and HCI
series. Addison-Wesley, 2017.

[33] B. Lee, T. Dwyer, D. Baur, and X. G. Veira. Watches to augmented
reality: Devices and gadgets for data-driven storytelling. In Data-Driven
Storytelling, pp. 153–168. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2018.

[34] A. Lele. Virtual reality and its military utility. Journal of Ambient In-
telligence and Humanized Computing, 4(1):17–26, Feb 2013. doi: 10.
1007/s12652-011-0052-4

[35] S. A. Linkenauger, M. Leyrer, H. H. B¨ulthoff, and B. J. Mohler. Welcome
to wonderland: The inﬂuence of the size and shape of a virtual hand on
the perceived size and shape of virtual objects. PLOS ONE, 8(7), 07 2013.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068594

[36] J. Loomis and J. Knapp. Visual perception of egocentric distance in
real and virtual environments. In Virtual and Adaptive Environments, pp.
21–46. CRC Press, June 2003. doi: 10.1201/9781410608888.pt1
since
shootings
Sukumar.
https://www.vox.com/a/
2019.

sandy
mass-shootings-america-sandy-hook-gun-violence,
[Accessed: 2020-07-23].

and K.
in

one map.

[37] G.

Lopez

hook,

Mass

[38] K. Marriott, F. Schreiber, T. Dwyer, K. Klein, N. Henry Riche, T. Itoh,
W. Stuerzlinger, and B. H. Thomas. Immersive Analytics. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer International Publishing, 2018.

[39] M. Mine, A. Yoganandan, and D. Coffey. Making vr work: Building
In
a real-world immersive modeling application in the virtual world.
Proceedings of the 2Nd ACM Symposium on Spatial User Interaction, SUI
’14, pp. 80–89. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2659766.
2659780

[40] B. J. Mohler, S. H. Creem-Regehr, W. B. Thompson, and H. H. B¨ulthoff.
The effect of viewing a self-avatar on distance judgments in an hmd-based
virtual environment. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
19(3):230–242, 2010. doi: 10.1162/pres.19.3.230

[41] M. F. Mortensen. Analysis of the educational potential of a science mu-
seum learning environment: Visitors’ experience with and understanding
of an immersion exhibit. International Journal of Science Education,
33(4):517–545, 2011. doi: 10.1080/09500691003754589

10

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030435

[42] B. Patnaik, A. Batch, and N. Elmqvist. Information olfactation: Harnessing
scent to convey data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 25(1):726–736, Jan 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865237
[43] PerplexingPotato. Our seven fellow planets could ﬁt end to end within
our moon’s orbit around us [oc]. https://imgur.com/Ae9hbU1, 2014.
[Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[44] K. Quealy and G. Roberts. Bob beamon’s long olympic shadow -
interactive graphic - nytimes.com. http://archive.nytimes.com/
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/08/04/sports/olympics/
bob-beamons-long-olympic-shadow.html, 2012.
[Accessed:
2020-07-23].

[45] K. Quealy, G. Roberts, and A. Cox. One race, every medalist ever -
interactive graphic - nytimes.com. http://archive.nytimes.com/
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/08/05/sports/olympics/
the-100-meter-dash-one-race-every-medalist-ever.html,
2012. [Accessed: 2020-07-23].

[46] D. Ren, B. Lee, and T. H¨ollerer. Xrcreator: Interactive construction of
immersive data-driven stories. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’18, pp. 136:1–136:2.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3281505.3283400
[47] R. S. Renner, B. M. Velichkovsky, and J. R. Helmert. The perception of
egocentric distances in virtual environments - a review. ACM Comput.
Surv., 46(2):23:1–23:40, Dec. 2013. doi: 10.1145/2543581.2543590
[48] N. Riche, C. Hurter, N. Diakopoulos, and S. Carpendale. Data-driven

Storytelling. AK Peters Visualization Series. CRC Press, 2018.

[49] E. Segel and J. Heer. Narrative visualization: Telling stories with data.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 16(6):1139–
1148, Nov 2010. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2010.179

[50] M. Slater. Measuring presence: A response to the witmer and singer
presence questionnaire. Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ., 8(5):560–
565, Oct. 1999. doi: 10.1162/105474699566477

[51] M. Slater and S. Wilbur. A framework for immersive virtual environ-
ments ﬁve: Speculations on the role of presence in virtual environments.
Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ., 6(6):603–616, Dec. 1997. doi: 10.
1162/pres.1997.6.6.603

[52] C. D. Stolper, B. Lee, N. H. Riche, and J. Stasko. Data-driven storytelling
techniques: Analysis of a curated collection of visual stories. In Data-
Driven Storytelling, pp. 85–105. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2018.

[53] F. Taher, Y. Jansen, J. Woodruff, J. Hardy, K. Hornbæk, and J. Alexander.
Investigating the use of a dynamic physical bar chart for data exploration
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
and presentation.
Graphics, 23(1):451–460, Jan 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598498
[54] L. Valmaggia, L. Latif, M. Kempton, and M. Rus-Calafell. Virtual reality
in the psychological treatment for mental health problems: An systematic
review of recent evidence. Psychiatry Research, 236, 01 2016. doi: 10.
1016/j.psychres.2016.01.015

[55] B. van der Hoort, A. Guterstam, and H. H. Ehrsson. Being barbie: The
size of one’s own body determines the perceived size of the world. PLOS
ONE, 6(5):1–10, 05 2011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020195

[56] Y. Wang, A. Segal, R. Klatzky, D. F. Keefe, P. Isenberg, J. Hurtienne,
E. Hornecker, T. Dwyer, and S. Barrass. An emotional response to
the value of visualization. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
39(5):8–17, Sep. 2019. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2019.2923483

[57] D. A. Washburn and L. M. Jones. Could olfactory displays improve data
visualization? Computing in Science and Engg., 6(6):80–83, Nov. 2004.
doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2004.66

[58] J. Wu, A. Singhvi,

and J. Kao.

A bird’s-eye view of
how protesters have ﬂooded hong kong streets - the new york
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/06/20/
times.
world/asia/hong-kong-protest-size.html, 2019.
[Accessed:
2020-07-23].

[59] S. Zhang, C. Demiralp, D. F. Keefe, M. DaSilva, D. H. Laidlaw, B. D.
Greenberg, P. J. Basser, C. Pierpaoli, E. A. Chiocca, and T. S. Deisboeck.
An immersive virtual environment for dt-mri volume visualization appli-
cations: a case study. In Proceedings Visualization, 2001. VIS ’01., pp.
437–584, Oct 2001. doi: 10.1109/VISUAL.2001.964545

11

