Advancing from Predictive Maintenance to Intelligent 
Maintenance with AI and IIoT 
Antonio R. Paiva 
ExxonMobil Research and 
Engineering Company 
 Annandale, NJ 08801 
antonio.paiva@exxonmobil.com 

Chris S. Gurciullo 
ExxonMobil Research and 
Engineering Company 
 Annandale, NJ 08801 
chris.s.gurciullo@exxonmobil.com 

Haining Zheng 
 ExxonMobil Research and 
Engineering Company 
 Annandale, NJ 08801 
 haining.zheng@exxonmobil.com 

ABSTRACT 
As Artificial Intelligent (AI) technology advances and increasingly 
large  amounts  of  data  become  readily  available  via  various 
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) projects, we evaluate the state 
of  the  art  of  predictive  maintenance  approaches  and propose our 
innovative framework to  improve the current practice. The paper 
first reviews the evolution of reliability modelling technology in the 
past  90  years  and  discusses  major  technologies  developed  in 
industry  and  academia.  We  then  introduce  the  next  generation 
maintenance framework - Intelligent Maintenance, and discuss its 
key components. This AI and IIoT based Intelligent Maintenance 
framework is composed of (1) latest machine learning algorithms 
including  probabilistic  reliability  modelling  with  deep  learning, 
(2) real-time data collection, transfer, and storage through wireless 
smart  sensors, 
(4) continuously 
integration and deployment of machine learning models, (5) mobile 
device and AR/VR applications for fast and better decision-making 
in  the  field.  Particularly,  we  proposed  a  novel  probabilistic  deep 
learning  reliability  modelling  approach  and demonstrate  it  in  the 
Turbofan Engine Degradation Dataset.  

(3) Big  Data 

technologies, 

CCS CONCEPTS 
• Artificial  intelligence  • Machine  learning  • Real-time  systems 
• Distributed  computing  methodologies  • Physical  sciences  and 
engineering  

KEYWORDS 
Predictive  Maintenance,  Industrial  Internet  of  Things  (IIoT), 
Artificial  Intelligent  (AI),  Machine  Learning,  Time  Series, 
Probabilistic Approach 

ACM Reference format: 

Haining  Zheng,  Antonio  R.  Paiva,  Chris  S.  Gurciullo,  2020.  Advancing 
from Predictive Maintenance to Intelligent Maintenance with AI and IIoT. 
In  AIoT  workshop  at  KDD  2020:  The  26  ACM  SIGKDD  International 
Conference on Knowledge, Aug 22-27, 2020, San Diego, CA, USA 6 pages. 
https://doi.org/xxxxx/yyyyy 

1  Introduction  

Equipment reliability has been a major issue for manufacturers of 
many  industries.  Based  on  Aberdeen's  independent  research  of 

industrial  plants  costs  $10k 

unplanned  downtime  for 
to 
$250K/hour  which  adds  up  to  $50  billion  annually.  Equipment 
failure is the cause of 42% of this unplanned downtime [1]. While 
reliability technology has been studied intensively in the past  90 
years  [2-5],  a  2017  survey  of  100  manufacturers  in  the  US  and 
Europe  by  Vanson  Bourne  Global  Study  shows  that  70%  of 
companies lack complete awareness of when equipment is due for 
maintenance or upgrade [6]. 

Machine  learning [7-9]  and  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  [10-12] 
have  made  significant  progress  recently  and  proven  successful 
across  different  industries,  including  a  number  of  traditional 
applications  in  the  energy  industry  [13-15]  from  upstream 
production  prediction,  midstream  transportation  optimization,  to 
downstream  product  manufacturing.  Equipped  with  our  years  of 
experience in the reliability technology domain and knowledge of 
latest  AI  and  IIoT  development,  we  revisit  this  important  yet 
unsolved problem. 

2   Evolution of Reliability Technology 

Reliability technology has gone through four generations as 
illustrated in Figure 1. 

2.1 Reactive Maintenance 

The  first  generation  of  maintenance  strategy  follows  a  reactive 
approach: only fix it  when the equipment is broken. This caused 
tremendous  unplanned  capacity  loss  because  it  is  subject  to 
availability of repair personnel and more often than not, the asset is 
severely damaged to the point that it needs to be replaced entirely 
which  is  costly  and  subject  to  replacement  parts  availability. 
Currently it is only applied to inexpensive and easily replaceable 
small assets for which spare parts can be easily kept in stock. 

2.2 Preventive Maintenance  
After World War II, a 2nd generation of maintenance strategies were 
developed,  giving  rise  to  preventive  maintenance,  meaning  that 
replacement of equipment is scheduled according to a fixed time 
interval,  regardless  of  the  condition.  Of  course,  this  approach 
creates a major dilemma for business decision makers: either they 
apply  a  large  safety  factor  to  serve  and  replace  equipment 
frequently  which  increases  maintenance  costs,  or  they  face 
situations  in  which  the  asset  breaks  before  its  expected  lifespan 
causing  unplanned  capacity  loss  similar  to  reactive  maintenance 
situation. 

 
 
KDD’20, August, 2020, San Diego, California USA 

system is becoming increasingly more complex and brings in new 
challenges to maintenance strategy.  

(1)  How to implement the AI/Machine learning algorithms 
developed  in  other  fields  to  manufacturing  time  series 
data which has complex nonlinear temporal and spatial 
dynamics? 

(2)  How to collect data from remote sources that are not con-
nected to the corporate network via wired connections?  

(3)  How to effective process and store high frequency data 
without overloading the whole network or data storage? 

(4)  How to keep models deployed up to date without causing 

disruptions to production? 

Figure  1:  Evolution  of  Reliability  Technology  (adapted  from 

(5)  How to allow fast and better decision-making in the field 

Moubray [2]). 

2.3 Predictive Maintenance 

As light-weight and fast computers became widely available in the 
1980s,  predictive  maintenance  becomes  practical.  The  goal  is  to 
preemptively  predict  equipment  failure 
through  data  from 
conditional  monitoring  and  computer  models.  A  number  of 
reliability  technologies  were  developed  in  this  period.  In  the 
equipment/asset development phase, Accelerated Testing, Design 
for  Reliability  and  Maintenance,  and  Design  Failure  Mode 
Analysis (DFMEA) are important design supporting tools. During 
the  project  and  operational  phases,  Reliability  Centered 
(ReBI), 
Maintenance 
Optimum Replacement Time (ORT), and Reliability, Availability, 
and  Maintainability 
(RAM)  analysis  are  commonly  used 
approaches. Moreover, Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) and event tree 
analysis  (ETA)  were  developed  for  failure  diagnosis  (root  cause 
analysis) to identify the main causes of failure of an asset after a 
failure  has  occurred.  Rule-based  expert  systems  were  also 
developed in this period. 

(RCM),  Reliability-Based 

Inspection 

is  prescriptive 
An  expansion  of  predictive  maintenance 
maintenance  which  emphases  on  quantify/predict  the  effect  of 
maintenance  decisions  before  they  are  made.  Its  goal  is  to 
recommend what mitigation or maintenance actions and by when 
they  need  to  be  done  on  an  asset.  Predictive  Maintenance  is  the 
most  prevalent  strategy  presently.  Currently  50%  of 
the 
manufacturers have established continuous improvement teams for 
condition based and RCM activities [1]. 

2.4 Intelligent Maintenance 

While  Industry  4.0  is  revolutionizing  every  aspect  of  industrial 
process and turning what was unimaginable into reality, like real 
time  plant-wide  optimization  and  scheduling,  manufacturing 

without access to laptop or workstation? 

In  the  next  section,  we  introduce  a  framework  needed  to  tackle 
these challenges and advance towards Intelligent Maintenance and 
discuss the barriers and opportunities for practical implementation.  

3 

 Intelligent Maintenance Framework   

This  Intelligent  Maintenance  framework  is  composed  of  five 
elements as shown in the yellow colored part of Figure 1 and which 
we will discuss in detail in this section. 

3.1 AI/Machine Learning Applied to Reliability 

3.3.1 Supervised Learning 

Regression  and  classification  are  two  most  common  Supervised 
Learning  approaches.  For  equipment  failure  prediction,  a 
regression  formulation  can  be  employed  to  predict  when  an  in-
service machine will fail in the future, so that maintenance can be 
planned  in  advance.  Estimates  of  Remaining  Useful  Life  (RUL) 
and Time to Failure (TTF) are the most common regression targets. 
Machine  learning  models  employed  toward  that  end  include 
Boosted  Decision  Trees  Regression,  Random  Forest  Regression, 
Poisson Regression, and Neural Network-based Regression.  

On the other hand, the same equipment failure prediction problem 
can be framed as classification: either as a Binary Classification to 
predict  if  an  asset  will  fail  within  certain  time  window  (e.g., 
30 days), or as a Multi-class Classification to predict if an asset will 
fail in one of different time windows: e.g., fails in window [0, w0] 
days, fails in the window [w0+1, w1] days, … fails in the window 
[wn+1, wn+1] days and not fail within wn+1 days. Logistic Regression, 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree, Random Forrest, 
eXtreme  Gradient  Boosting  (XGBoost)  and  Neural  Network  are 

  
 
 
 
 
Advancing from Predictive Maintenance to Intelligent 
Maintenance with AI and IIoT 

common  algorithms.  In  addition,  classification  models  can  help 
identify failure types. 

3.3.2 Unsupervised Learning 

Anomaly  detection  is  the  most  common  unsupervised  learning 
framework for maintenance analytics. It’s used to detect anomalies 
in  equipment  or  system  performance  or  functionality.  K-means, 
Isolation Forrest, Local Outlier Factor (LOF) are mostly commonly 
used models. 

3.3.3 Probabilistic approach 

As Data Science practitioners, we are facing significant challenges 
arising from actual manufacturing systems, such as: 

(1)  Low  accuracy  of  the  maintenance  records  (labels),  and  large 
number  of  undocumented  and  “unrelated”  shutdown  and 
maintenance events add noise to the data. 

(2) Run to failure is rare due to the high cost of unplanned capability 
loss. Thus the decision to conduct  maintenance is often complex 
and  involves  substantial  experience,  engineering,  and  logistical 
judgement. It could be performed long after the event occurred due 
to  lack  of  parts  or  before  any  event  as  a  preventive  measure 
(planned  maintenance),  or  sometimes  multiple  parts  are  replaced 
together  based  on  opportunity  and  engineering  judgement.  This 
further  increases  difficulty  to  collect  data  and  interpolate  data 
correctly. 

(3)  High-degree  of  nonlinear  temporal  and  multidimensional 
correlations between different types of upstream and downstream 
sensor data. 

(4) The fundamental physics behind the manufacturing system is 
highly nonlinear and non-explicit. 

(5) Process and sensor variables are often non-Gaussian distributed, 
which prevents simple statistical analysis and methods. 

(6) The normal operating condition, which defines the baseline for 
anomaly detection algorithms, is constantly changing and difficult 
to define even with a domain expert’s help. 

Thus,  Probabilistic  approaches,  such  as  a  recently  developed 
Bayesian  recurrent  neural  network  (BRNN)  architecture  [16-18], 
can help address a few key aspects of these challenges and serve as 
an  example  to  demonstrate  how  latest  development  of  machine 
learning can help advance predictive maintenance in section 4.  

3.2 IIoT and Smart Sensors 

The fast development of Industrial IoT helps achieve real-time data 
acquisition and connect isolated data source to corporate network 

KDD’20, August, 2020, San Diego, California USA 

with wireless sensors.  Edge computing technology enables model 
building  and  its  deployment  at  distributed  IoT  edge  devices. 
Nevertheless, even the best-in-class companies, only 30% of them 
have  IIoT  platforms  to  collect  device  data,  build  smart  apps  and 
enable  industrial  scale  analytics  for  application  performance 
management while the laggards were at 10% in 2017 [1].  

3.3 Big Data Analytics  

Big  Data  are  usually  branded  using  the  famous  3  Vs  (Volume, 
Velocity  and  Variety)  –  large  volume  of  data  streaming  at  high 
velocity  with  different  varieties  of  datatypes  from  relational 
databases to unstructured and semi-structured data.  Hadoop Data 
Lake serves as the primary repository for incoming streams of raw 
data  and  data  is  stored  in  the  Hadoop  Distributed  File  System 
(HDFS) after being processed by extract, transform and load (ETL) 
integration jobs. Then the data can be used for advanced analytics 
by running through a processing engine like Spark, which enables 
users to run large-scale data analytics applications across clustered 
systems in parallel.  

While  large  organizations  mostly  deployed  Big  Data  system  on 
premises, particularly in early days, public cloud platform vendors, 
such  as  Microsoft  Azure,  Amazon  Web  Services  (AWS)  and 
Google  Cloud  Platform  (GCP)  have  each  obtained  significant 
market  share.  Hybrid  Cloud  is  a  recent  trend  with  mixed 
computing,  storage,  and  services  environment  made  up  of  on-
premises  infrastructure,  private  cloud  services,  and  public  cloud 
services with benefits of security, control, agility and cost. 

3.4 Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment  

Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment (CICD) helps 
to keep models deployed up to date without causing disruptions to 
production.  While  Continuous  Integration  (CI)  establishes  a 
consistent  and  automated  way  to  build,  package,  and  test 
applications, Continuous delivery (CD) automates the delivery of 
applications  to  selected  environments  (development,  testing  or 
production).  CI/CD  automation  performs  any  necessary  service 
calls  to  web  servers,  databases,  and  other  services  and  keeps  the 
deployed  Machine  Leaning  models  up  to  date  without  causing 
disruptions to production. 

3.5 Mobility and VR/AR 

Mobile devices provide engineers access to job orders, equipment 
statics,  machine  schematics  and  part  inventory  in  real  time  and 
instantaneous visualizations in the field, such that they can make 
fast  and  enhanced  decisions  without  traveling  back  and  forth 
between offices and field. 

One  step  further,  Virtual  Reality  (VR)  and  Augmented  Reality 
(AR)  technologies  can  simulate  key  processes  and  performing 
virtual tests of production lines and equipment and helps pinpoint 

 
 
KDD’20, August, 2020, San Diego, California USA 

mistakes  which  could  lead  to  potential  disruptions  and  eliminate 
them before they stall operations. 

time-sequences of 50 samples and the Adam optimizer. Stopping 
was determined by early-stopping on a 10% validation set. 

4 Case Study  
We now demonstrate how to leverage recent advances in machine 
learning  discussed  in  section  3.1  and  increasing  levels  of  sensor 
data from IIoT networks discussed in section 3.2 to help advance 
from predictive maintenance to intelligent maintenance and tackle 
several aspects of the previously mentioned challenges. 

4.1 Approach 

In the following, we use the recently proposed Bayesian recurrent 
neural network (BRNN) framework with variational dropout [15-
17].  BRNNs  model  the  joint  distribution  and  nonlinear  complex 
dynamics between all variables (i.e., machine settings and sensor 
measurements).  Through  variational  dropout,  BRNNs  yield 
estimates of the prediction uncertainty, which capture both model 
uncertainty  and  the  inherent  noise  in  the  data.  These  mean  that 
BRNN  modeling  tackles  four  of  the  aforementioned  challenges: 
(1) nonlinear  spatio-temporal  correlations 
(i.e.,  correlations 
between  variables  and  time  lags),  (2) non-Gaussianity  in  system 
variables, (3) characterization of uncertainty in the predictions, and 
(4) data-driven modeling, without the need for explicit models of 
the system. Furthermore, the dropout technique used in the training 
of these models inherently regularizes and improves the robustness 
of the predictions. 

BRNNs  were  implemented  using  the  dropout  technique  at  both 
training  and  testing.  The  goal  is  use  dropout  as  a  variational 
approximation for efficient inference. For predictions, this involves 
drawing samples of the model and evaluating each model sample. 
The model samples are obtained by applying dropout which drops 
randomly selected inputs, outputs, and hidden states. This results in 
multiple random realizations of the RNN model, each obtained by 
implicitly removing a portion of the inputs, outputs, or hidden states. 
One  can  then  collect  statistics  over  the  predictive  distribution, 
which  characterize  uncertainty  in  the  model  predictions.  This 
approach  can  be  implemented  in  Keras  with  TensorFlow  rather 
easily. 

Specifically, the BRNN models used comprised 2 layers of LSTM 
nodes, each with 100 and 50 nodes respectively, and followed by a 
single-output dense  layer  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2.  Dropout  was 
applied in 3 places: (1) in the input of second LSTM layer with a 
drop rate of 10%, (2) in the states between time lags of both LSTM 
layers  with a drop rate of 10%,  and (3) in the inputs of the final 
dense  layer  with  a  drop  rate  of  20%.  The  network  training  used 

Figure 2. BRNN model neural net architecture schematics. 

4.2 Turbofan Engine Degradation Dataset [19]  

This  methodology  is  demonstrated  using  a  turbofan  engine 
degradation dataset. Since the Turbofan Engine is highly expensive 
to fix, predicting its time to failure (TTF) can help prevent turbofan 
failures, and minimize downtime. Failure probabilities will inform 
technicians to monitor turbofan engines that are likely to fail soon, 
and schedule maintenance regimes. 

IIoT sensors monitor the status of critical operating components by 
recording vibration, temperature and pressure. Data can be gathered 
from multiple turbofan engines in various regions and transmitted 
to cloud for batch processing and further predictive analytics. 

The dataset used here was obtained by simulation using C-MAPSS 
and was used as benchmark in the challenge competition held at the 
1st 
international  conference  on  Prognostics  and  Health 
Management  (PHM08).  Four  different  datasets  were  simulated 
under a number of combinations of operating conditions and failure 
modes. The recordings include a total of 24 variables recordings: 3 
settings  variables  (i.e.,  system  inputs)  and  21  sensor  variables  to 

  
 
 
 
 
Advancing from Predictive Maintenance to Intelligent 
Maintenance with AI and IIoT 

characterize the “system health”. All test sequences were stopped 
before the actual failure event, but the time-to-failure was recorded. 

The  problem  was  formulated  as  a  binary  classification  task 
corresponding to whether a failure is likely to occur within the next 
30 days, as discussed in section 3.1.1. 

4.3 Results 

The performance of this method is demonstrated and contrasted to 
a standard RNN, which are widely applied to process time series 
predictions  in  the  industry.  Figure    presents  a  test  prediction 
example an engine that was going to fail. Although the simulation 
was  halted  before  failure,  the  yellow  shaded  area  indicates  the 
warning time window that a failure would occur in 30 or less days. 
Note that the BRNN yield a predictive distribution, shown in the 
figure using shaded bands corresponding to the 10 to 90 percentile 
range and 25 to 75 percentile range. The center curve is the median 
predicted probability of failure. 

By aligning with respect to the warning window, we similarly show 
the  test  predictive  distribution  results  for  engines  known  to  be 
approaching  failure  in  Figure  .  The  results  show  that  BRNN 
robustly  indicates  with  high  probability  when  the  engines  are 
approaching the failure. 

Figure 3: BRNN distribution of probability of failure for an 
engine that would fail. The shaded region denotes the 30 day 
to failure time window. 

KDD’20, August, 2020, San Diego, California USA 

Figure 4: BRNN distribution of probability of failure for all 
test engines known to be approaching failure. 

For comparison, the results using a standard RNN model and with 
similar architecture are shown in Figure . There is increased spread 
between the curves and the probability of failure increases before 
the  30 day  time  window  for  a  number  of  engines.  Thus, 
maintenance decisions based on these predictions would likely lead 
to  a  larger  number/more  frequent  maintenance  events,  thereby 
reducing slightly the uplift of the predictive maintenance system. 

Figure 5: Probability of failure for an engine predicted by 
standard RNN. 

4.4 Discussion 

The case study shows how advances in BRNNs can help advance 
current predictive maintenance practices. There are still a number 
of open challenges however. The example relied on labels of when 
the  failure  occurred.  How  to  learn  and  infer  the  need  for 
maintenance  with  perhaps  only  a  few  examples  or  without  even 
letting  reach  that  point  remains  a  research  topic.  One  approach 
could involve an increased role of survival analysis  models ([20] 
but they still need enough examples to learn the underlying model 
feature representation. Another recent development that may help 
alleviate this issue are self-supervised learning techniques [21] for 
learning the model feature representation without labels. 

Yet  another  consideration  toward  Intelligent  Maintenance  is  that 
prediction of the need for maintenance is only the beginning. As 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[11] D. Singh, G. Tripathi, A. J. Jara (2014). A survey of internet-of-things: future 
vision, architecture, challenges and services. Proc. IEEE World Forum on 
Internet of Things, 287-292.  

[12] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, M. Palaniswami (2013). Internet of Things 
(IoT): a vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future 
Generation Computer Systems. February 1645-1660.  

[13] W. Z. Khan, M. Y. Aalsalem, M. K. Khan, M. S. Hossain, M. Atiquzzaman 
(2017). A Reliable Internet of Things based Architecture for Oil and Gas 
Industry. International Conference on Advanced Communications Technology, 
19-22.  

[14] M. Y. Aalsalem, W. Z. Khan, W. Gharibi, M. K. Khan, Q. Arshad (2018). 

Wireless Sensor Networks in oil and gas industry: Recent advances, taxonomy, 
requirements, and open challenges. Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications, 113, 87-97.  

[15] N. Awalgaonkar, H. Zheng, C. Gurciullo, “DEEVA: A Deep Learning and IoT 
Based Computer Vision System to Address Safety and Security of Production 
Sites in Energy Industry”, The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI-20) Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) Workshop, 
New York, NY, Feb. 7-11, 2020 http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.01196 

[16] Y. Gal, Z. Ghahramani (2016a), A theoretically grounded application of dropout 

in recurrent neural networks, in Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems, pp. 1019-1027. 

[17] Y. Gal, Z. Ghahramani (2016b), Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: 
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning, in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.1050-1059. 

[18] W. Sun, A. R. Paiva, P. Xu, A. Sundaram, R. D. Braatz (2020), Fault Detection 

and Identification using Bayesian Recurrent Neural Networks, Computers & 
Chemical Engineering, Volume 141, 106991, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2020.106991   

[19] Turbofan Engine Degradation Simulation Data Set, NASA Ames Prognostics 

Data Repository (https://ti.arc.nasa.gov/tech/dash/groups/pcoe/prognostic-
data-repository/#turbofan), NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 

[20] D. G. Kleinbaum, M. Klein, (2010), Survival Analysis, Springer. 
[21] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, A. A. Efros (2015). Unsupervised visual representation 
learning by context prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 1422-1430). 

[22] F. Fan, J. Xiong, G. Wang (2020). On Interpretability of Artificial Neural 

Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02522. 

KDD’20, August, 2020, San Diego, California USA 

previously mentioned, in practice many other considerations need 
to be taken into account when managing an inventory of machines, 
such  as  logistic  considerations  and  parts  availability.  Thus,  the 
result  of  the  predictive  maintenance  model  should  be  input  for 
schedule management optimization such as to minimize overall risk 
of failure. It is in that respect that uncertainty in the predictions of 
the model play a major role because they provide an optimizer with 
the ability to estimate how eminent is the failure. 

Finally,  the  goal  of  these  systems  is  to  inform  operators,  which 
often have many years of experience and engineering judgement. 
Hence, the ability to understand the why for the guidance from such 
systems is crucial. In that respect, neural network-based methods 
are  notoriously  opaque, but this is  a  very  active  area  of  research 
[22]. 

5 Conclusions 
In this paper, we reviewed past maintenance strategy and discussed 
the  evolution  of  reliability  technology.  Benefiting  from  the 
development of Artificial Intelligent and Industrial IoT technology, 
we  introduced  the  next  generation  maintenance  framework, 
Intelligent Maintenance, and discussed its key components. It’s a 
AI and IIoT based maintenance framework that combines the real-
time data collection, transfer, and storage through wireless sensors 
and  Big  Data  technologies,  continuously  train  and  deploy  the 
machine learning models, and implementation at mobile device, as 
well  as  AR/VR,  for  fast  and  better  decision  making  in  the  field. 
Finally, a case study was presented as example of methods that will 
enable 
the  above  framework.  With  72%  of  organizations 
considering  zero  unplanned  downtime  as  the  No. 1  priority  or  a 
high  priority[6],  advancing  from  Predictive  Maintenance  to 
Intelligent  Maintenance  with  AI  and  IIoT  is  a  solid  step  for  the 
ultimate goal of autonomous running manufacturing lines 24/7 with 
zero downtime in future enterprise. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The  authors  would  like  acknowledge  helpful  discussions  and 
support from Sasha Mitarai, Prasenjeet Ghosh, Peng Xu, Timothy 
Westhoven, Liezhong Gong, Jeff Ludwig and Anantha Sundaram. 

REFERENCES 
[1] Aberdeen report (2016), Maintaining Virtual System Uptime in Today’s 

Transforming IT Infrastructure 

[2] J. Moubray (2001). Reliability centered maintenance, Industrial Press Inc. 
[3] A. K. S. Jardine, A. H. C. Tsang (2013). Maintenance, replacement, and 

reliability: theory and applications, CRC press. 

[4] W. Q. Meeker, L. A. Escobar (1998), Statistical Methods for Reliability Data, 

Wiley-Interscience 

[5] R. K. Mobley (2002). An Introduction to Predictive Maintenance, Butterworth-

Heinemann.  

[6] Vanson Bourne global study (2017), After the Fall: Cost, Causes and 

Consequences of Unplanned Downtime. 

[7] C. M.  Bishop (2016), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer-

Verlag New York 

[8] T. Hastie (2009), The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, 

[9] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville (2016). Deep Learning, MIT Press 

and Prediction, Springer-Verlag, New York 

[10] A. Colakovic, M. Hadzialic (2018).Internet of Things (IoT): A review of 

enabling technologies, challenges, and open research issues. Computer 
Networks, 144, 17-39.  

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
