Towards a Practical Virtual Ofﬁce for Mobile Knowledge
Workers
Jens Grubert
Coburg University of Applied
Sciences

Michel Pahud
Microsoft Research

Eyal Ofek
Microsoft Research

0
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
9
2
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mark Phillips
Coburg University of Applied
Sciences

Per Ola Kristensson
University of Cambridge

Figure 1. Left: Virtual Reality (VR) enables customized ofﬁce environments, including large displays and background disturbance reduction, even in
challenging environments such as airplanes. To this end, the interaction space is designed to be as small as possible to avoid interfering with the physical
environment. Middle: A user interacts with remote participants in a physical ofﬁce over a tabletop using physical screens as surrogates [59]. Right:
The same setting in VR with virtual representation of users.

ABSTRACT
As more people work from home or during travel, new op-
portunities and challenges arise around mobile ofﬁce work.
On one hand, people may work at ﬂexible hours, independent
of trafﬁc limitations, but on the other hand, they may need
to work at makeshift spaces, with less than optimal working
conditions and decoupled from co-workers. Virtual Reality
(VR) has the potential to change the way information workers
work: it enables personal bespoke working environments even
on the go and allows new collaboration approaches that can
help mitigate effects of physical distance. In this paper, we
investigate opportunities and challenges for realizing a mobile
VR ofﬁces environments and discuss implications from re-
cent ﬁndings of mixing standard off-the-shelf equipment, such
as tablets, laptops or desktops, with VR to enable effective,
efﬁcient, ergonomic and rewarding mobile knowledge work.
Further, we investigate the role of conceptual and physical
spaces in a mobile VR ofﬁce.

Author Keywords
Virtual reality; virtual knowledge work; virtual ofﬁce work;
mobile virtual reality.

INTRODUCTION
The concept of the ofﬁce as we know it is changing and this
notion has only accelerated with the COVID-19 pandemic and
the resulting wide-scale lock-downs that has suddenly forced
millions of workers to carry out their work tasks in home
environments that may be ill-suited for prolonged ofﬁce work.

The COVID-19 crisis has also highlighted the challenges in
supporting effective collaborative environments and given rise
to new problems, such as as “zoom fatigue”1, the phenomenon
that extended videoconferencing tends to exhaust workers.

In general, more people are working in locations far from phys-
ical ofﬁce building or while on the move. While this transition
can induce many positive effects, such as enabling ﬂexible
hours, reducing time spent in trafﬁc and enable workers to
live in far away locations, it does require workers to be able
to carry out productive work in environments that might be
less than optimal. The worker may need to use a small home
ofﬁce, or a makeshift work-space on the go, crumbed in an
airplane seat, surrounded by a crowd of people with no privacy,
or using a small desk in a hotel room. Furthermore, working
from afar may strain collaboration with co-workers.

Another major change is the plurality of devices that users
employ today. While in the past, most of the information work
was done on stationary desktop PCs or relative mobile laptops
that enabled a few hours of work but using limited input and
a ﬁxed small screen. Nowadays, user may carry ultra-mobile
phones and tablets that can be used in small spaces but are
limited in their input space and display sizes, as well as larger
devices whenever there is more space or accessibility to power

1https://www.nationalgeographic.co.
uk/science-and-technology/2020/04/
zoom-fatigue-is-taxing-the-brain-heres-why-that-happens
Last access July 2nd, 2020

 
 
 
 
 
 
and WiFi. Cloud tools, enable to easily transfer data and
documents between the devices, yet editing capabilities varies
drastically between devices.

In recent years, VR technology has been progressed by leaps
and bounds. Head-mounted devices (HMDs) have become
light, cheap, supporting high-resolution displays that are on
par with available screens (such as HP Reverb’s 2160 x 2160
display), they may use inside-out optical tracking, which re-
quires no special setups of the user’s environment, enable
optical hand tracking for controller-less interaction, support
video pass-through for occasional interaction with the external
world and be driven by existing laptops and tablets. While
much of the hype around VR has focused on immersive gam-
ing and entertainment, in this work, we focus on the use of
mobile VR headset as a solution for many of the problems
raised before.

Past works such as the ofﬁce of the future by Raskar et al.
[50], looked how to support immersive and ﬂuid collabora-
tive knowledge work. They utilized projection systems that
increased the display area seen by the user and enabled the
transition between different work stations. Building on this
idea, without the need of instrumenting the user’s environment,
research has proposed to user consumer-oriented HMDs to
extend the display space and mold a uniﬁed work space using
multitude common devices, such as laptops and tablets [19].
We suggest a novel immersive work-space that enables the
user to work in a similar fashion at a large variance of real
physical environments. We direct our design space at the use
of large display space but at the same time, small physical
space that limits the input to the physical devices used by the
user such as a tablet and their immediate vicinity.

Furthermore, the sensing of VR HMDs enables extended col-
laboration than available by the devices alone. Beside sharing
documents between co-workers and enabling co-edit of them,
it is possible to render the reference space between multi-
ple users for better collaborations [59], that is unlimited by
physical limitations exist in real environments.

RELATED WORK
There has been different works that relate to the mobile VR of-
ﬁce work presented in this paper, mostly in the areas of mixed
reality (MR), information windows in spatial environments;
and spatial interaction.

Early work on supporting knowledge workers using MR inves-
tigated the instrumentation of the ofﬁce by projection systems
to extend the interaction space in the ofﬁce, e.g. [37] [48]
[65]. Later, research begun exploring MR for similar uses but
focusing on the use of HMDs [19, 24, 51]. Different tasks,
such as text entry (e.g., [21], system control [68, 67] and visual
analytics [62] have been the focus of research. Those works
were mostly looking at people working on a desktop PC, us-
ing the large interaction space of VR [8] with controllers or
hand gestures [38], which do not ﬁt the requirements for small
interaction space of uncontrolled physical environment.

The large display space of VR attracted researchers looking at
organizing information around the user [31, 42]. From head
and world references windows [14], arranging displays in a

cylinder around the user [4], to different coordinates system
referring to the user’s environment, and object, user’s body or
head [32]. Past works looked at fast access to virtual items [9,
40], multitasking [12] and visual analytics [13].

While VR enables large display space in any physical envi-
ronment, most past works did not addressed the limitation
of small input space that may be available for the user. We
are looking at different ways in which we may increased the
expressiveness of the user without using large gestures. While
current devices such as tablets and phones enable only 2D
display and touch input, we are looking at extending the in-
formation display and interaction in the depth direction too,
displaying different layers of information, and use the interac-
tion space only or near the tablet in order to support interaction
in constrained physical spaces [3, 15, 19, 41].

We draw on these rich sources of interaction ideas [32, 2, 43,
18, 7] and adopt techniques in the context of VR interaction
with touchscreens for mobile knowledge workers. Our work
complements multimodal techniques combining touch and
mid-air [27, 44], gaze-based techniques [47, 29] and ideas for
combining HMDs with touchscreens [17, 45] through novel
techniques for accessing virtual windows around or behind a
physical touchscreen.

DESIGN ASPECTS FOR MOBILE VR WORK
VR headsets can decouple workers from their physical envi-
ronments and transport them the virtual environment, thereby
allowing the user to work in a private virtual ofﬁce controlled
by them. The system may map limited input space to full
control of the large display space (see Figure 1 left). It may
enable collaboration between far away workers in a way that is
not possible in a physical space. In the following subsections
we will describe these advantages.

Work Environment Control
As described by Grubert et al. [19], the available work environ-
ment for the worker on the go may be sub-optimal, including
obstacles for interaction in the vicinity of the user, lack of good
illumination, a multitude visual and audio disturbances, lack
of privacy and more. Using VR HMDs, users can generate
their familiar ideal environments of their liking reducing to
adapt to new context, layout around them, masking them for
external visual and audio disturbances. While many virtual
application use a large input space and enable people to roam
inside a virtual space and operate using the full reach of their
arms, in this paper we are focusing on using small input space
and in particular use input spaces of devices such as a tablet,
due to the following reasons: The use of large input gestures
comes at the price of the amount of energy invested by the
users [28], and there are situations such as in an airplane or
touchdown spaces where there is not enough room to do ample
movements. To enable the user to work a full work day and
reduce the exhaustion, we expect the user to do small gestures
using supported hands, very similar to the gestures she would
have done near her desk at the ofﬁce. In fact, in the virtual
world, which may not adhere to the physical laws of reality,
small user gestures may reduce the amount of work users are
needed to do today, such as locomotion, reaching toward far

Figure 2. Visually Scrambling the layout of a virtual keyboard, enables
the user to type a password without worry of other people in his physical
vicinity [55].

objects. Also, while the virtual display space maybe as large
as we wish, interaction space may be limited by the physical
environment. By designing interaction for a small input space,
the user may be able to keep his familiar working gestures and
muscle memory in many different physical environments.

Privacy and Social Acceptability
One critical design aspect for VR ofﬁce workers situated in
uncontrolled environments, such as shared ofﬁce spaces, trains,
airplanes, cafes or public spaces, is preventing eavesdropping
of at least highly sensitive information, such as passwords.
While VR HMDs are inherently personal and do not expose
the displays to people around the user, the input gestures of
the user are exposed to the public around her. Schneider et al.
[55] addressed the use of standard keyboards while working in
VR. By augmenting the arrangement of the keyboards as seen
in the VR space they obfuscate the entry of passwords by the
user 2. In a similar fashion, the use of private display space
that can be rearranged without the knowledge of an external
viewer to hide the semantics of inputs such as stylus strokes
or soft keyboards to protect sensitive data input.

When using VR HMDs in public spaces, one also needs to
consider the social acceptability of those interactions [22]. For
example, Schwind et al. [56] indicated, that VR HMDs are
accepted to be used in public spaces, but only when social
interaction between physical present people is not expected.
For example, users acceptance of VR HMDs in settings such
as public transportation (trains or busses) was signiﬁcantly
higher than in a public cafe. Williamson et al. [66], high-
lighted the need for allowing for transitioning between physi-
cal and virtual worlds to allow to accommodate dealing with
interruptions when using VR HMDs on airplanes. Eghbali
et al. [11], put forward design recommendations for socially
acceptable use of VR in public spaces, again recommending
to be able to interact with the physical space and users in VR
and ideas how to achieve this have been proposed [41, 23, 25].

Re-appropriating Input Devices
Information worker uses a slew of input devices, some of them
have little changed over tens of years. For example, the physi-
cal keyboard is still the most known and preferred input device
for text entry. The use of a VR HMD obscure the view of the
keyboard from the user, and the application renders a virtual
view of the keyboard. Since the virtual environment is not
bound the limitation of the physical world, it is possible to
change the look and functionally of the device according to ap-
plication needs [55]. Figure 3 shows two different dimensions
in which a physical keyboard may be augmented for different
use in VR. The output mapping, or the way the keyboard is

Figure 3. Input-output dimensions of reconﬁguring physical keyboards
in virtual reality with mapped example applications. The x-axis shows
input mappings and the y-axis shows output mappings [55].

rendered in VR can change the functionalities of keys on the
keyboard. Some keys may not be displayed to direct the user
to speciﬁc keys, some keys may be rendered as one big key for
easier selection, or just changing the functionalities of keys.
Another option is to use a small portable keyboard, and change
it’s keys functionality according to need to simulate a full size
keyboard. The input dimension changes the understanding
of a signal from the keyboard. While the default semantics
is that each key has a unique input signal, it is also possible
to combine several keys to one big key or even use the full
keyboard to sense 2D location of a press.

The same type of augmentation may be used on other devices,
whether it is a mouse or track pad a touch screen or a sty-
lus. for example, adding new semantics for mouse buttons,
wheel or movement directions, or a stylus that represents it’s
functionality.

Retargeting Visuals of Input Space
The limited input space may not allow for comfortable viewing.
For example, when interacting with a tablet laying on a tray
of an airplane seat, it may not be easy to tilt the HMD down
to look at the tablet and the hands around it. Following the
work of Grubert et al. [21], the display of the tablet and the
user hands may be retargeted from their physical space to lie
in the user’s ﬁeld of view, see Figure 4. Grubert et al [21]
found that if the user is typing on a physical keyboard there is
no performance penalty in such retargeting, and when using a
soft keyboard that lacks of haptic feedback, there is a minor
speed penalty, but it enables much improved ergonomics for
the user’s head.

Such a difference between the input space and it’s correspond-
ing display may enable better utilization of the physical af-
fordances of the user’s environment, regardless of the display
space. For example, changing a continuous parameter, such as
audio volume, can be achieved by moving a slider on a tablet.
However, this requires the user to target their ﬁnger to the
slider and visually determine the new position for the slider.
The extended sensing of the HMDs may allow for tracking
users’ ﬁngers while they are away from the tablet, and re-
appropriate natural physical landmarks, such as a handle of a
chair or the side edge of a tablet or a tray, to guide the ﬁnger
as it moves the slider.

Figure 4. Retargeting the input space and the user hand to a location
easier seen by the user [21].

Sharing Reference Spaces
When people collaborate in physical environments, we can
deﬁne different spaces of collaboration [59]: Task space is
where the work appears. For the information worker this is
usually a set of documents such as spreadsheets, text docu-
ments, shared whiteboard, etc.. Most modern applications
let multiple people edit the same document concurrently on-
line. The user may see the locations of the other people edits,
send comments between users and so on. Person space are
where verbal and facial cues are used for expression. Video
and audio chat applications can be used to realize this level
of communication. However, in physical environment, people
also use reference space where remote parties can use body
language, such as pointing, to refer to the work, organize the
separation of work to different participants and more. Figure
1, middle, shows an ofﬁce that has these three spaces with a
local participant A and remote participants B and C. Figure
1 right, shows the same ofﬁce virtually created when user A
wears a HMD.

The use of VR HMDs opens up several opportunities for com-
munication of the reference space, some even beyond the
collaboration in a physical environment. For example, the
pointing direction of users hands or gaze can be visualized for
highlighting relevant objects and facilitating collaboraiton in
VR [54, 46, 49, 64]. Tang et al. [59] looked at different ar-
rangements for collaborators around a table Task space. They
found that if people sitting around the document as they tend
to do in a physical environment are visualized, it is easy to as-
sociate the gestures with people, however each person sees the
document from a different direction. They also tried to render
all users hands as if they all sit in one locations, but associating
the hands with different users proved to be confusing. VR
HMDs enable new arrangements, where all collaborators may
see the task space from the same point of view, but translating
their avatars and hand gestures, as if they are sitting around
the task space for easy associations.

Further, as people tend to work from a far, there is a start-
ing option of virtual room mates: People that are rendered
as working in the user’s vicinity, and if the user is moving
her body toward a virtual neighbour it can originate conver-
sations and ad-hoc collaborations. If on the other hand the
user is concentrating on a speciﬁc problem, it may fade out
the neighbours to help the user concentration.

Architectural Space
While VR has a long tradition of being used as design tool
for constructing architectural spaces [63], designing purely
virtual worlds for productive use from an architectural per-
spective has not seen detailed attention, yet. Often, virtual
ofﬁce environments have been modelled to be replicas from

physical rooms [36], or abstract ofﬁce spaces [21, 20]. Only
recently, researchers have begun to investigate the effects of
virtual space and place on ofﬁce work. For example, Ruvi-
mova et al. [51] indicated that VR environments (like working
on a virtual beach) can outperform work done in a physical
open ofﬁce in terms of ﬂow and performance. Guo et al. [24]
were inspired by insights on the positive effects of elements of
nature on workers well-being [1] and used a naturalistic envi-
ronment for studying long term work in a VR ofﬁce. Still, a
number of research questions remain to fully utilize the power
of well designed VR spaces for mobile knowledge workers
such as:

How much congruence between physical and virtual space
do ofﬁce workers need to work productively, safely, healthy
and enjoyably? When working in a physical environment,
co-located with other users, questions about awareness in
VR ofﬁce environments rise [41, 30, 34]. Also, transitions
between physical and virtual world have been studied , e.g., in
terms of presence [35, 58, 57, 60, 33]. However, the effects of
awareness and transition techniques on ﬂow and productivity
of knowledge workers have just begun to be explored [16, 52].
Also, it remains an open challenge, how spatial design can
support communication both with physically co-located and
remote users.

What is the impact of architectural design on virtual ofﬁce
environments? Large IT companies have invested substan-
tial resources to design and build physical ofﬁce buildings
such as Amazon spheres, Facebook Menlo Park, Apple Park
or Google Mountain View. Aspects such as spatial dimen-
sions, visibility, materials and lighting or the soundscape of
an environment have seen great attention to facilitate chance
encounters and physical meetings and still allow workers to
focus on individual tasks, if needed. This has partly been done
due to the observations that architectural design can support
collaboration, productivity and creativity [6, 10, 61, 53]. How-
ever, with recent trends to increase work from the home ofﬁce,
even with its positive effects on workers [26], these goals are
at stake. Groupware tools such as Slack, Microsoft Teams
or Workplace by Facebook focus at productivity and hardly
replace planed or chance personal interactions. It remains an
open question if properly spatially design virtual ofﬁce envi-
ronments can have similar effects on collaboration as physical
ofﬁce environments. To this end, studies are needed which
carefully compare effects of architectural and virtual space.
This is especially challenging, as potential confounds such as
technology artefacts [5] or user embodiment [39] have to be
considered as well.

Another open question to study is related to how a virtual
environment could create opportunities and motivate partic-
ipants to have unscheduled casual meetings such as hallway
conversations, which can be a great contribution to a project,
reinforce the bounds between colleagues, and decrease the
isolation factor for remote workers. Hallway conversations
could also encompass side discussions between team members
next to the conference room that happen just after a meeting.
Experiences such as having a virtual hallway nearby the virtual
ofﬁce could be interesting to study.

CONCLUSIONS
As an increasing number of people work away from the offer
there is an opportunity to use VR to enhance they way we
work and collaborate. VR can, for example, disconnect the
worker from disturbances, allow the ofﬁce worker to virtually
recreate a familiar working environment, and enable new col-
laborative ways of working to improve efﬁciency and mitigate
the effect of people working at a distance. In this paper, we
have reported on recent ﬁndings in this emerging area and
discussed design aspects that need to be taken into account
to realize a practical mobile virtual ofﬁce: work environment
control, privacy and social acceptability, re-appropriation of
input devices, retargeting visuals of input space, sharing refer-
ence spaces and architectural space. Through this we hope to
spark further research in this rapidly expanding ﬁeld.

REFERENCES
[1] An, Colarelli, O’Brien, and Boyajian. 2016. Why we
need more nature at work: Effects of natural elements
and sunlight on employee mental health and work
attitudes. PloS one 11, 5 (2016), e0155614.

[2] Argelaguet and Andujar. 2013. A survey of 3D object

selection techniques for virtual environments.
Computers & Graphics 37, 3 (2013), 121–136.

[3] Biener, Schneider, Gesslein, Otte, Kuth, Kristensson,
Ofek, Pahud, and Grubert. 2020. Breaking the Screen:
Interaction Across Touchscreen Boundaries in Virtual
Reality for Mobile Knowledge Workers. In IEEE TVCG
(2020).

[4] Billinghurst and Starner. 1999. Wearable devices: new
ways to manage information. Computer 32, 1 (1999),
57–64.

[5] Bowman and McMahan. 2007. Virtual reality: how

much immersion is enough? Computer 40, 7 (2007),
36–43.

[6] Brill. 1984. Using ofﬁce design to increase productivity.

Workplace Design and Productivity (1984).

[7] Brudy, Holz, Rädle, Wu, Houben, Klokmose, and

Marquardt. 2019. Cross-Device Taxonomy: Survey,
Opportunities and Challenges of Interactions Spanning
Across Multiple Devices. In ACM CHI 2019. 562.

[8] Büschel, Chen, Dachselt, Drucker, Dwyer, Görg,
Isenberg, Kerren, North, and Stuerzlinger. 2018.
Interaction for immersive analytics. In Immersive
Analytics. Springer, 95–138.

[9] Chen, Marquardt, Tang, Boring, and Greenberg. 2012.
Extending a mobile devices interaction space through
body-centric interaction. In Int. Conf. on
Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and
services. ACM, 151–160.

[10] F Duffy. 2005. The impact of ofﬁce design on business
performance. Commission for Architecture and the Built
Environment and British Council for Ofﬁces, London
(2005).

[11] Pouya Eghbali, Kaisa Väänänen, and Tero Jokela. 2019.

Social acceptability of virtual reality in public spaces:
experiential factors and design recommendations. In
MUM 2019. 1–11.

[12] Ens, Finnegan, and Irani. 2014. The personal cockpit: a

spatial interface for effective task switching on
head-worn displays. In CHI 2014. ACM, 3171–3180.

[13] Ens and Irani. 2016. Spatial analytic interfaces: Spatial
user interfaces for in situ visual analytics. IEEE CG&A
37, 2 (2016), 66–79.

[14] Feiner, MacIntyre, Haupt, and Solomon. 1993. Windows
on the world: 2 D windows for 3 D augmented reality. In
UIST 1993. 145–155.

[15] Gesslein, Biener, Gagel, Schneider, Ofek, Pahud,

Kristensson, and Grubert. 2020. Pen-based Interaction
with Spreadsheets in Mobile Virtual Reality. In IEEE
ISMAR 2020.

[16] Ghosh, Winston, Panchal, Kimura-Thollander, Hotnog,
Cheong, Reyes, and Abowd. 2018. NotiﬁVR: exploring
interruptions and notiﬁcations in virtual reality. IEEE
TVCG 24, 4 (2018), 1447–1456.

[17] Grasset, Duenser, Seichter, and Billinghurst. 2007. The

mixed reality book: a new multimedia reading
experience. In CHI’07 extended abstracts. ACM,
1953–1958.

[18] Grubert, Kranz, and Quigley. 2016. Challenges in

mobile multi-device ecosystems. mUX: The Journal of
Mobile User Experience 5, 1 (2016), 5.

[19] Grubert, Ofek, Pahud, Kristensson, Steinicke, and

Sandor. 2018a. The ofﬁce of the future: Virtual, portable,
and global. IEEE CG&A 38, 6 (2018), 125–133.

[20] Grubert, Witzani, Ofek, Pahud, Kranz, and Kristensson.
2018b. Effects of hand representations for typing in
virtual reality. In IEEE VR 2018. 151–158.

[21] Grubert, Witzani, Ofek, Pahud, Kranz, and Kristensson.

2018c. Text entry in immersive head-mounted
display-based virtual reality using standard keyboards.
In IEEE VR 2018. 159–166.

[22] Gugenheimer, Mai, McGill, Williamson, Steinicke, and
Perlin. 2019. Challenges using head-mounted displays
in shared and social spaces. In CHI 2019 EA. 1–8.

[23] Gugenheimer, Stemasov, Frommel, and Rukzio. 2017.

Sharevr: Enabling co-located experiences for virtual
reality between hmd and non-hmd users. In ACM CHI
2017. 4021–4033.

[24] Guo, Weng, Zhang, Jiang, Liu, Wang, Duh, and Henry.
2019. Mixed reality ofﬁce system based on maslowâ ˘A ´Zs
hierarchy of needs: Towards the long-term immersion in
virtual environments. In ISMAR 2019. 224–235.

[25] Jeremy Hartmann, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and
Andrew D Wilson. 2019. RealityCheck: Blending
virtual environments with situated physical reality. In
ACM CHI 2019. 1–12.

[26] Hill, Ferris, and Märtinson. 2003. Does it matter where
you work? A comparison of how three work venues
(traditional ofﬁce, virtual ofﬁce, and home ofﬁce)
inﬂuence aspects of work and personal/family life.
Journal of Vocational Behavior 63, 2 (2003), 220–241.

[27] Hilliges, Izadi, Wilson, Hodges, Garcia-Mendoza, and
Butz. 2009. Interactions in the air: adding further depth
to interactive tabletops. In UIST 2009. ACM, 139–148.

[28] Hincapié-Ramos, Guo, Moghadasian, and Irani. 2014.
Consumed endurance: a metric to quantify arm fatigue
of mid-air interactions. In CHI 2014. 1063–1072.

[29] Hirzle, Gugenheimer, Geiselhart, Bulling, and Rukzio.

2019. A Design Space for Gaze Interaction on
Head-Mounted Displays. In CHI 2019. ACM, 625.

[30] Huang, Bai, Mandalika, and Lindeman. 2018.

Improving virtual reality safety precautions with depth
sensing. In Australian Conf. on Computer-Human
Interaction. 528–531.

[31] Hans-Christian Jetter, Roman Rädle, Tiare Feuchtner,

Christoph Anthes, Judith Friedl, and
Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose. 2020. " In VR,
everything is possible!": Sketching and Simulating
Spatially-Aware Interactive Spaces in Virtual Reality. In
ACM CHI 2020. 1–16.

[32] LaViola Jr, Kruijff, McMahan, Bowman, and Poupyrev.

2017. 3D user interfaces: theory and practice.
Addison-Wesley Professional.

[33] Jung, Wisniewski, and Hughes. 2018. In limbo: The

[40] Li, Dearman, and Truong. 2009. Virtual shelves:

interactions with orientation aware devices. In ACM
UIST 2009. ACM, 125–128.

[41] McGill, Boland, Murray-Smith, and Brewster. 2015. A
dose of reality: Overcoming usability challenges in vr
head-mounted displays. In ACM Conf. on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 2143–2152.

[42] Mark Mcgill, Aidan Kehoe, Euan Freeman, and Stephen
Brewster. 2020. Expanding the Bounds of Seated Virtual
Workspaces. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 3 (2020), 1–40.

[43] Mendes, Caputo, Giachetti, Ferreira, and Jorge. 2019. A
survey on 3d virtual object manipulation: From the
desktop to immersive virtual environments. In Computer
Graphics Forum, Vol. 38. Wiley Online Library, 21–45.

[44] Müller, Bailly, Bossuyt, and Hillgren. 2014.

MirrorTouch: combining touch and mid-air gestures for
public displays. In int. conf. on Human-computer
interaction with mobile devices & services. ACM,
319–328.

[45] Normand and McGufﬁn. 2018. Enlarging a smartphone
with AR to create a handheld VESAD (Virtually
Extended Screen-Aligned Display). In IEEE ISMAR
2018. 123–133.

[46] Thies Pfeiffer, Marc E Latoschik, and Ipke Wachsmuth.
2008. Conversational pointing gestures for virtual reality
interaction: implications from an empirical study. In
IEEE VR 2008. IEEE, 281–282.

effect of gradual visual transition between real and
virtual on virtual body ownership illusion and presence.
In IEEE VR 2018). 267–272.

[47] Pfeuffer, Ken, Mayer, Benedikt, Mardanbegi, Diako,
and Hans Gellersen. 2017. Gaze+ pinch interaction in
virtual reality. In ACM SUI 2017. ACM, 99–108.

[34] Kanamori, Sakata, Tominaga, Hijikata, Harada, and
Kiyokawa. 2018. Obstacle avoidance method in real
space for virtual reality immersion. In ISMAR 2018.
80–89.

[35] Kijima and Ojika. 1997. Transition between virtual
environment and workstation environment with
projective head mounted display. In IEEE 1997 Annual
Int. Symposium on VR. 130–137.

[36] Knierim, Schwind, Feit, Nieuwenhuizen, and Henze.

2018. Physical keyboards in virtual reality: Analysis of
typing performance and effects of avatar hands. In ACM
CHI 2018. 345.

[48] Pinhanez. The everywhere displays projector: A device

to create ubiquitous graphical interfaces. In UBICOM
2001. Springer, 315–331.

[49] Thammathip Piumsomboon, Arindam Dey, Barrett Ens,

Gun Lee, and Mark Billinghurst. 2019. The effects of
sharing awareness cues in collaborative mixed reality.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI 6 (2019), 5.

[50] Raskar, Welch, Cutts, Lake, Stesin, and Fuchs. 1998.
The ofﬁce of the future: A uniﬁed approach to
image-based modeling and spatially immersive displays.
In ACM conf. on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. 179–188.

[37] Kobayashi and Koike. 1998. EnhancedDesk: integrating

[51] Ruvimova, Kim, Fritz, Hancock, and Shepherd.

paper documents and digital documents. In IEEE Asia
Paciﬁc Computer Human Interaction (Cat. No.
98EX110). 57–62.

[38] Kry, Pihuit, Bernhardt, and Cani. Handnavigator:

Hands-on interaction for desktop virtual reality. In ACM
VRST 2008. 53–60.

"Transport Me Away": Fostering Flow in Open Ofﬁces
through Virtual Reality. In ACM CHI 2020. 1–14.

[52] Rzayev, Mayer, Krauter, and Henze. 2019. Notiﬁcation
in vr: The effect of notiﬁcation placement, task and
environment. In Symposium on Computer-Human
Interaction in Play. 199–211.

[39] Latoschik, Roth, Gall, Achenbach, Waltemate, and

[53] Sailer and Thomas. 2019. Correspondence and

Botsch. 2017. The effect of avatar realism in immersive
social virtual realities. In ACM VRST. 1–10.

Non-Correspondence: Using ofﬁce accommodation to
calculate an organisation’s propensity for new ideas.
(2019).

[54] Yuji Sato, Masayuki Takemura, Itaru Kitahara, Junichi
Hoshino, Yuichi Nakamura, and Yuichi Ohta. 2001.
Visualizing focus of attention in mixed reality
community space. In Proc. 11th Int. Conf. on Artiﬁcial
Reality and Telexistence. 141–146.

[55] Schneider, Otte, Gesslein, Gagel, Kuth, Damlakhi, Dietz,
Ofek, Pahud, Kristensson, Jörg Müller, and Jens Grubert.
2019. ReconViguRation: Reconﬁguring Physical
Keyboards in Virtual Reality. IEEE TVCG (2019).

[56] Valentin Schwind, Jens Reinhardt, Rufat Rzayev, Niels
Henze, and Katrin Wolf. 2018. Virtual reality on the go?
a study on social acceptance of VR glasses. In
MobileHCI 2018 Adjunct. 111–118.

[57] Steinicke, Bruder, Hinrichs, and Steed. 2010. Gradual

transitions and their effects on presence and distance
estimation. Computers & Graphics 34, 1 (2010), 26–33.

[58] Steinicke, Bruder, Hinrichs, Steed, and Gerlach. 2009.
Does a gradual transition to the virtual world increase
presence?. In IEEE VR 2009. 203–210.

[59] Anthony Tang, Michel Pahud, Kori Inkpen, Hrvoje

Benko, John C Tang, and Bill Buxton. 2010. Three’s
company: understanding communication channels in
three-way distributed collaboration. In ACM CSCW
2010. 271–280.

[60] Dimitar Valkov and Steffen Flagge. 2017. Smooth
immersion: the beneﬁts of making the transition to
virtual environments a continuous process. In
Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Spatial User
Interaction. 12–19.

[61] Ben Waber, Jennifer Magnolﬁ, and Greg Lindsay. 2014.
Workspaces that move people. Harvard business review
92, 10 (2014), 68–77.

[62] Jorge A Wagner Filho, Carla Maria Dal Sasso Freitas,
and Luciana Nedel. 2018. VirtualDesk: a comfortable
and efﬁcient immersive information visualization
approach. In Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 37. Wiley
Online Library, 415–426.

[63] Wang and Schnabel. 2008. Mixed reality in architecture,
design, and construction. Springer Science & Business
Media.

[64] Peng Wang, Shusheng Zhang, Xiaoliang Bai, Mark

Billinghurst, Weiping He, Shuxia Wang, Xiaokun
Zhang, Jiaxiang Du, and Yongxing Chen. 2019. Head
Pointer or Eye Gaze: Which Helps More in MR Remote
Collaboration?. In 2019 IEEE conference on virtual
reality and 3D user interfaces (VR). IEEE, 1219–1220.

[65] Wellner. 1994. Interacting with paper on the
DigitalDesk. Technical Report. University of
Cambridge, Computer Laboratory.

[66] Julie R Williamson, Mark McGill, and Khari Outram.
2019. Planevr: social acceptability of virtual reality for
aeroplane passengers. In ACM CHI 2019. 1–14.

[67] Zielasko, Krüger, Weyers, and Kuhlen. 2019a. Menus on
the Desk? System Control in DeskVR. In IEEE VR
2019. 1287–1288.

[68] Zielasko, Krüger, Weyers, and Kuhlen. 2019b. Passive
Haptic Menus for Desk-Based and HMD-Projected
Virtual Reality. In 2019 IEEE WEVR. 1–6.

