0
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
7
2
4
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

How to Improve Your Virtual Experience –

Exploring the Obstacles of Mainstream VR

Von der Fakultät für Ingenieurwissenschaften,
Abteilung Informatik und Angewandte Kognitionswissenschaft
der Universität Duisburg-Essen

zur Erlangung des akademischen Grades

Doktor der Naturwissenschaften (Dr. rer. nat.)

genehmigte kumulative Dissertation

von

Andrey Krekhov
aus
Ufa, Russland

Gutachter: Prof. Dr. Jens Krüger

Gutachter: Prof. Dr. Maic Masuch

Tag der mündlichen Prüfung: 18.12.2019

 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrey Krekhov

How to Improve Your Virtual Experience – Exploring the Obstacles of Mainstream VR

Cumulative Dissertation, December 18, 2019

Reviewers: Prof. Dr. Jens Krüger and Prof. Dr. Maic Masuch

University of Duisburg-Essen

High Performance Computing Group (HPC)

Lotharstr. 65, 47057 Duisburg, Germany

List of Publications

2019

[1]: S. Cmentowski, A. Krekhov, and J. Krüger. „"I Packed my Bag and in It I Put...":
A Taxonomy of Inventory Systems for Virtual Reality Games“. In: Submission to the
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (under review).

[2]: A. Krekhov and K. Emmerich. „Player Locomotion in Virtual Reality Games“.
In: The Digital Gaming Handbook (accepted).

[3]: A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, A. Waschk, and J. Krüger. „Deadeye Visualization
Revisited: Investigation of Preattentiveness and Applicability in Virtual Environ-
ments“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.

[4]: A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, K. Emmerich, and J. Krüger. „Beyond Human: Ani-
mals As an Escape from Stereotype Avatars in Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play.

[5]: S. Cmentowski, A. Krekhov, and J. Krüger. „Outstanding: A Multi-Perspective
Travel Approach for Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play.

[6]: S. Cmentowski, A. Krekhov, A. Müller, and J. Krüger. „Toward a Taxonomy of
Inventory Systems for Virtual Reality Games“. In: Extended Abstracts of the Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts.

[7]: A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, and J. Krüger. „The Illusion of Animal Body
Ownership and Its Potential for Virtual Reality Games“. In: 2019 IEEE Conference on
Games.

[8]: A. Krekhov, M. Michalski, and J. Krüger. „Integrating Visualization Literacy into
Computer Graphics Education Using the Example of Dear Data“. In: Eurographics
2019 - Education Papers.

[9]: S. Cmentowski, A. Krekhov, and J. Krüger. „Outstanding: A Perspective-
In: Extended
Switching Technique for Covering Large Distances in VR Games“.
Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.

iii

2018

[10]: A. Krekhov and J. Krüger. „Deadeye: A Novel Preattentive Visualization
Technique Based on Dichoptic Presentation“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics. Best Paper Award.

[11]: A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, K. Emmerich, M. Masuch, and J. Krüger. „GulliVR:
A Walking-Oriented Technique for Navigation in Virtual Reality Games Based on
Virtual Body Resizing“. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction in Play. Honorable Mention Award.

[12]: A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, and J. Krüger. „VR Animals: Surreal Body
Ownership in Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts.

2017

[13]: A. Krekhov, K. Emmerich, P. Bergmann, S. Cmentowski, and J. Krüger. „Self-
Transforming Controllers for Virtual Reality First Person Shooters“. In: Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play.

[14]: A. Krekhov, K. Emmerich, M. Babinski, and J. Krüger. „Gestures From the Point
of View of an Audience: Towards Anticipatable Interaction of Presenters With 3D
Content“ In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.

2016

[15]: A. Krekhov, J. Grüninger, K. Baum, D. McCann, and J. Krüger. „MorphableUI:
A Hypergraph-Based Approach to Distributed Multimodal Interaction for Rapid
Prototyping and Changing Environments“. In: Proceedings of The 24th International
Conference in Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and Computer Vision
2016.

2013

[16]: F. Daiber, A. Krekhov, M. Speicher, J. Krüger, and A. Krüger. „A Framework
for Prototyping and Evaluation of Sensor-based Mobile Interaction with Stereoscopic
3D“. In: ACM ITS Workshop on Interactive Surfaces for Interaction with Stereoscopic
3D.

Abstract

What is Virtual Reality (VR)? A professional tool, made to facilitate our everyday
tasks? A conceptual mistake, accompanied by cybersickness and unsolved locomotion
issues since the very beginning? Or just another source of entertainment that helps
us escape from our deteriorating world? The public and scientiﬁc opinions in
this respect are diverse. Furthermore, as researchers, we sometimes ask ourselves
whether our work in this area is really “worth it”, given the ambiguous prognosis
regarding the future of VR. To tackle this question, we explore three different areas
of VR research in this dissertation, namely locomotion, interaction, and perception.
We begin our journey by structuring the VR locomotion landscape and by introducing
a novel locomotion concept for large distance traveling via virtual body resizing.
In the second part, we focus on our interaction possibilities in VR. We learn how
to represent virtual objects via self-transforming controllers and how to store our
items in VR inventories. We design comprehensive 3D gestures for the audience
and provide an I/O abstraction layer to facilitate the realization and usage of such
diverse interaction modalities. The third part is dedicated to the exploration of
perceptual phenomena in VR. In contrast to locomotion and interaction, where
we mainly deal with the shortcomings of VR, our contributions in the ﬁeld of
perception emphasize the strong points of immersive setups. We utilize VR to
transfer the illusion of virtual body ownership to nonhumanoid avatars and exploit
this phenomenon for novel gaming experiences with animals in the leading role. As
one of our most signiﬁcant contributions, we demonstrate how to repurpose the
dichoptic presentation capability of immersive setups for preattentive zero-overhead
highlighting in visualizations. We round off the dissertation by coming back to VR
research in general, providing a critical assessment of our contributions and sharing
our lessons learned along the way.

v

Abstract - German

Was ist die virtuelle Realität (VR)? Ein professionelles Werkzeug für die alltäglichen
Aufgaben? Ein konzeptioneller Fehler, begleitet von Cybersickness und von den
bis heute ungelösten Problemen der Fortbewegung? Oder einfach nur eine weitere
Unterhaltungsquelle, die uns die Flucht aus der unangenehmen Realität erleichtert?
Die öffentliche und wissenschaftliche Meinung diesbezüglich ist gespalten. Und
wir, als Forscher, fragen uns nicht selten, ob sich unsere Arbeit auf diesem Gebiet
tatsächlich als lohnend herausstellt, wenn man all die zweideutigen Prognosen
hinsichtlich der Zukunftsfähigkeit von VR berücksichtigt. Um eine Antwort auf
diese Frage zu ﬁnden, betrachten wir in dieser Dissertation drei unterschiedliche
VR-Forschungsgebiete: Lokomotion, Interaktion und Perzeption. Wir beginnen un-
sere Reise mit der Strukturierung der vorhandenen Fortbewegungsarten in VR und
der Einführung eines neuen Konzepts zum Zurücklegen großer Distanzen durch
virtuelle Körpergrößenänderung. Im zweiten Teil der Arbeit fokussieren wir uns
auf die Interaktionsmöglichkeiten in VR. Wir erlernen den Bau von transformier-
baren Controllern zur Repräsentation von virtuellen Objekten und betrachten das
Konzept von Inventaren in VR. Ferner entwickeln wir publikumsorientierte Inter-
aktionsgesten und führen eine Abstraktionsebene für I/O-Handling ein, um die
Umsetzung und Nutzung solch mannigfaltiger Interaktionsmöglichkeiten in VR zu
erleichtern. Der dritte Teil der Arbeit widmet sich der Erkundung verschiedener
Wahrnehmungsphänomene in VR. Im Gegensatz zu unserer Forschung auf den Ge-
bieten der Lokomotion und Interaktion, die sich vor allem mit den Problemen und
Herausforderungen in VR beschäftigte, konzentrieren wir uns hinsichtlich Perzeption
vor allem auf die starken Seiten von immersiven Setups. Wir verwenden VR, um
die Illusion des virtuellen Körperbesitzes auf nicht-humanoide Avatare zu über-
tragen und nutzen dieses Phänomen, um neuartige Spielkonzepte mit Tieren in
der Hauptrolle zu erschaffen. Als eine unserer Haupterrungenschaften zeigen wir
ferner auf, wie die dichoptische Präsentationsfähigkeit eines immersiven setups ohne
Zusatzaufwand für präattentives Highlighting im Bereich der Visualisierung einge-
setzt werden kann. In einer abschließenden Diskussion führen wir eine kritische
Bewertung unserer wissenschaftlichen Beiträge durch und teilen unsere während
der Promotion erworbenen Erfahrungen auf dem Gebiet der VR-Forschung.

vii

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Motives for Revisiting VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.1.1 Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.1.2 Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.1.3 Humans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 Scope and Contextual Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3 Structure of the Synopsis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Locomotion

2.1 VR Basics: Presence and Cybersickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Overview of the VR Locomotion Landscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

7

7

8

2.3 Novel Approaches: GulliVR and Outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.3.1 Virtual Body Resizing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.3.2 GulliVR: Walking as a Giant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.3.3 Outstanding: Leaving the Avatar Behind . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.4 Concluding Thoughts on Resized Walking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3 Interaction

17

3.1 Haptics: A Self-Transforming VR Controller

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3.2 Inventory Systems: Organizing Objects in VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

3.3 3D Gestures: Interaction for the Audience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

3.4 MorphableUI: I/O Handling in VR Applications

. . . . . . . . . . . . 22

3.5 Applicability of Our Achievements Outside VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

4 Perception

27

4.1 Nonhumanoid Avatars in VR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

4.1.1 The Illusion of Virtual Body Ownership . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

4.1.2 VR Animals: Applicability of IVBO Beyond Humans . . . . . . 29

4.1.3 Beastly Escape: Nonhumanoid Player Experience . . . . . . . 31

4.2 Preattentive Highlighting in VR Visualizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

4.2.1 Dear Data: Can Everyone Visualize? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

4.2.2 Highlighting and Preattentive Visual Features . . . . . . . . . 35

4.2.3 Deadeye: Dichoptic Presentation for Highlighting . . . . . . . 36

4.2.4 Deadeye VR: Going Beyond 2D Visualizations . . . . . . . . . 37

ix

4.3 Concluding Comments on Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

5 Conclusion

41
5.1 Critical Assessment of the Contributions and Possible Future Work . . 42
5.2 VR Research and the Lessons We Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

Bibliography

Declaration

47

67

x

Introduction

1

Virtual Reality (VR) has taken foot in everyday life. Or did it not? On the one
hand, the industry took critical leaps forward and established affordable living room
VR setups. Software companies are extending their products to VR and promise
unique beneﬁts, be it for entertainment or business purposes. On the other hand,
however, researchers are getting more and more vocal (cf. Figure 1.1) regarding the
omnipresent obstacles of VR that have not changed that much in the last decades:
limited locomotion, inferior interaction, or the risk of cybersickness, to name a few.

Fig. 1.1: Mixed voices on Twitter regarding the present and future of virtual reality.

As prospective or even established researchers, we often question ourselves which
impact our work in a certain area might have and whether it is “worth it”. So, is VR
doomed as some people claim, or are there good chances that our research efforts
will be rewarded? That is exactly the central question that unites the publications
gathered in this thesis. As the title already reveals, we dive into multiple VR entities
to win an impression of whether and how research might change the status quo of
mainstream VR. The particular contributions range from fundamental techniques,
such as novel locomotion approaches, to application domains, such as scientiﬁc visu-
alization. We dedicate the introduction section to answering three major questions
of the reader:

• Why was the thesis written (and why should I read it)?
• What is the thesis (not) about?
• How is the manuscript organized?

1

Note that this is a cumulative dissertation. Hence, in contrast to traditional manuscripts,
the present synopsis is a high-level pointer to published works, rather than a verbose
in-depth elaboration of a particular research topic. The main objectives of our
synopsis are to establish a red thread through the conducted research, to familiarize
the readers with the most important outcomes, and to draw conclusions related to
the present and future of virtual reality.

1.1 Motives for Revisiting VR

One crucial argument among opponents of VR (research) is that the base approach
of VR is not novel and has not evolved in the last decades. Nearly all “VR booms”
and associated promises failed, and many of us see no reason to believe the opposite
regarding the current VR era. In the early nineties, we faced ﬁrst commercial setups,
such as the Sega VR, and magazines predicted “affordable VR by 1994” [Eng92].
Now, more than twenty years later, VR is ﬁnally regarded as mainstream, arriving
in the price range of consoles and high-end smartphones. Yet the idea remains the
same: a stereo pair of images and head tracking form the basis for an experience
that is well-known and being studied extensively for decades. So why is it worth
reconsidering it?

As always, the devil is in the details. While there was no major invention that
revolutionized VR overnight, several subtle advances and incremental changes—
both from a technical and psychological perspective—give us enough reason to
revisit VR. We can aggregate such changes in the following categories:

1.1.1 Hardware

When it comes to technology, the most remarkable progress was achieved regarding
the three following characteristics of VR setups: affordability, comfort, and features.

Affordability. In general, the price tag is not important in research. However, readily
available head-mounted displays (HMDs) created a joint base for VR experiments and
increased reproducibility. Thanks to default setups, such as the HTC Vive ecosystem,
researchers began to share their testbed implementations and best practices. This
interchange enhanced the overall robustness and transferability of the results.

Comfort. In the past, wearing a heavy and chunky HMD unavoidably introduced
bias due to discomfort, which limited the potential of VR. Nowadays, HMDs have an
overall weight of around 500 grams and can be considered at least bearable for a
prolonged period. More importantly, the show-stopping and dangerous cable clutter
ﬁnally disappeared, be it in case of all-in-one solutions, such as the Oculus Quest, or
even for desktop VR variants, such as the HTC Vive Pro with a wireless adapter.

2

Chapter 1 Introduction

Features. Affordable and comfortable HMDs compete on the market, and this
competition ensures that manufacturers have to add unique features to their products.
Hence, users ﬁnally receive acceptable display resolutions and an increased—yet
still narrow—ﬁeld of view. Moreover, VR setups now include sophisticated and
precise controllers to enhance the interaction with VR content. And, perhaps most
importantly, room-scale VR paved its way into production, which allows us to utilize
the most realistic locomotion technique—natural walking.

1.1.2 Software

The progress of VR is not only driven by hardware. Advances in computer vision
were a crucial step towards enabling room-scale setups, be it in case of desktop-
based infrared tracking approaches (e.g., HTC Vive) or standalone optical tracking
solutions (e.g., Oculus Quest). On the developer (and researcher) side, the increas-
ing spread of consumer-grade HMDs gave rise to the integration of VR hardware
support into popular frameworks and game engines, such as Unity 3D [Tec18]. This
integration, in turn, opens VR to a broader mass of potential developers, including
indie companies.

More importantly, such a joint base facilitates the exchange of scientiﬁc results,
testbed scenarios, assets, and tutorials. Hence, it is not surprising that the majority
of current VR publications rely on Unity 3D or similar engines due to the signiﬁcantly
reduced turnaround time from idea to prototype. This signiﬁcantly increased pace
compared to the past decades is another critical reason for revisiting that discipline.

1.1.3 Humans

VR is an experience designed for humans by humans. Hence, an important factor
we have to consider is the target audience. The digital behavior of people changed
at a fast pace in recent years. By becoming more digital, our inhibition threshold
regarding VR technologies is now lower than ever. For instance, advanced interaction
metaphors, such as gestures, are already known from smartphones. Furthermore,
3D cinemas and similar stereoscopic experiences increased our robustness regarding
cybersickness.

These behavioral changes potentially have a high impact on a set of VR research
areas. In particular, aspects such as locomotion, interaction, and perception are
vital candidates to be affected by the change in our (digital) nature. Hence, the
thesis places a particular emphasis on these three areas while leaving out some other
entities, such as audio.

1.1 Motives for Revisiting VR

3

1.2 Scope and Contextual Boundaries

The virtual experience is based on several sensations. The general impression is
formed by what we see (vision), touch (somatosensation), hear (audition), smell
(olfaction), and taste (gustation). Some of these aspects were affected more by the VR
advances mentioned above than others. For this reason—and to maintain focus—the
thesis concentrates on vision and somatosensation and does not include research that
targets audition, olfaction, and gustation. Of course, this does not mean that these
areas are not worth further explorations. Particularly regarding olfaction [Yan+04]
and gustation [Nar+11], we surely can expect signiﬁcant advances soon. In the
meantime, we take a closer look at the following research disciplines:

Locomotion. The manuscript provides a high-level overview and classiﬁcation of VR
locomotion techniques, be it stationary or walking-based. Moreover, we introduce
and discuss two novel approaches based on virtual body resizing and natural walking:
GulliVR and Outstanding.

Interaction. In this manuscript, we contribute the following advances to this very
diverse research area:

• Haptics - by introducing a self-transforming controller approach
• Inventory systems - by establishing a VR inventory taxonomy
• Gestures - by designing gestures that an audience can easily understand
• I/O abstraction - by developing a framework for arbitrary, multimodal I/O.

Perception. VR setups impact the way how we see the (virtual) world and ourselves.
We focus on two examples: First, we take a closer look at the illusion of virtual body
ownership—a phenomenon that allows us to perceive our virtual avatar as our own
body. We extend this illusion to nonhumanoid representations, allowing users to
make novel experiences by embodying various creatures. Second, we dive into the
area of visualization and examine how the dichoptic presentation of a VR setup can
be “exploited” for preattentive highlighting.

1.3 Structure of the Synopsis

This dissertation consists of two parts: a synopsis and a collection of related pub-
lications. The main goal of the synopsis is to establish a red thread through the
included papers by grouping and summarizing the conducted research in a high-level
manner. For each research topic, the reader obtains a brief motivation, summarized
contribution, and an overview of the results. In particular, the insights exposed
in the synopsis are not meant to be a standalone report and should be regarded
as pointers to the actual manuscripts. For instance, the synopsis does not provide
particular p-values or source code to prevent a loss of focus.

4

Chapter 1 Introduction

Fig. 1.2: The main part of the synopsis and the respective publications at a glance. Note that
intermediate manuscripts, such as workshop contributions or works in progress,
are not listed as standalone items to maintain clarity.

1.3 Structure of the Synopsis

5

Overall, the thesis covers multiple research objectives that are thematically organized
in three chapters—Locomotion, Interaction, and Perception (cf. Figure 1.2). We start
by taking a closer look at one of the most crucial aspects of VR, namely locomotion.
After establishing a classiﬁcation of the diverse movement techniques, we discuss
two novel approaches for traveling in virtual environments. Both approaches share
the common idea of virtual body resizing and eye distance modiﬁcations to allow
natural walking over large distances without cybersickness.

In the second part, we examine four selected aspects of multimodal interaction.
Similar to our walking-inspired contributions in the case of locomotion, we initially
focus on the most realistic way to interact with objects in VR. More precisely,
we explore the beneﬁts of physical proxies on the example of a self-transforming
controller that mimics different virtual objects through a weight-shifting approach.
Such interaction with multiple objects requires a useful way to store and represent
these entities in VR. For this purpose, we construct a taxonomy for VR inventories
and elaborate it on three example scenarios. Then, as a sidestep, we escape user-
centered interaction research and consider the spectators instead. Our question in
mind is whether and how it is possible to establish gesture-based interaction that
is comprehensible and predictable by an audience. Finally, after being confronted
by such a diversity of I/O modalities, we see how a hypergraph-based abstraction
model can be used to hide this complexity from users and developers to foster the
usability of multimodal I/O setups.

The third part of the synopsis is dedicated to perceptional phenomenons that we
can achieve thanks to VR. In other words, we focus less on improving VR per se
and instead seek for possibilities to beneﬁt from the unique features of such setups.
We familiarize ourselves with the so-called illusion of virtual body ownership and
transfer such feelings of embodiment onto nonhumanoid avatars. In particular, we
see how VR allows us to become an animal and to gain novel experiences in the role
of such creatures. Furthermore, we delve into the area of preattentive vision and
learn how VR technology can be utilized to highlight objects in visualization tasks.

The synopsis is rounded off by a general discussion about the conducted research.
We look critically at the overall contribution of this dissertation and express our ﬁnal
thoughts regarding the possible impact of our results on the status quo of virtual
experiences.

6

Chapter 1 Introduction

Locomotion

2

Virtual environments evoke our sense of adventure and our urge for exploration.
Hence, locomotion ever since had an important role in VR research. Consequently,
we dedicate the ﬁrst chapter to answer the question of how to get from point A to
point B in a virtual environment. More precisely, we focus on VR games as a directly
affected application area, as it allows us to initiate a more in-depth discussion.
Hence, we replace the generic “user” by the more ﬁtting term “player”. Naturally,
the presented research is also applicable to other VR domains with no or minor
restrictions.

In particular, this chapter outlines three contributions: an overview of the current
VR locomotion landscape [KE] and two novel approaches that emphasize natural
walking as the most natural way of movement. Accordingly, we begin by drawing
a big picture of locomotion techniques to provide orientation and to establish a
foothold on basic concepts, such as presence and cybersickness. Hereafter, we
discuss the idea of virtual body resizing that lays the foundations for the two novel
techniques GulliVR [Kre+18] and Outstanding [CKK19a; CKK19b].

2.1 VR Basics: Presence and Cybersickness

Before delving into locomotion and VR research in general, we need to revisit certain
core mechanics of such setups. In addition to providing stereo images, VR headsets
also track the head orientation, which allows us to look around in VR like in the
real world. This impression is often described as a feeling of “being there” [Hee92;
LD97]. Other popular wordings include the two terms presence and immersion—
sometimes in an interchangeable manner. Throughout the dissertation, we utilize
immersion [CCN14] when focusing on the technical quality of VR hardware [BD95;
SC02]. In contrast, we use presence to describe how immersive setups affect our
perception [Sla03]. Researchers often target the increase of presence when coming
up with novel VR approaches, and VR locomotion is a prominent advocate for such
presence-enhancing research [SUS95]. The most common methods to measure
presence include the Presence Questionnaire (PQ) [WJS05] and the Igroup Presence
Questionnaire (IPQ) [Sch03; SRF18]. Also, the Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire
(ITQ) [WS98] can be administered before the actual survey to check participants’
tendencies to get immersed in an activity or ﬁction.

The feeling of presence imposes high demands on VR software and hardware. Minor
faults or technical issues, such as a slightly offset locomotion or a sudden drop in

7

frame rate, can have severe consequences regarding the players’ well-being and
result in cybersickness [SKD97; LaV00]. Other prominent terms often used in this
context are simulator sickness [Kol95] and motion sickness [Mon70; HR92; Ohy+07].
In contrast to the manifold reasons of cybersickness, the main cause of simulator
sickness is an incorrectly adjusted simulator [Ken+89], i.e., a rather technical
problem.

Cybersickness involves symptoms such as nausea, eye strain, and headaches. The
main reason behind that negative phenomenon is a mismatch in our vestibulo-ocular
system: Our vestibular system senses acceleration that ideally matches the visual
input. When these signals do not match, the symptoms mentioned above are likely
to occur [RB75]. Three popular explanations [LaV00] exist for such an undesired
body reaction: poison theory, postural instability theory, and—the most prominent—
conﬂict theory. Hettinger et al. [Het+90] also mentioned vection as a possible
reason behind cybersickness. Vection describes the feeling of movement that relies
only on our visual system and occurs when we, e.g., sit in a standing train and
observe another train that is currently accelerating. Vection is inﬂuenced by several
factors, including the ﬁeld of view (FOV), the alignment and proximity of moving
objects, and the optical ﬂow rate. For instance, the combination of a large FOV and
fast-moving objects that account for a large proportion of players’ view amplify the
perceived vection and smooth the way to cybersickness. Hence, limiting the FOV is
one of the possible approaches to reduce cybersickness [FF16; Lin+02].

Regarding VR locomotion, we recommend keeping cybersickness in mind and avoid-
ing cognitive mismatches where possible. However, this guideline should not be
pursued at all costs: “sickness-save”, stationary scenes without any locomotion will
potentially miss out on a wide range of beneﬁts that VR has to offer. Moreover, as
shown by von Mammen et al. [VKE16], games might even beneﬁt from an artiﬁcially
induced cybersickness in some instances.

2.2 Overview of the VR Locomotion Landscape

In recent years, research [Bol17] and the game industry [Hab+17] created a plethora
of varying locomotion approaches. As often the case, there is no “right” answer
which one to pick for an upcoming VR game. Hence, the main purpose of our
research article on player locomotion [KE] was to analyze the broad spectrum of
possibilities to move in VR and to serve as a starting ground for further research and
(game) development. The summarized approaches range from stationary methods
that rely on gamepads to advanced redirected walking techniques that trick our
perception into enabling unrestricted natural walking in a limited space.

Figure 2.1 outlines the proposed division in stationary and walking-oriented ap-
proaches. Stationary techniques, such as gamepad or gesture-based controls, do

8

Chapter 2 Locomotion

Fig. 2.1: An overview of VR locomotion techniques including their beneﬁts and drawbacks.
Green color means that this attribute is a known advantage of the technique,
yellow stands for limited value, and red is rather a disadvantage.

not involve a physical movement of the player. Hence, the main reasons for choos-
ing such approaches are the lower hardware requirements, as we do not have to
track the absolute player position, and the reduced fatigue, as players can remain
seated during a gaming session. On the downside, standing still while moving in
VR usually comes with the risk of cybersickness due to the cognitive mismatch.
Therefore, previous research [Med+16; Yao+14] suggests short, fast movements
with no acceleration as one measure to combat cybersickness in such cases.

2.2 Overview of the VR Locomotion Landscape

9

In contrast to stationary techniques, most of the approaches inspired by natural
walking are intuitive and robust concerning cybersickness. A signiﬁcant amount
of research has conﬁrmed the resulting superior realism of physical walking in VR
and its positive effect on the perceived presence [SUS95; Uso+99; RL09; WH13;
RL06]. Unfortunately, unrestricted natural walking is hardly achievable, as the
physical room size imposes an insuperable obstacle. Hence, approaches falling in the
walking-inspired category attempt to overcome this limitation in various ways—be it
physical treadmills or redirected walking.

Apart from the outlined classiﬁcation, our work contains a set of design implications
to facilitate the decision-making process on locomotion in research and (game)
development. We base our suggestions on the following three questions:

• What is our target audience?
• How important is exploration?
• What else happens during locomotion?

A general response to these questions can be extracted from Figure 2.1. For a more
detailed discussion of each aspect, we invite the reader to revisit the full publication
where we provide the corresponding design considerations.

2.3 Novel Approaches: GulliVR and Outstanding

Our research contributes to the ﬁeld of walking-inspired techniques. We believe
that the signiﬁcant advantages of natural walking, such as the mentioned increase
in presence [SUS95; Uso+99; RL09; WH13; RL06] or the improvement of our
cognitive map [RVB11], are worth our research efforts to deal with the fundamental
problem of physical space limitations.

In the broader sense, our approaches can be classiﬁed as a multiscale virtual environ-
ment navigation [Lam+09; AM16; ZF02; Kop+06]. Common locomotion methods
are based on a 1:1 ratio between the physical and the real world, i.e., the traveled
distance in the physical room roughly corresponds our virtual footprint. In contrast,
we ﬁt the virtual environment entirely into our living room by rescaling the player.
In the remainder of this chapter, we brieﬂy outline the core idea of virtual body
resizing and how it manifests in our two locomotion approaches. Finally, we share
some ideas about the general applicability of our work and its overall impact on the
VR locomotion landscape.

2.3.1 Virtual Body Resizing

Our core idea is to enlarge the virtual body of the player on demand. Such a
transformation allows the player to travel vast distances in a room-scale environment
using natural walking. We can obtain the same results by shrinking the size of the

10

Chapter 2 Locomotion

Fig. 2.2: The increased eye distance results in a larger vergence angle, altering the size/dis-
tance perception of objects and evoking the feeling of being a giant. Physical
movement is perfectly aligned with visual feedback, which obviates cybersickness.

world instead of enlarging the player. However, we would not recommend that
approach in practice for performance reasons. For instance, having a fully resizable
environment usually interferes with baked lighting and also favors ﬂoating point
precision errors.

At ﬁrst glance, the idea is similar to a common ﬂying approach, as both variants
share the same camera position and velocity. However, ﬂying is known for its severe
cybersickness due to the cognitive mismatch of physical and virtual movement
speeds. In contrast, enlarging the player comes with an increase of the interpupillary
distance, as depicted in Figure 2.2. Although tiny variations of the interpupillary
distance have been shown to have no measurable impact on size judgments [Bes96]
and can even be applied unnoticed [WGP98], setting the modeled eye separation to
a signiﬁcantly different value compared to the physical eye distance results in so-
called false eye separation [CLW14]. The resulting perceived image causes an altered
size perception compared to real objects [WHR99], leading to a miniature world
perspective. Renner et al. [Ren+15] and van der Hoort et al. [HGE11] also reported
similar ﬁndings, conﬁrming that increasing the stereo base (i.e., the modeled eye
distance) makes objects appear nearer and smaller. This altered perception allows us
to minimize the risk of cybersickness, as players feel like they are walking as giants
(no mismatch) and not like they are artiﬁcially ﬂoating or ﬂying.

2.3.2 GulliVR: Walking as a Giant

The GulliVR navigation metaphor [Kre+18] utilizes virtual body resizing to transform
players into giants on demand. As giants, players can travel over large distances
within a few steps, and switch to normal size once the destination is reached (cf.

2.3 Novel Approaches: GulliVR and Outstanding

11

Fig. 2.3: GulliVR: players turn into giants and traverse large distances without cybersickness

due to the adjusted interpupillary distance.

Figure 2.3). Although the underlying mechanism is straightforward, we have to
consider several degrees of freedom for proper functioning. First and foremost, we
need to decide how fast the transition between the two scales should be. By means
of a pretest, we found a sweet spot at t = 0.005 · Scalegiant. As an example, our
testbed scenario utilized ×100 as a scaling factor, resulting in a transition of half a
second. Slower transition times bear the risk of cybersickness, while faster or instant
transitions favor player disorientation.

The main reason for us to emphasize natural walking was the expected increase
in presence. Hence, we conducted a user study that compared GulliVR with the
established point and teleport locomotion approach [Boz+16b]. Our results con-
ﬁrmed our hypothesis regarding presence. Furthermore, players in the GulliVR group
walked signiﬁcantly more and did not show any signs of cybersickness.

In addition to these fundamental advantages, our work established different possi-
bilities for leaving the giant mode. In particular, we discussed the unguided, vanilla
version, a crosshairs-based extension, and an automated pulling system, as depicted
in Figure 2.4. The latter option is what we utilized in our testbed game: leaving the
giant mode pulled the player discreetly toward the nearest point of interest to avoid
unnecessary readjustments and frustration.

To summarize, GulliVR successfully introduced the core approach of giant-like trav-
eling in VR games. The idea was later picked up by Abtahi et al. [Abt+19] and
Cmentowski et al. [CKK19a; CKK19b]. In particular, these works conﬁrm our ﬁnding
that the increase of the interpupillary distance in giant mode prevents cybersickness,
which is an essential requirement for the applicability of such locomotion methods.

12

Chapter 2 Locomotion

Fig. 2.4: Two extensions of GulliVR to enable a precise transition from giant mode back to
normal mode. Pulling adds a horizontal translation toward the nearby point of
interest, whereas aiming displays a crosshair to indicate the destination location.

2.3.3 Outstanding: Leaving the Avatar Behind

In contrast to GulliVR, which relies on a consistent ﬁrst-person view, the Outstanding
technique [CKK19a; CKK19b] connects the virtual body resizing to a dynamic switch-
ing between ﬁrst-person and third-person perspectives. In the unscaled state, players
get the typical ﬁrst-person view to perform short-range exploration by physical
walking, detailed observation of local points-of-interest, and basic interactions, such
as picking up objects. For large-distance traveling, we once again perform the virtual
body resizing. This time, however, the avatar is left behind, and players obtain a
third-person bird’s eye perspective. We display the virtual avatar at the players’
feet to symbolize their original ﬁrst-person position in the world. This view allows
the disembodied players to observe the surrounding area from an elevated view
and to command their avatar by setting navigation targets using raycast aiming (cf.
Figure 2.5).

Each perspective has beneﬁts and drawbacks [STV06; Gor+17], i.e., the third-
person mode is excellent for environmental perception while the ﬁrst-person view
is superior regarding interaction-intensive tasks. The introduced dynamic perspec-
tive switching combines the strengths of both views and achieves uncomplicated,
overview-enhancing traveling with interactive, local exploration on demand.

Similar to GulliVR, the transition between the two modes—and even perspectives in
this case—required additional iterations and prestudies. In our work, we proposed a
fast, dolly-shot-like animation to improve the impression of embodying or disem-
bodying the avatar. We also added a translation backward to achieve a comfortable
45° viewing angle after switching to the third-person mode and included a curved

2.3 Novel Approaches: GulliVR and Outstanding

13

Fig. 2.5: Outstanding: players can switch to a bird’s eye third-person perspective and control
their avatar via raycast aiming. The picture-in-picture shows the optimal transition
parameters to convey the feeling of embodying or disembodying the avatar.

animation between both states. This curve emphasizes horizontal disembodiment
followed by a steeper vertical growth, as shown in Figure 2.5.

To validate our technique, we compared Outstanding to the point and teleport
locomotion approach. The results of our study conﬁrmed a signiﬁcant increase
in spatial orientation while maintaining high levels of presence, competence, and
enjoyment. Our experiments showed that players generally liked the idea of the
dynamic switching between different perspectives and that they were able to use
the technique without signiﬁcant problems. Additionally, the work summarized
the critical insights into a set of comprehensive design guidelines and established
technical extensions, such as a catching-up mechanism to skip ahead and close the
gap between the player and the avatar without switching perspectives.

2.4 Concluding Thoughts on Resized Walking

Apart from a classiﬁcation of the current locomotion landscape, this chapter intro-
duced two novel locomotion techniques that rely on virtual body resizing. The core
idea was the enlargement of players on demand to conquer large distances within
a few steps. Our main motivation was to emphasize natural walking as the most
intuitive locomotion method, and indeed, according to our results, we succeeded on
multiple fronts:

• the adjustment of the interpupillary distance prevented cybersickness
• the view from above increased the spatial orientation
• the approaches had a positive impact on presence
• players walked more, enjoying the advantages of physical movement [RL09].

14

Chapter 2 Locomotion

However, such contributions always require critical analysis. Neither Outstanding
nor GulliVR remove the room-scale limitation. Even if we can travel much larger
distances thanks to rescaling, we will eventually end up in front of a physical
wall. For instance, in the case of GulliVR, players have to go back to normal scale,
walk away from the wall, and re-enter the giant mode to continue traveling. For
this reason, we position our approaches as additional locomotion methods and
not as standalone solutions. More precisely, we recommend a combination with
stationary approaches, such as teleportation, to facilitate such resetting and foster
short-distance exploration.

As player resizing comes with speciﬁc strengths and weaknesses, we have to embed
such techniques carefully in the underlying scenarios.
In our testbed scenarios,
players encountered a medieval, fantasy-inspired setting, where being a giant poten-
tially ﬁts the narrative. In contrast, we discourage the application of such methods
in games with dominant indoor scenery: narrow, multilevel closed environments
diminish the advantages mentioned above, such as the increase of spatial orientation,
and further complicate targeting when switching back to a regular scale.

In addition to such scenery-related decisions, we recommend to consider the pace
of the game: dynamic ﬁrst-person shooters are less likely to beneﬁt from such
exploration-oriented techniques than slow-paced role-playing games or 3D adven-
tures relying on big open worlds. However, note that players could easily get spoiled
from seeing too far ahead, which requires additional techniques like the fog of war.

An important lesson that we learned from our evaluations is that players desire addi-
tional interactions while traveling as giants. For instance, in the case of Outstanding,
players have to wait for their avatar to reach the destination, and just looking around
quickly gets annoying. Digital games keep players engaged by introducing new
events regularly. Similarly, we propose to include additional incidents that force
players to switch back to regular size or to add speciﬁc actions as a giant. The
latter option was highly popular in the GulliVR study, and players enjoyed their
superhuman abilities while picking up and moving large objects.

To summarize, our research has shown how virtual body resizing can be used to
design locomotion techniques with unique advantages, such as increased spatial
orientation and fast travel without cybersickness. We suggest that rethinking player
movement from scratch, as we did with Outstanding and GulliVR, is a more promising
way rather than porting locomotion 1:1 from non-VR games. “VR-ﬁrst” approaches
allow us to take full advantage of the beneﬁts that VR setups have to offer, and we
believe that our and similar research efforts can pave the way to even more engaging
and fascinating player experiences and game mechanics in VR.

2.4 Concluding Thoughts on Resized Walking

15

Interaction

3

In the previous chapter, we mainly dealt with the issue of getting from point A to
point B. However, locomotion is just a basic need in VR. To create an engaging user
experience and fully beneﬁt from immersive setups, we need intuitive, user-tailored
interaction solutions that amplify our feeling of being in the virtual world.

This chapter covers four subareas of interaction and explores ways to enhance
the scope of user actions in VR. Throughout our related research, our primary
motivation was to make user interaction in VR as realistic and intuitive as possible.
In particular, we achieved these goals by developing physical proxies [Kre+17b],
rethinking virtual item representations [Cme+19; CKKew], designing comprehensive
gestures [Kre+17a], and providing a meaningful I/O abstraction layer [Dai+13;
Kre+16] to bring all these components together into a coherent VR ecosystem.

We start with object manipulation in VR and the possibilities to realize haptic feed-
back for such interactions. More precisely, the ﬁrst section focuses on the design of
input controllers that can accommodate multiple virtual objects via shapeshifting.

3.1 Haptics: A Self-Transforming VR Controller

One easy way to break presence in VR is to touch a virtual object without getting a
proper tactile feedback [SVG15]. Hence, input controllers play an essential role in
our virtual experience [Jen+08; YKM16; BM13]. In this section, we consider the
design of such controllers on the example of ﬁrst-person shooters [Zar+14]. We may
assume that a well-crafted controller that feels like its virtual counterpart [Bro+15],
i.e., a gun, can increase the feeling of presence. For instance, the Vive controller
resembles a gun handle with a trigger, while other devices mimic the shape of two-
handed guns to provide players more realistic haptics for games with such weapon
types. Note that the actual appeal of such devices is not relevant, as players do not
see the controller while being in VR.

Unfortunately, such devices can not reﬂect the in-game weapon switching, which
is a crucial element of most shooter games. Relying on a one-handed, pistol-like
controller for a game where the current weapon is a two-handed riﬂe is less realistic
than a two-handed input device, and vice versa. For this issue, our research proposed
a self-transforming controller [Kre+17b], as depicted in Figure 3.1. Our controller
adjusts its shape and handling according to its game representation, i.e., the device
feels and behaves similarly to a pistol in the ﬁrst state, and similarly to a riﬂe

17

Fig. 3.1: Our self-transforming controller simulating a two-handed laser riﬂe (left) and a
one-handed blaster (right). The transformation is triggered by a button at the
bottom of the handle and works based on a motor and two telescopic tubes. A
built-in Vive controller is used for tracking.

in the second state. The transformation is done via a telescopic, motor-driven
mechanism.

Our research contributes to the body of literature related to shapeshifting input
devices [Mic+04; Ste+13; Nak+16; NYI13; IOO16; KIH15]. Similar to Zenner
et al. [ZK17], we rely on weight shifts in the device to modify the rotational resis-
tance and the perceived inertness. Our design thinking workshop and subsequent
eveluations revealed the following insights:

• controllers should be lighter than real guns (< 0.8 kg)
• controllers should be shorter than real guns (guns: < 25 cm, riﬂes: <40 cm)
• subtle weight shifts sufﬁce (in our case, a 1:1.7 ratio of gun to riﬂe).

Our results conﬁrmed that such an adaptive approach outperforms default VR
controllers concerning scales such as appearance, efﬁciency, authenticity, experienced
realism, and ﬂow. Most importantly, 96 % of the participants reported liking the
overall concept of a self-transforming controller.

Based on this positive feedback, we suggest applying the same design approach
to other weapons or virtual objects. For instance, the inclusion of a second rack
that transports an equal weight toward the player allows simulating shoulder-ﬁred
missile weapons, which allows us to cover most of the weapon classes for ﬁrst-
person shooters. This kind of multifunctional physical proxies is also beneﬁcial for
other game genres, such as role-playing games or 3D adventures. In this regard, a
retractable handle would enhance the design space with sword-shaped virtual objects,
and simulate a switch between, e.g., a short knife and a two-handed sword.

3.2 Inventory Systems: Organizing Objects in VR

Transformable controllers that represent multiple virtual objects are a signiﬁcant
advancement toward a more realistic interaction in VR applications and games in
particular. Being equipped with multiple virtual objects requires efﬁcient ways to

18

Chapter 3 Interaction

Fig. 3.2: Our taxonomy of inventory systems in virtual environments. This ﬁgure is read
from top to bottom, starting with the requirements that we should take into
account before and while designing inventories. The considerations are used to
select design choices for each building block at the bottom.

manage such items. Storage interfaces, best known as inventories [Weg+17], are
among the most commonly used features in nearly every game genre. Although car-
rying multiple items appears like a natural addition to interaction-oriented gameplay,
most VR developers refrain from using inventories at all. For this reason, the goal of
our research [Cme+19; CKKew] was to understand the peculiarities of VR inventory
design. We applied the following scientiﬁc methods to achieve this objective:

• in-depth developer interviews to determine real-world challenges and pain

points related to inventory design in VR

• literature reviews to sublime best practices on VR menus in general
• games analysis via grounded theory approach [CB07; GSS68] to identify the

essential building blocks and characteristics of VR inventories.

3.2 Inventory Systems: Organizing Objects in VR

19

Fig. 3.3: Three example realizations based on our taxonomy. Flat grid: a 2D overlay and
virtual raycasts are used to achieve fast and straightforward item management.
Virtual drawers: items that are inserted using physical actions and scaled to equal
sizes. Magnetic surface: free item placement allows for a precise positioning;
items stick to the surface until removed.

The resulting taxonomy is depicted in Figure 3.2. Also, our publication exposes a
set of design implications and demonstrates the practical use of our taxonomy in
action. More precisely, the work introduces and evaluates three manifestations of VR
inventories: a ﬂat grid, virtual drawers, and a magnetic surface (cf. Figure 3.3).

The outlined work contributes to the area of VR interaction by decomposing the
inventory design process into requirements and building blocks. The resulting tax-
onomy can be used to facilitate and improve the decision-making of researchers
and game developers. There is a need for further evaluations of particular inven-
tories. We assume that such additional studies will allow our community to create
a big picture of the interplay between the individual building blocks. This under-
standing, in turn, will further improve the status quo of user interaction in virtual
environments.

3.3 3D Gestures: Interaction for the Audience

So far, we have seen how to realize direct object manipulation with transformable
physical proxies and how to manage virtual objects in virtual inventories. As usually
the case in human-computer interaction, we explicitly focused on the user. This
section breaks with this tradition and focuses on the observers, i.e., the audience
instead. More precisely, the outlined work [Kre+17a] explores whether and how
gesture-based interaction can be designed to be understandable by someone who
stands and watches aside.

Why is it important to understand our interaction? Firstly, acting or playing in VR is
often an experience that we can not easily share due to hardware requirements. In
this case, our audience can beneﬁt from clear, unambiguous gestures, which make it
easy to follow and understand our actions [Hes+12; GJM11]. Secondly, audience-
friendly and anticipatable gestures can be helpful during presentations [Hai+16;

20

Chapter 3 Interaction

Fig. 3.4: In the Wizard of Oz experiment, participants were asked to perform body move-
ments and complete a set of tasks, such as moving (the camera) forward. The
wizard monitored the participants via the Kinect camera and triggered the corre-
sponding behavior within the target application.

CJC16; Cuc+12; Tan+10], as they facilitate the process of message transporta-
tion [HEP07; Xia05; Bat+13].

We relied on a Wizard of Oz experiment [Alt+04; DJA93; MGM93; SC93] with
representatives from a typical audience to design multiple sets of anticipatable
gestures (cf. Figure 3.4). By ﬁltering and clustering the results, we established the
following three distinct sets: bimanual gestures, one-armed gestures, and full-body
movements, as shown in Figure 3.5.

An online evaluation revealed that two of the three gesture sets were indeed an-
ticipatable, which supports our suggested approach of gesture crowdsourcing and
emphasizes the beneﬁts of gestures for comprehensible 3D presentations. In particu-
lar, we determined that gestures that rely on weight shifting perform very robust in
terms of possible misinterpretations. Ambiguous conﬁgurations, i.e., where different
arms lead to different interactions despite executing the same gesture, are rather
hard to grasp and should be avoided.

For future research and applications, we recommend the following guidelines for
anticipatable gestures:

• keep gestures as distinct as possible
• use full body movements (e.g., weight shift) rather than minimalistic gestures
• provide analog behavior for both arms.

Fig. 3.5: Gestures for two example tasks. The green set mostly contains bimanual gestures.
The blue set adds weight transfer. The red set consists of minimalist, one-armed
gestures, and is the only set that was not predictable by the audience in our study.

3.3 3D Gestures: Interaction for the Audience

21

Such gestures depend on the target application and the environment (e.g., the given
VR setup). In our case, we considered the example of a digital planetarium. Hence,
the gestures might need an adaptation for a different use-case. Furthermore, we
suggest to examine the learning curve of an audience in a future study, i.e., the
aspect of how easily a gesture can be learned might play an even more important
role than the initial anticipation. We also encourage similar evaluations for VR
games, especially in combination with live streaming video platforms where player
actions in VR need to be understood by thousands of viewers.

3.4 MorphableUI: I/O Handling in VR Applications

Sophisticated gestures and (transformable) controllers are only a few examples of
interaction modalities that are possible in VR. Speech input, mobile devices, or gaze-
based controls—we have a plethora of contemporary I/O modalities and devices at
our disposal. This freedom comes at a cost, as the engineering workload involved
in making applications fully adaptable in this sense is very high. Hence, we need
a more efﬁcient way to establish connections between applications and interaction
devices rather than to integrate each device individually. A common approach to
provide such interconnectivity is the introduction of abstraction layers [OBL07;
JKN02; Sch+11; CW12; VGH12; KRR10] that decouple application logic from I/O
handling. This is especially relevant for VR [HGR03; Tay+01; Bau+01], where
novel devices are introduced at a high rate.

This section provides a pointer to MorphableUI [Dai+13; Kre+16]—a multimodal
system that transports interaction data between devices and applications. Our
approach is based on a taxonomization [Kin+12; RLL11; DH06; CMR90; MCR90]
of event types, application requirements, and device capabilities. In short, each
application relies on our API to state its requirements, and each device exposes its
capabilities that describe the type of generated or processed interaction events (cf.
Figure 3.6).

Fig. 3.6: The introduced operators allow substituting complex application requirements by
combining multiple devices. For instance, rotating the dataset can be achieved by
a combination of the d-pad of a gamepad and the stick rotation of a joystick. Users
choose between such wiring possibilities via a mobile conﬁguration frontend.

22

Chapter 3 Interaction

Fig. 3.7: An except from the underlying hypergraph model. Event types are captured as
vertices, whereas hyperedges represent the operators, i.e., split, merge, and cast.
An iterative algorithm starts at device vertices and traverses the hypergraph until
it reaches the requirement vertex. The red lines highlight an example of wiring
between a 3D rotation requirement and two merged devices.

A token-based hypergraph algorithm is applied to generate iterative solutions that
fulﬁll the application requirements given the currently available devices. As depicted
in Figure 3.7, our algorithm allows us to merge, split, and cast device capabilities,
e.g., it is possible to combine a 2D swiping input on our phone with two arrow keys
on a keyboard to trigger a 3D motion event inside the application. During runtime,
our distributed implementation handles the event propagation and transformation
via local and remote networks.

Our method removes the complexity of I/O handling from the application and
allows the integration of novel devices without any modiﬁcations to the application
logic. Also, MorphableUI introduces a visual conﬁguration tool (cf. Figure 3.6)
that allows users to select and adjust their preferred interaction methods. We can
reconﬁgure these user-tailored interfaces [DF01; GW04; GWW07] during runtime,
which emphasizes personalization and, in combination with device exchangeability,
brings an additional beneﬁt to rapid prototyping scenarios.

Although our work includes validation through a developer survey, we suggest
conducting a detailed study that explores the beneﬁts and drawbacks of such user-
tailored interfaces. While some of us enjoy tweaking and personalizing the controls
of an application, other users will ﬁnd themselves overburdened by this additional
complexity. Hence, as a next step, we strongly recommend an automated interface
generation routine that learns from user behavior and provides a starting point for
ﬁne-grained conﬁgurations.

3.4 MorphableUI: I/O Handling in VR Applications

23

3.5 Applicability of Our Achievements Outside VR

This chapter was an excursus into the world of VR interaction techniques. We
explored several ways to enrich our virtual stay with meaningful object manipulations
and natural user interfaces. In particular, we have discussed physical proxies, virtual
inventory systems, anticipatable gestures, and I/O abstraction layers. Similarly to
the previous locomotion chapter, we dedicate this discussion section to a critical
analysis of the outlined contributions.

More precisely, this section reﬂects upon the applicability of our work beyond virtual
environments. In contrast to locomotion, most of our interaction approaches are
transferrable to non-VR applications. Even more, certain ideas, such as audience
gestures, were inspired by non-VR challenges, which further underpins the generalis-
ability of such solutions. Hence, to make use of the full potential of our publications,
we summarize their value outside VR in the following paragraphs:

Self-transforming controller. The straightforward applications are non-VR ﬁrst-
person shooters. From a technical point of view, there is nothing that prevents
us from using the controller in a conventional digital game. However, we predict
two potential challenges that we need to tackle. Firstly, our prototype purposefully
ignores the overall appeal because players do not see the real controller while being
in VR. Hence, the—now visible—difference in appearance between the proxy and its
virtual counterpart might lead to a reduced increase in player experience. Secondly,
the same circumstance could require a more extensive shift in weight that aligns
with the virtual transformation.

Inventory Systems. Despite being an established game feature, we are not aware
of any research that targets inventories explicitly. Hence, we suggest reconsidering
our taxonomy for non-VR games. Even if we need to adjust the individual building
blocks due to altered requirements, our manuscript is still a valuable starting point
for further investigations. Ultimately, we suggest the creation of a general taxonomy
that covers all modalities, including mixed and augmented realities.

Comprehensible Gestures. In a subsequent collaboration, we utilized our gesture
sets in a digital planetarium. The presenter interactively navigates through the
universe while giving insights into astrophysics and answering live questions. Our
gesture sets greatly facilitate such communication. Hence, our crowdsourced ges-
tures have a high potential for many 3D content presentation contexts outside VR
that emphasize clear and anticipatable interaction on the part of the moderator.

MorphableUI. Many I/O abstraction layers, such as VRPN [Tay+01], were cre-
ated with VR in mind due to the rapidly changing landscape of available devices.
In contrast, our hypergraph approach allows for applicability beyond VR-speciﬁc
setups. The transformation of interaction events facilitates the usage of non-VR

24

Chapter 3 Interaction

devices, such as mobile phones, in VR scenarios, and vice versa. Furthermore, the
provided device exchangeability can be used not only for rapid prototyping and user-
tailored UIs but also for interactions in changing environments that require dynamic,
context-dependent interfaces. On the other hand, MorphableUI introduces additional
overhead in complexity, both for users and developers. Hence, we recommend to
carefully weigh up risks and opportunities before integration, because sophisticated
desktop software (e.g., Photoshop) with hundreds of different tasks would most
likely not beneﬁt from dynamic UI generation.

To conclude, all of the outlined contributions have signiﬁcant potential outside VR.
Indeed, the conducted research needs to be adjusted (e.g., controller) or extended
(e.g., inventories). Nevertheless, our essential observation is that VR-motivated
research can remain relevant in human-computer interaction, even if the hype
surrounding VR will not prove right.

3.5 Applicability of Our Achievements Outside VR

25

Perception

4

In contrast to locomotion and interaction, this chapter deals with a more subtle, yet
not less important aspect of VR, namely perception. While the outlined research of
the previous chapters was dedicated to improving the status quo of VR, our work on
(visual) perception focuses on the question of how users can beneﬁt from the strong
points of VR setups. In other words, the following sections explore the advantages
resulting from the altered perception in immersive setups. In particular, we take a
closer look at two research areas related to perception: (nonhumanoid) body owner-
ship [KCK18; KCK19; Kre+19b] and visualization [KMK19; KK19; Kre+19a].

4.1 Nonhumanoid Avatars in VR

Most VR applications represent our alter ego by using a virtual avatar. Given that
VR setups offer a high degree of immersion, the bond to this virtual body is usually
much stronger than in common desktop scenarios. Put more simply, VR allows us to
perceive the virtual representation as our own body. This perceptional phenomenon
is known as the illusion of virtual body ownership (IVBO) [Sla+10], and previous
research agrees that VR is an effective medium to induce such experiences [Sla+09;
Wal+18].

However, the investigated scenarios were limited mostly to human avatars. Our
research [KCK18; KCK19; Kre+19b], in contrast, focused on nonhumanoid represen-
tations, as we assume that this kind of unusual experience bears signiﬁcant potential
for several application areas, such as entertainment or education. For instance,
introducing exotic avatars beyond stereotypic knights and wizards is a viable option
to create refreshing and engaging player experiences in VR games. In an educational
documentary, the usage of animal avatars could help us to understand the behavior
of a particular creature better. Hence, the research on nonhumanoid IVBO outlined
in this section is driven by the following motivational question: Is IVBO applicable to
nonhumanoid avatars, and, if so, what potential does that phenomenon have for VR
applications?

4.1.1 The Illusion of Virtual Body Ownership

To facilitate the comprehension of our nonhumanoid research, we start by a brief
introduction of IVBO [LLL15]. This phenomenon originates in the effect of body
ownership and the experiments on the so-called rubber hand illusion [BC98]: the
participant’s arm is hidden and replaced by an artiﬁcial rubber limb, and stroking

27

both the real and virtual arms creates the illusion of actually owning that artiﬁcial
limb. After further studies [TH05], researchers proposed a number of models [Tsa10;
Ehr07; PE08; Len+07] to explain the interplay between external stimuli and our
In particular, prior work concludes that, apart from
internal body perception.
visuotactile and sensorimotor cues [Sla+10; San+10], the IVBO effect is mainly
impacted by visuoproprioceptive cues (perspective, body continuity, posture and
alignment, appearance, and realism) [Sla+09; Sla+10; PSS12; MS13].

The IVBO effect in virtual environments [Sla+08; BGS13] was mainly explored with
anthropomorphic characters and realistic representations [LLL15; LJ16; Jo+17].
For instance, regarding avatar customization in games, Waltemate et al. [Wal+18]
showed that customizable representations lead to signiﬁcantly higher IVBO ef-
fects. A strong IVBO can produce various changes in (player) behavior [Jun+18;
MVJ17], resembling the Proteus Effect by Yee et al. [YB07]. For instance, studies
revealed a signiﬁcant reduction in racial bias when players embody a black charac-
ter [Pec+13]. Other examples include childish emotions arising from embodying
child bodies [BGS13] or feeling more stable when having a robotic avatar [Lug+16].
Hence, prior work demonstrates that IVBO can be applied to evoke speciﬁc feel-
ings and attributes [Kor+16]. Similarly, we assume that a strong bond to an
animal caused by IVBO can also increase our involvement with environmental
issues [Ahn+16; Ber07] and our empathy for animals [TS05].

Researchers have also expressed interest in studying IVBO beyond human morphol-
ogy. For instance, Riva et al. [RWM14] posed the following question: But what if,
instead of simply extending our morphology, a person could become something else—a
bat perhaps or an animal so far removed from the human that it does not even have
the same kind of skeleton—an invertebrate, like a lobster? If we consider exotic body
compositions, as in the case of a lobster that has few properties in common with
our human body, the idea of sensory substitution [BK03] might play an important
role. Related to VR games, we could also consider such substitution mechanisms
as playful interactions: e.g., we could replace the echolocation feature of a bat by
tactile feedback in a VR game. Given the extreme diversity of real and ﬁctional
creatures, it is difﬁcult or even impossible to research IVBO for virtual animals as
a whole. Instead, previous research tackled isolated modiﬁcations of body parts.
For instance, Kilteni et al. [Kil+12] were able to stretch the virtual arm up to four
times its original length without losing IVBO. Normand et al. [Nor+11] used IVBO
to induce the feeling of owning a more massive belly than in reality. As a ﬁrst step
toward generalization, Blom et al. [BAS14] concluded that strong spatial coincidence
of real and virtual body part is not mandatory to produce IVBO.

Individual animals, such as scorpions or rhinos in one of our studies, have additional
body parts that players might want to control. In this respect, prior work [Ehr09;
GPE11] conﬁrmed that having an additional arm preserves IVBO and induces a

28

Chapter 4 Perception

double-touch feeling. Steptoe et al. [SSS13] reported the effects of IVBO upon
attaching a virtual tail-like body extension to the user’s virtual character. These
ﬁndings are relevant for a plethora of real and ﬁctive nonhumanoids, such as dragons.
The authors also discovered higher degrees of IVBO when we synchronize the tail
movement with the real body.

Naturally, we need a way to measure and compare the IVBO effect in order to
investigate whether and how this phenomenon inﬂuences our experience in VR. In
this regard, the recent work by Roth et al. [Rot+17] introduced the alpha IVBO
questionnaire based on a mirror scenario. The authors suggest acceptance, control,
and change as the three factors that determine IVBO. In our initial experiments, we
administered the proposed questionnaire as we were curious to see how it performs
for animal avatars. Subsequently, we relied on this questionnaire in all our IVBO
experiments to maintain comparability throughout our study results.

4.1.2 VR Animals: Applicability of IVBO Beyond Humans

The ﬁrst part of our research [KCK18; KCK19] investigated possible control mech-
anisms for nonhumanoid avatars and the related levels of IVBO. In general, body
ownership requires as much sensory feedback as possible to induce proper levels of
IVBO. However, providing such cues is challenging for nonhuman characters because
there is no straightforward mapping of controls—animals come in various shapes
and postures. For instance, bats share a human posture and skeleton but have scaled
arms or legs, i.e., they differ in terms of proportions. Tigers and dogs have an almost
human skeleton, including the same number of limbs, but they walk on all fours.
Other species, such as a spider, show a completely different skeleton and differ in the
limb count. Our publication suggests the following control approaches for animal
avatars to cover these different degrees of anthropomorphism:

First-person full-body tracking. The posture of the user is mapped 1:1 to the whole
virtual body (cf. Figure 4.1). In this mode, being a tiger implies that we have to
crouch on the ﬂoor. From a technical perspective, this approach usually requires

Fig. 4.1: Three virtual animals, their controls in full-body tracking mode, and the human

avatar that was used as the reference for our IVBO comparisons.

4.1 Nonhumanoid Avatars in VR

29

Fig. 4.2: The mirror scenario used to assess IVBO for nonhumanoid avatars in ﬁrst-person

(left) and third-person (right) modes.

an additional tracking of our hip and ankles, which we can easily achieve with
mainstream devices, such as Vive trackers [Cor19].

First-person half-body tracking. For particular creatures, a full-body mapping
might be too exhausting. Therefore, we designed an alternative that allows us to
remain in an upright position while our lower body is mapped to all of the animal’s
limbs. In the case of a tiger, each of our legs corresponds to two of the animal’s
pawns. Hence, we preserve the sensory feedback and keep the physical effort
minimal comparted to full-body tracking.

Third-person approaches. In some applications, we control our avatars from a
third-person perspective, i.e., we look over the shoulder of our virtual representation.
However, this perspective is challenging when we turn around in VR. There are
two ways to handle such rotation. We can either rotate ourselves, i.e., the camera,
around the avatar, or vice versa. Camera rotation results in a virtual translation
that does not correspond to our physical movement, which, as we remember, is a
potential cause of cybersickness. Rotating the avatar can be done in various ways,
e.g., by simply sliding the animal sideways around us or by using an agent-like
behavior that tries to reposition the animal via natural avatar movement.

We relied on a mirror scenario (cf. Figure 4.2) to measure the IVBO effects of our
control approaches for a tiger, a bat, and a spider. We chose the animals such that
they differ from humanoids in IVBO-critical domains, i.e., shape (bat), skeleton
(spider), and posture (tiger, spider). With this, we gathered the following insights:

• IVBO works for animals and even outperforms humanoid avatars in certain

cases (e.g., bat)

• similarly to human avatars [Gal+15], ﬁrst-person modes for animals outper-

form third-person approaches regarding IVBO

• half-body approaches are a compromise between IVBO and exhaustion: they
reduce fatigue for non-upright animals without a noticeable sacriﬁce of IVBO
• users enjoy the superhuman abilities (e.g., ﬂying) that come along with a

certain animal or an additional body part.

30

Chapter 4 Perception

4.1.3 Beastly Escape: Nonhumanoid Player Experience

It is one thing to be aware of nonhumanoid IVBO in virtual environments, but it is
another matter to apply this phenomenon in favor of the user—or, in our example,
the player. Unfortunately, there are very few studies on creature embodiment in VR,
which makes it difﬁcult for game designers to predict whether and how players will
perceive animal avatars. As only a few games have touched upon this topic, best
practices and design guidelines for such avatars are also lacking.

We contribute to this topic by an in-depth exploration of the design space, the
beneﬁts, and the limitations of animal avatars in VR games. Prior work indicates
that such research should not be overgeneralized, because animals vary signiﬁcantly
among themselves: they differ in posture, their (loco)motion, and often have entirely
different skeletons. Hence, in our work [Kre+19b], we decided to maintain a clear
focus on a few speciﬁc representatives to gather sufﬁcient knowledge regarding how
we can embed such avatars in a gaming context.

In particular, our publication presented the game creation pipeline for escape room
games involving three types of animals: a rhino, a bird, and a scorpion (cf. Fig-
ure 4.3). The escape room genre was chosen to allow locomotion via natural walking,
which removes the need for additional navigation techniques, such as teleportation.
As depicted in Figure 4.4, each game focuses on a different control approach and
equips players with a “superhuman” skill that is typical for the respective animal.
For instance, in the role of a bird, players have to use their virtual wings to ﬂy and
to create gusts of wind for object movement. Being a rhino allows players to use the
horn for tricky object interactions, such as lifting and removing a lock through the
cage bars. A scorpion offers even more unique interactions: in our game, players can
use the tail and claws to cut their way through a labyrinth and defeat an end boss.

Fig. 4.3: Our beastly escape rooms revealed that players enjoy the control over additional

body parts that allow novel interactions and enable superhuman abilities.

4.1 Nonhumanoid Avatars in VR

31

Fig. 4.4: The control approaches utilized in our example games. Rhino (full-body mapping):
players have to stay on all fours; head movement controls the horn. Scorpion
(half-body mapping): players remain in an upright posture and use the controllers
to open and close the claws and to initiate a tail strike. Bird (full-body mapping):
players use their virtual wings to ﬂy and create gusts of wind.

Our publication provides a detailed discussion of the underlying decision-making
process and reports an evaluation of the resulting games concerning IVBO and the
overall player experience. We summarize the key messages as following:

• IVBO correlates with player experience and is an important factor in nonhu-

manoid VR avatar design

• games should emphasize the animal’s speciﬁc characteristics and abilities
• players have no trouble controlling additional and exotic body parts
• only directly controllable body parts should be visualized
• controls (e.g., full-body vs. half-body) should be designed based on the game-

related animal abilities and the target audience.

Our experiments demonstrated that, by a smart choice of avatars, VR games could
allow us to collect impressions and experiences that would not be possible or would
be far less engaging in a less immersive setup. To put it another way, nonhumanoid
avatars proﬁt substantially from the current VR technology. One reason is the
correlation between IVBO, presence, and game enjoyment. Hence, as follow-up
research, we suggest disentangling these relations in detail. We assume that further
exploration will encourage researchers and practitioners to consider IVBO as a
helpful tool that allows the creation of novel and engaging virtual experiences.

Furthermore, we propose to study nonhumanoid IVBO beyond games. In particular,
this phenomenon might have an impact on our empathy for animals and nature
in general, or we could use it as an in virtuo exposure method [CHW97; Hof+03;
Gar+02; Bou+06; Hof98; BWB14] to combat speciﬁc animal-related fears, such as
arachnophobia.

32

Chapter 4 Perception

4.2 Preattentive Highlighting in VR Visualizations

Animal avatars were just one example of how we can beneﬁt from perception
phenomena in VR. In this section, we continue the exploration of such phenomena
and take a closer look at the area of visualization—an application domain that is
well aware of the advantages that VR has to offer [Kra+06; SBN08].

Our primary contribution is Deadeye [KK19]—a preattentive highlighting technique
for visualizations, i.e., an approach that allows us to notice an object of interest
within a split second. The underlying idea is easy to explain: we highlight an object
of interest by rendering it for one eye only. Technically, this is easy to achieve with
an HMD, which makes this approach an ideal candidate for VR visualizations. The
following sections provide a brief insight into the related research in the following
manner: Firstly, we assess the status quo of visualization literacy [KMK19]. Secondly,
we lay a foundation by establishing Deadeye for 2D visualizations [KK19]. Thirdly
and ﬁnally, we transfer our approach to virtual environments and integrate Deadeye
into real-world VR visualizations [Kre+19a].

4.2.1 Dear Data: Can Everyone Visualize?

In the course of this synopsis, we often regarded VR technology as something
mainstream, i.e., as something that has an impact on our daily life. One particular
reason was the overarching application area, i.e., most of our contributions can
be used for entertainment purposes. In contrast, visualization—and visualization
creation in particular—is usually considered a “serious” application area limited to
experts.

Nevertheless, the demand for people being capable of creating meaningful and
engaging visualizations outgrows the offer rapidly. Accordingly, the skills to under-
stand and generate visual representations are more crucial than ever—skills that we
often subsume under the general term visualization literacy [LKK16]. Hence, before
tackling the particular issue of visual highlighting, this section explores how ready
the mainstream is for visualization and how we can improve this status quo through
education.

Our particular contribution [KMK19] is an explorative study on the visualization
abilities of novices and a course design that encourages the creation of truly engaging
visualizations. The book Dear Data [LP16] motivated our course. The visualizations
in that book were created by composing visualization knowledge and creativity, and
we wanted to know if students could be motivated to produce similar results in
terms of comprehension [LRC12] and engagement [Bat+10; Bor+13]. Therefore,
we emphasized design thinking [PN18; CKJ13; Gol94; CDC96; Bro10; RS12] and

4.2 Preattentive Highlighting in VR Visualizations

33

Fig. 4.5: Example visualizations on the topic “water”. Novices experimented with different
approaches: day-by-day visualizations vs. aggregations, digital vs. analog, amount
of tracked attributes, visual clutter, and differing topic interpretations.

hands-on exploration of the visualization space [RHR16] to prevent students from
any kind of tunnel vision that we often attribute to visualization novices.

During the course, our participants had to track certain data each week and create
a meaningful visualization at the end of the week (cf. Figure 4.5). Interviews and
online surveys accompanied our course in order to collect insights into the thinking
process and pain points of visualization novices. Apart from the extracted creation
process, as shown in Figure 4.6, we outline the following key observations:

• design thinking motivates novices to experiment with a broader range of

visualization methods

• novices often skip the data analysis step and go straight to visualization
• novices tend to ignore the aspect of memorability [Bor+13; Bat+10]
• novices perceive collaborative visualization as more complex and less fun

To summarize, the enrichment of traditional teaching by basic design thinking prin-
ciples (e.g., divergent thinking, brainstorming) encourages novices to explore and
learn a plethora of visualization techniques without falling into a tunnel-vision
pattern. We suggest that such novice-oriented approaches can increase the over-
all visual literacy of the broad masses, which, in turn, is also beneﬁcial for VR
visualizations—be it on the part of consumers or producers.

Fig. 4.6: The nonlinear, iterative visualization creation approaches of our students.

34

Chapter 4 Perception

4.2.2 Highlighting and Preattentive Visual Features

As we have seen in the example of Dear Data, visualization is an indispensable part
of modern communication. Designing comprehensive visualizations requires a deep
understanding of how our visual perception works [NS71; IK01; Yar67]. In other
words, making efﬁcient use of particular visual characteristics helps us to create
visualizations that excel in their usability and performance.

The following sections focus on one aspect of visual perception, namely highlight-
ing, and its interplay with VR technology. Highlighting allows us to draw and
guide [War12; Hal+16; BI13] the attention of users to a particular object of interest.
One well-known example is the search function of a web browser: it uses color to
highlight the occurrence of a query, which allows us to locate the results instantly. A
more advanced example is a medical visualization that utilizes ﬂickering to highlight
suspicious cells or tissue and helps doctors with exploring the data. Cues such as
color, ﬂickering, shape, size, and motion are examples of so-called preattentive visual
features [HE12]. Our visual system can detect such features in a glance, i.e., before
our eyes initiate a saccadic movement. Consider the example in Figure 4.7: looking
at such an image for a split second would sufﬁce to tell whether or not there was a
red circle among blue ones. Since a saccade usually needs about 200-250 ms [HE12]
to initiate, researchers utilize that threshold to determine if a cue is preattentive.

One important property of preattentive cues is that they perform equally well with
an increasing number of distractors. Those features are processed in parallel by
our visual system and are not searched serially. That property is crucial when we
revise our example with a full-page text search or the exploration of a huge medical
dataset. Hence, advances in the exploration of preattentive features can provide
substantial beneﬁts [Wal+14; Suh+02; Col+06; Alp+11; GCC17] to visualization
researchers and practitioners.

Fig. 4.7: Left image: the target object is a red circle among blue distractors and can be
recognized preattentively. Right image: the target object is also an outlier – either
a blue square or a red circle (conjunction search). We have to search each object
in a serial fashion to ﬁnd the target, i.e., no preattentive processing is possible.

4.2 Preattentive Highlighting in VR Visualizations

35

4.2.3 Deadeye: Dichoptic Presentation for Highlighting

The core idea of our work on Deadeye [KK19] is to highlight an object by hiding it for
one eye. We refer to such a principle when each eye is exposed to a different stimulus
as dichoptic presentation. In general, that difference in stimuli leads to binocular
rivalry [LLS96; Bla89; Fri12; AB05; Paf+11], i.e., our vision system enters a context-
switching mode that allows us to perceive both monocular images alternately instead
of experiencing a superimposition. Whether or not we can perceive binocular rivalry
in a preattentive manner has been discussed in several prior works [WF88; DL74;
TG67; AH98; FM09]. The prevailing opinion is that this phenomenon is usually
too weak and overridden by more pronounced features [Zou+17]. Consequently,
a dichoptic presentation has only rarely been employed in visualization or for
highlighting purposes in general [ZCZ12; Zha14]. On the other hand, research by
Paffen et al. [PHV12] and especially the work by Zhaoping [Zha08] has provided
further evidence that we should reconsider binocular rivalry as a preattentive cue.

Our proposed approach has a unique advantage over existing highlighting methods:
Deadeye does not modify any visual properties of the target and, thus, is particularly
suited for visualization applications (cf. Figure 4.8). In contrast, all established
cues have to alter the target in one way or another – be it reshaping, recoloring, or
introducing a motion. Such changes in appearance can lead to data misinterpretation.
Furthermore, reserving a whole visual dimension, such as color or position, for
highlighting is an expensive tradeoff.

We veriﬁed our idea using a traditional evaluation approach for preattentive cues.
Typically, a series of images are displayed for a short amount of time (100-250
ms), and participants have to decide for each image whether a highlighted object
is present or not. A preattentive feature is characterized by a high success rate
independently from the number of overall objects, also called distractors, in the
image. In addition, we also explored the performance of Deadeye in a so-called
conjunction search scenario (cf. Figure 4.7) [TG80; TG88; TS86; WCF89; NS86] by

Fig. 4.8: Applicability of Deadeye: highlighting of lines in a line chart (left) and visual

storytelling in a scientiﬁc visualization of chemical reactions (right).

36

Chapter 4 Perception

Fig. 4.9: Examples of VR visualizations that can beneﬁt from our contribution. (a) Ed-
ucational visualizations of particle physics [DPG18]: Deadeye can be used to
capture and guide the attention of the students. (b) Immersive graph visualiza-
tions [Kwo+16]: utilizing Deadeye during user interaction to highlight the selected
vertices and edges. (c) Dinosaur track formation [Nov+19]: emphasizing 3D
pathlines of interest in unsteady ﬂow visualizations.

combining our technique with color as a second cue. Overall, our results allowed us
to draw the following conclusions:

• Deadeye works preattentively
• Deadeye does not lead to headache or any other physical strain
• in contrast to the depth cue [NS86], Deadeye can not be processed in parallel

when combined with other preattentive features

• the performance of Deadeye decreases with an increasing distance from the

focus point, i.e., it is less robust in the peripheral area.

The weak spot of Deadeye is its dependence on stereo equipment because we have
to render different images for each eye. Although the corresponding hardware
became a commodity in recent years (e.g., 3D glasses, stereo projectors, 3D TVs), this
mandatory requirement leads to an additional effort. For this reason, a more effective
solution would be to transfer Deadeye to a natively stereoscopic environment, namely
VR, and to apply our approach for 3D visualizations.

4.2.4 Deadeye VR: Going Beyond 2D Visualizations

As a follow-up to our original contribution, we explored Deadeye as a highlighting
technique for visualizations in VR [Kre+19a], because such stereoscopic scenarios
support dichoptic presentation out of the box. There are manifold reasons for
visualization in VR, such as a better understanding of spatial relationships [SB07]
or the increased presence. Hence, we also need robust and intuitive highlighting
techniques. While speciﬁc preattentive cues, such as color, are not affected by the
transition to VR, temporal approaches, such as ﬂickering, often interfere with aliasing
caused by constant micromovements in VR. To put it another way, establishing
Deadeye as a highlighting method in VR without occupying any additional visual
dimension offers signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the visualization community, as depicted in
Figure 4.9.

4.2 Preattentive Highlighting in VR Visualizations

37

We could not assume the applicability of our technique in VR as a given fact.
Firstly, dichoptic presentation is a rather subtle cue that might be overridden by
more pronounced features [Zou+17]. Secondly, our method suppresses binocular
disparities for the target object. However, our vision utilizes the binocular disparity
generated by the horizontal offset of our eyes to gather depth information, which
forms the basis for our stereo perception [Jul60; Jul71; CB15; M+76; MP79].
Therefore, we performed an in-depth evaluation, which revealed the following
results:

• the preattentiveness of Deadeye is preserved in VR
• Deadeye performs robust under heterogeneous conditions, i.e., when distractors

vary in protruding properties such as color or shape (cf. Figure 4.9)

• depth perception for highlighted objects is still possible due to occlusion

geometry [TWA12] and multi-perspective observation [SSN88].

A second contribution of our publication is an example integration of Deadeye into
VR volume rendering [Kra+06; SBN08], as depicted in Figure 4.10. Along with a
GPU-based implementation outline, the manuscript exposes a qualitative survey that
demonstrates the beneﬁts and limitations of our approach. According to our results,
Deadeye is particularly advantageous in non-greyscale scenarios and, in contrast to
temporal approaches, does not suffer from typical VR-related issues such as aliasing.
Furthermore, our participants noticed that the highlighted object could be faded
in or out depending on focus. Simply put, concentrating on something behind the
target allows us to suppress the Deadeye target completely and see through it. Hence,
we suggest investigating this multistable perception phenomenon in detail, as it
might have use-cases beyond highlighting, be it for visualizations or VR applications
in general.

Fig. 4.10: Left: our experiments in VR with homogeneous and heterogeneous distractors.
Right: VR volume rendering of medical datasets as our evaluated application
scenario for Deadeye.

38

Chapter 4 Perception

4.3 Concluding Comments on Perception

The approaches outlined in this chapter slightly differed from our research on
locomotion and interaction. In the previous chapters, our contributions were mainly
motivated by a shortcoming of current VR setups, be it the limited walking space in
a room-scale VR environment or the missing physical feedback of a virtual object.
Hence, we proposed methods to improve the status quo of VR by making virtual
environments easier to travel and more interactive overall.

In contrast, our methodology concerning perception followed the principle of am-
plifying the strong points of VR setups. Thanks to the high degree of immersion
that VR has to offer, we were able to apply the illusion of virtual body ownership to
nonhumanoid avatars, which would be rather hard (or even impossible) to achieve
in a desktop environment. Furthermore, we utilized a dichoptic presentation to
enhance visualizations with a preattentive highlighting method that does not modify
any visual properties of the target object. Hence, visualizations in VR beneﬁt from
Deadeye out of the box, i.e., without the additional hardware requirements of a
typical desktop scenario.

We covered only a tiny fraction of (visual) phenomena that are possible in a virtual
environment. Nevertheless, again, the bottom line is that such investigations aim
at taking advantage of VR here and now, which further increases the application
possibilities of immersive setups. Hence, as researchers, we have to ask ourselves
whether and how we can operationalize the search for such phenomena. From our
perspective, it is more promising to start in VR and to explore all nuances of virtual
experiences, instead of porting existing approaches from desktop to VR, as is often
done—with little success—with digital games.

This “VR ﬁrst” paradigm, combined with divergent thinking (cf. our work on
Dear Data), is something that can not be emphasized often enough concerning
our perception in VR. With that, we do not only mean the exploration of real-
world inspired perception phenomena: certain unrealistic perceptions, such as being
an animal, are only possible in VR, which further underpins the diversity and
advantageousness of such setups.

4.3 Concluding Comments on Perception

39

Conclusion

5

Throughout this synopsis, we explored three different areas of VR research: locomo-
tion, interaction, and perception. We began by classifying the different movement
approaches in VR. We outlined stationary approaches, such as gamepad or gaze-
based controls, and summarized the beneﬁts of walking-inspired techniques, such as
walking in place or redirected walking. We then focused on virtual body resizing
as one viable option to bring natural walking into our living rooms. Based on our
GulliVR and Outstanding publications, we exposed how to use player rescaling to
increase presence and spatial orientation while removing the risk of cybersickness.

Our stay in a virtual environment seldom remains limited to just walking—hence,
in the next step, we presented various ways to enhance and facilitate interaction
in VR. We proposed a self-transforming controller to increase presence and player
enjoyment in VR games and embedded this topic in a more general discussion about
object representations and inventories. Apart from these object-related contributions,
we investigated gestures as an essential entity in interaction research. We emphasized
the audience and created 3D gestures that are easy to understand and to predict
by an observer, be it during a presentation, a software demo, or for entertainment
purposes. Finally, we introduced MorphableUI, a distributed hypergraph-based
system that facilitates the integration and usage of diverse I/O modalities in and
outside VR, such as the aforementioned physical proxies and gestures.

In the case of interaction and locomotion, we mainly dealt with the shortcomings
of VR. For instance, we addressed issues such as the limited space for walking or
the (mostly) missing haptics. Our contributions in the ﬁeld of perception emphasize
the strong points of immersive setups. We have transferred the illusion of virtual
body ownership to nonhumanoid avatars and exploited this phenomenon to cre-
ate engaging and novel gaming experiences with animals in the leading role. As
a further example, we introduced Deadeye and demonstrated how to utilize the
dichoptic presentation capability of immersive setups for preattentive highlighting
in visualizations. In particular, our technique allows guiding the attention to an
object of interest with the unique beneﬁt of not modifying any visual property of the
target.

With these accomplishments in mind, we dedicate the remaining sections of this
chapter to a critical assessment of our contributions and their potential regarding
follow-up research. We round off the synopsis by presenting our concluding thoughts
on VR research in general and outlining our lessons learned along the way.

41

5.1 Critical Assessment of the Contributions and

Possible Future Work

We outlined 16 manuscripts in this synopsis. It is fair to assume that they differ
regarding their overall impact on the status quo of VR and computer science research
in general. Assessing the signiﬁcance of a contribution shortly after the publication
date is somewhat speculative, and the rating of own works is always prone to
personal bias. Nevertheless, such an initial judgment helps to complete the big
picture of this dissertation.

To maintain focus, we do not discuss each contribution in detail. Instead, for each
research area, we outline the—from our point of view—most signiﬁcant achieve-
ment(s), reason our choice, and provide possible follow-up research questions.

Locomotion. Our major achievement in this area is the introduction of the virtual
body resizing concept. The award-winning GulliVR publication (CHI Play 2018
honorable mention) demonstrates how an appropriate adaptation of the virtual eye
distance can be used to move at an increased pace without the risk of cybersickness.
Although prior research reported that an increased stereo base makes objects appear
nearer and smaller [Ren+15; HGE11], we are not aware of any previous attempts
to utilize this phenomenon as a viable countermeasure for locomotion-induced cy-
bersickness. Our core idea is applicable beyond games and entertainment, which is
reﬂected by the diversity of citing sources [Ioa+19; DW19] and follow-up publica-
tions [Abt+19; CKK19a; CKK19b]. We see two possible research directions based
on GulliVR: Firstly, the dynamic resizing approach has a straightforward use-case in
multiscale virtual environments [AM16; ZF02; Kop+06], be it for urban planning or
medical explorations. Secondly, we suggest further experiments on the signiﬁcantly
altered virtual eye separation. We believe that the induced change in the perception
of object size and distance is a subtle, yet powerful phenomenon that creates oppor-
tunities for several novel VR experiences, such as the miniature world look in the
case of Outstanding [CKK19a; CKK19b].

Interaction. In the respective chapter, we concluded that most of our results are
also applicable outside VR. However, as our assessment focuses on VR research, we
emphasize our work on self-transforming controllers as an essential contribution in
this area. We regard this publication as a signiﬁcant milestone because of our ﬁndings
related to weight shifting and weight perception in VR. In contrast to the pre-existing
opinion that a physical proxy has to mimic the virtual object as close as possible, our
research demonstrated that such proxies could (and should) be signiﬁcantly lighter
and handier. Hence, we have shown that most of the commercially available VR gun
controllers are on the wrong path, as they aim to replicate the exact look and feel of
the real gun, which is unnecessary and even counterproductive. More importantly,

42

Chapter 5 Conclusion

we have determined that a slight shift of weight is sufﬁcient to convey the impression
of holding a completely different object (or gun in our case), which paved the way
for further experiments on self-transforming controllers [ZK19]. Since haptics plays
a crucial role in our virtual experience, we argue that research on similar morphable
controllers signiﬁcantly advances the status quo of VR. As future work, we suggest a
broader exploration of such transforming devices by including additional parameters
aside from weight distribution. For instance, we can modify air resistance, as in
the case of Drag:on by Zenner et al. [ZK19], or add a tactile surface representation
similar to the Haptic Revolver by Whitmire et al. [Whi+18].

Perception. We outline two signiﬁcant contributions—VR Animals in the enter-
tainment sector and Deadeye in the area of visualization. Our work on animal
avatars pioneered the concept of nonhumanoid body ownership in VR. In multiple
experiments, we conﬁrmed that IVBO applies to avatars that are very different
from human beings. These insights allowed us to create novel, engaging virtual
experiences with animals in the primary role. Our research promotes the injection
of superhuman abilities, such as ﬂying or using a virtual horn, into VR games as
a central component of player experience. Although our publications emphasize
digital games, we assume that animal embodiment is also a viable enhancement for
other domains. In particular, we hypothesize that being an animal in VR increases
our empathy for animals and might be applicable as an in virtuo exposure method
to combat animal-related fears.

In contrast to this certainly unusual topic, our work on Deadeye, an IEEE VIS 2018
best paper award publication, is characterized by its simplicity and straightforward
advantages for everyday visualizations. The discovery of a novel preattentive visu-
alization method is a rare occasion. Together with the fact that Deadeye does not
modify any visual property of the target, it is reasonable to assume a high signiﬁcance
of this contribution. The applicability of our method in VR is what brings out the full
potential of Deadeye because dichoptic presentation comes out of the box in such
setups. As a result, we get a (less than) zero-overhead highlighting method that
is straightforward to implement while preserving all attributes of the target object.
As a next step, we suggest to go beyond visualizations and to evaluate Deadeye for
graphical user interfaces in VR, as they heavily rely on highlighting and attention
guidance and would supposedly beneﬁt from the non-invasiveness of our method.

5.2 VR Research and the Lessons We Learned

Our synopsis began with the question of whether (our) VR research is “worth it”.
In the previous section, we outlined our most signiﬁcant contributions and their
potential impact. However, ﬁnal publications are not everything—along the way, we
encountered several hidden obstacles, failed at particular challenges, and gained

5.2 VR Research and the Lessons We Learned

43

scientiﬁc maturity. Hence, as the last words of the synopsis, we summarize the
essential lessons that we have learned during our VR research.

VR ﬁrst instead of ﬁxes and ports. We noticed that VR is often treated as an
extension of conventional desktop-based computing. We hear people talking about
“porting an application to VR” or reading changelogs of games stating that a particular
element, such as the user interface or locomotion, “ was adapted to VR”. From our
experience, this approach of taking an application, rendering it in stereo, i.e., in VR,
and then asking oneself how to ﬁx the countless usability issues is worrying, saying
the least. Not only that such ﬁxes are difﬁcult or sometimes even impossible to
achieve—this patching process leaves a certain after-taste and increases the overall
skepticism regarding the maturity of VR. Moreover, how often have we witnessed
applications that remained unusable in VR, no matter how many patches were
applied? We argue that, as researchers and practitioners, we must distance ourselves
from this “port-and-ﬁx” mindset. If we really want to create meaningful experiences
in VR, we have to embrace this entity as a whole, with all its beneﬁts and drawbacks,
which often means starting from scratch. Do not get us wrong here, most principles
of human-computer interaction still apply to virtual environments, and that brings
us to the next point:

Reinventing the wheel in VR. For years, VR research is booming. Related confer-
ences, such as the IEEE VR, went from meet-ups with a few hundred attendees to
multi-track symposiums with thousands of visitors. Conferences on human-computer
interaction, such as the ACM CHI, dedicate multiple sessions to VR research nowa-
days. This seemingly rapid progress has both advantages and disadvantages. On the
one hand, the increasing number of scientists is, without a doubt, an essential factor
for the sustainable success of VR. More workforce results in more ideas and broader
dissemination of the respective ﬁndings thanks to our lively, vibrant community. On
the other hand, we noticed that VR research is occasionally accompanied by some
superﬁciality—instead of diving into the literature on stereoscopic environments
from the nineties, we tend to overlook previous efforts and claim novelty just because
nobody tried our method before with an up-to-date VR HMD.

Another example of reinventing the wheel is to (re-)publish methods and applications
by adding in VR to the title. Not all tasks are automatically better in a virtual
environment—we would even go so far as to say that most daily use-cases are better
off without VR. We should always ask ourselves, whether the VR-induced beneﬁts to
our application justify the fact that people have to put on a slightly uncomfortable
HMD, potentially experience cybersickness, and lose the advantages of a desktop
environment, such as efﬁcient text input. For instance, we needed VR in our animal
avatar research, as we built upon the virtual body ownership illusion. Otherwise,
a non-VR setup would have enabled such nonhumanoid experiences for a wider
audience. This example also introduces the last lesson we want to share:

44

Chapter 5 Conclusion

Simulations vs. unrealistic experiences. Certainly, we can utilize the provided
immersion of VR setups for ultra-realistic simulations. We can design our virtual
stay to match our real life as close as possible. However, in our opinion, one of the
greatest strengths of VR is to deliver unrealistic experiences. In VR, we are faced
with unique opportunities and activities that are not available to us in the real world.
In our experiments, the participants were particularly attracted by various unrealistic
actions like ﬂying or interacting with a miniaturized world as a giant. Ultimately, we
believe that such novel experiences are vital to the success of VR because curiosity is
an integral part of human nature.

5.2 VR Research and the Lessons We Learned

45

Bibliography

[AB05]

[Abt+19]

[AH98]

[Ahn+16]

[Alp+11]

[Alt+04]

[AM16]

[BAS14]

[Bat+10]

David Alais and Randolph Blake. Binocular rivalry. MIT press, 2005 (cit. on
p. 36).

Parastoo Abtahi, Mar Gonzalez-Franco, Eyal Ofek, and Anthony Steed. „I’m
a Giant: Walking in Large Virtual Environments at High Speed Gains“. In:
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM. 2019, p. 522 (cit. on pp. 12, 42).

Stuart Anstis and Alan Ho. „Nonlinear combination of luminance excursions
during ﬂicker, simultaneous contrast, afterimages and binocular fusion“. In:
Vision Research 38.4 (1998), pp. 523–539 (cit. on p. 36).

Sun Joo Ahn, Joshua Bostick, Elise Ogle, et al. „Experiencing nature: Em-
bodying animals in immersive virtual environments increases inclusion of
nature in self and involvement with nature“. In: Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 21.6 (2016), pp. 399–419 (cit. on p. 28).

Basak Alper, Tobias Hollerer, JoAnn Kuchera-Morin, and Angus Forbes. „Stereo-
scopic Highlighting: 2D Graph Visualization on Stereo Displays“. In: IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17.12 (Dec. 2011),
pp. 2325–2333 (cit. on p. 35).

Frank Althoff, Gregor McGlaun, Manfred Lang, and Gerhard Rigoll. „Evalu-
ating Multimodal Interaction Patterns in Various Application Scenarios“. In:
Gesture-Based Communication in Human-Computer Interaction: 5th Interna-
tional Gesture Workshop, GW 2003, Genova, Italy, April 15-17, 2003, Selected
Revised Papers. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 421–
435 (cit. on p. 21).

Ferran Argelaguet and Morgant Maignant. „GiAnt: stereoscopic-compliant
multi-scale navigation in VEs“. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. ACM. 2016, pp. 269–277 (cit. on
pp. 10, 42).

Kristopher J Blom, Jorge Arroyo-Palacios, and Mel Slater. „The effects of
rotating the self out of the body in the full virtual body ownership illusion“.
In: Perception 43.4 (2014), pp. 275–294 (cit. on p. 28).

Scott Bateman, Regan L. Mandryk, Carl Gutwin, et al. „Useful Junk?: The Ef-
fects of Visual Embellishment on Comprehension and Memorability of Charts“.
In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems. CHI ’10. Atlanta, Georgia, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 2573–2582 (cit. on
pp. 33, 34).

47

[Bat+13]

Ligia Batrinca, Giota Stratou, Ari Shapiro, Louis-Philippe Morency, and Stefan
Scherer. „Cicero - Towards a Multimodal Virtual Audience Platform for Public
Speaking Training“. In: International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Humans.
Lecture Notes on Computer Science. Edinburgh, UK, Aug. 2013, pp. 116–128
(cit. on p. 21).

[Bau+01]

M. Bauer, B. Bruegge, Gudrun Klinker, et al. „Design of a component-based
augmented reality framework“. In: Augmented Reality, 2001. Proceedings. IEEE
and ACM International Symposium on. 2001, pp. 45–54 (cit. on p. 22).

[BC98]

[BD95]

[Ber07]

[Bes96]

[BGS13]

[BI13]

[BK03]

[Bla89]

[BM13]

Matthew Botvinick and Jonathan Cohen. „Rubber hands ‘feel’touch that eyes
see“. In: Nature 391.6669 (1998), p. 756 (cit. on p. 27).

Frank Biocca and Ben Delaney. „Communication in the Age of Virtual Reality“.
In: ed. by Frank Biocca and Mark R. Levy. Hillsdale, NJ, USA: L. Erlbaum
Associates Inc., 1995. Chap. Immersive Virtual Reality Technology, pp. 57–124
(cit. on p. 7).

Jaime Berenguer. „The effect of empathy in proenvironmental attitudes and
behaviors“. In: Environment and Behavior 39.2 (2007), pp. 269–283 (cit. on
p. 28).

Scot Best. „Perceptual and oculomotor implications of interpupillary distance
settings on a head-mounted virtual display“. In: Aerospace and Electronics
Conference, 1996. NAECON 1996., Proceedings of the IEEE 1996 National.
Vol. 1. IEEE. 1996, pp. 429–434 (cit. on p. 11).

Domna Banakou, Raphaela Groten, and Mel Slater. „Illusory ownership of a
virtual child body causes overestimation of object sizes and implicit attitude
changes“. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.31 (2013),
pp. 12846–12851 (cit. on p. 28).

A. Borji and L. Itti. „State-of-the-Art in Visual Attention Modeling“. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35.1 (Jan. 2013),
pp. 185–207 (cit. on p. 35).

Paul Bach-y-Rita and Stephen W Kercel. „Sensory substitution and the human–
machine interface“. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 7.12 (2003), pp. 541–546
(cit. on p. 28).

Randolph Blake. „A neural theory of binocular rivalry.“ In: Psychological review
96.1 (1989), p. 145 (cit. on p. 36).

Max Birk and Regan L. Mandryk. „Control Your Game-self: Effects of Con-
troller Type on Enjoyment, Motivation, and Personality in Game“. In: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI
’13. Paris, France: ACM, 2013, pp. 685–694 (cit. on p. 17).

[Bol17]

[Bor+13]

Costas Boletsis. „The new era of virtual reality locomotion: a systematic
literature review of techniques and a proposed typology“. In: Multimodal
Technologies and Interaction 1.4 (2017), p. 24 (cit. on p. 8).

M. A. Borkin, A. A. Vo, Z. Bylinskii, et al. „What Makes a Visualization
Memorable?“ In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
19.12 (Dec. 2013), pp. 2306–2315 (cit. on pp. 33, 34).

48

Bibliography

[Bou+06]

[Boz+16a]

[Boz+16b]

Stéphane Bouchard, Sophie Côté, Julie St-Jacques, Geneviève Robillard, and
Patrice Renaud. „Effectiveness of virtual reality exposure in the treatment of
arachnophobia using 3D games“. In: Technology and health care 14.1 (2006),
pp. 19–27 (cit. on p. 32).

Evren Bozgeyikli, Andrew Raij, Srinivas Katkoori, and Rajiv Dubey. „Loco-
motion in Virtual reality for individuals with autism spectrum disorder“. In:
Proceedings of the 2016 Symposium on Spatial User Interaction. ACM. 2016,
pp. 33–42.

Evren Bozgeyikli, Andrew Raij, Srinivas Katkoori, and Rajiv Dubey. „Point
& teleport locomotion technique for virtual reality“. In: Proceedings of the
2016 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. ACM. 2016,
pp. 205–216 (cit. on p. 12).

[Bro+15]

Michael Brown, Aidan Kehoe, Jurek Kirakowski, and Ian Pitt. „Beyond the
gamepad: HCI and game controller design and evaluation“. In: Game User
Experience Evaluation. Springer, 2015, pp. 263–285 (cit. on p. 17).

[Bro10]

[BSH09]

[BWB14]

[Car16]

[CB07]

[CB15]

[CCN14]

[CDC96]

[CHW97]

[CJC16]

Frederick P. Brooks. The Design of Design: Essays from a Computer Scientist.
1st. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010 (cit. on p. 33).

Gerd Bruder, Frank Steinicke, and Klaus H Hinrichs. „Arch-explore: A natural
user interface for immersive architectural walkthroughs“. In: (2009).

S Bouchard, BK Wiederhold, and J Bossé. Advances in Virtual Reality and
Anxiety Disorders. 2014 (cit. on p. 32).

Jorge Cardoso. „Comparison of gesture, gamepad, and gaze-based locomotion
for VR worlds“. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology. ACM. 2016, pp. 319–320.

Kathy Charmaz and Linda Liska Belgrave. „Grounded theory“. In: The Black-
well encyclopedia of sociology (2007) (cit. on p. 19).

Baptiste Caziot and Benjamin T. Backus. „Stereoscopic Offset Makes Objects
Easier to Recognize“. In: PLoS ONE 10.6 (2015), e0129101 (cit. on p. 38).

Paul Cairns, Anna Cox, and A Imran Nordin. „Immersion in digital games:
review of gaming experience research“. In: Handbook of digital games (2014),
pp. 337–361 (cit. on p. 7).

1942- Cross Nigel, Kees Dorst, and Henri Christiaans. Analysing design activity.
English. Conference proceedings. Chichester New York Wiley, 1996 (cit. on
p. 33).

Albert S Carlin, Hunter G Hoffman, and Suzanne Weghorst. „Virtual reality
and tactile augmentation in the treatment of spider phobia: a case report“. In:
Behaviour research and therapy 35.2 (1997), pp. 153–158 (cit. on p. 32).

Keith Curtis, Gareth J. F. Jones, and Nick Campbell. „Speaker Impact on
Audience Comprehension for Academic Presentations“. In: Proceedings of the
18th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. ICMI 2016.
Tokyo, Japan: ACM, 2016, pp. 129–136 (cit. on p. 21).

Bibliography

49

[CKJ13]

[CKK19a]

[CKK19b]

[CKKew]

[CLW14]

[Cme+19]

[CMR90]

[Col+06]

YoungJoong Chang, Jaibeom Kim, and Jaewoo Joo. „An Exploratory Study
on the Evolution of Design Thinking: Comparison of Apple and Samsung“. In:
Design Management Journal 8.1 (2013), pp. 22–34 (cit. on p. 33).

Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, and Jens Krueger. „Outstanding: A
Perspective-Switching Technique for Covering Large Distances in VR Games“.
In: Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. CHI EA ’19. Glasgow, Scotland Uk: ACM, 2019, LBW1612:1–
LBW1612:6 (cit. on pp. 7, 12, 13, 42).

Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, and Jens Krüger. „Outstanding: A
Multi-Perspective Travel Approach for Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY
’19. Barcelona, Spain: ACM, 2019, pp. 287–299 (cit. on pp. 7, 12, 13, 42).

Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, and Jens Krüger. „"I Packed my
Bag and in It I Put...": A Taxonomy of Inventory Systems for Virtual Reality
Games“. In: Submission to the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (under review) (cit. on pp. 17, 19).

Isaac Cho, Jialei Li, and Zachary Wartell. „Evaluating dynamic-adjustment
of stereo view parameters in a multi-scale virtual environment“. In: 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), 2014 IEEE Symposium on. IEEE. 2014, pp. 91–98 (cit. on
p. 11).

Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, Ann-Marie Müller, and Jens Krüger.
„Toward a Taxonomy of Inventory Systems for Virtual Reality Games“. In:
Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play Companion Extended Abstracts. CHI PLAY ’19 Extended Abstracts.
Barcelona, Spain: ACM, 2019, pp. 363–370 (cit. on pp. 17, 19).

Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and George G. Robertson. „The design
space of input devices“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’90. Seattle, Washington, United States:
ACM, 1990, pp. 117–124 (cit. on p. 22).

F. Cole, D. DeCarlo, A. Finkelstein, et al. „Directing Gaze in 3D Models
with Stylized Focus“. In: Proceedings of the 17th Eurographics Conference on
Rendering Techniques. EGSR ’06. Nicosia, Cyprus: Eurographics Association,
2006, pp. 377–387 (cit. on p. 35).

[Cor19]

HTC Corporation. HTC Vive Tracker. Website. Retrieved March 10, 2019 from
https://www.vive.com/eu/vive-tracker/. 2019 (cit. on p. 30).

[Cuc+12]

Stefania Cuccurullo, Rita Francese, Sharefa Murad, Ignazio Passero, and
Maurizio Tucci. „A Gestural Approach to Presentation Exploiting Motion
Capture Metaphors“. In: Proceedings of the International Working Conference
on Advanced Visual Interfaces. AVI ’12. Capri Island, Italy: ACM, 2012, pp. 148–
155 (cit. on p. 21).

[CW12]

Jacek Chmielewski and Krzysztof Walczak. „Application Architectures for
Smart Multi-device Applications“. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Multi-
device App Middleware. Multi-Device ’12. Montreal, Quebec, Canada: ACM,
2012, 5:1–5:5 (cit. on p. 22).

50

Bibliography

[Dai+13]

[DCC97]

[DF01]

[DH06]

[DJA93]

[DL74]

[DPG18]

[DW19]

[Ehr07]

[Ehr09]

[Eng92]

[Fer+16]

Florian Daiber, Andrey Krekhov, Marco Speicher, Jens Krüger, and Antonio
Krüger. „A Framework for Prototyping and Evaluation of Sensor-based Mo-
bile Interaction with Stereoscopic 3D“. In: ACM ITS Workshop on Interactive
Surfaces for Interaction with Stereoscopic 3D. ISIS3D ’13. St. Andrews, United
Kingdom: ACM, 2013, pp. 13–16 (cit. on pp. 17, 22).

Rudolph P. Darken, William R. Cockayne, and David Carmein. „The Omni-
directional Treadmill: A Locomotion Device for Virtual Worlds“. In: Proceedings
of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
UIST ’97. Banff, Alberta, Canada: ACM, 1997, pp. 213–221.

P. Dragicevic and Jean-Daniel Fekete. „Input Device Selection and Interaction
Conﬁguration with ICON“. In: Proceedings of the HCI01 Conference on People
and Computers XV. Springer, 2001, pp. 543–558 (cit. on p. 23).

R. Dachselt and A. Hübner. „A Survey and Taxonomy of 3D Menu Techniques“.
In: Proceedings of the 12th Eurographics Conference on Virtual Environments.
EGVE’06. Lisbon, Portugal: Eurographics Association, 2006, pp. 89–99 (cit. on
p. 22).

Nils Dahlbäck, Arne Jönsson, and Lars Ahrenberg. „Wizard of Oz Studies: Why
and How“. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces. IUI ’93. Orlando, Florida, USA: ACM, 1993, pp. 193–200
(cit. on p. 21).

Ch MM De Weert and Willem Johannes Maria Levelt. „Binocular bright-
ness combinations: Additive and nonadditive aspects“. In: Perception & Psy-
chophysics 15.3 (1974), pp. 551–562 (cit. on p. 36).

Zach Duer, Leo Piilonen, and George Glasson. „Belle2VR: A Virtual-Reality
Visualization of Subatomic Particle Physics in the Belle II Experiment“. In:
IEEE computer graphics and applications 38.3 (2018), pp. 33–43 (cit. on p. 37).

Kurtis Danyluk and Wesley Willett. „Evaluating the Performance of Virtual
Reality Navigation Techniques for Large Environments“. In: Computer Graphics
International Conference. Springer. 2019, pp. 203–215 (cit. on p. 42).

H Henrik Ehrsson. „The experimental induction of out-of-body experiences“.
In: Science 317.5841 (2007), pp. 1048–1048 (cit. on p. 28).

H Henrik Ehrsson. „How many arms make a pair? Perceptual illusion of
having an additional limb“. In: Perception 38.2 (2009), pp. 310–312 (cit. on
p. 28).

Craig E Engler. „Affordable VR by 1994“. In: Computer Gaming World (1992),
pp. 81–83 (cit. on p. 2).

Andrea Ferracani, Daniele Pezzatini, Jacopo Bianchini, Gianmarco Biscini,
and Alberto Del Bimbo. „Locomotion by natural gestures for immersive virtual
environments“. In: Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on multimedia
alternate realities. ACM. 2016, pp. 21–24.

[FF16]

Ajoy S Fernandes and Steven K Feiner. „Combating VR sickness through subtle
dynamic ﬁeld-of-view modiﬁcation“. In: 3D User Interfaces (3DUI), 2016 IEEE
Symposium on. IEEE. 2016, pp. 201–210 (cit. on p. 8).

Bibliography

51

[FM09]

[Fri12]

[Gal+15]

[Gar+02]

[GCC17]

[GJM11]

[Gol94]

[Gor+17]

[GPE11]

[GSS68]

[GW04]

[GWW07]

Monika A Formankiewicz and JD Mollon. „The psychophysics of detecting
binocular discrepancies of luminance“. In: Vision research 49.15 (2009),
pp. 1929–1938 (cit. on p. 36).

Jay Friedenberg. Visual attention and consciousness. Psychology Press, 2012
(cit. on p. 36).

Henrique Galvan Debarba, Eray Molla, Bruno Herbelin, and Ronan Boulic.
„Characterizing embodied interaction in ﬁrst and third person perspective
viewpoints“. In: 2015 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). EPFL-
CONF-206979. 2015 (cit. on p. 30).

Azucena Garcia-Palacios, Hunter Hoffman, Albert Carlin, TA Furness Iii, and
Cristina Botella. „Virtual reality in the treatment of spider phobia: a controlled
study“. In: Behaviour research and therapy 40.9 (2002), pp. 983–993 (cit. on
p. 32).

Carl Gutwin, Andy Cockburn, and Ashley Coveney. „Peripheral Popout: The
Inﬂuence of Visual Angle and Stimulus Intensity on Popout Effects“. In:
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. CHI ’17. Denver, Colorado, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 208–219 (cit. on
p. 35).

Sukeshini A. Grandhi, Gina Joue, and Irene Mittelberg. „Understanding Natu-
ralness and Intuitiveness in Gesture Production: Insights for Touchless Gestu-
ral Interfaces“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’11. Vancouver, BC, Canada: ACM, 2011, pp. 821–
824 (cit. on p. 20).

Gabriela Goldschmidt. „On visual design thinking: the vis kids of architecture“.
In: Design Studies 15.2 (1994), pp. 158–174 (cit. on p. 33).

Geoffrey Gorisse, Olivier Christmann, Etienne Armand Amato, and Simon
Richir. „First-and Third-Person Perspectives in immersive Virtual environ-
ments: Presence and Performance analysis of embodied Users“. In: Frontiers
in Robotics and AI 4 (2017), p. 33 (cit. on p. 13).

Arvid Guterstam, Valeria I Petkova, and H Henrik Ehrsson. „The illusion of
owning a third arm“. In: PloS one 6.2 (2011), e17208 (cit. on p. 28).

Barney G Glaser, Anselm L Strauss, and Elizabeth Strutzel. „The discovery
of grounded theory; strategies for qualitative research“. In: Nursing research
17.4 (1968), p. 364 (cit. on p. 19).

Krzysztof Gajos and Daniel S. Weld. „SUPPLE: Automatically Generating User
Interfaces“. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces. IUI ’04. Funchal, Madeira, Portugal: ACM, 2004, pp. 93–100
(cit. on p. 23).

Krzysztof Z. Gajos, Jacob O. Wobbrock, and Daniel S. Weld. „Automatically
Generating User Interfaces Adapted to Users’ Motor and Vision Capabilities“.
In: Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology. UIST ’07. Newport, Rhode Island, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 231–
240 (cit. on p. 23).

52

Bibliography

[Hab+17]

M.P. Jacob Habgood, David Wilson, David Moore, and Sergio Alapont. „HCI
Lessons From PlayStation VR“. In: Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY ’17 Extended
Abstracts. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: ACM, 2017, pp. 125–135 (cit. on
p. 8).

[Hai+16]

[Hal+16]

[Har+14]

[HE12]

[Hee92]

[HEP07]

[Hes+12]

[Het+90]

[HGE11]

[HGR03]

[Hof+03]

F. Haider, L. Cerrato, N. Campbell, and S. Luz. „Presentation quality as-
sessment using acoustic information and hand movements“. In: 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
Mar. 2016, pp. 2812–2816 (cit. on p. 20).

K. Hall, C. Perin, P. Kusalik, and Carl Gutwin. „Formalizing Emphasis in
Information Visualization“. In: Computer Graphics Forum. Vol. 35. 3. 2016,
pp. 717–737 (cit. on p. 35).

Alyssa Harris, Kevin Nguyen, Preston Tunnell Wilson, Matthew Jackoski, and
Betsy Williams. „Human joystick: Wii-leaning to translate in large virtual
environments“. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGGRAPH International
Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and its Applications in Industry. ACM.
2014, pp. 231–234.

Christopher Healey and James Enns. „Attention and Visual Memory in Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 18.7 (July 2012), pp. 1170–1188 (cit. on p. 35).

Carrie Heeter. „Being there: The subjective experience of presence“. In: Pres-
ence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 1.2 (1992), pp. 262–271 (cit. on
p. 7).

R. Hartley, A. Elsayed, and M. Pesheva. „Communication and Design in Multi-
modal Presentations“. In: Seventh IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies (ICALT 2007). July 2007, pp. 923–924 (cit. on p. 21).

Luke Hespanhol, Martin Tomitsch, Kazjon Grace, Anthony Collins, and Judy
Kay. „Investigating Intuitiveness and Effectiveness of Gestures for Free Spatial
Interaction with Large Displays“. In: Proceedings of the 2012 International
Symposium on Pervasive Displays. PerDis ’12. Porto, Portugal: ACM, 2012,
6:1–6:6 (cit. on p. 20).

Lawrence J. Hettinger, Kevin S. Berbaum, Robert S. Kennedy, William P.
Dunlap, and Margaret D. Nolan. „Vection and simulator sickness“. In: 2 (Feb.
1990), pp. 171–81 (cit. on p. 8).

Björn van der Hoort, Arvid Guterstam, and H Henrik Ehrsson. „Being Barbie:
the size of one’s own body determines the perceived size of the world“. In:
PloS one 6.5 (2011), e20195 (cit. on pp. 11, 42).

Martin Hachet, Pascal Guitton, and Patrick Reuter. „The CAT for Efﬁcient 2D
and 3D Interaction As an Alternative to Mouse Adaptations“. In: Proceedings
of the ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. VRST ’03.
Osaka, Japan: ACM, 2003, pp. 225–112 (cit. on p. 22).

Hunter G Hoffman, Azucena Garcia-Palacios, Albert Carlin, Thomas A Furness
Iii, and Cristina Botella-Arbona. „Interfaces that heal: Coupling real and
virtual objects to treat spider phobia“. In: international Journal of Human-
Computer interaction 16.2 (2003), pp. 283–300 (cit. on p. 32).

Bibliography

53

[Hof98]

[HR92]

[Hua03]

[IK01]

[Ioa+19]

[IOO16]

[Jen+08]

[JKN02]

[Jo+17]

Hunter Hoffman. „Virtual reality: A new tool for interdisciplinary psychology
research“. In: CyberPsychology & Behavior 1.2 (1998), pp. 195–200 (cit. on
p. 32).

Lawrence J Hettinger and Gary E Riccio. „Visually induced motion sickness in
virtual environments“. In: Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 1.3
(1992), pp. 306–310 (cit. on p. 8).

Jiung-Yao Huang. „An omnidirectional stroll-based virtual reality interface
and its application on overhead crane training“. In: IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia 5.1 (2003), pp. 39–51.

Laurent Itti and Christof Koch. „Computational modelling of visual attention“.
In: Nature reviews. Neuroscience 2.3 (2001), p. 194 (cit. on p. 35).

Christos Ioannou, Patrick Archard, Eamonn O’Neill, and Christof Lutteroth.
„Virtual Performance Augmentation in an Immersive Jump & Run Exergame“.
In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM. 2019, p. 158 (cit. on p. 42).

Miyu Iwafune, Taisuke Ohshima, and Yoichi Ochiai. „Coded Skeleton: Pro-
grammable Deformation Behaviour for Shape Changing Interfaces“. In: SIG-
GRAPH ASIA 2016 Emerging Technologies. SA ’16. Macau: ACM, 2016, 1:1–1:2
(cit. on p. 18).

Charlene Jennett, Anna L Cox, Paul Cairns, et al. „Measuring and deﬁning
the experience of immersion in games“. In: International journal of human-
computer studies 66.9 (2008), pp. 641–661 (cit. on p. 17).

Hua Jiang, G. Drew Kessler, and Jean Nonnemaker. „DEMIS: A Dynamic
Event Model for Interactive Systems“. In: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. VRST ’02. Hong Kong, China: ACM,
2002, pp. 97–104 (cit. on p. 22).

Dongsik Jo, Kangsoo Kim, Gregory F Welch, et al. „The impact of avatar-
owner visual similarity on body ownership in immersive virtual reality“.
In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and
Technology. ACM. 2017, p. 77 (cit. on p. 28).

[Jul60]

Bela Julesz. „Binocular Depth Perception of Computer-Generated Patterns“.
In: Bell Labs Technical Journal 39.5 (1960), pp. 1125–1162 (cit. on p. 38).

[Jul71]

Bela Julesz. „Foundations of cyclopean perception.“ In: (1971) (cit. on p. 38).

[Jun+18]

[KCK18]

Joohee Jun, Myeongul Jung, So-Yeon Kim, and Kwanguk Kenny Kim. „Full-
Body Ownership Illusion Can Change Our Emotion“. In: Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. 2018,
p. 601 (cit. on p. 28).

Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, and Jens Krüger. „VR Animals: Sur-
real Body Ownership in Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings of the 2018
Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion Ex-
tended Abstracts. CHI PLAY ’18 Extended Abstracts. Melbourne, VIC, Australia:
ACM, 2018, pp. 503–511 (cit. on pp. 27, 29).

54

Bibliography

[KCK19]

[KE]

[Ken+89]

[KIH15]

[Kil+12]

[Kin+12]

[Kit+17]

[KK19]

[KMK19]

[Kol95]

[Kop+06]

[Kor+16]

A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, and J. Krüger. „The Illusion of Animal Body Own-
ership and Its Potential for Virtual Reality Games“. In: 2019 IEEE Conference
on Games (CoG). Aug. 2019, pp. 1–8 (cit. on pp. 27, 29).

Andrey Krekhov and Katharina Emmerich. „Player Locomotion in Virtual
Reality Games“. In: The Digital Gaming Handbook. Ed. by Roberto Dillon.
Boca Raton, Florida, USA: CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group (accepted).
Chap. 14 (cit. on pp. 7, 8).

Robert S Kennedy, Michael G Lilienthal, Kevin S Berbaum, DR Baltzley, and
ME McCauley. „Simulator sickness in US Navy ﬂight simulators.“ In: Aviation,
Space, and Environmental Medicine 60.1 (1989), pp. 10–16 (cit. on p. 8).

Hayato Kajiyama, Akifumi Inoue, and Tohru Hoshi. „SHAPIO: Shape I/O
Controller for Video Games“. In: Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY ’15. London, United Kingdom:
ACM, 2015, pp. 565–570 (cit. on p. 18).

Konstantina Kilteni, Jean-Marie Normand, Maria V Sanchez-Vives, and Mel
Slater. „Extending body space in immersive virtual reality: a very long arm
illusion“. In: PloS one 7.7 (2012), e40867 (cit. on p. 28).

Kenrick Kin, Björn Hartmann, Tony DeRose, and Maneesh Agrawala. „Proton:
Multitouch Gestures As Regular Expressions“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’12. Austin, Texas,
USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 2885–2894 (cit. on p. 22).

Alexandra Kitson, Abraham M Hashemian, Ekaterina R Stepanova, Ernst
Kruijff, and Bernhard E Riecke. „Comparing leaning-based motion cueing
interfaces for virtual reality locomotion“. In: 2017 IEEE Symposium on 3D
User Interfaces (3DUI). IEEE. 2017, pp. 73–82.

A. Krekhov and J. Krüger. „Deadeye: A Novel Preattentive Visualization Tech-
nique Based on Dichoptic Presentation“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 25.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 936–945 (cit. on pp. 27, 33,
36).

Andrey Krekhov, Michael Michalski, and Jens Krüger. „Integrating Visualiza-
tion Literacy into Computer Graphics Education Using the Example of Dear
Data“. In: Eurographics 2019 - Education Papers. Ed. by Marco Tarini and
Eric Galin. The Eurographics Association, 2019 (cit. on pp. 27, 33).

Eugenia M Kolasinski. Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments. Tech. rep.
Army Research Inst. for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, Alexandria, VA,
1995 (cit. on p. 8).

Regis Kopper, Tao Ni, Doug A Bowman, and Marcio Pinho. „Design and
evaluation of navigation techniques for multiscale virtual environments“. In:
Virtual Reality Conference, 2006. Ieee. 2006, pp. 175–182 (cit. on pp. 10, 42).

Martijn JL Kors, Gabriele Ferri, Erik D Van Der Spek, Cas Ketel, and Ben AM
Schouten. „A breathtaking journey. On the design of an empathy-arousing
mixed-reality game“. In: Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on
Computer-Human Interaction in Play. ACM. 2016, pp. 91–104 (cit. on p. 28).

Bibliography

55

[Kra+06]

[Kre+16]

[Kre+17a]

[Kre+17b]

[Kre+18]

[Kre+19a]

[Kre+19b]

[KRR10]

[Kwo+16]

Andrea Kratz, Markus Hadwiger, Anton Fuhrmann, Rainer Splechtna, and
Katja Bühler. „GPU-based high-quality volume rendering for virtual environ-
ments“. In: International Workshop on Augmented Environments for Medical
Imaging and Computer Aided Surgery (AMI-ARCS). Vol. 2006. Citeseer. 2006
(cit. on pp. 33, 38).

Andrey Krekhov, Jürgen Grüninger, Kevin Baum, David McCann, and Jens
Krüger. „MorphableUI: A Hypergraph-Based Approach to Distributed Multi-
modal Interaction for Rapid Prototyping and Changing Environments“. In:
Proceedings of The 24th International Conference in Central Europe on Com-
puter Graphics, Visualization and Computer Vision 2016 in co-operation with
EUROGRAPHICS. WSCG ’16. Plzen, Czech Republic: Václav Skala-UNION
Agency, 2016, pp. 299–308 (cit. on pp. 17, 22).

Andrey Krekhov, Katharina Emmerich, Maxim Babinski, and Jens Krüger.
„Gestures From the Point of View of an Audience: Towards Anticipatable
Interaction of Presenters With 3D Content.“ In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’17. Denver, Colorado,
USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 5284–5294 (cit. on pp. 17, 20).

Andrey Krekhov, Katharina Emmerich, Philipp Bergmann, Sebastian Cmen-
towski, and Jens Krüger. „Self-Transforming Controllers for Virtual Reality
First Person Shooters“. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY ’17. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: ACM,
2017, pp. 517–529 (cit. on p. 17).

Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, Katharina Emmerich, Maic Masuch,
and Jens Krüger. „GulliVR: A Walking-Oriented Technique for Navigation in
Virtual Reality Games Based on Virtual Body Resizing“. In: Proceedings of the
2018 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY
’18. Melbourne, VIC, Australia: ACM, 2018, pp. 243–256 (cit. on pp. 7, 11).

A. Krekhov, S. Cmentowski, A. Waschk, and J. Krüger. „Deadeye Visualiza-
tion Revisited: Investigation of Preattentiveness and Applicability in Virtual
Environments“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(2019), pp. 1–1 (cit. on pp. 27, 33, 37).

Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, Katharina Emmerich, and Jens
Krüger. „Beyond Human: Animals As an Escape from Stereotype Avatars in
Virtual Reality Games“. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction in Play. CHI PLAY ’19. Barcelona, Spain: ACM, 2019,
pp. 439–451 (cit. on pp. 27, 31).

Werner A. König, Roman Rädle, and Harald Reiterer. „Interactive Design of
Multimodal User Interfaces - Reducing technical and visual complexity“. In:
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces 3.3 (Feb. 2010), pp. 197–213 (cit. on
p. 22).

Oh-Hyun Kwon, Chris Muelder, Kyungwon Lee, and Kwan-Liu Ma. „A Study
of Layout, Rendering, and Interaction Methods for Immersive Graph Visual-
ization“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 22.7
(2016), pp. 1802–1815 (cit. on p. 37).

56

Bibliography

[Lam+09]

Marc Lambooij, Marten Fortuin, Ingrid Heynderickx, and Wijnand IJsselsteijn.
„Visual discomfort and visual fatigue of stereoscopic displays: A review“. In:
Journal of Imaging Science and Technology 53.3 (2009), pp. 30201–1 (cit. on
p. 10).

[LaV00]

[LD97]

[Len+07]

[Lin+02]

[LJ16]

[LKK16]

[LLL15]

[LLS96]

[LP16]

[LRC12]

[Lug+16]

Joseph J LaViola Jr. „A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments“.
In: ACM SIGCHI Bulletin 32.1 (2000), pp. 47–56 (cit. on p. 8).

Matthew Lombard and Theresa Ditton. „At the heart of it all: The concept
of presence“. In: Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3.2 (1997),
pp. 0–0 (cit. on p. 7).

Bigna Lenggenhager, Tej Tadi, Thomas Metzinger, and Olaf Blanke. „Video
ergo sum: manipulating bodily self-consciousness“. In: Science 317.5841
(2007), pp. 1096–1099 (cit. on p. 28).

JJ-W Lin, Henry Been-Lirn Duh, Donald E Parker, Habib Abi-Rached, and
Thomas A Furness. „Effects of ﬁeld of view on presence, enjoyment, memory,
and simulator sickness in a virtual environment“. In: Virtual Reality, 2002.
Proceedings. IEEE. IEEE. 2002, pp. 164–171 (cit. on p. 8).

Lorraine Lin and Sophie Jörg. „Need a hand?: how appearance affects the
virtual hand illusion“. In: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied
Perception. ACM. 2016, pp. 69–76 (cit. on p. 28).

Sukwon Lee, Sung-Hee Kim, and Bum Chul Kwon. „Vlat: Development of a
visualization literacy assessment test“. In: IEEE transactions on visualization
and computer graphics 23.1 (2016), pp. 551–560 (cit. on p. 33).

J-L Lugrin, Johanna Latt, and Marc Erich Latoschik. „Anthropomorphism and
illusion of virtual body ownership“. In: Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality and Telexistence and 20th Eurographics Sym-
posium on Virtual Environments. Eurographics Association. 2015, pp. 1–8
(cit. on pp. 27, 28).

Nikos K Logothetis, David A Leopold, and David L Sheinberg. „What is rivalling
during binocular rivalry?“ In: Nature 380.6575 (1996), p. 621 (cit. on p. 36).

Giorgia Lupi and Stefanie Posavec. Dear Data. Chronicle Books, 2016 (cit. on
p. 33).

Jason Lankow, Josh Ritchie, and Ross Crooks. Infographics: The power of
visual storytelling. John Wiley & Sons, 2012 (cit. on p. 33).

Jean-Luc Lugrin, Ivan Polyschev, Daniel Roth, and Marc Erich Latoschik.
„Avatar anthropomorphism and acrophobia“. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
Conference on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. ACM. 2016, pp. 315–
316 (cit. on p. 28).

[M+76]

David Marr, Tomaso Poggio, et al. „Cooperative computation of stereo dis-
parity“. In: From the Retina to the Neocortex (1976), pp. 239–243 (cit. on
p. 38).

[McC+15] Morgan McCullough, Hong Xu, Joel Michelson, et al. „Myo arm: swinging to
explore a VE“. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Applied
Perception. ACM. 2015, pp. 107–113.

Bibliography

57

[MCR90]

[Med+16]

[MGM93]

[Mic+04]

[Mon70]

[MP79]

[MS13]

[MVJ17]

[Nak+16]

[Nar+11]

Jock Mackinlay, Stuart K. Card, and George G. Robertson. „A semantic analysis
of the design space of input devices“. In: Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5.2 (June
1990), pp. 145–190 (cit. on p. 22).

Daniel Medeiros, Eduardo Cordeiro, Daniel Mendes, et al. „Effects of speed
and transitions on target-based travel techniques“. In: Proceedings of the
22nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. ACM. 2016,
pp. 327–328 (cit. on p. 9).

David Maulsby, Saul Greenberg, and Richard Mander. „Prototyping an In-
telligent Agent Through Wizard of Oz“. In: Proceedings of the INTERACT ’93
and CHI ’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’93.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: ACM, 1993, pp. 277–284 (cit. on p. 21).

G. Michelitsch, J. Williams, M. Osen, B. Jimenez, and S. Rapp. „Haptic
Chameleon: A New Concept of Shape-changing User Interface Controls with
Force Feedback“. In: CHI ’04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems. CHI EA ’04. Vienna, Austria: ACM, 2004, pp. 1305–1308 (cit. on
p. 18).

K E Money. „Motion sickness.“ In: Physiological Reviews 50.1 (1970), pp. 1–39
(cit. on p. 8).

David Marr and Tomaso Poggio. „A computational theory of human stereo
vision“. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B. Biological
Sciences 204.1156 (1979), pp. 301–328 (cit. on p. 38).

Antonella Maselli and Mel Slater. „The building blocks of the full body own-
ership illusion“. In: Frontiers in human neuroscience 7 (2013), p. 83 (cit. on
p. 28).

Daphne A Muller, Caro R Van Kessel, and Sam Janssen. „Through Pink and
Blue glasses: Designing a dispositional empathy game using gender stereo-
types and Virtual Reality“. In: Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. ACM. 2017, pp. 599–605
(cit. on p. 28).

Ken Nakagaki, Pasquale Totaro, Jim Peraino, et al. „HydroMorph: Shape
Changing Water Membrane for Display and Interaction“. In: Proceedings of the
TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction. TEI ’16. Eindhoven, Netherlands: ACM, 2016, pp. 512–517 (cit.
on p. 18).

Takuji Narumi, Shinya Nishizaka, Takashi Kajinami, Tomohiro Tanikawa, and
Michitaka Hirose. „Augmented reality ﬂavors: gustatory display based on
edible marker and cross-modal interaction“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM. 2011, pp. 93–102
(cit. on p. 4).

[Nor+11]

Jean-Marie Normand, Elias Giannopoulos, Bernhard Spanlang, and Mel Slater.
„Multisensory stimulation can induce an illusion of larger belly size in immer-
sive virtual reality“. In: PloS one 6.1 (2011), e16128 (cit. on p. 28).

58

Bibliography

[Nov+19]

Johannes Novotny, Joshua Tveite, Morgan L Turner, et al. „Developing Virtual
Reality Visualizations for Unsteady Flow Analysis of Dinosaur Track Formation
using Scientiﬁc Sketching“. In: IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics 25.5 (2019), pp. 2145–2154 (cit. on p. 37).

[NS71]

[NS86]

[NYI13]

[OBL07]

David Noton and Lawrence Stark. „Scanpaths in saccadic eye movements
while viewing and recognizing patterns“. In: Vision Research 11.9 (1971),
929–IN8 (cit. on p. 35).

Ken Nakayama and Gerald H Silverman. „Serial and parallel processing of
visual feature conjunctions“. In: Nature 320.6059 (1986), pp. 264–265 (cit.
on pp. 36, 37).

Ryuma Niiyama, Lining Yao, and Hiroshi Ishii. „Weight and Volume Changing
Device with Liquid Metal Transfer“. In: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction. TEI ’14. Munich,
Germany: ACM, 2013, pp. 49–52 (cit. on p. 18).

Jan Ohlenburg, Wolfgang Broll, and Irma Lindt. „DEVAL: a device abstraction
layer for VR/AR“. In: Proceedings of the 4th international conference on Uni-
versal access in human computer interaction: coping with diversity. UAHCI’07.
Beijing, China: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 497–506 (cit. on p. 22).

[Ohy+07]

Seizo Ohyama, Suetaka Nishiike, Hiroshi Watanabe, et al. „Autonomic re-
sponses during motion sickness induced by virtual reality“. In: Auris Nasus
Larynx 34.3 (2007), pp. 303–306 (cit. on p. 8).

[Paf+11]

[PE08]

[Pec+13]

[PHV12]

[Piu+13]

[PN18]

[PSS12]

Chris L. E. Paffen, Ignace T. C. Hooge, Jeroen S. Benjamins, and Hinze
Hogendoorn. „A search asymmetry for interocular conﬂict“. In: Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics 73.4 (May 2011), pp. 1042–1053 (cit. on p. 36).

Valeria I Petkova and H Henrik Ehrsson. „If I were you: perceptual illusion of
body swapping“. In: PloS one 3.12 (2008), e3832 (cit. on p. 28).

Tabitha C Peck, Soﬁa Seinfeld, Salvatore M Aglioti, and Mel Slater. „Putting
yourself in the skin of a black avatar reduces implicit racial bias“. In: Con-
sciousness and cognition 22.3 (2013), pp. 779–787 (cit. on p. 28).

Chris LE Paffen, Roy S Hessels, and Stefan Van der Stigchel. „Interocular
conﬂict attracts attention“. In: Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 74.2
(2012), pp. 251–256 (cit. on p. 36).

Thammathip Piumsomboon, Adrian Clark, Mark Billinghurst, and Andy Cock-
burn. „User-deﬁned gestures for augmented reality“. In: IFIP Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer. 2013, pp. 282–299.

Daniela Pusca and Derek O. Northwood. „Design thinking and its application
to problem solving“. In: Global Journal of Engineering Education 20.1 (2018)
(cit. on p. 33).

Daniel Perez-Marcos, Maria V Sanchez-Vives, and Mel Slater. „Is my hand
connected to my body? The impact of body continuity and arm alignment on
the virtual hand illusion“. In: Cognitive neurodynamics 6.4 (2012), pp. 295–
305 (cit. on p. 28).

[Raz05]

Sharif Razzaque. Redirected walking. University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 2005.

Bibliography

59

[RB75]

James T Reason and Joseph John Brand. Motion sickness. Academic press,
1975 (cit. on p. 8).

[Ren+15]

[RHR16]

[RKW01]

[RL06]

[RL09]

[RLL11]

[Rot+17]

[RS12]

[RVB11]

[RWM14]

[San+10]

[SB07]

Rebekka S Renner, Erik Steindecker, Mathias MüLler, et al. „The inﬂuence
of the stereo base on blind and sighted reaches in a virtual environment“.
In: ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP) 12.2 (2015), p. 7 (cit. on
pp. 11, 42).

Jonathan C Roberts, Chris Headleand, and Panagiotis D Ritsos. „Sketching
designs using the ﬁve design-sheet methodology“. In: IEEE Transactions on
Visualization & Computer Graphics 1 (2016), pp. 419–428 (cit. on p. 34).

Sharif Razzaque, Zachariah Kohn, and Mary C Whitton. „Redirected walking“.
In: Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS. Vol. 9. Citeseer. 2001, pp. 105–106.

Roy A Ruddle and Simon Lessels. „For efﬁcient navigational search, humans
require full physical movement, but not a rich visual scene“. In: Psychological
Science 17.6 (2006), pp. 460–465 (cit. on p. 10).

Roy A Ruddle and Simon Lessels. „The beneﬁts of using a walking interface
to navigate virtual environments“. In: ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI) 16.1 (2009), p. 5 (cit. on pp. 10, 14).

Jaime Ruiz, Yang Li, and Edward Lank. „User-deﬁned Motion Gestures for
Mobile Interaction“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. CHI ’11. Vancouver, BC, Canada: ACM, 2011,
pp. 197–206 (cit. on p. 22).

Daniel Roth, Jean-Luc Lugrin, Marc Erich Latoschik, and Stephan Huber.
„Alpha IVBO-construction of a scale to measure the illusion of virtual body
ownership“. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. 2017, pp. 2875–2883 (cit. on
p. 29).

Rim Razzouk and Valerie Shute. „What Is Design Thinking and Why Is It
Important?“ In: Review of Educational Research 82.3 (2012), pp. 330–348.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654312457429 (cit. on p. 33).

Roy A Ruddle, Ekaterina Volkova, and Heinrich H Bülthoff. „Walking improves
your cognitive map in environments that are large-scale and large in extent“.
In: ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 18.2 (2011),
p. 10 (cit. on p. 10).

Giuseppe Riva, John Waterworth, and Dianne Murray. Interacting with Pres-
ence: HCI and the Sense of Presence in Computer-mediated Environments. Walter
de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG, 2014 (cit. on p. 28).

Maria V Sanchez-Vives, Bernhard Spanlang, Antonio Frisoli, Massimo Berga-
masco, and Mel Slater. „Virtual hand illusion induced by visuomotor correla-
tions“. In: PloS one 5.4 (2010), e10381 (cit. on p. 28).

Philip Schuchardt and Doug A Bowman. „The beneﬁts of immersion for spatial
understanding of complex underground cave systems“. In: Proceedings of the
2007 ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology. ACM. 2007,
pp. 121–124 (cit. on p. 37).

60

Bibliography

[SBN08]

[SC02]

[SC93]

Rui Shen, Pierre Boulanger, and Michelle Noga. „Medvis: A real-time immer-
sive visualization environment for the exploration of medical volumetric data“.
In: 2008 Fifth International Conference BioMedical Visualization: Information
Visualization in Medical and Biomedical Informatics. IEEE. 2008, pp. 63–68
(cit. on pp. 33, 38).

William R Sherman and Alan B Craig. Understanding virtual reality: Interface,
application, and design. Elsevier, 2002 (cit. on p. 7).

Daniel Salber and Joëlle Coutaz. „Human-Computer Interaction: Third Inter-
national Conference, EWHCI ’93 Moscow, Russia, August 3–7, 1993 Selected
Papers“. In: Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1993. Chap. Apply-
ing the Wizard of Oz technique to the study of multimodal systems, pp. 219–
230 (cit. on p. 21).

[Sch+11]

Christophe Scholliers, Lode Hoste, Beat Signer, and Wolfgang De Meuter.
„Midas: A Declarative Multi-touch Interaction Framework“. In: Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction. TEI ’11. Funchal, Portugal: ACM, 2011, pp. 49–56 (cit. on p. 22).

[Sch03]

[SKD97]

[Sla+08]

[Sla+09]

[Sla+10]

[Sla03]

[SRF18]

[SSN88]

[SSS13]

Thomas W. Schubert. „The sense of presence in virtual environments: A three-
component scale measuring spatial presence, involvement, and realness“. In:
Zeitschrift für Medienpsychologie 15.2 (2003), pp. 69–71 (cit. on p. 7).

Kay M Stanney, Robert S Kennedy, and Julie M Drexler. „Cybersickness is
not simulator sickness“. In: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society annual meeting. Vol. 41. 2. SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles,
CA. 1997, pp. 1138–1142 (cit. on p. 8).

Mel Slater, Daniel Pérez Marcos, Henrik Ehrsson, and Maria V Sanchez-Vives.
„Towards a digital body: the virtual arm illusion“. In: Frontiers in human
neuroscience 2 (2008), p. 6 (cit. on p. 28).

Mel Slater, Daniel Pérez Marcos, Henrik Ehrsson, and Maria V Sanchez-Vives.
„Inducing illusory ownership of a virtual body“. In: Frontiers in neuroscience 3
(2009), p. 29 (cit. on pp. 27, 28).

Mel Slater, Bernhard Spanlang, Maria V Sanchez-Vives, and Olaf Blanke.
„First person experience of body transfer in virtual reality“. In: PloS one 5.5
(2010), e10564 (cit. on pp. 27, 28).

Mel Slater. „A note on presence terminology“. In: Presence connect 3.3 (2003),
pp. 1–5 (cit. on p. 7).

Thomas Schubert, Holger Regenbrecht, and Frank Friedmann. Igroup Presence
Questionnaire (IPQ). 2018 (cit. on p. 7).

Shinsuke Shimojo, Gerald H Silverman, and Ken Nakayama. „An occlusion-
related mechanism of depth perception based on motion and interocular
sequence“. In: Nature 333.6170 (1988), p. 265 (cit. on p. 38).

William Steptoe, Anthony Steed, and Mel Slater. „Human tails: ownership and
control of extended humanoid avatars“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization
& Computer Graphics 4 (2013), pp. 583–590 (cit. on p. 29).

Bibliography

61

[Ste+10]

[Ste+13]

[STV06]

[Suh+02]

[SUS95]

[SVG15]

[Tan+10]

[Tay+01]

[TDS99]

[Tec18]

[TG67]

F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, J. Jerald, H. Frenz, and M. Lappe. „Estimation of De-
tection Thresholds for Redirected Walking Techniques“. In: IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16.1 (Jan. 2010), pp. 17–27.

Christian Steins, Sean Gustafson, Christian Holz, and Patrick Baudisch. „Imagi-
nary Devices: Gesture-based Interaction Mimicking Traditional Input Devices“.
In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Human-computer In-
teraction with Mobile Devices and Services. MobileHCI ’13. Munich, Germany:
ACM, 2013, pp. 123–126 (cit. on p. 18).

Patrick Salamin, Daniel Thalmann, and Frédéric Vexo. „The beneﬁts of third-
person perspective in virtual and augmented reality?“ In: Proceedings of the
ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology. ACM. 2006, pp. 27–
30 (cit. on p. 13).

Bongwon Suh, Allison Woodruff, Ruth Rosenholtz, and Alyssa Glass. „Popout
Prism: Adding Perceptual Principles to Overview+Detail Document Inter-
faces“. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems. CHI ’02. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 251–258
(cit. on p. 35).

Mel Slater, Martin Usoh, and Anthony Steed. „Taking steps: the inﬂuence of
a walking technique on presence in virtual reality“. In: ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 2.3 (1995), pp. 201–219 (cit. on pp. 7,
10).

Adalberto L. Simeone, Eduardo Velloso, and Hans Gellersen. „Substitutional
Reality: Using the Physical Environment to Design Virtual Reality Experiences“.
In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. CHI ’15. Seoul, Republic of Korea: ACM, 2015, pp. 3307–
3316 (cit. on p. 17).

Kar-Han Tan, Dan Gelb, Ramin Samadani, et al. „Gaze Awareness and Interac-
tion Support in Presentations“. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia. MM ’10. Firenze, Italy: ACM, 2010, pp. 643–646
(cit. on p. 21).

Russell M. Taylor II, Thomas C. Hudson, Adam Seeger, et al. „VRPN: a device-
independent, network-transparent VR peripheral system“. In: Proceedings
of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology. VRST ’01.
Baniff, Alberta, Canada: ACM, 2001, pp. 55–61 (cit. on pp. 22, 24).

James N Templeman, Patricia S Denbrook, and Linda E Sibert. „Virtual lo-
comotion: Walking in place through virtual environments“. In: Presence 8.6
(1999), pp. 598–617.

Unity Technologies. Unity. Website. Retrieved March 29, 2018 from https:
//unity3d.com/. 2018 (cit. on p. 3).

Davida Y Teller and Eugene Galanter. „Brightnesses, luminances, and Fech-
ner’s paradox“. In: Perception & Psychophysics 2.7 (1967), pp. 297–300 (cit. on
p. 36).

[TG80]

Anne M Treisman and Garry Gelade. „A feature-integration theory of atten-
tion“. In: Cognitive psychology 12.1 (1980), pp. 97–136 (cit. on p. 36).

62

Bibliography

[TG88]

[TH05]

[TS05]

[TS86]

[Tsa10]

[TWA12]

[Uso+99]

[VGH12]

[VKE16]

[Wal+14]

[Wal+18]

[War12]

[WCF89]

Anne Treisman and Stephen Gormican. „Feature analysis in early vision:
Evidence from search asymmetries.“ In: Psychological review 95.1 (1988),
p. 15 (cit. on p. 36).

Manos Tsakiris and Patrick Haggard. „The rubber hand illusion revisited:
visuotactile integration and self-attribution.“ In: Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Perception and Performance 31.1 (2005), p. 80 (cit. on p. 28).

Nicola Taylor and Tania D Signal. „Empathy and attitudes to animals“. In:
Anthrozoös 18.1 (2005), pp. 18–27 (cit. on p. 28).

Anne Treisman and Janet Souther. „Illusory words: The roles of attention and
of top–down constraints in conjoining letters to form words.“ In: Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 12.1 (1986), p. 3
(cit. on p. 36).

Manos Tsakiris. „My body in the brain: a neurocognitive model of body-
ownership“. In: Neuropsychologia 48.3 (2010), pp. 703–712 (cit. on p. 28).

Inna Tsirlin, Laurie M Wilcox, and Robert S Allison. „Da Vinci decoded: Does
da Vinci stereopsis rely on disparity?“ In: Journal of Vision 12.12 (2012),
pp. 2–2 (cit. on p. 38).

Martin Usoh, Kevin Arthur, Mary C Whitton, et al. „Walking> walking-in-
place> ﬂying, in virtual environments“. In: Proceedings of the 26th annual con-
ference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques. ACM Press/Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co. 1999, pp. 359–364 (cit. on p. 10).

Dimitar Valkov, Alexander Giesler, and Klaus H. Hinrichs. „VINS - Shared
Memory Space for Deﬁnition of Interactive Techniques“. In: ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST 2012). ACM, 2012, pp. 145–
153 (cit. on p. 22).

Sebastian Von Mammen, Andreas Knote, and Sarah Edenhofer. „Cyber sick
but still having fun“. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Virtual
Reality Software and Technology. ACM. 2016, pp. 325–326 (cit. on p. 8).

Manuela Waldner, Mathieu Le Muzic, Matthias Bernhard, Werner Purgathofer,
and Ivan Viola. „Attractive Flicker: Guiding Attention in Dynamic Narrative
Visualizations“. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
20.12 (Dec. 2014), pp. 2456–2465 (cit. on p. 35).

Thomas Waltemate, Dominik Gall, Daniel Roth, Mario Botsch, and Marc Erich
Latoschik. „The Impact of Avatar Personalization and Immersion on Virtual
Body Ownership, Presence, and Emotional Response“. In: IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics 24.4 (2018), pp. 1643–1652 (cit. on
pp. 27, 28).

Colin Ware. Information visualization: perception for design. Elsevier, 2012
(cit. on p. 35).

Jeremy M Wolfe, Kyle R Cave, and Susan L Franzel. „Guided search: an
alternative to the feature integration model for visual search.“ In: Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human perception and performance 15.3 (1989),
p. 419 (cit. on p. 36).

Bibliography

63

[Weg+17]

[WF88]

[WGP98]

[WH13]

[Whi+18]

[WHR99]

[Wil+16]

[WJS05]

[WS98]

[WWB10]

[Xia05]

[Yan+04]

Konstantin Wegner, Sven Seele, Helmut Buhler, et al. „Comparison of two
inventory design concepts in a collaborative virtual reality serious game“. In:
Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human
Interaction in Play. ACM. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 323–329 (cit.
on p. 19).

Jeremy M Wolfe and Susan L Franzel. „Binocularity and visual search“. In:
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 44.1 (1988), pp. 81–93 (cit. on p. 36).

Colin Ware, Cyril Gobrecht, and Mark Andrew Paton. „Dynamic adjustment
of stereo display parameters“. In: IEEE transactions on systems, man, and
cybernetics-part A: systems and humans 28.1 (1998), pp. 56–65 (cit. on p. 11).

David Waller and Eric Hodgson. „Sensory contributions to spatial knowledge
of real and virtual environments“. In: Human walking in virtual environments.
Springer, 2013, pp. 3–26 (cit. on p. 10).

Eric Whitmire, Hrvoje Benko, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and Mike Sinclair.
„Haptic revolver: Touch, shear, texture, and shape rendering on a reconﬁg-
urable virtual reality controller“. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. 2018, p. 86 (cit. on p. 43).

Zachary Justin Wartell, Larry F Hodges, and William Ribarsky. The analytic
distortion induced by false-eye separation in head-tracked stereoscopic displays.
Tech. rep. Georgia Institute of Technology, 1999 (cit. on p. 11).

Preston Tunnell Wilson, William Kalescky, Ansel MacLaughlin, and Betsy
Williams. „VR locomotion: walking> walking in place> arm swinging“. In:
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual-Reality Contin-
uum and Its Applications in Industry-Volume 1. ACM. 2016, pp. 243–249.

Bob G. Witmer, Christian J. Jerome, and Michael J. Singer. „The Factor
Structure of the Presence Questionnaire“. In: Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments 14.3 (2005), pp. 298–312 (cit. on p. 7).

Bob G Witmer and Michael J Singer. „Measuring presence in virtual envi-
ronments: A presence questionnaire“. In: Presence 7.3 (1998), pp. 225–240
(cit. on p. 7).

Jeremy D Wendt, Mary C Whitton, and Frederick P Brooks. „Gud wip: Gait-
understanding-driven walking-in-place“. In: 2010 IEEE Virtual Reality Confer-
ence (VR). IEEE. 2010, pp. 51–58.

Dave Vronay Xiang Cao Eyal Ofek. „Evaluation of Alternative Presentation
Control Techniques“. In: ACM SIG CHI 2005. ACM, Jan. 2005 (cit. on p. 21).

Yasuyuki Yanagida, Shinjiro Kawato, Haruo Noma, Akira Tomono, and N
Tesutani. „Projection based olfactory display with nose tracking“. In: IEEE
Virtual Reality 2004. IEEE. 2004, pp. 43–50 (cit. on p. 4).

[Yao+14]

Richard Yao, Tom Heath, Aaron Davies, et al. „Oculus vr best practices guide“.
In: Oculus VR (2014), pp. 27–39 (cit. on p. 9).

[Yar67]

Alfred L Yarbus. „Eye movements during perception of complex objects“. In:
Eye movements and vision. Springer, 1967, pp. 171–211 (cit. on p. 35).

64

Bibliography

[YB07]

[YKM16]

[Zar+14]

[ZCZ12]

[ZF02]

[Zha08]

[Zha14]

[ZK17]

[ZK19]

Nick Yee and Jeremy Bailenson. „The Proteus effect: The effect of transformed
self-representation on behavior“. In: Human communication research 33.3
(2007), pp. 271–290 (cit. on p. 28).

Gareth W Young, Aidan Kehoe, and David Murphy. „Usability Testing of Video
Game Controllers“. In: Games User Research: A Case Study Approach (2016),
p. 145 (cit. on p. 17).

Alexander Zaranek, Bryan Ramoul, Hua Fei Yu, Yiyu Yao, and Robert J Teather.
„Performance of modern gaming input devices in ﬁrst-person shooter target
acquisition“. In: Proceedings of the extended abstracts of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM. 2014, pp. 1495–1500
(cit. on p. 17).

Haimo Zhang, Xiang Cao, and Shengdong Zhao. „Beyond Stereo: An Explo-
ration of Unconventional Binocular Presentation for Novel Visual Experience“.
In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. CHI ’12. Austin, Texas, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 2523–2526 (cit. on
p. 36).

Xiaolong Zhang and George W. Furnas. „Social Interactions in Multiscale
CVEs“. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Collaborative
Virtual Environments. CVE ’02. ACM, 2002, pp. 31–38 (cit. on pp. 10, 42).

Li Zhaoping. „Attention capture by eye of origin singletons even without
awareness—A hallmark of a bottom-up saliency map in the primary visual
cortex“. In: Journal of Vision 8.5 (2008) (cit. on p. 36).

Haimo Zhang. „Spectacularly Binocular: Exploiting Binocular Luster Effects
for HCI Applications“. PhD thesis. School of Computing, Natuanal University
of Singapore, 2014 (cit. on p. 36).

A. Zenner and A. Krüger. „Shifty: A Weight-Shifting Dynamic Passive Haptic
Proxy to Enhance Object Perception in Virtual Reality“. In: IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 23.4 (Apr. 2017), pp. 1285–1294
(cit. on p. 18).

André Zenner and Antonio Krüger. „Drag: on: A Virtual Reality Controller
Providing Haptic Feedback Based on Drag and Weight Shift“. In: Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2019, p. 211 (cit. on p. 43).

[Zou+17]

Bochao Zou, Igor S Utochkin, Yue Liu, and Jeremy M Wolfe. „Binocularity
and visual search—Revisited“. In: Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 79.2
(2017), pp. 473–483 (cit. on pp. 36, 38).

Bibliography

65

Declaration

I hereby declare that I have completed my work solely and only with the help of the
references I mentioned.

47057 Duisburg, Germany, December 18, 2019

Andrey Krekhov

68

Chapter Declaration

