0
2
0
2

t
c
O
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
4
9
1
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Actors in VR storytelling

Selma Rizvic∗, Dusanka Boskovic∗, Fabio Bruno†, Barbara Davidde Petriaggi‡, Sanda Sljivo∗ and Marco Cozza§
∗Faculty of Electrical Engineering
University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Email: {srizvic, dboskovic, sanda.sljivo }@etf.unsa.ba
†University of Calabria, Calabria, Italy
Email: fabio.bruno@unical.it
‡Istituto Superiore per la Conservazione ed il Restauro, Rome, Italy
Email: barbara.davidde@beniculturali.it
§3D Research Srl, Cosenza, Italy
Email: marco.cozza@3dresearch.it

Abstract—Virtual Reality (VR) storytelling enhances the im-
mersion of users into virtual environments (VE). Its use in virtual
cultural heritage presentations helps the revival of the genius loci
(the spirit of the place) of cultural monuments. This paper aims
to show that the use of actors in VR storytelling adds to the
quality of user experience and improves the edutainment value
of virtual cultural heritage applications. We will describe the
Baiae dry visit application which takes us to a time travel in
the city considered by the Roman elite as ”Little Rome (Pusilla
Roma)” and presently is only partially preserved under the sea.

Keywords—virtual reality, virtual cultural heritage, interactive

digital storytelling, VR storytelling, Baiae.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modern technologies offer various solutions for enhancing
perception, awareness, and knowledge of cultural and natural
heritage and thus contribute to its efﬁcient conservation and
sustainable promotion. Virtual, augmented and mixed reality
(VR, AR, and MR) can add to our surroundings a component
which cannot be seen in reality and revive the ”genius loci”
(the spirit of the place). Virtual reconstructions of decayed
cultural monuments, or those who do not exist anymore or
only their remains are preserved, lead our users through time
travels and introduce them to important historical objects and
characters.

The use of digital media platforms and interactivity for
narrative purposes, either for ﬁctional or non-ﬁction stories can
be considered as interactive digital storytelling (IDS) [1]. IDS
enables the user to inﬂuence the ﬂow and sometimes even the
content of the story. The writers of interactive digital stories’
scenarios are adjusting their storytelling methodology to the
Internet media. They have on disposal an enhanced set of tools,
instead of pure text, to tell the story. In collaboration with the
director and other team members, the writer decides on the
narrative method, characters, and user interaction, to raise the
attractiveness for the users.

Motivation for this work is to add to immersion of users in
VR environments emotions and empathy transferred through
actors playing roles of characters inhabiting cultural mon-
uments. 3D reconstructions without people do not convey
accurately the information on the life in the past. Characters
breathe life in virtual reconstructions of cultural heritage [22].

VR storytelling happens in 360-degree virtual environ-
ments for Head Mounted Displays. Because the user is in the
center of the story, it is impossible to use the classical ﬁlm
language and shot composition tools to attract his/her attention
to the plot. VR storytelling can be imagined as a theatre play
with the audience placed in the middle of the stage. However,
the 360-degree view reﬂects the way we perceive our natural
surroundings, so, if properly designed, the VR storytelling
could provide the full immersion of users in virtual worlds.

The adoption of immersive VR technologies for promoting
underwater cultural heritage is being studied in the context of
the iMARECulture Project [2] since it gives the possibility to
simulate the diving experience and visit ancient shipwrecks
and sunken cities.

In order to tell the story happening in the virtual recon-
struction of a seaside villa in Baiae (Figure 1), the city which
was a luxurious resort for the Roman Empire aristocracy, we
introduced the characters/actors and placed them inside the
360-degree video backgrounds. VR storytelling was combined
with a VR simulation of diving inside the underwater city
remains. This paper will show how the users perceive such a
combination and how immersive, educational and entertaining
is this kind of virtual cultural heritage presentation.

Fig. 1: Baiae archeological park

The paper

is structured in the following way. Sec-
tion 2 discusses similar projects with actors in 360-degree
videos/animations, their advantages, and drawbacks in compar-
ison with our method. Section 3 presents the Baiae Dry Visit

 
 
 
 
 
 
application, its structure, and implementation overview, while
Section 4 offers a detailed description of our VR storytelling
methodology. In Section 5 we describe the user experience
evaluation. Finally, in Section 6 we offer our conclusions.

II. RELATED WORK

A 5D modelling approach (3D geometry plus time plus
levels of details) [20] required for preservation and assessment
of outdoor large scale cultural sites, was considered when
creating the 3D model of Villa con Ingresso a Protiro from
Baiae underwater excavation site, which we used as virtual
environment for our storytelling scenes.

Several similar projects consider actors in 360-degree
videos or virtual environments. In this section, we describe
some of the most relevant to our research. One of the ﬁrst
usages of actors in VEs was an adventure game Phantasmago-
ria [3] by Sierra in 1995. Instead of the 3D model or 2D
sprite, the main characters were actors ﬁlmed in front of a
green screen with the pre-rendered VEs added as backgrounds.
Alongside Phantasmagoria, other similar adventure games also
used actors as main characters. At that time when 3D modeling
was not as developed as today, this approach was a good
solution for detailed graphics in the games.

On the other hand, games today have 3D or 2D sprites
characters because of their high level of customization. There
are some examples like The Quiet Man from Square Enix
(2018) [4] with a combination of live action video, in-game
cutscenes and standard gameplay with 3D characters and
environments. Unfortunately,
the users reported a lack of
immersion experience and the game did not have good reviews
after release. Maybe if this game was developed as a VR game
for HMD, the users could have better immersion experience.
Besides games, actors in VEs are also used in digitalization
of cultural heritage as in Livia’s Villa Reloaded [5]. In this
project, actors are telling the story in the 3D reconstruction of
the Livia’s Villa. Livia was a Roman emperor Augustus’ wife.
The authors have developed three types of interactive digital
storytelling application: Kinect application that uses gestures,
online WebGL application and application for HMD. During
the development, they have experimented with a combination
of virtual reality paradigms, natural interaction interfaces, cin-
ematographic techniques, and virtual set practices. The authors
also had paid special attention to the user’s orientation in the
application using audio and visual cues. As a drawback, this
project lacks user evaluation and could be improved with the
evaluation of all three types of application.

Another project that preserves cultural heritage is Samuel
Beckett in VR [6], where a team of interdisciplinary profes-
sionals, made an interactive VR narrative of Samuel Beckett’s
theatrical
text Play. They ﬁlmed the actors in front of a
green screen using free-viewpoint video (FVV) and then added
the VE as a background. Authors have decided to use FVV
instead of 360-degree video, because of the 360-degree video
limits the user’s viewpoint to the camera position imposed by
the moviemaker. This project has also experimented with the
organization of the author-audience dynamic. As Livia’s Villa,
this project also lacks thorough user evaluation.

In Elmezeny [7] the authors consider two dimensions of
immersion in 360-degree videos: narrative and technical. They

also did user evaluation with a comparison between 360-
degree videos and traditional linear videos. As limitations to
their approach, the authors state that 360-degree videos are
still mostly driven by narratives. They have stated that cues
are essential for directing the user attention in 360-degree
videos. They also note that cues could be overstated if users
just want to explore the environment, especially for videos
which do not have narrative aspects. When it comes to videos
without narrative aspects, there are a few examples of music
videos done in this technology as in [8], [9] mostly as artistic
experiments. It seems that these examples are just starting
points and there is an excellent potential for 360-degree videos
to become widespread storytelling methodology.

III. BAIAE DRY VISIT APPLICATION

The Marine Protected Area-Underwater Park (MPA-UP) of
Baiae was created on August 7th, 2002 by the Italian Ministry
of Environment and Land Conservation, acting together with
the Ministry of Cultural Heritage - now MIBAC, the Ministry
of Transport, the Ministry of Agrarian Policies and with the
Regione Campania [10].

The MPA-UP is located off the north-western coasts of
the bay of Puteoli (Naples), in the littoral zone between the
southern limit of the port of Baiae and the dock of Lido
Augusto. This site is part of the coastal region known as Campi
Flegrei, that has been characterized by a periodic volcanic and
hydrothermal activity, and it has been subjected to bradyseism,
namely gradual changes in the levels of the coast concerning
the sea level. Since antiquity, this coastal region has been
subject to this phenomenon, which may be positive or negative,
and in its present state, the remains of the Roman Era are
submerged at a depth ranging between one and 14 to 15 meters
below sea level.

Ancient Baiae was a bathing resort for the Roman aristoc-
racy between the 2nd century BC and the 4th century AD. It
was famous for its luxurious seaside villas, baths, shops, and
coastal installations. In the late antiquity, Baiae began to sink
into the water as a result of bradyseism and now a large part of
the city is almost completely submerged. The MPA-UP, which
has an area of about 176.6 hectares, not only safeguards the
archaeological remains of the Roman city and infrastructures
of the Roman harbor named Portus Iulius but also represents an
underwater area of great environmental value. Environmental
aspects of this area are related to a peculiar volcanic and
deformational history. Today the MPA-UP of Baiae has at
least ﬁve itineraries open to the public, divers or no divers.
This last type of tourists can visit the site on board of a
boat with a transparent bottom. The local diving clubs are
authorized by the Managing Authority - Parco Archeologico
dei Campi Flegrei to accompany underwater tourist visitors
to the submerged city. The underwater itineraries are: 1) the
Nymphaeum of Punta dell’Epitafﬁo; 2) the Villa con ingresso
a protiro - The Villa with a prothyrum entrance; 3) the Villa
dei Pisoni; 4) Portus Iulius; 5) the ”Secca fumosa.”

The purpose of the application was to show to the public
the 3D reconstruction of the ”Villa con ingresso a protiro,”
(Figure 2) located at 5/6 meters depth, one of the many villae
maritime scattered along the Lacus Baianus, and to increase
the users’ knowledge of this underwater archaeological site.

in the direction they want to go. The use of VR to simulate
the diving experience in underwater archaeological sites, and
in particular on ancient shipwrecks, has demonstrated to be
a useful educational tool able to engage people through a
fantastic approach [11], [12].

The exploration of the underwater archaeological site starts
above the water surface. In order to make a more attractive and
engaging experience, the terrestrial environment representing
the coastline that overlooks the archaeological site has been
added to the scene. Moreover, the texturized 3D model rep-
resenting the archeological site as it appears nowadays has
been enhanced with the 3D models of ﬂora and fauna. Also,
several graphical effects, such as fogs, caustics, reﬂections,
and refractions, have been combined in the scene in order
to better simulate the underwater environment. Once the user
dives in the submerged virtual environment, they are guided
by a virtual diver among the storytelling videos (Figure 3).
The user can explore the area and play the videos in a precise
order, by activating some particular objects placed in the virtual
environment. When these objects are activated, the full-screen
360-degree video is played. Moreover, the user can see also
the hypothetical reconstruction of the original structure of
the Villa. The application is provided with a 3D model that
represents the ”Villa con ingresso a protiro” as it appeared in
the past, and enables the user to explore the original status of
the structures, environments and even furnishings. In particular,
they can switch between the underwater environment and the
hypothetical reconstruction by activating a particular object
placed in the virtual environment.

The Dry Visit application has been developed using the
Unity 3D game engine, and designed to provide usability
for most type of users, implementing simple interactions and
effective User Interfaces. More info on the implementation can
be found in [21].

IV. VR STORYTELLING

The main challenge in VR storytelling is that the user has
control over what they see in the HMD. Because the users
have freedom to turn around inside the 360-degree virtual
environments, it is difﬁcult to stage the story in such a way that
they do not miss an essential part of the plot. All rules of shot
composition that we learn in the ﬁlm language grammar now
have to change, as we cannot any more vary the shot size or
make such shot composition to emphasize important elements
in the scene. Some staging techniques can be borrowed from
the theatre, but our audience is not in front of the stage, they
are in its center.

Guidelines we developed within the Sarajevo Charter [13]
still apply for the VR interactive digital storytelling. Based
on these guidelines we developed the Kyrenia application,
recreating the story of one of the oldest shipwrecks found in
the Mediterranean [14] through six stories with actors. After
watching these stories, the user can embark on a virtual model
of the ship. While in Kyrenia the stories have not been 360-
degree videos, in the Mostar Cliff Diving VR project [15] we
created 360-degree videos recording the various spots around
the Old Bridge and added audio narration about the history
of the bridge, its construction, destruction and reconstruction,
as well as the interview with the cliff diving champion about

Fig. 2: Ortophoto of the Villa con ingresso a protiro, ©ISCR

The 3D visit of the villa is enriched by the history of its
owner, Gaius Vibius Sabinus (invented name), belonging to an
important aristocratic family of Rome. He is involved in the
wine trade overseas and owns the villa built just in front of
the sea, along with the coast of Baiae, on the Lacus Baianus,
where he spends his time with his family and friends, relaxing.
He is a cultured man, loving Greek art and philosophy; he is a
collector of Greek masterpieces and well-done copies too. The
”Villa con ingresso a protiro” has two clearly deﬁned areas:
the residential quarters and the baths (probably public).

Two red-plastered masonry benches - framed in stucco
pilasters - mark out
the threshold. The name ’prothyrum’
comes from the presence of two stuccoed columns (no longer
existing) that were edging two short parting walls built in
front of the threshold. The vestibule, with doorways to the
ostiarius quarters (Serapis is the invented name in this history
of the gatekeeper’s lodge), led to the atrium, whose walls
were decorated with marble panels, as were those of adjacent
areas, many of which had mosaic ﬂooring. A mosaic ﬂoor in
black and white tesserae with geometrical motifs (hexagons
and pseudo-emblems with circles and peltae) is still visible
in a room at the north-eastern corner of the atrium and is
the room where Gaius Vibius Sabinus receives Heliodorus
(invented name), an artist, sculptor, and copyist, famous for
his opulent collection of copies of Greek masterpieces made
by himself and his collaborators and his young assistant
Saturninus (invented name). The story takes place in different
locations (the workshop of the sculptor Heliodorus, the street
with shops, the entrance of the villa, the atrium, the black and
white mosaic paved room, the garden), adds to the quality of
user experience and improves the edutainment value of this
virtual cultural heritage application.

A. Application structure and implementation

The Dry Visit application is a virtual exhibit that allows
users to explore the 3D reconstruction of the Baiae underwater
site using a Head Mounted Display (HMD). The HMD isolates
the user from the distraction of the actual physical environ-
ment and encompasses the entire ﬁeld of view, focusing the
attention to the experience. The user navigates in the virtual
environment simulating a real diving session from the scuba
diving viewpoint, by moving his head and interacting with a
single wireless handheld controller. In particular, to navigate,
he presses the trigger of the handheld controller and points it

Fig. 3: Underwater simulation screenshots

that 300 years old tradition. After the users successfully test
their knowledge gained from the stories, they can experience
the virtual dive through our simulation.

Although the results of the user experience evaluation
show that the users felt immersion in both applications and
qualiﬁed them with a high edutainment value, we consider that
the drawback of Kyrenia project was the lack of 360-degree
environments in the stories and of the Mostar project the lack
of actors-narrators. Therefore, continuing our research with
Baiae project, we implemented both and created VR stories
with actors.

A. The scenario

In the pre-production stage of the Baiae VR storytelling
project, we prepared the scenario, developed the visual styling
and planned the production. The archaeological partners in the
project provided the scenario with the story about a wealthy
aristocrat purchasing a statue from an artist to decorate his
garden. The scenario idea is based on statues remains found in
the archaeological sites where gardens of luxurious villas were.
Our story is happening in the “Villa con ingresso a protiro,”
3D reconstructed by the partner institution [16].

The storytelling conceived and written by Barbara Davidde
Petriaggi and Roberto Petriaggi consists of 6 parts: the intro
story (360-degree video of Baiae remains on land with a voice
over introducing the viewer with the city and its historical
signiﬁcance), the sculptor’s workshop where all characters in-
troduce themselves (the sculptor, his apprentice, the aristocrat,
and the slave), the street with shops (where the sculptor tells

his apprentice how beautiful is Baiae), the villa entrance, the
room with mosaics where the slave announces the visitors
to the aristocrat, the atrium (the sculptor is introducing his
apprentice with the villa) and the discussion of the sculptor
and the aristocrat about the statue design and price.

The visual styling of actors and their costumes were created
in collaboration with the archaeologists to accurately recreate
the life in the Roman period. Costumes sketches are shown in
Figure 4.

Fig. 4: Costumes and visual styling of characters

According to the scenario and advice from the archaeolog-
ical team, we made the actors casting. It was crucial to choose
actors who look like Romans and who are of appropriate age
for playing the characters in the stories.

Apart from the 3D model of the villa, we prepared 3D
models of the sculptor’s workshop, the street with shops and

the villa entrance outer side, as backgrounds for storytelling.
The models were created in 3ds max and rendered as 360-
degree videos.

The actors were recorded against the green screen back-
ground (Figure 5) and superimposed in 360-degree video
backgrounds in Adobe After Effects. After color correction
and sound postproduction, the ﬁnal 360-degree videos were
exported. During preparations of backgrounds and ﬁlming,
we have been previewing the scenes through Head Mounted
Display, as the desktop appearance of 360-degree videos
creates a signiﬁcantly different impression of depth and view
position.

A. Experiment setup

Before the commencement of the experiment participants
were informed about the experiment procedure, their tasks and
instructed to freely express their opinions. Immediately after
engaging with the Baiae VR digital stories users answered the
questions summarizing their perceived experience.

Evaluators were observing the users during the experiment
and noted user behavior, movements, objects of attention and
possible undesirable effect of using the VR equipment. The
complete experiment: interaction with the VR application and
answering the web based post-interaction questionnaire lasted
approximately 15 minutes.

B. Participants

The evaluation involved 23 participants. Summary of user
demographics is as follows: professional background: STEM
(n = 12), humanities (n = 6) and arts (n = 5); and their role in
educational process: student (n = 12), teacher (n = 6) and other
(n = 5). With respect to their age participants were categorized
into following groups: younger than 20 (n = 2), ages 20-25 (n
= 12), ages 25-35 years (n = 5), ages 35-50 years (n = 1), and
aged older than 50 years (n = 3).

C. Questionnaire

The questionnaire contained three sections: (1) introduc-
tory part with demographics data, (2) main part with Likert
scale items organized in 3 sub-scales measuring immersion,
edutainment and ease of use, and (3) concluding section:
user feedback and one question measuring effectiveness of
educational part. Likert items were deﬁned as straightforward
statements with positive logic and repetitions were avoided.
Responses were delivered on a 5-point Likert range, with 1-
strongly disagree and 5-strongly agree. The sub-scales were
balanced comprising 7 items each.

D. Results

Results are analyzed separately for each sub-scale present-
ing speciﬁc feature, namely: immersion, edutainment and easy
of use. Summary statistical scores are presented in table I.

TABLE I: Summary results.

Feature
Immersion
Edutainment
Ease of use

Mean
3.91
4.22
4.36

Percent Agree
72%
81%
84%

List of Likert statements and their respective scores are
provided in Table II. Questions are split by sub-scale, with
I.x addressing Immersion, E.x addressing edutainment and
U.x addressing Ease of Use. Respective summary statistics
measures are shown: Mean and Percent Agree. Percent Agree
corresponds to the proportion of users who responded with a
view greater than neutral, towards agree.

All three sub-scales contained several statements address-
ing explicitly the role of live actors, for example: I7, E3, U5.

It is signiﬁcant to note that among the items with the
highest score per sub-scale we can identify the most useful

Fig. 5: Filming the actors

The ﬁnal versions of stories were exported from Adobe
After Effects in VR video H.264 format. The screenshots can
be seen in Figure 6.

V. USER EXPERIENCE EVALUATION

Our research question was ”How the use of actors in the
VR storytelling affects user experience related to the immer-
sion and the edutainment value of virtual cultural heritage
applications?” Building on our previous results in evaluating
the user behaviors and the situational use of the VR technology
[15] we have decided to conduct quantitative user experience
study using structured questionnaire. The study was conducted
in the research lab at the University and the evaluators were
able to observe participants while engaged in the Baiae VR
digital stories.

The participants were recruited by invitation, and we in-
vited representatives of different user groups, aiming to balance
user types regarding their age, their professional interests and
their role in the educational process. In order to ensure that
the responses represent diverse cross-section of respondents
and to establish validity of survey responses, we included
questions for relevant demographic data: age, sex, professional
background, and their role in education, as recommended for
self-selection of participants [17].

Our primary hypothesis was to show that the use of actors
in VR storytelling adds to the quality of user experience and
improves the immersion and the edutainment value of virtual
cultural heritage applications.

Fig. 6: Screenshots from the VR stories

TABLE II: Detailed statistics

No

Statement - item

I1

I2
I3
I4

I5
I6
I7

E1

E2

E3

E4

E5

E6

E7

U1

U2

U3

U4
U5
U6
U7

I found the 3D villa environment pleasant in terms
of design and aesthetics.
I found the actors interesting in terms of aesthetics.
I found the voices of actors and narrator pleasant.
I found the appearance of actors truthful and
satisfactory.
The VR story provides satisfaction.
I have experienced the ancient Rome.
Live actors make the VR story more personal and
vivid.
I found the VR story scenario clear and satisfac-
tory
I would like to use a similar VR story to learn
about destroyed historical sites.
I had fun watching the actors and viewing the
Baiae surrounding.
I think that the VR story respects the tradition of
living in Roman city.
I have learned new facts about living in the ancient
Rome.
The VR stories like Baiae can generate learning
content and help the transmission and preservation
of knowledge.
The VR stories like Baiae should be included in
the ofﬁcial learning processes.
It is useful using 360o view to get an overview
of the scene.
It is interesting being able to turn around and to
look up the scene.
I like position of the viewer in the center of the
scene and among actors.
The VR story innovate transmission of knowledge.
Actors ﬁt in the ancient Rome environment.
I was comfortable with my role as a spectator.
I followed the narrator and actors’ dialogues with
ease.

Mean

4.30

3.91
3.52
3.48

4.26
3.83
4.10

Percent
Agree
87%

78%
61%
57%

83%
70%
70%

3.96

74%

4.61

87%

4.22

87%

4.00

74%

3.95

70%

4.61

91%

4.17

83%

4.65

91%

4.83

96%

3.87

70%

4.70
3.83
4.57
4.22

91%
74%
87%
78%

user observations facilitating analyses and providing for con-
clusions useful for our future work. Good example is the
monitoring how the users reacted to the change of colour of the
speaking actor as a visual cue to attract their attention, an im-
portant immersion factor in 360-degree VR environments [7].
We have avoided a direct questioning but observed and noted
that the directing user’s attention had a positive response. We
have noted that users’ attention was directed to the speaking
actor, regardless of their viewpoint, and the actor was easily
recognized by his coloured appearance. The use of visual cues
has particular importance for 360-degree videos that can not
rely on framing and positioning the objects of interest in the
center of user’s visual attention within the frame.

In our previous research we have identiﬁed the difference
in how students and teachers assess the beneﬁts of bringing
cultural heritage in the classroom using the VR [18]. The
following items in the edutainment sub-scale focus on the same
questions: ”E2 - I would like to use a similar VR story to learn
about destroyed historical sites,” and ”E6 - The VR stories like
Baiae can generate learning content and help the transmission
and preservation of knowledge,” with average scores: students
4.50 and teachers 4.91. It is important to note that in spite of a
difference between the scores, both groups assessed the items
with the highest score.

The graph presented in Figure 7 provides insight into each
speciﬁc item and illustrates distribution of responses grouped
according to the sub-scales. Visualization is programmed in
accordance with [19].

E. Discussion

items as the following: ”I1 - I found the 3D villa environment
pleasant in terms of design and aesthetics,” ”I7 - Live actors
make the VR story more personal and vivid,” ”E3 -I had fun
watching the actors and viewing the Baiae surrounding,” ”U1
- It is useful using 360 view to get an overview of the scene,”
and ”U2 It is interesting being able to turn around and to look
up the scene.”

In addition to the quantitative results we have found

Summary results presented in Table I and detailed item
scores in Table II proves our hypotheses that the use of actors
in VR storytelling contributes to the quality of user experience
and evokes positive level of immersion in virtual cultural
heritage applications.

Evaluation of edutainment was extended with a question
aimed to measure effectiveness of educational dimension: ”VR
story helped me understand the social roles hierarchy in the
ancient Rome.” The average score of answers is 4.26. We have

the right balance between narration and user interaction, to
achieve maximum edutainment level. We will also work more
on interaction methods within the virtual environments to pre-
vent unpleasant effects of motion sickness and claustrophobia.
We believe that in the future HMD devices will be accessible
for everyday use and there will be a need for applications using
their potential in communicating cultural heritage information
to the general public.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Research presented in this paper was supported by H2020
project 727153 iMARECULTURE. The Authors want to ex-
press warm thanks to the Parco Archeologico dei Campi
Flegrei, for a kind cooperation with the iMARECULTURE
project in Baiae, and to Roberto Petriaggi for his precious
contribution to the VR Storytelling implementation.

REFERENCES

[1] Carolyn Handler Miller. Digital storytelling: a creator’s guide to interac-
tive entertainment. Elsevier/Focal Press, Amsterdam Boston, 2014.
[2] Bruno F., Skarlatos D., Lagudi A., Agraﬁotis P., Liarokapis F., Poullis
C., Ritacco G., Cejka J., Kouril P., Philpin-Briscoe o., Mudur S., Simon
B., Development and integration of digital technologies addressed to
raise awareness and access to European underwater cultural heritage.
An overview of the H2020 i-MARECULTURE project. Oceans’17
MTS/IEEE conference, Aberdeen, June 2017.

[3] Daniel Kurlan, ‘Phantasmagoria,’ PC’s Best and Most Dated Horror
Game, Turns 21, Deadpixels, https://bloody-disgusting.com/video-
games/3403381/phantasmagoria-pcs-best-dated-horror-game-turns-21/
Visited on 1-2-2019

[4] Alice O’Connor, FMV brawler The Quiet Man out now, Rock paper
shotgun, https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2018/11/01/the-quiet-man-
released/ Visited on 1-2-2019

[5] E. Pietroni, M. Forlani and C. Rufa, ”Livia’s Villa Reloaded: An example
of re-use and update of a pre-existing Virtual Museum, following a novel
approach in storytelling inside virtual reality environments,” 2015 Digital
Heritage, Granada, 2015, pp. 511-518.

[6] O’Dwyer, Neill; Johnson, Nicholas; Bates, Enda; Pag´es, Rafael; Am-
plianitis, Konstantinos; Monaghan, David; Smolic, Aljoscha. (2018).
Samuel Beckett in Virtual Reality: Exploring narrative using free view-
point video. Leonardo. 1-10.

[7] ELMEZENY, Ahmed; EDENHOFER, Nina; WIMMER, Jeffrey. Im-
mersive Storytelling in 360-Degree Videos: An Analysis of Interplay
Between Narrative and Technical Immersion. Journal For Virtual Worlds
Research, [S.l.], v. 11, n. 1, Apr. 2018. ISSN 1941-8477

[8] Alannah Forman, VRScout

https://vrscout.com/news/360-vr-music-

videos-and-artists/, Visited on 2-2-2019

[9] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=81fer9ulOeA, Visited on 2-2-2019
[10] Ministero dei beni e delle attivit`a culturali e del

turismo, 2019

(http://www.parks.it/parco.sommerso.baia/par.php) Visited on 1-2-2019

[11] Bruno F., Barbieri L., Lagudi A., Cozza, M., Cozza A., Peluso,
R., Muzzupappa M., Virtual dives into the underwater archaeological
treasures of South Italy. Virtual Reality, pp. 1-12, 15 June 2017.
[12] Liarokapis, F., Kouˇril, P., Agraﬁotis, P., Demesticha, S., Chmel´ık,
J., & Skarlatos, D. (2017). 3D modelling and mapping for virtual
exploration of underwater archaeology assets. The International Archives
of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences,
42, 425.

[13] S. Rizvic, N. Djapo, F. Alispahic, B. Hadzihalilovic, F. Fejzic-Cengic,
A. Imamovic, D. Boskovic, V. Okanovic, Guidelines for interactive
digital storytelling presentations of cultural heritage, In Proceedings
of 9th International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Games for
Serious Applications (VS-Games 2017), pp 1-7, ISBN 978-1-5090-5812-
9 (Xplore)

Fig. 7: Visualization of Likert item analysis

designed the statement to address implicit knowledge linked
to the actors and their roles. The obtained results suggest that
use of actors has a potential in education, users learn through
transfer of experience and also through empathy with actors.

The passive role as spectator was not assessed as negative.
When asked for a feedback on ”If I had an opportunity to
act and inﬂuence the ﬂow of the story I would” users were
mainly interested in pausing the narrative and having more
time for observing the environment, adding more details in
the environment, being able to ”play back.” Only 2 of 23
participant expressed willingness to act as to provoke actors
or to inﬂuence the ﬂow of the story.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this work, we explored whether the use of actors
contributes to the immersion and edutainment of the VR
cultural heritage application. We placed the actors in virtual
environments created as 3D reconstructions of various lo-
cations in the Baiae underwater excavation site. They were
performing scenes from a scenario where a sculptor and his
apprentice are visiting a rich Roman aristocrat, owner of the
Villa con Ingresso a Protiro, in order to sell him a statue to
decorate his garden. This storytelling is a part of a Dry visit
application, aiming to enable the users to virtually dive using
Head Mounted Displays and explore the underwater remains
from Baiae archaeological park in Italy.

The achieved results are in accordance with our hypotheses.
The VR digital stories involving actors resulted in achieving
a high level of user immersion. User scores for edutainment
were even higher, and we can conclude that personalizing
historical roles presents a novel and entertaining way for users
to learn about historical sites and ancient societies. Users’
feedback brings to our attention important feature for the future
work: the ability to pause the story and explore the 360-degree
environment and rewind the narrative to some point of interest.
The interactivity could be extended to include a search for a
speciﬁc object or to help the user to learn some important fact.

VR storytelling for cultural heritage still has a lot of re-
search potential. In the future work we will focus on obtaining

[14] Selma Rizvic, Dusanka Boskovic, Vensada Okanovic, Sanda Sljivo,
Kyrenia - Hyper Storytelling Pilot Application, In: Proceedings of 15th
EUROGRAPHICS Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage 2017,
pp. 177–181.doi:10.2312/gch.20171311.

[15] E. Selmanovic, S. Rizvic, C. Harvey, D. Boskovic, V. Hulusic, M.
Chahin and S. Sljivo, VR Video Storytelling for Intangible Cultural Her-
itage Preservation, In: Proceedings of 16th EUROGRAPHICS Workshop
on Graphics and Cultural Heritage 2018

[16] B. Davidde Petriaggi, R. Petriaggi, F. Bruno et alii, A digital recon-
struction of the sunken “Villa con ingresso a protiro” in the underwater
archaeological site of Baiae, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science
and Engineering,June 2018,364 012013 OPEN ACCESS

[17] LAZAR J., FENG J. H., HOCHHEISER H., Research Methods in

Human-Computer Interaction, Wiley Publishing, 2010.

[18] Rizvic, S., Boskovic, D., Okanovic, V. et al., Interactive digital story-
telling: bringing cultural heritage in a classroom,J. Comput. Educ. (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40692-018-0128-7

[19] HEIBERGER R., ROBBINS N., Design of diverging stacked bar charts
for likert scales and other applications, Journal of Statistical Software 57,
5 (Apr. 2014), 1–32

[20] Doulamis, Anastasios and Doulamis, Nikolaos and Ioannidis, Charala-
bos and Chrysouli, Christina and Grammalidis, Nikos and Dimitropoulos,
Kosmas and Potsiou, Chryssy and Stathopoulou, Elisavet Konstantina and
Ioannides, Marinos, 5D MODELLING: AN EFFICIENT APPROACH
FOR CREATING SPATIOTEMPORAL PREDICTIVE 3D MAPS OF
LARGE-SCALE CULTURAL RESOURCES, ISPRS Annals of Pho-
togrammetry, Remote Sensing & Spatial Information Sciences, 2015
[21] Bruno, F. and Lagudi, A. and Barbieri, L. and Cozza, M. and Cozza, A.
and Peluso, R. and Davidde Petriaggi, B. and Petriaggi, R. and Rizvic,
S. and Skarlatos, D., VIRTUAL TOUR IN THE SUNKEN VILLA
CON INGRESSO A PROTIRO WITHIN THE UNDERWATER AR-
CHAEOLOGICAL PARK OF BAIAE, ISPRS - International Archives of
the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences,
XLII-2/W10, 2019, 45–51

[22] Rizvic, S.,How to Breathe Life into Cultural Heritage 3D Reconstruc-

tions, European Review, 2017, 25(1), pp. 39—50

