Real-Time Detection of Simulator Sickness in Virtual Reality Games 
Based on Players' Psychophysiological Data during Gameplay 

Jialin Wang 

Hai-Ning Liang¹ 

Diego Vilela Monteiro 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

Wenge Xu 

Hao Chen 

Qiwen Chen 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University 

ABSTRACT 

Virtual Reality (VR) technology has been proliferating in the last 
decade,  especially  in  the  last  few  years.  However,  Simulator 
Sickness  (SS)  still  represents  a  significant  problem  for  its  wider 
adoption. Currently, the most common way to detect SS is using 
the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ). SSQ is a subjective 
measurement and is inadequate for real-time applications such as 
VR games. This research aims to investigate how to use machine 
learning techniques to detect SS based on in-game characters’ and 
users'  physiological  data  during  gameplay  in  VR  games.  To 
achieve this, we designed an experiment to collect such data with 
three  types  of  games.  We  trained  a  Long  Short-Term  Memory 
neural  network  with  the  dataset  eye-tracking  and  character 
movement data to detect SS in real-time. Our results indicate that, 
in VR games, our model is an accurate and efficient way to detect 
SS in real-time. 

Keywords:  Virtual  Reality,  Gaming,  Simulator  Sickness, 
Machine Learning, EEG, Eye-tracking. 

Index  Terms:  [Human-centered  Computing]:  Human-Computer 
interaction—Interaction  Devices;  [Computing  Methodologies]: 
Machine Learning—Machine Learning Approaches  

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Virtual  Reality  (VR)  technology  has  been  growing  in  the  last 
decade,  especially  in  the  last  few  years,  with  the  proliferation  of 
mass-marketed  Head-Mounted  Displays  (HMDs).  However, 
Simulator  Sickness  (SS)  remains  a  constraint  and  challenge  for 
VR  and  has  a  negative  effect  on  its  wider  adoption  [1][2].  As 
such,  there  are  significant  benefits  in  finding  methods  to  detect 
and avoid SS in VR applications, especially in games. 
   SS is often considered a type of motion sickness which is caused 
by movement in the environment perceived by the visual system. 
Currently,  there  are  three  possible  etiologies  of  motion  sickness: 
eye  movements  (EM),  sensory  conflict  (SC),  and  postural 
instability  (PS)  [3].  One  of  the most  significant  challenges in  SS 
detection is to quantify it objectively and extract its features. 
   The most commonly used method to assess SS is the Simulator 
Sickness  Questionnaire  (SSQ)  [4].  It  can  be  used  to  quantify  SS 
for  activities  that  could  lead  to  SS  symptoms.  However,  it  is 
exceedingly  challenging  to  quantify  real-time  SS  with  SSQ. 
Although  numerous  novel  SS  assessment  methods  have  been 

¹ Corresponding author (haining.liang@xjtlu.edu.cn) 

proposed  to  solve  this  problem  [5][6],  they  require  distinct 
sensors. Such sensors are used to capture Electro Dermal Activity 
(EDA),  Heart  Rate  (HR),  and  electroencephalogram  (EEG)  data. 
In this research, we proposed a low-cost method to achieve real-
time  SS  detection  with  current  consumer-level  VR  HMDs  with 
eye trackers (e.g., FOVE, HTC VIVE Pro Eye).  
   Based  on  our  theoretical  analysis  and  a  pilot  study,  we 
hypothesize  that  two  in-game  features  are  highly  linked  to  SS:  
EM  and Character Movement (CM). We developed and used our 
novel own labeling method to break real-time gaming events into 
classes.  Those  classes  can  then  be  used  to  train  our  model  and 
subsequently detect real-time SS in VR.  We used a Long Short-
Term  Memory  (LSTM)  neural  network  to  train  our  model  using 
EM and CM. To our knowledge, we are the first to associate these 
data when looking for SS. Our model can be used to improve the 
gaming experience whenever SS is detected.  

2  DATA COLLECTION AND MODEL 

2.1  Concept and Model 
Based  on  the  literature,  we  pose  two  hypotheses:  H1  CM  may 
cause SS; H2 SS may cause EM. Therefore, EM and CM data may 
contain patterns that can be associated with SS.  
   To examine this hypothesis, we created a dataset contained four 
types  of  data:  (1)  magnitude  of  each  eye  acceleration,  (2) 
magnitude  of  character  acceleration,  (3)  speed,  and  (4)  angular 
acceleration.  The  magnitude  of  eye  acceleration  speed  was 
calculated from 13 types of raw eye movement data recorded from 
the  HTC  VIVE  Pro  Eye.  Magnitudes  of  character  acceleration 
speed and character angular acceleration were calculated using the 
virtual sensor script in the VR games.  
   For classification purposes, there are three event IDs in the raw 
dataset:  0  is  normal  gameplay  without  SS;  1  is  6  seconds  before 
SS  becomes  intolerable;  2  is  the  pause  state  (players  were 
requested to pause if sick). We implemented counter-measures to 
prevent a long blink from being classified as events 1 and 2. Later, 
we trained two LSTM models, A and B, to detect SS in VR games, 
prior and after its onset.  

Figure 1:  Screenshots of the three VR games used in our 

experiment for data collection. (A) Racing Car. (B) Parkour. 
(C) Space Miner. 

 The Three VR Games 

2.2 
Using Unity3D, we developed three VR games to collect the data 
during  gameplay  (see  Figure  1).  Our  pilot  run  showed  that  these 

 
 
 
 
 
three  VR  games  could  produce  enough  SS  stimulation  with 
different 
levels  during  gameplay.  To  record  possible  SS 
symptoms  and  levels,  no  SS  mitigation  techniques  have  been 
applied to these VR games.  
  In the data collection experiment, Parkour is the only first-person 
perspective  (1PP)  VR  game  among  the  three  games.  It  can 
produce twice as many valid SS tags than Racing Car and Space 
Miner  (both  3PP  VR  games).  Prior  research  also  has  suggested 
that  1PP  VR  games  can  produce  more  stimulation  than  3PP  VR 
games  [7].  Therefore,  it  is  useful  to  explore  1PP  games  in  more 
depth to collect data from other 1PP VR games to see if the same 
findings can be replicated. Further, to improve the performance of 
pre-SS  detection,  we  need  to  extract  more  SS  features  to  find 
further  SS  patterns  and  attempt  to  test  different  neural  networks. 
Different  length  of  pre-SS  event  tags  is  also  worth  further 
exploration due to the difficulty of quantifying SS in milder cases. 

recordings.  In  other  words,  Model  B  may  only  suitable  for  1PP 
VR games.  

5  CONCLUSION 

In  this  study,  we  used  three  different  VR  games  to  produce  SS 
stimulation while collecting data. We posed two hypotheses from 
the etiology of motion sickness and the result of EEG analysis: H1 
SS may cause EM; H2 CM may cause SS. The evaluation of our 
model  showed  its  high  performance  of  post-SS  detection  for 
players who are highly sensitive to SS. One of two models, Model 
A, can be used to detect post-SS for game developers to reduce SS 
stimulation  in  their  VR  games.  The  other  module,  Model  B,  can 
be used to detect part of pre-SS events for some VR games with 
strong SS stimulation and players who are highly sensitive to SS. 
Our  preliminary  results  indicate  that  our  detection  method  is  a 
effective way to detect SS during gameplay for VR games. 

3  PRELIMINARY RESULTS 

REFERENCES 

Figure  2  shows  that  Model  A  has  an  excellent  performance  on 
classifying  SS;  however,  it  can  only  detect  post-SS.  This  model 
can  be  used  to  reduce  SS  stimulation  during  the  development 
stage of VR games. It provides developers a low-cost and efficient 
solution  to  locate  and  remove  possible  SS  stimulating  aspects 
during game development or adding ways to mitigate them in the 
game when compared to existing SS detection methods [8][6].  
   Our Model B can detect real-time SS events for players who are 
highly  sensitive  to  SS,  but  the  model  is  not  as  sensitive  in  other 
cases. Using the model, developers can design pre-defined actions 
or features in response to SS feedback to improve user experience 
and  gameplay.  For  example,  when  SS  is  detected,  the  game 
difficulty can be automatically adjusted to a lower level. There is 
one  crucial  difference  between Model  A and  Model  B.  Model A 
can only be used to detect post-SS events. Model B can detect part 
of pre-SS events for players in some games (e.g., 1PP VR games). 

Figure 2:  Accuracy of Model A to classify game events. 

   The  application  of  our  real-time  SS  detection  during  gameplay 
is to form a feedback system: it can be used as the basis of an AI-
based feedback system in the VR gaming environment. The real-
time SS detection model can detect SS from user's real-time data 
(i.e.,  eye  movement  plus  character  movement  data)  during 
gameplay.  Then,  the  VR  environment  can  respond  to  the  SS 
feedback, possibly reducing SS stimulation in the game.  

4  LIMITATIONS 

Our  experiment  did  not  compare  its  results  to  more  traditional 
techniques  like  EDA  and  HR.  Our  analysis  of  EEG  data  did  not 
find  consistent  patterns,  which  could  be  due  to  the  sample  size. 
Our  Model  B  shows  better  performance  in  1PP  VR  game 
(Parkour)  which  may  indicate  that  the  1PP  VR  game  recordings 
contains  more  eye  movement  features  than  3PP  VR  game 

[1] 

W.  Xu,  D.  Monteiro,  H.  N.  Liang,  K.  Hasan,  Y.  Yu,  and  C. 

Fleming,  “Assessing  the  Effects  of  a  Full-body  Motion-based 

Exergame in Virtual Reality,” in ACM International Conference 

Proceeding 

Series, 

2019, 

pp. 

1–6, 

doi: 

10.1145/3332169.3333574. 

[2] 

S.  Weech,  J.  Moon,  and  N.  F.  Troje,  “Influence  of  bone-

conducted  vibration  on  simulator  sickness  in  virtual  reality,” 

PLoS  One,  vol.  13,  no.  3,  pp.  1–21,  2018,  doi: 

10.1371/journal.pone.0194137. 

[3] 

M.  B.  Flanagan,  J.  G.  May,  and  T.  G.  Dobie,  “The  role  of 

vection,  eye  movements  and  postural  instability  in  the  etiology 

of  motion  sickness,”  J.  Vestib.  Res.  Equilib.  Orientat.,  vol.  14, 

no. 4, pp. 335–346, 2004. 

[4] 

R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, S. Kevin, and M. G. Lilienthal, “The 

International Journal of Aviation Psychology Simulator Sickness 

Questionnaire : An Enhanced Method for Quantifying Simulator 

Sickness,”  Int.  J.  Aviat.  Psychol.,  vol.  3,  no.  3,  pp.  203–220, 

1993, doi: 10.1207/s15327108ijap0303. 

[5] 

D. Monteiro, H.-N. Liang, and N. Baghaei, “Correlating gamers’ 

brainwaves  to  their  subjective  feelings  in  virtual  reality  games 

under  different  viewing  perspectives,”  in  Proceedings  of  16th 

ACM  SIGGRAPH  International  Conference  on  Virtual-Reality 

Continuum  and  its  Applications  in  Industry  (VRCAI’18),  2018, 

pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1145/3284398.3284430. 

[6] 

N.  Martin,  N.  Mathieu,  N.  Pallamin,  M.  Ragot,  and  J.-M. 

Diverrez,  “Automatic  recognition  of  virtual  reality  sickness 

based  on  physiological  signals,”  Ibs  2018,  2018,  [Online]. 

Available: 

https://www.ibc.org/production/automatic-

recognition-of-virtual-reality-sickness-based-on-physiological-

signals/3337.article. 

[7] 

D. Monteiro, H. N. Liang, A. Abel, N. Bahaei, and R. De Cassia 

Monteiro,  “Evaluating  engagement  of  virtual  reality  games 

based  on  first  and  third  person  perspective  using  EEG  and 

subjective  metrics,”  in  Proceedings  -  2018  IEEE  International 

Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Virtual  Reality,  AIVR 

2018, 2019, pp. 53–60, doi: 10.1109/AIVR.2018.00015. 

[8] 

D.  Jeong,  S.  Yoo,  and  J.  Yun,  “Cybersickness  analysis  with 

EEG using deep learning algorithms,” 26th IEEE Conf. Virtual 

Real. 3D User Interfaces, VR 2019 - Proc., pp. 827–835, 2019, 
doi: 10.1109/VR.2019.8798334. 

