An In-Depth Exploration of the Effect of 2D/3D Views and Controller 
Types on First Person Shooter Games in Virtual Reality 

Diego Monteiro 

Hai-Ning Liang¹ 

Jialin Wang 

Hao Chen 

Nilufar Baghaei 

Xi'an Jiaotong-
Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-
Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-
Liverpool University 

Xi'an Jiaotong-
Liverpool University 

Massey University 

ABSTRACT 

The  amount  of  interest  in  Virtual  Reality  (VR)  research  has 
significantly increased over the past few years, both in academia 
and  industry.  The  release  of  commercial  VR  Head-Mounted 
Displays (HMDs) has been a major contributing factor. However, 
there  is  still  much to  be  learned, especially  how  views  and  input 
techniques, as well as their interaction, affect the VR experience. 
There is little work done on First-Person Shooter (FPS) games in 
VR, and those few studies have focused on a single aspect of VR 
FPS.  They  either  focused  on  the  view,  e.g.,  comparing  VR  to  a 
typical  2D  display  or  on  the  controller  types.  To  the  best  of  our 
knowledge, there are no studies investigating variations of 2D/3D 
views in HMDs, controller types, and their interactions. As such, it 
is challenging to distinguish findings related to the controller type 
from those related to the view. If a study does not control for the 
input method and finds that 2D displays lead to higher performance 
than  VR,  we  cannot  generalize  the  results  because  of  the 
confounding variables. To understand their interaction, we propose 
to analyze in more depth, whether it is the view (2D vs. 3D) or the 
way  it  is  controlled  that  gives  the  platforms  their  respective 
advantages. To study the effects of the 2D/3D views, we created a 
2D visual technique, PlaneFrame, that was applied inside the VR 
headset.  Our  results  show  that  the  controller  type  can  have  a 
significant  positive  impact  on  performance,  immersion,  and 
simulator sickness when associated with a 2D view. They further 
our  understanding  of  the  interactions  that  controllers  and  views 
have  and  demonstrate  that  comparisons  are  highly  dependent  on 
how  both  factors  go  together.  Further,  through  a  series  of  three 
experiments, we developed a technique that can lead to a substantial 
performance,  a  good  level  of  immersion,  and  can  minimize  the 
level of simulator sickness. 

Keywords: Virtual Reality, 2D/3D Views, Controller types, First 
Person Shooter, Gaming, Head-Mounted Displays. 

Index  Terms:  [Human-centered  Computing]:  Human-Computer 
interaction—Interaction  Devices;  [Human-centered  Computing]: 
Human-Computer 
interaction—Interaction  paradigms—Virtual 
reality; 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Virtual reality (VR) has been proliferating rapidly in the last few 
years,  especially  with  the  advent  of  mass  commercial  VR  Head-
Mounted  Displays  (HMDs).  Due  to  their  rapid  growth,  there  are 
still aspects that are not well understood, including the influence of 
different types of controllers in virtual interactions [1]–[4], and how 

¹ Corresponding author (haining.liang@xjtlu.edu.cn) 

they affect immersion [5]. Similarly, the effects of viewing types 
on Simulator Sickness (SS) during fast-paced applications, such as 
First-Person Shooter (FPS) games [6]–[9], are also underexplored. 
Players  pay  attention  to  several  factors  during  gameplay  [10], 
[11]. In VR, the level of playability and immersion are important 
considerations  because  they  affect  enjoyment  and  performance, 
especially  while  players  are  (or  are  not)  feeling  SS  symptoms. 
Playability  and  immersion  can  be  affected  by  how  the  VR 
environment  is  controlled  [12]–[14].  Nevertheless,  we  must  note 
that  research  shows  that  immersive  technologies  can  hinder 
performance  when  compared  to  a  traditional  setup  (i.e.,  monitor, 
keyboard, and mouse) [15], [16]. From these studies, it is not clear 
if  it  is  the  keyboard  and  mouse  combination  as  the  input  control 
responsible for the positive results. Likewise, it is not possible to 
know whether the enhanced results are the product of the reduced 
depth or visual detail of the 2D display that allows FPS players to 
perform  better  (e.g.,  having  a  better  aim).  After  all,  real-life 
marksmen close one eye when shooting, which effectively renders 
their vision to 2D mode as a filtering mechanism. Finally, it is not 
clear if better performance is caused by the combination of visual 
reduction  of  details  and  how  players  control  or  navigate  the 
environment. 

In this paper, we set up to investigate the effect of 2D and 3D 
views and the controller types in immersive VR for FPS gameplay. 
To  this  end,  our  aim  is  to analyze:  (1) the  effect  of  variations  of 
those views on immersion and performance in VR; (2) the impact 
of using a standard keyboard and mouse combination compared to 
hand-held controllers that are used in today's VR systems.  

To  study  the  effects  of  the  2D  views,  we  created  a  2D  visual 
technique, which we call PlaneFrame. It is a technique that slightly 
alters how the VR environment is viewed by users. Through three 
improve 
experiments,  we 
performance when playing an FPS game in VR, and decrease the 
level  of  SS  with  little  effect  on  the  users'  perceived  level  of 
immersion. The results of our studies show that PlaneFrame could 
be  a  useful  visual  technique  for  FPS  games  and  other  VR 
applications.  

technique  can 

found 

that 

this 

Our main contributions in this paper are a deeper understanding 
of  the  impact  of  2D/3D  views  on  VR  FPS  and  the  influence 
traditional input methods have on these kinds of VR applications. 
Further,  we  found  that  a  2D  view  in  VR  HMDs  can  be  a  good 
compromise  between  performance  and  immersion  and  can  help 
reduce symptoms of SS. Finally, we introduced PlaneFrame. This 
versatile  and  cost-effective  visual  technique  can  be  used  for  VR 
applications, including FPS games and exploratory environments. 

2  RELATED WORK 

Our  research  is  related  and  informed  by  three  main  themes:  (1) 
View  Modality;  (2)  Simulator  Sickness;  and  (3)  Gameplay 
Performance. First, we discuss viewing technologies and how they 
affect  immersion  and  enjoyment.  Then,  we  summarize  previous 
studies  on  mitigating  SS  associated  with  a  higher  level  of 
immersion. Last, we present previous studies that have dealt with 
the trade-off between immersion and performance. 

 
 
 
 
It  is  common  to  separate  the  terms  immersion  from  presence. 
However,  due  to  their  close  connection,  they  are  often  used 
interchangeably [17]. Hence, we also adopt this approach.  

2.1  2D/3D Views in VR 
While commercial VR HMDs are relatively new, techniques that 
focus  on  increasing  the  sense  of  immersion  are  not.  One  such 
example  is  commercial  3D  TVs,  which  have  been  used  to 
demonstrate  that  having a  3D image  changes  how  information is 
processed in the brain. They can elicit not only a greater sense of 
presence but also greater vection (the sensation of movement of the 
body  in  space  produced  purely  by  visual  stimulation)  when 
compared  to  2D  images  [18].  Such  findings  are  consistent  with 
research that has evaluated 2D/3D VR when comparing a 3D wall 
display against a 2D monitor [19]. This research seems to indicate 
that people process 2D and 3D views differently. However, both of 
these  studies  were  conducted  in  CAVE  like  displays  to  navigate 
mazes. Hence, it is still unclear if the same results would apply to 
other tasks, like looking for fast-moving opponents in a game, or 
whether more immersive technologies like VR HMDs [20] would 
produce the same results. 

One trait that seems consistent among the different studies is that 
people  often  seem  to  yield  the  highest  enjoyment  from  the  most 
immersive experiences, especially in HMD type of displays [15], 
[16], [20]–[24]. This is the case even though HMDs tend to cause 
nausea and other kinds of simulator sickness afflictions [18], [22]. 
Most of these studies compared HMD VR, PC, or a CAVE in some 
combination.  However,  to  our  knowledge,  there  has  not  been  a 
study  that  has  compared  2D  and  3D  views  within  an  HMD.  As 
such,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  higher  level  of  satisfaction  comes 
from the HMD display, regardless of whether it shows 2D or 3D 
views.  

2.2  Simulator Sickness  
Simulator sickness (SS) or kinetosis has been studied even before 
the arrival of VR HMDs [25]. Because it is often believed that SS 
is caused by the brain receiving conflicting information from the 
senses, some researchers assume that the closer we get to the real 
physical  environment,  the  less  likely  a  person  is  to  feel  the 
symptoms of SS [26]. Although some researchers have suggested 
that  such  an  approach  is  adequate  [27]  or  at  the  very  least 
indifferent  [28],  Dziuda  et  al.  [29]  have  re-evaluated  this 
assumption  to  identify  some  sort  of  uncanny  valley  of  SS.  They 
showed  that  a  simulator  which  included  a  moving  platform 
associated with the visual stimulus generated higher levels of SS. 
Their results would imply that trying to go for the highest possible 
realism might not be an effective way to prevent SS. Because the 
actual mechanisms for SS might be different from those of motion 
sickness, an earlier study found it hard to correlate motion sickness 
with SS [30].  

One technique that is simple but has yielded great success is the 
use of a gazing point in front of the user's view. The gazing point 
can be a circular point [31] or the head of a character in the case of 
the third-person perspective (3PP) view [23], [32]. Further, this is 
somewhat  a  diegetic  technique  and  can  be  easily  inserted  as  the 
gun's aim and can be quite useful. The counterpoint is that gazing 
cues  can  attract  the  player's  eyes  [33],  which  could  affect  users' 
ability to see objects that fall outside of the area of the gazing point 
and are located in their peripheral vision. 

More  advanced  and  intricate  techniques,  such  as  galvanic 
vestibular  stimulation,  require  extra  hardware  and  might  not  be 
usable  by  all  users  (e.g.,  users  wearing  pacemakers  cannot  use 
them)  [34],  [35].  Other  techniques  that  seem  to  yield  promising 
results  are  the  ones  that  use  vibration  to  stimulate  the  sense  of 
movement,  such  as  bone-inducted  vibration  [36]  or  producing 
small strikes on the region behind the ears [37]. Nevertheless, these 

techniques  are  still 
their  early  stages,  needing  further 
development  and  evaluation  to  assess  their  real  effectiveness, 
suitability, and long-term effects. 

in 

Recently, techniques that are developed primarily for VR HMDs 
(rather  than  all  kinds  of  simulators)  have  been  proposed.  These 
techniques focus more on how virtual worlds are presented rather 
than  the  movement  or  navigation  technique  alone.  For  example, 
some have attempted to apply blur during movement according to 
the  distance  of  objects  to  the  user  [38].  Others  deformed  the 
peripheric region in which the user is moving towards to create the 
illusion  of  less  movement  or  reduced  FOV  [39],  [40].  Other 
techniques involve removing visual information from the user [41], 
[42].  While  these  techniques  seem  to  present  positive  results  in 
lowering  SS,  it  is  unclear  if  these  optical  illusions  affect  user 
performance  and  their  perceived  level  of  immersion  in  the  VR 
environment. To the best of our knowledge, only two other studies 
have  evaluated  the  effect  of  their  mitigation  technique  on 
performance [43], [44].  They involve mainly changing the rotation 
aspect,  either  reducing  the  speed  during  rotation  or  removing 
information.  Their  techniques  interfered  little  with  the  user's 
performance  in  their  respective  applications.  As  such,  it  is  likely 
that  mitigation  techniques  are  a  promising  path  for  VR  games, 
especially for FPS games that require fast head movements [44].  

2.3  FPS Performance 
FPS  games  are  a  well-established  genre,  with  reasonably  simple 
gameplay mechanics and are well suited to be translated into VR 
due to its inherently first-person view format. Unavoidably, there 
are challenges to bring an established format (in 2D displays) to a 
new platform like VR. One possible problem is the loss of player 
performance. For example, in a study that compared a CAVE to a 
PC  FPS,  participants  performed  considerably  worse  in  CAVE; 
however, the same participants declared having enjoyed more the 
CAVE experience [15], [16]. It could be likely that VR HMDs may 
suffer  from  the  same  issue,  trading  immersion  for  performance 
[45].  However,  not  all  studies  agree  with  this  view;  [17],  when 
trying to replicate a study that compared an HMD and a desktop 
display for a Role-Playing Game (RPG) [46], found no significant 
differences between two in terms of user satisfaction and presence. 
One reason for the discrepancy is because FPS is naturally more 
engaging. A second explanation might be the kind of controller that 
players used, namely keyboard and mouse in all platforms, which 
could potentially break the immersion. 

One issue with these studies is the type of controller used because 
the  studies  had  their  controllers  match  the  technology  (i.e., 
keyboard for the desktop and a game controller for VR). As such, 
their results might have had more to do with the controller than the 
display.  After  all,  earlier  studies  on  the  influence  of  the  type  of 
controller  had  found  a  difference  in  presence  when  comparing  a 
more natural Wiimote to a PlayStation game controller for a tennis 
game  [5].  There  are  even  differences  in  brainwaves  when 
comparing both controllers [47].  

For FPS games, [4] found that there is no difference between the 
Oculus Touch dual hand controller and the Xbox game controller  
[4]. However, because the Oculus Touch is more closely related to 
the Xbox controller than to the keyboard and mouse, it may not be 
possible  still  to  discard  the  possibility  that  the  type  of  controller 
could affect immersion and performance [48]. In another study, it 
was found that the keyboard and mouse led to lower performance 
[3]. Like other studies, the authors also matched the controller to 
the technology. With new proposed designs emerging for VR FPS 
controllers [13], the search for a suitable controller is an on-going 
process [45] and an important aspect to be explored to seek ways 
to improve both immersion and performance for FPS VR games.  
In short, prior research shows that the closer we get to simulating 
a real environment, the lower the performance can get. Also, it is 

not clear how this affects SS. This research aims to fill this gap by 
investigating the following research questions. 

RQ1. Is performance loss caused by the VR environment or by the 

type of controller used?  

RQ2.  Do  visual  stimuli  play  a  more  prominent  role  in  in-game 

subjective feelings than how we control them?  

RQ3.  Is  the  stereoscopic  3D  view  a  significant  factor  within  the 

HMDs?  

To explore these three questions, we devised three studies. To our 
knowledge, there was not a technique or tool that allows rendering 
a  2D  view  inside  the  Stereoscopic  display,  like  VR.  Thus,  we 
developed  one  inhouse.  In  the  next  session,  we  present  this 
technique,  which  creates  a  customizable  2D  Frame,  which  we 
dubbed PlaneFrame.  

3  PLANEFRAME – 2D IN VR 

To study the effect of a 2D screen like view for HMDs for FPS VR 
games on performance, level of immersion, and degree of control, 
we  developed  PlaneFrame  (PF).  PF  displays  a  copy  of  the  3D 
virtual  environment  (VE)  within  a  user's  field-of-view  (FoV) 
through  a  2D  rectangular  plane  (see  Figures  1  and  2).  When 
navigating in the VE, the 2D plane appears in front of the user in a 
fixed  distance  (see  Figure  2a).  The  user can  perceive  the  3D  VE 
through  the  2D  plane,  like  looking  at  3D  views  through  a  2D 
display.  The  main  difference  between  PF  and  the  gazing  point 
technique [26] is that PF carries a 2D copy of the 3D VE region at 
which the user is looking. As such, with PF, there is no blind spot 
or hidden peripheral regions. This technique also differs from Slave 
Visualization [41], which is a technique not aimed at changing the 
whole VR environment but at sharing 3D views among VR users. 
As we show in Experiment C, the size of PF is configurable. It also 
works as a fixed gazing point to help avoid or minimize SS. 

To make PF easily configurable and fit diegetically in different 
kinds of application scenarios, we developed two variations, called 
Mask and 2D-3D Extreme Mask. 

Figure 1: The  concept  used  in  the  PlaneFrame  technique  and  the 
configurable  size  of  its  FoV.  (a)  A  smaller-sized  'mask.'  (b)  A 
bigger-sized mask. 

3.1  Mask View 
A  'Mask'  can  have  an  area  (A)  that  occupies  between  2.5%  and 
100% of the FoV (height (cid:3400) width) of the HMD (see Figures 1 and 
2). Mask is a rectangle plane in which the center is in position (0,0), 
with  a  given  height  (H)  and  width  (W).  We  define  the  PF  FoV 
(PFoV) to be based on H and W, as given in equations 1 to 4, where 
s is the desired size of PF. 

𝑘 (cid:3404) √𝑠, 0.025 (cid:3407) 𝑠 (cid:3407) 1            (1) 
𝐻 (cid:3404) ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (cid:3400) 𝑘                        (2) 
𝑊 (cid:3404) 𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ (cid:3400) 𝑘                         (3) 
𝑃(cid:3007)(cid:3042)(cid:3023) (cid:3404) 𝐻 (cid:3400) 𝑊                          (4) 

3.2  2D-3D Extreme Mask 
2D-3D  Extreme  Mask  View  (or  simply  Extreme  Mask),  like  the 
Mask, would allow the user to see the area in front of him/her and 
converted the 3D stereoscopic view into a 2D view. The size of PF 
was also configurable. However, in this version, the user can only 
see the area within the Mask, and the 3D VE is hidden (see Figure 
2c  and  2d).  One  main  difference  of  Extreme  Mask  is  that  it  was 
continuously activated, whereas, in the other versions, it was only 
activated  during  motion.  This  could  lead  to  a  more  immersive 
experience  because  it  would  remove  all  external  distractions  and 
changes in view.  

Figure 2: (a) PlaneFrame (PF) is a technique that displays a copy of 
the 3D virtual environment (VE) on a rectangular plane which is 
placed  in  front  of  the  camera  (or  users'  view).  (b)  A 
demonstration  of  the  PF  Mask  version  used  in  a  first-person 
shooter  (FPS)  game.  (c)  A  demonstration  of  the  PF  Extreme 
Mask version used in the game. (d) Illustrations of the concept 
of Mask and Extreme Mask: they both display a screenshot of 
the 3D VE within a user's field-of-view through a 2D rectangular 
plane.  Mask  keeps  the  3D  VE  behind  the  plane,  whereas 
Extreme Mask hides the 3D VE completely. 

4  GAME ENVIRONMENT AND EXPERIMENT METRICS  

We conducted three experiments to understand how the PF would 
affect  our  participants'  level  of  immersion,  SS,  and  gameplay 
performance. Experiment A collected keyboard data and compared 
different views, including unmodified VR 3D view and regular 2D 
monitor. In Experiment B, we compared PF with another existing 
technique  popular  in  FPS  games,  namely  "Gazing  point"  [31]. 
Experiment C evaluated the performance of three variations of the 
PF to help us understand in more depth the effect of different size 
of  PF  on  induced  SS,  user  performance,  and  immersion. 
Experiments  A  and  B  are  also  used  to  understand  the  effects  of 
controller types (i.e., keyboard and controller) for FPS games in VR 
from a between-subjects perspective. 

The  FPS  game  used  as  a  testbed  for  our  experiments  was 
developed  inhouse.  This  allowed  us  to  avoid  or  minimize  any 
confounding factors and to implement the different versions of PF 
and game to fit the specific controllers and displays. In the game, 
players  have  to  navigate  rapidly  while  performing  other  actions 
typical of an FPS game [42].  

Next, we describe the game environment.  

4.1  Game Environment 
The  goal  of  the  game  was  for  players  to  traverse  a  maze  with 
hallways, open spaces, and chambers and try to survive and destroy 
(kill) easily distinguishable non-player characters (which we called 
adversaries).  There  were  three  types  of  adversaries  with  three 
different  behaviors.  One  adversary,  Sniper,  was  stationary.  The 
second, dubbed Patroller, could only walk along a fixed route. The 
third adversary, the Hunters, could hunt the player (based on an AI 
algorithm provided in [49]). To make them easily distinguishable, 
they were presented in three different colors: green, blue, and red 
(see  Figure  3).  The  adversaries  were  positioned  throughout  the 
maze, progressively increasing in numbers until the final chamber 
(see Figure 4). 

 
 
 
 
 
through  the  maze  long  enough  to  allow  collecting  meaningful 
results. The IEQ also uses a 5-point Likert Scale for each question. 
In the end, all questions are summed.  

5  EXPERIMENT A 

Experiment  A  was  designed  to  (1)  compare  how  an  immersive 
environment compares to a regular computer screen; (2) determine 
the influence of a 2D view and; (3) collect the gameplay data for 
when players use the keyboard only. In short, we compared induced 
SS and user performance with or without PF when playing an FPS 
game in VR HMD systems. We also included a desktop version as 
another  comparative  baseline.  Thus,  this  experiment  evaluated 
three  versions:  conventional  PC  display  (CD),  HMD  VR  display 
without PF (RVR), and HMD VR display with PF (VRPF). For this 
experiment, we only used Extreme Mask. 

5.1  Participants 
We  recruited  18  participants  (6  females;  12  males)  from  a  local 
university. They had an average age of 18.89 (s.e. = 0.99), ranging 
between  17  and  21.  All  volunteers  had  a  normal  or  normal-to-
corrected  vision,  and  none  of  them  declared  any  history  of  color 
blindness  or  other  health  issues,  physical  or  otherwise.  Sixteen 
participants  (88.9%)  had  experience  with  VR  systems  before  the 
experiment.  Three  participants  (11.1%)  declared  having  already 
felt  a  certain  degree  of  sickness  when  playing  FPS  games  in  the 
common types of display (laptop, desktop, or TV). 

Apparatus 

5.2 
We used an Oculus Rift CV1 as our HMD, as it is one of the most 
popular  off-the-shelf  VR  devices.  The  HMD  was  connected  to  a 
desktop  with  16GB  RAM,  an  Intel  Core  i7-7700k  CPU  @ 
4.20GHz, a GeForce GTX 1080Ti dedicated GPU, and a standard 
21.5"  4K  monitor.  We  used  a  mechanical  keyboard  and  high-
resolution gaming mouse as input instead of the traditional Oculus 
Touch,  which  is  one  factor  we  are  collecting  data  in  this 
experiment.  

In  the  VR  versions,  although  participants  could  not  see  the 
keyboard, they were familiar with using the keyboard and mouse 
when playing FPS games. Nevertheless, to diminish the likelihood 
of it being a confounding factor, they were not required to move 
their  fingers  to  different  keys  on  the  keyboard  after  the  initial 
positioning. Further, it is essential to note that the position of the 
monitor was calculated to emulate the size of the VRPF; this would 
eliminate FOV as a confounding factor. Our VRPF configuration 
in Unity was (90,180,0) for rotation, (0.1, 0.1, 0.1) for scale, and 
(0, 0.687, 1.663) for position.  

Experimental Procedure 

5.3 
On  arrival,  each  participant  was  assigned  a  specific  order  of  the 
three versions in which he or she would play the game. The order 
was  counterbalanced  with  a  Latin  Square  design  approach  to 
mitigate  carry-over  effects.  The  participants  then  filled  in  a  pre-
experiment  questionnaire  that  collected  demographic  and  past 
gaming experience information. 

After that, participants were presented with a demonstration of 
the Oculus Rift and a virtual environment without walking to get 
them acquainted with the VR HMD and setup. Next, we introduced 
the input device and the rules of the game to each participant. 

Participants played the three versions in a pre-defined order and, 
after  completing  each  version,  were  asked  to  answer  the 
questionnaires mentioned above. The participants were required to 
rest (and as much as they wanted) before they could go to the next 
version.  

Figure 3: Three kinds of adversaries or enemies present in the game 
environment:  (a)  green  adversary,  a  Patroller;  (b)  blue 
adversary, a Sniper; (c) red adversary, a Hunter; (d) a player is 
inside  the  main  chamber  of  the  maze  which  contains  several 
adversaries of each kind. 

Figure 4: Bird'  s-eye  view  of  the  maze  used  in  the  experiment.  A 
player must eliminate all adversaries going from point A to point 
B (the final chamber). 

The maze was designed with tall gray walls and turning points, 
which forced the player to move in a non-straight path. This design 
slowly introduced the adversaries to the players. The lack of visual 
cues was meant to reduce path memorization, and the turns were 
meant to assess the occurrence of SS, as the act of rotating around 
the x-axis tends to increase the levels of SS during gameplay [36], 
[50]. This kind of turning also allows us to verify the accuracy of 
the different controller types (see next section). Like any FPS game, 
there were many positions where the player could hide, but to finish 
the game, the player had to reach the end of the maze (see Figure 
4). There were no ambiguous paths or splits; thus, all the players 
would follow roughly the same path.  

[25], 

(SSQ) 

the  experiments,  we  use 
and 

4.1.1  Evaluation Metrics 
the  Simulator  Sickness 
For  all 
Questionnaire 
Immersive  Experience 
Questionnaire (IEQ) [26]. The SSQ contains three parts, measuring 
the level of Nausea, Dizziness, and Oculomotor issues. These three 
parts are combined to give the overall weighted level for SS (Total 
Severity). Each symptom uses a 5-point Likert Scale, ranging from 
least  severe  to  most  severe.  Each  symptom  might  count  points 
towards more than one part.  

The scoring system for the game was as follows: when a player 
gets hit, he or she loses 10 points; when a player hits a target, he or 
she gets 10 points. Negative punctuation is possible. Based on this 
system, we define Accuracy (Acc) as the number of shots that hit 
the target divided by the number of shots performed by the player. 
The formula for Accuracy can be found in equation 6, where i is 
the total number of shots and j is the shots that did not find a target 

𝐴𝑐𝑐 (cid:3404)

(cid:3036)(cid:2879)(cid:3037)

(cid:3036)

    (6) 

Even though a player could be killed, the player's health points 
(HP)  was  set  to  be  able  to  endure  at  least  4  minutes  of  straight-
shooting. This life span guaranteed that the players could advance 

 
 
 
 
Results 

5.4 
The data were analyzed using both statistical inference methods and 
data visualizations. We conducted a Shapiro-Wilk test to check the 
normality of the data. For those that were classified as normal, we 
used parametric tests; for the others, we used non-parametric ones. 
 For normally distributed data, we conducted Mauchly's Test of 
Sphericity. We also employed Repeated Measures ANOVA (RM-
ANOVA)  using  Bonferroni  correction  to  detect  significant  main 
effects. If the assumption of sphericity was violated, we used the 
Greenhouse-Geisser  correction  to  adjust  the  degrees-of-freedom. 
Partial Eta-Squared is declared for the ones with significant main 
effects. We conducted Friedman tests for non-normal data. When 
there  was  a  detectable  significance,  we  ran  separate  Wilcoxon 
signed-rank tests on the different combinations to pinpoint where 
the differences occur.  

To make a consistent presentation of the plots, in all of them, we 
used  separate  colors  and  patterns  to  represent  the  three  versions: 
CD  (blue-checked),  RVR  (red-diagonally  stripped),  and  VRPF 
(green-plain).  The  data  were  presented  with  outliers  for a  deeper 
understanding of the results.  

5.4.1  Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) 
Figure  5  summarizes  the  results  of  the  SSQ  data  and  shows  that 
RVR presented the most significant change in the level of SS that 
the other versions. The data did not follow a normal distribution. 
The Friedman test showed that there was a statistically significant 
difference in Oculomotor, Dizziness, and Total Severity (hereafter 
Total) based on which version the game was being played, χ2(2) = 
11.815, p = .003, χ2(2) = 16.618, p = .000, and χ2(2) = 16.395, p = 
.000  respectively.  Nausea  did  not  appear 
to  differentiate 
significantly according to the test χ2(2) = .323, p = .851. 

did not have significant difference (Z = -.224, p = .823).  2, 4, and 
2 were the Median IQR of CD, VRPF, and VR, respectively. 

5.4.2  User Performance 
Figure 6 shows the data for Score, Time, and Accuracy across the 
three  versions.  The  Shapiro-Wilk  test  revealed  that  the  Score 
measurements did not follow a normal distribution, but Time and 
Accuracy  did.  The  RM-ANOVA  suggested  that  there  were 
significant main differences in Accuracy (F2, 34 = 7.304, p = .002, 
ηp2  =  .313) among  the  three  versions.  The  post-hoc  analysis 
showed that Accuracy in FPS-VR was significantly lower than the 
other  two  versions  (p=.013  and  p=0.14).  No  other  significant 
relations  were  found  for  Time  (F2,  34  =  1.448, p =  .250);  on 
average each condition lasted about 251 seconds (4.2 minutes). 

The  Friedman  test  revealed  no  significant  difference  for  Score 

χ2(2) = 3.254, p = 0.197.  

Figure 6: The  results  of  Score,  Accuracy,  and  Time.  Accuracy  in 
RVR was significantly lower than the other two versions. 

5.4.3  Subjective Immersion 
Figure  7  shows  the  data  for  Overall  Immersion  across  the  three 
versions. The  RM-ANOVA  suggested  that  there  were  significant 
main differences (F2, 32 = 3.852, p = .032, ηp2= .194) among the 
three versions. Post-hoc analyses using Tukey's HSD indicated that 
Overall Immersion was greater on VRPF when compared to VR (p 
= .030).  

Figure 5: The  results  of  SSQ  based  on  the  four  sub-scales  in 
Experiment  A.  RVR  presented  the  most  significant  change  in 
the level of SS compared to the other versions. VRPF and CD 
did not differ significantly between themselves. 

During  our  post-hoc analysis  with Wilcoxon  signed-rank  tests, 
we observed the Median (IQR) Oculomotor levels for CD, VRPF, 
and VR were 0, 0, and 1, respectively. After correction there were 
no significant differences between them, except between RVR and 
CD  (Z  =  -2.333,  p  =  0.020).  The  lack  of  significance  is  clear 
between CD and VRPF (Z = 0.000 p = 1.000), but less so between 
RVR and VRPF (Z = -1.684, p = 0.092). 

The post hoc analysis further showed significant differences in 
Dizziness  between  VRPF  and  RVR  (Z  =  -3.299,  p  =  0.001). 
However, there was no significant difference between VRPF and 
CD (Z = -1.476, p = 0.140) or between RVR and CD (Z = -1.764, 
p = 0.078). Their Median (IQR) were CD = 0, RVR = 2 and VRPF= 
0. 

What is important to note from this analysis is that Total diverged 
significantly between RVR and CD (Z = -2.759, p = 0.006), and 
between RVR and VRPF (Z = -2.831, p = 0.005). The other pair 

Figure 7: The  results  of  Overall  Immersion.  Overall,  Immersion  did 
differ significantly in VRPF compared to the other versions. 

Discussion 

5.5 
The results show that PF was a promising approach to lower the 
level of SS for FPS VR games. Results from SSQ showed that, with 
PF,  participants  had  significantly  lower  levels  of  Oculomotor, 
Dizziness,  and  Total  Severity  than  playing  in  the  original, 
unmodified VR environment. It seemed that by projecting the 3D 
VE  onto  the  2D  replica,  we  could  decrease  players'  level  of  SS 
significantly while allowing them to navigate in the VE and did not 
lead them to lose the context of the environment. Our results also 
showed  that  when  using  PF,  the  VR  environment  might  lead  to 
similarly  low  levels  of  SS,  as  does  the  CD.  This  offers  the 
possibility that users could play or, more generally, navigate in VEs 
with a low level of SS in VR systems with PF.  

 
 
 
 
Concerning user performance, the results indicated that PF led to 
a  significantly  higher  accuracy  than  the  original  VR  version  and 
had similar performance with the PC version. We could infer that 
because,  with  a  lower  SS,  the  players  were  able  to  shoot  at  the 
targets  more  accurately  in  the  FPS  VR  game.  This  result  is 
significant because this could mean that the lower SS could lead to 
a more precise view of the elements of the environment, and this 
could have applications outside of FPS games.  

Further, what was surprising was that VRPF was statically more 
immersive than RVR. We had expected that the free nature of RVR 
to be completely immersive and allow players to forget they were 
in  a  VE.  Based  on  the  results,  we  were  able  to  identify  two 
hypotheses for why RVR suffered in this experiment:   

HA1.  Playing  with  the  keyboard  did  not  allow  the  users  to  be 

fully immersed in the experience.      

HA2.  Given  the  total  lack  of  other  stimuli  in  the  VRPF,  the 

players got solely focused on the game and thus felt immersed. 

In  summary,  when  compared  to  a  regular  FPS  in  VR,  PF 
presented positive results in the reduction of SS and supported users 
to achieve high accuracy. Since the standard display is currently the 
baseline  for  most  FPS  games,  we  can  infer  that  PF  represents  a 
viable  technique  to  reduce  SS  in  VR  while  allowing  users  to 
achieve  performances  that  are  comparable  to  the  current  best 
environment. 

6  EXPERIMENT B 

Experiment B aimed to compare PlaneFrame (PF) and Regular FPS 
VR with a diegetic technique that can potentially improve simulator 
sickness and increase Accuracy during FPS gameplay in VR HMD 
systems: gaze point [31]. Three versions were compared: HMD VR 
display without PF (RVR), HMD VR display with PF (VRPF), and 
Gaze,  which  gave  the  users  a  point  to  stare  at  continuously  (see 
Figure 8). Our Gaze point was a circular green ring (with a radius 
of  15  Unity  Units)  located  at  the  center  of  the  camera.  It  was 
permanently  on  the  screen  and  followed  the  player's  head 
movement. The Gaze point was not used as a game controller.  

Figure 8: A screenshot during gameplay using the Gaze technique 
which  provides  a  gazing  point  represented  by  the  green  ring. 
The player could stare at the point during navigation to mitigate 
SS effect and potentially improve aim. 

6.1 

Participants, Apparatus, and Experimental 
Procedure  

Another  18  participants  (equally  divided  between  males  and 
females) were recruited from a local university with an average age 
of 20.0 (s.e. = 1.90) ranging from 18 to 27. All volunteers had a 
normal  or  normal-to-corrected  vision,  and  none  declared  any 
history  of  color  blindness  or  health  issues.  Thirteen  participants 
(72.2%) had experience with VR systems. Two (11.1%) reported 
feeling sick during regular FPS gameplay. We used the same VR 
device and the desktop PC configuration as in the first experiment. 

Participants also followed a similar procedure to complete the three 
versions offered in this experiment. 

Results 

6.2 
We employed a similar procedure to analyze the data as the first 
experiment.  We  used  the  following  colors  to  represent  the  three 
versions  in  the  plots:  Gaze  (blue-checked),  RVR  (red-diagonally 
stripped), and VRPF (green-plain).  

6.2.1  Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) 
Given  that  the  SSQ  data  were  not  normally  distributed,  we 
performed a series of Friedman tests, which showed that there was 
a statistically significant difference in all sub-scales and Total (see 
Table 1). The results of the SSQ in terms of sub-scales and Total 
are summarized in Figure 9. 

Table 1.  Summarized  results  of  Friedman  tests  of  SSQ, 

significant differences in all subscales. 

Scale
Nausea
Oculomotor
Dizziness
Total

χ2(2)
16.618 
16.745 
11.577 
11.789 

p 
.000
.000
.003
.003

Figure 9: The  results  of  SSQ  concerning  the  four  sub-scales  of 
Experiment B. VRPF presented positive results in Nausea and 
Oculomotor but underperformed in Dizziness. 

The post-hoc analysis with Wilcoxon signed-rank tests showed 
that the Median (IQR) Nausea levels for the Gaze, VRPF, and RVR 
were  8,  3,  and  5,  respectively.  After  correction  there  were 
significant differences between VRPF and Gaze (Z = -3.428, p = 
.001) and VRPF and RVR (Z = -1.960, p = .050), but not between 
Gaze and RVR (Z = -.828, p = .408). 

Post-hoc analysis of the Oculomotor component was similar to 
that  of  Nausea,  revealing  significant  differences  between  VRPF 
and Gaze (Z = -3.325, p = .001) and VRPF and RVR (Z = -2.183, 
p = .029), but not between Gaze and RVR (Z = -1.592, p = .111). 
Median  (IQR) Oculomotor  levels  for the  Gaze,  VRPF,  and  RVR 
were 2.5, 1, and 2. 

Interestingly, all comparisons presented significance in the post-
hoc analysis of the Dizziness component: VRPF and Gaze (Z = -
1.968, p = 0.049) and Gaze and RVR (Z = -2.365, p = 0.018). The 
strongest  effect  was  between  RVR  and  VRPF  (Z  =  -3.051,  p  = 
0.002).  Median  (IQR)  Dizziness  levels  for  the  Gaze,  VRPF,  and 
RVR were 1.5, 2.5, and 0.5. 

Finally,  our  post-hoc  comparison  showed  that  Total  diverged 
significantly between Gaze and VRPF (Z = -3.190, p = .001). the 
other pair combinations did not have significant difference: RVR 
Gaze  (Z  =  -1.709,  p  =  0.087)  and  VRPF  and  VR  (Z  =  -1.156,  p 

 
 
 
 
 
 
=.248).  The Median IQR were Gaze = 11.5, RVR = 6 and VRPF= 
6.5 respectively. 

6.2.2  User Performance 
The  RM-ANOVA  indicated  that  there  were  no  statistically 
significant  differences  in  Accuracy  (F2,  34  =  2.605, p =  .089)  or 
Time (F2, 34 = .493, p < .615); on average each version lasted 280 
seconds  (4.6  minutes).  However,  the  Friedman  test  revealed 
significant differences for Score χ2(2) = 9.662, p = 0.008. Figure 
10 shows the results.   

Post-hoc  analysis  revealed  that  the  Score  in  VRPF  was 
significantly lower than RVR (Z = -2.369, p = .018) and Gaze (Z = 
-3.247, p = .001), while the Median (IQR) Score levels for the Gaze, 
VRPF and RVR were 76.5, 60.5 and 74.5. Gaze and RVR did not 
present significant differences (Z = -0.327, p = .744).  

Figure 10: The results of Score, Accuracy, and Time for Experiment 
B. VRPF performed worse than the two other versions in Score. 

6.2.3  Subjective Immersion 
Figure 11 shows the data for Overall Immersion across the three 
versions.  The  RM-ANOVA  showed  that  there  were  significant 
main  differences  in  Overall  Immersion  (F1.508,  25.635  = 
7.849, p =  .004) among  the  three  versions.  Post-hoc  analysis 
showed  that  Overall  Immersion  in  Gaze  was  significantly  higher 
than in the VRPF (p=.04). VRPF and RVR (p=.02) also presented 
significant  differences.  Gaze  and  RVR  (p>.05)  did  not  present 
significant differences. 

Figure 11: The results of Overall Immersion in Experiment B.  VRPF 
presented  significant  differences  compared  to  the  two  other 
versions. 

regarding 

Discussion 

6.3 
From our analysis, we observed a clear difference among the three 
induced  SS.  The  Total  Severity  was 
versions 
significantly different between VRPF and Gaze, but not between 
VRPF  and  RVR.  These  results  are  somewhat  surprising.  We 
expected  Gaze  to  perform  better  than  no  technique  at  all.  VRPF 
performed visibly better in most subscales except in dizziness. The 
results suggest that the FP 2D view helps to mitigate much of the 
symptoms of simulator sickness but can also cause disorientation, 
which should be investigated further (see Experiment C, in the next 
section).  

The  counterpoint  to  this  distinctly  lower  level  of  simulator 
sickness is the lower levels of immersion generated. This result is 
especially interesting since, in Experiment A, we observed VRPF 
generating the highest levels of Immersion. This divergence might 
be  caused  by  the  influence  of  the  controller.  According  to  the 
results, if the users use a keyboard, they will feel more immersed 
in a 2D view while, when using the controller, using a 3D view will 
likely increase their level of immersion. 

This effect extends further as VRPF has led to lower Score results 
and  can  have  implications  on  the  controller  aspect  as  well.  The 
results  together  seem  to  imply  that  the  type  of  controller  could 
affect  the  speed  of  navigation,  which  in  turn  could  have  a 
disorienting effect when looking at 2D and 3D views. The effect 
could  be  enhanced  further  in  the  latter.  Disorientation  could 
invariably affect performance and lower scores.  

7  EXPERIMENT C 

The goal of this experiment was to compare different variations of 
PF regarding induced SS, user performance, and immersion when 
playing an FPS game in VR HMD systems only. We varied the size 
of PF to 30% (SM) and 95% (BM) of the HMD's FoV. We were 
interested  in  exploring  if  the  size  of  PF  would  influence  the 
dependent  variables.  Therefore, in  this experiment,  we compared 
three versions in total: VRPF, SM, and BM. 

7.1 

Participants, Apparatus, and Experimental 
Procedure 

We recruited another 18 participants (five females, twelve males, 
and one non-binary) from a local university with an average age of 
19.7  (s.e.  =  1.73)  ranging  from  18  to  24.  All  volunteers  had  a 
normal  or  normal-to-corrected  vision,  and  none  declared  any 
history  of  color  blindness  or  health  issues.  Thirteen  participants 
(72.2%) had experience with VR systems. Three (16.7%) declared 
feeling sick during FPS gaming sessions with regular displays. We 
used the same VR device, and the desktop PC as in Experiment A. 
Participants followed a similar procedure as the other experiments 
to complete the three versions for this experiment. 

Results 

7.2 
We employed a similar procedure to analyze and represent the data 
as the first experiment. We used the following colors and patterns 
to represent the three versions in the plots: BM (blue-checked), SM 
(red-diagonally stripped), and VRPF (green-plain).  

7.2.1  Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) 
Results of the SSQ in terms of sub-scales and total are summarized 
in  Figure  12.  Because  of  the  non-normality  of  the  data,  we 
performed a series of Friedman tests, which showed that there was 
a statistically significant difference in Oculomotor and Dizziness, 
χ2(2) = 14.292, p = 0.001 and χ2(2) = 8.667, p = 0.013 respectively. 
On the other hand, Nausea and Total did not appear to differentiate 
significantly according to the test χ2(2) = 1.755, p = 0.416 and χ2(2) 
= 5.729, p = 0.057, respectively. 

During  the  post-hoc  analysis  with  Wilcoxon  signed-rank  tests, 
we observed the Median (IQR) Oculomotor levels for the VRPF, 
BM, and SM were 0, 2, and 1, respectively. After correction there 
were significant differences between VRPF and SM (Z = -2.365, p 
= .018) and VRPF and BM (Z = -3.169, p = .002), but not between 
BM  and  SM  (Z  =  -1.512,  p  =  .131).  We  further  observed 
significances in Dizziness, VRPF and SM (Z = -2,337, p = .019) 
and VRPF and BM (Z = -2.209, p = .027), but not for BM and SM 
(Z  =  -0.686,  p  =  .492).  Median  (IQR)  Oculomotor  levels  for  the 
VRPF, BM, and SM were 3, 2 and 1. 

 
 
 
 
Discussion 

7.3 
In  this  experiment,  we  observed  that  different  variations  of  PF 
resulted in similar levels of user performance and immersion. BM 
and SM presented virtually no difference except in the oculomotor 
component  of  SS,  which  was  also  statistically  insignificant, 
suggesting that our results are not the fruit of the FOV, unlike the 
work of [30] that used some kind of visual technique to hide only 
the outer region without a 2D effect.  

Both  SM and  BM  presented  reduced  levels  of  Dizziness  when 
compared  to  VRPF,  but  also  presented  increased  levels  of 
Oculomotor  discomfort.  The  darker  outer  region  could  have 
allowed  for  the  eyes  to  rest.  However,  this  was  a  liability  when 
associated with the fast movement of the controller. 

From  the  results,  it  seems  that  it  can  be  advantageous  to  keep 
some  level  of  the  3D  view  besides  the  PF  view  when  using  a 
controller  because  it  might  aid  in  the  Dizziness  factor.  If  the 
oculomotor  strain  is  the  most  significant  concern,  opting  for  the 
darker outer layer can be of more considerable aid, similar to [30].  
Since there was no notable difference among these techniques in 
this experiment, it can be concluded that all of them are somewhat 
viable  for  FPS  games,  even  considering  the  SS.  However, 
considering  the  results  from  Experiment  B,  it  may  be  useful  to 
investigate SM further, since it generated less Nausea than VRPF 
and lower levels of Dizziness as well. 

8  BETWEEN-SUBJECTS ANALYSIS (EXPERIMENTS A AND B) 

The goal of this analysis was to compare how vital the controller is 
for user performance and immersion when playing an FPS game in 
VR HMD. We compared the keyboard against the recommended 
VR  controller.  We  were  interested  in  exploring  if  the  controller 
would  influence  the  dependent  variables.  Therefore,  in  this 
analysis, we compared four conditions based on two inputs and two 
views: VRPF-Keyboard (1), VRPF-Controller (2), RVR-Keyboard 
(3), and RVR-Controller (4). 

We compared the data of participants from Experiments A and 
B. However, to avoid confounding factors, we only compared the 
data from the first version played by each participant. As such, we 
have a total of 24 participants, 6 played VRPF and 6 RVR using a 
keyboard and 12 participants who did the same using the Oculus 
Touch  Controller.  We  performed  two  between-subjects  analyses 
using  the  data,  one  comparing  the  differences  between  keyboard 
and controller in VR regardless of the view and one only between 
subjects who had experienced the same view. 

Results 

8.1 
We employed a similar procedure to analyze the data as the first 
experiment, first checking for normality, followed by investigating 
significant  differences  with  ANOVA  for  parametric  data; 
otherwise, Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney was used. We used 
the following colors and patterns to represent the four versions in 
the plots: 1 (light green – vertical stripes), 2 (dark green - diagonal 
stripes), 3 (light red – vertical stripes), and 4 (dark red – diagonal 
stripes). 

8.1.1  Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) 
Figure 15 shows the results of the SSQ in terms of sub-scales and 
Total. Because the data were not normally distributed, the Mann-
Whitney  test  was  used  and  showed  that  there  was  a  significant 
difference  in  Nausea  (Mann-Whitney  U  =  24.5,  P  <  0.05), 
Oculomotor (U = 28.0, P < 0.05) and Total (U = 22.0, P < 0.05) 
based  on  the  input  alone.  No  significant  difference  was  found  in 
Dizziness (U = 66.0, P > 0.05). 

Figure 12: The results of SSQ for four sub-scales in Experiment C. 
VRPF generated more Dizziness than BM and SM, but less in 
Oculomotor distress. 

7.2.2  User Performance 
Figure 13 shows the data for Score, Time, and Accuracy across the 
three versions. Like Experiment A, Shapiro-Wilk revealed a lack 
of normality for Score, but Time and Accuracy data were normal. 
The  RM-ANOVA  suggested  that  there  were  no  significant  main 
differences in Accuracy (F2, 34 = .677, p = .515) among the three 
versions. No significant relations were found for Time (F2, 34 = 
0.26, p =  .974)  either.  On  average,  each  condition  lasted  307 
seconds (5.1 minutes). 

Unlike in Experiment A the Friedman test revealed a significant 
difference for Score χ2(2) = 8.121, p = 0.017. The Wilcoxon test 
revealed that the difference was significative between BM and SM 
(Z = -2,182, p = .029) and between BM and VRPF (Z = -2,535, p = 
.011).  Their  medians  were  BM  =  74.9,  SM  =  69.8,  and  VRPF  = 
61.2.   

Figure 13: The results of Score, Accuracy, and Time in Experiment 
C. BM presented a higher Score than the other versions. 

7.2.3  Subjective Immersion 
Among  the  three  studied  versions,  Overall  Immersion  did  not 
present significant differences according to the RM-ANOVA (F2, 
34  =  .535, p =  .591).  Figure  14  shows  the  data  for  Overall 
Immersion across the versions. 

Figure 14: The  results  of  Overall  Immersion  for  Experiment  C. 

Overall Immersion across versions did not differ significantly. 

 
 
 
 
Figure 15: The  results  of  SSQ  concerning  four  sub-scales  in  the 
between-subjects  analysis.  The  input  method  was  hugely 
influential. 

Comparing  inputs  within  a  view  Mann-Whitney  tests  also 
presented significant differences in Nausea for both RVR (U = 5.0, 
P < 0.05), and VRPF (U = 6.0, P < 0.05); Oculomotor for both RVR 
(U = 5.5, P < 0.05), and VRPF (U = 6.0, P < 0.05). Total had similar 
results for RVR (U = 3.0, P < 0.05) and VRPF (U = 5.5, P < 0.05). 

8.1.2  User Performance 
When  analyzing  input  alone,  the  Kruskal-Wallis  H  test  did  not 
show  a  statistically  significant  difference  in  Accuracy  (χ2(2)  = 
.654, p = .419), with a mean rank of 13.67 for Controller and 11.33 
for Keyboard. However, there was a significant difference in Score 
(χ2(2) = 6.321, p = 0.012), with a mean rank of 8.88 for Controller 
and 16.13 for Keyboard.  

Results  from  a one-way  ANOVA  showed  no  significant effect 
for  Time  (F1,  22  =  0.013, p =  .911);  on  average  each  condition 
lasted  293  seconds  (4.9  minutes).  The  medians  can  be  seen  in 
Figure 16. 

The  input  conditions  presented  differences  in  Score  when  the 
players were using the VRPF (U = 3.5, P < 0.05 two-tailed) with a 
mean rank of 8.92 for 1 and 4.08 for 2. 

Figure 16: The results of Score, Accuracy, and Time in the between-
subjects analysis. The keyboard yielded better results in Score; 
Accuracy relied on the input method matching the view. 

8.1.3  Subjective Immersion 
When comparing all views, the Kruskal-Wallis H test did not show 
a statistically significant difference (χ2(2) = 4.984, p = 0.173), with 
a  mean  rank  of  16.75,  7.83,  13.58  and  11.83  for  conditions  1-4, 
respectively.  When  checking  without  considering  the  2D/3D 
aspect,  the  difference  was  still  non-existent  (Mann-Whitney  U  = 
40, P > 0.05). However, when comparing input in VRPF, there a 
difference in immersion (U = 5.0, P < 0.05); details can be seen in 
Figure 17. 

Figure 17: The results of Overall Immersion for the between-subjects 
analysis.  Overall  Immersion  across  versions  did  not  differ 
significantly. 

Discussion 

8.2 
Our results suggest that the kind of controller used can be the most 
influential aspect of FPS when it comes to SSQ Nausea and Total. 
The  keyboard  generated  lower  levels  of  simulator  sickness  when 
compared  to  the  regular  Oculus controller  when playing  the  FPS 
VR  game.  In  addition,  the  Score  measure  also  presented  an 
improvement when using the keyboard combined with our VRPF, 
which suggests that the use of controllers might not be beneficial 
for people who are using a 2D view. Similarly, keyboards might be 
less precise for those who are using a 3D view.  

Interestingly, for Overall Immersion, our results did not show a 
significant  difference  when  using  the  keyboard  in  RVR.  These 
results somewhat contradict findings from [3]–[5]. The cause might 
be  simply  due  to  how  the  other  studies  were  conducted.  For 
example,  in  [3]–[5],  the  authors  did  not  count  for  the  cofound 
variable of view, which the results in Experiments A and B show 
to  affect  immersion.  Moreover,  FPS  games  might  be  less 
susceptible  to  variations  in  immersion,  as  suggested  in  previous 
studies (e.g., [17]). RQ2 is answered with mixed results. Our results 
support  that  subjective  feelings  of  physiological  background  are 
more  affected  by  the  controller  than  by  the  view.  However,  our 
results suggest that the view can be highly impactful, even if it has 
an unnatural synergy with the controller.  

Our  results  strongly  suggest  that  using  a  Keyboard  can  bring 
benefits for the overall VR experience. Our results do not support 
HA1—playing  with  the  keyboard  is  not  detrimental  to  the 
immersive experience; it yielded a good score performance and was 
superior in immersion when using a 2D view. Our results support 
HA2—the 2D view can be immersive, and it lets the players focus 
solely  on  the  game;  as  such,  overall,  it  is  not  detrimental  to  the 
immersive  experience.  For  FPS  games,  the  overall  superior 
playability and the possibility of spending extended periods in the 
games might make the keyboard a preferred choice. For RQ1, our 
results indicate that the controller seems to have a more significant 
part  in  the  performance  than  the  view  does.  However,  for  the 
maximum yield of each controller type, it must be harmonized with 
the adequate type of view, because score performance was the best 
when the view matched its expected controller type. Based on the 
answers to RQ1 and RQ2, the answer to RQ3 appears to be mixed: 
the  stereoscopic  3D  view  alone  is  not  a  significant  influence; 
however,  its  combination  with  the  control  method  can  be  highly 
significant. 

9  RECOMMENDATIONS AND POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF PF 

Based on our findings, we recommend the use of the VRPF version 
of  our  PF  associated  with  a  keyboard  for  VR  FPS  games.  This 
combination  seems  to  lead  players  to  enjoy  an  immersive 
experience while obtaining their best performance scores. Besides, 
PF  players  appear  to  be  able  to  play  the  game  longer  because, 

 
 
 
though they are fully immersed in VR, they are likely to feel less 
sick. 

Figure 18: a) Demo of a museum visit using PlaneFrame Mask. The 
user can appreciate the exposition and travel/look around for a 
longer time, which is adequate for such a learning environment 
that  requires  attention  to  detail  as  simulator  sickness  can  be 
reduced.  b)  Demo  of  an  open  house  or  architectural  3D  VR 
environment. The user can have a complete understanding of 
the  space,  due  to  the  linear  movement  provided  by  the 
technique  and  without  having  the  vision  occluded  by  a  gaze 
point. 

In an environment that does not allow the use of a keyboard, we 
recommend the use of an SM (see Experiment C) because it keeps 
most of the SS mitigation benefits provided by VRPF, while still 
letting  players  immersed  and  allowing  them  to  achieve  high 
Accuracy. 

PF  can  be  inserted  in  many  games.  FPS  and  Racing  game 
characters can justify the use of the technique through the use of 
protective gear. In horror games, it can be a device to bring focus 
to  a  specific  scene.  In  addition,  PF  could  also  be  used  in 
applications outside of games that do not require fast responses. For 
example, educational environments such as museums (see Figure 
18a) and other forms of VR education and training environments 
can make use of the technique. It allows students to be immersed 
for extended periods or let them move more and explore further the 
environment. Extensive exploration is also useful for other kinds of 
applications, such as an open-house VE (see Figure 18b). In this 
kind  of  scenario,  the  user  likely  wants  and  needs  a  clear 
understanding  of  the  space.  Such  clear  understanding  could  be 
challenging to achieve when users feel sick and want to disengage 
from  the  system  because  further  exposition  will  have  adverse 
effects after every movement.  

10  LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

We  studied  three  variations  of  PlaneFrame  (PF).  Due  to  the 
continuous nature of the mask FoV, we did not explore all possible 
sizes  for  the  frame.  Nevertheless,  given  that  the  two  sizes  we 
explored did not lead to significant differences in the results, it is 
likely  the  case  for  other  possible  sizes.  Further  explorations  are 
needed to ascertain if this is the case.   

We explored the use of PF in one specific kind of game (FPS). 
We  chose  FPS  games  because  of  the  fast-moving  nature  and 
constant  change  of  viewpoints;  they  are  often  regarded  as  ideal 
environments  to  investigate  SS  mitigation  techniques  (see  [41], 
[51]). These techniques have also been used outside of the context 
of  VR HMD [51]–[54]. Our results could be applied to other VR 
applications with less demanding navigation tasks. Nonetheless, it 
will  be  useful  to  explore  the applicability  and  use  of  PF  in  other 
types of applications. For future work, we would like to explore if 
we can achieve the same results in other types of games. 

As the main aim of our study was to identify the effect of view 
mode and controller type on people's level of immersion, SS, and 
performance for VR FPS, we have been able to develop a viewing 
technique that led to improved results in VR FPS. In the future, it 
will be useful to explore the combination of PF with other types of 
devices and techniques that also aim to reduce SS [36], [43]. We 
can  evaluate  users'  preferences  and  assess  their  combined  effect. 

Further, we can analyze other tasks like locating objects in 3D VE 
and  spatial  memory  recall  of  the  location  of  items  in  these 
environments [24]. 

11  CONCLUSION 

This paper presents an in-depth exploration of the effect of different 
view  dimensionalities  and  input  methods  in  virtual  reality  (VR) 
gaming,  with  a  focus  on  first-person  shooter  games.  We  studied 
how  such  interactions  affect  immersion,  accuracy,  and  simulator 
sickness. To do so, we developed a concept technique PlaneFrame 
(PF) to study 2D/3D views in VR. In the first of three studies, we 
investigated  the  2D/3D  views  and  display  using  a  keyboard  in  a 
first-person shooter game. The results showed that with PF users 
achieved  better  performance  and  had  lower  SS  than  playing  the 
game  in  the  original,  unmodified  VR  display.  In  our  second 
experiment,  we  compared  PF  with  other  VR  conditions  using  a 
controller (gaze pointing and original, unmodified VR display). In 
our last experiment, we presented and evaluated three variations of 
PF. In our final analysis, we observed that even though the view did 
play a factor in all the components, the controller type was more 
influential.  

Our results suggest that PF is useful in reducing the levels of SS 
in  VR  while  maintaining  and  possibly  boosting  players' 
performance.  It  is  a  novel  technique  that  is  simple  to  implement 
with  nearly  no  associated  computing  overhead.  It  also  does  not 
require additional external devices, is not intrusive, and is relatively 
easy for users to adapt to and use it. Keyboards are preferred when 
there is no need for fast turning, and 2D is acceptable. We conclude 
that further investigations should focus on controllers rather than 
viewing  because  of  its  considerably  stronger  influence  in  the 
diverse aspects of VR. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to thank the participants for their time. This research 
was  partially  funded  by  AI  University  Research  Centre  at  Xi’an 
Jiaotong-Liverpool  University  (XJTLU),  XJTLU  Key  Program 
Special  Fund  (KSF-A-03  and  KSF-02)  and  XJTLU  Research 
Development Fund. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

W. Xu, H. N. Liang, Y. Zhao, T. Zhang, Di. Yu, and Di. Monteiro, 

“RingText:  Dwell-free  and  hands-free  Text  Entry  for  Mobile 

Head-Mounted Displays using Head Motions,” IEEE Trans. Vis. 

Comput.  Graph.,  vol.  25,  no.  5,  pp.  1991–2001,  2019,  doi: 

10.1109/TVCG.2019.2898736. 

[2] 

D. Yu, K. Fan, H. Zhang, D. Monteiro, W. Xu, and H. N. Liang, 

“PizzaText:  Text  entry  for  virtual  reality  systems  using  dual 

thumbsticks,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 24, no. 11, 

pp. 2927–2935, 2018, doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868581. 

[3] 

D. C. Rachevsky, V. C. De Souza, and L. Nedel, “Visualization 

and  interaction  in  immersive  virtual  reality  games:  A  user 

evaluation  study,”  Proc.  -  2018  20th  Symp.  Virtual  Augment. 

Reality,  SVR  2018,  no.  November,  pp.  89–98,  2018,  doi: 

10.1109/SVR.2018.00024. 

[4] 

D. Hufnal, E. Osborne, T. Johnson, and C. Yildirim, “The impact 

of  controller  type  on  video  game  user  experience  in  virtual 

reality,” 2019 IEEE Games, Entertain. Media Conf. GEM 2019, 

2019, doi: 10.1109/GEM.2019.8811543. 

[5] 

R.  McGloin  and  M.  Krcmar,  “The  Impact  of  Controller 

Naturalness  on  Spatial  Presence,  Gamer  Enjoyment,  and 

Perceived  Realism  in  a  Tennis  Simulation  Video  Game,” 

 
 
Presence Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 309–

“Video  Game  User  Experience:  To  VR,  or  Not  to  VR?,”  2018 

324, Aug. 2011, doi: 10.1162/PRES_a_00053. 

IEEE Games, Entertain. Media Conf. GEM 2018, pp. 125–131, 

[6] 

S. W. Lee, J. W. An, and J. Y. Lee, “The Relationship between e-

2018, doi: 10.1109/GEM.2018.8516542. 

Sports Viewing Motives and Satisfaction: The Case of League of 

[18] 

S. M. Slobounov, W. Ray, B. Johnson, E. Slobounov, and K. M. 

Legends,” 2014, doi: 10.15242/icehm.ed0214019. 

Newell, “Modulation of cortical activity in 2D versus 3D virtual 

[7] 

J.  Rambusch,  P.  Jakobsson,  and  D.  Pargman,  “Exploring  E-

reality environments: An EEG study,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 

sports: A case study of gameplay in Counter-strike,” 3rd Digit. 

95, 

no. 

3, 

pp. 

254–260, 

2015, 

doi: 

Games  Res.  Assoc.  Int.  Conf.  "Situated  Play.  DiGRA  2007,  pp. 

10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2014.11.003. 

157–164, 2007. 

[19] 

S. E. Kober, J. Kurzmann, and C. Neuper, “Cortical correlate of 

[8] 

D. Monteiro, H. N. Liang, A. Abel, N. Bahaei, and R. De Cassia 

Monteiro, “Evaluating engagement of virtual reality games based 

on  first  and  third  person  perspective  using  EEG  and  subjective 

spatial presence in 2D and 3D interactive virtual reality: An EEG 
study,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 365–374, 2012, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.12.003. 

metrics,” in Proceedings - 2018 IEEE International Conference 

[20] 

R. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Guo, and S. H. B, “Image Synthesis with 

on Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality, AIVR 2018, 2019, 

Aesthetics-Aware,”  vol.  2,  no.  2017,  pp.  169–179,  2018,  doi: 

pp. 53–60, doi: 10.1109/AIVR.2018.00015. 

10.1007/978-3-030-00767-6. 

[9] 

W.  Xu,  H.-N.  Liang,  Z.  Zhang,  and  N.  Baghaei,  “Studying  the 

[21] 

F.  Pallavicini,  A.  Pepe,  and  M.  E.  Minissi,  “Gaming  in  Virtual 

Effect  of  Display  Type  and  Viewing  Perspective  on  User 

Reality:  What  Changes  in  Terms  of  Usability,  Emotional 

Experience in Virtual Reality Exergames,” Games Health J., vol. 

Response  and  Sense  of  Presence  Compared  to  Non-Immersive 

9, no. 4, pp. 1–10, 2020, doi: 10.1089/g4h.2019.0102. 

Video  Games?,”  Simul.  Gaming,  vol.  50,  no.  2,  pp.  136–159, 

[10] 

D. Monteiro, H. N. Liang, J. Wang, L. Wang, X. Wang, and Y. 

2019, doi: 10.1177/1046878119831420. 

Yue,  “Evaluating  the  effects  of  a  cartoon-like  character  with 

[22] 

I. Hupont, J. Gracia, L. Sanagustin, and M. A. Gracia, “How do 

emotions  on  users’  behaviour  within  virtual 

reality 

new visual immersive systems influence gaming QoE? A use case 

environments,”  in  Proceedings  -  2018  IEEE  International 

of serious gaming with Oculus Rift,” 2015 7th Int. Work. Qual. 

Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Virtual  Reality,  AIVR 

Multimed.  Exp.  QoMEX  2015,  no. 

July,  2015,  doi: 

2018, Dec. 2019, pp. 229–236, doi: 10.1109/AIVR.2018.00053. 

10.1109/QoMEX.2015.7148110. 

[11] 

A. S. Horta, L. F. De Almeida, R. D. C. R. V. Monteiro, and D. 

[23] 

D. Monteiro, H. N. Liang, W. Xu, M. Brucker, V. Nanjappan, and 

V.  Monteiro,  “A  proposal  of  a  game  for  education  and 

Y. Yue, “Evaluating enjoyment, presence, and emulator sickness 

environmental  consciousness,” 

in 

IAMOT  2015 

-  24th 

in  VR  games  based  on  first-  and  third-  person  viewing 

International  Association 

for  Management  of  Technology 

perspectives,” Comput. Animat. Virtual Worlds, vol. 29, no. 3–4, 

Conference:  Technology,  Innovation  and  Management  for 

p. e1830, May 2018, doi: 10.1002/cav.1830. 

Sustainable Growth, Proceedings, 2015, pp. 1664–1676. 

[24] 

H.  N.  Liang,  F.  Lu,  Y.  Shi,  V.  Nanjappan,  and  K.  Papangelis, 

[12] 

W.  Xu,  D.  Monteiro,  H.  N.  Liang,  K.  Hasan,  Y.  Yu,  and  C. 

“Evaluating  the  effects  of  collaboration  and  competition  in 

Fleming,  “Assessing  the  Effects  of  a  Full-body  Motion-based 

navigation tasks and spatial knowledge acquisition within virtual 

Exergame in Virtual Reality,” in ACM International Conference 

reality environments,” Futur. Gener.  Comput. Syst., no. March, 

Proceeding 

Series, 

2019, 

pp. 

1–6, 

doi: 

2018, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2018.02.029. 

10.1145/3332169.3333574. 

[25] 

R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, S. Kevin, and M. G. Lilienthal, “The 

[13] 

M. H. Amir, A. Quek, N. R. Bin Sulaiman, and J. See, “DUKE: 

International Journal of Aviation Psychology Simulator Sickness 

Enhancing  virtual  reality  based  FPS  game  with  full-body 

Questionnaire : An Enhanced Method for Quantifying Simulator 

interactions,” ACM Int. Conf. Proceeding Ser., no. August 2019, 

Sickness,” Int. J. Aviat. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 203–220, 1993, 

2016, doi: 10.1145/3001773.3001804. 

doi: 10.1207/s15327108ijap0303. 

[14] 

W. Xu, H. N. Liang, Y. Zhao, D. Yu, and D. Monteiro, “DMove: 

[26] 

M. McGill, A. Ng, and S. Brewster, “I Am The Passenger: How 

Directional  Motion-based  Interaction  for  Augmented  Reality 

Visual  Motion  Cues  Can  Influence  Sickness  For  In-Car  VR,” 

Head-Mounted  Displays,”  in  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 

Proc. 2017 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. - CHI ’17, no. 

Computing  Systems  -  Proceedings,  2019,  pp.  1–14,  doi: 

May, pp. 5655–5668, 2017, doi: 10.1145/3025453.3026046. 

10.1145/3290605.3300674. 

[27] 

B. Aykent, F. Merienne, C. Guillet, D. Paillot, and A. Kemeny, 

[15] 

J. L. Lugrin, F. Charles, M. Cavazza, M. Le Renard, J. Freeman, 

“Motion sickness evaluation and comparison for a static driving 

and  J.  Lessiter,  “Are  immersive  FPS  games  enjoyable?,”  Proc. 

simulator  and  a  dynamic  driving  simulator,”  Proc.  Inst.  Mech. 

ACM  Symp.  Virtual  Real.  Softw.  Technol.  VRST,  p.  199,  2012, 

Eng. Part D J. Automob. Eng., vol. 228, no. 7, pp. 818–829, 2014, 

doi: 10.1145/2407336.2407378. 

doi: 10.1177/0954407013516101. 

[16] 

J. L. Lugrin, M. Cavazza, F. Charles, M. Le Renard, J. Freeman, 

[28] 

M. E. Mccauley, “Do Army Helicopter Training Simulators Need 

and  J.  Lessiter,  “Immersive  FPS  games:  User  experience  and 

Motion Bases?,” United States Army Res. Inst. Behav. Soc. Sci., 

performance,”  ImmersiveMe  2013  -  Proc.  2nd  Int.  Work. 

no.  February,  pp.  01–52,  2006, 

[Online].  Available: 

Immersive Media Exp. Co-located with ACM Multimed. 2013, no. 

https://www.google.com.pk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source

October, pp. 7–12, 2013, doi: 10.1145/2512142.2512146. 

=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwil9em-

[17] 

C. Yildirim, M. Carroll, D. Hufnal, T. Johnson, and S. Pericles, 

qJnLAhWHCo4KHflYALwQFggZMAA&url=http://www.dtic.

mil/cgi-

doi: 10.1109/3DUI.2016.7460053. 

bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA444549&usg=AFQjCNGXLBE_HgX

[41] 

P. Budhiraja, M. R. Miller, A. K. Modi, and D. Forsyth, “Rotation 

4uPrPE0GQY1yrItXXmg&sig2=ixCIE-

etbmpbDqGKY4axxg&bvm=bv. 

Blurring: Use of Artificial Blurring to Reduce Cybersickness in 

Virtual  Reality  First  Person  Shooters,”  Oct.  2017,  [Online]. 

[29] 

Ł. Dziuda, M. P. Biernacki, P. M. Baran, and O. E. Truszczyński, 

Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02599. 

“The effects of simulated fog and motion on simulator sickness 

[42] 

Y.  Farmani  and  R.  J.  Teather,  “Viewpoint  snapping  to  reduce 

in  a  driving  simulator  and  the  duration  of  after-effects,”  Appl. 

cybersickness  in  virtual  reality,”  Proc.  -  Graph.  Interface,  vol. 

Ergon.,  vol.  45,  no.  3,  pp.  406–412,  2014,  doi: 

2018-May, pp. 159–166, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.20380/GI2018.21. 

10.1016/j.apergo.2013.05.003. 

[43] 

P.  Hu,  Q.  Sun,  P.  Didyk,  L.  Y.  Wei,  and  A.  E.  Kaufman, 

[30] 

J.  Lee,  S.  Lim,  J.  Ahn,  Y.  Yi,  and  H.  Kim,  “Analysis  of  video 

“Reducing  simulator  sickness  with  perceptual  camera  control,” 

image  based  element  for  motion  sickness,”  IS  T  Int.  Symp. 

ACM  Trans.  Graph.,  vol.  38,  no.  6,  pp.  1–12,  Nov.  2019,  doi: 

Electron. 

Imaging  Sci.  Technol.,  pp.  3–8,  2018,  doi: 

10.1145/3355089.3356490. 

10.2352/ISSN.2470-1173.2018.03.ERVR-470. 

[44] 

Y.  Farmani  and  R.  J.  Teather,  “Evaluating  discrete  viewpoint 

[31] 

D.  Clarke,  G.  McGregor,  B.  Rubin,  J.  Stanford,  and  T.  C.  N. 

control to reduce cybersickness in virtual reality,” Virtual Real., 

Graham, “Arcaid: Addressing situation awareness and simulator 

no. 0123456789, 2020, doi: 10.1007/s10055-020-00425-x. 

sickness  in  a  virtual  reality  Pac-Man  game,”  CHI  Play  2016  - 

[45] 

E.  Martel,  A.  Hassan,  F.  Su,  A.  Girouard,  J.  Gerroir,  and  K. 

Proc. Annu. Symp. Comput. Interact. Play Companion, pp. 39–

Muldner,  “Diving  Head-First  into  Virtual  Reality—Evaluating 

45, 2016, doi: 10.1145/2968120.2968124. 

HMD Control Schemes for VR Games,” no. Fdg, 2015. 

[32] 

E.  Medina,  R.  Fruland,  and  S.  Weghorst,  “VIRTUSPHERE: 

[46] 

W. J. Shelstad, D. C. Smith, and B. S. Chaparro, “Gaming on the 

walking in a human size VR ‘hamster ball,’” Proc. Hum. Factors 

rift:  How  virtual  reality  affects  game  user  satisfaction,”  Proc. 

Ergon.  Soc.,  vol.  3,  no.  27,  pp.  2102–2106,  2008,  doi: 

Hum.  Factors  Ergon.  Soc.,  vol.  2017-Octob,  pp.  2072–2076, 

10.1177/154193120805202704. 

2017, doi: 10.1177/1541931213602001. 

[33] 

L. Pomarjanschi, M. Dorr, P. J. Bex, and E. Barth, “Simple gaze-

[47] 

L. E. Nacke, “Wiimote vs. Controller : Electroencephalographic 

contingent  cues  guide  eye  movements  in  a  realistic  driving 

Measurement  of  Affective  Gameplay  Interaction,”  Proc.  Int. 

simulator,”  Hum.  Vis.  Electron.  Imaging  XVIII,  vol.  8651,  p. 

Acad. Conf. Futur. Game Des. Technol., pp. 159–166, 2010, doi: 

865110, 2013, doi: 10.1117/12.2002833. 

10.1145/1920778.1920801. 

[34] 

M.  J.  Cevette  et  al.,  “Oculo-Vestibular  Recoupling  Using 

[48] 

D.  Yu,  H.-N.  Liang,  K.  Fan,  H.  Zhang,  C.  Fleming,  and  K. 

Galvanic Vestibular Stimulation to Mitigate Simulator Sickness,” 

Papangelis, “Design and Evaluation of Visualization Techniques 

Aviat. Sp. Environ. Med., vol. 83, no. 6, pp. 549–555, 2012, doi: 

of  Off-Screen  and  Occluded  Targets 

in  Virtual  Reality 

10.3357/ASEM.3239.2012. 

Environments,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 2626, no. 

[35] 

R. J. Reed-Jones, J. G. Reed-Jones, L. M. Trick, and L. A. Vallis, 

c, pp. 1–1, 2019, doi: 10.1109/tvcg.2019.2905580. 

“Can  Galvanic  Vestibular  Stimulation  Reduce  Simulator 

[49] 

E.  Begue,  “Panda  Behaviour  Tree  Scripting  for  Unity,”  2019. 

Adaptation Syndrome?,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 

http://www.pandabehaviour.com/?page_id=246. 

Driving  Symposium  on  Human  Factors  in  Driver  Assessment, 

[50] 

E. D. Ragan, S. Scerbo, F. Bacim, and D. A. Bowman, “Amplified 

Training,  and  Vehicle,  Oct.  2007,  pp.  534–540,  doi: 

Head Rotation in Virtual Reality and the Effects on 3D Search, 

10.17077/drivingassessment.1288. 

Training  Transfer,  and  Spatial  Orientation,”  IEEE  Trans.  Vis. 

[36] 

S.  Weech,  J.  Moon,  and  N.  F.  Troje,  “Influence  of  bone-

Comput.  Graph.,  vol.  23,  no.  8,  pp.  1880–1895,  2017,  doi: 

conducted  vibration  on  simulator  sickness  in  virtual  reality,” 

10.1109/TVCG.2016.2601607. 

PLoS  One,  vol.  13,  no.  3,  pp.  1–21,  2018,  doi: 

[51] 

S. Hillaire, A. Lécuyer, R. Cozot, and G. Casiez, “Depth-of-field 

10.1371/journal.pone.0194137. 

blur effects for first-person navigation in virtual environments,” 

[37] 

S.  Liu,  L.  Chan,  and  M.  Y.  Chen,  “PhantomLegs :  Reducing 

IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 47–55, Nov. 2008, 

Virtual  Reality  Sickness  using  Head-Worn  Haptic  Devices,” 

doi: 10.1109/MCG.2008.113. 

2019. 

[52] 

A.  Toet,  S.  C.  de  Vries,  M.  L.  van  Emmerik,  and  J.  E.  Bos, 

[38] 

G.-Y.  Nie,  H.  B.-L.  Duh,  Y.  Liu,  and  Y.  Wang,  “Analysis  on 

“Cybersickness and desktop simulations: field of view effects and 

Mitigation  of  Visually  Induced  Motion  Sickness  by  Applying 

user experience,” Enhanc. Synth. Vis. 2008, vol. 6957, no. April, 

Dynamical  Blurring  on  a  User’s  Retina,”  IEEE  Trans.  Vis. 

p. 69570P, 2008, doi: 10.1117/12.771992. 

Comput.  Graph.,  vol.  PP,  no.  8,  pp.  1–1,  2019,  doi: 

[53] 

J. E. Bos, S. C. de Vries, M. L. van Emmerik, and E. L. Groen, 

10.1109/tvcg.2019.2893668. 

“The  effect  of  internal  and  external  fields  of  view  on  visually 

[39] 

R.  Lou  and  J.  R.  Chardonnet,  “Reducing  Cybersickness  by 

induced motion sickness,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 516–

Geometry Deformation,” 26th IEEE Conf. Virtual Real. 3D User 

521, 2010, doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2009.11.007. 

Interfaces,  VR  2019  -  Proc.,  pp.  1058–1059,  2019,  doi: 

[54] 

W.  Xu,  H.-N.  Liang,  Y.  Chen,  X.  Li,  and  K.  Yu,  “Exploring 

10.1109/VR.2019.8798164. 

Visual  Techniques  for  Boundary  Awareness  During  Interaction 

[40] 

A.  S.  Fernandes  and  S.  K.  Feiner,  “Combating  VR  sickness 

in  Augmented  Reality  Head-Mounted  Displays,”  in 2020  IEEE 

through subtle dynamic field-of-view modification,” 2016 IEEE 

Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), Mar. 

Symp. 3D User Interfaces, 3DUI 2016 - Proc., pp. 201–210, 2016, 

2020, no. 1, pp. 204–211, doi: 10.1109/VR46266.2020.00039. 

