0
2
0
2

t
c
O
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
4
9
0
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Virtual Smartphone: High Fidelity Interaction
with Proxy Objects in Virtual Reality

Gian-Luca Savino
University of Bremen
Bremen, Germany
gsavino@uni-bremen.de

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
EPO4VR - 1st Workshop on Everyday Proxy Objects for Virtual Reality at CHI ’20,
April 26, 2020, Honolulu, HI, USA.
© 2020 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).

Abstract
This workshop paper presents two proxy objects for high
ﬁdelity interaction in virtual reality (VR): a paper map and
a smartphone. We showcase how our virtual paper map
can increase interactivity and orientation, while our virtual
smartphone extends the use of a proxy object, as it allows
for actual touch input on a real phone leading to an almost
inﬁnite set of possible (inter-)actions (e.g. snapping pictures
in the virtual world). Observations showed that participants
were very precise in holding and interacting with both the
paper map and the smartphone even though they did not
see their hands in VR. The interaction in general was very
intuitive which was mostly attributed to the realistic size of
the virtual objects. Using our ﬁndings we discuss the trade
off between adaptivity and high ﬁdelity of proxy objects in
VR.

Author Keywords
Virtual Reality; Navigation; Proxy Objects; High Fidelity In-
teraction

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; Haptic
devices; Laboratory experiments;

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Left: Setup of the real and virtual paper map. Right: Setup of the real and virtual smartphone with visualised touch points.

Introduction & Motivation
The lack of haptic feedback in virtual reality (VR) opened
up a large area of research in HCI since the release of con-
sumer HMDs like the HTC Vive and Occulus Rift. Many
studies try to simulate haptic feedback by creating resis-
tances [7], adding weight to the controllers [8], or providing
surface textures [6]. This allows for multi-use and adaptive
applications for a multitude of objects.

This ﬂexibility also means that the haptic feedback can be
limited and might not exactly represent the object of interest
in its properties. To overcome these limitations, researchers
have started to use proxy objects that represent their vir-
tual counterpart in it’s form, weight, texture, or all of them to
provide the user with the most realistic and immersive feel-
ing available [3, 9, 2]. This, of course, results in the loss of
adaptivity and ﬂexibility when it comes to the variety of ob-
jects each proxy can represent: A real apple only maps to a
virtual apple and not much else.

In this workshop paper we want to show that there are do-
main speciﬁc proxy objects that still retain some ﬂexibility

(within their domain application) while delivering a high ﬁ-
delity interaction in VR. The following pages present two
proxy objects: a paper map and a smartphone, which were
both used as navigation aids in a VR study [5]. The aim
of the study by Savino et al. [5] was to recreate an overall
close to reality navigation experience in VR. To achieve this
goal we developed high ﬁdelity, interactive proxy objects
that served as exact replicas of their virtual counterparts.

As the above mentioned paper by Savino et al. [5] focuses
mainly on the general comparison between a VR and real
life experience, we want to take the opportunity in this work-
shop paper to highlight the functionality and setup of our
high ﬁdelity proxy objects. We discuss further use cases
and showcase additional functionality that was not men-
tioned in the paper [5].

Technical Setup
To properly interact with the virtual paper map and the vir-
tual smartphone, their physical proxy objects need to be
tracked alongside with the participants in VR. In our setup

we used an additional HTC Vive controller that was at-
tached to the paper map and the smartphone respectively
using velcro (this was shortly before HTC released their
separate trackers). The paper map supported attachment
of a controller to either the left or the right side to account
for handedness. The smartphone was placed within a rub-
ber case, which was then attached to the controller (see
ﬁgure 1). As both hands were usually used to manipulate
the proxy object, we used a walking-in-place locomotion
method where participants wore a controller on their back
(see ﬁgure 1). The up-and-down movement was then trans-
lated into forward movement [5].

We used a multiplayer architecture in Unity3D to send the
touch input data from the Android phone to a server which
hosted the virtual environment. This way the real smart-
phone just showed a black screen after starting the appli-
cation but still sent all the touch input to the virtual smart-
phone. We then used it to classify different traditional touch
gestures like tap, pinch and rotate. This allowed us, for ex-
ample, to use well established gestures like pinch-to-zoom
and two-ﬁnger-rotate in our mobile maps application as
shown in ﬁgure 1.

When creating the 3D versions of both the paper map and
the smartphone, we made sure to use the exact dimen-
sions of their real life counterparts. This proved to be very
effective for the precision when interacting with the virtual
devices.

Observations
While testing our setup as well as during the main study
of [5] we made observations that we present and discuss
in this section. From these we will extend further use cases
and improvements.

Figure 2: A participant using the camera application of our virtual
smartphone.

One interesting observation we made already during the
testing phase was that the size of the virtual objects had a
huge impact on the precision with which people were able
to grasp the object. This supports the results by Kwon et
al. [4], who found that an object was easier to grasp initially
when the size of the proxy object and the virtual objects
matched. It did not effect the manipulation after the initial
grasp, though. In our case, once the paper map had the
exact right dimensions, people were able to easily grasp it
with two hands. In regards to the smartphone, this meant
that once the size was right people were already very good
at hitting the right buttons (e.g. the camera shutter) without
any kind of additional feedback. To increase the accuracy
for these kinds of tasks, we included markers on the screen
that visualise the touch points (see ﬁgure 1).

Using the Proxy Objects for Navigation
In the case of a navigation task the interactive nature, good
"graspability", and easy to hold controller of the paper map

allowed for a very important action, namely rotating the pa-
per map. As people have an easier time navigating when
the map is in a track up alignment [1] ("forward is up"), it
is crucial that the map rotation is intuitive and comfortable.
Using our proxy, participants were able to rotate the map
successfully but were sometimes hindered by the one-sided
weight distribution of the attached controller.

The smartphone, on the other side, did not suffer from un-
natural weight distribution. Participants did however have
problems manipulating the smartphone with a single hand,
due to the added thickness from the controller. Since most
gestures on mobile maps usually need two hands anyway,
this wasn’t much of a drawback. The two-ﬁnger-rotate ges-
ture allowed for easy map manipulation and direction align-
ment.

Adaptability
The navigation context really shows the adaptability of both
proxy objects. The paper map, for example, was used for
four different routes in the experiment. By just exchanging
the visual representation of the virtual map we can use any
kind of map section an reuse the proxy object in further ex-
periments. It could even serve as any kind of text document
in other contexts, for example as an information brochure
about landmarks.

The adaptability of the smartphone lies mainly it its feature
to use any kind of application that is needed for any spe-
ciﬁc purpose. In the navigation context it allows for testing a
multitude of established and novel navigation applications.
But even outside of this scope, it allows for completely new
interactions, e.g. taking smartphone pictures in VR like
shown in ﬁgure 2.

Conclusion
In our study we experienced that participants were very
precise at interacting with the virtual paper map and the
virtual smartphone even though they were not able to see
their own hands. Our observations show that, using proper
tracking, as long as the virtual and the real objects share
the same dimensions, it is rather easy to manipulate them
in VR. Still, for future experiments, the tracking of partici-
pants’ hands might increase their precision and will enable
even more control when interacting with proxy objects.

We showcase how proxy objects that have a 1:1 mapping
to a virtual object with all their properties can still be adap-
tively used in different contexts. Even more so, when there
are domain speciﬁc needs that proxy objects need to fulﬁl,
using exact replicas as proxy objects might be worth the
trade-off between adaptability and high ﬁdelity interaction.

REFERENCES
[1] Anthony J. Aretz and Christopher D. Wickens. 1992.

The Mental Rotation of Map Displays. Human
Performance 5, 4 (1992), 303–328. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15327043hup0504_3

[2] Mahdi Azmandian, Mark Hancock, Hrvoje Benko, Eyal

Ofek, and Andrew D. Wilson. 2016. Haptic
Retargeting: Dynamic Repurposing of Passive Haptics
for Enhanced Virtual Reality Experiences. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1968–1979. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858226

[3] Martin Feick, Scott Bateman, Anthony Tang, André

Miede, and Nicolai Marquardt. 2020. TanGi: Tangible
Proxies for Embodied Object Exploration and

Manipulation in Virtual Reality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.03021 (2020).

[4] E. Kwon, G. J. Kim, and S. Lee. 2009. Effects of sizes
and shapes of props in tangible augmented reality. In
2009 8th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality. 201–202. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2009.5336463

[5] Gian-Luca Savino, Niklas Emanuel, Steven Kowalzik,
Felix Kroll, Marvin C. Lange, Matthis Laudan, Rieke
Leder, Zhanhua Liang, Dayana Markhabayeva, Martin
Schmeiundeﬁneder, and et al. 2019. Comparing
Pedestrian Navigation Methods in Virtual Reality and
Real Life. In 2019 International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction (ICMI ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 16–25.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3340555.3353741

[6] Eric Whitmire, Hrvoje Benko, Christian Holz, Eyal

Ofek, and Mike Sinclair. 2018. Haptic Revolver: Touch,
Shear, Texture, and Shape Rendering on a
Reconﬁgurable Virtual Reality Controller. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
Paper 86, 12 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173660

[7] André Zenner and Antonio Krüger. 2019. Drag:On: A
Virtual Reality Controller Providing Haptic Feedback
Based on Drag and Weight Shift. In Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Paper 211, 12
pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300441

[8] A. Zenner and A. Krüger. 2017. Shifty: A

Weight-Shifting Dynamic Passive Haptic Proxy to
Enhance Object Perception in Virtual Reality. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
23, 4 (April 2017), 1285–1294. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2656978

[9] Yiwei Zhao, Lawrence H. Kim, Ye Wang, Mathieu

Le Goc, and Sean Follmer. 2017. Robotic Assembly of
Haptic Proxy Objects for Tangible Interaction and
Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
International Conference on Interactive Surfaces and
Spaces (ISS ’17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 82–91. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3132272.3134143

