An Overview of Enhancing Distance Learning Through Augmented and
Virtual Reality Technologies

Elizabeth Childso*

Ferzam Mohammado†

Logan Stevens‡

Hugo Burbelo§

Amanuel Awoke¶

Nicholas Rewkowski||

Dinesh Manocha**

University of Maryland
oThese authors contributed equally to this work

ABSTRACT
Although distance learning presents a number of interesting edu-
cational advantages as compared to in-person instruction, it is not
without its downsides. We ﬁrst assess the educational challenges pre-
sented by distance learning as a whole and identify 4 main challenges
that distance learning currently presents as compared to in-person in-
struction: the lack of social interaction, reduced student engagement
and focus, reduced comprehension and information retention, and
the lack of ﬂexible and customizable instructor resources. After as-
sessing each of these challenges in-depth, we examine how AR/VR
technologies might serve to address each challenge along with their
current shortcomings, and ﬁnally outline the further research that is
required to fully understand the potential of AR/VR technologies as
they apply to distance learning.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Ubiquitous and mo-
bile computing—Ubiquitous and mobile computing design and eval-
uation methods; Human-centered computing—Human computer
interaction (HCI)—Interaction paradigms—Mixed / augmented re-
ality; Human-centered computing—Human computer interaction
(HCI)—Interaction paradigms—Virtual reality

1 INTRODUCTION
Augmented reality (AR) is an emerging form of digital experience
in which the user’s visual perception of the world around them is
augmented using a computer-generated graphical overlay. This over-
lay is superimposed onto the user’s view through a combination of
sensors and algorithms, enabling virtual components to be projected
into the real world, sometimes on the lens of a head-mounted dis-
play (HMD) that the user wears. In addition to AR, Virtual Reality
(VR) is a related technology that also leverages computer technol-
ogy in order to create an artiﬁcially rendered digital experience, but
crucially differs from AR in the fact that the visual experience of
VR is entirely computer-generated, while AR superimposes digital
rendering on top of the real world.

While the technical feasibility of AR and VR has existed for
decades, AR and VR have only recently become commercially ac-
cessible due to the advent of mobile platforms (e.g. iOS and Android)
combined with rapid advances in consumer grade hardware [72].
Applications of AR and VR have the potential to beneﬁt many ﬁelds,
but one of the most exciting and vital applications for these tech-
nologies is leveraging them in an educational context [8, 66].

*e-mail:ehchilds@terpmail.umd.edu
†e-mail:fmoham18@terpmail.umd.edu
‡e-mail:lsteven7@umd.edu
§e-mail:hburbelo@terpmail.umd.edu
¶e-mail: aawoke@terpmail.umd.edu
||e-mail:nick1@umd.edu
**e-mail:dmanocha@umd.edu

The promise of aiding learning via the addition of immersive
virtual environments has been alluring, but due to the fact that edu-
cation as a whole has been disrupted recently due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the importance of evaluating exactly how AR and VR
technologies can improve the learning experience cannot be over-
stated. Distance learning, a method of studying in which lectures are
broadcast or classes are conducted by correspondence or over the
internet without the student’s needing to attend a school or college,
had also already become an integral part of many schools around the
globe prior to the pandemic [19]. Greenberg deﬁnes contemporary
distance learning as “a planned teaching/learning experience that
uses a wide spectrum of technologies to reach learners at a distance
and is designed to encourage learner interaction and certiﬁcation of
learning” [29]. Distance learning is a particularly promising edu-
cational application of AR and VR due to its unique pedagogical
structure and existing and rabidly expanding technological depen-
dency. AR and VR have the potential to create unique learning
opportunities that allow course content to be taught and presented
in ways that may have otherwise been extremely challenging if not
impossible. This is of value in any form of education, but could
vastly improve distance education because of the issues students
regularly face in distance learning environments.

In this paper, we ﬁrst assess the educational challenges presented
by distance learning as a whole, and identify 4 main challenges that
distance learning currently presents as compared to in-person in-
struction: the lack of social interaction, reduced student engagement
and focus, reduced comprehension and information retention, and
the lack of ﬂexible and customizable instructor resources. After as-
sessing each of these challenges in-depth, we examine how AR/VR
technologies might serve to address each challenge along with their
current shortcomings, and ﬁnally outline the further research that is
required to fully understand the potential of AR/VR technologies as
they apply to distance learning. Seeing as these ﬁelds are relatively
new, examination of the provided tables is strongly encouraged for
further clariﬁcations on the information provided in this review.

2 IMMERSIVE ENVIRONMENTS

Immersive environments blend a digital, computer generated world
with the real world. They augment, or fully replace a user’s percep-
tion of the spacial world around him or her, placing the user in an
altered environment. The ratio of real objects to digital objects in
a user’s view affects the amount of digital augmentation, and was
deﬁned in Milgram’s Mixed Reality (MR) continuum [49]. In the
continuum, a real to digital ratio of 1:0 would be the real world at
the beginning of the spectrum. As digital content is added, com-
puter generated images are superimposed onto the user’s view. The
amount of digital content added to the user’s view determines the
program’s position on the MR continuum. For example, simply text
or 2D images that appear in the user’s view (such as when Google
Maps AR gives an arrow and street name for walking directions [28]),
would be at the lower end (left) of the continuum. Increasing the
immersion, such as adding a realistic 3D couch in your living room
before buying it [9] moves the application farther right on the MR

spectrum. Environments that are entirely computer generated but
allow the user view of certain real elements, such as a hand or select
real objects, would be considered augmented virtuality. With this
deﬁnition, everything with a real to digital ratio greater than 0 and
less than inﬁnity constitutes mixed reality, with augmented reality
being at the lower end of the spectrum and augmented virtuality
being at the higher end.

It should be noted that over time, the deﬁnitions of AR and
MR have evolved since Milgram ﬁrst deﬁned the MR continuum.
Conventionally, anything that is not purely real or purely virtual has
been deﬁned as augmented reality. Technically, Microsoft deﬁnes
their HoloLens as mixed reality [47] to distinctly differentiate it
from lower resolution AR glasses, such as the raptor [22], which
ﬁts Milgram’s true deﬁnition of augmented reality. It should be
noted that for the purposes of this study, all immersive experiences
except for pure virtual reality will be addressed as augmented reality,
both to match the convention of similar studies and for simplicity of
understanding.

2.1.2 Non-Immersive Devices
Non-Immersive devices include handheld displays, and typically
use a smartphone or tablet. The user can still move around in the
virtual or augmented world; however, all of the digital content is
viewed through the device screen. AR and VR applications can also
tap into the device’s camera, gyroscope, and/or accelerometer to
enhance an immersive experience. Non-Immersive devices are used
more prevalently for AR education, which is discussed further in the
section below.

Advantages of non-immersive devices stem mostly from their
accessibility. While non-immersive devices may not have the same
technical capability or depth of experience as immersive devices,
over half of the world has a smartphone [2]. This makes non-
immersive devices ideal as educational tools because they are acces-
sible, inexpensive, and relevant for current educational populations.
For example, smartphones allow the user to experience MR by
altering the screen content based on the spacial location of the device.
The MR content can then be viewed as a handheld device, by looking
through the phone, or as a head mounted display (HMD) by strapping
the phone to the face. Additionally, the device’s accelerometer,
gyroscope, microphone, and speaker can provide additional levels
of immersion.

Figure 1: Milgram’s MR Continuum. [49]

When the user’s view is completely virtual (real to digital ratio
of 0:1), the experience is considered VR. With VR, the user has no
view of the real world and can only see a computer generated word
that exist in the same spacial area as the real world. For the purpose
of this paper, AR will be considered all devices in the middle of the
MR continuum, where both digital and real images are visible, with
VR being entirely virtual environments. We will consider the hand
tracking and body tracking that many present day VR headsets have
as completely virtual for the scope of this research, as this often
appears a rendered image based on sensors.

2.1 Devices for Immersive Enviroments

In addition to the blend of real and digital content that deﬁnes
immersive environments, they can also be categorized by the way a
user experiences the digital content. Immersive Devices have control
over the user’s entire point of view, whereas non-immerse devices
only augment part of the user’s view.

2.1.1 Immersive Devices

Immersive devices are typically headsets, or head mounted displays
(HMDs). They may include earpieces like noise-cancelling head-
phones to control the user’s auditory ﬁeld, and most HMDs incorpo-
rate handheld controllers which increase the methods of input for the
immersive experience. With VR, the user actually feels transported
into the new environment, and with AR, the digital information is
cohesive across all of the user’s visual ﬁeld. In terms of education,
immersive displays have been shown to increase memory recall over
non-immersive displays [64] and help with information retainment.
However, immersive displays do have limitations. While inex-
pensive immersive displays exist, such as Google Cardboard [27],
they do not have the graphics and computing ability to offer truly
immersive environments. Devices like the Oculus Quest 2 have
begun to enter the consumer market due to lower price tags than
what VR headsets initially launched at (i.e. as of June 14th 2021, oe
can buy a 64 GB Oculus Quest 2 off of the Oculus website for $299
USD. However, when the Oculus Rift launched it was priced at $599
USD). However, the more immersive headsets like the Oculus Quest
2 may still be too expensive to bring into educational environments.

(a) Non-Immersive AR Device [4]

(b) Immersive AR (top) [3] and VR (bottom) Headsets [47]

Figure 2: Immersive and Non-Immersive Devices.
Non-Immersive Device - See digital content through a mobile screen.
Immersive Device - View digital content through a headset.

3 EXISTING FORMS OF DISTANCE EDUCATION MODELS
Online learning had become a critical tool utilized by close to 70%
of higher education institutions prior to the COVID-19 pandemic
[19]. Instructors were already making use of virtual educational
strategies such as asynchronous course delivery, synchronous online
course delivery, or a ﬂipped classroom model that utilizes both. It is
valuable to understand these existing forms of online education and
how they work before discussing speciﬁc challenges within each
system and how AR or VR can help address these issues.

3.1 Asynchronous Learning
An asynchronous learning model involves students interacting with
and responding to material at their own pace. Though students will
still have to meet deadlines, the timing of when they learn/submit the
material is ﬂexible. An example of this model is a teacher posting
all lecture material and class assignments with their respective dead-
lines at the beginning of a course. The students would then manage
their time however they see ﬁt in order to get these tasks done by the

deadline. Asynchronous courses can use tools like video recordings
of lectures, digitally distributed typed/written material, discussion
posts, or a combination of these tools. This delivery method gives
students ﬂexibility in regards to when they access material, which
can be crucial to academic success for non-traditional students nav-
igating other time commitments like a job or taking care of their
families [35].

3.2 Synchronous Learning

A synchronous model is what traditional face-to-face courses use,
where students and their instructors meet regularly for teaching
sessions, tests, and homework submissions. Synchronous online
courses may require a different set of resources as compared to the
asynchronous model. Learning Management Systems (LMSs) like
Canvas or Blackboard have also been adopted by the majority of
universities as supplementary resources intended to support teaching
and learning activities [51]. Certain LMSs offer tools that allow
for synchronous course delivery, like Blackboard’s “Blackboard
Collaborate” (formally Elluminate Live! [14]). Universities have
also adopted other third party options to conduct online classes such
as video conferencing software, e.g. Zoom [5]. Tools commonly
found within such platforms include video and text chat features,
a participant list, polling/surveying tools, a raise hand tool, and
the ability to record a session [6]. Synchronous courses can also
make use of “screen-share” features that allow students to see what
is on an instructor’s computer screen, and these can be used in
conjunction with digital content like PowerPoint slides to help relay
course material.

3.3 Flipped Classroom Model

A “ﬂipped classroom” is a teaching model where “that which is
traditionally done in class is now done at home, and that which is
traditionally done as homework is now completed in class” [11].
This typically involves students viewing “lecture” material, or the
material related to the introduction of concepts, at home as opposed
to in the classroom. Class time is then spent on “more enriching
activities” [56] that allow students to deeply explore concepts they
learned from the lecture material. In an all-online environment, a
ﬂipped classroom could be implemented using asynchronous meth-
ods to distribute course material prior to synchronous sessions. The
synchronous sessions would then focus on student application of
knowledge learned from their material. This would involve the
resources required of both asynchronous and synchronous teaching.

3.4 Limitations of Current Distance Learning Technolo-

gies

There are clear beneﬁts in regards to existing distance learning
education models, but several drawbacks have been noted as well.
Distance learning in any form appears to decrease opportunities
for social interaction and discourse as compared to traditional, in-
person courses [19]. The current digital format has also been seen
to disengage students from their courses due to technical issues or
unsatisfactory experiences with the online class setting [45]. Schools
that only offer online courses have also seen higher dropout rates
than those which are in-person [60].

These issues indicate that the way we currently deliver distance
education could be damaging students’ learning opportunities. How-
ever, they also give motivation for why we should work towards
integrating AR and VR into distance education. The immersive na-
ture and virtual components of AR and VR can create opportunities
to address current drawbacks of distance education. We explore the
different ways AR and VR address these issues throughout section
4.

3.5 Distance Learning and Gamiﬁcation

Recent years have shown developments in the design of online
coursework, and these advancements are worth understanding when
considering how we can effectively make AR or VR useful for the
classroom. Concepts like gamiﬁcation have been applied to digi-
tal educational resources as a way to improve many aspects of the
learning process. Using “game mechanics” like points, levels, chal-
lenges, or badges in educational activities has helped improved the
ability to learn new skills by 40% compared to without the use of
those mechanics [26]. Gamiﬁcation has also led to increased com-
mitment and motivation when participating in activities beyond just
education [39]. Effective gamiﬁcation requires the consideration of
many aspects of a course like learning objectives or the characteris-
tics of learners [39], and successful implementation of gamiﬁcation
in a curriculum parallels many aspects of what “good” teaching
already looks like [62]. Educational tools which make use of gam-
iﬁcation are seeing great popularity as well. Duolingo, an phone
app designed to help people learn languages through “gamiﬁed”
lessons, had around 40 million monthly active users as of December
2020 [15]. Kahoot!, an online game where you can make your own
quizzes on any topic of your choosing, reached 5 billion cumulative
players around the world as of January 2021 [31]. Gamifying edu-
cation has see great support as mentioned previously; learning to
leverage gamiﬁcation both in traditional distance learning models
as well as when integrating immersive technologies into education
could have a strong positive on educational systems if done correctly.

4 CHALLENGES IN DISTANCE LEARNING

In this section we explore the speciﬁc issues faced by students utiliz-
ing current distance education methods. After describing the issue,
we explore existing work in how AR and VR are being used to ad-
dress the issue being faced. Finally, we consider what work remains
to totally resolve the issue when using immersive technologies.

4.1 Social Interaction

We will deﬁne social interaction as “an intentional event in which
one person’s behavior is directed toward another person or is in
response to the other person’s behavior” [25]. This deﬁnition re-
mains the same both in “real-life” settings as well as online, though
the interactions may appear differently between the two mediums
(e.g. an example of social interaction in a digital setting may be a
student sending a message via text chat to another student, while in
real-life settings like in-person classrooms students will primarily
directly talk to one-another). Virtual classrooms like Blackboard
Collaborate are platforms which allow students to interact with the
teacher or other students through text or voice chat, and these plat-
forms can also enable students to see course material like slides
remotely. Virtual classrooms and LMSs are different. An LMS
provides features needed to handle the logistics of the entirety of a
course, like the ability to post class-wide lesson materials, assess-
ments, and feedback for everyone to see. Virtual classrooms attempt
to replace the physical space of a classroom by focusing on creating
opportunities for real-time interaction between users or users and
content. Virtual classrooms can also differ from AR or VR learning
modules in several ways. Existing virtual classrooms are designed
to entirely replace the classroom for the duration of a whole course
as opposed to being a substitute for single lessons which AR or
VR learning modules may be speciﬁcally built for (e.g. the virtual
classroom Blackboard Collaborate provides the tools needed for
students and teachers to engage with each other as well as mate-
rial during digital class periods, while a VR learning module for a
course would have to be predeﬁned to support the content related
to a speciﬁc lesson). Existing non-VR or AR virtual classrooms are
also typically web applications and only encourage as much social
interaction as web-based voice/video platforms can. While distance
learning methods give students more ﬂexibility in accessing course

content, studies have shown that students can feel “disconnected”,
or struggle to practice social interaction with others in these online
environments [35, 45]. Traditional face-to-face education is shown
to be “more likely to promote collaborative learning, student-faculty
interaction, effective teaching practices, quality of interactions, and
discussion with diverse others” when compared to a virtual class-
room [19]. Quality social interactions have previously been claimed
as a way for young children to develop cognitively [10,16], so the ab-
sence of these interaction can prevent this cognitive growth [17, 53].
This means students in current distance learning models are losing
aspects of their education due to the lack of social engagement.

4.1.1 AR Research to Address Social Interaction

Since distance learning can decrease social interaction, research has
used AR to facilitate social collaboration when users are separated.
Attempts to use computer vision to recreate user movements into
remote avatars have been under investigation for several years now
[46, 55]. Raskar had previously shown that this could be done
by using high depth cameras to capture a user’s 3D image which
could then be projected remotely for other users. However, since
this method required camera images from multiple perspectives, it
was not practical for the average learning environment. As a result,
recent researchers have turned to other methods like generating
avatars using low-cost cameras [46] or projecting 2D images to
enhance collaboration [12]. For example, Michael et al. explored
ways to cut costs for avatar generation using machine learning. He
started by training two machine learning models on a dataset of
3D body scans. One of these models was trained to identify and
extract the parts of the image which were the body, and the other was
trained to then apply those extracted images onto a 3D model. After
training both these models, a low-cost camera could be used to get
full-body images of a person from multiple perspectives, and then
the machine learning models could be fed these images to generate
a 3D model. Michael et al. did use one other high-resolution scan of
the face so that facial features were captured, but this was much more
cost-effective than previous, similar approaches which used several
high-end cameras to get the input images [46]. Billinghust et al.
used HMDs and AR marker cards to project images of participants
for video conferencing of physical cards [12]. The participants
would wear the HMD and carry an AR marker card which projected
their partner’s video feed if seen through the HMD. The partners
would then walk through and participate in an art sale. Billinghust
compared the AR conferencing method to audio only conferencing
and traditional video conferencing under the same context. In the
AR conference, participants could move freely around the room
with their cards and see their partner. In contrast, the traditional
video conferencing took place over a desktop computer, while the
audio conference was a phone call. Participants were then asked to
rank their sense of presence as well as the conference’s similarity to
in-person meetings. Notably, the AR conference scored signiﬁcantly
higher (p value <.05) than audio or traditional video conferencing.
However, the HMD obscured participants faces and ﬁeld of view,
and conversely made communication much harder during the AR
conference.

Pejoska et al. used AR to aid social interaction while teaching
construction workers [52]. They designed Social AR, which helped
the workers communicate over large distances while on the job.
Social AR allowed users to send voice and text messages through
their mobile phone, as well as augment their video for others to view.
For example, a user at one end of a construction site would be able
to show their video feed in real time, annotate it, and the annotations
would also appear to other users during creation. This allows workers
to be able to see what their coworkers are seeing. Additionally, text
features allow participants to discuss the annotations and video
feed as if they were interacting in person. While this research is
not used to teach construction, in indicates the potential of AR

Study
Raskar [55]

Device
Projectors
and Sur-
faces

Billinghurst [12] Head

Mounted
Display

Pejoska [52]

Mobile

Result
Details theoretical “ofﬁce of
the future” that could connect
collaborative spaces in differ-
ent locations using projectors
and wall surfaces
AR conferencing can provide
an increased sense of pres-
ence and improve transmission
of communication cues for re-
mote users
Social AR successfully used to
enhance video calls with over-
laid drawings

Table 1: Results of AR Studies to Address Social Interaction. 1st
Column: Reference. 2nd Column: AR device used for the study.
3rd Column: Result of AR Study. These results indicate AR can
be useful in creating creating social interactions for education.

to increase social interaction during information sharing, as well
as suggests methods for social interaction to be incorporated into
distance learning via AR.

These studies indicate that AR can be used to provide a sense a
presence with other classmates, which is crucial for distance learning,
where students are not located in the same place. This makes AR a
great avenue for enhancing distance education, as it enhances video
calls and connects students collaboratively to bring social interaction
in distance learning closer to that of traditional education.

4.1.2 VR Research to Address Social Interaction

The ability to socialize despite being physically separate is a critical
aspect of the efﬁcacy of virtual reality experiences. A primary reason
VR is viewed as a unique alternative to common virtual communica-
tion tools like text or voice chat is due to its ability to emulate human
interaction, which cannot be fully achieved over a video conference
call (such as Zoom). Utilizing data from the National Survey of
Student Engagement, Dumford and Miller analyzed ﬁrst, fourth,
and ﬁfth year college students and found a signiﬁcant correlation
between online classes and social interaction [19]. These students
had lower levels of collaborative learning, less student-faculty inter-
actions, discussions, and lower quality of interactions [19]. VR can
aid in this scenario because it will provide a simulation of face to
face interaction, while still providing some of the convenience of
online learning.

Socialization and interaction with VR appears to match in-person
interaction experiences closely. In a study that focused on social
interaction quality in VR, researchers examined how the reduced
social information and behavioral channels in immersive virtual en-
vironments compared to that of the real world, and whether virtual
reality environments as a whole were a viable alternative in terms
of task completion and socialization [57]. Roth et al.
[57] had
participants interact in communicative scenarios (a negotiation) both
through a virtual environment as well as a real world environment.
After comparing the effectiveness in communication, socialization,
and overall task completion across two different environments, one
virtual reality-based and one in the real world, the researchers were
able to conﬁrm that “differences in effectiveness in the communica-
tive role play were not present”, and that the VR experience was
equally as effective in enabling participants to adequately socialize
and communicate while attempting to complete a task.

Studies in VR social interaction suggest that advanced computer
graphics such as avatar facial expressions may not be necessary for

VR communication. This can makes VR education applications
more affordable and easier to adapt for educational institutions

Study
Roth [57]

Device
Head
Mounted
Display

Result
Absence of cues like gaze
or facial expression do not
change effectiveness of com-
munication in VR

Table 2: Results of VR Studies to Address Social Interaction. 1st
Column: Reference. 2nd Column: AR device used for the study.
3rd Column: Result of VR Study. These results indicate complex
gesture algorithms and graphics are not necessary for educational
VR social interaction.

4.1.3 Future Research in Social Interaction
While current AR/VR research has developed additional opportuni-
ties for social interaction in distance learning, there are still limita-
tions to the state-of-the-art. There are currently no standard metrics
used for measuring social interaction in AR or VR, so the ﬁeld
would greatly beneﬁt from establishing a standard to determine what
AR/VR technologies and methods can best help in social interaction.
In terms of hardware, HMDs have a limited ﬁeld of view, and ob-
struct the user’s face. As a result, it is harder to make eye contact and
experience a social connection when both users have a headset [12].
Future research into facial communication with HMDs (such as less
obtrusive hardware, or another way to communicate non-verbally)
can enhance social communication with AR/VR. In VR, more edu-
cational tools are becoming publicly available as well [50]. It could
be valuable to evaluate these tools and how effective they are in both
encouraging discourse as well as facilitating lessons. Understanding
what makes these environments effective or ineffective could help
us build better VR or AR educational platforms. This information
could also help us see how to modify traditional distance learning
education methods so that they are more effective in encouraging
discourse.

4.2 Student Engagement and Focus
Asynchronous and synchronous courses have both faced criticism
in regards to how engaging they are for students. In asynchronous
classrooms, students entirely lose the non-verbal communication
present in face-to-face communication, which can damage students’
sense of social presence and make it harder to stay engaged in a
class [35]. In a study by McBrien et al. on how synchronous online
courses affect student engagement, 9% of students in the study felt
“disconnected“ as a result of the digital course format. Similar to the
previous section, one of the reasons for feeling “disconnected” is
the minimal non-verbal communication available. Technical issues
(i.e. poor internet connection or trouble with joining into a class)
can have a huge detrimental effect on how “connected” students feel
with a course, as well. The negative responses from students in the
study by McBrien et al. included comments like “sometimes it was
hard to keep up with the messages, listening to commentators, and
reading over the lessons,” “lack of visual stimulation during lecture,”
“frustration signing on and getting kicked off,” and “microphone
troubles.” It seems like certain students would have preferred to
have fewer stimuli going on during courses. Conversely, there was
a claim that there was too little visual stimulation, indicating that
the material being focused on by the teacher may have been too
bland given the online setting. The last couple of claims indicate
the signiﬁcance of technical issues in the educational experience;
any trouble with getting the class to work as it is expected to seems
to greatly take away from the learning experience. John Keller’s

ARCS model for motivation claims that motivation stems from four
major components: attention, relevance, conﬁdence, and satisfac-
tion [36]. Looking at the students’ claims from the perspective
of Keller’s ARCS model, it seems like the different issues behind
the complaints could have made it harder for students to maintain
uninterrupted attention or feel satisﬁed with the online course. De-
creased satisfaction or attention has a negative effect on a person’s
motivation according to Keller, and decreased motivation may have
damaged students’ abilities to engage with the class.

4.2.1 AR Research to Address Student Engagement and

Focus

Researchers have already turned to AR to investigate its effect on
engagement and focus. Ferrer-Torregrosa et al. utilized AR to teach
anatomy students in a ﬂipped classroom distance learning model [23].
Participants were given AR books, traditional notes with pictures,
and videos to learn anatomy content. They were then assessed by
which tool (book, notes, or video) kept the students more engaged
and focused. Notably, the AR books were the superior method for
holding a student’s attention and focus without the teacher present.
Mahadzir et al. took AR motivation research a step further by de-
signing AR books speciﬁcally to try to increase motivation in English
language learning [43]. Using the Keller model for motivational
design [36], Mahadzir et al. created AR books for primary students
in Malaysia that do not require teacher assistance using the ARCS
evaluation of motivation. All students were considered engaged and
had a motivated interest in using the AR books, determined both by
observation and ﬁrst person interviews. While the study had very
few participants (n=5), it represents the potential for AR to increase
student participation in remote learning environments.

Additionally, consumer mobile augmented reality applications
have been assessed for their usage in increasing student motivation.
Anatomy 4D, which is meant to supplement anatomy learning, is
a free mobile AR application for teaching students anatomy. The
software shows a 3D human body, with annotations labeling the
different body parts. This software can be downloaded and used
without a teacher present, and offers a great example of AR remote
learning tools. Through pre-usage and post-usage tests, Khan et al.
determined a signiﬁcant increase in student motivation from using
Anatomy 4D [38].

Figure 3: Preview of Anatomy4D Application [38]

These studies show that AR had a signiﬁcant increase in student
engagement and focus. As engagement is a major difﬁculty in
distance education, AR can be used to beneﬁt distance education by
increasing engagement.

Study
Mahadzir [43]

Device
Desktop

Khan [38]

Mobile

Result
AR engaged student interest
and retained it during the ex-
perience
Motivation and attention was
increased by 14% and 31% re-
spectively

Table 3: Results of AR Studies to Address Student Engagement and
Focus. 1st Column: Reference. 2nd Column: AR device used for
the study. 3rd Column: Result of AR Study. These results indicate
AR can elevate student engagement and focus.

provision of teaching materials, especially online, and too little
on motivating students to learn.” Using VR in education has led
to improved knowledge acquisition and understanding of material
compared to those learning via video, and students learning via VR
have shown better performance remembering than those learning via
textbook or video. AR technology has also been demonstrated to
increase knowledge acquisition rate among a variety of educational
subjects [72]. AR has also made abstract or complex concepts easier
for students to visualize and understand. For example, AR could
allow a learner to visualize phenomena like airﬂow or magnetic
ﬁelds using virtual 3D objects [68]. Using immersive technology
to illustrate these typically unobservable phenomena would give
students a novel opportunity to understand new concepts within a
familiar context.

4.3.1 AR Research in Comprehension and Information Re-

4.2.2 VR Research to Address Student Engagement and

tention

Focus

The advantages of using VR to teach educational objectives and
improve student engagement are similar in many ways to the ad-
vantages of using a computer or interactive simulation, particularly
a 3D computer simulation. Computer simulations create a sense
of immersion by walking a user through the experience from a
ﬁrst-person perspective, such as a virtual tour of a historic build-
ing. Computer-based simulations have been used for many years in
computer-assisted instruction (CAI). Steinberg asserts that “simu-
lations make it possible to explore new domains, make predictions,
design experiments, and interpret results” [61]. VR also gives the
user a ﬁrst person perspective of the experience; however, instead
of interacting with the experience via a keyboard and mouse, the
user can physically move around and utilize their hands to create a
greater sense of immersion. As a result, VR maintains many of the
same qualities and advantages of computer simulations listed above
Through these studies, virtual reality experiences have provided a
unique ability to improve user engagement and focus due to the
novelty of the interaction device and unique characteristics of the
experience.

4.2.3 Future Research in Student Engagement and Focus

VR or AR has already proven to be an engaging supplemental re-
source for different subjects whenever available. There have also
been reports that VR learning environments have shown an increase
in positive emotions along with a decrease in negative emotion
compared to both video and textbook options [7].

Going back to the study by McBrien et al., one of the issues
mentioned was the lack of visual stimuli in the traditional online
learning environment. Both AR and VR do a phenomenal job in
creating engaging, informative environments, which should resolve
this issue. However, another similar noteworthy comment made
was the potential for too much stimuli in these virtual environments.
VR or AR could easily involve more stimuli that the traditional
distance education methods, so this seems like a factor to watch
out for. Understanding when there is too much going on at once in
existing distance education platforms could provide a basic idea of
what a focused, effective teaching environment might look like in
VR or AR. Research into what factors add to the educational value
of a distance learning environment and which factors are excessive
will help with removing unnecessary stimuli in these environments.
That information could then be considered when designing VR or
AR educational environments.

4.3 Comprehension and Information Retention

Schools that rely entirely on distance learning have previously held
higher dropout rates than those which are in-person, but these statis-
tics have also been tied to ineffective online teaching practices [60].
Simpson writes that “institutions have focused too much on the

AR technology has been demonstrated to increase knowledge acqui-
sition rate among a variety of educational subjects [72] due to AR’s
ability to help visualize abstract and 3D objects. This is especially
helpful for mechanical psycho-motor tasks, as AR overlays can
show intuitive instructions for user activity without switching to an
external screen. This was demonstrated with HMDs in Henderson
et. al. by using AR displays to facilitate assembly alignment [32].
Henderson tested the time and accuracy for users to determine the
location of parts, position them, and then align the parts together
correctly. Participants aligned the mechanical parts almost twice
as fast as compared to a traditional screen, with about 50% more
accuracy. Additionally, subsequent studies showed an AR instruc-
tion to be almost equivalent to labeling each and every assembly
part. However, since it can be unrealistic to try label every part, AR
applications can be used as a valid learning substitute.

Non-immersive devices have also assisted in education when
a teacher cannot be physcally present. Schoop et al. used AR
to teach construction for do-it-yourself projects [58]. Common
household tools were converted to help with allignment, drilling
holes, measuring wood, and etching details. The enhanced dynamic
feedback demonstrated the ability for AR to work as an assisted
teacher, as laypeople were able to use skilled machine tools and
accomplish traditionally skilled machining tasks.

Figure 4: Student using a handheld display to view an AR book [13].

AR has also been researched in the academic teaching realm. In
addition to studying motivation, Ferrer-Torregosa et al. analyzed
how AR can increase students’ abilities to self-learn, as well as their
information comprehension [23]. When compared to traditional
notes and videos, students felt more comfortable performing learning
activities outside of class and increased their comprehension of
the speciﬁed material after learning via AR. Ferrer-Torregosa et
al. did not perform pre- and post-tests in order to conﬁrm students

increased comprehension of the material, but the students’ perceived
increases in comprehension (from metacognative survey analysis)
can contribute to their actual understanding of material.

To increase information retention, Duesner et al. included haptics
in their study of AR books [18]. Using a handheld device, partici-
pants were given books that introduced magnetism and electromag-
netism through traditional or AR formats. All participants studied
their respective materials for the same amount of time. Through
pre-tests, post-tests, and retention tests (four weeks after the study),
participants were evaluated both on their memory recall and com-
prehension of the physics concepts. The participants using the AR
interactive book scored slightly higher in the post-test, especially for
questions that required visualization (such as the left hand rule or
drawing magnetic lines). However, both groups performed approxi-
mately the same in the retention test.

AR can also increase information retention by supplementing
distance education. K¨uc¸ ¨uk et al. created a mobile AR app to provide
extra instruction for anatomy students in addition to lectures [41].
With the app, students could scan images of anatomy body parts and
then view 3D animations and sounds to assist in learning. Students
were able to retain more information using the AR mobile applica-
tion while also facing a lesser cognitive load than with traditional
studying. This represents AR’s ability to aid in the difﬁculties of
learning through distance education without interrupting the tradi-
tional distance education format. These studies indicate that AR
can help students learn better, as well as more quickly compared to
traditional methods. This makes AR a prime candidate for educa-
tion, especially in distance education, where time with a teacher is
signiﬁcantly reduced.

Study
Henderson [32]

Schoop [38]

Ferrer-
Torregosa
[23]

Duesner [18]

Device
Head
Mounted
Display
AR
hanced
tools
Handheld
Display

en-

Handheld
Device

K¨uc¸ ¨uk [41]

Mobile

Result
Increase in learning and reten-
tion

Validation of AR to assist with
learning in construction tasks

Students learning with AR
scored signiﬁcantly higher
compared to video or tradi-
tional learning
Students with AR scored
higher than students learning
with traditional books
Students retained more infor-
mation with less cognitive load

Table 4: Results of AR Studies to Address Comprehension and In-
formation Retention. 1st Column: Reference. 2nd Column: AR
device used for the study. 3rd Column: Result of AR Study.These
results show that AR can beneﬁt in both comprehension and infor-
mation retention.

4.3.2 VR Research in Comprehension and Information Re-

tention

VR learning environments consistently show beneﬁts in areas such as
comprehension, memory, and information retention. A study at the
University of Warwick in 2018 observed such improvements. Study
participants who learned in VR settings demonstrated improved
knowledge acquisition and understanding of material compared to
those learning via video, and showed better performance in terms of
information recollection than those learning via textbook or video.
Additionally, participants reported a heightened sense of novelty and

interest toward the VR learning medium as a whole, along with a
decrease in negative emotion compared to both video and textbook-
based options for instruction [7]. This indicates that VR can be
helpful for improving comprehension of information compared to
traditional learning techniques such as textbooks and videos.

Another major advantage of using virtual reality to achieve learn-
ing objectives is that it is highly motivating. Even before VR became
more mainstream, studies with computer based immersive experi-
ences generated positive attitudes towards learning [48]. Mikropou-
los et. al. created a VR application where future teachers could
explore a lake and learn about different sea organisms. After using
the application, all of the participants felt the experiences could
help in a teaching environment. Furthermore, VR presents novel
opportunities to not only improve overall information retention and
engagement, but provide opportunities for learning that cannot be
achieved in person. For example, VR is capable of emulating ﬁeld
trips in ways impossible for both distance education as well as in
person. In 2019, a ﬁeld trip-like study by the Pennsylvania State
University was used to test information retained while in the ﬁeld.
There were 3 groups: a “normal“ ﬁeld trip in person, a basic virtual
ﬁeld trip, and an enhanced virtual ﬁeld trip. Those in the basic virtual
ﬁeld trip were provided a 10 by 10 area using an HTC Vive HMD,
which is a VR HMD. Those in the enhanced virtual ﬁeld trip used
the same setup, and were also provided the option to view locations
at an elevated level (27 feet high). Those in the basic virtual ﬁeld
trip reported higher mean levels of enjoyment with the ﬁeld trip,
and those in the enhanced ﬁeld trip performed better than the actual
ﬁeld trip. All students then undertook the trip from 35-45 minutes.
A Spatial Situation Model (SSM) is “a mental representation that
comes into play when users attempt to retrieve spatial information
from memory. [73].” Given a questionnaire in the style of an SSM,
those in the basic virtual ﬁeld trip performed better than those in the
actual ﬁeld trip, and the enhanced virtual reality performed better
than both. This shows that VR can not only emulate a classroom, but
can provide educational experiences which could not be provided
by an in-person classroom alone. [73].

Figure 5: An Immersive Memory Palace: Supporting the Method of
Loci with Virtual Reality. 2017. Memory Palace simulation used for
testing. [34].

Figure 6: Scale - Unexplored Opportunities for Immersive Technolo-
gies in Place-based Learning. 2019. From left to right: Models used
in Zhao study with increasing levels of realism [73].

While the results of VR studies are not as signiﬁcant in compre-
hension and retention as AR studies, they do help with information
recollection, due to the enhance realism and visualization VR pro-
vides. For this reason, it can be useful in education.

Study
Allcoat [7]

Mikropoulos
[48]

Device
Head
Mounted
Display
Head
Mounted
Display

Result
Improved recollection and en-
gagement

VR seen as valuable educa-
tional tool

Table 5: Results of VR Studies to Address Comprehension and In-
formation Retention. 1st Column: Reference. 2nd Column: AR
device used for the study. 3rd Column: Result of AR Study. These
results show that VR can help with information recollection.

4.3.3 Future Research in Comprehension and Information

Retention

Within augmented reality, not much research has been conducted
on information retention for distance learning. While Duenser et
al. did test retention for physics education, there were not enough
participants to determine conclusively AR’s effect on retention [18].
One concern voiced by students in the same study by McBrien et
al. mentioned in section 3.2 was, “Sometimes it was hard to keep
up with the messages, listening to commentators, and reading the
lesson,” [45] indicating that too much stimuli could harm students’
learning experiences. Doing more research on how different amounts
of visual stimuli in an AR or VR experience affect information
comprehension would give us a better idea of how to design lessons
using VR or AR.

5 INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES IN AR/VR DISTANCE EDUCA-

TION

As mentioned previously, education AR or VR resources were far
too rigid to be utilized by teachers without a lot of coding experience
in the past. Many studies have explored the viability of using AR and
VR for educational purposes, but these studies used pre-developed
content for instructors. Developing content requires advanced skills
in both AR and VR technology [41], and is typically created by
individuals far removed from the educational subject matter, such as
a contracted developer. This makes it very difﬁcult for instructors to
customize content for students, as well as adapt and change lesson
plans as ﬂuidly as with traditional learning materials [37]. This issue
almost entirely prevents teachers from adopting AR or VR resources
in education, as this stops educators from designing virtual learning
environments that are speciﬁc to their material.

5.0.1 Research and Resources for Distance Education in

AR

There has been a large push within AR research to facilitate the
creation of AR development resources for teachers and laypeople
without coding experience. Using the Equator Component Toolkit,
a system used to integrate digital devices [20], Hampshire et al.
was able to create an AR developer application [30]. It features a
drag and drop user interface, where developers can use AR content
pre-created for general applications. While this has not yet been
used in an educational context, it demonstrates the desire for AR
creation software, as well as the need for user-speciﬁc development
tools [30]. Additionally, Hampshire’s group created ComposeAR
[59]. ComposeAR requires python for added functionality such as
interaction or application plugins, but implements a graphic user
interface to compile and view code as it is being created.

Speciﬁcally for distance education, Ying Li created AR Environ-
ment for Remote Education (ARERE) [70]. Students are able to see
and interact with the same virtual object from different locations
using this tool. Additionally, the digital objects track physical ob-
jects that are distributed to students in advance, so they can tangibly
interact with the physical object and observe as it changes digitally.

This has not yet been tested on students for feasibility in an actual
education environment, but it represent promising potential for AR
to give a sense of presence for remote education.

Figure 7: AR Environment for Remote Education (ARERE) Structure.
[70]

While digital overlays can be extremely useful, it is sometimes
necessary for students to be able to physically touch and interact
with their learning resources. To provide haptic feedback, instruction
materials have utilized real objects with AR markers - easily recog-
nizable 2D symbols such as pictures to designate where to display
AR objects - for augmentation through computer vision tracking
techniques. This allows students to physically rotate and discover
the augmented object, adding sensory feedback to the educational
experience [24]. In this way, the same mechanical hardware can be
used for a variety of teaching levels, reducing hardware cost and
increasing content variability. These technologies can greatly aid
understanding in areas such as biology, astronomy, mechanics, and
other ﬁelds where digital overlays can be used to help describe typ-
ically unobservable physical structures. Additionally, commercial
HMDs such as the HoloLens allow users to interact with digital over-
lays by touching digital buttons [69]. This, combined with physical
objects, can allow for haptic and digital feedback, further aiding the
learning process.

Many commercial AR tools also exist to aid instructors in edu-
cation. Wondershare offers interactive AR mobile storybooks for
children to creatively learn literacy while [67]. It features traditional
story books such as Little Red Riding Hood, and teaches children
how to read. As they read the words, they can watch Little Red Rid-
ing Hood perform the actions. ARTutor allows teachers to quickly
and easily augment textbooks with AR content [42]. Teachers can
upload a book pdf and add 2D overlays, sound, and videos for stu-
dents. Then, as students read the physical book through the ARTutor
smartphone application, they will be able to view the augmented con-
tent. As teachers can easily upload any sound, video, or image ﬁles,
ARTutor provides immense customizability for teachers. Teachers
can add audio of themselves explaining a formula in a textbook or
a video of a particular battle in a history book. Quiver is another
commercially available software that allows users to download ed-
ucational coloring pages in order to teach students about science
and mathematics [54]. The coloring page will then become a 3D
image, allowing the student to see their creation come to life by
adding a new dimension as well as animations. As the content is not
customizable, this application is more suitable for simple subjects
with younger children.

5.0.2 Research and Resources for Distance Education in

VR

While many studies have explored the viability of using VR for
educational purposes, these studies generally used pre-developed
content for instructors. Developing content requires advanced skills
in VR technology [41], and is typically created by individual far
removed from the educational subject matter, such as a contracted

Figure 8: Demonstration of QuiverEducation for learning about
volcanoes. Students color image of a volcano (left) and watch it
erupt through the Quiver smartphone app (right). [54]

developer. This makes it very difﬁcult for instructors to customize
content for students, as well as adapt and change lessons plans as
ﬂuidly as with traditional learning materials [37]. For this reason,
further research into content creation and the ability to customize
content for instructors would be helpful in advancing VR educational
applications, especially for distance learning. This can include soft-
ware that allows for creating customized content without intense
coding knowledge, as well as dynamic programs, where the teacher
can easily adapt current content into a VR learning environment. For
distance learning, this could be environments where the teacher can
teach normally, and the students will simply experience the content
in an immersive way. Youngblut conducted an extensive survey of
research and educational uses of virtual reality during the 1990s, and
attempted to answer questions about the use and effectiveness of
virtual reality in kindergarten through grade 12 education [71]. They
found that there are unique capabilities of virtual reality, and the
majority of uses included aspects of constructivist learning, which is
a theory that that recognizes the learners’ understanding and knowl-
edge based on their own experiences prior to entering school. He
generally concluded that VR holds potential educational effective-
ness for special needs students [71]. However, he also made note of
the contexts in which VR is not a suitable option for educational use,
and where its downsides are most prevalent, noting that the chief
inhibitor of widespread implementation is the lack of customizable
content: teachers commonly reported frustration with the lack of
ability to customize educational content for a lesson, both before
and during the lesson.

5.0.3 Future Research in Immersive Instructional Resources
More and more AR/VR resources are becoming available to the
public, but one of the greatest challenges faced when trying to
adopt VR or AR as an educational resource is the inability to easily
create virtual environments without programming knowledge. VR
and AR are advancing rapidly, so a survey of what resources are
currently available, their strengths and weaknesses, and what is
needed for them to be ideal for education could be valuable in trying
to understand how these platforms can be made more accessible
for education. Updated research on how effective new AR/VR
educational resources are would give us a direction in how to move
forward with developing an AR or VR content creation platform for
educators. In order to consider AR or VR as a viable option for any
form of education, teachers will need to be able to easily manipulate
the virtual environments so that they can work with curricula or
lesson plans.

6 FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
AR and VR have proven to be valuable educational resources where
they ﬁt in, but we have found several issues that need to be over-
come in order to make these technologies more widely available to
educators. Critiques of traditional distance education include the
decreased amount of social interaction, lack of discourse, and ab-
sence of non-verbal cues within these environments [19, 35, 45]. VR
and AR help patch these issues, as they encourage communication
more effectively that traditional audio or video methods. However,
they could still beneﬁt from further advancements. AR HMD’s were

in the way when two users were trying to communicate and make
eye contact [12], so research in how communication is affected with
varying types of HMD’s would be valuable. VR can effectively
facilitate opportunities to socialize, but understanding how well VR
encourages discourse in education environments or how successful
existing VR educational environments are in supporting discourse
is still an area that should be explored. In terms of engagement
and focus, more research is needed in determining what amount of
visual stimuli helps to engage and focus students without being too
distracting.

Distance learning environments have faced criticism for causing
disengagement between students and their courses for reasons like
technical issues or improper amounts of visual stimulation related
to the lesson [45]. Traditional distance educational environments
and VR or AR environments will have different requirements of
users, and these will likely act as a limitation for widespread adop-
tion of AR and VR. Those limitations will be discussed further in
sections 4.1.3, 4.2.3, 4.3.3, 5.0.3, and 6. Other factors that nega-
tively impacted student engagement in traditional distance learning
environments were related to having too much or too little stimuli
during the lesson. AR and VR are capable of creating extremely
engaging environments due to their immersive nature, so virtual
lessons should be engaging for students. Too much stimuli could
become an issue in these environments, though. Understanding
what factors are necessary (or unnecessary) for students to have
in traditional distance education might give us an idea of how we
should be designing virtual environments for students. Additionally,
more research is still needed how virtual lessons affect long-term
information retention.

Acceptance of AR or VR technology by teachers or educational
systems will also play a role in the widespread adoption of AR or
VR in education. Teachers have concerns about the need for contin-
uous training required to be able to use the devices effectively, and
opinions about the process of 3D modeling received both positive
and negative feedback [63]. Further research in how educators under
different age groups feel about immersive technologies may also be
valuable in better understanding what teachers think about bringing
AR and VR into their classrooms. Studies aimed at trying to gauge
teachers’ willingness to accept technologies like AR and VR into
the classroom do exist, but focus on teachers which are millennials
or younger [21, 44]. During the 2017-2018 school year, at least 75%
of teachers in the United States were 30 years or older, and about a
quarter of teachers in the U.S. were over 50 years old [1]. By only
studying younger teachers, we are missing out on how a substantial
portion of the education workforce might see the adoption of VR or
AR into education.

Financial concerns about bringing these devices into the class-
room are also important constraints to consider when deciding if
AR or VR can be widely used in schools. Immersive devices have
gotten cheaper, and devices like Google Cardboard exist now as
well. However, robust HMDs may still prove to be challenging to
ﬁt into school budgets. Higher-end AR devices like the Microsoft
Hololens 2 are also still too expensive to enter the consumer market
(the Hololens 2 retails at $3500 USD on the Microsoft Store). Edu-
cational systems commonly face funding issues, so more research
with regards to whether schools can afford immersive technologies
is necessary.

The last major challenge preventing educators from adopting VR
or AR into their classrooms is the inﬂexibility of the technology
when it comes to designing lessons. Teachers need to be able to
easily create virtual environments related to their curricula without
programming knowledge. There have been recent advancements
in what resources are available as educational VR or AR tools, so
research into what resources are available now, as well as how ef-
fective these resources are would be valuable. While investigation
into content creation in AR and VR has been attempted, there is still

room for future research. Current methods are either not customiz-
able, or require much time and practice to create. While ARTutor
is easy to use and customizable, it only provides 2D content, and
therefore does not take advantage of AR’s immersive 3D potential.
Work in creating platforms which allow users to create thorough
virtual experiences easily would be extremely valuable in pushing
VR and AR into education.

A crucially research direction for the future is to establish metrics
for evaluating immersive environments in education. The methods
utilized in this paper were more categorical, and could not numer-
ically quantify what methods for AR and VR are best. Having a
universal metric for future researchers to follow will help in evaluat-
ing these technologies.

6.1 Hardware Advancement

AR and VR hardware are integral to providing an immersive experi-
ence for users. Current AR headsets include the HoloLens and digital
overlay glasses. However, due to the high cost of the HoloLens and
technical limitation of AR glasses, VR headsets with cameras have
also been used to create AR experiences. These headsets, along with
the HoloLens, are relatively large and quite heavy. This can be un-
comfortable, especially for younger students. Further research into
increasing computing power or decreasing headset size would be
helpful in enhancing the user experience for AR and VR technology.

6.2 Software Advancements

Currently, certain technological aspects of AR and VR hinder their
educational advancement. For classrooms, AR and VR technology
must become more user friendly from a teacher’s perspective [37], so
that they can teach and present the AR/VR content with similar effort
as teaching in traditional methods. This could include developing
a more user friendly teaching interface, or automating some of the
AR/VR content so the teacher can focus on instruction.

Alternate forms of input are also helpful [33]. While this has of
course been implemented through controllers for VR HMDs and
HoloLens, mobile VR and most AR applications do not utilize hand
tracking for interaction. Alternate forms of input increase the inter-
actablility of displays, further engaging students. The HoloLens has
the ability for hand and eye tracking [40] and touch interaction [69],
and mobile devices can utilize hand tracking to incorporate touch
feedback. However, these have not yet been realized or evaluated
in an educational context. Utilizing the sense of touch will be very
helpful to increase interactivity and engage kinetic learners.

Furthermore, educational solutions that leverage AR and VR
technologies as a whole must evolve, both in terms of technical
feasibility and in acceptance by educators. Like many educational
innovations in the past, the use of AR in classrooms could encounter
constraints from schools and resistance among teachers. The learn-
ing activities associated with AR and VR usually involve innovative
approaches such as participatory simulations and studio-based ped-
agogy [37]. The nature of these instructional approaches however
is quite different from the teacher-centered, delivery-based focus
in conventional teaching methods, where the teacher is the focal
point of the student body and student participation is less frequent.
Institutional constraints such as covering a certain amount of content
within a given time frame also cause difﬁculties in implementing
novel educational initiatives like this [37]. Thus, there may be a
gap between the teaching and learning methods currently used in
classrooms and the student-centered and exploratory nature of learn-
ing engendered by AR and VR systems. Designers of AR and VR
learning environments need to be aware of this gap and provide
support to help teachers and students bridge it, ideally in the form of
tutorials, listening sessions, and working closely with educators in
order to ensure the technology is suitable for the unique challenges
education presents.

6.3 Scalability Issues

VR and AR do have technical demands that may be impractical
for the average present-day classroom. We have seen traditional
synchronous distance education courses run into connectivity issues
in the university setting where the number of users are large. AR or
VR educational settings should make internet connection require-
ments more demanding than video conferencing software due to
the additional data needed for the virtual environments. This means
that students will likely need much stronger internet connections to
run these devices without interruption, and running a university-like
VR lecture hall with over a hundred students might be impossible
at the moment because of the internet bandwidth required. How-
ever, the development of 5G connection technology could make this
possible. 5G promises internet speeds of greater than one gigabit
per second [65], which would make streaming large amounts of
data much more feasible. Drawbacks to 5G, like possible issues
with wall-penetration do exist, but the bandwidth offered by 5G
connectivity should expand on online capabilities for AR or VR.

6.4 Future of AR/VR in Education

AR/VR allow digital images to interact in our real world, making
them useful in education, particularly within distance education,
where a teacher cannot always be present with a student. AR and
VR have been shown to increase social interaction, comprehension,
and engagement. However, multiple hindrances such as technology
and hardware limitations as well as cost impede its adoption in
education institutions. While studies suggest AR and VR can be
most beneﬁcial in K-12 education, where interaction, engagement,
and focus play a larger role in the learning process, both the cost
of hardware, educator adoptions, and developing content for such a
wide variety of curriculum reduce the practicality of adoption within
K-12 schools. Currently, it seems as if both AR and VR will be
great for speciﬁc, and general educational knowledge to supplement
teacher instruction, similar to educational activities or ﬁeld trips.
They cannot cover everything a student must learn, but they can help
to reinforce knowledge and keep students engaged.

7 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we ﬁrst assessed the educational challenges presented
by distance learning as a whole, and then identiﬁed 4 main chal-
lenges that distance learning currently presents as compared to in-
person instruction: the lack of social interaction, reduced student
engagement and focus, reduced comprehension and information
retention, and the lack of ﬂexible and customizable instructor re-
sources. After assessing each of these challenges in-depth, we
examined how AR/VR technologies might serve to address each
challenge along with their current shortcomings, and ﬁnally outlined
the further research that is required to fully understand the potential
of AR/VR technologies as they apply to distance learning.

AR and VR are prime candidates for addressing the various edu-
cational challenges presented by distance learning, especially during
the COVID-19 pandemic, but we ﬁnd they are currently inadequate
for widespread adoption in the educational community and require
further technological developments to take place. The COVID-19
pandemic has heightened the need for interactive and engaging edu-
cational environments, as the forced transition to distance learning
has resulted in instruction being generally limited to discussions and
lectures presented via video conferencing tools such as Zoom. This
widespread implementation of distance learning has led to decreased
student motivation and information retention, primarily due to the
fact most students are unfamiliar with the format of distance learning
and the instruction styles are often less engaging than if the content
was delivered in-person.

At ﬁrst glance, and especially in terms of individual features, AR
and VR educational solutions appear to be ideal choices to help
combat these challenges with student motivation, engagement, and

information retention. Due to the fact they closely mimic learn-
ing in-person through a 3-dimensional environment, the use of AR
and VR technologies as educational tools has been demonstrated
to improve knowledge acquisition among a variety of educational
subjects. Furthermore, AR and VR have also been shown to improve
student engagement and motivation in the classroom, as immersive
lectures are much more interesting and comprehensive than lectures
presented on a 2-dimensional screen. AR and VR educational solu-
tions were already being used before the pandemic for these reasons,
in contexts such as supplementing in-person instruction through an
AR-based anatomy lesson.

Despite presenting numerous advantages over both in-person in-
struction and distance learning, AR and VR educational solutions
are still not technically mature enough yet to be implemented in a
widespread fashion as a direct solution to many of the challenges
presented by distance learning. In this paper, we note how a chief
inhibitor of widespread adoption by the educational community is
the lack of customizable content: teachers commonly reported frus-
tration with the lack of ability to customize educational content for
a lesson, both before and during the lesson. Additionally, further
research to reduce motion sickness and eye strain for AR and VR
is necessary before incorporating these devices into a required cur-
riculum, as students must feel comfortable learning for long periods
of time without fear of negatively impacting their health. Finally,
the cost of high-end versions of AR and VR devices is also a major
inhibitor of their widespread use: educators must be able to buy
these devices in bulk for affordable prices. Additionally, further
applied research can help educators and institutions realize the full
potential of AR and VR for a variety of subjects. We hope that
this paper brings to light these limitations and aids researchers in
assessing the current state of immersive technologies as educational
resources. We suggest areas of improvement to promote adoption of
AR and VR in educational environments for distance learning, with
the goal that AR and VR may soon be able to supplement or even
completely replace the entire in-person classroom experience.

REFERENCES

[1] National

teacher and principal survey (ntps).

Average age of
teachers, by age cat-
teachers and percentage distribution of
egory, school
2017–18.
https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/ntps/tables/ntps1718 20062205 t12n.asp.
world.

type, and main teaching assignment:

smartphones

many

the

are

in

[2] How

https://www.bankmycell.com/blog/how-many-phones-are-in-the-
world, October 2020.

[3] Oculus Rift S - 3D virtual reality system. https://www.lenovo.com/,

2020.

[4] Mobile

augmented

2019.
https://medium.com/@themani f est/mobile − augmented − reality −
in − 2019 − 6a4 f 687 f 900, 2020.

reality

in

[5] Zoom: Video conferencing, web conferencing, webinars, screen shar-

ing. 2020. ”https://zoom.us/”.

[6] E. Acosta-Tello. Enhancing the online class: Effective use of syn-
chronous interactive online instruction. Journal of Instructional Peda-
gogies, 17, 2015.

[7] D. Allcoat and A. von M¨uhlenen.
performance,

Learning in virtual
engage-
and
Research in Learning Technology, 26, Nov. 2018.

reality:
ment.
https://journal.alt.ac.uk/index.php/rlt/article/view/2140.

emotion

Effects

on

[8] M. V. Archana and M. Chinchamalatpure. Augmented reality: Imple-

mentation in technological institute. 2014.
Ikea

lanches

[9] A. Ayoubi.

augmented reality application.

https://www.architectmagazine.com/technology/ikea-launches-
augmented-reality-applicationo, 2020.

[10] D. J. Bearison, S. Magzamen, and E. K. Filardo. Socio-cognitive con-
ﬂict and cognitive growth in young children. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly
(1982-), pp. 51–72, 1986.

[11] J. Bergmann and A. Sams. Before you ﬂip, consider this. Phi Delta

Kappan, 94(2):25–25, 2012.

[12] M. Billinghurst and H. Kato. Out and about — real world tele-
conferencing. BT Technology Journal, 18(1):80–82, Jan. 2000.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026582022824.

[13] M. Billinghurst, H. Kato, and I. Poupyrev. The magicbook - moving
seamlessly between reality and virtuality. Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE, 21:6 – 8, 06 2001.

[14] Blackboard. Blackboard to acquire Elluminate and Wimba.

Jun
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/blackboard-to-

2018.
acquire-elluminate-and-wimba-97969544.html.

[15] C. Blanco.

The 2020 duolingo language report, Dec 2020.

https://blog.duolingo.com/global-language-report-2020/.

[16] G. S. Cannella. Learning through social interaction: Shared cognitive
experience, negotiation strategies, and joint concept construction for
young children. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 8(4):427–444,
1993.

[17] E. W. Carter and C. Hughes.

Increasing social interaction among
adolescents with intellectual disabilities and their general education
peers: Effective interventions. Research and Practice for Persons with
Severe Disabilities, 30(4):179–193, 2005.

[18] A. Duenser, L. Walker, H. Horner, and D. Bentall. Creating interactive
physics education books with augmented reality. pp. 107–114, 11 2012.
[19] A. Dumford and A. Miller. Online learning in higher education: ex-
ploring advantages and disadvantages for engagement. Journal of
Computing in Higher Education, 30, 04 2018.

[20] S. R. Egglestone, J. Humble, C. Greenhalgh, T. Rodden, and A. Hamp-
shire. The equator component toolkit: managing digital information
ﬂow in the home. In Proceedings of UIST. Citeseer, 2006.

[21] L. Eutsler and C. S. Long. Preservice teachers’ acceptance of virtual
reality to plan science instruction. Educational Technology & Society,
24(2):28–43, 2021.

[22] Everysight. Raptor - everysight. https://everysight.com/product/raptor/,

2020.

[23] J. Ferrer Torregrosa, M. Rodr´ıguez, J. Torralba-Estelles, M. F. Farin´os,
M. P´erez-Bermejo, and N. Ehrling. Distance learning ects and ﬂipped
classroom in the anatomy learning: Comparative study of the use of
augmented reality, video and notes. BMC Medical Education, 16, 12
2016.

[24] A. Fuste and C. Schmandt. Hypercubes: A playful introduc-
tion to computational
Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3341215.3356264.

thinking in augmented reality.

[25] J. K. Ghuman, C. D. Peebles, and H. S. Ghuman. Review of social
interaction measures in infants and preschool children. Infants & Young
Children, 11(2):21–44, 1998.

[26] V. Giang. Gamiﬁcation techniques increase your employees’ ability to

learn by 40%. Business Insider, 18, 2013.

[27] Google. Google cardboard. https://arvr.google.com/cardboard/, 2020.
[28] Google. Google AR & VR. https://arvr.google.com/ar/, 2020.
[29] G. Greenberg. Distance education technologies: best practices for k-12
settings. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 17(4):36–40, 1998.
[30] A. Hampshire, H. Seichter, R. Grasset, and M. Billinghurst. Augmented
reality authoring: Generic context from programmer to designer. vol.
409-412, pp. 409–412, 01 2006.

[31] E. Hanoa. Kahoot! reaches 5 billion players after a year of record-
high growth, Jan 2021. https://kahoot.com/blog/2021/01/05/kahoot-5-
billion-players-year-record-high-growth/.

[32] S. Henderson and S. Feiner. Augmented reality in the psychomotor

phase of a procedural task. pp. 191–200, 10 2011.

[33] J. Hong. Effect of digitally augmented toys on young children’s experi-

ence in pretend play. 10 2019.

[34] J. Huttner and S. Robra-Bissantz. An immersive memory palace:

Supporting the method of loci with virtual reality. In AMCIS, 2017.

[35] D. Jorgensen. The challenges and beneﬁts of asynchronous learning

networks. The Reference Librarian, 37:3–16, 01 2003.

[36] J. Keller. How to integrate learner motivation planning into lesson

planning: The arcs model approach. 01 2000.

[37] L. Kerawalla, R. Luckin, S. Seljeﬂot, and A. Woolard. Making it
real: exploring the potential of augmented reality for teaching primary
school science. Virtual Reality, 10:163–174, 12 2006.

[38] T. Khan, K. Johnston, and J. Ophoff. The impact of an augmented

our students? Open Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and
e-Learning, 28(2):105–119, 2013.

[61] R. N. Steinberg. Computers in teaching science: To simulate or not to
simulate? American Journal of Physics, 68(S1):S37–S41, 2000.
[62] A. Stott and C. Neustaedter. Analysis of gamiﬁcation in education.

Surrey, BC, Canada, 8:36, 2013.

[63] S. Tzima, G. Styliaras, and A. Bassounas. Augmented reality applica-
tions in education: Teachers point of view. Education Sciences, 9(2):99,
2019.

[64] S. Ventura, E. Brivio, G. Riva, and R. M. Ba˜nos. Immersive versus non-
immersive experience: Exploring the feasibility of memory assessment
through 360° technology. Frontiers in Psychology, 10:2509, 2019.
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02509.
[65] L. J. Vora. Evolution of mobile generation technology: 1G to 5G and
review of upcoming wireless technology 5G. International journal of
modern trends in engineering and research, 2(10):281–290, 2015.
[66] C. D. Wickens. Virtual reality and education. In [Proceedings] 1992
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, pp.
842–847 vol.1, 1992.

[67] I. Within Unlimited. Wonderscope: An augmented reality iOS app for

kids. https://wonderscope.com/, 2020.

[68] H.-K. Wu, S. W.-Y. Lee, H.-Y. Chang, and J.-C. Liang. Cur-
rent status, opportunities and challenges of augmented real-
Computers Education, 62:41 – 49, 2013.
ity in education.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131512002527.
[69] R. Xiao, J. Schwarz, N. Throm, A. D. Wilson, and H. Benko. Mrtouch:
Adding touch input to head-mounted mixed reality. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(4):1653–1660, 2018.
[70] Ying Li. Augmented reality for remote education. 3:V3–187–V3–191,

2010.

[71] C. Youngblut. Educational uses of virtual reality technology. 1997.
[72] S. Yuen, Y. Yuen, G. Yaoyuneyong, and E. Johnson. Augmented
reality: An overview and ﬁve directions for ar in education. Journal
of Educational Technology Development and Exchange, 119:140, 11
2011.

[73] J. Zhao and A. Klippel. Scale - unexplored opportunities for immersive
technologies in place-based learning. In 2019 IEEE Conference on
Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 155–162, 2019.

reality application on learning motivation of students. Advances in
Human-Computer Interaction, 2019:1–14, 02 2019.

[39] G. Kiryakova, N. Angelova, and L. Yordanova. Gamiﬁcation in educa-
tion. Proceedings of 9th International Balkan Education and Science
Conference, 2014.

[40] M. Kyt¨o, B. Ens, T. Piumsomboon, G. A. Lee, and M. Billinghurst.
Pinpointing: Precise Head- and Eye-Based Target Selection for Aug-
mented Reality, p. 1–14. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173655.
[41] S. K¨uc¸ ¨uk, S. Kapakin, and Y. G¨oktas¸. Learning anatomy via mo-
bile augmented reality: Effects on achievement and cognitive load.
Anatomical Sciences Education, 9(5):411–421.

[42] C. Lytridis, A. Tsinakos, and I. Kazanidis. Artutor—an augmented
reality platform for interactive distance learning. Education Sciences,
8(1), 2018. https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/8/1/6.

[43] N. Mahadzir. The use of augmented reality pop-up book to increase
motivation in english language learning for national primary school.
IOSR Journal of Research Method in Education, 1:26–38, 01 2013.

[44] F. A. Majid and N. M. Shamsudin. Identifying factors affecting accep-
tance of virtual reality in classrooms based on technology acceptance
model (tam). Asian Journal of University Education, 15(2):51–60,
2019.

[45] J. McBrien, C. Rui, and P. Jones. Virtual spaces: Employing a syn-
chronous online classroom to facilitate student engagement in online
International Review of Research in Open and Distance
learning.
Learning, 10, 06 2009.

[46] N. Michael, M. Drakou, and A. Lanitis. Model-based generation
of personalized full-body 3d avatars from uncalibrated multi-view
photographs. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 76(12):14169–14195,
2017.

[47] Microsoft. Hololens 2. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens,

2020.

[48] T. Mikropoulos, A. Chalkidis, A. Katsikis, and A. Emvalotis. Students’
attitudes towards educational virtual environments. Education and
Information Technologies, 3:137–148, 06 1998.

[49] P. Milgram and F. Kishino. A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays.
IEICE Trans. Information Systems, vol. E77-D, no. 12:1321–1329, 12
1994.

[50] T. Monahan, G. McArdle, and M. Bertolotto. Virtual reality for collab-
orative e-learning. Computers & Education, 50(4):1339–1353, 2008.
[51] J. Mtebe. Learning management system success: Increasing learning
management system usage in higher education in sub-saharan africa.
International Journal of Education and Development using Information
and Communication Technology (IJEDICT), 11:51–64, 01 2015.
[52] J. Pejoska, M. Bauters, J. Purma, and T. Leinonen. Social augmented
reality: Enhancing context-dependent communication and informal
learning at work. British Journal of Educational Technology, 47(3):474–
483.

[53] A.-N. Perret-Clermont. Social interaction and cognitive development

in children. Academic Press, 1980.

[54] QuiverVision.

About

quiver

education.

https://quivervision.com/products/apps/quiver-education, 2020.
[55] R. Raskar, G. Welch, M. Cutts, A. Lake, L. Stesin, and H. Fuchs.
The ofﬁce of the future: A uniﬁed approach to image-based modeling
and spatially immersive displays. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIG-
GRAPH ’98, p. 179–188. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1998. https://doi.org/10.1145/280814.280861.
[56] C. Rotellar and J. Cain. Research, perspectives, and recommenda-
tions on implementing the ﬂipped classroom. American Journal of
Pharmaceutical Education, 80:34, 03 2016.

[57] D. Roth, J.-L. Lugrin, D. Galakhov, A. Hofmann, G. Bente,
M. Latoschik, and A. Fuhrmann. Avatar realism and social interaction
quality in virtual reality. 03 2016.

[58] E. Schoop, M. Nguyen, D. Lim, V. Savage, S. Follmer, and B. Hart-
mann. Drill sergeant: Supporting physical construction projects
through an ecosystem of augmented tools. pp. 1607–1614, 05 2016.

[59] H. Seichter, J. Looser, and M. Billinghurst. Composar: An intuitive

tool for authoring ar applications. pp. 177–178, 09 2008.

[60] O. Simpson. Student retention in distance education: are we failing

