1
2
0
2

n
a
J

5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
5
6
1
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interpersonal distance in VR: reactions of older
adults to the presence of a virtual agent

Grzegorz Pochwatko1[0000−0001−8548−6916],
Barbara Karpowicz2[0000−0002−7478−7374],
Anna Chrzanowska1[0000−0002−2412−4169], and
Wies(cid:32)law Kope´c2[0000−0001−9132−4171]

1 Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences gp@psych.pan.pl
https://psych.pan.pl
2 Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology kopec@pja.edu.pl

Abstract. The rapid development of virtual reality technology has in-
creased its availability and, consequently, increased the number of its
possible applications. The interest in the new medium has grown due
to the entertainment industry (games, VR experiences and movies). The
number of freely available training and therapeutic applications is also in-
creasing. Contrary to popular opinion, new technologies are also adopted
by older adults. Creating virtual environments tailored to the needs and
capabilities of older adults requires intense research on the behaviour of
these participants in the most common situations, towards commonly
used elements of the virtual environment, in typical sceneries. Comfort-
able immersion in a virtual environment is key to achieving the impres-
sion of presence. Presence is, in turn, necessary to obtain appropriate
training, persuasive and therapeutic eﬀects. A virtual agent (a humanoid
representation of an algorithm or artiﬁcial intelligence) is often an ele-
ment of the virtual environment interface. Maintaining an appropriate
distance to the agent is, therefore, a key parameter for the creator of
the VR experience. Older (65+) participants maintain greater distance
towards an agent (a young white male) than younger ones (25-35). It
may be caused by diﬀerences in the level of arousal, but also cultural
norms. As a consequence, VR developers are advised to use algorithms
that maintain the agent at the appropriate distance, depending on the
user’s age.

Keywords: virtual reality · embodied virtual agents · older adults.

1 Theoretical context

1.1 Serious virtual environments

Virtual environments are a new communication medium. Interactions in VR
have become particularly common in recent years when the quality of sound and
graphics oﬀered by modern devices has come close to natural (see [2], [3]). Nowa-
days, they are not just an amusing novelty. There are more and more serious

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

G. Pochwatko et al.

applications and virtual experiences emerging. Some of them rely on interper-
sonal mediated communication, but, thanks to advanced algorithms, natural
language processing and machine learning, an increasing number of apps in-
corporate embodied virtual agents. Users got used to intelligent virtual agents.
Google Assistant or Siri is becoming a part of our everyday life, and the popu-
larity of Alexa and Google Home devices is increasing (to name just a few most
popular ones). But embodied agents are something more than that. People have
a tendency to treat computers as if they were other people. Reeves and Nass [11]
show that users treat computers in a social and natural way. Giving them a body
that responds naturally to the environment by mimicking human-like movement,
reacting to the user’s presence, following with the gaze and maintaining social
distance, makes this tendency even stronger. One doesn’t have to imagine the
ghost in the machine any more and suspend his/her disbelief. It’s (almost) not
an illusion of copresence any more as well. Instead, we have (almost) genuine
social interaction. One of the recent applications is shown by Kim et al. [6] who
proposed giving intelligent assistants a human body with the use of augmented
reality. According to the expectations, contact with embodied agents resulted in
higher conﬁdence, trust and feeling of social presence.

Serious games, training and therapy applications are increasingly used in
place of traditional methods. They are cheaper, sometimes more eﬀective, they
oﬀer users almost unlimited access, especially where it is diﬃcult for any reason.
It is particularly important in times of pandemic when traditional services are
limited and safer, remote methods are preferred. This refers primarily to older
adults, who are highly vulnerable. However, serious games must constantly evolve
to adapt to the changing conditions and needs of new user groups [4].

1.2 Older adults’ population

Older adults are the group in which the increase in interest in VR and experience
with the use of various applications is the largest (according to the Global Web
Index from 0.5% in 2016, an increase to 6% in 2018). The global virtual real-
ity software market is predicted to double in size till 2023. Simultaneously, the
percentage of older adults in the European population (according to the United
Nations Population Division) will exceed 25%. Similarly, the World Health Or-
ganization is predicting the dawn of the super-aged society. We will face the
possible decline in both physical and mental health, which may lead to the de-
terioration of quality of life and well being of older adults. Can VR reduce those
negative eﬀects and assure active ageing?

At the same time, older adults can gain a lot from using applications de-
veloped in new technologies. This is not only about entertainment, which has
dominated recently, but also about improving mental well-being and general
functioning (e.g. [5], [10], [1]). It seems we have a pretty good foundation for
this. According to Syed-Abdul et al. [13], older adults have positive attitudes
towards the use of VR as a supportive technology. Perceived ease of use is high,
which makes the experience enjoyable and regraded as useful. These are the main

Older adults’ responses to the virtual agent

3

factors inﬂuencing the intention to use. Complying to social norms, on the other
hand, is less important.

Objective One of the critical challenges is to develop guidelines for creating
eﬀective interfaces in virtual environments targeted at older adults. An element
of the VR interface can be a virtual agent, i.e. a humanoid representation of
an application or artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. An important task is to ﬁnd
out if there are any diﬀerences between younger and older adults in interacting
with the virtual agency. An important parameter is a distance to the virtual
agent. Maintaining a comfortable distance to the user may translate into the
eﬀectiveness of a training or therapeutic application. In the world of physical
reality, interpersonal distance is an essential feature of individuals’ social be-
haviour in relation to their physical environment and social interactions (for a
review see [12]). The same is true of virtual reality [2].

2 Method

2.1 Participants

Participants were invited to take part in the study conducted in the Virtual Re-
ality and Psychophysiology Lab of the Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy
of Sciences. Older adults were recruited from among the participants of VR
workshops organised by the KOBO Association with XR Lab, Polish-Japanese
Academy of Information Technology (PJAIT) and Emotion Cognition Lab of
SWPS University. The VR workshops were organised as a part of follow-up
studies of previous research on VR experience with older adults by Living Lab
Kobo and HASE research initiative (Human Aspects in Science and Engineer-
ing) [9], based on previous intergenerational participatory studies by Living Lab
PJAIT [7, 8]. Six older adults, aged 65+, were in the experimental group. There
were three women and three men among them. The control group consisted of
6 people aged 18-35 (4 women and 2 men), volunteers from VRLab IP PAN
participants’ panel. The results of 12 people were analysed. All participants had
a normal or corrected vision. All participants in the experimental group expe-
rienced immersive VR for the ﬁrst time. The participants in the control group
were selected to meet the same condition. People in the experimental and con-
trol groups were recruited in such a way that they diﬀered only in belonging to
a speciﬁc age group. The reason for this was that according to Sorokowska et
al. [12], gender and age are the only personal characteristics associated with in-
terpersonal distance. The third feature, closing the list of signiﬁcant predictors,
is the air temperature (which in our case, in laboratory conditions, was kept at
a constant level of 22 degrees Celsius).

2.2 Apparatus

Lenovo ThinkSTation P510 workstation with Intel (R) Xeon (R) E5-1630 3.70
GHz processor with 32 GB RAM, with Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti graph-

4

G. Pochwatko et al.

ics card, and 64-bit Windows 10 Pro operating system was used. The virtual
environment was prepared in the Worldviz Vizard Virtual Reality software, dis-
played using HMD HTC Vive with AudioStrap (AMOLED screen, 2160x1200
resolution, i.e. 1080x1200 per eye, 90Hz refresh rate, 110 degrees ﬁeld of view
width). It is worth noting that using a worse or much better display could aﬀect
the results.

2.3 Procedure

The participants performed initial activities aimed at getting used to the virtual
environment and the way of moving around. Display parameters, IPD, sharpness,
HMD mount and controllers were also adjusted.

Fig. 1. The view of the immersive virtual environment that participants saw (top
left: initial view, introduction and practice; top right: the beginning of the procedure;
bottom left and right: close-ups of an agent.

The participants were immersed in a virtual environment which was a map-
ping of a room corresponding to the dimensions of the laboratory’s physical

Older adults’ responses to the virtual agent

5

space. We used the standard HTC VIVE play area: 3.5 by 3.5 meters. The phys-
ical space was slightly larger to ensure the safety of the participants. On each side
of the play area, we have left at least 1.5 meters of space to the nearest barrier.
One virtual agent, a white young man, was placed in the room. The agent did
not interact with the participants. We used the so-called idle pose animation,
in which the character stands still and performs only small natural movements.
More speciﬁcally, it is a cyclical animation in which the character stands relaxed,
you can see breathing movements, slight movements of the head, arms, hands
along the body, the center of gravity is shifted to the left or right side. The target
task of the participants was to approach the agent and read the inscriptions on
badges placed on his clothes, on the front and the back (cf. Bailenson et al. [2]).
The lettering on the agent’s chest uses a font 3 cm high so that it cannot be read
from the starting position. The inscription on the back uses an 8 cm high font.
In both cases, white letters with black borders were used. The position of the
participants’ heads and hands was measured during the task (with a frequency
of 90 Hz). It should be noted that traditional research on social distancing diﬀers
in approaches and methods from research using immersive VR. In the traditional
study cited above, conducted in 42 countries, participants marked the declared
distance towards a stranger, acquaintance and a close person on a paper diagram
showing schematic drawings of two human ﬁgures, representing the participant
and another person. This approach is convenient for mass intercultural research.
In a virtual environment, the participant (in the case of this study) or the agent
physically moves through space and adopts convenient positions. In our opin-
ion, this type of measurement is more reliable and accurate. It’s worth noting
that there are studies on social distance, also carried out in immersive VR, that
contain elements such as the movement of an agent in the space of a motion-
less participant or instructions for the participant to take speciﬁc positions in
space of an agent. Undoubtedly they may cause discomfort to the participants,
which can be registered objectively, in the form of physiological response (HR
and skin conductance changes resulting from activation of the sympathetic ner-
vous system) or declaratively. For ethical reasons, we consciously resigned from
procedures that could cause discomfort to participants.

3 Results

The research was preliminary, and therefore a small group of volunteers took
part. In this situation, it can be assumed that the distribution of results will
diﬀer from normal. The Shapiro-Wilk distribution tests conﬁrmed it for the
group of seniors (for body distance: Wolder adults = .76, p<.05; Wcontrol = .91, p
= .41; for hand distance: Wolder adults = .90, p = .36; Wcontrol = .86, p = .18).
Failure to meet the assumption of normal distribution forces the application of
the non-parametric Wilcoxon test for two independent samples.

At ﬁrst glance, the manner in which the older participants and the con-
trol group move in the space diﬀers. The older adults move more slowly and

6

G. Pochwatko et al.

cautiously than younger people from the control group. Their relative position
towards the embodied virtual agent also diﬀers (see Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Position towards embodied virtual agent (m).

The Wilcoxon test for independent samples revealed that older adults keep a
greater distance from the virtual agent than younger people in the control group
(0.54 m vs 0.38 m). The Wilcoxon test for two independent samples was found
to be signiﬁcant (W = 2, p < .05; see Fig. 3).

The same relationship occurred in the case of the distance between the hands
and the embodied virtual agent. The Wilcoxon test for independent samples
revealed that older adults keep the hands further from the virtual agent than
younger people in the control group. The Wilcoxon test for two samples was
found to be signiﬁcant (W = 3, p<.05; see Fig. 4). An analysis of the position

Older adults’ responses to the virtual agent

7

Fig. 3. Mean minimal body distance (m) towards embodied virtual agent in older
adults and control group.

Fig. 4. Mean minimal hand distance (m) towards embodied virtual agent in older
adults and control group.

8

G. Pochwatko et al.

of the hands in relation to the body showed that the participants did not try to
stretch them towards the virtual agent. There were also no attempts to touch
the agent’s virtual body in any of the groups.

4 Discussion

Diﬀerences in the pace and manner of movement of the older and younger partic-
ipants can be explained in two ways: ﬁrst, in the case of older adults, there may
be deﬁcits in mobility and the sense of balance. Secondly, the lower speed and no-
ticeable caution of movements could also result from the general less familiarity
of the older participants with virtual environments. However, it should be noted
that both the older adults and those in the control group experienced virtual
reality for the ﬁrst time in their lives. It was possible to repeat and extend the
results of Bailenson et al. [2]. As for the interpersonal distance maintained, the
participants treated the virtual agent in the same way that strangers are usually
treated in a public place. Older participants avoided entering the agent’s inti-
mate space (<45 cm) and kept the average distance above 50 cm. The younger
participants maintained a signiﬁcantly smaller distance; they slightly entered the
agent’s intimate space (38 cm on average). Hand position analysis showed that
participants from both groups did not try to touch the agent. This may indicate
that the virtual agent is treated like another living person in the same room.
However, an alternative explanation cannot be ruled out. In case of negative
emotions towards the virtual agent, it could be an aversive reaction. Diﬀerences
between younger and older participants in the distance kept from the virtual
agent may have a cultural background [12]. Another possible explanation is that
younger people have greater experience with virtual environments (such as video
games) and virtual agents (such as non-player characters - NPCs), which may
lead to them to treat the agent in the simulation in a more objective manner.
Maybe the older adults are more under the illusion of social presence (or cop-
resence). However, this requires more systematic research and larger trials.

5

Implications and further directions

There are many VR applications on the market that are designed for older adults
(although most often not only about them). Among them, there are relaxation
applications that allow one to regain peace and move into a pleasant, relaxing
space, even when it is impossible in the real world. There are also virtual social
environments that allow you to stay in touch with family and friends, and spend
time together. A special place among them is occupied by applications aimed
at residents of retirement homes or other such communities, thanks to which
members can jointly participate in specially prepared simulations. Thanks to
some, you can explore the world and watch various exciting places both in the
form of spherical photos and 360 ﬁlms, and even travel back in time and explore
the same places at diﬀerent times in history. The increasing percentage of older
adults in the population, as well as their noticeably greater activity, will raise

Older adults’ responses to the virtual agent

9

the interest in this type of solutions. The creators of VR applications should
take into account the preferences of users if they want to provide them with a
comfortable experience of their simulations. In applications whose interface is an
embodied virtual agent, care should be taken to increase the distance towards the
older user, as well as to avoid gestures that violate the intimate zone and virtual
touch, if it is not accepted in a given culture. For younger users, it is possible to
shorten the distance. The use of VR applications by older adults requires further
in-depth research on much larger trials. It is worth taking a closer look at the
issues of reaction to facial expressions, and pantomimics of a virtual agent, gaze
tracking, voice communication, issuing and listening to commands, compliance
without pressure. An interesting development of the described research is also
the manipulation of gender and age of a virtual agent.

6 Acknowledgments

We would like to thank our participants, older adults from our Living Lab, those
aﬃliated with Kobo Association and volunteers from VRLab IP PAN panel who
participated in this study. We would also like to thank all transdisciplinary
experts involved with the HASE research initiative (Human Aspects in Science
and Engineering).

References

1. Amorim, J.S.C.d., Leite, R.C., Brizola, R., Yonamine, C.Y.: Virtual reality therapy
for rehabilitation of balance in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Advances in Rheumatology 58 (2018)

2. Bailenson, J.N., Blascovich, J., Beall, A.C., Loomis, J.M.: Interpersonal distance in
immersive virtual environments. Personality and social psychology bulletin 29(7),
819–833 (2003)

3. DeFanti, T.: Better than being there: Next millennium networks. IEEE Computer

Graphics and Applications 20(1), 60–61 (2000)

4. Fleming, T.M., Bavin, L., Stasiak, K., Hermansson-Webb, E., Merry, S.N., Cheek,
C., Lucassen, M., Lau, H.M., Pollmuller, B., Hetrick, S.: Serious games and gam-
iﬁcation for mental health: current status and promising directions. Frontiers in
psychiatry 7, 215 (2017)

5. Garcia-Betances, R.I., Jim´enez-Mixco, V., Arredondo, M.T., Cabrera-Umpi´errez,
M.F.: Using virtual reality for cognitive training of the elderly. American Journal
of Alzheimer’s Disease & Other Dementias® 30(1), 49–54 (2015)

6. Kim, K., Boelling, L., Haesler, S., Bailenson, J., Bruder, G., Welch, G.F.: Does
a digital assistant need a body? the inﬂuence of visual embodiment and social
behavior on the perception of intelligent virtual agents in ar. In: 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR). pp. 105–114.
IEEE (2018)

7. Kope´c, W., Balcerzak, B., Nielek, R., Kowalik, G., Wierzbicki, A., Casati, F.: Older
adults and hackathons: A qualitative study. Empirical Software Engineering 23(4),
1895–1930 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-017-9565-6

10

G. Pochwatko et al.

8. Kope´c, W., Skorupska, K., Jaskulska, A., Abramczuk, K., Nielek, R., Wierzbicki,
A.: Livinglab pjait: Towards better urban participation of seniors. In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Web Intelligence. pp. 1085–1092. WI ’17, ACM,
New York, NY, USA (2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3106426.3109040

9. Kope´c, W., Wichrowski, M., Kalinowski, K., Jaskulska, A., Skorupska, K.,
Cnotkowski, D., Tyszka, J., Popieluch, A., Voitenkova, A., Mas(cid:32)lyk, R., Gago, P.,
Krzywicki, M., Kornacka, M., Biele, C., Kobyli´nski, P., Kowalski, J., Abramczuk,
K., Zdrodowska, A., Pochwatko, G., Mo˙zaryn, J., Marasek, K.: Vr with older adults:
Participatory design of a virtual atm training simulation. IFAC-PapersOnLine
52(19), 277–281 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.110

10. Korn, O., Buchweitz, L., Rees, A., Bieber, G., Werner, C., Hauer, K.: Using aug-
mented reality and gamiﬁcation to empower rehabilitation activities and elderly
persons. a study applying design thinking. In: International Conference on Applied
Human Factors and Ergonomics. pp. 219–229. Springer (2018)

11. Reeves, B.N., Nass, C.: C.(1996) the media equation: How people treat computers.
Television, And New Media Like Real People And Places. Cambridge University
Press, New York, Ny, Usa

12. Sorokowska, A., Sorokowski, P., Hilpert, P., Cantarero, K., Frackowiak, T., Ah-
madi, K., Alghraibeh, A.M., Aryeetey, R., Bertoni, A., Bettache, K., et al.: Pre-
ferred interpersonal distances: a global comparison. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy-
chology 48(4), 577–592 (2017)

13. Syed-Abdul, S., Malwade, S., Nursetyo, A.A., Sood, M., Bhatia, M., Barsasella,
D., Liu, M.F., Chang, C.C., Srinivasan, K., Raja, M., et al.: Virtual reality among
the elderly: a usefulness and acceptance study from taiwan. BMC geriatrics 19(1),
223 (2019)

