1
2
0
2

n
a
J

2
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
4
4
4
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience: A Comparison of
the First-Person and Third-Person Perspectives

Katharina Emmerich
katharina.emmerich@uni-due.de
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Sebastian Cmentowski
sebastian.cmentowski@uni-due.de
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Andrey Krekhov
andrey.krekhov@uni-due.de
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Jens Krüger
jens.krueger@uni-due.de
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany

Figure 1: Our research compares two common perspectives used to deliver VR gaming content: using the player’s view as a
first-person perspective (left) versus a third-person mixed-reality view blending the player into the virtual world (right).

ABSTRACT
The spectatorship experience for virtual reality (VR) games differs
strongly from its non-VR precursor. When watching non-VR games
on platforms such as Twitch, spectators just see what the player
sees, as the physical interaction is mostly unimportant for the
overall impression. In VR, the immersive full-body interaction is a
crucial part of the player experience. Hence, content creators, such
as streamers, often rely on green screens or similar solutions to
offer a mixed-reality third-person view to disclose their full-body
actions. Our work compares the most popular realizations of the
first-person and the third-person perspective in an online survey
(N = 217) with three different VR games. Contrary to the current
trend to stream in third-person, our key result is that most viewers

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445515

prefer the first-person version, which they attribute mostly to the
better focus on in-game actions and higher involvement. Based on
the study insights, we provide design recommendations for both
perspectives.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; • Software
and its engineering → Interactive games; Virtual worlds soft-
ware; • General and reference → Empirical studies.

KEYWORDS
virtual reality, spectator, games, streaming, perspective, first-person,
third-person

ACM Reference Format:
Katharina Emmerich, Andrey Krekhov, Sebastian Cmentowski, and Jens
Krüger. 2021. Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience: A Comparison of
the First-Person and Third-Person Perspectives. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445515

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

1 INTRODUCTION
Ever since the establishment of live streaming platforms such as
Twitch [1], watching other play became a popular spare-time activ-
ity across all ages. The digital audience tunes in for various reasons,
be it to follow an esports tournament or to check out a newly re-
leased, trending game. This curiosity also applies to recent virtual
reality (VR) titles (cf. Half-Life: Alyx [46]), forcing streamers to
adapt their content creation and delivery pipeline to the specifics
of VR.

The main difference is that VR games heavily rely on the high
degree of immersion provided by such stereoscopic setups. The
player experiences a feeling of being in the virtual world, which is
usually achieved by the head-orientation-dependent view in combi-
nation with realistic full-body interactions. Clearly, that impression
cannot be easily transferred to the audience, because most spec-
tators utilize 2D displays, e.g., mobile devices or PC/TV screens.
Hence, streamers seek for viable non-VR workarounds to deliver
the immersive VR gaming content.

One prominent way to transport the experienced presence to the
audience is to provide a mixed-reality view of the player/streamer.
By switching to a third-person perspective, the player blends into
the surrounding virtual environment. The spectators can see the
player’s full-body movements and interactions in context, enabling
a better understanding of the actual gameplay experience (see Fig-
ure 1).

On the other hand, the traditional first-person perspective offers
a unique advantage: seeing the game from the player’s perspective
brings the spectators as close to the in-game action as possible. Due
to the same point of view, the spectators obtain identical visual
information. This similar visual perception of the virtual world can
potentially evoke the viewers’ feeling of playing on their own.

So, which perspective is best for the streaming of VR games?
Given the aforementioned conceptual differences and the fact that
both perspectives are widely used and accepted, we do not expect
a definite answer to this question. The right choice of perspective
seems to depend on different contextual factors, such as the type
of the game or the purpose of watching. Hence, there is a need to
study spectators’ preferences and motives in different contexts to
support the creation of compelling audience experiences.

With our work, we lay the foundations for the research of spec-
tator experiences and perspectives in VR settings. The choice of
perspective significantly frames the viewing experience. While re-
searchers agree that immersion is an important part of interactive
VR experiences, it remains unclear how important immersion is
for spectators of VR players compared to other factors such as
contextual understanding and player centricity.

Aiming towards a comprehensive VR streaming guideline, our
work is the first to contribute relevant insights into spectators’
opinions. We present an online survey (N = 217), which covered
three different VR games: Beat Saber [2], Superhot VR [42], and
Stand Out: VR Battle Royale [31]. For each game, the spectators
watched a first-person and a third-person video and finally shared
their impressions. The so obtained results allow us to discuss each
perspective’s particular strengths and weaknesses and formulate
preliminary design considerations, which are meant to provide a
starting point for VR content creators.

We have to understand how different perspectives (such as first-
person and third-person) contribute to different demands of specta-
tors to be able to make informed design choices. This research is
not only relevant in the context of game streaming. It also applies
to related VR setups including some kind of spectator. In particular,
the choice of perspective is important in multi-user scenarios that
combine VR and non-VR users. Example scenarios include VR train-
ing applications (surgical training, rehabilitation games) where the
perspective choice is crucial for supervisors to be able to adequately
monitor and evaluate the trainee’s performance. Hence, apart from
giving practical advice to VR streamers and content providers, our
work creates the basis for more sophisticated choices of perspective
and paves the way for future research on audience experiences in
VR.

2 RELATED WORK
Today, online video and streaming platforms such as YouTube [54]
and Twitch [1] enable a globally distributed audience to watch their
favorite players and games at any time. Former consumers can now
easily produce user-generated content (UGC) and are challenging
the traditional media [5]. So-called Let’s Play videos have become
increasingly popular [14] and game live streaming has become a
cultural phenomenon comparable to sports events [18, 29, 41]. Apart
from casual gaming videos, competitive gaming events, commonly
referred to as esports [17, 30], are taking a growing share of the
overall streaming landscape [8].

Considering the overall popularity of game streaming, the mo-
tives and experiences of spectators have been of ongoing interest
to the games user research community [21, 43, 50]. Instead of just
focusing on the experience of the active player, a variety of work
has broadened the research scope by explicitly investigating the
spectator experience [4, 11, 13, 28, 44] and the motivations for view-
ers to spend their free time watching others play [10, 18, 24]. The
spectator’s experience is influenced by the game content, but also
by the spectator interface [32], that is the available information
and the perspective from which they view both the game and the
player. Moreover, spectators—no matter if co-located or mediated—
are part of the social play setting and often engage in some form
of interaction with the player, which further shapes their experi-
ence [12, 18, 44, 48].

This social interaction is also a strong motivator for watching
game streams [18]. Other vital factors are enjoyment, informa-
tion seeking, and distraction [6, 18, 24]. For esports, research has
revealed two additional motivators: the general competitive atmo-
sphere and the opportunity to share emotional connections [17,
26, 38, 51, 52]. Hence, the reasons why spectators watch Let’s Play
videos and game live streams seem manifold. A commonly used
framework to assess the motivation behind media usage is the uses
and gratification (UG) model [22, 23, 33, 34]. UG is based on the
assumption that users actively choose certain media with the mo-
tivation to achieve a particular gratification. The available media
has to compete constantly with other sources of gratification, and
personal reasoning is considered individually for every user. UG
typically classifies the user needs into the categories cognitive, af-
fective, personal integrative, social integrative, and tension release. In
an empirical study, Sjöblom et al. [39] revealed that all five classes

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

of gratification are associated with the motivations of twitch users
watching game live streams.

The previous research on game videos and streams is mainly
based on the footage of common, non-VR games. VR games have
just recently gained a foothold in the consumer market. New hard-
ware and the release of sophisticated AAA-games, such as Half-Life:
Alyx [46] and Asgard’s Wrath [37], have led to regular media cov-
erage and an increased interest of the broad gamer community. In
contrast to non-VR games, the special setup of VR games including
head-mounted displays (HMDs) and movement tracking makes
it more challenging to convey the entire immersive experience
to spectators. In particular, the player’s body movements used to
control the game become an integral part of gameplay. Research
dealing with the audience of VR games remains sparse and is mainly
focused on local spectatorship [16, 19, 20, 25, 53]. Hence, the ques-
tions remains how the game experience can best be delivered in
videos and streams to a broad online audience.

One possibility is to use the same approach as with non-VR
games: players directly broadcast the game view that is displayed
on the HMD, so that the audience sees the same as the player.
This first-person perspective ensures that the spectator’s focus
always matches the player’s current focus and that the spectators
see the game world as if they were playing themselves. Research
on different player perspectives indicates that a first-person view
makes it easier for players to focus on the action and provides
advantages to immersion [9, 49]. These effects might also apply to
the spectator’s perspective.

On the other hand, a first-person streaming perspective does
not show the player’s bodily interaction with the VR game. This
might impede a full understanding of what is happening, as the
manipulations conducted by the player are partly hidden from
the spectator and only the effects in the game are revealed [32].
Tekin and Reeves [44] point out that seeing the game on screen
and at the same time seeing the player’s bodily actions—resulting
in a “dual vision”—are important parts of spectating. Therefore,
many VR game streamers follow a different approach by providing
a third-person perspective: they use a green screen and external
cameras to blend themselves into the virtual world (similar to the
original trailer of the HTC Vive [45]). This mixed-reality perspective
enables spectators to see the game world and the player at the same
time, and might thus enhance their experience. At the same time,
this approach creates a mismatch between the spectator’s view
and the player’s view. Consequently, the third-person perspective
underlines the difference between player and spectator and shifts
the focus of spectating from events in the game world to the player.
As both perspectives seem to have advantages and shortcomings,
the question arises how spectators experience and evaluate the
different views and which perspective is superior in certain contexts.
To the current date, there is no other work investigating this open
research question. While there are some related studies on the use
of different user perspectives in VR environments [7, 15, 36, 40],
these are not directly applicable to the experience of spectators.

3 ONLINE SURVEY
We conducted an online survey to assess spectators’ preferences
and opinions on the different perspectives in VR game videos. More

Figure 2: Beat Saber [2] is one of the three games used in
the online survey. Participants compared two perspectives:
first-person (top) and third-person view (bottom).

precisely, we compared the first-person perspective, which directly
displays the in-game view of the player, with a mixed-reality third-
person perspective, in which the player is captured and directly
cut into the game world (see Figure 1). The goal of the study was
to gain insights about the advantages and disadvantages of both
approaches regarding different aspects of the viewing experience
such as comprehensibility, entertainment, and involvement. Hence,
our main research question is how spectators experience the two
perspectives, which differences can be found, and which perspective
is preferable in certain settings.

3.1 Selection of Three Exemplary VR Games
We decided to compare the two perspectives using different com-
mercial VR games, as viewers’ preferences and experiences may
also depend on certain characteristics of the game. Our game selec-
tion process was based on several criteria. First, the games should
be popular and positively rated, to ensure that they provide an inter-
esting experience and successfully make use of VR headsets. Second,
the games had to support the software tool LIV [27], which enabled
us to create the mixed reality third-person perspective. Finally, the
games should represent different game genres, which feature dif-
ferent core mechanics and controls. Following these criteria, we
reviewed the rankings of current VR games on the online gaming
platform Steam [47] and analyzed viewer numbers on Twitch to

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

versa. This way, the player has to consider every movement, result-
ing in rather slow-paced gameplay. Though the player can move in
room-scale, the enemies are then approaching quickly. So in most
levels, there is not much locomotion happening, and the focus is on
the opponents. However, enemies are approaching from different
sides, so that the perspective is not fixed in contrast to Beat Saber.
Stand Out is a first-person shooter in which the player plays on-
line against a large group of other players (see Figure 4). Following
the battle royale principle, the goal is to be the last survivor on
the island where the game takes place. To win, the player has to
collect weapons and ammunition, shoot other players, and move
across the island. The player can travel larger distances using the
control stick. Hence, in contrast to the other two games, locomotion
is very prevalent in Stand Out. Like in other first-person shooters,
the gameplay is rather fast-paced in general. The focus of attention
is very dynamic since the player has to react quickly in case of an
attack.

All in all, the three games differ mainly concerning pace, focus,
and locomotion. We assume that these characteristics can poten-
tially influence the spectators’ experience in the two perspectives
under investigation, as these provide different main focal points.
For instance, quick game events might be more comprehensible
for spectators if they see both the player and the game world in
the third-person mixed-reality perspective. On the other hand, the
first-person perspective might be more suitable for games with
a dynamic focus and much locomotion. Therefore, we included
all three games in both perspectives in our study to investigate
potential differences.

3.2 Implementation of the Different

Perspectives

Overall, there are several possibilities to compile a stream of a
VR gaming session. We decided to compare two basic approaches
which are commonly used by streamers and at the same time differ
significantly regarding their main focal point: the first-person view
and a mixed-reality third-person perspective. While some streamers
also use a combination of different views by compiling picture-in-
picture modes, we focus on the two main approaches, as we are
particularly interested in how spectators evaluate the possibility
to see the player integrated in the game world in the third-person
view and the lack thereof in the first-person view.

As stated above, we recorded two gameplay videos for each of
the three games: one with the first-person perspective and one with
the third-person perspective. In all cases, the same player (male, 26
years old) played the game and all videos are about three minutes
long.

The first-person view was simply a screen-recording of the game
from the player’s point of view. To create the third-person mixed-
reality views, we used the software LIV [27], which allows integrat-
ing a green screen recording of the player into the game world. We
used an additional, static game camera to capture the game scene
from behind the player (cf. Figures 2, 3, and 4). We also consid-
ered rotating the mixed-reality camera dynamically based on the
player’s actions. While this approach is technically possible using
LIV, it requires a far more sophisticated setup. Since a dynamic
camera was not required to address our main research question and

Figure 3: Superhot VR [42] is one of the three games used in
the online survey. Participants compared two perspectives:
first-person (top) and third-person view (bottom).

identify popular games. We chose three games that match all cri-
teria: Beat Saber [2], Superhot VR [42], and Stand Out: VR Battle
Royale [31] (hereafter abbreviated as Stand Out). All games had
more than 25.000 peak viewers on Twitch and more than 1.000
mainly positive reviews on Steam, indicating their popularity.

Beat Saber is a music-based VR game. The player chooses a song
and then swings two colored lightsabers to cut blocks of the same
color, which represent the beats of the music and quickly approach
the player (see Figure 2). Hence, the main focus of the game is on
the quick gestural reaction of the player to the fast-paced blocks.
There is a direct mapping between the player’s hand movement
and the movement of the lightsabers in the game. Apart from single
steps to the side to avoid an obstacle wall, there is no locomotion
needed. As the blocks always approach on fixed paths in front of the
player, the view orientation in Beat Saber is rather fixed. We chose
this game due to its remarkably high popularity, and because in
current Beat Saber streams, both perspectives we want to compare
(first person and third person mixed reality) are commonly used.

In Superhot VR, the player has to complete short levels by de-
stroying all enemies and dodging their attacks (see Figure 3). For
this purpose, the player can use various objects lying around, such
as pistols and bottles. The unique twist of this game is that time
progresses only at the speed in which the player moves. That means,
if the player moves slowly, the enemies also move slowly, and vice

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

participants’ familiarity with VR headsets and VR games, as well
as their digital gaming and streaming habits.

As we were also interested in viewers’ general motivations to
watch videos or streams of VR games, we compiled a list of possible
motives based on the uses and gratification theory. More precisely,
we derived our items from the work of Sjöblom et al. [39], who
investigated the motivation of Twitch users. Although this moti-
vational model does not explicitly refer to VR streaming content,
we believe that the general types of motives of viewers are largely
independent from the platform used by the streamer (including VR
setups). Hence, we think the model includes all high-level motiva-
tions that are relevant in the context of our study. The question
and the final list of answers can be found in Table 1. Participants
were asked to select all reasons that apply (multiple answers were
possible). We also included the option "None (I would not watch a
video of a VR game)", to be able to identify participants having no
interest in the study’s topic.

Following this first, general part of the questionnaire, we asked
participants to ensure that their speakers or headphones are active
to be able to hear the sound of the videos and then showed them the
first video. To control that the video was not forwarded or skipped,
we measured the time participants spent with the video. This way,
we were able to identify participants who skipped (parts of) the
videos and label their data as invalid.

After the video, we administered the enjoyment subscale of
the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) [35] to assess how much
participants enjoyed watching the video. To further investigate the
viewing experience, we asked additional custom questions about
the view and the comprehensibility of the video, as well as the
perceived involvement. The full list of questions can be found in
Table 2. Then the second video was shown, and again IMI and the
custom questions were administered after that. Then, we asked
whether participants knew or have played the game shown in the
videos before, how much they like the game and how much they
like the genre it belongs to in general. Finally, participants were
asked which of the two perspectives they preferred. There was also
the option to indicate that they did not have a preference. In a free-
text form, we asked participants to give reasons for their decision.
Moreover, participants could provide any additional notes.

Considering that we cannot completely control the setting and
conditions under which participants take part in an online study,
we increased the validity of the data by including sanity check
questions. For this purpose, we asked the same question twice with
reversed scales, to ensure that participants have read the question
text and did not select random answers.

3.4 Recruitment and Sample
We were interested in the opinion of potential spectators of VR
game videos and aimed at improving their viewing experience.
Thus, we defined all persons who have at least some interest in VR
technology and digital games as our target group, with no further
restrictions regarding demographic data or prior experience with
VR. We promoted the survey on different online channels, both in
English and in German. That included several Reddit communities
and Facebook groups related to the topics game streaming or VR

Figure 4: Stand Out: VR Battle Royale [31] is one of the three
games used in the survey. Participants compared two per-
spectives: first-person (top) and third-person view (bottom).

since we wanted to stick to the most commonly used techniques in
the gaming community, we discarded this option. Instead, we tested
different positions while implementing the third-person views to
find an appropriate static camera position for each game.

LIV also enables to replace the real player by an avatar model, a
feature used by some streamers, as well. However, such a third-party
avatar is not visually matched to the game and, thus, introduces an
additional source of interference. While the real player’s appearance
also mismatches with the game world, a mixed-reality view best
reveals the manipulations conducted by the player in the direct
context of the game. For these reasons, we decided to not use a
virtual avatar.

3.3 Study Plan and Survey Structure
We conducted a mixed design online study with the game shown in
the videos as a between-subjects variable and the video perspective
as a within-subjects variable. That means, each participant was
randomly assigned to one game and watched both videos of that
game. The order of the two perspectives was counterbalanced, as
well, to avoid bias due to potential sequence effects.

The survey started with a short introduction, informing partici-
pants about the goal, procedure, and anonymity of the study. Then
we asked for basic demographic data, including age, gender, and
nationality. Additionally, we requested some information about

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

Table 1: Overview of the different motivational aspects related to the viewing of VR game videos (participants were asked to
select all answers that apply).

Class of Gratification
(based on Sjöblom et
al. [39])

cognitive
cognitive
affective
personal integrative
social integrative
tension release
tension release

Which of the following reasons could motivate you to watch a video where a player is
playing a VR game?

Votes
(N =217)

to inform me about the game or to get an impression of it (information seeking)
to learn new game strategies or how to master the game (learning game strategies)
because it is entertaining and/or exciting (enjoyment)
to be able to comment and have a say (recognition)
in order not to feel alone (companionship)
to distract me and pass the time (distraction)
in order to relax (relaxation)

113
84
119
24
26
62
46

games. Moreover, we also used more general groups that are aimed
at the recruitment of online survey participants.

In total, 316 participants completed the survey. Sixty-nine of
these cases had to be excluded from the analysis because partici-
pants failed the sanity check questions or did not watch the videos
completely. Moreover, we excluded 30 additional participants, who
stated that they had no interest in VR games and would never view
videos of such games voluntarily. Those participants do not match
our target group. Hence, our final sample contains 217 participants.
The sample includes a wide variety of nationalities (27 different
countries), with 63 German and 77 American participants being the
majority. The mean age of participants was 28 (SD = 8.69), with a
range from 16 to 64. Regarding gender, the sample included 125 male
and 92 female participants. About three-quarters of all participants
(N = 172) reported that they regularly played digital games. Many
participants also had prior experience with VR games, with only 58
persons stating that they have not yet used a VR headset. Regarding
the question how often they watched gaming videos/streams on
average, most participants (N = 189) reported that they watched
game streams at least once a month.

Concerning our three game subgroups, the distribution is a bit
uneven: 89 participants viewed the videos of Superhot VR, 67 par-
ticipants viewed Beat Saber, and 61 Stand Out. However, the dis-
tribution of age, gender, and nationality is comparable among the
three groups. About two thirds of the participants in the Beat Saber
group knew the game before (N = 44) and nearly half of the group
had played the game themselves (N = 29). Superhot VR was known
to half of the participants (N = 40) and 33 participants had played
the game. Stand Out was less known by our participants, with only
13 persons being familiar with the game, of whom 8 had played it.
Asked about how much they liked the game, participants in all three
game groups rated the games slightly positive on average on a scale
from 0 to 6 (Beat Saber: M = 4.19, SD = 1.79; Superhot VR: M = 3.53,
SD = 2.07; Stand Out: M = 3.15, SD = 1.99). Similarly, participants
stated to rather like the genre of the game they watched in general
(Beat Saber: M = 4.39, SD = 1.65; Superhot VR: M = 3.73, SD = 2.17;
Stand Out: M = 3.30, SD = 2.13).

4 RESULTS
In the first step of our data analysis, we have a look at participants’
general motivation to watch videos of VR games. After that, we
address our main research question by comparing participants’
evaluations of both video perspectives and their preferences.

4.1 Motivation to Watch VR Game Videos
To examine participants’ general motivation to watch VR game
videos, we analyzed their answers to the uses and gratifications
question. Table 1 shows how often participants selected each rea-
son to watch a VR game video. Whereas all different motivations
received some votes, the distribution of votes indicates that affec-
tive and cognitive gratifications were most prevalent among our
participants. The majority of participants would watch videos of
VR games, if they seek information about the game (N = 113) or
because they enjoy watching them and feel entertained (N = 119).
Learning about game strategies was also mentioned often (N = 84).
On the other hand, fewer participants see tension release, both in
terms of distraction (N = 62) and relaxation (N = 46), as a moti-
vation to watch videos of VR games. Finally, personal and social
integrative motives were least prevalent (N = 24 and N = 26).

4.2 Evaluation of First- and Third-Person

Perspectives

With regard to our main research question, we analyze how partic-
ipants perceived both perspectives and which one they preferred.
Overall, the voting shows a recognizable preference for the first-
person perspective: 134 of all 217 participants preferred the first-
person perspective, whereas only 60 voted for the third-person
perspective. Twenty-three participants stated that they have no
favorite view. We performed Pearson chi-square tests to investigate
if there are significant relations between the preferred perspective
and certain characteristics of participants that might influence their
vote, namely their gender, whether or not they were familiar with
the game that was shown, and their general motivations to watch
VR game videos. Regarding gender, vote distribution is very similar
between male and female participants, and there is no significant
correlation, 𝜒 2(2) = 2.31, p = .316. Participants’ familiarity with the
game seems to have no effect on their voting, either, 𝜒 2(2) = 0.35,
p = .839. To test the influence of different general motivational

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Figure 5: Distribution of the preferred perspective votes of our participants for the three games Beat Saber, Superhot VR, and
Stand Out.

aspects, we performed chi-square tests for each of the statements
shown in Table 1. The results indicate that whether or not par-
ticipants selected a particular motivation is not related to their
preferred perspective, as no significant correlations could be found
(all p > .348).

As there might be differences with regard to the three games we
tested, we further investigate participants’ preferences in the three
subgroups for Beat Saber, Superhot VR, and Stand Out. Therefore, we
split our data for the following analysis and report results for each
game individually. Figure 5 shows participants’ preferred perspec-
tive in the three study conditions. In line with the overall result, the
first-person perspective received most votes in all cases. However,
there is a noticeable difference regarding the distribution of votes:
whereas there is a clear preference for the first-person perspective
in the Stand Out group (48 out of 61 participants) and the Superhot
VR group (55 out of 89 participants), the votes in the Beat Saber
group are almost evenly distributed with 31 participants preferring
the first-person perspective and 27 participants preferring the third-
person perspective. A chi-square test underlines that the game that
was shown had a significant influence on the vote of the preferred
perspective, 𝜒 2(4) = 14.48, p = .006, Cramer’s V = 0.183 (no expected
cell frequencies were below 5). Though the effect size is only small
(V < 0.3), the result indicates that the two video perspectives were
perceived differently in Beat Saber than in the other games.

To investigate the reasons why participants prefer one view to
the other, we compared the viewing experiences between both
perspectives and tested for significant differences. Table 2 shows
all mean values for both perspectives in the three game conditions.
For each game and each dimension of the viewing experience, we
performed repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
perspective as a within-subjects variable and order of game views
as a between-subjects factor to test for potential sequence effects.
In the following, we report the results of these analyzes for each
game. In the interest of better legibility, we only report on sequence
effects if they are significant. If not mentioned, the analysis did
not show a significant interaction effect between the experience
dimension and the order of the two perspectives.

4.2.1 Beat Saber. In the Beat Saber group, most differences are
not significant. Neither enjoyment nor any ratings of focus and
clear view and comprehensibility were rated significantly different
between the two perspectives (all p > .05). In contrast, the two
questions regarding the perceived involvement of the viewers show

significant differences: in the first-person view, participants felt
more like being part of the game (I1), F(1, 65) = 6.06, p = .016, and
like being in the virtual world (I2), F(1, 65) = 9.04, p = .004.

Superhot VR. In the Superhot VR condition, the repeated
4.2.2
measures ANOVA revealed more significant differences. In the first-
person perspective, the ratings regarding having a good view of
the game world (F3) were higher than in the third-person perspec-
tive, F(1, 87) = 5.64, p = .020. Additionally, the feeling of missing
important things (F2) was significantly higher in the third-person
perspective, F(1, 87) = 6.93, p = .010. In terms of comprehensibility,
participants had the feeling of significantly better understanding
what happened in the game (C1), F(1, 87) = 7.47, p = .008, and
how successful the player was (C3), F(1, 87) = 7.93, p = .006, in the
first-person perspective. Similar to the results in the Beat Saber
group, both items regarding involvement (I1 and I2) were rated
significantly higher in the first-person perspective, F(1, 87) = 17.19,
p < .001 (I1), and F(1, 87) = 15.91, p < .001 (I2). However, in the Su-
perhot VR condition, there was also a significant interaction effect
between the ratings for involvement and the order in which the two
videos were watched, indicating sequence effects. The rating for
being part of the game (I1) was particularly high for the first-person
perspective if participants had viewed the third-person perspective
video beforehand (M = 3.64 compared to M = 2.88), F(1, 87) = 6.27,
p = .014. The same pattern becomes apparent for the item "I saw
the virtual world as if I was there myself" (M = 3.98 compared to
M = 2.64), F(1, 87) = 13.40, p < .001. All other differences (IMI, F1,
and C2) were not significant (all p > .05).

Stand Out. In the Stand Out group, enjoyment (IMI) was sig-
4.2.3
nificantly higher in the first-person video, F(1, 59) = 13.68, p < .001.
Moreover, participants gave significantly better ratings regarding
focus and clear view in the first-person perspective: they better saw
how the player interacted with game objects (F1), F(1, 59) = 12.47,
p = .001, and had a better view of the game world (F3), F(1, 59) = 15.53,
p < .001. At the same time, the feeling of missing important things
was lower (F2), F(1, 59) = 14.43, p < .001. The three items regarding
comprehensibility were also rated significantly higher in the first-
person perspective: participants better understood what happened
in the game (C1), F(1, 59) = 4.10, p = .047, what the player was doing
(C2), F(1, 59) = 6.98, p = .011, and how successful the player was
(C3), F(1, 59) = 16.60, p < .001. In line with the other two groups,
involvement (I1 and I2) was significantly higher in the first-person
perspective: F(1, 59) = 16.39, p < .001 (I1), and F(1, 59) = 26.23,

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

Table 2: Mean values and standard deviations (M(SD)) of different aspects of the viewing experience in the three study con-
ditions (games) Beat Saber, Superhot VR, and Stand Out, comparing the first-person and the third-person perspectives. Each
item was rated on a 7-point scale ranging from 0 to 6. Significant differences between two perspectives are indicated in bold
print.

Beat Saber (N =67)

1st person

3rd person

Superhot VR (N =89)
3rd person
1st person

Stand Out (N =61)

1st person

3rd person

3.18 (1.47)

3.26 (1.44)

3.03 (1.70)

3.10 (1.64)

3.21 (1.52)

2.43 (1.73)

4.24 (1.61)

4.57 (1.46)

4.28 (1.60)

4.10 (1.62)

4.54 (1.21)

3.74 (1.70)

IMI

Enjoyment

Focus and Clear View
F1) I saw well how the player

interacted with objects in the
game world.

F2) While watching, I had the

2.58 (1.83)

2.19 (1.78)

2.31 (1.97)

3.03 (2.07)

2.70 (1.80)

3.93 (1.89)

feeling of missing important
things in the game because I
couldn’t see them.

F3) I had a good view of the game

4.15 (1.49)

4.24 (1.46)

4.18 (1.47)

3.65 (1.72)

4.14 (1.38)

3.13 (1.94)

world.

Comprehensibility
C1) I always understood what
happened in the game.

C2) At any time I could

comprehend what the player
was doing in the VR world.
C3) I was able to understand how
successful the player was in
the game.

Involvement
I1) I felt like being part of the

game.

4.52 (1.58)

4.75 (1.47)

4.33 (1.43)

3.80 (1.63)

4.23 (1.33)

3.64 (1.89)

3.93 (1.64)

4.42 (1.63)

4.17 (1.51)

4.06 (1.74)

4.44 (1.35)

3.78 (1.75)

4.33 (1.66)

4.61 (1.59)

4.37 (1.58)

3.85 (1.70)

4.10 (1.47)

3.16 (1.91)

3.06 (1.88)

2.46 (1.97)

3.28 (1.85)

2.35 (1.95)

3.67 (1.88)

2.54 (2.28)

I2) I saw the virtual world as if I

3.54 (1.99)

2.70 (1.92)

3.35 (1.85)

2.44 (1.89)

3.93 (1.83)

2.59 (2.03)

was there myself.

p < .001 (I2). Summarized, all aspects of the viewing experience
differ significantly between the first- and the third-person perspec-
tive in the Stand Out group, with the first-person perspective being
rated better in all cases.

4.3 Thematic Analysis: Reasons for Preferred

Perspective

To gain further insight into the positive and negative qualities
of the two perspectives, we performed a thematic analysis of the
free text answers to the question of why participants prefer one
perspective to the other. For this purpose, two researchers looked
at all answers independently and sorted them by recurring topics.
We followed a deductive approach based on the reflexive thematic
analysis described by Braun and Clarke [3], with an additional
check of inter-rater agreement. After the first round of clustering,
both researchers compared their lists and discussed all differences.
Based on the discussion, a final clustering was agreed upon.

We identified six clusters that describe reasons why participants
preferred the first-person perspective, as shown in Table 3. Many

participants (N = 38) highlighted a higher involvement perceived
in the first-person perspective. They reported that this perspective
made them feel like being part of the game or even being the player
themselves. Besides, some participants (N = 12) pointed out that the
focus was better in the first-person perspective because they were
able to see the important things (such as enemies approaching).
Participants also reported that the comprehensibility was higher,
as they were better able to follow the game events (N = 10). In the
third-person perspective, the player was perceived as an obstacle
by some participants (N = 10), covering parts of the game and
interfering with immersion. Apart from the higher involvement,
some participants (N = 8) also emphasized that they prefer the
first-person perspective because it is the "original game perspective".
This way, they experience how the game looks to the player and
can better imagine how it would feel to play the game. Finally, some
participants (N = 7) pointed out that the experienced realism was
higher in the first-person perspective.

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Table 3: Results of the thematic analysis with regard to reasons why participants preferred the first-person perspective. The
middle column contains exemplary quotes of participants which were assigned to the topics. The right column shows the
number of mentions, i.e. how many single answers of participants were assigned to the respective topic.

Reasons to Prefer the
First-Person Perspective

Involvement

Examples

Mentions

The viewers felt more immersed, they felt like being part of the
game, being in the game world, or being the player.

I like the first-person perspective because it makes me
feel like I’m playing the game, not someone else. It is
more entertaining when I feel like I’m part of the game.

Focus

The viewers think that the focus was better, because they were
able to see all important things and did not miss something
outside the viewport.

It gives me the ability to see the important parts of the
game as they happen, rather than being stuck facing
one direction, missing details that are behind my point
of view.

Comprehensibility

The viewers better understood what happened in the game and
what the player was doing.

First person (in this game at least) lets viewers
understand what the player is doing.

Obstructive Player in Third Person

The player in the third-person view was perceived as
obstructive, because he obscured the view on the game world
and did not fit to the environment.

Original Game Perspective

The first-person view corresponds with the original game
perspective, hence viewers can better imagine how it would be
to play the game.

Realism

First person allows for better visibility without
obstruction by the player.

I don’t like the mixed reality view. I want to see
exactly what the player sees.

The experience felt more real to viewers.

Because it looks more real to me.

38

12

10

10

8

7

For the third-person perspective, we identified four categories of
reasons to prefer it to the first-person perspective, as shown in Ta-
ble 4. The most frequently mentioned reason was that participants
(N = 19) liked to see the player and his movements. They reported
that it was more interesting and entertaining to focus the player
and to be able to observe the direct interaction between the player
and the game’s environment. Related to seeing the player’s move-
ment, some participants (N = 10) also highlighted that they gained
a better understanding of how the game is played and how the in-
teraction works. Hence, they stated that the comprehensibility was
better in the third-person perspective. Besides, some participants
(N = 6) preferred the third-person view, because they experienced
some form of motion sickness in the first-person perspective. They
reported that it was more comfortable to watch the game in third
person. Finally, some participants (N = 4) preferred the third-person
perspective, because they think that it enabled them to see more of
the game world.

Part of the identified reasons to prefer one perspective to the
other were mentioned comparably often in all three game groups.
More precisely, participants in each group addressed the topics
higher involvement, realism, and the original game perspective of
the first-person perspective, as well as less motion sickness and a
better view on the game world in the third-person perspective. In
contrast, some topics were more prevalent for specific games. The

better focus and the better comprehensibility of the first-person
perspective were predominantly mentioned by participants who
had watched the videos of Superhot VR: we counted focus eight
times and comprehensibility six times in the Superhot VR condition,
while both topics appeared only two times in each of the other
two conditions. However, at this point we want to remind that
the Superhot VR group was also bigger than the other two groups
(N = 89 vs. 67 and 61), which might account for such differences.
In the Stand Out condition, participants complained more about
the obstructive player in the third-person perspective (N = 8) than
participants in the other two groups. Moreover, two reasons to
prefer the third-person perspective—seeing the player’s movements
and comprehensibility—were mentioned for both Beat Saber and
Superhot VR, but not for the game Stand Out. Even though the Stand
Out group was a bit smaller than the other two study groups, the
difference is still noticeable.

5 DISCUSSION
We observed an overall preference for the first-person perspective
in our study. However, we found significant differences between
the three games. This result confirms our assumption that the
choice of an appropriate perspective is dependent on the particular
game. Moreover, the perceived benefits and shortcomings of both

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

Table 4: Results of the thematic analysis with regard to reasons why participants preferred the third-person perspective. The
middle column contains exemplary quotes of participants which were assigned to the topics. The right column shows the
number of mentions, i.e. how many single answers of participants were assigned to the respective topic.

Reasons to Prefer the
Third-Person Perspective

Player’s Movements

Examples

Mentions

To see the player’s movement and his interaction with the game
world is more entertaining and interesting.

It was more interesting to see how the person was
actually moving around and how it looked like he was
actually in the game world.

Comprehensibility

The viewers better understood what the player was doing.

Motion Sickness in First Person

It was more comfortable, because in the first-person view
viewers experienced dizziness or nausea.

View on Game World

The viewers feel that they can see more of the game world.

It was easier to see what the player was doing in the
game world.

Watching first person made me kind of dizzy so the
third-person perspective was more interesting and
more comfortable to watch.

The third-person perspective gave me a wider view of
the world in which the game was taking place.

19

11

6

4

perspectives as reported by our participants indicate that personal
preferences and the motivation of the viewer also play an important
role.

5.1 Influence of Game Characteristics on

Perspective Preferences

We received the most homogeneous feedback for the game Stand
Out. Very few participants preferred the third-person perspective,
and it also performed significantly worse regarding all measured
aspects of the viewing experience, including overall enjoyment.
Many participants mentioned a feeling of confusion and the impres-
sion of missing essential parts of the gameplay. Whereas viewers
of the other two games rather appreciated seeing the player in
action according to our thematic analysis, viewers of Stand Out
experienced the player as obstructive in the third-person view. We
assume that this issue is caused by a mismatch between the focus of
the viewer in the third-person perspective, which lies on the player,
and the location of the important game events: in Stand Out, the
main actions—such as approaching enemies, the search for coverage
or gun fights—are not centered around the player’s position, but
evolve further away in the surrounding. A first-person perspective
better matches this game characteristic and, thus, seems to be more
appropriate for this kind of games.

For the game Superhot VR, the participants were able to perceive
the player’s actions and interactions with objects in both views
equally and preferences are less clearly distributed. In contrast to
Stand Out, there is no significant difference in the IMI enjoyment
subscale: both perspectives induced similar levels of enjoyment.
Since entertainment was the most commonly mentioned motiva-
tor to watch VR game videos, we can assume that at least some
participants preferred the third-person view in Superhot VR for
enjoyment reasons. Nevertheless, many participants still disliked

the third-person perspective due to the feeling of having a lim-
ited view and missing important game events. Comments of some
participants point towards a possible explanation: these viewers
explicitly stated problems with situations where the player reacted
to opponents that were not visible on the screen. This issue seems
similar to the problems reported for the third-person perspective
in Stand Out. Yet, the problem is less prominent in Superhot VR and
only applies to certain situations. In contrast to Stand Out, Superhot
VR also contains important game events that are directly centered
around the player, such as dodging attacks in slow-motion. Such
events might account for the fact that still 27% of participants pre-
ferred the third-person perspective, which offers a good view on
the player. We assume that a more dynamic third-person camera
could reduce the issue of the limited view and increase approval of
the third-person view to a certain extent.

The most inconclusive results are the ones for the game Beat
Saber. In this case, our sample shows no clear preference for one
perspective. Regarding the spectator experience, only involvement—
measuring the feeling of being part of the game—was rated higher
for the first-person view. All other subscales, namely enjoyment,
comprehensibility, and seeing everything that is important, do not
indicate any difference between the two perspectives. These results
indicate that the third-person view seems to have advantages to
this particular game and that the first-person alternative is not
preferable in every case. Beat Saber seems to be more appropriate
for the third-person perspective than both other games.

Considering the identical study conditions and similar audiences,
the reasons for the measured differences between all three games
have to reside within the particular game characteristics. Our re-
sults indicate that the focus on the player’s bodily interaction in
the third-person perspective is more compelling for spectators of
Beat Saber than for viewers of the other two games. In contrast

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

to Stand Out and Superhot VR, Beat Saber requires very fast and
coordinated movements of the players. All relevant game events
(approaching blocks and hits of the player) are tightly coupled to
these movements both temporally and visually. Watching this type
of experience is likely more interesting if the viewers can see the
players and their movements, as they have an immediate effect
on the gameplay. Spectators of the other two games might prefer
the first-person perspective, because the player’s bodily interaction
looks less intriguing and, hence, a clear focus on the in-game events
is more interesting.

In addition, the overall high pace of the players’ movements in
Beat Saber makes it hard for new viewers to understand and follow
the gameplay. In this case, the third-person perspective could help
the audience to gain a better understanding of the game and its goals.
For the other two games, it is more important to see the players’
view and their interactions with the weaponry to understand the
overall gameplay and the players’ strategies.

Moreover, we assume that the fixed viewing direction of Beat
Saber contributes to the success of the third-person view. During
the game, the player’s view is mostly fixed in one direction, which
makes it easy to align the third-person camera with the main course
of action. As a result, the viewers’ impression of missing essential
aspects is reduced. For comparison, Superhot VR features a more
dynamic environment where enemies approach the player from
multiple directions. Stand Out provides the most dynamic locomo-
tion system that combines virtual motion and rotation with real
movements. Additionally, it relies heavily on long travel distances.
In summary, we assume that the key difference between the
three games is the visual coupling of the main game actions and the
player’s position and movement. In games like Beat Saber all rele-
vant game events are centered directly around the player and, thus,
emphasized by the third-person-perspective. In games like Stand
Out most events dynamically evolve in the wider surroundings. In
the latter case, the first-person perspective is more appropriate, as
it better guides the focus of the spectator towards the important
game events.

Despite the discussed reasons that explain the usefulness of
the third-person perspective for games like Beat Saber, a consid-
erable number of our participants still favored the first-person
view for this game. This preference hints towards certain desires
of the spectators—such as experiencing the game from the player’s
view—that require a first-person perspective and are less linked
to characteristics of the game. This finding is especially interest-
ing considering that using a mixed-reality third-person view is a
widespread approach in current Beat Saber videos and streams.

5.2 Subliming the Perceived Strengths and
Weaknesses of Both Perspectives

Our analysis of the three VR games has shown that certain game
characteristics seem to influence the suitability of the two different
streaming perspectives. However, we also consider spectators’ per-
sonal preferences and motives to be a relevant factor. The UG results
revealed two primary motivators of our participants for watching
VR game videos: entertainment and information seeking. This find-
ing fits the most frequently mentioned reasons for choosing one
perspective over the other: involvement and comprehensibility.

Whereas we could not identify significant correlations between
participants’ general motives and the perspective they preferred,
our thematic analysis of participants’ reasons to prefer a certain
perspective further helps to understand the perceived strengths
and weaknesses of both views. The first-person view is preferred
by spectators who want to feel like they are playing the game them-
selves and who want to see "through the player’s eyes". Some partici-
pants explicitly mentioned a "preference for the original perspective".
An increased involvement was the most prevalent reason of our
participants to prefer the first-person perspective. This finding of
the thematic analysis is underlined by our questions concerning the
feeling of "being part of the game". For all three games, participants
felt significantly more as a part of the game in the first-person
view. Hence, the first-person perspective better fosters immersive
experiences of spectators than the third-person view.

On the downside, some participants indicated that "seeing through
the player’s eyes" made them dizzy and motion sick. In these cases,
participants preferred the third-person view, which seems to be
less prone to motion sickness.

Interestingly, a better "comprehensibility" is mentioned as an
perceived advantage for both views. Participants disagreed which
perspective provides a better understanding. This feedback might
be the result of the different foci of both perspectives: In the first-
person perspective, viewers experience the game exactly how it
would look like playing it. Hence, some participants might have
the feeling that this view provides a better overall impression of
the game. In the third-person view, the spectators see the player’s
movements and the resulting actions in the virtual environment.
They might feel that this matching between manipulations and
effects provides a better understanding. In this case, the focus does
not lie on the original perspective and game events, but on the
player and their interaction with the game.

We can summarize the feedback of our participants into three
main perceived advantages of the third-person perspective: (1) pro-
viding an entertaining experience by showing the player in action,
(2) giving a good impression of the VR experience by revealing the
player’s full-body movement and the relation between the player’s
manipulations and the effects in the game world, and (3) avoid-
ing motion sickness. Consequently, the mixed-reality third-person
approach is particularly promising for games in which the player
performs interesting, distinctive movements in real life.

However, the overall preference for the first-person view and
the aforementioned concerns demonstrate that the third-person
perspective introduces challenges that need to be taken into account.
It is essential that the spectator’s view is not noticeably limited:
spectators must not feel that they miss important events due to
a static third-person view or that the player’s body might cover
significant parts of the environment. Besides the higher immersive
experience, these were the most prevalent reasons speaking in favor
of the first-person alternative. Hence, the chosen point of view in the
third-person perspective must be considered carefully. Especially
in the case of dynamic viewing directions, content creators should
consider integrating more dynamic solutions, such as aligning the
third-person camera with the player’s head rotations.

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

5.3 Limitations and Future Work
Our work presents the first step towards a better understanding of
the preferences and experiences of VR game spectators with regard
to the streaming perspective. While the study provides valuable
insights, there are also some limitations leading to the need for
further research.

First of all, we point out that our choice of games does not rep-
resent the full VR gaming landscape. Hence, our results are limited
to comparable game content. We will consider other genres (e.g.,
RPGs like Asgard’s Wrath [37]) in the future to see which features
of the two perspectives become particularly prevalent in other sce-
narios. Furthermore, our study does not take into account other
common streaming approaches that integrate the player into the
stream in other ways, such as picture-in-picture modes. While this
is a limitation of our current work and should be considered in
the future, our focus on the comparison of the first-person and the
third-person perspectives promotes our understanding of specta-
tor’s basic preferences and desires.

Another limitation concerns the concrete implementation of the
third-person perspective used in our study, in particular regarding
the game Superhot VR. As already explained in Section 3.2, the
static mixed-reality approach is just one possibility to create a third-
person view. Other possibilities include the use of a dynamic camera
and the replacement of the real player footage by a virtually created
avatar. Some of the perceived shortcomings of the third-person
view might trail off when using a different method, in particular a
dynamic camera. For instance, the missing focus on current game
events or the occlusion of relevant game objects can be reduced by
automatically adapting the camera to the player’s viewing direction
or by enabling spectators to control the viewing angle. While we
are convinced that our choice of a static mixed-reality view is
appropriate to investigate basic differences between a focus on
the game (first-person) and a focus on the player (third-person),
future studies with alternative implementations such as using a
dynamic camera or a virtual avatar should complement and refine
the findings.

Our design decisions regarding the concrete positions of the
static third-person viewpoint in the three games (i.e., the position
of the spectator’s camera) might have influenced the viewing experi-
ence, as well. During the design process, we experienced that some
positions are better suited than others, though no position seems to
be optimal in every game situation, because a static view does not
adapt during the course of the game. Hence, we informally tested
different positions while implementing the third-person views to
find an appropriate position for each game.

Another important constituent of the third-person perspective
is the player’s persona. We used the same player in all our videos to
preserve comparability. Nevertheless, the specific choice introduces
possible effects arising from participants’ personal preferences re-
garding gender or appearance of the player. Hence, future studies
should include other types of players to investigate potential im-
pacts. Furthermore, preferences may change if the viewers have
some kind of relationship with the content producer, for instance,
if the player is their favorite streamer. One participant explicitly
stated: "If it’s my usual go-to streamer on Twitch, then I would prob-
ably like the third-person perspective better because it’d be funnier.".

In such cases, the focus of interest is more on the player and less
on the game, which is much better supported by a mixed-reality
perspective.

Previous research also indicates that the social interaction be-
tween the player and the audience can be an important motivator
for spectators to follow game streamers [18, 39]. Particularly in a
live streaming context, viewers’ social motives become more preva-
lent, as they have the possibility to interact with the streamer or
other viewers while the action takes place. In our study, we pre-
sented prerecorded videos and decided to not include social features
(i.e., the player did not speak to the audience) to reduce the potential
interference effects caused by our specific player. This approach
increased the controllability of the study procedure, but limits the
direct transferability of our results to live streaming. We assume
that the pros and cons of the different perspectives found in our
study also apply to live streaming contexts and that our results can
also inform live streaming design choices. For instance, streamers
using a first-person perspective can further increase comprehensi-
bility by verbally describing which movements they are performing
(because these are not visible to the audience).

However, our study does not provide direct indications on how
the different perspectives support or interfere with the viewers’
need for social interaction. It might become more important to see
the player, as visual cues are a central aspect in human communica-
tion. On the other hand, a first-person view might provide a closer
connection to the player, because this perspective fosters a shared
focus and attentional allocation. Future research is needed to test
such assumptions. Hence, as a complement to our current work,
we recommend the conduct of in-the-wild studies on streaming
platforms with actual streamers and their audiences to capture this
important social aspect with regard to the preferences of different
perspectives. This would also enable a more sophisticated investi-
gation of the correlations between spectators’ motives to watch a
certain VR game stream and their preferred view.

Another interesting direction for future research in the area of VR
spectatorship would be to investigate the experience of spectating
VR game streams using HMDs. If the viewer is equipped with an
immersive HMD, there are different possibilities to present VR
content and the viewing experience will probably differ from 2D
displays.

6 CONCLUSION
Delivering the highly immersive experience of VR games to a broad
audience via common 2D video streams is a challenge for VR con-
tent providers, such as streamers, advertisers, and game developers.
This work offers support by giving advice on the choice of an appro-
priate spectator perspective to foster a positive viewing experience.
Based on our study results, we identified two key factors that
need to be considered when deciding between a first-person and
a mixed-reality third-person perspective: first, the characteristics
of the game, in particular the location of game events in relation
to the player’s position; and second, the motives and expectations
of the audience. While the first-person perspective puts the focus
on the game and resembles the player’s view, the mixed-reality
third-person perspective shifts the focus to the player and the
player-game interaction. For games in which most game events

Streaming VR Games to the Broad Audience

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

evolve directly around the player, the third-person perspective
provides viewers with unique insights by revealing the player’s real
movements and their effects in the game world. This positive effect
of the third-person perspective particularly applies to games that
require the player to perform interesting, distinctive movements.
In contrast, if the main game action is distributed over the game
environment and not centered around the player, a first-person
perspective is more appropriate due to its immersive quality and a
clear focus on relevant game events.

Apart from the game characteristics, content providers also
should consider their audience. If spectators are supposed to be
mainly interested in gaining an impression of the game and less
in the player’s persona, the first-person view provides the desired
information better than the third-person perspective. On the other
hand, if spectators have a keen interest in a specific streamer, their
preference might be biased towards a third-person view, which
highlights this person.

This work presents the first step towards a comprehensive VR
streaming guideline. As discussed above, there are some limitations
and follow-up studies with more VR games and different settings
are needed to extent our current knowledge. In particular, other
implementations of the third-person perspective, for instance with
a dynamic camera, need to be investigated to test our hypothe-
sis about the importance of player centricity and visual coupling.
Our work paves the way for further research on the spectators’
experiences and expectations in the context of VR content. In the
long term, understanding how different perspectives contribute
to different demands of VR spectators will foster informed design
decisions in diverse application areas such as game streaming, VR
training and mixed-reality multi-user scenarios.

REFERENCES
[1] Amazon.com, Inc. 2020. Twitch. Website.

https://twitch.tv/.

Retrieved April 16, 2020 from

[2] Beat Games. 2019. Beat Saber. VR Game [Windows]. Beat Games, Prague, Czech

Republic. Last played February 2020.

[3] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/
1478088706qp063oa

[4] Christian Carlsson and Alex Pelling. 2015. Designing Spectator Interfaces for

Competitive Video Games. Ph.D. Dissertation. Master’s thesis, Report.

[5] Meeyoung Cha, Haewoon Kwak, Pablo Rodriguez, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Sue
Moon. 2007.
I Tube, You Tube, Everybody Tubes: Analyzing the World’s
Largest User Generated Content Video System. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM
SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (San Diego, California, USA)
(IMC ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1298306.1298309

[6] Gifford Cheung and Jeff Huang. 2011. Starcraft from the Stands: Understanding
the Game Spectator. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (CHI ’11). Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 763–772. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.
1979053

[7] Sebastian Cmentowski, Andrey Krekhov, and Jens Krüger. 2019. Outstanding:
A Multi-Perspective Travel Approach for Virtual Reality Games. In Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (Barcelona,
Spain) (CHI PLAY ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 287–299. https://doi.org/10.1145/3311350.3347183

[8] Dan Cryan. 2014. eSports video: A cross platform growth story. Technical Report.

Technical report, IHS Tech.

[9] Alena Denisova and Paul Cairns. 2015. First Person vs. Third Person Perspective
in Digital Games: Do Player Preferences Affect Immersion?. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul,
Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 145–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702256

[10] John Downs, Frank Vetere, Steve Howard, Steve Loughnan, and Wally Smith.
2014. Audience Experience in Social Videogaming: Effects of Turn Expectation

and Game Physicality. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3473–3482. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2556288.2556965

[11] Steven Drucker, Li-wei He, Michael Cohen, Curtis Wong, and Anoop Gupta.
Spectator Games: A New Entertainment Modality For Networked
Technical Report MSR-TR-2003-105. Microsoft Re-
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/spectator-

2003.
Multiplayer Games.
search.
games-a-new-entertainment-modality-for-networked-multiplayer-games/
[12] Katharina Emmerich. 2019. Investigating the Social Player Experience: Social Effects
in Digital Games. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg,
Germany.

[13] Jonathan Frome and Aaron Smuts. 2004. Helpless spectators: Generating suspense

in videogames and film. TEXT technology 13 (2004), 13–34.

[14] René Glas. 2015. Vicarious play: Engaging the viewer in Let’s Play videos.
Empedocles: European Journal for the Philosophy of Communication 5, 1-2 (2015),
81–86.

[15] Geoffrey Gorisse, Olivier Christmann, Etienne Armand Amato, and Simon Richir.
2017. First-and Third-Person Perspectives in immersive Virtual environments:
Presence and Performance analysis of embodied Users. Frontiers in Robotics and
AI 4 (2017), 33.

[16] Jan Gugenheimer, Evgeny Stemasov, Julian Frommel, and Enrico Rukzio. 2017.
ShareVR: Enabling Co-Located Experiences for Virtual Reality between HMD and
Non-HMD Users. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4021–4033. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.
3025683

[17] Juho Hamari and Max Sjöblom. 2017. What is eSports and why do people watch

it? Internet research 27, 2 (2017), 34.

[18] William A. Hamilton, Oliver Garretson, and Andruid Kerne. 2014. Streaming on
Twitch: Fostering Participatory Communities of Play within Live Mixed Media.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1315–1324. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557048
[19] Jeremy Hartmann, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D. Wilson. 2019.
RealityCheck: Blending Virtual Environments with Situated Physical Reality. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 347, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300577
[20] Brett Jones, Rajinder Sodhi, Michael Murdock, Ravish Mehra, Hrvoje Benko,
Andrew Wilson, Eyal Ofek, Blair MacIntyre, Nikunj Raghuvanshi, and Lior
Shapira. 2014. RoomAlive: Magical Experiences Enabled by Scalable, Adap-
tive Projector-Camera Units. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA)
(UIST ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 637–644.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2642918.2647383

[21] Dennis L. Kappen, Pejman Mirza-Babaei, Jens Johannsmeier, Daniel Buckstein,
James Robb, and Lennart E. Nacke. 2014. Engaged by Boos and Cheers: The Effect
of Co-Located Game Audiences on Social Player Experience. In Proceedings of the
First ACM SIGCHI Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play
(Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CHI PLAY ’14). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 151–160. https://doi.org/10.1145/2658537.2658687
[22] Elihu Katz, Jay G Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch. 1973. Uses and gratifications

research. The public opinion quarterly 37, 4 (1973), 509–523.

[23] Elihu Katz, Hadassah Haas, and Michael Gurevitch. 1973. On the use of the mass
media for important things. American sociological review 38, 2 (1973), 164–181.
[24] Mehdi Kaytoue, Arlei Silva, Loïc Cerf, Wagner Meira, and Chedy Raïssi. 2012.
Watch Me Playing, i Am a Professional: A First Study on Video Game Live
Streaming. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web
(Lyon, France) (WWW ’12 Companion). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1181–1188. https://doi.org/10.1145/2187980.2188259
[25] Andrey Krekhov, Daniel Preuß, Sebastian Cmentowski, and Jens Krüger. 2020.
Silhouette Games: An Interactive One-Way Mirror Approach to Watching Players
in VR. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction
in Play (Virtual Event, Canada) (CHI PLAY ’20). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 561–571. https://doi.org/10.1145/3410404.3414247
[26] Donghun Lee and Linda J Schoenstedt. 2011. Comparison of eSports and tradi-
tional sports consumption motives. ICHPER-SD Journal Of Research 6, 2 (2011),
39–44.

[27] LIV Inc. 2019. LIV. Software [Windows]. LIV Inc, Prague, Czech Republic. Last

used February 2020.

[28] Bernhard Maurer, Ilhan Aslan, Martin Wuchse, Katja Neureiter, and Manfred
Tscheligi. 2015. Gaze-Based Onlooker Integration: Exploring the In-Between of
Active Player and Passive Spectator in Co-Located Gaming. In Proceedings of the
2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (London, United
Kingdom) (CHI PLAY ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 163–173. https://doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2793126

CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Emmerich and Krekhov, et al.

[29] Karine Pires and Gwendal Simon. 2015. YouTube Live and Twitch: A Tour of User-
Generated Live Streaming Systems. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Multimedia Sys-
tems Conference (Portland, Oregon) (MMSys ’15). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 225–230. https://doi.org/10.1145/2713168.2713195
[30] Jana Rambusch, Anna-Sofia Alklind Taylor, and Tarja Susi. 2017. A pre-study
on spectatorship in eSports. In Spectating Play 13th Annual Game Research Lab
Spring Seminar, Tampere, Finland, April 24-25, 2017. DiVA, Sweden, 9.

[31] Raptor Lab. 2019. Stand Out: VR Battle Royale. VR Game [Windows]. Raptor

Lab, Lyon, France. Last played February 2020.

[32] Stuart Reeves, Steve Benford, Claire O’Malley, and Mike Fraser. 2005. Designing
the Spectator Experience. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Portland, Oregon, USA) (CHI ’05). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 741–750. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1054972.1055074

[33] Alan M Rubin. 2009. Uses-and-gratifications perspective on media effects. In

Media effects. Routledge, New York, NY, USA, 181–200.

[34] Thomas E Ruggiero. 2000. Uses and gratifications theory in the 21st century.

Mass communication & society 3, 1 (2000), 3–37.

[35] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. 2000. Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American
psychologist 55, 1 (2000), 68.

[36] Patrick Salamin, Daniel Thalmann, and Frédéric Vexo. 2006. The Benefits of
Third-Person Perspective in Virtual and Augmented Reality?. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (Limassol, Cyprus)
(VRST ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–30.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1180495.1180502

[37] Sanzaru Games. 2019. Asgard’s Wrath. VR Game [Oculus]. Oculus Studios,

Menlo Park, California, US. Last played March 2020.

[38] Andrew Shaw. 2014. E-Sport spectator motivation. Master thesis. George Mason

University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA.

[39] Max Sjöblom and Juho Hamari. 2017. Why do people watch others play video
games? An empirical study on the motivations of Twitch users. Computers in
Human Behavior 75 (2017), 985–996.

[40] Mel Slater, Bernhard Spanlang, Maria V Sanchez-Vives, and Olaf Blanke. 2010.
First person experience of body transfer in virtual reality. PloS one 5, 5 (2010),
1–9.

[41] Thomas Smith, Marianna Obrist, and Peter Wright. 2013. Live-Streaming Changes
the (Video) Game. In Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Interactive
TV and Video (Como, Italy) (EuroITV ’13). Association for Computing Machinery,

New York, NY, USA, 131–138. https://doi.org/10.1145/2465958.2465971

[42] Superhot Team. 2017. Superhot VR. VR Game [Windows]. Superhot Team, Lodz,

Poland. Last played February 2020.

[43] Nicholas Taylor. 2016. Play to the camera: Video ethnography, spectatorship,

and e-sports. Convergence 22, 2 (2016), 115–130.

[44] Burak S. Tekin and Stuart Reeves. 2017. Ways of Spectating: Unravelling Spectator
Participation in Kinect Play. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Denver, Colorado, USA) (CHI ’17). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1558–1570. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025813

[45] Valve. 2016. Virtual Reality - SteamVR featuring the HTC Vive. YouTube Video.
Accessed April 18, 2020 from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qYfNzhLXYGc.
[46] Valve. 2020. Half-Life: Alyx. VR Game [Windows]. Valve, Bellevue, Washington,

US. Last played April 2020.
[47] Valve. 2020. Steam. Website.

steampowered.com/.

Retrieved April 20, 2020 from https://store.

[48] Amy Voida and Saul Greenberg. 2009. Wii All Play: The Console Game as a
Computational Meeting Place. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA) (CHI ’09). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1559–1568. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1518701.1518940

[49] Gerald A Voorhees, Joshua Call, and Katie Whitlock. 2012. Guns, grenades, and
grunts: First-person shooter games. Bloomsbury Publishing USA, New York, NY,
USA.

[50] Rina R. Wehbe and Lennart E. Nacke. 2015. Towards Understanding the Im-
portance of Co-Located Gameplay. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Sympo-
sium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (London, United Kingdom) (CHI
PLAY ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 733–738.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2810312

[51] Thomas Weiss. 2011. Fulfilling the Needs of eSports Consumers: A Uses and

Gratifications Perspective. Bled eConference 30 (2011), 572–580.

[52] Thomas Weiss and Sabrina Schiele. 2013. Virtual worlds in competitive contexts:
Analyzing eSports consumer needs. Electronic Markets 23, 4 (2013), 307–316.

[53] Finn Welsford-Ackroyd, Andrew Chalmers, Rafael Anjos, Daniel Medeiros, Hyejin
Kim, and Taehyun Rhee. 2020. Asymmetric Interaction between HMD Wearers
and Spectators with a Large Display. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality
and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW). IEEE, New York, NY, USA,
670–671. https://doi.org/10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00186

[54] YouTube, LLC. 2020. YouTube. Website. Retrieved April 16, 2020 from https:

//youtube.com/.

