Evolution of Small Cell from 4G to 6G: Past, Present, and Future

Vanlin Sathya

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

0
2
0
2
c
e
D
9
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
5
4
0
1
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

To boost the cellular system’s capacity, the operator’s have started to reuse the same licensed spectrum by deploying
4G LTE small cells (i.e., Femto Cells) in the past. But in time, these small cell licensed spectrum is not suﬃcient
to satisfy future applications like augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR). Hence, cellular operators look for
alternate unlicensed spectrum in Wi-Fi 5 GHz band, later 3GPP named as LTE Licensed Assisted Access (LAA).
The recent and current roll-out of LAA deployments (in developed nations like the US) provides an opportunity to
understand coexistence’s profound ground truth. This paper discusses a high-level overview of my past, present, and
future research works in the direction of small cell beneﬁts. In the future, we shift the focus onto the latest unlicensed
band: 6 GHz, where the latest Wi-Fi version, 802.11ax, will coexist with the latest cellular technology, 5G New Radio
(NR) in unlicensed.

Keywords: Femtocells, Small cells, LAA, NR-U, Wi-Fi

1. Introduction

The growing penetration of high-end consumer devices (smartphones, tablets, etc.) running bandwidth-hungry ap-
plications (e.g., mobile multimedia streaming) has led to a commensurate surge in demand for mobile data (pegged to
soar up to 77 exabytes by 2022). An anticipated second wave will result from the emerging Augmented/Virtual Reality
(AR/VR) industry and, more broadly, the Internet-of-Things that will connect an unprecedented number of intelligent
devices to next-generation (5G and beyond) mobile networks. These must, therefore, greatly expand their aggregate
network capacity to meet this challenge. It is achieved by combining approaches, including multi-input, multi-output
(MIMO) techniques, network densiﬁcation (i.e., deploying small cells), and more eﬃcient traﬃc management and
radio resource allocation.

On the other side cheap, fast, and portable computing devices with ubiquitous wireless connectivity [2, 19, 33]
can revolutionize the personal computing [39] landscape by creating an opportunity to design an unprecedented array
of new services and applications. Keeping the same philosophy in mind, we have focused mainly on maximizing the
experienced data rate of an end-user by oﬀering increased bandwidth through the coexistence of licensed wireless
services (e.g., Long Term Evolution (LTE)) an unlicensed band [81, 82, 83, 84]. To achieve the goal of throughput
maximization [79], we focused on minimizing the interference and handling frequent handovers. It is done by opti-
mally placing the small cells [37, 38] (i.e., a miniature base station, speciﬁcally designed to extend the data capacity,
speed, and eﬃciency of a cellular network [40]) and controlling their emitting power in a dense small cell deployment
scenario.

5G LTE, which operates in the licensed band and 802.11 wireless LAN (Wi-Fi) [32, 36], which operates in
an unlicensed band, has some fundamental structural diﬀerences. For example, LTE control is where a base station
(BS) exclusively allocates the radio resources to the users, interference due to concurrent transmission by the users

1Email: vanlin@uchicago.edu (Vanlin Sathya)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

January 27, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
handled. On the other hand, Wi-Fi [66, 80] follows a distributed approach [63, 64] where each user independently
contests to occupy the channel, thereby concurrent transmission results in interference. The main motive of LTE/Wi-
Fi coexistence in unlicensed bands for LTE users in case of very few or no Wi-Fi users. So, the research on the fair
coexistence of LTE/Wi-Fi mainly focuses on the intelligent use of the unlicensed band by the LTE users to keep the
Wi-Fi users unaﬀected so that the aim of formation of the unlicensed band remains unaltered.

The standard development community has accepted two mechanisms for using the unlicensed band by LTE.
These mechanisms are licensed assisted access (LAA) and LTE Unlicensed (LTE-U). LAA follows the same approach
of sensing the unlicensed channel, called Listen Before Talk (LBT), as Wi-Fi. LTE-U estimates its duty cycle to access
the unlicensed channel based on the various parameters such as interference, type of traﬃc, and load on the track. In
our recent research, we have focused on both LAA and LTE-U mechanisms. In both mechanisms, we keenly observe
the various aspects of real-time, which can adversely aﬀect the Wi-Fi users and were ignored by the existing literature.
Some of the observations are a) static channel allocation to LTE-U node in an unlicensed band, b) diﬃculty in associ-
ation to the Wi-Fi access point (AP) by the Wi-Fi users due to high duty cycle (i.e., repeating ON and OFF intervals in
the medium) in LTE-U, c) a considerable reduction in the duration of duty cycle in LTE-U if several surrounded APs
considered in its estimation. We used a Machine Learning approach to propose solutions based on these observations.
As part of my future research plan, We want to explore the research challenges in the fair coexistence of LTE and
Wi-Fi on the 6 GHz band used as an unlicensed band. Apart from that, We plan to provide Machine Learning (ML)
based solutions to some of the existing problems on LTE/Wi-Fi coexistence on 5 GHz. These problems are an eﬃcient
use of high bandwidth by Wi-Fi users and optimal channel selection by both LAA BS and a Wi-Fi AP in a multi LTE
operators-multi AP scenario. ML algorithms are used to closely observe the system’s behavior on diﬀerent conditions
to make intelligent decisions.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of 4G and 5G Heterogeneous Networks.
Section 3 describes the associated challenges and solutions for the past and present small cell deployments. Section
4 focuses on the future and recent NR-U small cell in 6 GHz. Finally, conclusions and future research directions are
presented in Section 5.

2. 4G & 5G Heterogeneous Networks (HetNets) [5, 6]:

Presently, cellular network users are not only those which generate mostly downlink traﬃc (i.e., web browsing,
downloading) but also combination of users generating symmetric (both uplink (UL) and downlink (DL)) traﬃc (i.e.,
social networking, gaming) and users generating uplink traﬃc (i.e., M2M/IoT). In order to provide better connectivity
and high data rates to these users, low power network nodes, called as small cells, are being deployed. Presence
of such diverse traﬃc generating users and small cells with diﬀerent transmit powers and sizes, has turned cellular
networks from homogeneous to heterogeneous in nature. A heterogeneous network (HetNet) consists of a Macro cell
augmented with various types of small cells to address the challenge of enhancing system capacity and coverage.
Examples of small cells are micro cell, pico cell, relay, Remote Radio Head (RRH), Femto, Licensed Assisted Access
(LAA), New Radio in Unlicensed (NR-U), and Femto cell [3, 4] as shown in Fig. 1. Table 1 shows characteristics of
various types of cells. The description of various types of small cells are as follows.

• Pico or Micro BS: These are deployed in an outdoor environment to cover a radius up to 300 m. The pico BS
(i.e., 30 dBm) is smaller than that of Macro BS. Pico BS has a dedicated X3 backhaul connection to the Macro
BS for coordination.

• Relay: Relay BS acts as a repeater. It receives the data/signal from the Macro BS and transmits/boosts the data
to the relay connected users. The link between the relay and Macro BS is also wireless. Normally the relay
BS(s) is the preferred choice of operators to extend the coverage region (e.g., Hilly region, rural areas) of the
Macro BS.

2

Table 1: Characteristics of heterogeneous cells in 4G and 5G

Technology

Placement

Macro BS
Pico or Micro cell
RRH

Relay

Femotcell

LAA [65, 67]

NR-U

Outdoor
Outdoor
Outdoor
Indoor
Outdoor
Indoor
Indoor

Outdoor
Indoor
Outdoor
Indoor

Transmit
Power
46 dBm
30 dBm
30-35 dBm

30-35 dBm

20-23 dBm

20-23 dBm

20-23 dBm

or

or

or

or

Macro

Backhaul Characteristic

Dedicated wireline
Dedicated wireline
Dedicated wireline

of

Number
Users
1000-2000
100-200
100-200

or

enterprise

Wireless out-of-band or in-
band
Residential
broadband
Residential
broadband
Residential
broadband

enterprise

enterprise

or

or

60-100

10-30

10-30

10-30

Femto

NR-U

Relay

LAA

RRH

Figure 1: 4G and 5G Heterogeneous Network

• RRH: Unlike traditional BS, RRH is a radio transceiver component that performs only the transmission and
reception of In-phase Quadrature (IQ) samples. The remaining BS processing is done at a centralized cloud data
center by Baseband Unit (BBU) pool. The BS’s cost will come down by performing centralized processing,
which directly reduces CAPEX and OPEX.

• LAA: Unlike traditional Femtocells, LAA operates on the 5 GHz unlicensed spectrum, which does implement
an LBT protocol similar to that used by Wi-Fi, with diﬀerent values for parameters such as sensing threshold
and transmission intervals.

• NR-U: Unlike LAA cells, NR-U operates on the 6 GHz unlicensed spectrum, which implements an LBT pro-

tocol to fair share the spectrum protect the incumbent users.

The advantage of HetNets is as follows.

1. cell range expansion (CRE) [20, 26, 27]: Increasing or decreasing the transmit power (or coverage region)

based on the load in small cells will boost the overall system throughput.

2. Integrating Macro and small cells: Improving user throughput by dual connectivity [28] (i.e., Macro and one

small cell).

3. Self-organizing network (SON): In HetNets, small cells are deployed in huge number. The operator can provide
each small cell with SON features, which aim to automatically conﬁgure and optimize the network, reducing
the human eﬀort. It plays a key role in improving OAM (operation, administration, management).

3

2.1. LTE Femtocell Networks

The existing Macro Base Stations (MBS) cannot satisfy mobile users because of most users’ huge data demand
and indoor locality. Reports by Cisco tell that 70% of the traﬃc is generated in indoor environments such as homes,
enterprise buildings, and hotspots. Hence, mobile operators must improve coverage and capacity‘[11] of indoor
environments. But the basic problem with the existing MBS (or small outdoor cells with shorter coverage) is that
they can only boost data rates of Outdoor User pieces of equipment (OUEs). But, they cannot do the same for Indoor
User pieces of equipment (IUEs) because it is diﬃcult for electromagnetic signals to penetrate through walls and
ﬂoors. Owing to numerous obstacles in the communication path between MBS and IUEs inside the building, radio
signals attenuate faster with an increase in the distance. Thus, IUEs receive low signal strength (i.e., Signal-to-Noise
Ratio, SNR) compared to outdoor users. Hence, mobile operators must improve coverage and capacity in indoor
environments.

As a solution, Femtocells are being deployed by both operators and end customers. Femtocell is a low-cost,
low-power consuming cellular base station that operates only in a licensed spectrum and designed for outdoor and
indoor communication. The range of Femtocell is 100-150 meters for enterprise environments consuming 100 mW
power. A home-based Femto (HeNB) can serve 4-5 users, whereas an oﬃce-based Femto can serve a maximum of 64
users. Each Femto requires a backhaul connection to the evolved packet core (EPC). Advantages of using Femtos are
described as follows:

Operator Advantages :

1. The operator can increase the network capacity.
2. The operator can reduce Operational expenditure (OPEX) and Capitational expenditure (CAPEX).
3. The operator can reduce Backhaul cost.
4. The operator can reduce Traﬃc overload on MBSs.

User Advantages :

1. Improved Quality of Experience (QoE).
2. Improved energy eﬃciency/battery life.

2.2. Architecture of Indoor LTE Femto cells

In the LTE HetNet system’s architecture, Femtos are deployed inside the building and connected to a Femto
Gateway (F-GW) over the S1 interface. F-GW is mainly used to reduce the load on MME. It acts as a virtual core
network to Femtos. The F-GW gets assigned with an eNB ID, and thus F-GW is considered another eNB by the
MME. The X2 interface [89, 90, 91, 92, 93] is introduced between Femtos of enterprise Femtocell networks to avoid
inter-cell interference and directly route the data and signaling messages among Femtos, thereby reducing the load on
LTE core network and oﬀering better coordination among Femtos.

2.3. Access Modes in Femto

Since Femtos [35] are deployed for oﬀering high data rates to indoor (paid) users in enterprise and residential
buildings, each Femto is conﬁgured with a list of subscribers called Subscriber Group (SG) such that only the users
in the SG can access the Femto. The users not belonging to this list are called Non-SG (NSG), and they may not be
served by the Femto even when they are close to the Femto. Following access modes are deﬁned for Femtos:

• Open access: The open-access mode allows all users (i.e., SG & NSG) to access the Femto without any

restriction.

• Closed access : The fast-access mode permits only authorized users (i.e., SG) to access the Femto.

• Hybrid access: The hybrid access [24] is the combination of both open and closed access. It allows all users

(i.e., SG & NSG) by providing preferential access for SG users over NSG users.

4

2.4. LTE Licensed Assisted Access

3GPP speciﬁes LTE-LAA in Release 13 adopted the LBT approach for coexistence with Wi-Fi and supported only
DL transmissions in the unlicensed band: a secondary cell (sCell) aggregated with a licensed primary cell (pCell).
Enhanced LAA (eLAA), as speciﬁed in Release 14, supports UL operation in the unlicensed band. However, the
legacy LTE UL schedule continued to be used in eLAA, thus increasing the processing delay in scheduling grants
due to LBT procedures. Hence, in April 2017, 3GPP started the "further eLAA" (FeLAA) working group (in Release
15) to improve LAA DL and UL performance through enhanced support for autonomous UL transmissions. In the
proposed FeLAA, a UL transmission ought to receive a grant from the eNB before the transmission, which solves the
constraint imposed by the legacy eLAA. Most of these features have not been tested in the ﬁeld before deployment.
As LTE-LAA deployments are being rolled out in major cities in the US, they oﬀer an opportunity for real-world
testing.

2.5. 5G Small Cell in Unlicensed Deployment

The coexistence of small-cell LTE-U [68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75] and Wi-Fi networks in unlicensed bands at
5 GHz is a topic of active interest [23, 25], primarily driven by industry groups aﬃliated with the two (cellular and
Wi-Fi) segments. In contrast, there is a body of analytical work [76, 77, 78, 85] exploring the coexistence of LTE-U
and Wi-Fi, our focus in this project has been on real-time measurements [104, 105] and real-time deployment aspects
of such coexisting networks. Coexistence is a topic that has seen little traction in the existing literature. As per the
scope of this project, we actively design, analyze, and implement wireless network algorithms in simulation (using
ns-3), in a real-time National Instrument (NI) unlicensed coexistence test-bed [29, 34] and also conduct measurements
and analysis on recently deployed LAA in the Chicago area.

In our previous work [29, 34], we investigated various aspects of coexistence between the two principle variants
of LTE in the unlicensed bands, LTE-U and LAA, and Wi-Fi [106]. For LTE-U, we analyzed the eﬀect of the LTE-U
duty cycle [86, 87, 88, 1] on the performance of the association of Wi-Fi. We demonstrated [45, 46, 47, 53] that
using a high duty cycle adversely impacted Wi-Fi’s ability to access the channel due to the Wi-Fi beacon transmission
process’s disruption. Therefore, we recommended using a lower duty cycle even if there was no Wi-Fi present in
the channel to enable fair access to a new Wi-Fi access point that may wish to use the channel. We also developed
machine-learning-based algorithms to determine the number of Wi-Fi APs on the air to enable an appropriate duty
cycle setting. However, since LTE-U is not considered for wide deployment by industry, we switched our attention to
evaluating LAA coexistence.

We have made tremendous progress toward understanding Wi-Fi and LAA’s coexistence behavior in our previous
work’s unlicensed bands. Our theoretical analysis, corroborated by detailed system-level simulations using ns-3 and
use of software-deﬁned-radios, demonstrates that coexistence is improved substantially when the two systems treat
each other symmetrically. That is when Wi-Fi and LAA use the same detection threshold to defer to each other. In
our recent work [61], we added a new dimension by performing detailed measurements of deployed LAA networks
by the three major carriers, Verizon, AT&T, and T-Mobile, in Chicago. We conducted these measurements using oﬀ-
the-shelf and custom-designed apps to extract detailed network information via APIs on Android smartphones. We
believe this to be the ﬁrst such exercise in academia and the measurements revealed several interesting new directions,
which we will continue to research. Two such topics are: (i) Though most LAA deployments are outdoors and Wi-Fi’s
are indoors, the client devices that connect to these networks can be used outdoor/indoor; this results in hidden-node
scenarios worse by the fact that two systems do not decode each other’s signals (ii) Most academic analyses have
focused on coexistence in a single 20 MHz channel, Whereas our measurements reveal that LAA usually aggregates
three unlicensed channels, therefore increasing Wi-Fi’s impact. These results have been presented to the industry as
well and been incorporated into recommendations by Cisco.

3. Associated Challenges and Existing Solutions for past and present small cell deployments

In this section, we discuss various issues and challenges while deploying small cells in LTE HetNets. Also, we
discuss existing solutions to address these issues and challenges. All the challenges boil down to ﬁnding a solution to

5

improve the system performance. Some of the important challenges are discussed below:

1. Small Cell Placement in 4G LTE

Due to the large scale deployment of Femtocells in enterprise/oﬃce environments [7, 8, 9] and many practical
constraints (e.g., lack of space and power), operators will go for arbitrary deployment. Arbitrary deployment of
Femtos will lead to coverage holes and an increased number of Femtos (increased OPEX and CAPEX). To ad-
dress these issues, placement of Femtos needs to be optimal [10, 60]. Optimal placement of Femtos [7, 41, 56]
ensures good SINR and improves overall system capacity. Usually, due to physical constraints, operators may
need to go for sub-optimal or arbitrary deployment. Consequently, the number of Femtos deployed is more
than that in the optimal model to ensure no coverage holes inside the building. Approaches that deal with the
deployment of single Femto is not scalable to enterprise buildings. Placement approaches do not consider the
building model parameters (like wall thickness), dynamic power transmission, cost of human resources, and
ﬁeld testing for randomly placed Femtos. Femtos create coverage holes for UEs when the Femtos operate in
closed access mode, and non-subscriber UEs are in close vicinity. [12, 13, 14] propose to mitigate coverage
holes by proper placement and power control mechanisms.

In HetNet systems, the major factor that aﬀects the network throughput is the interference (between Femtos and
between Macro and Femtos). There are two types of interference possible in the HetNet systems:

(a) Co-tier Interference: Due to reuse of one usage of spectrum, interference from the neighboring small
cells is called co-tier interference [15, 17, 58]. For example, UE2 is getting served by the Femto BS (F2),
but it is receiving interference from the neighboring Femto BSs (F1 & F3). The traditional solution to
avoid co-tier interference among BSs is Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC). In the ICIC scheme,
all BSs cooperatively communicate using the X2 interface and allocate RBs eﬃciently to the cell edge
users, but on the other hand, this increases the signaling messages.

(b) Cross-tier Interference: The interference between Macro BS and small cell is called cross-tier interfer-
ence [16, 17, 18]. For example, UE1 is getting served by the Macro BS, but it is receiving interference
from small cells (i.e., Femtocells F1, F3). The traditional solution to avoid cross-tier interference is en-
hanced ICIC (eICIC) [21, 22, 59]. In the eICIC scheme, the interference between MBS and Femto BS
(FBS) is avoided by muting some sub-frames (Almost Blank Sub-frame) in MBS during FBSs transmis-
sions. In turn, it reduces the interference and increases the capacity in HetNet systems.

Though the spectrum eﬃciency and system capacity could increase due to spatial reuse of the same spectrum
in LTE HetNets, SINR and network throughput may be aﬀected by cross-tier inference MBS(s) and small cells
and co-tier interference among small cells and obstacles inside buildings. The signal leaks at the buildings’
edges/corners, which causes cross-tier interference and degrading the performance of OUEs in the High Inter-
ference Zone (HIZone) around the building connected to one of the Macro BSs in LTE HetNet. To the best of
our knowledge, none of the existing works addressed the cross-tier interference issue to HIZone UEs (HIZUEs)
in a dynamic fashion based on their occupancy levels in the HIZone. In this work, we propose an active power
control scheme which is employed at the Femtos to reduce cross-tier interference to HIZUEs in the HIZone.

2. Scheduling or Radio Resource Allocation

Since Femtos are deployed to oﬀer high data rate services to indoor (paid) users in enterprise and residen-
tial buildings, each Femto is conﬁgured with a list of subscribers called Subscriber Group (SG) that can access
them [24]. The users not belonging to this list belong to the Non-Subscriber Group (NSG), and they are served
by MBSs even when they are close to a Femto. This type of restricted access is called closed access. Femtos
conﬁgured in open access do not distinguish between SG and NSG users, and hence, they may fail to ensure QoS
for SG users, especially during peak traﬃc loads. Telecom operators favor hybrid access Femtocells (HAFs) as
they can provide QoS for SG users by giving them preferential access to radio resources over NSG users and

6

also improve the capacity of LTE HetNet by serving nearby NSG users. Rewarding mechanisms have been pro-
posed to popularize hybrid access mode for Femtos. Challenges here are optimal HAF deployment and eﬃcient
splitting of radio resources [95, 96, 97, 98, 99] between SG and NSG users of HAFs in indoor environments.

3. Improving Data Rates in LTE Small Cells and D2D Communication

Though the deployment of Femtocells (Femtos) improves indoor data rates, the resulting LTE Heterogeneous
Network may face a host of problems [15, 43]. To number a few co-tier, cross-tier interference (frequent reuse
in one LTE), and regular handovers due to short coverage areas of Femtos are some signiﬁcant issues. Deploy-
ment of Femtos inside a building can lead to signal leakage at the buildings’ edges/corners. It causes cross-tier
interference and degrades outdoor UEs in the HIZone around the building area, connected to one of the Macro
BS (MBSs) in the LTE HetNet. Arbitrary placement of Femtos can lead to high co-channel cross-tier interfer-
ence among Femtos [54, 55] and MBSs coverage holes inside buildings. If Femtos are placed without power
control, it leads to increased power consumption and high inter-cell interference in large scale deployments.
Our goal was to address these problems by developing eﬃcient LTE small cell architecture, optimal Femto
placement, power control to ensure SINR threshold in Indoor environment and Device-to-Device (D2D) based
communication were in free/idle Indoor UEs connected to Femto act like UE-relays (i.e., UE-like BS, forward-
ing downlink data plane traﬃc for some of the phone users connected to MBS.

4. Asymmetric Vs. Symmetric ED threshold on LAA and Wi-Fi

The exponential increase in the number of mobile devices in use today has led to a commensurate increase
in cellular and Wi-Fi infrastructure demands, thus requiring that both licensed (cellular) and unlicensed (Wi-Fi)
spectrum be utilized as eﬃciently as possible. The industry’s actively pursued solution is for cellular systems
to use the unlicensed spectrum and the licensed spectrum, which would require fair coexistence with Wi-Fi in
the unlicensed spectrum. As per the IEEE 802.11 standard, Wi-Fi uses an energy detection (ED) threshold of
-62 dBm when LTE-LAA and LTE-U nodes are deployed close by LTE-LAA speciﬁcation recommends that
LTE-LAA detect Wi-Fi at -72 dBm. In our work [25], we evaluate the eﬀect of this asymmetry in the ED
threshold on the coexistence between two systems. We develop a coexistence simulator in ns-3 and vary both
the Wi-Fi and LTE energy detection thresholds, and demonstrate that lowering the Wi-Fi ED threshold from -62
dBm improves performance Wi-Fi LTE-LAA. Prior work has mostly focused on determining the ED threshold
that should be used by LTE-LAA/LTE-U. As far as we are aware, this is the ﬁrst result that demonstrates that
lowering the Wi-Fi ED threshold improves both systems’ performance. The conclusion is that if Wi-Fi treats
LTE-LAA/LTE-U as it would an overlapping Wi-Fi, coexistence performance improves compared to the current
assumption that Wi-Fi treats LTE-LAA/LTE-U as noise.

5. Facilitating LAA/Wi-Fi Coexistence Using Machine Learning Approach

The various aspects of the coexistence scenarios such deployments give rise to have been considered in a vast
body of academic and industry research. However, there is very little data and analysis on how these coexisting
networks will behave in practice. The question of "fair coexistence" between Wi-Fi and LAA has moved from a
theoretical question to reality. The recent roll-out of LAA deployments provides an opportunity to collect data
on these networks’ operations and study coexistence issues on the ground. In our recent work [61], we examined
the problems raised due to the coexistence of LAA and Wi-Fi in a real-time deployment scenario by various
US carrier operators in downtown Chicago. Based on the nature of the traﬃc (e.g., data, video, live streaming,
etc.) and the availability of the small cell (Femto/LAA) coverage, enabling of secondary unlicensed component
carriers are observed. The observation concluded that due to a static channel allocation strategy followed by an
LAA BS, a particular channel occupied for a longer time, thereby unlicensed Wi-Fi APs face resource crunch
as they follow dynamic channel allocation strategy. As a solution, we predicted the best channel assignment to
LAA BS by applying ML algorithms to the collected data so that Wi-Fi users are not aﬀected.

6. Association Issues on LTE-U/Wi-Fi Coexistence

7

In our previous work [30, 31], we address the issue of association fairness when Wi-Fi and LTE unlicensed
(LTE-U) coexist on the same channel in the unlicensed 5 GHz band. Since beacon transmission is the ﬁrst step
in starting the association process in Wi-Fi, we deﬁne association fairness as to how fair LTE-U is in allowing
Wi-Fi to start transmitting beacons on a channel that it occupies with multiple duty cycles. According to the
LTE-U speciﬁcation, if an LTE-U base station determines that a channel is vacant, it can transmit for up to 20 ms
and turn OFF for only 1 ms, resulting in a duty cycle 95%. In an area with heavy spectrum usage, there will be
cases when a Wi-Fi access point wishes to share the same channel, as it does today with Wi-Fi. We study, both
theoretically and experimentally, the eﬀect that such a sizeable LTE-U duty cycle can have on the association
process, speciﬁcally Wi-Fi beacon transmission and reception. We demonstrated via an experimental set-up
using NI USRPs so that a signiﬁcant percentage of Wi-Fi beacons will neither be transmitted in a timely fashion
nor be received at the LTE-U BS, thus making it diﬃcult for LTE-U BS to adapt its duty cycle in response to
the Wi-Fi usage. We proposed a novel Carrier Sense Adaptive Transmission (CSAT) algorithm [50, 51, 52]
to address the problem of Wi-Fi client association in a dense deployment scenario and enable a fair share of
spectrum access.

7. Optimal Scaling of LTE-U Duty cycle in LTE-U/Wi-Fi Coexistence

The application of Machine Learning (ML) techniques to complex engineering problems has proved to be an
attractive and eﬃcient solution. ML has been successfully applied to several practical tasks like image recog-
nition, automating industrial operations, etc. The promise of ML techniques in solving non-linear problems
inﬂuenced this work, which aims to apply known ML techniques and develop new ones for wireless spectrum
sharing between Wi-Fi and LTE in the unlicensed spectrum. In this work [45, 46, 47, 53], we focus on the LTE-U
speciﬁcation developed by the LTE-U Forum, which uses the duty-cycle approach for fair coexistence [42, 44].
The operator can scale the LTE-U duty cycle optimally if the exact numbers of Wi-Fi APs are known. In the
literature, no work is proposed on identifying the precise number of APs by the LTE-U BS. The speciﬁcation
suggests reducing the LTE-U BS’s duty cycle when the number of co-channel Wi-Fi basic service sets (BSSs)
increases from one to two or more. However, without decoding the Wi-Fi packets, detecting the number of
Wi-Fi BSSs operating on the channel in real-time is challenging. This work demonstrates a novel ML-based
approach that solves this problem using energy values observed during the LTE-U OFF duration. It is relatively
straightforward to watch only the energy values during the LTE-U BS OFF time compared to decoding the
entire Wi-Fi packet, which would require a full Wi-Fi receiver at the LTE-U base-station. We implement and
validate the proposed ML-based approach by real-time experiments and demonstrate distinct patterns between
the energy distributions between one and many Wi-Fi AP transmissions. The presented ML-based approach
results in higher accuracy (close to 99% in all cases) as compared to the existing auto-correlation (AC) and
energy detection (ED) approaches.

4. Future NR-U Small Cell in 6 GHz

The current research (on Spectrum Sharing on 5 GHz) has opened many exciting possibilities to solve the research
challenges for LTE/Wi-Fi coexistence in 6 GHz used as an unlicensed band [48, 49]. In the following, we outline
some of my future directions on the spectrum, sharing small cells.

4.1. Fair Coexistence of NR-U and Wi-Fi in 6 GHz Spectrum [102]:

Since the licensed spectrum is a limited and expensive resource, its optimal utilization may require spectrum
sharing between multiple network operators/providers of diﬀerent types. Increasingly licensed-unlicensed sharing is
being contemplated to enhance network spectral eﬃciency beyond the more traditional unlicensed-unlicensed sharing.

8

Common carrier
Operational fixed service

Local television transmission service
Broadcast auxiliary service
Cable television relay service

0
0
0
4

0
0
0
3

0
0
0
2

z
H
M

r
e
p

s
t

n
e
m
n
g
s
s
a

i

f

o

#

0
0
0
1

0

5.925

6.425

6.525

6.875

7.125

U-NII-5

U-NII-6

U-NII-7

U-NII-8

Frequency in GHz

Figure 2: Bandwidth Allocation on 6 GHz Spectrum [100]

As the most common unlicensed incumbent, Wi-Fi is now broadly deployed in the unlicensed 5 GHz band in North
America, where approximately 500 MHz of bandwidth is available. However, these 5 GHz unlicensed bands are also
seeing the increasing deployment of cellular services such as LTE-LAA. Recently, the Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC) sought to open up 1.2 GHz of additional spectrum for unlicensed operation in the 6 GHz [102, 103]
band through a Notice of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM) [100, 101, 57] as shown in Fig. 2. Thus, this spectrum
allocation for the unlicensed operation will only accelerate the need for other coexistence solutions among heteroge-
neous systems. Hence it is clear that regulatory authorities worldwide are paying close attention to the 6 GHz band
as the next spectrum band that will continue to enhance unlicensed services across the world. However, it is also
clear that this band, like the 5 GHz band, will see both Wi-Fi and cellular systems being deployed, and hence the
coexistence issues played out in the 5 GHz band will repeat in this new frequency as well. In recognition of this, the
two principal stakeholder standardization entities, IEEE and 3GPP, held a coexistence workshop in July 2019 [103] to
discuss methods to address this before the next generation standards being speciﬁed. This section discusses the recent
activities on FCC’s 6 GHz NPRM and IEEE & 3GPP eﬀorts towards coexistence in the 6 GHz band.

4.2. 6 GHz Coexistence: Deployment Scenarios, and Channel Access

Although several industry entities were not in favor of a re-evaluation, IEEE recommended that coexistence eval-
uations for NR-U should include 802.11ac (in 5 GHz), 802.11ax (in 6 GHz), and 802.11ad (in 60 GHz). For the sub-7
GHz bands, coexistence evaluations will be technology-neutral (e.g., channel access mechanism) and performed in
random carrier frequencies in the 5 GHz band. These evaluations also necessitate devising suitable 11ac/ax coexis-
tence topologies with a signiﬁcant number of links below -72 dBm.

4.3. Future NR-U: Deployment Scenarios

The NR-U work item recently approved by 3GPP supports the existing unlicensed 5 GHz band and the new
unlicensed "greenﬁeld" 6 GHz band. Industry players such as Qualcomm expect that other unlicensed and shared
spectrum bands, including mmWave, will be added to this list in future releases. Researchers will study the following
deployment scenarios to investigate the functionalities needed beyond the operation speciﬁcations in an unlicensed
spectrum.

• Carrier aggregation between licensed band NR (PCell) and NR-U (SCell): (a) NR-U SCell with both DL and

UL. (b) NR-U SCell with DL-only.

9

 
 
 
 
• Dual connectivity between licensed band LTE (PCell) and NR-U (PSCell)

• Stand-alone NR-U

• An NR cell with DL in the unlicensed band and UL in licensed band

• Dual connectivity between licensed band NR (PCell) and NR-U (PSCell)

The Legacy cellular operators oppose the NR-U stand-alone scenario and want 3GPP to drop it. They fear stiﬀ
competition from new players who can use NR-U stand-alone for limited cellular operation. NR-U is likely to be
a more potent competitor to 802.11 than LAA as it will have a more ﬂexible and eﬃcient PHY/MAC marked by
a shorter symbol duration, shorter HARQ Round Trip Time (RTT), etc. Further, NR-U can be deployed in every
conﬁguration where 802.11 is currently operational if both stand-alone and dual connection is approved. Also, unlike
802.11, NR-U will be capable of deploying the same PHY/MAC with ﬂexible conﬁgurations across all current and
future unlicensed bands.

4.4. ML Based approaches to Solve Issues in Current and Future Spectrum Sharing:

We have listed some of the interesting problems on LAA/Wi-Fi coexistence solved through an ML-based ap-

proach:

• Narrowband vs. Wideband LBT in 6 GHz: The LBT mechanism is used by a device to avoid collisions by
ensuring that no other transmissions are concurrently active in the channel. LTE-LAA follows CAT 4 LBT for
most of its transmissions, while CAT 2 LBT is used for about 5% of DL transmissions. NR-U is likely to adopt
a mechanism similar to the LAA LBT. NR-U Release 16, like its predecessor, the NR Release 15, supports
component carriers up to the maximum limit of 100 MHz bandwidth. Besides, it supports the aggregation
of several inter and intraband component carriers. Multi-carrier LBT channel access as deﬁned in 5 GHz is
assumed i.e., the Type A LBT in 3GPP TS37.213, where each channel performs its independent LBT procedure.
Consequently, there is bound to be high complexity when the operation bandwidth is wide. The alternative Type
B LBT in 3GPP TS37.213 can reduce this complexity by performing a single LBT on multiple channels. The
wideband LBT could simplify the implementation of wideband operation when it identiﬁes that the channel is
free of narrowband interference i.e., limiting the narrowband signal (20 MHz) certain sub-bands or by long/short
term measurements and LBT bandwidth adaption. Hence, wideband LBT is beneﬁcial for systems operating
with wide bandwidth as it simpliﬁes LBT implementation.

• Intelligent Selection of Unlicensed Channel by LAA BS: While analyzing the collected data in real-time on
LAA/Wi-Fi coexistence [61], we found that in an incredibly dense deployment scenario, multiple LAA oper-
ators contest for the unlicensed channel. However, numerous unlicensed channels are available, but choosing
a particular channel and estimating the duration to occupy the track, with the vision of not aﬀecting the Wi-Fi
users and multiple LAA operators, is challenging. To solve this problem, we propose to use a Q-learning based
ML solution so that a channel and its occupancy time decided intelligently based on the parameters such as
interference from other operators, load on the channels, channel activities of Wi-Fi users, etc.

• Intelligent Channel Selection by Wi-Fi AP in LTE/Wi-Fi Coexistence: In a multi-AP setting, an AP selects
the channel for the operation of the expected capacity of the existing links. The traditional way is to take the
SINR-based capacity estimate into account. However, this capacity model may sometimes fail to represent
the complex interactions between PHY and MAC layers due to the presence of LAA, as it makes the scenario
heterogeneous. As a result, decisions regarding channel selection may be delayed or inaccurate. To solve this
problem, we propose to use supervised learning as a tool to model the complex interactions between PHY and
MAC layers based on factors such as power and PHY rate of a neighboring Wi-Fi link.

10

• Eﬃcient Radio Resource Allocation Using Reinforcement Learning In the ﬁfth-generation (5G) of mobile
broadband band systems, Radio Resources Management (RRM) has reached unprecedented levels of complex-
ity. To cope with the ever more sophisticated RRM functionalities and to make prompt decisions required in 5G,
eﬃcient radio resource scheduling will play a critical role in the RAN system. Depending on tasks’ purposes,
the scheduling process is divided into three steps: prioritization, resource number determination, and resource
allocation. However, to support a diverse range of applications such as ultra-reliable low latency applications,
IoT applications, V2X applications, AR/VR applications, massive multimedia applications, etc., the scheduling
process’s steps become more complex. As a solution, we propose to use deep reinforcement learning tools to get
feedback about the traﬃc in real-time so that eﬃcient scheduling decisions and optimal use of radio resources
are made.

5. Conclusions

Small Cells deployment in 4G and 5G play a crucial role in boosting the capacity by eﬃcient reuse of the same
spectrum. This paper listed some of the open challenges and issues in the current (in 5GHz) and future (in 6GHz)
spectrum sharing. We will continue the research into coexistence by shifting focus onto the latest unlicensed band: 6
GHz. The newest Wi-Fi version, 802.11ax, will coexist with the latest cellular technology, 5G NR-U. Unlike LAA,
5G NR-U will transmit both uplink and downlink data in the unlicensed band. Unlike 802.11ac in 5 GHz, 802.11ax
in 6 GHz will employ Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA): these changes will create new
coexistence scenarios.

References

[1] 3GPP, “TSGRAN; Study on Licensed-Assisted Access to Unlicensed Spectrum,” Tech. Rep. TR 36.889 V13.0.0, June 2015.
[2] M. K. Giluka, N. Rajoria, A. C. Kulkarni, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Class based dynamic priority scheduling for uplink to support m2m

communications in lte,” in 2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 313–317, IEEE, 2014.

[3] R. Chaganti, V. Sathya, S. A. Ahammed, R. Rex, and B. R. Tamma, “Eﬃcient son handover scheme for enterprise femtocell networks,” in

2013 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2013.

[4] V. Sathya, H. V. Gudivada, H. Narayanam, B. M. Krishna, and B. R. Tamma, “Enhanced distributed resource allocation and interference
management in lte femtocell networks,” in 2013 IEEE 9th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and
Communications (WiMob), pp. 553–558, IEEE, 2013.

[5] B. M. Krishna, M. Siddula, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “A dynamic link aggregation scheme for hetregenous networks,” 2014.
[6] S. Madhuri, V. Sathya, B. R. Tamma, et al., “A dynamic link aggregation scheme for heterogeneous wireless networks,” in 2014 IEEE

International Conference on Electronics, Computing and Communication Technologies (CONECCT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.

[7] M. Tahalani, V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, U. Suhas, M. K. Giluka, and B. R. Tamma, “Optimal placement of femto base stations in enterprise
femtocell networks,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommuncations Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2014.

[8] V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Joint placement and power control of lte femto base stations in enterprise environments,” in

2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), pp. 1029–1033, IEEE, 2015.

[9] M. Tahalani, V. Sathya, U. Suhas, R. Chaganti, and B. R. Tamma, “Optimal femto placement in enterprise building,” in 2013 IEEE Interna-

tional Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–3, IEEE, 2013.

[10] H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Phantom cell realization in lte and its performance analysis,” in 2014 IEEE International

Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommuncations Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.

[11] R. V. Sathya and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic spectrum allocation in femto based lte network,” in 2013 Fifth International Conference on

Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2013.

[12] H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Phantom cell architecture for lte and its application in vehicular iot environments,” EAI

Endorsed Transactions on Ubiquitous Environments, 2015.

[13] V. Sathya, K. Bala Murali Krishna, and B. R. Tamma, “Eﬃcient interference management scheme for lte femtocell networks,” ACM

Mobihoc (Poster), 2013.

[14] A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, V. Venkatesh, R. Ramji, and B. R. Tamma, “Energy-eﬃcient femtocell placement in lte networks,” 2015.
[15] V. Sathya, A. Ramamourthy, S. Kumar, and B. R. Tamma, “On improving sinr in lte hetnet with d2d relays,” Elsevier Computer Communi-

cation (COMCOM), 2016.

[16] V. Sathya, A. Ramamourthy, M. Tahalani, and B. R. Tamma, “On femto placement and decoupled access for downlink and uplink in

enterprise environments,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Ubiquitous Environments (Future Internet), 2015.

[17] V. Sathya, V. Venkatesh, R. Ramji, A. Ramamourthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Handover and sinr optimized deployment of lte femto base stations

in enterprise environments,” Wireless Personal Communications (WPC), pp. 1–25, 2016.

11

[18] V. Sathya, A. Kumar, A. Ramamourthy, S. Kumar, and B. R. Tamma, “Maximizing dual cell connectivity opportunities in lte small cells

deployment,” in National Conference on Communications (NCC), IEEE, 2016.

[19] S. Dama, T. Valerrian, V. Sathya, and K. Kuchi, “A novel rach mechanism for dense cellular-iot deployments,” in Wireless Communications

and Networking Conference (WCNC), IEEE, 2016.

[20] A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Franklin, and B. R. Tamma, “On improving capacity of full-duplex small cells with d2d,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:1606.07198, 2016.

[21] M. K. Giluka, M. S. A. Khan, G. Krishna, T. A. Atif, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “On handovers in uplink/downlink decoupled lte hetnets,”

in 2016 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[22] M. K. Giluka, M. S. A. Khan, V. Sathya, and A. A. Franklin, “Leveraging decoupling in enabling energy aware d2d communications,” in

2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[23] A. M. Baswade, V. Sathya, B. R. Tamma, et al., “Unlicensed carrier selection and user oﬄoading in dense lte-u networks,” in 2016 IEEE

Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[24] S. Ghosh, V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, B. Akilesh, and B. R. Tamma, “A novel resource allocation and power control mechanism for hybrid

access femtocells,” Computer Communications, vol. 109, pp. 53–75, 2017.

[25] M. Iqbal, C. Rochman, V. Sathya, and M. Ghosh, “Impact of changing energy detection thresholds on fair coexistence of wi-ﬁ and lte in the

unlicensed spectrum,” in 2017 Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2017.

[26] S. Y. Kumar, V. Sathya, and S. Ramanath, “Enhancing spectral eﬃciency in lte-d2d networks,” in 2017 9th International Conference on

Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), pp. 401–402, IEEE, 2017.

[27] B. Akilesh, V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “A novel scheduling algorithm to maximize the d2d spatial reuse in lte networks,”

in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[28] D. Martolia, V. Sathya, A. K. Rangisetti, B. R. Tamma, and A. A. Franklin, “Enhancing performance of victim macro users via joint absf
and dynamic power control in lte hetnets,” in 2017 Twenty-third National Conference on Communications (NCC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017.
[29] M. Mehrnoush, V. Sathya, S. Roy, and M. Ghosh, “Analytical modeling of wi-ﬁ and lte-laa coexistence: Throughput and impact of energy

detection threshold,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1990–2003, 2018.

[30] V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Association fairness in wi-ﬁ and lte-u coexistence,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless Communica-

tions and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.

[31] V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Analysis of csat performance in wi-ﬁ and lte-u coexistence,” in 2018 IEEE International

Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.

[32] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, M. P. K. Reddy, B. Lala, and B. R. Tamma, “A socio-inspired calm approach to channel assignment performance

prediction and wmn capacity estimation,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 42–66, 2019.

[33] S. Dama, V. Sathya, K. Kuchi, and T. V. Pasca, “A feasible cellular internet of things: Enabling edge computing and the iot in dense futuristic

cellular networks,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 66–72, 2016.

[34] M. Mehrnoush, S. Roy, V. Sathya, and M. Ghosh, “On the fairness of wi-ﬁ and lte-laa coexistence,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive

Communications and Networking, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 735–748, 2018.

[35] R. Vanlin Sathya and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic spectrum allocation in femto based lte network,” 2013.
[36] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, M. P. K. Reddy, and B. R. Tamma, “icalm: A topology agnostic socio-inspired channel assignment performance
prediction metric for mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 24th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
pp. 702–704, 2018.

[37] A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Franklin, and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic power control and scheduling in full duplex cellular network

with d2d,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 695–726, 2019.

[38] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Exploring the relationship between socio-inspired calm and network capacity through regression
analysis,” in 2018 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 2369–2374, IEEE,
2018.

[39] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. S. Magdum, T. V. K. Buyakar, H. Lokhandwala, and B. R. Tamma, “Designing infrastructure-less disaster networks
by leveraging the alljoyn framework,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking,
pp. 417–420, 2019.

[40] H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Eai endorsed transactionspreprint research article/editorial,”
[41] V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “On placement and dynamic power control of femtocells in lte hetnets,” in 2014 IEEE Global

Communications Conference, pp. 4394–4399, IEEE, 2014.

[42] V. Sathya, M. Merhnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Energy detection based sensing of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss for lte-u csat,” in 2018 IEEE Global

Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2018.

[43] S. M. Kala, W. K. Seah, V. Sathya, and B. Lala, “Statistical relationship between interference estimates and network capacity,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:1904.12125, 2019.

[44] Y. Kumar, V. Sathya, and S. Ramanath, “Enhancing spectral utilization by maximizing the reuse in lte network,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:1907.05201, 2019.

[45] V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Auto-correlation based sensing of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss for lte-u csat,” in 2019 IEEE 90th

Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Fall), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2019.

[46] M. G. Adam Dziedzic, Vanlin Sathya and S. Krshnan, “Detection of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss for lte-u csat using machine learning approach,”

2019.

[47] V. Sathya, A. Dziedzic, M. Ghosh, and S. Krishnan, “Machine learning based detection of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss for lte-u csat,” in 2020

International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), pp. 596–601, IEEE, 2020.

[48] G. Garg, V. Reddy, V. Sathya, R. T. Bheemarjuna, et al., “An sla-aware network function selection algorithm for sfcs,” in 2019 IEEE 2nd 5G

World Forum (5GWF), pp. 524–527, IEEE, 2019.

[49] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. S. Magdam, and B. R. Tamma, “Odin: Enhancing resilience of disaster networks through regression inspired

optimized routing.,” Telecommunications Systems, 2019.

12

[50] V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Wi-ﬁ/lte-u coexistence: Real-time issues and solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 9221–

9234, 2020.

[51] S. Manas Kala, V. Sathya, M. Reddy, B. Lala, and B. Reddy Tamma, “A socio-inspired calm approach to channel assignment performance

prediction and wmn capacity estimation,” arXiv, pp. arXiv–1808, 2018.

[52] S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. W. KG, and B. R. Tamma, “Cirno: Leveraging capacity interference relationship for dense networks optimization,”

in 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2020.

[53] A. Dziedzic, V. Sathya, M. I. Rochman, M. Ghosh, and S. Krishnan, “Machine learning enabled spectrum sharing in dense lte-u/wi-ﬁ

coexistence scenarios,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 1, pp. 173–189, 2020.

[54] A. K. Rangisetti and V. Sathya, “Qos aware and fault tolerant handovers in software deﬁned lte networks,” Wireless Networks, pp. 1–19,

2020.

[55] V. Sathya, R. Madhumathi, and R. Radhakrishnan, “Modiﬁed aco algorithm for resource allocation in cloud computing environment,”
[56] V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Small cell planning: Resource management and interference mitigation mecha-

nisms in lte hetnets,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 115, no. 1, pp. 335–361, 2020.

[57] V. Sathya, S. M. Kala, M. I. Rochman, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Standardization advances for cellular and wi-ﬁ coexistence in the unlicensed

5 and 6 ghz bands,” GetMobile: Mobile Computing and Communications, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 5–15, 2020.

[58] V. Sathya, S. M. Kala, S. Bhupeshraj, and B. R. Tamma, “Raptap: a socio-inspired approach to resource allocation and interference man-

agement in dense small cells,” Wireless Networks, pp. 1–24, 2020.

[59] V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, M. I. Rochman, and M. Ghosh, “Qos guaranteed radio resource scheduling in stand-alone unlicensed multeﬁre,”

in IEEE 5G World Forum, 2020.

[60] “Optimal femto placement in enterprise building,” in IEEE ANTS.
[61] V. Sathya, M. I. Rochman, and M. Ghosh, “Measurement-based coexistence studies of laa & wi-ﬁ deployments in chicago,” IEEE Wireless

Communication Magazine, 2020.

[62] M. Ghosh, V. Sathya, M. Iqbal, M. Mehrnoush, and S. Roy, “Coexistence of lte-laa and wi-ﬁ: Analysis simulation and experiments,” in

P802. 11 Coexistence SC Workshop, 2019.

[63] S. C. Liew, C. Kai, H. C. Leung, and P. Wong, “Back-of-the-Envelope Computation of Throughput Distributions in CSMA Wireless Net-

works,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1319–1331, 2010.

[64] G. Bianchi, “Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination Function,” IEEE Journal on selected areas in communica-

tions, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 535–547, 2000.

[65] Z. Jiang and S. Mao, “Harmonious Coexistence and Eﬃcient Spectrum Sharing for LTE-U and Wi-Fi,” in Proc. of International Conference

on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), pp. 275–283, IEEE, 2017.

[66] I. S. Association et al., “802.11-2012-IEEE Standard Part 11: Wireless LAN MAC and PHY Speciﬁcations,” Retrived from http://standards.

ieee. org/about/get/802/802.11. html, 2012.

[67] L.-U. Forum, “LTE-U SDL Coexistence Speciﬁcations.” LTE-U Forum, http://www.lteuforum.org/documents.html, 2015.
[68] C. Chen, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, “Downlink performance analysis of LTE and WiFi coexistence in unlicensed bands with a simple

listen-before-talk scheme,” in Proc. of Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) Spring, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2015.

[69] A. M. Baswade, T. A. Atif, B. R. Tamma, and A. A. Franklin, “On the Impact of Duty Cycled LTE-U on Wi-Fi Users: An Experimental

Study,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks, pp. 196–219, Springer, 2018.

[70] Y. Gao, X. Chu, and J. Zhang, “Performance analysis of laa and wiﬁ coexistence in unlicensed spectrum based on markov chain,” in Proc.

of Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[71] A. M. Baswade, L. Beltramelli, F. A. Antony, M. Gidlund, B. R. Tamma, and L. Guntupalli, “Modelling and analysis of wi-ﬁ and laa co-
existence with priority classes,” in Proc. of International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2018.

[72] Qualcomm, “LTE in Unlicensed Spectrum: Harmonious Coexistence with Wi-Fi.” Qualcomm White Paper, June 2014.
[73] 3GPP, “3GPP-TSG-RAN-WG1; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA),” Tech. Rep. TR 36.814 V9.0.0, March 2010.
[74] J. Jeon, H. Niu, Q. C. Li, A. Papathanassiou, and G. Wu, “LTE in the Unlicensed Spectrum: Evaluating Coexistence Mechanisms,” in Proc.

of Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2014, pp. 740–745, IEEE, 2014.

[75] E. Almeida, A. M. Cavalcante, R. C. Paiva, F. S. Chaves, F. M. Abinader, R. D. Vieira, S. Choudhury, E. Tuomaala, and K. Doppler,
“Enabling LTE/WiFi coexistence by LTE blank subframe allocation,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communications (ICC),
pp. 5083–5088, IEEE, 2013.

[76] A. Abdelfattah and N. Malouch, “Modeling and Performance Analysis of Wi-Fi Networks Coexisting with LTE-U,” in Proc. of Conference

on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2017.

[77] P. C. Ng and S. C. Liew, “Throughput analysis of ieee802.11 multi-hop adhoc networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on networking, vol. 15,

no. 2, pp. 309–322, 2007.

[78] Y. Gao, D.-M. Chiu, and J. Lui, “Determining the end-to-end Throughput Capacity in Multi-hop Networks: Methodology and Applications,”

in ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 34, pp. 39–50, ACM, 2006.

[79] Cisco, “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traﬃc Forecast Update, 2017-2022.” Cisco White Paper, Feb 2019.
[80] K. Medepalli and F. A. Tobagi, “Towards Performance Modeling of IEEE 802.11 based Wireless Networks: A Uniﬁed Framework and its

Applications,” in Proc. of International Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2006.

[81] A. M. Cavalcante, E. Almeida, R. D. Vieira, S. Choudhury, E. Tuomaala, K. Doppler, F. Chaves, R. C. Paiva, and F. Abinader, “Performance
Evaluation of LTE and Wi-Fi Coexistence in Unlicensed Bands,” in Proc. of Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2013.

[82] S. Sagari, I. Seskar, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Modeling the coexistence of lte and wiﬁ heterogeneous networks in dense deployment scenarios,”

in Proc. of International Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), pp. 2301–2306, IEEE, 2015.

[83] R. Ratasuk, M. A. Uusitalo, N. Mangalvedhe, A. Sorri, S. Iraji, C. Wijting, and A. Ghosh, “License-exempt lte deployment in heterogeneous

network,” in Proc. of International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), pp. 246–250, IEEE, 2012.

13

[84] T. Nihtilä, V. Tykhomyrov, O. Alanen, M. A. Uusitalo, A. Sorri, M. Moisio, S. Iraji, R. Ratasuk, and N. Mangalvedhe, “System performance
of lte and ieee 802.11 coexisting on a shared frequency band,” in Proc. of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), pp. 1038–1043, IEEE, 2013.

[85] S. Sagari, S. Baysting, D. Saha, I. Seskar, W. Trappe, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Coordinated Dynamic Spectrum Management of LTE-U and
Wi-Fi Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), pp. 209–220, September
2015.

[86] LTE-U Forum, “LTE-U Technical Report.” [Online] http://www.lteuforum.org/documents.html, 2015.
[87] Y. Li, F. Baccelli, J. G. Andrews, T. D. Novlan, and J. C. Zhang, “Modeling and analyzing the coexistence of Wi-Fi and LTE in unlicensed

spectrum,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 6310–6326, 2016.

[88] C. Cano and D. J. Leith, “Coexistence of WiFi and LTE in unlicensed bands: A proportional fair allocation scheme,” in Proc. of International

Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), pp. 2288–2293, IEEE, 2015.

[89] M. Sawahashi, Y. Kishiyama, A. Morimoto, D. Nishikawa, and M. Tanno, “Coordinated multipoint transmission/reception techniques for

lte-advanced,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 3, p. 26, 2010.

[90] S. Brueck, L. Zhao, J. Giese, and M. A. Amin, “Centralized scheduling for joint transmission coordinated multi-point in lte-advanced,” in

2010 International ITG Workshop on Smart Antennas (WSA), pp. 177–184, IEEE, 2010.

[91] D. Bladsjö, M. Hogan, and S. Ruﬃni, “Synchronization aspects in lte small cells,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 70–

77, 2013.

[92] R. Mendrzik, R. A. J. Castillo, G. Bauch, and E. Seidel, “Interference coordination-based downlink scheduling for heterogeneous lte-a

networks,” in 2016 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

[93] M.-Y. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Zhou, Y. Yang, H. Hu, and H. Wang, “Coordination method between access points using unlicensed frequency band,”

Apr. 16 2019. US Patent 10,264,603.

[94] V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Wi-Fi/LTE-U Coexistence: Real-Time Issues and Solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,

pp. 9221–9234, 2020.

[95] R. Liu, Q. Chen, G. Yu, G. Y. Li, and Z. Ding, “Resource Management in LTE-U Systems: Past, Present, and Future,” IEEE Open Journal

of Vehicular Technology, vol. 1, pp. 1–17, 2019.

[96] P. Charalampou, I. Giannoulakis, E. Kafetzakis, and E. D. Sykas, “Experimenting on LTE-U and WiFi coexistence,” in 2019 4th South-East
Europe Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer Networks and Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2019.

[97] R. Biswas and J. Wu, “Co-existence of LTE-U and Wi-Fi with Direct Communication,” in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference

on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.

[98] S. Zinno, G. Di Stasi, S. Avallone, and G. Ventre, “On a fair coexistence of LTE and Wi-Fi in the unlicensed spectrum: A Survey,” Computer

Communications, vol. 115, pp. 35–50, 2018.

[99] A. M. Voicu, L. Simi´c, and M. Petrova, “Survey of spectrum sharing for inter-technology coexistence,” IEEE Communications Surveys &

[100] FCC,

Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1112–1144, 2018.
Notice

Proposed
https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-18-147A1.pdf, 2018.

Rulemaking

Unlicensed

“FCC

on

of

Use

of

the

6

GHz

Band.”

[Online]

[101] S. Methley and W. Webb., “Wi-Fi Spectrum Needs Study, Final Report to Wi-Fi Alliance 3rd ed.” [Online] http://www.wi-fi.org, 2017.
[102] N. Patriciello, S. Goyaly, S. Lagen, L. Giupponi, B. Bojovic, A. Demir, and M. Beluri, “Nr-u and wigig coexistence in 60 ghz bands,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:2001.04779, 2020.

[103] IEEE 802.11 coexistence workshop., “IEEE 802.11 coexistence workshop..” [Online] https://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/,

2019.

[104] D. Xu, A. Zhou, X. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Liu, C. An, Y. Shi, L. Liu, and H. Ma, “Understanding operational 5g: A ﬁrst measurement study on
its coverage, performance and energy consumption,” in Proceedings of the Annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication on the applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communication, pp. 479–494, 2020.

[105] A. Narayanan, E. Ramadan, R. Mehta, X. Hu, Q. Liu, R. A. Fezeu, U. K. Dayalan, S. Verma, P. Ji, T. Li, et al., “Lumos5g: Mapping and
predicting commercial mmwave 5g throughput,” in Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement Conference, pp. 176–193, 2020.
[106] F. Wilhelmi, S. Barrachina-Muñoz, B. Bellalta, C. Cano, A. Jonsson, and G. Neu, “Potential and pitfalls of multi-armed bandits for decen-

tralized spatial reuse in wlans,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 127, pp. 26–42, 2019.

14

