An ecologically valid examination of event-based 

and time-based prospective memory using 

immersive virtual reality: the effects of delay and 

task type on everyday prospective memory.   

Panagiotis Kourtesisa,b,c,d,e,f,g,h*, Simona Collinac,d, Leonidas A.A. Doumasb, 

and Sarah E. MacPhersona,b 

aHuman Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, 

Edinburgh, UK; 

 bDepartment of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; 

 cLab of Experimental Psychology, Suor Orsola Benincasa University of Naples, Naples, 

Italy; 

 dInterdepartmental Centre for Planning and Research "Scienza Nuova", Suor Orsola 

Benincasa University of Naples, Naples, Italy; 

 eNational Research Institute of Computer Science and Automation, INRIA, Rennes, 

France; 

 fUniv Rennes, Rennes, France; 

 gResearch Institute of Computer Science and Random Systems, IRISA, Rennes, France; 

 hFrench National Centre for Scientific Research, CNRS, Rennes, France. 

* Panagiotis Kourtesis, Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, 7 George 

Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, United Kingdom. Email: pkourtes@exseed.ed.ac.uk 

1 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

Recent research has focused on assessing either event- or time-based prospective 

memory (PM) using laboratory tasks. Yet, the findings pertaining to PM performance 

on laboratory tasks are often inconsistent with the findings on corresponding naturalistic 

experiments. Ecologically valid neuropsychological tasks resemble the complexity and 

cognitive demands of everyday tasks, offer an adequate level of experimental control, 

and allow a generalisation of the findings to everyday performance. The Virtual Reality 

Everyday Assessment Lab (VR-EAL), an immersive virtual reality neuropsychological 

battery with enhanced ecological validity, was implemented to comprehensively assess 

everyday PM (i.e., focal and non-focal event-based, and time-based). The effects of the 

length of delay between encoding and initiating the PM intention and the type of PM 

task on everyday PM performance were examined. The results revealed that everyday 

PM performance was affected by the length of delay rather than the type of PM task. 

The effect of the length of delay differentially affected performance on the focal, non-

focal, and time-based tasks and was proportional to the PM cue focality (i.e., semantic 

relationship with the intended action). This study also highlighted methodological 

considerations such as the differentiation between functioning and ability, distinction of 

cue attributes, and the necessity of ecological validity.  

Keywords: focal event-based prospective memory; non-focal event-based prospective 

memory; time-based prospective memory; everyday prospective memory;   

Introduction 

Prospective memory (PM) involves the ability to remember to initiate an action in the 
future. The PM action may be associated with either a certain event (event-based e.g., 
when you see Alex, give him this card) or a specific time (time-based e.g., at 3 pm call 
Anne). The importance of PM tasks in everyday life varies from minimal importance 
(e.g., watering the plants every second day) to extreme importance (e.g., taking blood-
pressure tablets after lunch). Hence, PM is paramount to various aspects of everyday 
life.  

Event-based prospective memory 

The two predominant theoretical models of event-based PM are the preparatory 
attentional and memory (PAM) theory and the multiprocess theory (Anderson, 
McDaniel, & Einstein, 2017).  The PAM theory suggests that efficient PM ability stems 

2 | P a g e  

 
from a constant top-down monitoring of environmental and internal cues, which allow 
the individual to recall the intended action and initiate it (Smith, 2003; Smith, Hunt, 
McVay, & McConnell, 2007). The multiprocess theory is complementary to the PAM 
theory (McDaniel & Einstein, 2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007). In addition to PAM’s 
top-down monitoring, the multiprocess theory postulates that effective performance on 
PM tasks is also facilitated by bottom-up spontaneous retrieval (McDaniel & Einstein, 
2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007). Hence, when retrieving the intention to perform a 
PM task, the PAM theory suggests that there is an intentional retrieval process through 
the constant monitoring of target cues, while the multiprocess theory suggests an 
additional reflexive associative retrieval process by passively detecting environmental 
and internal cues (McDaniel, Umanath, Einstein, & Waldum, 2015). Bottom-up 
retrieval is thought to take place when the PM event-based target cue is focal, while top-
down retrieval is implemented when the event-based target cue is non-focal (McDaniel 
& Einstein, 2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007; McDaniel et al., 2015). More recently, 
the dynamic multiprocess framework has been proposed, which suggests a dynamic 
interplay between top-down and bottom-up retrieval processes for performing PM 
event-based tasks regardless of the focality of the target cue (Scullin, McDaniel, & 
Shelton, 2013; Shelton & Scullin, 2017).  

Focal event-based tasks 

A focal event-based PM task has a target cue with high salience (i.e., it can be easily 
detected) and high focality (i.e., it is strongly associated with the intended action; 
McDaniel & Einstein, 2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007; McDaniel et al., 2015).  For 
example, if an individual wants to buy a loaf of bread after work, while driving home, 
they may passively notice a large and easily detectable billboard at the side of the road 
(i.e., high salience), which displays pastry products (i.e., high focality). This focal target 
cue reminds the individual of their PM intention to buy a loaf.  

Non-focal event-based tasks 

In contrast, a non-focal event-based PM task has a target cue with low salience (i.e., it 
cannot be easily detected) and low focality (i.e., it is not strongly associated with the 
intended action; McDaniel & Einstein, 2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007; McDaniel et 
al., 2015). Revisiting the above example, while driving home, the individual 
intentionally monitors the environment and detects a sign among other signs (i.e., low 
salience) for a supermarket (i.e., low focality). This non-focal cue detection assists the 
individual in retrieving the PM intention to buy a loaf.  

Performance differences 

Individuals have been found to perform substantially better on focal PM tasks than non-
focal PM tasks. This indicates the difference in difficulty between the intentional and 
reflexive associative retrieval of the intention for each type of PM task (Anderson et al., 

3 | P a g e  

 
2017; McDaniel et al., 2015; Mullet, Scullin, Hess, Scullin, Arnold, & Einstein, 2013; 
Scullin, McDaniel, Shelton, & Lee, 2010). Higher focality of the PM cue is thought to 
facilitate better encoding and retrieval of the PM intention (Anderson et al., 2017; 
McDaniel & Einstein, 2000; McDaniel & Einstein, 2007; McDaniel et al., 2015), which 
may explain the performance differences on focal and non-focal event-based tasks.   

Time-based prospective memory 

As stated above, everyday PM consists of both event- and time-based tasks (Einstein & 
McDaniel, 1996). Hence, including only event-based tasks in the assessment of PM 
does not allow for generalisation of the results to daily life (e.g., Einstein, Smith, 
McDaniel, & Shaw, 1997; Einstein, McDaniel, Manzi, Cochran, & Baker, 2000; Mullet 
et al., 2013; Scullin et al., 2010; Smith, 2003; Smith et al., 2007). 

In the same way as the non-focal event-based tasks, the time-based tasks require 
individuals to monitor the environment for the appropriate target cue (Zuber, Mahy, & 
Kliegel, 2019). The target cue (e.g., a clock or a timer) is frequently non-salient (i.e., in 
the periphery or outside the field of view), while the focality of the cue is substantially 
low (i.e., the association between the time and intended PM action). Time-monitoring is 
also important for performing time-based tasks (Glickson, & Myslobodsky, 2006). 
Individuals appear to implement strategic time monitoring where, by checking the time, 
they estimate when they should repeat their time check and correspondingly regulate the 
frequency of their time monitoring (Cona, Arcara, Tarantino, & Bisiacchi, 2012; 
Kliegel, Martin, McDaniel, & Einstein, 2001; Mäntylä, Carelli, & Forman, 2007). For 
example, if an individual is required to take a blood-pressure tablet at 8 pm, they will 
monitor the time on their watch, which reminds them of the intended PM action, and 
will intensify their time monitoring as the appropriate time approaches. When the time 
is approximately 8 pm, the individual will perform the PM intended action and take the 
blood-pressure tablet.    

The literature suggests that time-based tasks are more cognitively demanding 
than event-based tasks as individuals frequently perform more poorly on time-based 
tasks compared to event-based tasks (Einstein & McDaniel, 1996).  In laboratory tasks, 
often performance on both focal and non-focal tasks is significantly better than 
performance on time-based tasks (e.g., Conte & McBride, 2018; Zuber et al., 2019). 
However, in some lab-based studies, only focal task performance was found to be 
significantly better than performance on time-based tasks (e.g., McBride & Flaherty, 
2020).    

The importance of ecological validity 

Many of the studies examining performance on focal, non-focal, and time-based PM 
tasks have involved lab-based paradigms (e.g., Conte & McBride, 2018; Einstein et al., 
1997, 2000; McBride & Flaherty, 2020; Mullet et al., 2013; Scullin et al., 2010; Smith, 
2003; Smith et al., 2007; Zuber et al., 2019). These laboratory tasks incorporate simple, 

4 | P a g e  

 
static stimuli within a highly controlled environment and do not resemble the 
complexity of real-life situations (Parsons, 2015). For example, a laboratory PM 
experiment may incorporate a single on-going task such as a computerised lexical 
decision task, where the participant should indicate whether the presented word is an 
actual or fictional word, with a comparable computerised PM task, where the participant 
should indicate when a specific word appears. Hence, the laboratory tasks incorporate 
simple stimuli (e.g., static) and testing environments (e.g., two-dimensional), almost 
automatic responses (i.e., in milliseconds) provided using a keyboard, a relatively short 
testing duration (e.g., 15 minutes) and delay after encoding a PM intention (e.g., up to 
10 minutes), and a single on-going task and a low difficulty PM task. 

PM studies adopting experimental tasks and conditions that substantially diverge 

from the complexity and cognitive demands of everyday tasks may provide discrepant 
results compared to ecologically valid research paradigms (Chaytor & Schmitter-
Edgecombe, 2003; Franzen & Wilhelm, 1996; Marsh, Hicks, & Landau, 1998; Spooner 
& Pachana, 2006). Implementing ecologically valid tasks allows one to generalise the 
findings to everyday functioning (Chaytor & Schmitter-Edgecombe, 2003; Haines et al., 
2019; Higginson, Arnett, & Voss, 2000; Mlinac & Feng, 2016; Parsons, 2015; Phillips, 
Henry, & Martin, 2008). Therefore, adopting ecologically valid research paradigms 
allows researchers to understand PM performance in daily life.  

Naturalistic Experiments 

Ecologically valid research paradigms have predominantly involved assessments 

in various real-life settings such as performing errands in a shopping centre or a 
pedestrianized street or at home (e.g., Garden, Phillips, & MacPherson, 2001; Marsh et 
al., 1998; Shallice & Burgess, 1991). In PM research, a discrepancy is found between 
performance on laboratory tasks and naturalistic tasks in terms of the so-called age-
prospective memory-paradox (Kvavilashvili, Cockburn, & Kornbrot, 2013; 
Niedźwieńska & Barzykowski, 2012; Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). In laboratory 
tasks, there are significant age-related differences found on event-based and time-based 
tasks where older adults perform more poorly than younger adults, while in naturalistic 
tasks, age differences are not typically found (Kvavilashvili et al., 2013; Niedźwieńska 
& Barzykowski, 2012; Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). In naturalistic tasks, older 
adults may use compensatory strategies and external memory aids to successfully 
perform PM tasks (Phillips et al., 2008; Shelton & Scullin, 2017; Uttl, 2008). However, 
naturalistic experiments rarely consider the diverse types of PM tasks within the same 
paradigm. Niedźwieńska and Barzykowski (2012) investigated performance on focal, 
non-focal, and time-based tasks in a naturalistic setting and found no significant 
differences among the PM tasks. In contrast, the same comparisons using lab-based 
tasks revealed that, in younger adults, performance on the event-based task with focal 
cue was performed better than the event-based task with non-focal cue and the time-
based PM task, whereas performance on these latter two tasks did not differ. In older 
adults, performance on the event-based task with non-focal cue was significantly poorer 

5 | P a g e  

 
than on both the event-based task with focal cue and the time-based task, while 
performance on these latter two tasks did not differ. 

Nonetheless, real-world tasks suffer from several limitations. These include a 
lack of standardization for use in other clinics and laboratories, reduced feasibility for 
use with certain neurological populations (e.g., schizophrenia patients), being time-
consuming and expensive, having procedural and bureaucratic demands, as well as 
diminished experimental control over external factors (Logie, Trawley, & Law, 2011; 
Parsons, 2015).  

Virtual Reality 

Another approach for achieving ecological validity involves the implementation of 
technological mediums such as recordings of real-world locations and non-immersive 
virtual environments (Farrimond, Knight, & Titov, 2006; Logie et al., 2011; McGeorge 
et al., 2001; Paraskevaides et al., 2010). These technologies are able to simulate real-
life tasks, are cost-effective, require less administration time, enable increased 
experimental control, and can be implemented in other clinical and research settings 
(Parsons, McMahan, & Kane, 2018; Werner & Korczyn, 2012; Zygouris & Tsolaki, 
2015). Non-immersive virtual reality (VR) refers to the software (i.e., virtual 
environments) which are projected onto two-dimensional displays (i.e., hardware) such 
as computer screens, laptops, tablets, and mobile devices (Kourtesis, Collina, Doumas, 
& MacPherson, 2019a). Non-immersive VR tests, such as the VR Prospective Memory 
Test (Man et al., 2018) and the Virtual Ride in a Town (Lecouvey et al., 2019), have 
been implemented in an attempt to assess PM. However, non-immersive VR tests can 
be challenging for individuals without gaming backgrounds (Zaidi, Duthie, Carr, & 
Maksoud, 2018), especially for older adults and clinical populations (e.g., individuals 
with mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer’s disease; Werner & Korczyn, 2012; 
Zygouris & Tsolaki, 2015).  

In contrast, immersive VR refers to virtual environments (i.e., software) which 
are projected onto devices such as head-mounted displays (HMDs) and CAVE systems 
(Kourtesis et al., 2019a). Non-immersive VR provide a less ecologically valid testing 
environment than immersive VR tests (Bohil, Alicea, & Biocca, 2011; Parsons, 2015; 
Rizzo, Schultheis, Kerns, & Mateer, 2004; Teo et al., 2016). Importantly, differences in 
performance between gamers and non-gamers are mitigated by the first-person view and 
ergonomic interactions that are proximal to real-life actions in immersive VR 
environments (Zaidi et al., 2018). Consequently, an immersive VR research paradigm 
provides the most efficient approach to study everyday PM performance.  

The Virtual Reality Everyday Assessment Lab 

We have recently developed the Virtual Reality Everyday Assessment Lab (VR-EAL), 
which is an immersive VR neuropsychological battery assessing everyday cognitive 
functions such as PM (i.e., event-based and time-based), episodic memory (i.e., 
immediate and delayed recognition), attentional processes (i.e., visual, visuospatial, and 
auditory), and executive functioning (i.e., planning and task-shifting; Kourtesis, Korre, 

6 | P a g e  

 
  
Collina, Doumas, & MacPherson, 2020b). The convergent, construct, and ecological 
validity of the VR-EAL has been provided against established ecologically valid paper-
and-pencil tests such as the Cambridge Prospective Memory Test (Wilson et al., 2005), 
the Rivermead Behavioral Memory Test–III (Wilson, Cockburn, & Baddeley, 2008), 
the Test of Everyday Attention (Robertson, Ward, Ridgeway, & Nimmo-Smith, 1996), 
and the Behavioral Assessment of Dysexecutive Syndrome (Wilson, Alderman, 
Burgess, Emslie, & Evans, 1997; Kourtesis, Collina, Doumas, & MacPherson, 2020a). 
Notably, the VR-EAL does not induce differences in performance between gamers and 
non-gamers, and the VR-EAL tasks were rated by participants as substantially more 
similar to everyday tasks compared to their equivalent ecologically valid paper-and-
pencil tasks (Kourtesis et al., 2020a). Hence, the VR-EAL better resembles the 
complexity and cognitive demands of real-life tasks.  

The VR-EAL assesses both event-based and time-based PM (Kourtesis et al., 

2020b). It incorporates five event-based tasks and four time-based tasks. The event-
based tasks consist of two non-focal event-based tasks, two focal event-based tasks, and 
one misleading task (i.e., prompting the examinee to perform a task when there is no 
task to perform). In addition, the focal and non-focal event-based tasks are further 
subdivided into tasks performed at an early or late stage of the scenario. Similarly, the 
time-based tasks are divided into early (two tasks) and late tasks (two tasks), where one 
of the two late tasks is a misleading task. The segregation of the PM tasks into early and 
late tasks allows us to investigate the effect of the length of the delay between encoding 
the PM intention and performing the PM action.  

Moreover, PM assessment in the VR-EAL is aligned with the methodological 

suggestions for the assessment of event-based PM provided by McDaniel and 
collaborators (2015). There are only two focal event-based tasks within a scenario of 
approximately 70 minutes. The focal event-based tasks have a single focal cue each and 
there are no other cues driving the participant’s attention to the PM task. Participants are 
instructed that the PM tasks need to be performed later in the scenario (i.e., anytime 
between 15 and 60 minutes after forming a PM intention). Finally, the importance of 
PM and non-PM tasks (e.g., planning the itinerary, preparing breakfast, and buying 
groceries from the supermarket) is equally highlighted. The non-PM VR-EAL tasks do 
not serve simply as distractive on-going tasks but are cognitively demanding tasks that 
assess cognitive functions central to everyday functioning. 

The current study 

To our knowledge, the present study is the first to adopt an ecologically valid paradigm 
using immersive VR to examine real-life PM. In addition, our study is the first to assess, 
in a single sample, everyday PM performance on focal event-based, non-focal event-
based and time-based PM tasks with diverse delay lengths using an ecologically valid 
immersive VR paradigm. Previous studies have found a significant effect of delay on 
either focal event-based tasks (e.g., Kliegel & Jager, 2006; Meier, Zimmermann, & 
Perrig, 2006; Scullin & McDaniel, 2010), non-focal event-based tasks (e.g., Martin, 
Brown, & Hicks, 2011; McBride, Beckner, & Abney, 2011), or time-based tasks (e.g., 

7 | P a g e  

 
McBride, Coane, Drwal, & LaRose, 2013). However, these significant performance 
differences between the various types of PM tasks in laboratory experiments have not 
been replicated using naturalistic paradigms, except in McBride et al. (2013) which 
involved time-based tasks.  

In this study, we have implemented the VR-EAL, which has been validated and 

evaluated as being more ecologically valid against standardized ecological PM 
measures. We also subdivided everyday PM performance into PM functioning and PM 
ability. PM functioning is based on the VR-EAL PM score, which provides values from 
0 – 6 proportionally to the number of prompts (i.e., external aids) that the participant 
required to successfully perform the PM task. PM ability is based on a dichotomised 
VR-EAL PM score (i.e., 0 or 1) where zero indicates a failure to perform the PM task 
without using external aids, and 1 indicates success in performing the PM task without 
using external aids.  

Here, we explored the effects of delay and PM task type on everyday PM 
functioning and ability. Since an effect of PM task type has not been observed in 
naturalistic settings (e.g., Niedźwieńska & Barzykowski, 2012), we expected that the 
effect of delay on PM performance would be more important than the effect of task type 
on PM performance. However, previous research has shown that the effect of delay is 
greater on non-focal event-based (Martin et al., 2011; McBride et al., 2011) and time-
based tasks (McBride et al., 2013), which may be attributed to the focality of the target 
cue (Martin et al., 2011; McBride et al., 2011, 2013). Since the focality of the target cue 
in each PM task type varies, we expected an effect of delay on the performance on each 
PM task type. We expected that the effect of delay would be greater on time-based tasks 
compared to the event-based tasks. Equally, we expected that the effect of delay would 
be greater on non-focal event-based tasks than focal event-based tasks. 

Furthermore, we investigated the performance on each type of PM task, as well 

as on PM tasks with a diverse length of delay. Considering the enhanced ecological 
validity of the VR-EAL and the discrepancies that have emerged from naturalistic 
experiments, we hypothesized that there would not be significant differences between 
performance on the PM tasks, unlike the differences found using laboratory-based 
studies. On the other hand, we expected significant differences between early and late 
PM tasks. Specifically, everyday PM performance on substantially delayed PM tasks 
was anticipated to be significantly decreased, especially for time-based and non-focal 
event-based tasks. 

Methods 

Participants and Procedure 

Participants were recruited via social media and the internal mailing list of the 
University of Edinburgh and were the same cohort as in Kourtesis et al. (2020a). Forty-
one participants (21 females) with a mean age of 29.15 years (SD = 5.80, range = 18-
45) and mean education of 13.80 years (SD = 2.36, range = 10-16) were recruited. The 

8 | P a g e  

 
study was approved by the Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences Research 
Ethics Committee of the University of Edinburgh. Written informed consent was 
obtained from each participant. All participants received verbal and written instructions 
regarding the procedures, possible adverse effects of immersive VR (e.g., 
cybersickness), utilization of the data, and general aims of the study. The participants 
attended the session individually. Upon their arrival, they were instructed by the 
examiner how to use the VR equipment. Then the participants were immersed into VR-
EAL, where they had a practice period without any time restrictions to familiarise 
themselves with the basic controls and configuration. When the participants felt 
comfortable interacting with the virtual environment, the VR-EAL scenario 
commenced. All participants completed all tasks (i.e., non-PM and PM) and the full- 
VR-EAL scenario. See below a description of the VR-EAL’s tasks and scenario. 
Finally, after exposure to VR, the Virtual Reality Neuroscience Questionnaire (VRNQ; 
Kourtesis, Collina, Doumas, &MacPherson, 2019b) was used to assess cybersickness 
symptomatology.   

Materials 

Hardware 

An HTC Vive HMD with two lighthouse stations for motion tracking and two HTC 
Vive wands with six degrees of freedom (6DoF) for navigation and interactions within 
the virtual environment were implemented in accordance with our previously published 
technological recommendations for immersive VR research (Kourtesis et al., 2019a). 
The spatialized (bi-aural) audio was facilitated by a pair of Senhai Kotion Each G9000 
headphones. The size of the VR area was 5m2, which provides an adequate space for 
immersion and naturalistic interaction within virtual environments (Borrego, Latorre, 
Alcañiz, & Llorens, 2018). The HMD was connected to a laptop with an Intel Core i7 
7700HQ 2.80GHz processor, 16 GB RAM, a 4095MB NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1070 
graphics card, a 931 GB TOSHIBA MQ01ABD100 (SATA) hard disk, and Realtek 
High Definition Audio. 

VR-EAL 

VR-EAL can be run on any VR HMD which is compatible with SteamVR, such as HTC 
Vive series (e.g., Pro, Pro Eye, and Cosmos), Oculus Rift series (e.g., Rift and Rift S), 
Pimax series (e.g., 4K, 5K, and 5K Plus), Varjo series (e.g., VR-1 and VR-2), Samsung 
Odyssey series (e.g., Odyssey and Odyssey +), and Valve Index. VR-EAL assesses 
everyday cognitive functions such as PM, episodic memory (i.e., immediate and 
delayed recognition), executive functioning (i.e., planning, multitasking) and selective 
visual, visuospatial and auditory (bi-aural) attention within a realistic immersive VR 
scenario lasting around 70 minutes (Kourtesis et al., 2020a). See Table 1 and Figures 1 
and 2 for a summary of the VR-EAL tasks assessing each cognitive ability. In addition, 
a brief video recording of the VR-EAL may be accessed at this hyperlink: 

9 | P a g e  

 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IHEIvS37Xy8&t .  Please see supplementary 
material for a more comprehensive description of the VR-EAL tasks that are not 
considered in the current study (i.e., ongoing tasks, and misleading PM tasks).  

Table 1. VR-EAL tasks and score ranges 

Scene 

Cognitive Function 

Task 

Score  

3 

3 

3 

6 

6 

8 

8 

10 

12 

14 

15 

16 

17 

19 

20 

21 

22 

Prospective memory 

Write down the notes for the errands. 

Immediate recognition  

Recognising items on the shopping list. 

Planning 

Multitasking 

Drawing the route to be taken. 

Cooking task (preparing breakfast). 

Prospective memory – event based 

Take medication after breakfast. 

 Selective visuospatial attention  

Collect items from the living room. 

Prospective memory – event based 

Take the chocolate pie out of the oven. 

Prospective memory – time based 

Call Rose at 10 am. 

0 – 6 

0 – 20 

0 – 19 

0 – 16 

0 – 6 

0 – 20 

0 – 6 

0 – 6 

Selective visual attention 

Find posters on both sides of the road. 

0 – 16 

Delayed recognition 

Recognising items from the shopping list. 

0 – 20 

Prospective memory – time based 

Collect the carrot cake from the bakery at 12 pm.  

0 – 6 

Prospective memory – event based 

False prompt before going to the library.  

-6 – 0 

Prospective memory – event based 

Return the red book to the library. 

0 – 6 

Selective auditory attention 

Detect sounds from both sides of the road. 

0 – 32 

Prospective memory – time based 

False prompt before going back home. 

-6 – 0 

Prospective memory – event based 

Back home, give the extra pair of keys to Alex. 

0 – 6 

Prospective memory – time based 

Take the medication at 1pm. 

0 – 6 

*The tasks are presented in the same order as they are performed within the scenario. The table 
derives from Kourtesis et al., (2020a). 

10 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. VR-EA L Storyline: Scenes 3 - 12.  

Scene 3   

                      Scene 3 

Scene 6   

                    Scene 6 

Scene 6   

                    Scene 8 

Scene 8   

                   Scene 10 

Scene 12 

      Scene 12 

Derived from Kourtesis et al., (2020b). 

11 | P a g e  

 
  
                                                                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. VR-EAL Storyline: Scenes 14 – 22  

Scene 14 

        Scene 14 

Scene 15 

        Scene 17 

Scene 19 

        Scene 19 

Scene 20 

        Scene 22 

Scene 22 

        Scene 22 

Derived from Kourtesis et al., (2020b). 

12 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prospective Memory. VR-EAL considers both event-based and time-based PM tasks. 
The PM tasks are divided into five event-based tasks and four time-based tasks. In the 
event-based tasks, the participant should remember to perform a PM action when a 
specific event occurs (e.g., take medicines after breakfast). In the time-based tasks, the 
examinee should remember to perform a planned action at a specific time (e.g., call 
Rose at 12 pm). Consider the following as a scoring example. At the end of a scene, the 
examinees should press a button to confirm that all the tasks in the scene are completed. 
If the examinees have already taken their medication (i.e., PM task) before pressing the 
final button, then the scene ends, and the examinees receive 6 points. Otherwise, the 
first prompt appears (i.e., “You Have to Do Something Else”). If the examinees then 
follow the prompt and take their medication, they receive 4 points. If the examinees 
press the final button again, then the second prompt appears (i.e., “You Have to Do 
Something After Having your Breakfast”). If the examinees follow this prompt and take 
their medication, they receive 2 points. If the examinees press the final button again, 
then the third prompt appears (i.e., “You Have to Take Your Meds”). If the examinees 
follow this prompt and take their medication, they then receive 1 point. If the examinees 
repress the final button without ever taking their medication, they get zero points, and 
the scene ends. Scores range from zero to six. 

Focal event-based tasks. There are two focal event-based tasks, where the first task is 
performed in an early stage of the scenario (15-30 minutes after encoding the intention), 
and the second one is performed in a late stage (45-60 minutes after encoding the 
intention). The environmental cue in focal event-based tasks should be easily detected 
(i.e., salient) and of high focality (e.g., to be in the same semantic category). For 
example, the examinee is in front of the library facing the large sign displaying 
“Library”, where the examinee should remember to return a book. 
Non-focal event-based tasks. Comparable to the focal event-based tasks, there are two 
non-focal event-based tasks, which are performed in an early and late stage. However, 
in the non-focal event-based tasks, the focality and salience of the cue should be 
adequately low to motivate the examinee to monitor the area for cues. For example, the 
examinee finishes preparing breakfast (see the cooking task below), and after having 
breakfast, the examinee should remember to take his/her medicine (see the scoring 
example above). The medicine is out of the field of view of the examinee, but it is in the 
same room (i.e., kitchen) among other kitchen objects (e.g., cups, plates, towels, 
microwave, and toaster). Hence, the examinee should purposefully monitor the area to 
detect the medicine and perform the PM task. 

Time-based tasks. There are four time-based tasks, from which three are traditional 
time-based tasks (e.g., call Rose at 12pm) and one is a misleading task (see below). The 
examinee should be checking his/her digital watch, which is attached to the left 
hand/controller in the virtual environment, to perform the time-based task. Hence, the 
salience of the PM cue (i.e., the time on the watch) is low, while the focality of the PM 
cue (i.e., association between time and the intended action) is extreme low as frequently 
happens in daily time-based tasks. Two of the traditional time-based tasks, one 

13 | P a g e  

 
 
performed in an early stage (i.e., 15-30 minutes after encoding the intention) and one in 
a late stage (i.e., 45-60 minutes after encoding the intention), are used in the comparison 
with the focal and non-focal event-based tasks. 

Design and Variables 

This study follows a within subjects repeated measures design. The participants 
performed all the tasks while following the VR-EAL scenario as described above. There 
are focal, non-focal, and time-based tasks with different delay lengths between encoding 
and retrieval (i.e., performed at an early or a late stage of the scenario). Controlling the 
type of PM task and the length of delay allows for scrutiny of their effect on everyday 
PM performance. However, everyday PM performance is examined in terms of 
everyday PM functioning (i.e., considering the correct responses after receiving a 
prompt to perform that particular task) and everyday PM ability (i.e., the correct 
responses without requiring a prompt to perform that particular task).    

Everyday prospective memory performance. 

Prospective memory functioning. The VR-EAL PM score on each task is used for 
depicting everyday PM functioning. As described above, the VR-EAL’s scoring system 
provides a PM score for each task ranging from zero to six. The score is proportional to 
the number of prompts that were required to perform the corresponding task, as well as 
the correctness of the PM response (i.e., performing the PM task that corresponds to this 
event or time). 

Prospective memory ability. A dichotomous PM score is used for depicting everyday 
PM ability. Consequently, the possible values for this score are either 0 or 1. A 
dichotomous PM score equal to 1 corresponds to the VR-EAL PM score equal to 6, 
while zero corresponds to the remaining possible values for the VR-EAL PM score (i.e., 
0 - 5). Hence, a dichotomous PM score equal to 1 signifies that the participant 
performed the respective PM task independently without requiring a prompt, while the 0 
indicates that the participant required a prompt to perform the corresponding PM task.  

Prospective memory tasks’ parameters 

Type of prospective memory task. This variable will be referred as PM task type, and it 
has three levels (i.e., focal, non-focal, and time-based). Two VR-EAL PM tasks of each 
type were considered. Thus, there are two focal, two non-focal, and two time-based 
tasks. The tasks were selected to have similar demands (i.e., difficulty) and in terms of 
their length of delay (see below). The similar demands across items was ensured during 
the development of VR-EAL. One pilot study was conducted for each of the three 
versions of VR-EAL (i.e., alpha, beta, and final) involving professional and non-
professional user testers (Kourtesis et al., 2020b). During these studies, participants 
provided quantitative and qualitative feedback regarding the tasks and the scenario.  The 

14 | P a g e  

 
criteria included the proximity to the target (e.g., similar distances between the cue and 
performing the PM task), ergonomics (e.g., similar physical movements to perform the 
PM task), user interface (e.g., performing the PM tasks using button presses, while 
touching the relevant object), similar types of feedback (e.g., visual, auditory, and 
haptic), and time of performance (e.g., tasks were performed after interacting with the 
environment and/or 3D character).  More information regarding the development of 
VR-EAL is provided in the Kourtesis and collaborators (2020b) study.  

Length of delay between encoding and retrieval. This variable has two levels (i.e., early 
and late), where the early tasks are performed approximately 15-30 minutes after 
forming the PM intention (i.e., encoding), and the late tasks are performed 
approximately 45-60 minutes after forming the PM intention. One PM task of each type 
(i.e., focal, non-focal, and time-based) is performed at an early stage in the scenario, and 
the second task of each type is performed at a late stage in the scenario. This temporal 
differentiation allows the inspection of the delay’s effect on PM performance for each 
type of PM task.  This also facilitates a comparison between the performance on early 
and late PM tasks per type (i.e., focal event-based, non-focal event-based, and time-
based tasks). 

Statistical Analyses 

An a priori power analysis for an α = .05 and a power ≥ 80% indicated that a sample 
size of N ≥ 32 is required to detect moderate effects in regression analyses and post hoc 
tests. Our sample size (N=41) is well beyond this threshold. All the statistical analyses 
were conducted using R language (R Core Team, 2020) in RStudio (RStudio Team, 
2020). The distribution of the performance variables was initially examined. The 
distribution of the VR-EAL PM scores (i.e., everyday PM functioning) followed a 
Poisson distribution, while the distribution of the dichotomous PM score (i.e., everyday 
PM ability) followed a binomial distribution. 

Mixed effects generalised linear regression analyses 

Mixed effects generalised linear regression analyses were performed to investigate 
which parameters affect and predict everyday PM functioning and ability. The mixed 
effects generalised linear regression analyses were performed using the stats (RStudio 
Team, 2020) and lmerTest packages (Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, and Christensen, 2017). 
Corresponding to the distribution family of each performance variable, mixed effects 
generalised linear regression models were created. Firstly, a model for each fixed effect 
(i.e., PM task type and Delay) and the mixed effect (i.e., the interaction between PM 
task type and Delay) were created. The random effect per participant was also included 
in each model. A null model was also created including only the random effect per 
participant. The models were compared by conducting analyses of deviance. The 
criteria for the comparisons between the models were the Akaike’s information criterion 
(AIC), the deviance of the model, and the χ2 probability. Initially, the three models (i.e., 

15 | P a g e  

 
PM task type, Delay, and mixed effects) were compared individually with the null 
model. Then, the 3 models were compared with one another. The best model among 
them was used for building the models in the next step by adding predictors to it. An 
incremental approach was adopted, where a variable was added as a predictor to the 
current best model. Each new model was then compared against the current best model 
and the null model. After identifying the model that has the best combination of 
predictors, this model was then used for adding variables as random effects per 
participant.  As described above, the same incremental approach with stepwise 
comparisons against the null model and the current best model was implemented for the 
random effects. The model that was identified as the best model was then accepted as 
the model that best predicts PM functioning or ability. 

Post hoc comparisons for the models. To further explore the effect of each parameter on 
everyday PM functioning and ability, the least-squares means of the models’ predictors 
were calculated and then compared. The post hoc comparisons of the predictors’ least-
squares means were performed using the emmeans package (Lenth, 2020).  The p-
values of the comparisons were adjusted using a Bonferroni correction to avoid p-value 
inflation due to the existence of multiple comparisons.  

Pairwise multiple comparisons of mean rank sums  

Non-parametric multiple comparisons based on the mean ranks sums of the 
observations were performed to examine the performance differences in PM functioning 
and ability under each condition pertinent to PM task type, the length of delay, and the 
possible combinations between them. The Durbin-Conover test and the Wilcoxon mean 
rank sum test were implemented for the variables with 3 (i.e., PM task type) and 2 (i.e., 
length of delay) levels respectively. The p-values were corrected for possible inflations 
due to the multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni correction method. The PMCMR 
(Pohlert, 2014) and the ggstatsplot (Patil, 2018) packages were used for conducting and 
visualising the pairwise multiple comparisons of mean rank sums.  

Results 

The spectrum of VRNQ possible responses on cybersickness items include 1-extremely 
intense feeling, 2-very intense feeling, 3-intense feeling, 4-moderate feeling, 5-mild 
feeling, 6-very mild feeling, and 7-absent feeling. In the current study, the medians for 
nausea, dizziness, disorientation, and instability items of VRNQ were 7 (i.e., absent 
feeling), except for fatigue, which was 6 (i.e., very mild feeling). Only intense 
cybersickness symptoms appear to affect cognitive performance, while moderate 
symptoms do not appear to affect it (Mittelstaedt, Wacker, & Stelling, 2019). Notably, 
no participant in our study reported cybersickness symptoms (i.e., nausea, dizziness, 
disorientation, fatigue, or instability) stronger than a mild feeling, which postulates that 
cybersickness symptoms did not affect the participants’ performance.  

16 | P a g e  

 
 
The descriptive statistics for the PM scores are displayed in Table 2. In terms of 

everyday PM functioning, the length of the delay was found to better predict 
performance than the type of PM task. Nevertheless, together these factors only 
explained 5% of the observations and random effects were found to significantly affect 
everyday PM functioning. In contrast, in terms of everyday PM ability, random effects 
did not significantly affect performance. The length of delay again explained everyday 
PM performance better than the PM task type. The interaction between the length of 
delay and the PM task type was found to better explain everyday PM ability, where the 
interaction explained 27% of the observations pertinent to everyday PM ability. The 
post-hoc comparisons of the least-squares means and the mean ranks sums indicated 
significant differences between the tasks performed at an early (i.e., 15 – 30 mins) and 
late (i.e., 45 – 60 mins) delay within the scenario for both everyday PM functioning and 
ability.  There were no significant performance differences between the types of PM 
tasks when the length of delay was 15 – 30 minutes. However, significant differences 
between the types of PM tasks were found when the length of delay was more than 45 
minutes. 

Table 2. Descriptive statistics for the PM scores 

PM Task 
Type 

Focal 

Non-Focal 

Time-based 

All 

All 

Focal 

Non-Focal 

Time-based 

Score 

Delay 

Mean (SD)  Median  Range 

VR-EAL (max = 6) 
Dichotomous (max = 1) 
VR-EAL (max = 6) 
Dichotomous (max = 1) 
VR-EAL (max = 6) 
Dichotomous (max = 1) 
VR-EAL (max = 6) 
Dichotomous (max = 1) 
VR-EAL (max = 6) 
Dichotomous (max = 1) 

VR-EAL (max = 6) 

Dichotomous (max = 1) 

VR-EAL (max = 6) 

Dichotomous (max = 1) 

VR-EAL (max = 6) 

Dichotomous (max = 1) 

All 
All 
All 
All 
All 
All 
Early 
Early 
Late 
Late 
Early 
Late 
Early 
Late 
Early 
Late 
Early 
Late 
Early 
Late 
Early 
Late 

5.34 (1.00) 
1.00 (0.00) 
4.95 (1.01) 
0.50 (0.50) 
4.57 (1.31) 
0.39 (0.49) 
5.29 (1.11) 
0.68 (0.47) 
4.62 (1.15) 
0.37 (0.48) 
5.46 (1.00) 
5.22 (0.99) 
0.76 (0.44) 
0.61 (0.49) 
5.27 (1.07) 
4.63 (1.04) 
0.66 (0.48) 
0.34 (0.48) 
5.15 (1.26) 
4.00 (1.10) 
0.63 (0.49) 
0.15 (0.36) 

6.0 
1.0 
5.0 
0.5 
4.0 
0.0 
6.0 
1.0 
4.0 
0.0 
6.0 
6.0 
1.0 
1.0 
6.0 
4.0 
1.0 
0.0 
6.0 
4.0 
1.0 
0.0 

2 - 6 
0 - 1 
2 - 6 
0 - 1 
1 - 6 
0 - 1 
1 - 6 
0 - 1 
2 - 6 
0 - 1 
2 - 6 
4 - 6 
0 - 1 
0 - 1 
2 - 6 
2 - 6 
0 - 1 
0 - 1 
1 - 6 
2 - 6 
0 - 1 
0 - 1 

N = 41; “Early” and “Late” corresponds to the time in the scenario that this PM task was 
performed. Dichotomous corresponds to dichotomized outcomes i.e., 0 = failure to recall 
PM intention and 1 = successfully recalled PM intention.  

17 | P a g e  

 
 
 
Mixed effects generalised linear regression models  

The models with additional variables as random effects did not appear better than the 
equivalent models with only a random effect per participant, while the latter models had 
better AIC and deviance.  

Everyday prospective memory functioning 

The models for everyday PM functioning are displayed in Table 3. Compared to the null 
model, the models containing only the length of delay, the PM task type, or the 
interaction between them as predictors were found to explain everyday PM functioning 
significantly better. The delay model appeared to have the better fit to the data based on 
AIC, while the interaction model explained a greater percentage of the observations. 
However, the best model that emerged was the model with both PM task type and the 
length of delay as predictors of everyday PM functioning, indicating that the PM task 
type and the length of delay affect PM functioning. Nevertheless, the model explained 
only 5% of everyday PM functioning. 

Table 3. Mixed effects generalised linear regression models for VR-EAL’s PM score. 

Model 
Null  
(only random effects) 

F 
- 

χ2 
- 

p-value (> χ2)  AIC 
925.15 

- 

Deviance 
921.15 

R2 
0.00 

Delay 

5.64 

05.66 

.017* 

921.49 

915.49 

0.02 

PM task type 

2.44 

4.89 

.087 

924.26 

916.26 

0.02 

Interaction between  
Delay and PM task type 

2.43 

12.69 

.026* 

922.46 

908.46 

0.06 

Delay and 
 PM task type 

5.64 
2.44  

10.54 

.014* 

920.61 

910.61 

0.05 

The best model is displayed in Italics; AIC = Akaike’s Information Criterion; For AIC and 
Deviance, a smaller value indicates a better fit for the model; The displayed χ2 statistics are 
against the null model; R2 is a pseudo-R² for mixed effects generalised linear regression 
models. 

The effects on everyday PM functioning are presented in Table 4. The random 

effect per participant was found to be significant, postulating the existence of individual 
differences affecting everyday PM functioning. In addition, a greater length of delay 
appears to significantly negatively affect PM functioning, while the inverse is observed 
for shorter delays. Similarly, the focal event-based tasks appeared to increase PM 

18 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functioning, while the time-based tasks were found to decrease everyday PM 
functioning. This postulates that the focality and the salience of the cue indeed affect 
everyday PM functioning. Finally, the interaction between PM task type and length of 
delay appears to have an effect on PM functioning, except for the late non-focal 
combination.  

Table 4. Effects on VR-EAL’s PM Score. 

Effect 

Levels 

z Value 

p-value (>|z|)  β coefficient 

β  95% CI 

Random effect 
per participant 

fixed effect per 
Delay 

fixed effect per 
PM task type  

mixed effect 
per 
Interaction 
between 
Delay and 
PM task type 

- 

55.88 

<.001*** 

1.60 

[1.54, 1.66] 

Early 

Late 

Focal 

Non-Focal 

Time-based 

Early Focal 

Late Focal 

Early Non-Focal 

Late Non-Focal 

Early Time-based 

42.52 

-2.38 

35.07 

-1.10 

-2.21 

3.03 

2.56 

2.66 

1.38 

2.42 

<.001*** 

.020* 

<.001*** 

.270 

.030* 

<.001*** 

.010** 

.010** 

.170 

.020* 

Late Time-based 

17.75 

<.001*** 

1.67 

-0.14 

1.68 

-0.08 

-0.16 

0.31 

0.27 

0.28 

0.15 

0.25 

1.39 

[1.59, 1.74] 

[-0.25, -0.02] 

[ 1.58, 1.77] 

[-0.21, 0.06] 

[-0.29, -0.02] 

[ 0.11, 0.51] 

[ 0.06, 0.47] 

[ 0.07, 0.48] 

[-0.06, 0.36] 

[ 0.05, 0.46] 

[ 1.23, 1.54] 

The effects of the best model are displayed in Italics; CI = Confidence interval. 

The post hoc comparisons of the least-squares means of the models’ predictors 

indicated that there is not a significant difference between the types of PM tasks. In 
contrast, a significant difference in the z ratio = 2.38, p = .018 was detected between the 
two delay lengths, suggesting that the effect of each delay on PM functioning is 
significantly different from each other. This finding hence confirms that the shorter 
delay tends to improve PM functioning, while the longer delay tends to worsen PM 
functioning.  A similar pattern was also revealed for the significant difference of the z 
ratio = 3.03, p = .029 between the least-squares means of the early focal task and the 
late time-based task. Hence, an early focal task affects everyday PM functioning 
positively, and it is significantly different from the negative effect of a late time-based 
task on everyday PM functioning.   

19 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Everyday prospective memory ability 

The models for everyday PM ability are presented in Table 5. Compared to the null 
model, the models only containing the length of delay, the PM task type, or the 
interaction between them as predictors were found to explain everyday PM ability 
significantly better.  The delay model appeared substantially better than the PM task 
type model. Nevertheless, the interaction model was found to be the best model with a 
substantially better AIC, deviance, and R2. Notably, the interaction model was found to 
explain 27% of everyday PM ability.  

Table 5. Mixed effects generalised linear regression models for the dichotomous PM 
score. 

Model 
Null  
(only random effects) 

F 
- 

χ2 
- 

p-value (χ2) 
- 

AIC 
344.44 

Deviance 
340.44 

R2 
0.00 

Delay 

24.48 

25.34 

<.001*** 

321.11 

315.11 

0.13 

PM task type 

07.01 

14.64 

<.001*** 

333.80 

325.80 

0.08 

Interaction between  
Delay and PM task type 

07.67 

47.39 

<.001*** 

307.06 

293.06 

0.27 

The best model is displayed in Italics; AIC = Akaike’s Information Criterion; For AIC and 
Deviance, a smaller value indicates a better fit for the model; The displayed χ2 statistics are 
against the null model; R2 is a pseudo-R² for mixed effects generalised linear regression 
models. 

The effects on everyday PM ability are presented in Table 6. In contrast to 

everyday PM functioning, the random effects were not found to significantly affect 
everyday PM ability. However, similarly to PM functioning, a greater length of delay 
was found to decrease everyday PM ability scores, while the shorter delays appear to 
positively affect everyday PM ability. Likewise, the focal event-based tasks facilitate 
improved PM ability, while the non-focal and time-based tasks appear to decrease 
everyday PM ability scores. This finding further supports the importance of the focality 
and salience of the target cue in everyday PM ability. Lastly, all the combinations 
between the type of task and the length of delay were found to have a significant effect 
on everyday PM ability. 

20 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6. Models' effects on the dichotomous PM Score. 

Effect 

Levels 

z Value 

p-value (>|z|)  β coefficient 

β  95% CI 

Random effect 
per participant 

fixed effect 
per 
Delay 

fixed effect 
per 
PM task type  

mixed effect 
per 
Interaction 
between 
Delay and 
PM task type 

- 

0.76 

0.44 

0.10 

[-0.15, 0.35] 

Early 

Late 

Focal 

Non-Focal 

Time-based 

Early Focal 

Late Focal 

Early Non-Focal 

Late Non-Focal 

Early Time-based 

3.86 

-4.81 

3.20 

-2.36 

-3.67 

5.02 

4.05 

4.38 

2.03 

4.22 

<.001*** 

<.001*** 

<.001*** 

.020** 

<.001*** 

<.001*** 

<.001*** 

<.001*** 

.040* 

<.001*** 

0.78 

-1.34 

0.77 

-0.77 

-1.22 

3.00 

2.29 

2.51 

1.14 

2.39 

[ 0.38, 1.17] 

[-1.88, -0.79] 

[ 0.30, 1.24] 

[-1.41, -0.13] 

[-1.87, -0.57] 

[ 1.83, 4.17] 

[ 1.18, 3.39] 

[ 1.38, 3.63] 

[ 0.04, 2.24] 

[ 1.28, 3.51] 

Late Time-based 

-3.97 

<.001*** 

-1.82 

[-2.72, -0.92] 

The effects of the best model are displayed in Italics; CI = Confidence interval. 

Post hoc comparisons of the least-squares means of the models’ predictors 

postulated that, between the types of PM tasks, only the focal event-based task has a 
significantly different effect on everyday PM ability from the time-based task, z ratio = 
3.67, p <.001, while the remaining comparisons indicated no significant differences 
between the types of PM tasks. Also, in the same way as everyday PM functioning, a 
significant difference of a z ratio = 4.81, p <.001 was identified between the two lengths 
of delay, postulating that the improvement in PM ability due to shorter delays is 
substantially different from the decrease in everyday PM ability due to longer delays.  
Similarly, the early focal PM task had a significant different effect on everyday PM 
ability from the late non-focal PM task, z ratio = 3.65, p = .004, and the time-based task, 
z ratio = 5.02, p <.001. Also, the effects of the early non-focal task, z ratio = 4.38, p 
<.001, and the early time-based task, z ratio = 4.22, p <.001, are found to be 
significantly different from the effect of late time-based task on everyday PM ability. 
Finally, the effect of the late focal task was substantially different from the effect of the 
late time-based task, z ratio = 4.05, p <.001, on everyday PM ability.  These findings 
postulate that the type of task does not appear as central as the length of delay, which 
appears to affect more the non-focal and time-based tasks with less focal and salient PM 
cues. However, the effect of delay is greater in time-based tasks compared to non-focal 
tasks. This suggests that the different effect of delay on non-focal and time-based tasks 
is due to the focality of the PM cue.  

21 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pairwise multiple comparisons of mean rank sums 

Box-violin plots were preferred to visualise the comparisons because they also illustrate 
the kernel probability density of the data. This allowed an inspection for ceiling effects, 
which there did not appear to be for PM performance. Figure 3 demonstrates that there 
was a marginally significant difference between the performance on focal and non-focal 
event-based tasks for everyday PM functioning, while the difference between non-focal 
and time-based tasks was not significant. On the other hand, significantly decreased 
performance was found on time-based tasks compared to focal event-based tasks. 
Figure 4 illustrates that the significant differences and the absence of significant 
differences for everyday PM ability are comparable to the outcomes for everyday PM 
functioning. The only difference for PM ability is that the performance on non-focal 
tasks appears to be significantly, instead of marginally, different compared to 
performance on focal tasks.   

Figure 3. Prospective memory functioning per type of task 

22 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Prospective memory ability per type of task 

Regarding the effect of delay on both everyday PM functioning (see Figure 5) 

and ability (see Figure 6), there was decreased performance on the PM tasks performed 
at the late stage of the VR-EAL scenario compared to the tasks performed at an early 
stage of the scenario. Also, for both everyday PM functioning (see Figure 7) and ability 
(see Figure 8), there was not any significant difference in the performance between 
focal, non-focal, and time-based tasks which were performed at an early stage of the 
VR-EAL scenario. On the contrary, there were noticeable differences between the PM 
tasks when they were performed at a late stage of the scenario. The comparisons, for 
both everyday PM functioning and ability, showed that the performance on late focal 
tasks is substantially greater than the performance on late non-focal tasks, and 
performance on both late focal and non-focal event-based tasks is significantly greater 
than performance on late time-based tasks. Finally, the diverse effect of the length of 
delay on each type of task was also apparent in the comparisons between the tasks of 
the same type, which were performed at an early and late stage of the scenario. For both 
everyday PM functioning (see Figure 9) and ability (see Figure 10), there was a 
significant difference on the performance between early non-focal and late non-focal, as 
well as between early time-based and late time-based, where the performance on the 
late tasks was substantially poorer. However, for both everyday PM functioning and 
ability, there was not any significant difference in the performance between early focal 
and late focal tasks.  

23 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Prospective memory functioning per delay 

Figure 6. Prospective memory ability per delay 

24 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Prospective memory functioning per task type and delay 

Figure 8. Prospective memory ability per task type and delay 

25 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Prospective memory functioning per delay and task type  

Figure 10. Prospective memory ability per delay and task type  

Discussion 

This study aimed to investigate the effects of delay and PM task type on everyday PM 
performance by using an immersive VR paradigm with enhanced ecological validity. 
The inability of laboratory experiments to generalise their findings to everyday PM 
performance has caused several discrepancies with the observations derived from 
naturalistic approaches. The findings of the current study further postulated the 

26 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
 
unreliability of the findings of laboratory tasks for depicting everyday PM performance. 
Overall, the length of delay was found to have a greater effect than the type of PM task 
type on everyday PM functioning and ability. However, the effect of the length of the 
delay significantly differed in terms of the performance on focal, non-focal, and time-
based tasks.    

We differentiated everyday PM performance in terms of everyday PM 
functioning (i.e., performing everyday PM tasks using external aids) and everyday PM 
ability (i.e., performing everyday PM tasks without using external aids). This 
differentiation may be useful to appraise the added value of using external aids, and 
judge whether an individual is capable of performing everyday PM tasks either 
independently, or by using compensatory strategies. In addition, an impairment in PM 
functioning may indicate that an individual requires support (e.g., by a support worker 
or a care assistant) to perform everyday PM tasks.  

Everyday prospective memory performance 

The length of the delay was found to explain everyday PM functioning better than the 
type of PM task, although both were found to be predictors in the best model. 
Nevertheless, the length of delay together with the type of PM task type only explained 
5% of the observations. The current findings contradict the multiprocess framework 
which states that the type of PM task (e.g., focal or non-focal) is the significant 
contributor to PM performance (McDaniel & Einstein, 2007). However, the claims of 
the multiprocess framework are based on the findings of non-ecologically valid 
laboratory tasks (e.g., Conte & McBride, 2018; Einstein et al., 1997, 2000; McBride & 
Flaherty, 2020; Mullet et al., 2013; Scullin et al., 2010; Smith, 2003; Smith et al., 2007; 
Zuber et al., 2019). As mentioned earlier, discrepancies between naturalistic and 
laboratory tasks have previously been found, including the age-prospective memory-
paradox, and postulated the necessity of using ecologically valid tasks to explain 
everyday PM performance (Kvavilashvili et al., 2013; Niedźwieńska & Barzykowski, 
2012; Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). 

Nonetheless, these discrepancies may be attributed to individual differences and 

the use of compensatory strategies and external memory aids, which are common in 
daily life for performing PM tasks (Phillips et al., 2008; Shelton & Scullin, 2017; Uttl, 
2008). In our study, random effects were found to significantly affect everyday PM 
functioning (i.e., also using external aids such as prompts), postulating the influence of 
individual differences on everyday PM functioning. These findings seem better aligned 
with the dynamic multiprocess framework, where the contextual variability (similar to 
everyday life) and individual differences are considered as factors which may affect 
how individuals perform PM tasks (Scullin et al., 2013; Shelton & Scullin, 2017). 

Nevertheless, in contrast with everyday PM functioning, individual differences 
(i.e., random effects per participant) did not appear to significantly affect everyday PM 
ability (i.e., performing the tasks without using external aids such as prompts). This 
postulates that individual differences may predominantly pertain to the use of 

27 | P a g e  

 
compensatory strategies and external aids (see also Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). 
Moreover, compared to the effect of PM task type, the length of delay again appeared to 
better explain everyday PM performance. However, in the case of everyday PM ability, 
the effect difference between the length of delay and type of PM task was smaller 
compared to the effect difference observed in everyday PM functioning. Nevertheless, 
these findings again contradict the findings commonly found in laboratory designs, 
where the effect of the PM task type is central. In our study, however, the interaction 
between the length of delay and the PM task type was found to better explain everyday 
PM ability. Notably, this interaction explained 27% of the observations pertinent to 
everyday PM ability.  

Effect differences by the length of delay 

Τhe post-hoc comparisons of the least-squares means indicated that the increase 

in everyday PM functioning and ability due to the short delays of 15-30 minutes is 
substantially different from the decrease in everyday PM functioning and ability due to 
the long delays of more than 45 minutes. This significant difference further suggests the 
important role of the length of delay on everyday PM performance.  

On the contrary, there were no significant differences between the effects of 

focal, non-focal, and time-based tasks on everyday PM functioning. This contradicts the 
findings of laboratory experiments, where the focal event-based tasks (i.e., positive 
effects) had significantly different effects on PM performance than the non-focal event-
based tasks (i.e., negative effects; e.g., McDaniel, Shelton, Breneiser, Moynan, & 
Balota, 2011; Mullet et al., 2013; Scullin et al., 2010; Zuber et al., 2019), and the 
effects of both event-based types were substantially different from the effects of time-
based tasks (i.e., negative effects; e.g., Conte & McBride, 2018; Zuber et al., 2019). As 
these discrepancies were also seen in naturalistic experiments, they may be due to the 
effect of using external aids (e.g., notes and prompts), which assist PM performance in 
ecologically valid paradigms (Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). These external aids 
remind the individual of the intended action (Phillips et al., 2008; Uttl, 2008). However, 
there are individual differences on how well external aids are used (Phillips et al., 2008; 
Shelton & Scullin, 2017; Uttl, 2008). Hence, performance with external aids may 
indicate examinee’s PM functioning, as is observed in naturalistic tasks, but not 
examinee’s PM ability, which is observed in lab-based tasks.    

Nevertheless, only one significant difference between the effects of diverse PM 
task types on everyday PM ability was found. The effect of focal event-based tasks (i.e., 
increasing performance) on everyday PM ability was found to be substantially different 
from the effect of time-based tasks (i.e., decreasing performance) on everyday PM 
ability. The absence of significantly different effects of diverse PM types (i.e., focal vs 
non-focal, non-focal vs time-based) on everyday PM ability (i.e., without using 
prompts) is again discrepant to the findings of laboratory experiments.  However, the 
effect difference between time-based vs focal event-based observed in our study is in 
line with the corresponding findings of other laboratory experiments (e.g., Conte & 
McBride, 2018; McBride & Flaherty, 2020; Zuber et al., 2019). Nevertheless, overall, 

28 | P a g e  

 
the findings pertaining to the differences between the effects of diverse PM task types 
on everyday PM performance do not align with the findings of laboratory experiments. 
Since the discrepancies were found for both everyday PM functioning and ability, this 
suggests that these differences are due to the enhanced ecological validity of the 
assessment used in the current study.    

However, as mentioned above, the length of delay had a significant effect on 
everyday PM performance. Considering the different focality of the PM cue for each 
PM task type, the length of delay may have differently affected PM performance on 
each type of task. The post-hoc comparisons of the least-squares means revealed a 
significant difference between the effects of the early focal event-based task (i.e., 
positive) and the late time-based task (i.e., negative) on everyday PM functioning. In 
contrast with the absence of significant differences between the effects of diverse PM 
task types, this finding further postulates the importance of delay on PM performance. 
However, the use of prompts may have mitigated the effect of delay on the performance 
on each PM task type. 

Indeed, several significant differences among the effects of distinct interactions 

between delay and PM task types on everyday PM ability were observed. The early 
focal PM task had a significant different effect (i.e., positive) on everyday PM ability 
from the late non-focal PM task, and the time-based task (i.e., a negative effect). In 
addition, the positive effects of the early non-focal task and the early time-based task 
are found to be significantly different from the negative effect of late time-based task on 
everyday PM ability. Since the increasing or decreasing nature of the effect was defined 
by the length of delay, these findings further support the important role of delay length. 
However, the positive effect of the late focal task was substantially different from the 
negative effect of the late time-based task on everyday PM ability. This finding 
postulates that PM performance on focal event-based tasks is affected significantly less 
than PM performance on time-based tasks with a long delay of more than 45 minutes.      

Performance differences 

The findings from the performance comparisons also supported the importance 

of the length of delay. As with the post-hoc comparisons of the least-squares means, 
there was a significant difference between the tasks performed at an early (i.e., 15 – 30 
mins) and late (i.e., 45 – 60 mins) delay within the scenario for both everyday PM 
functioning and ability.  However, the performance comparisons indicated some 
significant differences, which were not observed via the post-hoc least-squares means 
comparisons. For both everyday PM functioning and ability, the performance on focal 
event-based tasks was significantly better than the performance on non-focal event-
based tasks. Yet, the significance of this performance difference was marginal. 
However, the performance on time-based tasks was substantially worse than the 
performance on focal event-based tasks, while the performance on non-focal and time-
based tasks did not significantly differ. Nevertheless, our work suggests that one should 
also consider the effect of delay in these comparisons to allow one to draw reliable 
conclusions.  

29 | P a g e  

 
Indeed, for both everyday PM functioning and ability, there were no significant 

performance differences between the types of PM tasks when the length of delay was 15 
– 30 minutes. These findings speak against the findings of laboratory-based experiments 
(e.g., Conte & McBride, 2018; McBride & Flaherty, 2020; McDaniel et al., 2011; 
Mullet et al., 2013; Scullin et al., 2010; Zuber et al., 2019), but support the findings of 
Niedźwieńska and Barzykowski, (2012) in a naturalistic setting. Importantly, the 
laboratory PM tasks are commonly performed after a delay length of 10–15 minutes, 
which is a considerably shorter delay compared to the PM tasks performed during the 
early stage of the VR-EAL scenario (i.e., after 15 – 30 minutes).  

Nevertheless, for both everyday PM functioning and ability, there were 
significant performance differences when the length of delay was 45 minutes or more, 
which differs from Niedźwieńska and Barzykowski (2012). Niedźwieńska and 
Barzykowski (2012) did not report how their participants performed the naturalistic PM 
tasks, and there were no on-going tasks except to watch the news on television. 
Furthermore, scoring was dichotomous (i.e., 0 = failure, 1 = success), which may have 
resulted in ceiling effects, and they did not consider the use of external aids (e.g., a 
prompt by their spouse to call the experimenter). Lastly, the on-going task favoured the 
non-focal task because the target cue (i.e., the name of a politician) was typically 
mentioned during the first couple minutes of the news, while the focal cue (i.e., the 
weather map of Poland) was usually at the end of the news. Some of these differences 
may explain the discrepancy between our findings and those of Niedźwieńska and 
Barzykowski (2012). 

In our study, when the length of delay was more than 45 minutes, performance 

on the focal event-based task was significantly better than performance on the non-focal 
event-based and the time-based task for both everyday PM functioning and ability. In 
addition, the performance on non-focal task was better than the performance on time-
based task for both everyday PM functioning and ability. The performance difference 
between them was significant for PM functioning, while it was marginal (i.e., p =.057) 
for PM ability. Given the lack of differences among the PM tasks during the early stage 
of the VR-EAL scenario, the differences at the late stage of the scenario suggest that the 
length of delay differently affects performance on each type of task.  

The salience of the PM cue does not appear adequate to explain these 
performance differences across PM tasks, since cue salience is comparable across non-
focal and time-based tasks, especially in the case of the VR-EAL. Instead, the focality 
of the PM cue might be the reason for these differences, since the target cue’s focality is 
lower in non-focal event-based and time-based tasks, with time-based tasks (e.g., at 1 
pm – take your meds) having even lower focality than non-focal event-based tasks (e.g., 
when you return – give an extra pair of keys to Alex). Another explanation for the 
performance differences between non-focal and time-based tasks after a late delay may 
be the time monitoring that is required for the time-based task. Individuals do not 
implement constant time monitoring, which is cognitively demanding and tiring (Cona 
et al., 2012; Kliegel et al., 2001; Mäntylä et al., 2007). The individuals predominantly 
adopt a strategic time monitoring approach, where after checking the time, they estimate 

30 | P a g e  

 
when they should check the time again and regulate their frequency of time monitoring 
(Cona et al., 2012; Kliegel et al., 2001; Mäntylä et al., 2007). Strategic monitoring 
appears to be more efficient and less cognitively demanding, while it does not seem to 
be affected by a delay (Cona et al., 2012; Kliegel et al., 2001; Mäntylä et al., 2007). 
Therefore, the focality of the cue appears to be a more reasonable explanation for the 
significant effects of delay on everyday PM performance.  

Moreover, the performance on all types of late PM tasks was poorer than the 

performance on all types of early PM tasks. Our findings are concordant with the 
findings of previous studies that have attempted to examine the effect of delay on focal 
(e.g., Kliegel & Jager, 2006; Meier et al., 2006; Scullin & McDaniel, 2010) and non-
focal event-based tasks (e.g., Martin et al., 2011; McBride, Beckner, & Abney, 2011), 
as well as time-based tasks (McBride, Coane, Drwal, & LaRose, 2013). It has been 
argued that a delay does not affect PM performance or even increases performance if 
the ongoing task permits rehearsal (Hicks, Marsh, & Russell, 2000; Kliegel & Jager, 
2006; Martin et al., 2011). However, the results of our study revealed a substantial 
decline in PM performance due to the delay. In VR-EAL, the ongoing tasks attempt to 
be highly engaging and demanding like real-life tasks (e.g., cooking, shopping, 
searching for items, and paying attention to the road), so they are not thought to permit 
rehearsal. This might explain why there was not a practice effect and that the duration 
of the delay negatively affected PM performance. Our findings are more in line with 
studies where the duration of the delay (e.g., 12 hours) is more representative of 
everyday PM (e.g., McBride et al., 2013; Scullin & McDaniel, 2010). Also, the ongoing 
tasks are equally demanding at both the early (e.g., cooking and searching for items) 
and late (e.g., shopping and paying attention to the road) stages of the scenario. Hence, 
they seem equally disruptive of the early and late PM tasks. 

In VR-EAL, the focality of the PM cue (i.e., the semantic association with the 

intended action) was stronger in focal event-based tasks (e.g., a sign displaying the 
word “library” when the action was to return a book), weaker in non-focal tasks (e.g., 
having breakfast when the action was take the meds), and even weaker in time-based 
tasks (e.g., detecting that the time is 1 pm when the action is to take your meds). As 
discussed above, the focality of the PM cue seems to explain the differential effect of 
delay on each PM task type. These results show similarities with the encoding and 
retrieval of episodic memory, where stronger semantic associations between the items 
to be memorised, as well as the stronger associations between the cue (i.e., reminder) 
and the memorised items, assist with better encoding and retrieval of the episodic 
memory (Frankland, Josselyn, & Köhler, 2019; Tulving, 1983; Tulving & Thomson, 
1973; Xue, 2018). Indeed, the pattern of PM forgetting seems comparable to episodic 
memory forgetting on non-focal event-based (Martin et al., 2011; McBride et al., 2011) 
and time-based tasks (McBride et al., 2013), which further suggests that the encoding 
and retrieving mechanism is similar in PM and episodic memory and emphasizes the 
importance of cue focality (i.e., the semantic association between PM cue and intended 
action). However, the role of the PM’s cue focality should be further investigated and 
differentiated from the role of cue salience.  

31 | P a g e  

 
Moreover, VR-EAL is a neuropsychological battery that attempts to simulate 

everyday life. The tasks are performed in a realistic order (e.g., first preparing the 
breakfast, and then driving to the supermarket) in an attempt to simulate real-life 
(Kourtesis et al., 2020b). While it is possible that the VR-EAL is susceptible to order 
effects, given that a selective decline in performance was only observed for non-focal 
event-based and time-based tasks, but not focal event-based tasks or the other everyday 
cognitive function tasks, it is unlikely that this is the case (see also Kourtesis et al., 
2020a). Nevertheless, the effect of delay proportional to the cue attributes should be 
further explored.    

Methodological considerations for future prospective memory studies 

Differentiating functioning from ability  

In the current study, everyday PM functioning (i.e., using external aids) and ability (i.e., 
without requiring external aids) revealed similar performance differences on PM tasks. 
However, delay length appeared to have a greater negative effect on PM ability 
compared to PM functioning. Delay length may have had less of an effect on PM 
functioning because of the use of external aids (Phillips et al., 2008; Shelton & Scullin, 
2017; Uttl, 2008). One should consider functioning and ability when assessing PM, as 
functioning better describes individuals’ PM performance in the real-world, and this 
distinction may have contributed to the discrepancies between the findings of 
naturalistic and laboratory experiments.  

Differentiating the cue’s focality from the cue’s salience  

In the current study, the effect of delay was attributed to the focality of the target cue for 
each type of PM task. However, it is difficult to consider salience and focality 
separately as the cue’s features are typically coupled together (i.e., high focality with 
high salience or low focality with low salience) in PM research. This coupling of both 
features prevents one from examining their separate contributions on PM performance. 
For example, the salience of the target cue may affect the type of monitoring approach 
adopted (e.g., intentional or passive), while the focality of the cue may affect the 
encoding and retrieval of the PM intention. Future work might attempt to separate 
salience and focality in order to elucidate the individual roles that these cue features 
play on everyday PM performance.  

Ecological validity 

The discrepancy between the current results and the results of previous 
laboratory-based PM studies further highlights the importance of ecological validity for 
understanding everyday PM performance. The VR-EAL provides a testing environment 
that is closer to real life situations. Yet, while daily life simulations like VR-EAL are 
suitable for the investigation of real-life PM, they may also be susceptible to 
confounding factors and fail to examine specific processes. For example, an 

32 | P a g e  

 
environmental stimulus (e.g., a building with several signs) or an interaction with a 3D 
character (i.e., requirement of communicational skills) may affect the PM performance, 
while they were not experimentally controlled for it. Laboratory tasks have the 
advantage of isolating confounding factors and allowing the examination of specific 
processes. However, laboratory PM tasks in their current form suffer from certain 
limitations (e.g., a two-dimensional environment, keyboard-based responses, static 
stimuli, and a lack of realism). In addition, the interface of laboratory PM tasks is 
keyboard-based. Hence, familiarity with computer systems might affect performance 
(Zaidi et al., 2018).  

In contrast, gaming and computing competency does not affect performance in 
VR systems, when they have ergonomic and naturalistic interactions (Kourtesis et al., 
2020a, 2020b; Zaidi et al., 2018).  Moreover, older adults have shown high acceptance 
of immersive VR systems (Huygelier et al., 2019; Syed-Abdul et al., 2019). Hence, one 
solution would be to modernize existing laboratory tasks using immersive VR 
technology, which would enable the use of a 360o environment with dynamic and 
realistic stimuli, and naturalistic and ergonomic interactions within the testing 
environment. Hence, the implementation of immersive VR laboratory tasks may reduce 
the divergence from real-life conditions, and enable a thorough examination of PM 
performance, components, and cue attributes.  

Limitations and future studies 

This study has some limitations that should be considered. While our sample size 
allowed us to perform sound statistical analyses, future studies should include a larger 
sample for a more extensive investigation of the factors influencing PM performance 
(e.g., diverse cue attributes and interactions). Furthermore, the participants were only 
young adults. Future work should also include a more diverse population, including 
both younger and older adults, which will facilitate the examination of the effect of 
aging on everyday PM performance using our VR-EAL environment. Finally, the VR-
EAL has the limitation that it cannot directly measure time monitoring so a future 
version of the VR-EAL should integrate such a mechanism.   

Conclusions 

Everyday PM performance, in terms of both functioning and ability, appears to be 
affected more by the length of the delay between the encoding and retrieval of the PM 
intention, rather than the type of PM task performed (i.e., focal event-based, non-focal 
event-based, and time-based). Nevertheless, the effect of the delay length differentially 
affected performance on focal, non-focal, and time-based tasks. This was proportional 
to the focality of the PM target cue (i.e., semantic relationship between the cue and the 
intended action). In conclusion, this study further highlighted the necessity of ecological 
validity to appropriately assess everyday PM functioning and ability. The 
implementation of immersive VR methods may facilitate an ecologically valid 
examination of everyday PM.   

33 | P a g e  

 
References 

Anderson, F. T., McDaniel, M. A., & Einstein, G. O. (2016). Remembering to remember: An 

examination of the cognitive processes underlying prospective memory. In The Curated 
Reference Collection in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Psychology (pp. 451–463). Elsevier 
Science Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-809324-5.21049-3  

Bohil, C. J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2011). Virtual reality in neuroscience research and therapy. In 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience (Vol. 12, Issue 12). Nat Rev Neurosci. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3122  

Borrego, A., Latorre, J., Alcañiz, M., & Llorens, R. (2018). Comparison of Oculus Rift and HTC Vive: 
Feasibility for Virtual Reality-Based Exploration, Navigation, Exergaming, and Rehabilitation. 
Games for Health Journal, 7(3), 151–156. https://doi.org/10.1089/g4h.2017.0114  

Chaytor, N., & Schmitter-Edgecombe, M. (2003). The ecological validity of neuropsychological tests: A 
review of the literature on everyday cognitive skills. In Neuropsychology Review (Vol. 13, Issue 
4, pp. 181–197). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:NERV.0000009483.91468.fb  

Cona, G., Arcara, G., Tarantino, V., & Bisiacchi, P. S. (2012). Electrophysiological Correlates of 

Strategic Monitoring in Event-Based and Time-Based Prospective Memory. PLoS ONE, 7(2), 
e31659. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0031659  

Conte, A. M., & McBride, D. M. (2018). Comparing time-based and event-based prospective memory 
over short delays. Memory, 26(7), 936-945. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2018.1432662  

Einstein, G. O., & McDaniel, M. A. (1996). Retrieval processes in prospective memory: Theoretical 
approaches and some new empirical findings. In M. Brandimonte, G. O. Einstein, & M. A. 
McDaniel (Eds.), Prospective memory: Theory and applications (pp. 115–141). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  

Einstein, G. O., Smith, R. E., McDaniel, M. A., & Shaw, P. (1997). Aging and prospective memory: The 

influence of increased task demands at encoding and retrieval. Psychology and Aging, 12(3), 
479. https://doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.12.3.479  

Einstein, G. O., McDaniel, M. A., Manzi, M., Cochran, B., & Baker, M. (2000). Prospective memory and 
aging: Forgetting intentions over short delays. Psychology and Aging, 15(4), 671-683. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.15.4.671  

Farrimond, S., Knight, R. G., & Titov, N. (2006). The effects of aging on remembering intentions: 
Performance on a simulated shopping task. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 533–555. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1202  

Frankland, P. W., Josselyn, S. A., & Köhler, S. (2019). The neurobiological foundation of memory 

retrieval. In Nature Neuroscience (Vol. 22, Issue 10, pp. 1576–1585). Nature Publishing Group. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-019-0493-1  

Franzen, M. D., & Wilhelm, K. L. (1996). Conceptual foundations of ecological validity in 

neuropsychological assessment. In R. J. Sbordone & C. J. Long (Eds.), Ecological validity of 
neuropsychological testing (p. 91–112). Gr Press/St Lucie Press, Inc.  

Garden, S., Phillips, L. H. & MacPherson, S. E. (2001). Mid-life aging, open-ended planning, and 
laboratory measures of executive function. Neuropsychology, 15(4), 472-482. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0894-4105.15.4.472  

Glickson, J., & Myslobodsky, M. (2006). Timing the future: The case of time-based prospective memory. 

New York, NY: World Scientific Publishing.  

Haines, S., Shelton, J., Henry, J., Terrett, G., Vorwerk, T., & Rendell, P.  (2019, February 25). 

Prospective Memory and Cognitive Aging. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Psychology. 
Retrieved 7 Dec. 2019, from 
https://oxfordre.com/psychology/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.001.0001/acrefore-
9780190236557-e-381 .  

Hicks, J. L., Marsh, R. L., & Russell, E. J. (2000). The properties of retention intervals and their affect on 

retaining prospective memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 26, 1160–1169. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.26.5.1160  

Higginson, C. I., Arnett, P. A., & Voss, W. D. (2000). The ecological validity of clinical tests of memory 

and attention in multiple sclerosis. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 15(3), 185–204. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0887-6177(99)00004-9  

Huygelier, H., Schraepen, B., van Ee, R., Vanden Abeele, V., & Gillebert, C. R. (2019). Acceptance of 

immersive head-mounted virtual reality in older adults. Scientific Reports, 9(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-41200-6  

34 | P a g e  

 
Kliegel, M., Martin, M., McDaniel, M. A., & Einstein, G. O. (2001). Varying the importance of a 

prospective memory task: Differential effects across time-and event-based prospective memory. 
Memory, 9(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210042000003  

Kliegel, M., & Jager, T. (2006). Delayed–execute prospective memory performance: The effects of age 

and working memory. Developmental Neuropsychology, 30(3), 819-843. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326942dn3003_4  

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2019a). Technological competence is 

a precondition for effective implementation of virtual reality head mounted displays in human 
neuroscience: a technological review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 
342. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00342  

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2019b). Validation of the Virtual 

Reality Neuroscience Questionnaire: maximum duration of immersive virtual reality sessions 
without the presence of pertinent adverse symptomatology. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
13, 417. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00417  

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2020a). Validation of the Virtual 

Reality Everyday Assessment Lab (VR-EAL): an immersive virtual reality neuropsychological 
battery with enhanced ecological validity. Journal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society, 1-16. doi: https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617720000764 

Kourtesis, P., Korre, D., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2020b). Guidelines for the 

development of immersive Virtual Reality software for cognitive neuroscience and 
neuropsychology: the development of Virtual Reality Everyday Assessment Lab (VR-EAL), a 
neuropsychological test battery in immersive virtual reality. Frontiers in Computer Science, 1, 
12. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2019.00012  

Kuznetsova A, Brockhoff PB, Christensen RHB (2017). “lmerTest Package: Tests in Linear Mixed 

Effects Models.” Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13), 1-26. doi: 10.18637/jss.v082.i13 (URL: 
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v082.i13 ). 

Kvavilashvili, L., Cockburn, J., & Kornbrot, D. E. (2013). Prospective memory and ageing paradox with 
event-based tasks: A study of young, young-old, and old-old participants. Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 66(5), 864-875. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2012.721379  

Lecouvey, G., Morand, A., Gonneaud, J., Piolino, P., Orriols, E., Pélerin, A., ... & Desgranges, B. (2019). 

An impairment of prospective memory in mild Alzheimer’s disease: A ride in a virtual town. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 241. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00241  

Lenth R (2020). emmeans: Estimated Marginal Means, aka Least-Squares Means. R package version 

1.5.1. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=emmeans.  

Logie, R. H., Trawley, S., & Law, A. S. (2011). Multitasking: Multiple, domain speciﬁc cognitive 

functions in a virtual environment. Memory & Cognition, 39, 1561–1574. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-011-0120-1  

Man, D. W., Ganesan, B., Yip, C. C., Lee, C. O., Tsang, S. Y., Yu, P. W., ... & Shum, D. H. (2018). 
Validation of the virtual-reality prospective memory test (Hong Kong Chinese version) for 
individuals with first-episode schizophrenia. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 28(7), 1197-
1210. https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2016.1251949  

Mäntylä, T., Carelli, M. G., & Forman, H. (2007). Time monitoring and executive functioning in children 

and adults. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 96(1), 1-19. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2006.08.003  

Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., & Landau, J. D. (1998). An investigation of everyday prospective memory. 

Memory & Cognition, 26(4), 633-643. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03211383  

Martin, B. A., Brown, N. L., & Hicks, J. L. (2011). Ongoing task delays affect prospective memory more 
powerfully than filler task delays. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(1), 48–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022872  

McBride, D. M., Beckner, J. K., & Abney, D. H. (2011). Effects of delay of prospective memory cues in 

an ongoing task on prospective memory task performance. Memory & Cognition, 39(7), 1222-
1231. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-011-0105-0  

McBride, D. M., Coane, J. H., Drwal, J., & LaRose, S. A. M. (2013). Differential effects of delay on 
time-based prospective memory in younger and older adults. Aging, Neuropsychology, and 
Cognition, 20(6), 700-721. https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2013.765937  

McBride, D. M., & Flaherty, M. (2020). Comparing costs in time-based and event-based prospective 

memory. Memory, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2020.1798463  

McDaniel, M. A., & Einstein, G. O. (2000). Strategic and automatic processes in prospective memory 

retrieval: A multiprocess framework. Applied Cognitive Psychology: The Official Journal of the 

35 | P a g e  

 
Society for Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 14(7), S127-S144. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.775  

McDaniel, M. A., & Einstein, G. O. (2007). Prospective memory: An overview and synthesis of an 

emerging field. Sage Publications. 

McDaniel, M. A., & Scullin, M. K. (2010). Implementation intention encoding does not automatize 

prospective memory responding. Memory & Cognition, 38(2), 221-232. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/MC.38.2.221  

McDaniel, M. A., Shelton, J. T., Breneiser, J. E., Moynan, S., & Balota, D. A. (2011). Focal and nonfocal 
prospective memory performance in very mild dementia: A signature decline. Neuropsychology, 
25(3), 387. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021682  

McDaniel MA, Umanath S, Einstein GO and Waldum ER (2015) Dual pathways to prospective 

remembering. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9:392. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00392   

McGeorge, P., Phillips, L. H., Crawford, J. R., Garden, S. E., Della Sala, S. D., Milne, A. B., . . . 

Callender, J. S. (2001). Using virtual environments in the assessment of executive dysfunction. 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 10(4), 375–383. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/1054746011470235  

Meier, B., Zimmermann, T. D., & Perrig, W. J. (2006). Retrieval experience in prospective memory: 

Strategic monitoring and spontaneous retrieval. Memory, 14, 872–889. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210600783774  

Mlinac, M. E., & Feng, M. C. (2016). Assessment of activities of daily living, self-care, and 

independence. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 31(6), 506-516. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acw049  

Mittelstaedt, J. M., Wacker, J., & Stelling, D. (2019). VR aftereffect and the relation of cybersickness and 

cognitive performance. Virtual Reality, 23(2), 143–154. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-018-
0370-3  

Mullet, H. G., Scullin, M. K., Hess, T. J., Scullin, R. B., Arnold, K. M., & Einstein, G. O. (2013). 

Prospective memory and aging: Evidence for preserved spontaneous retrieval with exact but not 
related cues. Psychology and Aging, 28(4), 910. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034347  
Niedźwieńska, A., & Barzykowski, K. (2012). The age prospective memory paradox within the same 

sample in time-based and event-based tasks. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 19(1-2), 
58–83. https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2011.628374  

Paraskevaides, T., Morgan, C. J. A., Leitza, J. R., Bisby, J. A., Rendell, P. G., & Curran, H. V. (2010). 

Drinking and future thinking. Acute effects of alcohol on prospective memory and future 
simulation. Psychopharmacology, 208, 301–308 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-009-1731-0  
Parsons, T. D. (2015). Virtual reality for enhanced ecological validity and experimental control in the 
clinical, affective and social neurosciences. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00660  

Parsons, T. D., McMahan, T., & Kane, R. (2018). Practice parameters facilitating adoption of advanced 
technologies for enhancing neuropsychological assessment paradigms. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 32(1), 16-41. https://doi.org/10.1080/13854046.2017.1337932  

Patil, I. (2018). ggstatsplot: 'ggplot2' Based Plots with Statistical Details. CRAN. Retrieved from 

https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggstatsplot/index.html .  

Phillips, L. H., Henry, J. D., & Martin, M. (2008). Adult aging and prospective memory: The importance 

of ecological validity. In M. Kliegel, M. A. McDaniel, & G. O. Einstein (Eds.), Prospective 
memory: Cognitive, neuroscience, developmental, and applied perspectives (p. 161–185). Taylor 
& Francis Group/Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Pohlert T (2014). _The Pairwise Multiple Comparison of Mean Ranks Package (PMCMR)_. R package, 

<URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=PMCMR> . 

R Core Team (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/ . 

Rizzo, A. A., Schultheis, M., Kerns, K. A., & Mateer, C. (2004). Analysis of assets for virtual reality 

applications in neuropsychology. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 14(1-2), 207-239. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09602010343000183 

 Robertson, I. H., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V., Nimmo-Smith, I., et al. (1994). The Test of Everyday Attention 

(TEA). Bury St. Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Company, 197–221. 

RStudio Team (2020). RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio, PBC, Boston, MA 

URL http://www.rstudio.com/ . 

Scullin, M. K., & McDaniel, M. A. (2010). Remembering to execute a goal: Sleep on it! Psychological 

Science, 21, 1028–1035. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610373373  

36 | P a g e  

 
Scullin, M. K., McDaniel, M. A., & Shelton, J. T. (2013). The Dynamic Multiprocess Framework: 

evidence from prospective memory with contextual variability. Cognitive Psychology, 67(1-2), 
55–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2013.07.001  

Scullin, M. K., McDaniel, M. A., Shelton, J. T., & Lee, J. H. (2010). Focal/nonfocal cue effects in 

prospective memory: Monitoring difficulty or different retrieval processes? Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(3), 736. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018971  

Shallice, T., & Burgess, P. (1991). Deficits in strategy application following frontal lobe damage in man. 

Brain, 114, 727–741. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/114.2.727  

Shelton, J. T., & Scullin, M. K. (2017). The dynamic interplay between bottom-up and top-down 

processes supporting prospective remembering. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
26(4), 352–358. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417700504  

Smith, R. E., & Bayen, U. J. (2004). A multinomial model of event-based prospective memory. Journal 

of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30(4), 756–777. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.30.4.756  

Smith, R. E., Hunt, R. R., McVay, J. C., & McConnell, M. D. (2007). The cost of event-based prospective 

memory: Salient target events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 33(4), 734–746. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.33.4.734  

Spooner, D. M., & Pachana, N. A. (2006). Ecological validity in neuropsychological assessment: A case 
for greater consideration in research with neurologically intact populations. Archives of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, 21(4), 327-337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2006.04.004  

Syed-Abdul, S., Malwade, S., Nursetyo, A. A., Sood, M., Bhatia, M., Barsasella, D., Liu, M. F., Chang, 

C. C., Srinivasan, K., Raja, M., & Li, Y. C. J. (2019). Virtual reality among the elderly: A 
usefulness and acceptance study from Taiwan. BMC Geriatrics, 19(1), 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12877-019-1218-8  

Teo, W. P., Muthalib, M., Yamin, S., Hendy, A. M., Bramstedt, K., Kotsopoulos, E., ... & Ayaz, H. 

(2016). Does a combination of virtual reality, neuromodulation and neuroimaging provide a 
comprehensive platform for neurorehabilitation?–A narrative review of the literature. Frontiers 
in Human Neuroscience, 10, 284. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00284  

Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory. 

Psychological Review, 80(5), 352. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0020071  

Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Uttl, B. (2008). Transparent meta-analysis of prospective memory and aging. PloS One, 3(2), e1568. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001568  

Werner, P., & Korczyn, A. D. (2012). Willingness to use computerized systems for the diagnosis of 
dementia: testing a theoretical model in an Israeli sample. Alzheimer Disease & Associated 
Disorders, 26(2), 171-178. https://doi.org/10.1097/wad.0b013e318222323e  

Wilson, B. A., Evans, J.J., Emslie, H., Foley, J., Shiel, A., Watson, P., Hawkins, K., & Groot, Y. (2005). 

The Cambridge Prospective Memory Test: CAMPROMPT. London: Harcourt Assessment.  

Wilson, B. A., Cockburn, J., & Baddeley, A. (2008). The Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test. Bury St 

Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Company. 

Wilson, B. A., Alderman, N., Burgess, P. W., Emslie, H., & Evans, J.J. (1996). Behavioural Assessment 
of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS). Bury St. Edmunds, UK, Thames Valley Test Company. 

Xue, G. (2018). The neural representations underlying human episodic memory. Trends in Cognitive 

Sciences, 22(6), 544-561. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.03.004  

Zaidi, S. F. M., Duthie, C., Carr, E., & Maksoud, S. H. A. E. (2018, December). Conceptual framework 
for the usability evaluation of gamified virtual reality environment for non-gamers. In 
Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual-Reality 
Continuum and its Applications in Industry (p. 13). ACM. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3284398.3284431  

Zuber, S., Mahy, C. E., & Kliegel, M. (2019). How executive functions are associated with event-based 

and time-based prospective memory during childhood. Cognitive Development, 50, 66-79. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2019.03.001  

Zygouris, S., & Tsolaki, M. (2015). Computerized cognitive testing for older adults: a review. American 

Journal of Alzheimer's Disease & Other Dementias®, 30(1), 13-28. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1533317514522852  

37 | P a g e  

 
