International Journal of Computing Sciences Research (ISSN print: 2546-0552; ISSN online: 2546-115X) 
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 644-662 
doi: 10.25147/ijcsr.2017.001.1.64 
https://stepacademic.net 

Short Paper 
Architectural Visualization Using Virtual Reality: A User 
Experience in Simulating Buildings of a Community 
College in Bukidnon, Philippines 

Benzar Glen S. Grepon 
Program Head, Information Technology Department, Northern Bukidnon State College, 
Philippines 
ben.it2c@gmail.com 
(corresponding author) 

Aldwin Lester M. Martinez 
Information Technology Department, Northern Bukidnon State College, Philippines  

Date received: September 29, 2020 
Date received in revised form: December 31, 2020 
Date accepted: January 20, 2021 

Recommended citation: 

Grepon, B., & Martinez, A. (2021). Architectural Visualization Using Virtual Reality: A 
User  Experience  in  Simulating  Buildings  of  a  Community  College  in  Bukidnon, 
Philippines. International Journal of Computing Sciences Research, 5(1), 644-662. doi: 
10.25147/ijcsr.2017.001.1.64 

Abstract  

Purpose – The study aims to design and develop a virtual structural design that simulates 
the  campus  and  its  buildings  of  a  community  college  in  Bukidnon,  Philippines  through 
Virtual  Reality.  With  the 
immersion  of  technology,  this  project  represents  the 
architectural design of the establishment with the use of Virtual Reality Technology.  

Method – The project uses a modified Iterative Development Model which is a guide for 
the design and development of the 3D Models and VR Application. TinkerCAD which is a 
web-based application has been used to design buildings on the other hand Unity is used 
to develop the structural designs of the buildings. 

Results – The respondents of this study are the Grade 12 Senior High students from the 4 
schools  which  are  geographically  near  to  the  college.  With  this  study,  the  researchers 
were  able  to  showcase  its  VR  Application  to  the  students  and  later  evaluated  using  a 
System  Usability  Scale,  a  10  item  questionnaire  measuring  usability  with  an  overall 

is 

an  Open  Access 

This 
License 
the 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,  distribution,  and  reproduction in any  medium,  provided the 
original work is properly credited. 

the  Creative  Commons  Attribution 

article  distributed  under 

terms  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
average of 90% or Point Score of 4.5 which is interpreted as excellent in a Likert table for 
descriptive  interpretation.  With  the  use  of  the  VR  application  potential  students  of  the 
college  will  be  able  to  visualize  and  experience  the  present  structures  of  the  college 
without being physically present in the area. 

Conclusion  –  In  this  paper,  the  buildings  and  structures  of  NBCC  were  designed  and 
developed through a Virtual Reality Platform allowing students from different secondary 
schools that are geographically near to the college to experience the feeling to be in the 
school  without  being  able  to  set  a  step  in  physically.  Using  VR  Gadgets  in  navigating 
buildings is still new from the community which makes the VR application a hit to those 
who  use  it.  The  Application  was  evaluated  personally  by  every  student  from  different 
schools and rated excellent. With this advancement of technologies, VR plays a vital part 
in allowing people to see what's inside the building and navigate around it without being 
physically present in the place. 

Recommendations – This study is limited only to simulating the architectural buildings of a 
community  college  in  northern  Bukidnon  Philippines  and  currently  has  no  controllers 
used  and  no  sound  effects.  The  researchers  recommend  continuing  to  improve  and 
developing  the  project  since  the  school  buildings  expand  every  year,  adding  details  to 
every  room,  including  furniture,  add  doors  to  the  rooms,  landscapes,  mini-map  UI  and 
improve the landform to be more realistic. 

Research  Implications  –  The  study  enabled  viewing  and  designing  of  school  structures 
using the technology of Virtual Reality. With this study, future development of the college 
in terms of structural design will be easier to visualize. 

Keywords – virtual reality, technology, architectural structure, architectural visualization, 
Philippines 

INTRODUCTION 

Technology has a lot to do especially in changing our ways of living (Langridge, 2020). 
New  technologies  unfold  every  day,  one  technology  is  Virtual  Reality  (VR)  which  is  a 
prime  player  in  this  generation  especially  the  millennials  (Voxburner,  2017).  Some 
applications  of  Virtual  Reality  are  Gaming,  Education,  or  Architectural  Simulation 
(Castronovo et al., 2019). The development of VR Technologies transitions from desktop-
based  to  mobile  ones  with  additional  features  that  include  enhanced  involvement  and 
interaction abilities (Wang et al., 2018).  People tend to use the conventional method of 
visualizing objects using Virtual Reality, however, experiencing Virtual Reality in terms of 
using body motions is another exciting idea to look forward to. Virtual reality has recently 
become an affordable technology and will contribute to scientific discovery (El Beheiry, et 
al., 2019). Schools also believe that Virtual Reality as immersed in education and use it as 
an alternative way of teaching and learning allows students to work out their creativity 

645 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills  effectively,  especially  if  they  are  also  engaged  to  design  architectural  plans  and 
objects, VR plays an important role in teaching process because it provides an interesting 
and engaging way of acquiring information (Kamińska et al., 2019).  

In  Japan,  a  virtual  game  has  been  developed  from  a  light  novel  written  by  Reki 
Kawahara  entitled  Sword  Art  Online.  The  game  will  not  be  played  with  a  traditional 
controller, but by the movement of any body parts, making the whole  project different 
from any other, with nothing similar available on the market as of now. Sword Art Online: 
The  Beginning  will  come  with  some  additional  features  that  sound  more  interesting  on 
paper such as systems called Cognitive System and SoftLayer, which promise to create an 
environment  that  will  feel  like  the  real  world.  Additionally,  a  proposal  of  using  an 
integrated  adoption  model  of  VR  games  in  order  to  provide  a  better  understanding  of 
player’s perspectives toward VR games which are advancement and improvement in the 
Electronic Game World (Jang & Park, 2019). 

Virtual  Reality  (VR)  is  the  use  of  computer  technology  to  create  a  simulated 
environment  unlike  traditional  user  interfaces,  VR  places  the  user  inside  an  experience. 
Instead of viewing a screen in front of them, users are immersed and able to interact with 
3D  worlds.  By  simulating  as  many  senses  as  possible,  such  as  vision,  hearing,  touching, 
even smelling, the computer is transformed into a gatekeeper to this artificial world the 
only  limits  to  near-real  VR  experiences  are  the  availability  of  content  and  cheap 
computing power (Jackson, 2018).  

Northern Bukidnon Community College is on its way to developing its establishments, 
particularly  on  developing  its  buildings.  However,  the  project  focuses  only  on  the 
enhancement  of  the  existing  structures  on  the  campus.  The  college  provides  only  a 
miniature model of the campus development plan which was a futuristic plan and not the 
recent vicinity of the college  with the use of blocks, paper, woods,  and other variety of 
materials to create a physical type of architectural model to show the over-all vicinity area 
of the campus, but it is limited on viewing the external structures of each building on a 
top  view  perspective.  During  school  promotion  conducted  by  the  college  to  nearby 
secondary schools, the admissions office has difficulties in describing the school campus 
and  its  buildings  especially  when  a  curious  student  inquires  which  building  and  what 
particular place to go when they are on the campus.  

The project came up with an idea on using Virtual Reality (VR) Technology in viewing 
the  structure  of  an  architectural  design  not  only  the  external  but  also  the  internal 
structure with the near accurate scale allowing participants to move around in the virtual 
world and can see it from different angles, reach into it, grab it and reshape it. This study 
aims to develop an android application that will serve as an alternative way on promoting 
the college and its campus through Architectural Visualization using Virtual Reality to tour 
prospective  students  remotely  and  allows  users  to  view  the  present  and  actual 
architectural  structure  of  the  school  buildings  without  being  physically  present  in  the 
area, which can be navigated using a smartphone that runs an android operating system 

646 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and any VR headset. This technology helps students to be more familiar with the school 
campus and buildings before they will take entrance examinations and physically inquire 
about  admission  requirements.  This  VR  Architectural  Application  is  evaluated  through  a 
System  Usability  Scale  (SUS)  to  measure  sustainability  and  assess  functionality  for  the 
application to be used during an annual school to school promotion and career guidance 
for prospective college freshmen of the college. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

Virtual  reality  has  been  used  in  games,  education,  and  architectural  simulations. 
Imagine  roaming  around  a  virtual  building  or  a  house  or  a  condo  development  even 
before  construction  begins.  Looking  to  the  21st-century  learners,  teaching  and  learning 
are  best  delivered  through  virtual  reality  especially  integrating  and  utilizing  it  for  the 
educational  system  here  in  the  Philippines.  A  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry  (DTI) 
sponsored  event  showcases  different  ways  to  engage  the  student  and  help  them  to 
compete  and  to  align  skills  and  learnings  to  different  schools  to  near  countries  as  the 
main focal point of the event, there are sharing of possible opportunities of using VR as a 
tool for better learning and boost students’ interest towards technology (Barrozo et al., 
2017).  According  to  Espiritu  (2017),  the  Philippines  is  very  much  behind  in  education, 
unlike the other countries. Filipino students exert a lot of effort and spend a lot of time 
doing  school-related  activities  but  very  little  time  in  laboratories.  In  virtual  reality, 
common problems such as corrosions and being burn are not an issue since they are not 
physically  involved  with  what  is  happening  to  the  virtual  environment.  Virtual  Reality 
became  popular  in  creating  an  architectural  simulation  for  business  and  it  can  be  used 
also for educational purposes. By this, it gives the researchers the purpose to pursue their 
project  to  develop  an  architectural  simulation  through  virtual  reality  for  Northern 
Bukidnon Community College.  

Japan  has  created  ways  to  deliver  made-to-order  designs  that  are  unique  to 
businesses related to housing. Merging Virtual reality into architect's showrooms allows a 
client to interact and at the same time collaborate ideas on how to improve the current 
designs and to view the possible visualization of the plan set by the professionals on their 
traditional blueprints and models. There  is a huge demand from them to show possible 
homes designs through VR Technology since they found that they will see a more realistic 
view  of  these  designs  through  VR  Technology,  one  exciting  part  of  using  it  is  they  can 
"walk around a home" even if it's still on the initial stages of the design process, with it, 
clients  have  already  ideas  on  the  visions  set  by  the  architect  and  also  to  allow  them  to 
make specific arrangements on request they would like to include in their future homes 
(Kusano, 2017).   

Virtual reality has improved and transformed the art of architecture, allowing better 
insights in terms of "virtual property inspections" since it provides a clearer vision or view 
of a perspective of a home or property both from the owner and the crews before the 

647 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction  begins.  Using  VR  Gadgets  including  the  Headset  and  other  materials  gives 
the  viewer  the  ability  to  fully  see  a  unique  experience  of  what  would  be  the  actual 
property  would  look  like,  the  most  accurate  illustration  of  a  traditional  blueprint  of  the 
proposed  project  which  is  an  epitome  to  most  architects  who  would  like  to  have 
engagement with their clients for more client-centered designs (Rodriguez, 2018).  

In  line  with  the  new  development  of  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  Virtual  reality  has 
been  used  for  humans  and  computers  naturally  and  intelligently.  A  study  by  Lv  (2020) 
shows that the interaction, simulated natural state and 3D environment can be formed at 
the display terminal through the processing and operation of information by a computer 
program,  which  can  make  people  feel  immersed  which  means  that  emerging  VR  to  IoT 
could be very beneficial to promote industrial applications and enhance human activities. 

Portman,  Natapov  and  Fisher-Gewirtzman  (2015)  reviewed  the  VR  Environments  for 
research  and  teaching  for  different  disciplines  such  as  architecture  and  environmental 
planning. For architecture, VR contributes to the wide development for a practitioner to 
use VR in their work while for Environmental planning VR is less frequently used since an 
exception to climate change issues is one of the contributing factors to consider. VR was 
used  that  creates  a  framework  for  testing  the  overall  validity  of  the  proposed  plan 
whether from an architectural design and environmental planning. 

These VR developments give the researchers some ideas as an inspiration on how to 

develop an effective and efficient project using the technology. 

METHODOLOGY 

Software Development 

The  study  uses  a  Modified  Iterative  Development  as  a  guide  for  the  design  and 
development  of  the  VR  3D  Model  and  its  environment.  Iterative  development  is  a 
procedure on which there is a breaking down of the computer program advancement of 
a  huge  application  into  little  portions.  In  the  iterative  development  process,  the 
highlighted  code  is  planned,  created,  and  tried  in  rehashed  cycles.  In  each  repetition, 
there is re-designing of additional features, developed and verified until it is ready to be 
deployed or installed. Since this project used Modified Iterative Development, there are 
some  changes  of  the  iteration  on  the  stages  to  ensure  that  the  program  follows  the 
desired  outcomes  set  by  the  developers.  Figure  1  illustrates  the  Modified  Iterative 
Development  to  produce  an  increment  project  that  is  being  developed.  The  process 
starts  with  the  Planning,  Data  Gathering  and  Data  Analysis,  System  Requirements, 
Designing, Testing, and Evaluation.  

648 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Modified Iterative Development 

Planning 

Project  planning  may  be  technical  procedures  in  doing  projects  where  required 
documents  are  made  to  guarantee  effective  extended  completion  of  the  project. 
Documentation incorporates all activities required to characterize, get ready, coordinate, 
and  facilitate  extra  plans.  The  project  plan  clearly  characterizes  how  the  project  is 
performed,  evaluated,  and  deployed.  In  creating  the  project,  thorough  planning 
constitutes  primarily  the  entire  actions  because  this  is  the  process  of  organizing  all  the 
tasks; such that who will do the task and when will be the tasks for the project should be 
done  will  be  determined.  In  this  part  also,  the  materials  and  tools  to  be  used  for  the 
project  are  identified.  The  researchers  used  the  Gantt  chart  as  their  guide  and  basis  to 
create their system. At first, the researchers planned to create a system with the use of 
Augmented  Reality  (AR)  technology  but  AR  is  really  expensive  and  not  good  for 
simulating  multiple  near  accurately  scaled  buildings,  that's  why  they  decided  to  use 
Virtual  Reality  instead.  After  their  planning,  they  did  the  brainstorming  for  them  to 
contribute  ideas  and  to  give  them  insights  into  what  are  the  possible  works  to  do.  The 
researchers had different assignments and roles.  

The researchers used the Gantt chart  as shown in figure 1 below  to determine what 
work should be done in a specific time frame. Gantt chart really helped the researchers 
plan and schedule the project effectively. This helped them evaluate the entire duration 
of the project whether they hit the target or not, this also helped them in managing the 
dependencies between their assignment and tasks.  

649 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. GANTT Chart for the Project Development 

Data Gathering and Data Analysis 

The gathering of information is the next step which is vital in interpreting or analyzing 
structure responses that increase the core knowledge on the project to develop. The data 
can  be  gathered  in  a  diverse  way,  for  example,  interviews,  observations,  gathering  of 
receipts  and  forms,  surveys,  experiments,  and  other  related  activities.  The  data  or 
information  that  has  been  gathered  must  be  summarized,  interpreted,  and  analyzed 
before having conclusions (UniSA, 2016).  

In gathering data, the researchers used the Survey Method using questionnaires to be 
answered by the students. The questionnaire consists of two questions that are related 
to the study. The overall response of the students is used as the basis of the project to 
pursue allowing the project to gather relevant data to determine its validity and success. 
Data analysis is the next step after data gathering. In this part, the project analyzed all the 
data that were gathered, meaning the answers from the survey were organized and then 
interpreted. The results then served as a guide for the validity and pursuit of the project.  

The  researchers  conducted  a  survey  of  at  least  10  percent  of  the  total  student 
population of each department to determine if the miniature was enough for viewing the 
inside  and  outside  structure  of  the  building.  Out  of  107  total  respondents  of  each 
department, 72  students  said that the  architectural  miniature  is not enough  to  visualize 
the  present  structure  of  the  school,  and  79  agreed  that  there  should  be  an  alternative 
way to visualize the existing structure of Northern Bukidnon Community College. Majority 
of  the  student  favors  about  the  idea  of  having  a  new  alternative  way  in  visualizing  the 
present structure of the school.  

System Requirements 

650 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
System requirements refer to the equipment and program components of a computer 
framework that are required to introduce and utilize a computer program effectively. This 
is used to know whether the computer components installed would suffice the necessary 
requirements  for  the software  to properly  run  on  the  system (Beal,  2018).  Through  this 
procedure,  the  project  identifies  and  decides  for  the  appropriate  qualifications  of  the 
software  and  hardware  to  be  used,  because  the  project  requires  specific  system 
qualifications  to  be  followed.  The  researchers  used  these  software  applications  in 
creating  their  system,  these  are  Unity  as  their  Engine,  Monodevelop-Unity  as  their  Text 
editor, C# as their Programming Language, and Kitkat for the Android OS.  

Designing 

Designing software is a long process since it requires process defining of the things to 
use  that  includes  its  functions,  the  objects  to  consider,  the  user  interface,  the  general 
structures which are based on the user requirements (UCAR, 2018). Designing is the most 
interesting  part  of  all  the  processes  because  the  project  is  VR  architectural  simulation 
which involves the creation and designing of buildings including coding. The researchers 
used TinkerCAD to create and model the buildings and developed in the Unity  software 
and  then  converted  the  assets  from  OBJ  into  FBX  file  with  the  use  of  Autodesk  FBX 
Converter 2013. 

Testing 

Testing is the method or strategy of finding mistakes or possible errors in a program 
application  so  that  it  concurs  with  the  user's  necessity  (Coleman,  2017).  Testing  follows 
right  after design.  This  is  the  process  where  to  measure  the  usability  and  design  of  the 
system. The researchers went to the surrounding High School Institutions of NBCC to test 
their project by the Grade 12 senior high students as the prospective college freshmen if 
it’s functional and if there’s an existing error during the testing period. They provided VR 
gear or goggles and a supported Android phone to be used to test the VR App. 

Evaluation 

Evaluation is very important to software development since it examines whether a 
program  follows  its  purpose  whether  it  reaches  the  desired  outcome  and  to  ensure 
sustainability (Patton, 1987). The evaluation part gives the researchers an idea of whether 
the developed application is ready to be used and to know moreover in the event that it 
meets  its  reason.  The  researchers  evaluate  the  project  through  user  experience  which 
allows the Grade 12 senior high school students to try and evaluate the system through 
writing  comments  and  feedback  about  the  system.  Table  1  shows  the  questions  of  the 
System Usability Scale (SUS) for evaluation. 

Table 1. System Usability Scale for Evaluation 

651 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questions 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1. I think that I would like to use this application frequently 

2. I found the application very beneficial 

3. I thought the application was easy to use 
4. I think that I would not need the support of a technical person 
to be able to use this application. 
5.  I  found  the  various  functions  in  this  application  were  well 
united. 

6. I thought I can work with fewer mistakes with this application. 

7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this app 
very quickly 
8. I found the application very useful 
9. I felt very confident in using the application. 
10. I don’t  need to learn a lot of things  before I could get going 
with this application. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The  researchers  took  some  pictures  of  the  buildings  as  a  basis  for  their  design. 
Figure  3  shows  some  of  the  pictures  of  the  buildings  of  the  college  taken  by  the 
researchers.  

Figure 3. Sample Building and Inner Structures 

Software Requirements 

A  software  requirement 

is  a  document  that  describes  the 

intended  purpose 

requirements and nature of the product to be developed. 

652 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Table 2. The Software Requirements for the Development of Virtual Reality 

Architectural Simulation 

Software 
Game Engine 
Script Editor 
Programming Language 
3D Model Type Converter 
Web Browser 
3D Modelling Tool 
Android SDK 

Specifications 
Unity 5.6.6p3 
MonoDevelop 
C# 
Autodesk FBX Converter 2013 
Google Chrome 10/Firefox 4 
TinkerCAD 
Android Studio 3.1.4 

Table 2 shows the Software requirement that was used in creating the project. They 
used TinkerCAD as their 3D Modeling Tool because it is free and an easy browser-based 
3D  design  and  modeling  tool  and  also  Unity  game  engine  because  this  supports  the 
Google  Cardboard  plugin  and  is  compatible  with  the  programming  language  that  they 
used.  

For  Script  Editor,  the  researchers  used  MonoDevelop.  C#  is  the  Programming 
language used because it is one of the supported programming languages in Unity and it 
is the most commonly used programming language by other programmers. Autodesk FBX 
Converter  2013  was  used  by  the  researchers  to  convert  OBJ  (Object)  files  to  FBX 
(Filmbox)  files.  By  default,  TinkerCAD  exports  3D  models.  STL  (Standard  Triangle 
Language),  Scalable  Vector  Graphics  (.svg),  and  Object  (.obj)  type,  but  the  researchers 
prefer (.fbx) type to be imported to unity because through converting the 3D model type, 
the  materials  of  the  3d  model  are  joined  as  one  with  the  mesh.  Unlike  in  OBJ  files,  the 
materials are separated from the mesh and are saved as MTL (material) files. 

Design 

The most interesting and challenging part of the whole development even though the 
actual  scale  and  measurements  of  the  buildings  are  not  accurate,  still  looks  closer  to 
reality. Figure 4 shows the Guardhouse that is made up of woods and the windows are 
made up of jalousie. This actual structure for this building was functional for the school's 
guards. 

653 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. 3D Model Guard House 

Figure 5 shows the Covered court of the school where most of the school programs 

and events happen. This was patterned from the actually covered court of the college. 

Figure 5. 3D Model Covered Court 

Figure 6 shows the sample lecture rooms. These rooms are also concrete just like the 

previous classrooms and are used for student’s classes. 

Figure 6. 3D Model Classroom 

654 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure  7  shows  the  School  Library  where  the  students  study  and  conduct  their 
research and assignments. The library is concrete, the windows are made up of jalousie 
and the doors are made up of metals. 

Figure 7. 3D Model Library 

Figure 8 shows the 3 Story Building, composed of three (3) floors, with five (5) rooms 
on the second and third floor, while there are six (6) rooms on the first floor, composed 
of  three  (3)  classrooms,  a  clinic,  SAS  office  and  the  Faculty  office  of  the  Business 
Administration Department 

Figure 8. 3D Model of a 3 Story Building 

Figure 9 shows the Splash Screen of the VR Application while loading and preparing 
the necessary components for the VR application to work. This flash screen contains the 
logo that comprises of a VR Glass with letters NBCC representing the college, this is one 

655 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way  of  promoting  the  VR  Application  to  the  users  while  waiting  for  the  necessary 
components to be loaded.   

Figure 9. Splash Screen 

Figure 10 and 11 shows the in-game of the application. The screen is split into two but 
using the VR Viewer like Google Cardboard, Google Daydream, and VR Headset will merge 
these  two  screens  into  one  for  a  better  vision  and  experience.  The  user  can  navigate 
around by 360 degrees and can move forward by looking 30 degrees below. 

Figure 10. In-game 3D Model 3 Story Building 

656 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. In-game 3D Model Covered Court 

Testing 

Testing is the process where the researchers let other users test their projects. Their 
target  respondents  are  Grade  12  Senior  High  students  as  shown  in  Figure  12  below 
because these students are the possible future students of the college. The researchers 
have chosen the four (4) different High School Institutions that surround the college to 
test their VR application. The researchers sent a letter to each designated principal asking 
permission  to  conduct  a  usability  scale  test  and  fortunately  all  principals  in  each  school 
gave  them  permission  to  do  so.  Before  the  testing  part,  the  researchers  conducted  a 
short  lecture  about  the  project  and  then  allow  the  students  to  test  the  VR  Application. 
Some grade 12 students tried to use the application using VR Googles. 

Figure 12. Testing at Sankanan National High School 

Figure 13 shows the Grade 12 Students of Manolo Fortich National High School testing 
and  evaluating  the  system  seriously.  Some  of  the  students  enjoyed  the  experience  and 
invite others to try. 

657 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Figure 13. Testing at Manolo Fortich National High School 

Figure  14  shows  the  Grade  12  Students  of  Dalirig  National  High  School  testing  the 

system very well and evaluate the system after experiencing the Virtual Reality. 

Figure 14. Testing at Dalirig National High School 

And  lastly,  figure  15  shows  the  students  of  Alae  National  High  School  trying  the  VR 

Goggles for the first time and enjoyed the experience. 

Figure 15. Testing at Alae National High School 

Evaluation 

658 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation 

is  the  next  process  after  testing 

in  which  the  students  rate  the 
functionality  and  at  the  same  the  usability  of  the  project  (Table  3).  Through  this,  the 
researchers will be able to determine if their study is relevant and efficient.  

Table 3. The Likert Table for the Qualitative Interpretation to be used in interpreting 

results of the survey. 

Values 
1.00 – 1.79 
1.80  – 2.59 
2.60 – 3.39 
3.40 –4.19 
4.20 – 5.00 

Qualitative Interpretation 
Poor 
Fair 
Good 
Very Good 
Excellent 

The researchers used the qualitative Likert Table of Sorrel Brown (2010) to interpret 
the result of the evaluation. The range is evenly distributed to ensure that specific results 
are given consideration.  

Table 4. The Overall Evaluation Results 

Sankanan 
NHS 

4.70 

Manolo  
Fortich NHS 
4.50 

Dalirig  
NHS 

4.40 

Alae  
NHS 

4.40 

Over-all 
Average 
4.50 

Table 4 as shown above presents the overall VR project rating, based on the results 
from the four (4) high school institutions where the researchers conducted their testing 
and evaluation, the VR Application got consistent excellent remarks. Among the four (4) 
schools,  Dalirig  and  Alae  National  High  Schools  rated  the  VR  App  least  because  some 
students were not given ample time to experience the VR App very well due to the short 
period  of  time  given  to  the  researchers  as  permitted  by  the  school  principals  and  the 
student’s excitement were shortened because they have not completed roaming around 
on all buildings. But somehow the average of 4.4 falls inside the excellent range and it is a 
great achievement for the researchers. 

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

In  this  paper,  the  buildings  and  structures  of  NBCC  were  designed  and  developed 
through  a  Virtual  Reality  Platform  allowing  students  from  different  secondary  schools 
that are geographically near to the college to experience the feeling to be in the school 
without being able to set a step in physically. Using VR Gadgets in navigating buildings is 
still new from the community which makes the VR application a hit to those who use it. 
The  Application  was  evaluated  personally  by  every  student  from  different  schools  and 
rated a very generous score average of 90% or a point score of 4.5 which means Excellent 
using  a  System  Usability  Scale.  With  this  advancement  of  technologies,  VR  plays  a  vital 

659 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part in allowing people to see what's inside the building and navigate around it without 
being physically present in the place.  

This  study  is  limited  only  to  simulating  the  architectural  buildings  of  a  Community 
College in Northern Bukidnon, Philippines, and currently has no controllers used and also, 
no  sound  effects.  The  researchers  recommend  to  future  researchers  to  continue 
developing a project, to add doors to the rooms, landscapes, mini-map UI, and improve 
the landform. This is to make the project look closer to the real feature of the college. It is 
recommended  also  to  add  controllers  to  interact  with  the  objects  inside  the  Virtual 
Environment.  The  researchers  hope  that  the  future  researchers  will  be  courageous 
enough to continue this project and will not be limited only on viewing the buildings but 
also adding virtual human to stand as a tour guide when using the VR App. 

IMPLICATIONS 

The  study  enabled  viewing  and  designing  of  school  structures  using  Virtual  Reality 
technology. With this study, future developments of NBCC in terms of structural design 
will  be  easier  to  visualize,  the  institution  will  have  convenience  on  developing  its 
establishment  which  would  allow  encouraging  more  students  to  enroll.  This  would 
contribute  to  an  effective  marketing  strategy.  This  study  also  allows  other  students  to 
experience  the  advanced  technology  of  virtual  reality,  which  would  interest  them  to 
explore more technological ideas and not limit their learning. To Future Researchers, the 
success and limitation of this study will allow future researchers to scrutinize the process 
and  develop  better  methods  and  other  systems  to  improve  the  field  of  research  of 
information technology. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The researchers acknowledge the support of the following people and institutions 
who have taken part in the success of the project: Kouim Joshua Decena, Vince April Q. 
Baguio,  Michael  T.  Melecio,  John  Dexter  M.  Miro,  and  Ronald  John  L.  Salvacion.  The 
Manolo  Fortich  National  High  School,  Alae  National  High  School,  Dalirig  National  High 
School, and Sankanan National High School. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the 
use of service and facilities of the Northern Bukidnon Community College for the conduct 
of this study.  

REFERENCES 

Barrozo, V. M. & Vargas M. A. (2017). Company urges use of virtual reality in schools. 

Retrieved 
from 
reality-in-schools/ 

https://businessmirror.com.ph/company-urges-use-of-virtual-

Beal, 

V. 

(2016). 

System 

requirements. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.webopedia.com/TERM/S/system_requirements.html 

660 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Castronovo, F., Nikolic, D., Mastrolembo Ventura, S., Shroff, V., Nguyen, A., Dinh, N., ... & 
Gaedicke, C. (2019). Design and development of a virtual reality educational game 
for  architectural  and  construction  reviews.  ASEE  2019  Annual  Conference  and 
Exposition. Retrieved from https://peer.asee.org/32592.pdf 

Coleman, 

B. 

(2017). 

Definition 

of 

software 

testing. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.google.com/amp/s/m.economictimes.com/definition/software-
testing/amp 

El Beheiry, M., Doutreligne, S., Caporal, C., Ostertag, C., Dahan, M., & Masson, J. (2019).  

Virtual reality: Beyond visualization. Journal of Molecular Biology, 431, 1315-1321. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmb.2019.01.033 

Espiritu, 

P. 

(2017). 

Education  with 

virtual 

reality. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.vexplode.com/en/tedx/education-with-virtual-reality-paolo-espiritu-
tedxadmu/ 

Jackson, 

B. 

(2018).  What 

is 

virtual 

reality. 

Retrieved 

from 

https://www.marxentlabs.com/what-is-virtual-reality/ 

Jang,  Y.  &  Park,  E.  (2019).  An  adoption  model  for  virtual  reality  games:  The  roles  of 
presence  and  enjoyment.  Telematics  and  Informatics,  volume  42,  Article  101239. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2019.101239 

Kamińska, D., Sapiński, T., Wiak, S., Tikk, T., Haamer, R., Avots, E., Helmi, A., Ozcinar, C., & 
Anbarjafari, G. (2019). Virtual reality and its applications in education: Survey. 
Information, 10(10), 318. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/info10100318 
Kusano,  K.  (2017).  Freedom  architects  advances  home  designs  using  virtual  reality 
https://www.autodesk.com/redshift/virtual-

Retrieved 

from 

showrooms. 
showroom/ 

Langridge, M.  (2020).  Life  in  the future:  Tech  that  will  change  the  way  we  live.  Retrieved 
https://www.pocket-lint.com/gadgets/news/142027-tech-innovations-that-

from 
will-shortly-change-the-world 

Lv,  Z.  (2020).  Virtual  reality  in  the  context  of  Internet  of  Things.  Neural  Computer  & 
Application,  32,  9593–9602.  Retrieved  from  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-019-
04472-7 

Patton,  M.  Q.  (1987).  Qualitative  research  evaluation  methods.  Retrieved  from 

http://meera.snre.umich.edu/evaluation-what-it-and-why-do-it. 

Portman, M., Natapov, A., & Fisher-Gewirtzman, D. (2015). To go where no man has gone 
before:  Virtual  reality  in  architecture,  landscape  architecture  and  environmental 
planning.  Computers,  Environment  and  Urban  Systems  Journal,  volume  54,  pages 
376–384. 

Rodriguez, I. (2018). Virtual reality walkthroughs are transforming architecture. Retrieved 
https://www.google.com/amp/s/venturebeat.com/2017/11/10/virtual-reality-

from 
walkthroughs-are-transforming-architecture/amp/ 

UCAR.  (2018).  What 

is  software  design?.  Retrieved  from  https://sea.ucar.edu/best-

practices/design 

UniSA. 

(2016). 

analysis. 
http://w3.unisa.edu.au/researchstudents/milestones/data.asp 

gathering 

Data 

data 

and 

Retrieved 

from 

661 

 
 
 
Voxburner.  (2017).  Why  VR  is  the  “future”  of  technology  for  millennials.  Retrieved  from 

https://www.voxburner.com/blog-source/vr 

Wang, P., Wu, P, Wang, J., Chi, H., & Wang, X. (2018). A critical review of the use of virtual 
reality in construction engineering education and training. International Journal of 
Environmental  Research  and  Public  Health,  15(6),  article  1204.  Retrieved  from 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15061204. 

662 

 
 
