Social Virtual Reality: Ethical Considerations and Future Directions for
An Emerging Research Space

Divine Maloney*
Clemson University

Guo Freeman†
Clemson University

Andrew Robb‡
Clemson University

1
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
3
0
5
0
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

The boom of commercial social virtual reality (VR) platforms in
recent years has signaled the growth and wide-spread adoption of
consumer VR. Social VR platforms draw aspects from traditional
2D virtual worlds where users engage in various immersive experi-
ences, interactive activities, and choices in avatar-based representa-
tion. However, social VR also demonstrates speciﬁc nuances that
extend traditional 2D virtual worlds and other online social spaces,
such as full/partial body tracked avatars, experiencing mundane ev-
eryday activities in a new way (e.g., sleeping), and an immersive
means to explore new and complex identities. The growing pop-
ularity has signaled interest and investment from top technology
companies who each have their own social VR platforms. Thus far,
social VR has become an emerging research space, mainly focus-
ing on design strategies, communication and interaction modalities,
nuanced activities, self-presentation, harassment, privacy, and self-
disclosure. These recent works suggest that many questions still
remain in social VR scholarship regarding how to ethically conduct
research on these sites and which research areas require additional
attention. Therefore, in this paper, we provide an overview of mod-
ern Social VR, critically review current scholarship in the area, raise
ethical considerations for conducting research on these sites, and
highlight unexplored areas.

Keywords: social virtual reality, commercial VR

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Virtual Reality——

1 INTRODUCTION

Social Virtual Reality (VR) provides novel digital spaces where
users can interact, socialize, and game with one another through
head-mounted displays (HMDs) [49, 50]. In these open-ended 3D
virtual spaces, users engage in cultivating online social relation-
ships [67], exploring diverse virtual activities [40], experimenting
with self-representation [26, 27], and enjoying immersive gaming
[41, 42]. These spaces are similar to traditional virtual worlds such
as Second Life, Runescape, and Club Penguin. However, social
VR provides a much more immersive experience due to the use
of HMDs and open up new opportunities for embodied interaction.
The popularity and immense potential for social VR has signaled
signiﬁcant interest and investment from top technology companies
such as Microsoft, HTC, and Facebook, who each own a social VR
platform. Recent worldly events (e.g., the COVID-19 global pan-
demic) have further demonstrated the increasing potential of using
social VR for interaction and virtual relationships. As these plat-
forms continue to grow in popularity, many questions still remain
about the ramiﬁcations of social VR as it grows as an emerging
research space.

*e-mail: divinem@clemson.edu
†e-mail:guof@clemson.edu
‡e-mail: arobb@clemson.edu

Therefore, in this paper we provide an overview of modern So-
cial VR, critically review current scholarship in the area, point re-
searchers towards unexplored areas, and raise ethical considerations
for how to ethically conduct research on these sites and which re-
search areas require additional attention.

2 Social VIRTUAL REALITY
2.1 Deﬁning and Characterizing Commercial Social VR
For the purpose of this paper, we adopt and expand McVeigh et
al.’s [49, 50] work to deﬁne social VR as any commercial 3D vir-
tual environment where multiple users can interact with one another
through VR HMDs. We focus on commercial applications of Social
VR for two reasons. First, VR’s relevance and societal impact will
likely have a more signiﬁcant impact on commercial VR uses than
non-commercial uses. Second, non-commercial platforms impose
signiﬁcant barriers to entry, including programming expertise and
VR knowledge that is not available to the average consumer. The
majority of prior scholarship involving VR will also be more ap-
plicable to commercial social VR platforms (i.e., for entertainment
purposes) as opposed to other forms of VR (e.g., for training and
simulation purposes). For example, commercial social VR is used
in ways that researchers would not normally expect, such as users
sleeping in VR [40]. This demonstrates that certain facets of social
VR may be challenging to replicate in a laboratory.

Modern commercial social VR platforms afford four main char-
acteristics, making them attractive and popular digital social spaces.
One of the characteristics is embodied virtual avatars. These avatars
support full/partial body representation along with real-time move-
ments and gestures.
In these environments, users can create and
customize their embodied avatars to explore different virtual spaces
and interact with other users. The avatar body in social VR is the
primary interface for the user. Second, social VR supports vivid
spatial and temporal experiences through high-ﬁdelity 360-degree
content and six degrees of freedom. These experiences include a
plethora of activities and engagement experiences that may or may
not resemble activities in the ofﬂine world. Third, there are multiple
means of communicating and interpreting communication in social
VR via verbal or non-verbal communication. The ability to commu-
nicate with another person via non-verbal means such as gestures
and body movements has the potential to eliminate language barri-
ers and allow for accessible communication to those who are im-
paired [43]. Finally, modern social VR platforms are free to play
and are widely accessible to anyone who has a VR device; some
social VR platforms are also accessible to non-VR users, allowing
interaction between desktop-based users and VR users. To the best
of our knowledge, most if not all, major social VR platforms are
free to use. These include: AltspaceVR, RecRoom, VRchat, Face-
book Spaces (discontinued), Facebook Horizon, Mozilla Hubs, Big
Screen, High Fidelity, Sansar, Neos, Anyland, and Pokerstars.

2.2 Popular Social VR Platforms
The majority of social VR platforms afford various types of
events/activities and the creation of diverse places and spaces. Each
platform has different levels of customizable avatars and offers dif-
ferent levels of avatar ﬁdelity. We introduce several of the most
popular social VR platforms below.

 
 
 
 
 
 
AltspaceVR. Owned by Microsoft, AltspaceVR is described as
“the premier place to discover the next frontier of entertainment
and community.” In AltspaceVR, users can attend live events and
meetups such as open mic night, improv comedy, meditation, yoga,
LGBTQ meetups, or VR church. Users can also host their own
events. Events on AltspaceVR can also be accessible via a PC.

RecRoom. RecRoom is considered most popular among minors,
while adults tend to prefer AltspaceVR [41]. The main activities
in RecRoom are centered around games (e.g., paintball and basket-
ball). Users can create their own private rooms. They can also ven-
ture into a central hub called the Rec Center and go into different
rooms for gaming.

VRchat. Among all the social VR platforms, VRchat (owned
by HTC) affords minimal activities but features uniquely designed
rooms (e.g., spaceship, Japan Shrine) that attract various types of
users.
It also offers the most sophisticated avatar customization
compared to RecRoom and AltspaceVR. VRchat is ranked as one
of the most popular applications on the Steam game marketplace.

Facebook Horizon. Currently, Facebook Horizon’s is the newest
of all the social VR platforms. Horizon is Facebook’s second social
VR platform, building on the now discontinued Facebook Spaces.
According to Facebook, Horizon is a sandbox universe where users
can create and craft their environments and games; they can also
socialize with current Facebook friends or other users on the plat-
form.

2.3 Comparing Social VR with Traditional Virtual Worlds

Grounded in the deﬁnitions and characteristics of emerging social
VR platforms, we therefore, summarize and highlight the similar-
ities and uniqueness of social VR compared to traditional virtual
worlds.

The current designs and experiences of social VR platforms
mimic behaviors and designs that were ﬁrst observed in collabo-
rative virtual environments (CVEs) [12]. In fact, social VR can be
compared to CVE in three ways: multiple methods of communica-
tion, various interactive and collaborative experiences, and experi-
ences mediated by the agency of digital self (i.e., avatar).

Communication. In early CVEs, interactivity was mediated via
rich text-based interaction [10, 15], involving role-playing, adven-
ture, questing, and reenacting pop culture [31, 60]. Collaboration
was also facilitated in these spaces as they were seen as a more
efﬁcient means of communication in the workplace [17]. Similar
to social VR, this facet was attractive to users because even though
communication was mediated via text, it was real-time, unobtrusive,
multi-user, and exclusive [23]. However, two key differences should
be noted between early text-based CVEs and social VR. First, cur-
rent interactions in social VR platforms are not yet archivable as
these in early CVEs were [23]. Second, text-based CVE systems
limit the ability to convey and interpret rich social cues via verbal
(e.g., voice intonation) or nonverbal behavior (e.g., gestures, facial
expressions), while social VR signiﬁcantly promotes this ability.

Interaction and Collaboration. The nature of sociality in so-
cial VR very closely mimics early CVEs where users can be con-
nected, play, and work with one another while being physically
apart [18]. As time progressed, CVEs evolved to include multi-
ple means of communication speciﬁcally highlighting in-depth in-
terpersonal communication [3–5,36]. These early examples demon-
strate the nuances of CVEs when compared to face-to-face interac-
tion and modern commercial social VR, yet the majority of prior
scholarship was conducted in a controlled lab setting versus an open
collaborative environment like social VR.

As CVEs evolved to have a multi-player focus, different social
groups began to emerge. For example, groups in MMORPGs vary
in size but often have a common goal, enabling different types of
social interactivity between group members [47, 54]. Some groups
(often known as guilds) are highly organized, which promotes more

dynamic and intimate relationships between guild members [21, 22,
54]. Similar to social VR, the intimate relationships formed in these
virtual groups can lead to social activities unrelated to actual in-
game objectives, such as building substantial emotional bonds of
friendship, intimacy, affection, and romance [25, 28, 56].

Avatar-Mediated Experiences. Currently, facets like appear-
ance and identity in most CVEs, MMORPGs, and virtual worlds
are mediated via their embedded systems. As avatars become more
advanced and embodied, they may lead to more nuanced connec-
tions with the users who control them. For example, customizing
one’s avatar is commonly considered an activity in virtual worlds
[32, 61]. This activity is also seen in social VR [26, 27]. In par-
ticular, social VR creates a more natural avatar-body connection,
where the users’ body acts as the interface rather than a mouse or
keyboard. This connection may lead to more naturalistic experi-
mentation with different bodies as compared to experimenting in
virtual worlds [20, 24, 25].

In summary, social VR demonstrates both similarities and
uniqueness compared to traditional CVEs. This leads to an emerg-
ing research space on social VR about how these novel digital sys-
tems are shaping our online social lives.

3 CURRENT SOCIAL VR RESEARCH LANDSCAPE

There is a growing research agenda to explore social VR as an
emerging technology. Current studies have focused on design
strategies [33, 49, 65], communication and interaction modality
[7, 40, 43, 50, 53, 66], long-distance couples’ and children’s expe-
riences [41, 42, 67], exploration of self-representation [26, 27], ha-
rassment [13], and privacy [45].

3.1 Design Strategies

Early scholarship surrounding design strategies for social VR was
conducted by McVeigh et al. [49, 50]. In their works, McVeigh et
al. coined the term social VR and introduced the design strategies
surrounding this pro-social interaction in social VR. In particular,
McVeigh et al. highlighted three types of recommendations: (1)
leveraging ofﬂine modalities and interactivity, (2) self-governed so-
cial environments and safe onboarding, and (3) creating meaning-
ful connections with friends, inside and outside of the environment.
However, as these recommendations were not exhaustive, they did
not point towards future design directions for accessibility, mitigat-
ing unwanted interactions, and designing for different demograph-
ics (e.g., age).

Similarly, design strategies by Jones et al. [33] only focused on
the taxonomy of social VR design, which did not include solely
commercial social VR applications but rather a broader deﬁnition
of social VR as “a growing set of multi-user applications that enable
interactivity between head-mounted displays.” In this work, Jones
at al. Shed light on three core features of social VR: avatars, in-
teraction with others, and the environment. However, these facets
did not fully explain why the immersiveness of social VR made
these facets any different from prior work done in traditional vir-
tual worlds or comment on how they may inﬂuence interactivity in
social VR.

3.2 Communication and Interaction Modalities

One of the nuances of social VR is the interpretation of inter-
personal communication cues, which have been demonstrated to
mimic behavioral cues of the ofﬂine world [43,50,53,66]. McVeigh
and colleagues’ early work highlighted that the affordances of loco-
motion, spatial embodiment, and social mechanics were key modal-
ities for expressing sociality on social VR platforms [50]. Similar
work by Moustafa and Steed demonstrated that users perceived in-
teractions in social VR as identical to those in the ofﬂine world,
speciﬁcally relating to gestures and embodiment [53]. These stud-
ies demonstrated the distinct similarities of interpersonal communi-

cation between social VR and the ofﬂine world. Still, they did not
fully explain how or why users were using communication modal-
ities in social VR.In addition, Maloney et al. demonstrated that
social VR users used non-verbal communication modalities to com-
municate in a safer and more comfortable fashion [43]. This work
also highlighted some key interaction outcomes of using non-verbal
communication in social VR. Although this work sheds light on
how a particular subset of social VR users (e.g., marginalized users)
may take advantage of non-verbal communication, it did not clas-
sify in-depth all the different types of non-verbal communication
modalities such as facial control mentioned by Tanenbaum and col-
leagues [66].

3.3 Nuanced Activities & Engagement

Social VR inherently affords a broad range of social activities and
engaging experiences. Many are traditional activities that can be
found in virtual worlds and MMORPGs, such as game playing, en-
tertainment, and learning [40, 42]. However, one uniqueness of en-
gaging in social VR is re-experience ofﬂine actions, events, and
interactivity. For example, Zamanifard and Freeman highlighted
that long distance couples used social VR as a means to be con-
nected and replicate their ofﬂine activities so as to feel virtually
together [67]. Maloney et al. also highlighted that mundane of-
ﬂine activities such as dancing and sleeping were re-experienced in
social VR but in a new way [40]. Similar to Zamanifard and Free-
man’s work, the affordance of the body as the sole interface made
behaviors such as dancing more engaging in social VR and even
as a means to invite interactivity. Additionally, behaviors such as
sleeping demonstrate the distinct affordances of social VR over tra-
ditional virtual worlds and online experiences. In the same study,
Maloney et al.
found that users’ enjoyed a variety of activities
including social and mental improvement, immersive cultural ap-
preciation, and engaging in immersive events. More scholarship is
needed to conﬁrm these ﬁndings and extrapolate different immer-
sive activities.

Another set of activities in social VR are geared towards younger
users. For example, Maloney et al. described social VR as a
new experience for relationship building between different gener-
ations [41] and a new modality of building intimacy and stronger
emotional connections [42]. These works also highlighted the inter-
cultural exchange between younger users and adult users as an ev-
eryday activity. Therefore, activities in social VR have emerged
beyond gameplay and entertainment and expand to education, rela-
tionship building, and immersive speciﬁc behaviors (e.g., dancing
and sleeping).

3.4 Self-Presentation & Avatar

Another focus in social VR scholarship revolves around how
users choose to present themselves in social VR. Like traditional
MMORPGs and virtual worlds, social VR users opt for a variety
of choices in avatar self-representation. Yet recent works by Free-
man et al. [26, 27] highlight that users choose to represent them-
selves similarly to their physical selves or craft a self-presentation
based on the affordances and social atmosphere of the speciﬁc plat-
form. Therefore, these works explore a different aspect of selective
self-presentation that emphasizes consistency and involves an inter-
play of body, avatar, audience, and conscious personal choice. They
have also highlighted how such nuanced self-presentation in social
VR affects users’ understandings of self. For example, social VR
avatars allow for a more in-depth exploration of identities, particu-
larly by trans users. For them, this was an embodied approach of
exploring their non-traditional gender identity.

3.5 Harassment, Privacy, and Self-Disclosure

Similar to traditional virtual worlds, negative experiences such as
harassment and unwanted interactivity occur in social VR. For ex-

ample, a survey by Shriram and Schwartz highlighted that two out
of seven women and 21 out of 99 men reported that they had ex-
perienced harassment in social VR [62]. Work by Blackwell et
al. pointed out that feelings of presence, body movement, embodi-
ment, and voice chat could aggravate harassment [13]. However, it
should be noted that this study only explored harassment in Face-
book Spaces. More research on other social VR spaces is needed
to verify such ﬁndings. Additionally, Maloney et al. demonstrated
that marginalized users (e.g., younger users, non-English speakers,
LGBTQ, and women) are often subject to more harassment based
on their gender, sexuality, race, and age, with one instance of virtual
sexual assualt towards a minor [41–43].

Thus far, the area of privacy and self-disclosure in social VR
has also revealed how different users perceive and approach privacy
and self-disclosure in various ways [45]. In particular, Maloney et
al. described three patterns regarding self-disclosure in social VR:
(1) sharing information based on familiarity with friends or close
acquaintances; (2) preferring to remain anonymous when sharing
information; and (3) open to sharing information regardless of their
familiarity and anonymity. These ﬁndings demonstrate particular
trade-offs and conﬂicting points of view regarding privacy and self-
disclosure in social VR. Future directions for privacy consent and
privacy transparency are needed as the use of social VR continues
to grow.

4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS FROM PRIOR VR AND VIR-

TUAL WORLDS RESEARCH

Existing social VR literature has highlighted future areas of explo-
ration in this emerging research space. However, we express cau-
tions and urge researchers to draw ethical considerations from both
prior VR work [11,37,63,64] and work in traditional virtual worlds
as they conduct future social VR research [14, 29, 48]. These con-
siderations are two-folded; one focuses on VR and virtual worlds
as a research context and the other focuses on the safety of VR and
virtual worlds for consumer use.

4.1 Challenges for Conducting VR Research

As VR technology has become widely available and accessible,
challenges for conducting VR research are of growing concern.
Slater introduced two grand challenges for VR technology [63],
which focus on consumer well-being. The ﬁrst challenge recog-
nizes that VR will become a mass consumer product. Therefore,
these devices must be cheap, safe, and deliver compelling experi-
ences so that researchers should investigate their longitudinal im-
pacts on consumers. Second, barriers and challenges determined
by the ofﬂine-world physics may impact user experiences.

Regarding the safety and experimentation of users, Behr and col-
leagues insisted that motion sickness must be mitigated and that
researchers must assist their research participants to reorient to the
ofﬂine world [11]. To address the posed risks of motion sickness,
Behr et al. suggested that exposure time should be limited until
adaption to VR has occurred; tasks prone to sickness should be
avoided, and considerations for VR use should be on an individual
basis. Yet, these suggestions did not fully elaborate on other eth-
ical concerns or other risks posed by VR. Madary and Metzinger
built upon Behr et al.’s work and highlighted six potential issues
of VR research: (1) limits of experimental environments, (2) in-
formed consent with regard to the lasting psychological effects, (3)
risks associated with clinical applications of VR, (4) the possible
use of VR research for malicious purposes, (5) online research us-
ing VR, and (6) inherent limitations of a code of conduct for VR
research [37]. Madary and Metzinger also highlighted that ethical
VR experimentation must follow the principles of beneﬁcence and
non-maleﬁcence in VR. To address the concerns of VR and con-
cerns regarding VR research, Madary and Metzinger proposed the
following recommendations. First, all research must follow proce-

dures of informed consent and preserve participants’ autonomy and
trust. Second, be honest and clear with the scientiﬁc progress of
VR for medical treatment.

4.2 Concerns & Risks Towards Consumers in VR Re-

search

Prior VR scholarship has highlighted several risks and concerns to-
wards consumers [1, 37, 44, 64], which we summarize below.

One risk is the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral changes via
virtual embodiment. For example, embodied virtual avatars are ca-
pable of altering a person’s racial biases [8, 9, 38, 39, 57, 58]. An-
other risk is the over-use of VR content, especially regarding the
frequency and duration of using the device. Additionally, nega-
tive psychological effects may emerge when users leave VR (e.g.,
fantasy-based content).Users may feel less enthusiastic about ven-
turing back into the ofﬂine world and suffer depression or with-
drawals. As negative experiences may occur in VR, concerns sur-
rounding the legal and ethical responsibilities of VR also begin to
emerge as this is largely a grey area.

The area of privacy is also of growing concern of VR use, specif-
ically regarding the sharing of personal data with third parties. Sim-
ilar to other online technologies (e.g., social media), users will have
access to negative content and/or mature content that is readily
available.This is of concern as immature audiences such as chil-
dren and teens may have access to this content. Slater et al. even
highlighted that some if not all of these concerns may become more
apparent as VR moves towards higher levels of realism [64].

To address the above-mentioned risks, Slater and colleagues pro-
posed ﬁve principles for action, including: (1) Minimizing potential
harm of immoderate use, (2) minimizing content-induced risk, (3)
selecting levels of deception, (4) educating implementers and par-
ticipants, and (5) protecting personal information.

4.3 Challenges for Conducting Virtual Worlds Research

The research potential of virtual worlds have been a long-standing
interest of scientiﬁc communities [5, 6, 10, 16, 19, 21, 22, 29–31,
34, 35, 46, 48, 52, 54, 60]. Bainbridge explains that virtual worlds
have emerged as an interdisciplinary space [6].He also highlighted
emerging challenges for conducting research in these spaces. One
challenge lies in the psychological concerns about the attachment
with a users’ virtual avatar/character. Another challenge focuses on
ethics regarding human subjects research in virtual worlds.

Another set of considerations by Minocha et al. highlighted their
experiences and suggestions for conducting empirical research in
Second Life [52]. One of the research considerations mentioned is
communicating details of the experiment with said ethics commit-
tee andfocusing on how to achieve the privacy and dignity of obser-
vations in public and private spaces in virtual worlds. Another con-
sideration emphasized the recruitment of participants, where they
scouted potential participants within Second Life and sent them a
short, direct message informing them of the potential research op-
portunity. Minocha et al. also suggested that researchers should
be part of the online community for an extended period of time
before any formal data could be collected. The goal is to familiar-
ize themselves with the community before conducting any research.
Researchers were also recommended to develop their identity in the
virtual worlds in order to maintain participants’ trust and conﬁdence
in the project. Finally, Minocha et al. stated that researchers should
adhere to the platform-speciﬁc community standards of practice.

Grimes et al. also highlighted a few considerations when think-
ing of approaching research in virtual worlds [29]. One considera-
tion is that research on virtual worlds cannot be conducted exactly
as research in ofﬂine space. Another consideration is that respecting
individuals’ privacy and their avatars are essential to build and keep
participants’ trust. Finally, striving for transparency and respecting

the (social) norms of the virtual community should be essential to
any virtual world research.

In addition, several ethical and legal considerations regarding
concerns and risks towards consumers in virtual worlds research
have also been observed [30]. One example is the intellectual prop-
erty rights of user-generated content, such as objects created by
users. Additional concerns emerged regarding how ofﬂine laws ap-
ply to virtual worlds. For example, regarding privacy and safety, at
what point does misrepresentation (via avatar) become unethical or
criminal? What are the ramiﬁcations of the incorporation of copy-
righted music/video that occur in virtual worlds?

5 PROPOSED GUIDELINES FOR CONDUCTING RESEARCH

IN SOCIAL VR

Grounded in prior scholarship on challenges, concerns, and risks to-
ward VR and virtual world research and taking the nuances of social
VR technology into account, we propose the following guidelines
for conducting social VR research in an ethical way.

• The welfare and consent of the research participant(s)

should be prioritized in all social VR research.

Speciﬁcally, social VR research should adhere to beneﬁcence
and respect for persons [2, 55]. This requires maximizing po-
tential beneﬁts and minimizing possible harms and making
sure participants have autonomy and rights to make their own
decisions. Informed consent of risk must be given and only
should be waived if complying with platforms’ policies.

• Knowledge of said Social VR platform

Before embarking on a speciﬁc social VR to conduct research,
researchers should aim to spend ample time on the platform to
fully understands the nuances, novelty, and uniqueness of the
platform. As each platform has different norms, user-bases,
and affordances, such knowledge is necessary to ensure that
the researcher understand the underlying culture and social
atmosphere of the speciﬁc platform.

• Ensuring Privacy and Care of Participants

Participants’ anonymity and privacy must be kept safe as not
to reveal their identity unless given consent by participants.
This includes data such as gait, motion-tracked data, avatar ap-
pearance, username, and voice. For example, as scholarship
demonstrates, motion-tracked data can be identiﬁable up to
95% accuracy when other personally identiﬁable information
is redacted [51]. This demonstrates that researchers should
take measures to ensure the privacy of unique motion signa-
tures (e.g., biometric data, eye-tracking, brain-computer inter-
face) of participants. An additional level of care should be
noted when conducting research with users and particularly
younger users on these platforms, as users are not always en-
tirely aware of said risks posed. For example, when conduct-
ing research with adolescents seeking informed consent of the
younger user and their parent/guardian and only waiving con-
sent when minimal to no harm is possible.

• Compliance with Platforms’ Terms of Service.

Researchers must aim to comply with the speciﬁc social VR
platform’s terms of service when conducting research as this
may affect their research methodology. For example, if a re-
searcher aims to conceal or present a different identity in a
speciﬁc community, it may not comply with certain platforms’
community rules. For example, AltspaceVR’s terms of ser-
vice restricts creating “a false identity or impersonating an-
other person or entity in any way.” Similarly, RecRoom also
restricts “impersonate or misrepresent your afﬁliation with
any person or entity.” These platforms’ terms of service also

include procedures for conducting research. For example,
public spaces on some platform are fair ground for conduct-
ing research, whereas private rooms are not.

• Given the immense sociality of social VR, what are the long-
term psychological and behavioral effects of social VR immer-
sion?

• Respect for Community Norms

Most social VR platforms foster speciﬁc sub-communities
(e.g., users of a certain identity and/or interest).
Some
sub communities are formally recognized by said platforms
whereas others are created and managed by their respective
group members. Sub-communities may have their own rules,
social norms, and regulations. Researchers should respect
these communities and adhere to their community norms
Some sub-communities may
while conducting research.
also be cautious when researchers conduct research covertly
within their communities.

• Recruit diverse participants

Social VR attracts a broad range of users, each with different
demographics relating to race, gender, sexual orientation, abil-
ity, and age. Researchers should seek to diversify participants
as to best ensure that diverse viewpoints and perspectives are
taken into account. The current lack of representation was
demonstrated by Peck et al. who showed that female partici-
pants are signiﬁcantly underrepresented in VR research [59].

We acknowledge that these guidelines are neither complete nor
exhaustive but aim to lead to open conversions and reﬂections. We
also note that the uniqueness of social VR may continue to lead
to new concerns and emerging guidelines that are currently not
included in this paper. For example, as advances in VR technol-
ogy further enable photo-realistic telepresence, what considerations
should be made for participants as social experiences in VR become
indistinguishable from the ofﬂine world? These concerns, therefore,
point to unexplored areas and emerging questions for social VR re-
search, which we discuss in the next section.

6 CALL TO ACTION FOR SOCIAL VR RESEARCHERS

Our guidelines for conducting social VR research in an ethical way
also highlights the need to further investigate unexplored or un-
derstudied areas in social VR research. In this section, we point
researchers towards such areas. These emerging questions are
grounded in research considerations in prior social VR scholarship
surrounding social VR design, self-presentation, safety, well-being,
immersive experiences, and privacy,

• What design considerations should be made to help platforms
maintain intimate communication and still grow their user
base?

• What does the design of social VR platforms lend itself to?
Should social VR mimic the ofﬂine world or be a balance of
both the ofﬂine and online world?

• What are the considerations for designing a social environ-

ment inclusively for marginalized groups of all kinds?

• How can bias (e.g., gender/racial), body dysmorphia, and
other concerns of self-identity be mitigated in social VR?

• How do we help protect personal space and other consider-
ations of psychological and physical vulnerability in social
VR?

• How can you validate the identity of another person in social

VR without violating their privacy?

• What are the legal considerations and ramiﬁcations regarding
content, interactivity, misbehavior, and privacy in social VR?

• What information is considered biometric data in social VR,
and what types of information is not biometric but can still be
identiﬁable?

7 CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we call attention to commercial social VR, a popular
online digital space where users socialize via HMDs in immersive
virtual worlds. These spaces resemble traditional 2D virtual worlds
where users engage in interactive activities and are represented via
avatars. Yet, social VR affords facets that traditional 3D virtual ex-
periences do not offer, such as full/partial body tracked avatars and
360-degree immersive content. Despite the increasing popularity
of social VR, research in this area is still emerging. Therefore, in
this paper, we provide a summary of social VR scholarship relat-
ing to design strategies, communication and interaction modalities,
nuanced activities and self-presentation, harassment, privacy, and
self-disclosure. Additionally, we provide ethical guidelines on how
to conduct research in this space and point the VR community to-
wards unexplored areas of social VR. We hope that our summary,
guidelines, and research directions motivate and inform future di-
rections for designing more safer, transparent, and fulﬁlling social
VR experiences.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Adams, A. Bah, C. Barwulor, N. Musaby, K. Pitkin, and E. M. Red-
miles. Ethics emerging: the story of privacy and security perceptions
In Fourteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and
in virtual reality.
Security ({SOUPS} 2018), pp. 427–442, 2018.

[2] W. M. Association et al. World medical association declaration of
helsinki. ethical principles for medical research involving human sub-
jects. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 79(4):373, 2001.
[3] J. N. Bailenson, A. C. Beall, J. Loomis, J. Blascovich, and M. Turk.
Transformed social interaction: Decoupling representation from be-
havior and form in collaborative virtual environments. Presence: Tele-
operators & Virtual Environments, 13(4):428–441, 2004.

[4] J. N. Bailenson, J. Blascovich, A. C. Beall, and J. M. Loomis. Inter-
personal distance in immersive virtual environments. Personality and
social psychology bulletin, 29(7):819–833, 2003.

[5] J. N. Bailenson and N. Yee. Digital chameleons: Automatic assimila-
tion of nonverbal gestures in immersive virtual environments. Psycho-
logical science, 16(10):814–819, 2005.

[6] W. S. Bainbridge. The scientiﬁc research potential of virtual worlds.

science, 317(5837):472–476, 2007.

[7] S. Baker, R. M. Kelly, J. Waycott, R. Carrasco, T. Hoang, F. Batchelor,
E. Ozanne, B. Dow, J. Warburton, and F. Vetere. Interrogating social
virtual reality as a communication medium for older adults. Proceed-
ings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–24,
2019.

[8] D. Banakou, R. Groten, and M. Slater.

Illusory ownership of a vir-
tual child body causes overestimation of object sizes and implicit at-
titude changes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 110(31):12846–51, 2013. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1306779110

[9] D. Banakou, P. D. Hanumanthu, and M. Slater. Virtual embodiment
of white people in a black virtual body leads to a sustained reduction
in their implicit racial bias. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 10:601,
2016.

[10] R. A. Bartle. Designing virtual worlds. New Riders, 2004.
[11] K.-M. Behr, A. Nosper, C. Klimmt, and T. Hartmann. Some practical
considerations of ethical issues in vr research. Presence, 14(6):668–
676, 2005.

[12] S. Benford, J. Bowers, L. E. Fahl´en, C. Greenhalgh, and D. Snow-
don. User embodiment in collaborative virtual environments. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 242–249, 1995.

[13] L. Blackwell, N. Ellison, N. Elliott-Deﬂo, and R. Schwartz. Ha-
rassment in social virtual reality: Challenges for platform gover-
nance. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
3(CSCW):1–25, 2019.

[14] T. Boellstorff, B. Nardi, C. Pearce, and T. L. Taylor. Ethnography and
virtual worlds: A handbook of method. Princeton University Press,
2012.

[15] A. Bruckman. Programming for fun: Muds as a context for collabora-

tive learning. 1994.

[16] A. S. Bruckman. MOOSE crossing: Construction, community and
learning in a networked virtual world for kids. PhD thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 1997.

[17] E. F. Churchill and S. Bly. Virtual environments at work: ongoing use
of muds in the workplace. In ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering
Notes, vol. 24, pp. 99–108. ACM, 1999.

[18] E. F. Churchill, D. N. Snowdon, and A. J. Munro. Collaborative vir-
tual environments: digital places and spaces for interaction. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2012.

[19] N. Di Blas and C. Poggi. Can ict support inclusion? evidence from
multi-user edutainment experiences based on 3d worlds. In Proceed-
ings of the 7th international conference on Interaction design and chil-
dren, pp. 97–100, 2008.

[20] N. Ducheneaut, M.-H. Wen, N. Yee, and G. Wadley. Body and mind: a
study of avatar personalization in three virtual worlds. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp.
1151–1160. ACM, 2009.

[21] N. Ducheneaut, N. Yee, E. Nickell, and R. J. Moore. Alone together?:
exploring the social dynamics of massively multiplayer online games.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in com-
puting systems, pp. 407–416. ACM, 2006.

[22] N. Ducheneaut, N. Yee, E. Nickell, and R. J. Moore. The life and
death of online gaming communities: a look at guilds in world of
warcraft. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems, pp. 839–848. ACM, 2007.

[23] R. Evard. Collaborative networked communication: Muds as systems

tools. In LISA, 1993.

[24] G. Freeman, J. Bardzell, and S. Bardzell. Revisiting computer-
mediated intimacy: In-game marriage and dyadic gameplay in audi-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 4325–4336. ACM, 2016.

[25] G. Freeman, J. Bardzell, S. Bardzell, and S. C. Herring. Simulating
marriage: Gender roles and emerging intimacy in an online game. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Co-
operative Work & Social Computing, pp. 1191–1200. ACM, 2015.
[26] G. Freeman and D. Maloney. Body, avatar, and me: The presenta-
tion and perception of self in social virtual reality. Proc. ACM Hum.-
Comput. Interact. (CSCW), 2020.

[27] G. Freeman, S. Zamanifard, D. Maloney, and A. Adkins. My body,
my avatar: How people perceive their avatars in social virtual reality.
In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 1–8, 2020.

[28] G. Z. Freeman, J. Bardzell, and S. Bardzell. Intimate experiences in
virtual worlds: The interplay among hyperpersonal communication,
avatar-based systems, and experiential drives. IConference 2016 Pro-
ceedings, 2016.

[29] J. M. Grimes, K. R. Fleischman, and P. T. Jaeger. Virtual guinea pigs:
Ethical implications of human subjects research in virtual worlds. In-
ternational Journal of Internet Research Ethics, 2(1):38–56, 2009.

[30] A. Hendaoui, M. Limayem, and C. W. Thompson. 3d social virtual
IEEE internet computing,

worlds: research issues and challenges.
12(1):88–92, 2008.

[31] K. Hoon, J. Park, K. Yul, H. Moon, and H. Chun. E-lifestyle and
Iris Marketing Review, 15(2):71–72,

motives to use online games.
2002.

[32] S. Huh and D. Williams. Dude looks like a lady: Gender swapping in
an online game. In Online worlds: Convergence of the real and the

virtual, pp. 161–174. Springer, 2010.

[33] M. Jonas, S. Said, D. Yu, C. Aiello, N. Furlo, and D. Zytko. Towards
In Extended Abstracts
a taxonomy of social vr application design.
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play
Companion Extended Abstracts, pp. 437–444. ACM, 2019.

[34] Y. Kafai, D. A. Fields, M. T. Giang, N. Fefferman, J. Sun, D. Kunka,
and J. Wong. Designing for massive engagement in a tween com-
munity: Participation, prevention, and philanthropy in a virtual epi-
demic. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design
and Children, pp. 365–370, 2017.

[35] J. L. Kolodner, T. Said, K. Wright, and A. Pallant. Drawn into sci-
In Proceedings of the 2017

ence through authentic virtual practice.
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, pp. 385–391, 2017.

[36] E. A. Konijn, S. Utz, M. Tanis, and S. B. Barnes. Mediated interper-

sonal communication. Routledge, 2008.

[37] M. Madary and T. K. Metzinger. Real virtuality: a code of ethical con-
duct. recommendations for good scientiﬁc practice and the consumers
of vr-technology. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:3, 2016.

[38] L. Maister, N. Sebanz, G. Knoblich, and M. Tsakiris. Experiencing
ownership over a dark-skinned body reduces implicit racial bias. Cog-
nition, 128(2):170–178, 2013.

[39] L. Maister, M. Slater, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, and M. Tsakiris. Chang-
ing bodies changes minds: owning another body affects social cogni-
tion. Trends in cognitive sciences, 19(1):6–12, 2015.

[40] D. Maloney and G. Freeman. Falling asleep together: What makes
activities in social virtual reality meaningful to users. In Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play,
2020.

[41] D. Maloney, G. Freeman, and A. Robb. It is complicated: Interacting
with children in social virtual reality. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Vir-
tual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW),
pp. 343–347. IEEE, 2020.

[42] D. Maloney, G. Freeman, and A. Robb. A virtual space for all: Ex-
ploring children’s experience in social virtual reality. In Proceedings
of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play,
2020.

[43] D. Maloney, G. Freeman, and D. Y. Wohn.

”talking without a
voice”: Understanding non-verbal communication in social virtual
reality. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
CSCW, 2020.

[44] D. Maloney, S. Rajasabeson, A. Moore, J. Caldwell, J. Archer, and
A. Robb. Ethical concerns of the use of virtual avatars in consumer
In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D
entertainment.
User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1489–1492. IEEE, 2019.

[45] D. Maloney, Z. Samaneh, and G. Freeman. Anonymity vs familiarity:
Self-disclosure and privacy in social virtual reality. In 26th ACM Sym-
posium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST, 2020e.

[46] J. Marsh. Young children’s play in online virtual worlds. Journal of

early childhood research, 8(1):23–39, 2010.

[47] G. McEwan, C. Gutwin, R. L. Mandryk, and L. Nacke. I’m just here
to play games: social dynamics and sociality in an online game site.
In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, pp. 549–558. ACM, 2012.

[48] H. A. McKee and J. E. Porter. Playing a good game: Ethical issues
International Journal of

in researching mmogs and virtual worlds.
Internet Research Ethics, 2 (1), pp. 5–37, 2009.

[49] J. McVeigh-Schultz, A. Kolesnichenko, and K. Isbister. Shaping pro-
social interaction in vr: An emerging design framework. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 1–12, 2019.

[50] J. McVeigh-Schultz, E. M´arquez Segura, N. Merrill, and K. Isbister.
What’s it mean to” be social” in vr? mapping the social vr design
In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference Companion
ecology.
Publication on Designing Interactive Systems, pp. 289–294, 2018.
[51] M. R. Miller, F. Herrera, H. Jun, J. A. Landay, and J. N. Bailenson.
Personal identiﬁability of user tracking data during observation of 360-
degree vr video. Scientiﬁc Reports, 10(1):1–10, 2020.

[52] S. Minocha, M. Tran, and A. Reeves. Conducting empirical research
in virtual worlds: experiences from two projects in second life. Jour-
nal of virtual worlds research, 3(1):3–21, 2010.

[53] F. Moustafa and A. Steed. A longitudinal study of small group in-
In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
teraction in social virtual reality.
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, p. 22. ACM,
2018.

[54] B. Nardi and J. Harris. Strangers and friends: Collaborative play in
world of warcraft. In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary con-
ference on Computer supported cooperative work, pp. 149–158, 2006.
[55] M. National Commission for the Proptection of Human Subjects of
Biomedicaland Behavioral Research, Bethesda. The Belmont report:
Ethical principles and guidelines for the protection of human subjects
of research. Superintendent of Documents, 1978.

[56] T. Pace, S. Bardzell, and J. Bardzell. The rogue in the lovely black
dress: intimacy in world of warcraft. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 233–242,
2010.

[57] T. C. Peck, M. Doan, K. A. Bourne, and J. J. Good. The effect
of gender body-swap illusions on working memory and stereotype
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
threat.
24(4):1604–1612, 2018.

[58] T. C. Peck, S. Seinfeld, S. M. Aglioti, and M. Slater. Putting yourself
in the skin of a black avatar reduces implicit racial bias. Consciousness
and cognition, 22(3):779–787, 2013.

[59] T. C. Peck, L. E. Sockol, and S. M. Hancock. Mind the gap: The un-
derrepresentation of female participants and authors in virtual reality
research. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics, 26(5):1945–1954, 2020.

[60] J. Sanchez. A social history of virtual worlds. Library Technology

Reports, 45(2):9–13, 2009.

[61] R. Schroeder. The social life of avatars: Presence and interaction
in shared virtual environments. Springer Science & Business Media,
2012.

[62] K. Shriram and R. Schwartz. All are welcome: Using vr ethnography
to explore harassment behavior in immersive social virtual reality. In
2017 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 225–226. IEEE, 2017.

[63] M. Slater. Grand challenges in virtual environments. Frontiers in

Robotics and AI, 1:3, 2014.

[64] M. Slater, C. Gonzalez-Liencres, P. Haggard, C. Vinkers, R. Gregory-
Clarke, S. Jelley, Z. Watson, G. Breen, R. Schwarz, W. Steptoe, et al.
The ethics of realism in virtual and augmented reality. Frontiers in
Virtual Reality, 1:1, 2020.

[65] M. Sra, A. Mottelson, and P. Maes. Your place and mine: Designing
a shared vr experience for remotely located users. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference, pp. 85–97. ACM,
2018.

[66] T. J. Tanenbaum, N. Hartoonian, and J. Bryan.

” how do i make
this thing smile?” an inventory of expressive nonverbal communica-
tion in commercial social virtual reality platforms. In Proceedings of
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1–13, 2020.

[67] S. Zamanifard and G. Freeman. ” the togetherness that we crave” expe-
riencing social vr in long distance relationships. In Conference Com-
panion Publication of the 2019 on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work and Social Computing, pp. 438–442, 2019.

