1
2
0
2

r
p
A
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
0
1
2
0
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned from
Organizing a Transdisciplinary VR Hackathon

WIESŁAW KOPEĆ, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology
KRZYSZTOF KALINOWSKI, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology
MONIKA KORNACKA, SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities
KINGA H. SKORUPSKA, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology
JULIA PALUCH, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology
ANNA JASKULSKA, KOBO Association
GRZEGORZ POCHWATKO, Institute of Psychology Polish Academy of Sciences
JAKUB FILIP MOZARYN, Warsaw University of Technology
PAWEŁ KOBYLIŃSKI, National Information Processing Institute
PIOTR GAGO, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology

Fig. 1. Participants and team at the PJAIT Innovative Technologies Research Centre in Bytom, Poland

In this article we report a case study of a Language Learning Bauhaus VR hackathon with Goethe Institute.
It was organized as an educational and research project to tap into the dynamics of transdisciplinary teams
challenged with a specific requirement. In our case, it was to build a Bauhaus-themed German Language
Learning VR App. We constructed this experiment to simulate how representatives of different disciplines may
work together towards a very specific purpose under time pressure. So, each participating team consisted of
members of various expert-fields: software development (Unity or Unreal), design, psychology and linguistics.
The results of this study cast light on the recommended cycle of design thinking and customer-centered design
in VR. Especially in interdisciplinary rapid prototyping conditions, where stakeholders initially do not share
competences. They also showcase educational benefits of working in transdisciplinary environments. This

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).

CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8095-9/21/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3443432

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Kopeć et al.

study, combined with our previous work on human factors in rapid software development and co-design,
including hackathon dynamics, allowed us to formulate recommendations for organizing content creation VR
hackathons for specific purposes. We also provide guidelines on how to prepare the participants to work in
rapid prototyping VR environments and benefit from such experiences in the long term.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; HCI design and evaluation methods;
Empirical studies in HCI .

Additional Key Words and Phrases: hackathon, language learning, teamwork, VR, participatory design

ACM Reference Format:
Wiesław Kopeć, Krzysztof Kalinowski, Monika Kornacka, Kinga H. Skorupska, Julia Paluch, Anna Jaskulska,
Grzegorz Pochwatko, Jakub Filip Mozaryn, Paweł Kobyliński, and Piotr Gago. 2021. VR Hackathon with
Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned from Organizing a Transdisciplinary VR Hackathon. In CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts), May 8–13, 2021,
Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3443432

1 INTRODUCTION
Team collaboration of experts in multiple fields is necessary to break new ground in multiple
areas of industry and research while working at the intersection of ICT, HCI and other disciplines.
Yet, engaging a team of experts in projects for specific purposes tends to be resource-intensive
and time-consuming. Even more so if the projects involve VR, where low-budget prototyping
is quite difficult and lengthy, especially when co-designing with stakeholders who have little
prior experience with VR. For this reason, it is important to explore collaboration schemes which
not only cut the cots and allow for low fidelity VR prototyping of content to increase creativity,
but also engage all stakeholders in the design process. This need is closer to "design for user
empowerment", as proposed by Ladner [10] than the traditional "human centered design", which
uses tools approximating the needs of the real target group rather than direct involvement of
stakeholders in the design process. To see how representatives of different disciplines may work
together towards a very specific purpose under time pressure in the context of VR, we have
organized an educational and research project in the form of a VR hackathon. This study allowed
us to evaluate our approach to VR hackathons as a rapid prototyping tool for building VR solutions
for specific purposes. It also showcased the dynamics of work in transdisciplinary teams consisting
of stakeholders representing different disciplines, in our case Linguistics, Design, Psychology and
VR tech. What follows is a case study of a Language Learning Bauhaus VR hackathon with Goethe
Institute where the interdisciplinary teams were challenged with a specific requirement: to build a
Bauhaus-themed German Language Learning VR Application.

2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Hackathons are hacking marathons, usually held over 24 hours, where individuals or teams work
towards a solution to a presented problem, usually in the field of software engineering. There are
marked benefits of hackathon participation for students [12], especially in STEM disciplines and
when it comes to informal learning [7]. This format is increasingly popular and more widespread,
with multiple researchers gathering best practices [11] and insights, for example, into the long-term
effects of hackathons on innovation [4]. Their variety can be seen in a classification developed by
Briscoe in 2014 [1] that takes into account the themes and focus of different types of hackathons.
The same review points out how women are often underrepresented in hackathons, but those teams
which include them, or other diverse groups suffer from lower performance [5] possibly owing to
time constraints and unconscious biases due to snap judgments of categorizing individuals in the
team. To mitigate this problem Flippova et al. [6] suggests brainstorming at the start of the event,

2

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Fig. 2. A summary of key points related to the theme of the VR Hackathon - the Bauhaus school of art

and Kopeć et al. suggests engaging in the empowerment stage [9]. Overall, hackathons are very
valuable learning experiences, which may inspire creators to adapt multiple areas of civil society
(education, government or market economy) to this new reality, as noticed by Prieto et al.[13] in
their account of taking part in an MIT VR Hackathon.

3 VR HACKATHON
We constructed this experiment as a VR Hackathon case study, a very effective form of exploratory
qualitative research [14], which is particularly effective to study phenomena which are rather
difficult to be examined separately from the context, as postulated by Yin [16]. We used this
approach to simulate how representatives of different disciplines may work together towards a
very specific purpose under time pressure in rapid prototyping conditions in the context of VR.

3.1 Key information
3.1.1 The Specific Requirement. The goal of the hackathon was to prototype a Bauhaus-themed
German Language Learning VR App.

The target group of the app were to be young adults, whose linguistic competence is around
A2-B1 according to Common European Reference Levels and who are open to new experiences
in VR, as well as curious about the German culture. This was done in the context of a bigger goal
to make learning German more attractive to young people who may want to study or work in
the German language. Goethe Institute seeks to intertwine German learning with Virtual and
Augmented reality by engaging with tech-savvy partners and forming innovative cooperation
schemes. These could pave the way for more modern and engaging ways of learning the German
language.

3.1.2 Theme. The theme was connected to the celebration of the 100th founding anniversary of
the Bauhaus in 2019. 1 Based on the lectures by Michael Fleischer some key points were given to
clarify the ideas behind this movement can be seen in Figure 2. In short, the Bauhaus was a German
art school of fine arts and crafts whose ideas heavily influenced modern art and design practice

1The centenary celebrations were organized under the motto "Thinking the World Anew" which resonates very well with
VR. More on The Bauhaus can be found here: https://www.bauhaus100.com/the-bauhaus/

3

CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Kopeć et al.

and education. Bauhaus was also chosen because of its approach to experimenting in education,
open-mindedness to new methods and the idea that form follows function; all of these ideas were
well-aligned with the goal of this VR hackathon.

3.1.3 Research Tools. We have invited multiple experts to act not only as mentors and members
of the jury, but also to observe the dynamics of the team formation, collaboration, work and the
quality of the final products. Therefore, the key tool in this case, as most of our data is qualitative,
was participatory observation and analysis.

3.2 Organization
3.2.1 Recruitment and Timeline. The Acknowledgments section describes how cooperation was
initiated, as it warrants special thanks. Proper preparations for the Hackathon started with a joint
recruitment scheme: students of different faculties from several universities with diverse profiles
(technology and social sciences) were invited to apply through an application form at the Goethe
Institute website. The recruitment call was followed by a kick-off meeting, which explained the
objective, theme and principles of the hackathon, presented attractions (such as the tour of the
Hackathon venue and access to the variety of top-notch solutions across the VR HMD board) and
announced the awards: the possibility to present the outcomes to the greater audience at a special
event and an all-inclusive trip to Berlin to present the winning VR app.

The organizational timeline of the hackathon and related events was as follows:

(1) The kick-off meeting: 15.11.2019
(2) The hackathon: 29.11. – 1.12.2019
(3) Follow-up meetings and consultations: scheduled after the hackathon and before forthcoming

presentations (Winter 2019/2020)

(4) Presentation of winners 1–3 in the context of the Themenraum programme: March 2020
(5) Participation of winners in an international VR-Training at Goethe-Institut Berlin: April 2020

3.2.2 Venue, Technology and Supplies. Our venue was an Innovative Technologies Research Centre
which houses the Human Motion Lab, the Human Seeing Lab, The Human Facial Modelling Lab
as well as Human Microexpression Lab and Wearable Technologies Lab. Part of the appeal of
the hackathon was the possibility to get a quick tour of the labs on day 1, before the start of the
hackathon. During the core part of the contest, 2 of 5 VR kits were situated in the main event
hall at opposite corners; therefore, two of five teams were stationed there, enabling them to work
together and avoid interfering with each other in both technical and organizational matters. The
other three teams were located in adjacent rooms, that also enabled a non-interfering environment
i.e. in terms of non-overlapping tracking systems. At the main hall a variety of different solutions
were at teams’ disposal: from affordable cardboard, through standalone mobile devices like Oculus
Go and Quest, up to top-notch Varjo VR-1 with UHD display. Nevertheless, during the main part
of the hackathon each team was provided an with individual comparable VR development set in
non-blocking configuration, that comprised of wired HMD (HTC Pro or Oculus Rift class, with
standard base stations and controllers ) hooked up to custom workstation based on the latest AMD
Ryzen 7 class CPU platform coupled with Nvidia GeForce RTX 2080 class GPUs.

3.2.3 Experts’ Support. The teams were supported by experts from the participating institutions and
universities who were there on site to provide mentoring and guidance. The guidance ranged from
technical expertise on Unity or Unreal, through psychology, teaching and learning methodology
and art guidance on the key principles of Bauhaus. The teams participated in initial training on
these topics, but later they could consult the experts as needed.

4

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Fig. 3. Overview of the hackathon events.

3.3 Collaboration and Outputs
3.3.1 Team formation and composition. An important part of enabling better team collaboration
was a one-hour integration workshop. During the workshop, warm-up and ice-breaking were
merged with practical exercises providing basic psychoeducation and to participants and enhancing
their communication skills in order to empower interdisciplinary cooperation. This main aim was
achieved through:

(1) underlining the importance of communication, including the adjustment of the message to

the audience coming from a different scientific background; [3]

(2) working out an appropriate amount of message content enhancing memorization and taking

into account cognitive functions efficiency and environmental distractors; [8]
(3) group roles while solving a complex problem requiring creative thinking and [2]
(4) enhancing both group and individual creativity. [15]

Two conducted exercises addressed all four points mentioned above. 2 In the first exercise, addressing
1 and 2, participants had to choose a Dixit card illustrating their expectations about the hackathon
and to describe it briefly on a post-it. With the principle of speed dating, they had one minute to
present the card to another participant, then exchange each other’s cards and move on to the next
participant. At the end of the exercise, each participant described the last received card and the
group compared the description with the original one written down on the post-it. In the second
exercise, addressing 3 and 4, participants were divided into 6 groups, each group had to solve a
complex tangram-like puzzle requiring creative thinking (elements had to be turned inside out in
order to complete the puzzle). The exercises were discussed from the perspective of communication,
memory and executive functioning, and the sum-up was focused on group roles and individual and
group creativity.

2This, and the whole event, is well-illustrated in our hackathon summary video, which is available on YouTube, at the
XRLab PJAIT channel here: https://youtu.be/uZhgHDv2xPk

5

CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Kopeć et al.

Fig. 4. Left: Some teams started with paper prototyping and creating mash-ups to come up with the idea for
their VR app. This allowed all team members to contribute equally from the start. [Team 4]. Right: Interaction
concept from the final presentation [Team 2]

The next day there was an opportunity to rethink the strategy of team formation and composition
during the second part of empowerment workshops in the morning, which also brought back themes
discussed during the kickoff meeting two weeks prior. After the introduction of the outline of
the competition and foundations of effective transdiciplinary teamwork, participants had another
opportunity to get to know each other before final team formation. Every participant had to
present publicly their own motivation, expectations, background and expertise to provide equal
distribution of information among participants. They also put on the sticky notes their names with
key information, i.e. skills or area of expertise, important from the viewpoint of transdisciplinary
team composition. The groups of participants included: software developers (with specialization:
Unity/Unreal/other), designers (with optional details on modeling/animation/other), psychology
and language. This procedure facilitated the process of finalizing team formation and the following
registration session. As a result five transdiscyplinary teams were composed, each of which consisted
of members of various expert-fields: software development (Unity or Unreal), design, psychology
and linguistics.

Judging Criteria. The Jury consisted of 13 experts from various institutions, including the
3.3.2
Goethe Institute, technical universities and innovation-driven NGOs, each of whom had 9 points
to award, 3 in each category: innovation, functionality, feasibility. In total, 117 points were
awarded. The assessment relied on jury members’ expert knowledge and experience applied to
those three crucial dimensions; special attention was given to the functions required in the process
of learning languages and project viability. Each team was granted freedom in regard to their
willingness to further work on their project, but the important criterion was whether the project
could be developed from the hackathon hi-fidelity prototype into a fully-fledged app with the
support of the organizers. As a result, we ended up with a comprehensive, multidimensional
assessment of the projects. If the result did not satisfy the Goethe Institute representatives they
had the right to change the ranking of the projects (which was not used).

3.3.3 Projects. In this subsection we present the projects in order of teams’ registration number.

• Team 1 - Follow the Path

The team created a labyrinth with multiple rooms where the users could engage with various
language learning games at an easy level; to proceed to the next room you had to receive a key
after solving the puzzle correctly. The color scheme followed the key colours of Bauhaus and the
aesthetics were aligned with its principles. The project was the most robust and functional, and
it had great potential for further development. The team got second place, with 28 points, 8 for
innovation, 11 for functionality and 9 for feasibility.

6

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Fig. 5. Left: In this room the users could throw items into the right basket depending on the words they
heard to indicate which article (der, die or das) the word takes. [Team 1] Right: One of the rooms allowing
users to test their reading skills, the idea was to use voice recognition using Azure Speech to Text, Amazon
Transcribe and Amazon Comprehend to evaluate the user’s performance. [Team 1]

Fig. 6. Left: The users had to put furniture together for it to appear in their environment. Right: The workshop
area where the users would put the furniture together after hearing instructions in German. [Team 4]

• Team 2 - Travel

The users could walk around in Street View, and the project assumed that they could stop by
any hotspots or attractions, such as museums and restaurants and interact with them. The project
was at an early concept stage, but it received recognition due to the idea of using the language in a
natural setting. However, it was not very functional, as only some UI elements were present in VR
together with Google Street View that one could explore, and there was not much interactivity. The
team got third place, with 25 points, 8 for innovation, 6 for functionality and 11 for feasibility.

• Team 3 - Escape German

The project consisted of an Escape Room in VR where the users were to solve puzzles in German
to find clues that would help them to leave the room. However, the team did not have many ideas
of how to create German language puzzles that could help learning and did not implement them in
VR. The team got fifth place, with 3 points, 2 for innovation, 1 for functionality and 0 for feasibility.

• Team 4 - Motion Craft

The user appears in an environment with Bauhaus-style furniture outlines, and for the furniture
to appear they have to put them together in a workshop area following audio instructions in
German. The team prototyped one room where the users could put together a piece of furniture.
The idea to scale it was to add more workshops with different furniture and objects, so the whole
project seemed to be easily expandable based on a concept of subsequent rooms. The project was
well-received in terms of the linguistic element because of the learning-by-doing factor. Overall
the team got first place, with 39 points, 15 for innovation, 16 for functionality and 8 for feasibility.

7

CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Kopeć et al.

• Team 5 - Bauhaus Jazz

The user entered a Bauhaus-style room with key information about the Bauhaus movement on
a wall. The user was to throw a ball, a cube or a cone at different things in the room depending
on the article they take (der, die or das). If the user threw correctly they got a point so the game
was competitive as it allowed for performance comparisons. The project was well-made and quite
finished, however, the linguistic element was not prominent and the team member responsible for
the language part had very little to do, and finally withdrew from teamwork due to this. The team
got fourth place, with 22 points, 6 for innovation, 5 for functionality and 11 for feasibility.

3.3.4 Recognition and Rewards. The winning projects continued to be developed under the tutorage
of the experts taking part in the hackathon. During the first quarter of 2020, the teams started intense
work on porting the whole solution into Unity, predominantly having in mind further expansion of
the project by other teams and the capability of coupling the project with the psychophysiological
framework for further in-depth research in terms of user interaction, reception and learning
efficiency compared to other methods. Ultimately, the winners were to participate in a special VR
summit and training event at Goethe-Institut Berlin and show off their projects; however, the event
was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

4 DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED

4.1 Preparation
The organizers should have provided more comprehensive support concerning modern language
teaching and learning methodology, especially that Goethe and DAAD were available to aid the
process, and that, they as the clients/partners, did not want a traditional approach to language
learning to appear in the developed VR applications. In retrospect, the hackathon participants
specializing in teaching methodology and language learning would also have benefited from a
workshop on this topic organized by Goethe and DAAD, as they did not share the same views on
what constitutes modern language-learning methodology as the judges/clients. An example of a
successful theme introduction is the presentation of Bauhaus concepts of art and design. A few
general slides and broad strokes on the history of this art school and its principles together with a
link to a website that collected information about Bauhaus were sufficient to see some references
to Bauhaus in each project.

4.2 Execution
Useful observations and insights have been gained over the execution of the case study. First,
initially there were 6 teams, but the last team quickly joined team number 4, forming a larger
team that ultimately won the competition. Another important fact relates to the team diversity
and composition. Most of the teams followed the guidelines conveyed during workshops and
empowerment sessions and formed very diverse teams in terms of expertise as well as gender
balance. In contrast, one of the teams (5) remained unbalanced till the end. Although its members
were highly skilled in terms of designing and coding, they lacked both: gender balance and expertise
coverage, with only one expert (although in a double role: as a psychologist and linguist).

4.3 Impact and Afterthoughts

Integration and Empowerment. We have noticed marked benefits of working in transdis-
4.3.1
ciplinary environments for the members of each team, such as quick knowledge acquisition on
unfamiliar topics, learning to work with ambiguity and to collaborate with representatives of dif-
ferent disciplines. However, despite the requirement that the team includes representatives of each
of the four expert areas collaborating and exchanging expertise, some team members seemed to

8

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

engage to a lesser extent. Having that in mind in the subsequent follow-up steps after the hackathon
we put more emphasis on strengthening this area by organizing special empowerment sessions
with experts from the Goethe Institute and in-depth language workshops. Moreover, the fact that
during this hackathon paper prototyping stage was very short and consisted of brainstorming
during idea development without much actual drawing on paper aided in making the applications
more feasible, and it made it more motivating for the participants to continue work on them after
the hackathon. This is in line with the assumptions of project-based learning, where practical
application of knowledge speeds up the learning process. It is very important also that there was
always a sight of the end goal: the presentation of the apps in Berlin, so that the participants knew
that their work will not be shelved.

4.3.2 Rapid Design Cycle for VR and Continuing Projects. The format of the hackathon necessitates
making quick design decisions and going from ideas, through prototypes towards working solutions
at a very fast pace. On the other hand, without proper empowerment some participants of the team
may miss their chance to veto an idea, as they have little prior experience with the XR solutions’
continuum. However, because the solutions in VR may be prototyped quite quickly with ready
assets, even the team members who had little prior experience can start to see what the end goal is
and help with shaping it as VR testers.

Overall, we believe that prototyping in VR, rather than on paper/with clay may be more effective.
First, interaction in VR is very intuitive and the users/testers can quickly grasp the concepts which
they may have otherwise have trouble imagining. Jumping straight to prototyping in VR, without
creating outside mock-ups which function on a metaphorical level, helps people who do not share
the same understanding of the metaphor contribute valuable insights early.

Second, prototyping applications which are usable encourages the teams to continue their work
after the hackathon. This, of course, necessitates that in every VR hackathon team there is at least
one VR developer who can create such prototypes.

4.3.3 Our Recommendations.

(1) Team composition We recommend that in each team prototyping for VR there is at least
one developer who can make a functional prototype and who can be engaged enough to be
able to take this prototype further after the hackathon is done.

(2) Integration The integration aspect was critical for the participants to gain an understanding
of their goals for the hackathon, and to learn to work as a group. Especially solving the special
tangram-like puzzles together helped create a sense of camaraderie and aided in kicking off
work the next day.

(3) Empowerment This element is critical, as without it some team members may be excluded

or overlooked.
• VR empowerment For participants who have little experience with VR it is important to
show them the range of this technology, the possibilities and the way one interacts with
the environment. In our case, this was done in several ways, also including trying out the
Beat Saber game in VR.

• Sufficient need explanation The hackathon organizers ought to provide the clients with
expert assistance in the area of participatory design and requirement analysis to assist in
explaining their needs in detail, as they may not realize the extent of knowledge (or lack
thereof) of the participants.

• Presentation team members’ expertise It is important to place the participants most
strongly related to the theme at the centre. Especially team diversity and team members
voice equality are two important fundamentals. From our experience, all of the participants

9

CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

Kopeć et al.

should be introduced as experts in their respective fields who have specific and crucial
knowledge on the topic at hand.

(4) Idea generation The importance of the idea generation phase should be underlined, and
the participants should be provided with post-it cards and other supplies and encouraged
to use them. This is especially crucial as we recommend the paper prototyping phase to be
shortened considerably in favour of creating working prototypes in VR.

(5) Expert feedback The experts have to be instructed to attempt to help each team equally.
Some of the experts were disproportionally used by some teams, and later they, because of
familiarity, felt the need to check on them more often, which only widened the gap. This was
especially visible with language and technology.

(6) Prototyping We recommend actual prototyping to be done already in VR and to encourage
the teams to build working prototypes, as this helps with both testing in a participatory
manner during the hackathon, and later the actual implementation.

(7) Follow-up Knowing what will happen to the prototypes later helps the team remain moti-
vated. Hackathons, in general, suffer from low implementation levels, but making working
prototypes is a great way to not only encourage further development, but also garner interest
from others after the hackathon ends, including investors.

5 CONCLUSIONS
The results of this study cast light onto the recommended cycle of design thinking and customer-
centered design in VR, showcasing the need to create working prototypes in the low-fidelity
development stage to enable stakeholders to experience, and thus, imagine the end product. The
better the early immersion, the more valid the insights all team members can produce. They also
showcase the educational benefits of working in transdisciplinary environments, such as quick
knowledge acquisition, working with ambiguity and learning to collaborate with representatives
of different disciplines. However, the non-technical members of teams need to be encouraged to be
more vocal and active. We are also looking forward to testing more participatory and hands-on
ways of designing for VR, using theatre techniques and improvisation, which would allow to quickly
test early prototypes by acting out scripts rather than building physical or virtual mock-ups.

This study, combined with our previous work on human factors in rapid software development
and co-design, including hackathon dynamics, allowed us to formulate recommendations for
organizing content creation VR hackathons for specific purposes. We also provided guidelines
on how to prepare the participants to work in rapid prototyping VR environments and benefit
from such experiences in the long term. One key suggestion is to organize participatory design
workshops with the client who has a specific purpose before the hackathon, to work on the concept
of the hackathon and specify exact requirements prior to its execution and empower all of the
participants to make the best use of their skills.

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all the members of our Living Lab, those affiliated with the Kobo Association
who participated in this study and all transdisciplinary experts involved with the HASE research
initiative (Human Aspects in Software and System Engineering). We also would like to thank all
the students and partners involved in this research activity and events, especially Goethe Institut.
This cooperation could not happen without the direct involvement of our late professor Krzysztof
Marasek, who enabled the cooperation between the research group of our Living Lab and Goethe
Institut. We treat the work reported in this article and our further research as a special tribute
to our late professor which we think commemorates him better than any kind of monument he
deserves.

10

VR Hackathon with Goethe Institute: Lessons Learned CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan

REFERENCES
[1] Gerard Briscoe and Catherine Mulligan. 2014. Digital Innovation: The Hackathon Phenomenon. Creativeworks London

Working Paper 1, 6 (2014), 13.

[2] Gerald Burch, Jana Burch, and John Batchelor. 2019. Group Creative Problem Solving: The Role of Creative Personality,
Process and Creative Ability. Quality Innovation Prosperity 23 (11 2019), 38. https://doi.org/10.12776/qip.v23i3.1286
[3] Nagib Callaos and Jeremy Horne. 2013. Interdisciplinary Communication. Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics and
Informatics 11, 9 (2013), 23–31. https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/doaj/16904532/2013/00000011/00000009/
art00004

[4] Marthe Dehli. 2016. Hackathons as a ground for creating start-ups: Evidence from THE Port 2014. Ph.D. Dissertation.

CERN.

[5] Priscilla M Elsass and Laura M Graves. 1997. Demographic diversity in decision-making groups: The experiences of

women and people of color. Academy of Management Review 22, 4 (1997), 946–973.

[6] Anna Filippova, Erik Trainer, and James D. Herbsleb. 2017. From Diversity by Numbers to Diversity as Process:
Supporting Inclusiveness in Software Development Teams with Brainstorming. In Proceedings of the 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering (Buenos Aires, Argentina) (ICSE ’17). IEEE Press, 445 Hoes Ln, Piscataway, NJ
08854, United States, 152–163. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2017.22

[7] Allan Fowler. 2016. Informal STEM Learning in Game Jams, Hackathons and Game Creation Events. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Game Jams, Hackathons, and Game Creation Events (San Francisco, CA, USA) (GJHGC
’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 38–41. https://doi.org/10.1145/2897167.2897179
[8] Gary Kidd and Larry Humes. 2015. Keeping track of who said what: Performance on a modified auditory n-back task

with young and older adults. Frontiers in Psychology 6 (2015), 987. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00987

[9] Wiesław Kopeć, Radoslaw Nielek, and Adam Wierzbicki. 2018. Guidelines towards Better Participation of Older Adults
in Software Development Processes Using a New SPIRAL Method and Participatory Approach. In Proceedings of the
11th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering (Gothenburg, Sweden) (CHASE
’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 49–56. https://doi.org/10.1145/3195836.3195840

[10] Richard E Ladner. 2015. Design for user empowerment. interactions 22, 2 (2015), 24–29.
[11] Hilmar Lapp, Sendu Bala, James P Balhoff, Amy Bouck, Naohisa Goto, Mark Holder, Richard Holland, Alisha Holloway,
Toshiaki Katayama, Paul O Lewis, et al. 2007. The 2006 NESCent phyloinformatics hackathon: a field report. Evolutionary
Bioinformatics Online 3 (2007), 287.

[12] Arnab Nandi and Meris Mandernach. 2016. Hackathons as an Informal Learning Platform. In Proceedings of the 47th
ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education (Memphis, Tennessee, USA) (SIGCSE ’16). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 346–351. https://doi.org/10.1145/2839509.2844590

[13] M. Prieto, K. Unnikrishnan, C. Keenan, K. D. Saetern, and W. Wei. 2019. Designing for Collaborative Play in New
Realities: A Values-Aligned Approach. In 2019 IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference (GEM). IEEE, New Haven,
CT, USA, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/GEM.2019.8811545

[14] Gretchen B Rossman and Sharon F Rallis. 2003. Learning in the field: An introduction to qualitative research. Sage

Publications, 2455 Teller Road Thousand Oaks, CA 91320.

[15] Simon Taggar. 2002. Individual Creativity and Group Ability to Utilize Individual Creative Resources: A Multilevel

Model. Academy of Management Journal 45 (04 2002), 315–330. https://doi.org/10.2307/3069349

[16] Robert K Yin. 2013. Case study research: Design and methods. Sage Publications, 2455 Teller Road Thousand Oaks, CA

91320.

11

