1
2
0
2

r
p
A
2
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
3
5
0
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

EFFECTIVENESS OF SOCIAL VIRTUAL REALITY

Lisa Izzouzi, Anthony Steed
Department of Computer Science
University College London
l.izzouzi@ucl.ac.uk, A.Steed@ucl.ac.uk

April 13, 2021

ABSTRACT

A lot of work in social virtual reality, including our own group’s, has focused on effectiveness of
speciﬁc social behaviours such as eye-gaze, turn taking, gestures and other verbal and non-verbal
cues. We have built upon these to look at emergent phenomena such as co-presence, leadership and
trust. These give us good information about the usability issues of speciﬁc social VR systems, but
they don’t give us much information about the requirements for such systems going forward. In this
short paper we discuss how we are broadening the scope of our work on social systems, to move
out of the laboratory to more ecologically valid situations and to study groups using social VR for
longer periods of time.

Keywords virtual reality, 3D user interfaces

1 Introduction

Social virtual reality (SVR) applications have been around almost as long as virtual reality systems. For example, the
seminal Reality Built for Two system from VPL Research dates from the late 1980s and the machines from Virtuality
Systems were available to the general public in arcades from the 1990s. Since these early systems, it has been noted
that the immersive nature of systems creates a collaborative situation that is quite different than video, text and audio-
based communication. This appears to be because each user is represented as an avatar and that avatar is dynamically
animated by tracking information. Thus body language is quite natural and we can observe spatial interactions between
people that can use rules and styles that are inherited from real social situations (e.g. see [1]).

There are now a plethora of SVR systems to engage with, many of which are available on consumer VR equipment
[2, 3]. There are many different design choices around the avatar representations, capabilities for interaction, tasks
supported and social structures that are supported (e.g. see surveys [4, 5]).

While there is a lot of design variation, prior work of our own group has focused on interaction of small groups. The
core activity is that a small group (2-5 persons) are engaged in a task that involves talk around a small number of
objects in the environment. Our concern has been how effective tasks can be, especially when compared to a group
engaging in a similar task in the real world (e.g. from [6] through to [7]). In this position paper we discuss the
trajectories of some of this work.

2 Virtual versus Real Interactions

Something seemingly unique happens when users are immersed in VR: they can be observed using behaviours or
showing reactions, that would be appropriate in analogous real-world situations. Thus, even very early SVR systems
solicited socially appropriate behaviours from participants, such as offering and receiving of handshakes, social group
formation, and other non-verbal behaviours. Such behaviours demonstrate that the users are engaging with others, and
many studies have looked at the necessary conditions for such engagement (e.g. see review [8]).

 
 
 
 
 
 
One tactic we have used in the past is simply to compare group collaboration in real and virtual worlds. The benchmark
being that performance, or ratings of collaboration, should be similar in immersive SVR compared to real world
environments (e.g. [9, 10])). While realistic behaviours are still a big concern of ours (see next section), we are
developing a theme of work around how users adapt to use of the system over hours and weeks of use [11, 7]. A
key point here has been the participant variability in adaptation to being represented as an avatar and interacting with
representations of others, especially those they know well.

3 Evaluation of communication social cues

The success in completion of tasks in social VR is a testament to the effectiveness of certain types of non-verbal
communication (e.g. [12]). We can delve into these behaviours to get more detail, but our own experience is that
movement is well represented. Obviously more tracking points help (e.g. even foot tracking has an impact [13]).

Tanenbaum et al. inventory expressive nonverbal communication in commercial social VR platforms with four cate-
gories : movement and proxemic spacing, facial control, gesture and posture and ﬁnally virtual environment speciﬁc
non-verbal communication [14]. They note that faces and eye-gaze are a particular remaining problem. We have
tackled eye-gaze in a variety of projects in the past (e.g. [15, 16]). We have found eye-tracking to be highly commu-
nicative, but hard to simulate well. Fortunately eye-tracking is a feature we should expect in many more HMDs in the
near future. Our own trajectory of work here is to focus on the ﬁne-grained actions that combine multiple verbal and
non-verbal acts, to see if they can support certain communicative acts, such as conversation hand-over.

4 Evaluation of trust

A particular component of social interaction that we have focused on is trust. We feel that it is useful as a measure
because it highlights a slightly higher level of response that the immediacy of gesture or communicative acts, but it is
amenable to study in controlled experiments. Trust is term used in many different ways, but we will refer to behavioural
responses, although we note that Salanitri et al. show that the best-known questionnaire to measure usability and trust
could be applied to VR [17]. They also showed there is a relationship between user’s satisfaction and trust in the use
of VR, and a relationship between usability and trust for different VR technologies.

Behavioural responses that depend on trust are interesting because they are studied in business and economic contexts.
We have adopted a couple of techniques from those ﬁelds in our SVR studies: trust through advice seeking (e.g. [18]),
and trust through a game with stakes that depend on implicit trust of the other(s) [19]). Of course, when embodied
by virtual avatars, users might act differently than in real life [20], but we can certain use such methods to study any
bias between different communication conﬁgurations. This leads to our current objectives in this area: to understand
how particular conﬁgurations of the VR, such as avatars representation and interface usability bias formation of these
higher-level attitudes and relationships between users.

References

[1] Ralph Schroeder. Being There Together: Social Interaction in Shared Virtual Environments. Oxford University

Press, November 2010.

[2] Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, Elena M´arquez Segura, Nick Merrill, and Katherine Isbister. What’s It Mean to ”Be
Social” in VR? Mapping the Social VR Design Ecology. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference Compan-
ion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems, DIS ’18 Companion, pages 289–294, New York, NY, USA,
May 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.

[3] Ryan Schulz. Comprehensive List of Social VR Platforms and Virtual Worlds, 2020. Accessed September 10,

2020.

[4] Marcel Jonas, Steven Said, Daniel Yu, Chris Aiello, Nicholas Furlo, and Douglas Zytko. Towards a taxonomy of
social vr application design. In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in
Play Companion Extended Abstracts, CHI PLAY ’19 Extended Abstracts, page 437–444, New York, NY, USA,
2019. Association for Computing Machinery.

[5] Anya Kolesnichenko, Joshua McVeigh-Schultz, and Katherine Isbister. Understanding emerging design practices
for avatar systems in the commercial social vr ecology. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Sys-
tems Conference, DIS ’19, pages 241–252, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[6] Jolanda Tromp, Adrian Bullock, Anthony Steed, Amela Sadagic, Mel Slater, and Emmanuel Fr´econ. Small group
behavior experiments in the coven project. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 18(6):53–63, 1998.

2

[7] F. Moustafa and A. Steed. A longitudinal study of small group interaction in social virtual reality. Proceedings

of the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, 2018.

[8] Catherine S. Oh, Jeremy N. Bailenson, and Gregory F. Welch. A Systematic Review of Social Presence: Deﬁni-

tion, Antecedents, and Implications. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5:114, 2018.

[9] A. Steed, M. Slater, A. Sadagic, A. Bullock, and J. Tromp. Leadership and collaboration in shared virtual
environments. In Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality (Cat. No. 99CB36316), pages 112–115, March 1999. ISSN:
1087-8270.

[10] Ralph Schroeder, Anthony Steed, Ann-Soﬁe Axelsson, Ilona Heldal, ˚Asa Abelin, Josef Widestr¨om, Alexander
Nilsson, and Mel Slater. Collaborating in networked immersive spaces: as good as being there together? Com-
puters & Graphics, 25(5):781–788, October 2001.

[11] Ilona Heldal, Anthony Steed, Maria Spante, Ralph Schroeder, Sophia Bengtsson, and Marja Partanen. Successes
and Failures in Co-Present Situations. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 14(5):563–579, Octo-
ber 2005. Publisher: MIT Press.

[12] Ye Pan and Anthony Steed. The impact of self-avatars on trust and collaboration in shared virtual environments.

PLoS ONE, 12(12):1–20, 2017. ISBN: 1111111111.

[13] Ye Pan and Anthony Steed. How Foot Tracking Matters: The Impact of an Animated Self-Avatar on Interaction,
Embodiment and Presence in Shared Virtual Environments. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 6, 2019. Publisher:
Frontiers.

[14] Theresa Jean Tanenbaum, Nazely Hartoonian, and Jeffrey Bryan. ”how do i make this thing smile?”: An inven-
tory of expressive nonverbal communication in commercial social virtual reality platforms. In Proceedings of
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’20, page 1–13, New York, NY, USA,
2020. Association for Computing Machinery.

[15] William Steptoe, Robin Wolff, Alessio Murgia, Estefania Guimaraes, John Rae, Paul Sharkey, David Roberts,
and Anthony Steed. Eye-tracking for avatar eye-gaze and interactional analysis in immersive collaborative virtual
environments. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, CSCW
’08, pages 197–200, New York, NY, USA, November 2008. Association for Computing Machinery.

[16] William Steptoe, Anthony Steed, Aitor Rovira, and John Rae. Lie Tracking: Social Presence, Truth and De-
ception in Avatar-mediated Telecommunication. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’10, pages 1039–1048, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM. event-place: Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

[17] Davide Salanitri, Chrisminder Hare, Simone Borsci, Glyn Lawson, Sarah Sharples, and Brian Waterﬁeld. Rela-

tionship between trust and usability in virtual environments: An ongoing study. volume 9169, 08 2015.

[18] Ye Pan and Anthony Steed. A Comparison of Avatar-, Video-, and Robot-Mediated Interaction on Users’ Trust

in Expertise. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3, 2016.

[19] Ye Pan and Anthony Steed. The impact of self-avatars on trust and collaboration in shared virtual environments.

PloS one, 12(12):e0189078, 2017.

[20] Iris A. Junglas, Norman A. Johnson, Douglas J. Steel, D. Chon Abraham, and Paul Mac Loughlin. Identity

formation, learning styles and trust in virtual worlds. SIGMIS Database, 38(4):90–96, October 2007.

3

