Effects of VR Gaming and Game Genre on  
Player Experience 

Michael Carroll 
Department of Computer Science 
State University of New York at Oswego 
Oswego, NY, USA 
mcarroll@oswego.edu 

Ethan Osborne 
Department of Computer Science 
State University of New York at Oswego 
Oswego, NY, USA 
eosborn2@oswego.edu 

Caglar Yildirim* 
Department of Computer Science 
State University of New York at Oswego 
Oswego, NY USA 
caglar.yildirim@oswego.edu

(PX)  during 

Abstract—  With  the  increasing  availability  of  modern 
virtual reality (VR) headsets, the use and applications of VR 
technology  for  gaming  purposes  have  become  more 
pervasive than ever. Despite the growing popularity of VR 
gaming,  user  studies  into  how  it  might  affect  the  player 
the  gameplay  are  scarce. 
experience 
Accordingly,  the  current  study  investigated  the  effects  of 
VR  gaming  and  game  genre  on  PX.  We  compared  PX 
metrics  for  two  game  genres,  strategy  (more  interactive) 
and racing (less interactive), across two gaming platforms, 
VR  and  traditional  desktop  gaming.  Participants  were 
randomly assigned to one of the gaming platforms, played 
both  a  strategy  and  racing  game  on  their  corresponding 
platform, and provided PX  ratings. Results revealed that, 
regardless of the game genre, participants in the VR gaming 
condition  experienced  a  greater  level  of  sense  of  presence 
than did those in the desktop gaming condition. That said, 
results  showed  that  the  two  gaming  platforms  did  not 
significantly differ from one another in PX ratings. As for 
the effect of game genre, participants provided greater PX 
ratings  for  the  strategy  game  than  for  the  racing  game, 
regardless of whether the game was played on a VR headset 
or  desktop  computer.  Collectively,  these  results  indicate 
that  although  VR  gaming  affords  a  greater  sense  of 
presence in the game environment, this increase in presence 
does not seem to translate into a more satisfactory PX when 
playing either a strategy or racing game.   

Keywords— VR gaming; player experience; game genre; virtual 

reality gaming; video games; PX 

I.  INTRODUCTION  

The way  in  which a player interacts  with a game can alter 
their experience with the game. With the rise of virtual reality 
(VR) as a commercial product, the question developed of just 
how  this  technology  can  impact  the  gaming  experience.  The 
Oculus Rift was one of the first head mounted displays (HMDs) 

* Corresponding author 

to become commercially available to users and paved the way 
for the VR boom that we are seeing today [1]. Even with the 
negative side effects associated with VR, mainly cybersickness, 
the uptake in the technology has been swift in recent years [1]. 
The biggest difference in VR and traditional desktop gaming is 
the use of an HMD through which the player sees the virtual 
environment. The use of an HMD enables the user to control 
the point of view (POV) with their head and freely look around 
their environment, which is not possible with desktop gaming 
[2]. This distinct difference is what many VR companies and 
developers say enhance the gaming experience of the platform. 
With many VR systems promising a more immersive and better 
gaming experience, the question arises as to whether that really 
is the case. 

Some  variables  included  in  VR  that  increase  player 
experience (PX) are immersive qualities and game genre. These 
factors, among others, are indicative of a game that should be 
rated with a high PX. As it currently stands most research into 
VR and gaming experience has focused on first-person shooter 
games [3, 4]. However, as more and more games are released 
for VR, it is important to consider how other game genres affect 
the PX during the VR gameplay.  

A.  VR Gaming and Factors Affecting PX 

Gaming  in  a  virtual  environment  (VE)  introduces  new 
elements to the game play that designers and developers need 
to consider, including immersion and presence. These elements 
have helped to define what is considered the PX in VR and can 
be what propels a game to the status of Red Dead Redemption, 
a  2010  Western  themed  open-world  RPG  that  was  critically 
acclaimed or ends the game’s “life”. 

Several  theories  have  been  posited  to  describe  what 
contributes to a player’s enjoyment of a video game. One such 
theory,  the  schema  theory,  states  that  there  are  factors  and 
pleasures behind the enjoyment of the game [5]. Some of these 
factors  include  effectance,  escape,  and  achieving  a  sense  of 
flow, amongst others [5]. Effectance can be defined as a player 
feeling  empowered  by  completing  an  action  and  having  the 
game  respond  to  that  action.  Escape  is  is  considered  to  be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
achieved when a player supplants themselves into an alternate 
reality fictional world present in a game [5]. A sense of flow is 
achieved when the player feels like they are completely in the 
game  world.  All of these factors, among others,  facilitate the 
immersion of users into the gameworld and increase enjoyment. 
Immersion  in  video  games  is  the  sense  that  the  player  is 
completely  lost  in  the  VE  due  to  the  quality  of  the  sensory 
feedback provided by the VE. According to Mestre, immersion 
is  achieved  when  sensations  experienced  in  the  VE  overtake 
real world sensations [6]. This is important in VR gaming, as a 
break  in  immersion  can  cause  the  player  to  have  a  mediocre 
experience.  For instance, Slater, Linackis, Usoh, and Kooper 
[7]  looked  at  the  difference  in  immersion  while  playing  tri-
dimensional chess between players wearing an HMD or playing 
on a TV screen. The participants were then placed in one of two 
environments: a garden environment or an empty environment, 
which  was  described  by  the  experimenters  as  a  void.  Results 
showed  that  the  HMD  condition  contributed  to  a  better 
performance in both environments, and that being in a garden 
environment  helped  to  conduce  better  PX  than  it  did  in  the 
neutral environment. This indicates that the more salient the VE 
is, the higher the likelihood a better PX is. This relates to the 
aforementioned  state  of  flow;  if  a  player  is  placed  in  an 
environment that offers the ability to be in a different world (in 
a garden playing chess) they are more likely to give into that 
notion that they are in  fact in  a garden. This “notion” can  be 
described  as  presence,  which  is  yet  another  factor  that 
contributes to PX during gameplay.  

There  has  not  been  one  accepted  definition  of  presence 
because it is a hard measure to define. Rather, there have been 
many  attempts  by  scholars  to  define  it—usually  within  the 
constraints of the experiment they are running. Slater et al. [7] 
define presence as a construct that refers to the extent to which 
a person's behavior in the VE is representative of their behavior 
in comparable situations in real life, rather than with how well 
they  perform  as  such.  As  the  authors  here  argue,  presence  is 
different  from  immersion  in  that  a  player  does  not  need  to 
perform well in the VE to feel present. Rather, the VE has to 
“perform” well to allow the player to feel present.  

Slater and Usoh [8] compared participants using an HMD in 
a  VE  to  those  who  were  navigating  the  same  environment 
through an input device (mouse) and a TV. The environment 
was  comprised  of  six  doors  in  a  hallway,  with  each  door 
corresponding to a different scenario related to the VE-person 
interaction  [8].  Results  of  this  study  indicate  that  there  are 
exogenous  factors  that  are  capable  of  both  causing  a  greater 
sense of presence and of taking the presence away. One of these 
exogenous  factors  contributing  to  the  sense  of  presence  was 
interacting  with  objects/doing  a  task.  Interacting  with  objects 
increases the salience of the  environment,  which could allow 
the  participants  to  achieve  a  flow  state;  previously  stated  to 
increase immersion and presence within the environment. It is 
believed  that  the  more  interactive  a  game  is,  the  higher  the 
likelihood  the  player  will  experience  a  greater  sense  of 
presence. 

B.  Effects of Gaming Platform 

Previous  research  has  actively  investigated  the  putative 
effects  of  gaming  platform  on  PX,  mainly  focusing  on  the 
comparison  between  VR  and  desktop  gaming  platforms.  One 
study in particular by Shelstad, Smith, and Chaparro explored 
how VR affected the gaming experience of the strategy game 
DG2: Defense Grid 2 [16]. Shelstad et al.  found that the  VR 
version  of  the  game  was  rated  as  more  enjoyable  by  the 
participants  than  that  of  the  desktop  version  [1].  The  idea 
behind VR providing a better gaming experience is that users 
are  able  to  feel  as  though  they  are  truly  apart  of  their 
environment,  a  feeling  that  is  hard  to  imitate  in  traditional 
desktop  gaming.  Another  study  into  the  viability  of  VR  as  a 
more enjoyable gaming platform showed that users found the 
use  of  VR  in  gaming  more  appealing  than  the  likes  of  a  2D 
monitor, which in this study was a tablet [9]. On the contrary, 
other research has shown that there does not seem to be much a 
difference between VR and traditional desktop gaming, as was 
the case with the study by Yildirim, Carroll, Hufnal, Johnson, 
Pericles [2]. The key difference between these different studies 
was the genre of the game that was used in the study. Given the 
mixed findings regarding the effects of VR gaming on PX, it is 
important  to  further  study  this  topic  to  better  understand  the 
influence of gaming platform on PX. 

C.  Effects of Game Genre 

Extant literature on the effects of game genre and VR gaming 
has focused on how different games might impact immersion 
and  sense  of  presence  in  the  game  environment.  One  study 
compared a fighting game, a shooter game, and a racing game 
over two different platforms,  VR and PC  with a joystick [3]. 
Predictions  of  this  experiment  were  that  presence  would  be 
greater overall in VR compared to PC and would be the greatest 
in  the  fighting  game.  The  researchers  were  also  interested  in 
whether  playing  against  another  person  would  increase 
presence  as  opposed  to  playing  against  a  computer.  Results 
indicated  that  participants  felt  most  present  in  the  console  as 
opposed  to  the  VR  condition  and  that  the  highest  sense  of 
presence  came  from  the  shooting  game  as  opposed  to  the 
fighting  game.  There  was  also  no  significant  effect  of  player 
against  player  compared  to  player  against  computer.  The 
authors argued that participants’ comfortability and familiarity 
with standard console play could have contributed to the higher 
levels of presence. This study indicates that further research is 
warranted  to  further  elucidate  the  relationship  between  VR 
gaming and game genre and their effects on presence. 

First  person  shooter  (FPS)  games  have  been  utilized  in 
previous  research  due  to  their  perceived  higher  levels  of 
immersion  in  a  VR  environment  [2].  The  higher  levels  of 
immersion  were  thought  to  bring  about  a  higher  PX  as  well. 
Results of this study indicated that there was no difference in 
presence  levels  or  GUESS  scores  between  VR  and  the 
traditional  desktop  experience. This  suggests  that  FPS  games 
might not be the best genre for immersion in VR, because FPS 
games are immersive enough in a traditional gaming experience 
[2].  Conversely,  strategy  games  have  been  shown  to  elicit  a 
greater PX in VR as opposed to the traditional experience [1].  

The current study was an attempt to replicate Shelstad et al. 
[1] as well as continue the research conducted by Yildirim et al. 
[2]. The purpose of the current study was to examine the effects 
of  game  platform  and  game  genre  on  PX  and  presence.  The 
following are the hypotheses of the current study: 

H1a:  Participants  would  experience  a  greater  sense  of 
presence  in  the  VR  gaming  platform,  when  compared  to  the 
desktop gaming platform. 

H1b:  Participants  would  experience  a  greater  sense  of 
presence  in  the  strategy  game,  when  compared  to  the  racing 
game. 

H1c: The effect of VR gaming on sense of presence would 

be greater in the strategy game, compared to the racing game. 

H2a: Participants would experience a greater PX in the VR 
gaming  platform,  when  compared  to  the  desktop  gaming 
platform. 

H2b:  Participants  would  experience  a  greater  PX  in  the 

strategy game, when compared to the racing game. 

H2c: The effect of VR gaming on PX would be greater in the 

strategy game compared to the racing game. 

II.  METHOD 

A.  Design 

This  study  used  a  two-factorial  (gaming  platform  x  game 
genre) mixed design. The independent variables were the type 
of gaming platform, Oculus Rift and Desktop PC, which was 
manipulated between-subjects, and the genre of the game that 
was  played,  Strategy  and  Racing,  which  was  manipulated 
within-subjects. The dependent variables were PX, as measured 
by the Game User Experience Satisfaction Scale (GUESS) and 
sense of presence, as measured with the Presence Scale. 

B.  Participants 

The participants of this study were recruited from the college 
student  population  at  the  university  where  this  study  was 
conducted. In total there were 36 participants, with 18 in each 
condition.  The  sample  consisted  of  30  female  and  16  male 
participants. The average age of the participants was 22.31 (SD 
= 3.98). Participants  were recruited via email announcements 
and were offered the opportunity to enter a raffle to win one of 
the three $10 gift cards.  

C.  Materials 

(GUESS) 

1)  Game User Satisfaction Scale 
The  Game  User  Satisfaction  Scale 

is  a 
multidimensional  measure  of  the  user’s  PX.  The  GUESS 
measures  9  different  aspects  of  the  gaming  experience 
including: Usability/Playability, Narratives, Play Engrossment, 
Enjoyment,  Creative  Freedom,  Audio  Aesthetics,  Personal 
Gratification, Social Connectivity, and Visual Aesthetics [10]. 
With the nature of the games that were used in this study being 
focused  on  racing  and  strategy  both  the  narrative  and  social 
connectivity  aspects  of  this  measure  were  omitted  from  the 
survey that was given to the participants. Overall the GUESS 
scale encompasses 55 items used in the measurement, but for 
the  purposes  of  this  study  only  44  were  deployed  [10].  This 

study used the remaining seven dimensions averaged together 
to gather the overall GUESS score. With the GUESS measure, 
a higher score indicated a more satisfactory PX. 

2)  Presence Scale 
In order to determine the level of presence the participants 
felt,  the  presence  scale  was  used  [11].  The  presence  scale 
contains eight items, all of which are on a 7-point Likert scale. 
These  measures  are  all  self-reported  and  the  results  are 
averaged  to  determine  the  level  of  presence  the  individual 
experiences.  The  higher  the  score  on  the  presence  scale,  the 
more present the individual feels during their experience. 

3)  Gaming Platforms 
This  study  used  two  different  gaming  platforms,  one  VR 
headset and a Desktop (Windows) PC (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). 
The VR headset that was used in this study was the Oculus Rift 
[12]. The Oculus Rift is a VR headset that makes use of a HMD 
to  track  the  users  position  around  the  VE.  The  Oculus  Rift 
features a display with a 1080 x 1200 resolution per eye with a 
refresh rate of 90 Hz [13]. This HMD also features a gyroscope 
and  accelerometer,  which  is  used  to  track  the  user’s  head 
motion. The Oculus Rift also has a field of view (FOV) of 110 
degrees [14]. With the use of the Oculus Rift comes the ability 
to  use  motion  controllers,  but  for  the  purposes  of  this  study 
participants  were  given  an  Xbox  controller  to  use.  This  was 
done to keep the input type a constant between the platforms, 
as the desktop versions of the games are not compatible with 
the motion controls. 

4)  Game Genres 
This study explored the effects of two different game genres: 
Racing and Strategy. The racing game  what  was  used during 
this  study  was  Assetto  Corsa  [15].  Assetto  Corsa  is  a  racing 
simulator game where the player uses a first-person perspective 
to navigate a car around a track. Both of the VR and desktop 
versions of the game were identical.  

The second game that was played during this study was the 
strategy game DG2: Defense Grid 2 [16]. DG2: Defense Grid 
2 is a top-down tower defense game, where the player aims to 
stop  enemies  from  depleting  their  cores  through  the  use  of 
towers  that  attack  the  enemies  as  they  maneuver  through  the 
map.  Similar  to  Assetto  Corsa,  there  is  no  differences  in  the 
versions  of  the  game  between  VR  and  desktop  platforms. 
Participants  within  the  study  played  both  games  during  the 
course of the experiment in a counterbalanced order.  

D.  Procedure 

When participants first arrived, they were greeted and asked 
to read over the informed consent form. While the participants 
were reviewing the form the experimenter randomly drew the 
participants  starting  condition,  which  were  PC  Racing,  PC 
Strategy,  VR  Racing,  or  VR  Strategy.  This  selection 
determined the platform on which the participant played both 
game genres as well as which game would be played first. Once 
the  starting  condition  was  selected  participants  were  given  a 
short demo (using the Xbox controller) of the first game.  

 
 
 
 
 
between the games, while the experimenter prepared the next 
part  of  the  experiment.  After  the  break  participants  were 
brought back into the room and given a short demo (using the 
Xbox controller) on the next game they would play. Once again, 
they  were  given  10  minutes  to  play  the  game  while  the 
experimenter waited outside. After 10 minutes had passed the 
experimenter re-entered the room and guided the participant to 
the final set of surveys. Once the participant had concluded the 
final surveys they were debriefed and afforded the opportunity 
to ask any questions. The entire experiment was completed in 
less than 60 minutes.  

III.  RESULTS 

Several descriptive and inferential statistics tests were run to 
test the  hypotheses of the current study. Table 1 and Table 2 
present  the  descriptive  statistics  and  the  results  of  inferential 
statistics tests for each of the dependent variables, respectively. 

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for the Dependent Variables 

Strategy 

M (SD) 

Racing 

M (SD) 

3.63 (1.43) 
4.65 (1.05) 

2.88 (1.62) 
3.94 (.984) 

35.10 (7.00) 
37.06 (6.25) 

29.20 (9.16) 
29.32 (7.40) 

Sense of Presence 
   Desktop PC 
   VR 

Player Experience 
   Desktop PC 
   VR 

Sense of Presence was  measured by the average score on PQ. 
Player  Experience  denotes  PX  ratings  as  indexed  by  the  total 
score on GUESS.

Table 2. Results of Factorial ANOVA 

Variable 

F (1, 34) 

p 

η2 

Sense of Presence 
   Platform 
   Game Genre 
   Platform x Genre 

Player Experience 
   Platform 
   Game Genre 
   Platform x Genre 

8.10 
10.05 
.015 

.229 
29.18 
.534 

.007 
.003 
.905 

.192 
.228 
.0 

.636 
<.001 
.470 

.964 
.462 
.015 

η2 represents partial eta-squared values as an estimate of effect 
size. Alpha level set at .05 for all hypothesis tests.  

A 2 (gaming platform) x 2 (game genre) mixed ANOVA was 
conducted  to  examine  the  effect  of  gaming  platform  (VR  vs. 
desktop gaming) and game genre (strategy vs. racing game) on 
sense of presence levels (Fig. 3). In contrast with Hypothesis 
1c, there was no significant interaction effect between gaming 
platform and game genre, F(1, 34) = .015, p = .905, indicating 
the  effect  of  gaming  platform  on  sense  of  presence  did  not 
change as a function of the game played. Therefore, each main 
effect was individually examined. 

Fig. 1. Image of participant in Desktop condition. 

Fig. 2. Image of participant in VR condition. 

Following the random assignment of the starting condition, 
the experimenter left the room and the participants were left to 
play the game for 10 minutes. After 10 minutes had passed the 
experimenter re-entered the room and directed the participants 
to  the  surveys.  The  experimenter  once  again  left  the  room 
whilst the participants completed the surveys. Upon conclusion 
of the first set of surveys participants were given a short break 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.  DISCUSSION 

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  investigate  VR  and 
traditional desktop (PC) gaming to determine which resulted in 
a greater PX, and to determine if game genre had an effect on 
PX as well. The hypothesis of this study was that VR gaming 
would  provide  a  greater  PX  than  traditional  desktop  (PC) 
gaming. Results of this experiment indicated that there was no 
significant differences between VR gaming and desktop (PC) 
gaming  in  terms  of  PX.  This  differs  from  previous  research 
demonstrating that VR gaming afforded a greater PX compared 
to desktop (PC) gaming [1]. Since this study was not a one-to-
one replication of Shelstad et al. [1], it can be inferred that the 
differences  in  findings  resulted  from  the  differences  in  the 
studies. The previous work focused solely on the strategy game 
whereas this study included a racing game as well to check for 
differences  in  game  genre.  Also,  the  previous  work  was  a 
within-subjects  design  as  opposed  to  the  current  studies 
between-subjects  design,  which  could  have  contributed  to  a 
greater difference in the scores.  

Even though there were no significant results between game 
platforms,  there  was  a  significant  difference  of  PX  between 
game genres. Results indicated that the strategy game brought 
a higher PX than did the racing game. This can be attributed to 
the  fact  that  the  strategy  game  used  in  the  current  study  was 
more interactive than was the racing game. During the racing 
game, participants drove around a track with no other cars for 
the  ten-minute  period.  During  the  strategy  game,  participants 
were  constantly  being  stimulated  by  the  game  due  to  the 
constant need to defend the towers. These results are consistent 
with  those  found  by  Lindley  and  Sennersten  [5],  in  which 
participants  achieved  a  higher  sense  of  effectance  during  the 
strategy  game  due  to  the  constant  feedback  loops  granted  to 
them for completing actions. Therefore, it can be inferred that 
regardless of platform, more interactivity can lead to a greater 
PX. 

One aspect of VR and the PX that was explored in this study 
was how both the platform and game genre affected the sense 
of  presence.  As  was  predicted  in  this  study,  the  level  of 
presence  was  greater  in  the  VR  condition  compared  to  the 
desktop  (PC)  condition,  regardless  of  the  genre  of  the  game 
played. There have been many studies that have focused on how 
interaction with VEs can affect the user’s feeling of presence 
[12,  19].  In  their  study  of  presence  Witmer  and  Singer  [11] 
highlighted the importance of interactivity in VR on the sense 
of presence in the VE. Witmer and Singer [11] also discuss how 
the  better  the  interaction  with  a  VE  is  the  better  sense  of 
presence the user will feel. Along similar lines as Witmer and 
Singer  [11]  is  the  research  of  Schubert,  Friedmann,  and 
Regenbrecht [17], who’s research determined that the level of 
interaction with a VE is one of the main predictors, the other of 
which  was  immersion,  of  presence  level.  The  results  of  the 
current study are consistent with previous research in that the 
game with more interactions produced a greater level of sense 
of presence during the gameplay.  

While the results of presence levels in the current study are 
consistent with previous research, it does differ from the results 
of the study by Yildirim et al. [2] This research did not find a 

Fig. 3: Sense of presence levels 

Results revealed a significant main effect of gaming platform 
on sense of presence, F(1, 34) = 8.10, p = .007 (Hypothesis 1a). 
This  indicates  that  regardless  of  which  game  was  played, 
participants  experienced  a  greater  sense  of  presence  when 
playing  the  game  on  the  VR  headset  than  on  the  desktop 
computer. Similarly, there was a main effect of game genre on 
sense of presence, F(1, 34) = 10.05, p = .003 (Hypothesis 1c). 
This indicates that regardless of whether the game was played 
in  VR,  participants  experienced  a  greater  sense  of  presence 
when playing the strategy game, compared to the racing game. 
As for the effect of gaming platform and game genre on PX 
(Fig.  4),  results  of  ANOVA  revealed  that  there  was  no 
significant  interaction  between  these  two  factors,  F(1,  34)  = 
.534, p = .47 (Hypothesis 2c), indicating the effect of gaming 
platform on sense of presence did not change as a function of 
the game played. Therefore, each main effect was individually 
examined. Results showed no significant main effect of gaming 
platform on PX ratings, F(1, 34) = .229, p = .636 (Hypothesis 
2a), suggesting that the game platform used to play the game 
did  not  significantly  influence  PX,  regardless  of  the  game 
played. That said, the main effect of game genre on PX ratings 
was  statistically  significant,  F(1,  34)  =  29.18,  p  <  .001 
(Hypothesis 2b). This indicates that regardless of whether the 
game was played in VR, participants experienced a greater PX 
when playing the strategy game, compared to the racing game. 

Fig. 4. PX ratings as a function of gaming platform and genre 

 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

1.  W. J. Shelstad, D. C. Smith, and B. S. Chaparro, “Gaming on the Rift: 
How Virtual Reality Affects Game User Satisfaction,” in Proceedings of 
the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society  Annual  Meeting,  61(1), 
2017, pp. 2072-2076. 

2.  Yildirim,  Caglar  &  Carroll,  Michael  &  Hufnal,  Daniel  &  Johnson, 
Theodore & Pericles, Sylvia. (2018). Video Game User Experience: To 
VR, or Not to VR?. 1-9.  

3.  Eastin,  M.  S.,  &  Griffiths,  R.  P.  (2006).  Beyond  the  Shooter  Game: 
Examining Presence and Hostile Outcomes Among Male Game Players. 
Communication Research, 33(6), 448–466.  
S. Persky and J. Blascovich. (2008). Immersive virtual video game play 
and presence: Influences on aggressive feelings and behavior. Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 17(1), pp. 57-72. 

4. 

5.  Craig  A.  Lindley  and  Charlotte  C.  Sennersten,  “Game  Play  Schemas: 
From  Player  Analysis  to  Adaptive  Game  Mechanics,”  International 
Journal of Computer Games Technology, vol. 2008, Article ID 216784, 7 
pages, 2008.  

8. 

Paris: Ecole des Mines de Paris 

6.  Daniel  R. Mestre  and     P.  Fuchs.  (2006).  Immersion  et  présence.  In  P.  
Fuchs, G.  Moreau, A.  Berthoz, & J.  L. Vercher (Eds.), Le traité de la 
réalité virtuelle (pp.  309–338). 
7. 
Slater, Mel & Linakis, Vasilis & Usoh, Martin & Kooper, Rob. (1999). 
Immersion,  Presence,  and  Performance  in  Virtual  Environments:  An 
Experiment with Tri-Dimensional Chess. ACM Virtual Reality Software 
and Technology (VRST). 
Slater,  Mel  and  Usoh,  Martin.  (1993).  Presence  in  immersive  virtual 
environments.  1993 
International 
Symposium. 90 - 96.  

IEEE  Annual  Virtual  Reality 

9. 

10.  Pallavicini,  Federica  &  Ferrari,  Ambra  &  Zini,  Andrea  &  Garcea, 
Giacomo  &  Zanacchi,  Andrea  &  Barone,  Gabriele  &  Mantovani, 
Fabrizia.  (2017).  What  Distinguishes  a  Traditional  Gaming  Experience 
from One in Virtual Reality? An Exploratory Study. 

11.  M.  H.  Phan,  J.  R.  Keebler,  and  B.  S.  Chaparro,  B.  S.  (2016).  The 
development  and  validation  of  the  Game  User  Experience  Satisfaction 
Scale (GUESS). Human Factors, 58(8), 1217-1247. 

12.  B.  G.  Witmer  and  M.  J.  Singer.  (1998).  Measuring  presence  in  virtual 
environments: A presence questionnaire. Presence, 7(3), pp.225-240. 
13.  Oculus Rift: VR Headset for VR Ready PCs | Oculus. (2018). [Online]. 

Available: https://www.oculus.com/rift/ 

14.  Buy Oculus Rift + Touch - Microsoft Store. (2018). [Online]. Available: 

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/p/oculus-rift-
touch/8mt5ws8lgbwl?activetab=pivot:techspecstab 
Specs. 
https://www.cnet.com/products/oculus-rift/specs/ 

(2018). 

Rift 

15.  Oculus 

[Online]. 

Available: 

16.  Kunos  Simulazioni  (2014,  Dec).  Assetto  Corsa  Steam  [Online]. 

Available: https://store.steampowered.com/app/244210/Assetto_Corsa/ 

2. 

17.  Hidden Path Entertainment and 505 Games (2014, Sept). DG2: Defense 
Available: 

Grid 
https://store.steampowered.com/app/221540/DG2_Defense_Grid_2/ 
18.  Schubert, T., Friedmann, F., & Regenbrecht, H. (2001). The Experience 
of Presence: Factor Analytic Insights. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual 
Environments, 10, 266-281. 

[Online]. 

Steam 

19.  L.E.  Nacke,  S.  Stellmach,  and  C.  A.  Lindley,  C.A.  (2011). 
Electroencephalographic assessment of player experience: A pilot study 
in affective ludology. Simulation & Gaming, 42(5), pp. 632-655. 

significant difference in presence [2]. Since the current study is 
a follow up to Yildirim et al.’s [2] work it is important to note 
that  the  current  study  was  able  to  produce  a  difference  in 
presence  levels,  which  was  not  achieved  previously.  It  is 
possible  that  changes  in  interaction  style  and  using  different 
game  genres,  which  also  have  different 
interactions, 
contributed to produce this difference. Yildirim et al. [2] used a 
first-person shooter game and compared player experience and 
presence across two VR conditions and desktop (PC) gaming. 
The authors found no differences across these three conditions 
in PX and presence levels. Therefore, it could be argued that 
VR gaming and traditional desktop gaming do not differ in PX 
and  sense  of  presence  levels  when  the  game  is  a  first-person 
shooter  game,  a  game  genre  involving  fast  paced,  highly 
interactive  combat  environments.  That  said,  based  on  the 
findings of the current study, it is seen that VR gaming affords 
a greater sense of presence when playing a strategy and racing 
game.  Since  the  current  study  did  not  include  a  first-person 
shooter game in the game genre comparison, future research is 
warranted to elucidate the extent to which this interpretation in 
tenable. 

in 

Inclusion  of  physiological  measures 

One of the limitations of the current study was that it relied 
on  subjective  measures  to  measure  PX.  There  were  no 
physiological measures taken due to technological issues while 
setting  up  the  experiment,  which  prevented  the  use  of  these 
measures. 
the 
measurement of enjoyment while playing video games has the 
capacity  to  further  elucidate  the  effects  that  game  genre  and 
that 
platform  can  have  on  PX.  Research  has  shown 
physiological measures can be indicative of a greater PX [18]. 
This  shows  the  efficacy  of  using  physiological  measures  in 
research in this area and including physiological measures can 
help identify which game genre and platform is most engaging. 
Overall,  this  study  provided  results  showing  that  VR  does 
not always afford a greater PX than does the traditional gaming 
experience. However, there are differences in game genres as 
they relate to PX; this could be due to the extent to which they 
fit into the schema theory [5]. As VR continues to become more 
popular commercially, it is important that research be done on 
it in order to curate the greatest PX. Future research into this 
topic should investigate a one-to-one replication of the Shelstad 
et al. study in order to replicate those results. Furthermore, other 
game genres must be tested to learn how effective they are at 
granting a good PX. The current study examined the roles of 
gaming platform and game genre on PX. Other factors, such as 
controller naturalness should be investigated as  well to better 
understand what provides for an exquisite PX. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  study  was  conducted  in  the  SUNY  Oswego  VR  First 
Lab, established through the academic partnership between VR 
First and SUNY Oswego. The authors would like to thank VR 
First  for  supporting  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  the 
lab. 

 
 
