Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Computers in Human Behavior Reports 

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-in-human-behavior-reports 

How immersive virtual reality methods may meet the criteria of the 
National Academy of Neuropsychology and American Academy of Clinical 
Neuropsychology: A software review of the Virtual Reality Everyday 
Assessment Lab (VR-EAL) 

Panagiotis Kourtesis a,b,c, d,*, Sarah E. MacPherson e,f 
a National Research Institute of Computer Science and Automation, INRIA, Rennes, France 
b Univ Rennes, Rennes, France 
c Research Institute of Computer Science and Random Systems, IRISA, Rennes, France 
d French National Centre for Scientific Research, CNRS, Rennes, France 
e Human Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 
f Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Virtual reality 
Neuropsychological assessment 
Ethical standards 
Safety 
Usability 
Methodology 

Clinical tools involving immersive virtual reality (VR) may bring several advantages to cognitive neuroscience 
and neuropsychology. However, there are some technical and methodological pitfalls. The American Academy of 
Clinical  Neuropsychology  (AACN)  and  the  National  Academy  of  Neuropsychology  (NAN)  raised  8  key  issues 
pertaining to Computerized Neuropsychological Assessment Devices. These issues pertain to: (1) the safety and 
effectivity; (2) the identity of the end-user; (3) the technical hardware and software features; (4) privacy and data 
security;  (5)  the  psychometric  properties;  (6)  examinee  issues;  (7)  the  use  of  reporting  services;  and  (8)  the 
reliability  of the  responses and  results.  The VR Everyday  Assessment Lab  (VR-EAL)  is the  first immersive VR 
neuropsychological battery with enhanced ecological validity for the assessment of everyday cognitive functions 
by offering a pleasant testing experience without inducing cybersickness. The VR-EAL meets the criteria of the 
NAN  and AACN, addresses the methodological pitfalls, and brings advantages for neuropsychological testing. 
However, there are still shortcomings of the VR-EAL, which should be addressed. Future iterations should strive 
to improve the embodiment illusion in VR-EAL and the creation of an open access VR software library should be 
attempted.  The  discussed  studies  demonstrate  the  utility  of  VR  methods  in  cognitive  neuroscience  and 
neuropsychology.   

1. Introduction 

A series of studies from our laboratory have adopted a multidisci-
plinary approach (i.e., computer science and psychology) to explore the 
potency of immersive virtual reality (VR) as a research and clinical tool 
in cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology. The studies have also 
addressed the issue of ecological validity in neuropsychological testing, 
especially  regarding  the  assessment  of  cognitive  functions  which  are 
central  to  everyday  functioning.  Finally,  we  have  examined  the  tech-
nical and methodological pitfalls associated with the implementation of 
immersive VR in cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology. 

Firstly, a technological systematic literature review of the reasons for 

adverse  VR  induced  symptoms  and  effects  (i.e.,  cybersickness)  was 
conducted  (Kourtesis,  Collina,  Doumas,  &  MacPherson,  2019a).  The 
review  provided  suggestions  and  technological  knowledge  for  the 
implementation  of  VR  head-mounted  displays  (HMD)  in  cognitive 
neuroscience (Kourtesis et al., 2019a). A meta-analysis of 44 neurosci-
entific and neuropsychological studies involving VR HMD systems was 
also  performed.  Another  aim  was  to  devise  a  brief  screening  tool  to 
quantitatively appraise and report both the quality of software features 
and  cybersickness  intensity,  as  such  a  tool  did  not  exist.  The  Virtual 
Reality  Neuroscience  Questionnaire  (VRNQ)  was  developed  and  vali-
dated to assess the quality of VR software in terms of user experience, 
game  mechanics,  in-game  assistance,  and  cybersickness  (Kourtesis, 

* Corresponding author. National Research Institute of Computer Science and Automation, INRIA, Rennes, France. 

E-mail address: panagiotis.kourtesis@inria.fr (P. Kourtesis).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chbr.2021.100151 
Received 28 May 2021; Received in revised form 2 November 2021; Accepted 5 November 2021   

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)100151Availableonline10November20212451-9588/©2021TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Collina,  Doumas,  &  MacPherson,  2019b).  The  same  study  provided 
suggestions  pertaining  to  the  maximum  duration  of  VR  sessions 
(Kourtesis et al., 2019b). 

Guidelines were also proposed that described the development of the 
Virtual Reality Everyday Assessment Lab (VR-EAL), the first immersive 
VR neuropsychological battery, programmed using Unity game devel-
opment  software  (Kourtesis,  Korre,  Collina,  Doumas,  &  MacPherson, 
2020b). Furthermore, the convergent, construct, and ecological validity 
of VR-EAL as an assessment of prospective memory, episodic memory, 
visual attention, visuospatial attention, auditory attention, and execu-
tive  functions  were  examined  (Kourtesis,  Collina,  Doumas,  &  Mac-
Pherson,  2020a).  Finally,  using  VR-EAL,  prospective  memory  in 
everyday  life  was  examined  by  comparing  performance  on  diverse 
prospective  memory  tasks  (i.e.,  focal  and  non-focal  event-based,  and 
time-based tasks; Kourtesis, Collina, Doumas, & MacPherson, 2021) and 
identifying the cognitive functions which predict everyday prospective 
memory functioning (Kourtesis & MacPherson, 2021). 

The  findings  of  these  aforementioned  studies  have  already  been 
published  as  individual  studies.  However,  the  results  of  these  studies 
will be discussed here using an all-inclusive approach in an attempt to 
examine whether the VR-EAL meets the criteria of the National Acad-
emy  of  Neuropsychology  (NAN)  and  American  Academy  of  Clinical 
Neuropsychology 
for  Computerized  Neuropsychological 
Assessment Devices (CNADs). The VR-EAL was designed and developed 
to meet the NAN and AACN criteria. The current software review will 
examine whether the VR-EAL indeed meets these criteria and offers a 
discussion of how other immersive VR CNADs may also meet them. 

(AACN) 

2. Summary of the VR-EAL and relevant studies 

VR-EAL assesses everyday cognitive functions such as PM, episodic 
memory  (i.e.,  immediate  and  delayed  recognition),  executive  func-
tioning (i.e., planning, multitasking) and selective visual, visuospatial 
and auditory (bi-aural) attention within a realistic immersive VR sce-
nario  lasting  around  70  min.  The  VR-EAL  offers  both  tutorials  and  a 
continuous storyline in an alternating fashion. See Table 1 and Figs. 1–4 
for a summary of the VR-EAL scenario and tasks. A brief video recording 
of  the  VR-EAL  may  also  be  accessed  at  this  hyperlink:  https://www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=IHEIvS37Xy8&t. 

VR-EAL  can  be  run  on  any  VR  HMD  which  is  compatible  with 
SteamVR, such as the HTC Vive series (e.g., Pro, Pro Eye, and Cosmos), 
Oculus Rift series (e.g., Rift and Rift S), Pimax series (e.g., 4K, 5K, and 5K 
Plus), Varjo series (e.g., VR-1 and VR-2), Samsung Odyssey series (e.g., 
Odyssey and Odyssey +), and Valve Index. Other criteria that should be 
met for efficient implementation of VR-EAL include the size of the VR 
area, which should be 5 m2 to provide an adequate space for immersion 
and  naturalistic  interaction  within  virtual  environments  (Borrego, 
Latorre,  Alca˜niz,  &  Llorens,  2018).  The  spatialized  (bi-aural)  audio 
should be facilitated by a pair of headphones and the HMD should be 
connected to a laptop with the following minimum characteristics: Intel 
i5-4590/AMD  Ryzen  5  1500X  or  greater,  NVIDIA  GTX  1060/AMD 
Radeon RX 480 or greater, NVIDIA GTX 970/AMD Radeon R9 290 or 
greater, 8 GB+ RAM, and high definition audio. 

The development and compatibility of VR-EAL was based on a sys-
tematic literature review (Kourtesis et al., 2019a) and a study on the 
acceptability  of VR technologies (Kourtesis et  al., 2019 ab). The suit-
ability  of  VR-EAL  was  thoroughly  examined  during  the  development 
phase  (Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020b)  and  its  validity  and  advantages  were 
evaluated  against  an  extensive  paper-and-pencil  neuropsychological 
battery  (Kourtesis,  Collina,  Doumas,  &  MacPherson,  2020).  The 
contribution  of  VR-EAL  in  the  understanding  of  everyday  cognitive 
functions  was  also  examined  (Kourtesis,  Collina,  Doumas,  &  Mac-
Pherson,  2021;  Kourtesis  &  MacPherson,  2021).  Table  2  provides  a 
summary of the aims and the findings for each study included in this 
series of studies. As Table 2 illustrates, the implementation of immersive 
VR in cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology may be efficient and 

Table 1 
VR-EAL scenario.  

Order 

Type 

Description 

Basic interactions and navigation 
Interactive boards (recognition and planning) 
List of prospective memory tasks, shopping list (immediate 
recognition), and itinerary (planning) 
List of mechanics for the prospective memory tasks, prompts, 
and notes 
Cooking 
Prepare breakfast (multi-tasking) and take medication 
(prospective memory, event-based, short delay) 
Tutorial: collect items 
Collect items from the living-room (selective visuospatial 
attention) and take a chocolate pie out of the oven 
(prospective memory, event-based, short delay) 
Interaction with 3D non-player characters 
Call Rose (prospective memory task, time-based, short 
delay) 
Gaze interaction 

Detect posters on both sides of the road (selective visual 
attention) 
Shopping, how to collect the items from the supermarket 

Collect the shopping list items from the supermarket 
(delayed recognition) 
Go to the bakery to collect the carrot cake (prospective 
memory task, time-based, medium delay) 
False prompt before going to the library (prospective 
memory task, event-based, medium delay) 
Return the red book to the library (prospective memory task, 
event-based, medium delay) 
Auditory interaction 

Detect sounds from both sides of the road (selective auditory 
attention) 
False prompt before going back home (prospective memory 
task, time-based, long delay) 

Scene 1 
Scene 2 
Scene 3 

Tutorial 
Tutorial 
Storyline 

Scene 4 

Tutorial 

Scene 5 
Scene 6 

Tutorial 
Storyline 

Scene 7 
Scene 8 

Tutorial 
Storyline 

Tutorial 
Storyline 

Tutorial 

Storyline 

Tutorial 

Storyline 

Storyline 

Storyline 

Storyline 

Tutorial 

Storyline 

Storyline 

Scene 9 
Scene 
10 
Scene 
11 
Scene 
12 
Scene 
13 
Scene 
14 
Scene 
15 
Scene 
16 
Scene 
17 
Scene 
18 
Scene 
19 
Scene 
20 
Scene 
21 
Scene 
22 

Storyline  When you return home, give the extra pair of keys to Alex 

Storyline 

(prospective memory task, event-based, long delay) 
Put away the shopping items and take the medication 
(prospective memory task, time-based, long delay)  

advantageous. Specifically, it is feasible to avoid or substantially alle-
viate  adverse  cybersickness  and  provide  a  neuropsychological  assess-
ment  like  VR-EAL  with  enhanced  ecological  validity  and  a  shorter 
administration time. Also, the VR-EAL was rated as a highly pleasant 
testing  experience  and  able  to  contribute  to  the  understanding  of 
everyday cognition. 

3. Meeting the criteria of the National Academy of 
Neuropsychology and the American Academy of Clinical 
Neuropsychology 

Bauer and collaborators (2012) published the official joint position 
of the American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology (AACN) and the 
National  Academy  of  Neuropsychology  (NAN)  which  discusses  8  key 
issues regarding the development, dissemination, and implementation 
of Computerized Neuropsychological Assessment Devices (CNADs) for 
research  and  clinical  purposes.  The  CNADs  encompass  any  new 
computer-based  neuropsychological  assessments  or  computerised  ver-
sions of already established paper-and-pencil tests (e.g., Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test; Sahakian &  Owen, 1992) or web-based tests. The CNAD 
could be a standalone device (i.e., hardware and software) or software 
(i.e., either installed locally or on the internet) that can be run on devices 
such  as  personal  computers,  laptops,  tablets,  or  smartphones  (Bauer 
et al., 2012). The VR-EAL, as an immersive VR software and neuropsy-
chological assessment, would be categorised as a CNAD. Hence, VR-EAL 
or any other VR CNAD should meet the criteria of AACN and NAN to be 
effectively implemented for clinical or research purposes. 

The AACN and NAN recognise the potential advantages of CNADs 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001512P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Fig. 1. VR-EAL tutorials: Scenes 1-5.  

which include testing large numbers of individuals quickly (e.g., parallel 
administration);  immediately  available  tests;  enhanced  accuracy  and 
precision  (e.g.,  reaction  time  measurements);  shorter  administration 
time  and  reduced  costs  (e.g.,  for  test  administration  and  scoring); 
adaptable in different languages; exporting the data automatically (e.g., 
for research purposes); increased accessibility (e.g., remotely); and the 
integration  of  algorithms  for  making  decisions  on  issues  such  as  the 
identification of an impairment or a statistically reliable change (Bauer 
et al., 2012). In these series of studies, the VR-EAL has already shown 
that  it  achieves  several  of  these  benefits.  The  VR-EAL  is  immediately 
available after its installation on a personal computer and automatically 

produces accurate performance scores that are exported into a.txt file 
(Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020b).  Consequently,  the  VR-EAL  has  no  costs  for 
administration  and  scoring,  and  it  requires  a  substantially  shorter 
administration  time  as  compared  to  the  equivalent  paper-and-pencil 
batteries (Kourtesis, Collina, et al., 2020). 

However,  the  VR-EAL  currently  does  not  incorporate  a  predictive 
algorithm  for  identifying  cognitive  impairment,  since  it  has  not  been 
administered to any clinical populations. Thus, the predictive validity of 
VR-EAL has yet to be established and this is one of our future directions. 
Furthermore,  the  procedure  for  adapting  the  VR-EAL  for  use  with 
different languages and cultures is more complex than the adaptation of 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001513P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Fig. 2. VR-EAL tutorials: Scenes 7-18.  

a paper-and-pencil test, since, in the case of the VR-EAL, this procedure 
requires  programming  and  software  development  skills,  which  will 
necessitate more time. Lastly, the VR-EAL may be accessed remotely, yet 
the  unsupervised  (i.e.,  without  a  trained  clinician  or  a  researcher) 
administration of the VR-EAL is not recommended, and the installation 
requires  hardware  (i.e.,  immersive  VR  HMD,  controllers,  motion 
tracking  devices,  and  a  VR-ready  personal  computer)  which  may  be 
unaffordable for an individual to purchase. 

Nevertheless,  as  mentioned  above,  the  AACN  and  NAN  specified 
eight  issues  that  should  be  addressed  to  benefit  from  the  previous 
mentioned advantages of CNADs (Bauer et al., 2012). These issues are 

pertaining to: (1) the safety and effectivity of the CNAD; (2) the identity 
of  the  end-user  (i.e.,  the  operator  of  the  CNAD);  (3)  the  technical 
hardware and software features of the CNAD; (4) privacy and data se-
curity; (5) the psychometric properties of the CNAD; (6) examinee issues 
(e.g.,  cultural,  experiential,  and  disability  issues);  (7)  the  use  of 
reporting services; and (8) the reliability of the responses and results of 
the  CNADs  (i.e.,  the  performance  on  CNADs;  Bauer  et  al.,  2012). 
Therefore, the utility of the VR-EAL should be discussed in relation to the 
guidelines for CNADs by AACN and NAN. The aim of this discussion is to 
highlight how the VR-EAL already satisfies these criteria, as well as to 
identify the shortcomings of the VR-EAL and define the necessary future 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001514P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Fig. 3. VR-EAL storyline: Scenes 3-12.  

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001515P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Fig. 4. VR-EAL storyline: Scenes 14-22.  

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001516P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Table 2 
The main aims and findings of the studies.  

Aims 

Findings 

Identify the technical reasons for 

• The review indicated features 

cybersickness and examine the effect 
of these technical factors in 
neuroscientific and 
neuropsychological studies.  

Develop and validate the VRNQ and 

explore the maximum duration of VR 
sessions.  

Provide guidelines for the development 

of VR software in cognitive 
neuroscience and neuropsychology, 
by describing the development of VR- 
EAL.  

Validate and compare VR-EAL against a 
paper-and-pencil ecologically valid 
neuropsychological battery.  

Examine the focal and non-focal event- 
based, and time-based prospective 
memory using an ecological valid 
research paradigm, as well as to 
identify the cognitive functions which 
predict everyday prospective memory 
functioning.  

pertinent to display, sound, motion 
tracking, navigation mode, ergonomic 
interactions, user experience, and 
computer hardware that should be 
considered by researchers.  

• The meta-analysis of the VR studies 
demonstrated that new generation 
HMDs induce significantly less cyber-
sickness and marginally fewer drop-
outs. Importantly, the commercial 
versions of the new generation HMDs 
with ergonomic interactions had zero 
incidents of adverse symptomatology 
and dropouts. HMDs equivalent to or 
greater than the commercial versions 
of contemporary HMDs, accompanied 
with ergonomic interactions, are suit-
able for implementation in cognitive 
neuroscience. 

• VRNQ is a valid tool for assessing VR 
software in terms of self-reported user 
experience, game mechanics, in-game 
assistance, and cybersickness in-
tensity; it has good convergent, 
discriminant, and construct validity.  
• The maximum duration of VR sessions 
should be between 55 and 70 min 
when the VR software meets or 
exceeds the parsimonious cut-offs of 
the VRNQ, and the users are familiar-
ized with the VR system. 

• The Unity game engine, in conjunction 

with compatible software 
incorporating assets and software 
development kits, assist cognitive 
scientists in overcoming challenges 
pertinent to cybersickness and the 
quality of the VR software. 

• Better in-game assistance, game me-
chanics, and graphics substantially 
increase the quality of the user expe-
rience and almost eradicate 
cybersickness.  

• It is feasible to develop effective VR 

research and clinical software without 
the presence of cybersickness during a 
60-min VR session. 

• VR-EAL scores were significantly 

correlated with their equivalent scores 
on the paper-and-pencil tests. 
• The participants’ self-reports indi-
cated that the VR-EAL tasks were 
considered significantly more ecolog-
ically valid and pleasant to perform 
than the paper-and-pencil neuropsy-
chological battery. Also, the VR-EAL 
battery had a shorter administration 
time. 

• The VR-EAL is a suitable neuropsy-
chological assessment of everyday 
cognitive functions with enhanced 
ecological validity, providing a highly 
pleasant testing experience, and not 
inducing cybersickness. 

• The length of the delay between 
encoding and retrieving the 
prospective memory intention, and 
not the type of prospective memory 
task, appears to play a central role in 
everyday prospective memory.  
• Everyday prospective memory 
functioning is predominantly 
facilitated by episodic memory, 
visuospatial attention, and executive 
functions.  

directions for improving VR-EAL’s utility as a research and clinical tool. 

3.1. End-user, privacy, and reliability issues (points 2, 4, 7, and 8) 

A critical issue is the targeted end-user of the CNAD (i.e., the person 
who  operates  the  CNAD).  As  defined  by  the  American  Psychological 
Association (APA), researchers and clinicians “do not promote the use of 
psychological  assessment  techniques  by  unqualified  persons,  except  when 
such  use  is  conducted  for  training  purposes  with  appropriate  supervision” 
(APA, 2010, Ethical Standard 9.07, Assessment by Unqualified Persons). 
CNADs can be implemented by other professionals who do not have a 
background in psychometrics or neuropsychology but the results should 
be  integrated  and  interpreted  by  a  competent  professional  such  as  a 
cognitive  neuroscientist  or  neuropsychologist  (Bauer  et  al.,  2012). 
Specifically,  the  VR-EAL  should  be  administered  by  a  clinician  or 
researcher who has competency in both neuropsychological assessment 
and immersive VR technologies (Kourtesis et al., 2020b). Therefore, the 
definition that the end-user of VR-EAL should be a trained professional 
hence aligns with the ethical principles of the APA (APA, 2010, Ethical 
Standard 9.07, Assessment by Unqualified Persons). 

or 

collects 

through 

researcher 

Furthermore, regarding privacy and data security, test scoring and 
interpretation, and record keeping, the principal concern of AACN and 
NAN pertains to whether the end-user would be trained to follow the 
respective APA guidelines and ethical standards (Bauer et al., 2012). The 
cognitive neuropsychologist or neuroscientist administering the VR-EAL 
should abide with the record keeping guidelines (e.g., data should be 
stored and encrypted locally) of the APA (APA, 2007, Record Keeping 
Guidelines).  The  VR-EAL  does  not  require  an  internet  connection. 
Hence, the VR-EAL can be run offline, which eliminates the possibility of 
having  the  neuropsychological  data  accessed  by  possible  digital  per-
petuators. The data that the VR-EAL provides should be thus handled 
and stored in the same way as other neuropsychological data that the 
clinician 
(e.g., 
paper-and-pencil  test)  methods.  The  VR-EAL  offers  a.txt  file  to  the 
end-user, where all the recorded data (i.e., response times, duration of 
each task, quantification of various types of errors, and cognitive per-
formance scores) are displayed (Kourtesis et al., 2020b). This.txt file and 
the containing data (e.g., if they have been transferred to an excel file) 
should  be  stored  locally  and  encrypted,  which  is  a  common  practice 
among researchers and clinicians (APA, 2007, Record Keeping Guide-
lines). Moreover, since the end-user of VR-EAL should be an individual 
trained in psychometrics and neuropsychology, the end-user should be 
capable  of  integrating  and  interpreting  the  data  amassed  by  VR-EAL, 
which also agrees with the APA ethical standards for test scoring and 
interpretation  (APA,  2010,  Ethical  Standard  9.09,  Test  Scoring  and 
Interpretation  Services).  Therefore,  the  guideline  that  every  VR-EAL 
end-user  should  be  a  cognitive  neuropsychologist  or  neuroscientist 
meets points 2 (i.e., end-user issues), 4 (i.e., privacy and data security 
issues), and 7 (i.e., scoring and data recording issues) of the guidelines of 
AACN and NAN for the appropriate implementation of CNADs. 

traditional 

Furthermore,  examinee  cooperation  and  sufficient  motivation  are 
crucial  for  obtaining  reliable  neuropsychological  test  scores  (AACN, 
2007; Bauer et al., 2012; Heilbronner et al., 2009). Specifically, partic-
ipants’  efforts have been found to substantially affect performance on 
neuropsychological  tests;  indeed,  in  some  studies,  participants’  effort 
was found to have a greater impact on their cognitive performance than 
the  pathophysiological  condition  (Constantinou,  Bauer,  Ashendorf, 
Fisher, &  McCaffrey, 2005; Stevens, Friedel, Mehen, &  Merten, 2008; 
West, Curtis, Greve, & Bianchini, 2011). However, when the end-user of 
the  CNAD  is  a  trained  clinician  or  researcher,  they  are  capable  of 
identifying behavioural signs (e.g., slow movements when there is not 
any  motor  disability)  that  there  is  reduced  effort  by  the  participant 
through behavioural observation (Bauer et al., 2012; Heilbronner et al., 
2009).  Nevertheless,  the  suspicion  of  poor  effort  on  cognitive  tests 
should  be  further  explored  and  confirmed  (e.g.,  using  an  effort  test; 
Bauer  et  al.,  2012;  Heilbronner  et  al.,  2009).  Consequently,  the 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001517P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

suggestion that the end-user of the VR-EAL should be a trained clinician 
or researcher assists with the detection and confirmation of poor effort 
on  the  VR-EAL’s  tasks.  In  addition,  the  VR-EAL,  as  an  immersive  VR 
software  which  has  game-like  features  (e.g.,  a  user-centred  interface) 
and  simulates  everyday  tasks  within  a  realistic  scenario,  appears  to 
engage  and  motivate  the  examinees  (Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020a,  2020b). 
Notably, our two different samples of participants rated the VR-EAL as a 
highly  pleasant  testing  experience  (Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020a,  2020b). 
Motivating  the  participant  to  perform  the  tasks  is  important  for 
acquiring reliable data, while it also assists with identifying behavioural 
signs  of  poor  effort  (Heilbronner  et  al.,  2009).  Thus,  the  motivating 
nature  of  VR-EAL  (i.e.,  a  highly  pleasant  testing  experience  with  an 
engaging scenario) may also assist with the avoidance or the detection of 
potential  issues  pertaining  to  the  examinee’s  effort.  Nevertheless,  a 
future  version  of  the  VR-EAL  should  also  consider  hand  and  head 
movement speed to appraise whether the examinee is indeed motivated 
to engage with the VR-EAL. This system may assist end-users (clinicians 
and researchers) in detecting malingering or a lack of motivation. 

3.2. Technical features, safety, and effectivity issues (points 1 and 3) 

The AACN and NAN underline that a CNAD should meet the safety 
criteria of the Federal Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act (FD&C; Bauer et al., 
2012). Section 201(h) of the FD&C (21 U.S.C. 301) defines a “medical 
device”  as  “an  instrument,  apparatus,  implement,  machine,  contrivance, 
implant,  in  vitro  reagent,  or  other  similar  or  related  article,  including  a 
component part, or accessory which is … intended for use in the diagnosis of 
disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or preven-
tion of disease, in man or other animals . …”. Hence, a CNAD as a medical 
device should also comply with the safety criteria of FD&C (i.e., to not 
cause  any  harm  to  the  examinees;  Bauer  et  al.,  2012).  Any  inconve-
nience or adverse effects may be attributed to the hardware and software 
features of the CNAD (Bauer et al., 2012; Cernich, Brennana, Barker, & 
Bleiberg,  2007).  Likewise,  the  hardware  and  software  features  of  a 
CNAD may compromise the effectivity of a CNAD and the reliability of 
the acquired neuropsychological and/or physiological data (e.g., Bauer 
et al., 2012; Cernich et al., 2007). Parsons, McMahan, and Kane (2018) 
argued that contemporary hardware (e.g., personal computers with dual 
processors) have the computing power to sustain the parallel operation 
of several software, while software are now developed to exploit and 
effectively  use  this  computing  power.  These  recent  technological  ad-
vancements  pertaining  to  hardware  and  software,  allow  the  parallel 
acquisition of accurate and reliable data such as reaction times, errors, 
neuroimaging data, and physiological data (Parsons, McMahan, & Kane, 
2018). Regarding VR-EAL and VR CNADs, the principal problem is the 
presence of adverse cybersickness, which compromises the safety of the 
participants  and  the  reliability  of  the  acquired  data.  Individuals  with 
conditions which affect the vestibular (e.g., stroke patients) and/or oc-
ulomotor systems (e.g., epileptic patients) may be susceptible to expe-
rience  cybersickness  or  seizures  respectively.  Hence,  the  use  of 
immersive  VR  should  be  avoided  or  excluded  in  individuals  with 
vestibular  and/or  oculomotor  symptoms  or  disorders.  Regarding 
cybersickness,  intense  cybersickness  has  been  found  to  compromise 
overall  cognitive  performance  (i.e.,  neuropsychological  data;  Mittel-
staedt, Wacker, & Stelling, 2019; Nalivaiko, Davis, Blackmore, Vakulin, 
&  Nesbitt,  2015;  Nesbitt,  Davis,  Blackmore,  &  Nalivaiko,  2017)  and 
increase electrical activity and connectivity of frontotemporal and oc-
cipital lobes (i.e., neuroimaging data; Arafat, Ferdous, & Quarles, 2018; 
Gavgani  et  al.,  2018;  Toschi  et  al.,  2017).  The  main  cause  of  cyber-
sickness is the implementation of immersive VR hardware (e.g., HMDs 
and personal computers) of inadequate quality (e.g., low resolution or 
processing power) and/or software that does not have certain features 
(e.g.,  ergonomic  navigation  and  interaction  system;  Kourtesis  et  al., 
2019a; 2019b). 

A  meta-analysis  of  VR  neuropsychological  and  neuroscientific 
studies  confirmed  the  importance  of  hardware  characteristics  for 

removing  cybersickness,  where  studies  that  utilized  contemporary 
HMDs  had  substantially  less  incidents  of  cybersickness  and  dropouts. 
Studies that used an HTC Vive HMD (Kim, Choe, Hwang, & Kwag, 2017) 
with two lighthouse stations for motion tracking (Plouzeau et al., 2015) 
and two HTC Vive wands with six degrees of freedom (6DoF) for navi-
gation  and  interactions  within  the  virtual  environment  (Figueiredo, 
Rodrigues,  Teixeira,  &  Techrieb,  2018)  have  reduced  or  eradicated 
cybersickness. In line with this, the studies of Kourtesis and collabora-
tors (2019b; 2020a; 2020b) used hardware that was in line with these 
hardware-related suggestions. There were no dropouts and the presence 
and  intensity  of  cybersickness  was  minimal  to  none,  which  further 
confirms the importance of the suggested hardware characteristics. Labs 
and  clinics  can  acquire  an  appropriate  HMD  since  commercial 
desktop-based  (e.g.,  HTC  Vive)  and  standalone  (e.g.,  Oculus  Quest) 
HMDs can be purchased for a relatively low price (e.g., $300 - $500; 
Kourtesis et al., 2019a). As a result, recent immersive VR studies have 
implemented HMDs which meet the minimum hardware characteristics 
(e.g.,  Banakou,  Kishore,  &  Slater,  2018;  Detez  et  al.,  2019;  George, 
Demmler, & Hussmann, 2018; Mottelson & Hornnaek, 2017; Parsons & 
McMahan, 2017). Also, the VR-EAL is only compatible with these recent 
HMDs. Therefore, the VR-EAL appears to meet the hardware criteria of 
AACN  and  NAN,  which  ensure  the  safety  of  the  examinees  and  the 
reliability of the acquired data. 

Beyond the hardware characteristics, the quality of the software is 
also  important  to  avoid  or  alleviate  cybersickness  incidence  and  in-
tensity.  Using  an  appropriate  HMD  and  hardware  when  the  software 
does  not  have  the  required  characteristics  may  still  result  in  intense 
cybersickness and dropouts (e.g., Detez et al., 2019). Navigation within 
the virtual environment should be facilitated by teleportation or phys-
ical movement or a combination of both (Porcino et al., 2017), and the 
interactions  with  the  virtual  environment  should  be  ergonomic  and 
naturalistic  (Figueiredo  et  al.,  2018).  Furthermore,  the  in-game  in-
structions, prompts, and tutorials should provide the user with adequate 
and salient information regarding the storyline, controls, and orienta-
tion  (Jerald,  LaViola,  &  Marks,  2017).  Lastly,  the  audio  and  ambient 
sounds within the virtual environment should be spatialized and of high 
quality (Vorl¨ander & Shinn-Cunningham, 2014). On the basis of these 
recommendations,  the  VR-EAL  combines  teleportation  and  physical 
movement  as  a  navigation  method  (Porcino  et  al.,  2017),  provides 
haptic  information  and  has  ergonomic  and  naturalistic  interactions 
(Figueiredo  et  al.,  2018),  spatialized  and  high  definition  audio 
(Vorl¨ander  &  Shinn-Cunningham,  2014),  and  several  informative 
in-game  instructions,  prompts,  and  tutorials  (Jerald  et  al.,  2017).  In 
Kourtesis et al. (2019b), the cybersickness intensity was minimal and 
only related to fatigue. In Kourtesis et al. (2020a; 2020b), the imple-
mentation of VR-EAL showed no dropouts and the cybersickness inci-
dence and intensity was negligible and again solely related to fatigue. 
These results replicated across all three studies confirming the signifi-
cance of software features in avoiding or alleviating the incidence and 
intensity  of  cybersickness,  as  well  as  demonstrating  that  the  VR-EAL 
incorporates  these  software  features  and  does  not  induce  significant 
cybersickness, which complies with the software criteria of AACN and 
NAN. 

These VR software features are not only crucial for the avoidance or 
alleviation of cybersickness, but also for the efficiency of the VR soft-
ware.  The  ultimate  purpose  of  VR  is  to  immerse  individuals  deeply 
enough to deceive the brain into believing that the virtual world is the 
real world. The depth of immersion depends  on the strength of three 
perceptual illusions: the placement, plausibility, and embodiment illu-
sions (Maister, Slater, Sanchez-Vives, & Tsakiris, 2015; Pan & Hamilton, 
2018; Slater, 2009; Slater, Spanlang, &  Corominas, 2010). The place-
ment illusion is the deception that the virtual environment is a real one; 
hence, it depends on how close the virtual environment is to an equiv-
alent  real  environment  (Slater,  2009;  Slater,  2018).  The  plausibility 
illusion is the deception that the virtual environment reacts to the laws 
of  physics  and  the  actions  of  the  participant,  thus,  it  depends  on  the 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001518P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

proximity of the virtual environment’s behaviour and senses to real life 
(Slater, 2009; Slater, 2018). The embodiment illusion is the deception 
that the virtual body of the participant is her/his own body; hence, it 
depends on the proximity of the virtual body’s appearance and behav-
iour  (i.e.,  synchronized  with  the  movements  in  the  physical  environ-
ment) to the participant’s real body and movement (Maister et al., 2015; 
Pan & Hamilton, 2018). 

Beyond the level of immersion, the three illusions (i.e., placement, 
plausibility,  and  embodiment)  are  also  important  for  the  ecological 
validity of the immersive VR CNADs. The three illusions ensure that the 
individual will perform the tasks as s/he would perform them in real life 
(Maister et al., 2015; Pan & Hamilton, 2018; Slater, 2009; Slater, 2018). 
The  VR-EAL  has  substantially  strong  placement  and  plausibility  illu-
sions, and a moderate embodiment illusion. Our participants reported 
that these illusions resulted in deep immersion levels (Kourtesis et al., 
2020a, 2020b). Kourtesis and collaborators (2020b) provided an explicit 
description  of  how  the  VR-EAL  tasks  were  designed  to  resemble 
everyday  life  tasks  (e.g.,  cooking,  shopping,  and  finding  items  in  the 
living room). Notably, the participants reported that the VR-EAL tasks 
are  very  similar  to  the  corresponding  tasks  that  they  perform  in 
everyday  life  (Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020a).  Also,  the  performance  of  the 
participants on the VR-EAL tasks was significantly correlated with their 
performance on ecologically valid paper-and-pencil tasks. Hence, these 
two  studies  propose  that  the  three  illusions  are  crucial  to  ecological 
validity, as suggested by the previous literature (i.e., Maister et al., 2015; 
Pan & Hamilton, 2018; Slater, 2009; Slater, 2018). Thus, in line with the 
criteria of the Federal Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act, the software features 
of  VR-EAL  enabled  the  VR-EAL  to  efficiently  achieve  its  purpose  of 
delivering  an  ecological  valid  assessment  of  these  everyday  cognitive 
functions. 

Finally, another safety measure is to provide an adequate space for 
immersion  and  naturalistic  interaction  within  virtual  environments 
(Borrego et al., 2018). In line with Borrego and collaborators’  recom-
mendation, the VR-EAL should be implemented in a VR area of 5 m2, 
which should be clear of obstacles to allow the user to interact freely 
with the VR environment. Also, the VR-EAL embeds a chaperone (see 
SteamVR)  which  informs  the  user  when  participants  approach  the 
boundaries of the VR area. In addition, the VR-EAL has a teleportation 
system  for  navigation,  which  reduces  the  requirement  for  physical 
walking and the likelihood of falling on physical obstacles (e.g., a wall). 
Notably, the researcher or clinician should also be in the same room and 
supervise the examinee in order to intervene whenever appropriate (e. 
g.,  the  user  approaches  the  wall).  Following  these  precautions,  the 
VR-EAL facilitates a safe testing procedure. 

3.3. Psychometric properties issues (point 5) 

An important issue highlighted by the AACN and NAN is that, similar 
to traditional psychometric tests, the CNADs abide with the same stan-
dards  and  conventions  of  psychometric  test  development,  such  as 
providing  evidence  regarding  their  reliability,  validity,  and  utility 
(Bauer  et  al.,  2012).  The  information  pertaining  to  the  psychometric 
properties of the CNAD, which support the claimed purpose or appli-
cation of the test, should be provided to potential end-users of the CNAD 
(Bauer  et  al., 2012). Notably, the APA ethical standards (APA, 2010) 
state that, “Psychologists who develop tests and other assessment techniques 
use  appropriate  psychometric  procedures  and  current  scientific  or  profes-
sional  knowledge  for  test  design,  standardization,  validation,  reduction  or 
elimination of bias, and recommendations for use” (Standard 9.05). Hence, 
all cognitive tests, either traditional or CNAD, must meet the minimum 
psychometric standards for reliability and validity. The validity of a test 
examines different psychometric properties of the test such as the con-
tent validity (i.e., the test measures the cognitive domain that is sup-
posed to measure; e.g., episodic memory), construct validity (i.e., the 
test measures the cognitive function(s) that it is supposed to measure), 
and  criterion-related  validity  (e.g.,  diagnostic  validity,  the  test 

efficiently  detects  a  cognitive  disorder  such  as  Alzheimer’s  disease; 
Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). Similarly, the aspects that are examined 
for the reliability of a test are the internal consistency (i.e., the consis-
tency across all the items of the test), rest-retest (i.e., consistency over 
time), alternate forms (i.e., consistency across all forms/versions of the 
test),  and  inter-rater  reliability  (i.e.,  consistency  of  the  scores  across 
diverse examiners; Nunnally &  Bernstein, 1994). Importantly, as APA 
(2010) Ethical Standard 9.02 (Use of Assessments), Section (b) states, 
“Psychologists use assessment instruments whose validity and reliability have 
been established for use with members of the population tested. When such 
validity  or  reliability  has  not  been  established,  psychologists  describe  the 
strengths and limitations of test results and interpretation.” 

In VR-EAL, the principal aim was to develop an immersive VR neu-
ropsychological  battery  with  enhanced  ecological  validity  for  the 
assessment  of  cognitive  functions  central  in  everyday  functioning. 
Hence, VR-EAL had to be consistent with the available ecologically valid 
assessments of these everyday cognitive functions. For the development 
of VR-EAL, the procedures and scoring systems of established ecologi-
cally valid paper-and-pencil tests such as the Test of Everyday Attention 
(Robertson, Ward, Ridgeway, and Nimmo-Smith, 1994), the Rivermead 
Behavioral Memory Test – III (Wilson, Cockburn, & Baddeley, 2008), the 
Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (Wilson, Evans, 
Emslie,  Alderman,  &  Burgess,  1996),  and  the  Cambridge  Prospective 
Memory Test (Wilson et al., 2005) were meticulously studied. However, 
the fact that the development of VR-EAL was based on the procedures 
and scoring of established ecological valid tests does not ensure that the 
VR-EAL will have equivalent psychometric properties. As the AACN and 
NAN  suggest,  even  a  computerised  version  of  an  established 
paper-and-pencil test should be treated as a new test, for which validity 
(e.g., content and construct validity) should be examined and confirmed 
(Bauer  et  al.,  2012).  For  this  reason,  the  psychometric  properties  of 
VR-EAL were assessed, where performance on the VR-EAL tasks signif-
icantly correlated with performance on the equivalent ecologically valid 
tests,  which  also  supported  the  construct  and  content  validity  of  the 
VR-EAL to assess these everyday cognitive functions (Kourtesis et  al., 
2020a). In addition, the VR-EAL tasks were rated by participants as more 
substantially  more  ecologically  valid  than  the  corresponding  tasks  of 
these tests, which may be attributed to the benefits of using immersive 
VR methods (Kourtesis et al., 2020a). 

Overall, the content, construct, and ecological validity were explored 
and supported (Kourtesis et al., 2020a). Additionally, the VR-EAL has 
shown  good  internal  consistency  (i.e.,  reliability;  Kourtesis  et  al., 
2020a). Furthermore, high inter-rater reliability is warranted in every 
VR CNAD. Since the VR-EAL has a standardised and automated scoring 
method, there are not any differences across diverse end-users (i.e., the 
VR-EAL has perfect inter-rater reliability). However, since the VR-EAL 
does not have alternate forms, alternate-form reliability and test-retest 
consistency  were  not  examined.  The  test-retest  reliability  of  VR-EAL 
should be explored in future work. As both the validity and reliability 
of  a  test  are  not  unitary  psychometric  properties,  they  should  be 
re-examined as populations and the testing context changes over time 
(Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). Notably, the eventual aim of CNADs, such 
as  VR-EAL,  is  their  utilisation  for  research  and  clinical  purposes  in 
healthy aging and clinical groups such as dementias (Anderson & Craik, 
2017),  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder  and  autism  (Karalunas 
et al., 2018), mild cognitive impairment (Schmitter-Edgecombe et al., 
2009), acquired and traumatic brain injuries (Groot, Wilson, Evans, & 
Watson, 2002), HIV (Woods et al., 2008), schizophrenia (Twamley et al., 
2008),  and  Parkinson’s  disease  (Pirogovsky  et  al.,  2012).  Thus,  the 
administration of the VR-EAL in healthy aging and clinical populations 
may highlight its clinical utility through an exploration of its diagnostic 
validity (e.g., in the detection of mild cognitive impairment) and pre-
dictive  validity  (e.g.,  predicting  everyday  functionality  and  the  inde-
pendence of older adults). 

One limitation of this series of studies is that the VR-EAL was only 
administered to healthy young adults (18–45 years old) who are unlikely 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)1001519P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

to  demonstrate  any  cognitive  impairments  or  disorders  (Chaytor  & 
Schmitter-Edgecombe, 2003). Hence, the validity of the VR-EAL should 
also  be  studied in  older  adults  and  it  may  elucidate  issues  associated 
with cognitive ageing. For example, an age-related paradox is observed 
in relation to prospective memory and older adults, where older adults 
are  impaired  on  laboratory-based  prospective  memory  tasks,  but 
perform better than younger adults on naturalistic tasks (Schnitzspahn, 
Ihle,  Henry,  Rendell,  &  Kliegel,  2011).  Due  to  their  increased 
life-experience and crystallised intelligence, older adults appear to be 
more effective in using environmental cues and compensatory strategies 
such  as  having  a  structured  plan  of  action  (e.g.,  noting  down  the 
sequence of necessary tasks), setting reminders (e.g., using notes, alarm 
clocks,  or  smartphones),  making  stronger  and  more  complex  associa-
tions between a task and an environmental cue (e.g., seeing a building, 
which  used  to  be  a  post-office  in  the  past,  may  remind  them  of  the 
intention to mail a postcard to a relative), and using specialised items (e. 
g.,  using  a  dosette  box  to  manage  medications;  Chaytor  & 
Schmitter-Edgecombe,  2003;  Marsh,  Hicks,  &  Landau,  1998;  Schnitz-
spahn et al., 2011). However, the utilisation of such techniques is not 
feasible in non-ecologically valid tests because their structured proced-
ures only allow participants to respond or perform the task in a certain 
way (e.g., pressing a button on the keyboard, when seeing a specific item 
on the screen; Marsh et al., 1998; Schnitzspahn et al., 2011). 

Consequently,  the  prospective  memory  age-related  paradox  high-
lights  the  importance  of  ecological  validity  in  the  assessment  of 
everyday  cognitive  functioning  (Chaytor  &  Schmitter-Edgecombe, 
2003; Schnitzspahn et al., 2011). However, tasks performed in the real 
world (e.g., Marsh et al., 1998) cannot be standardized to allow their 
administration  in  other  clinics  or  laboratories  (Parsons,  2015).  Also, 
they may not be appropriate for some individuals in challenging pop-
ulations (e.g., a patient using a wheelchair), they are time-consuming 
and  expensive  (e.g.,  they  require  participant  transport  and  consent 
from local businesses), and they do not have experimental control over 
the external situation (Parsons, 2015). In contrast, immersive VR CNADs 
like  VR-EAL  enable  an  adequate  level  of  experimental  control,  while 
they  are  more  cost-effective  and  inclusive  than  real-world  tasks  (i.e., 
naturalistic tasks; Parsons, 2015). 

Potentially the VR-EAL could be used in the future to investigate the 
age-related  paradox  in  prospective  memory  functioning  in  older  and 
younger  adults.  This  may  also  clarify  the  veridicality  and  predictive 
validity of VR-EAL by examining the existence of potential relationships 
between  VR-EAL  scores  and  established  questionnaires  assessing  the 
ability to perform instrumental activities of daily life. Also, the inclusion 
of  patients  with  mild  cognitive  impairment,  which  is  a  challenging 
population  for  diagnostic  cognitive  tests  (i.e.,  tests  frequently  fail  to 
achieve an adequately high sensitivity and specificity in differentiating 
individuals  with  mild  cognitive  impairment  from  healthy  controls; 
Schmitter-Edgecombe et al., 2009), may inform on the predictive val-
idity of VR-EAL by examining its sensitivity and specificity in differen-
tiating older adults with mild cognitive impairment from healthy older 
adults. In summary, in line with the guidelines of AACN and NAN on 
providing evidence for a CNAD’s utility (i.e., psychometric properties), 
this series of studies has demonstrated the ecological validity of VR-EAL, 
as well as its content and construct validity in young adults. However, 
the  experimental  and  clinical  utility  of  VR-EAL  should  be  further 
explored in healthy older adults and individuals with major (e.g., de-
mentias)  or  mild  (e.g.,  mild  cognitive  impairment)  neurocognitive 
disorders. 

3.4. Examinee issues (point 6) 

Another important concern of AACN and NAN regarding the imple-
mentation  of  CNAD  is  that  individual  differences  (e.g.,  age,  culture, 
education,  motor abilities,  and  computer  skills) may  affect  the exam-
inees’ performance on CNADs (Bauer et al., 2012). For these reasons, the 
developers of CNADs should investigate how diverse age, and cultural 

and educational backgrounds may affect the performance of the exam-
inees, and then provide normative data correspondingly (Bauer et al., 
2012). Furthermore, cognitive, motor, or sensory disabilities might have 
an  impact  on  the  examinees’  ability  to  perform  the  CNAD’s  tasks 
effectively;  hence, the suitability  of the  tests for  individuals with  dis-
abilities  should  be  explored  and  documented  (Bauer  et  al.,  2012). 
Finally, competency and familiarity with computers may also affect the 
validity  of  the  CNAD’s  results  (Bauer  et  al.,  2012).  Indeed,  there  are 
significant individual differences pertaining to the competency and fa-
miliarity  with  computer  use  (Iverson,  Brooks,  Ashton,  Johnson,  & 
Gualtieri, 2009). For example, gamers have been found to have faster 
perceptual processing speed compared to non-gamers, regardless their 
performance  on  tasks  (e.g.,  number  of  errors  and  correct  responses; 
Kowal, Toth, Exton, &  Campbell, 2018). Importantly, the results from 
computerized  versus  paper-and-pencil  tests  may  be  substantially 
different  in  computer-familiarized  versus  computer-naive  populations 
(Feldstein et al., 1999; Iverson et al., 2009). 

However,  the  examinee’s  competency  in  using  computers  mainly 
influences  performance  on  non-immersive  CNADs.  The  user  interface 
and  procedure  of  non-immersive  CNADs  can  be  challenging  for  in-
dividuals  without  gaming  backgrounds  or  familiarization  with  com-
puters  (Parsons  et  al.,  2018;  Zaidi,  Duthie,  Carr,  &  Maksoud,  2018), 
especially for older adults (Werner & Korczyn, 2012; Zygouris & Tsolaki, 
2015). On the other hand, immersive VR CNADs appear to rely signifi-
cantly less on gaming or computing ability than non-immersive CNADs 
(Bohil,  Alicea,  &  Biocca,  2011;  Parsons,  2015;  Teo  et  al.,  2016).  The 
first-person perspective in conjunction with naturalistic interactions (i. 
e., close to real-life actions) assist non-gamers to perform comparable to 
gamers in immersive VR environments (Zaidi et al., 2018). Indeed, the 
findings of the series of Kourtesis and collaborators’  studies indicated 
that the gaming ability of the examinee does not affect the utilisation of 
immersive VR technologies and performance on the VR-EAL. There was 
no significant difference between gamers and non-gamers in the dura-
tion of the VR session (Kourtesis et al., 2019b). Similarly, performance 
on the VR-EAL appeared to demonstrate no difference between gamers 
and non-gamers (Kourtesis et al., 2020a, 2020b). Finally, performance 
on  the  VR-EAL  was  not  found  to  be  affected  by  age  or  educational 
background. Therefore, the VR-EAL appears to be appropriate for the 
assessment  of  young  individuals  regardless  of  their  educational  back-
ground, age, or competency in using computers. 

However, as discussed above, the VR-EAL should also be adminis-
tered to older adults to investigate their attitudes towards VR-EAL, and 
whether their competency in computers affects their performance on the 
VR-EAL. Nevertheless, recent studies have found that older adults, after 
using  immersive  software,  expressed  a  very  positive  attitude  towards 
immersive VR technologies and rated immersive VR software as a highly 
pleasant experience, while they did not experience adverse cybersick-
ness (Appel et al., 2020; Brown, 2019; De Vries, Van Die¨en, Van Den 
Abeele,  &  Verschueren,  2018;  Huygelier,  Schraepen,  van  Ee,  Vanden 
Abeele, & Gillebert, 2019). Also, the application of immersive VR soft-
ware was feasible in older adults with lower-motor disabilities (Appel 
et al., 2020; Brown, 2019), as well as in older adults with various levels 
of cognitive impairments (i.e., mild, moderate, and severe; Appel et al., 
2020). However, older adults were found to prefer and perform better on 
immersive VR software that has ergonomic and naturalistic interactions 
(De  Vries  et  al.,  2018).  Furthermore,  both  younger  and  older  adults 
showed an increased motivation to perform cognitive tasks in immersive 
VR rather than traditional paper-and-pencil tests (Corriveau Lecavalier, 
Ouellet,  Boller,  &  Belleville,  2020).  Finally,  the  performance  of  both 
younger and older adults on episodic memory tasks in an immersive VR 
traditional 
CNAD  were  analogous 
paper-and-pencil  episodic  memory  tests,  indicating  that  the  perfor-
mance  of  both  younger  and  older  adults  was  not  affected  by  their 
competency in using computers (Corriveau Lecavalier et al., 2020). 

their  performance  on 

to 

In this series of studies, the VR-EAL, which provides ergonomic and 
naturalistic  interactions,  was  rated  as  a  highly  pleasant  testing 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)10015110P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

experience by younger adults, whose performance on the VR-EAL was 
substantially  correlated  with  their  performance  on  equivalent  paper- 
and-pencil  tests.  Therefore,  based  on  the  findings  of  the  aforemen-
tioned  studies  (i.e.,  Appel  et  al.,  2020;  Brown,  2019;  Corriveau 
Lecavalier et al., 2020; De Vries et al., 2018), in conjunction with the 
findings of this series of studies, it may be hypothesized that the future 
implementation of VR-EAL in older adults with diverse functionality (i. 
e., healthy individuals, individuals with cognitive impairments and/or 
lower-motor disabilities) is feasible. Furthermore, the implementation 
of VR-EAL in older adults is expected to offer a pleasant testing expe-
rience without cybersickness and show equivalent psychometric prop-
erties  regardless their gaming/computing ability. Nevertheless, future 
implementations of the VR-EAL in diverse populations will allow one to 
examine VR-EAL’s psychometric properties, strengths, and limitations 
to create more detailed documentation to assist VR-EAL’s end-users with 
implementing VR-EAL competently. 

3.5. Beyond the AACN & NAN criteria 

The NAN and  AACN criteria were formulated concerning comput-
erized  neuropsychological assessment  devices. However, at  that time, 
the chances and challenges of VR or extended reality (XR) applications 
were  not  yet  foreseeable.  Thus,  the  guidelines  and  criteria  should  be 
updated to address the ethical and practical challenges specific to VR 
and  XR  applications.  As  discussed  above,  Kourtesis  et  al.  (2019b) 
showed the maximum duration of VR sessions without the presence of 
cybersickness. In our later work, we provided guidelines for the devel-
opment of VR software appropriate for neuropsychological research or 
clinical  practices  (Kourtesis  et  al.,  2020b).  Ethical  and  privacy  impli-
cations in mixed reality applications (Bye, Hosfelt, Chase, Miesnieks, & 
Beck,  2019)  and  developing  virtual  worlds  (e.g.,  VR  applications),  as 
well  as  implementing  them  in  training,  education,  psychotherapy, 
rehabilitation,  marketing,  entertainment,  and  research  (Slater  et  al., 
2020)  have  also  been  discussed.  Vasser  and  Aru  (2020)  provided 
guidelines  for  implementing  immersive  VR  systems  in  psychological 
research. Finally, Krohn and collaborators (2020) developed a multidi-
mensional evaluation framework for VR applications in clinical neuro-
psychology (a.k.a. VR-Check). 

The VR-Check framework encompasses 10 principal evaluation di-
mensions,  such  as  cognitive  domain  specificity,  ecological  relevance, 
technical feasibility, user feasibility, user motivation, task adaptability, 
performance  quantification,  immersive  capacities,  training  feasibility, 
and predictable pitfalls. As Table 3 displays, there is indeed a compa-
rability  between  the  AACN  and  NAN  criteria  with  the  VR-Check 
framework  dimensions.  This  could  indicate  that  the  VR-EAL  also  sat-
isfies the dimensions-issues raised by Krohn et al. (2020). Furthermore, 
although the AACN & NAN Criteria can be used to evaluate a VR-CNAD 
like  VR-EAL,  VR-Check  addresses  issues  pertaining  specifically  to  VR 
software. A future joint position and guidelines for AACN & NAN may 
include  the  dimensions  of  the  VR-Check  Framework  as  well  as  the 
guidelines raised by other VR studies (e.g., Bye et al., 2019; Kourtesis 

Table 3 
Comparability of AACN & NAN criteria with VR-Check framework.  

VR – Check Framework 

AACN & NAN Criteria 

Cognitive Domain Specificity 

Psychometric properties (point 5) 

Ecological Relevance 

Task Adaptability 
Technical Feasibility 
User Feasibility 
User Motivation 
Performance Quantification 

Immersive Capacities 
Expected Pitfalls 
Training Feasibility 

Reliability Issues (points 7, 8) 
Technical Features (point 1) 
End-user issues (point 2) 
Examinee Issues (point 6) 
Reliability Issues (point 7) 
Privacy Issues (point 4) 
Technical Features (point 1) 
Safety and Effectivity Issues (point 3) 
NA  

et al., 2020b, 2019b; Slater et al., 2020; Vasser & Aru, 2020). 

4. Limitations and future directions 

This  series  of  studies  also  have  some  limitations  that  should  be 
considered.  As  the  current  series  of  studies  aimed  to  explore  the 
appropriateness and utility of the immersive VR methods in cognitive 
neuroscience and neuroscience, the various types of VR software (i.e., 
including  VR-EAL)  were  only  administered  to  younger  healthy  adults 
with a relatively high level of education. While performance on the VR- 
EAL was not found to be affected by age, education, or gaming ability, it 
would be important for these relationships to be examined in a more 
education-  and  age-diverse  population  including  older  adults.  Also, 
technological means like immersive VR may further contribute in the 
diagnosis  and  care  of  major  neurocognitive  disorders  like  dementia 
(Moyle, 2019). As discussed above, the clinical and experimental utility 
of the VR-EAL should be further investigated in individuals with neu-
rocognitive disorders, including Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive 
impairment. 

VR-EAL  offers  an  assessment  of  prospective  memory  and  relevant 
cognitive functions central to everyday functioning (Kourtesis, Collina, 
Doumas,  &  MacPherson,  2021;  Kourtesis  &  MacPherson,  2021). 
Impaired prospective memory is frequently found in healthy older in-
dividuals  (Huppert,  Johnson,  &  Nickson, 2000), as  well  as  in  clinical 
populations  such  as  Alzheimer’s  disease  (Jones,  Livner,  &  B¨ackman, 
2006), individuals with mild cognitive impairment (Costa, Caltagirone, 
& Carlesimo, 2011), and autism spectrum disorder (Sheppard, Bruine-
berg,  Kretschmer-Trendowicz,  &  Altgassen,  2018).  The  ecologically 
valid  examination  of  prospective  memory  may  hence  assist  with 
improving  our  understanding  of  everyday  prospective  memory  func-
tioning, and consequently provide ways to improve functioning in in-
dividuals  with  impaired  prospective  memory.  Also,  administering  the 
VR-EAL to both younger and older adults may help to probe the effect 
of  aging  on  prospective  memory.  Older  adults  have  reported  a  high 
acceptance of immersive VR systems (Huygelier et al., 2019; Syed-Abdul 
et al., 2019). These findings further postulate that the VR-EAL could be 
administered in older adults or individuals with neurocognitive disor-
ders. Nevertheless, the clinical utility and predictive validity of VR-EAL 
has to be explored in future studies. 

Furthermore, the VR-EAL presented some limitations as a CNAD in 
our  series  of  studies.  As  discussed  above,  the  VR-EAL  induces  strong 
placement and plausibility illusions, though, the embodiment illusion is 
only  of  moderate  strength  because  it  only  relies  on  hand/controller 
movements. The embodiment illusion relates to the illusion of owning a 
virtual body (i.e., virtual avatar; Maister et al., 2015; Pan & Hamilton, 
2018) and  is important for acquiring cognitive and behavioural data, 
which  resemble  the  individual’s  cognition  and  behaviour  in  real  life 
(Maister et al., 2015; Pan &  Hamilton, 2018). Despite this limitation, 
VR-EAL was rated as very similar to real life (i.e., enhanced ecological 
validity);  however,  improvement  in  the  embodiment  illusion  would 
probably  increase  the  already  enhanced  ecological  validity  of  the 
VR-EAL. The most common and easy technique to create a responsive 
virtual body is the utilisation of software development kits (e.g., VRIK, 
Final IK, and IK for VR) which offer reliable and accurate inverse kine-
matics  (i.e.,  animating  the  virtual  avatar  with  respect  to  the  user’s 
movements; Lugrin et al., 2018). 

Nonetheless, the virtual body should be as close as possible to the 
actual appearance and body of the examinee. Owning a virtual body that 
is dissimilar to the examinee’s body may affect the performance of the 
examinee, either positively or negatively (Maister et al., 2015; Pan & 
Hamilton, 2018). For example, owning a virtual body which resembles 
that  of  Albert  Einstein  was  found  to  significantly  increase  cognitive 
performance (Banakou et al., 2018). Regardless of whether the impact of 
the virtual body on cognitive performance is positive or negative, the 
virtual body that an immersive VR CNAD like VR-EAL offers should be as 
similar as possible to the examinee’s body in order that the observed 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)10015111P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

cognitive  performance  relates  to  the  examinee’s  everyday  cognitive 
ability. Hence, a future version of VR-EAL should include an application 
(e.g., using a photograph(s) of the examinee) which generates a virtual 
avatar  that  looks  similar  to  the  participant  as  in  other  immersive  VR 
software (e.g., EngageVR). 

Also,  the  VR-EAL  does  not  have  a  mechanism  to  measure  time 
monitoring, although there is a digital watch which the examinee uses to 
monitor time. Time monitoring has been found to be crucial in time- 
based  prospective  memory  functioning  (McFarland  &  Glisky,  2009; 
Mioni & Stablum, 2014; Vanneste, Baudouin, Bouazzaoui, & Taconnat, 
2016). One way to implement time monitoring is to use the same gaze 
interaction system as in the VR-EAL visual attention task. Here, the gaze 
interaction system uses an invisible ray emitted (i.e., ray-casting) from 
the forehead point between the eyes (i.e., the upper point of the nose) 
straight towards the centre of the participant’s field of view. This would 
allow for the recording of when and how many times the participant 
reads the time on the digital watch. The inclusion of a quantified time 
monitoring score in a future version of the VR-EAL will facilitate a more 
comprehensive assessment of time-based prospective memory. 

Moreover, prospective memory components (e.g., retrospective), cue 
attributes (e.g., focality and salience of the cue) and the role of executive 
functions are important in prospective memory functioning, and they 
should be further explored in future studies. However, ecological valid 
CNADs like VR-EAL, which simulate everyday tasks (e.g., cooking), may 
be susceptible to confounding factors and fail to thoroughly examine a 
specific cognitive process. On the other hand, laboratory tasks are able 
to exclude confounding factors and permit the examination of a specific 
cognitive process. Nevertheless, laboratory tasks in their current form 
suffer from limitations such as their two-dimensional environment, non- 
naturalistic  and  non-ergonomic  responses  (i.e.,  using  a  keyboard,  a 
button box, or joystick), static stimuli, and a substantial divergence from 
looking realistic. The utilisation of immersive VR technologies may be 
capable of resolving the limitations of laboratory tasks. Immersive VR 
◦
laboratory  experiments  would  facilitate  a  360
testing  environment, 
which incorporates realistic and dynamic stimuli, where the participant 
can interact in an ergonomic and naturalistic way (i.e., using wands/ 
controllers or her/his own hands). Therefore, immersive VR laboratory 
experiments would minimize the divergence from real-life conditions, 
while facilitating a meticulous examination of the prospective memory 
components and cue attributes, as well as the role of executive functions 
in prospective memory functioning. 

The VR-EAL can be utilized as an entire scenario for the assessment 
of  everyday  prospective  memory,  episodic  memory,  visual  attention, 
visuospatial  attention,  auditory  attention,  and  executive  functions. 
However,  the VR-EAL also offers a  shorter  scenario, where  the afore-
mentioned  cognitive  functions  can  be  assessed  without  prospective 
memory  and  auditory  attention.  Moreover,  the  VR-EAL  tasks  may  be 
administered independently (i.e., a generic tutorial, a specific tutorial 
for this task, and the storyline task) for the assessment of an individual 
cognitive function (e.g., multitasking, visual attention). Hence, VR-EAL 
could  be  considered  as  a  mini  library  of  immersive  VR  cognitive  as-
sessments.  In  the  future,  the  sum  of  VR-EAL  assessments  (i.e.,  whole 
scenario, short scenario, and independent tasks) in conjunction with any 
future immersive VR CNAD may form an open access and source library 
of  immersive  VR  software  for  cognitive  neuroscience  and  neuropsy-
chology. Considering the widespread adoption of open access and source 
tools  such  as  PsychoPy  (Peirce,  2007,  2009),  OpenSesame  (Mathˆot, 
Schreij, &  Theeuwes, 2012), R software (Culpepper &  Aguinis, 2011), 
and the Psych Package (Revelle, 2011) in the last decade, the creation of 
an open access and source library of immersive VR software will pro-
mote  the  adoption  of  immersive  VR  technologies  in  cognitive  neuro-
science and neuropsychology. 

Immersive VR technologies (i.e., HMDs) are compatible with elec-
troencephalography  (EEG;  Teo  et  al.,  2016),  eye-tracking  (Pettersson 
et al., 2018), and near-infrared spectroscopy (Teo et al., 2016). Neuro-
imaging  and  eye-tracking  techniques  been  used  in  combination  with 

immersive VR in several studies (e.g., Hofmann et al., 2018; Pettersson 
et al., 2018; Singh, Gramann, Chen, & Lin, 2021). Although combining 
neuroimaging  and  eye-tracking  techniques  with  immersive  VR  has 
shown great potential for advancing psychological research, they have 
not been extensively implemented together (Pettersson et al., 2018; Teo 
et  al.,  2016).  Future  immersive  VR  software  for  implementation  in 
cognitive  neuroscience  should  strive  to  incorporate  neuroscientific 
methods. 

Eye-tracking may offer a detailed map with the trajectories of the 
examinee’s  eye  gaze  alongside  response  times  (i.e.,  the  time  that  the 
examinee’s gaze fell on this point) and performance on the immersive 
VR CNAD (Pettersson et al., 2018). For example, combining eye-tracking 
with  an  immersive  VR  CNAD  may  assist  with  clarifying  whether 
impaired performance on a cognitive task (e.g., abstract reasoning) is 
indeed due to an impaired ability on the assessed cognitive function or 
due  to  impaired  attentional  processes  (Pettersson  et  al.,  2018).  Com-
parable to traditional approaches, combining neuroimaging techniques 
(e.g.,  EEG) with  an immersive  VR CNAD may inform  on which  brain 
regions  are  activated  when  a  cognitive  task  is  performed  (Teo  et  al., 
2016). Also, the combined implementation of immersive VR software 
with neuroimaging techniques such as EEG facilitates the utilisation of a 
brain  computer  interface  (BCI;  i.e.,  a  direct  communication  pathway 
between the brain and an external device), where the examinee controls 
her/his virtual body in the virtual environment by activating predefined 
brain regions (Teo et al., 2016). For example, the examinee thinks the 
word  “forward”  to  move  her/his  virtual  body  forward  in  the  virtual 
environment. Using a BCI allows examinees with severe motor disabil-
ities (e.g., tetraplegic) to perform tasks in an immersive VR CNAD (Teo 
et al., 2016). Hence, an open access and source library for immersive VR 
software in cognitive neuroscience should facilitate and/or incorporate 
some of the aforementioned neuroscientific methods (e.g., eye-tracking 
and EEG). 

5. Conclusions 

This series of studies endeavoured to address the shortcomings per-
taining to the implementation of immersive VR technologies in cognitive 
neuroscience and neuropsychology by providing essential technological 
knowledge  for  the  selection  of  appropriate  hardware  (i.e.,  HMDs, 
external, and computer) and software, as well as guidelines for the in- 
house  and  cost-effective  development  of  immersive  VR  software.  In 
addition,  an  advancement  of  the  current  available  immersive  VR 
research  methods  was  attempted  by  developing  and  validating  the 
VRNQ and VR-EAL. The VRNQ appears to be a valid and reliable tool for 
the appraisal of the intensity of cybersickness and the VR software fea-
tures which are crucial for the alleviation or avoidance of cybersickness. 
The VR-EAL is the first immersive VR neuropsychological battery with 
enhanced ecological validity for the assessment of everyday cognitive 
functions,  which  facilitates  a  pleasant  testing  experience  without 
inducing cybersickness. The VR-EAL was also found able to contribute to 
the  understanding  of  everyday  cognitive  functions,  which  provides 
further evidence for the utility of immersive VR methods in cognitive 
neuroscience and neuropsychology. It is hoped that the findings of these 
series of studies have demonstrated the utility of immersive VR methods 
for improving the ecological validity and realism of neuropsychological 
assessment. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgments 

The VR-EAL is a free software that can be used by any clinician or 
researcher. PK is the developer of VR-EAL. Both authors were involved 
in  the  studies  where  VR-EAL  was  developed  and  implemented.  The 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)10015112P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

software  review was  conducted  based  on  the  objective  criteria of  the 
National Academy of Neuropsychology and the American Academy of 
Clinical Neuropsychology. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

References 

American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology. (2007). American Academy of Clinical 
Neuropsychology (AACN) practice guidelines for neuropsychological assessment and 
consultation. Clinical Neuropsychology, 21(2), 209–231. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13825580601025932 

American Psychological Association. (2007). Record keeping guidelines. American 
Psychologist, 62(9), 993–1004. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.62.9.993 

American Psychological Association. (2010). Ethical principles of psychologists and code 
of conduct (2010 amendments). Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/i 
ndex.aspx. 

Anderson, N. D., & Craik, F. I. (2017). 50 years of cognitive aging theory. Journal of 
Gerontology: Series B, 72(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbw108 

Appel, L., Appel, E., Bogler, O., Wiseman, M., Cohen, L., Ein, N., … Campos, J. L. (2020). 
Older adults with cognitive and/or physical impairments can benefit from immersive 
virtual reality experiences: A feasibility study. Frontiers of Medicine, 6, 329. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2019.00329 

Arafat, I. M., Ferdous, S. M. S., & Quarles, J. (2018). March). Cybersickness-provoking 
virtual reality alters brain signals of persons with multiple sclerosis. In 2018 IEEE 
conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) (pp. 1–120). IEEE. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/VR.2018.8446194.  

Banakou, D., Kishore, S., & Slater, M. (2018). Virtually being Einstein results in an 

improvement in cognitive Task performance and a decrease in age bias. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 9, 917. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00917 

Bauer, R. M., Iverson, G. L., Cernich, A. N., Binder, L. M., Ruff, R. M., & Naugle, R. I. 

(2012). Computerized neuropsychological assessment devices: Joint position paper 
of the American Academy of clinical neuropsychology and the national Academy of 
neuropsychology. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 27(3), 362–373. https://doi. 
org/10.1093/arclin/acs027 

Bohil, C. J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2011). Virtual reality in neuroscience research and 
therapy. In Nature reviews neuroscience (Vol. 12)Nat Rev Neurosci. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nrn3122. Issue 12. 

Borrego, A., Latorre, J., Alca˜niz, M., & Llorens, R. (2018). Comparison of Oculus Rift and 
HTC vive: Feasibility for virtual reality-based exploration, navigation, exergaming, 
and rehabilitation. Games for Health Journal, 7(3), 151–156. https://doi.org/ 
10.1089/g4h.2017.0114 

Brown, J. A. (2019). An exploration of virtual reality use and application among older 
adult populations. Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, 5. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
2333721419885287 

Bye, K., Hosfelt, D., Chase, S., Miesnieks, M., & Beck, T. (2019). The ethical and privacy 

implications of mixed reality. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2019 panels (pp. 1–2). 

Cernich, A. N., Brennana, D. M., Barker, L. M., & Bleiberg, J. (2007). Sources of error in 

computerized neuropsychological assessment. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 
22S, S39–S48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2006.10.004 

Chaytor, N., & Schmitter-Edgecombe, M. (2003). The ecological validity of 

neuropsychological tests: A review of the literature on everyday cognitive skills. In 
Neuropsychology review (Vol. 13, pp. 181–197). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1023/B: 
NERV.0000009483.91468.fb. Issue 4. 

Constantinou, M., Bauer, L., Ashendorf, L., Fisher, J. M., & McCaffrey, R. J. (2005). Is 

poor performance on recognition memory effort measures indicative of generalized 
poor performance on neuropsychological tasks? Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 
20, 191–198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2004.06.002 

Corriveau Lecavalier, N., Ouellet, ´E., Boller, B., & Belleville, S. (2020). Use of immersive 
virtual reality to assess episodic memory: A validation study in older adults. 
Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 30(3), 462–480. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09602011.2018.1477684 

Costa, A., Caltagirone, C., & Carlesimo, G. A. (2011). Prospective memory impairment in 
mild cognitive impairment: An analytical review. Neuropsychology Review, 21(4), 
390–404. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-011-9172-z 

Culpepper, S. A., & Aguinis, H. (2011). R is for revolution: A cutting-edge, free, open 

source statistical package. Organizational Research Methods, 14(4), 735–740. https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/1094428109355485 

De Vries, A. W., Van Die¨en, J. H., Van Den Abeele, V., & Verschueren, S. M. (2018). 

Understanding motivations and player experiences of older adults in virtual reality 
training. Games for Health Journal, 7(6), 369–376. https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
g4h.2018.0008 

Detez, L., Greenwood, L. M., Segrave, R., Wilson, E., Chandler, T., Ries, T., … Yücel, M. 

(2019). A psychophysiological and behavioural study of slot machine near-misses 
using immersive virtual reality. Journal of Gambling Studies, 1–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10899-018-09822-z 

Feldstein, S. N., Keller, F. R., Protman, R. E., Durham, R. L., Klebe, K. J., & Davis, H. P. 
(1999). A comparison of computerized and standard version of the Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 13, 303–313. https://doi.org/10.1076/ 
clin.13.3.303.1744 

Figueiredo, L., Rodrigues, E., Teixeira, J., & Techrieb, V. (2018). A comparative 

evaluation of direct hand and wand interactions on consumer devices. Computers & 
Graphics, 77, 108–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2018.10.006 

Gavgani, A. M., Wong, R. H., Howe, P. R., Hodgson, D. M., Walker, F. R., & Nalivaiko, E. 

(2018). Cybersickness-related changes in brain hemodynamics: A pilot study 
comparing transcranial Doppler and near-infrared spectroscopy assessments during a 

virtual ride on a roller coaster. Physiology & Behavior, 191, 56–64. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.04.007 

George, C., Demmler, M., & Hussmann, H. (2018, April). Intelligent interruptions for 
IVR: Investigating the interplay between presence, workload and attention. In 
Extended abstracts of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (p. 
LBW511). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188686.  

Groot, Y. C., Wilson, B. A., Evans, J., & Watson, P. (2002). Prospective memory 

functioning in people with and without brain injury. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 8(5), 645–654. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S1355617702801321 

Heilbronner, R. L., Sweet, J. J., Morgan, J. E., Larrabee, G. J., Millis, S. R., & Conference 
Participants. (2009). American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology Consensus 
Conference Statement on the neuropsychological assessment of effort, response bias, 
and malingering. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 23(7), 1093–1129. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13854040903155063 

Hofmann, S. M., Klotzsche, F., Mariola, A., Nikulin, V. V., Villringer, A., & Gaebler, M. 
(2018, December). Decoding subjective emotional arousal during a naturalistic VR 
experience from EEG using LSTMs. In 2018 IEEE international conference on Artificial 
intelligence and virtual reality (AIVR) (pp. 128–131). IEEE.  

Huppert, F. A., Johnson, T., & Nickson, J. (2000). High prevalence of prospective 

memory impairment in the elderly and in early-stage dementia: Findings from a 
population-based study. Applied Cognitive Psychology: The Official Journal of the 
Society for Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 14(7), S63–S81. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/acp.771 

Huygelier, H., Schraepen, B., van Ee, R., Vanden Abeele, V., & Gillebert, C. R. (2019). 
Acceptance of immersive head-mounted virtual reality in older adults. Scientific 
Reports, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-41200-6 

Iverson, G. L., Brooks, B. L., Ashton, V. L., Johnson, L. G., & Gualtieri, C. T. (2009). Does 

familiarity with computers affect computerized neuropsychological test 
performance? Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 31, 594–604. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13803390802372125 

Jerald, J., LaViola, J. J., Jr., & Marks, R. (2017, July). VR interactions. In ACM 

SIGGRAPH 2017 courses (p. 19). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3084873.3084900.  

Jones, S., Livner, Å., & B¨ackman, L. (2006). Patterns of prospective and retrospective 

memory impairment in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology, 20(2), 144. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0894-4105.20.2.144 

Karalunas, S. L., Hawkey, E., Gustafsson, H., Miller, M., Langhorst, M., Cordova, M., … 
Nigg, J. T. (2018). Overlapping and distinct cognitive impairments in attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity and autism spectrum disorder without intellectual disability. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 46(8), 1705–1716. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10802-017-0394-2 

Kim, J. W., Choe, W. J., Hwang, K. H., & Kwag, J. O. (2017, May). 78-2: The optimum 

display for virtual reality. In SID symposium digest of technical papers (Vol. 48, pp. 
1146–1149). https://doi.org/10.1002/sdtp.11845. No. 1. 

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2019a). Technological 
competence is a precondition for effective implementation of virtual reality head 
mounted displays in human neuroscience: A technological review and meta-analysis. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 342. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2019.00342 

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2019b). Validation of 
the virtual reality neuroscience questionnaire: Maximum duration of immersive 
virtual reality sessions without the presence of pertinent adverse symptomatology. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 417. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2019.00417 

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2020). Validation of the 
virtual reality everyday assessment Lab (VR-EAL): An immersive virtual reality 
neuropsychological battery with enhanced ecological validity. Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S1355617720000764 

Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2021). An ecologically 

valid examination of event-based and time-based prospective memory using 
immersive virtual reality: The effects of delay and task type on everyday prospective 
memory. Memory, 29(4), 486–506. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09658211.2021.1904996. In this issue. 

Kourtesis, P., Korre, D., Collina, S., Doumas, L. A. A., & MacPherson, S. E. (2020b). 

Guidelines for the development of immersive virtual reality software for cognitive 
neuroscience and neuropsychology: The development of virtual reality everyday 
assessment Lab (VR-EAL), a neuropsychological test battery in immersive virtual 
reality. Frontiers of Computer Science, 1, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fcomp.2019.00012 

Kourtesis, P., & MacPherson, S. E. (2021). An ecologically valid examination of event- 
based and time-based prospective memory using immersive virtual reality: The 
facilitation of real-world prospective memory by attention, memory, and executive 
function processes. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation. In press. 

Kowal, M., Toth, A. J., Exton, C., & Campbell, M. J. (2018). Different cognitive abilities 
displayed by action video gamers and non-gamers. Computers in Human Behavior, 88, 
255–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.07.010 

Krohn, S., Tromp, J., Quinque, E. M., Belger, J., Klotzsche, F., Rekers, S., … Th¨one- 

Otto, A. (2020). Multidimensional evaluation of virtual reality paradigms in clinical 
neuropsychology: Application of the VR-check framework. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 22(4), Article e16724. https://doi.org/10.2196/16724 

Lugrin, J. L., Ertl, M., Krop, P., Klüpfel, R., Stierstorfer, S., Weisz, B., … Latoschik, M. E. 
(2018). March). Any “body” there? Avatar visibility effects in a virtual reality game. 
In 2018 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR) (pp. 17–24). 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2018.8446229.  

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)10015113P. Kourtesis and S.E. MacPherson                                                                                                                                                                                                           

Maister, L., Slater, M., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., & Tsakiris, M. (2015). Changing bodies 
changes minds: Owning another body affects social cognition. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 19(1), 6–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.11.001 

Marsh, R. L., Hicks, J. L., & Landau, J. D. (1998). An investigation of everyday 
prospective memory. Memory & Cognition, 26(4), 633–643. https://doi.org/ 
10.3758/BF03211383 

Mathˆot, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). OpenSesame: An open-source, graphical 
experiment builder for the social sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 44(2), 
314–324. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0168-7 

McFarland, C. P., & Glisky, E. L. (2009). Frontal lobe involvement in a task of time-based 
prospective memory. Neuropsychologia, 47(7), 1660–1669. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.023 

Mioni, G., & Stablum, F. (2014). Monitoring behaviour in a time-based prospective 

memory task: The involvement of executive functions and time perception. Memory, 
22(5), 536–552. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2013.801987 

Schnitzspahn, K. M., Ihle, A., Henry, J. D., Rendell, P. G., & Kliegel, M. (2011). The age- 
prospective memory-paradox: An exploration of possible mechanisms. International 
Psychogeriatrics, 23(4), 583–592. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1041610210001651 
Sheppard, D. P., Bruineberg, J. P., Kretschmer-Trendowicz, A., & Altgassen, M. (2018). 

Prospective memory in autism: Theory and literature review. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 32(5), 748–782. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13854046.2018.1435823 

Singh, A. K., Gramann, K., Chen, H. T., & Lin, C. T. (2021). The impact of hand movement 
velocity on cognitive conflict processing in a 3D object selection task in virtual 
reality. NeuroImage, 226, 117578. 

Slater, M. (2009). Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in 

immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 364(1535), 3549–3557. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0138 
Slater, M. (2018). Immersion and the illusion of presence in virtual reality. British Journal 

of Psychology, 109(3), 431. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12305 

Mittelstaedt, J. M., Wacker, J., & Stelling, D. (2019). VR aftereffect and the relation of 
cybersickness and cognitive performance. Virtual Reality, 23, 143–154. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10055-018-0370-3 

Slater, M., Gonzalez-Liencres, C., Haggard, P., Vinkers, C., Gregory-Clarke, R., Jelley, S., 
… Silver, J. (2020). The ethics of realism in virtual and augmented reality. Frontiers 
in Virtual Reality, 1, 1. 

Mottelson, A., & Hornbæk, K. (2017). November). Virtual reality studies outside the 

Slater, M., Spanlang, B., & Corominas, D. (2010, July). Simulating virtual environments 

laboratory. In Proceedings of the 23rd acm symposium on virtual reality software and 
technology (p. 9). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3139131.3139141.  

Moyle, W. (2019). The promise of technology in the future of dementia care. Nature 
Reviews Neurology, 15(6), 353–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-019-0188-y 

Nalivaiko, E., Davis, S. L., Blackmore, K. L., Vakulin, A., & Nesbitt, K. V. (2015). 

Cybersickness provoked by head-mounted display affects cutaneous vascular tone, 
heart rate and reaction time. Physiology & Behavior, 151, 583–590. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.08.043 

Nesbitt, K., Davis, S., Blackmore, K., & Nalivaiko, E. (2017). Correlating reaction time 
and nausea measures with traditional measures of cybersickness. Displays, 48, 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2017.01.002 

Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd ed.). New York: 

McGraw-Hill.  

Pan, X., & Hamilton, A. F. D. C. (2018). Why and how to use virtual reality to study 
human social interaction: The challenges of exploring a new research landscape. 
British Journal of Psychology, 109(3), 395–417. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12290 
Parsons, T. D. (2015). Virtual reality for enhanced ecological validity and experimental 

control in the clinical, affective and social neurosciences. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00660 

Parsons, T. D., & McMahan, T. (2017). An initial validation of the virtual environment 
grocery store. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 291, 13–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jneumeth.2017.07.027 

Parsons, T. D., McMahan, T., & Kane, R. (2018). Practice parameters facilitating adoption 
of advanced technologies for enhancing neuropsychological assessment paradigms. 
The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 32(1), 16–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13854046.2017.1337932 

Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy—psychophysics software in Python. Journal of 

Neuroscience Methods, 162(1–2), 8–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jneumeth.2006.11.017 

Peirce, J. W. (2009). Generating stimuli for neuroscience using PsychoPy. Frontiers in 

Neuroinformatics, 2, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.11.010.2008 

Pettersson, J., Albo, A., Eriksson, J., Larsson, P., Falkman, K. W., & Falkman, P. (2018). 

June). Cognitive ability evaluation using virtual reality and eye tracking. In 2018 
IEEE international conference on computational intelligence and virtual environments for 
measurement systems and applications (CIVEMSA) (pp. 1–6). IEEE. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/CIVEMSA.2018.8439999.  

Pirogovsky, E., Woods, S. P., Filoteo, J. V., & Gilbert, P. E. (2012). Prospective memory 
deficits are associated with poorer everyday functioning in Parkinson’s disease. 
Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 18(6), 986–995. https://doi. 
org/10.1017/S1355617712000781 

Plouzeau, J., Paillot, D., Chardonnet, J. R., & Merienne, F. (2015). Effect of 

proprioceptive vibrations on simulator sickness during navigation task in virtual 
environment. In International conference on Artificial reality and relexistence. Kyoto, 
Japan http://hdl.handle.net/10985/10422. 

Porcino, T. M., Clua, E., Trevisan, D., Vasconcelos, C. N., & Valente, L. (2017, April). 

Minimizing cyber sickness in head mounted display systems: Design guidelines and 
applications. In Serious games and applications for health (SeGAH), 2017 IEEE 5th 
international conference on (pp. 1–6). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
SeGAH.2017.7939283.  

Revelle, W. (2011). An overview of the Psych package. Evanston, IL: Department of 

Psychology, Northwestern University. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=psych.  

Robertson, I. H., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V., Nimmo-Smith, I., et al. (1994). The test of 

everyday attention (TEA) (pp. 197–221). Bury St. Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test 
Company. 

Sahakian, B. J., & Owen, A. M. (1992). Computerized assessment in neuropsychiatry 
using CANTAB: Discussion paper. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 85(7), 
399–422. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1629849. 

Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., Woo, E., & Greeley, D. R. (2009). Characterizing multiple 

within virtual environments as the basis for a psychophysics of presence. In ACM 
transactions on graphics (TOG) (Vol. 29, p. 92). ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
1778765.1778829. No. 4. 

Stevens, A., Friedel, E., Mehen, G., & Merten, T. (2008). Malingering and 

uncooperativeness in psychiatric and psychological assessment: Prevalence and 
effects in a German sample of claimants. Psychiatric Research, 157, 191–200. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2007.01.003 

Syed-Abdul, S., Malwade, S., Nursetyo, A. A., Sood, M., Bhatia, M., Barsasella, D., et al. 
(2019). Virtual reality among the elderly: A usefulness and acceptance study from 
Taiwan. BMC Geriatrics, 19(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12877-019-1218-8 
Teo, W. P., Muthalib, M., Yamin, S., Hendy, A. M., Bramstedt, K., Kotsopoulos, E., … 
Ayaz, H. (2016). Does a combination of virtual reality, neuromodulation and 
neuroimaging provide a comprehensive platform for neurorehabilitation?–A 
narrative review of the literature. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 284. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00284 

Toschi, N., Kim, J., Sclocco, R., Duggento, A., Barbieri, R., Kuo, B., et al. (2017). Motion 
sickness increases functional connectivity between visual motion and nausea- 
associated brain regions. Autonomic Neuroscience, 202, 108–113. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.autneu.2016.10.003 

Twamley, E. W., Woods, S. P., Zurhellen, C. H., Vertinski, M., Narvaez, J. M., 

Mausbach, B. T., … Jeste, D. V. (2008). Neuropsychological substrates and everyday 
functioning implications of prospective memory impairment in schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Research, 106(1), 42–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
schres.2007.10.030 

Vanneste, S., Baudouin, A., Bouazzaoui, B., & Taconnat, L. (2016). Age-related 

differences in time-based prospective memory: The role of time estimation in the 
clock monitoring strategy. Memory, 24(6), 812–825. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09658211.2015.1054837 

Vasser, M., & Aru, J. (2020). Guidelines for immersive virtual reality in psychological 
research. Current Opinion in Psychology, 36, 71–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
copsyc.2020.04.010 

Vorl¨ander, M., & Shinn-Cunningham, B. (2014). Virtual auditory displays. In K. S. Hale, 
& K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments (pp. 107–134). Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press. https://dl.acm.org/doi/book/10.5555/2721506.  

Werner, P., & Korczyn, A. D. (2012). Willingness to use computerized systems for the 
diagnosis of dementia: Testing a theoretical model in an Israeli sample. Alzheimer 
Disease and Associated Disorders, 26(2), 171–178. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
wad.0b013e318222323e 

West, L. K., Curtis, K. L., Greve, K. W., & Bianchini, K. J. (2011). Memory in traumatic 
brain injury: The effects of injury severity and effort on the Wechsler Memory Scale- 
III. Journal of Neuropsychology, 5, 114–125. https://doi.org/10.1348/ 
174866410X521434 

Wilson, B. A., Alderman, N., Burgess, P. W., Emslie, H., & Evans, J. J. (1996). Behavioural 
assessment of the dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS). Bury St. Edmunds, UK: Thames 
Valley Test Company.  

Wilson, B. A., Cockburn, J., & Baddeley, A. (2008). The Rivermead behavioural memory 

test. Bury St Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Company.  

Wilson, B. A., Evans, J. J., Emslie, H., Foley, J., Shiel, A., Watson, P., et al. (2005). The 
Cambridge prospective memory test: CAMPROMPT. London: Harcourt Assessment.  

Woods, S. P., Iudicello, J. E., Moran, L. M., Carey, C. L., Dawson, M. S., & Grant, I. 
(2008). HIV-associated prospective memory impairment increases risk of 
dependence in everyday functioning. Neuropsychology, 22(1), 110. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/0894-4105.22.1.110 

Zaidi, S. F. M., Duthie, C., Carr, E., & Maksoud, S. H. A. E. (2018, December). Conceptual 
framework for the usability evaluation of gamified virtual reality environment for 
non-gamers. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGGRAPH international conference on 
virtual-reality continuum and its applications in industry (p. 13). ACM. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3284398.3284431.  

memory deficits and their relation to everyday functioning in individuals with mild 
cognitive impairment. Neuropsychology, 23(2), 168. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
a0014186 

Zygouris, S., & Tsolaki, M. (2015). Computerized cognitive testing for older adults: A 
review. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias, 30(1), 13–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1533317514522852 

ComputersinHumanBehaviorReports4(2021)10015114