Dissolving yourself in connection to others: Shared experiences of ego attenuation and 

connectedness during group VR experiences can be comparable to psychedelics   

David R. Glowacki,1,2,* Rhoslyn Roebuck Williams,1,3,4 Mark D. Wonnacott,3,4 Olivia M. Maynard,1,5 Rachel 
Freire,1,6 James E. Pike,1,2 Mike Chatziapostolou1,2 

1Isness-D Node Network; 2ArtSci International Foundation, Bristol, UK; 3Intangible Realities Laboratory, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK; 4Centre for Computational Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; 5School of Psychological Science, 
University of Bristol, UK; 6Rachel Freire Studio, London, UK 

With a growing body of research highlighting the therapeutic potential of experiential phenomenology which diminishes egoic 

identity and increases one’s sense of connectedness, there is significant interest in how to elicit such ‘self-transcendent experiences’ 

(STEs) in laboratory contexts. Psychedelic drugs (YDs) have proven particularly effective in this respect, producing subjective 

phenomenology which reliably elicits intense STEs. With virtual reality (VR) emerging as a powerful tool for constructing new 

perceptual  environments,  we  describe  a  VR  framework  called  ‘Isness-distributed’  (Isness-D)  which  harnesses  the  unique 

affordances of distributed multi-person VR to blur conventional self-other boundaries. Within Isness-D, groups of participants co-

habit a shared virtual space, collectively experiencing their bodies as luminous energetic essences with diffuse spatial boundaries. 

It enables moments of ‘energetic coalescence’, a new class of embodied phenomenological intersubjective experience where bodies 

can fluidly merge, enabling participants to have an experience of including multiple others within their self-representation. To 

evaluate Isness-D, we adopted a citizen science approach, coordinating an international network of Isness-D 'nodes'. We analyzed 

the results (N = 58) using 4 different self-report scales previously applied to analyze subjective YD phenomenology (the inclusion 

of  community  in  self  scale,  ego-dissolution  inventory,  communitas  scale,  and  the  MEQ30  mystical  experience  questionnaire). 

Despite the complexities associated with a distributed experiment like this, the Isness-D scores on all 4 scales were statistically 

indistinguishable  from  recently  published  YD  studies,  demonstrating  that  distributed  VR  can  be  used  to  design  intersubjective 

STEs where people dissolve their sense of self in the connection to others. 

*www.glow-wacky.com 
© The authors, Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 (creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  INTRODUCTION 

Describing the sensations that arose immediately following a left-hemisphere stroke, brain scientist Jill Bolte Taylor recounted: 
I could no longer define the boundaries of my body. I can’t define where I begin and where I end, because the atoms and molecules 
of my arm blend with the atoms and molecules of the wall, and all I could detect was this energy... I was immediately captivated 
by the magnificence of the energy around me. And because I could no longer identify the boundaries of my body, I felt enormous 
and expansive. I felt at one with all the energy that was, and it was beautiful. (1) Recounting the sensations that arose after seeing 
the Earth from space, astronaut Edgar Mitchell said: And suddenly I realized that the molecules of my body, the spacecraft, the 
body  of  my  partners,  were  all  manufactured  in  some  ancient  generation  of  stars.  I  felt  an  overwhelming  sense  of  oneness,  or 
connectedness... an insight, an epiphany. (2) During a particularly potent meditation session Zen master Sokei-an Sasaki recounted 
how: I lost the boundary of my physical body. I had my skin, of course, but I felt I was standing in the center of the cosmos… I saw 
people coming towards me, but all were… myself! (3) Recounting the sensations which arose from a high dose of the psychedelic 
drug (YD) psilocybin, a participant in a 2008 Griffiths et al. study recounted a feeling of no boundaries, where I didn’t know where 
I ended and where my surroundings began. Somehow I was able to comprehend what oneness is. (4)  

These accounts, which express a profound sense of unity with other beings and other objects, stand in contrast to our typical 
day-to-day perspective, in which we often default to conceptual representations of ourselves (and others) as separate objects rather 
than coupled interdependent subjects. Yaden et al. have coined the term ‘self-transcendent experiences’ (STEs) to describe transient 
mental states in which the subjective sense of one’s self as an isolated entity can temporarily fade into an experience of unity with 

other people or one’s surroundings, involving the dissolution of boundaries between the sense of self and ‘other’ (5). Research 
across  psychology,  neuroscience,  philosophy,  pharmacology,  and  theology  has  drawn  attention  to  the  meaning  and  insight 
attributed to STEs by those who undergo them. Because they have been studied across so many different knowledge domains, they 
are described using different terminology, conceptual frameworks, and theoretical lenses, which makes it complicated to perform 
a comprehensive analysis of their subjective qualities, behavioral effects, and therapeutic potential. In an attempt to draw conceptual 
links across these various domains, Yaden et al. have proposed the following mental states as STEs: 1) Flow states, (6) which arise 
from focused absorption in an interesting and challenging task; 2) Mindfulness states, (7) which are characterized by moment-to-
moment, open, nonjudgmental awareness; 3) Awe, (8) which often results from the perception of vastness (e.g., immensity in size, 
number, scope, complexity, etc.), and the subsequent need to accommodate this vastness; 4) Peak Experiences, (9) relatively rare 
events that were originally named by Maslow, and which typically include a feeling of merging with the universe; and 5) Mystical-
Type  Experiences,  (10)  a  particularly  intense  class  of  experience  often  characterized  by  ineffability,  a  feeling  of  internal  and 
external  unity,  changes  in  the  experience  of  space  and  time,  and  interwoven  senses  of  connectedness,  sacredness,  and  noetic 

qualities. 

The phenomenology associated with different classes of STEs varies in saliency and visceral potency. As such, STEs have a 
broad range of intensities, some of which are more or less memorable, and thereby more significant for the person undergoing the 
experience. For example, “losing oneself” whilst reading a book or writing computer code may represent a relatively weak STE; 
whereas the deep sense of interdependence with the cosmos that arises from a spiritual ‘God-encounter’ experience represents a 
considerably  more  intense  form  of  STE.  (11)  Analysis  by  Yaden  et  al.  suggests  that  STEs  involve  at  least  two  interrelated 
phenomenological  ingredients:  1)  an  ‘annihilation’  of  the  sense  of  self,  accomplished  by  dissolving  self-boundaries  and  self-
salience; and 2) a ‘relational’ sense of unity with something beyond the self (e.g., others or the natural world). The intensity of an 
STE is associated with the degree to which the participant experiences these interrelated phenomenological ingredients. While the 
precise sense of ‘self’ is difficult to define here, several different studies have nevertheless demonstrated the effectiveness of the 
so-called  Inclusion  of  Other  in  the  Self  (IOS)  Scale  (12)  for  assessing  the  degree  to  which  an  individual  feels  a  sense  of 
connectedness to others or to their environment. As shown in Fig 1, this scale represents individuals and others as distinct circles. 

2 

During weak unitive experiences, overlap between the circles is small; during particularly intense unitive experiences the overlap 
is more significant, representing an individual’s sense that ‘the other’ forms a significant part of the self. 

Figure 1: The Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale, which offers a continuum for expressing the sense of unitive feelings 

William  James  suggested  that  particularly  intense  classes  of  STEs  –  namely  ‘mystical  type  experiences’  (MTEs),  where 
participants often describe a profound sense of unity with their surroundings – can have lasting positive, transformative, and life-
changing effects. Recent analysis of questionnaire data from more than 4000 participants by Griffiths et al. (11) seems aligned with 
James’ supposition: individuals who had undergone intense MTEs arising from subjective spiritual experiences rated them to be 
amongst  their  most  meaningful  and  spiritually  significant  life  experiences,  associated  with  persistent  positive  changes  in  life 
satisfaction  and  purpose.  Given  their  long-term  therapeutic  benefit,  increasing  research  effort  has  been  directed  to  explore 
technologies  for  reliably  eliciting  MTEs  in  a  laboratory  context.  In  this  respect,  psychedelic  drugs  (YDs)  have  emerged  as  a 
particularly promising way of producing subjective phenomenology similar to non-drug MTEs, (11) and are associated with lasting 
therapeutic  benefit  in  addressing  depression,  addiction,  and  end-of-life-anxiety.  (4,  13-16)  Unitive  experiences  of 
interconnectedness  are  common  during  YD  experiences,  where  they  are  often  associated  with  subjective  perception  of  ego 
dissolution (17-19), near-death-like experiences, (20) altered perception of both time and space, (21) and a sense of the ineffable. 
(11) For example, a 2006 Griffiths et al. study showed that 67% of participants who had subjective MTEs while taking psilocybin 
as part of a ‘psychedelic psychotherapy’ program considered the experience to be amongst the most meaningful experiences of 
their lives. Despite their potential, YDs face a number of practical challenges to widespread administration: they produce intense 
phenomenology that can lead to transient fear or panic, (13) and therefore require expensive psychotherapy support; YDs also 
invoke  short-term  physiological  responses  like  increased  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure,  (22)  sometimes  leading  to  headaches, 
nausea,  and  vomiting;  and  ongoing  questions  remain  how  to  determine  a  YD  dose  that  reliably  elicits  therapeutic  effects  but 
minimizes the aforementioned risks. Finally, YDs face significant regulatory challenges, which vary considerably across cultures. 
Given  the  various  challenges  associated  with  YD  administration,  there  has  been  emerging  research  exploring  non-drug 
technologies for reliably eliciting STEs. Virtual Reality (VR) has emerged as a particularly interesting candidate (23, 24) given its 

ability to create strong alterations in perceptual phenomenology. For example, Glowacki et al. (25) recently described a multi-
person VR experience called ‘Isness’, where four participants co-located in the same physical and virtual space (Fig 2A) experience 
the  collective  emergence,  fluctuation,  and  dissipation  of  their  bodies  (and  those  of  their  co-participants)  as  diffuse  energetic 
essences. The subjective MTEs produced by this co-located version of Isness (Isness-C) were evaluated (N = 57) using the MEQ30, 

(26,  27)  a  commonly  used  YD  experience  questionnaire.  (28)  Glowacki  et  al.  compared  the  Isness-C  MEQ30  results  to  those 
obtained  from  more  than  540  participants  in  26  previous  YD  studies  and  showed  that  the  Isness-C  scores  were  statistically 
indistinguishable from MEQ30 scores following moderate-to-high doses of YDs. Isness-C participants reported positive emotions, 
a unitive sense of connectedness, a weakening of ego boundaries, and awareness of pure presence that was less distracted by ego. 

Isness-C offers a case study demonstrating that multi-person VR can be used to design group experiences that create the conditions 
for intense STEs from which participants derive insight and meaning. To distinguish technologies like Isness from psychedelic 
technologies, Glowacki et al. coined the term numadelic. Combining the Greek words pneuma (pneuµa, ‘breath’, ‘spirit’, or ‘soul’) 
and delein (dhlein, ‘to reveal’, ‘to make visible’, or ‘to manifest’), numadelic may be translated as ‘spirit-manifesting’ or ‘spirit-

3 

 
 
 
 
revealing’. The numadelic aspect of Isness-C arises from the fact that participant bodies are represented as luminous energetic 
essences, an aesthetic representation associated with ‘spirit’ in a variety of wisdom and meditation traditions. 

Figure 2: (A) the co-located version of Isness (Isness-C), an intersubjective multi-person group VR experience which Glowacki et al. showed 
produces MEQ30 scores comparable to moderate to high doses of YDs; (B) the distributed version of Isness (Isness-D), with four participants 
simultaneously joining a session from different Isness-D nodes distributed across the world. 

While Isness-C was (to the best of our knowledge) the first study using the MEQ30 to analyse subjective participant experience 
in a VR context, previous work has investigated the ability of both 2d and immersive video content to elicit two phenomenological 
ingredients known to be important components of a subjective YD-MTE, namely: 1) altered visual perception, (29) and 2) a sense 
of awe. (23, 30) The former has been studied by Suzuki et al., who presented individuals with immersive 360 videos derived from 
Google’s deep dream convolutional neural nets, rendered in a VR headset. (31, 32) Their results (N = 12) suggested that it is 
possible  to  induce  visual  phenomenology  similar  to  psilocybin;  however,  they  were  unable  to  evoke  in  participants  the 
corresponding  sense  of  temporal  distortion  that  psilocybin  produces.  The  latter  –  awe  –  has  been  the  topic  of  several  studies. 
Broadly,  these  studies  have  shown  that  awe  can  be  reliably  elicited  by  presenting  individuals  with  video  content  of  various 
environments, e.g.: views from a mountaintop, within a vast open space, seeing earth from space, submerged in the ocean, amongst 
very tall trees, etc. (33-38) Recent fMRI studies suggest that participants presented with awe-eliciting 2d videos have reduced 
activity in the brain’s default mode network, (39) which is an ego-reaffirming neurological network that YDs also attenuate. (15) 

Chirico et al. showed that immersive videos rendered in head-mounted-displays (HMDs) are able to elicit a stronger sense of awe 
compared to standard 2d videos, (33) given that VR enables a heightened sense of immersion. (40, 41)  

The two items which Yaden et al. identified as primary phenomenological ingredients of STEs – 1) a weakened sense of self-
boundaries  and  diminished  self-salience;  and  2)  a  ‘relational’  sense  of  unity  with  something  beyond  the  self  –  are  not  easy  to 

untangle. The difficulty becomes apparent by undertaking a simple thought experiment, imagining the dynamics that arise when 
two drops of liquid water coalesce: their individual identities and associated properties fade away as their respective boundaries 
co-mingle and eventually dissolve into one another, eventually creating a drop with new physical properties. Characterizing the 
softness, fluidity, or porosity of a body’s boundaries is impossible without corresponding observations of the dynamics that unfold 

when  it  undergoes  some  form  of  relational  interaction  with  another  body.  The  tight  relational  co-dependence  of  these 
phenomenological ingredients, in which one is required to characterize the other and vice-versa, suggests that they are perhaps best 
realized in a multi-body, relational context. This observation highlights a potentially significant gap in YD laboratory studies and 
efforts to design STEs using VR: nearly all of the work described to date involves individual, intrasubjective experiences.  

4 

 
 
2  PRESENT WORK 

In what follows, we describe our efforts designing intersubjective group STEs which enable participants distributed across the 
world (e.g., as shown in Fig 2B and 3A) to collectively co-habit a shared virtual space and undergo an embodied phenomenological 
experience of the overlap shown in the Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale in Fig 1 (albeit in 4d (x, y, z, t) rather than 2d). Specifically, 
we constructed a multi-person cloud-mounted VR experience called Isness-distributed (Isness-D), which is illustrated in Fig 3A 
and Fig 3B. Harnessing the unique affordances of distributed multi-person VR, Isness-D’s numadelic aesthetic blurs conventional 
boundaries between self and other. Isness-D participants are rendered as luminous energetic essences with radiance concentrated 
at the heart centre. Compared to the hard boundaries illustrated in the IOS Scale (Fig 1), Isness-D body boundaries are diffuse, 
fuzzy, and soft: they extend beyond the limits of the physical body, making it difficult to specify clearly where one body ends and 
another begins, as shown in Fig 3B. This energetic aesthetic takes inspiration from subjective 1st person accounts describing intense 
unitive experiences of the sort described at the beginning of this article, which often report a heightened sensitivity to a more 
fundamental energetic essence, and to the molecular and atomic constituents that combine to create our bodies and everything 
around  us.  The  numadelic  aesthetic  is  aligned  with  fundamental  insights  of  modern  physics  (e.g.,  quantum  mechanics),  which 
emphasizes that objects have wave-like energetic essences and behaviors. Unlike their classical counterparts, waves are energetic 
processes  and  fundamentally  non-local.  This  emphasis  on  matter’s  energetic  essence  (rather  than  a  localized  materiality)  is 
famously encapsulated by David Bohm’s description of matter as ‘frozen light’. Karl Popper similarly observed: Matter turns out 
to be highly packed energy, transformable into other types of energy; and therefore something in the nature of a process… the 

results of modern physics suggest that we should give up the idea of a substance or essence… there is no self-identical entity 
persisting during all changes in time… (42) 

The  embodied  experience  of  energetic  overlap,  illustrated  in  Fig  3A  and  3B  –  where  participants  can  fluidly  merge  their 
energetic virtual bodies with those of the others in the group – we refer to as ‘energetic coalescence’. To the best of our knowledge, 
‘energetic  coalescence’  represents  a  new  class  of  phenomenological  experience  which  is  only  possible  within  a  multi-person 
distributed VR environment – i.e., it cannot be realized in any other way. This distinguishes Isness-D from previous work using 
VR to investigate STEs, which use VR to simulate STEs that are in principle available in the real world (YD visuals in the case of 
Suzuki, or awe experiences in the case of Chirico). In this respect, ‘energetic coalescence’  is similar to the ‘body-transfer’ work 
of Slater and co-workers (which enables a VR participant to inhabit the body of another person) – i.e., a ‘body-transfer’ experience 
is only possible using VR. (43) Whereas ‘body-transfer’ is an individual experience, ‘energetic coalescence’ is a group experience. 
The ‘energetic coalescence’ experience represents a particularly explicit form of ‘identity fusion’, which ‘entails a visceral feeling 
of oneness with the group’. (44) As an experience of intense togetherness that temporarily transcends social structures, dissolving 

the norms that typically characterize relationships within structured institutional contexts, ‘energetic coalescence’ represents an 
example of what Victor Turner called ‘communitas’. (45) 

5 

 
Figure 3: (A.i) shows 4 participants + 1 facilitator joining Isness from various ‘nodes’ distributed across the world. Participants are kneeling at the 
edge of their space and are represented in-world as energetic essences connected by a tangible dynamical molecular thread (which they ‘hold’ in 
their hands). (A.ii) shows participants undertaking ‘energetic coalescence’. Standing at the center of their respective mats, their energetic bodies 
overlap as they occupy the same position in the shared virtual space. The pattern on the floor in (A.i) and (A.ii) shows how participants’ local 
‘play spaces’ were oriented within the virtual space. (B.i) & (B.ii) show IOS diagrams corresponding to (A.i) and (A.ii), for analogy with Fig 1. 
(C) shows the international Isness ‘node’ locations as circular markers labelled with the total number of nodes in that location. There were 5 
nodes in the San Francisco Bay Area (USA), 1 node in Tennessee (USA), 1 node in Massachusetts (USA), 6 nodes in Bristol (UK), and 1 node in 
London (UK). The Isness server was mounted on data centers D in London (UK), Frankfurt (Germany) and Washington D.C (USA).  

Isness-D is a group VR experience in which participants experience the emergence, dissipation, and fluctuation of their own 
bodies and the body of a simulated molecular ‘organism’ as energetic essences. Participants are guided by a combination of a live 
in-world facilitator and a pre-recorded narrative (further details in sections 3.7 – 3.9). It grew out of the open-source Narupa project, 

(46) a multi-person room-scale VR framework (47) we initially designed to enable individuals (46, 48, 49) and then groups (46, 
50-52) to cohabit virtual environments where they can reach out and sculpt the dynamics of simulated molecular objects, made 
possible by mounting the simulation on GPU-accelerated cloud servers. (46, 48, 49) Our work over the years suggests that people 
interacting with real-time molecular simulations (who from the outside appear to be doing little more than waving their hands 

around in the air) are able to ‘feel’ differences in the simulated dynamical flexibility of different molecular objects. (46, 53) This 
highlights a crucial affordance of VR: a modality that enables a tangible sensory experience of touching phenomena whose essences 

6 

 
 
are  purely  energetic.  For  designing  STEs,  this  is  a  particularly  useful  affordance,  given  that  it  is  aligned  with  subjective  YD 
accounts  where  participants  report  sensitivity  to  the  energetic  nature  of  their  environment  –  famously  encapsulated  by  Aldous 
Huxley’s account of his mescaline experience. In a vase of flowers, he reported seeing “the miracle, moment by moment, of naked 
existence… flowers shining with their own inner light and all but quivering under the pressure of the significance with which they 
were charged… [even] the folds of my grey flannel trousers were charged with is-ness.” (54) The presence of a molecular object 
whose  dynamics  were  simulated  in  real-time  was  therefore  an  important  intersubjective  aspect  of  Isness-D.  It  represented  for 
participants a kind of tangible, fluctuating organism (referred to at various points in the narrative as a ‘molecular organism’ or 
‘energetic thread’) with a purely energetic essence, inviting people to recognize that their own essential energetic quality is shared 
with  every  other  object  (living  and  non-living)  in  the  natural  world.  The  depth  of  the  Isness-D  matter-energy  narrative  was 
reinforced  by  the  fact  that  the  dynamics  of  the  molecular  object  were  calculated  in  real-time  using  a  state-of-the-art  GPU-
accelerated computational biophysics engine. (55) This sophistication anchored the Isness-D narrative in physical and scientific 
reality, encouraging participants to reflect on the fact that everyday material objects are actually constructed from the dynamical 
choreography of molecular organisms whose essences are fundamentally energetic, (49) an insight which arises in many first-
person STE accounts (e.g., those at the beginning of this article). As shown in Fig 3A.i, multiple participants rendered as energy 
bodies,  connected  across  different  locales  and  time  zones  via  an  energetic  molecular  thread,  represents  a  class  of 
phenomenological experience that is only possible using the affordances of multi-person distributed VR. 

Given that our laboratory (like many labs) was shut down as a result of COVID restrictions, we evaluated Isness-D using a 
‘citizen science’ approach, coordinating a set of 14 “Isness-nodes” distributed across the world (Fig 3C). Each node operated as a 

portal where a single participant could virtually enter into the shared Isness-D experience along with participants from other nodes. 
To  analyse  Isness-D,  we  again  utilized  the  MEQ30  in  order  to  facilitate  direct  comparisons  with  Isness-C.  To  assess  other 
phenomenological ingredients known to be important during intense STEs, we used three additional measurement scales. First, we 
measured the extent to which participants in Isness-D experienced a unitive sense of connectedness with the various participants 

joining from other Isness-D nodes. To measure this, we used an adapted version of the Inclusion of Community in Self (ICS) Scale, 
which is essentially a 5-item version of the IOS scale shown in Fig 1, where participants were asked to rate the extent to which a 
circle representing the community of ‘Other Isness Participants’ overlapped with their sense of self. (56) Second, we measured the 
extent to which participants experienced a diminished sense of egoic identity, which (as discussed above) is closely interrelated 

with the intensity of the unitive experience, prominent within MTEs and YD experiences. To do this, we utilized the ego-dissolution 
inventory (EDI), which measures aspects of both ego dissolution and ego inflation, and has been utilized in prior YD studies. (57-
60)  Third,  given  that  Isness-D  was  constructed  as  an  intersubjective  group  experience,  we  attempted  to  measure  the  extent  of 
‘communitas’, which has been defined as an experience of intense togetherness and shared humanity that temporarily transcends 

social structures, mediated by an anti-structural and often ritualized ‘liminal’ phase of equality amongst community members. (45) 
To do this, we used the recently validated psychedelic communitas scale from Kettner et al., (61) who showed that communitas 
experienced  during  intersubjective  group  YD  experiences  predicts  enduring  changes  in  psychological  well-being  and 
connectedness, with associated improvements in wellbeing, depressive symptoms, trait anxiety, and interpersonal tolerance. 

Isness-D offers an interesting case study in developing technologies, methods, strategies, and protocols to carry out distributed 
multi-person studies in scenarios where face-to-face laboratory studies and clinical interactions are difficult. The lockdowns, social 
distancing, and uncertainty that has arisen as a result of the public response to the COVID-19 pandemic have created the conditions 
for increased social isolation and loneliness, which are correlated with feelings of fear, anxiety, stress, depressive thoughts, and 

helplessness.  (62-64)  While  the  longer  term  effects  of  COVID  remain  to  be  determined,  past  studies  have  highlighted  social 
disconnectedness to be a key feature of depression, (65) while feelings of connectedness are associated with reduced depressive 
symptoms. (66) By encouraging participants to imagine their own bodies and those of others as energetic essences whose luminosity 

7 

extends beyond the boundaries of their material form, Isness-D offers participants new experiences of connectedness, which may 
help address the isolation resulting from COVID. In this respect, experiences like Isness-D respond to recent calls to use human-
computer-interaction  (HCI)  technologies  to  design  meaningful  experiences  (67)  which  deal  with  the  fundamentals  of  human 
existence  (e.g.,  mortality,  identity,  isolation,  meaning),  (68,  69)  in  order  to  stimulate  alternative  narratives  and  visions  within 
interconnected systems (70, 71) and explore new forms of spiritual sensitivity. (72, 73)  

3  METHODS 

3.1  Ethics 

Ethics approval for the study described herein was obtained from the Faculty of Science Research Ethics Committee at the 
University of Bristol (ethics approval code: 111003). Participants read an online study information sheet and completed a tick box 
consent form before signing up to an Isness-D session. The study was conducted according to the revised Declaration of Helsinki 
(2013) and the 1996 ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice E6(R1). All participants were at least 18 years old, and consented 
to their data being gathered and published. To minimize participant risk, we adopted VR guidelines in line with those recommended 
by Madary and Metzinger. (74)   

3.2  Software & Hardware 

Isness-D is an approximately 50-minute experience with conceptual roots in earlier work by Glowacki and co-workers. (25, 75-

77) As a fork of the Narupa project, Isness-D is designed around a client/server architecture enabling each VR client access to the 
positional data of all the other participants, and a shared real-time molecular simulation of a 40-Alanine peptide macrocycle (40-
ALA) whose dynamics are calculated in real-time using OpenMM, a GPU-accelerated computational biophysics engine. (55) Each 
participant can see through their headset a visual representation of both the molecular simulation and all of the other participants 

(e.g, as in Fig 3). We designed the Isness-D experience to accommodate 4 – 5 participants wearing either the HTC Vive Pro or 
Valve Index HMD. Our cloud computing resources enabled us to mount our server on GPU shapes available at three different data 
centres: Frankfurt (Germany), London (UK), and Ashburn (Maryland, USA). Prior to entering Isness-D, participants at each node 
were fitted with the Open Mudra Gloves for Virtual Reality (OMG-VRs), etextile gloves that sense when a user pinches together 

their thumb and index finger, or thumb and middle finger to form a "mudra" position. (13) The OMG-VRs were designed to enable 
research scientists and students to ‘grasp’ and ‘manipulate’ molecular objects whose essence is purely energetic. They provide 
good positional tracking of the point at which a pinch takes place, require no calibration, and proved sufficiently robust to withstand 
use  across  the  international  network  of  Isness-D  nodes  in  Fig  3C.  The  OMG-VRs  played  an  important  role  during  the  Isness 

experience. By adopting a ‘mudra pose’ (bringing the tip of their thumb in contact with the tip of either their forefinger or middle 
finger), Isness-D participants could generate light and collectively sculpt the dynamics of the tangible molecular object. For the 
participants’ bodies, the in-world renderers are designed so that the intensity of the light generated during moments of energetic 
coalescence depends on the overlap between energetic bodies. For example, two coalesced bodies generate more light than a single 

body, and four coalesced bodies generate more light than two.  

3.3  Isness Nodes and Citizen Science Design 

Each of the 14 different nodes distributed across the world (Fig 3C) was equipped with the equipment required to run Isness: 
1) a room-scale play space of 2m x 3m; 2) a VR-capable computer; 3) an HTC Vive Pro or Valve Index HMD; 4) a single pair of 

OMG-VRs;  and  5)  a  reliable  internet  connection.  Each  node  was  managed  by  a  ‘host’:  an  individual  whom  we  trained  over 
Zoom/Slack in how to set up the VR hardware and how to connect an Isness client into a cloud-mounted server instance. Hosts 

8 

were given guidance on how to prepare participants prior to entering Isness-D (e.g. discussing what the experience would involve, 
creating a calming space, and offering participants an opportunity for quiet reflection), how to deal with participant discomfort, 
how to troubleshoot technology issues, and how to sanitize the VR equipment after participant use. In order to give hosts a sense 
of what their participants would experience during Isness-D, and also some indication of how the experience should feel, each of 
the hosts had the opportunity to undergo the full experience prior to engaging participants.  

3.4  Participants & Data Gathering 

Participants for Isness-D were recruited by each of the node hosts. After the node hosts collectively agreed a schedule of 
Isness-D time slots during which they were available to accommodate participants, this list of timeslots was placed into a web 
scheduler, with a link that was then circulated to participants. After receiving the web link, participants were able to identify the 
various session times available at their host node. Before registering for an Isness-D time slot, they first had to read the online study 
information sheet and complete a tick box consent form. We based our data collection on the structure of the psychedelic ceremony 
study,  (78)  which  involves  a  ‘pre-ceremony’  and  a  ‘post-ceremony’  component  and  includes  a  combination  of  psychometrics 
commonly  used  in  psychedelic  research  studies.  The  online  pre-Isness-D  questionnaire  (using  the  survey  platform  Qualtrics) 

consisted  of  the  ICS  scale  (56)  and  items  relating  to  participants’  openness  to  the  upcoming  experience.  The  post-Isness-D 
questionnaire included: 1) the ICS scale; (56) 2) the MEQ30 (26, 27) 3) the EDI; (79) and 4) the Communitas questionnaire (61). 
Additionally, participants were asked questions related to bodily effects and demographics. We added to the post questionnaire a 
final comments section where participants were able to leave written feedback. Since it was designed to evaluate YD experiences, 
not all aspects of these pre- and post-ceremony questionnaires were relevant to Isness-D. To ensure its relevance, we undertook a 
number of modifications. For example, we removed any questions asking about suffering and surrendering; we judged these to be 
less  relevant  to  the  Isness-D  experience  and  moreover  our  preliminary  analysis  suggested  that  they  increased  anxiety  among 
participants.  The  final  versions  of  the  pre-  and  post-Isness-D  questionnaires  used  to  evaluate  Isness-D  are  given  in  the  SM. 
Participants received an email link to a digital version of the pre-Isness-D questionaire approximately one hour prior to entering 
into Isness-D, and another link to the post-Isness-D questionaire after the conclusion of their session. 

3.5  Isness-D Experience Design 

Participants experienced Isness-D as a 3-phase journey, composed of a preparatory/induction phase, the Isness-D session, and 

an integration/reflection phase, adopting a similar model to that which we have utilized previously, and which is based on the model 
utilized in YD assisted psychotherapy. (22) An Isness-D session involved a facilitator along with 3 – 5 participants, each of whom 
simultaneously connected into the Isness server from one of the nodes shown in Fig 3. In some cases, additional observers were 
present within the Isness-D environment: by utilizing ‘spectate’ mode, they were invisible to the participants and to the facilitator. 

As technical assistants, observers played an important role in helping to stabilize the Isness-D experience. The ‘spectate’ function 
also  helped  us  to  train  new  facilitators,  giving  them  the  opportunity  to  observe  first-hand  without  affecting  the  participant 
experience. All of the Isness-D nodes had available a play space of approximately 2m x 3m. To align participants within the shared 
virtual space, we adopted the following radial orientation strategy: we placed at the center of each node’s space a vector that pointed 

toward one of the long (3m) boundaries, aligned each node’s space so that their centers were coincident and the vectors were 
aligned, and then rotated each node’s vector to make an angle of 360/n° with respect to its neighbors (where n is the number of 
participants). Fig 3 shows the resulting orientation for our most typical arrangement, with n = 4 participants.  

Isness-D was constructed from a set of ‘aesthetic hyperparameters’, each of which controls some aspect of the participants’ 

phenomenological  experience  and  can  be  precisely  varied  using  an  available  set  of  on-screen  sliders.  We  defined  a 
phenomenological ‘state’ as a given set of aesthetic hyperparameter values with some specified time duration. Each phase of Isness-

9 

D is comprised of a set of states, whose hyperparameter values are saved to a JSON file to ensure reproducibility. The Isness-D 
experience involved varying 69 different aesthetic hyperparameters, including for example: the color, distribution, density, and 
latency of the energetic bodies; the size of the heart center light; the rendering options for the energetic thread shown in Fig 3; 
options for setting interactive forces to achieve different effects; the state duration, and the global light levels. Our decisions on 
how to set the aesthetic hyperparameters were grounded in the various design considerations outlined in our previous work. (25) 
Each phase of Isness-D involved two audio components (played through the HMD earphones): 1) communication with the other 
participants in the space, which was achieved using an audio-only Zoom call using the mic built-in to the HMD; and 2) a pre-
recorded narrative soundtrack, which we streamed as a separate audio channel using Twitch (www.twitch.tv). In what follows we 
describe the various phases of the Isness-D experience in further detail. 

3.6  Pre-Experience Technical Checks 

At the beginning of a scheduled Isness-D session, the node hosts would: 1) connect to the cloud mounted Isness server using an 
I.P. address provided by the session facilitator; 2) connect to an audio-only zoom call, using the earphones and mic in their HMD, 
and 3) connect to the Twitch feed. After the hosts confirmed that all of the relevant equipment was either plugged in or charged up, 

they would then enter into the Isness-D virtual environment with the facilitator prior to any participants entering and carry out: 1) 
an interaction latency check, to identify nodes whose latency or fluidity was significantly different from others as a result of a slow 
internet connection or network instability; 2) an OMG-VR check, verifying that the gloves generated light through the mudra pose, 
and were able to interact with the dynamical molecular object; 3) an audio check, where the facilitator ascertained whether any of 
the host nodes were suffering significant Twitch latency; 4) a spatial orientation check, where each node host confirmed that their 
respective radial orientation within the Isness-D virtual space minimized cable trip hazards. Hosts were asked to ensure that their 
participants were not in the same room while these checks were performed; however, this was not possible in many cases owing to 
space constraints. 

We found Isness-D offered a fluid and stable experience so long as the internet connection at each node was stable. Persistent 
packet loss was the most substantial technological challenge to a smooth Isness-D experience. Technical instabilities were more 
common during the first week of our studies. Early on, we realized that the fluidity and reliability of an Isness-D experienced 
depended less on network speed and more on network stability (i.e., reliability low jitter, and low packet loss). We encouraged our 
nodes to evaluate their network stability using a simple online test, (80) and undertake optimization where possible – e.g., using a 
wifi router rather than tethering to a phone, moving closer to the wifi router, using an ethernet cable where possible, and encouraging 
other network users to avoid heavy usage during an Isness-D session. This combination of measures significantly reduced network-
related glitches, creating a robust set of distributed nodes, and led to an increase in the number of sessions that we judged to be 

technologically seamless. 

3.7  Phase 1: Preparation 

Once the facilitator was satisfied that each node passed the technical checks outlined above, they invited each host to fit their 
participants with the HMDs and a pair of OMG-VRs, and ensure they were in a comfortable seated or kneeling position. When all 

the participants were ready, the facilitator initiated the Isness-D state sequence and Twitch audio stream. Over the next ~15 minutes 
(7  aesthetic  states),  the  facilitator:  1)  introduced  themselves  and  greeted  the  participants;  2)  asked  each  of  the  participants  to 
introduce themselves, saying where they were located physically and how they were feeling; 3) instructed participants to alert their 
hosts if at any stage they suffered network problems or wished to leave; 4) thanked the participants for participating in our data 

collection  efforts,  and  5)  asked  that  everybody  respect  the  anonymity  of  the  others.  Next,  the  facilitator  invited  each  of  the 
participants to stand up and participate in some gentle movement exercises, to help them develop familiarity with moving in Isness-

10 

D and interacting with others. Participants were led in the following sequence: 1) acknowledging the others in the space by placing 
their  hands  in  a  prayer  position  and  bowing  to  one  another;  2)  three  rounds  of  gently  raising  and  lowering  their  arms,  with 
synchronized inhalation and exhalation; 3) rapport-building where each participant in turn was offered the opportunity to make up 
a motion which the others could then simultaneously mimic; and 4) encouraging each participant to gradually move toward the 
center  of  the  virtual  space  (“a  little  closer…  a  little  closer…  a  little  closer…”)  until  they  all  overlapped  in  order  to  have  the 
phenomenological experience of coalescing their energetic body with the other energetic bodies (Fig 3A and 3B). 

The facilitator then invited the participants to return to a comfortable seated or kneeling position, practice generating light using 
their OMG-VRs, and sculpt the dynamics of the molecular thread. Expanding the scale of the molecular thread, the facilitator 
encouraged all the participants to hold onto it, creating a circular shape (Fig 3A.i). The facilitator invited the participants to imagine 
Isness-D as a kind of meditation on the relationship between matter and energy, and how new senses of interconnectedness might 
emerge from imagining ourselves, others, and the world around us as luminous energetic essences rather than rigid material objects. 
The molecular thread was described to participants as a kind of tangible dynamical organism which – because its essence was 
purely energetic – could operate as kind of thread to connect our energetic essences across different physical locations and time 
zones. Whilst holding the molecule, the facilitator framed an intention-setting exercise, inviting each participant in turn to say a 
few words about something to which they would like to connect, inviting them to imagine the molecule as an energetic vessel to 
contain these intentions. 

3.8  Phase 2: A loosely guided choreography 

As the visual display of each participant faded to darkness, the facilitator went into ‘spectate’ mode, and another narrator took 
over.  For  the  next  25  mins,  participants  were  guided  through  a  pre-recorded  narrative  soundtrack  played  through  the  HMD 
headphones. The narrative began with a short visualization, inviting participants to close their eyes and imagine their breath as 
radiant light concentrated at their heart center. After being instructed to open their eyes, the participants were guided through 16 
states, each composed from a different combination of aesthetic hyperparameters. The narrative journey was an adaptation of the 
experience  we  previously  developed  for  Isness-C,  (25)  but  reworked  in  order  to  accommodate  the  unique  affordances  of  the 
distributed  environment.  The  experience  took  participants  through  a  loose  narrative  of  energetic  emergence,  dissipation,  and 
fluctuation. It was designed to balance moments of individual introvertive exploration with collective extrovertive interaction. The 
narrative  was  accompanied  by  a  soundtrack  designed  to  broadly  reflect  the  arc  of  the  journey.  Whilst  in  ‘spectate’  mode,  the 
facilitator kept watch over the virtual space, in order to discern signs of potential technical difficulties, contact the relevant hosts 
in cases where there may be technical problems, and gently remind participants who became particularly excited that they should 
move gently, carefully and fluidly. 

3.9  Phase 3: Integration & Discussion 

Once the pre-recorded narrative finished and the participants were once again in a comfortable seated or kneeling position, the 
facilitator then re-emerged from spectate mode, making themselves visible to the Isness participants and gently greeting them. As 
during phase 1, the facilitator altered the scale of the energetic molecular organism and encouraged all the participants to hold onto 

it, forming an energetic circle which connected together the participants, as shown in Fig 3A.i. Over the next 10 mins, the facilitator 
encouraged the participants to share any thoughts, feedback, emotions, or impressions which arose during the experience. These 
group discussions were undertaken to enable maximum conversation amongst the participants, with the facilitator’s role as that of 
an  active  listener.  The  format  of  these  group  discussions  was  not  rigidly  prescribed;  instead,  the  emphasis  was  on  enabling 

conversation amongst the group. In many groups, participants did not immediately wish to speak. In such cases, the facilitator 
asked a simple question to initiate the conversation – e.g., ‘How do you feel?’; ‘What remains?’; ‘Were you aware of the others in 

11 

the space with you?’ Each of these discussions was recorded on Zoom, and subsequently transcribed as part of our data gathering 
efforts. After the discussion finished, the facilitator instructed participants in how to gently exit VR. Specifically, the participants 
were instructed to: 1) close their eyes; 2) gently remove their HMDs and place them on the ground next to them; 3) lie down; 4) let 
the light and sound in the ambient environment seep back into their conscious awareness; 5) open their eyes when they were ready; 
and 6) undertake the reflective writing on the paper and pencil provided from their host. This anonymized free writing was then 
photographed by hosts and sent to us for qualitative analysis. Those who were not ready to write in their post-Isness emotional state 
had the option to do so in their own time. 

4  RESULTS 

4.1  Sample Size, Demographics, and Emotional Response 

From  Aug-Sept  2020,  we  carried  out  29  Isness  sessions  distributed  across  our  network  of  14  Isness  nodes,  with  109  total 
participants. 24 participants were not included in the analysis because their participation formed part of a technical training session 
or support role (i.e., as citizen science ‘volunteers’). 9 participants were removed from the analysis because the facilitator or node 
host identified that their experience suffered significant technical difficulties – primarily glitches and dropouts as a result of network 
instability. This left 75 remaining participants whose Isness-D sessions could be analyzed. Of these, 54 answered the pre-Isness-D 
questionnaire, and 58 answered the post-Isness-D questionnaire. Of these 58 participants, 59% were male, 37% were female, 2% 
were other, and 2% declined to state.  Ages ranged from 23 to 75 years old with a mean (SD) of 38 (10) years. Over half the 
participants  (57%)  had  not  been  in  VR  at  all  over  the  last  year.  Four  (7%)  had  used  VR  20+  times  in  the  last  year. 12%  had 
experienced the earlier, co-located version of Isness. (25) One reported a brief period of nausea (they did not comment on the 
strength or duration and finished their session as usual). Three reported body aches and three reported headaches. Six participants 
reported crying at some point during their Isness-D experience. Anecdotally, our study team obtained several other reports of people 
who experienced a brief period of tears. One participant reported trembling and two felt sweats or chills. None of the participants 
reported these emotional reactions to be negative or traumatic. 

4.2  MEQ30 

The MEQ30 (27) is a questionnaire that can distinguish dose dependent effects of YDs. It asks participants to rate the intensity 
with which they experienced 30 items on a 6-point scale [from “0 = none; not at all” to “5 = extreme (more than ever before in my 
life and stronger than 4)”], with three questions to capture ineffability I, fifteen mystical M [capturing unitive experiences, noetic 
quality, and sacredness], six positive mood P, and six transcendence of time/space T. Participant responses for each factor (I, M, 

P, T) are then averaged, and reported as a percentage of the maximum score. Fig 4 compares the Isness-D MEQ30 factor scores to 
27 previous studies: 26 studies in the altered states database (28), where the MEQ30 has been used to analyse YD altered states, 
and our previous Isness-C study. (25) To analyze these results, we followed the approach Barsuglia et al. (81) used to analyze 
MEQ30  results  obtained  during  MeO-DMT  field  tests.  Specifically,  we  undertook  comparative  analysis  of  Isness-D  to  the 

previously published studies using independent sample t-tests with a significance level of 5% (α = 0.05) calculated using Python 
(see SM for further details). Our previous work has shown that independent sample t-tests give results broadly aligned with more 
sophisticated statistical analyses. (25) Fig 4 and Table SM2 show the results of 27 different independent-sample t-tests, comparing 
the Isness MEQ30 results to each of the studies in Table SM2. To make Fig 4, we analyzed  whether a study  was statistically 

indistinguishable (p > 0.05) from Isness-D on each of its I, M, P or T factor scores. (25) Compared to Isness-D, Fig 4 shows:  

12 

•  3 studies which were more intense on all 4 factors: 1) an MeO-DMT study (81); 2) a 30 mg psilocybin study [26]; and 
3) a 2018 study by Griffiths et al. (82) where participants in a program offering high levels of support in carrying out 
meditation and spiritual (M/S) practice were given 20 – 30 mg psilocybin 

•  6 studies which were more intense on 2 factors: Five of these studies involved participants being administered doses 

between 20 – 42 mg of psilocybin. The sixth included our previous Isness-C study (25). 

•  7 studies of equal intensity (indistinguishable on 3 or 4 factors): 3 studies were indistinguishable on all 4 factors (a 21 
mg psilo study, (83) a 20 mg psilo study, (84) and a 200 µg LSD study (85)), and 4 were indistinguishable on three factors 
(psilocybin studies of 5 mg, (14) 10 mg, (14) 31.5 mg, (83) and a 200 µg LSD study (85)).  

•  1 study which was less intense on 2 factors, where participants were given dextromethorphan. (84) 
•  10  studies  which  were  less  intense  on  3  or  4  factors:    Amongst  these,  6  were  baseline  studies,  and  4  were  drug-
administration studies. The baseline studies included: 4 placebo studies; a 2016 study where Griffiths et al. gave participants 
sub-perceptual (1 – 3 mg) doses of psilocybin (86); and a 2018 study where Griffiths et al. (82) gave 1 mg psilocybin to 
participants in a program offering M/S practice support. The drug-administration studies investigated: MDMA (85, 87); 
methylphenidate (85, 87); ketamine (88); and psilocybin (14, 84). 

Griffiths and co-workers identify an MEQ30 respondent as having had a ‘complete MTE’ when each of the I, M, P, T factor scores 
are ≥ 60% of the maximum. (22) In general, the fraction of participants reporting a complete MTE is proportional to the YD dose. 
Barrett and Griffiths (89) reported a meta-analysis of high dose (30 mg/70 kg) psilocybin studies in 119 healthy volunteers (13, 14, 

82), and observed that 57% of participants had ‘complete’ MTEs. Our analysis shows that 29% of Isness-D participants had a 
complete MTE, compared to the previous value of 44% for Isness-C. 

13 

 
 
Figure 4: Comparison of the average (I, M, P, T) factor scores of Isness-D to Isness-C (25) and previously published research studies that have 
employed the MEQ30 (Bar ’18 (81), Carb ’18 (84), Griff ’11 (14), Grif ’16 (86), Grif ’18 (82), Lie ’17 (85),  Nich ’18 (83), Vlis ’18 (88), and 
Isness-C (25)). (A) shows the average factor scores for the studies that were statistically distinguishable from Isness-D (p < 0.05). (B) shows 
studies that were statistically indistinguishable from Isness-D on at least 2 factors (p > 0.05), where the blue lines indicate a study with two factor 
scores indistinguishable from Isness-D, and the red lines indicate a study with three or four factor scores indistinguishable from Isness-D. The 
area highlighted in pink shows the approximate region within which a factor score was determined to be indistinguishable at a 5% confidence 
level. (C) shows the distribution of the four factor scores of the MEQ30 results of Isness-D.  

4.3  Inclusion of Community in Self Scale 

54 participants answered both the pre and post questionnaires, both of which included aforementioned ICS scale shown in Fig 
5. The ICS asked which set of circles best describes their relationship with the other Isness participants from a series of images. 
The first image showed two circles with no overlap (a score of 0) and the last image showed two circles almost entirely overlapping 
(a score of 5). Fig 5 shows a significant shift in the distribution of ICS scores following Isness-D, with participants indicating higher 

degrees of connectedness. A Wilcoxon signed rank test showed that the difference between the pre and post values was statistically 
significant (p < 1E-6), with the mean ICS rating of 1.2 ± 1.5 (SD) pre-Isness-D increasing to 2.9 ± 1.4 (SD) post-Isness-D. The 
post-Isness-D ICS results are statistically indistinguishable from recent results published by Forstmann et al., (90) who investigated 
the  effects  of  psychedelic  substance  use  on  positive  mood  and  social  connectedness  of  450  participants  (in  naturalistic  mass 

gathering settings) who used hallucinogens and/or euphorics in the last week. Given that the Forstmann et al. (90) scale ranged 
from 1 to 7, we mapped their results onto a 0 to 5 scale to enable comparison. Forstmann et al. found an average IOS of 2.8 ± 1.3 
(SD), which is statistically indistinguishable from the post-Isness-D results according to independent sample t-tests (p = 0.510).  

14 

 
 
Figure 5: Panel (A) shows the ICS scale shown to participants in the pre-Isness-D and post-Isness-D questionnaire.  Each picture has been 
labelled numerically from 0 to 5 for analysis, however, the pictures in the questionnaires were labelled alphabetically from (a) to (f). Panel (B) 
gives histograms of the ICS scores for all participants before and after Isness-D, with dashed lines indicating the respective averages. 

4.4  Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI) 

The  EDI  (79)  self-report  scale  is  typically  employed  in  psychedelic  studies  to  measure  subjective  experiences  of  ego 
dissolution. It consists of 16 items: 8 relate to ego dissolution (e.g., I experienced a dissolution of my "self" or ego”, I felt a sense 
of union with others, etc.) and 8 relate to ego inflation (e.g., I felt more important or special than others, I felt especially sure-of-
myself,  etc.).  Following  Isness-D,  participants  were  asked  to  rate  the  extent  to  which  each  statement  applied  to  their  Isness-D 

experience on a scale of 0 (no, not more than usually) to 100 (yes, I experienced this completely). Cronbach’s alpha was calculated, 
and the results showed high internal consistency for both ego dissolution (α = 0.86) and inflation (α = 0.87). Fig 6 shows that the 
ego inflation distributions are shifted to lower values compared to the ego dissolution distributions, with a mean ego dissolution 
across the cohort of 40 ± 20 (SD), and mean ego inflation of 17 ± 15 (SD). The results in Fig 6 are consistent with subjective 
participant reports following LSD-equivalent doses of ~100 µg, based on inspection of values published by Nour et al. (79) Direct 
comparison of the complete Isness-D EDI scores to previous YD studies is complicated owing to the fact that several previous 
studies use only a single EDI item to measure ego dissolution, usually I experienced a dissolution of my “self” or ego, or similar.  
For Isness-D, the mean for this specific question was 43 ± 29 (SD), which is higher (p < 0.001) than the subjective responses 

following 75 microgram doses of LSD published by Tagliazucchi et al. (57) and lower (p < 1E-14) than responses following 100 
micrograms of LSD, published by Holze et al. (83 ± 10.2). (58) In the same study, Holze et al. reported the mean ego dissolution 
across participants following a 125 mg dose of MDMA to be 44 ± 7.9 (SD), which was found to be indistinguishable (p = 0.702) 
from Isness-D. Madsen et al. (59) used the EDI to measure ego dissolution for participants following a range of doses of psilocybin 

(0 – 30 mg).  Compared to Isness-D, Madsen et al. found similar or lower mean ego dissolution values following doses up to and 
including 18 mg of psilocybin.  Increasing the psilocybin dose further led to higher mean scores for all participants compared to 

15 

 
 
Isness-D.  Mason et al. (60) measured the subjective ego dissolution of participants following 0.17 mg of psilocybin per kg of body 
weight (avg ~12 mg dose per person) using the EDI.  The mean across the participants was 30.7 ± 4.6 (SD), which is lower (p = 
0.003) than Isness-D. 

Figure 6: (A) distributions of the average scores for the ego inflation and ego dissolution items of the EDI across the Isness participants. The 
respective averages are indicated by the dashed lines. (B) scatter plot of the average ego dissolution against the post-Isness-D ICS scores for each 
participant, with a line of best fit calculated using a linear least-squares regression. The legend gives the Pearson correlation coefficient (‘corr’) 
and the R2 value. 

To evaluate the relationship between a participant’s sense of ego dissolution and their sense of connectedness, Fig 6B shows a 

correlation plot of each participant’s average post-Isness-D ego dissolution against the corresponding post-Isness-D ICS score. 
While there is some scatter in the data, a linear least-squares regression indicated a positive correlation (R2 = 0.37) between the 
average  post-Isness-D  EDI  score  and  the  ICS  score.  The  Pearson  correlation  coefficient  (0.61)  similarly  indicated  a  positive 
correlation. These results are distinct from the weaker correlations observed between the post-Isness-D ego dissolution scores and 
the pre-Isness-D ICS scores (R2 = 0.17 and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.41). The change in correlation suggests that the 
sense of social connectedness which Isness-D elicits for participants correlates with a sense of ego attenuation.  

4.5   Communitas 

Following Kettner et al., (61) we used the scale in Fig 7 to assess participants’ Isness-D experiences. The first 8 items offer a 
subjective assessment of communitas, item 9 assesses participant-to-participant connection, and item 10 assesses participant-to-
facilitator connection. The scale ranges from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).  Calculation of Cronbach’s coefficient 
showed high internal consistency within the 10 items (α = 0.84). A one-sample t-test against the midpoint of the scale showed that 

the overall mean of the 10 items across the participants was higher than the midpoint of the scale value (p < 0.001), indicating that 
a sense of togetherness was felt by participants during their shared Isness-D sessions. The item the ceremony really allowed me to 
get to know the other participants was the only one to receive a lower mean score than the midpoint scale value, perhaps because 
the Isness-D experience involved little verbal communication between participants. The rest of the items all received ratings higher 

than scale midpoint value, with the item during the ceremony, I felt that social status became irrelevant receiving the highest mean 
rating. In recently published studies where Kettner et al. explored collective psychedelic use during YD ceremonies in naturalistic 
settings (N = 886), they calculated the mean reported total communitas as the sum across the first 8 items in Fig 7. They obtained 
values of 39.58 (SD 11.23), corresponding to ~71% of the maximum score of 56. Isness-D produced mean reported communitas 

values that are statistically distinguishable (p = 0.002), with an average total communitas of 44.14 (SD 6.87), which corresponds 
to ~78% of the maximum score. 

16 

 
 
Figure 7: Mean ratings for the 8 items in the Communitas questionnaire (items 1–8), and two additional items relating to 
connection with another participant and with the facilitator (items 9 & 10), with ±1 SD error bars. 

4.6  Qualitative Analysis 

Our qualitative analysis is based on data from three sources: 1) semi-structured group discussion in VR during phase 3 of 
Isness-D; 2) optional free writing upon exiting VR; and 3) a post-Isness-D questionnaire. All the group discussions were recorded 
(~3.5 hours total) and then transcribed (~14,000 words). We received 36 free writing responses in a variety of forms: prose (27 
legible  and  1  illegible),  poetry  (4  responses),  and  drawings  (4  responses).  Only  the  prose  (~3000  words)  was  included  in  the 
thematic analysis. An inductive thematic analysis (91) was used to categorize the qualitative data into themes. Any statements that 
involved  multiple  themes  were  assigned  to  the  most  relevant.  The  identified  themes  and  the  number  of  times  each  theme  was 
observed are as follows: Connectedness (75); Positive Emotions (65); Embodied awareness (40); Ego Dissolution (31); Supportive 
Setting (28); Sense of Play (24); Transcendence of Space/Time (13); Noetic Quality (11); Comparison to other Altered States (10); 
Sense of Beauty (9); and Reflection on Mortality (8). Table SM6 contains indicative quotations for each theme; the SM includes 
the entire thematic analysis classification. Several of the participant statements (written in italics) are woven into the discussion 
that follows. 

5  DISCUSSION 

Our results overwhelmingly suggest that the phenomenological intensity of STEs which arose for participants during Isness-
D is comparable to YDs, in both naturalistic and laboratory settings. For example, Isness-D participants’ average ICS score of 2.9 
± 1.4 (SD) is statistically indistinguishable from recent results published by Forstmann et al., (90) who found values of 2.8 ± 1.3 
(SD) in a large-scale naturalistic study investigating YD effects for more than 450 participants. Similarly, the extent of communitas 

17 

 
 
reported by Isness-D participants (44.14 ± 6.87, corresponding to ~78% of the max score) is statistically higher than the value of 
39.58 ± 11.23 (~71% of the max score) reported in Kettner et al.’s recent N = 886 study investigating collective psychedelic use 
during YD ceremonies in naturalistic settings. Our EDI analysis indicates that the Isness-D results are comparable to YD drug does 
of ~18 mg psilocybin, 75 – 100 µg LSD, or 125 mg MDMA. These results are broadly consistent with the results of the MEQ30 
analysis, showing 3 previous YD studies which were indistinguishable from Isness-D on all 4 factors: psilocybin studies of  20 mg 
(84)  and  21  mg,  (83)  and  an  LSD  study  of  200  µg  (85).  The  qualitative  analysis  indicates  some  phenomenological  similarity 
between Isness-D and psychedelics, with participants for example observing how it was “similar to experiences that I have had as 
somatic  visions  through  medicine  plants.  The  interconnective  nature  of  energy/intention  and  the  ‘strings’  that  appear  to 
interconnect us with all living matter [is] also related to childhood dreams I had prior to any ‘psychedelic experience’ ”. Others 
stated how Isness-D left them with a “sense of interconnectedness… only previously noticed with the help of psychedelics in the 
right setting”. Some commented on the emotional impact of Isness-D, “I was amazed [by] how moved I was. I think it was the 
juxtaposition of the frustration and then the beholding beauty. I think the music really helped. It felt very beautiful to sit back and 
witness. I don’t normally get moved quite so much.” Similar to YD experiences, some participants attributed a spiritual significance 
to Isness-D, “That’s definitely a spiritual experience of some sort. It’s like, tangible”. Because Isness-D grounds emergent spiritual 
concepts in rigorous physics insights like the fundamental relationship between matter and energy, it offers a case study for how 
careful human computer interaction (HCI) design can be used to cultivate spiritual sensitivities which avoid the “woo-woo” pseudo-
scientific associations which can arise from YDs, e.g., which have recently been discussed by Carhartt-Harris and Friston. (15) 

Connectedness,  which  has  been  previously  been  highlighted  as  a  key  aspect  of  the  YD  experience,  (92)  emerged  as  the 

strongest  qualitative  theme  for  Isness-D  participants,  “I  felt  connected  with  myself  but  also  with  everyone  else  here…  I  think 
‘connected’ is the word for me for the end of this session.” Others commented on how Isness-D offered “A completely other way 
of connecting that I’m not familiar with, [where] all the usual stuff disappears.” Comments like these are aligned with the observed 
change  in  ICS  post-Isness  versus  pre-Isness.  The  matter-energy  narrative  of  Isness-D  and  its  aesthetics  of  luminosity  –  which 

blurred the boundaries of individual identity – seems to have been important  for enabling participants to reimagine a sense of 
connectedness: “Connecting light and emotions as energy was special… light as connection; light transferring between matter; 
light creating memory. Experiencing myself and the other people in the group as light energy was joyful. It… allowed me to think 
about other spaces connecting in the world.” While the experience of energetic coalescence was only one aspect of the Isness-D 

experience, it seemed to be particularly poignant and intimate for many people, with participants “struck with how quickly the 
abstract lights grew to hold tangible meaning… as other people. It was especially poignant [during moments of coalescence] when 
we  moved  toward  the  centre  and  felt  as  if  we  might  collide  or  enter  each  other’s  personal  space.”  For  many  participants, 
coalescence  facilitated  a  particularly  strong  sense  of  connectedness:  “we  could  get  closer  than  [in  real-life]  which  felt  more 

intimate, and connecting—nearly as much so as with a partner, child or pet—even though we were in different places.” Others 
observed how moments of coalescence produced somatic sensations: “I can just literally walk into people and it’s quite sensuous”, 
and also “I could feel subtle changes in my hands as if something was passing by, something physical.” Another commented how, 
during moments of coalescence “I got quite emotional… I got this surge of emotion where I don’t know if I wanted to gasp or cry 

or what it was, but I was kind of shocked in awe.” Not a single participant was uncomfortable when others coalesced with their 
energetic essence; however, some worried they were invading others ‘personal space’: “You can sense an imaginary presence 
around the glowing light, and you give it space even though there is no barrier there, other than imagined.” Several commented 
on the sense of intimacy that accompanied coalescence “It felt really intimate. And I tried to connect to whichever light being it 

was and… I tried to join mudras, and I think I sat [as an energetic essence] inside a few of you. I hope that was OK” Many people 
reported  a  pleasant  sense  of  spaciousness  at  the  moment  of  coalescence,  recognizing  in  that  instant  that  conventional  material 
boundaries did not apply, “I found it really strange at the start, when you were telling us to go closer and closer and then that weird 

18 

boundary  of  where  personal  space  is  and  all  of  a  sudden  it  was  like  ‘oh,  actually  this  is  kind  of  nice!’  ”  Several  participants 
commented on how the intimacy of the coalescence experience was balanced with a sense of innocence and purity, enabling “the 
sweetest tenderness or pure, childlike love....” 

Earlier in this article, we highlighted two phenomenological ingredients known to be important in STEs: 1) diminished self-
salience arising from dissolving self-boundaries; and 2) a sense of unity with something beyond the self. Given the tight relational 
co-dependence of these ingredients (where one is required to characterize the other and vice-versa), we suggested that they are best 
realized in a multi-body context, given that the softness, fluidity, or porosity of a body’s boundaries become most apparent by 
observing its relational interactions with another body. One participant succinctly articulated how they experienced this relational 
co-dependence during Isness-D: “you lose yourself in the connection to other people”. Fig 6B and Fig SM1 show that the correlation 
between participants’ sense of connectedness and their diminished sense of egoic identity was significantly stronger following 
Isness-D  than  it  was  beforehand:  the  diminished  sense  of  ego  entailed  in  “losing  oneself”  arises  through  the  unique  sort  of 
“connection to other people” that Isness-D enables. The relational co-dependence between connectedness and diminished egoic 
identity  is  also  seen  in  quotations  like,  ‘Identity  didn’t  matter  anymore;  it  was  about  experiencing  things  together. That  was 
wonderful.’ As energetic essences, the implicit, explicit, conscious, and unconscious judgments that permeate social and relational 
interactions were diminished: ‘I found [the anonymity] quite powerful because we were all completely equal in the space. Any of 
the pre-judgements that come from how people look, sound and that sort of thing just aren’t there.’ Stripping away the various ego-
games that characterize interpersonal interactions led to a sense of joy, purity, love, and beauty: ‘I felt [when touching one another’s 
heart centres] the sweetest tenderness or pure, childlike love… stripped back, without any of the assumed layerings that we place 

upon reality and relationships… just to the absolute core, it was truly beautiful.’ These comments support the exceptionally high 
scores observed for item 6 in the Communitas scale in Fig 7 (During the ceremony, I felt that social status became irrelevant). 
Yaden et al (5) note that the experience of self-loss is sometimes linked to pathologies (e.g., going back to the work of Freud); 
however, they argue that it is more often associated with positive outcomes. Our results are broadly aligned with this conclusion: 

the experience of self-loss for Isness-D participants was overwhelmingly positive.  

Participants  reported  positive  emotions  and  an  overwhelming  sense  of  calm  and  relaxation  at  the  end  of  their  Isness-D 
experience, “I feel remarkably happy. There’s something very happiness-inducing about this whole practice.” Some reported lower 
levels of anxiety and stress, observing that Isness-D helped them to “dissociate from something within you…I don’t know if it… 

was  my  identity  or  my  anxieties  that  I  put  on  the  side…”  Another  similarly  commented,  “I  arrived  feeling  pretty  anxious  and 
disconnected from others, but after that experience I feel much more calm and hopeful. Hugely due to the focus of how energy 
doesn’t truly disappear. I guess the fear of dying (the existential threat) is always on our minds, but that experience quieted the 
fear.” For some, Isness-D encouraged reflection on mortality, and their own energetic transience amidst a larger unfolding energetic 

process:  “It’s  clear  that  the  energy  isn’t  just  gone  [in  death],  it  goes  somewhere.  It’s  beautiful  to  think  that  it’s  all  out  there 
somewhere and it’s still circling you constantly” and also “Seeing all the lights together reminded me of a dream I had years ago 
where the universe was ending and everybody was dissolving into balls of light and merging into one. So, I was like ‘oh cool! The 
universe is ending. I’m cool with that.’ ” Some participants articulated how Isness-D offered a form of connectedness that contrasts 

COVID-related isolation: “[the sense of connection] is an experience I haven’t felt in a while because of COVID and being in front 
of screens all of the time”, and also “I feel like we’ve had a hug, and I haven’t had many of those recently… a really nice thing to 
have”. Another commented on how it helped them understand the difference between “stillness and stagnation…. This [pandemic] 
can make you feel very stagnant, cause you’re in the same place and you’re not still or rooted to anything.” For many participants, 

positive emotions seemed to be associated with the sense of playfulness that arose from relaxed egoic identity: “It was…a space to 
be free, you could do whatever you want and not feel judged” and also “There certainly was a sense of playfulness in this, which 
was really nice. As adults that’s not always something that we pursue.”  

19 

For the MEQ30, the Isness-D and Isness-C results for the I and T factors were statistically indistinguishable. For the M and 
P factors, the Isness-D scores were lower than Isness-C. The lower scores make sense for several reasons. First, the distributed 
‘citizen science’ approach meant that we had significantly less control over participant’s set and setting prior to entering VR and 
after leaving VR. Whereas in our previous study we were able to offer all participants the same context, the same preparatory 
environment, similar psychological priming, and a more consistent experience of the technology, this was not possible using the 
distributed citizen science approach, where the variability was more significant. For example, we had little ability to influence 
participant expectations or control how the node hosts described Isness-D to participants during the recruitment phase. Especially 
in the early stages, there was variability in host preparation: for example, there were some cases where participants from one node 
would  be  ready  and  waiting  in  VR  for  the  beginning  of  Isness-D  phase  1,  whilst  other  node  hosts  were  troubleshooting  the 
technology (e.g., HMD fit, focus, OMG-VR fit, etc.). Second, whereas our previously published results were all obtained using a 
local area network where we could closely monitor latency and quickly solve any technical problems, the same was not true for the 
work described herein. During the early stages of our citizen science study, a number of participants had intermittent disruptions 
to their plausibility illusion, (40, 41) as a result of unoptimized network instability issues. Third, whereas the previous participant 
cohort were drawn from attendees at a psychedelics & consciousness conference, the cohort for Isness-D was drawn from a broader 
distribution  of  international  participants.  Finally,  Isness-D  was  effectively  an  adaptation  of  an  experience  that  we  originally 
designed  to  be  co-located.  Whilst  we  made  several  changes  to  accommodate  the  affordances  of  a  multi-person  distributed 
experience, our limited resources during the lockdown period made it difficult for us to undertake more extensive changes.  

Isness-D differs from conventional YD psychotherapy in various ways. For example, the phase 1 preparation lasted ~15 mins, 

far less than the preparation for studies carried out for YD psychotherapy, which typically include a total of 4 – 8 individual sessions 
(both before and after the YD session). The three phases of Isness-D last a total of ~70 minutes, shorter than psilocybin and LSD 
experiences, which can often last from 6 – 14 hours. Finally, Isness-D was designed as a group experience, whereas most YD and 
VR studies are individual experiences. As discussed above, the distributed multi-body group aspect of Isness-D is clearly important 

for weakening ego boundaries, and fostering a sense of connectedness. The opening and closing interactions between the group 
and the facilitator (e.g., to develop the energy-matter narrative and encourage moments of energetic coalescence) were important, 
‘really help[ing] to hold the experience and make me feel more comfortable with everyone.’ Compared to previous YD studies, the 
N = 58 Isness-D sample size was reasonably sized; however, this study had a number of limitations. For example, while we were 

able to demonstrate significant changes post-Isness compared to pre-Isness, we did not carry out a control experiment, and therefore 
some of our analyses are primarily comparative. Whilst the ‘citizen science’ participant sample in this work clearly represents an 
improvement on our previous work, further work will be required to make definitive statements about the extent to which sample 
selection bias may have influenced our results. Our ability to compare the MEQ30 from this work with previous studies depends 

on the assumption that the baseline responses of our participant sample are not anomalously high or low, and within the range 
spanned by 6 previously published baseline studies. Fig 4 shows that these baseline studies have a broad MEQ30 score distribution. 
Our comparative statistical analyses (Fig 4 and Table SM2) show that the Isness-D results are more intense (p < 1E-6) than all of 
them. Nevertheless, we believe that the results described herein provide a degree of confidence in the results which we obtained in 

our previous study. As discussed above, the fact that the MEQ30 results for Isness-D are slightly lower than the results obtained 
for the co-located Isness-C experience is entirely aligned with our expectations, given the very different circumstances in which 
each study was conducted. At this stage, it is unclear how exactly to define a “placebo” for an experience like Isness-D, but this is 
an issue that would be interesting to investigate in future work. The design of Isness-D as a group experience suggests that the 

individual data may be correlated. In future studies we wish to investigate the correlation of the results obtained for participants 
within specific groups, and compare intra-group results to inter-group results. 

20 

6  CONCLUSIONS 

The aim of the work described herein was to determine whether the unique affordances of multi-person distributed VR can be 
used  to  reliably  elicit  intense  STEs.  Within  this  paper,  we  have  described  Isness-D,  an  experience  we  have  developed  to  blur 
conventional self-other boundaries using the unique affordances of distributed multi-person VR. Built on a matter-energy narrative, 
Isness-D enables groups of participants distributed across the world to co-habit a shared virtual space and collectively experience 
their bodies as luminous energetic essences with soft spatial boundaries. It encourages participants to imagine themselves, others, 
and the world around them as unfolding interconnected processes which are energetic (rather than fixed material entities). This 
fluid  energetic  representation  enables  participants  to  undergo  moments  of  ‘energetic  coalescence’,  a  new  class  of  embodied 
intersubjective phenomenological experience whereby participants can have an embodied experience of including multiple others 
within their self-representation. To evaluate Isness-D, we adopted a ‘citizen science’ approach, coordinating a network of nodes 
distributed around the world to run multiple Isness-D sessions. This strategy enabled us to carry out this research amidst COVID 
related social distancing constraints. As a distributed approach, it was difficult to prime Isness-D participants in a controlled way. 
Nevertheless, analysis of Isness-D participant scores on four different self-report scales commonly used to assess YD experiences 
overwhelmingly suggest that the phenomenological intensity of STEs which arose for participants during Isness-D is comparable 
to previously published YD studies, in both naturalistic and laboratory settings. Isness-D enables participants to dissolve their sense 
of self in the connection to others, relaxing attachment to egoic identity and facilitating a strong sense of connectedness. For many 
participants, Isness-D offered a sense of intimacy, innocence, playfulness, and purity, eliciting a state of calm spaciousness. To the 

best  of  our  knowledge,  this  work  represents  the  first  attempt  to  analyze  a  distributed  multi-person  VR  experience  using 
measurement scales which are typically applied to YD experiences. These results demonstrate that distributed VR can be used to 
elicit  intersubjective  STEs  which  simultaneously  attenuate  egoic  identity  and  facilitate  a  sense  of  connectedness.  This  study 
reaffirms the ideas in our previous work, (25) where we speculated that it is possible to design phenomenological experiences using 
numadelic technologies like multi-person VR to create the conditions for STEs from which participants derive insight and meaning. 
Distributed intersubjective VR experiences like Isness-D may have a role to play in easing unprecedented feelings of loneliness, 
isolation, and fear that have arisen with COVID restrictions. In future work, we hope to explore in futher detail the mechanisms 
responsible for the results obtained during Isness-D, and also carry out detailed follow-ups with participants in order to understand 
its impacts over the longer term. 

21 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Author Contributions: DRG led the project, conceived the idea, organized and supervised the team, wrote the original draft, co-
designed the Isness-D experience, guided the software design, and provided funding. RRW ran an Isness node, co-designed the 
experience, analyzed the data, and helped write the paper. MDW worked on the software and helped make figures. OMM ran an 
Isness node, helped carry out participant studies, assisted in data collection, and commented on the paper. RF made the mudra 
gloves, ran an Isness node, helped carry out the participant studies, and helped make the figures. JEP and MC co-designed the 
Isness-D  experience,  helped  carry  out  the  participant  studies,  ran  two  Isness  nodes,  and  organized  the  Isness  node  network. 
Funding: This project was supported by the Leverhulme Trust (Philip Leverhulme Prize), Royal Society (URF/R/180033) and 
EPSRC  (EP/P021123/1);  RRW  is  funded  by  the  EPSRC  TMCS  CDT  (EP/L015722/1);  MDW  by  the  Royal  Society 
(RGF/EA/181075); JEP, MC, & RF by the ArtSci International Foundation. Thanks: We would like to thank the network of Isness 
participants, node hosts, and citizen science volunteers around the world who donated their time to this project, and without whom 
we could not have accomplished this work. We specifically acknowledge the following people: Gregory Roufa and Joseph Hardy 
ran Isness nodes and helped to organize and expand the network of Isness nodes. Matt Rojo, Justin Wall, Harrison Blum, Steph 
Suddel, Owen Williams, Vadmin Zhuk, William Zhuk, and Jeremy Lam, all helped to run Isness nodes. Kara de los Reyes and 
Manda Baynes helped with various aspects of the organization along the way, and Oussama Metatla made valuable comments on 
the paper structure. Isolde Freeth-Hale performed, recorded, and co-designed the audio component of Isness-D. The open source 
VR software used to construct Isness has been developed and maintained by various members and collaborators of the Intangible 

Realities Laboratory (IRL) over the years. The ability to run cloud-mounted instances of the Isness-D server was made possible 
through work by Dr. Jonathan Barnoud and Mark Pope, along with a generous grant of cloud computing credits from Oracle through 
their University Partnership Cloud Program.  

REFERENCES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

J. B. Taylor, https://www.ted.com/talks/jill_bolte_taylor_my_stroke_of_insight. TED,  (2008). 
D. Sington, In the Shadow of the Moon.  (2007). 
A. Watts, The way of Zen.  (Vintage, 1999). 
R. R. Griffiths, W. A. Richards, M. W. Johnson, U. D. McCann, R. Jesse, Mystical-type experiences occasioned by psilocybin mediate the attribution of 
personal meaning and spiritual significance 14 months later. Psychopharmacology 187, 268-283 (2008). 
D. B. Yaden, J. Haidt, R. W. Hood, D. R. Vago, A. B. Newberg, The Varieties of Self-Transcendent Experience. Review of General Psychology 21, 143-160 
(2017). 
M. Csikszentmihalyi, M. Csikzentmihaly, Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  (Harper & Row New York, 1990), vol. 1990. 
M. A. Lau et al., The toronto mindfulness scale: Development and validation. Journal of Clinical Psychology 62, 1445-1467 (2006). 
D. Keltner, J. Haidt, in Cognition and Emotion. (2003), vol. 17, pp. 297-314. 
A. H. Maslow, Religions, values, and peak-experiences.  (Ohio State University Press Columbus, 1964), vol. 35. 
J. R. W. Hood et al., Dimensions of the Mysticism Scale: Confirming the Three-Factor Structure in the United States and Iran. Journal for the Scientific 
Study of Religion 40, 691-705 (2001). 
R. R. Griffiths, E. S. Hurwitz, A. K. Davis, M. W. Johnson, R. Jesse, Survey of subjective "God encounter experiences": Comparisons among naturally 
occurring experiences and those occasioned by the classic psychedelics psilocybin, LSD, ayahuasca, or DMT. PLoS ONE 14, e0214377 (2019). 
A. Aron, E. N. Aron, D. Smollan, Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of personality and social psychology 
63, 596 (1992). 
R. R. Griffiths, W. A. Richards, U. McCann, R. Jesse, Psilocybin can occasion mystical-type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning 
and spiritual significance. Psychopharmacology 187, 268-283 (2006). 
R. R. Griffiths et al., Psilocybin occasioned mystical-type experiences: immediate and persisting dose-related effects. Psychopharmacology 218, 649-665 
(2011). 
R. L. Carhart-Harris, K. J. Friston, REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews 
71, 316-344 (2019). 
R. Carhart-Harris et al., Trial of Psilocybin versus Escitalopram for Depression. New England Journal of Medicine 384, 1402-1411 (2021). 
M. R. Uncapher, A. D. Wagner, Minds and brains of media multitaskers: Current findings and future directions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, 9889-9896 
(2018). 
R. Millière, Looking for the Self: Phenomenology, Neurophysiology and Philosophical Significance of Drug-induced Ego Dissolution. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience 11,  (2017). 
R. Millière, R. L. Carhart-Harris, L. Roseman, F.-M. Trautwein, A. Berkovich-Ohana, Psychedelics, Meditation, and Self-Consciousness. Front. Psychol. 9,  
(2018). 
C. Timmermann et al., DMT Models the Near-Death Experience. Front. Psychol. 9, 1 (2018). 

5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 
17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

22 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 
25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 
29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

37. 
38. 
39. 

40. 

41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 

45. 
46. 

47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 

53. 

54. 
55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 
59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 
64. 

65. 

J. Wackermann, M. Wittmann, F.  Hasler, F. X. Vollenweider,  Effects of varied doses  of psilocybin on time  interval reproduction  in  human  subjects. 
Neuroscience Letters 435, 51-55 (2008). 
M.  W.  Johnson,  P.  S.  Hendricks,  F.  S.  Barrett,  R.  R.  Griffiths,  Classic  psychedelics:  An  integrative  review  of  epidemiology,  therapeutics,  mystical 
experience, and brain network function. Pharmacology and Therapeutics 197, 83-102 (2019). 
J.  S.  Aday,  C.  C.  Davoli,  E.  K.  Bloesch,  Psychedelics  and  virtual  reality:  parallels  and  applications.  Therapeutic  Advances  in  Psychopharmacology  10, 
204512532094835 (2020). 
D. Strutt, Mystical-Type Experience at The Virtual Reality Interface. Iluminace 32, 71-95 (2020). 
D. R. Glowacki et al., Isness: Using Multi-Person VR to Design Peak Mystical Type Experiences Comparable to Psychedelics. Proceedings of the 2020 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–14 (2020). 
K. A. MacLean, J.-M. S. Leoutsakos, M. W. Johnson, R. R. Griffiths, Factor Analysis of the Mystical Experience Questionnaire: A Study of Experiences 
Occasioned by the Hallucinogen Psilocybin. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 51, 721-737 (2012). 
F. S. Barrett, M. W. Johnson, R. R. Griffiths, Validation of the revised Mystical Experience Questionnaire in experimental sessions with psilocybin. J 
Psychopharmacol 29, 1182-1190 (2015). 
T. T. Schmidt, H. Berkemeyer, The Altered States Database: Psychometric Data of Altered States of Consciousness. Front. Psychol. 9, 1-5 (2018). 
P. C. Bressloff, J. D. Cowan, M. Golubitsky, P. J. Thomas, M. C. Wiener, What Geometric Visual Hallucinations Tell Us about the Visual Cortex. Neural 
Computation 14, 473-491 (2002). 
P. S. Hendricks, Awe: a putative mechanism underlying the effects of classic psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy. International Review of Psychiatry 30, 
331-342 (2018). 
K. Suzuki, W. Roseboom, D. J. Schwartzman, A. K. Seth, A deep-dream virtual reality platform for studying altered perceptual phenomenology. Scientific 
reports 7, 15982 (2017). 
K. Suzuki, W. Roseboom, D. J. Schwartzman, A. K. Seth, Hallucination Machine: Simulating Altered Perceptual Phenomenology with a Deep-Dream 
Virtual Reality platform. Artificial Life Conference Proceedings, 111-112 (2018). 
A. Chirico et al., Effectiveness of Immersive Videos in Inducing Awe: An Experimental Study. Scientific Reports, 1-11 (2017). 
A. Chirico, F. Ferrise, L. Cordella, A. Gaggioli, Designing Awe in Virtual Reality: An Experimental Study. Front. Psychol. 8, 105 (2018). 
D. Quesnel, Are You Awed Yet? How Virtual Reality Gives Us Awe and Goose Bumps. fpsyg-09-02158.tex, 1-22 (2018). 
E. R. Stepanova, D. Quesnel, B. E. Riecke, Space—A Virtual Frontier: How to Design and Evaluate a Virtual Reality Experience of the Overview Effect. 
Front. Digit. Humanit. 6, 235 (2019). 
E. R. Stepanova, D. Quesnel, B. E. Riecke, in Front. Digit. Humanit. (2019), vol. 6, pp. 185. 
A. Chirico, D. B. Yaden, G. Riva, A. Gaggioli, The Potential of Virtual Reality for the Investigation of Awe. Front. Psychol. 7, 734 (2016). 
M. van Elk, M. A. Arciniegas Gomez, W. van der Zwaag, H. T. van Schie, D. Sauter, The neural correlates of the awe experience: Reduced default mode 
network activity during feelings of awe. Human Brain Mapping 40, 3561-3574 (2019). 
M. Slater, Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences 364, 3549-3557 (2009). 
M. Slater, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, Enhancing Our Lives with Immersive Virtual Reality. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3,  (2016). 
K. R. Popper, J. C. Eccles, The self and its brain.  (Springer Science & Business Media, 2012). 
M. Slater, B. Spanlang, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, O. Blanke, First Person Experience of Body Transfer in Virtual Reality. PLoS ONE 5, e10564 (2010). 
W. B. Swann Jr, J. Jetten, Á. Gómez, H. Whitehouse, B. Bastian, When group membership gets personal: A theory of identity fusion. Psychological Review 
119, 441-456 (2012). 
V. Turner, Liminality and communitas. The ritual process: Structure and anti-structure 94, 125-130 (1969). 
M.  B.  O’Connor  et  al.,  Interactive  molecular  dynamics  in  virtual  reality  from  quantum  chemistry  to  drug  binding:  An  open-source  multi-person 
framework. The Journal of chemical physics 150, 220901 (2019). 
Narupa-Isness, https://gitlab.com/intangiblerealities/narupa-applications/isness/-/tree/master. The Intangible Realities Laboratory (2019). 
M. O’Connor et al., Sampling molecular conformations and dynamics in a multiuser virtual reality framework. Science advances 4, eaat2731 (2018). 
D. R. Glowacki, Perceptions at the nanoscale. Nature Nanotechnology 14, 403-403 (2019). 
S. J. Bennie et al., Teaching Enzyme Catalysis Using Interactive Molecular Dynamics in Virtual Reality. Journal of Chemical Education,  (2019). 
H. M. Deeks et al., Interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality for accurate flexible protein-ligand docking. PLoS ONE 15, e0228461 (2020). 
L. M. Thomas, D. R. Glowacki, Seeing and feeling in VR: bodily perception in the gaps between layered realities. International Journal of Performance 
Arts and Digital Media 14, 145-168 (2018). 
R. R. Williams et al., Subtle Sensing: Detecting Differences in the Flexibility of Virtually Simulated Molecular Objects. Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–8 (2020). 
A. Huxley, The doors of perception and Heaven and hell.  (Harper & Row, New York, 1963). 
P.  Eastman  et  al.,  OpenMM  4:  A  Reusable,  Extensible,  Hardware  Independent  Library  for  High  Performance  Molecular  Simulation.  J.  Chem.  Theory 
Comput. 9, 461-469 (2013). 
D. Mashek, L. W. Cannaday, J. P. Tangney, Inclusion of community in self scale: A single-item pictorial measure of community connectedness. Journal 
of Community Psychology 35, 257-275 (2007). 
E. Tagliazucchi et al., Increased Global Functional Connectivity Correlates with LSD-Induced Ego Dissolution. Current Biology 26, 1043-1050 (2016). 
F. Holze et al., Distinct acute effects of LSD, MDMA, and d-amphetamine in healthy subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 45, 462-471 (2020). 
M.  K.  Madsen  et  al.,  Psychedelic  effects  of  psilocybin  correlate  with  serotonin  2A  receptor  occupancy  and  plasma  psilocin 
Neuropsychopharmacology 44, 1328-1334 (2019). 
N. L. Mason et al., Me, myself, bye: regional alterations in glutamate and the experience of ego dissolution with psilocybin. Neuropsychopharmacology 
45, 2003-2011 (2020). 
H. Kettner et al., Psychedelic Communitas: Intersubjective Experience During Psychedelic Group Sessions Predicts Enduring Changes in Psychological 
Wellbeing and Social Connectedness. Frontiers in Pharmacology 12,  (2021). 
C. Wang et al., Immediate psychological responses and associated factors during the initial stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic 
among the general population in China. International journal of environmental research and public health 17, 1729 (2020). 
W. Cao et al., The psychological impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on college students in China. Psychiatry research, 112934 (2020). 
G. Serafini et al., The psychological impact of COVID-19 on the mental health in the general population. QJM: An International Journal of Medicine 113, 
531-537 (2020). 
L. M. Heinrich, E. Gullone, The clinical significance of loneliness: A literature review. Clinical Psychology Review 26, 695-718 (2006). 

levels. 

23 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 
79. 

80. 
81. 
82. 

83. 
84. 

85. 

86. 

87. 
88. 
89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 

R. Watts, C. Day, J. Krzanowski, D. Nutt, R. Carhart-Harris, Patients’ Accounts of Increased “Connectedness” and “Acceptance” After Psilocybin for 
Treatment-Resistant Depression. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 57, 520-564 (2017). 
E. D. Mekler, K. Hornbæk, A Framework for the Experience of Meaning in Human-Computer Interaction. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1-15 (2019). 
V. Kaptelinin, Making the Case for an Existential Perspective in HCI Research on Mortality and Death. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 352-364 (2016). 
V. Kaptelinin, Technology and the Givens of Existence: Toward an Existential Inquiry Framework in HCI Research. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1-14 (2018). 
A. Light, A. Powell, I. Shklovski, Design for Existential Crisis in the Anthropocene Age. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities 
and Technologies, 270-279 (2017). 
A. Light, I. Shklovski, A. Powell, Design for Existential Crisis. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 722-734 (2017). 
E. A. Buie, paper presented at the CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,  2014. 
R. B. Markum, K. Toyama, paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Honolulu, HI, 
USA,  2020. 
M.  Madary,  T.  K.  Metzinger,  Real  Virtuality:  A  Code  of  Ethical  Conduct.  Recommendations  for  Good  Scientific  Practice  and  the  Consumers  of  VR-
Technology. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3,  (2016). 
D. Glowacki et al., Sculpting molecular dynamics in real-time using human energy fields. Molecular Aesthetics, 246-257 (2013). 
T. Mitchell, J. Hyde, P. Tew, D. R. Glowacki, Danceroom Spectroscopy: At the frontiers of physics, performance, interactive art and technology. Leonardo 
49, 138-147 (2016). 
D. R. Glowacki et al., A GPU-accelerated immersive audio-visual framework for interaction with molecular dynamics using consumer depth sensors. 
Faraday Discussions 169, 63-87 (2014). 
Centre-for-Psychedelic-Research, Pyschedelic Ceremony Study: https://ceremonystudy.com/.  (2020). 
M. M. Nour, L. Evans, D. Nutt, R. L. Carhart-Harris, Ego-Dissolution and Psychedelics: Validation of the Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI). Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience 10,  (2016). 
VSee-Network-Stability-Test, https://test.vsee.com/network/index.html. v1.0.4,  (2020). 
J. Barsuglia et al., Intensity of Mystical Experiences Occasioned by 5-MeO-DMT and Comparison With a Prior Psilocybin Study. Front. Psychol. 9,  (2018). 
R. R. Griffiths et al., Psilocybin-occasioned mystical-type experience in combination with meditation and other spiritual practices produces enduring 
positive changes in psychological functioning and in trait measures of prosocial attitudes and behaviors. J Psychopharmacol 32, 49-69 (2018). 
C. R. Nicholas et al., High dose psilocybin is associated with positive subjective effects in healthy volunteers. J Psychopharmacol 32, 770-778 (2018). 
T.  M.  Carbonaro,  M.  W.  Johnson,  E.  Hurwitz,  R.  R.  Griffiths,  Double-blind  comparison  of  the  two  hallucinogens  psilocybin  and  dextromethorphan: 
similarities and differences in subjective experiences. Psychopharmacology 235, 521-534 (2018). 
M. E. Liechti, P. C. Dolder, Y. Schmid, Alterations of consciousness and mystical-type experiences after acute LSD in humans. Psychopharmacology 234, 
1499-1510 (2017). 
R.  R.  Griffiths  et  al.,  Psilocybin  produces  substantial  and  sustained  decreases  in  depression  and  anxiety  in  patients  with  life-threatening  cancer:  A 
randomized double-blind trial. J Psychopharmacol 30, 1181-1197 (2016). 
Y. Schmid et al., Differential effects of MDMA and methylphenidate on social cognition. J Psychopharmacol 28, 847-856 (2014). 
P. E. Vlisides et al., Subanaesthetic ketamine and altered states of consciousness in humans. British Journal of Anaesthesia 121, 249-259 (2018). 
F. S. Barrett, R. R. Griffiths, Classic Hallucinogens and Mystical Experiences: Phenomenology and Neural Correlates. A. L. Halberstadt, F. X. Vollenweider, 
D. E. Nichols, Eds., Behavioral Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2017), pp. 393-430. 
M. Forstmann, D. A. Yudkin, A. M. B. Prosser, S. M. Heller, M. J. Crockett, Transformative experience and social connectedness mediate the mood-
enhancing effects of psychedelic use in naturalistic settings. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 2338 (2020). 
V. Braun, V. Clarke, Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 77-101 (2006). 
R. L. Carhart-Harris, D. Erritzoe, E. Haijen, M. Kaelen, R. Watts, Psychedelics and connectedness. Psychopharmacology 235, 547-550 (2017). 

24 

 
Table SM1: Showing the mean MEQ30 (I, M, P, T) factor scores (as a percentage of the maximum score) for each participant. 

Participant 
number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

Positive Mood 

60 
73 
60 
40 
53 
100 
53 
80 
33 
40 
100 
0 
80 
93 
60 
67 
100 
40 
80 
73 
20 
40 
7 
40 
53 
60 
80 
7 
40 
73 
47 
73 
100 
47 
7 
73 
73 
40 
60 
67 
27 
47 
87 
100 
67 
13 
33 
60 
60 
80 
40 
87 
40 
73 
33 
87 
13 
80 

53 
67 
77 
45 
65 
61 
35 
35 
55 
53 
51 
45 
55 
79 
63 
48 
97 
52 
75 
75 
27 
37 
17 
27 
44 
60 
71 
13 
48 
32 
11 
64 
83 
31 
21 
60 
48 
56 
60 
41 
71 
13 
87 
83 
52 
3 
8 
60 
53 
49 
25 
48 
29 
43 
27 
63 
5 
87 

57 
83 
83 
63 
87 
90 
60 
77 
37 
57 
87 
53 
63 
87 
60 
67 
100 
73 
77 
73 
40 
60 
20 
40 
70 
67 
77 
40 
63 
70 
43 
77 
77 
43 
40 
70 
67 
70 
60 
57 
77 
40 
97 
90 
63 
27 
37 
67 
70 
73 
37 
67 
37 
50 
37 
70 
57 
97 

Transcendence of Space & 
Time 
60 
87 
83 
57 
80 
67 
40 
60 
60 
67 
60 
37 
63 
87 
37 
67 
100 
63 
63 
83 
30 
57 
23 
43 
37 
53 
90 
20 
83 
33 
40 
77 
93 
53 
40 
70 
67 
47 
60 
57 
53 
20 
100 
100 
57 
30 
13 
63 
63 
83 
50 
47 
43 
70 
67 
73 
33 
90 

Table SM2: The p values from independent sample t-tests comparing the mean MEQ30 (I, M, P, T) factor scores from Isness-D to Isness-C and to previously published YD studies, calculated by the 
function “scipy.stats.ttest_ind_from_stats()” (Python 3.7 and SciPy 1.6.2). Studies highlighted in blue were statistically distinguishable for 1 or fewer I, M, P or T factor scores and more intense (i.e., 
higher mean MEQ30 score) than Isness-D. Studies highlighted in light grey are those for which two or more I, M, P or T factor scores were statistically indistinguishable from Isness-D. All values that 
satisfy p > 0.05 are in bold and indicate that the corresponding study results were statistically indistinguishable from Isness-D at a significance level of 5%.   

Isness-D 
Isness-C 
Bar '18, MeO-DMT 
Grif '11, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + 
high M/S practice 
Grif '11, psilo (20mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (42mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + 
standard M/S practice 
Nich '18, psilo (31.5mg) 
Grif '16, psilo (22-30mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (21mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (20mg) 
Grif '11, psilo (10mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg) 
Grif '11, psilo (5mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg)-A 
Carb '18, psilo (10mg) 
Carb '18, dextromethorphan 
Grif '16, psilo (1-3mg) 
Grif '11, Placebo (0mg psilo) 
Grif '18, psilo (1 mg) + 
standard M/S practice 
Carb '18, Placebo 
Lie '17, MDMA (75mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo (25µg LSD) 
Lie '17, methylphenidate 
(40mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo 
Vlis '18, ketamine 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

Positive mood 

mean 
57.2 
63.9 
88.7 
85 

76.3 

79 
81 
72 

74.4 

78 
74.5 
73 
66.3 
66 
49 
57 
83 
45.7 
59 
30.8 
23 

20.1 

4.7 
16 
3 

7 

0 
6.5 

std dev 
26.6 
20.4 
12.6 
25 

19.5 

25 
26 
18.8 

31.5 

26 
26 
27.2 
23.3 
25 
26.5 
30 
12 
19.4 
18 
31.7 
21 

20.5 

9 
16.4 
0 

16.4 

0 
2.6 

p value 
n/a 
0.13287 
0.00000 
0.00019 

0.00179 

0.00291 
0.00609 
0.02456 

0.01250 

0.01988 
0.00093 
0.08842 
0.17803 
0.21782 
0.35166 
0.97850 
0.00034 
0.08002 
0.77973 
0.00001 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00015 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 

mean 
49 
61.5 
79.3 
73 

std dev 
22.4 
16.5 
18.4 
25 

71.8 

67 
65 
61.3 

60.5 

60 
59.6 
53 
48.5 
48 
44 
43 
40 
34.8 
29.7 
24.3 
19 

13.9 

6.5 
5 
4 

1 

1 
- 

18 

21 
35 
21 

36.5 

35 
29.8 
37 
28 
25 
26.5 
21 
24 
19.8 
21 
27.1 
21 

17.5 

9.3 
32.8 
0 

0 

0 
- 

p value 
n/a 
0.00092 
0.00000 
0.00024 

0.00002 

0.00346 
0.04646 
0.03471 

0.08258 

0.18009 
0.03758 
0.64050 
0.93597 
0.87255 
0.51192 
0.31728 
0.16539 
0.01404 
0.00117 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00018 

0.00000 

0.00000 
- 

mean 
63.3 
72.5 
88.7 
79 

std dev 
18.7 
11.4 
11.7 
21 

79.8 

72 
72 
66.3 

74.5 

64 
69.8 
68 
60.5 
63 
58 
55 
65 
49.3 
46.3 
35.8 
33 

30 

15.8 
18 
9 

11 

3 
- 

19 

25 
28 
20 

21.5 

29 
27 
28 
24 
25 
26.5 
30 
16 
18 
22.1 
28.3 
21 

18 

11.7 
21.9 
8 

21.9 

0 
- 

p value 
n/a 
0.00191 
0.00000 
0.00344 

0.00043 

0.11682 
0.18513 
0.54511 

0.01908 

0.91788 
0.14453 
0.49964 
0.59372 
0.95651 
0.42453 
0.16278 
0.74137 
0.00468 
0.00128 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
- 

n 
58 
57 
20 
18 

25 

18 
12 
20 

25 

11 
50 
10 
20 
18 
11 
18 
16 
20 
20 
50 
18 

25 

20 
30 
4 

30 

16 
15 

Transcendence of  
Space & Time 

mean 
59.5 
66 
85.7 
80 

std dev 
21.6 
13.4 
13.8 
25 

p value 
n/a 
0.05547 
0.00000 
0.00113 

70.6 

69 
73 
59.8 

66.6 

65 
62.1 
54 
51.5 
47 
48 
44 
60 
35.2 
49 
22.4 
21 

22.3 

6.3 
9 
5 

4 

2 
6.6 

18.5 

0.02796 

30 
31 
17 

28 

31 
23.9 
33 
21 
25 
23.2 
30 
20 
16.2 
21.2 
20.5 
30 

20.5 

9.8 
27.3 
2 

0 

0 
2.1 

0.14317 
0.07303 
0.95525 

0.21369 

0.47436 
0.55396 
0.49635 
0.15449 
0.04235 
0.11415 
0.01823 
0.93391 
0.00002 
0.06349 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00001 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 

 
  
  
  
Table SM3: Identical values as to those Table SM2, except the formatting indicates statistically indistinguishable studies using a significance level of 1% (p > 0.01). 

Isness-D 
Isness-C 
Bar '18, MeO-DMT 
Grif '11, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + 
high M/S practice 
Grif '11, psilo (20mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (42mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (30mg) 
Grif '18, psilo (20-30 mg) + 
standard M/S practice 
Nich '18, psilo (31.5mg) 
Grif '16, psilo (22-30mg) 
Nich '18, psilo (21mg) 
Carb '18, psilo (20mg) 
Grif '11, psilo (10mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg) 
Grif '11, psilo (5mg) 
Lie '17, LSD (200µg)-A 
Carb '18, psilo (10mg) 
Carb '18, dextromethorphan 
Grif '16, psilo (1-3mg) 
Grif '11, Placebo (0mg psilo) 
Grif '18, psilo (1 mg) + 
standard M/S practice 
Carb '18, Placebo 
Lie '17, MDMA (75mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo (25µg LSD) 
Lie '17, methylphenidate 
(40mg) 
Lie '17, Placebo 
Vlis '18, ketamine 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

Positive mood 

Transcendence of  
Space & Time 

mean 

std dev 

57.2 
63.9 
88.7 
85 

76.3 

79 
81 
72 

74.4 

78 
74.5 
73 
66.3 
66 
49 
57 
83 
45.7 
59 
30.8 
23 

20.1 

4.7 
16 
3 

7 

0 
6.5 

26.6 
20.4 
12.6 
25 

19.5 

25 
26 
18.8 

31.5 

26 
26 
27.2 
23.3 
25 
26.5 
30 
12 
19.4 
18 
31.7 
21 

20.5 

9 
16.4 
0 

16.4 

0 
2.6 

p value 

n/a 
0.13287 
0.00000 
0.00019 

0.00179 

0.00291 
0.00609 
0.02456 

0.01250 

0.01988 
0.00093 
0.08842 
0.17803 
0.21782 
0.35166 
0.97850 
0.00034 
0.08002 
0.77973 
0.00001 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00015 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 

mean 

std dev 

49 
61.5 
79.3 
73 

71.8 

67 
65 
61.3 

60.5 

60 
59.6 
53 
48.5 
48 
44 
43 
40 
34.8 
29.7 
24.3 
19 

13.9 

6.5 
5 
4 

1 

1 
- 

22.4 
16.5 
18.4 
25 

18 

21 
35 
21 

36.5 

35 
29.8 
37 
28 
25 
26.5 
21 
24 
19.8 
21 
27.1 
21 

17.5 

9.3 
32.8 
0 

0 

0 
- 

p value 

n/a 
0.00092 
0.00000 
0.00024 

0.00002 

0.00346 
0.04646 
0.03471 

0.08258 

0.18009 
0.03758 
0.64050 
0.93597 
0.87255 
0.51192 
0.31728 
0.16539 
0.01404 
0.00117 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00018 

0.00000 

0.00000 
- 

mean 

std dev 

63.3 
72.5 
88.7 
79 

79.8 

72 
72 
66.3 

74.5 

64 
69.8 
68 
60.5 
63 
58 
55 
65 
49.3 
46.3 
35.8 
33 

30 

15.8 
18 
9 

11 

3 
- 

18.7 
11.4 
11.7 
21 

19 

25 
28 
20 

21.5 

29 
27 
28 
24 
25 
26.5 
30 
16 
18 
22.1 
28.3 
21 

18 

11.7 
21.9 
8 

21.9 

0 
- 

p value 

n/a 
0.00191 
0.00000 
0.00344 

0.00043 

0.11682 
0.18513 
0.54511 

0.01908 

0.91788 
0.14453 
0.49964 
0.59372 
0.95651 
0.42453 
0.16278 
0.74137 
0.00468 
0.00128 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
- 

mean 

std dev 

59.5 
66 
85.7 
80 

70.6 

69 
73 
59.8 

66.6 

65 
62.1 
54 
51.5 
47 
48 
44 
60 
35.2 
49 
22.4 
21 

22.3 

6.3 
9 
5 

4 

2 
6.6 

21.6 
13.4 
13.8 
25 

18.5 

30 
31 
17 

28 

31 
23.9 
33 
21 
25 
23.2 
30 
20 
16.2 
21.2 
20.5 
30 

20.5 

9.8 
27.3 
2 

0 

0 
2.1 

p value 

n/a 
0.05547 
0.00000 
0.00113 

0.02796 

0.14317 
0.07303 
0.95525 

0.21369 

0.47436 
0.55396 
0.49635 
0.15449 
0.04235 
0.11415 
0.01823 
0.93391 
0.00002 
0.06349 
0.00000 
0.00000 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 
0.00001 

0.00000 

0.00000 
0.00000 

n 

58 
57 
20 
18 

25 

18 
12 
20 

25 

11 
50 
10 
20 
18 
11 
18 
16 
20 
20 
50 
18 

25 

20 
30 
4 

30 

16 
15 

 
  
  
  
Table SM4: The p values returned from the ‘DistributionFitTest’ command in Mathematica on the I, M, P and T averages for each 
participant, where the p value indicates whether the data are characteristic of a normal distribution. The data were categorized as being 
normally distribution if the p value was above a statistical significance level of 5% (p > 0.05). The M, P and T factor scores pass every 
test, and the I factor score passed all except the Pearson χ2 test (in bold). 

Ineffability 

Mystical 

Positive Emotions 

Anderson-Darling 
Baringhaus-Henze 
Cramér-von Mises 
Jarque-Bera ALM 
Mardia Combined 
Mardia Kurtosis 
Mardia Skewness 
Pearson χ2 
Shapiro-Wilk 

0.12434 
0.45081 
0.16477 
0.31246 
0.31246 
0.30232 
0.38654 
0.03311 
0.07108 

0.61534 
0.56455 
0.55253 
0.58568 
0.58568 
0.38436 
0.63793 
0.80075 
0.57495 

0.07552 
0.20420 
0.09207 
0.48709 
0.48709 
0.35291 
0.54530 
0.12823 
0.17330 

Transcendence of 
Space & Time 
0.53278 
0.90626 
0.49145 
0.59613 
0.59613 
0.33066 
0.90848 
0.39732 
0.45009 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure SM1: Scatter plots of the average ego dissolution against the pre-Isness-D ICS scores for each participant (panel A) and the post-Isness-D 
ICS scores for each participant (panel B), with a line of best fit calculated using a linear least-squares regression.  Each legend gives the correlation 
coefficient and the R2 value. 

 
 
 
Item number 

Item 

Average 

Std. dev. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

During the ceremony, I felt a bond with my fellow participants that I could not 
experience outside the ceremony. 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of belonging with the other participants. 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of harmony with the others. 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of sharing with the other participants. 

The ceremony really allowed me to get to know the other participants. 

During the ceremony, I felt that social status became irrelevant. 

During the ceremony, I experienced all participants as equal based on basic 
shared humanity. 
During the ceremony, ego-related tensions between participants seemed to 
resolve. 

During the ceremony, I felt a strong connection to another participant. 

10 

During the ceremony, I felt a strong connection the facilitator. 

5.2 

5.5 

5.9 

6.0 

3.6 

6.4 

6.2 

5.3 

4.3 

4.6 

1.6 

1.2 

1.1 

1.1 

1.4 

1.0 

1.3 

1.4 

1.9 

1.5 

Table SM5: Mean rating and standard deviation for the 8 items in the Communitas questionnaire (items 1–8), and two additional items relating to 
connection with another participant and with the facilitator (items 9 & 10). 

 
Table SM6: Themes that arose in the qualitative analysis and several corresponding indicative quotations, in order of the number of 
associated quotations. 

Theme  
(N statements) 

Indicative quotations 

Connectedness 
(75) 

I’m pretty bewildered… It’s very immersive… you lose yourself in the connection to other people. 
It was the antithesis of what we’re going through right now, with all the separation. 

- 
- 
-  Blissful sense of connectivity. 
-  You can have this quite intense… intimacy in space… but you are also totally safe.  You can be with 

Positive 
emotions  
(65) 

Embodied 
awareness  
(40) 

Ego dissolution 
(31) 

Supportive 
setting  
(28) 

Sense of play 
(24) 

Transcendence 
of space/time  
(13) 

Noetic quality 
(11) 

Comparison to 
other altered 
states  
(10) 

Sense of beauty 
(9) 

Reflection on 
mortality  
(8) 

I feel way less stressed. 

strangers and… be really close but also know where your boundaries are. 
I feel remarkably happy.  There’s something very happiness-inducing about this whole practice. 
It was quite a trip.  But a pleasant one. 

- 
- 
-  For me that was very very calming, amazingly calming. 
- 
-  Even though there was no body there, you wanted to respect each other’s space. 
- 
-  Following the [dynamical molecular organism] with my nose, it felt like I was breathing it in. 
- 
- 

Identity didn’t matter anymore; it was about experiencing things together.  That was wonderful. 
I found [the anonymity] quite powerful because we were all completely equal in the space.  Any of the pre-
judgements that come in from how people look, sound and that sort of thing just aren’t there. 

It felt really nice to touch people. Having not touched people for so long [in lockdown], it felt really nice.  

-  Yeah, I felt [when touching one another’s heart centres] the sweetest tenderness or pure, childlike love… 
stripped back, without any of the assumed layerings that we place upon reality and relationships… just to 
the absolute core, it was truly beautiful. Thank you, all of you. Thank you, Isness. 

-  At first, I thought [it] might be difficult to [reflect on connection with] strangers, but there was no pressure 

- 

to give a long statement… the breathing exercise helped get comfortable in the space. 
I really liked the opening and closing exercises with [the facilitator].  It really helped to hold the experience 
and make me feel more comfortable with everyone. 

-  The time of reflection at the end of the session, hearing other people’s thoughts on the experience made the 

experience more meaningful. 

-  There certainly was a sense of playfulness in this, which was really nice. As adults that’s not always 

something that we pursue.  It was good. 
I was inspired to dance on the top of the table at one point. 

- 
-  A feeling of being grounded, a playfulness facilitated in a calm way. 
- 

It felt like the space opened up to me. I’d been aware of the confines of [the space], vaguely.  And then we 
pushed [the molecular organism] through the floor… it was very odd to feel like everything opened out. 
-  Things didn’t have the same human scale, so at times it felt this could be [an enormous] space and we were 

- 
- 

a completely different scale, or it could be microscopic, and it didn’t really matter, actually. 
I liked the parts that allowed me to view the world in a way that isn't possible in real life. 
I got quite emotional… And then the experience was guiding us forward, so it was fleeting.  But I got this 
surge of emotion where I don’t know if I wanted to gasp or cry or what it was, but I was kind of shocked in 
awe. 

-  That’s definitely a spiritual experience of some sort.  It’s, like, tangible. 
-  Pure unity. 
- 

- 

[Taking psychedelics] wasn’t quite like this, but I guess there’s elements of it, for sure. 
I experienced the sense of interconnectedness…only previously noticed with the help of psychedelics in the 
right setting. 

-  The experience brought up memories for me of medicine plant journeys and realisations that have shaped 
my life and give my life meaning. These realisations are very much connected with going beyond form...  
I was amazed [by] how moved I was.  I think it was the juxtaposition of the frustration and then the 
beholding beauty.  I think the music really helped.  It felt very beautiful to sit back and witness.  I don’t 
normally get moved quite so much. 

- 

-  Yes, thank you. I was a little bit doubtful in the beginning, I didn’t know what to expect and what was going 

- 

to happen. It was a beautiful experience. 
It’s clear that [our life] energy isn’t just gone, it goes somewhere.  It’s beautiful to think that it’s all out there 
somewhere and it’s still circling you constantly 

-  There was one moment… talking about seeing past energies and I was thinking about my cat, whom I lost 
last year. I really miss her. I could really see her and… was writing her name. It was beautiful, thank you. 

THEMATIC ANALYSIS 

A summary of the identified themes (N quotes): 

1.  Connectedness (75) 

a.  General (42) 
b.  Through body-movement (19) 
c. 

Intimacy (14) 
2.  Positive emotions (65) 
a.  General (40) 
b.  Feeling of calmness (25) 

3.  Embodied awareness (40) 
4.  Ego dissolution (31) 
5.  Supportive setting (28) 
6.  Sense of play (24) 
7.  Transcendence of space and time (13) 
8.  Noetic quality (11) 
9.  Comparison to other altered states (10) 
10.  Sense of beauty (9) 
11.  Reflection on mortality (8) 

Each quotation has been formatted according to the source: 

•  Regular = Guided discussions 
•  Bold = free writing responses 
• 
• 

Italic = questionnaire feedback from “what did you like?” 
Italic bold - questionnaire feedback from “Do you have any other comments?” 

 
 
 
 
 
Theme: Connectedness 

General connection 

1.  At first I was a bit suspicious with this network, but I feel that I’m starting to understand the metaphor a bit 
better...The one thing that I was a bit wary of was the fact that we had to go about and do the mudra in order to 
interact with it.  I thought at first it would go against the idea of being always connected, but I guess now I feel 
like  in  order  to  be  connected  we  have  to  put  in  effort,  we  have  to  understand  that.    Being  connected  is  not 
something that should be expected all the time.  And it takes some effort to realise it, but now I feel like, I don’t 

know if that’s going to be a changing experience, but now I’m ready to have this metaphor in my head whenever 
I’m scouring through life. 

2.  Yeah, when we were doing the initial mudra and [the narrator] said change to the other one and see what you 

notice.  But that initial one, yeah, I could just get a real connection with [the molecule]. 

3. 
4. 

I feel very calm and centred...It’s really nice.  Connected as well, you know. 
I’ve  been  also  trying  to  be  more  connected  with  myself  through  meditation,  and  it  felt  really  nice  to  have  a 
meditation  with  other  people.    So,  I  felt  connected  with  myself  but  also  with  everyone  else  here.    It’s  an 
experience I haven’t felt in a while because of COVID and being in front of screens all the time.  That’s why I 

think ‘connected’ is the word for me for the end of this session. 

5.  This is the closest [that] I’ve been to any strangers in a year. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

It was beautiful.  It was amazing.  I kind of feel like I know you guys now. 
It felt more useful [than other guided meditation], in a sense a bit more connected. 

I think it’s nice that we’re all in the middle together now.  We all started out on the outside and we’re all together 
now, it’s nice. 
I suppose it’s a bit more collaborative than just a normal meditation because we were able to work together and 
connect with each other in different ways. 

9. 

10.  I’m pretty bewildered, to be honest.  It’s very immersive.  It feels you lose yourself in the connection to other 

people.  Quite remarkable. 

11.  Yeah, I feel grateful as well, for being so connected to the sense beyond touch and taste and smell.  Very clear 

connection in a way [trails off] beautifully connected in this experience. 

12.  It was also just so amazing to feel that movement in myself to connect, and that readiness.  All I wanted to do 
was to be together.  Such enjoyment of being together and to feel that so powerfully in oneself, that is really 
confirming and opening and expanding.  

13.  Such a pure joy of connection. 
14.  Connection for sure, yes, and so much more. 
15.  [When the lights faded] Still connected. 
16.  Especially in the situation we’re in at the moment, globally, not only was there, on a practical level, more freedom 
to move and [no] fear that you were going to whack someone in the face.  But also, you could physically get 

closer to one another’s lights, which was really cool.  You could be in the light, which you couldn’t before.  But 
also, the connection is so much more than who you’re physically in the same room as, it’s about a bigger thing, 
feeling connected to people we’re not physically connected to, necessarily.   

17.  I wish it was bigger, I don’t know if that makes sense.  That there was more space and, also, more of us...It felt 

like at any moment the lights could come on and there would be 6 billion more. 

18.  I think the fact that we’re all doing it together makes such a difference...It’s the fact that you realise that it is 

someone else, an actual real person making those moves.  

19.  It was the antithesis of what we’re going through right now, with all the separation.  
20.  It was weirdly connected [when coalescing]. 
21.  Connecting light and emotions as energy was special.  My work is in renewable energy and I also take 
photographs and think about light; light as connection; light transferring between matter; light creating 
memory.  Experiencing myself and the other people in the group as light energy was joyful.  It was both 
another space and allowed me to think about other spaces connecting in the world.  

22.  Loved the thought of connection with total strangers, in such a gentle way.  Thank you for the experience! 
23.  It was really nice to feel really connected to people – especially during COVID to feel so free to touch & 

connect with other people.  Felt very strange standing inside someone, but also lovely.   

24.  I  noticed  that  I  enjoyed  the  ability  to  join  with  people  and  leave  when  I  wanted  —  togetherness  and 
separateness.  The option does not always seem available to choose for myself.  The music was a significant 
part of the experience for me — relaxing and connecting.  The attention to a separate ‘self’ was intriguing.  
The energy part.  The energy among the lights, (people) was easier for me to experience — I experienced 
some type of connection.  

25.  I liked the fogging effects that connected us all in haze.  Very soothing and centering experience overall.  I 
was sort of expecting it to go from protein folding to a tree growing.  I liked us being amorphous jelly fish 
together.  Feeling connected to others —distance irrelevant.  

26.  Actually, this great ‘therapy’ in time of social distancing.  Happy to participate again and again. 
27.  Connectiveness — good moment of release. 
28.  Wished to see and feel all the people on Earth in the experience, since the idea is that we are all light beings.  

Would be incredible to experience that directly.  

29.  I felt at ease with the other participants and felt a positive connection with them at the end.  
30.  Blissful sense of connectivity. 
31.  Everything!    I  liked  being  energetically  Together  yet  Physically  apart  from  the  other  participants  a  lot.    It 

increased the sense of connection. 

32.  I  felt  excited  by  the  international  connections  and  the  use  of  the  Internet  as  a  way  of  creating  relationships 
between people whom I have never met.  I felt a sense of joy and connection which, in part due to lock down, I 
have been unable to experience as my normal dance practice of contact improvisation has been suspended. 
33.  That I was able to feel immersed in the experience.  Feeling of connection with a group of strangers who were 

spread out across the country. 

34.  The potential for bringing people together.   
35.  Connecting with the other participants, interacting with beings as balls of light. 
36.  The opportunity to connect with other beings and myself in a new way. 
37.  The feeling of calm and peace I felt and the thought that I was connecting with strangers from around the World 

going through the same experience. 

38.  I like that I have a visual now that I can map onto the real world when I'm around other people so that I can see 

everyone as that beam of light. 

39.  I wish I could do it again, now I know what’s involved.  It was so beautiful; I felt an amazing connection to 
the lights and energy.  Now I think about it, maybe I did feel more ‘at one’ than I scored in the questionnaire.  

40.  Really great, I would love to do this with my siblings across the world as I feel it would make me feel so close.  
41.  Really beautiful.  My intention at the start was to look more at my connection with myself and my body and I 

really feel like I was able to explore this from a new and different point of view.  Thanks guys! 

42.  I think I preferred the remote experience more than when we were in the same room.  It felt more profound 
and in line with the project.  I also wasn't afraid I was going to whack someone and so I could move more 
freely.  It also meant we could get closer than before which felt more intimate, and connecting—nearly as 
much so as with a partner, child or pet—even though we were in different places. 

Connection through body movement 

1. 

I think I was still aware that I wanted to help out what everyone else was doing, rather than ruining it, if that was 
such a thing.  If someone was trying to go a certain direction, then I wanted to go with them rather than spoil 
their activity. 

2.  Today felt so much more like a dance floor.  I guess you feel that thing when you’re on a dance floor in a club 
with your mates and you feel that sense of connection.  And you’re moving in a similar, exploratory way.  Today, 
for some reason, [Isness] felt more like a disco.   
I just wanted to move in, to be honest.  I was just really curious to see what happens when you put more and 

3. 

more light together.  And I think people were receptive, I don’t know if that’s just in my head.  When I was 
trying to get as much light together as possible, I felt like a lot of people were following those same thought 
patterns.  And you definitely felt that when we were all bunched up on top of each other, that was really cool. 
I felt really connected with all the other people in this room, even though we’re in different places.  It was really 

nice all putting our lights in the middle, it was a way of feeling connected. 
It felt like there was a way to tell whether people wanted to [coalesce] or not, people kind of moved gently and 
moved direction. 

4. 

5. 

6.  Naturally, I wanted to start moving slower.  And I felt like the interaction could be greater perhaps when we 
were moving slower.  So, I feel like I slowed down during the process.  I started a bit more like ‘woah, what’s 
going on’, and then I was enjoying slowing down and observing others and seeing how others were interacting 
if I went near them. 
I also found it really cool as a social experiment, to see how leading and following happens within the group 

7. 

before it started being led.  When we were just left to our own devices, what we implicitly did with the creature—
trying to stretch it out—came from someone and everybody else just picked it up.  How quickly that happened 
was fascinating. 

8.  Really enjoyed that.  Loved feeling of being connected with people — sense of a very intimate space despite 
being so far apart (one in London and one in Knowle, Bristol).  Lovely working together.  You get a sense 
of whether others in the group are playful, generous, co-operative, from how they interact with the shapes 
and the other people.  So — body language still comes through even without a physical body.   

9.  OK, trying not to think too much but I can’t help it.  I’m really into the idea of building the sense of 
interconnectedness in this way.  Simple; three moving lights to represent a stranger.  Was enough to really 
feel  and  play  with  a  sense  of  connection.    There  was  mirroring,  suggesting/influencing,  and  being 
influenced.  Plus a shared novel experience.   

 
10.  Social experiment – play and unspoken coordination.  I really liked how quickly unspoken coordination 
to stretch out the creature developed – way before we got ‘the directive’.  The directive then felt really out 
of touch. 

11.  I didn’t really connect with the ‘beings of light’ script.  Instead, I thought the participants convinced me 
they are good, well-intentioned, and bright people (‘that carry light’) all on their own, through interaction.  
The whole recorded script fell flat in the light of this realization that was about reality, not some pre-
recorded open-loop non-judgement. 

12.  Doing simple actions, having to go into the middle, choosing a movement helped put me at ease.   Guide 
stating to be gentle with the molecule set up the conditions of we should interact in the space – ‘be gentle’.  
And  each  other.    There  was  a  sense  of  play  which  you  don’t  have  in  the  real  world  because  of  social 
constraints.  I felt everyone was respectful of each other’s space, no one was dominant, more curious and 
wanting to gently interact.  

13.  I tend to be quite shy but felt I got easily and quickly comfortable with the others, through body movements and 

interactions mainly. 

14.  I loved playing with the energy and manipulating it.  It was great when we could all coordinate our movements. 
15.  I enjoyed playing particularly with one of the participants, improvising and guessing each other’s moves. 
16.  That there were a small number of participants, so we could interact in a small group.  Everyone was friendly 
and  playful.    The  visuals,  especially  the  trails  and  fog  effects  were  cool.    Working  together  to  stretch  the 
protein/organism/thing out was fun. 

17.  The way it became a dance. 
18.  I felt free to dance with others and play freely. 
19.  I feel much closer to my intention set at the start than I did before the session.  I enjoyed the live guiding and 
group  engagement  a  lot  and  felt  very  safe  and  connected.  The  pre-recorded  guide  sometimes  seemed  too 
frequent or didactic so there wasn’t as much space as I would have liked to play, explore, learn from watching 

others through chance encounters. 

Connection in intimacy 

3. 

It feels really much more intimate, so much more intimate [than a video conference]. 

1. 
2.  The fact that you can have this quite intense, almost, intimacy in space, you are right in each other's space, but 
you  are  also  totally  safe.    You  can  be  with  strangers  and  you  can  be  really  close  but  also  know  where  your 
boundaries are in certain ways. 
It felt really intimate.  And I tried to connect whichever light being it was, and you didn’t know who it was.  I 
tried to join mudras, and I think I sat inside a few of you.  I hope that was OK! 
It’s also really interesting because the first time I tried this there were four people in the room together, so we 
ended up bumping into each other and you had to be aware of space and cables.  And now, I can just literally 
walk into people and it’s quite sensuous, almost. 
It felt strangely intimate...it was really nice. 

5. 
6.  Feel slowed down now.  Liked connecting with others.  More intimate than would have thought.  Enjoyed 

4. 

the visuals of my own movements, was less interested in others. 

7.  Overlapping in ‘virtual space’ almost felt uncomfortably intimate at time—probably a good exercise!   

8.  Physical boundaries being breached was initially really jarring but quickly gave way to feeling of intimacy.  

This was a really good part of the experience.   

9.  Super fast intimacy and trust establishment.  Following and leading, playing one on one led to a feeling of 
true intimacy, which was a surprise.  Was completely emergent.  I used to do improv – this kind of exercise 

would establish physical trust much faster than happened in real life.  

10.  I found it incredibly energizing.  Crawling through the light, the creature we were all holding, as well as 
the [?] light of other beings.  It was sensual and playful and safe, felt like feeding off each other’s energy.  
Also, quite erotic.  

11.  The sense of an intimate space despite being far apart. 
12.  The closeness, intimacy, body-meld. 
13.  The sense of intimacy. 
14.  I  thought  the  playful  intimacy  did  come  about  very  quickly,  I  have  experienced  real  life  playful  intimacy 
through  Contact  Dance  to  the  same  kind  of  depth  however,  I  would  agree  and  echo  one  of  the  other 
participants that this happened very quickly. 

 
 
 
 
Theme: Positive Emotions 

General 

1.  This was amazing.  
2.  And just I guess a feeling right now, not that it was part of the experience, but just a great conversation with a 

bunch of glowing gas balls.  Absolutely loving this, it’s something I never knew I needed. 
Just a whole lot of gratitude, [Facilitator’s name].  This has been absolutely gorgeous. 

3. 
4.  Yes, thank you so much for this opportunity, I never felt like this before.  And thank you for that. 
5.  When [the molecule] was leaving behind trails, I found that particularly amazing.  That really felt 

extraordinary. 

6.  Yeah, [coalescing] feels a bit funny at first, quite jaunting almost.  But then it feels quite nice, like ‘ah yeah, 

7. 

OK!’ 
I feel like there’s a difference between stagnant and stillness.  That’s how I’m feeling.  That it’s nice to know 
the difference.  I guess this time can make you feel very stagnant, cause you’re in the same place and you’re 
not still or rooted to anything...I feel like there’s a difference. 
I liked [coalescing], I thought that was really nice. 
[Coalescing] was great. 

8. 
9. 
10.  [Coalescing was] a quick way of freeing you up and making you realise that you can walk across other 

people’s space. 

11.  I was expecting to walk into you guys, but [we were] disincorporated beings.  It was great. 
12.  [Coalescing] was a highlight, an absolute highlight.  It was very interesting having done the physical version of 

this and seeing the advantages of the virtual.  That was definitely one of them, being able to invade and 
conquer someone else’s space. 

13.  I like silence in the space.  It’s really interesting the experience of silence in this dark space without anything at 

all.  Not only the experience of light, but [also] the experience of silence and darkness is really great. 

14.  Yeah, I was going to say that I haven’t really got any words.  Which is a good thing, I think. 
15.  [Coalescing] was definitely a highlight. 
16.  [Coalescing] was really cool. 
17.  I felt quite greedy for it [the molecule]. I just wanted to be in it and it to be completely surrounding me and to 

be amongst it.  I still feel that. 

18.  I feel remarkably happy.  There’s something very happiness-inducing about this whole practice.  
19.  I feel happy and pretty optimistic about going out and seeing energy in everything and having that as a positive 

lens about life. 

20.  It was quite a trip.  But a pleasant one. 
21.  I’d like to do again in the morning, though curious what I’ll be in dream state tonight.  
22.  I really like that the creature is common to all. 
23.  Felt a strong urge to disappear/let go of mudras.  When I did, I felt elated and giggly. 
24.  Overall, very impressed.  Thanks to everyone who worked on this, it’s going to be a beautiful, 

revolutionary public service.  

25.  The previous time I experienced this, there were people actually in the room with me and I was 

conscious of their personal space, headset cables, etc.  Now it was so much more freeing and … safe? 
26.  Initially I was thinking about driving on the motorway with other death machines around me, which 
makes me anxious.  Translating that sense of danger in a completely safe space, yet with other live 
participants who you can still FEEL almost physically, I was delighted that it didn’t diminish the sense 
of sharing energies at all.  That is amazing! 

27.  I feel so [?], awake, glowing, even after a long day.  Transcending time, time zones, other humans in the 

experience with me … I feel so full of LIGHT and HAPPY.  

28.  All of it. 
29.  All of it! 
30.  It was a really GORGEOUS experience... this iteration is more powerful than the Church one I did 8-9 

months ago…the music adds a lot… 

31.  Great experience, thank you. 

 
32.  It was very centering!  
33.  Brilliant. 
34.  I really enjoyed it, and it is something that I would definitely like to do again in the future. 
35.  No. It was fantastic! :) 
36.  Thank you.  I'm humbled and grateful to have been able to enter this space.  It arose so many things from 

within and beside me.  Thank you!  Very fun and very humbling. 

37.  I had a great time, but mostly forgot my ‘connectedness intention’ that I had been asked to think about 

before the isness experience as I played with the energy string and the other participants.  I was aware from 
conversations with others about the inspiration from chemical modelling so that may have been in my mind 
when I did that. 
It is something I think I will remember for a long time, and would love to have another play! 

38.  I never thought this could be done with VR.  Amazing.  Please keep going.  
39.  Many thanks!  Amazing :) 
40.  I really enjoyed it! 

Feeling of Calmness 

41.  Tranquil.  
42.  Yes, absolutely [I feel chilled].  I’m like a lukewarm glass of water. 
43.  [When the lights faded] Like going to sleep as a kid.  Maybe at the end of your birthday, or something.  Or 

falling asleep in the car when your parents are driving. 

44.  [When the lights faded] Like when you’re little and you fall asleep and your parents are having a party.  You 

know there’s those times where you fall asleep on the sofa and could hear other voices around you and that 
sense of togetherness. 

45.  And I definitely want to do it again.  Now I’ve experienced it, I want to do it all over again and I can relax into 
it a bit more.  I do feel relaxed now.  Especially that point where our lights all got on top of each other.  It was 
relaxing. 

46.  I feel way less stressed. 
47.  Yes, very relaxed.  Really calm.  And I was amazed at how I wanted to gather all the mudras together.  I 

wanted to bring everyone [trails off].  I didn’t like to see people straying off. 

48.  I felt very peaceful, I think. 
49.  For me that was very very calming, amazingly calming. 
50.  I will say that I’m relaxed in a way that I can describe, I think that my shoulders are very much lower, I had a 

tense neck.  And I loved the dance, I was dancing with my hands. 

51.  Overwhelming calmness once I had let myself fully immerse in the journey!   
52.  The experience was fun and eye opening! Felt very meditative and calming.  It was cool interacting with 

the ‘organism’ as well as the fellow users.   

53.  Overall, a very joy-inducing and calming experience.  
54.  My first VR with headset.  Reminiscent of Tokyo Light Digital Museum.  Very relaxing (recharging). 
55.  All in all, I felt renewed/re-energized. [?] Would be happy to do again. 
56.  Heart opening. 
57.  Great for group therapy. Great for group tonglen practice. 
58.  There was a point when you were asked to focus on the past as you looked at the light trails.  I had a 

spike of an anxious feeling – perhaps because depression is an obsession with the past…and I have 
always looked at it in a way where I focus on the negative.  What was interesting was I didn’t feel like 
that; I focused on the non-linear patterns.  It was nice to look at the past in a calming way.  

59.  I found it difficult to write about this experience straight afterwards.  Although I felt lucid and wanted 
to talk to my host about it, I have had very limited experience with VR and was focused on feeling 
calmer and strangely energized from the experience.  

60.  Some of the questions in the survey were difficult to answer because I didn’t come into the experience 

with an ego – my starting place was a feeling of anxiety and stagnation.  I came away from the 

 
 
experience with an overwhelming sense of calm, which onto the next morning.  I woke up thinking about 
how I keep a sense of play and wonderment.  

61.  Interacting with the energy string was fascinating and soothing. 
62.  The use of VR to aid the disillusionment of self as a starting part to a meditative practise. 
63.  I liked the immersive nature which removed me from my normal thoughts and experiences.  
64.  Calming, relaxing feeling at end. 
65.  I'm not sure I took away any profound insights, but this may be because I have never really tried yoga or 
meditation, which would perhaps make me more primed and open for this type of experience.  It was, 
however, quite relaxing and I would try it again. 

 
 
 
 
Theme: Embodied awareness 

1. 

I  almost…we  were  different  creatures.    In  fact,  I  remember  now  the  dance  movements  were  these  fuzzy, 
round...you know...we are these fuzzy round cloudy things, and that was a great form for the particular dance. 
2. 
It felt like we were all, you know, coming together, like I could feel that.  That’s what it felt like, I think. 
3.  Having done mediation without visual aids, I’ve not really done group meditation before.  It’s a similar process 
although I definitely feel an awareness of other people in my space.  There’s a duality in the fact that you’re not 
in my physical space. Definitely, I think that at the end when I closed my eyes, I could still feel things moving 
around me.  It’s hard to separate traces that are left on my visual senses, differentiation the physical from the 
mental. 

4. 

I thought it was very interesting to experience the same space without bumping into anybody.  And just becoming 
into the same space with other people and merging, sort of, and at first I feel a bit ‘OK I’m going to bump into 
them’ but no, I can completely merge with them, it’s wonderful. 

5.  Even now, I’m arranging myself sat down and I’m like ‘ooh have I given space to the person on the left and the 

person on the right’ and it’s kind of incredible. 

7. 

6.  There’s definitely a feeling here like ‘someone’s messing with my lights’ [and] ‘somebody’s standing in my orb’ 
or ‘somebody’s standing in my space’ or ‘am I going to touch someone else?’.  Like ‘is that allowed?’ [or] ‘is 
that taboo?’. 
It felt really nice to touch people.  Especially in lockdown, having not touched people for so long, it felt really 
nice.  
I think I still found myself respecting peoples’ personal space; it felt weird to try and walk over someone or walk 
through someone.  I did treat people as if they had a slight solidness to them. 
I found myself putting my ball of light on other peoples’ hands and then feeling self-conscious that I was an 
inappropriate guy at the party. 

8. 

9. 

10.  I totally stepped into all of you purposely, I wanted to see how that felt like.  I was trying to put my head on your 
other heads and my hands in the same spots, just to see if that made me feel anything.  It felt like someone else’s 
energy. 

11.  I always find it interesting when you give people more space to these, let’s say, ‘imagined people’ than you 
would in real life.  You can sense an imaginary presence around the glowing light, and you give it space even 
though there is no barrier there, other than imagined.  But, with people in real life, even though it is, let’s say, 
‘real’ or the barrier is real, you push that more so than you would here, where you give people more space. 

12.  Even though there was no body there, you wanted to respect each other's space. 
13.  I wasn’t sure if something else was going to happen when we did that [coalescing].  I don’t know what I was 
expecting.  It was weird, I suppose, not touching because it feels like we should have been, if you see what I 
mean. 

14.  I think the ‘not touching’ is part of starting the dissolution of the body and translation into this kind-of more 
‘energy state’, and so it felt, when you couldn’t touch someone, you were like ‘that makes sense’ because you’re 
no longer a body, but you’re light. 

15.  I found it really strange at the start when you were telling us to go closer and closer and then that weird boundary 
of where personal space is...and all of a sudden it was like ‘oh, actually this is kind of nice!’.  Like, we’re all in 
the same block together. 

16.  Yeah, [coalescing] was really nice. 

17.  I felt aware of that, I think, more so than I needed to, being in someone’s space.  
18.  I think part of me, I don’t know, there was something in me that felt a little bit rude walking into someone else’s 

space, despite the fact that I’m not actually doing that.  It felt quite intimate with strangers. 

19.  I kept wanting to touch people, physically.  To reach out and grab their hands or hug them, see what would 

happen if our energy came together. 

20.  I actually had a sensation of different temperature on my skin.  And my heart opened.  It was definitely heart-
opening.  Much more rapid, I think, from the regular loving, kindness meditation, even.  It speeded up the heart-
opening for me a little bit.  Yes, I felt really deeply connected to all of you.  In a human but non-human way. 
21.  When we could then, right at the start, we all moved closer and closer together and we [were] on top of each 
other’s lights.  Until that point it really felt like you were all in the room with me, in a sense, and then that made 
me realise that you weren’t.  I thought that was really interesting. 

22.  I kept being concerned about people’s personal space and not stepping on them.   
23.  I was a little surprised at how connected I felt with the other people.  I think, like the other gentleman was saying, 

somebody coughed, and I thought ‘Am I too close to this person?’  It was kind of strange. 

24.  In one way, I felt like there wasn’t enough space.  On the other hand, the constricted space, sort of, increases 

interactions and like, yeah, there was something happening.  That was an interesting dichotomy for me. 

25.  What was interesting for me [was that] we couldn’t see each other’s body forms.  At one stage I was lying down 
and at one stage I was kneeling, and I thought that was interesting.  I was curious what everyone else was doing. 
26.  I was struck by how quite quickly something that was quite abstract—the light—suddenly held a lot of meaning 
when you perceived [them] as being people.  I was quite struck when we all walked into the middle together, 

how that felt really real. 

27.  [?] get the proprioception, you know, to figure out how far you were from the other person and all that.  But it 

was kind of fun, that was fun.  

28.  Expected haptic feedback when connecting with creature and others, then felt it anyway, a little.  
29.  I enjoyed the subtle movements of the gloves.  You felt aware of your body, but mostly more focused on 

the molecule.  

30.  It also felt really cool that I felt the heat from the light. 
31.  Whenever I would physically merge with any of the other participants, I got chills. 
32.  I loved touching people—I think because of the lockdown this enjoyment was even more heightened. 
33.  It also felt really cool to actually step inside others and also put [the molecule] in the ground. 
34.  Following the [dynamical molecular organism] with my nose, it felt like I was breathing it in. 
35.  When we were smoke. 
36.  I really enjoyed when we climbed on top of each other and all stood in the same spot.   
37.  I was struck with how quickly the abstract lights grew to hold tangible meaning, to understand them as other 
people.  It was especially poignant when we moved toward the centre and felt as if we might collide or enter 
each other’s personal space. 

38.  When bodies came together it felt like I was being tickled. 
39.  Being able to get closer to people and become the same light.  Knowing that we were all in different places 

having a shared experience that wasn’t on Zoom.  

40.  I was not sure if there was an effect when I touched or if someone else touched my heart light.  In some ways 
I felt that I would have liked to be able to show my consent towards someone else interacting with my heart 
light. 

 
 
 
 
Theme: Ego Dissolution 

1.  For me, the whole feeling of just being in that space was that my identity felt lost.  And then when you expand 
you feel like the [vastness] of the space that you’re in and the energy that forms meant [for me] that myself as 
an identity didn’t matter anymore and that was actually really liberating. 

2.  Yeah, it was very beautiful.  I really loved how it challenges the relations.  Like remember when we just 

5. 

3. 

4. 

gathered around, the worry at first [that we] would hurt one another, and then it quickly vanished.  Now I just 
feel like it helps you dissociate from something within you.  I think it can relate to what you said [participant 
name], about how your identity gets a bit lost.  And I don’t know if it for me was my identity or my anxieties 
that I put on the side.  I feel present right now. 
Identity didn’t matter anymore; it was about experiencing things together.  That was wonderful.  There was an 
exterior manifestation of identity, yeah, it was new. 
It was more like a space to be free, you could do whatever you want and not feel judged.  A bit different from 
going to the gym.  
I’m really enjoying [the current moment] when somebody talks, turning to them as though you’re going to look 
in their face but you’re just looking at this shape.  And that feels really nice!  Knowing that’s a person and 
hearing your voice, and everything’s live and real and connected, but then there is also this really abstract 
element.  That’s really fun. 
I enjoyed not knowing who was who. 
[The anonymity] Relaxing. 
I feel like when you meet people outside of here there’s so much superfluous stuff on top; there’s layers of 
personality and layers of expectation that they also portray.  Weirdly, here, when you’re seeing someone just as 
a blob of light and two little blobs, which you can assume are hands, you lose all of that and you see more of a 
personality.  I know that sounds weird.  I almost see authentically.  Like a childishness, like a pureness in it. 
9.  Takes down the ego a bit. I just mean once you’re talking to a point of light, I think it produces that sense of 
the other person’s inner sense and yours and, I guess, would allow you to talk in a more matter-of-fact way. 
10.  I found [the anonymity] quite powerful because we were all completely equal in the space.  Any of the pre-

6. 
7. 
8. 

judgements that come in from how people look, sound and that sort of thing just aren’t there. 

11.  Yeah, I felt that also [when touching one another’s heart centres] and, the sweetest tenderness or pure, childlike 
love in how stripped back, without any of the assumed layerings that we place upon reality and relationships 
and just, to the absolute core, it was truly beautiful.  Thank you, all of you.  Thank you, Isness. 
12.  It’s a completely other way of connecting that I’m not familiar with.  All the usual stuff disappears.   
13.  There was a freedom in being there. 
14.  Yeah, I think so.  The fact that you can’t see anybody and it’s just you [trails off].  You can’t really be self-

conscious. 

15.  I felt a little self-conscious at the beginning when everyone’s position was established but once everyone had 

moved around, I felt much less self-conscious. 

16.  Everyone together moving arms from side to side was magic.  We were all the same.  We were all one.  

We all looked the same but had our own spirits. 

17.  Group dynamics – rejection, not being part of it, missing the point.  Helpful to realize as we were all 

equal this was completely my filters.  Able to let those anxieties go.  Judgments of others based on voice 
and what they sound — slowly melting away.   

18.  In a time where the human race is being told to be socially distant, it is fantastic to have this 

representation of how connected we are in reality, and that having to stay physically apart doesn’t 
prevent us from mentally and energetically connecting to each other.  Also, that sometimes what actually 
prevents deeper connection is the outward assumptions we make of one another based on physical 
appearances and social conventions. 

19.  The experience was strange.  It seemed to reduce relationships between people to the simplest concept—

connectedness—but without visual cues and no judgements that go with it. 

20.  It’s a lot of easier to focus on people when they are just 3 points.  I felt a bit more able to understand and 

interact in the absence of extra cues.  Maybe that’s just my [asperges] talking though. 

21.  Love the smoke effect and the ego erasure. 

 
22.  The sense of connection with the other participants at a real level not superficial, societal, etc.  Just them as 

they are. 

23.  That you could tell the personalities of people around you despite not being able to see them. 
24.  The sense that everyone was the same but with different energies and then the blending of these energies and 

the anonymisation of them as the session progressed. 

25.  I also liked the sandbox nature where we were anonymous and depicted only by points of light.  
26.  Feeling of anonymity, connection, playfulness, equality. 
27.  I enjoyed the sense of seeing others while not having to see the superficial form, which led to the felt sense of 

connection as beings. 

28.  The inability to perceive people as I normally would. 
29.  Loss of personal space.  Being able to connect with other people as if touching was particularly enjoyable due 

to current COVID-19 restrictions.  Meeting strangers as light forms with voices reduced preconceptions and 
helped us connect quickly, I think. 

30.  Interacting with others' disembodied gestures had a quality of dissolving boundaries, gentleness, and 

warmth.  

31.  It reminded me slightly of a trip, but mostly of a very intense and beautiful meditation session.  The one big 
difference being the shared aspect of it.  The connectedness of the group in the middle of a dissolved ego 
was really fascinating.  Thank you!!! 

 
 
 
 
Theme: Supportive Setting 

1. 

I loved [the chaperone line]...At the beginning I didn’t really pay much attention to it, but by the end I was like 
‘the blue line makes me feel safe and really contained’, both in physical space but, maybe because of that 
reliance, without really thinking about it, it made me feel like it emotionally or something as well. By the end, I 
was like ‘I love the blue line!’. And then I was surprised by that. 

2.  The talk that you gave, [Facilitator’s name], at the start was really helpful as well.  Especially the David Bohm 

quote, I was really interested in the general gist of ‘the luminosity of this is not really available to us with our 
current brain chemistry’. 

3.  Really nice to have little bit of getting to know [?] (movements/dancing) at the start to warm up and 

make everyone comfortable.  [Facilitator’s name] is a brilliant host! 

4.  The smoke-light point was particularly nice.  I very much enjoyed the mudra lights and the organism. 
5.  Nice space.  The touching the ground thing was cool.  I liked picking the molecules.  
6.  Camp fire start/end was a nice touch. 
7.  Lovely narration, visuals well produced with further R&D could be even better. 
8. 

[Host Name]’s incense gave a real presence to the body-smoke.  That worked REALLY WELL.  Do that.  
A mid-way breeze cleared the room of incense for a bit and it really changed the experience.  I was glad 
when it returned.  
I loved the bit where the ‘history trails’ came to the creature.  Made it feel a lot less spastic.  

9. 
10.  [My host] put incense on at the moment smoke appeared.  I found that really enhance the experience.  
11.  I’ve been in several group meditation scenarios (in person) and always found them invasive and stifling.  
I often respond badly to ‘energy-policing’ that is sometime found in such environments.  The Isness 
platform is comfortable and safe in a way typical group meditation environments often aren’t.  

12.  Setting an intention – at first, I thought that this might be difficult to [reflect on connection with] 

strangers, but there was no pressure to give a long statement.  I felt the breathing exercise helped you get 
comfortable in the space.  

13.  The repetition of the woman’s voice helped situate you within the space.  Gave you a focus.  
14.  I thought the guide did an excellent job of setting the tone without giving too much instructions or being 

intrusive.  

15.  I felt the guide was relaxed and not overpowering.  [Facilitator’s name] put me at ease. 
16.  I loved how gentle [Facilitator’s name] was of a guide, the guided meditation script was on point, and the 

progression of activities and visuals were wonderful.  I loved how in a matter of moments I felt a similar peak 
experience that I am more accustomed to experiencing with skilled dancers. 

17.  The guided meditation was super.  Loved the woman’s voice. 
18.  I really liked the opening and closing exercises with [Facilitator’s name].  It really helped to hold the 

experience and make me feel more comfortable with everyone. 

19.  The reminders by the guide to be gentle with it because it held everyone's intentions was a lovely touch. 
20.  Loved the narration. 
21.  I enjoyed the quality of the guided meditation and the tone of voice of the facilitator. 
22.  The female narrator and overall experience was excellent, but I cannot say the best ever. 
23.  The sense of being present and absorbed by the experience.  The music really helped with this.  Great music! 
24.  The music and the gentle lighting. 
25.  The campfire start/end was a nice touch—it felt like other ceremonial experiences, and setting out on a 

journey. 

26.  The time of reflection at the end of the session, hearing other people’s thoughts on the experience made the 

experience more meaningful. 

27.  Enjoyed the sharing of impressions with other participants in the end too. 
28.  Most of the visuals and audio were great.  I really enjoyed the smoke effect, the spatial weirdness, and the 

interactions with the light creature.  

 
 
 
Theme: Sense of play 

1. 

I had a similar experience, with realising the point isn’t about trying to control it, the point is just to enjoy it and 
play.  Yeah, I really enjoyed it. 

2.  There certainly was a sense of playfulness in this, which was really nice.  As adults that’s not always something 

3. 

4. 

that we pursue.  It was good. 
[Coalescing] felt nice, yeah. It felt lovely. There are points where [you wonder] ‘are they playing with me?’ and 
[I realised] ‘yes, we’re playing with each other’.  It’s a comfortable feeling. 

I was just trying to make my own patterns and overwrite everything else, and come up with new ideas, and march 
through everything.  That’s me in a social situation. 

5.  With a lot of this, it was just so much fun playing with you guys.  Which, I mean, I’m an adult, you sound like 

adults, that’s not something that happens often. 

6. 

7. 
8. 
9. 

I think there was a point where someone was drawing lines with traces and I couldn’t help but draw some circles 
around their lines and start playing around like that.  Almost like kids with sparklers, or something. 
It was very interesting and engaging [to play with one another]. 
[Coalescing] was quite playful.  That was quite fun. 

I think it was playful to interact with people, almost not as people but as people in a different form, or maybe not 
as physical people, is what I mean.  And to see these different energy balls moving around.  That was different 
to what you could do otherwise, and fun. 

10.  I was inspired to dance on the top of the table at one point. 
11.  I enjoyed how playful it was.  It reminded me how fun humans are in their capacity for play. 
12.  It reminded me a little of writing with fireworks, like when you had sparklers as a kid. 
13.  I felt playful rather than deep.   
14.  Playful connection — a sense of love. 
15.  It was very playful, and that part was fun.  It was very relaxing.   
16.  Felt very playful as we continued.   
17.  The changing mudra light was fun. 
18.  Playful exploration of myself in space and flowing into connections with others. 
19.  A feeling of being grounded, a playfulness facilitated in a calm way. 
20.  That there were a small number of participants, so we could interact in a small group.  Everyone was friendly 

and playful.  

21.  The creative aspect.  Drawing lines.  Pressing my fingers to create energy. 
22.  It was very fun, very unique.  I feel privileged to have had the opportunity to take part. 
23.  It was fun. 
24.  I'm not a big gamer and hesitate to make a generalized comparison to multiplayer interactive games.  While 
mutually interactive and peaceful, a similar experience might be reached through guided meditation together 

while holding hands with strangers with your eyes closed.  The visuals were cool, and there was a degree of 
intimacy, and the technology was not ‘in the way’ but rather helping to connect in different locations, which 
is certainly cool.  Overall, I thought it felt more like playing an interactive game with fun teammates than a 
spiritual experience.  

 
Theme: Transcendence of Space and Time 

1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

It was a funny feeling when the thing went through the floor. It felt like the space opened up to me.  I’d been 
aware of the confines of [the space], vaguely.  And then we pushed it through the floor and it was very very odd 
to feel like everything opened out. 
[The molecule] was just so going down beneath the floor, I couldn’t comprehend it. 

I had no idea who anybody was...I have no idea where I am in the space so I’m quite interested, when I open my 
eyes, where on Earth I’ll be. 
[The molecule] going into the ground, that’s just so fascinating that you can overcome the physical boundaries 
of our reality, that always blows my mind. 

I think I was imagining things didn’t have the same human scale, so at times it felt like this could be a ginormous 
space and we were a completely different scale, or it could be a microscopic space, and it didn’t really matter, 
actually. 
I’ve lost perception of time. 

It was the beginning.  I didn’t feel like there was an end.  Actually thought I was in space.   
I couldn’t believe how much my perspective changed when we put the molecule into the ground.  
It seemed divorced from space and time.  I had a hard time giving in to the concept without trying to 
analyze what was going on.  Very enjoyable experience.  

10.  I didn’t feel a sense of time.  I was surprised at the end that it had been an hour.  
11.  I liked being unaware of restrictions like time. 
12.  Looking down and seeing the world under the floor. 
13.  I liked moving the object and unravelling and when we put it through the floor.  I liked the parts that allowed me 

to view the world in a way that isn't possible in real life. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Theme: Noetic Quality 

1. 

I got quite emotional, for a moment. And then the experience was guiding us forward, so it was fleeting.  But I 
got this surge of emotion where I don’t know if I wanted to gasp or cry or what it was, but I was kind of 
shocked in awe. 

2.  That’s definitely a spiritual experience of some sort.  It’s, like, tangible. 
3. 

I didn’t feel any nervousness.  Seeing all the lights together reminded me of a dream I had years ago where the 
universe was ending and everybody was dissolving into balls of light and merging into one.  So, I was like ‘oh 
cool!  The universe is ending.  I’m cool with that’. 

4.  Like awakening from a most blissful dream, that leaves its loving traces in body, heart and mind.  A 

remembrance, a return to the simplicity and purity of being, that which we always are and can at time 
forget.  Thank you for the remembrance. 

5.  The power and light in each individual — how this can be more potent with guidance and moving 

together. 

6.  Having everyone be portrayed as balls of light seemed like a very true representation of a person.  Just 

7. 

sort of struck home as a true way to see someone.   
I enjoyed intermingling lights with everyone.  Got a little teary-eyed during that part, I miss people so 
much with COVID.  And making those connections felt quite profound.  

8.  Pure unity. 
9. 

I really did gather a DMT/death like Becoming for my reality.  The experience felt fun, fleeting, VERY special, 
and at times holy.  I would not say that in all my teachings and explorations that this ceremony dissolved ego 
in the sense that one can achieve in Healing and with inward work.  This experience felt galactic, MUCH 
bigger in terms of the sense of Soulfulness, meaning after death, then what? 
10.  The abstraction and the time given to becoming connected to that abstraction.   
11.  The distillation of existence.   

 
 
 
 
 
Theme: Comparison to Other Altered States 

[Taking psychedelics] wasn’t quite like this, but I guess there’s elements of it, for sure. 

1. 
2.  Similar to experiences that I have had as somatic visions through medicine plants. The interconnective 

nature of energy/intention and the ‘strings’ that appear to interconnect us all with all living matter.  This 
also related to childhood dreams I had prior to any ‘psychedelic experience’. 

3.  About 5 days ago I tried mushrooms for the first time – if I hadn’t have done that I could have selected 5 

for most of them (most I’ve ever felt lost sense of time/space/ego). 
It was like psychedelics without the psychedelics. 
I wonder [how] people with and without psychedelic experiences relate to Isness. 

4. 
5. 
6.  There was something common with psychedelic experience. 
7. 

I experienced the sense of interconnectedness that I would I've only previously noticed with the help of 
psychedelics in the right setting.  

8.  The experience brought up memories for me of medicine plant journeys and realisations that have shaped my 
life and what give my life meaning.  These realisations are very much connected with going beyond form and 
finery conceptions, and also beyond mainstream conceptions of leading a good life. 

9.  Felt psychedelic. 
10.  I wondered before and during if one's prior experience with meditation and psychedelics significantly 

impacts how one experiences Isness.  I've got some experience with both and didn't feel ‘blown away’ by 
the ceremony, although I did enjoy it and feel it has potential.  I did not feel I was being critical or 
judgmental during it, I was simply experiencing it.  I did feel more peaceful / less agitated and the end 
and connected to the others.  Everyone was kind, sweet, and playful.  

 
 
 
 
 
Theme: Sense of Beauty 

1.  When I let go of needing to have control over [the molecule], it actually became spectacularly beautiful.  And, 

actually, sitting motionless and watching what else was going on.  And there was a bit, I think, where 
[participant’s names] were dancing and interacting and it was so beautiful.  So yeah, there was something 
about letting go of control. 
I was amazed [by] how moved I was.  I think it was the juxtaposition of the frustration and then the beholding 
beauty.  I think the music really helped.  It felt very beautiful to sit back and witness.  I don’t normally get 
moved quite so much. 
[Molecules] are so beautiful. 
It felt quite powerful and quite beautiful, really.  The idea of interacting with abstract entities but were at the 
same time real entities, just not physically in this space, yet at the same time visible, and touchable, and 
present. 

2. 

3. 
4. 

5.  Yes, thank you. I was a little bit doubtful in the beginning, I didn’t know what to expect and what was going to 

6. 

happen.  It was a beautiful experience. 
...the whole sort of connectedness of it. The sort of weird amorphous space that you end up taking up and then 
just the mingling with everybody and the absence of borders and things like that...was just a very very beautiful 
experience. 

7.  Respect, awe, love for the energy being — felt its innocence!  And beauty. 
8.  The connector object is beautiful when it opens but seems too flickering when in the middle.  Reminds 

me of flash [illegible] when I have a migraine. 

9.  Very beautiful visuals, audio and emotions that came with it! 

 
 
 
 
 
Theme: Reflection on Death or Loss 

1. 

2. 

It sounds really cheesy, but it’s given me a deep understanding of maybe what happens after life ends.  I feel a 
bit more connected to those people that have gone, having now seen this. 
It’s clear that the energy isn’t just gone, it goes somewhere.  It’s beautiful to think that it’s all out there 
somewhere and it’s still circling you constantly. 
[I feel] sad that [the lights are] going away.  [I feel] a lot more relaxed than I felt when I came in. 
[When the lights faded] Does this mean we’re dead? 

3. 
4. 
5.  There was one moment, we were talking about seeing past energies and I was thinking about my cat, whom I 

lost last year.  I really miss her.  I could really see her and the [?] was writing her name.  It was beautiful, thank 
you. 

6.  That was super cool!  I arrived feeling pretty anxious and disconnected from others, but after that 

experience I feel much more calm and hopeful.  Hugely due to the focus of how energy doesn’t truly 
disappear.  I guess the fear of dying (the existential threat) is always on our minds but that experience 
quietened the fear.  AMAZING! 

7.  On the occasions where thing went dark, I felt a little triggered.  Like, OMG, everyone’s gone!  Or, like 

my senses disappeared and so I couldn’t perceive anyone.  Which was lonely!  Noticed some agitation 
due to [Participant Name] having glitches, but then I was equating it to the idea of Boudicca.  Because 
being light being felt akin to the idea of enlightenment, I thought how if anyone gets left behind it’s going 
to leave lingering unhappiness for everyone.  At one point, the energy web circle broke on [Participant 
Name]’s side.  I wanted to mend it but couldn’t seem to.  Made me a little sad – for [Participant Name] 
and for all of us. 

8.  When meditating upon the traces of energy remaining around us (fave bit!) I felt, again, the realization 
of time being not linear; I felt like I was summoning a Patronus from my lost loved ones.  I think this 
would be amazing for grief counselling. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Isness pre-ceremony questionnaire 

Start of Block: Introduction 

Q23 On the following pages are a few quick questions for you to complete before starting 
the Isness virtual reality ceremony. Please read the questions carefully.  

Thank you!  

End of Block: Introduction 

Start of Block: Unique code 

Q26 Please enter a unique code / text (e.g. yellowsubmarine123). You will need to enter 
the same information on a second form after Isness has finished - this is so we can link 
your data and keep you anonymous.  

________________________________________________________________ 

End of Block: Unique code 

Start of Block: Demographics 

Q28 What country are you participating from?  

________________________________________________________________ 

Q27 What time is your Isness session due to start? Please write as time and your time zone 
(e.g. 5pm GMT)  

________________________________________________________________ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q29 What is today's date? (format required is DD/MM/YYYY) 

________________________________________________________________ 

End of Block: Demographics 

Start of Block: Inclusion of Community in the Self (ICS) scale. 

Q14 Below are a series of circles. The circle on the left of the pair represents you, while 
the circle on the right represents the other people who will be participating in your virtual 
reality Isness experience (who you've not yet met).   

Which picture best describes your relationship with the other Isness participants?     

o a  (4)  
o b  (5)  
o c  (6)  
o d  (7)  
o e  (8)  
o f  (9)  

End of Block: Inclusion of Community in the Self (ICS). 

Start of Block: Openness to the upcoming experience scale 

 
 
 
 
 
    
    
 
 
 
 
Q17 Please rate to what extent the statements below apply to your feeling right now, at 
this present moment.  

On the scale below each statement, mark with an “X” a number between 0 and 100, 
where 0 = Strongly disagree and 100 = Strongly agree. There are no right or wrong 
answers. Do not spend too much time on any one statement but give the answer which 
seems to best describe your present feelings.     This is a survey which is used for personal 
development ceremonies, so some of the questions may not be too relevant for the virtual 
reality experience you are about to have.    

Strongly disagree 

Strongly agree 

0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
I am preoccupied with my work and/or life 
duties. () 

I feel open to the upcoming experience. () 

I feel well prepared for the upcoming 
experience. () 

I have a clear intention for the upcoming 
experience. () 

I feel comfortable about the upcoming 
experience. () 

I have strong expectations for the upcoming 
experience. () 

I am in a good mood. () 

I feel anxious. () 

The environment/setting feels good for my 
upcoming experience. () 

I have a good feeling about my relationship 
with the group/people who will be with me 
during my experience. () 

I have a good relationship with the main 
person/people who will look after me during 
the upcoming experience. () 

I feel able to receive without fighting back. () 

I have a lot of things I should be doing right 
now. () 

I have a lot on my mind right now. () 

I feel I have endless time to devote to this 
experience. () 

Page Break 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q9 Thank you for your responses - Isness will start soon.   

End of Block Openness to the upcoming experience scale 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Isness post-ceremony questionnaire 

Start of Block: Introduction 

Q26 Thank you for taking part in Isness. There are now some further questions for you to 
answer about your experience.   

Page Break 

Q27 Please enter the unique code / text you created in the pre-Isness survey (e.g. 
yellowsubmarine123).  

________________________________________________________________ 

End of Block: Introduction 

Start of Block: (ii) Peak experiences questionnaire 

Q18  

The following questions are about your memory of the Isness ceremony experience. Try to 
think of the most intense part, the peak of the experience. 

Not at all 

Very much so 

0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. I remember my emotional experience 
clearly, and with confidence could describe 
how I felt. () 

2. I remember my surroundings exactly and 
with confidence can recall what the 
environment looked like. () 

3. The peak experience exists in my mind 
like a very clear photograph or video. () 

End of Block: (ii) Peak experiences questionnaire 

Start of Block: (iv) Communitas scale 

Q19  

Please indicate how strongly you agree or disagree with the following statements about 
your Isness ceremony experience, taking into account that 1=Strongly disagree and 7= 
Strongly agree 

Strongly 
disagree 

Neither agree 
nor disagree 

Strongly agree 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the ceremony, I felt a bond with my 
fellow participants that I could not 
experience outside the ceremony. () 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of 
belonging with the other participants. () 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of 
harmony with the others. () 

During the ceremony, I felt a sense of 
sharing with the other participants. () 

The ceremony really allowed me to get to 
know the other participants. () 

During the ceremony, I felt that social status 
became irrelevant. () 

During the ceremony, I experienced all 
participants as equal based on basic shared 
humanity. () 

During the ceremony, ego-related tensions 
between participants seemed to resolve. () 

During the ceremony, I felt a strong 
connection to another participant. () 

During the ceremony, I felt a strong 
connection the facilitator. () 

End of Block: (iv) Communitas scale 

Start of Block: (v) MEQ 30 

Q27  

For each of the following, please rate the extent to which you agree with each statement. 
Looking back on the entirety of your ceremony experience, please rate the degree to which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at any time you experienced the following phenomena. Answer each question according to 
your feelings, thoughts, and experiences at the time of the ceremony. 

None, 
not at 
all 

So 
slight 
cannot 
decide 

Slight  Moderate  Strong 

(equivalent 
in degree 
to any 
other 
strong 
experience) 

Extreme 
(more 
than any 
other 
time in 
my life 
and 
stronger 
than 4) 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

 
 
 
 
1. Loss of your usual sense of time. () 

2. Experience of amazement. () 

3. Sense that the experience cannot be 
described adequately in words. () 

4. Gain of insightful knowledge experienced 
at an intuitive level. () 

5. Feeling that you experienced eternity or 
infinity. () 

6. Experience of oneness or unity with 
objects and/or persons perceived in your 
surroundings. () 

7. Loss of your usual sense of space. () 

8. Feelings of tenderness and gentleness. () 

9. Certainty of encounter with ultimate 
reality (in the sense of being able to “know” 
and “see” what is really real at some point 
during your experience. () 

10. Feeling that you could not do justice to 
your experience by describing it in words. () 

11. Loss of usual awareness of where you 
were. () 

12. Feelings of peace and tranquility. () 

13. Sense of being “outside of” time, beyond 
past and future. () 

14. Freedom from the limitations of your 
personal self and feeling a unity or bond 
with what was felt to be greater than your 
personal self. () 

15. Sense of being at a spiritual height. () 

16. Experience of pure being and pure 
awareness (beyond the world of sense 
impressions). () 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Experience of ecstasy. () 

18. Experience of the insight that “all is 
One”. () 

19. Being in a realm with no space 
boundaries. () 

20. Experience of oneness in relation to an 
“inner world” within. () 

21. Sense of reverence. () 

22. Experience of timelessness. () 

23. You are convinced now, as you look 
back on your experience, that in it you 
encountered ultimate reality (i.e., that you 
“knew” and “saw” what was really real). () 

24. Feeling that you experienced something 
profoundly sacred and holy. () 

25. Awareness of the life or living presence 
in all things. () 

26. Experience of the fusion of your personal 
self into a larger whole () 

27. Sense of awe or awesomeness. () 

28. Experience of unity with ultimate reality. 
() 

29. Feeling that it would be difficult to 
communicate your own experience to others 
who have not had similar experiences. () 

30. Feelings of joy. () 

End of Block: (v) MEQ 30 

Start of Block: (vi) Ego-dissolution inventory (EDI) (Nour et al., 2016) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q20  

Please rate to what extent the following statements apply to your Isness ceremony 
experience by choosing a number between 0 and 100 on the scale below each statement. 
Note that zero corresponds to your normal waking consciousness.  

No, not more than 
usually 

Yes, I experienced this 
completely 

0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
I felt especially assertive. () 

I experienced a dissolution of my "self" or 
ego. () 

I felt more important or special than others. 
() 

I felt at one with the universe. () 

My ego felt inflated. () 

I felt a sense of union with others. () 

I felt especially sure-of-myself. () 

I experienced a decrease in my sense of self-
importance. () 

I felt especially keen and competitive. () 

I experienced a disintegration of my "self" or 
ego. () 

I felt my viewpoint was worth more than 
other peoples’ () 

I felt far less absorbed by my own issues and 
concerns. () 

I felt especially self-confident. () 

I lost all sense of ego. () 

I felt especially self-assured. () 

All notion of self and identity dissolved 
away. () 

End of Block: (vi) Ego-Dissolution Inventory (EDI) (Nour et al., 2016) 

Start of Block: (x) Inclusion of Community in the Self (ICS) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q37 Below are a series of circles. The circle on the left of the pair represents you, while 
the circle on the right represents the other people participating in your virtual reality Isness 
experience  

Which picture best describes your relationship with the other Isness participants?     

o a  (4)  
o b  (5)  
o c  (6)  
o d  (7)  
o e  (8)  
o f  (9)  

End of Block: (x) Inclusion of Community in the Self (ICS) 

Start of Block: (xii)  

Q21  

Please answer according to your feelings towards your Isness ceremony group, taking into 
account that 1=Not at all and 7= All of the time 

Not at 
all 

Almost 
never 

Occasionally Sometimes Frequently Almost 
always 

All of 
the 
time 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I felt that we were one () 

I felt more sensitive to my emotions and 
feelings because I was surrounded by people 
who felt the same. () 

I felt a strong shared emotion. () 

I felt really united with the group, almost 
melded into one. () 

I felt more intense emotions because we all 
went through the same experience. () 

End of Block: (xii)  

Start of Block: (xiii) Bodily effects 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q22  

Have you experienced any of these bodily effects during the ceremony? Tick all that 
apply.  

▢ 
▢ 
▢ 
▢ 
▢ 
▢ 
▢ 
▢ 

Nausea or vomiting  (1)  

Diarrhea  (2)  

Body aches  (3)  

Ringing in the ears  (4)  

Headache  (5)  

Sweats or chills  (6)  

Trembling  (7)  

Crying  (8)  

End of Block: (xiii) Bodily effects 

Start of Block: Demographics 

 
 
 
 
 
Q11 Who is your host for the experience?  

o Vadim  (4)  
o Dave  (5)  
o Rhos  (6)  
o Olivia  (7)  
o Mike  (8)  
o Greg  (9)  
o Justin  (10)  
o Harrison  (11)  
o Jeremy  (12)  
o Matthew  (13)  
o Jamie  (14)  
o Rachel  (15)  
o Sara  (16)  
o Joe  (17)  

Page Break 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Q13 What is your age in years?  

________________________________________________________________ 

Q13 What is your gender?  

o Male  (1)  
o Female  (2)  
o Other  (4)  
o Decline to state  (5)  

Page Break 

Q12 How many times have you had a virtual reality experience in the past 12 months?   

________________________________________________________________ 

Q25 Have you taken part in Isness before?  

o Yes  (1)  
o No  (2)  

End of Block: Demographics 

Start of Block: Final comments 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q29 Were there any technical problems that you noticed? If so, how did these impact the 
experience?  

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

Q30 What did you like about the experience?  

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

Q31 What did you dislike about the experience?  

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q32 How do you think the experience could be improved?   

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

Q33 Yes - the whole time  (1)  

o Yes - some of the time  (4)  
o No  (2)  
o Unsure  (3)  

Q34 How, if at all, did their presence / absence impact your experience?  

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q28 Do you have any other comments about the experience?  

If you would prefer, your host will have paper and pen (please write your unique code at 
the top of the paper so we can link your data).   

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

________________________________________________________________ 

End of Block: Final comments 

Start of Block: Debrief 

Q10 Debrief 

 Thank you for taking part in Isness.   

 Isness is a multi-person virtual reality experience that we have created. Here we are 
investigating how running Isness in a distributed (across multiple sites) manner impacts 
the Isness experience. We are particularly interested in the impact of Isness on feelings of 
connectedness between participants. 

 If you have any further questions, please do not hesitate to get in touch with the research 
team 
 Dave Glowacki (glowacki@bristol.ac.uk) or Olivia Maynard 
(Olivia.maynard@bristol.ac.uk). 

If you would like the study team to contact you with details of this study or other work 
they're doing, you can enter your email address at the following link - this separates your 
email address from your study data, keeping your responses anonymous  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
https://bristolexppsych.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_6mSi4TBYy0Ir9CR    

End of Block: Debrief 

 
 
 
