Research Abstract for Current Ongoing Work 
Presented at IEEE VR 2020 VR in VR: Workshop on Virtual Conferencing 

Evaluating Metrics for Standardized Benchmarking of Remote 
Presence Systems 

Charles  Peasley,  Iowa  State  University 
Rachel  Dianiska,  Iowa  State  University 
Emily  Oldham,  Iowa  State  University 
Nicholas  Wilson,  Iowa  State  University 
Stephen Gilbert, Iowa State University 

Peggy Wu, United Technologies Research Center 
Brett Israelsen, United Technologies Research 
Center 
  James Oliver, Iowa State University 

Seeking Travel Replacement Thresholds 
To reduce the need for business-related air travel and its associated energy 
consumption and carbon footprint, the U.S. Department of Energy’s ARPA-E is 
supporting a research project called SCOTTIE - Systematic Communication 
Objectives and Telecommunications Technology Investigations and Evaluations. 
SCOTTIE tests virtual and augmented reality platforms in a functional comparison 
with face-to-face (FtF) interactions to derive travel replacement thresholds for 
common industrial training scenarios. The primary goal of Study 1 is to match the 
communication effectiveness and learning outcomes obtained from a FtF control 
using virtual reality (VR) training scenarios in which a local expert with physical 
equipment trains a remote apprentice without physical equipment immediately 
present. This application scenario is commonplace in industrial settings where access 
to expensive equipment and materials is limited and a number of apprentices must 
travel to a central location in order to undergo training. Supplying an empirically 
validated virtual training alternative constitutes a readily adoptable use-case for 
businesses looking to reduce time and monetary expenditures associated with travel. 
The technology used for three different virtual presence technologies was strategically 
selected for feasibility, relatively low cost, business relevance, and potential for 
impact through transition. The authors suggest that the results of this study might 
generalize to the challenge of virtual conferences. 

One of the major hurdles for any remote collaboration is supporting the behavioral 
intricacies of natural social interactions. The selection decision of the communication 
medium is multifaceted (e.g. El-Shinnawy & Markus, 1997). The communication 
outcome can further be influenced by evolving compensatory behaviors that collaborators 
make to accommodate for limitations of that medium (Kock et al., 2006). The present 
work aims to investigate support for abstract communication objectives using current 
commercially available platforms. As no previous work identified a comparable set of 
assessable benchmarks for such platforms, a novel Communications Objective Model 
(COM) was developed based on over 150 publications that systematically characterizes 
the psychosocial constructs of effective telecommunications, how these constructs 
manifest in behavioral markers, and several methodological approaches supporting their 
measurement. 

This COM research is currently under review and can be discussed at the Virtual 
Conferencing Workshop. SCOTTIE’s Study 1, described below, is in progress and 
designed to explore the effectiveness of the COM metrics for evaluating remote presence 

 
 
 
systems. 

SCOTTIE Study 1: Comparing Three Systems for Remote Trainer Presence and 
Training Effectiveness 

Each participant will receive maintenance training on a set of circuit systems, 
such as an LED display, a spinning motor, photoresistor, or a potentiometer. 
Each trial will consist of a short training session in which an expert 
confederate describes the particular system and relevant troubleshooting 
procedures, followed by the administration of several surveys, and then a test 
assessing participants’ ability to fix a malfunctioning circuit without assistance 
and under time-constraints. Critically, each training session will be conducted 
through a particular randomly assigned and counterbalanced communication 
medium. The experimental task of performing maintenance on various 
breadboard circuit systems was selected for its ecological realism, scalable 
level of complexity, spatial and procedural memory components, and ability to 
equate cognitive demand between tasks. A mobile app tablet interface will 
provide diagnostic information for the participant as they complete the task. 

There will be four experimental within-subject conditions used to assess the impact of 
using different platforms and technologies on facilitating procedural and spatial 
knowledge acquisition for conducting maintenance on the circuit systems: Condition 0) 
FtF co-location, Condition 1) a lean teleconferencing medium, and Condition 2) a virtual 
environment. These conditions vary in their level of artificiality, a broad term here 
encompassing user agency, embodiment, and media richness (Milgram et al., 1994; 
Benford et al., 1998; Ens et al., 2019). Agency refers to the extent to which a participant 
can make modifications to his or her view of the world; embodiment refers to the visual 
and auditory characteristics of the human operator, where high embodiment values 
represent greater capability to represent gestures and body language; media richness is 
the extent to which the work environment is represented and includes factors such as 
accuracy, video resolution, and audio quality. Together, these independent variables are 
anticipated to impact the degree to which the technology platform supports 
communication metrics as described by the COM and to influence the overall user 
experience as a result. 

Condition 0: Face to Face 
In the FtF control condition, the trainer and apprentice (i.e., participant) will be co-
located for training, whereas all other conditions involve remote communication. 
Agency, embodiment, and media richness levels are at the maximum possible value for 
the in-person training. 

Condition 1: Lean Medium Telecommunications  
In the lean medium condition, standard commercially available telecommunications 
tools such as Zoom or skype is used with live video stream on a standard desktop or 
laptop computer. The apprentice receives instruction through an audio stream and a 
forehead webcam perspective of the physical workspace. This condition affords the 
apprentice low agency due to the inability to move about the space and to actively 
manipulate perspective. User embodiments are medium due to visual realism but still 
lower than FtF. Media Richness is considered low due to the limited field of view of the 
the camera. 

 
 
Condition 2: VR  
During the VR training conditions, the remote apprentice will don an HTC Vive while 
the expert trainer will don a Microsoft HoloLens. Two viewpoints are afforded to the 
apprentice that can be chosen at will by the apprentice: either a static image of the 
workspace taken from a 360° video camera that continuously updates with an avatar 
representation of the expert, or a live video feed from the trainer’s forehead camera. 
Simple avatars of the trainer and apprentice will be represented for each other in the 
same 3D space. Gestural information will be delivered through these avatars, and 
audio streams are delivered through in-house speakers and microphones. The VR 
condition affords medium agency because the apprentice can control point of view, 
embodiments are low due to low avatar realism, and media richness is considered 
medium since spatial information about the environment and the operator’s 
interactions with the environment are replicated. 
. 

Dependent Variables Based on the COM 
Dependent variables include electrophysiological data, qualitative measures of user 
experience, and objective measures of performance during testing of the trained task. 
Electrophysiological data will be recorded from participants using the Empatica E4 
wristwatch and facial electromyography (EMG). Qualitative surveys administered 
following each training session will assess trust, shared situational awareness and mental 
models, engagement, co-presence, and mental workload or ease of use. Objective 
measures include task performance metrics such as time to completion, accuracy, and 
number of errors. Participants will also complete a delayed interval posttest in which 
performance on the same set of maintenance tasks is assessed again two weeks after 
completing the original training session. This additional component addresses a gap in 
the existing literature because apprentices are often challenged with applying knowledge 
after some period of delay following training. 

The dependent variable scores for each independent training condition will be statistically 
compared with the baseline condition FtF, co-located training serving as the benchmark 
for each measure. The following discussion outlines the expected dependent variable 
outcomes according to the tested communication technologies. Based on previous 
findings in the literature: task performance is expected to vary according to levels of 
agency during the training, wherein higher levels of agency lead to increased knowledge 
retention; trust and rapport increase with avatar realism and with embodiment; co-
presence and shared situational awareness benefit from increased agency, embodiment, 
and media richness; cognitive workload decreases with increased agency and increased 
environmental richness. Therefore, task performance, trust and rapport, co-presence, 
shared situational awareness, and ease of use should be best for VR, followed by the 
telecommunications conditions. 

This experiment will assess the potential for virtual and augmented reality technologies 
to improve upon existing teleconferencing platforms in delivering equipment training to 
remote users and compare the respective capacities of each relative to in-person 
training. The most direct goal is to provide a viable and cost-efficient software and 
hardware alternative that reduces the need and decision for business travel under the 
constraint of training with immobile equipment. 

For this Virtual Conferencing Workshop, the research team is prepared to present 

 
 
virtually, and one of the authors may be attending the conference live, which could 
facilitate this process. The team would look forward to demonstrating the remote 
presence systems and described the COM measures used to evaluate their success. 

Acknowledgments: 

This work is funded by the Department of Energy’s Advanced Research Projects Agency- 
Energy (ARPA-E) and United Technologies Research Center (UTRC).  We would like to 
thank Dr. Rachel Slaybaugh and Mr. Reid Rusty Heffner for their continued guidance and 
support. 

References 

Benford, S., Greenhalgh, C., Reynard, G., Brown, C., & Koleva, B. (1998). 
Understanding and constructing shared spaces with mixed-reality boundaries. ACM 
Transactions on computer-human interaction (TOCHI), 5(3), 185-223. 

El-Shinnawy, M., & Markus, M. L. (1997). The poverty of media richness theory: 
explaining people's choice of electronic mail vs. voice mail. International Journal 
of Human-Computer Studies, 46(4), 443-467. 

Ens, B., Lanir, J., Tang, A., Bateman, S., Lee, G., Piumsomboon, T., & Billinghurst, M. 
(2019). Revisiting collaboration through mixed reality: The evolution of groupware. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies. 

Kock, N., Lynn, G. S., Dow, K. E., & Akgün, A. E. (2006). Team adaptation to 
electronic communication media: evidence of compensatory adaptation in new 
product development teams. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(3), 
331-341. 

Milgram, P., & Kishino, F. (1994). A taxonomy of mixed reality visual 
displays. IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems, 77(12), 1321-
1329. 

 
 
 
