The Efficacy of a Virtual Reality-Based Mindfulness Intervention  

Caglar Yildirim  
Khoury College of Computer Sciences 
Northeastern University 
Boston, MA, US 
c.yildirim@northeastern.edu 

Tara O’Grady 
Department of Computer Sciences 
State University of New York at Oswego 
Oswego, NY, US 
togrady@oswego.edu

Abstract—Mindfulness  can  be  defined  as 

increased 
awareness of and sustained attentiveness to the present moment. 
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the applications 
of mindfulness for empirical research in wellbeing and the use 
of  virtual  reality  (VR)  environments  and  3D  interfaces  as  a 
conduit  for  mindfulness  training.    Accordingly,  the  current 
experiment investigated whether a brief VR-based mindfulness 
intervention  could  induce  a  greater  level  of  state  mindfulness, 
when  compared  to  an  audio-based  intervention  and  control 
group.  Results  indicated  two  mindfulness  interventions,  VR-
based and audio-based, induced a greater state of mindfulness, 
compared  to  the  control  group.  Participants  in  the  VR-based 
mindfulness  intervention  group  reported  a  greater  state  of 
mindfulness than those in the guided audio group, indicating the 
immersive  mindfulness 
intervention  was  more  robust. 
Collectively,  these  results  provide  empirical  support  for  the 
efficaciousness of a brief VR-based mindfulness intervention in 
inducing a robust state of mindfulness in laboratory settings. 

Keywords—  Virtual 

reality,  mindfulness,  mindfulness 

induction; virtual mindfulness, attention 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Virtual Reality (VR) allows users to view and interact with 
a  computer-generated  environment.  The  technology  first 
emerged  over  50  years  ago,  however,  due  to  high  cost  and 
specific hardware capabilities it was not easily accessible to 
the public [1]. In recent years, this has changed. As the price 
of headsets decrease and our technologies improve, VR is no 
longer 
laboratories.  Several 
commercially available head-mounted displays (HMDs) have 
been released, ranging from high-end technologies such as the 
Oculus Rift and HTC Vive to low-end technologies such as 
Google cardboard paired with a VR capable smartphone. 

to  expensive 

restricted 

With the proliferation of commercial-grade VR headsets, 
the  use  of  VR  in  research  applications  has  progressed.  VR 
allows  for  controlled  perceptual  stimuli,  a  controlled 
environment,  and  constraint  of  user  interactions.  These 
qualities have great potential to benefit research: extraneous 
variables  that  would  otherwise  be  uncontrollable  can  be 
limited,  making  the  implementation  of  VR  applicable  to  a 
broad  range  of  subjects.  For  this  reason,  there  has  been 
widespread use and adoption of VR technology in research, 
including 
training  and 
meditation [2]. 

investigations  of  mindfulness 

Mindfulness,  in  its  simplest  form,  entails  reflexively 
attending  to  and  contemplating  one’s  own  experience, 

embodied  within  the  body,  feelings,  states  of  mind,  and 
experiential  phenomena.  Mindfulness  has  been  a  topic  of 
empirical  research  since  its  introduction  in  1979  as  a  stress 
reduction  intervention  by  Jon  Kabat-Zinn  [5].  Since  then, 
there  has  been  an  increasing  scholarly  interest  in  its 
applications for empirical research, and mindfulness training 
has been shown to lead to better cognitive control, increased 
happiness,  satisfaction  with  life,  and  overall  psychological 
wellbeing [31]. 

While  previous  studies  have  provided  converging 
evidence  for  the  benefits  of  long-term  mindfulness  training 
interventions, lasting from several weeks to months [5], these 
studies necessitate the investment of a considerable amount of 
time, financial resources, and preparation, making it harder to 
investigate  the  effects  of  MT  in  diverse  settings  for  many 
researchers.  Therefore,  it  is  useful  to  explore  whether  brief 
MT  interventions,  which  involve  participants  engaging  in  a 
single  mindfulness practice  for a  short period  of  time  (5-20 
minutes),  can  yield  positive  outcomes  similar  to  those 
obtained from long-term MT interventions [30]. Experimental 
manipulations aimed at inducing a state of mindfulness do not 
attempt to replicate the long-term benefits of MT, but instead 
are  being  used  to  examine  the  short-term  effects  of  brief 
mindfulness  practices  on  certain  dependent  variables 
conceptually linked to mindfulness [32]. Therefore, although 
such brief interventions may not provide as robust benefits as 
long-term  interventions,  these  investigations  can  provide 
invaluable insight into immediate benefits of brief MT and its 
including  wellbeing, 
application 
settings,  work 
life 
interpersonal 
environments, education, etc. Previous studies into such brief 
interventions  have  yielded  mixed  results  [5,  11,  24], 
underscoring the importance of devising strategies to induce a 
robust  state  of  mindfulness  in  controlled  experimental 
settings.  

to  various  domains, 
relationships,  daily 

To  address  the  need  for  a  robust  method  of  inducing 
mindfulness,  we  explored  the  potential  of  VR  as  an 
intervention technology to induce mindfulness. We conducted 
a between-subjects experiment in which participants (N = 45) 
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: VR-based 
intervention,  audio-based  intervention,  and  active  control 
group.  Participants  in  the  VR-based  intervention  condition 
engaged in a 10-minuted guided mindfulness practice in a VR 
the  audio-based 
environment,  while  participants 
intervention  condition  engaged  in  the  same  mindfulness 
practice,  using  the  audio  recording  only  (without  the  VR 

in 

 
 
 
 
 
environment). Participants in the active control group listened 
to  an  audiobook  for  10  minutes.  After  the  practice/audio 
phase, participants indicated their state mindfulness levels and 
completed  a  short  attention  task.  Results  indicated  that  the 
VR-based  intervention  induced  the  greatest  level  of  state 
mindfulness, when compared to the other two conditions and 
that  there  were  no  immediate  beneficial  effects  of  a  brief 
mindfulness practice on mind wandering. 

With the current study, our goal was to present a first step 
in the direction of utilizing VR-based interventions to induce 
a  state  of  mindfulness  and  explore  its  immediate  effects  in 
experimental settings. Another aim of the current study was to 
call for future research into the design, implementation, and 
evaluation  of  immersive  VR-based  interventions  to  induce 
and cultivate mindfulness and promote cognitive functioning 
and overall wellbeing. The contributions of the current study 
are as follows: 

• 

Implementation  of  a  VR-based  mindfulness 
intervention enriched with such immersive elements 
as ambient sound effects and guided practice, 
•  Empirical  support  for  the  effectiveness  of  a  VR-
based mindfulness intervention in inducing a state of 
mindfulness, and 

•  Experimental design strategies and future directions 
for  investigating  the  efficaciousness  of  such  VR-
based interventions. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

In  this  section,  we  review  related  work  examining 
outcomes  of  mindfulness  interventions  and  the  effects  of 
integrating VR into mindfulness practices. 

A.  Mindfulness 
Mindfulness  can  be  defined  as  increased  awareness  of  and 
sustained  attentiveness  to  the  present  moment.  Theoretical 
accounts of mindfulness offer an operational definition that 
consists of two components. The first component emphasizes 
self-regulated  attention;  how  much  focus  one  has  on  the 
immediate  experience  [4].  The  immediate  experience  can 
involve  several  forms  of  self-monitoring,  such  as  body 
sensations, emotional reactions, mental images, mental talk, 
and perceptual experiences [5]. The second component is the 
curiosity  and  acceptance  of  the  experience,  outside  of 
whether  one  desires  it.  Many  contemporary  approaches  to 
mindfulness stress the importance of embracing an attitude of 
openness towards one’s experience [5]. 

B.  Benefits of Mindfulness 

Mindfulness  interventions  have  been  shown  to  impact 
physical health, mental health, cognitive and affective states, 
and even interpersonal relations. Regarding physical health, 
it  has  been  found  that  interventions  can  bolster  body 
stress 
awareness,  promote 
management  and  coping 
[5].  Studies  have 
demonstrated improved management of chronic pain, as well 

relaxation,  and 
skills 

improve 

as  reduced  symptoms  of  stress-related  conditions  such  as 
fibromyalgia,  IBS,  breast  cancer,  and  psoriasis  [5].  For 
applications  to  mental  health,  there  is  strong  evidence  that 
mindfulness  interventions  reduce  depression  relapse  rates, 
rumination,  anxiety,  PTSD  symptomology,  and  improve 
outcomes in the treatment of drug addiction [5]. 

The  current  mindfulness 

literature  has  utilized 
interventions ranging from short-term [11, 12] to long-term 
interventions  [13].  Several  studies  have  shown  that  using 
brief interventions can increase mindfulness. Xua et al. [20] 
compared  a  guided  audio  intervention  to  a  control  group. 
They  found  that  ten  minutes  of  brief  interventions  overall 
increased mindfulness. Another study conducted by Taraban 
et al. [3] found that listening mindfully for twelve minutes to 
sounds of nature increased mindfulness.  

Cognitive  and  affective  outcomes  of  mindfulness 
interventions reflect that practicing mindfulness can improve 
working memory and sustained attention [5]. Several studies 
support the connection between mindfulness and attentional 
control [4], as evidenced by improvements in the Stroop test, 
a widely used attention task to assess selective attention and 
cognitive flexibility [4]. A study performed by Kramer et al. 
even  demonstrated  that  mindfulness  meditation  influences 
the perception of time, highlighting the focus on the present 
moment [6].  

C.  Mind Wandering 

Considering  mindfulness  training  involves  the  self-
regulation  of  attention,  mind  wandering,  the  drifting  of 
attention from an ongoing task to task-unrelated thoughts, has 
been closely linked to mindfulness. Recognizing the potential 
of MMT as a means of enhancing one’s attentional control 
and executive functioning abilities as well as increasing one’s 
awareness of the present moment, researchers have proposed 
mindfulness  as  an  antidote  for  mind  wandering  and  have 
become interested in its effects on mind wandering [11]. For 
instance, Mrazek et al. [11] reported two studies investigating 
the  relationship  between  mindfulness  and  mind  wandering. 
Study 1 was aimed at disentangling the association between 
the Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS), which is a 
commonly  used  measure  of  dispositional  mindfulness,  and 
several measures of mind wandering. Results from Study 1 
showed that high levels of mindfulness, as measured by the 
MAAS,  were  associated  with  fewer  episodes  of  mind 
wandering. While Study 1 provided evidence for the notion 
that  mindfulness  and  mind  wandering  are  opposing 
constructs, the generalizability of the results was limited by 
the correlational design of the study. In Study 2, therefore, 
the authors set out to examine the effects of an induced short-
term mindfulness state on mind wandering. Specifically, they 
were  interested  in  whether  a  brief  (8-minute)  mindful 
breathing  exercise  could  attenuate  mind  wandering.  There 
were  three  groups,  namely  mindful  breathing,  passive 
relaxation, and reading. All participants completed the same 
attention task before and after the manipulation. Compared to 

the participants in the passive relaxation and reading groups, 
participants in the mindful breathing group had fewer SART 
errors  and  lower  reaction  time  coefficient  of  variability, 
which  have  been  associated  with  reduced  mind  wandering. 
Mrazek  et  al.  concluded  that  a  brief  8-minute  mindfulness 
practice  could  reduce  mind  wandering  during  a  sustained 
attention task. 

Prior  work  has  demonstrated  that  similar  to  long-term 
mindfulness interventions, short-term interventions can yield 
promising  results  regarding 
the  beneficial  effects  of 
mindfulness  training  on  attentional  control.    Mrazek  and 
colleagues  found  that  just  eight  minutes  of  breath-focused 
mindfulness  training  led  to  improved  performance  on  a 
sustained  attention  task  as  compared  to  both  reading  and 
passive relaxation control groups [11]. Similarly, Sormaz and 
colleagues showed that thirty minutes of a guided, breathing 
mindfulness  practice  led  to  considerable  enhancements  in 
distractor filtering [12], and Xua et al. [20] found that brief 
guided  audio  intervention  prevented  the  increase  of  mind 
wandering. 

D.  Mindfulness Training in VR 

The integration of technology into mindfulness practices 
has  already  demonstrated  positive  outcomes.  Specifically, 
visual stimuli have been utilized to create an isolated context 
for relaxation [27]. VR can amplify these positive findings; it 
allows  a  user  to  feel  present  in  a  virtual  environment  (VE) 
solely  designed  to  enhance  the  state  of  mindfulness.    The 
degree  of  presence  is  influential  in  mindfulness  research 
incorporating  VR;  thus,  mindfulness  measures  are  often 
correlated with a level of presence in the VE. 

VR enhances presence through stimuli oriented with how 
a person perceives their environment. The HMD uses visual 
input to stimulate the visual cortex, and sound (e.g., sounds 
of  nature,  sounds  of  water,  and  birds  chirping  in  a  VE)  to 
stimulate the auditory cortex. In a recent study by Navarro-
Haro  et  al.,  participants  reported  having  a  moderate  to  a 
strong sense of presence while practicing mindfulness skills 
in a VE. Results demonstrated that after a brief intervention, 
participants  showed  a  significant  increase  in  mindfulness 
state  as  well  as  an  improved  emotional  state  after  the  VR 
session [2]. Furthermore, participants were very accepting of 
the  intervention  and  encouraging  the  use  of  VR  for 
mindfulness.  These  findings  are  promising  given  the  brief 
intervention used. 

A study focusing on the intersection of meditation and VR 
by  Shaw  et  al.  [14]  utilized  a  VE  in  which  participants 
experienced three phases. Each phase consisted of a different 
environment  with  a  “vocal  coach”  guiding  them  through 
different exercises, using skin conductance as biofeedback to 
alter  the  environment’s  state.  Results  revealed  that  post-
session relaxation levels were significantly higher than pre-
session  relaxation  levels,  indicating  again  that  short-term 
interventions could produce immediate effects [14].  

VR  may  also  afford  the  reduction  of  mind  wandering 
during mindfulness practice. VR consumes a lot of attentional 
resources [3], making it less likely that attention will drift to 
sights  and  sounds  in  the  real  world.  The  increased  sensory 
input can also reduce distressing thoughts or emotions while 
in VR, as improved emotional states after brief interventions 
have  been  reported  [2].  In  a  study  conducted  to  evaluate  a 
neuroadaptive VR meditation system called RelaWorld [15], 
participants  completed  six  10-minute  virtual  meditation 
sessions. Results indicated that when compared to a computer 
screen  the  use  of  an  HMD  elicited  fewer  hindrances,  or 
negative feelings about the meditative experience, a greater 
sense of relaxation, a higher level of self-reflection, positive 
transpersonal  qualities,  and  greater  feelings  of  non-duality 
[15]. 

E.  The Current Study 
Previous  studies  have  provided  support  for  the  potential  of 
VR in increasing relaxation levels. Nonetheless, prior work 
incorporating  VR 
relaxation 
practices has not specifically investigated the efficacy of VR-
based  interventions  in  inducing  a  state  of  mindfulness. 
Expanding on the potential of VR demonstrated in previous 
studies and the increased sense of presence afforded by VEs, 
we formulated the following hypotheses:  

into  mindfulness  and/or 

•  Hypothesis  1a: 

the 

two  brief  mindfulness 
interventions,  VR-based  and  guided  audio,  would 
induce a greater level of state of mindfulness when 
compared to the control group.  

•  Hypothesis  1b: 

the  VR-based  mindfulness 
intervention  group  would  state  a  greater  level  of 
mindfulness  when  compared  to  the  guided  audio 
group.  

•  Hypothesis  2a: 

the  VR-based  mindfulness 
interventions  and  the  guided  audio  intervention 
would  induce  greater  reductions  in  the  level  of 
mind-wandering than for the control group.  
•  Hypothesis 2b: the reductions in the level of mind-
wandering  would  be  greater  in  the  VR-based 
mindfulness  intervention  group  than  in  the  guided 
audio group. 

III.  METHOD 

A.  Design 

In the current study, the independent variable was the type 
of  intervention  participants  received  and  was  composed  of 
three levels: VR-based mindfulness intervention, audio-based 
mindfulness intervention, and an active control intervention. 
The independent variable was manipulated between-subjects 
to minimize demand characteristics. The dependent variables 
were state mindfulness, as measured by the State Mindfulness 
Scale [17], and performance markers of mind wandering, as 
indexed by the Sustained Attention to Response Task [29]. 

B.  Participants 

The  sample  was  selected  from  the  local  undergraduate 
student  population.  Forty-eight  undergraduate  students 
participated in the experiment in exchange for course credit. 
Three participants were excluded from the experiment due to 
program errors during data collection, resulting in a sample of 
45 participants (27 females) with a mean age of 20.5 (SD = 
1.57,  age  range:  18-26)  years  old.  All  participants  reported 
little to no prior experience with mindfulness. This study was 
reviewed  and  approved  by  the  local  Institutional  Review 
Board prior to the onset of experiments. 

C.  Materials 

1)  Interventions 

interventions  were 

identical,  except  for 

In  the  current  experiment,  we  employed  two  brief 
mindfulness  interventions:  VR-based  and  audio-based.  The 
two 
the  VR 
component utilized in the former. The VR-based intervention 
used  a  3D  beach  environment  in  which  participants  could 
experience  Costa  Del  Sol  [28].  The  environment  featured  a 
sandy  beach environment  surrounded by  rock  formations  in 
blue ocean whose waves were visible and populated with palm 
trees swaying in the breeze (See Fig. 1 for a screenshot of the 
virtual environment).  

attention and the curiosity and acceptance of the experience. 
This operational definition is the basis for the development of 
the  State  Mindfulness  Scale  (SMS)  used  in  this  study  [17]. 
The SMS is a 21-item measure of state mindfulness and was 
developed to capture the state-like experience of mindfulness 
following a mindfulness practice. All participants completed 
the  SMS  immediately  after  the  audio  recording  (guided 
mindfulness  practice  for  the  two  mindfulness  intervention 
groups and the audiobook for the active control group), using 
a 5-point Likert scale. An SMS score was calculated for each 
participant by calculating the average of the responses to the 
items  on  the  SMS.  Greater  SMS  scores  indicated  greater 
levels of induced mindfulness state. 

3)  Sustained Attention to Response Task 

Participants completed a Sustained Attention to Response 
Task  (SART)  following  the  completion  of  audio  recording 
and SMS. The SART is a go/no-go sustained attention task in 
which participants are shown an array of visual stimuli of a 
single category and are asked to respond to nontargets and to 
withhold response to targets [29]. In the version of the SART 
used in the current study, nontargets, or go stimuli, were all 
the digits except for the digit 3, and targets, or no-go stimuli, 
were the digit 3. Participants were asked to make a response 
as  fast as possible  to all  digits  except  for  the digit 3,  which 
were  frequently  presented,  and  to  withhold  response  to  the 
digit 3, which was rarely presented. The SART consisted of 
225 trials (200 nontargets and 25 targets) and was completed 
in approximately 4.3 minutes. The presentation time was 250 
ms for all stimuli with a mask of 900 ms (i.e., double circles). 
Fig. 2 illustrates a typical flow of three trials. 

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the Virtual Environment [28] 

Participants  in  the  two  mindfulness  intervention  groups, 
VR-based and audio-based, listened to the same brief guided 
mindfulness  practice  designed  to  prompt  the  listener  to  pay 
attention to his or her breathing and to try to experience the 
present moment without judgment. This guided mindfulness 
practice was 10 minutes long. The audio recording included 
some  ambient  beach  sound  effects  (ocean  wave  and  bird 
chirping sounds) to make the practice more immersive. Those 
assigned to the listening group listened to an audiobook for 
the  same  amount  of  time  as  the  mindfulness  training.  
Specifically, participants in the listening group listened to a 
portion of the audiobook of JRR Tolkein’s The Hobbit, which 
has  been  used  in  previous  studies  [30].  The  portion  of  the 
audiobook used in the current experiment corresponded to the 
first chapter of the book and it was 10 minutes long. 

2)  State Mindfulness Scale 

The operational definition of mindfulness accepted by this 
study consists of two components; emphasis on self-regulated 

Fig. 2. Example SART trials 

4)  Procedure 

Participants,  upon  arrival  to  the  lab,  provided  informed 
consent, and then were randomly assigned to one of the three 
intervention conditions: a VR environment with guided audio 

 
 
 
used 

practice 

condition 

practice,  guided  audio  practice,  or  a  listening  (control) 
condition.  All  participants  were  seated  during  the  entire 
experiment,  regardless  of  their  experimental  condition.  The 
VR-based  mindfulness 
a 
commercially  available  VR  headset,  HTC  Vive.  Using  the 
Guided Meditation VR application on Steam [19], participants 
were virtually teleported to a beach environment that provided 
participants  a  visual  experience  with  sand,  lapping  water 
against a coastline, and palm trees swaying in the wind. The 
audio provided  for this  condition  was  a  guided  mindfulness 
practice that instructed participants to focus on their breathing. 
The  guided  audio  lasted  for  ten  minutes.  Similar  to the  VR 
group,  the  guided  audio  condition  used  the  same  guided 
mindfulness practice audio (but without the VR environment). 
The  listening  (control)  group  listened  to  the  first  chapter  of 
JRR Tolkien’s The Hobbit, which also lasted for ten minutes. 
All  conditions  used  the  same  headphones  for  audio  output. 
After  the  audio  phase,  participants  completed  the  SMS  to 
report  their  level  of  state  mindfulness.  Then  they  were 
informed about the  SART. Participants  were asked  to press 
the space key bar as quickly as possible when the digit was 
not  3  and  to  refrain  from  responding  when  the  digit  was  3. 
Having  completed  some  practice  trials,  participants  began 
completing  the  SART.  At  the  end  of  the  experiment, 
participants were debriefed about the purpose of the study. 

IV.  RESULTS 

We  conducted  several  descriptive  and  inferential  statistical 
tests  to  examine  the  hypotheses  stated  earlier.  Table  1 
presents a summary of these tests for each of the dependent 
variables. 

TABLE I.  

SUMMARY OF HYPOTHESIS TESTING 

M (SE) 

F 

MSE 

State Mindfulness 
   VR-Based 
   Guided Audio 
   Listening 
SART Errors 

   VR-Based 
   Guided Audio 
   Listening 

RT CV 

   VR-Based 
   Guided Audio 
   Listening 

3.54 (.186) 
3.01 (.258) 
2.37 (.133) 

.425 (.055) 
.478 (.054) 
.399 (.055) 

.378 (.064) 
.354 (.060) 
.327 (.060) 

8.65* 

.596 

.559 

.043 

.169 

.053 

* p < .001. n = 15 in each condition (total N = 45).  
State Mindfulness represents the average SMS score. SART 
Errors represent the percentage of errors in withholding response. 
RT CV represents the variation in reaction times. 

Hypothesis  1a  was  that  the  two  brief  mindfulness 
interventions would induce a greater state of mindfulness as 
measured by the average score on SMS, when compared to 
the  listening  group.  Hypothesis  1b  was  that  of  the  two 
mindfulness interventions, VR-based intervention would lead 
to  a  greater  state  of  mindfulness  (see  Fig.  3).    A  one-way 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to examine the 
effect  of  experimental  manipulation  on  SMS  scores.  The 

the 

assumption  of  homogeneity  (equality)  of  variances,  as 
assessed by Levene's test (p > .05) was met. Results revealed 
a  statistically  significant  difference  among 
three 
conditions, F(2, 42) = 8.65, MSE = .596, p < .001, η2 = .29, 
ω2 = .25, BF10 = 46.17. Considering the effect size measures, 
the  amount  of  variance  in  SMS  scores  explained  by  the 
manipulation  of  mindfulness  intervention  was  substantially 
large. In line with Hypothesis 1a, planned contrasts indicated 
that the two mindfulness interventions, VR-based and guided 
audio, induced a greater state of mindfulness, t(42) = 3.71, p 
<  .001  (one-tailed),  when  compared  to  the  control  group. 
Similarly,  in  line  with  Hypothesis  1b,  planned  contrasts 
revealed  that  participants  in  the  VR-based  mindfulness 
intervention  group  reported  a  greater  state  of  mindfulness 
than those in the guided audio group, t(42) = 1.88, p < .05 
(one-tailed). 

Fig. 3. Average state mindfulness levels as measured by the SMS on 5-point 
Likert  Scale.  Greater  scores  indicate  greater  levels  of  state  mindfulness. 
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. 

in 

Hypotheses 2a and 2b were concerned with the changes 
in behavioral markers of mind wandering before and after the 
intervention.  More  specifically,  Hypothesis  2a  predicted 
greater  reductions  in  SART  errors  and  reaction  time 
coefficient  of  variability,  RT  CV,  for  the  two  mindfulness 
groups  than  for  the  control  group.  Hypothesis  2b  was  that 
the  VR-based 
these  reductions  would  be  greater 
mindfulness  intervention  group  than  in  the  guided  audio 
group.  To  test  these  hypotheses,  a  one-way  analysis  of 
covariance  (ANCOVA)  was  conducted,  controlling  for  the 
proportion of SART errors measured at the baseline (before 
the  participants  were  exposed 
the  experimental 
manipulation). Results revealed no significant differences in 
the  proportion  of  SART  errors  among  the  three  conditions 
after adjustment for baseline proportion of SART errors, F(2, 
41) = .559, MSE = .043, p = .576, η2
p = .03, ω2 = .00, BF01 = 
3.29.  Similarly,  ANCOVA  results  revealed  no  significant 
differences  in  RT  CV  among  the  three  conditions  after 

to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adjustment for baseline RT CV, F(2, 41) = .169, MSE = .053, 
p  =  .845,  η2
p  =  .01,  ω2  =  .00,  BF01  =  5.66.  These  results 
suggest that the brief mindfulness interventions produced no 
immediate improvements in sustained attention performance 
and thus no reductions in mind wandering, contradictory to 
predictions. 

V.  DISCUSSION 

The purpose of the current study was to investigate the 
efficacy of a VR-based mindfulness intervention in inducing 
a  state  of  mindfulness  and  in  reducing  mind  wandering. 
Results  indicated  that  both  VR-based  and  audio-based 
interventions  induced  a  greater  level  of  state  mindfulness, 
when  compared  to  an  active  control  intervention  (i.e., 
listening  to  an  audiobook).  In  both  interventions,  the  same 
guided-audio recording was used to encourage participants to 
pay  attention  to  their  breathing,  thoughts,  feelings,  and 
sensations  during  the  practice.  It  could  be  argued  that 
engaging  in  such  a  contemplative  practice  is  sufficient  for 
inducing  a  state  of  mindfulness,  with  no  need  for  a  VR 
component.  Results,  however,  showed  that  participants 
undergoing the VR-based intervention reported greater levels 
of state mindfulness than did participants in the audio-based 
intervention, lending support for the contributions of a VR-
based immersive practice above and beyond an audio-based 
guided  practice.  In  line  with  Hypothesis  1a  and  1b,  these 
results indicate that a brief mindfulness practice is effective 
in inducing a state of mindfulness in laboratory settings and 
that  VR-based  interventions  lead  to  greater  levels  of  state 
mindfulness. 

Another portion of our study focused on mind wandering 
through attention tasks, where results showed no significant 
differences in two performance markers of mind wandering, 
SART errors and RT CV, among the three conditions. Our 
hypothesis  predicted  greater  reductions  in  performance 
markers of mind wandering for the VR and audio conditions 
than  for  the  control  group.  However,  this  was  inconsistent 
with  the  results.  The  hypothesis  further  implied  that  these 
reductions  would  be  greater  in  the  VR-based  mindfulness 
intervention group than in the guided audio group, which was 
also not supported by the results. This suggests that the brief 
mindfulness 
immediate 
improvements in sustained attention performance and thus no 
reductions in mind wandering, contrary to our predictions. 

interventions 

produced 

no 

The 

findings 

to  several 

factors.  Studies 

inconsistencies  with  previous 

that 
mindfulness interventions improve sustained attention could 
be  attributed 
that  have 
demonstrated  improvement  in  sustained  attention  involve 
mindfulness  interventions  that  differ  from  the  guided 
mindfulness intervention used in our study. Mrazek et al. [11] 
demonstrated that eight minutes of mindful breathing led to 
reduced behavioral indicators of mind wandering. Zeidan et 
al. found that after four sessions of mindfulness intervention 
delivered  over  a  four-day  span  improved  performance  on 
tasks related to sustained attention [22]. Both of these studies 

implemented  a  mindful  breathing  task.  Guidance  was 
provided in parts of the study carried out by Zeidan et al. [22]. 
However,  the  majority  of  the  time  was  spent  in  silence 
meditating. Additionally, longitudinal research that involved 
guidance and training of mindful breathing practices over the 
course of three months reported significant improvement in 
sustained attention [23]. While participants in our study were 
able to attain a significant state of mindfulness, it is possible 
that  guided  meditation  in  both  the  virtual  and  audio 
the 
conditions  prevented  participants 
necessary 
improve 
performance on the sustained attention task within the short 
time frame.  

in  mind-wandering 

from  attaining 

reduction 

to 

is  evidence 

that  mindfulness 

these  studies  demonstrate 

The vast majority of studies conducted on mindfulness 
are field studies with clinical populations, such as individuals 
with  eating,  mood,  anxiety,  or  personality  disorders  [9]. 
Although 
the  benefits  of 
mindfulness-based practice, there is a lot to be learned about 
the  underlying  effects  of  mindfulness  on  well-being  [9]. 
There 
training  causes 
neurobiological  changes  [10].  However,  the  validity  of 
findings at neurological levels such as changes in alpha and 
theta brain waves and cortical thickening are debated; this is 
due  to  the  low  number  of  clinical  studies  that  have  been 
performed, the small number of participants in these studies, 
and the lack of longitudinal design [7]. Nonetheless, studies 
have found that participants who received a brief mindfulness 
intervention  prior  to  a  verbal  learning  test  recollected  a 
significantly  lower  proportion  of  negative  words  than 
positive  when  compared  to  a  control  group  on  a  delayed 
recall  task  [9]. These  findings  demonstrate  that  beyond  the 
benefits  individuals  can  gain  from  mindful  practices, 
mindfulness  interventions  can  provide  an  avenue  to  gain 
insight into a further understanding of cognitive functions. 

A.  Future Research 

The current study indicates that further investigations into 
the use and efficacy of VR-based mindfulness interventions 
and the influence of these interventions on mind wandering 
are warranted. For instance, future research could investigate 
the influence of a more thorough, but still brief, mindfulness 
intervention on mind wandering. Such an investigation could 
have participants engage in a brief mindfulness practice and 
then  discuss  with  the  participants  what  they  experienced 
during the practice. Having ensured that they understand the 
importance  of 
their  breathing  and  of 
nonjudgmentally  bringing  attention  back  to  their  breathing 
whenever  their  minds  wander  off,  the  experimenters  could 
have  the  participants  engage  in  another  brief  mindfulness 
practice,  after  which  the  participants  could  go  on  to  the 
attention task. In so doing, the empirical question is whether 
this  type  of  modified  brief  intervention  might  reduce  mind 
wandering. 

focusing  on 

the 

Given 
the  brief 
immediate  beneficial  effects  of 
intervention  on  state  mindfulness,  it  would  be  especially 

useful for future studies to focus on short-term mindfulness 
interventions (e.g., multiple practices over several days or a 
few  weeks)  and  to  incorporate  a  self-regulated  training 
regimen  that  allows  participants  to  practice  mindfulness 
repeatedly and consistently over an extended period of time, 
as opposed to a one-time practice. Using such a strategy, it 
would  be  possible  to  investigate  the  effects  of  VR-based 
mindfulness interventions on both state and trait mindfulness, 
mind  wandering,  and  psychological  wellbeing.  Cahn  and 
Polich,  for  instance,  provided  support  that  consistent  and 
extensive  meditation  training  promotes  lasting  changes  in 
cognitive abilities and well-being [26]. 

One  limitation  of  the  current  study  concerns  the  extent  to 
which individuals in the mindfulness meditation group could 
immerse  in  the  brief  meditation  practice.  A  limitation 
inherently  present  in  most  contemplative  studies,  it  is  not 
possible  to  behaviorally  determine  the  extent  to  which 
individuals are able to focus on the present moment during 
the  practice  without  using  physiological  measures.  This 
limitation  may  be  even  more  pronounced  for  brief 
mindfulness  interventions,  in  which  individuals  have  little 
guidance as to how well they are engaging in the meditation 
practice.  Therefore,  future  studies  could  address 
this 
limitation  by  incorporating  physiological  measures  into  the 
experimental  procedures  to  assess  individuals’  engagement 
level with the mindfulness practice. Such measures can also 
be useful for the purposes of providing real-time feedback to 
the  individuals  regarding  their  current  state  of  being  and 
helping them better focus on the chosen object of attention or 
the anchor (i.e., one’s breathing). 

In  addition,  future  research  could  consider  a  comparison 
between  novice  and  experienced  mindfulness  practitioners 
and  investigate  the  efficacy  of  a  VR-based  intervention  in 
inducing a state of mindfulness. It would be interesting to test 
whether the VR-based intervention, being a more immersive 
practice,  would  induce  a  state  of  mindfulness  in  novice 
practitioners similar to the level of state mindfulness reported 
by experienced practitioners. 

Another  line  of  future  research  would  be  to  develop  and 
validate  an  adaptive  mindfulness  intervention  in  VR  (e.g., 
[33]), where the virtual environment and guided practice can 
respond to users’ physiological state (breathing or attention 
patterns). Such an intervention could run users’ physiological 
data through a machine learning pipeline online (as the users 
are engaged in the practice) and could change how the virtual 
environment responds, providing  virtual biofeedback to the 
users. This approach could increase users’ immersion in the 
practice and could potentially yield better gains, which is a 
hypothesis that could be tested in future studies.  

B.  Experimental Design Strategies 
One  aspect  of  the  current  study  that  differed  from  similar 
studies  on  the  incorporation  of  VR  into  mindfulness  and 
relaxation practices [2, 14, 15, 19] is the use of two treatment 
conditions  and  one  active  control  conditions.  More 

specifically, instead of comparing the VR-based mindfulness 
intervention  to  a  control  group,  the  current  experiment 
incorporated both VR-based  and audio-based interventions, 
which enabled us to rule out the possibility that engaging in 
a mindfulness practice was sufficient for inducing a state of 
mindfulness.  Additionally,  the  current  study  utilized  an 
active  control  group  in  which  participants  listened  to  an 
audiobook  for  the  same  amount  of  time  the  mindfulness 
interventions  lasted,  10  minutes.  By  incorporating  such  an 
active control group, the current experiment concluded that 
listening to an audio recording was not enough for inducing 
a  state  of  mindfulness.  Instead,  the  current  experiment 
showed that a state of  mindfulness  was achieved only after 
engaging in a mindfulness practice and that greater levels of 
state  mindfulness  could  be  obtained  by  completing  the 
practice in VR than by completing the practice using guided-
audio recordings without an immersive virtual environment. 
Future studies could take these suggestions into consideration 
when planning and designing similar intervention studies. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C. Neiger. 2016. Virtual reality is too expensive for most people — but 
that's  about  to  change.  2016.  Retrieved  April  23,  2017  from 
http://www.businessinsider.com/why-is-virtual-reality-so-expensive-
2016-9. 

[2]  M. V. Navarro-Haro, Y. López-del-Hoyo, D. Campos, M. M. Linehan, 
H.  G.  Hoffman,  A  García-Palacios, M. Modrego-Alarcón,  L.  Borao, 
and J. García-Campayo. 2017. Meditation experts try Virtual Reality 
Mindfulness:  A  pilot  study  evaluation  of  the  feasibility  and 
acceptability  of  Virtual  Reality  to  facilitate  mindfulness  practice  in 
people attending a Mindfulness conference. PLoS ONE 12, 11 (Nov. 
2017), 1-14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187777 
[3]  T. Orion, H. Frederick, M. Woollacott, and D. Chan. 2017. The effects 
of a mindful listening task on mind-wandering. Mindfulness 8, 2 (April 
2017), 433-443. DOI: http://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-016-0615-8 
[4]  P.  Malinowski.  2008.  Mindfulness  as  psychological  dimension: 
Concepts  and  applications.  The  Irish  Journal  of  Psychology  29,  1-2 
(2008), 
DOI: 
155-166. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03033910.2008.10446281 

[5]  D.  Creswell.  2017.  Mindfulness  interventions.  Annual  Review  of 
DOI: 

Psychology 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-042716-051139 

491-516. 

2018), 

(Jan. 

68 

[6]  R. S. S. Kramer, U. W. Wegerb, and D. Sharma. 2013. The effect of 
mindfulness  meditation  on  time  perception.  Consciousness  and 
Cognition 
DOI: 
2013), 
3 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.05.008 

846-852. 

(Sept. 

22, 

[7]  Y.  Tang,  B.  K.  Hölzel  and M.  I.  Posner.  2015.  The neuroscience  of 
mindfulness meditation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16, 4 (March, 
2015), 213-225. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3916 

[8]  M. A. Killingsworth and D. T. Gilbert. 2010. A wandering mind is an 
unhappy  mind.  Science  330,  6006  (Nov.  2010),  932.  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192439 

[9]  H.  J.E.M.  Alberts  and  R.  Thewissen.  2011.  The  effect  of  a  brief 
mindfulness  intervention  on  memory  for  positively  and  negatively 
valenced  stimuli.  Mindfulness  2,  2  (June  2011),  73-77.  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs12671-011-0044-7 

[10]  K. C.R. Fox, S. Nijeboer, M. L. Dixon, J. L. Floman, M. Ellamil, S. P. 
Rumak, P. Sedlmeier, and K. Christoff. Is meditation associated with 
altered  brain  structure?  A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of 
in  meditation  practitioners.  2014. 
morphometric  neuroimaging 
Neuroscience  &  Biobehavioral  Reviews  43  (June  2014),  48-73. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.03.016 

[11]  M. D. Mrazek, J. Smallwood and J. W. Schooler. 2012. Mindfulness 
and  Mind-Wandering:  Finding  Convergence  Through  Opposing 
Constructs.  Emotion  12,  3 
(June  2012),  442-448.  DOI:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0026678 

[12]  T.  E.  Gorman  and  C.  Shawn  Green.  2016.  Short-term  mindfulness 
intervention  reduces  the  negative  attentional  effects  associated  with 
heavy media multitasking. Scientific Reports 6, Article 24542 (April 
2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24542 

[13]  C. Coelho,  J. Tichon, T. J. Hine, G. Wallis and G. Riva. 2006. Media 
presence  and  inner  presence:  the  sense  of  presence  in  virtual  reality 
technologies. From communication to presence: Cognition, emotions 
and  culture  towards  the  ultimate  communicative  experience.  25-45. 
IOS Press, Amsterdam. 

[14]  C.  Shaw,  D.  Gromala  and  M.  Song. 2010.  The  meditation  chamber: 
towards  self-modulation.  Metaplasticity  in  virtual  worlds:  aesthetics 
and 
IGI  Publishing.  121-133.  DOI: 
concepts. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-60960-077-8.ch007 

semantics 

[15]  I.  Kosunen, A. Ruonala, M. Salminen, S. Järvelä, N. Ravaja, and G. 
Jacucci.  2017.  Neuroadaptive  Meditation  in  the  Real  World.  In 
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Workshop on An Application-oriented 
Approach to BCI out of the laboratory (BCIforReal '17). ACM, New 
York, 
DOI: 
USA, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3038439.3038443 

29-33. 

NY, 

[16]  G.  Optale,  C.  Urgesi,  V.  Busato,  S.  Marin,  L.  Piron,  K.  Priftis,  L. 
Gamberini,  S.  Capodieci  and  A.  Bordin.  2009.  Controlling  memory 
impairment in elderly adults using virtual reality memory training: a 
randomized  controlled  pilot  study.  Neurorehabilitation  and  neural 
DOI: 
4 
repair 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1545968309353328 

348-357. 

2009), 

(Nov. 

24, 

[17]  T.  Galia  and  B.  Amit.  2013.  State  Mindfulness  Scale  (SMS): 
development  and  initial  validation.    Psychological  assessment  25,  4 
(Dec. 2013), 1286-1299. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0034044 
[18]  D.  Peebles  and  D.  Bothell.  2004.  Modelling  Performance  in  the 
Sustained  Attention  to  Response  Task.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Sixth 
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling. Pittsburgh, PA, 231-
236. 

[19]  Steam.com.  2016.  Guided  Meditation  VR.  Retrieved 

from 
http://store.steampowered.com/app/397750/Guided_Meditation_VR/. 
[20]  M. Xu, C. Purdon, P. Seli, and D. Smilek. 2017. Mindfulness and mind 
wandering:  The  protective  effects  of  brief  meditation  in  anxious 
individuals.  Consciousness  and Cognition.  51  (May  2017), 157-165. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2017.03.009 

[21]  J. Freeman, J. Lessiter, E. Keogh, F.W. Bond, and K. Chapman, 2004. 
Relaxation Island: virtual, and really relaxing. Presence, 67-72. 
[22]  F. Zeidan, S. K. Johnson, B. J. Diamond, Z. David, and P. Goolkasian. 
2010. Mindfulness meditation improves cognition: Evidence of brief 

mental training. Consciousness and cognition 19, 2 (June 2010), 597-
605. DOI: 10.1016/j.concog.2010.03.014 

[23]  K. A. MacLean, E. Ferrer, S. R. Aichele, D. A. Bridwell, A. P. Zanesco, 
T. L. Jacobs, B. G. King, E. L. Rosenberg, B. K. Sahdra, P. R. Shaver, 
B.  A.  Wallace,  G.  R.  Mangun,  and  C.  D.  Saron.  2010.  Intensive 
meditation training improves perceptual discrimination and sustained 
attention.  Psychological  science  21,  6  (May  2010),  829-839.  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610371339 

cognitive 

systematic 

[24]  A. Chiesa, R. Calati, and A. Serretti. 2011. Does mindfulness training 
improve 
of 
abilities?  A 
neuropsychological findings. Clinical Psychology Review 31, 3 (April 
2011), 449–464. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2010.11.003 
[25]  C. Crescentini, L. Chittaro, V. Capurso, R. Sioni, and F. Fabbro. 2016. 
Psychological  and  physiological  responses  to  stressful  situations  in 
immersive  virtual  reality:  Differences  between  users  who  practice 
mindfulness meditation and controls. Computers in Human Behavior 
59 
DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.02.031 

304-316. 

review 

2016), 

(June 

[26]  B. R. Cahn, and J. Polich. 2006. Meditation States and Traits: EEG, 
ERP, and Neuroimaging Studies. Psychological Bulletin 132, 2 (March 
2006) 180–211. DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.180 

[27]  D. Villani and G. Riva. 2008. Presence and Relaxation: A Preliminary 
Controlled  Study.  PsychNology  Journal  6,  1  (Jan.  2008)  7-25. 
Retrieved from www.psychnology.org. 

[28]  Guided  Meditation  VR.  2016.  Experience  Costa  Del  Sol.  Retrieved 

from https://www.guidedmeditationvr.com/costa-del-sol/. 

[29]  A. J. Cheyne, G. J. F. Solman, J. S. A. Carriere, and D. Smilek. 2009. 
task 
Anatomy  of  an  error:  A  bidirectional  state  model  of 
engagement/disengagement  and  attention-related  errors.  Cognition 
111, 1, 98-113. 

[30]  F. Zeidan, S. K. Johnson, B. J. Diamond, Z. David, and Z. Goolkasian. 
2010. Mindfulness meditation improves cognition: Evidence of brief 
mental training. Consciousness and Cognition 19, 2, 597-605. 

[31]  R.  J.  Davidson,  and  A.  W.  Kaszniak.  2015.  Conceptual  and 
methodological  issues  in  research  on  mindfulness  and  meditation. 
American Psychologist 70, 7, 597-605. 

[32]  M.  G.  Williams,  J.  2010.  Mindfulness  and  psychological  process. 

Emotion 10, 1, 1-7. 

[33]  A.  Dey,  A.  Chatourn,  and  M.  Billinhurst.  “Exploration  of  an  EEG-
based Cognitively Adaptive Training System in Virtual Reality,” Proc. 
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (IEEE VR 
2019), pp. 220-226. 

 
 
