Comparing Field Trips, VR Experiences and Video Representations on 
Spatial Layout Learning in Complex Buildings 

Cetin Tuker a*, Togan Tong b 

a Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University, Graphic Design Department, Fındıklı Kampüsü, Meclisi Mebusan Cad., 

Beyoğlu, İstanbul, Turkey 
b Yıldız Technical University, Department of Architecture, Yıldız Kampüsü, Barbaros Bulvarı., Beşiktaş, 

İstanbul, Turkey 

Corresponding Author: Cetin Tuker* 

Mailing Adress:  

Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University,  

Graphic Design Department, 

Fındıklı Kampüsü, 

Meclisi Mebusan Cad., 

Beyoğlu, İstanbul, Turkey 

cetin.tuker@msgsu.edu.tr 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparing Field Trips, VR Experiences and Video Representations on Spatial Layout 
Learning in Complex Buildings 

Abstract 
This study aimed to compare and investigate the efficacy of the real-world experiences, immersive virtual reality 
(IVR) experiences, and video walkthrough representations on layout-learning in a complex building. A quasi-
experimental, intervention, and delayed post-test research design was used among three groups: real-world, IVR, 
and video walkthrough representation. A total of 41 first-year design students from architecture, and game 
design departments were attended the study. Design students were selected as they already know how to 
communicate graphically the layout of a building on paper. IVR and video walkthrough groups experienced the 
representations of the building by themselves, but real-world group experienced the building within a group as 
imitating a design education field trip. After 10 days, a total of 26 participants out of 41 tested for spatial recall 
performance. Recall performances were measured as an indicator of layout learning by analysing the plan 
sketches drawn by the participants. Results showed IVR group recalled significantly more spatial memories 
compared with the real-world and video walkthrough representation groups. Real-world group performed the 
worst among three groups. This result was interpreted to three conclusions. First, the layout learning tends to be 
overly sensitive to distractions and lower levels of distraction may lead to better levels of layout learning. 
Second, for the domain of layout knowledge learning, a remarkably simple IVR model is enough. Third, 
although real-world experiences give direct and richer sensory information about the spaces, layout knowledge 
acquisition from the surrounding environment requires psychologically active wayfinding decisions. 

Keywords: spatial learning; layout learning; virtual reality; wayfinding; spatial recall  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.Introduction 
People acquire spatial knowledge from two types of sources: (a) direct sources, the space itself which was 
experienced by the people directly by sensory-motor experiences (sitting, standing, walking, moving, in the 
space); (b) indirect sources, which are the external representations (plans, elevations, sections, maps, video 
walkthroughs) of the space (Montello, Waller, Hegarty, Richardson, 2004, p.252). In the former, the scale of the 
space is larger than the observer and the observer is contained by the space (in other words, space surrounds the 
observer) and in the latter, the scale of the representation is smaller than the observer, and it is observed from 
outside of the representation (Montello et al. 2004, p.252). When space contains the observer, the spatial data 
from the environment is direct, and the observer can create the mental image of the space easily.  

Indirect sources are  pictorial representations like plans, elevations, and sections and use abstract symbols to 
represent spatial information. Symbolic representations and verbal narratives of space contain insufficient data 
compared to direct on-site experiences due to limitations of the media used in the presentation process. They 
need more cognitive load compared to direct sources because of the mental processes needed to convert or 
decipher the symbols to a meaningful mental image of the space (Montello, et. Al., 2004, p.255).  

As the level of mental visualization abilities of people is not the same, the correctness of the created mental 
representation of the space depends on the spatial skills of the individual. Previous studies show that there are 
differences between the experience of the three-dimensional environment directly on-site and visualization in 
mind through pictorial representations in terms of the amount of information transmitted from human sensory 
organs and the brain regions in which the information is processed (Hegarty, Montello, Richardson, Ishikawa, 
Lovelace, 2006)(Table 1).   

Table 1 
Information Types of Various Experiences 

Direct Experience 

Video 
Walkthrough 
IVR Experience 

Sensory-Motor Information 

Vision 

Data Source 

Eyes, locomotion, vestibular 
system 
Only eyes 

Stereoscopic 

On a 2D flat screen 

Limited tracking of HMD. 
Limited movement of viewer 

Stereoscopic but field of 
view is not equal to natural 
vision 

Direct (little need of mental 
visualization) 
Indirect, series of images 
(Requires mental visualization) 
Direct (little need of mental 
visualization) 

In all cases, the viewer needs some level of cognitive power to create allocentric interrelations between the 
locations of landmarks and the initial layout to create route knowledge (the knowledge of direct connections, 
walk paths from one space to the other) between the landmarks. While receiving visual data, any distraction 
(environmental factors, fidelity issues of interfaces, human factors) will result to a decrease in the level of spatial 
data stored in the brain. 

Existing literature mostly focuses on how users of the space create cognitive maps of the space in the navigation 
context. Three types of spatial learning types emerge in literature: (a) route knowledge, recalling the relations of 
routes or corridors in a built environment that provide navigation without getting lost; (b) survey knowledge, 
correctly orienting oneself in the environment and assuming distances between parts of the environment; (c) 
landmark knowledge, remembering the landmarks in the environment (Hirtle, 2009).  

On the one hand, it can be claimed that direct on-site experiences can provide more spatial information and 
spatial experience (Hegarty, et. Al., 2006) which can lead to a richer spatial learning outcome, on the other hand, 
it is not logistically, and economically viable and practical, and can be very time-consuming activity to 
experience real-world environments in some situations. Educational settings related with spatial learning (like 
architecture and design) can be major examples of these kinds of situations. Instructors mostly prefer to teach 
spatial relations by using indirect sources, as it is more practical to prepare educational material, and only very 
little part of the courses can be reserved for direct on-site experiences due to the logistical shortcomings 
mentioned above. Even if the student can create a mental image of the certain space by using indirect sources, it 
is open to question whether the student could successfully create the mental image of the space or benefit from it 
to contribute to education. Researches show that mental visualization skills are not equal for individuals and 
(Cherney, 2008; Terlecki & Newcombe, 2005; Uttal et. Al., 2013), and lack of mental visualization skills can 
increase the probability of dropping out of university in engineering education (Sorby, 2009).  Additionally, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group interactions such as a crowded group that interacts with each other instead of observing the spatial 
interrelations during on-site experiences can demand the attention of the student from the educational subject, 
and this could result in a decrease in the amount of spatial learning.  

Within this context, stereoscopic immersive virtual reality (IVR) experiences can be an intermediate level 
platform between direct and indirect experiences. Immersion is a technology (mostly hardware) that simulates 
the real-world equivalent of a sensory input modality (Slater, 2003). According to Berkman & Akan (2019), 
“immersion is the user’s engagement with a VR system and depends on sensory immersion” (p. 1), which is 
provided by the equipment. IVR technology is not new, and as technology develops, IVR systems are getting 
more available for educational institutions. Although IVR experiences in the future may be an alternative to 
direct experiences, it must be investigated by experiment that whether the idea of using IVR systems in the 
instruction of spatial knowledge can be supported with measurable and replicable scientific evidence. The 
reasons how, why, and in what limits students’ learning the spatial knowledge from IVR experiences, is another 
subject to investigate. Therefore, this study aims to compare the real-world experiences (field trips), IVR 
experiences, and video representations on spatial learning. To accomplish this goal an experimental research 
study was conducted by measuring the spatial recall performances of participants among three conditions: (a) 
real-world spatial experience which is also the control group; (b) video recorded spatial experience; (c) virtual 
reality experience with tracked head-mounted display.  

2. Background 
2.1 How fast the spatial knowledge is formed? 
One of the discussions in the area is about how fast spatial knowledge is formed. In one of the most prominent 
research, Moeser (1988) shows survey knowledge does not form automatically in student nurses working in a 
complex hospital building even after three years of experience. In the study, experienced student nurses failed to 
draw maps (schematic) of the hospital they were working. A naïve control group that studied the same building 
from a map performed better in room-labeling, direction, and distance estimation tasks compared with student 
nurses. The study of Rossano, West, Robertson, Wayne, & Chase, (1999) supports these findings in survey type 
learning. In this study, there were three groups. A computer model walkthrough was used to train participants. 
Another group studied the building by using a map. The last group was the users of the building. In route tasks, 
the real-world group was superior to others. But in survey knowledge tasks, map group were superior to other 
groups. It was reported that the real-world group and computer group, needs time and repeated exposures to 
learn the spatial relations. The study of Waller, Hunt, & Knapp (1998) supports these findings as long exposures 
with the surrounding environment (IVR) affect spatial learning in a positive way. The study of Thorndyke, & 
Hayes-Roth’s (1982) findings contradicts with Moeser (1988) for females. In this study, straight-line distance, 
root distance, and direction estimation, and route-finding task, performances of naïve users that studied the 
building from maps were compared with the users of the building. With moderate exposure, naïve users were 
superior to users of the building that were using the building for 1-2 months. With extensive exposure (6-8 
months and 10-11 months), this superiority vanishes, and the real-world experience becomes superior for route 
distance and orientation tasks (Thorndyke, & Hayes-Roth, 1982). These findings show different methods can be 
used for different learning objectives and possible effects of other variables such as gender difference, 
complexity or landmark layout of the building plan, or wayfinding strategies of the users in addition to exposure 
duration. 

2.2 Spatial Knowledge Training with Media and Types of VR Representations 
Another discussion is about training types and efficiency of media and methods used in spatial knowledge 
training. There are two learning modes exists in the literature concerned with spatial learning in virtual 
environments. These are physical and psychological modes and both have active and passive conditions 
(Carassa, Geminiani, Morganti, & Varotto, 2002; Wallet, Sauzéon, Rodrigues, & N'Kaoua, 2008; Wilson, 
Foreman, Gillett, & Stanton, 1997). Phsically passive condition means participant experiences the virtual 
environment without a body movement (like watching a video) and being active means participant controls the 
movement by using a joystick or keyboard like device. Psychologically passive means participant is being 
guided by an avatar or the movement within the environment is restricted, whereas psychologically active is 
exploring the virtual environment freely .   

Comparing participants’ spatial learning with walkthrough training (that participants passively watch the camera 
traverse the environment without interaction) with a map, pictorial presentations, and real-life experience is a 
frequently used study design. With the development of virtual reality (VR), researches include training with 
virtual environments with different capabilities. Broadly there are two types of VR systems mentioned in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
literature: (a) three-dimensional models and environments viewed on two dimensional flat monitors (these can 
be classified as indirect pictorial representations -VR, desktop virtual environment); and (b) three-dimensional 
environments and models viewed with stereoscopic head-mounted displays (HMD) and where both HMD and 
the locomotion of the user can be tracked (immersive VR - IVR).  The former is in the first-person perspective 
and either actively controlled by the user or passive walkthrough animations that the user cannot interact with the 
motion of the camera. The latter, IVR, can be either in the form of a stationary user (mostly sitting) or the user 
can move in the space with a tracked HMD with 6 degrees of freedom. With the development of computer 
technology, new IVR systems have more smooth tracking systems and are easy to use for research.  

The former is closer to indirect experiences, and data collected from that kind of representation is stored in 
human memory as a series of images that needs to be mentally constructed to a mental representation of the 
space that was experienced. The latter, with its ability of locomotion tracking and providing stereoscopic images 
that creates the feeling of the viewer, that is surrounded by the environment (immersive VR - IVR) can simulate 
the immersion and can be an alternative to direct experiences for spatial learning.  

2.3 Effects of Spatial Abilities and Media on Spatial Learning 
The relations between spatial abilities and spatial learning are also subject to investigation. In the study of 
Hegarty, Montello, Richardson, Ishikawa, & Lovelace (2006), participants were trained with real-world 
experience, video walkthrough, and interactive desktop VR. The study draws connections with the scale of the 
environment focusing on the dissociation model of participants’ learning of spatial layout of a building either 
from small scale (viewed on a computer screen) or large scale (environment that surrounds the viewer like direct 
experience) presentations of spaces. 221 participants were tested on psychometric measures of spatial and verbal 
abilities and working memory. In this study, small scale presentations were a walkthrough video and a first-
person view (like a video game) interactive walkthrough VR experience of the same building, and large-scale 
presentation was the direct experience (real-world) guided by a researcher in the corridors of the same building. 
Findings show that learning from small scale presentations is related to the small-scale visualization ability of 
the participant. In other words, not all participants can learn spatial layouts from video and game-like VR 
presentations represented on flat computer screens (Hegarty et. Al., 2006).  

Ruddle, Payne, & Jones (1997) and Albert, Rensink, & Beusmans (1999) used only desktop VE’s to train and 
assess participants. In the former study, landmarks in VE’s affects the wayfinding performances of participants 
positively (Ruddle et al.,1997). The latter study supports these findings that desktop VE creates viewpoint 
dependent representational memories Albert et. Al. (1999). To compare wayfinding performances of participants 
trained by using an animated walkthrough with pictorial presentations of decision points in a building, the 
animated walkthrough group performed better than the pictorial presentation group (Münzer, & Stahl; 2011). In 
other words, participants store images of the landmarks instead of creating a layout map of the building in their 
mind and locate the landmark on that plan and linking the connection between the landmarks with a series of 
images of the route help perform better. Moeser (1988) also shows student nurses cannot draw maps of the 
hospital that they were working for almost three years and use landmarks to find their way in the building. These 
studies show creating maps of an environment is not an automatic process, or it is easier to store route 
information with a series of viewpoint dependent images.  

Interactive game-like VE’s also affects spatial learning. Tüzün, & Özdinç, (2016) compared route learning 
performances of participants trained in a multiuser online VE with participants who were trained by a researcher 
on a map while learning the spatial layout. In this study, the VE group recalled route details better than real-
world group (which was guided by the researcher during spatial learning session). The study of Farrell, Arnold, 
Pettifer, Adams, Graham, & MacManamon (2003) supports that users that make active navigational decisions 
learn more than the users guided by the researcher that already knows the route. Waller et. Al. (1998) also 
supports these findings. Waller et al. compare six different groups that learn the plan of a maze from no-training, 
real-world, map, desktop VE walkthrough, IVR short-exposure, IVR long-exposure. They were assessed with a 
wayfinding task in a real-world maze. In this study with long exposure training, the IVR group surpasses real-
world group in the wayfinding task. This shows to acquire route knowledge in IVR training time, repeated 
exposures to training material, and active navigational decisions are essential. Active learning has an impact on 
the level of spatial learning. Clawson, Miller, Knott & Sebrechts, (1998) studied the effects of user control on 
indoor navigational learning. Participants were trained with no-user-controlled VR, limited-user-control VR, 
full-user-controlled VR. Results show, as user control of VR increases, learning level increases in route learning 
tasks. In this study, the full user-controlled VR group has the maximum level of route learning. Findings of 
Farrell et. Al. (2003) supports Clawson et. Al.’s (1998) findings. In a study that aimed to investigate transfer of 
route knowledge in desktop VR to real environment, three training regimes were followed; train on map; active 
VR; and passive VR. Groups were tested on real life. Findings show that active VR with map training produces 

 
 
 
 
more transfer than passive VR or no VR training, and map with passive VR is not superior to active map only.  
Writers conclude active navigational decisions create spatial learning.  

Some researchers claim training spatial knowledge with IVR systems also bring issues emerging from the field 
of view (FOV) of the virtual camera, the HMD, fidelity issues, and cognitive workload because of the interface. 
In one of the experimental studies (Henry and Furness, 1993) focuses on the differences of perception of real-
world and virtual-spaces, the participants (architects, n=24) were asked to assume spatial dimensions and their 
orientation with respect to spatial landmarks while experiencing the same space in four different conditions that 
are direct experience, VR (non-immersive) on a 2D monitor, immersive VR with HMD tracking and immersive 
VR without HMD tracking. It was reported that findings favor the real experience over VR experiences as the 
subjects experienced the VR (in all three groups) guessed the dimensions of the spaces significantly smaller (this 
effect was maximized in immersive VR with HMD tracking) than the subjects experienced the real environment. 
Writers conclude this issue is probably because the FOV of the virtual camera used in the VR experiences was 
wider than the FOV of the human eye. Findings of Miller, Clawson, & Sebrechts (1999) partially support this 
finding. Participants that learned the plans and landmarks of an existing building from maps, trained with the 
actual building, and trained with IVR with HMD (78 degrees FOV) assessed with route finding and direction 
estimation tasks in the real building after two weeks both in aligned and reversed direction. IVR group was better 
only in route tasks with the same orientation with the training material but less accurate in survey tasks (in IVR), 
possibly because of low fidelity interface or excessive cognitive workload during training. For real-life tasks, 
although the IVR group is superior to the map group, training in real building influenced route learning the most. 
Contrarily, Findings of Johnson & Stewart (1999) does not support the claim that narrower FOV has a negative 
effect on spatial knowledge acquisition. A study made on soldiers who experience an IVR environment by using 
widescreen HMD’s, small screen HMD’s, and rear projection widescreen displays shows no difference in spatial 
knowledge, although there is a difference in perceived presence among HMD’s and widescreen display. 

2.4 Spatial Learning in Architectural Education 
Field trips are widely used in the context of architectural education to help students to gain spatial experience 
from existing and outstanding buildings. As it is not logistically efficient to organize field trips every time for a 
large architectural class, the photographs, plans and sections of the buildings are also studied in architectural 
studios as a training material. However, the differences in how spatial learning occurs from field trips and from 
various media (representational tools) in the context of architectural education is not a well-studied area. There is 
also a very little amount of studies exist that try to create a link between human cognitive research and 
architectural design. In one of these studies, the wayfinding strategies of experienced and inexperienced users in 
a complex multi-level building were investigated (Hölscher, Meilinger, Vrachliotis, Brösamle, & Knauff, 2006) 
and architectural elements, mainly staircases that can possibly cause navigation problems were identified. About 
wayfinding, Lawton (1996) studies the self-reported strategies in indoor wayfinding and compares the results 
with the outdoor wayfinding strategies. In the same study, writers investigate the relationships of wayfinding 
strategies with spatial anxiety levels, and gender was also studied. Memikoğlu (Memikoğlu, İ. S. 2012. 
Exploring vertical navigation within a virtual environment: a staircase experience. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey) focuses on the vertical navigation problem targeting the 
process of the architectural design of multi-level buildings by articulating the problem by adding the parameter 
of the angle between staircases with respect to the location of the user. In the same study, staircase preferences of 
different genders in a virtual environment were studied in order to draw conclusions that can be used to guide 
designers with the design process.  

2.5 Method and Media Debate in Instructional Technology 
The last discussion at this point is the essential debate of method and media. According to Clark (1994), media is 
just a vehicle that delivers the instruction to be learned to learners, and it will not affect the achievement of 
learning goals. The main factor that influences learning is the instructional method. In this study, video and IVR 
are different types of media. Media can have several attributes like zooming in and out to details or slow-down 
the video-play to help a detail to be seen better, but these are not the main structural element of learning. As 
supported by evidence, the same learning goals can be achieved by different attributes of various media (Clark, 
1994, p.22). The structural element of learning is the instructional method chosen for the specific need of the 
instruction (Clark, 1994). As an example, the learning-by-doing methodology is a standard method being used in 
design education. Focusing on the cost-effectiveness of several media, Clark claims, it is better to choose the 
media that leads to a cheaper, more comfortable, and faster way to deliver the same instruction (1994). In this 
study, as IVR simulates the real-world environment, theoretically, learning influenced by IVR cannot be larger 
than real-world experience. However, considering the other dynamics, in practice, IVR can have some positive 
attributes that can influence spatial layout learning. 

 
 
 
 
2.6 Hypothesis 
In this study, the hypothesis is related with the recall performance of the students in a complex building and 
claims that the students that experienced real-world field trip will be able to recall more spatial memories than 
VRE and video walkthrough experiences whereas the recall performance of the VRE group will be higher than 
the video walkthrough group.   

3. Method 
This study addresses the problem in measuring spatial recall (remembering) performance of the participants after 
seven days to ten days, as being able to recall information is one of the necessities of learning. This is a quasi-
experimental, spatial experience, and delayed post-test research design.  

3.1. Research Context and Participants 
Participants of the study were the first and second-year video game design and architecture students of two 
different universities, and according to educational settings, it was not possible to select participants randomly. 
Therefore, participants of the same experiment group come from the same instructors’ class. Researchers have 
no background information about how these students grouped into classes of different instructors.  

A total of 41 participants attended the spatial experience part of the study. None of them has ever been in the 
Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University (MSFAU) building before. 30 of them were from the Architecture 
Department of Yıldız Technical University (YTU), and 11 of them were from Bahçeşehir University Game 
Design Department (BAU). All participants were first-year students, and all of them had just started (3 weeks to 
6 weeks) their first semester at the date of the study. The male-female ratio of the groups was almost half. The 
total number of participants in groups are, 14 students for the real-world experience group; for the video 
experience group, 11 students; and for VRE group, 16 students. A total of 26 students out of 41 attended the 
second part of the study. Distribution of the participants by experiment groups were 7 students for real-world 
group; 8 students for video experience group and 11 students for IVR experience group (Table 2).   

Table 2 
Distribution of Participants According to Their Universities 
1st Part 
14 (Architecture Students) 
11 (Architecture Students) 

Real World (Control) 
Video Walkthrough 
Virtual Reality Environment 
Total 

16 (5 Arch. – 11 Game Design Students)  11 (5 Arch – 6 Game Design) 

41 

26 

2nd Part 
7 
8 

3.2 Preparation of the study environment 
MSFAU Architecture Faculty building (Fig. 2) was selected as the study environment. A walkthrough path that 
covers almost all corridors and three main stairs of the building were selected by the researchers. The researchers 
video-recorded the selected walkthrough path with an iPhone 7 Plus. The field of view (FOV) angle of an iPhone 
7 Plus is 73.5 degrees (Fig. 1, Top). The duration of the recording was 11 minutes, and the camera was facing a 
strictly forward direction (first-person view) during the video recording. The whole walkthrough was recorded in 
a single shot. There was no sound channel in the video. 

For IVR experience, the three-dimensional model of the building was created by using SketchUp software. Level 
of detail of the model was very low. Although all the architectural features of the building were modelled, most 
of the surface textures, details like ceiling beams, hanging lamps and sculptures were not added to the model. By 
using this model, a three-dimensional experience was programmed in the Unity game engine by the researchers 
(Fig 1, Bottom), which uses an HTC-VIVE IVR system as the visualisation hardware. The head mounted display 
of HTC-VIVE has 6DOF locomotion capabilities in 3 by 3 meters range and can be tracked by the two external 
tracking stations. So, users can freely move and look around within this range. Users interact with the IVR 
environment by using the two hand controllers. The horizontal FOV of the HTC VIVE is 110 degrees, whereas 
the peripheral vision of the human eye is 60 degrees for near peripheral, 120 degrees for mid-peripheral, and 220 
degrees, including the far peripheral area (Adithya, Kumar, Lee, Kim, Moon, & Chai, 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1 
Top: First frame of video looking from the main entrance to main atrium of MSFSU Architecture faculty. 
Bottom: Starting point of VR experience looking from the main entrance to main atrium of MSFAU Architecture Faculty. 

 
 
Fig 2 
Floor plans of MSFAU Architecture Faculty Building. Arrows indicate the route that participants followed. Numbers indicate 
route segments. 
Top: Entrance floor. Middle: First Floor. Bottom: Second Floor 

3.3 Procedure 
Researchers contacted with the participants by the help of their course instructors. The aim of the research was 
explained clearly to the instructors first. Next, researchers and instructors scheduled meetings with the student 
groups. Before or during the experiences, no instructions were given related with the aim of the research, about 
the building or any other subject to students to avoid a possible interference between the instructed material and 

 
 
 
spatial learning. Participants didn’t know any information about the spatial relations and plan layout of the 
MSFAU building which was selected for the experiment also. Participants didn’t know why they were 
experiencing the representations during the experiences.  

In order to measure the memory recall performance of participants, a recall test was administered seven to ten 
days after the experiences. All participants have been contacted by email and they were asked to recall spatial 
memories of the building they experienced and to sketch a basic scheme or layout of all the floors they walked 
on. While sketching the layout, they were asked to locate their starting point on the walkthrough path, locate 
atrium openings, and vertical circulation shafts (staircases and elevators). 26 participants out of 41 replied and 
sent sketches (7 for the real-world group, 8 for the video group, 11 for the IVR environment group). (Fig. 3). 

Fig 3 
Schematic diagram of research study design 

3.3.1 The IVR Group (Experimental Group 1) 
Participants of the IVR group attended the experience one-by-one as there was only one HTC-VIVE HMD exist. 
Researchers briefly instructed them how to use the HMD’s and the hand controllers. Although HTC-VIVE can 
track the user while moving in a 3x3 meters area, in this research, the main technique of moving from one point 
to another was teleporting in the IVR environment. Teleporting in IVR means the used is being transported from 
one teleport point to another teleport point without walking the distance between them. This was the only way 
they can move in a building of that size. The consecutive teleport points which have almost 3-5 meters in 
between were located on the same path that other experiment and control group followed during the experience. 
The IVR environment was designed in such a way that participants can follow the same walkthrough path in the 
same duration (11 minutes) as the other groups.  

3.3.2 The Video Group (Experimental Group 2) 
Participants of the video experience group watched the video in the computer laboratory at the same session on 
desktop computers (11 minutes). The screen size of the monitors was 21.5 inches and they were LCD flat 
monitors. All the participants remained seated during the video experience.  

3.3.3. The Control Group  
The researchers scheduled a meeting with the instructor of the real-world group in front of the main entrance of 
the MSFAU building. Participants were instructed briefly that how the experiment will be conducted. The 
participants of the real-world group attended the experience at the same time. During the experiment, the group 
walked the exact same path in the same duration (11 minutes). One of the researchers guided the group walking 
before them. 

3.4 Data collection  
Seven to 10 days after the experience, participants have been contacted by the researchers by email, and asked to 
recall their memories to make a sketch of the layout of the building. Layout sketching method was used in this 
study to measure how many of the architectural features of the building was recalled by the participants. Layout 
sketching method was used by Moeser (1988) by sketching the spaces (rooms) by the participants on a paper and 
labelling them. We improved the Moeser’s method to a more quantitative method to make it free from the 
sketching skills of the participants. Instead of sketching the spaces of the building and labelling them correctly 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researchers asked participants to locate the key circulatory features (staircases, elevators and atriums). The 
sketches of the participants were graded by counting all features they located correctly on the layout sketch with 
respect to their starting point of the walkthrough. The upper limit of the grade a participant can achieve was 30. 
There are 14 features that exist on the original plan of the building (7 staircases, 3 elevators, 4 atrium openings. 
Fig. 4). If the participant recalls any of the features and sketches it on the paper (existence), it is graded by 1 
point. Additionally, if the location of the same feature with respect to the starting point is correct, they get an 
additional 1 point (like on the left/right of the start point). The maximum points can be scored form features is 
28. Additional one point comes from locating the entrance (start point of the experience) of the building 
correctly, and the last point is scored if the overall geometry of the plan sketched on the paper by the participant 
looks similar to the original plan (which is an elongated rectangle). If they are not similar enough, the participant 
can get 0 to 0.5 points. For every missing feature, the participant gets 1 missing feature point to be added to the 
missing feature score. Finally, if the participant remembers the feature but places on a different place than it 
should be, this was graded as 1 point for the feature score and 1 point for misplacement score. If the participant 
places more features on the sketch than should exist on the plan, he/she gets 1 misplacement point for every 
unnecessary feature. 

3.5 Data Analysis 
To calculate if at least one of the differences between the mean values of the three independent groups is 
statistically significant we conducted a one-way-ANOVA analysis. Due to the differences in group sizes we 
conducted a Scheffe’s test as the post-hoc comparison test since it does not consider the assumption that the 
number of observations in groups is equal. 

4. Findings 
There was a significant effect of media on recall performance at the p<.05 level for the three conditions [F(2,23) 
= 7.43, p = 0.002]. Post-hoc comparisons using the Scheffe test indicated that, the mean score for the IVR 
experience (M = 16.68, SD = 5.61)  was significantly different (p=0.024) than the video experience (M = 9.5, SD 
= 3.30)  and the direct experience (M = 7.43, SD = 6.25, p=0,005). There is no significant difference between the 
recall scores of the video experience and direct experience groups. It can be concluded that IVR experience 
group remembers recall more spatial layout data compared with the other two groups (Table 3).  

Missing feature performances of the groups were also investigated. The effect of media on missing feature 
performances was significant at the p<.05 level for the three conditions [F(2,23) = 7.17, p = 0.004]. Post hoc 
comparisons using the Scheffe test indicated that, the mean score for the IVR experience (M = 6.09, SD = 2.77) 
was significantly less (p=0.005) than the real-world experience (M = 10.86, SD = 3.13). There was no significant 
difference between the IVR experience and the video experience (M = 9.00, SD = 2.07, p=0.087). There was no 
significant difference between the missing feature scores of the video experience and direct experience groups. It 
can be concluded that IVR experience group remembers recall more spatial layout data compared with the other 
two groups by means of missing features (Table 4).  

There was no significant effect of media on recall performance by means of misplaced features at the p<.05 level 
for the three conditions [F(2,23)=0.931, p=0.408] (Table 5). All mean scores of groups are given in Table 6. 
Some Examples of the sketches of recall task are given in Fig. 5.  

Table 3 
Spatial Recall Performance of Features Placed Correctly ANOVA Table 

Sum of Squares 

df 

Mean Square 

F 

Sig. 

Between Groups 

437.390 

Within Groups 

625.351 

Total 

1062.740 

2 

23 

25 

218.695 

27.189 

8.043 

0,002 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 
Spatial Recall Performance of Missing Features ANOVA Table 
Sum of Squares 

df 

Mean Square 

F 

Sig. 

Between Groups 

103.349 

Within Groups 

165.766 

Total 

269.115 

2 

23 

25 

51.675 

7.170 

7.170 

0,004 

Table 5 
Spatial Recall Performance of Misplaced Features ANOVA Table 
Sum of Squares 

df 

Mean Square 

F 

Sig. 

Between Groups 

6.690 

Within Groups 

82.589 

Total 

89.279 

2 

23 

25 

Table 6 
Spatial recall performance score averages of groups 

3.345 

3.591 

0.931 

0,408 

Groups 
Real-World (N=7) 
Video (N=8) 
IVR (N=11) 

Feature Score (out of 30) 
7.43 
9.5 
16.68 

Missing Features Score 
10.86 
9 
6.1 

Misplaced Features Score 
2.57 
3.88 
3.5 

Fig 4 
Summary graphs of findings (Error bars show 95% of CI of mean) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 5 
Example drawings of recall task. 
Top left: Example from VR Group. Score: 22 out of 30; 4 missing; 3 errors. Top right: Example from Real-world Group. 
Score 18.5 out of 30. 5 missing; 1.5 errors. Bottom: Example from Video Group. Score: 9 out of 30; 10 missing; 2 errors. 

5. Discussion 
This study aimed to compare and investigate the efficacy of the direct-experiences, IVRE, and video 
representations on layout-learning. The hypothesis was that: (a) the students that experienced real-world and IVR 
would be able to recall more spatial memories than video walkthrough experiences; (b) real-world experiences 
will be superior to IVR experiences. 

First part of the hypothesis, which is that the participants that experienced real world and IVR field trips, will be 
able to recall more spatial memories than video walkthrough experiences is partially accepted. The IVR group 
scored significantly more than both the video and real-world experience group. Second part of the hypothesis 
which is that the participants that experienced real-world will recall more spatial memories compared to IVR is 
rejected (Table 7). 

As the theory explained before, the real-world provides the richest sensory input related to the environment, and 
IVR simulate this input, maybe not completely similar but almost similar at some level. Method – media debate 
of instructional technology also claims that media (IVR in this case) are only vehicles to transport the knowledge 
and will not influence learning (Clark, 1994), and the method is the main influencer of learning (field trip of a 
selected environment in this case).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7 
Summary of findings 

IVR - Real-world 

IVR - Video 

Real-world - Video 

Correct 
Features 

Missing 
Features 

Misplaced 
Features 

IVR (M = 16.68) > Real-world (M = 
7.43)* 

IVR (M = 16.68 > Video M = 
9.50)* 

IVR (M = 6.09) < Real-world (M = 
10.86)* 

No sig. differences 
IVR (M = 6.09, Video M = 9.00) 

No sig. differences 
IVR (M = 3.50) > Real-world (M = 2.57) 

No sig. differences 
IVR (M = 3.50 > Video M = 3.88) 

No sig. differences 
Real-world (M = 7.43), Video (M = 
9.50) 

No sig. differences 
Real-world (M = 10.86), Video (M = 
9.00) 

No sig. differences 
Real-world (M = 3.50), Video (M = 
3.88) 

*indicates significant difference at p>0.05 level 

By means of the richness of the sensory input three conditions can be compared. For the real-world experience, 
the real-world surrounds the viewers’ field of view, and as the viewer moves inside the environment, the 
surrounded view is updated depending on the viewpoint of the viewer. The viewer feels being inside the 
environment. Vestibular, muscular, and skeletal sensory systems support the consistency of the visual data with 
locomotion, angular transformation, and gyroscopic data. This creates a richer data flow from the sensory 
systems to the brain, thus may leading to requesting higher levels of attention. 

The IVR equipment with tracked HMD’s try to imitate these sensory input and the feeling of being inside the 
environment by creating surrounding stereoscopic visual data, and some degree of vestibular and muscular data 
originated from the (limited) locomotion of the user. Unfortunately, the simulation is not perfect as the 
locomotion is limited, and the field of view of the equipment is slightly narrower than the human eye, and the 
weight of the HMD exhausts the users rapidly.  

Contrarily, a video presentation is a vista scale (Hegarty et al., 2006) representation and perceived as a series of 
images (Montello et. Al., 2004) instead of a surrounding environment and the viewer needs to convert these 
series of images to a three-dimensional mental representation of the environment to create the layout information 
of the space that demands more mental power compared with a surrounding environment. 

So, it can be expected that the spatial recall performance of the real-world and IVR must be equal, or there must 
be a tendency to favour real-world experiences, while both are superior to video representations. But our 
findings lead to a different conclusion. Therefore, it is better to investigate the factors that can affect the spatial 
learning negatively. In other words, the factors that can decrease the level of spatial learning.   

Our findings show participants of the real-world experience scored the worst. There are two possible 
explanations for this. The first one is, students were distracted because of the crowded group and environment. 
The design of this study tries to imitate the methods of architectural education. In architectural education, field 
trips are organized with the attendance of a class with mostly about 10 to 50 students at the same time. So, in 
real-world experience part of this study, participants experienced the building within a group of their peers 
guided by the researchers. Contrarily, IVR and video groups experienced the environment by their selves in the 
laboratory. A crowded group of students can cause distractions. Some participants can lose their attention to 
space and prefer to chat with their friends. Some participants prefer to interest in irrelevant detail while the 
lecturer talks about the spatial organization. These distractions can interfere with the level of spatial learning in a 
real-world group. For the IVR group, participants were experiencing the environment by their selves, and they 
know they were monitored by the researcher during the experience. So possibly they were more concentrated on 
the environment. The video group paid extreme attention to the walkthrough because although researchers did 
not explain them the objective of the experiment, they know they were in an experiment, and this could put them 
in an alert position. The second possible explanation which is also related to the first one is, in real-world 
experiences, because of too much detail on in space and the surfaces of the environment such as walls, doors, 
columns etc. participants become overloaded and cannot pay enough attention to space itself.  

The second explanation is the effect active wayfinding on spatial learning, which was also mentioned by Farrell 
et. Al. (2003), and Tüzün, & Özdinç (2016). When someone guides the participant group, participants are less 
likely to pay attention to the layout and route decisions, because a guide makes these decisions for them. Active 
wayfinding decisions force participants to make judgments about the spatial relations of the building and this 
leads to a better learning. In this study participants of the IVR and video group experienced the environment all 
by themselves in a quiet laboratory. The video and real-world group did not make any wayfinding decisions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Video group were both physically and psychologically passive. IVR group were guided by the signs in the IVR 
environment, and they were free to look around when they want to. They were physically active but 
psychologically almost passive. The real-world group followed the researcher guiding them on the route, they 
did not try to understand the spatial relations of the environment. They were just following the crowd. So, they 
were physically active but psychologically passive.  

All these findings show, among these three groups the most active group (both physically and psychologically) is 
the IVR group. IVR group is also the less distracted group among the three groups. The outcome of this finding 
is that, although theoretically provides richer spatial data, field trips, because of distractions, are probably not 
that efficient to teach about the layout knowledge. More studies needed to understand and measure the effects of 
different group sizes, lectures during experiences, and efficiencies of single and group experiences. 

6. Conclusion 
In this study, the spatial knowledge acquisition of direct-experiences, IVR, and video representations were 
studied. This study has three main findings. First, the study shows layout learning tends to be overly sensitive to 
distractions. Lower levels of distraction may lead to a better levels of layout learning. Furthermore, the 
distractions caused by crowded groups may decrease the layout knowledge acquired by the students. More 
studies are needed to articulate the application of spatial learning with different group sizes to clearly understand 
the effect of group sizes in spatial learning. Second, the study shows, for the domain of layout knowledge 
learning, a remarkably simple IVR model is enough (as we used a very simple model). The three-dimensional 
models which can be used for educational IVR experiences do not need to be photorealistic and full of every 
detail. Further studies needed to clarify the effect of detail level of the three-dimensional model on layout 
learning. Third, although real-world experiences give direct information about the spaces, layout knowledge 
acquisition from the surrounding environment (real-world and stereoscopic VR) requires psychologically active 
wayfinding decisions. Lastly, this study does not cover the effect of the instruction about the spatial relations of 
the studied space during participants are experiencing the space. The effect of this kind of instruction on spatial 
learning must be further studied.  

References 

Adithya, B., Kumar, B. P., Lee, H., Kim, J. Y., Moon, J. C., & Chai, Y. H. (2018). An experimental study on relationship 
between foveal range and FoV of a human eye using eye tracking devices. In 2018 International Conference on 
Electronics, Information, and Communication (ICEIC) (pp. 1-5). IEEE.  

Albert, W. S., Rensink, R. A., & Beusmans, J. M. (1999). Learning relative directions between landmarks in a desktop virtual 

environment. Spatial cognition and computation, 1(2), 131-144. 

Berkman, M. I., & Akan, E. (2018). Presence and Immersion in Virtual Reality. Encyclopedia of Computer Graphics and 

Games, 1–10. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08234-9_162-1  

Carassa, A., Geminiani, G., Morganti, F., & Varotto, D. (2002). Active and passive spatial learning in a complex virtual 

environment: The effect of efficient exploration. Cognitive processing, 3(4), 65-81. 

Cherney, I. D. (2008). Mom, Let Me Play More Computer Games: They Improve My Mental Rotation Skills. Sex 

Roles. 59, 776-786.  

Clark, R. E. (1994). Media will never influence learning. Educational technology research and development, 42(2), 21-29.  

Clawson, D. M., Miller, M. S., Knott, B. A., & Sebrechts, M. M. (1998). Navigational training in virtual and real buildings. 
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 42, No. 20, pp. 1427-1431). 
Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications. 

Farrell, M. J., Arnold, P., Pettifer, S., Adams, J., Graham, T., & MacManamon, M. (2003). Transfer of route learning from 

virtual to real environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 9(4), 219. 

Hegarty, M., Montello, D. R., Richardson, A. E., Ishikawa, T., & Lovelace, K. (2006). Spatial abilities at different 

 scales: Individual differences in aptitude-test performance and spatial-layout learning. Intelligence, 34(2), 151-176.  

Henry, D., & Furness, T. (1993). Spatial perception in virtual environments: Evaluating an architectural application. In 

Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium (pp. 33-40). IEEE.  

Hirtle, S. (2009). Cognitive maps. In Handbook of Research on Geoinformatics (pp. 58-64). IGI Global. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachliotis, G., Brösamle, M., & Knauff, M. (2006). Up the down staircase: Wayfinding 

strategies in multi-level buildings. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 26(4), 284-299. 

Johnson, D. M., & Stewart, J. E. (1999). Use of virtual environments for the acquisition of spatial knowledge: Comparison 

among different visual displays. Military Psychology, 11(2), 129-148. 

Lawton, C. A. (1996). Strategies for indoor wayfinding: The role of orientation. Journal of environmental psychology, 16(2), 

137-145. 

Miller, M. S., Clawson, D. M., & Sebrechts, M. M. (1999). Long-term retention of spatial knowledge acquired in virtual 

reality. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 43, No. 22, pp. 1243-
1246). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications. 

Montello, D. R., Waller, D., Hegarty, M., & Richardson, A. E. (2004). Spatial memory of real environments,  virtual 

environments, and maps. Human spatial memory: Remembering where, 251-285.  

Moeser, S. D. (1988). Cognitive mapping in a complex building. Environment and Behavior, 20(1), 21-49. 

Münzer, S., & Stahl, C. (2011). Learning routes from visualizations for indoor wayfinding: Presentation modes and 

individual differences. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 11(4), 281-312. 

Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., & Hegarty, M. (1999). Spatial knowledge acquisition from maps and from navigation in 

real and virtual environments. Memory & cognition, 27(4), 741-750. 

Rossano, M. J., West, S. O., Robertson, T. J., Wayne, M. C., & Chase, R. B. (1999). The acquisition of route and survey 

knowledge from computer models. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 19(2), 101-115. 

Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., & Jones, D. M. (1997). Navigating buildings in" desk-top" virtual environments: Experimental 
investigations using extended navigational experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3(2), 143. 

Slater, M. (2003). A note on presence terminology. Presence connect, 3(3), 1-5. 

Sorby, S. A. (2009). Educational research in developing 3‐D spatial skills for engineering students. International 

 Journal of Science Education, 31(3), 459-480.  

Terlecki, M. S., Newcombe, N. S. (2005). How Important Is the Digital Divide? The Relation of Computer and 

 Videogame Usage to Gender Differences in Mental Rotation Ability. Sex Roles. 53/5-6, 433-441.   

Tüzün, H., & Özdinç, F. (2016). The effects of 3D multi-user virtual environments on freshmen university students' 

conceptual and spatial learning and presence in departmental orientation. Computers & Education, 94, 228-240. 

Thorndyke, P. W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation. Cognitive 

psychology, 14(4), 560-589. 

Uttal, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A. R., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. S. (2013). The 

 malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training studies.Psychological bulletin,139(2), 352.  

Waller, D., Hunt, E., & Knapp, D. (1998). The transfer of spatial knowledge in virtual environment training. Presence, 7(2), 

129-143. 

Wallet, G., Sauzéon, H., Rodrigues, J., & N'Kaoua, B. (2008). Use of virtual reality for spatial knowledge transfer: Effects of 
passive/active exploration mode in simple and complex routes for three different recall tasks. In Proceedings of the 
2008 ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology (pp. 175-178). 

Wilson, P. N., Foreman, N., Gillett, R., & Stanton, D. (1997). Active versus passive processing of spatial information in a 

computer-simulated environment. Ecological Psychology, 9(3), 207-222. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
