Immersive Stories for Health Information: Design 
Considerations from Binge Drinking in VR 

Douglas Zytko1, Zexin Ma2, Jacob Gleason1, Nathaniel Lundquist1,  
and Medina Taylor2 

1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA 
zytko@oakland.edu 
2 Department of Communication, Journalism, and Public Relations, Oakland University,  
Rochester, MI, USA 
zexinma@oakland.edu 

Abstract. Immersive stories for health are 360° videos that intend to alter viewer 
perceptions about behaviors detrimental to health. They have potential to inform 
public health at scale, however, immersive story design is still in early stages and 
largely devoid of best practices. This paper presents a focus group study with 147 
viewers  of  an  immersive  story  about  binge  drinking  experienced  through  VR 
headsets and mobile phones. The objective of the study is to identify aspects of 
immersive story design that influence attitudes towards the health issue exhibited, 
and  to  understand  how  health  information  is  consumed  in  immersive  stories. 
Findings emphasize the need for an immersive story to provide reasoning behind 
a character’s engagement in the focal health behavior, to show the main character 
clearly engaging in the behavior, and to enable viewers to experience escalating 
symptoms of the behavior before the penultimate health consequence. Findings 
also  show  how  the  design  of  supporting  characters  can  inadvertently  distract 
viewers and lead them to justify the detrimental behavior being exhibited. The 
paper  concludes  with  design  considerations  for  enabling  immersive  stories  to 
better inform public perception of health issues. 

Keywords: Immersive stories, virtual reality, 360-degree video, 360°, film, 
public health, binge drinking, alcohol 

1 

Introduction 

“Nothing  like  seeing  a  group  of  doctors  smoking  outside  to  let  you  know  that 
information alone doesn’t persuade.” – Ramit Sethi 

Urban legends told over campfire, figures etched in old stone, an article in a yellowing 
newspaper, a comic book, a novel, a radio program, a movie, a Youtube video. Story 
has been  a quintessentially human way of sharing information for centuries,  and the 
most powerful stories do more than just inform - they alter, persuade, and culminate in 
action.  

 
2 

Technology has continually expanded the ways in which stories are told and impact 
our behavior. Immersive stories [1] are a particularly novel form of storytelling; they 
utilize  360°  video  to  share  narrative  through  virtual  reality  [2]  headsets and  mobile 
devices. Through immersive stories a viewer typically experiences a narrative in first 
person through the eyes of a character and can freely explore their virtual surroundings 
by manipulating their character’s gaze. This immersion can instill a sense of presence 
(or  “being  there”)  and  the  perception  that  one  is  personally  experiencing  a  story’s 
events [3, 4].  

Immersive  stories  are  growing  in  popularity  for  news  consumption  [5]  and  for 
informing  the  public  about  health  issues  [6].  The  potential  for  viewers  to  viscerally 
experience the implications of a public health issue can be a powerful way to not only 
shape understanding, but to convince the public to adopt healthier behavioral choices 
[7].  This  capacity  for  attitudinal  and  behavioral  change  is  of  paramount  and  timely 
importance  in  light  of  health  pandemics  that  necessitate  mass  adoption  of  specific 
health behaviors to keep the public safe. 

Despite the potential of immersive stories to inform and improve public health at 
scale, knowledge of immersive story design is still in fledgling stages. A majority of 
immersive story research has explored differences in viewing device [8-14] (e.g., VR 
headsets, phones, and computer monitors), leaving immersive story content and design 
as a figurative “black box” that is relatively understudied. Some literature has identified 
and  provided  opinions  on  the  design  of  discrete  story  elements—namely  character 
perspective  choice  [15-19]  and  direction  of  viewer  attention  [10,  12,  14,  20-23]. 
However, actual viewers of immersive stories have largely been absent from design 
research. Their involvement is vital not just for validating the impact of pre-identified 
design elements [18, 21, 22], but for identifying immersive story elements impactful to 
their  perceptions  and  articulating  how  design  choices  impact  them.  This  gap  is 
especially pronounced for immersive stories in the public health context: what elements 
of  immersive  story  design  are  impactful  to  viewers’  attitudes  towards  a  respective 
public health issue, and how do they impact viewers? 

To address this gap, we conducted a focus group study with viewers of an immersive 
story about binge drinking—a widespread and severe public health issue [24, 25]—to 
identify  and  explore  elements  of  immersive  story  design  critical  to  viewer  attitudes 
about  the  respective  health  issue.  In  the  next  section  we  review  prior  research  on 
immersive stories and their design, which informs our research questions and method. 
We then present the focus group study, and conclude by discussing considerations and 
directions for immersive story design based on the study’s findings. 

2 

Background 

Immersive  stories  are  video-based  stories  that  offer  a  360°  panoramic  view  and 
spatialized  audio  [26,  27].  They  are  typically  viewed  on  VR  headsets  and  mobile 
devices, as facilitated with special viewing options on Youtube and other media outlets, 
and have been increasingly used in journalism, marketing, and non-profit sectors [1]. 
For example, mainstream media like The New York Times, the BBC, and USA Today 

3 

have  used  immersive  stories  to  offer  experiential  insight  into  news  events  [1,  5]. 
Organizations like the United Nations have used immersive stories to promote social 
good [28].  

Immersive stories are a promising tool for improving health-related knowledge and 
facilitating behavior change [7] because they allow viewers to vividly experience health 
implications  and  symptoms  of  illness  without  suffering  from  any  serious  harm.  An 
example is A Walk Through Dementia, which tells stories of people living with different 
forms of dementia by putting viewers in the shoes of those battling the disease [29]. 

As a relatively new storytelling experience, scientific research into immersive stories 
is still in its infancy. The majority of research has focused on the role of modality by 
comparing  the  viewing  experience  across  head-mounted  displays  (HMDs),  mobile 
devices, and flat computer screens [5, 8-14, 30-32]. These studies reinforce the potential 
of immersive stories, but with mixed results as to how choice of viewing device affects 
viewer experience—if at all [11]. 

There is relatively limited understanding of best practices for designing immersive 
stories, or what Banos and colleagues call “elements of the [virtual] environment and 
the content itself” [13]. Furthermore, immersive story research has focused on varying 
outcomes or goals of the viewing experience—including presence [4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 
14], enjoyment [5], empathy [11, 14, 17, 30, 33], and emotional response [8, 9, 13]—
making  it  difficult  to  synthesize  design  insight  for  health  contexts.  Attitudinal  and 
behavioral change (the goals of health-related stories) have been particularly rare focal 
outcomes of immersive story research [8]. 

Early research into immersive story design has focused predominantly on character 
perspective  and  directing  viewer  attention.  Directing  viewer  attention  has  been 
recognized as a primary challenge to immersive story design due to viewers having the 
freedom to manipulate their gaze, therefore making it possible to miss key plot elements 
[10, 12, 14, 20-22]. Research has posed and tested various audio-based, visual-based, 
and mixed audio/visual cues for directing viewer attention [14, 21-23].  

Regarding character perspective, research has identified three options available to 
designers. One is a third person/non-character observer who plays no role in the story 
[17-19]. The other two are first-person character perspectives (the viewer experiences 
the story through the eyes of a character) including the main character of the story who 
engages in plot-driving actions and a supporting character who observes plot-driving 
occurrences  [15,  17].  There  is  some  empirical  evidence  arguing  against  the  non-
character  observer  role  or  for  a  first-person  perspective  more  broadly  [11,  34-36]. 
However, there is a lack of empirical evidence into the main character and supporting 
character choices—speculations on the advantages of each character perspective can be 
found in [15, 17]. 

A rare example of immersive story design research beyond character perspective and 
user attention direction involved the identification of story elements broadly conducive 
to immersion [16], although these are based on the researchers’ perspective  rather than 
insight from viewers. The only research into immersive story design pertinent to viewer 
attitudes around a health issue, to the authors’ knowledge, studied the impact of broadly 
conceptualized “emotional content” [8]. 

4 

Ultimately, there persists a need for  empirical  research that identifies elements of 
immersive story design that viewers consider impactful to their experience, especially 
their attitudes towards exhibited public health issues. Our study pursued the following 
research questions: 

1. What elements of immersive story design do viewers consider influential to their 

attitudes towards the health information being conveyed? 

2. How do these elements impact viewers’ perceptions of the health information? 
3. In what ways could immersive story design for health be improved so that health 

information impacts viewers’ attitudes as intended? 

3  Method 

To  explore  the  research  questions,  we  conducted  a  focus  group  study  with  147 
participants about an immersive story depicting binge drinking and its negative health 
consequences.  Participants  were  graduate  and  undergraduate  students  (mean  age  = 
22.14, SD = 4.05) recruited from a medium-sized public university in the Midwest of 
the  United  States,  and  were  compensated  with  extra  course  credit.  Participants 
identified as White (77.6%), Black (10.9%), Asian (6.8%), Hispanic (2.7%), and other 
(2.0%). Regarding gender, 50.3% identified as male and 49.7% as female. 

3.1  The Immersive Story 

Binge drinking was chosen as the focal health issue based on its severity and prevalence 
[24],  particularly  amongst  our  participant  demographic  of  young  adults  [25].  Binge 
drinking  is  a  pattern  of  drinking  alcoholic  beverages  that  brings  a  person’s  blood 
alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 g/dL; typically 4+ drinks for women and 5+ for 
men [37].  

The immersive story about binge drinking used in the study [38, 39] was selected 
because it represents common immersive story design choices: a first-person point of 
view, the ability to select a character perspective, gaze manipulation around a 360° field 
of vision, and a duration that is 10 minutes or less [15] (this particular story is 6 minutes 
in duration).  

The story centers on Greg, who engages in binge drinking at a house party hosted by 
his friend Stephanie because he is moving away for a new job. Greg drinks 11 alcoholic 
beverages over a 5-hour period (a mix of beer, wine, and shots), which is conveyed by 
intermittent cuts to a black screen that shows a number of alcoholic beverages  being 
added to a table with a time stamp. Greg’s intoxication is exhibited with blurred and 
slowed vision later in the story. Stephanie observes and interacts with Greg throughout 
the story, eventually helping him to a couch to fall asleep. In the morning Stephanie 
finds Greg unresponsive due to alcohol poisoning and calls an ambulance.  

The video  opens with text content about  the  definition of binge drinking, and its 
potential health consequences including alcohol poisoning. After the immersive story 
is experienced the video ends with text information about the severity of binge drinking.  

 
5 

There  are  two  versions  of  the  immersive  story  that  vary  based  on  character 
perspective,  but  otherwise  have  identical  plots  and  information.  In  one  version,  the 
viewer experiences the story through the eyes of Greg, and in the other through the eyes 
of Stephanie.  

3.2  Data Collection and Analysis 

Focus  group  discussions  were  the  second  stage  in  a  broader study  about  immersive 
stories for health; the first stage (an experiment on character perspective) necessitated 
that  participants  experience  the  binge  drinking  immersive  story  on  Youtube  either 
through a VR headset or smart phone, and either from Greg’s perspective or Stephanie’s 
perspective (rendering 4 different conditions that participants were evenly allocated to). 
On a smartphone the viewer moves the handheld device in any direction to manipulate 
their character’s gaze; on the VR headset the viewer moves their head to manipulate 
gaze (See Fig. 1). All participants used headphones for the immersive story’s audio. 
Focus  groups  were  conducted  on  the  university  campus  in  two  separate  rooms 
immediately  after  participants  viewed  the  immersive  story  and  filled  out  a  survey 
regarding the experience for the first stage of the study. One room was for participants 
who viewed the immersive story through a smart phone, and the other for VR headsets. 
The 147 participants were split across 15 focus group sessions, ranging from 4 to 20 
participants each. Session lengths ranged from 15 to 25 minutes, as determined by level 
of disagreement or debate amongst participants. 

Focus group discussions opened with participants describing the overall experience 
of viewing  the  immersive story, and then recollecting (and sometimes debating)  the 
plot of the immersive story in their own words. Participants were prompted to discuss 
their attitudes and understanding of the story, the characters (Greg and Stephanie), and 
the health-related behavior exhibited (binge drinking).  

All focus group discussions were voice recorded and transcribed. A team of  five 
researchers  held  recurrent,  synchronous  sessions  for  inductive  open  coding  of  the 
transcripts [40], followed by organization of emergent themes using axial coding, and 
then finalization of the code mapping and hierarchy.  

Fig. 1. Manipulating character gaze on a VR headset (left) versus a smartphone (right) 

 
 
 
6 

4 

Findings 

Participants’ attitudes and perceptions towards the health information provided in the 
binge drinking immersive story were mixed. Some expressed a reluctance to engage in 
excessive  drinking  after  watching.  Others,  however,  were  skeptical  of  the  health 
impacts of binge drinking as depicted in the immersive story, and were either confused 
by the behavior or interpreted the behavior as justified. 

Participants  referenced  two  overarching  aspects  of  immersive  story  design  as 
influential to their attitudes and perceptions about binge drinking: 1) health behavior 
design, which comprises aspects of an immersive story that serve to convey and explain 
the  focal  health  behavior;  and  2)  supporting character  design,  which  comprises  the 
actions  of  a  character  who  observes  the  detrimental  health  behavior  (but  does  not 
personally engage in it) and how that character’s role is understood by viewers. The 
coding process did not reveal any themes unique to viewing the immersive story in a 
VR  headset  or  mobile  phone.  There  were  some  differences  based  on  character 
perspective, which are noted throughout the findings. 

4.1  Health Behavior Design 

Axial coding partitioned health behavior design into three sub-concepts: the context of 
the focal behavior (where and why it happens), engagement in the behavior, and health 
consequences of the behavior. 

Context of the Behavior. Most participants understood that Greg was drinking a large 
amount of alcohol, but they reported needing to know his reasons or “backstory” for 
excessive drinking in order to fully empathize with the character. This backstory would 
be distinct from contextual information that explains why characters would be drinking 
alcohol in general. Participants universally understood the going-away party context 
due  to  the  house  setting  and  party  guests  visible  around  the  virtual  environment. 
However they did not consider the virtual environment to offer much information to 
contextualize  Greg’s  excessive  drinking  relative  to  other  characters.  In  lieu  of  this 
information,  participants  invented  their  own  backstories  for  Greg’s  drinking  that 
usually involved a need to “escape” real world problems, such as family drama, fights 
with  other  partygoers,  and  sadness  about  moving  away.  These  speculations  were 
sometimes used to justify Greg’s behavior and (as will be reported later) shift the blame 
for Greg’s hospitalization to the party host, Stephanie. 

“A lot of people drink to escape, you don’t know what he was going through in the 
video, it never exactly said why he was drinking so much. He was moving, he probably 
could’ve been sad about moving away.” (Smartphone, Greg’s perspective, female) 

“And the other thing, one thing for me personally, that I just think would have added 
something to the level of empathy for the characters - if I knew their backstory, in the 
sense of like, why is Greg drinking so much? [Was it] a fight? Did he have a bad history 
with his family? Was there a reason for that?” (VR headset, Greg’s perspective, male) 
Relatedly,  some  participants  wanted  to  know  the  amount  of  alcohol  that  Greg 
typically drinks at parties, speculating that he may not have been aware of his limits. “I 

 
 
7 

would like to know if he got drunk more in the past, that same amount or was that his 
first time drinking a whole lot?” (VR headset, Greg’s perspective, female) 

Several  participants  scanned  the  360°  environment  for  explanations  of  Greg’s 
excessive drinking. Some assessed the party to consider how they would have acted in 
a  similar  situation.  As  one  participant  put  it:  “The  environment  didn’t  feel  joyous 
anyway, like it’s a party but this seems like a really lame party. Like I would’ve been 
just drinking too” (Smartphone, Greg’s perspective, male). Critical perceptions of the 
party were influenced by the number of partygoers (approximately 10 people are seen 
throughout the house) and their activities (conversation and light dancing), which some 
participants  considered  incongruent  with  parties  they  had  personally  attended  that 
involved heavy drinking. 

A few of these participants expressed frustration with scanning the environment for 
contextual  information.  While  there  were  various  audible  cues  throughout  the  story 
prompting  viewers  to  redirect  their  attention,  some  were  hesitant  to  explore  them 
because they feared missing vital plot information happening in their immediate field 
of  vision.  This  hesitance  to  redirect  attention  was  most  pronounced  in  scenes when 
someone  was  directly  interacting  with  the  viewer’s  character,  because  it  would 
normally  be  considered  rude  to  redirect  visual  attention  while  in  the  middle  of 
conversation. 

“And I think in terms of having a 360 experience, it's kind of strange because a lot 
of  times  when  you're  engaging  with  someone,  you're  engaging  straight,  you're  not 
looking over here [referencing an area in the periphery]. Most people will be focused 
on what's going on in front of them, versus what's going on behind them.” (VR headset, 
Stephanie’s perspective, male) 

Some participants reported that they stopped reacting to audible cues around them 
because  they found prior cues  to be uninteresting  or uninformative to the plot when 
they sought out their sources. “…there was nothing really interesting to look at, like on 
the other side [of the 360 degree environment when I looked]. So it's like, I didn't move 
around  as  much  [afterwards  because]  I  didn't  expect  there  to  be  something  very 
important.” (Smartphone, Greg’s perspective, male)  

A few participants suggested that visual  directional signals could be added to the 
immersive  story  interface  to  help  users  identify  cue  sources  faster  and  therefore 
minimize attention redirected from their current focus. 

Engagement in the Behavior. Greg’s engagement in binge  drinking was conveyed 
through frequent transitions to a black screen with a table that progressively had more 
drinks added to it throughout the story, with time stamps associated with the drinks. 
Some participants reported confusion with this format of information. This was usually 
due to doubts as to whether Greg was actually consuming all of these drinks, or merely 
being offered them by friends and potentially not finishing them.  

“They were trying to symbolize how much he was drinking with a black screen and 
like drinks plopped down,  obviously. That was, I feel like we didn't visually see that 
when we’re seeing it from his perspective. [...] I didn't see him drinking that much. 
Where  I  was  like,  this  doesn’t  seem  to  be  following  like,  how  much  he’s  actually 
drinking compared to what they're trying to illustrate him drinking. I think it's just for 

 
8 

visual factors like, beer! Shot! Is he really drinking all of that?” (Smartphone, Greg’s 
perspective, female) 

Some participants admitted having “no clue” as to how much alcohol Greg actually 
consumed  prior  to  hospitalization,  which  complicated  their  understanding  of  binge 
drinking. Some also felt the black screen “cut scenes” were interruptions that detracted 
from  immersion  in  the  story.  A  few  suggested  that  removing  these  cut  scenes  and 
instead  being  able  to  witness  Greg  consume  the  drinks  would  have  been a  superior 
choice for conveying the binge drinking behavior. 

“The cuts in between where they told you what time it was kind of un-immersed me 
from it a little bit. Okay. I feel like if they didn't do that, and just had me following the 
one character the whole time without interruption, might have been a little bit more 
convincing.” (Smartphone, male) 

Health  Consequences  of  the  Behavior.  The  alcohol  poisoning  and  hospitalization 
experienced by Greg at the end of the immersive story were met with some skepticism 
and  confusion  by  participants.  This  was  sometimes  attributed  to  an  overly  rapid 
transition from “drunk to dead” which did not match participants’ personal experiences 
with excessive drinking, and led some to suspect that factors other than binge drinking 
contributed to Greg’s hospitalization.   

“It didn't really seem totally convincing that he just went from drunk to dead. So 
maybe that's why I didn't think it was binge drinking because it didn't seem as drastic 
as we usually picture when you're doing something like that.”  (Smartphone, Greg’s 
perspective, male) 

“Because of how fast it was. I'll be very honest. I thought there was like a drug in 
those  drinks  because  it  just  took  off  so  quickly.  Like  I  thought  maybe  he  spiked  the 
drinks or something or someone spiked drinks.” (VR headset, Greg’s perspective, male) 
Relatedly, participants were confused about Greg’s alcohol poisoning because of the 
absence of visible escalating health symptoms. While participants who experienced the 
story  from  Greg’s  perspective  routinely  noted  the  blurred  and  slowed  vision  as  a 
symptom  of  his  drunkenness,  several  expected  progressively  worse  symptoms 
indicative of alcohol poisoning. Vomiting was the most commonly expected symptom. 
“The fact that he was fine, then he got a little blurry and it just went from that to 
passing out. Like I, that doesn’t happen. […] I feel like, when I’ve witnessed people 
who drink to excess they get really sick and they like to throw up.” (Smartphone, Greg’s 
perspective, female) 

“I didn’t connect with it as much because of the progression. Like alcohol poisoning 
you  usually  start  throwing  up  first.  Other  things  happen  before  you’re  just  like 
gone.”(Smartphone, female) 

Participants from Stephanie’s perspective echoed a need for information that Greg 
had transitioned from drunkenness (which they did not consider in need of intervention) 
to  alcohol  poisoning.  Some  of  them  wondered  aloud  if  they  had  missed  scenes 
visualizing  symptoms  of  alcohol  poisoning,  or  if  Greg’s  hospitalization  was  simply 
unavoidable given the absence of signs for intervention.  

 
9 

“I just have a question, [about] Greg’s thing [the participant references to the entire 
room]. Was he showing signs like alcohol poisoning? It's like vomiting and twitching 
and stuff like that.” (VR headset, Stephanie’s perspective, female) 

4.2 

Supporting Character Design 

Supporting character design refers to the design of characters who viewers can assume 
the perspective of, but who do not personally engage in the focal health behavior of the 
story.  In  this  immersive  story’s  case,  Stephanie  would  be  the  supporting  character. 
While  the  immersive story  intended  to  focus  participants  on Greg’s  binge  drinking, 
participants  who  assumed  Stephanie’s  perspective  talked  more  about  her  behavior 
during focus groups. They exhibited a tendency to assign Stephanie a “role” in the story, 
which had implications on how they interpreted her actions and Greg’s binge drinking. 
The majority of participants understood Stephanie’s role to a  “good friend.” This 
carried an understanding that she would look after Greg and either prevent him from 
drinking too much, or force him to drink water throughout the party. Almost all of these 
participants thought that Stephanie failed to effectively take care of Greg; they  were 
more critical of her behavior than Greg’s, and in some cases blamed her for Greg’s 
hospitalization. 

“If you’re a really good friend or just even a friend in general I just truly believe she 
would be like, ‘hey stop drinking, here’s the water’ you know. She was good friends 
with him already. She knew he was drunk, like, a good friend would at least offer him 
a cup of water, at least check on him to see…” (VR headset, Stephanie’s perspective, 
male) 

The  mechanism  behind  how  participants  arrived  at  their  understanding  of 
Stephanie’s role seemed to have been a comparison to how they would act in similar 
situations of observing a friend drink to excess. While some used this comparison to 
admonish  Stephanie’s  lack  of  intervention,  others  expressed  curiosity  about  her 
“personality” and wanted to know more about her choices. 

“I would have liked to have known her character better, being put into her shoes, 
because I still have my whole personality and no idea of her personality. So, I would 
give my friend water. I would lay next to my friend on the couch. And I don't really 
understand why she didn't do that.” (VR headset, Stephanie’s perspective, female) 

A few participants shared in critique of Stephanie, but from an understanding that 
her character was designed to be the cause of Greg’s drinking. They all pointed to the 
lack of attention that Stephanie gave to Greg, which—from their understanding—made 
him feel lonely and prone to drinking. One participant elaborated on this loneliness by 
suggesting that Greg was in love with Stephanie. 

“This dude’s girl, they’re about to fight over what this [relationship] is. It looks like 
every  time  he  was  drinking  he  was  alone  and  drinking  or  he  just  wanted  Steph’s 
attention for the most part. That’s what it seemed like. And then since he wasn’t getting 
any he just kept drinking. And I’m like this is a sad love story.” (Smartphone, Greg’s 
perspective, male)  

Not all participants were critical of Stephanie’s actions. Some participants reasoned 
that being the party host prevented her from giving too much attention to any one party 

 
10 

guest. They also made common reference to Greg and Stephanie as “adults” who are 
responsible for their own decisions, and that it would not have been appropriate for 
Stephanie to try to control Greg’s drinking. 

“There’s a bunch of people here [at the party] that she can't like, he’s a grown man 
and he doesn’t need someone watching him.”  (Smartphone, Stephanie’s perspective, 
female) 

“You can't tell your friends what to do because people are going to do whatever they 

want to do.” (Smartphone, Stephanie’s perspective, female) 

5 

Limitations 

There  are  some  limitations  to  this  focus  group  study  that should  be  noted.  For  one, 
participants’ attitudes  towards binge drinking and the immersive story could have been 
influenced by other participants, meaning the opinions of the most vocal participants—
or those first to speak—could have been overemphasized. In addition, while our sample 
does  align  with  victim  demographics  of  binge  drinking  [25],  the  attitudes  and 
perceptions of our sample may not generalize to other viewer demographics, such as 
those  not  in  college,  those  from  largely  minority  populations,  those  outside  of  the 
United States, and those outside of the early/mid-20s age range. The study also included 
only one immersive story, and it is unclear if or how the findings may generalize to 
other  types  of  immersive  stories  and  for  different  focal  health  behaviors.  Lastly,  it 
cannot  be  known  with  our  study’s  design  whether  viewers’  attitudes  towards  binge 
drinking affected their subsequent  drinking behavior—we thus reiterate a distinction 
between attitudes and behavior post-immersive story consumption. 

6 

Discussion 

We conducted a focus group study with 147 viewers of an immersive story about binge 
drinking to identify aspects of immersive story design that influence attitudes towards 
public  health  issues,  and  more  broadly  to  understand  how  health  information  is 
consumed in immersive stories. The study elucidated two aspects of immersive story 
design  critical  to  viewer  attitudes  and  comprehension  of  binge  drinking:  1)  health 
behavior design, including the context of the behavior, engagement in the behavior, and 
escalation of health repercussions; and 2) supporting character design: the impact of a 
character who the viewer can assume the perspective of, but who does not personally 
engage in the detrimental health behavior, on the viewer’s attention and judgment of 
the behavior.  In this section we reflect on how the findings inform immersive story 
design practices, and open questions that they raise. 

6.1  Design Constraints of Story Duration 

Immersive stories are touted for their capacity to instill a sense of presence  [4] in a 
virtual environment that enables viewers to develop empathy for virtual characters [17, 
30] and experience the unfolding story as if it were personally happening to them [32]. 

 
11 

Our participants confirmed this potential and indicated that they wanted to feel empathy 
for the characters, but they often failed to do so. A downside of “being there” in a virtual 
world is that viewers expect the same depth of information that would be customary in 
the real world to contextualize and comprehend an experience that is really happening 
to them. This expectation was most apparent in demands for reasons behind the binge 
drinking  behavior,  direct  observation  of  alcohol  consumption,  and  an  accurate 
escalation of alcohol poisoning symptoms—all of which the immersive story failed to 
provide, according to participants. 

An  impediment  to  immersive  stories  simply  adding  additional  content  to  satisfy 
these  empathic  information  needs  is  video  duration.  Immersive  stories  are  typically 
around  10  minutes  in  duration  or  shorter.  Larsen  suggests  immersive  stories  are 
restricted  to  this  length  because  of  general  discomfort  with  VR  headsets  [15].  One 
alternative,  also  posed  by  Larsen  [15],  is  a  serialized  narrative  made  up  of  multiple 
videos, but there is much uncertainty as to whether a viewer would actively select the 
next video to watch (this can be problematic to viewer comprehension if subsequent 
videos contain vital health information and context). This problem is likely to persist 
for viewers on mobile devices as well, who  are familiar with shorter-form media on 
social networking apps and are subject to distraction from their surroundings and phone 
notifications. 

Immersive  story  designers  should  consider  ways  to  encapsulate  viewer-expected 
information about a health behavior into a relatively short (linear) duration. This poses 
particular challenges for conveying public health issues that progress over several hours 
or even days. Design decisions that are ineffective according to our study are cut scenes 
that  indirectly  convey  engagement  in  the  focal  behavior  (e.g.,  a  black  screen  that 
quantifies the number of alcoholic beverages consumed) and bypassing typical health 
symptoms to progress to the penultimate health consequence faster. Designers should, 
at  a  minimum,  prioritize  conveyance  of  context  (i.e.,  reasons)  for  the  character’s 
behavior, direct engagement in the behavior, and all of its standard escalating health 
symptoms. 

6.2  Design Considerations for the Supporting Character Perspective 

The  immersive  story  literature  has  elaborated  on  a  variety  of  character  perspective 
options  that  designers  can  choose  from  (i.e.,  the  eyes  through  which  a  viewer 
experiences  the  story).  These  options  include  non-character  observer,  the  main 
character  (i.e.,  the  character  that  engages  in  the  focal  behavior),  and  a  supporting 
character (a character that observes the focal behavior, but does not personally engage 
in  it)  [11,  15,  17].  Arguments  for  the  supporting  character  perspective  posit  that  it 
enables viewers to develop empathy for others as opposed to oneself (Kors et al., 2018), 
and  facilitates  explorability  of  the  virtual  environment  without  losing  narrative 
coherence because the supporting character is not personally engaging in plot-driving 
acts [15]. These arguments frame the supporting character purely as an observer whose 
own actions have no consequence on the story or the viewer’s comprehension of it. Our 
findings  indicate  that  supporting  characters  play  a  more  active  role  in  the  eyes  of 
viewers. 

 
12 

In our study’s immersive story, the supporting character was Stephanie, a party host 
who observed the main character’s (Greg’s) binge drinking behavior and found him 
unresponsive  from  alcohol  poisoning.  Our  participants  were  just  as  attentive  to 
Stephanie’s actions as to Greg’s, and in many cases were more critical of her lack of 
intervention  into  Greg’s  drinking  than  the  actual  binge  drinking  behavior.  Merely 
observing a main character’s behavior, in this sense, was considered a (non-)action in 
itself, or a conscious behavioral choice from the supporting character. It became the 
focal point of viewers’ attention when the character’s absence of intervention into the 
binge drinking behavior deviated from how viewers would have acted in that situation. 
This  finding  emphasizes  that  immersive  story  designers  need  to  be  attentive  to 
supporting character design, and recognize that passive observance of a situation can 
be considered the character’s conscious behavioral choice.  

The sense of embodiment that viewers may feel when they view a story through a 
character’s eyes has traditionally been seen as an advantage of VR experiences  [41–
44]. However, a non-character observer perspective that removes the viewer from any 
sense of embodying a character may be superior if the designer wishes the viewer to 
passively observe a situation. Otherwise viewers  may redirect their attention to how 
their embodied character does or does not utilize their opportunity to alter the events 
unfolding. 

6.3  Designing Attention Cues 

Managing  viewer  attention  has  been  a  persistent  concern  in  the  immersive  story 
literature [10, 12, 14, 20, 21]. Story designers and viewers fear that vital plot points and 
information will be missed if the viewer exercises their ability to visually explore their 
360°  field  of  vision.  Our  participants  certainly  shared  in  this  concern.  Designs  for 
directing  viewer  attention  have  been  posed  and  tested  in  prior  research  [21,  22], 
typically in regards to how the attention cue is generated (e.g., visual cue, audio cue). 
Our  study  introduces  another  dimension  to  attentional  design:  the  viewer-perceived 
value of the information being cued.  

The binge drinking immersive story viewed by our participants featured a variety of 
audio cues, but some participants reported ignoring later cues because the information 
gathered when they sought out prior cues was considered uninteresting or inapplicable 
to the plot. This begs the question: should immersive story designs attempt to redirect 
the viewer’s attention at all for non-essential plot information? If viewers are dismayed 
by the value of early nonessential cues, they may miss out on other, plot-imperative 
cues later. We  therefore  argue that  immersive story designers should minimize non-
essential attention cues, and consider how to incorporate plot-essential cues  in ways 
that are not perceived to conflict in priority with whatever is in the viewer’s current 
field of vision. 

6.4 

Future Work 

The aforementioned discussion points give researchers and designers several avenues 
for  exploration.  Future  work  should  involve  viewers  in  assessment  of  variations  to 
supporting  character  design  and  health  behavior  design,  as  well  as  continued 

 
 
13 

identification of latent or overlooked immersive story elements influential to viewer 
perception.  Considering  that  the  present  study  focused  only  on  viewers’  attitudes 
towards binge drinking, and immediately after experiencing the immersive story, future 
work  can  and  should  explore  long  term  impacts  of  immersive  story  experience  on 
viewers’ actual behaviors regarding the focal health issue.  

7 

Conclusion 

Immersive  stories  for  health—or  360°  videos  that  convey  narrative  about  a  public 
health issue— have the potential to influence public health at scale because they enable 
viewers  to  viscerally  experience  the  consequences  of  a  detrimental  health  behavior 
without experiencing real harm. This paper reported a focus group study that facilitated 
viewers  of  an  immersive  story  about  binge  drinking  in  elucidating  elements  of 
immersive story design most impactful to their attitudes towards the respective health 
behavior. Findings provide insight on: 1) health behavior design: how context of the 
behavior is sought by viewers, how engagement in the behavior is perceived, and how 
health repercussions are comprehended; and 2) supporting character design: the impact 
of a secondary character’s behavior on the viewer’s attention and judgment of the focal 
health  behavior.  Ultimately,  while  immersive  stories  hold  promise  for  positively 
impacting  public  health,  the  study  demonstrates  that  immersive  stories  can  have 
minimal or adverse impact on viewer attitudes if their design is not closely considered.  

Acknowledgements 

We thank Devin Yang, Stephen Davidson, and Rukkmini Goli for their data analysis 
contributions.  We  also  thank  Ryan  Handley  for  his  artistic  contributions  in  creating 
Figure 1 for this paper.  

References 

1.  

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

Slater, M., Sanchez-Vives, M. V: Enhancing Our Lives with Immersive Virtual Reality. 
Front. Robot. AI. 3, 74 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2016.00074 
Steuer,  J.:  Defining  Virtual  Reality:  Dimensions  Determining  Telepresence.  J. 
Commun. 42, 73–93 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1992.tb00812.x 
Lee,  K.M.:  Presence,  Explicated.  Commun.  Theory.  14,  27–50 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2004.tb00302.x 
Lombard, M., Ditton, T.: At the Heart of It All: The Concept of Presence. J. Comput. 
Commun. 3, 0–0 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.1997.tb00072.x 
Hendriks Vettehen, P., Wiltink, D., Huiskamp, M., Schaap, G., Ketelaar, P.: Taking the 
full view: How viewers respond to 360-degree video news. Comput. Human Behav. 91, 
24–32 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.09.018 
Ma,  Z.:  The  use  of  immersive  stories  to  influence  college  students’  attitudes  and 
intentions  related  to  drinking  and  driving.  J.  Am.  Coll.  Heal.  Advance  on,  (2020). 

(2004). 

14 

7.  

8.  

9.  

10.  

11.  

12.  

13.  

14.  

15.  

16.  

17.  

18.  

19.  

20.  

24, 

film 

Cogn. 

Emot. 

1439–1445 

https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.2020.1842418 
Ahn, S.J.G., Fox, J.: Immersive Virtual Environments, Avatars, and Agents for Health. 
In: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Communication. Oxford University Press (2017) 
Fonseca, D., Kraus, M.: A comparison of head-mounted and hand-held displays for 360° 
videos  with  focus  on  attitude  and  behavior  change.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  20th 
International  Academic  Mindtrek  Conference.  pp.  287–296.  ACM,  New  York,  NY, 
USA (2016) 
Visch, V.T., Tan, E.S., Molenaar, D.: The emotional and cognitive effect of immersion 
in 
(2010). 
viewing. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930903498186 
Passmore, P.J., Glancy, M., Philpot, A., Roscoe, A., Wood, A., Fields, B.: Effects of 
viewing condition on user experience of panoramic video. In: International Conference 
on  Artificial  Reality  and  Telexistence  and  Eurographics  Symposium  on  Virtual 
Environments, ICAT-EGVE 2016. pp. 9–16. The Eurographics Association (2016) 
Bindman,  S.W.,  Castaneda,  L.M.,  Scanlon,  M.,  Cechony,  A.:  Am  I  a  Bunny?  In: 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 
1–11. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2018) 
MacQuarrie, A., Steed, A.: Cinematic virtual reality: Evaluating the  effect of display 
type  on  the  viewing  experience  for  panoramic  video.  In:  2017  IEEE  Virtual  Reality 
(VR). pp. 45–54. IEEE (2017) 
Baños, R.M., Botella, C., Alcañiz, M., Liaño, V., Guerrero, B., Rey, B.: Immersion and 
Emotion: Their Impact on the Sense of Presence. CyberPsychology Behav. 7, 734–741 
(2004). https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2004.7.734 
Tse, A., Jennett, C., Moore, J., Watson, Z., Rigby, J., Cox, A.L.: Was I there? Impact of 
platform  and  headphones  on  360  video  immersion.  In:  Proceedings of  the  2017  CHI 
conference extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems. pp. 2967–2974 
(2017) 
Larsen, M.: Virtual sidekick: Second-person POV in narrative VR. J. screenwriting. 9, 
73–83 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1386/josc.9.1.73_1 
Elmezeny,  A.,  Edenhofer,  N.,  Wimmer,  J.:  Immersive  Storytelling  in  360-Degree 
Videos:  An  Analysis  of  Interplay  Between  Narrative  and  Technical  Immersion.  J. 
Virtual Worlds Res. 11, (2018). https://doi.org/10.4101/jvwr.v11i1.7298 
Kors, M.J., van der Spek, E.D., Ferri, G., Schouten, B.A.: You; the Observer, Partaker 
or  Victim.  Delineating  Three  Perspectives  to  Empathic  Engagement  in  Persuasive 
Games using Immersive Technologies. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium 
on Computer-Human Interaction in Play Companion Extended Abstracts. pp. 493–501. 
ACM, New York, NY, USA (2018) 
Cho, J., Lee, T.-H., Ogden, J., Stewart, A., Tsai, T.-Y., Chen, J., Vituccio, R.: Imago: 
presence and emotion in virtual reality. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2016 VR Village. pp. 1–
2. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2016) 
Dahlstrom, M.F., Niederdeppe, J., Gao, L., Zhu, X.: Operational and Conceptual Trends 
in  Narrative  Persuasion  Research:  Comparing  Health-and  Non-Health-Related 
Contexts. Int. J. Commun. 11, (2017) 
Syrett, H., Calvi, L., van Gisbergen, M.: The Oculus Rift Film Experience: A Case Study 
on Understanding Films in a Head Mounted Display. In: International Conference on 

15 

Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment. pp. 197–208 (2017) 
Nielsen, L.T., Møller, M.B., Hartmeyer, S.D., Ljung, T.C.M., Nilsson, N.C., Nordahl, 
R.,  Serafin,  S.:  Missing  the  point.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  22nd  ACM  Conference  on 
Virtual Reality Software and Technology. pp. 229–232. ACM, New York, NY, USA 
(2016) 
Sheikh, A., Brown, A., Evans, M., Watson, Z.: Directing attention in 360-degree video. 
In: IBC 2016 Conference. Institution of Engineering and Technology (2016) 
Gugenheimer,  J.,  Wolf,  D.,  Haas,  G.,  Krebs,  S.,  Rukzio,  E.:  SwiVRChair.  In: 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 
1996–2000. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2016) 
Stahre, M., Roeber, J., Kanny, D., Brewer, R.D., Zhang, X.: Contribution of Excessive 
Alcohol Consumption to Deaths and Years of Potential Life Lost in the United States. 
Prev. Chronic Dis. 11, 130293 (2014). https://doi.org/10.5888/pcd11.130293 
Kanny,  D.,  Naimi,  T.S.,  Liu,  Y.,  Lu,  H.,  Brewer,  R.D.:  Annual  Total  Binge  Drinks 
Consumed  by  U.S.  Adults,  2015.  Am.  J.  Prev.  Med.  54,  486–496  (2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2017.12.021 
Ma,  Z.,  Zytko,  D.:  Perspective-Taking  with  the  Risk  Taker  in  an  Immersive  Story 
Increases Psychological Reactance and Decreases Persuasion. In: Kentucky Conference 
on Health Communication (2020) 
Mateer, J.: Directing for Cinematic Virtual Reality: how the traditional film director’s 
craft applies to immersive environments and notions of presence. J.  Media Pract. 18, 
14–25 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1080/14682753.2017.1305838 
VR Films, http://unvr.sdgactioncampaign.org/vr-films/#.X4tw0EJKhBx 
A Walk Through Dementia, https://www.awalkthroughdementia.org/ 
Shin, D.: Empathy and embodied experience in virtual environment: To what extent can 
virtual reality stimulate empathy and embodied experience? Comput. Human Behav. 78, 
64–73 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.09.012 
Breves,  P.:  Bringing  People  Closer:  The  Prosocial  Effects  of  Immersive  Media  on 
Users’  Attitudes  and  Behavior.  Nonprofit  Volunt.  Sect.  Q.  49,  1015–1034  (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0899764020903101 
Ma,  Z.:  Effects  of  immersive  stories  on  prosocial  attitudes  and  willingness  to  help: 
(2020). 
testing  psychological  mechanisms.  Media  Psychol.  23,  865–890 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2019.1651655 
Jones,  S.,  Dawkins,  S.:  Walking  in  someone  else’s  shoes:  creating  empathy  in  the 
practice  of 
(2018). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/25741136.2018.1520538 
de la Hera Conde-Pumpido, T.: A conceptual model for the study of persuasive games. 
In: Proceedings of DiGRA 2013: DeFragging Game Studies (2013) 
Herrera, F., Bailenson, J., Weisz, E., Ogle, E., Zaki, J.: Building long-term empathy: A 
large-scale comparison of traditional and virtual reality perspective-taking. PLoS One. 
13, e0204494 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0204494 
Moyer-Gusé,  E.:  Toward  a  Theory  of  Entertainment  Persuasion:  Explaining  the 
Persuasive Effects of Entertainment-Education Messages. Commun. Theory. 18, 407–
425 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2008.00328.x 
approves 
NIAAA 

film.  Media  Pract.  Educ.  19,  298–312 

immersive 

definition 

drinking, 

council 

binge 

of 

21.  

22.  

23.  

24.  

25.  

26.  

27.  

28.  
29.  
30.  

31.  

32.  

33.  

34.  

35.  

36.  

37.  

16 

38.  

39.  

40.  

41.  

42.  

43.  

44.  

– 

Steph’s 

–  Greg’s 

Perspective, 

Perspective, 

Party’s  Over 

Party’s  Over 

J.  Comput.  Commun.  3,  0–0 

https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/Newsletter_Number3.p
df 
Diageo  DRINKiQ:  Decisions: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQl_NVT9P0Y 
Diageo  DRINKiQ:  Decisions: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2JI-ws-FA5E 
Charmaz,  K.,  Belgrave,  L.,  others:  Qualitative  interviewing  and  grounded  theory 
analysis. SAGE Handb. interview Res. Complex. Cr. 2, 347–365 (2012) 
Biocca, F.: The Cyborg’s Dilemma: Progressive Embodiment in Virtual Environments 
[1]. 
(2006).  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-
6101.1997.tb00070.x 
Slater, M., Spanlang, B., Sanchez-Vives, M. V, Blanke, O.: First Person Experience of 
Body  Transfer 
(2010). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0010564 
Kilteni,  K.,  Groten,  R.,  Slater,  M.:  The  Sense  of  Embodiment  in  Virtual  Reality. 
(2012). 
Virtual 
Teleoperators 
Presence 
https://doi.org/10.1162/PRES_a_00124 
Peck, T.C., Seinfeld, S., Aglioti, S.M., Slater, M.: Putting yourself in the skin of a black 
avatar  reduces 
implicit  racial  bias.  Conscious.  Cogn.  22,  779–787  (2013). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.04.016 

in  Virtual  Reality.  PLoS  One. 

373–387 

Environ. 

e10564 

21, 

5, 

 
 
