Effects of Task Type and Wall Appearance on
Collision Behavior in Virtual Environments

1st Sebastian Cmentowski
High Performance Computing Group
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
sebastian.cmentowski@uni-due.de

2nd Jens Krüger
High Performance Computing Group
University of Duisburg-Essen
Duisburg, Germany
jens.krueger@uni-due.de

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
4
8
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Driven by the games community, virtual reality
setups have lately evolved into affordable and consumer-ready
mobile headsets. However, despite these promising improvements,
it remains challenging to convey immersive and engaging VR
games as players are usually limited to experience the virtual
world by vision and hearing only. One prominent example of such
open challenges is the disparity between the real surroundings
and the virtual environment. As virtual obstacles usually do
not have a physical counterpart, players might walk through
walls enclosing the level. Thus, past research mainly focussed on
multisensory collision feedback to deter players from ignoring
obstacles. However, the underlying causative reasons for such
unwanted behavior have mostly remained unclear.

Our work investigates how task types and wall appearances
inﬂuence the players’ incentives to walk through virtual walls.
Therefore, we conducted a user study, confronting the partici-
pants with different task motivations and walls of varying opacity
and realism. Our evaluation reveals that players generally adhere
to realistic behavior, as long as the experience feels interesting
and diverse. Furthermore, we found that opaque walls excel in
deterring subjects from cutting short, whereas different degrees
of realism had no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on walking trajectories.
Finally, we use collected player feedback to discuss individual
reasons for the observed behavior.

Index Terms—virtual reality, game design, virtual walls, loco-

motion, collisions, player behavior, walking trajectories

I. INTRODUCTION

Exploring extensive virtual worlds is a challenging task.
Despite the development of more than 100 virtual navigation
techniques, real walking is still considered the gold standard
for VR locomotion [1], [2]. Matching the virtual movement to
the physical steps offers precise control and assures a realistic
and natural experience. However, using the real movement also
introduces additional challenges that must be considered in the
development phase. Although current headsets, such as Oculus
Quest 2 [3], already handle sufﬁcient room-scale tracking of the
head-mounted display (HMD) and the controllers, the disparity
between the virtual world and the real surroundings remains a
problem [4], [5].

These differences between the physical playspace and the
VR scenario typically fall into one of two groups: The ﬁrst are
virtual obstacles, such as walls, that do not have a physical
counterpart. Most VR setups—except speciﬁcally designed lab

978-1-6654-3886-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

environments—do not offer matching haptic proxies for the
virtual objects [6]. Consequently, players could easily grasp
or walk through these immaterial obstacles, which breaks
coherency and might spoil the game experience [7]. In the
other group fall real obstructions, such as a bench standing
in the players’ living room, that are not visible to the players
but pose an imminent risk of injury [4]. Therefore, current
VR systems typically mark the playspace’s borders with easily
identiﬁable virtual walls to deter players from leaving this
area [8].

Even though the dangers in the second case are much more
critical than potential breaks-in-presence [9], both types of
discrepancies between the real and virtual worlds share a
common aspect: Preventing them requires virtual obstacles
that the players do not ignore – be it out of curiosity or in the
attempt to cut short. Past research has approached this issue by
developing various types of auditory, visual, and vibrotactile
feedback to notify players of virtual collisions and deter them
from willfully ignoring walls [7], [10].

However, up to this point, very little work has addressed
the underlying questions: What causes players to not adhere
to the virtual world’s rules in the ﬁrst place? Studies have
indicated that players might ignore virtual obstacles under
speciﬁc circumstances [7], [11], but they have mainly focused
on simple setups and repeating tasks, such as walking be-
tween checkpoints. Other research has shown that players
generally tend to conform to the rules in highly immersive
experiences [12]. Whether the previously observed collisions
are a general phenomenon or are caused by individual properties
of the virtual scenario remains unclear.

Therefore, we explored how different task types and appear-
ances of the virtual walls inﬂuence the players’ incentives to
cut short and walk right through the obstacles. Speciﬁcally,
we conducted a mixed study setup to isolate the observed
effects. The participants played a VR game with two similar
rounds of carrying objects between checkpoints. For the within-
subject part, we varied the task motivation: In one round, the
participants had to solve a puzzle by placing different objects
on the correct checkpoint. The other round did not offer a
similar motive but was designed as a dull and repetitive job. We
combined this design with an additional between-subject part:
Participants were split into four groups, each being confronted

 
 
 
 
 
 
with another wall type, differing in the degree of opacity and
the degree of realism.

Our results indicate that the given task type has the greatest
inﬂuence on player behavior. Most participants ignored the
walls only in the repetitive round to ﬁnish their task faster.
In the more diverse and interesting puzzle level, very few
subjects collided with a single wall. We conclude that players
mostly prefer to stick to realistic behavior and only deviate if
getting bored. Furthermore, our experiment reveals that opaque
surfaces are highly efﬁcient in deterring players from non-
adherent behavior as they feel discouraged from not being
able to see behind the wall before walking through. Lastly,
our different wall designs had a signiﬁcant impact on the
perceived presence. However, this effect did not inﬂuence the
players’ walking behavior as expected. Apart from testing these
three potential factors on collisions in virtual environments, we
collected aural feedback from participants to discuss individual
reasons for the observed behavior.

II. RELATED WORK

In this section, we summarize the relevant prior research to
this work. Therefore, we start by covering the fundamentals
of real walking and locomotion in general. Next, we brieﬂy
address haptic feedback before discussing the current state of
research on virtual collisions and walking trajectories.

A. Walking in Virtual Environments

While non-VR games tend to rely on joystick controls for
locomotion, these are less favorable in VR, as purely virtual
continuous motion is a key factor leading to cybersicknness [13].
Instead, natural walking has emerged as the gold standard
among locomotion techniques in virtual environments. Accu-
rately transferring the players’ steps into the virtual world not
only prevents cybersickness but also feels most realistic and
natural [14]. Furthermore, it results in higher presence levels
compared to other locomotion alternatives such as walking-in-
place [2], [15]. However, natural walking is limited by the play
area’s physical boundaries, making it challenging to achieve
larger explorable virtual environments. Thus, an ever-growing
body of research has focused on overcoming this limitation,
for instance, by developing novel locomotion metaphors [16]
or altering the user’s movements unconsciously [5], [17].

B. Haptics and Surfaces

The virtuality of an immersive experience becomes most
obvious when players interact with the virtual world and its
objects. Touching a wall or grasping an item without feeling
a haptic resistance does not even feel close to the familiar
multisensorial experience in reality. Therefore, research has
focussed on providing surface feedback through passive prox-
ies [18], haptic retargeting [19], electro-tactile feedback [20],
or electrical muscle stimulation [21], [22]. Another promising
approach, which does not require additional hardware, is the
concept of simulated surface constraints [23]: This technique
elicits the impression of resistive virtual objects by simply
displacing the virtual hand from its real counterpart.

C. Virtual Collisions

According to Blom et al. [10], treating virtual collisions
consists of two consecutive parts: collision detection [24] and
collision notiﬁcation. The ﬁrst aspect, collision detection, is
a mostly solved problem in current game engines used for
virtual environments. Therefore, this section focuses on the
latter problem: Collision feedback not only prevents unwanted
penetration of virtual objects, but may also increase the
perceived realism [25].

In reality, we usually notice bumping into objects through
a haptic response. As haptic reactions are mostly missing in
virtual scenarios, research has investigated the effectiveness of
a wide variety of other possible feedback channels, including
vision, sound, and vibrotactile impulses. Among the ﬁrst
to investigate possible collision behaviors, Jacobson and
Lewis [26] altered the users’ movement in the virtual world, e.g.,
by stopping them upon impact. However, such manipulations
do not apply to real walking, where the virtual movement is
always bound to the physical steps.

Therefore, Bloomﬁeld and Badler [27] examined the use
of vibrotactile actuators to convey better collision feedback
and found them more effective than purely visual indicators.
While they used a shirt-based tactorsuit to convey the collision
impressions, other research has achieved comparable effects
with different hardware, such as tactile belts [28]. In a similar
study, Blom et al. [10] compared vibrotactile feedback using
their haptic ﬂoor with sound- and controller-based responses.
Even though auditory notiﬁcations scored worse than the ﬂoor
feedback, Afonso et al. [29] found spatial sounds to be well
suited for preceding collision avoidance.

D. Walking Behavior

A growing body of research has added evidence to the
ﬁnding that people tend to act realistically in virtual scenarios
that conform to reality. This behavior is particularly seen in
situations with high Place Illusion, Plausibility Illusion [12],
and visual realism [30]. These ﬁndings also apply to VR
movement. Ruddle et al. [31] found that using real walking for
locomotion causes users to walk around virtual objects. The
observed obstacle avoidance trajectories generally conform to
real-world walking patterns [32], [33].

Simeone et al. [4] investigated the effects of different ground
textures and virtual obstacles on individual movement behavior.
The reported ﬁndings are closely related to our research
focus: Participants generally hesitated cutting short through
immaterial but solid virtual objects. For the case of collisions,
Boldt et al. [7] presented a multimodal collision feedback
approach combining visual, auditory, and vibrotactile feedback
that effectively deters players from ignoring virtual walls.
Similarly, Ogawa et al. [11] showed that the body-ownership
effect of realistic full-body avatars also discourages users from
penetrating walls.

III. STUDY DESIGN

As explained in the previous section, research has already
dealt with possible ways to deter players from walking through

walls using multisensory collision feedback or virtual avatars.
However, under which circumstances players ignore walls in the
ﬁrst place remains to be investigated. Therefore, we conducted
a study to address the identiﬁed unclear aspects of wall-related
behavior.

A. Research Questions and Hypotheses

Existing studies have mainly relied on strong incentives to cut
short by using heavily repetitive and monotonous tasks [7], [11].
Therefore, our ﬁrst goal was to conﬁrm the players’ behavior
under more engaging circumstances by using an immersive
puzzle-scenario. We hypothesize that more varying tasks lead
to fewer wall collisions than repetitve and annoying missions.
Further, it remains unclear whether the type of virtual
wall inﬂuences the players’ incentives to cut short. Is this
decision connected to the thematic ﬁtting of the wall? Less
well-ﬁtting walls potentially reduce the virtual environment’s
overall authenticity. Since visual realism is one key factor for
conforming behavior according to Slater et al. [30], we assume
that abstract walls provoke players to walk through them more
often.

Another inﬂuencing factor might be the wall’s degree
of opacity. Viewing the target through an obstructing wall
could enforce the players’ decision to cut short. Also, this
characteristic might decrease the Plausibility Illusion [12] and
raise the players’ impression that the wall is safe to pass
through. A similar ﬁnding was already reported by Simeone
et al. [4]. Thus, we assume that partly transparent walls or
obstacles with holes lead to more wall collisions.
In summary, our three hypotheses are as follows:
• H1: Repetitive and monotonous tasks provoke signiﬁcantly
more participants to walk through virtual walls than diverse
tasks.

• H2: Participants walk signiﬁcantly more often through

abstract walls than through realistic walls.

• H3: Opaque surfaces deter more participants from ignoring

virtual obstacles than partly transparent surfaces.

Apart from these hypotheses, we were also interested in the
particular reasons players decide to either ignore walls or follow
real-world’ rules.
• RQ1: How do players decide whether they pass through

virtual walls or walk around them?

B. Wall Design and Testbed Scenario

Based on our hypotheses, the virtual walls used in the
study should differ in degree of realism and degree of opacity.
Considering these requirements, we decided on four wall
designs (see Figure 1). Two of these walls are completely
abstract blocks with a uniform color. These obstacles differ
only in the degree of opacity, with one wall having 30% and the
other 60% opacity. The other two walls are designed to ﬁt the
surrounding scenario thematically. One wall is implemented as
a solid wood wall, thus resulting in full opacity. The other wall
resembles a hedge consisting of twines. Whereas this design
still looks realistic, it offers enough holes to look through it
and creates a similar opacity effect as the abstract walls.

Fig. 1. Our four tested wall designs: Top row: abstract cuboid wall with 30%
opacity (left) and 60% opacity (right). Bottom row: twine hedge with holes
(left) and opaque wood wall (right), both matching the virtual scenario.

In sum, our four wall designs are:
• A30: Abstract wall design with 30% opacity
• A60: Abstract wall design with 60% opacity
• RTH: Realistic twine hedge with holes
• RWW: Realistic and fully opaque wood wall

Our surrounding testbed scenario was realized with the Unity
game engine [34]. The setting is a maritime-themed scenery,
featuring boulders and sunken ships (see Figure 2). Since our
research focussed on natural walking, we restricted the virtual
environment’s size to match our lab, i.e., 16 m2. This limited
area contains four points of interest and three walls, which
– depending on the study condition – match any of the four
styles. The walls separate the interaction points so that the
players would have to either walk through them or make a
detour through the playspace center. We decided against the
fourth wall to avoid cluttering the playspace and producing
unintended wall collisions.

C. Tasks

Testing H1 required two tasks, one diverse and interesting,
and the other highly repetitive. Despite these differences, we
still aimed for a similar structure in both tasks and only changed
the motivation and reasoning behind the required interactions.
Our ﬁrst task is a simple sequential puzzle. The players carry a
single item that must be placed in the correct spot to advance
with the task and obtain the next object. For instance, the
players may use a key to unlock a chest. They are rewarded
with a pearl that must be put into an open shell. These subtasks
are chained into complex puzzle of adequate length and require
the players to constantly walk between the interaction points.
This task resembles repetitive task designs used in previous
studies but adds an engaging motivation and varying inter-
actions, e.g., opening a chest with a key or throwing a coin
into a piggy bank. The second task eliminates these diverse
interactions. Instead, it is just a simple carrying task. Players
must carry a coin in counter-clockwise rotation from one

Fig. 2. Schematic map depicting our testbed environment, featuring four interaction points (P1–P4) and three virtual walls (W1–W3). The images illustrate the
different activities: in the puzzle task (left), items and interactions vary. In the repetitive task (right), participants only move coins between bowls.

interaction point to the other. Whereas this task resembles
the ﬁrst one regarding movement patterns, it is deliberately
designed to feel utterly annoying.

D. Procedure and Applied Measures

We conducted a user study with a mixed design. All
participants were randomly split into four groups, each playing
both tasks with one of the four wall designs. The study was
executed in our VR lab using an HTC Vive Pro [35]. We started
by informing the subjects about the study process without
giving away our research focus. Subsequently, the participants
completed a general questionnaire assessing gender, age, and
prior VR and gaming experiences. Finally, we administered
the Immersive Tendencies Questionnaire (ITQ) [36] to assess
the participants’ tendency to immerse in ﬁction.

After we introduced the participants to our VR equipment,
they played the ﬁrst round. Upon completion, the subjects
removed the HMD and ﬁlled out the IGroup Presence Ques-
tionnaire (IPQ) [37]. We administered the IPQ to assess whether
the wall designs inﬂuence the perceived presence, serving as an
explanatory factor for H2. Subsequently, the subjects returned
to the virtual environment to complete the second task. After
ﬁnishing, the study was closed with a semistructured interview
session to gather the personal reasons for ignoring or avoiding
walls. Additionally, we logged the relevant playing statistics,
such as the players’ speed and walking distance, to conﬁrm
comparability between the two conditions. Finally, we recorded
the timing and number of wall collisions. As participants might
accidentally touch walls without passing them, we only counted
collisions where the headset moved entirely through the wall.

IV. RESULTS

In total, 40 persons (20 female, 20 male) participated in our
study with a mean age of 24.1 (SD = 2.68). The subjects
equally split among nonplayers, occasional players, and regular
gamers, and a majority (75%) of them had already used
VR headsets before. For the between-subject distinction, we
randomly split the participants into four groups (A30: 11, A60:
9, RTH: 10, RWW: 10). Further, we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant

differences regarding age, gender, prior VR experience, or
immersive tendencies according to the ITQ (all p > .05).

To compare the four independent groups, we performed
one-way analyses of variances (ANOVA) for the IPQ measures
and most of the logged data. To meet the requirements, we
ensured normal distribution with Kolmogorov-Smirnov and
homogeneity of variances with Levene’s tests. All measures met
both conditions. This result allowed us to use Tukey’s tests for
all post hoc comparisons. For dichotomous data, i.e., assessing
whether subjects ignored virtual walls, we used chi-squared
tests of independence for comparisons between conditions and
McNemar’s test for comparisons between the two tasks.

A. IPQ

To determine whether our different wall designs affected
the players’ feeling of presence and realism, we assessed all
subscales of the IPQ questionnaire. The results are depicted
in Table I. For the two subdimensions involvement (p = .022)
and realism (p < .001), as well as for the general feeling
of presence (p = .019), the ANOVA indicates a signiﬁcant
difference. Post hoc comparisons indicate that
the RTH
(p = .047; 95% CI[.011, 2.655]) and RWW (p = .029; 95%
CI[.111, 2.755]) conditions led to a signiﬁcantly higher general
presence compared to the more opaque abstract wall (A60).

Furthermore, both realistic wall designs RTH and RWW
provided a signiﬁcantly higher perceived realism compared to
the two abstract conditions A30 and A60, according to post
hoc comparisons (A30/RTH: p = .003; 95% CI[.301, 1.864],
A60/RTH: p = .001; 95% CI[.966, 2.601], A30/RWW:
p = .016; 95% CI[.134, 1.689], A60/RWW: p = .001;
95% CI[.791, 2.426]). For the involvement subscale, only the
difference between the A30 and RWW conditions is signiﬁcant
(p = .027; 95% CI[.127, 2.787]).

B. Logged Data

Apart from assessing the IPQ, we also analyzed the par-
ticipants’ play sessions by logging the individual walking
trajectory, total walking distance, average walking speed, and
wall collisions. The walking distance and walking speed

TABLE I
MEAN SCORES, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND ONE-WAY ANOVA VALUES OF THE IGROUP PRESENCE QUESTIONNAIRE (IPQ) FOR BOTH TASKS.

IPQ (scale: 0 - 6)

Spatial Presence
Involvement
Realism
General

A30 (N = 11)

A60 (N = 9)

RTH (N = 10)

RWW (N = 10)

F(3,36)

ˆω2

p

4.02 (1.09)
3.07 (1.31)
3.11 (0.70)
4.27 (1.27)

3.91 (0.66)
3.33 (0.77)
2.42 (0.47)
3.67 (1.12)

4.68 (0.92)
4.10 (0.90)
4.20 (0.77)
5.00 (1.05)

4.90 (1.10)
4.53 (1.37)
4.03 (0.64)
5.10 (0.74)

2.496
3.631
15.120
3.766

.101
.165
.514
.172

.075
.022
.001
.019

*
**
*

*p < .05, ** p < .01

TABLE II
MEAN SCORES, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND ONE-WAY ANOVA VALUES OF THE LOGGED WALKING DISTANCES, AVERAGE WALKING SPEEDS, AND
AVERAGE NUMBER OF WALL COLLISIONS FOR BOTH TASKS.

A30 (N = 11)

A60 (N = 9)

RTH (N = 10)

RWW (N = 10)

F(3,36)

ˆω2

p

Task 1: Puzzles
Collisions
Walked Distance (m)
Walking Speed (m/s)

Task 2: Moving Coins
Collisions
Walked Distance (m)
Walking Speed (m/s)

0.18 (0.40)
51.75 (14.46)
0.260 (0.052)

0.11 (0.33)
49.11 (15.85)
0.279 (0.041)

0.00 (0.00)
49.20 (10.70)
0.254 (0.021)

0.10 (0.32)
53.27 (10.36)
0.264 (0.045)

11.91 (17.77)
161.58 (29.77)
0.561 (0.078)

20.11 (20.31)
172.92 (30.15)
0.536 (0.095)

10.80 (15.92)
177.23 (42.17)
0.555 (0.105)

6.00 (12.79)
184.14 (23.44)
0.545 (0.063)

0.612
0.240
0.220

1.136
1.589
0.162

-.003
-.060
-.076

.612
.868
.882

.010
.042
-.061
*p < .05, ** p < .01

.348
.209
.921

measures did not reveal any signiﬁcant differences between
the puzzle task’s four conditions. Similarly, the differences for
both values were not signiﬁcant for the repetitive task either.
These results are depicted in Table II.

The most important data for our analysis are the participants’
behavior concerning the virtual walls (see Figure 3). While
playing the puzzle task, only four subjects (10%) ignored a
single obstacle, whereas the others did not collide once. In
contrast, 21 participants (52.5%) walked through walls in the
second, repetitive task. This difference is signiﬁcant according
to McNemar’s test (p < .0001). Exemplary walking trajectories
of both rounds are shown in Figure 4.

When comparing the wall collisions between the four
conditions for the puzzle task, we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
differences, neither between opaque and transparent walls
(χ2(1) = .000, p = 1.000) nor between realistic and abstract
wall designs (χ2(1) = 1.111, p = .605). However, for
the repetitive task, the player behavior differs signiﬁcantly
between conditions of different opacity. Whereas 80% of
subjects in the RWW condition avoided walking through
walls, this was the case in only 36.7% of the other three
groups featuring see-through walls. This difference is signiﬁcant
(χ2(1) = 5.647, p = .028).

On the other hand, the degree of realism had no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the behavior in the repetitive task. In the two
abstract conditions A30 and A60, 60% of subjects walked
through walls, whereas in the two other conditions, 45% ignored
obstacles (χ2(1) = .902, p = .527). It is worth mentioning that
– in contrast to the puzzle task – subjects tended to use shortcuts
frequently after crossing walls once. The participants split
almost exclusively into two groups: 65% of subjects collided
less than four times, whereas 35% collided 23-50 times.

V. DISCUSSION

Virtual scenarios can reach their full potential, be it for
entertainment or educational purposes, only if users adhere to
the environment’s fundamental laws. Moving through purely
virtual obstacles that do not have a physical counterpart not
only harms the feeling of being there but might also cause
unwanted experiences or even result in dangerous situations. In
our study, we addressed three characteristics of virtual scenarios
that might foster such behavior.

H1: Repetitive and monotonous tasks provoke signiﬁcantly
more participants to walk through virtual walls than diverse
tasks.

We approached this hypothesis by integrating two similar
tasks in a within-subject design into our study. Both required
the players to move virtual items between interaction points
spread across the play area. The necessary completion time
and walking distance were chosen similarly so that
the
task’s motivation remained the only variation. The signiﬁcant
difference between both tasks regarding players that cut short
through walls, i.e., 10% versus 52.5%, conﬁrms our hypothesis.
Furthermore, we observed that all subjects, who walked
through walls in the diverse puzzle task, tried this shortcut only
once. In contrast, 35% of the participants ignored most of the
walls in the repetitive condition. This ﬁnding further supports
our initial assumption that player behavior mainly relies on
personal interest in the situation. Varying and interesting
assignments preserve the scenario’s plausibility and provide
a solid incentive to stick to the rules. On the other hand,
repeated and simple actions fail to keep the players immersed
in the virtual world. As oral feedback suggests, participants
were more aware of the real situation and looked forward to

Fig. 3. Results from the data logged during the play sessions. Left: the percentage of subjects walking through at least one wall for each task and condition.
Right: dot-plot of the wall collisions per participant and condition in the repetitive task.

completing the task: "I knew that the walls were not real, so
I just walked through them to get this annoying task done as
fast as possible."(P14).

H2: Participants walk signiﬁcantly more often through abstract
walls than through realistic walls.

Among the four walls that we tested in a between-subject
design, two were implemented as abstract blocks (A30 &
A60), and the other two thematically ﬁt the testbed scenario
(RTH & RWW). We assumed designs that matched less
would serve as a break-in-presence [9], diminishing the visual
realism and consequently leading to less conform behavior. By
administering the IPQ, we conﬁrmed that the abstract walls
indeed harmed the perceived presence and realism. Additionally,
subjects later reported that the walls in these conditions "felt like
unﬁnished placeholders and somewhat ruined the appealing
visuals of the scenery"(P2).

However, these observations did not affect the participants’
walking behavior. Even though the percentage of subjects
walking through walls was tendentially higher for the abstract
conditions (in the repetitive task: 56.1% versus 45%), this
difference was not signiﬁcant. Therefore, we cannot conﬁrm
our second hypothesis. Considering the observed tendencies in
the data, we suspect the potential presence of a less noticeable
effect that was overlain by the strong ﬁndings of H1 and H3.
Thus, we propose further research to investigate this open
question in isolation.

H3: Opaque surfaces deter more participants from ignoring
virtual obstacles than partly transparent surfaces.

Apart from varying the virtual walls in the degree of realism,
we also used multiple opacity levels. For this hypothesis, we
group A30, A60, and RTH into one category of see-through
designs. Even though the twine material was fully opaque,
the underlying wall model featured numerous holes, clearly
revealing the other side. In contrast to these designs, the wooden
surface completely blocked the view of objects behind the wall.
This differentiation between conditions resulted in signiﬁcantly
different behavior observed in the repetitive task: 63.3% of

the subjects in the see-through conditions deliberately ignored
walls, compared to only 20% in the RWW condition.

Subjects often reported the wall’s transparency as assuring
factor in their decision-making: "I saw that my goal was right
behind the wall. Since I knew that there were no free-standing
walls in the room, I felt safe to walk through."(P8). Similarly,
participants in the RWW group felt deterred by the solid
appearance of the wall: "Of course I knew that these walls
were only virtual. But they appeared so sturdy that I preferred
to walk around."(P11). The oral feedback shows that users
generally prefer the safety of seeing where they are going
and refrain from walking into unclear areas. Together with the
recorded data, this ﬁnding conﬁrms our hypothesis that opaque
surfaces deter players from walking through walls.

RQ1: How do players decide whether they pass through virtual
walls or walk around them?

Apart from investigating our three main hypotheses, we were
also interested in the participants’ reasons for deciding whether
they walk through or around virtual walls. Thus, we followed
the main study with a semistructured interview allowing the
subjects to share their personal thoughts. We analyzed the
resulting interview data for reoccurring motives using a peer-
reviewed deductive thematic analysis [38] and structured the
reasons into two categories.

A. Reasons for refraining from walking through obstacles

The overwhelming majority of subjects stated a simple reason
for not even considering walking through obviously virtual
walls: "Walls are solid, you cannot walk through them."(P3).
This feedback indicates a strong Plausibility Illusion. The
participants transferred the real world’s fundamental rules to
the virtual scenario and stuck to basic physical principles,
treating the virtual environment like its material counterpart.
Many subjects also reported their fear of negative conse-
quences when breaking the rules. This reason encloses a variety
of partly subconscious considerations. Some participants felt
unsure not being able to see behind the wall: "I would not
have seen what was directly in front of me, so I decided to stay

A3018%11%10%0%25%50%75%100%A60RTH0%RWWPuzzleTaskA300%25%50%75%100%46%67%70%20%A60RTHRWWRepetitiveTaskWallCollisionsperParticipantRepetitiveTaskA30A60RTHRWW015304560PercentageofParticipantscollidingwithWallscautious."(P16). Others feared hurting themselves: "The twines
seemed painful – I usually avoid touching such hedges."(P23).
Finally, subjects also expected to get punished for nonadherent
behavior, such as "having to restart the level"(P20).

B. Reasons for walking through obstacles

The most commonly mentioned reason for ignoring the
walls in the puzzle task was curiosity. Participants were eager
to explore their abilities in the virtual world and test the
game’s rules. However, after experiencing the absence of any
punishment, all subjects reverted to an adherent playstyle for
the remaining time: "It was interesting to revolt against the
intended playstyle. But after trying once, I decided that walking
around the walls was more fun and felt more natural."(P1).

For the repetitive task, most players reported a different
reason for their behavior: cutting short. As this round consisted
only of the always same interaction of putting coins on
matching plates, subjects mostly decided to act pragmatically
and "choose the shorted possible path, even though walking
through the walls felt awkward and unnatural"(P19). The
logged walking trajectories support this feedback as many
participants began walking as intended and only started cutting
short after realizing that the task would not change for the
remainder of the round.

Finally, few subjects in the more transparent A30 condition
mentioned a different reason not observed for any other group.
These players did not recognize the walls as obstacles being
part of the virtual environment. Instead, they had the impression
that "these vitreous-looking cuboids must have been some kind
of graphical artifact that had no particular meaning. It did
not match the underwater scenario and was barely visible, so
I thought it was safe to ignore."(P26). This feedback is in line
with ﬁndings by Simeone et al. [4], who reported that incorrect
interpretations could lead to arbitrary behavior.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

When playing VR games, users might not always behave
in the intended way or adhere to the fundamental principles
of virtual scenarios. While developers can prevent most of
such behavior through prescient game design, some challenges
remain. One prominent example is the discrepancy between
the physical surroundings and the virtual world. When using
real walking, players can walk freely within the play area’s
boundaries, despite virtual obstacles blocking their path. It
is not possible to prohibit such behavior without losing the
valuable advantages of natural walking. Therefore, past research
has mainly concentrated on providing multisensory collision
feedback to deter players from deliberately walking through
virtual walls. However, it remained unclear how the virtual
scenarios’ characteristics, such as wall design or task type,
inﬂuence the players’ incentives toward this behavior.

In our work, we investigated how players reacted when
confronted with different situations. We thus concentrated on
three potentially inﬂuencing factors: task type, wall opacity,
and wall realism. In a mixed study, we confronted the subjects
with two iterations of item-carry tasks. One round featured an

Fig. 4. Two exemplary walking trajectories of our study. The path’s color
changes from blue to green. Top: subject solving the riddle task and colliding
once with a wall. Bottom: subject playing the repetitive task and ignoring the
virtual walls most of the time.

engaging motivation, whereas the other lacked any interesting
variety and focussed on repetition only. Participants in the
repetitive condition cut short signiﬁcantly more often to ﬁnish
the assignment as fast as possible. Further, we varied the tested
wall layouts in a between-subject design to cover different
degrees of realism and opacity. Even though signiﬁcantly more
subjects ignored transparent walls than solid ones, we could not
ﬁnd a similar difference between realistic and abstract designs.
Our ﬁndings reveal that various factors inﬂuence the indi-
vidual decision whether players adhere to or ignore obstacles
in the virtual scenario. One of the most decisive parameters
is the task type. Challenges that keep the players engaged
and interested in the experience are particularly effective in
avoiding nonadherent behavior. In contrast, repetitions, simple
interactions, or forced obligatory tasks diminish the users’
feeling of presence and foster pragmatic actions. In such cases,
opaque surfaces deter more players from walking through
virtual walls as these hide the destination and cause doubts
regarding the penetrability. These ﬁndings extend the existing
research corpus on player behavior and help developers design
virtual scenarios that reach their full potential.

Future studies are needed to investigate the open questions on
player behavior in the context of virtual collisions. Even though
we did not ﬁnd any evidence for an inﬂuence of the degree of
realism, we suspect that our other ﬁndings might have concealed
a potential minor effect. Apart from this lack of clarity, we

also aim to research whether the observed behavior might be
affected by individual player characteristics. Throughout the
study, we noticed that participants either walked strictly around
every wall or always took the direct path. However, we did not
arrive at a ﬁnal explanation for this almost binary classiﬁcation.
Finally, how time pressure might alter the observed behavior
remains to be investigated. Strictly timed tasks were often used
by prior research to provide a strong wall-ignoring incentive.
However, this approach was based upon personal experiences
and has not yet been observed in isolation.

REFERENCES

the

vault:

extra mile

[1] M. d. Luca, H. Seiﬁ, S. Egan,

and M. Gonzalez Franco,
VR
“Locomotion
in ACM CHI, May 2021.
[Online].
locomotion techniques,”
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
Available:
locomotion-vault-the-extra-mile-in-analyzing-vr-locomotion-techniques/
[2] M. Usoh, K. Arthur, M. C. Whitton, R. Bastos, A. Steed, M. Slater,
and F. P. Brooks, “Walking > walking-in-place > ﬂying, in virtual
environments,” in the 26th annual conference. ACM Press, 1999,
Conference Proceedings, pp. 359–364.

analyzing

in

[3] Facebook Technologies, LLC., “Oculus Quest 2,” Website, 2020, retrieved

October 15, 2020 from https://www.oculus.com/quest-2/.

[4] A. L. Simeone, I. Mavridou, and W. Powell, “Altering user movement
behaviour in virtual environments,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1312–1321, 2017.

[5] S. Razzaque, Z. Kohn, and M. C. Whitton, “Redirected walking,” in
Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS, vol. 9. Citeseer, 2001, pp. 105–106.
[6] A. L. Simeone, E. Velloso, and H. Gellersen, “Substitutional reality:
Using the physical environment to design virtual reality experiences,”
in CHI ’15: CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Seoul Republic of Korea: ACM, 2015, Conference Proceedings, pp.
3307–3316.

[7] M. Boldt, B. Liu, T. Nguyen, A. Panova, R. Singh, A. Steenbergen,
R. Malaka, J. Smeddinck, M. Bonfert, I. Lehne, M. Cahnbley, K. Ko-
rschinq, L. Bikas, S. Finke, M. Hanci, and V. Kraft, “You shall not pass:
Non-intrusive feedback for virtual walls in VR environments with room-
scale mapping,” in 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D
User Interfaces (VR). Reutlingen: IEEE, 2018, Conference Proceedings,
pp. 143–150.

[8] J. Hartmann, C. Holz, E. Ofek, and A. D. Wilson, “Realitycheck: Blending
virtual environments with situated physical reality,” in CHI ’19: CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Glasgow Scotland
Uk: ACM, 2019, Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–12.

[9] M. Slater and A. Steed, “A virtual presence counter,” Presence: Teleop-
erators and Virtual Environments, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 413–434, 2000.
[10] K. J. Blom and S. Beckhaus, “Virtual collision notiﬁcation,” in 2010
IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). Waltham, MA, USA:
IEEE, 2010, Conference Proceedings.

[11] N. Ogawa, T. Narumi, H. Kuzuoka, and M. Hirose, “Do you feel like
passing through walls?: Effect of self-avatar appearance on facilitating
realistic behavior in virtual environments,” in CHI ’20: CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Honolulu HI USA: ACM,
2020, Conference Proceedings, pp. 1–14.

[12] M. Slater, “Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour
in immersive virtual environments,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol. 364, no. 1535, pp. 3549–3557,
2009.

[13] M. J. Habgood, D. Wilson, D. Moore, and S. Alapont, “HCI lessons
from PlayStation VR,” in Extended Abstracts Publication of the Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play, ser. CHI PLAY ’17
Extended Abstracts. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 125–135.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3130859.3131437
[14] R. A. Ruddle and S. Lessels, “The beneﬁts of using a walking interface to
navigate virtual environments,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2009.

[15] J. N. Templeman, P. S. Denbrook, and L. E. Sibert, “Virtual locomotion:
Walking in place through virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 598–617, 1999.

[16] C. Boletsis, “The new era of virtual reality locomotion: A systematic
literature review of techniques and a proposed typology,” Multimodal
Technologies and Interaction, vol. 1, no. 4, p. 24, 2017.

[17] T. C. Peck, H. Fuchs, and M. C. Whitton, “Evaluation of reorientation
techniques and distractors for walking in large virtual environments,”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 383–394, 2009.

[18] B. E. Insko, “Passive haptics signiﬁcantly enhances virtual environments,”

Ph.D. dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2001.

[19] M. Azmandian, M. Hancock, H. Benko, E. Ofek, and A. D. Wilson,
“Haptic retargeting: Dynamic repurposing of passive haptics for enhanced
virtual reality experiences,” in Proceedings of the 2016 chi conference
on human factors in computing systems, 2016, pp. 1968–1979.

[20] D. S. Pamungkas and K. Ward, “Electro-tactile feedback system to
enhance virtual reality experience,” International Journal of Computer
Theory and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 465–470, 2016.

[21] P. Lopes, A. Ion, and P. Baudisch, “Impacto: Simulating physical impact
by combining tactile stimulation with electrical muscle stimulation,”
in UIST ’15: The 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. Charlotte NC USA: ACM, 2015, Conference
Proceedings, pp. 11–19.

[22] P. Lopes, S. You, L.-P. Cheng, S. Marwecki, and P. Baudisch, “Providing
haptics to walls & heavy objects in virtual reality by means of electrical
muscle stimulation,” in CHI ’17: CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Denver Colorado USA: ACM, 2017, Conference
Proceedings, pp. 1471–1482.

[23] E. Burns, S. Razzaque, A. T. Panter, M. C. Whitton, M. R. McCallus,
and F. P. Brooks, “The hand is more easily fooled than the eye: Users
are more sensitive to visual interpenetration than to visual-proprioceptive
discrepancy,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2006.

[24] P. Jiménez, F. Thomas, and C. Torras, “3D collision detection: a survey,”

Computers & Graphics, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 269–285, 2001.

[25] K. J. Blom and S. Beckhaus, “Virtual travel collisions: Response method
inﬂuences perceived realism of virtual environments,” ACM Transactions
on Applied Perception, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1–19, 2013.

[26] J. Jacobson and M. Lewis, “An experimental comparison of three methods
for collision handling in virtual environments,” Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 1273–
1277, 1997.

[27] A. Bloomﬁeld and N. I. Badler, “Collision awareness using vibrotactile
arrays,” in 2007 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference. Charlotte, NC, USA:
IEEE, 2007, Conference Proceedings.

[28] J. Ryu and G. J. Kim, “Using a vibro-tactile display for enhanced collision
perception and presence,” in the ACM symposium. Hong Kong: ACM
Press, 2004, Conference Proceedings, p. 89.

[29] C. Afonso and S. Beckhaus, “How to not hit a virtual wall: aural
spatial awareness for collision avoidance in virtual environments,” in the
6th Audio Mostly Conference. Coimbra, Portugal: ACM Press, 2011,
Conference Proceedings, pp. 101–108.

[30] M. Slater, P. Khanna, J. Mortensen, and I. Yu, “Visual realism enhances
realistic response in an immersive virtual environment,” IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 76–84, 2009.

[31] R. A. Ruddle, E. Volkova, and H. H. Bülthoff, “Learning to walk in
virtual reality,” ACM Transactions on Applied Perception, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 1–17, 2013.

[32] P. W. Fink, P. S. Foo, and W. H. Warren, “Obstacle avoidance during
walking in real and virtual environments,” ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 2, 2007.

[33] G. Cirio, A.-H. Olivier, M. Marchal, and J. Pettre, “Kinematic evaluation
of virtual walking trajectories,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 671–680, 2013.

[34] Unity Technologies, “Unity,” Website, 2020, retrieved October 26, 2020

from https://unity.com/.

[35] HTC Corporation, “HTC Vive Pro,” Website, 2020, retrieved October

26, 2020 from https://www.vive.com/eu/product/vive-pro/.

[36] B. G. Witmer and M. J. Singer, “Measuring presence in virtual
environments: A presence questionnaire,” Presence, vol. 7, no. 3, pp.
225–240, 1998.

[37] T. W. Schubert, F. Friedmann, and H. T. Regenbrecht, “Decomposing
the sense of presence: Factor analytic insights,” in 2nd international
workshop on presence, vol. 1999, 1999.

[38] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology,”
Qualitative research in psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006.

