AN EXAMINATION OF SKILL REQUIREMENTS FOR AUGMENTED REALITY 
AND VIRTUAL REALITY JOB ADVERTISEMENTS 

Amit Verma*, Craig School of Business, Missouri Western State University, Saint Joseph, MO, USA 
Pratibha Purohit, School of Business, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA 
Timothy Thornton, College of Education, Athens State University, Athens, AL, USA 
Kamal Lamsal, Craig School of Business, Missouri Western State University, Saint Joseph, MO, USA 

*Corresponding Author: averma@missouriwestern.edu, Address: 315L, Popplewell Hall, 4525 Downs Drive, 
Saint Joseph, MO, 64507, Tel: +1 816 271 4357, Fax: +1 816 271 4338 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

The field of Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) has seen massive growth in recent years. Numerous 

degree programs have started to redesign their curricula to meet the high market demand of such job positions. In 

this paper, we performed a content analysis of online job postings hosted on Indeed.com and provided a skill 

classification framework for AR/VR job positions. Furthermore, we present a ranking of the relevant skills for the 

job position. Overall, we noticed that technical skills like UI/UX design, software design, asset design and graphics 

rendering are highly desirable for AR/VR positions. Our findings regarding prominent skill categories could be 

beneficial for the human resource departments as well as enhancing existing course curricula to tailor to the high 

market demand. 

Keywords: Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, Skill Requirements, Content Analysis, Computer Science, 

Information Systems, Curriculum Design 

INTRODUCTION 

According to the Hired.com survey (Hired, 2021), Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) interview 

requests have grown by 1400% over the last year. These jobs have been identified among the top emerging jobs of 

the year (Perry, 2020). 74% of those surveyed by Hired.com agreed that the technology would have a major impact 

on the job market within five years. The demand for these job positions has grown 79% compared to last year, partly 

due to rapid advancements in AR/VR inventions and patents. It has been forecasted that by 2030 over 23 million 

jobs will be impacted by the two technologies (Alsop, 2021). The same findings were echoed by a Facebook study 

(Facebook, 2021) which estimated substantial adoption of AR/VR across all industries. Several industries have 

already begun incorporating AR/VR technologies to enhance customer experiences. For example, Ikea, Lacoste, 

New York Times, Kate Spade, etc. have leveraged the technology to aid the marketing delivery channels (Paine, 

2021). Both studies noted that the market demand for AR/VR jobs is prominent and growing. Even though there is a 

forecasted increase in demand, there remains a dearth of skilled professionals. Similar skill shortages exist in other 

newer Information Technology (IT) domains as well as traditional fields like marketing, finance, healthcare, and 

supply chain (Wilson et al., 2017). The AR/VR job opportunities are dispersed across various industries. Because of 

the evolving nature of work and the need for standardization, better classification of the job skills in this domain will 

 
 
make the hiring process more coordinated and efficient. Moreover, the structure provided by such a classification 

could be utilized in curriculum design to address the skill gaps and highlight the relatively important skillsets. 

Therefore, one of the goals of this research project is to develop a comprehensive skill classification framework for 

AR/VR job positions. 

Content analysis was utilized to extract keywords from job postings hosted on Indeed.com in order to calculate the 

frequencies of specific skills corresponding to each skill category.  In this way, we identified the most critical skills 

in the dataset which was based on the relative frequency of each skill for AR/VR jobs. The findings can also aid in 

curriculum design efforts such that the most valued skill sets are emphasized in the existing analytics curricula. 

Moreover, the existing AR/VR courses can be revised to reflect the current sought-after software tools and 

applications.  

The studied job positions belong to the professional areas of AR and VR. Both of these domains were defined within 

the big umbrella term of Mixed Reality (MR) or Extended Reality (XR) based on Billinghurst et al.(2017). MR 

merges real and virtual worlds to create new environments. The relationship between these fields is summarized by 

the mapping in Figure 1. 

                               Figure 1. Hierarchy Of Different Domains 

The three areas immerse a digital layer (typically through a smartphone or headset) over the physical reality. The 

individual differences are due to varying levels of immersion and the relationship between the two layers. AR 

enhances an individual’s physical environment by overlaying an interactive 3D virtual object on a real-world 

 
 
environment (Thornton et al., 2012). AR supplements the physical reality by adding only some extra details. The 

classic examples of AR include Google Glass, Pokemon Go, and Snapchat filters. On the other hand, VR 

incorporates the highest level of immersion and fully immerses the user in a computer created environment (Goldiez 

et al., 2004). VR users typically wear a headset like Oculus Rift and Microsoft Holoens to engage in a completely 

virtual experience. Note that some simple adaptations of VR have been initiated by Google Cardboard using only a 

smartphone and cardboard. MR or XR allows physical and digital layers to operate in tandem and might involve 

different combinations of AR and VR. Gaming consoles such as Xbox Kinect rely on Human Computer Interaction 

(HCI) coupled with gesture recognition and sensors to operate in this domain. The higher-end applications of MR 

also exist in drone and robot-assisted surgeries. 

The interest in AR/VR technologies has especially grown since the pandemic (Robertson, 2021; Facebook, 2021). 

Academic institutions could benefit from an in-depth exploration of the skill requirements in this field. In this 

regard, the goal of this study was to address the following research questions:  

1.  Which skills are required for AR/VR professionals?  

2.  What majors do employers request for AR/VR professionals? 

3.  What software tools are currently in-demand for such positions? 

In this paper, job advertisements in the US were studied. A breakdown of different skills required for the AR/VR 

positions was analyzed in order to provide insights into employers’ expectations. Using the ranked skill categories 

based on relative frequency, academics can repurpose the existing degree programs in order to highlight the current 

skillsets required in the job market.  The focus of this study was the “demand side” of the US job market via a 

descriptive analysis of the job advertisements posted by employers. Future research could analyze the skills gaps by 

studying the “supply side” of the related degree programs. This would involve a review of the course descriptions or 

course syllabi. Scholars could also perform a survey of administrators and faculty members who are responsible for 

course design in the AR/VR domain. Another future research direction involves the study of local trends in the job 

market across multiple countries or multiple regions within the same country. 

The main contributions of this study were:  

1.  The identification of the key skills needed for AR/VR based on our skill classification framework. 

 
2.  The analysis could assist the human resources team in creating job advertisements in addition to specific 

current training modules for the working professionals in the industry. 

3.  Academic institutions can also utilize our findings in curricula design efforts. This is helpful to create new 

courses or restructure existing course offerings. Moreover, the students interested in related career domains 

could also emphasize the top in-demand skills in their job applications.  

This paper contributes to the extant literature of curriculum design in degree programs by presenting the popular 

skills in the AR/VR domain.  Thus, universities could align their coursework with the existing job market demand. 

In addition, employers could design more standardized and better-curated job positions, clearly emphasizing the 

required skills.  

The article was organized as follows.  Initially, a literature review on the impact of AR/VR on various disciplines 

was presented, followed by the employers’ perspective of job requirements.  Next, the classification framework, 

research technique, and datasets used for the study were discussed.  Thereafter, the results detailing a ranked list of 

the skill categories sorted with respect to the relative frequency among the total number of jobs was presented.  

Finally, the conclusions of the study and an outline of the future research directions was discussed. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

AR/VR is an emerging technology with wide-ranging applications in many domains. The technology augments the 

physical space with a digital presence in order to enhance customer experiences (Schmalstieg & Höllerer, 2016). 

The nascent phases of this technology found applications in video games. However, over the last decade, various 

industrial and commercial applications have been envisioned. Various applications of AR/VR have been proposed 

for robotics, engineering, automotive, aerospace, maintenance and education (Nee at al., 2012; Chi et al., 2013; 

Akçayır & Akçayır, 2017; Doshi, 2017; Mourtzis et al., 2017; Helin et al., 2017). The standard definitions and 

related taxonomies, along with some successful applications, are surveyed in Billinghurst et al. (2017). The impact 

of AR/VR on the field of education has been studied by the authors in Bacca Acosta et al. (2014). The different 

pedagogical approaches involved in teaching and training along with case studies is detailed in Wang et al. (2018). 

In terms of STEM learning, the review of the literature of AR/VR is provided in Ibáñez and Delgado-Kloos (2018). 

Similar to the technique used in this study, a content analysis was utilized through a study of 28 research 

 
publications from 2010 to 2017. Finally, the study presented AR/VR activities that could be used a part of 

instructional delivery.  

A set of closely related studies were proposed by Fomiykh et al. (2019), Fomiykh et al. (2020a) and Fomiykh et al. 

(2020b). First, Fomiykh et al. (2019) analyzed the existing course offerings in AR/VR as well as conducted a 

preliminary job market analysis. The study summarized the various teaching methods, learning activities, course 

objectives and learning outcomes. The authors compiled a list of skill sets based on the firsthand scan of few job 

postings followed by a survey of industry professionals. More specifically, they studied only the technical skill 

requirements for 16 jobs in the US and the coverage of the study was global. Given that the biggest players in the 

AR/VR domain viz. Apple, Facebook and Google belong to the US, an in-depth assessment of the skill requirements 

is warranted. Hence, 397 job advertisements in the US using a complete skill classification framework consisting of 

hard and soft skills were analyzed in this paper. Fomiykh et al. (2020a) and Fomiykh et al. (2020b) provided a 

blueprint for the CS curriculum in order to facilitate AR/VR teaching in universities. They also provided an outline 

of two AR/VR courses at the foundation and advanced levels using 12 groups of skills. The study is concluded with 

a discussion on curriculum design implications. 

AR/VR can be considered as one of the digital skills needed for success in the workplace of the future. The technical 

and soft skill sets needed for Industry 4.0 is analyzed in Saari et al. (2021). In addition to Industry 4.0, other relevant 

fields are business analytics, data analytics, and big data. Many studies have explored the employers’ side through 

the skill-based analysis on job postings. For instance, Debortoli et al. (2014) analyzed the difference between big 

data and business intelligence job positions using a skill classification framework based on a Latent Semantic 

Analysis of the job descriptions. The authors concluded that the business domain skills as well as technical skills 

were valued for both job positions. Gardiner et al. (2018) studied 1216 job advertisements having “big data” as part 

of their title. The authors found that analytical skills and soft skills are highly valued for such job positions in 

addition to technical skills.  Lovaglio et al. (2018) collected Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and 

Statistical Italian job advertisements between June and September 2005. The authors concluded that statistical 

positions require more technical and computing skills in relation to soft skills. Verma et al. (2019) utilized a skill 

classification framework for related job categories like Business Analyst, Business Intelligence Analyst, Data 

Analyst and Data Scientist using a content analysis of 1235 job advertisements. The results indicated that skills such 

 
as decision making, organization, communication, and data management were essential for success in these 

professions. More recently, Anton et al. (2020) analyzed the skill requirements for three related occupations: Data 

Science and Engineering, Software Engineering and Development, and Business Development and Sales. A mixed-

methods approach was employed in conjunction with a text mining of scientific literature.  Similar to other studies, 

the authors presented the important soft and hard skills required for these positions. 

The current study supplements the extant literature by proposing a new skill classification framework for AR/VR 

jobs. Given the high demand for AI/VR jobs, an in-depth analysis of the required skills is merited. Therefore, this 

paper’s goal was to study an important job category in the Industry 4.0 era.  

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 

 Skill Classification Framework  

In this section, the skill classification framework used for AR/VR job postings was presented. The goal was to 

determine if each job posting was a member of one or more of these skill categories based on the keywords. A list of 

skill categories developed by Fomiykh et al. (2019), Verma et al. (2021a) and Verma et al. (2021b) was used as a 

starting point. Additionally, more skill categories to reflect the needs in the AR/VR domain were added. For 

achieving this, a sample of 50 AR/VR jobs was taken and an in-depth content analysis of the skills needed for 

AR/VR was conducted. The skill categories and subcategories were then updated based on the findings. Three 

independent raters were utilized to determine the reliability score of the proposed categorization framework. The 

alpha coefficient of the intercoder reliability measure (based on De Swert, 2012) was calculated as 0.91. The final 

list of skill categories and subcategories, along with sample keywords were detailed (see Table 1). 

Table 1. Classification Framework  

Skill Category 

Skills 

Keywords 

Communication 

Written 

Copywriting, Editing, Blogging, Content Creation, Story-ideation 

Employee 
Attributes 

Verbal 
Presentation 
Generic 
Motivation 

Time 
Management 
Detail oriented 
Attitude 

Verbal, Oral, Cold calling 
Present, Presentation, Report 
Responsible, Determined, Competitive, Witty, Success-oriented 
Motivated, Ambition, Willingness to learn, Delivering result, 
Continuous learning 
Time management, Timely manner, Prioritize time, Deadline driven 

Attention to detail, Eye for detail, Accuracy, Precision 
Can do, Go-getter, Self-learner, Self-directed, Positive Attitude  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational 
Attributes 

Independence 
Adaptability 
Confidence 
Other 
Programming 

Software Design 
Principles 

XR SDKs 

Asset Design 

UI/UX Design 

3D Software 

Game Engine 
XR Hardware 

Performance 
Tools 
2D Software 

Graphics 
Rendering 

Mathematics 

Sensors 

Cloud Tools 
Project 
Management 

Independence, Without supervision, Autonomous 
Adaptable, Flexible, Multitasking 
Confident, Decisive 
Funny, Smiling, High energy, Reliable, Proactive 
Python, C#, C++, VB, Excel Macros, PERL, C, Java, Visual Basic, 
VB.NET, VBA, COBOL, FORTRAN, S, SPLUS, BASH, Javascript, 
ASP.NET, JQUERY, JBOSS 
API, REST, Product lifecycle management, JSON, REACT, 
Architecture, Testing, Security, Source control, Unit testing, 
Debugging, Documentation, Continuous integration, Build trains, 
OOP, Event handling, Source control, Inheritance, Abstraction, 
Encapsulation, Loops, Control-logic, Multithreaded, Data structure, 
Devops 
UIKit, AVFoundation, Core Motion, Core ML, CloudKit, SiriKit, 
StoreKit, ARKit, RealityKit, ARKit, ARCore, AR Foundation, 
MRTK, WebXR, CoreMedia, CoreAudio, CoreAnimation 
Prototype, Visualization, Visual effect, 3D asset, asset, content 
developer, content strategist, 3D images, Animation, Proof-of-
concept, Storytelling, Validation, Content, Film production, Video 
production 
Interaction, Studying users, XR experience, UX Design, Interaction 
design principles, Usability, Design thinking process, HCI, 
Accessibility, User experience design, DFI, DFM, DFA 
Maya, Houdini, Blender, 3Ds Max, Arnold, RenderMan, Cycles, 
three.js, Meshlab, Blender, Maya and Cinema4D, Direct3D 
MAYA, 3D MAX, Autodesk 3D, Autodesk 3ds max, BIM 360 
Unity, Unreal 
HTC VIVE, Varjo HMD, Microsoft Hololens, Rift, VIVE, Gear VR, 
Oculus Rift, PlayStation VR, Google Cardboard, Google Daydream, 
Samsung Gear VR, Magic Leap, Rift, Oculus Quest, Microsoft 
Hololens 
VTune, XPerf/GPUView, valgrind, Instruments, Performance 
profiling, Profiling, Profiler 
Adobe Sketch, Illustrator, FIGMA, CAD, CAM, Adobe Illustrator, 
Autodesk, Revit, Adobe Photoshop, Photoshop, Adobe Sketch, 
Illustrator, Metal, FIGMA 
Metal, HLSL, GLSL, Animation effects, VFX, Computer graphics, 
Imaging system, Imaging, Feature definition, Computational 
photography, Object capture, Rendering, Visual effect, Image signal 
processing, Texture, Lighting, Photogrammetry, Modeling, Mapping, 
Rigging 
Geometry, Linear Algebra, 3D math, 3D geometry, Vector Math, 
Vector 
EEG, fMRI, fNIRS, EMG, MTF, SNR, human interface, HCI, haptic, 
hand gesture, compression, sensing, PICO 
AWS, Google Firebase, Azure, Server 
Project management, PERT, CPM, PERT/CPM, Change 
management, Project budget, Project documentation, PMP, Microsoft 
Project, Gannt Chart, Lean, Agile 

General Hardware  Hardware, Architecture, Devices, Printer, Storage, Desktop, PC, 

Decision Making 

Interpersonal 

Interpersonal 

Server, Workstation, Mainframe, Legacy, System architecture 
Reporting, Analysis, Modeling, Design, Problem-solving, 
Implementation, Testing, Analytical, Strategic thinking 
Team management, Collaboration, Cooperation, Networking, Client 
relationship 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Problem Solving 

Problem Solving 

Creativity 
Process Design 

Administrative 
Analytical 

Administrative 
Analytical 

Research 

Research 

Problem solving, Troubleshoot, Conflict resolution, Solve issue, 
Critical thinker 
Creative, Out of box, Storyteller 
Design Process, Improve process, Continuous improvement, 
Operations management 
Issue management, Posting schedule, Product launch, social calendar 
Insight, Identify trend, Summarize finding, Analyze trend, Synthesize 
information, Draw conclusion, Propose solution, Google Analytics, 
ArcGIS, GIS, QGIS, Data Analytics, Business Analytics 
Data gathering, Data collection, Data reporting, Monitor trend, 
Monitor performance 
Financial Management, Bookkeeping, Accountancy 

Numeracy 
Foreign Language  Spanish, French, German, Italian, Chinese 

Numeracy 
Foreign Language 

Research Technique  

For this research project, job postings from Indeed.com, the most popular job search site across the US were 

utilized. Web scraping was the primary source of data collection. The data was extracted during June – December 

2020. The results on a web search on Indeed.com based on the titles of “Augmented Reality (AR)” and “Virtual 

Reality (VR)” were gathered. After downloading the job postings through Python, the job description was split up 

into keywords using content analysis. Content analysis is a tool to analyze words in a document and identify patterns 

in the text (Neuendorf, 2016). The text was divided into various categories in order to summarize the skill 

requirements for the studied job positions. Note that each of these individual keywords of the text fits into a specific 

category and subcategory given by the skill classification framework described in the previous section. This allowed 

the authors to measure the required skills for each job posting. In this way, aggregate measures were developed for 

the relative importance of each skill category (see Figure 2). 

Figure 2: Summary of our research technique 

 
 
 
 
 
Next, each component of the technique was detailed. The first component was the web scraper. Python was utilized 

to build the web scraping tool. It was entirely dependent on the existing Indeed Application Programming Interface 

(API). The API requires job title, location, and time period as input arguments. The specific search query based on 

job titles was conducted during the specific time period in the United States. The output was an XML file consisting 

of the job title, job URL, location, company, posting date, and a job summary. This job summary field provided a 

very high-level summary of the job description but did not contain all the necessary information.  Thus, the job URL 

becomes critical for our approach because the job summary field of the API did not contain important information 

such as software development kits (SDKs), programming languages, graphical design tools, and specific hardware. 

To address the lack of relevant information, the actual job postings corresponding to the URLs provided by the API 

were downloaded. 

The downloading procedure was also completed programmatically using Python leading to the local storage of 

HTML files. Each HTML file contained different elements stored under different tags. The benefit of using the 

Indeed.com API output was that the final webpage followed a consistent design. Therefore, the job descriptions 

were always found using a specific tag. Thus, the development of the parser could be streamlined. In turn, the parser 

extracted the job description for each downloaded HTML file. The job description field was crucial since it contains 

important data points such as job type, major, related work experience, and required software tools. Furthermore, the 

parser eliminated all unnecessary keywords from consideration like a, an, the, in, for, and special symbols like 

quotation marks and semicolon. The parser is paramount for success of natural language processing projects 

involving content analysis (Neuendorf, 2016). The residual words were individually recognized as unigrams. The 

two-closest and three-closest unigrams were considered as bigrams and trigrams respectively. These n-grams were 

critical to our technique because the keywords belonging to each skill category (detailed in Table 1) were directly 

matched with the n-grams. 

The parsed text within the job description tag was inputted to a frequency analyzer that counts whether the text 

contains specific keywords belonging to each category and subcategory of our skill classification framework. Recall 

that the associated keywords for each skill category were listed in Table 1. If any keywords belonging to a specific 

skill were present in the job description, the authors declared that the associated skill category was required for a 

specific job posting. This method was repeated for each job posting and each skill category. Combining all the 

 
outcomes, the number of jobs for which a specific skill category was required were calculated. This characterized 

the frequency of occurrence of each skill category for each job title. In this way, the relative importance of each skill 

category for AR/VR job title was determined. Note that the relative importance of each skill category was directly 

provided by the relative frequency (given by the frequency count divided by the total number of jobs). The relative 

frequency was reported as a percentage count (see Table 4). This data will be employed in the next section to 

establish the relative importance for different skill categories. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The job titles containing phrases “Augmented Reality / AR” and “Virtual Reality / VR” between July and December 

2020 were obtained from Indeed.com. A large sample size of 397 was the target for data analysis. The top five states 

wherein the jobs were located was developed (see Table 2).  

Table 2. Geographical Distribution of AR/VR Jobs 

Rank 

State (Percentage Count of AR/VR jobs) 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

CA (90.20%) 
CO (5.33%) 
MA (2.10%) 
NY (1.13%) 
TX (0.32%) 

The majority of the current interest in AR/VR technologies resides in the IT sector. As evident from the results, most 

of these jobs are located in the Silicon Valley in the state of California. Denver, Colorado has also emerged as an 

upcoming entrepreneurial hub for newer technologies. IT giants like Facebook, Apple, Google and Amazon have 

propelled interest in AR/VR technologies, especially in the metropolitan areas of San Francisco.  

The required majors for the job positions were systematically extracted using regular expressions in content 

analysis, which allows matching of strings like Graphic Design in a specific neighborhood of the complete text of 

job description field. To accomplish this task, complete sentences in the job description of each job posting were 

used. More specifically, keywords in the neighborhood of information that pertains to majors like B.S., B.A, 

Bachelor’s, etc. were examined. These matched keywords belong to related majors in the AR/VR field, such as 

Computer Science, Fine Arts, Information Technology, etc. (see Table 3). 

Table 3. Majors Required for AR/VR Jobs 

 
 
Rank 

Major (Percentage Count of AR/VR jobs) 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Engineering (65.48%) 
Computer Science (39.09%) 
Machine Learning (27.41%) 
Mathematics (21.32%) 
Architecture (15.23%) 

As can be observed in Table 3, the percentage column for each skill category does not sum up to 100% because each 

job posting might accept multiple majors like Bachelor’s in Computer Science or Machine Learning. It was clear 

that the various engineering majors were more desirable for AR/VR professions, given the technical nature of the 

job. The conventional degree programs in mathematics and computer science were still valued for AR/VR jobs.  

Next, a breakdown of the skill requirements for the AR/VR job positions was provided. The five most common skill 

categories required for the job position were sorted from high to low in terms of the number of job advertisements in 

which at least one skill associated with the skill category is present (see Table 4). The top five skills associated with 

each skill category were also presented.  These skills were similarly ranked with respect to the relative frequency 

(expressed as percentage count). For this purpose, the number of job positions associated with a specific skill was 

divided by the total number of job postings.  

Table 4. AR/VR Results 

Skill Category 

Skill 

Percentage Count (%) 

Occupation 

Employee 

Communication 

Interpersonal 

UI/UX Design 
Software Design Principles 
Asset Design 
Graphics Rendering 
Programming 

Time Management 
Motivation 
Attention to Detail 
Independence 
Other 

General 
Verbal 
Written 
Presentation 

95.48 
90.36 
71.07 
64.47 
57.87 

64.41 
31.91 
26.40 
22.84 
11.42 

60.91 
42.61 
24.87 
12.69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analytical 
Administrative 
Research Skills 

Team Management 
Personal 
Creativity 
Other 

50.76 
29.95 
24.87 
15.74 
39.09 
21.83 
18.27 

The research project established 38 skills structured into 10 different skill categories for AR/VR professions (see 

Table 1). While the literature provided some insights regarding AR/VR professions (Fominykh et al., 2019, 

Fominykh et al., 2020a and Fominykh et al., 2020b), a thorough analysis of hard and soft skills centered on 

extensive empirical data was conducted by the authors. The occupational skills were assigned the highest priority for 

AR/VR job postings. UI/UX design skill subcategory was ranked at the top. This included designing user 

experiences while keeping in mind the constructs of accessibility and human computer interaction (HCI). In this 

way, people with varying abilities should be able to use the end product seamlessly. The employees were also 

expected to be familiar with various design concepts like New Product Introduction (NPI), Design for 

Manufacturing (DFM) and Design for Assembly (DFA). These concepts typically exist in engineering activities and 

strengthen the connection of AR/VR with Computer Aided Design (CAD) and Computer Aided Manufacturing 

(CAM). This also emphasized the overwhelming need for majors with an engineering background in these job 

postings, as illustrated in Table 3. The next ranked subcategory was the traditional software design principles. Thus, 

successful employees have a concrete understanding of software engineering principles like object-oriented 

programming, product lifecycle management and security protocols. Employees should also be able to perform 

traditional software developer tasks, including debugging, testing, documentation, and source control. Thus, they 

should be proficient in DevOps, which involves the combination of software development activities with business 

operations. Asset Design is the next prioritized skill subcategory dealing with video production or simulation in 

order to develop a prototype or proof of concept to meet client requirements. These activities typically involve 

content creation through storytelling aided via VFX animations or some other 3D modeling software. The list of 3D 

modeling software is also captured separately through a skill subcategory defined in Table 1. The relevant results in 

the form of a sorted list based on the percentage occurrence of the 3D modeling tools were presented (see Table 5).  

Table 5. 3D modeling software for AR/VR Jobs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rank 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Software (Percentage Count of AR/VR jobs) 
Autodesk Maya (23.26%) 
CATIA (22.93%) 
Autodesk VRED (20.41%) 
Blender (9.30%) 
Autodesk ReCap (4.65%) 

These findings established that the marketplace was dominated by commercial software from Autodesk (see Table 

5). The only open-source offering consists of Blender at the fourth place. These in-demand tools could be utilized at 

the course level to enhance student learning experiences. In this way, we can well prepare the students for success in 

the AR/VR industry. The next critical skill category consists of Graphic Rendering. This exercise involves tracking, 

lighting, rigging and mapping objects in scenes through the use of algorithms relying on deep learning and 

reinforcement learning. At a fundamental level, this skill assumes familiarity with visual effects using features and 

spatial imaging. This is sometimes achieved by using a shader programming language to adjust the levels of light, 

darkness and color. Both High Level Shading Language (HLSL) and OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) are 

written in a C-like language. The AR/VR job positions are technical in nature and place a higher emphasis on 

computer programming skills. The top five programming languages in order of relative occurrence in the job 

advertisements were identified (see Table 6). 

Table 6. Programming languages for AR/VR Jobs 

Rank 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Programming Language (Percentage Count 
of AR/VR jobs) 
C/C++/C#/Objective C (32.72%) 
Java (10.49%) 
Python (8.95%) 
SQL (5.25%) 
Swift (4.63%) 

These findings identified C-like languages as most common. Given that the popular game engines Unity and Unreal 

are built on the C-type languages, this observation was trivial. Moreover, Android and iOS application development 

requires knowledge of Java and Swift programming language respectively. Python is needed for deep learning and 

reinforcement learning for advanced imaging applications in the graphical rendering pipeline. Basic data 

management skills using SQL are also in-demand.  

 
 
 
AR/VR development is facilitated by SDKs designed by Apple, Google and Facebook. Apple utilizes popular 

frameworks like ARKit and RealityKit, while Google’s service is called ARCore. Facebook’s immersive 

experiences are created through AR Studio. Traditional AR/VR job positions also entail game development on web, 

desktop or mobile environments. The web-based framework for AR/VR is called WebVR or WebXR, a Javascript 

application that allows interaction with various AR/VR devices. The ranked list of relative frequency of these 

AR/VR specific hardware devices was described (see Table 7). 

Table 7. Hardware Devices for AR/VR Jobs 

Rank 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Hardware Devices (Percentage Count of 
AR/VR jobs) 
Facebook Oculus Rift (33.05%) 
HTC Vive (19.13%) 
Microsoft Hololens (17.39%) 
Samsung Gear (9.57%) 
Varjo VR (7.83%) 

The most popular device identified was Oculus Rift, followed by HTC Vive and Microsoft Hololens. Due to the 

high initial investment cost in hardware for developing an AR/VR course, these findings could serve as a guideline 

to help institutions select the most appropriate AR/VR hardware. The desktop game development is primarily 

performed on two game engines: Unity and Unreal. Unity is a proprietary software developed by Unity 

Technologies, while Unreal is a commercial software developed by Epic Games. Based on our dataset, we observed 

that Unity (59.55%) was more popular than Unreal (40.45%). Overall, the current job listings demand more 

technical expertise in commercial software tools from corporations like Autodesk, Unity, etc. 

Employee traits have also started to become more important for success in the workplace. First, as noted in Table 2, 

the Employee skill category was less valued than the Occupational attributes. Among the Employee skill category, 

time management was the most in-demand. Especially in the current business climate with millennials, time 

management skills are especially crucial. Employees with a focus on achieving deadlines in a timely manner are 

sought after in a fast-paced and dynamic workplace. The next ranked skill was motivation. Higher levels of 

motivation are typically associated with lifelong success in any profession. The next skill in the sorted list was 

attention to detail. It is regarded as an indicator of organized and attentive professionals who are paramount to the 

success of any firm. The next key soft skill was independence. An independent worker typically completes assigned 

 
 
activities with minimal supervision. These individuals are regarded as proactive and take the initiative towards 

ownership and completion of their assigned projects. Note that these employee attributes are valued for success in 

any job. These skills could be incorporated into the course offerings to adjust the curriculum appropriately. 

Another important skill category deals with basic communication skills. The most frequent generic skills included 

keywords corresponding to responsibility and determination. Thus, taking initiatives and dealing with stressful 

situations were considered as success factors in a fast-paced work environment. Upon closer inspection, verbal, 

written and presentation skills were also valued for success in these job positions. This job entails understanding 

client requirements and typically modeling them through 3D software. Hence, various inputs from multiple team 

members need to be gathered and the employees are expected to analyze the aggregate results. Therefore, verbal and 

written skills are more in-demand. The presentation skills are also vital for AR/VR specialists since the modeling 

phase usually involves various meetings and brainstorming sessions with different teams. 

Interpersonal skills were also valued for this job position.  These skills typically involved cooperation and 

collaboration within a team environment. Personality and creativity attributes were also highly valued. Because, in 

various settings, the individual deliverables were assigned to each team member. Additionally, creativity is 

paramount in the art design field, which has many parallels with AR/VR. The analytical and research skill categories 

target individuals who were analytical thinkers and could use rational judgment to understand and resolve client 

requirements.  The long-term growth of a company is contingent on such individuals with sound judgment. The 

creativity or innovation skillset pertains to the artistic side of the individual in tune with the arts design aspect of the 

job. Lastly, the analytical skillset coincides with the problem-solving mindset of the individual, which is necessary 

for the long-term growth of a firm. It is well known that all strategic problem-solvers benefit from a sound 

understanding of the business processes to increase the effectiveness of deployed solutions. Thus, the employees are 

supposed to have an essential knowledge of the holistic product lifecycle. This necessitates the understanding of 

product design, supply chains, and marketing channels to be successful professionals. Moreover, various routine 

administrative tasks are expected to be handled by AR/VR specialists. 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

This paper analyzed the skill requirements of AR/VR jobs in the US.  The study employed content analysis to 

develop a ranking of the required skill categories.  The findings found that occupational skills were most valued, 

 
technical in nature and placed a greater emphasis on UI/UX design, software design, asset design and graphics 

rendering skills. The job positions also assigned more importance to interpersonal and communication skills.  

This research project established and ranked skills that are currently required for AR/VR positions.  The results 

could be utilized in two different ways.  First, the degree programs such as Computer Science and Fine Arts could 

repurpose their existing curriculum related to AR/VR.  Hence, this paper could benefit the associated undergraduate 

and graduate degree programs.  Second, the findings could be used by human resource departments to identify 

qualified AR/VR professionals.  More specifically, the human resources department could design well-structured 

and consistent job descriptions to effectively manage their employees. 

Future research could investigate the effects of job localization in some specific US states on different skill 

requirements. This would involve studying the job postings in a specific geographical region allowing local 

employers and universities to benefit from the relevant findings.  An additional research direction could involve the 

analysis of the existing curricula of degree programs in the AR/VR domain in the US.  In this way, the findings of 

the current study could be used in conjunction with the coursework of related degree programs. By identifying the 

existing skill gaps between academic programs and local industry needs, specific recommendations related to 

curriculum design could be made. 

REFERENCES 

Aasheim, C. L., Williams, S., Rutner, P., & Gardiner, A. (2015). Data Analytics vs. Data Science: A Study of         
Similarities and Differences in Undergraduate Programs Based on Course Descriptions. Journal of 
Information Systems Education, 26(2), 103-115.  

Adi Robertson. (2021, July 7). Oculus Sales spike up in the lead up to Half-Life. Retrieved from 

https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/30/21241995/facebook-q1-2020-earnings-oculus-rift-quest-sales-half-
life-alyx-pandemic 

Akçayır, M. and Akçayır, G., 2017. Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education: A 

systematic review of the literature. Educational Research Review, 20, pp.1-11. 

Anton, E., Behne, A., & Teuteberg, F. (2020). The humans behind artificial intelligence – an operationalization of 

AI competencies. 

Bacca Acosta, J.L., Baldiris Navarro, S.M., Fabregat Gesa, R. and Graf, S., 2014. Augmented reality trends in 
education: a systematic review of research and applications. Journal of Educational Technology and 
Society, 2014, vol. 17, núm. 4, p. 133-149. 

Bacca Acosta, J.L., Baldiris Navarro, S.M., Fabregat Gesa, R. and Graf, S., 2014. Augmented reality trends in 
education: a systematic review of research and applications. Journal of Educational Technology and 
Society, 2014, vol. 17, núm. 4, p. 133-149. 

Billinghurst, M., Clark, A. and Lee, G., 2015. A survey of augmented reality. 
Chi, H.L., Kang, S.C. and Wang, X., 2013. Research trends and opportunities of augmented reality applications in 

architecture, engineering, and construction. Automation in construction, 33, pp.116-122. 

 
 
De Swert, K., 2012. Calculating inter-coder reliability in media content analysis using Krippendorff’s Alpha. Center 

for Politics and Communication, 15. 

Debortoli, S., Müller, O., & vom Brocke, J. (2014). Comparing business intelligence and big data skills. Business & 

Information Systems Engineering, 6(5), 289-300. 

Doshi, A., Smith, R.T., Thomas, B.H. and Bouras, C., 2017. Use of projector based augmented reality to improve 
manual spot-welding precision and accuracy for automotive manufacturing. The International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 89(5-8), pp.1279-1293. 

Facebook. (2021, July 7). AR/VR – New Dimensions of Connection. Retrieved from 

https://www.facebook.com/business/news/insights/future-ar-vr 

Fominykh, M., Wild, F., Klamma, R., Billinghurst, M., Costiner, L.S., Karsakov, A., Mangina, E., Molka-
Danielsen, J., Pollock, I., Preda, M. and Smolic, A., 2020. Model augmented reality curriculum. 
In Proceedings of the Working Group Reports on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science 
Education (pp. 131-149). 

Fominykh, M., Wild, F., Klamma, R., Billinghurst, M., Costiner, L.S., Karsakov, A., Mangina, E., Molka-

Danielsen, J., Pollock, I., Preda, M. and Smolic, A., 2020, June. Developing a model augmented reality 
curriculum. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer 
Science Education (pp. 508-509). 

Fominykh, Mikhail & Bilyatdinova, Anna & Koren, István & Jesionkowska, Joanna & Karsakov, Andrey & 

Khoroshavin, Aleksandr & Klamma, Ralf & Klimova, Alexandra & Molka-Danielsen, Judith & Rasool, 
Jazz & Smith, Carl & Wild, Fridolin. (2019). Existing Teaching Practices and Future Labour Market Needs 
in the Field of Augmented Reality. 10.13140/RG.2.2.33051.49443/2. 

Gardiner, A., Aasheim, C., Rutner, P., & Williams, S. (2018). Skill requirements in big data: A content analysis of 

job advertisements. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 58(4), 374-384.  

Goldiez, B., Livingston, M. A., Dawson, J., Brown, D., Hancock, P., Baillot, Y., & Julier, S. J. (2004, November 

29–December 2). Advancing human-centered augmented reality research [Paper presentation]. 24th Annual 
Army Science Conference, Orlando, FL. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA433480.pdf 
Helin, K., Karjalainen, J., Bolierakis, S., Frangakis, N., Kemppi, P., Tedone, D. and Oliveira, D.M., 2017. 

Augmented Reality System for Space Station Maintenance Support. In European Association for Virtual 
Reality and Augmented Reality Conference, EuroVR-2017. 

Hired. (2021, July 17). 2021 State of Software Engineers Retrieved from https://hired.com/state-of-software-

engineers 

Ibáñez, M.B. and Delgado-Kloos, C., 2018. Augmented reality for STEM learning: A systematic review. Computers 

& Education, 123, pp.109-123. 

James Paine. (2021, July 17). 10 Brands Already Leveraging the Power of Augmented Reality. Retrieved from 

https://www.inc.com/james-paine/10-brands-already-leveraging-power-of-augmented-reality.html 
Joseph Seb. (2021, July 7). How Ikea is using Augmented Reality. Retrieved from https://digiday.com/media/ikea-

using-augmented-reality/ 

Lovaglio, P. G., Cesarini, M., Mercorio, F., & Mezzanzanica, M. (2018). Skills in demand for ICT and statistical 

occupations: Evidence from web‐based job vacancies. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data 
Science Journal, 11(2), 78-91. 

Mourtzis, D., Zogopoulos, V. and Vlachou, E., 2017. Augmented reality application to support remote maintenance 

as a service in the robotics industry. Procedia Cirp, 63, pp.46-51. 

Nee, A.Y., Ong, S.K., Chryssolouris, G. and Mourtzis, D., 2012. Augmented reality applications in design and 

manufacturing. CIRP annals, 61(2), pp.657-679. 

Neuendorf, K. A. (2016). The Content Analysis Guidebook. Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA. 
Perry, T.S., 2020. AR/VR is this year's hot ticket for jobs: But growth in demand for blockchain developers stutters-

[Careers]. IEEE Spectrum, 57(4), pp.19-19. 

Robert Brown. (2021, July 7). Augmented Reality in the Future of Work. Retrieved from 

https://www.cognizant.com/futureofwork/article/augmenting-your-future-job-title-and-monetization-with-
augmented-reality 

Robert Half. (2021, July 7). The Future of Work – Adapting to Technical Change. Retrieved from 
https://www.roberthalf.com/research-and-insights/workplace-research/the-future-of-work 

Saari, A., Rasul, M.S., Yasin, R.M., Rauf, R.A.A., Ashari, Z.H.M. and Pranita, D., 2021. Skills Sets for Workforce 
in the 4th Industrial Revolution: Expectation from Authorities and Industrial Players. Journal of Technical 
Education and Training, 13(2), pp.1-9. 

Schmalstieg, D. and Hollerer, T., 2016. Augmented reality: principles and practice. Addison-Wesley Professional. 

 
Thomas Alsop. (2021, July 7). Global Augmented Virtual Reality Market Size. Retrieved from 

https://www.statista.com/statistics/591181/global-augmented-virtual-reality-market-size/ 
Thornton, T., Ernst, J. V., & Clark, A. C. (2012). Augmented reality as a visual and spatial learning tool in 

technology education. Technology and Engineering Teacher, 71(8), 18–21. 

Verma, A., Frank, P. and Lamsal, K., 2021. An exploratory study of skill requirements for social media positions: A 

content analysis of job advertisements. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11040. 

Verma, A., Lamsal, K. and Verma, P., 2021. An investigation of skill requirements in artificial intelligence and 
machine learning job advertisements. Industry and Higher Education, p.0950422221990990. 

Verma, A., Yurov, K. M., Lane, P. L., & Yurova, Y. V. (2019). An investigation of skill requirements for business 
and data analytics positions: A content analysis of job advertisements. Journal of Education for 
Business, 94(4), 243-250. 

Wang, M., Callaghan, V., Bernhardt, J., White, K. and Peña-Rios, A., 2018. Augmented reality in education and 

training: pedagogical approaches and illustrative case studies. Journal of ambient intelligence and 
humanized computing, 9(5), pp.1391-1402. 

Wang, M., Callaghan, V., Bernhardt, J., White, K. and Peña-Rios, A., 2018. Augmented reality in education and 

training: pedagogical approaches and illustrative case studies. Journal of ambient intelligence and 
humanized computing, 9(5), pp.1391-1402. 

Wilson, H. J., Daugherty, P., & Bianzino, N. (2017). The jobs that artificial intelligence will create. MIT Sloan 

Management Review, 58(4), 14. 

 
 
