1
2
0
2

p
e
S
3

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
9
5
1
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Developing Virtual Reality Activities for the Astro 101 Class and
Lab

Gur Windmiller, Philip Blanco, and William F. Welsh

San Diego State University, San Diego, California, USA; gwindmiller@ sdsu.edu

Abstract. We report on our ongoing eﬀorts to develop, implement, and test VR
activities for the introductory astronomy course and laboratory. Speciﬁcally, we devel-
oped immersive activities for two challenging "3D" concepts: Moon phases, and stellar
parallax. For Moon phases, we built a simulation on the Universe Sandbox platform
and developed a set of activities that included ﬂying to diﬀerent locations/viewpoints
and moving the Moon by hand. This allowed the students to create and experience the
phases and the eclipses from diﬀerent vantage points, including seeing the phases of
the Earth from the Moon. We tested the eﬃcacy of these activities on a large cohort
(N=116) of general education astronomy students, drawing on our experience with a
previous VR Moon phase exercise (Blanco (2019)). We were able to determine that
VRbased techniques perform comparably well against other teaching methods. We
also worked with the studentrun VR Club at San Diego State University, using the
Unity software engine to create a simulated space environment, where students could
kinesthetically explore stellar parallax - both by moving themselves and by measuring
parallactic motion while traveling in an orbit. The students then derived a quantitative
distance estimate using the parallax angle they measured while in the virtual environ-
ment. Future plans include an immersive VR activity to demonstrate the Hubble expan-
sion and measure the age of the Universe. These serve as examples of how one develops
VR activities from the ground up, with associated pitfalls and tradeoﬀs.

1. Virtual Reality for the Introductory Astronomy Laboratory

Our small group at San Diego State University has been exploring the possible use
of Virtual Reality (VR) to provide authentic, student-centered laboratory activities to
teach diﬃcult-to-grasp 3-dimensional concepts in general education astronomy lecture
and lab classes. The hope is that by putting students in the driver’s seat and allow-
ing them to control their vantage point, they will achieve a deeper understanding of
these concepts. Our initial trials comparing VR with other teaching methods for Moon
phases and eclipses show promise (Blanco 2019; Welsh 2020). This is in accord with
the results of a similar Moon Phases study by Madden (2020). Here we report on a
continuation of this work, and on the creation of a new VR laboratory activity on stellar
parallax.

2. Moon Phases and Eclipses

A number of excellent 2D Moon phase simulators are available online, such as the
app provided by the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. We wanted to create a much

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Windmiller, Blanco, and Welsh

more immersive experience, with six degrees of freedom (“6-dof”), meaning 3 axes
of rotation plus 3 directions of translation. These allow the student to look in any
direction, and also change their viewpoint by moving around in a deﬁned space (e.g.
walking between the Earth and Moon). We adapted the free VR package Universe
Sandbox 2 for this activity. Initially we tried keeping the Sun-Earth-Moon system to an
accurate relative scale, but this proved awkward for educational purposes – the angular
sizes of the Sun and Moon are too small compared to the full ﬁeld of view. We therefore
created a “closer Moon” to facilitate one’s ability to see Moon’s phase and shadow on
the Earth, and to create an eclipse by grabbing this Moon using the HTC Vive’s hand
controllers.

As described in Blanco (2019), we used a “buddy system” to deploy this immersive
activity, where each of a pair of students took turns. While one wore the headset, the
other read the exercise instructions, recorded results, and monitored the headset view
on a large 2D display. The VR room was located in the campus library (“BuildIT
MakerSpace” area) so the students had access to the equipment most of the time. Based
on feedback from our initial testing (Blanco 2019), we created a pre-lab introductory
video describing the headset and hand controllers.

We administered pre- and post-VR experience quizzes to test students’ understand-
ing, and did the same with a "control" group taught by traditional methods. Assessment
methods and results are reported in Welsh (2020); Figure 1 shows an example. In sum-
mary, we found that students who participated in the VR activity did at least as well as
students who were taught with traditional methods, as found by Madden (2020).

The change in quiz score for students who did the Moon VR activity
Figure 1.
(N = 48) versus a control group (N = 68) taught with traditional methods. See
Welsh (2020)

3. Stellar Parallax

Having demonstrated that the Moon VR activity did not impede student learning, we
chose stellar parallax as the next topic to investigate. This is a diﬃcult activity to imple-
ment, ﬁrst because of conceptual diﬃculties in students’ understanding of the motions

3

and geometry, and second the instructor’s challenge of a creating an authentic 3D activ-
ity. In the past, we have set up objects at various distances in the laboratory, or outdoors,
and provided instructions to students to observe the objects from two positions sepa-
rated by a known baseline distance. However, the analogy to stellar parallax is diﬃcult
for students to conceptualize, and the apparent position change is conﬁned to a straight
line, which is unlike the motion of the Earth about the Sun. A VR simulation allows us
to correct these deﬁciencies.

Since no oﬀ-the-shelf software existed to demonstrate stellar parallax in 3D, we
teamed up with SDSU’s student-run VR Club. We chose to simulate real asterisms
(the Big Dipper and Cassiopeia), set against a backdrop of stars at inﬁnite distance.
Custom code was written by the students using the Unity platform. We met weekly
for a semester, providing guidance (and pizza) to the students. The learning went both
ways – we explained the astronomy and math to the students, and the students explained
optimal ways to achieve our goals, including better visualization ideas and thoughts on
how to “gameify” the exercise.

The outcome of this collaboration was a two-part activity (Figure 2). In the ﬁrst
part, students would play a game where the goal was to rank the distances to stars
in an asterism, by moving from side-to-side to gauge the parallax. This provided an
introduction to the second, quantitative activity, where the student was carried around
the Sun on an Earth orbit, and their task was to trace out the apparent path of a nearby
star relative to the background stars, using a hand controller pointer. Then, using an
angle tool, they could measure the width of the resulting ellipse and use this to calculate
a distance to the star. As with the Moon phases activity, scaling was necessary since
real parallaxes of a fraction of an arcsecond are impossible to discern. Therefore, we
artiﬁcially expanded Earth’s orbit such that observed parallaxes would be 5◦ − 10◦ in
the VR headset.

The stellar parallax activity was designed in two parts. Left: A game
Figure 2.
where students moved their viewpoint so that they could rank stars in an asterism in
order of distance. Right: Students then used the hand controller to trace the apparent
elliptical path of a star on the sky as they orbited the Sun along with the Earth.

Most students were able to orient themselves and use the hand controllers easily.
From an instructor’s standpoint, the biggest change from a traditional laboratory ex-

4

Windmiller, Blanco, and Welsh

ercise where students follow instructions “in parallel”, was that they now had to wait
their turn and perform the activity “in series”. All students completed a worksheet
where they calculated distances to the stars using the parallax angle they measured in
the second part of the activity. (We did not count “missed guesses” from the ﬁrst part
against their grade.) In addition, we asked conceptual questions to test their depth of
understanding. For example, “If we could make parallax measurements from Jupiter,
would they be better or worse than what we can do from Earth?” The vast majority of
students performed well on these tasks.

4. Conclusions and Further Directions

Producing VR activities is a lot of work! And although we wanted to keep astronomical
scales authentic, this was not a good idea educationally. However, VR served very well
in demonstrating the geometries of both Moon and stellar parallax activities. A key part
of our methodology was to include time for unscripted activities to allow students to
explore these diﬃcult concepts on their own. While learning outcome improvements
are modest, part of that may be due to inadequate assessment tools. We do know that
student enthusiasm for VR is very high.

Future activities include a demonstration of the Hubble expansion, where students
can “ﬂy” to diﬀerent galaxies and construct their own Hubble diagram from any vantage
point. In a draft version of this activity, we established reasonable sizes and number of
galaxies that allow students to collect useful quantitative datasets for oﬄine analysis.
We invite interested readers to contact the authors for additional information, or to
provide suggestions for additional activities.

Acknowledgments. The authors thank John Hood, Jr. for support, and the SDSU
Instructional Technology Services and Library for providing equipment and space for
student testing. We also thank the members of the SDSU VR Club, especially Carter
Andrews and Kain Shepard, for their indispensable assistance in writing code and pro-
viding valuable feedback on the stellar parallax activity

References

Blanco, P. R., Windmiller, G., Welsh, W. F., & Hauze, S., 2019 “Lessons Learned from Teach-
ing Astronomy with Virtual Reality”, in Advancing Astronomy for All: ASP 2018: Pro-
ceedings of a conference held (10-13 October 2018) in the California Wine Country,
Sonoma Valley, California, USA. Edited by Greg Schultz, Jonathan Barnes, and Linda
Shore, 524, 159-162.

Welsh, W. F., Windmiller, G., & Blanco, P. R., 2020 “Teaching Moon Phases and Eclipses
in Virtual Reality – Pros and Cons,” 235th meeting of the American Astronomi-
cal Society, Bulletin of the AAS 52, 229. Available online as iPoster 176.04, at
tinyurl.com/aas235VRposter

Madden, J., Pandita, S., Schuldt, J. P., et al, 2020 “Ready student one: Exploring the pre-
dictors of student learning in virtual reality” PLOS ONE (PLoSO), 1529788, DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0229788.

