1
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
7
1
4
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comfort and Sickness while Virtually Aboard an
Autonomous Telepresence Robot

Markku Suomalainen1, Katherine J. Mimnaugh1, Israel Becerra2, Eliezer
Lozano2, Rafael Murrieta-Cid2, and Steven M. LaValle1

1 Center for Ubiquitous Computing, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
firstname.surname@oulu.fi
2 Centro de Investigacion en Matematicas (CIMAT), Guanajuato, Mexico
{israelb,eliezer.lozano,murrieta}@cimat.mx

Abstract. In this paper, we analyze how diﬀerent path aspects aﬀect
a user’s experience, mainly VR sickness and overall comfort, while im-
mersed in an autonomously moving telepresence robot through a virtual
reality headset. In particular, we focus on how the robot turns and the
distance it keeps from objects, with the goal of planning suitable tra-
jectories for an autonomously moving immersive telepresence robot in
mind; rotational acceleration is known for causing the majority of VR
sickness, and distance to objects modulates the optical ﬂow. We ran a
within-subjects user study (n = 36, women = 18) in which the partic-
ipants watched three panoramic videos recorded in a virtual museum
while aboard an autonomously moving telepresence robot taking three
diﬀerent paths varying in aspects such as turns, speeds, or distances to
walls and objects. We found a moderate correlation between the users’
sickness as measured by the SSQ and comfort on a 6-point Likert scale
across all paths. However, we detected no association between sickness
and the choice of the most comfortable path, showing that sickness is
not the only factor aﬀecting the comfort of the user. The subjective ex-
perience of turn speed did not correlate with either the SSQ scores or
comfort, even though people often mentioned turning speed as a source
of discomfort in the open-ended questions. Through exploring the open-
ended answers more carefully, a possible reason is that the length and
lack of predictability also play a large role in making people observe
turns as uncomfortable. A larger subjective distance from walls and ob-
jects increased comfort and decreased sickness both in quantitative and
qualitative data. Finally, the SSQ subscales and total weighted scores
showed diﬀerences by age group and by gender.

Keywords: Telepresence · Robotics · VR Sickness.

1

Introduction

In immersive robotic telepresence, as seen in Fig. 1, a user wearing a Head-
Mounted Display (HMD) embodies a physical robot in a distant location. Be-
sides the visual input through the HMD, the user can communicate with people

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

M. Suomalainen et al.

Fig. 1. Immersive robotic telepresence.

around the robot through bidirectional audio, and can command the robot to
move. This technology creates opportunities to visit museums or nature for peo-
ple with limited mobility or who otherwise cannot, or grandparents attending
grandchildren’s birthdays far away. Overall, the technology enables meetings
which mix physically present and remotely attending people, such that, for ex-
ample, a single remote participant can join a physical meeting and actually feel
as if she was really there. The robot also allows for touring real facilities or oﬃce
buildings, helps join physical conferences remotely and facilitates the important
impromptu corridor discussions during remote work [50].

There is evidence that telepresence robot users prefer the robot to handle low-
level motions autonomously, such that the users only choose the target location
for the robot to move in a map or within visible area [41,1]. Most of current
commercial telepresence robots (with standard camera streaming into a standard
screen, in other words, not employing an HMD) have a joystick or similar as
the main control method, with autonomy functionalities only being rolled out
at the moment in products such as the Double 3 robot. However, with the
increased immersion and embodiment of an HMD-based telepresence robot, any
autonomous path is not suitable but the motions the robot makes must be
carefully planned to avoid adversarial eﬀects; pure Virtual Reality (VR) research
and applications usually enable and encourage the use of teleportation to avoid
VR sickness, often caused by sensory mismatch rising from seeing motion in the
HMD while staying stationary. Thus, there is a very limited amount of research
on how an immersive telepresence robot should move to make the embodied user
feel comfortable.

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

3

It is unclear which aspects of autonomous motions make an HMD user feel
uncomfortable or experience VR sickness [26,5], besides the known result of
rotations causing more sickness than translations [22]. For example, distance
to walls and objects modulates the optical ﬂow linked to sickness, but simply
staying as far as possible from objects and walls is often not a suitable path
planning strategy for a robot in complex environments. Also, even though there
is evidence that performing turns faster may reduce cybersickness [51,2], such
fast motions may not feel comfortable for the immersed users and there may be
more factors in turns besides the speed that modulate comfort and sickness.

In this paper we make an attempt to disentangle comfort and VR sickness ex-
perienced by subjects aboard an autonomous immersive telepresence robot and
advise what aspects in the trajectory of such a robot should be paid attention to.
First, we present an unexpected result: the amount of VR sickness suﬀered by
users does not aﬀect their choice of most comfortable path, even though paths
are shown to induce diﬀerent amounts of VR sickness. As there is a correlation
between experienced VR sickness and comfort, it was expected that people who
suﬀer more from sickness would prefer paths that are more comfortable. Then,
we present several results regarding the robot’s turns; the Likert-scale answers
show that perceived turn speed does not correlate with VR sickness or perceived
comfort. However, turns are very often mentioned in open-ended questions as
reason for discomfort or the choice of most comfortable path; further analysis of
the open-ended questions reveals that even though turn speed was the most men-
tioned keyword, predictability and length of turn also play major roles in making
a turn comfortable or uncomfortable. Additionally, distances to walls and objects
were weakly correlated with comfort and sickness, which was also reﬂected in
the open-ended questions, meaning that distance should be kept whenever pos-
sible. Finally, we report the eﬀect of age, gender and gaming experience on the
results, as well as the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) subscales, ﬁnding
that women in our study experienced higher levels of sickness on average than
men, adding to the currently conﬂicting results on the topic [13,39]. Contrary
to a recent meta-analysis [45], in this study older subjects suﬀered more from
the eﬀects of VR sickness. We discuss why subjects in our experiments suﬀered
more from VR sickness when compared to roller coaster studies and ﬁnd ways
to reduce the VR sickness caused by VR-based telepresence to make it a viable
option for the general population.

The main contributions of this paper are 1) quantitative analyses of the re-
lation between sickness, comfort, and other variables related to immersive telep-
resence, with suggestions on turn lengths and speeds, and 2) in-depth analysis of
open-ended questions regarding turns, leading to ﬁndings that turn predictabil-
ity and length play major roles in making turns comfortable while retaining the
non-sickening abilities of performing the turns fast. Additionally, we present re-
sults on VR sickness; carryover eﬀects, eﬀect of demographics and comparison
to similar studies, to contribute to the literature on the topic from the perspec-
tive of autonomous motions in VR. We note that we performed the experiments
purely in VR to avoid confounding factors (such as shaking of the robot) that

4

M. Suomalainen et al.

would arise from using a physical robot. However, we are planning to test the
results also on a physical robot to conﬁrm the results.

2 Related work

Telepresence, a term originally coined by Minsky [33] and sometimes referred to
as tele-embodiment [38], is classically, and in this paper, deﬁned as embody-
ing a robot in a remote location. Most of the work on robotic telepresence
considers seeing the remote environment through a standard naked-eye display
[28,40,41,35,11]; these works present the potential of telepresence robots in, for
example, conferences and classrooms, with also medical applications being an
often researched topic [16,47]. Additionally, there is research for more personal,
intimate, and extensible use cases, such as sharing outdoor activities [15] or more
personal long-distance relationships [52].

There is an increasing number of works that demonstrate the potential of
increased immmersion created by an HMD in telepresence, such as better task
performance [12] and situational awareness [30]. An interesting motivator is also
the ﬁnding that in a group work task, users telepresent through a traditional dis-
play speak less and perceive tasks as more diﬃcult than the physical participants
[48]; this is exactly the sort of issue that the increased feeling of presence by the
user [44], facilitated by the increased immersion of an HMD, can remedy. A few
other researchers have also noticed the importance of robotic telepresence using
an HMD: Baker et al. [1] let the user choose the destination similarly as in tele-
porting and then make the robot move to the destination autonomously. Zhang
et al. [53] explored using redirected walking on a telepresence robot. Finally, Oh
et al. [36] used such a robot on a tour with several pre-selected destinations.

However, as always when using an HMD, VR sickness can severely deterio-
rate the experience for many users. A major cause for VR sickness is a conﬂict
between the visual and vestibular senses when self-motion is seen through the
HMD but not sensed by the vestibular organs in the ears [42,5]. In virtual en-
vironments, the use of teleportation is frequently used to avoid VR sickness [3],
but in telepresence teleportation would have a signiﬁcant delay and is thus not a
realistic option. Thus, in virtual environments, continuous autonomous motions
are often avoided, with perhaps the notable exception of roller coasters often used
in sickness studies due to their more sickening eﬀects [8,34,31,18]. Though there
is a recommendation that VR sessions should not last longer than 55-70 minutes
to avoid overwhelming sickness levels [25], in the roller coaster studies many
people could not even complete a 15 minute session. A meta-analysis found that
15.6% of participants across 46 VR studies dropped out due to sickness eﬀects
[45].

Even though sickness plays a major part in the comfort of an embodied
telepresence user, it should not be the only criterion considered when design-
ing motions for a telepresence robot. Becerra et al. [2] showed that the use of
piecewise linear paths (meaning that the robot is only rotating in place, and
during forward motions there was no rotation) can decrease the VR sickness

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

5

on embodied participants and make the path more comfortable when compared
to a traditional robot path where the robot can rotate and move forward si-
multaneously; however, they did not explore more detailed questions on why
such turns were preferred, or other path aspects such as speeds and distances to
objects. Moreover, due to the varying susceptibility to VR sickness [43], other
aspects should not be completely ignored in favor of reducing VR sickness, as
some methods to reduce VR sickness (such as driving extremely slowly) also
deteriorate the overall experience. To the knowledge of the authors, there are no
studies that would consider aspects such as closeness to objects and speeds as
factor in immersive telepresence robots motion planning.

To collect results from VR studies that give a more accurate reﬂection of
eﬀects in the general population, demographic information and individual diﬀer-
ences must be taken into account. Though there have been conﬂicting ﬁndings in
the VR literature regarding gender diﬀerences in response to VR sickness [13], a
recent meta-analysis found that SSQ eﬀects were systematically associated with
the number of men and women in the study [39], such that when there are fewer
women participants, SSQ scores tend to be higher. In regards to age diﬀerences
in VR sickness eﬀects as measured by the SSQ, a 2020 meta-analysis of 55 VR
articles analyzing VR sickness across types of content and individual factors
found that older subjects had lower SSQ scores, and in particular older subjects
had signiﬁcantly lower SSQ scores on the disorientation subscale as compared
with younger subjects [45].

3 Methods

3.1 Setup and test paths

The study was run on a university campus in February 2020 before COVID-19
caused any local restrictions. The users were seated during the study, as shown
in Fig. 2, and shown pre-recorded panoramic videos with an Oculus Rift S using
the Virtual Desktop application; as the video was recorded as a 360 video, the
users were able to look around in the virtual environment as the virtual robot
was moving. The test environment was designed with Unity. To create a more
realistic optical ﬂow and experience for the users, there were various paintings
on the walls and statues in the gallery of the museum.

Three paths were considered, presented in Fig. 3. Two of the paths, Pareto
Least Turns (PLT) and Pareto Shortest Path (PSP), were piecewise linear, and
in [2] they were shown to be less sickening and more comfortable than the third
path, the Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRT) path. PLT and PSP were
paths chosen from a Pareto front across multiple criteria; the Pareto front of
a multiobjective optimization problem is the set of solutions from which any
objective score cannot be improved without deteriorating another objective. The
Pareto front was computed with the objectives of minimizing the number of
turns, minimizing the distance to goal and minimizing the amount of time an
object was closer than 2m from the subject.

6

M. Suomalainen et al.

Fig. 2. A participant in the user study watches one of the panoramic videos in the
Oculus Rift S (right). A screenshot of the gallery inside the virtual museum (left).

The ﬁrst path, the PLT, (duration 76s, length 72m, min. distance to walls
1m), minimized the number of turns along a piecewise linear path (2 turns),
and the second path, the PSP, (67s, 62.6m, 0.4m), minimized the length of the
path (4 turns). Both the PLT and PSP had a constant turn speed of 90 deg/s
and mean forward speed of 1m/s. The RRT path had smooth turns and was
generated by the RRT algorithm [27], widely used in robot motion planning.
This algorithm respects the dynamics of the Diﬀerential Drive Robot (DDR)
base, which means that the actual path exists in a 5-D space, from which only
two dimensions are plotted here; this is why simply curating the path to avoid
unnecessary curves, or ﬁnding a more optimal path, is infeasible. As the RRT is
a sampling-based algorithm and does not provide an optimal path, the algorithm
was run 1000 times and the path with the least amount of changes in direction
was chosen as the third path (129s, 67.2m, 0.3m, avg. turn speed 18.8 deg/s,
avg. forward speed 0.52m/s).

3.2 Participants

Subjects were recruited from a university campus and the surrounding commu-
nity. Of the 45 participants, altogether nine subjects were excluded; three quit
the experiment due to excessive sickness symptoms (we will discuss possible rea-
sons for this high number of dropouts in Section 5), and the rest were excluded
due to technical failures, not completing questionnaires, or for feeling severe sick-
ness symptoms before the study began. Thus, the results are from 36 subjects,
age 20-44 with mean 28.25, divided equally between men (n = 18) and women

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

7

Fig. 3. The paths presented to the subjects in the user study: blue is the Pareto Least
Turns (PLT), dotted red the Pareto Shortest Path (PSP) and yellow the RRT path.

(n = 18). Regarding video game use, 25% of the subjects (n = 9) reported that
they never played video games on PC, mobile, or console, 14% (n = 5) rarely
played them, 28% (n = 10) played them weekly or often, 19% (n = 7) played
them daily, and 14% (n = 5) did not respond.

3.3 Measures

The Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) [21] was used as a measure of VR
sickness symptoms. Before seeing any of the path videos, subjects completed a
baseline SSQ which was used for screening purposes. They also ﬁlled out SSQ’s
immediately after seeing each video; the order in which the videos were shown to
users was counterbalanced to avoid order eﬀects. Then, the subjects completed a
questionnaire created for this study after each path. The questionnaire consisted
of several questions that were rated on a six-point Likert scale, followed by
some open-ended questions asking why they gave that rating. The Likert-rated
questions asked subjects how comfortable their experience was on the path (from
very uncomfortable to very comfortable), how well they could ﬁnd their way back
to where they started in the museum (from not easily at all to very easily), how
they felt about the distance between themselves and the walls or objects in the
museum (from too close to too far), and how they felt about the speed of the
turns (from too slow to too fast). The open-ended questions asked why a path
was uncomfortable if they had given that rating, and if they had any comments.
After they had seen all three paths, they answered additional questions asking
them to select which of the paths was preferred and most comfortable, and the
reason for that choice.

8

M. Suomalainen et al.

3.4 Procedure
Upon arrival, each subject was given an information sheet about the study and
asked to sign a consent form if they wanted to participate. A baseline SSQ was
administered, and then the subject was seated in the experiment chair (Fig. 2).
The experimenter read the instructions out loud for the subjects, and then the
subject put on the HMD and the ﬁrst path video was played. After the video,
the subject removed the HMD, ﬁlled in an SSQ, answered the Likert scale and
open-ended questions and drew the path. This process was not timed, but the
duration between videos was approximately ﬁve minutes. Then, the second video
was played and the procedure was repeated. After the third video, the subject
completed the ﬁnal questionnaire comparing the paths, and then reported de-
mographic information and gaming experience. Once they had completed this,
they were given a debrieﬁng about the study, copies of the consent forms to take
home, and a coupon worth €2 for a coﬀee from the local cafe.

4 Results

Data from the same experiment has earlier been used in [2,32], where the focus
has been on both the technical implementation, comparison of the paths and the
naturalness and preference of the user. In contrast, in this paper we do not focus
on comparing the paths and path-planning methods, but instead analyze other
interesting results accross all paths. The main focus is about perceived user com-
fort, to present the community more information about the use of autonomous
motions in VR-based telepresence. The total number of comments on turns and
distances for the ”why was the path uncomfortable” question have been reported
in [32], but without the more detailed analysis presented in this paper regarding
the actual contents of the open-ended comments. Also, even though individual
results on questions regarding comfort across paths have been reported, the re-
lationship analyses between variables reported here have not been presented.
Finally, we note that [2] found PSP and PLT causing less VR sickness and being
rated more comfortable than the RRT.

Exploratory analyses were conducted with two-tailed signiﬁcance levels for
alpha set at 0.05 and conﬁdence intervals set at 95%. When multiple tests were
run, Bonferroni correction within each test was used. Post-hoc power analyses
and observed eﬀect sizes [6] were calculated using G*Power [10], Psychometrica
freeware [29], or by hand [49]. Thematic analysis with an inductive approach [37]
was used to classify the responses to open-ended questions by two independent
coders. Results from Likert-scale questions, forced-choice questions and SSQ are
ﬁrst presented in Section 4.1, after which responses to the open-ended questions
are analyzed in Section 4.2.

4.1 Quantitative data
Sickness had a negative correlation with comfort. The more the subjects
suﬀered from VR sickness, the less comfortable they felt. A Spearman’s rank-
order correlation test was run between the Likert comfort ratings, from very

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

9

uncomfortable (1) to very comfortable (6), and the total weighted SSQ scores
after each path. There was a statistically signiﬁcant moderate, negative correla-
tion (rs(108) = −.400, p < .001); as the total SSQ scores increased, the Likert
comfort ratings decreased.

High sickness scores did not inﬂuence people’s choice of preferred or
most comfortable path. The motivation for checking for this relationship is
the assumption that people who suﬀer more from VR sickness would put a higher
weight on how comfortable the path is. To crudely rank the sickness sensitivity
of the participants, the highest of the three total SSQ scores for each individual
was selected as an index. These scores were then separated into three equal-sized
groups of 12 people. Highest total weighted SSQ scores under 15 were in the low
sickness group, between 15 and 40 in the medium sickness group, and over 40 in
the high sickness group. The relationship between sickness groups and choice of
most comfortable path was analyzed using crosstabulation and a Fisher’s exact
test (two-sided) to account for the small sample size. There was no statistically
signiﬁcant association in choice of the most comfortable path by sickness group,
p = .164, w = 0.85. Similarly, there was no statistically signiﬁcant association
between choice of preferred path and sickness group, p = .873, w = 0.58.

Increase in perceived distance to walls and objects had a weak correla-
tion with sickness and comfort. The distance to walls and objects in virtual
museum from 1 (too close) to 6 (too far) was compared to Likert ratings for
comfort (higher numbers mean greater comfort) and total weighted SSQ scores
(higher scores mean more sickness symptoms) using a Spearman’s rank-order
correlation test. There was a statistically signiﬁcant weak, positive correlation
(rs(108) = .302, p = .002) between the distance to walls and objects and comfort.
The closer to walls and objects the paths were rated, the less comfort subjects
reported experiencing. Compared to the SSQ scores, there was again a statis-
tically signiﬁcant weak, negative correlation (rs(108) = −.277, p = .004). The
closer to walls and objects the paths were rated, the more sickness symptoms
subjects reported experiencing.

The perceived speed of turns did not inﬂuence comfort or sickness
There was no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between the speed of the turns,
rated from too slow (1) to too fast (6), and the Likert ratings of comfort
(rs(108) = −.157, p = .105) or the total weighted SSQ scores (rs(108) =
.117, p = .228).

There were no carryover eﬀects on sickness with 5 minute breaks be-
tween videos. The videos of the museum were counterbalanced by gender and
by the order that they were seen in. This counterbalancing was used to allow
comparison between paths regardless of whether carryover eﬀects had an impact
or not. However, to see if there were carryover eﬀects, a Friedman’s test on the

10

M. Suomalainen et al.

SSQ total weighted scores after each video by order was run. There was no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the distributions of total weighted SSQ scores
after the ﬁrst, second, and third videos, χ2(2, 36) = .775, p = .679, W = 0.01.
Thus, the recovery time subjects had with the headset oﬀ, involving answering
questionnaires for about ﬁve minutes after each video, appears to have been suf-
ﬁcient for participants to recover from these VR sickness eﬀects. In one extreme
case, for example, the subject’s total weighted SSQ score after their second video
was 153.34, and the score after their third video was zero. Whereas several pa-
pers report longer carryover eﬀects (for example [46]), a large variation across
studies has been observed, with lowest recovery times being 10 minutes [9].

Older people suﬀered more from VR sickness. Age diﬀerences in sickness
were examined by splitting the subjects into three similar-sized groups for anal-
ysis (small variance in group sizes result from not splitting same-aged subjects
to diﬀerent groups): Under 26 (13 subjects), 26 to 30 (12 subjects), and Over 30
(11 subjects), collapsing across paths, and testing the diﬀerence between these
groups on each of the SSQ subscales and total weighted scores. A Kruskal-Wallis
test showed for the nausea subscale (NS), χ2(2, 108) = 19.02, p < 0.001, η2 =
0.16, the disorientation subscale (DS), χ2(2, 108) = 9.23, p = 0.010, η2 = 0.07,
and the total weighted score (TS), χ2(2, 108) = 11.48, p = 0.003, η2 = 0.09, there
were statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in scores between the age groups. Post-
hoc pairwise comparisons all showed the same pattern, with the Over 30 age
group signiﬁcantly higher than the 26 to 30 group (NS p = .001, DS p = .019,
TS p = .012), and the Over 30 group signiﬁcantly higher than the Under 26
group (NS p < .001, DS p = .030, TS p = .007), but no diﬀerence between the
Under 26 group and the 26 to 30 group. The exception to this pattern was on
the oculomotor subscale, where there was no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the age groups, χ2(2, 108) = 4.296, p = 0.117, η2 = 0.02. Mean SSQ
subscales and total scores for each age group are shown in Fig. 4.

Previous VR experience did not inﬂuence VR sickness. Subjects were
split into three groups based on how often they used virtual reality to test
whether or not previous virtual reality experience had an impact on sickness.
Ten subjects had never tried a VR HMD (28% of the sample), 15 subjects had
tried VR between one and nine times or a few times (43% of the sample), and
10 subjects tried ten or more times or used VR regularly (28% of the sample).
One subject did not give a response about his previous VR use and was excluded
from these analyses. There were no statistically signiﬁcant correlations between
VR usage frequency and the nausea subscale (rs(105) = .011, p = .915), the
oculomotor subscale (rs(105) = −.030, p = .764), the disorientation subscale
(rs(105) = .038, p = .697), or the total weighted SSQ score (rs(105) = .008, p =
.933).

Women suﬀered more from VR sickness. To investigate potential diﬀer-
ences in sickness by gender, scores across paths were collapsed and compared each

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

11

Fig. 4. Mean weighted SSQ subscales and total scores from all paths by age group.

with a Mann-Whitney U test. Women had statistically signiﬁcantly higher SSQ
scores than men on the nausea subscale (U = 746.00, z = −4.55, p < .001, r =
0.44), the oculomotor subscale (U = 1037.50, z = −2.63, p = .008, r = 0.25),
the disorientation subscale (U = 904.50, z = −3.51, p < .001, r = 0.34), and the
total weighted score (U = 827.50, z = −3.90, p < .001, r = 0.38), as presented in
Fig. 5.

Subjective wayﬁnding ability was weakly correlated with comfort. The
idea for testing this correlation is reports that loss of wayﬁnding ability can
cause discomfort [7]. Likert ratings for comfort (higher numbers mean greater
comfort) were also tested against the Likert ratings for subjective wayﬁnding
(answer to the question ”If you had to go back to where you started in the
museum, how well do you think you could ﬁnd your way back?”, with a high
number meaning more likelihood of ﬁnding the way back) using a Spearman’s
rank-order correlation test. There was a statistically signiﬁcant weak, positive
correlation (rs(108) = .205, p = .034). The better that subjects believed they
could ﬁnd their way back to the beginning of the museum, the greater the comfort
experienced.

12

M. Suomalainen et al.

Fig. 5. Mean weighted SSQ subscales and total scores from all paths by gender.

4.2 Qualitative data

Turns was the most commented aspect making a path uncomfort-
able, with fast turns being the most commented within turns but
unexpectedness and length of turns also playing major roles. After the
Likert-rated question regarding how comfortable each path was, subjects were
asked an open-ended question, ”if it [the path] was uncomfortable, why?” Their
answers were coded with keywords based on the text that they provided. A full
breakdown of the distribution of all codes for each path can be seen in Fig. 7.
The largest group of comments was in relation to the turns, with 59 comments
across all paths; fast turns had the greatest number of individual comments, with
surprising turns, sharp turns and many turns also getting at least several men-
tions. This is in contrast to turn speed not being correlated with the Likert-scale
value for comfort.

Whereas fast and surprising turns are quite evident, looking closely into the
comments saying ”sharp turns” reveals that the word ”sharp” is often associ-
ated with the ”length” of the turn. For example, the comments ”SHARP (90
DEGREE)TURNS ARE VERY UN REALISTIC” and ”The turn is very sharp
and rapid. Turn is like 90 degree, so I feel uncomfortable” were typical. More-
over, the degrees of the turn were mentioned also when turns were classiﬁed as
”fast”, such as ”The 90 degrees turns felt very fast.”. It is likely that because
there is no clear and concise everyday word, especially within non-native speak-

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

13

Fig. 6. The frequently found codes from the question ”If the path was uncomfortable,
why?” which was asked after each path that a each user watched.

ers, to talk about the degrees a turn makes, the ”large turns” category is in fact
larger than it appears to be in these results.

Turns also had the largest inﬂuence on the choice of the most com-
fortable path. The ”size”, speed and predictability of the turn seem
to have a large eﬀect. The largest number of individual comments were un-
der the code ”good turns”. However, it become evident that people had varying
preference of turns when looking at the responses together with the chosen path.
For example, subjects chose the PSP because ”It was smoother, there were not
so many forced turns” and ”The walking speed was not too high, and again,
the number of uncomfortable turns was not too high.” and ”Turn is not rapid
and sharp. The distance is also OK.”, even though PSP had the same amount of
90° turns as PLT, and additionally two 45° turns. This implies that, even though
long turns at once should make people less sick, users would still prefer not to
have such long turns and 45° turns do not bother users as much. Additionally,
even though only one subject used the word ”predictable”, terms such as ”forced”
(above) and ”abrupt” (”There were not so much abrupt turns.”) were used on the
paths not chosen as the most comfortable, indicating that predictability plays a
bigger role in making such turns comfortable than what could be deducted from
the coding alone.

Small distances to walls and objects were considered a major source
of discomfort, and an important factor when choosing the most com-

14

M. Suomalainen et al.

Fig. 7. The frequently found codes from the question ”Of the three paths, which one
was the most comfortable? Why?” which was asked after the subject had seen all three
paths.

fortable path. There were 26 comments across all paths regarding the distance
group of responses in the ”why uncomfortable” question, most of which were re-
lated to close walls (18) or corners (6), with only two responses mentioning being
too close to objects. A very related category is fear of collision (10 mentions),
where most quotes were related to distance to walls (”Sometimes it felt I would
bump into the walls”); these responses were detected in all paths, with PSP
and RRT being most mentioned but also PLT gathering several mentions, even
though PLT had a larger minimum clearance (1m) than the other two paths
(0.3m and 0.4m). The responses reveal that it was considered problematic that
the 1m clearance was at a 2m wide corridor, which was deemed too narrow (”in
the end when we went trough a very narrow path, it felt like the walls were clos-
ing in.”); indeed, a good distance to objects or walls was often mentioned as
a favorable property when choosing the most comfortable path (Fig. 7), with
almost all mentions being together with the PL. When inspecting the comments
regarding most comfortable path, the distance to objects is mentioned as often
as distance to walls. However, from the ﬁve mentions of ”distance to objects”,
only one considered that the objects were close enough (”going near to the ob-
jects”), whereas another one simply stated that distance was ”good” and the
rest preferred staying as clear from objects as from walls and corners.

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

15

5 Discussion

We expected to ﬁnd a stronger link between the perceived comfort and SSQ
scores than what the results showed (no relationship between the SSQ and the
choice of ”most comfortable path,” and a moderate correlation between the SSQ
and the Likert-scale comfort); we expected people with higher SSQ scores to
prefer paths that, in general, caused less sickness (PLT and PSP). The lack of
this connection shows that there are more facets to a user’s comfort than only
the often used SSQ; even though experiencing VR sickness can have the most
impact on users, sickness symptoms may not be the most signiﬁcant part of
the VR experience for the users. Several subjects stated this outright, such as
”It was not sickening but not comfortable in the way the (virtual) robot moves”.
The importance of this is highlighted by a strong relationship between perceived
comfort and preference reported in [32], meaning that people can like things that
make them a little sick. Also, comfort is a more subjective feeling than sickness,
and discomfort does not necessarily equal sickness; all of this should be taken
into account when designing VR experiences and new methods for quantifying
the sickness eﬀects and comfort of VR exposure.

We were also expecting that perceiving a fast turn speed would not have an
eﬀect on the SSQ, based on [51] ﬁnding that performing the same turn faster
than slower makes people less sick; the data conﬁrmed this. However, it came
as a surprise that even though the turns were most frequently mentioned in the
open-ended questions regarding why users felt a particular path was uncomfort-
able, there was no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between Likert-scale turn
speed ratings and comfort. A likely reason is that we speciﬁcally asked about
the turn speeds in the Likert-scale question; thus, the Likert-scale question did
not consider any other aspects of the turn besides speed. Besides the earlier
mentioned quotes where the 90° turns were speciﬁcally mentioned, also other
quotes with fast turns had additional adjectives hinting towards the surprise
element, such as ”the movement was slow but, the turns were fast a jarring”.
Another subject, who chose PSP as the most comfortable path, stated that PSP
”Didn’t contain sharp turns and lot’s of unreasonable moves. ”, even though it
contained the same amount of 90° turns as PLT, and additionally two 45° turns;
this suggests that the 45° turns were not considered as uncomfortable as the
longer turns. These ﬁndings indicate that there could be even a contradiction
between perceived comfort and experienced VR sickness during turns; long turns
are considered uncomfortable, even though they reduce sickness. We believe this
should be taken into account when designing the motions of a telepresence robot,
and make a more controlled experiment about turn speeds and lengths in VR,
where besides sickness also comfort is queried. Even though the results are only
preliminary, we suggest avoiding 90 degree turns at once and making the turns
more predictable. We still suggest keeping the turns fast, at least close to the
90 deg/s, since there is known evidence of eﬀect on VR sickness but contradictory
evidence with comfort.

Distance to walls and objects had a correlation with both comfort and sick-
ness, even if weak, and was also mentioned frequently in the open-ended ques-

16

M. Suomalainen et al.

tions. This was expected, as a closer passing distance increases the optical ﬂow,
which is linked to increase in VR sickness. Additionally, fear of collision was
mentioned a few times, which, as a strong feeling causing anxiety, may have a
strong eﬀect on comfort and sickness [14]. Based on the results, 1m passing dis-
tance did not cause users any discomfort unless in a narrow corridor, but such
a passing distance would make robot motion planning complicated. However, it
would be beneﬁcial to verify the result on a real robot in a real environment,
with more variance of passing distance.

The observed relationship between subjective wayﬁnding ability and comfort
is not surprising, since there is evidence in the literature that loss of wayﬁnding
ability can cause discomfort [7]. The environment used in this study was too
simple to test objective wayﬁnding ability, and the correlation is only weak,
with also the possibility that this is only a coincidence; however, the observed
connection and evidence in literature indicates that a more focused study would
be useful to explore whether the wayﬁnding ability can be increased by careful
planning of the robot’s motions.

The subjects succumbed to VR sickness quickly considering that the videos
were not very long (67s-129s) and the robot moved slowly (0.5m/s − 1m/s);
however, the subjects also recovered faster than suggested by earlier literature.
For example, Kourtesis et al. [25] state that VR sessions can be comfortable up
to 55 to 70 minutes, but we experienced three dropouts (two during their ﬁrst
videos, which were RRT and PLT, and one while watching RRT as second video
after already ﬁnished PLT) with videos lasting less than two minutes. This sup-
ports the proposition that continuous motions, without a visual, stationary cue
that moves with the user, are a signiﬁcant contributor to VR sickness. However,
the surprisingly fast recovery time (no carryover eﬀects detected with 5 minute
breaks, whereas the lowest suggested required recovery time from literature is
10 minutes [9]) balance this; these results hint that VR sickness with continuous
motions raises fast but also decreases fast. However, more focused research on
VR sickness for continuous motions would be required to conﬁrm this.

Comparing to the SSQ scores caused by roller coasters in two other studies
(both using HTC Vive), the results from this study were comparable or slightly
higher when adjusted for the duration of the stimuli; Islam et al. [18] had no
dropouts in a 15-minute roller coaster ride with a mean SSQ of 55.45, and
McHugh et al. [31] had no dropouts in a 5 minutes 50 seconds exposure with a
mean SSQ of 34 (visually approximated from ﬁgure), whereas our mean SSQ was
20.3; thus, it seems that the telepresence experience provided a higher variance
of sickness to test subjects than a roller coaster, since in our study there were
more dropouts but less average sickness. In fact, there are a few considerable
diﬀerences between telepresence and a roller coaster, both adding and reducing
the potential for VR sickness. A roller coaster moves much faster, which increases
the optical ﬂow and the probability for sickness, but it has a constant frame of
reference (the car) which is known to decrease VR sickness [4]. Also, most of the
scenery does not move with the speed of the roller coaster if it travels higher
than on ground level, reducing the optical ﬂow; a reduction of sickness has been

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

17

reported when a plane ﬂies higher above the ground [20]. Additionally, the turns
are predictable - the user can always see the track ahead, which has also been
shown to reduce VR sickness [24]. We also observed individual comments in
open-ended questions on turns being unpredictable (”the turns were too fast,
but thankfully pretty predictable this time.”) and, in regards to why the path
was uncomfortable, ”The turns were very strong (sudden)” and ”It was not
sickening but not comfortable in the way the (virtual) robot moves. Sudden turns
very close to the corners of the walls.” Thus, future ways to combat VR sickness
in autonomous telepresence motions could be visualizing the path to the user so
that movements are less unexpected and providing a constant frame of reference,
such as visualizing the robot.

Women experienced greater sickness symptoms during the study than men,
which has been found previously in VR research [43]). In this study, previous VR
experience did not inﬂuence the severity of VR sickness, which is in agreement
with [25], even though such an eﬀect through habituation [17] has been reported
elsewhere [43]. Regarding higher sickness in older subjects, we were unable to
ﬁnd similar work in the literature, and in fact found conﬂicting results [45]. One
explanation could perhaps be related to diﬀerences in lens ﬂexibility in the eye
across the lifespan, making it easier to focus on things very close to your face
when you’re younger and sometimes resulting in the need for reading glasses
later in life. It will be an interesting topic for future research whether there is
something speciﬁc in continuous motions that causes this discrepancy.

5.1 Limitations and future work

We established in this study that the design of the robot’s turns are very impor-
tant for increasing comfort and reducing VR sickness. Based on the results, we
can provide initial suggestions for designing robot motions, but to draw decisive
conclusions more research is needed. For example, it seems that a Likert-scale
question about the length of the turns should have been asked, to pinpoint with
more accuracy which aspect of the turn makes them so uncomfortable. More-
over, we want to test how big a role predictability plays, to make the experience
closer to a slow speed roller coaster. The predictability could be done either
explicitly, such as using arrows or a path on the ground, or by modifying the
velocity proﬁle of the turns; for example, the common trick used in animation to
employ high-order derivatives of speed, such as jerk, could be useful to increase
predictability by making the turn start slower but then increase the speed to
take advantage of the less-sickening nature of performing turns fast [51].

The diﬀerent durations of the videos could have had an eﬀect on the SSQ
measures. However, as the travelled distance was still similar, this means that
the higher speed had less of an impact on the experienced VR sickness. The
slower RRT path made some unnecessary turns, but it is a de facto standard
robot motion planning algorithm, and therefore we believe this to be a useful
comparison. However, a more direct comparison between a path similar to the
PSP but with smooth turns could also be useful to pinpoint the eﬀect of rotation
in place. We did not measure head motions, but as they have been successfully

18

M. Suomalainen et al.

used in predicting VR sickness [19], it would have been interesting to test their
correlation to VR sickness; ad-hoc observations from the study instructors indi-
cate that an increase in sickness was observable by a decrease in the subjects’
head motions.

We intentionally had art in the museum to make the study more realistic,
both in terms of ecological validity and optical ﬂow. Besides an expected eﬀect
on the subjects’ preferences, the art also aﬀected the perceived comfort; users
reported in open-ended questions issues such as how comfortably they could see
the art (”Many times I was just facing the wall and couldn’t see the displayed
items”). Whereas it is important to acknowledge the eﬀect that the situation
and environment have on comfort, it is diﬃcult to quantify. In the future we
plan to run another study in an empty museum and compare the results; this
will give us a proper, quantiﬁable metric on the importance of context, at least
between the cases of museum and a simple path from A to B.

The study was run in a virtual environment, even though the ideas are meant
for a telepresence robot streaming real video footage. Although there is some
evidence that 360◦ videos make people more sick than virtual environments [45],
there is no single study comparing these two cases on sickness (although it has
been shown that teleoperation increases stress over a virtual environment, which
in turn can increase discomfort and sickness [23]); moreover, as there is no reason
to believe that the mechanisms causing sickness would work diﬀerently in a 360
video than in a virtual environment, we expect our results to extend to real video
capture. Nevertheless, we will also run a study with a real telepresence robot to
verify these results.

The number of subjects in the study was small. We tried to account for
this by using statistical tests that are more sensitive for small samples when
appropriate, and by calculating the eﬀect sizes and then running post-hoc power
analyses. One ﬁnal limitation was the choice of a six point Likert scale rating
instead of a standard ﬁve or seven point scale. This scale was selected so that
subjects would need to make a decision either way on the ratings and could not
simply select a neutral choice. In future studies, a more traditional scale will be
used.

6 Conclusion

We presented an analysis focusing on the interplay between and possible causes
of comfort and sickness of VR telepresence users with regards to the path taken
by the robot. In essence, discomfort and sickness are distinct yet overlapping
concepts, and more focus should be put on addressing the comfort of the user
instead of simply targeting VR sickness since reducing only sickness may cause
other issues that degrade the whole experience. As autonomous motions are
rarely considered in virtual worlds, this paper will hopefully spark further inter-
est in research from other investigators both in telepresence and in autonomous
continuous motions in virtual worlds.

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

19

References

1. Baker, G., Bridgwater, T., Bremner, P., Giuliani, M.: Towards an immersive user
interface for waypoint navigation of a mobile robot. In: The Second International
Workshop on Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality for Human-Robot Interaction
(2020)

2. Becerra, I., Suomalainen, M., Lozano, E., Mimnaugh, K.J., Murrieta-Cid, R.,
LaValle, S.M.: Human perception-optimized planning for comfortable vr-based
telepresence. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(4), 6489–6496 (2020)
3. Buttussi, F., Chittaro, L.: Locomotion in place in virtual reality: A comparative
evaluation of joystick, teleport, and leaning. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics p. 1–12 (2020)

4. Cao, Z., Jerald, J., Kopper, R.: Visually-induced motion sickness

reduc-
In: 2018 IEEE Conference
(VR). pp. 105–112 (2018).

tion via static and dynamic
on Virtual Reality and 3D User
https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2018.8446210

rest

frames.
Interfaces

5. Chang, E., Kim, H.T., Yoo, B.: Virtual reality sickness: A review of causes and
measurements. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 36(17), 1–25
(2020)

6. Cohen, J.: Statistical Power Analysis for Behavioral Sciences. Routledge, 2nd edn.

(1988)

7. Darken, R.P., Peterson, B.: Spatial orientation, wayﬁnding, and representation. In:

Handbook of Virtual Environments. CRC Press (2014)

8. Davis, S., Nesbitt, K., Nalivaiko, E.: Comparing the onset of cybersickness using the
oculus rift and two virtual roller coasters. In: Proceedings of the 11th Australasian
Conference on Interactive Entertainment (IE 2015). vol. 27, p. 30 (2015)

9. Du˙zma´nska, N., Strojny, P., Strojny, A.: Can simulator sickness be avoided? a
review on temporal aspects of simulator sickness. Frontiers in psychology 9, 2132
(2018)

10. Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.G., Buchner, A.: G*power 3: A ﬂexible statis-
tical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences.
Behavior Research Methods 39(2), 175–191 (May 2007)

11. Fitter, N.T., Raghunath, N., Cha, E., Sanchez, C.A., Takayama, L., Matari´c, M.J.:
Are we there yet? comparing remote learning technologies in the university class-
room. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), 2706–2713 (2020)

12. Garc´ıa, J.C., Patr˜ao, B., Almeida, L., P´erez, J., Menezes, P., Dias, J., Sanz, P.J.:
A natural interface for remote operation of underwater robots. IEEE computer
graphics and applications 37(1), 34–43 (2015)

13. Grassini, S., Laumann, K.: Are modern head-mounted displays sexist? a systematic
review on gender diﬀerences in hmd-mediated virtual reality. Frontiers in Psychol-
ogy 11(August) (2020)

14. Guna, J., Gerˇsak, G., Humar, I., Song, J., Drnovˇsek, J., Pogaˇcnik, M.: Inﬂuence of
video content type on users’ virtual reality sickness perception and physiological
response. Future Generation Computer Systems 91, 263–276 (2019)

15. Heshmat, Y., Jones, B., Xiong, X., Neustaedter, C., Tang, A., Riecke, B.E., Yang,
L.: Geocaching with a beam: Shared outdoor activities through a telepresence robot
with 360 degree viewing. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1–13 (2018)

16. Hilty, D.M., Randhawa, K., Maheu, M.M., McKean, A.J., Pantera, R., Mishkind,
M.C., et al.: A review of telepresence, virtual reality, and augmented reality applied
to clinical care. Journal of Technology in Behavioral Science pp. 1–28 (2020)

20

M. Suomalainen et al.

17. Howarth, P.A., Hodder, S.G.: Characteristics of habituation to motion in a virtual

environment. Displays 29(2), 117–123 (2008)

18. Islam, R., Lee, Y., Jaloli, M., Muhammad, I., Zhu, D., Quarles, J.: Automatic detec-
tion of cybersickness from physiological signal in a virtual roller coaster simulation.
In: 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and
Workshops (VRW). pp. 649–650. IEEE (2020)

19. Jin, W., Fan, J., Gromala, D., Pasquier, P.: Automatic prediction of cybersickness
for virtual reality games. In: 2018 IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference
(GEM). pp. 1–9. IEEE (2018)

20. Johnson, D.M.: Introduction to and review of simulator sickness research. Tech.
rep., ARMY RESEARCH INST FIELD UNIT FORT RUCKER AL (2005)
21. Kennedy, R.S., Lane, N.E., Berbaum, K.S., Lilienthal, M.G.: Simulator sickness
questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness. The inter-
national journal of aviation psychology 3(3), 203–220 (1993)

22. Keshavarz, B., Hecht, H.: Axis rotation and visually induced motion sickness: the
role of combined roll, pitch, and yaw motion. Aviation, space, and environmental
medicine 82(11), 1023–1029 (2011)

23. Khenak, N., V´ezien, J., Bourdot, P.: Spatial presence, performance, and behavior
between real, remote, and virtual immersive environments. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 26(12), 3467–3478 (2020)

24. Kolasinski, E.M.: Simulator sickness in virtual environments, vol. 1027. US Army

Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences (1995)

25. Kourtesis, P., Collina, S., Doumas, L.A.A., MacPherson, S.E.: Validation of the
virtual reality neuroscience questionnaire: maximum duration of immersive vir-
tual reality sessions without the presence of pertinent adverse symptomatology.
Frontiers in human neuroscience 13, 417 (2019)

26. LaValle, S.M.: Virtual reality. Cambridge University Press (2021)
27. LaValle, S.M., Jr., J.J.K.: Randomized kinodynamic planning. The international

journal of robotics research 20(5), 378–400 (2001)

28. Lee, M.K., Takayama, L.: Now, i have a body: Uses and social norms for mobile
remote presence in the workplace. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems. pp. 33–42. ACM (2011)

29. Lenhard, W., Lenhard, A.: Calculation of eﬀect sizes (2016)
30. Martins, H., Ventura, R.: Immersive 3-D teleoperation of a search and rescue robot
using a head-mounted display. In: 2009 IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies
& Factory Automation. pp. 1–8. IEEE (2009)

31. McHugh, N., Jung, S., Hoermann, S., Lindeman, R.W.: Investigating a physical
dial as a measurement tool for cybersickness in virtual reality. In: 25th ACM Sym-
posium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. pp. 1–5 (2019)

32. Mimnaugh, K.J., Suomalainen, M., Becerra, I., Lozano, E., Murrieta-Cid, R.,
LaValle, S.M.: Analysis of user preferences for robot motions in immersive telep-
resence. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE (2021)
33. Minsky, M.: Telepresence (1980)
34. Nesbitt, K., Davis, S., Blackmore, K., Nalivaiko, E.: Correlating reaction time and
nausea measures with traditional measures of cybersickness. Displays 48, 1–8
(2017)

35. Neustaedter, C., Singhal, S., Pan, R., Heshmat, Y., Forghani, A., Tang, J.: From
being there to watching: Shared and dedicated telepresence robot usage at aca-
demic conferences. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI)
25(6), 1–39 (2018)

Comfort Aboard a Telepresence Robot

21

36. Oh, Y., Parasuraman, R., McGraw, T., Min, B.C.: 360 VR based robot teleoper-
ation interface for virtual tour. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop
on Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed Reality for HRI (VAM-HRI) (2018)

37. Patton, M.Q.: Qualitative research. Encyclopedia of statistics in behavioral science

(2005)

38. Paulos, E., Canny, J.: Social tele-embodiment: Understanding presence. Au-

tonomous Robots 11(1), 87–95 (2001)

39. Peck, T.C., Sockol, L.E., Hancock, S.M.: Mind the gap: The underrepresentation
of female participants and authors in virtual reality research. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 26(5), 1945–1954 (2020)

40. Rae, I., Mutlu, B., Takayama, L.: Bodies in motion: mobility, presence, and task
awareness in telepresence. In: Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems. pp. 2153–2162. ACM (2014)

41. Rae, I., Neustaedter, C.: Robotic telepresence at scale. In: Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 313–324 (2017)

42. Reason, J.T., Brand, J.J.: Motion sickness. Academic press (1975)
43. Rebenitsch, L., Owen, C.: Individual variation in susceptibility to cybersickness.
In: Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology. pp. 309–317 (2014)

44. Sanchez-Vives, M.V., Slater, M.: From presence to consciousness through virtual

reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6(4), 332–339 (2005)

45. Saredakis, D., Szpak, A., Birckhead, B., Keage, H.A., Rizzo, A., Loetscher, T.: Fac-
tors associated with virtual reality sickness in head-mounted displays: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 14 (2020)

46. Singer, M.J., Ehrlich, J.A., Allen, R.C.: Virtual environment sickness: adaptation
to and recovery from a search task. In: Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. vol. 42, pp. 1506–1510. SAGE Publications
Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA (1998)

47. Soares, N., Kay, J.C., Craven, G.: Mobile robotic telepresence solutions for the
education of hospitalized children. Perspectives in health information management
14(Fall) (2017)

48. Stoll, B., Reig, S., He, L., Kaplan, I., Jung, M.F., Fussell, S.R.: Wait, can you move
the robot? examining telepresence robot use in collaborative teams. In: Proceedings
of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. pp.
14–22 (2018)

49. Tomczak, M., Tomczak, E.: The need to report eﬀect size estimates revisited. An
overview of some recommended measures of eﬀect size. Trends in Sport Sciences
1(21), 19–25 (2014)

50. Tsui, K.M., Desai, M., Yanco, H.A., Uhlik, C.: Exploring use cases for telepres-
ence robots. In: 2011 6th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). pp. 11–18. IEEE (2011)

51. Widdowson, C., Becerra, I., Merrill, C., Wang, R.F., LaValle, S.: Assessing postural
instability and cybersickness through linear and angular displacement. Human
factors (2019)

52. Yang, L., Neustaedter, C.: Our house: living long distance with a telepresence
robot. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2(CSCW), 1–18
(2018)

53. Zhang, J., Langbehn, E., Krupke, D., Katzakis, N., Steinicke, F.: Detection thresh-
olds for rotation and translation gains in 360 video-based telepresence systems.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 24(4), 1671–1680 (2018)

