1
2
0
2

t
c
O
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
9
4
0
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Department: Head
Editor: Name, xxxx@email

DiVRsify: Break the Cycle and
Develop VR for Everyone

Tabitha C. Peck
Davidson College

Kyla McMullen
University of Florida

John Quarles
The University of Texas at San Antonio

Abstract—Virtual reality technology is biased. It excludes approximately 95% the world’s
population by being primarily designed for male, western, educated, industrial, rich, and
democratic populations. This bias may be due to the lack of diversity in virtual reality
researchers, research participants, developers, and end users, fueling a noninclusive research,
development, and usability cycle. The objective of this paper is to highlight the minimal virtual
reality research involving understudied populations with respect to dimensions of diversity, such
as gender, race, culture, ethnicity, age, disability, and neurodivergence. Speciﬁcally, we highlight
numerous differences in virtual reality usability between underrepresented groups compared to
commonly studied populations. These differences illustrate the lack of generalizability of prior
virtual reality research. Lastly, we present a call to action with the aim that, over time, will break
the cycle and enable virtual reality for everyone.

VIRTUAL REALITY (VR) researchers argue
that the diverse array of VR applications has the
potential to change the world. A subset of these
applications includes driving and ﬂight simula-
tors, surgical training, exposure therapy, physical
therapy, empathy exercises, and perspective tak-
ing. Although these applications are intended to
be useful for everyone, regardless of their age,
gender, race, culture, ethnicity, class, ability, neu-
rodiversity, etc., the majority of VR development
is focused on a minority of the population. This

narrow focus limits what we are calling the VR
research, development, and usability cycle. This
cycle excludes the majority of the population
from being involved in the use, research, and
development of VR applications and hardware.

(Figure

The VR research, development, and us-
1) begins with the
ability cycle
researchers being Male, White,
majority of
Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic
(M-WEIRD) [9]. The WEIRD population is less
than 6% of the worlds population. Assuming that
men are roughly half of this population the M-

IT Professional

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

© 2021 IEEE

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Department Head

Figure 1. The noninclusive VR research, develop-
ment, and usability cycle.

WEIRD population is representative of less than
3% of the world’s population. At their incep-
tion, VR research questions are primarily cre-
ated by M-WEIRD researchers and evaluated on
M-WEIRD participants [19]. Subsequently, the
knowledge gained from this limited subsection of
the population is broadly applied 1) in industry
by M-WEIRD developers and then 2) inﬂuences
future research by M-WEIRD researchers. The
hardware and software developed by industry
professionals, based on knowledge gained and
investigated by M-WEIRD researchers and par-
ticipants is then used by M-WEIRD users. This
cycle often excludes other VR users who do not
identify as M-WEIRD and may limit the broad
effectiveness of VR research and applications.

Research and design decisions may dispropor-
tionately dissuade non-M-WEIRD people from
effectively using VR, due to VR research and de-
velopment primarily focusing on the M-WEIRD
population. For example, modern head-mounted
displays (HMDs) used for perceiving VR do not
accommodate women or children. The interpupil-
lary distance (IPD) accommodated in modern
HMDs supports 81% of men’s IPDs yet only 61%
of women’s and even fewer children’s [5]. This
mismatch in IPD can cause discomfort and eye-
strain as well as in depth perception errors. This
discrepancy may also explain why the Oculus
Rift was found to be more nauseating for women
than men [13]. In addition, the physical design of
HMDs for virtual reality is often unaccommodat-
ing of the hair and headdresses of marginalized
racial and ethnic groups.

Because recreational VR has primarily been
designed for M-WEIRD users, M-WEIRD users
are more likely to have positive experiences with
VR. These experiences may inﬂuence some M-
WEIRD users to become VR researchers and
developers. The authors have witnessed this anec-
dotally in the students who elect to enter the
ﬁeld of computer science due to their interest in
video games and/or VR. Further, having systems
designed or advertised for M-WEIRD users may
propagate the lack-of-ﬁt model [8] and build
a barrier to entry for under-served populations
using VR. Regardless of how or why people
decide to become developers and researchers, it
is clear that the people in this cycle are majority
M-WEIRD. This exclusionary practice continues
the cycle where VR will be developed for and
designed by a non-diverse group of people. This
cycle may inadvertently exclude, limit usability,
or dissuade potential VR users that do not iden-
tify as M-WEIRD from using VR or becoming
researchers or developers.

The VR research, development, and usability
cycle is of course simpliﬁed for illustration pur-
poses and does not take into account additional
external factors. These other factors may affect
who uses and develops VR hardware and soft-
ware, and include societal and family pressures,
economic barriers, stereotype threats, exclusion-
ary messaging, etc.

initially result

Immediately creating a more diverse group of
researchers and developers may not be possible,
however building a diverse group of researchers
and developers is an important future goal. Fur-
ther, asking a more diverse group of users to
quickly adopt VR may not
in
wide acceptance, especially if applications and
hardware are not designed to support these users.
Nevertheless, the VR research community does
have the ability to enforce participant population
diversity to include a wider range of participants
and to ask research questions that consider the
needs of all potential users. Having researchers
and reviewers commit to the simple act of diversi-
fying participant populations may have profound
impacts on research results and break the current,
noninclusive VR research, development, and us-
ability cycle so that future VR is designed to be
more inclusive.

The goal of this article is to highlight the

2

IT Professional

importance of inclusivity when creating VR hard-
ware, software, and applications. There is a need
to include more diverse populations in the VR
research, development, and usability cycle. This
work introduces the negative impact of design
bias and presents research identifying the dif-
ferences between different demographic groups
within VR research. Finally, a call
to action
is presented for the VR research community to
improve our current practices, with the goal of
making VR more accessible for everyone.

DESIGN BIAS

Bias is deﬁned as an unequal weighting in
favor of one group compared to another. Design
bias is “the development and dissemination of
hardware and software whose characteristics sys-
tematically do not meet the needs of a subset
of target users” [19]. Design bias can reduce the
generalizability of research study results and can
negatively impact the usability and accessibility
of designs. To mitigate bias, VR researchers and
developers should include feedback from more
diverse populations when designing VR hardware
and software. One way to include diverse feed-
back is through user-centered design, a design
technique used to engage and involve critical
stakeholders in the co-design of the technologies
they use. Ensuring a diverse participatory design
population can help to reduce design bias. This
involvement can occur at any stage of the de-
sign process and includes methods such as focus
groups, prototype development, and developing
storyboards. Historically, design bias has resulted
in negative consequences, as seen in the following
cautionary example.

The automotive industry historically excludes
female passengers when evaluating vehicle safety.
As recently as 2010, automotive safety was
primarily tested using crash-test dummies that
represented an average-sized, adult male body.
Because female passengers were not represented
during testing, in the same car accident women
had a 47% higher chance of injury compared to
men [3]. Even as of today there are no crash-test
dummies based on female bodies, rather they are
scaled-down male dummies, which still increases
risk of injury for female passengers.

Design bias has also affected many under-
represented groups, such as women, racial and

ethnic minorities, children, the elderly, transgen-
der people, people with physical disabilities, and
people with cognitive disabilities. These types
of biases can appear in physical hardware or
software contexts and have been observed in a
variety of scenarios from facial recognition to
video games.

It is generally agreed that bias can be divided
into three categories: preexisting bias, technical
bias, and emergent bias [6]. Preexisting bias
occurs when the designer (knowingly or unknow-
ingly) infuses their own inherit biases into the
product they are creating. For example, this can
occur in VR, during visuomotor synchrony, when
the virtual world is designed such that all users
must embody a White virtual avatar. Technical
bias occurs when the system design limits the
usability. This can occurs when designing an
interface for only right-handed users, or designing
a head-mounted display that does not support all
user’s IPDs. Emergent bias occurs over time and
as people use the system. It can occur during
development or after product release. Consider
the case of virtual characters learning verbal
interactions driven by machine learning (ML).
Using biased training data, virtual characters have
learned sexist and racist behaviors [14].

PARTICIPANT
UNDERREPRESENTATION

VR research often requires data collected
from human participants, similar to many other
research communities. Many of these research
communities, including ML, human-computer in-
teraction, and the medical industry have called for
using more diverse and representative participant
populations.Some of these calls to action have
stemmed from research highlighting the problems
of underrepresentation in participant samples in
psychology research.

Similarly to VR, most research in psychol-
ogy is based on participants who are WEIRD
[9]. Henrich et al. [9] highlight several instances
where non-WEIRD study participants yield very
different results compared to WEIRD partici-
pants, even in studies on aspects of human per-
ception that were once thought to be universal.
For example, consider the Mueller-Lyer Illusion,
which is a perceptual illusion where two lines
are judged to be different lengths based upon the

May/June 2021

3

Department Head

orientation of the arrows at the ends. Results of
prior studies have shown this to be a very strong
illusion in WEIRD societies, but many non-
WEIRD societies are not fooled by this illusion.
This suggests that since human visual perception
varies greatly over such a simple visual illusion,
then visual perception differences are likely to be
found in VR as well.

Similar concerns have been raised about using
non-representative samples in ML data sets. It
is widely agreed that when training a machine
learning algorithm, choosing appropriate and rep-
resentative training data is critical. If the training
data is biased, then then ML algorithm predic-
tions will also be biased. The majority of the ML
literature tends to focus on sample selection that
only includes observable data, meaning that the
data that is chosen for training only includes the
data that could be directly observed. Oftentimes
the predicted outcomes could be inﬂuenced by
unobservable or uncollected data. For example,
suppose someone wanted to create an algorithm
to predict PhD student retention using data from
past PhD graduates. We would only observe the
outcome of a student ﬁnishing a PhD program if
the student decided to stay in the PhD program.
The observed outcomes are only a consequence of
a human-decision maker. There are unobservable
factors (such as family dynamics, advisor rela-
tionship, ﬁnancial burden, stereotype threat, de-
partment climate, experienced microaggressions
etc.) that inﬂuence the outcome. This scenario
makes it challenging to create a predictive model
since the outcomes observed do not represent a
random sampling of all PhD students who entered
the ones who received
the program (not
their PhD). Oftentimes in ML, the mechanism
that determines selection has no impact on the
outcome being conditional on the observed at-
tributes. Standard ML classiﬁers assume that data
is drawn independently and normally distributed,
however the selection of examples is often biased,
thus leading to biased inferences. For example,
training sets consisting of a majority of light-
skinned and male faces are speculated to be the
reason why face-recognition systems are most
accurate at identifying light-skinned male faces,
and are less accurate at identifying female faces
and dark-skinned faces [4]. Using ML within VR

just

is becoming more common, and this trend further
highlights the importance of using diverse and
representative data sets for training in all ﬁelds.
Finally, Peck et al. [19] demonstrated that
female participants were signiﬁcantly underrep-
resented in VR research and that this underrep-
resentation biased research ﬁndings. The change
in simulator sickness after VR exposure was sys-
tematically proportional to the number of women
who participated in experiments such that exper-
iments with more women had a smaller increase
in simulator sickness. If simulator sickness results
were systematically related to gender it can be
assumed that other unknown measures may also
be affected. This further demonstrates the im-
portance of using diverse participant populations
when performing VR research.

DIVERSITY DIMENSIONS

Even though numerous research communities
have called for including more diverse participant
samples, it is unclear which diversity dimensions
are important to consider. The WEIRD dimen-
sions of race/ethnicity, education, industrializa-
tion level, socioeconomic status, and government
type are only a small subset of the dimensions
of human diversity.Moreover, this subset of di-
mensions is not regularly reported in research
papers, which often report little more than age
and binary-gender. These additional diversity di-
mensions include, but are not
limited to age,
culture, gender, sex, mental abilities, physical
abilities, sexual orientation, appearance and body,
class, geographic location, language and accent,
migration biographies, parental status, relation-
ship status, and religion.

To evaluate the inclusion of diversity dimen-
sions in human computer interaction research,
Himmelsbach et al. [10] investigated how many
papers in the ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI) included diversity
dimensions and counted how many dimensions
were included in reports of participant demo-
graphics. They found that there was a signiﬁcant
increase in the number of diversity dimensions
reported per paper between 2001 and 2011. How-
ever, there was no signiﬁcant difference between
2011 and 2016. The average number of dimen-
sions reported in 2016 was approximately 3 out
it seems
of 14 considered dimensions. Thus,

4

IT Professional

that human diversity has been largely ignored in
the CHI community, which overlaps signiﬁcantly
with VR research.

Determining the diversity dimensions that
most inﬂuence usability and design remains an
open research question. Collecting and reporting
diversity dimensions will provide readers a better
understanding of the participant populations and
may provide insight into demographic groups that
should be evaluated in further detail.

PARTICIPANT POPULATION
DIFFERENCES

In this section we present numerous studies
that identiﬁed response differences based on di-
versity dimensions. These differences could be
caused by numerous factors including biological,
behavioral, situational, or cultural differences. Al-
though we present experiments identifying dif-
ferences based on diversity dimensions, we do
not hypothesize on what caused these identiﬁed
differences.

The authors acknowledge that there are dif-
ferences within and between the diversity dimen-
sion groups identiﬁed in this section. As such,
we recognize that there are unique effects due
to intersectionality that cannot be captured by
studying one dimension in isolation. Our hope
is that by bringing awareness to the necessity of
research along various identity dimensions, future
research can explore intersectional experiences in
VR.

Gender

Numerous gender differences have been re-
ported in VR research, however it is likely that
many more differences have never been explored.
For example, studies speciﬁcally looking for gen-
der differences have identiﬁed them in perceptual
threshold studies.

Additional differences have been found be-
tween genders in response to simulator sickness.
However, results are mixed and suggest
that
women are more likely to get sick compared to
men, have comparable levels of simulator sick-
ness to men, or based on a 5-year meta analysis
may be less likely to get simulator sickness com-
pared to men [19]. This discrepancy suggests that
gender differences in simulator sickness is still an
open question, where additional factors such as

environment type, participant age, or participant
VR experience may need to be considered to
fully understand response differences within VR
experiences.

Additional unexpected gender differences
have been identiﬁed in VR scenarios. Women and
men used hand-held trackers differently, experi-
enced different levels of spatial immersion, and
women outperformed men on spatial performance
tasks. Women and men experienced embodiment
in a self avatar differently such that women were
less likely to accept avatar hands that were dif-
ferent from their own appearance. Demonstrating
preexisting bias, this effect was further seen in a
lowered embodiment score for women compared
to men when an average male-sized hand was
used in an experiment [17].

Even though differences have been detected,
more often than not, gender differences are rarely
tested. When differences are tested, studies may
only be sufﬁciently powered to detect large effects
while gender differences are likely to be small
effects [19]. The sample size in many studies
is small (n ≤ 40) and disproportionately male,
further complicating the investigation of potential
differences.

Race, Culture, and Ethnicity

Additional diversity dimensions that are sel-
dom evaluated and often conﬂated include race,
culture, and ethnicity. As noted by Henrich et
al. [9] people who did not identify as WEIRD
perceived a perceptual illusion differently than
WEIRD people. This work suggests that differ-
ences may exist due to race, culture, and ethnicity.
For example in VR research, Almog et al.[1]
conducted a study including Israeli, Arab and
non-Arab men and women. Participants rode in
a virtual airplane. The plane took off, ﬂew in
nice weather, ﬂew in stormy weather, and then
landed. Results suggest that Arab women were
signiﬁcantly less likely than non-Arab women
to look out
the window of the airplane. This
behavior was signiﬁcantly correlated with their
self-reported sense of presence.

Additionally, Olson [15] performed a qual-
itative analysis of how participants’ experience
growing up with racial and ethnic socialization
(RES) affected decisions in a VR game including
racial discrimination themes. The game, Passage

May/June 2021

5

Department Head

Home VR, was an interactive narrative where
the player is accused of plagiarism in an edu-
cational setting. The body language of the avatar
determined the events in the narrative. The author
found that participants’ previous experiences with
RES informed their decisions in VR.

The limited work in this area may be due
to different interpretations of race, culture, and
ethnicity worldwide as well as the challenge of
creating a universal questionnaire for collecting
this information. Peck et al. [19] proposed a ques-
tionnaire and recommended allowing participants
to self-identify. Additionally, many research loca-
tions may not be racially, ethnically, or culturally
diverse, thus limiting the option of investigating
differences along these dimensions. Even though
there are obvious challenges for investigating
race, culture, and ethnicity it is still possible to
collect this participant data and to report it in
papers.

Age

Though VR may be created with an adult
end-user in mind, attention should be paid to
VR applications for populations of any age. For
example, virtual reality has positively impacted
children and older adults by improving physical
activity. VR games increase physical activity in
children and research has demonstrated that older
adults who use VR for exercise increase their
mobility and decrease their likelihood of falling.
Conversely, older populations may also be more
reluctant to use VR for a myriad of reasons such
as user expectations, demographic segmentation
in marketing, and lack of familiarity.Future efforts
should aim to mitigate these issues to promote the
inclusion of older adults.

Participant age can also affect presence and
embodiment in VR. For example, Mcglynn et al.
[11] investigated the inﬂuence of age on partic-
ipants’ sense of presence. Participants played a
VR game called ’Diner Duo’ in which they had
to make and serve virtual hamburgers to virtual
customers in a virtual diner. Results suggest that
spatial presence was not signiﬁcantly different
across ages but older participants were less likely
to notice breaks in presence.

When considering embodiment, Serino et al.
[23] investigated the inﬂuence of age in body
size perception in VR. Participants experienced

an embodiment illusion with an avatar that had
smaller proportions than the participants. One
task for the participants was to estimate the width
of their hips both before and after VR expo-
sure. The 19-to-25-year-old participants increas-
ingly underestimated hip width post VR expo-
sure, whereas the 26-to-55-year-old participants
width estimations were not signiﬁcantly affected
by VR. Further, Peck and Gonzalez-Franco [17]
identiﬁed that participants over 30 had a lower
sense of embodiment in a self-avatar compared
to participants under 30.

Children are a protected population and al-
though VR may be beneﬁcial in numerous ap-
plications including increasing physical activity,
pain distraction, or education care must be taken
when developing and designing for this group.
Children are physically smaller than adults and
current HMDs are not designed for children
and do not support their smaller IPDs.Further,
children are actively in the process of cognitive
development and may respond in unanticipated
ways when put into virtual environments.

For example, Segovia et al. [21] investigated
children’s acquisition of false memories as an
effect of VR exposure. A false memory in VR im-
plies believing that what happened in the VE hap-
pened instead in the real world. They compared
several different conditions that could impact
memory - idle, mental imagery, VR with another
child’s avatar, and VR with a self avatar. Results
suggested that preschool children were equally
likely to acquire false memories in any condition.
However, elementary school children acquired
more false memories in the mental imagery and
VR self-avatar conditions than the idle condition.
This ﬁnding suggests that VR may have different
effects on users’ memory depending on age.

Disability

VR is not accessible to many people with
disabilities. Unfortunately, these populations are
rarely consulted during the non-inclusive VR re-
search, development and usability cycle, which
creates a major barrier to accessibility. For ex-
ample, some people with balance impairments
may not be able to safely stand up in many
standing-based VR experiences. This limitation
may prevent users with balance impairments from
engaging in all parts of the experience. Often-

6

IT Professional

times, disabled people are only considered in VR
research for the sole purpose of rehabilitation
or correction applications. VR designers never
initiate research to study recreational uses of VR
for disabled people and instead treat them as a
deviation from ”normal” which needs correction
[24].

There have been various studies that have
investigated the unique experiences and responses
that persons with disabilities have in VR. For
example, numerous studies support
the claim
that people with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) have
a different experience of presence than people
without MS. [7]. Moreover, persons with MS
may respond to latency differently than persons
without disabilities[20].

Additional studies have focused on the experi-
ence of cybersickness on people with MS as com-
pared to people without MS, speciﬁcally looking
at physiological and brain wave responses.Many
of the baseline differences persisted in VR. How-
ever, in some cases VR induced completely op-
posite changes between the participants with MS
and participants without MS. Differences were
found near the parietal lobe - sensation, percep-
tion, integration of sensory input and decision
making, emotional behavior, and visual reception
- and the frontal lobe, which mainly deals with
motor functions[2]. These results suggest VR may
need to be made more adaptive and accessible to
the needs of persons with disabilities.

Neurodiversity

VR is widely accepted as a training tool for
learning various skills, however,
this may not
be an acceptable intervention for neurodiverse
people. In fact, in some instances VR has been
harmful in practice when applied to autism in-
tervention. Williams and Gilbert [25] conducted
a survey of wearable technologies applied to
autism intervention. Their work found that 90%
of interventions focused on ”normalizing” autistic
people, viewing their traits as deﬁcits. Only 10 %
of the technologies surveyed addressed user needs
for sensory regulation, emotional regulation, com-
munication, or executive function. It is critical
to ensure that VR applications for neurodiverse
people do not follow this pattern.

In the VR domain, Self et al. [22] created a
VR learning environment for children with autism

spectrum disorder to learn ﬁre safety skills. All
of the children in the study learned and demon-
strated an understanding of ﬁre safety skills in
the virtual environment. However, these results
did not always generalize to the real world. For
example, when a ﬁre alarm was triggered in the
real world, several students with ASD still needed
verbal prompting to exit. Moreover aspects that
can affect learning in VR such as interfaces, may
not be inclusive to neurodivergent people. Mei
et al. [12] investigated how children with autism
spectrum disorder performed basic 3D interaction
tasks, such as rotation and translation, compared
to typically developed children. Participants had
two tasks: 1) rotating a virtual object to match
the pose of a target object, and 2) translating
a virtual object to the same relative position as
a target object. Results suggested that on tasks
requiring attention to precision (e.g., translation
along the z axis) and tasks in which the interface
was more ergonomically limiting (e.g., rotation
tasks when trying to align the controller with
the virtual object), the autism spectrum disorder
group demonstrated signiﬁcantly longer comple-
tion time and error prone performance than the
typically developed group. These ﬁndings suggest
that additional research should seek to understand
how neurodiverse populations learn and apply
skills, such that VR can adapt to these speciﬁc
needs.

A CALL TO ACTION

The previous sections presented examples of
signiﬁcant differences in how participants re-
spond to VR based on different diversity dimen-
sions. In some of the above examples the initial
research goal was not to investigate differences in
diversity dimensions. For example, the difference
in the subjective sense of embodiment by age
was identiﬁed because of a diverse participant
sample even though this was not the intended goal
of the study [17], [18]. This example highlights
the importance of diversifying sample populations
when designing for general populations instead of
relying primarily on convenience sampling of M-
WEIRD college-aged participants. When working
with untested populations, researchers may ﬁnd
unanticipated results that lead to new lines of
research and generate more generalizable results
across diverse populations.

May/June 2021

7

Department Head

We argue the the VR research community
is ethically obligated to develop inclusive VR
hardware and applications. To support this, we
propose several actions that every VR researcher
can take to improve the generalizability of their
research through engaging with more diverse par-
ticipant populations and researchers:

Place greater emphasis on population di-
versity. When reviewing papers, consider if the
participant population is representative of the
intended population for the proposed research.
If the studied population lacks appropriate di-
versity (gender, age, race, etc.) provide construc-
tive criticism and require the paper to highlight
this limitation and accurately quantify the results
according to the lack of participant diversity.
Conference and journal review criteria should
include evaluation of participant diversity and
place more weight on generalizability of results
such that papers with greater participant diversity,
or research including understudied populations
are more likely to be published.

Actively recruit participants from outside
your university. Recruiting primarily from uni-
versity students is a common method of con-
ducting studies in psychology, HCI, and VR,
because it is convenient. However, the diversity
of university students is limited to a narrow
range of ages and educational backgrounds. Thus,
sampling only university students may not be suf-
ﬁcient for generalizability. Therefore, most other
populations can be considered underrepresented
in the scope of VR research.

A ﬁrst step in the right direction would be to
recruit from the local population. For example,
recruiting through online social media platforms,
like Reddit, working with local businesses to
hang ﬂyers in store windows, or collaborating
with local afﬁnity groups. The people recruited
through these means should be paid for their con-
tribution, including any ﬁnancial costs incurred
from traveling to the laboratory to conduct the
experiment (i.e.- gas, parking, compensation for
long travel time). If possible, you should try to
to these outside people,
bring the experiment
rather than requiring them to travel to you.

Re-evaluate your evaluation methods. Dif-
ferences may be observed between various pop-
ulations in VR research, however it is critical
to understand if these differences are charac-

teristic of the population, or if some aspect of
the methodology is affecting performance. In
addition to collecting quantitative experimental
data, qualitative data analyzing the participants’
experiences should be taken. This information
will be critical in making the experiment design
more inclusive. A ﬁrst step in this direction would
be to include an exit survey at the conclusion
of each experiment, asking open ended questions
about the user’s experience, how they perceived
the virtual world, and any factors that may have
helped or hindered their performance.

Use inclusive imagery in recruitment ma-
terials, environmental scenes, and publication
images. Imagery provides a subtle cue as to who
is “welcome” in a space. For example, a recruit-
ment ﬂyer with an image of a White man may
subtly indicate that women and non-White peo-
ple do not belong. Additionally, hyper-sexualized
images of women are non-professional and prop-
agate hostile unwelcoming environments. Make
sure the imagery is inclusive during recruitment
and publication and use it to encourage the widest
variety of people to participate. Show recruitment
ﬂyers to a diverse group during the design pro-
cess; listen and act if someone ﬁnds the materials
to be offensive or non-inclusive. When creating
materials, be aware of and avoid stereotypes.

Develop a relationship with afﬁnity groups.
Afﬁnity groups are groups of people that meet
and have interests. Examples include include
women in the workplace, working parents, les-
bian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or ques-
tioning etc. (LGBTQ+) afﬁnities. A positive and
collaborative relationship can increase the diver-
sity of the project’s research participants or pro-
vide diverse insights and perspective on research
projects. When working with afﬁnity groups it
is critical
that you inform the group of your
intentions, for example to increase recruitment
diversity or in an advisory role. Be mindful that
the relationship should be mutually beneﬁcial.
You could commit to recruiting research students
within this group, giving research presentations,
or applying for funding to support their advisory
role.

Collaborate with researchers from diverse
geographic populations. While recruiting from
the local general population is a step in the right
direction towards increasing participant diversity,

8

IT Professional

it
is not sufﬁcient. The better method of in-
creasing participant diversity is to also recruit
from beyond the local population. The easiest
way to do this is to collaborate with researchers
outside your institution or outside your country.
Compatibility of hardware and software makes
this research more challenging, however the de-
velopment of commercialized VR hardware over
the past decade makes collaboration between labs
more feasible. Moreover, commercial VR systems
are possible to ship for sharing with distant col-
laborators and participants.

Replicate experiments and include under-
represented populations. The replication cri-
sis [16] highlights the importance of replicating
previous studies and valuing replication work.
Replicating previous experiments and including
diverse participant populations will determine if
the experiment is replaceable, supports general-
izability of results, or highlights usability differ-
ences between groups. Further, when evaluating
papers, place a higher value on replication work
that
includes or investigates previously under-
served populations.

Collect and report participant diversity
data. When creating your demographic survey
collect additional diversity dimension data and
report these data in the participant section of your
research papers. This should also be reﬂected
in the discussion and limitations sections, either
as a strength or weakness of the work. Adding
information about the participant population in-
forms other researchers about the generalizability
of the data. It may also highlight interesting and
unexpected differences between groups and guide
further research. Administer the demographic sur-
to induce
vey after the experiment so as not
unexpected stereotype threats and always present
inclusive choices in questions. For example, do
not restrict gender to a binary response.

Actively and consistently consider the per-
spective of someone much different than your-
self. In the design process, encourage the re-
search team to ponder, how would someone of
a different race, educational background, gender,
age, ability, ethnicity, literacy level, culture, class,
language experience this system? Would there
be any barriers to their engagement? How can
we mitigate those challenges? When in doubt,
consult with someone from that demographic.

Additionally, include people from a wide variety
of demographics in an advisory capacity for VR
projects to help ponder and answer these ques-
tions. If your research and development team does
not have the necessary diversity, hire experts from
those populations to help inform the trajectory of
the research.

Diversify the people in charge. Having di-
verse reviewers, program committees, keynote
speakers, and awardees signiﬁes that diversity is
an important contribution worth acknowledging
and rewarding since different perspectives en-
hance research quality. When diversifying com-
mittees, be aware that underrepresented popula-
tions are often asked to complete higher shares
of advisory work. Respect and acknowledge their
time and contributions. Do not recruit non M-
WEIRD personnel solely to increase a diversity
quota, but to instead listen, learn, and respect
their differing opinions. Further, call people out
if someone questions the accomplishments of
someone based on their identity, and instead
highlight their well-deserved accomplishment and
the barriers they may have overcome along the
way.

Continually Engage in Professional Devel-
opment Focused on Diversity. Caring about
diversity is the ﬁrst step. To better understand,
recognize, and respect the importance of diversity
requires professional development. Commit
to
educate yourself in this nuanced and intricate
science and treat it with the same respect you
would a new academic area. This professional
development is an important part of developing
as researchers to improve and develop VR for
a diverse and inclusive society. Pick up a book,
join a reading group, listen to a podcast, or attend
a lecture. Search for available resources in your
area and utilize them to make yourself a better
researcher.

Regardless of your experience level or back-
ground, take the ﬁrst step and commit to any
one of the above actions to help break the nonin-
clusive VR research, development, and usability
cycle. If everyone takes one small step, we can
start
to dismantle the system and create VR
experiences that are useful for and inclusive of
everyone.

May/June 2021

9

Department Head

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the following
people for graciously providing their thoughts and
insight on this manuscript: Dr. Rua Williams and
Dr. Jessica J. Good.

REFERENCES

11. S. A. McGlynn. Investigating age-related differences in

spatial presence formation and maintenance in virtual

reality. PhD thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology,

2019.

12. C. Mei, L. Mason, and J. Quarles. Usability issues with

3d user interfaces for adolescents with high functioning

autism.

In Proceedings of the 16th international ACM

SIGACCESS conference on Computers & accessibility,

1.

I. Almog, H. S. Wallach, and M. P. Saﬁr. Ethnicity

pp. 99–106. ACM.

and sense of presence in a virtual environment: Arab

13. J. Munafo, M. Diedrick, and T. A. Stoffregen. The virtual

women-a case in point.

In 2009 Virtual Rehabilitation

International Conference, pp. 78–82. IEEE, 2009.

reality head-mounted display oculus rift induces motion

sickness and is sexist in its effects. Experimental brain

2.

I. M. Arafat, S. M. S. Ferdous, and J. Quarles.

research, 235(3):889–901, 2017.

Cybersickness-provoking virtual reality alters brain sig-

14. G. Neff. Talking to bots: Symbiotic agency and the case

nals of persons with multiple sclerosis.

In 2018 IEEE

of tay. International Journal of Communication, 2016.

Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces

15. D. M. Olson. Exploring the role of racial and ethnic

(VR), pp. 1–120. IEEE.

socialization in virtual reality (VR) narratives. PhD

3. D. Bose, M. Segui-Gomez, ScD, and J. R. Crandall.

thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019.

Vulnerability of female drivers involved in motor vehicle

16. H. Pashler and E.-J. Wagenmakers. Editors’ introduc-

crashes: an analysis of us population at risk. American

tion to the special section on replicability in psycholog-

journal of public health, 101(12):2368–2373, 2011.

ical science: A crisis of conﬁdence? Perspectives on

4. J. Buolamwini and T. Gebru. Gender shades: Inter-

psychological science, 7(6):528–530, 2012.

sectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender

17. T. C. Peck and M. Gonzalez-Franco. Avatar embodi-

classiﬁcation. In Conference on fairness, accountability

ment. a standardized questionnaire. Frontiers in Virtual

and transparency, pp. 77–91, 2018.

Reality, 1:44, 2021. doi: 10.3389/frvir.2020.575943

5. N. A. Dodgson. Variation and extrema of human inter-

18. T. C. Peck, J. J. Good, and K. Seitz. Evidence of racial

pupillary distance. In Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual

bias using immersive virtual reality: Analysis of head

Reality Systems XI, vol. 5291, pp. 36–46. International

and hand motions during shooting decisions.

IEEE

Society for Optics and Photonics, 2004.

Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,

6. B. Friedman and H. Nissenbaum. Bias in computer

27(5):2502–2512, 2021.

systems. ACM Transactions on Information Systems

19. T. C. Peck, L. E. Sockol, and S. M. Hancock. Mind

(TOIS), 14(3):330–347, 1996.

the gap: The underrepresentation of

female partici-

7. R. Guo, G. Samaraweera, and J. Quarles. The effects

pants and authors in virtual reality research.

IEEE

of avatars on presence in virtual environments for per-

Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,

sons with mobility impairments.

In Proceedings of the

26(5):1945–1954, 2020.

24th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality and

20. G. Samaraweera, R. Guo, and J. Quarles. Head track-

Telexistence and the 19th Eurographics Symposium on

ing latency in virtual environments revisited: Do users

Virtual Environments, pp. 1–8, 2014.

with multiple sclerosis notice latency less? Visualiza-

8. M. E. Heilman. Sex bias in work settings: The lack of ﬁt

tion and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on,

model. Research in organizational behavior, 1983.

PP(22.5):1630–1636, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2015.

9. J. Henrich, S. J. Heine, and A. Norenzayan.

The

2443783

weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and brain

21. K. Y. Segovia and J. N. Bailenson. Virtually true:

sciences, 33(2-3):61–83, 2010.

Children’s acquisition of false memories in virtual reality.

10. J. Himmelsbach, S. Schwarz, C. Gerdenitsch, B. Wais-

Media Psychology, 12(4):371–393, 2009.

Zechmann, J. Bobeth, and M. Tscheligi. Do we care

22. T. Self, R. R. Scudder, G. Weheba, and D. Crumrine.

about diversity in human computer interaction: A com-

A virtual approach to teaching safety skills to children

prehensive content analysis on diversity dimensions in

with autism spectrum disorder. Topics in Language

research. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference

disorders, 27(3):242–253, 2007.

on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–16,

23. S. Serino, F. Scarpina, A. Dakanalis, A. Keizer, E. Pe-

2019.

droli, G. Castelnuovo, A. Chirico, V. Catallo, D. Di Lernia,

10

IT Professional

Antonio and the Chief Technology Ofﬁcer of MedCog-
nition, Inc. Dr. Quarles received his bachelor’s degree
in Computer Science from The University of Texas at
Austin in 2004 and his PhD in Computer Engineer-
ing from the University of Florida in 2009. He has
conducted research in virtual, mixed, and augmented
reality, serious games, and 3D User interfaces. Much
of his work has focused on the accessibility of these
technologies for persons with disabilities. He has
published numerous works in top conferences such
as IEEE VR and top journals, such as IEEE TVCG.
He has been awarded signiﬁcant funding from the
National Institutes of Health, the Department of De-
fense, and the National Science Foundation, including
the prestigious NSF CAREER award in 2014. He was
diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis in 2004, resulting
a variety of disabilities that have inhibited his use
of virtual reality. He has the unique experience of
being both a VR researcher and an end user with
disabilities, serving to inform his chosen research
focus. Contact him at John.Quarles@utsa.edu.

and G. Riva. The role of age on multisensory bodily

experience: an experimental study with a virtual reality

full-body illusion. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and So-

cial Networking, 21(5):304–310, 2018.

24. K. Spiel. The bodies of tei–investigating norms and

assumptions in the design of embodied interaction.

In

Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference

on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, pp.

1–19, 2021.

25. R. M. Williams and J. E. Gilbert. Perseverations of the

academy: A survey of wearable technologies applied to

autism intervention.

International Journal of Human-

Computer Studies, 143:102485, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.

ijhcs.2020.102485

Tabitha C. Peck is an Associate Professor of Math-
ematics and Computer Science at Davidson College.
Dr. Peck received her PhD in Computer Science from
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
in
2010. Dr. Peck’s research involves developing and
testing usable virtual reality systems. Her current
research includes investigation of the psychological
implications of embodiment in self-avatars with the
goal of using avatars to reduce and mitigate bias. Dr.
Peck has been both a Journal and Conference Paper
Program Chair for IEEE VR and a Journal Paper
Science and Technology Chair for IEEE ISMAR. She
is a Review Editor for Frontiers in Virtual Reality and
an Associate Editor for Presence. She has received
numerous honorable mentions and nominations for
best paper awards at IEEE VR, and received a NSF
CAREER award in 2020. Dr. Peck is an IEEE Senior
Member. Contact her at tapeck@davidson.edu.

is an Assistant Professor of
Kyla A. McMullen
Computer and Information Science and Engineering
at the University of Florida. Dr. McMullen received
her PhD in Computer Science from the University
of Maryland, Baltimore County. Dr. McMullen directs
the SoundPAD Lab, which focuses on the Perception,
Application, and Development of 3D audio technolo-
gies for virtual and augmented reality. Broadly, her
research aims to elucidate the human and computa-
tional factors that researchers must consider in the
design and use of 3D audio systems. Dr. McMullen
has served as the General Chair for the International
Community on Auditory Display (ICAD) Conference
and the National Society of Blacks in Computing
(NSBC). She won the NSF CAREER Award in 2019.
Contact her at drkyla@uﬂ.edu.

is an Associate Professor of Com-
John Quarles,
puter Science at The University of Texas at San

May/June 2021

11

