GENERATIONAL FRAMESHIFTS IN TECHNOLOGY:  
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND NEUROSURGERY, THE VR USE CASE 

Samuel R. Browd1, Maya Sharma2, Chetan Sharma3 

1Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA, 
2Eastside Preparatory School, Kirkland, Washington, USA, 3Chetan Sharma Consulting, Issaquah, 
Washington, USA 

Contact Information: Dr. Samuel Browd, sbrowd@gmail.com. Maya Sharma, 
reachmayasharma@gmail.com. Chetan Sharma, chetan@ieee.org  

Abstract – We are at a unique moment in history where there is a confluence of technologies which will 
synergistically  come  together  to  transform  the  practice  of  neurosurgery.  These  technological 
transformations  will  be  all-encompassing,  including  improved  tools  and  methods  for  intraoperative 
performance  of  neurosurgery,  scalable  solutions  for  asynchronous  neurosurgical  training  and 
simulation, as well as broad aggregation of operative data allowing fundamental changes in quality 
assessment,  billing,  outcome  measures,  and  dissemination  of  surgical  best  practices.  The  ability  to 
perform surgery more safely and more efficiently while capturing the operative details and parsing each 
component  of  the  operation  will  open  an  entirely  new  epoch  advancing  our  field  and  all  surgical 
specialties. The digitization of all components within the operating room will allow us to leverage the 
various fields within computer and computational science to obtain new insights that will improve care 
and  delivery  of  the  highest  quality  neurosurgery  regardless  of  location.  The  democratization  of 
neurosurgery is at hand and will be driven by our development, extraction, and adoption of these tools 
of the modern world. Virtual reality provides a good example of how consumer-facing technologies are 
finding a clear role in industry and medicine and serves as a notable example of the confluence of various 
computer science technologies creating a novel paradigm for scaling human ability and interactions. 
The authors describe the technology ecosystem that has come and highlight a myriad of computational 
and data sciences that will be necessary to enable the operating room of the near future. 

Keywords – 5G, Artificial Intelligence, Edge Computing, S-Curves, Virtual Reality 

1. 

INTRODUCTION  

The  last  twenty  years  have  seen  a  complete 
shift from an analogue to a digital society. The 
shift to digital emcompasses all aspects of our 
learn, 
from  how  we  shop,  bank, 
lives, 
communicate, etc.  There remain few vestiges of 
the  analogue  world  in  our  lives,  bar  one 
location; the operating room. 

A critical look shows technology rooted in ideas 
and  methods 
if  not 
Microscopes 
generations, 
fundamentally use ground and polished glass to 
magnify the scene. Navigation technologies are 

that  are  decades, 
dated. 

rooted  in  technologies  that  are  decades  old.  
Information  gathering  and  sharing  is  archaic 
and  remains  largely  analog.  Along  the  same 
lines,  learning and training have  not  changed 
appreciable  since  the  inception  of  surgical 
apprecticships.  Even with the advent of digital 
books,  the  text  is  flat  and  video  is  largely  2-
dimentional.  

There are several reason that the digitization of 
the  operating  room  has  been  slow  to  arrive.  
HIPAA  regulations  and  our  important  and 
necessary  drive  to  ensure  patient  privacy  has 
limited  movement  of  data  outside  of  the 
surgeon’s  home  instiution.  Moving  data  from 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
source  to  cloud  and  back  introduces  security 
risk  and  potential  data  breach  but  this  said, 
parallel  advancements  in  cryptography  and 
security has transformed areas such as banking 
and other areas of the financial sector. 

The  moment  has  arisen  when  there  is  an 
intersection  of  technologies  that  are  coming 
together that will fundamentally changes  how 
surgery  is  taught,  performed,  and  improved.  
Concepts,  technologies  and  regulations  forged 
in the consumer markets are being brought to 
the  operating  room  in  this  unique  moment  of 
surgical  history.    We  review  some  of  the 
fundental  technologies  that  will  shape  the 
modern  surgical  technology  revolution  and 
disucss  VR  as  a  multi-facet  proxy  to  these 
enabling technologies.   

Fig 1: Remote VR surgery setup. (Top) In this case, one 
of the authors (SR) is shown with the VR HMD in the 
operating room working on the patient. (Bottom) View 
seen by the surgeon on the VR headset. The surgeon 
sees the actual imagery being transmitted through a 
communications network, and the images on the bottom 
right are being rendered in real time so the remote 
surgeon can interact with the live surgery using hand 
gestures like picking up the virtual screwdriver to 
indicate where exactly the incision needs to be made on 
the spine. The various elements of AI, Edge Computing, 
and 5G will help in making the system work end-to-end. 
(The authors were involved in demonstrating one of the 
earliest remote VR surgeries in September 2019 using 
the components and technologies discussed in this 

2 

paper. Video of that demo is available at 
https://youtu.be/iwEeA0GzcZA.) © Propriovision. 

full 

forces, 

including 

frameshift 

technologies.  VR  will 

As we look towards the next decade and what is 
coming,  we  see  a  significant  number  of  new 
technologies becoming available as a toolset for 
transforming  industries  like  healthcare  and 
specifically  surgery,  and  we  appear  on  the 
verge  of  a 
in  enabling 
technologies. The development and integration 
of  these  new  technologies  are  driven  by 
multiple 
desired 
improvements  in  care,  lower  costs,  higher 
quality,  and  equitable  delivery  of  care  and 
training.  Virtual  reality  (VR)  surgeries,  as  an 
example,  will  not  be  enabled  by  just  one 
technology;  instead,  this  emerging  field  will 
benefit from the growth of several adjacent and 
simultaneous 
take 
advantage  of  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  fifth-
generation  wireless  network  technology  (5G), 
robotics,  computational  imaging,  and  edge 
computing,  each  of  which  is  an  emerging  and 
rapidly  growing  area  within  computer  and 
computational  sciences  that  has  blossomed 
within the last decade. These technologies have 
seen accelerated development and adoption in 
use cases outside of medicine. The intersection 
of these various technologies is creating a new 
technology  s-curve  in  surgery  (Figure  1)  that 
will see the confluence of multiple technologies 
being brought into the operating room. VR is a 
fascinating  example  of  how  technology  is 
evolving, and adaptations and new methods are 
being  developed  to  bring  these  emerging 
technologies into the operating room. 

2.  ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES – 

STATE OF THE ART 

Computer  and  computation  devices  no  longer 
are  singular  platforms,  driven  by  synclastic 
technologies.  VR/MR/AR  platforms  of  today 
incorporate myriad of functions from wireless 
functionality, to IT integration, to edge compute 
technologies.    The  digital  OR  will  incorporate 
synergistic  technologies  such  as  5G  for  data 
communications and access, AI and ML for data 
management  and 
for 
for  data 
edge 
automation, 

insights, 
computing 

robotics 

 
 
 
 
processing,  and  light-field  imaging  to  digitize 
the  visual  field  of  view. 
  Synergetic  and 
combinatorial  variations  of  such  technologies 
will provide some of the biggest gains in health 
care.  VR  thus  becomes,    not  a  standalone 
technology,  but  requires 
leveraging  new 
concomitant  technologies  to  fully  realize  the 
  For  exampke,  
value  proposition  inherent. 
synthetic or semi-synthetic environments that 
enhance  the  surgeon’s  vision  or  situational 
awareness  need  to  perform  quickly,  transfer 
relevant data efficiently and without error, and 
meet  demanding  physical  requirements  that 
will lead to embodiments of the technology that 
fit  the  ergonomic  and  workflow  requirements 
in  the  operating  room.    Examples  of  enabling 
technologies that have impacted consumer and 
industries outside of surgery include 5G, AI/ML, 
edge  compute,  and  visualization,  experiential 
plaforms such as VR.  

2.1  5G 

As wireless connectivity accelerates (Figure 2), 
there  is  a  new  opportunity  to  seize  upon  the 
roll-out  of  5G  cellular-based  technologies 
within healthcare, leveraging the revolutionary 
ability  to  move,  share,  and  harvest  data 
wirelessly  from  within  the  hospital  and  the 
operating  room  environment.  The  adaptation 
and integration of 5G will accelerate the use of 
wireless  technologies  in  the  OR  including 
transfer  of  large  data  sets  used  in  imaging  as 
well  as  improve  the  ability  to  leverage  cloud-
based  computational  power.    Head-mounted 
visual  platforms  that  are  integrated  into  the 
surgeons  line-of-sight  will  increase  in  power 
and  capacity  while  also,  and  importantly, 
in 
undergoing 
ergonomic and weight.   The wireless industry 
is going through a massive 5G network upgrade 
cycle [1][2].  

improvements 

continue 

Fig 2. Expected growth of 5G in the U.S [3] 

for 

security 

enhanced 

sensors  nodes 

5G  brings  in  a  range  of  new  features  and 
capabilities  that  will  be  transformative  for 
healthcare.  In  addition  to  gigabit  speeds  and 
sub 20-msec latencies, 5G offers features such 
as  network  slicing  that  can  dedicate  a  slice  of 
to  an  application,  support 
the  network 
distributed 
in  a  dense 
environment  like  the  operating  room,  and 
provide 
data 
transmission.  Further,  the  trends  around 
having  private  networks  to  build  a  dedicated 
network  for  hospital  campuses  or  operating 
rooms  using  cellular  technologies  are  quite 
attractive because they reduce interference and 
improve  reliability  of  wireless  networks  in 
hospital environments. The scale of 5G cellular 
handsets  in  the  market  will  lead  to  network 
effects  and  lower  the  pricing  for  5G  chipsets 
such that they can be embedded in new forms 
of  devices  such  as  VR  headsets,  which  will 
the  advent  of  new 
further  accelerate 
applications and services.  

5G  will  impact  surgery  by  allowing  operating 
rooms to be configured without wires using 5G 
infrastructure  that  use  high-band  spectrum 
allowing  for  gigabit-per-second  speed  that  is 
free of interference and provides extremely low 
latency.  This  will  be  critical  for  VR  and  head-
mounted  device  data  transmission  in  the 
operating  room,  rendering  of  high-resolution 
images, overlaying of real-time data within the 
synthetic 
facilitating 
surgical  view,  and 
telesurgical  platforms  that  will  require  high-
speed,  low-latency  data  transfer  to  facilitate 
surgeons 
interactions  between 
real-time 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
positioned  across  the  globe.  5G  is  attractive 
because it offers this high-bandwidth capability 
in  higher  bands  coupled  with  significantly 
lower latency.  

2.2  Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

AI  or  automation  of  data  analysis  and 
intelligence  is  one  of  the  most  fundamental 
shifts  that  is  occurring  across  all  industry 
verticals. The role of AI in healthcare is going to 
be  transformational  because  of  the  enormity 
and  complexity  of  data  that  must  be  analyzed 
both in real-time as well as post-processing [4]. 
AI can help decipher data patterns much faster 
than  even 
the  most  well-trained  and 
experienced  professionals  and,  as  such,  it  will 
become a mainstay within surgery allowing for 
real-time  decision-making  assistive  tools.  The 
real  superpower  of  AI  comes  from  ingesting 
data  and 
in  categorical, 
noncategorical,  or  contextual  data  that  might 
take  hours  or  months  to  find  or  might  be 
unrecognized by the human eye. AI is the most 
basic layer in the software stack that induces a 
intelligence-driven 
to 
layered 
decision-making,  whether 
is  detecting 
surgical anatomy, outlining surgical margins, or 
providing 
surgical 
environment  in  real-time,  on-demand.  AI  can 
be  trained  to  examine  patterns  within  an 
individual  or  interrogate  data  of  populations, 
surfacing  meaningful  trends,  patterns,  and 
learnings that would otherwise go undetected.  

finding  meaning 

insights  within 

approach 

the 

it 

As an example, marrying AI to VR opens a host 
of 
interesting  abilities.  Understanding  the 
context  and  phase  of  an  operation  allows  for 
smart decision support that can be based on a 
growing repository of computation data related 
to best practices, surgical outcome metrics, and 
importantly  intraoperative  risk  assessment 
and  warnings  such  as  approaching  critical 
structures  or  passing  anatomical  planes  that 
could lead to injury or poor outcome. Surgical 
decision  support  could  offer  suggestions 
related  to  aneurysm  clip  selection,  pedicle 
screw  size/length  recommendations, 
final 
spinal  construct  alignment  or  assessment  of 

electrocorticography  and  optimal  surgical 
resection boundries; all happening in real time 
with true contextual knowledge. If we leverage 
the  masters  of  neurosurgery  to  inform  our 
practice,  how  could  their  knowledge  and 
outcomes  be  transferred  with  contextual 
relevance  to  other  surgeons  and  applied  in  a 
specific  case  at  the  right  moment  in  the 
operation. AI delivered via VR synthetic vision 
could allow for the transfer of knowledge in the 
operating environment in real time, presented 
in  a  way  that  integrates  the  true  anatomical 
view with the synthetic data. The digitization of 
the  operating  room  including  capture  of  the 
visual scene and performance of surgery allows 
us to capture, process and anaylize in a way that 
has not been possible. In aggregate, the  pearls 
and  wisdom  of  surgery  can  be  capture, 
analyzed  and  shared  making  what  was  once 
tribal knowledge handed down one to the next; 
instead,  widely  and  freely  shared  and  made 
available  and  deployed  in  surgery  at  the  right 
moment and in context. 

2.3  Edge Computing 

to 

The  Edge  Internet  is  a  computational  overlay 
architecture  that  essentially  upgrades  the 
existing  network 
infrastructure  [5].  Edge 
computing  allows  for  data  processing  at  the 
device in use, without having to fully access the 
cloud  to  transmit,  compute,  and  resend  data 
back 
the  source  device.  Thus,  edge 
computing allows for reduction in data latency 
times  and  creates  the  ability  to  quickly  cycle 
data for specific use cases [6]. The importance 
in  surgery  to  have  rapid,  precise  data  turn-
around  makes  edge  computing  a  logical  and 
important advancement as these high-compute 
and 
are 
positioned for patient care. 

communications 

technologies 

Fig 3. (Top) Legacy architecture; (bottom) Edge 
Internet architecture. 

4 

 
 
 
 
The data generation in hospitals is expected to 
reach over 3 Terabytes/day [7]. Obviously, only 
a small fraction of the data produced needs to 
be  transmitted,  but  it  needs  to  be  processed, 
in  real-time,  and  the  current 
sometimes 
architecture is inadequate for handling the new 
demands and the new opportunities. 

Figure  3  further  expands  on  how  such  an 
architecture would work in a wireless network. 
In  a  VR-assisted  neurosurgical  environment, 
Edge  computing  capability  is  likely  to  be 
distributed  between  the  VR  headset,  surgical 
equipment,  5G  small  cell,  operator’s  radio 
access network, and data centers, depending on 
the  workloads  and  latency  requirements  of  a 
specific use case. 

requirements 

The 
for  computation  and 
communications  are  enormous.  Just  doing 
some  basic  math,  for  VR,  each  of  the  human 
eyes can see up to 64 million pixels at any given 
moment, and with 120 frames per second (fps) 
requirement to generate a real-life view, we are 
looking  at  15.5  billion  of  pixels/second.  By 
storing  each  colored  pixel  in  36  bits  and  with 
1:600  video  compression  available  in  H.265 
the 
HEVC  encoding,  we  are 
consistency of 1 Gbps to guarantee acceptable 
user  experience  [8].  Additionally,  5-msec 
latency  is  required  to  ensure  high-resolution 
and  undistorted  vision.  These  kinds  of 
requirements  are  impossible  to  fulfill  with 
legacy 
communications 
and 
architectures. 

looking  at 

Internet 

As the discussion above illustrates, 5G, AI, and 
Edge  computing  come  together  to  aid  VR 
neurosurgery  in  a  way  that  empower  the 
neurosurgeon  with  data, 
and 
visualization in real-time that will create better 
outcomes 

insights, 

3.  VIRTUAL REALITY AND SURGERY 

Within 
the 
synthetically 

last  decade, 
a 

create 

the  ability 
to 
virtual  world 

5 

environment  has  gone  from  science  fiction  to 
reality. Technological innovation in the virtual- 
and mediated-reality world has been occurring 
at  breakneck  speed,  and  the  commoditization 
of VR devices has accelerated the use, adaption, 
accessibility,  and  cost  of 
these  devices. 
Although VR was originally considered for use 
in  the  context  of  gaming  and 
primarily 
immersive  player  experiences,  others  quickly 
realized that the ability to synthetically create a 
novel  world  view  could  have  implications 
throughout myriad contexts including business 
and industry. In the last five years, the medical 
community has also recognized the uses of VR 
modalities that look to address issues that can 
be uniquely dealt with using VR methodology. 
These use cases range from early examples in 
the study of anatomy to more recent use cases 
in  the  treatment  of  post-traumatic  stress 
disorder, depression, anxiety and chronic pain. 
Surgeons quickly found utility in seeing three-
surgical 
dimensional 
anatomy  in  a  format  that  allowed  contextual 
information to be presented such that allowed 
the  surgeon  could  move  through  and  around 
the  anatomy,  manipulate  the  viewpoint  and 
scale,  and  do  some  cursory  renditions  of 
operative  procedures.  The  potential  to  early 
adopters  has  been  obvious:  VR  stands  to 
transform how information is presented to the 
surgeon  before,  during,  and  potentially  after 
the operation.  

representations  of 

for 

training 

The medical community has recently begun to 
recognize what has long been observed in the 
leveraging 
industry,  namely,  that 
aviation 
simulation 
synthetic 
and 
environmental 
immersion  can  offer  great 
benefit. The ability to take learners and deploy 
them  in  a  realistic  training  environment  not 
only allows for the practice of routine skills, but 
also allows learners to experience challenging, 
anomalous, and dangerous situations in a risk-
free environment. In medicine, this presents a 
safe  situation  that  requires  no  direct  patient 
interaction  or  risk.  The  scenarios  can  be 
repeatedly experienced and practiced, and the 
speed and ability to experience these situations 

 
 
 
 
choosing, 

is  not  limited  by  one’s  training  experience, 
institution, or mentors. VR-based technologies 
will  allow  the  practice  sessions  that  have 
commonly  happened  in  cadaver  labs  to  be 
experienced  at  the  time  and  place  of  the 
fundamentally 
learner’s 
learn 
transforming  how 
and 
anatomical 
experience  new 
variants, 
intraoperative 
emergencies 
that  until  now  are  only 
experienced in the moment. As haptics and VR-
for 
augmented  surgical  tools  are  crafted 
engaging 
in  these  training  scenarios,  the 
realism will only increase. 

surgeons 
techniques, 

common 

and 

navigation, 

Beyond the training scenarios, VR will become 
integrated  into  operating  procedures  and  can 
potentially be used by surgeons throughout the 
operation. Although these use cases are starting, 
they  will  initially  be  limited  to  value-added 
situations  such  as  navigation.  As  VR  and  its 
enabling  technologies  that  will  become  the 
digital operating room advance, VR will become 
the methodology of choice for many functions, 
data-
including  microscopy, 
directed  surgeon  augmentation,  and  directed 
decision-making. As the surgeon operates in VR 
(Figure  1),  the  relevant  radiographic  images 
will be superimposed in context and scale to the 
patient’s  anatomy;  furthermore,  the  anatomic 
structures will be labeled, and suggestions will 
be presented to the surgeon regarding a variety 
of  options  as  the  case  progresses.  Examples 
might  include  which  screw  to  select  in  fusion 
cases, which aneurysm clip is best suited for the 
specific  aneurysm  being  clipped,  and  which 
wavelengths  of  light  might  be  interpreted  to 
assess and inform the surgeon as to the tumor 
margins.  

VR will also enable telesurgery to occur in ways 
that,  to  date,  have  not  been  possible.  VR 
headsets  will  be  used  to  share  the  surgical 
experience  in  a  fully  immersive  way  with 
colleagues and trainees in the room, in the same 
city, and across the globe. The ability to bring in 
an  expert  who  will  be  able  to  virtually 
participate  in  the  case will  transform  the  way 

6 

expert  surgeons  are  deployed  and  scaled  for 
complex cases outside of their own catchment 
areas. Similarly, expert surgeons will be able to 
capture  surgeries  that  can  be  annotated, 
archived, and shared broadly for training. The 
digitization  of  the  operating  room  will  enable 
new forms of education using VR including new 
textbooks that are immersive and interactive. 

Although  VR  headsets  are  becoming  more 
common  and  commoditized  in  the  consumer 
space,  associated  technologies  will  need  to  be 
developed  to  bring  the  imaging  and  other 
enabling data in a usable format to the surgeon. 
The  areas  of  5G  broadband  communications, 
computer vision, data transfer and connectivity, 
AI  and  machine  learning  (ML),  and  edge 
computing  will  enable  the  digital  operating 
room  of  the 
future  and  the  ubiquitous 
integration of VR technologies there.  

4.  VR SURGERY ROADMAP 

in 

As  has  been  established  in  the  paper,  VR 
technology will have a profound impact on how 
surgeries are done in the future. However, we 
must  work  through  the  limitations  of  the  VR 
the  short-term  and  be 
environment 
cognizant  of  the  influencing  factors  on  the 
roadmap. For example, VR is highly sensitive to 
jitter, 
latency,  and  bandwidth  and  each 
deployment is going to be slightly different due 
to  the  radio-frequency  characteristics  of  the 
operating  room  and  the  hospital,  so,  these 
performance  KPIs  must  be  measured  for 
consistency and reliability. In scenarios where 
some surgeons might be joining the live surgery 
from remote, connectivity on the other end also 
becomes paramount. While the VR headsets are 
powerful  computing  device,  the  battery  life  is 
limited, and the headsets are bulky. It also takes 
some amount of getting used to VR in a surgical 
environment, so time needs to be carved out for 
training  and  testing.  With  the  new  sources  of 
imaging, 
data 
confidentiality  elements  of  the  policy  and 
procedures  need to  be updated. New network 
that  such  devices  can  be 
nodes  mean 

and  VR 

video, 

data, 

 
 
 
 
susceptible  to  hacks  and  as  such  need  to  be 
monitored  and  protected,  data  needs  to  be 
encrypted  end-to-end,  and  data  privacy  laws 
need  to  be  adhered  to.  Finally,  given  the 
introduction  of  a  new  technology,  one  has  to 
update the legal liability frameworks as well. 

5.  OVERCOMING THE LIMITATIONS 

Practitioners  of  the  trade  need  to  understand 
that  future  surgeries  will  be  a  joint  IT  and 
medicine undertaking. The medical expertise of 
surgeons  will  need  to  be  ably  assisted  by  VR 
surgery apparatus of edge computing, headsets, 
wireless networks, security, imaging, and more. 
Hiring  of 
technical  expertise  at  medical 
institutes will become essential to carry out VR 
surgeries.  VR  gives  a  completely  new 
dimension  to  visualizing  data  and  intelligence 
in  real-time  and  it  will  take  some  time  for 
surgeons  to  get  used  the  new  working 
environment.  In  fact,  to  reduce  the  learning 
curves, residents and medical students must be 
exposed  to  these  new  tools  much  early  on  so 
they develop proficiency in understanding the 
data, imaging, surgical references points and in 
trusting the tools. The technology space evolves 
faster than the procedures in medicine, so the 
teams need to stay up to speed on updates and 
upgrades  across  multiple  technology  areas 
such as the ones discussed in the paper. Finally, 
while initially the VR surgical apparatus might 
be expensive, the costs will come down as the 
market  scales  and  the  cost  of  equipment  will 
easily  be  compensated  by  savings 
from 
simulation  training  and  getting  physicians 
better  prepared,  be  safer  and  by  reducing 
errors in the operating room. 

6.  CONCLUSION 

into 

an  immersive,  shared  experience  that  can 
happen in the same room or across continents. 
Because  the  data  presented  are  synthesized, 
novel  and  unique  applications  can  be  brought 
the  operative  environment. 
directly 
Surgeons can benefit from the overlay of data, 
imagery,  shared 
intelligence,  and  decision 
support  in  real  time  as  they  prepare  for  and 
perform  surgeries.  Telesurgical  collaborations 
will occur in real time, allowing colleagues to be 
visually transported into the remote operating 
room  to  participate  in  surgery  with  the  same 
perspective  and  context  as  the  physically 
present surgeon.  

Technology  cycles  are  happening  quickly,  and 
the  integration  of  advanced  computer  science 
methodologies  is  creating  new  opportunities 
and  disruptive  trajectories  within  verticals 
such as surgery that will move the field forward 
into  the  next  technological  epic.  VR,  synthetic 
vision,  and  associated  enabling  technologies 
such as 5G, computer vision, VR, and AI will be 
transformational  to  the 
field  of  surgery, 
bringing sophisticated knowledge and decision 
support  into the  modern operating room.  The 
evolution  of  the  digital  operating  room, 
including  VR,  will  advance  the  quality  of  care, 
reducing  costs  and  facilitating  training  and 
education.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

We  thank  Kristin  Kraus,  MSc,  for  editorial 
assistance.  

DISCLOSURES 

Dr.  Browd  has  equity  in  Propriovision.  The 
other authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

Although  originally  developed  in  the  gaming 
ecosystem,  VR  technology  has  found  myriad 
uses in medicine across a variety of use cases, 
from post-traumatic stress disorder therapy to 
VR 
surgical 
applications will expand rapidly finding utility 
in many areas of surgical practice. VR allows for 

planning. 

potential 

The 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

bfs/LF%20Edge/StateoftheEdgeReport
_2021.pdf.  Published  2021.  Accessed 
March 29, 2021. 

Dollar 

Sharma C. Edge Internet Economy: The 
Multi-Trillion 
Ecosystem 
Opportunity. 
http://www.chetansharma.com/public
ations/edge-internet-economy/. 
Published  2019.  Accessed  March  29, 
2021. 

Cisco.  Cisco  Global  Cloud  Index,  2014-
2019. 
https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/m/en_
us/service-
provider/ciscoknowledgenetwork/files
/547_11_10-15-
DocumentsCisco_GCI_Deck_2014-
2019_for_CKN__10NOV2015_.pdf. 
Published  2015.  Accessed  March  29, 
2021. 

Elbamby  M,  Perfecto  C,  Bennis  M, 
Doppler  K.  Toward  Low-Latency  and 
Ultra-Reliable  Virtual  Reality. 
IEEE 
Network. 2018;32(78-84). 

Maya  Sharma,  is  a  student  at 
Eastside  Preparatory  School.  Her 
research areas include application 
of  new  technology  areas  such  as 
VR, 5G, IoT, Robotics, and AI to the 
medical  field.  She  is  the  author  of  Paving  – 
Conversations  With  Incredible  Women  Who  Are 
Shaping  Our  World  published  by  Olympia 
Publishers,  London  (2021).  She  is  author  of  peer-
reviewed journal papers in the International Youth 
Neuroscience  Association  Journal  (IYNA),  Health 
and  Medicine  related  articles  for  The  Sports 
Institute  at  University  of  Washingont  School  of 
Medicine,  Op-Eds and articles related to medicine.  
She is a frequent speaker on STEM and leadership 
topics  at  conferences  and  on  TV.  Her  essay  on 
“Strategies  and  Solutions  to  solve  Global  Water 
Crises” won first place in statewide competition.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

Balachandran K. 5G wireless access: an 
Ericsson. 
overview. 
https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports
-and-papers/white-papers/5g-
wireless-access-an-overview. Published 
2020. Accessed March 29, 2021. 

Tian W, Fan M, Zeng C, Liu Y, He D, Zhang 
Q.  Telerobotic  Spinal  Surgery  Based  on 
5G  Network:  The  First  12  Cases. 
Neurospine. 2020;17(1):114-120. 

Sharma  C.  5G  U.S.  Market  Impact. 
https://shop.cta.tech/collections/resea
rch/products/5g-us-market-impact. 
Published  2018.  Accessed  March  29, 
2021. 

Hashimoto  DA,  Rosman  G,  Rus  D, 
Meireles  OR.  Artificial  Intelligence  in 
Surgery: Promises and Perils. Ann Surg. 
2018;268(1):70-76. 

Linux  Foundation.  State  of  the  Edge:  A 
Market and Ecosystem Report for Edge 
Computing. 
https://project.linuxfoundation.org/hu

AUTHORS 

Dr.  Samuel  R.  Browd,  earned  his 
M.D.,  Ph.D,  from  the  University  of 
Florida  in  2000  and  completed  his 
Neurological  Surgery  residency  at 
the University of Utah. He is a board 
certified  pediatric  neurosurgeon  at  Seattle 
Children’s  Hospital,  Harborview  and  University  of 
Washington Medical Center and a UW professor of 
Neurological  Surgery  and  an  adjunct  professor  of 
Biomedical engineering. He specializes in providing 
care to children with surgical disorders of the  brain 
and spinal cord. He has published over 100 articles 
in peer-reviewed medical journals. Dr.  Browd has 
also co-founded and served as chief medical officer 
of  six  companies  in  healthcare  and  holds  multiple 
device  patents  in  the  fields  of  neurosurgery, 
computer science, and mechanical engineering. He 
currently  serves  as  co-founder  and  chief  medical 
officer of Propriovision, Inc.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chetan  Sharma,  received  BS  in 
Electrical  Engineering  from  Indian 
Institute  of  Technology,  Roorkee  in 
1991  and  MS  in  EECE  from  Kansas 
State University in 1993. Since 2000,  
he  has  been  CEO  of  a  research  and 
strategy  consulting 
-  Chetan  Sharma 
firm 
Consulting.  He  is  author  or  editor  of  15  books 
related  to  wireless  and  has  publsihed  over  250 
papers,  articles,  and  reports  on  the  wireless 
industry. His research interests are in applying new 
computing  and  communications  technologies  like 
5G and Edge Computing to vertical industries.  

9 

