Wireless Edge-Empowered Metaverse: A
Learning-Based Incentive Mechanism for Virtual
Reality

Minrui Xu, Dusit Niyato, Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Chunyan Miao, and Dong In Kim

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
7

]
T
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
7
7
3
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The Metaverse is regarded as the next-generation
Internet paradigm that allows humans to play, work, and socialize
in an alternative virtual world with immersive experience, for
instance, via head-mounted display for Virtual Reality (VR)
rendering. With the help of ubiquitous wireless connections
and powerful edge computing technologies, VR users in the
wireless edge-empowered Metaverse can immerse themselves in
the virtual through the access of VR services offered by differ-
ent providers. However, VR applications are computation- and
communication-intensive. The VR service providers (SPs) have
to optimize the VR service delivery efﬁciently and economically
given their limited communication and computation resources.
An incentive mechanism can be thus applied as an effective
tool for managing VR services between providers and users.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a learning-based Incentive
Mechanism framework for VR services in the Metaverse. First,
we propose the quality of perception as the metric for VR
users immersing in the virtual world. Second, for quick trading
of VR services between VR users (i.e., buyers) and VR SPs
(i.e., sellers), we design a double Dutch auction mechanism to
determine optimal pricing and allocation rules in this market.
Third, for auction information exchange cost reduction, we design
a deep reinforcement learning-based auctioneer to accelerate
this auction process. Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed framework can achieve near-optimal social welfare
while reducing at least half of the auction information exchange
cost than baseline methods.

I. INTRODUCTION

The Metaverse is the next-generation Internet after the web
and the mobile network revolutions, in which humans (acting
as digital avatars) can interact with other people and software
applications in a three-dimensional (3D) virtual world [1],
[2]. As described in the famous ﬁlm Ready Player One, the
Metaverse allows everyone acting as a customized avatar to
be connected and do everything at will only following some
basic rules. The Metaverse provides users with immersive
experiences in the virtual world by head-mounted display
(HMD) for Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality
(VR) [3]. As envisioned in Ready Player One, the Metaverse is

M. Xu, D. Niyato, and C. Miao are with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (e-
mail: minrui001@e.ntu.edu.sg; dniyato@ntu.edu.sg; ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg)

J. Kang is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of

Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: kavinkang@gdut.edu.cn)

Z. Xiong is with the Pillar of Information Systems Technology and Design,
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372, Singapore
(e-mail: zehui xiong@sutd.edu.sg)

D. I. Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail:
dikim@skku.ac.kr)

feasible under today’s reachable technologies, such as digital
twins for modeling of the physical world, VR/AR for immer-
sive experience via HMD rendering, and Blockchain for dis-
tributed ledgers and decentralized autonomous organizations
(DAOs) [1]. Empowered by 5G and beyond wireless networks
and edge computing/intelligence technologies, the Metaverse
allows users to access this virtual world anywhere and anytime.
In the wireless edge-empowered Metaverse, VR users can feel
and experience seamlessly immersive in various Metaverse
applications, such as massively multiplayer online (MMO)
videogames and virtual concerts, with ultra-low latency and
ultra-high reliable connections [3].

Although wireless edge-empowered Metaverse has so many
advantages, its economic system design (especially the incen-
tive mechanisms) for motivating and incentivizing both users
and service providers (SPs) to participate in the Metaverse
interaction still needs much further investigation. For example,
when playing MMO video games, VR users need to allocate
a large amount of communication and computation resources
from SPs to guarantee their quality of experience. However,
there are three main problems in designing economic mecha-
nisms in the wireless edge-empowered Metaverse. First, unlike
omnidirectional VR applications, wireless edge-empowered
Metaverse renders the virtual world via non-panoramic VR
for the communication trafﬁc cost and the computation con-
sumption reductions of wireless devices [4]. In this context,
the utility of VR users and SPs in the Metaverse needs to be
redesigned to emphasize the quality of perception experience
of VR users [5]. Second, the Metaverse service market is a
bilateral market with VR users acting as buyers and SPs acting
as sellers, thus complicating their interactions. Third, unlike
continuous trading markets, the Metaverse service market is
a call market and requires efﬁcient matching and pricing
between VR users and SPs [6].
To address these problems,

the Double Dutch Auction
(DDA) [7], a generalization of Dutch auction in the double-
side market, is a promising solution. The auctioneer in DDA,
run by DAOs in the Metaverse [1], uses two Dutch clocks to
match and determine transactions for buyers (i.e. VR users)
and sellers (i.e., VR SPs) in the VR service market. The
Buyer clock, starting from high and descending over time,
shows the current buy price of VR services, and the Seller
clock, starting from low and ascending over time, shows the
current sell price of VR services. The bidding process of
DDA is asynchronous and iterative. In each auction round,

 
 
 
 
 
 
the auctioneer ﬁrst broadcasts the current auction clocks to
buyers and sellers, respectively. The buyers and sellers indicate
their willingness to buy and sell and stop their clocks at a
market price at least as favorable as their respective clock
prices. During the auction, the clocks are always restarted
at the same value at which they were stopped. This allows
multiple units to be traded at the same clock price. Finally,
the auction ends when the two clocks cross and the auctioneer
clears the market at the common crossing price between the
winning buyers and winning sellers. Furthermore, via Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [8], the auctioneer can learn
to adjust the clock stepsize of the auction clocks dynamically
during the auction process without prior auction knowledge. In
this way, this learning-based auctioneer can maximize social
welfare while improving auction efﬁciency.

In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient deep reinforcement
learning-based incentive mechanism framework to manage
and allocate non-panoramic VR services between SPs and
users in wireless edge-empowered Metaverse. For efﬁcient
determination of the allocation and pricing rules for VR
services, we propose the DDA call market,
in which the
auction is completed in a ﬁnite time. In order to improve the
efﬁciency of DDA, that is, to reduce the auction information
exchange cost within the VR service market, the auctioneer
acting as the agent in deep reinforcement learning can learn the
near-optimal policy through interaction with the environment
without prior auction knowledge.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We present an efﬁcient learning-based incentive mecha-
nism framework for wireless edge-empowered Metaverse
to evaluate and reinforce the seamless experience of im-
mersion of VR users, which is the ﬁrst market mechanism
for VR services in the Metaverse.

• Unlike existing double auctions for continuous trading
markets, we propose the double Dutch auction to match
and price VR services between users and VR SPs dynam-
ically for our framework. The SPs and users can offer
their buy-bids and sell-bids asynchronously but
trade
simultaneously while guaranteeing incentive rationality,
truthfulness, and budget balance.

• To improve the DDA efﬁciency, we design a DRL-based
DDA to maximize social welfare with high communica-
tion efﬁciency. The auctioneer act as the DRL agent to
learn the efﬁcient auction policy without prior knowledge
and reduce the auction information exchange cost.

II. WIRELESS EDGE-EMPOWERED METAVERSE MODEL

We consider a wireless edge-empowered Metaverse system
with a set N = {1, . . . , n, . . . , N } of N VR SPs and a set
M = {1, . . . , m, . . . , M } of M VR users in a downlink
wireless network [5]. As shown in Fig.1, the wireless edge-
empowered Metaverse focuses on providing non-panoramic
VR applications for interactive entertainments, e.g., immersive
videogames and virtual concerts, through wireless connec-
tions [9]. By the non-panoramic VR, users can immerse in the
Metaverse with 3D and high-resolution video steams with 3D

Fig. 1. A Typical Framework of Wireless Edge-empowered Metaverse.

surround sound from SPs. The SPs, which render 3D scenes
for VR applications, ﬁrst encode the resulting content using
the NVENC H.264 codes. The SPs transmit them to their VR
users via wireless networks. Finally, the VR users decode and
display the content in their HMD devices.

A. Communication Model

In the Metaverse, maintaining high bitrate among VR
users is a desiring property for immersive experience. How-
ever, the solution for streaming of 360 VR by using pre-
rendered panorama images requires on average bitrate at 132
Mbps [9]. Fortunately, the bitrate recommendation to support
non-panoramic VR for the HMD resolution is a range of 20-38
Mbps. This is also a heavy burden on wireless networks, so
we consider an frequency division multiple access (FDMA)
system that each SP has one resouce block to server one
VR user, for a more general case. Accordingly, the downlink
bitrate for the VR user under SP n is described as [3]:
(cid:18)

Rn = BnEhn

log2(1 +

,

(1)

pn|hn|2
BnN0

(cid:19)
)

where Bn denotes the allocated bandwidth of SP n in its
resource block, pn refers to the transmit power of SP n,
N0 is the noise power spectral density, and Ehn (·) refers to
the expectation with respect to the channel gain hn between
VR SP n and the VR user. Similar to [10], we consider that
each orthogonal resource block allocated for the VR service
is occupied by at most one VR user, namely, the interference
caused by other VR SPs or users participating in the wireless
edge-empowered Metaverse could be ignore.

B. Quality of Perception Experience Model for the Metaverse

Different from omnidirectional VR, which requires images
to cover a much larger area, non-panoramic VR demands
less data trafﬁc and rendering power to support similar qual-
ity of perception experience of VR applications. However,
non-panoramic VR requires different metrics to evaluate the
quality of perception experience of VR users. Continuous
Rotation takes ten samples of instantaneous Structural SIMilar-
ity (SSIM) [11] and Video Multi-Method Assessment Fusion
(VMAF) [12] within a constant rotation at various bitrates.
SSIM measures the similarities between two images in non-
panoramic VR rendering. Based on previous work, the authors

①Open VR service call market②Auction clock broadcast③Auction clock acceptance④Auction clock adjustment⑤Clock cross and clear market⑥Transactionsof VR services and payments④④Metaverse⋯⋯VR serviceProviders(Sellers)VR users (Buyers)①①②②③③⑤⑥Seller ClockBuyer ClockAuctioneerVRTABLE I
COEFFICIENTS OF THE SSIM AND THE VMAF FORMULATES [9]

SSIM
VMAF

b1
0.65
36.13

b2
0.368
-1.66e-2

b3
1.23e-3
11.62

b4
0.850
-6.07e-3

in [13], used the number, 0.98, as the limit for a visually
lossless experience. VMAF is a perceptual video quality as-
sessment algorithm developed by Netﬂix seeking to reﬂect the
viewer’s perception of our streaming quality. Although VMAF
is initially designed to work with traditional 2D content, it
can also be successfully used without any speciﬁc adjustments
to obtain the quality of VR sequences actually perceived by
users. The authors in [12] provide extensive experimental tests
on omnidirectional VR content. Accordingly, we formulate our
quality of VR perception experience model based on SSIM and
VMAF. Let Vm be the average rotation speed of VR user m
and Rm be the required bitrate to support its VR applications.
Due to the constrictions of human health and ﬁerce online
games, the average rotation speed is between 360◦ and 1080◦,
i.e., 360◦ ≤ Vm ≤ 1080◦. The SSIM perceived by VR user
m is given by [9]

the VR services satisfying Rreq needs to jointly consider
the communication resources and the computation resources
of SPs. For example, the value of communication resources
depends on the spectrum bands which vary due to the time-
varying demand [5]. The valuation of computation resources
depends on the CPU frequencies of SPs [3]. Thus, the SP n
determines its valuation function vs
n on its resource and the
rendering requirements, in terms of resolution D and frame
rate f , of the VR services, which can be expressed as

n = Df (w1EnBn + w2αnf 2
vs
where En denotes the spectrum efﬁciency of SP n determined
by the communication model in (1), αn denotes the effective
capacitance coefﬁcient of SP n’s computing chipset, the fn is
its CPU frequency, and w1 + w2 = 1 are weights.

n),

(4)

The valuation function vb

m of buyer m for the VR service
depending on its average rotation speed and expected bitrate
can be calculated as

m(Vm, Rm) = g(Vm, Rm)f (Vm,Rm),
vb
where Vm is the average rotation speed of user m and Rm is
the expected bitrate of user m.

(5)

f (Vm, Rm) = max{b0, 1 − (b1 + b2Vm)R−(b3+b4Vm)

m

},

(2)

B. Double Dutch Auction for VR Services

with coefﬁcients bi listed in Table I. As Vm grows, SSIM
values approach the optimal value 1 in an asymptotic way.
Also, with the corresponding ﬁts for Vm, VMAF for VR user
m can be expressed as [9]

g(Vm, Rm) = min{100, b1 + b2Vm + b3Rm + b4VmRm}, (3)

where bi are coefﬁcients listed in Table I. The negative sign of
coefﬁcients b2 and b4 indicates that as Rm increases, the value
of Vm slows down to approach the maximum of 100. VMAF
values, however, increase earlier and steeper as Rm increases
from their minimal values, ﬁnally reaching their peak value of
100, unlike SSIM.

III. MARKET DESIGN AND PROBLEM FORMULATION

A. VR Service Call Market

In the security industries, orders are batched for simultane-
ous execution in multiple-unit auctions in what is referred to
as “call markets”; that is, the security is “called” for auction
at a particular point in time. This type of market is used on
the stock exchanges in many countries [7].

As the wireless VR applications, such as MMO video games
and virtual concerts, should be loaded in a short period of
time. The VR service market in the wireless edge-empowered
Metaverse is a kind of call market, in which VR SPs and
users open and ﬁnish a VR service trade instantaneously.
At the loading process of the games or concerts, VR users
and VR SPs open a VR service call market, as shown in
Fig. 1, where VR users are the buyers and SPs are the
sellers, to trade VR services under the supervision of DAO,
acting as auctioneer. Let Rreq be the required bitrate for VR
users to run the VR applications. However, the provision of

Considering multiple VR SPs and users in the wireless edge-
empowered Metaverse, we utilize the DDA mechanism for
the VR service double-side call market. The objectives of the
double auction mechanism are (i) to match the SPs to VR
users, and (ii) to determine the buying prices of VR users and
selling prices of SPs.

In the VR service call market, there are several entities

acting in different roles as follows:

1) VR users (Buyers): The VR users are the buyers in this
call market that pay the SPs for their resources in facilitating
the VR applications of users. In order to participate in the
auction, the VR users submit their buy-bid to the auctioneer.
The buy-bid of VR users m at time slot t, which is denoted by
kt
m, represents the maximum price that VR user m is willing
to pay for the VR service from SPs, which can be calculated
as kt
m(Vm, Rreq), where Rreq is the requried bitrate for
the VR service to support current VR applications. The VR
users are able to decide on the average rotation speed and the
acquired bitrate of their VR applications.

m = vb

2) VR SPs (Sellers): The VR SPs are the sellers that
provide their computation and communication resources to
deliver VR services for users. In return, they receive monetary
rewards for the provision of their resources. By participating in
the DDA mechanism, the sellers submit their offering sell-bids
to the auctioneer, which can be calculated as ot

n = vs
n.

3) DAO (Auctioneer): The auctioneer of DDA is run by the
DAOs in the Metaverse. The auctioneer of DDA maintains
two Dutch clocks for the buyer side Ψt = 0 and the seller
side Ψt = 1 simultaneously, where Ψt is the ﬂag denoting the
current trading side. The buyer clock CB shows the buying
price which opens with the highest price C 0
B = pmax and
descends over time. On the other hand, the seller clock CS

shows the selling price which opens with the lowest price
C 0
S = pmin and ascends over time. The auctioneer usually
starts with the buyer round, i.e., Ψ0 = 0.

Without

m ≥ · · · ≥ vb

the buyers
loss of generality, we assume that
are arranged according to their values non-increasingly, i.e.,
vb
1 ≥ · · · ≥ vb
M . And the sellers are arranged
according to their value non-decreasingly, i.e., vs
1 ≤ · · · ≤
vs
n ≤ · · · ≤ vs
N . There are three steps in the DDA, i.e.,
Clock Broadcast, Clock Acceptance, and Clock Adjustment.
The following terminologies are used in the DDA:

1) Clock Broadcast: At

the beginning of each auction
round, the auctioneer broadcasts the current clock to
buyers or sellers in the market. When Ψ = 0, which
means the auction is on the buyer’s side, the auctioneer
broadcasts the current buyer clock C t
B to all the buyers.
If the auction is on the seller side, i.e., Ψ = 1, the current
seller clock C t
S is sent to all the sellers.
2) Clock Acceptance: After receiving the auction clock
from the auctioneer,
the buyers and sellers compare
their bids with their current bids. If the current auction
clock meets the bid conditions, the buyers or sellers
whose conditions are met will bid or ask the auctioneer.
Speciﬁcally, when Ψt = 0, which means the current
auction is on the buyer side, the m-th available buyer,
i.e., m /∈ Mt
B, submits its buy-bid as the current buyer
B if it accepts the clock kt
clock bt
B. Then
the set of winning buyers adds the buyer m in current
trade Mt+1
B ∪{m}. Thus, the difference between
the expected buy-bid and the real buy-bid is the regret
et
m of buyer m, which can be calculated as

B = Mt

m ← C t

m ≥ C t

m = kb
et

m − bt

m.

(6)

After that, the auctioneer will change the ﬂag Ψt+1 to 1
and turn to the seller side. If the current auction market
is on the seller side, i.e., Ψt = 1, the situation is similar.
The sellers who have not yet traded will judge whether
they want to participate in this round of transactions after
receiving the seller’s clock from an auctioneer. If the
conditions for participating in the transaction are met,
S and n /∈ N t
that is, ot
S, the seller will accepts
its sell-bid to the current seller clock, i.e., at
S to
inform auctioneer that it wants to trade. The auctioneer
will then add the seller to set of winning sellers, i.e.,
N t+1
S ∪ {n}. Therefore, the difference between
the expected sell-bid and the real sell-bid is the regret
et
n of seller n, which can be calculated as

S = N t

n ≤ C t

n ← C t

n = at
et

n − ot
n.

(7)

The auctioneer then adjusts the ﬂag Ψt+1 = 0, locks the
buyer clock, and switches to the seller’s side.

3) Clock Adjustment: The situations mentioned in the
second step are situations where the buyer or seller
satisﬁes the transaction. However, for the current auction
clock, there may be no participants in the market who
want to trade, so the auction clock needs to be adjusted.

When Ψt = 0 and no buyer can offer a bid,
the
auctioneer chooses a stepsize Θt, which is a multiple of
the minimum price interval, to adjust the buyer clock.
Therefore, the auctioneer reduces the buyer clock as
B = C t

B − Θt.

C t+1

(8)

If the current auction is on seller side, i.e., Ψt = 1 and
no seller can offer a sell-bid, the current seller clock
price should be raised as

C t+1

S = C t

S + Θt.

(9)

The default step size in the Vanilla DDA is set to the
minimum price interval. Note that the auctioneer can
also adjust this step size dynamically, so it can improve
the efﬁciency of the auction via proper step size.
After the adjustment of the auction clock, the auctioneer
can also check whether the two clocks are cross. The
auction ends at time slot T ← t when the two clocks
cross, i.e., C t
S. At this time, the clear market price
is set at the common crossing price p∗ = κC T
B + (1 −
κ)C T

B < C t

S , where κ ∈ [0, 1] is the pricing coefﬁcient.
The utility of buyer m can be expressed as um = bt

m − p∗.
Moreover, the utility of seller n can be expressed as un =
p∗ − at
n. Thus, the total social welfare among the buyers and
sellers can be expressed as

SW =

(cid:88)

um +

(cid:88)

un.

(10)

m∈MT
B

n∈N T
s

The design of the double Dutch auction mechanism has

several desirable properties:

• Individual Rationality: Each buyer or seller achieves non-

negative utility in the DDA mechanism.

• Truthfulness: The payment of buyers and the revenue
of sellers is determined by the common crossing price.
Therefore, buyers and sellers do not have any other
incentive to submit their buy-bids or sell-bids except their
true valuations to the VR services.

• Budget balance: In the DDA, the buyers and the sell-
ers trade with the common crossing price p∗ of buyer
clock and seller clock. Thus, the auctioneer gains a non-
negative utility as the total payment received from all
winning bidders is higher than or equal
to the total
revenue paid to all winning sellers.

C. Markov Decision Process of the DDA

A Markov Decision Process is deﬁned by the tuple <
S, A, P, R >, where S is the state space of the DDA, A
is the action space of the auctioneer in the DDA, P is the
state transition probabilities, and R is the reward.

1) State Space: We deﬁne the state space at the current
auction slot t(t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) as a union of the side ﬂag of
B, the seller clock C t
auction market Ψt, the buyer clock C t
S,
the size of winning buyer set |Mt
B|, and the size of winning
seller set |N t
S|, which is denoted as

St (cid:44) {Ψt, C t

B, C t

S, |Mt

B|, |N t

S|}.

(11)

2) Action Space: Action space of auctioneer includes the
available step size Θt of the buyer clock and the seller clock
at decision slot t, i.e., at (cid:44) {Θt}.

3) Reward: The reward of auctioneer in the DDA consists
of two parts,
the trade regret of buyers and sellers and
the auction information exchange cost to broadcast the new
auction clock to buyers or sellers, which can be expressed as

r(St, at, St+1) =






Ψt = 0, bt
−et
m,
−et
Ψt = 1, bt
n,
−pa(N ), Ψt = 0, bt
−pa(M ), Ψt = 1, bt

m ≥ C t
B,
n ≤ C t
S,
m < C t
B,
n > C t
S,

(12)

where pa(X) is the auction information exchange cost func-
tion for X participants in this market size with augmented
Lagrangian methods, which can be expressed as follows:

pa(X) = cX,

(13)

and c is the penalty of communication in auction.

4) Value Function: Given policy π : π(at|St), the value
function Vπ(S) of the state S of the auctioneer, the expected
discounting reward when starting in S and following π there-
after, can be expressed as

Vπ(S) := Eπ

(cid:34)T −1
(cid:88)

t=0

γtr(St, at, St+1)|S0 = S

,

(14)

(cid:35)

where the expected value of a random variable given that the
agent follows policy π is denoted by Eπ(·) and the reward
discount factor is denoted by γ ∈ [0, 1] used to reduce the
weights as the time step increases.

Fig. 2. Convergence of the DRL-based DDA under different sizes of market.

bandwidth of each resource block ranges from 0.1 to 0.2
MHz [3]. The resolution for HMD devices of VR users is
2160×1200@90 fps, i.e., D = 2160 × 1200 and f = 90. The
computation resource owned by SP is sampled from fn ∈ [2, 4]
GHz, and α is set to 0.01. The highest price pmax is set to
100 and the lowest price pmin is set to 1. The weight is set to
w1 = w2 = 0.5. The minimum price interval is set to 1. The
auction information exchange cost c is set to 0.1.

1) Baseline Methods:
• Vanilla DDA: The auctioneer updates the auction clocks

with the minimum price interval.

• State-of-the-art (SOTA) method [7]: The auctioneer up-
dates the auctions clocks with stepsize sampled from
the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, which is large at the
beginning and then converges to minimum price interval.
• Random method: The auctioneer chooses the clock up-

D. Evaluation and Improvement of Auctioneer Policy

date stepsize from a uniform distribution.

The value function can be computed to help each agent
formulate a better policy. For any arbitrary policy π with
a determined value function Vπ, we can improve it through
policy iteration. Using policy gradients, we aim to increase
the likelihood of actions that will lead to higher expected
rewards and reduce the likelihood of actions that will lead to
lower expected rewards, until we obtain the optimal policy. To
parameterize the policy and value function of the auctioneer,
we use the neural network parameter ϑ. We update the
network parameters every time we train by randomly selecting
samples from the replay buffer. We compute variance-reduced
advantage-function estimators A(S, a) employing a learning
state-value function V (S). Finally, we update the policy and
value function of the auctioneer by maximizing the objective
via stochastic gradient ascent following the proximal policy
optimization update rules [8].

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

We consider a wireless edge-empowered Metaverse that
consists of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 VR users and 10, 20, 30, 40,
50 SPs. The average rotation speed of VR users ranges from
360◦ to 1080◦ [9]. The required bitrate Rreq to support VR
applications is set to 20 Mbps. The maximum transmits the
power of SP to provide one VR service is set to 20 dBm.
Thus the spectrum efﬁciency ranges from 1 to 3. The channel

A. Convergence Analysis

Firstly, we analyze the convergence performance of the
proposed DRL-based DDA algorithm under different sizes of
the VR service market. The sizes of VR service markets range
from 10 buyers and 10 sellers (10×10) to 50 buyers and 50
sellers (50×50). As shown in Fig. 2, the DRL-based DDA
can converge under various scales of the market. However,
the speed to reach the convergence is different. For example,
the DRL-based DDA converges faster in small-scale markets,
which costs only about 30 epochs to achieve. However, in
large-scale markets, such as 50×50, it costs about 160 epochs
to converge to the solution. Clearly, the DRL-based auctioneer
needs to make more interactions with the market to learn
participants’ valuation for their VR services. Moreover, in
larger markets, the DRL-based auctioneer’s performance is
less stable in its learning process, as shown by the yellow line
representing 30×30. The reason is that ﬁtting the valuation of
a large number of participants is not a trivial task.

B. Performance Evaluation under Different system parameters

Then, we compare the performance of the proposed DRL-
based DDA under different system parameters, such as the
required bitrate of VR services and sizes of the VR service
market, with other baseline methods. Under the size of the

0255075100125150175200Epochs020406080100120140160RegretRegret (50×50)Regret (40×40)Regret (30×30)Regret (20×20)Regret (10×10)(a) Social welfare and Auction information exchange
cost vs. Bitrates.

(b) Social welfare vs. Sizes of market.

(c) Auction information exchange cost vs. Sizes of
market.

Fig. 3. Performance evaluation under different system parameters

market with 30×30, Fig. 3(a) shows the trend of social welfare
and auction information exchange cost, as the required bitrate
of VR services increases. From Fig. 3(a), the social welfare
in the market increases as the required bitrate increases. The
reason is that as the required bitrates increase, the quality of
perception experience of VR users increases, so their utility
increases. Moreover, the auction information exchange cost
of the DRL-based DDA is dynamic during the increasing of
required bitrate, while others are static.

In Fig. 3(b), we show the comparison with other baseline
methods on achieved social welfare and auction information
exchange cost under different sizes of markets. It can be
observed that the SOTA and the Vanilla DDA methods achieve
similar social welfare. This social welfare is also the maximum
social welfare in the market as the Vanilla DDA is a regret-zero
method. The social welfare achieved by the DRL-based DDA
is about 5% less than the maximum social welfare. However,
the performance of the DRL-based DDA in social welfare is
much better than the Random method, whose achieved social
welfare is about 20% less than that of the maximum social
welfare. Moreover, in Fig. 3(c), we can observe that the auction
information exchange cost of SOTA and Vanilla DDA is very
large. Although the DRL-based DDA faces a slight loss in
social welfare, its auction efﬁciency is much better than other
baseline methods. The DRL-based DDA only incurs one-third
of the auction information exchange cost of the Vanilla DDA
and half of the SOTA methods.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have studied the economic system in the
wireless edge-empowered Metaverse for VR services. We have
proposed a learning-based incentive mechanism framework to
evaluate and enhance the VR experience in the Metaverse
efﬁciently. By using non-panoramic VR to reduce data trafﬁc
and computation consumption, we have applied SSIM and
VMAF to formulate the experience of perception of VR
users jointly. Then, to facilitate the trading of VR services,
we have proposed the double Dutch auction to facilitate the
matching and pricing processes between VR SPs and users
asynchronously. To further enhance the efﬁciency of the DDA,
we have trained the auctioneer in the DDA as the learning
agent via DRL without prior auction knowledge. Finally, the

experimental results demonstrate that our proposed economic
framework for the Metaverse can achieve effective and ef-
ﬁcient performance in terms of social welfare and auction
information exchange cost in various system settings.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse
for social good: A university campus prototype,” in Proceedings of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ser. MM ’21.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p.
153–161. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238
[2] P. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about Metaverse:
A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and
research agenda,” Oct. 2021.

[3] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Virtual reality over wireless networks:
Quality-of-service model and learning-based resource management,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 5621–5635,
June 2018.

[4] V. Kelkkanen, M. Fiedler, and D. Lindero, “Bitrate requirements of
non-panoramic VR remote rendering,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, ser. MM ’20. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 3624–3631.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3394171.3413681

[5] D. Niyato, N. C. Luong, P. Wang, and Z. Han, Auction Theory for

Computer Networks. Cambridge University Press, 2020.

[6] K. A. McCabe, S.

J. Rassenti, and V. L. Smith, “Designing
call auction institutions: Is double dutch the best?” The Economic
Journal, vol. 102, no. 410, pp. 9–23, Jan. 1992. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2234848

[7] D. Friedman, The double auction market: Institutions, theories, and

evidence. Routledge, 2018.

[8] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.

[9] V. Kelkkanen, M. Fiedler, and D. Lindero, “Bitrate requirements of
non-panoramic VR remote rendering,” Proceedings of the 28th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, 2020.

[10] W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim,
“Dynamic edge association and resource allocation in self-organizing
hierarchical federated learning networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[11] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, April
2004.

[12] M. Orduna, C. D´ıaz, L. Mu˜noz, P. P´erez, I. Benito, and N. Garc´ıa,
“Video multimethod assessment fusion (VMAF) on 360VR contents,”
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 66, pp. 22–31, Feb.
2020.

[13] E. Cuervo, A. Wolman, L. P. Cox, K. Lebeck, A. Razeen, S. Saroiu,
and M. Musuvathi, “Kahawai: High-quality mobile gaming using GPU
ofﬂoad,” Proceedings of the 12th annual international conference on
Mobile systems, applications, and services, 2015.

1015202530Required Bitrates (Mbps)02004006008001000Social Welfare02004006008001000Auction Information Exchange CostDRLSOTAVanilla DDARANDOM10×1020×2030×3040×4050×50Sizes of Market0200400600800Social WelfareDRLSOTAVanilla DDARANDOM10×1020×2030×3040×4050×50Sizes of Market0100200300400500Auction Information Exchange CostDRLSOTAVanilla DDARANDOM