my journal manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana
Naidu

1
2
0
2
c
e
D
8
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
4
2
4
1
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract With the exponential increase in mobile users, the mobile data demand has grown
tremendously. To meet these demands, cellular operators are constantly innovating to en-
hance the capacity of cellular systems. Consequently, operators have been reusing the li-
censed spectrum “spatially," by deploying 4G/LTE small cells (e.g., Femto Cells) in the
past. However, despite the use of small cells, licensed spectrum will be unable to meet the
consistently rising data traﬃc because of data-intensive applications such as augmented re-
ality/virtual reality (AR/VR) and on-the-go high-deﬁnition video streaming. Applications
such AR/VR and online gaming not only place extreme data demands on the network, but
are also latency-critical. To meet the QoS guarantees, cellular operators have begun leverag-
ing the unlicensed spectrum by coexisting with Wi-Fi in the 5 GHz band. The standardizing
body 3GPP, has prescribed cellular standards for fair unlicensed coexistence with Wi-Fi,
namely LTE Licensed Assisted Access (LAA), New Radio in unlicensed (NR-U), and NR
in Millimeter. The rapid roll-out of LAA deployments in developed nations like the US,
oﬀers an opportunity to study and analyze the performance of unlicensed coexistence net-
works through real-world ground truth. Thus, this paper presents a high-level overview of
past, present, and future of the research in small cell and unlicensed coexistence communi-
cation technologies. It outlines the vision for future research work in the recently allocated
unlicensed spectrum: The 6 GHz band, where the latest Wi-Fi standard, IEEE 802.11ax, will
coexist with the latest cellular technology, 5G New Radio (NR) in unlicensed.

Keywords : Femtocells, Small cells, LAA, NR-U, Wi-Fi

Vanlin Sathya
Department of CSE, The University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.
E-mail: vanlin@uchicago.edu
Srikant Manas Kala
Mobile Computing Laboratory, Osaka University, Japan.
E-mail: manas_kala@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Kalpana Naidu
Department of ECE, NIT Warangal, India
E-mail: kalpana@nitw.ac.in

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

1 Introduction

Mobile networks or cellular networks have evolved rapidly over the course of the last four
decades. The ﬁrst generation of mobile networks (1G) were introduced towards the end of
1970s. They relied almost entirely on analog communication techniques and were primarily
designed to oﬀer voice services to the end-users. A few of the noteworthy ﬁrst generation
systems include the Extended Total Access Communication Systems (ETACS), the Nar-
rowband Total Access Communication Systems (NTACS), and the Advanced Mobile Phone
Service (AMPS). 1G cellular networks were followed by the second generation of mobile
networks (2G) that became publicly and commercially available in the 1990s. The hall-
mark of 2G communication was a giant leap towards the digital mode of communication, a
clear break from its analog predecessor. The switch to digital communication signiﬁcantly
enhanced the capabilities of the cellular systems as it oﬀered greater network capacity, en-
hanced quality of voice services through intelligent speech codecs, reduced drain on the
battery, and greater security. However, the landmark technological advancement was the
commencement of digital data services including the Short Message Service (SMS) and In-
ternet access over wireless cellular networks. Global System for Mobile Communications
(GSM), IS-95 Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), and IS- 136 Time Division Multiple
Access (TDMA) represent the most signiﬁcant 2G systems.

A few years later, General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) was introduced which employs
packet switching i.e., data is transmitted in the form of packets. In sharp contrast, in 1G and
2G systems circuit switching was used for data transmission. A major advantage that packet
switching has over circuit switching, is that the resources are reserved for an entire session
and only released when the session ends (for both voice and data sessions). Packet switching
became more relevant as the world wide web or the Internet evolved and the Internet Pro-
tocol (IP) was widely adopted. These developments paved the way for an enhanced GPRS
standard known as the Enhanced Data for Global Evolution (EDGE), which is an important
feature of the 2.75G cellular technology stack.

Despite, oﬀering voice/data services and internet access of a higher quality than the
earlier standards, EDGE failed to catch up with the surge in mobile data demand as the
penetration of mobile phones increased and there was a tremendous increase in the number
of end-users.

To meet the end-user demands, 3G cellular standards were adopted in late 1990s with
the promise of higher data rates and and enhanced Quality of Service (QoS) for several
data-intensive web applications viz., browsing, multimedia streaming, and online gaming.
CDMA was one of the primary 3G technologies, W-CDMA and CDMA2000 being the
most important CDMA versions.

However, the CDMA technology was not without ﬂaws, the most important being its in-
herent inability to scale adequately at higher bandwidths i.e., at 5 MHz and beyond. Reason
being, that at higher bandwidths, the data transmission rate is usually higher, leading to a
shorter transmission step, which in turn exacerbates the adverse impact of multipath fading
on the received signal quality.

The demand for higher data rates continued to rise, which necessitated the research com-
munity in academia and industry to design and develop new technologies that operate well
at higher bandwidths. One of the ﬁrst key developments was the deployment of Orthogo-
nal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) technology. OFDM is designed to split the
data signal into multiple data streams, where each individual data-stream is allocated to a
narrowband channel. Doing so ensured an increased transmission step, mitigating the ad-
verse impact of multipath fading on the received signal. This enabled cellular providers to

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

3

scale their systems for higher bandwidths by provisioning adequate number of narrowband
carriers,

Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) technology further enhanced the network ca-
pacity overcoming the challenges of adverse wireless environments viz., co-channel interfer-
ence and multipath fading. In MIMO, both sender and receiver are equipped with multiple
antennas, which can be used to transmit/receive data over multiple streams using special
MIMO techniques. Together, MIMO and OFDM ushered in the era of high-capacity 4G
cellular networks.

Table 1: Comparison of LTE and LTE-Advanced Networks [45,46]

Parameter
Downlink peak data rate
Uplink peak data rate
Downlink bandwidth
Uplink bandwidth
Bandwidth scalability

LTE
300 Mbps
75 Mbps
20 MHz
20 MHz
1.4, 3, 5, 10, 15 & 20 MHz

LTE-Advanced
1 Gbps
500 Mbps
100 MHz
40 MHz
20, 40, 60, 80 & 100 MHz

Leveraging the technological foundations of the GSM technologies, standards and spec-
iﬁcations for 3G mobile systems were designed by the Third Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), structured as ’releases’. The vision and purpose of 3GPP is to continually de-
velop and maintain cellular technologies and their related standards such as GSM and
GPRS/EDGE, UMTS and HSPA, LTE and LTE-A. 4G or Long Term Evolution (LTE) stan-
dards were introduced by 3GPP in Release 8, with numerous technological advantages that
oﬀer enhanced network coverage and throughput, enhanced Quality of Experience (QoE),
and seamless backward compatibility with legacy cellular technologies such as 2G and 3G.
Further, LTE-Advanced (LTE-A) meets the speciﬁcations of LTE prescribed by International
Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced (IMT-Advanced) and represents the improvements
made in LTE on and after Release 10. A comparison of LTE and LTE-A networks is pre-
sented in Table 1 and a summary of the technological advancements in LTE-A is presented
below:

1. Carrier Aggregation: Introduced in Release 10, the technique seeks to aggregate mul-
tiple carriers to enhance system bandwidth [9]. While, the maximum network band-
width is 100 MHz, carrier aggregation makes it possible to achieve peak data rates of
upto 1 Gbps in downlink and upto 500 Mbps in uplink. Carrier aggregation also of-
fers several other beneﬁts such as carrier load balancing, interference management and
mitigation, QoS diﬀerentiation, and optimal heterogeneous network deployment [47,
48,49,50,51,52]. Three carrier aggregation scenarios are possible depending upon the
bandwidth available. They are: (a) contiguous aggregation in a single radio band, (b)
non-contiguous aggregation in a single radio band, and (c) non-contiguous aggregation
in multiple radio bands.

2. Co-ordinated Multi-point Transmission and Reception (COMP): Proposed in Re-
lease 11, COMP makes it possible for users in the overlapping zone of multiple BSs [18]
to be jointly scheduled. In COMP, multiple neighbouring BSs allocate the same radio
resources to the UE leading to an enhanced throughput and improved QoS for the end-
users at the edge of the cell. Further, dynamic coordination of transmission and reception
over several BSs within the network is also made possible by COMP. Both, homoge-
neous networks comprising of BSs of identical types and power class, and heteroge-

4

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Fig. 1: Typical example of D2D communication

neous networks comprising of BSs of diﬀerent type and/or power classes, are supported
by COMP.

3. Device to Device (D2D) Communication: Generally, when two UEs communicate in
the legacy cellular networks, the base station is in charge of the data plane and the control
plane. [22,28,29,38]. However, in D2D communication, the communicating end-user
devices data exchange directly without involving the BSs, while the control-plane sig-
nalling is overseen br the BSs. Thus, the BSs regulate the use of shared system resources
to ensure optimal performance in both, regular and D2D sessions [39, 40]. D2D is stan-
dardized for proximity-centric communication by 3GPP in Release 12 and a typical D2D
communication scenario is presented in Fig. 1. The major challenges in D2D communi-
cation include, but are not limited to, interference mitigation and management, optimal
resource allocation, session management, mobility and multi-hop network management,
power control, communication security, location estimation, etc.

4. Dual Connectivity: The concept of dual connectivity was introduced by 3 GPP in re-
lease 12 [7,8], which allowed a UE to connect to both, a Macro evolved NodeB (eNB)
and a small cell eNB. Further, both data and control plane communication is facilitated
through both Macro and small cell eNBs. This is particularly useful for UEs located in
the cell edge or in the overlapping coverage region of both type of eNBs, as it signiﬁ-
cantly enhances the throughput.

5. LTE-WiFi Interworking [70,71,72,73,74,75]: This feature was introduced by 3GPP
in Release 9. Wi-Fi, operates in the unlicensed spectrum and oﬀers the cellular operators
and opportunity to enhance network capacity by oﬄoading mobile data from cellular
networks onto Wi-Fi. [25,27,31,32,33,43]. This is particularly true for indoor environ-
ments where cellular penetration maybe low and mobility is not a primary concern [113].
Interworking of Wi-Fi and LTE ensures maximal spectral utilization, thereby improving
QoS of data ﬂows and in turn, overall network capacity. Release 13 further standard-
ized LTE-WiFi aggregation (LWA)to facilitate optimal interworking of LTE-WiFi at the
UE/eNB protocol stack level.

6. Machine-to-Machine (M2M) Communication: M2M communication is characterized
by low power, low cost, resource constrained, and low bandwidth communication of a

MacroUE1UE2D2DControl (C-Plane)Data (D-Plane)Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

5

large number of Internet of Things (IoT) devices communicate with a remote server, pri-
marily on the uplink [1]. M2M communication diﬀers from traditional UE-UE or H2H
(Human-to-Human) communication with respect to nature, scope, and quantum of data
traﬃc, types of communicating devices, the number of devices participating, and quite
importantly, delay tolerance [78,79,80,83,86]. Consequently, the challenges in M2M
are also quite diﬀerent from the H2H communication paradigm. The primary challenges
include excessive signaling overhead generated by a large number of IoT devices, pro-
viding support to devices with longer sleep cycles, ensuring low power communication,
and facilitating reliable latency-critical small data uplink transmission. Since the tradi-
tional cellular networks were desgined with the vision and scope of facilitating H2H
communication, 3GPP introduced solutions to the expected challenges in M2M com-
munication in Release 11, where solutions such as RAN overload control (due to excess
signaling [21]) are proposed. Further, advanced technical solutions to the problems of
power-constrained small data transmission for low-cost IoT devices have been speciﬁed
in Release 12 and Release 13.

Motivation for 5G and Beyond: The growing penetration of high-end consumer devices
(smartphones, tablets, etc.) running bandwidth-hungry applications (e.g., mobile multimedia
streaming) has led to a commensurate surge in demand for mobile data (pegged to soar
up to 77 exabytes by 2022). An anticipated second wave will result from the emerging
Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) industry and, more broadly, the Internet-of-Things that
will connect an unprecedented number of intelligent devices to next-generation (5G and
beyond) mobile networks. These must, therefore, greatly expand their aggregate network
capacity to meet this challenge. It is achieved by combining approaches, including multi-
input, multi-output (MIMO) techniques, network densiﬁcation (i.e., deploying small cells),
and more eﬃcient traﬃc management and radio resource allocation. The other alternate
approach the operators are looking towards the Millimeter technology [6], where there is
more spectrum beyond 28 GHz frequency. In US, the operators like Verizon and AT&T they
deployed more small cell base stations in the downtown, stadium, open-park to boost the
overall spectrum eﬃciency. But in real-time the challenges of NR-Milimeter in terms of
blockage, multi-path, penetration, beam management, etc.

On the other side cheap, fast, and portable computing devices with ubiquitous wireless
connectivity [1,21,34] can revolutionize the personal computing [40] landscape by creating
an opportunity to design an unprecedented array of new services and applications. Keep-
ing the same philosophy in mind, we have focused mainly on maximizing the experienced
data rate of an end-user by oﬀering increased bandwidth through the coexistence of licensed
wireless services (e.g., Long Term Evolution (LTE)) an unlicensed band [83,84,85,86]. To
achieve the goal of throughput maximization [81], we focused on minimizing the interfer-
ence and handling frequent handovers. It is done by optimally placing the small cells [38,
39] (i.e., a miniature base station, speciﬁcally designed to extend the data capacity, speed,
and eﬃciency of a cellular network [41]) and controlling their emitting power in a dense
small cell deployment scenario.

5G LTE, which operates in the licensed band and 802.11 wireless LAN (Wi-
Fi) [109,37], which operates in an unlicensed band, has some fundamental structural dif-
ferences. In Wi-Fi 5 GHz, there are more spectrum available for the operators to boost the
performance of the end customers as shown in Fig. 2. For example, LTE control is where
a base station (BS) exclusively allocates the radio resources to the users, interference due
to concurrent transmission by the users handled. On the other hand, Wi-Fi [68] follows a
distributed approach [65,66] where each user independently contests to occupy the chan-

6

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Fig. 2: Wi-Fi spectrum allocation in the 5 GHz Bands

nel, thereby concurrent transmission results in interference. The main motive of LTE/Wi-Fi
coexistence in unlicensed bands for LTE users in case of very few or no Wi-Fi users. So,
the research on the fair coexistence of LTE/Wi-Fi mainly focuses on the intelligent use of
the unlicensed band by the LTE users to keep the Wi-Fi users unaﬀected so that the aim of
formation of the unlicensed band remains unaltered.

The standard development community has accepted two mechanisms for using the
unlicensed band by LTE. These mechanisms are licensed assisted access (LAA) and LTE
Unlicensed (LTE-U). LAA follows the same approach of sensing the unlicensed channel,
called Listen Before Talk (LBT), as Wi-Fi. LTE-U estimates its duty cycle to access the
unlicensed channel based on the various parameters such as interference, type of traﬃc,
and load on the track. In our recent research, we have focused on both LAA and LTE-
U mechanisms. In both mechanisms, we keenly observe the various aspects of real-time,
which can adversely aﬀect the Wi-Fi users and were ignored by the existing literature. Some
of the observations are:

– Static channel allocation to LTE-U node in an unlicensed band
– Diﬃculty in association to the Wi-Fi access point (AP) by the Wi-Fi users due to high

duty cycle (i.e., repeating ON and OFF intervals in the medium) in LTE-U

– A considerable reduction in the duration of duty cycle in LTE-U if several surrounded

APs considered in its estimation.

We used a Machine Learning approach to propose solutions based on these observations.
As part of my future research plan, We want to explore the research challenges in the fair
coexistence of LTE and Wi-Fi on the 6 GHz band used as an unlicensed band. Apart from
that, We plan to provide Machine Learning (ML) based solutions to some of the existing
problems on LTE/Wi-Fi coexistence on 5 GHz. These problems are an eﬃcient use of high
bandwidth by Wi-Fi users and optimal channel selection by both LAA BS and a Wi-Fi AP
in a multi LTE operators-multi AP scenario. ML algorithms are used to closely observe the
system’s behavior on diﬀerent conditions to make intelligent decisions.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of 4G and 5G
Heterogeneous Networks. Section 3 describes the associated challenges and solutions for
the past and present small cell deployments. Section 4 focuses on the future and recent NR-
U small cell in 6 GHz. Finally, conclusions and future research directions are presented in
Section 5.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

7

2 4G & 5G Heterogeneous Networks (HetNets) [4,5]:

Current cellular networks comprise of end-users that generate primarily uplink traﬃc (e.g.,
M2M communication /IoT devices), primarily downlink (e.g., streaming and web browsing),
and both uplink and downlink traﬃc (e.g., gaming and social networks). Further, to oﬀer
better coverage, higher data rates, and enhanced QoS to the end-user, cellular operators
have deployed low power cellular stations called small cells such as, micro cell, pico cell,
Remote Radio Head (RRH), relay, and Femto cell. Together, the diversity in types and nature
of mobile traﬃc generated by end-users and the variation in transmit powers and size of
small cells, current cellular networks have lost the homogeneity of traditional networks,
and are heterogeneous in nature. A typical heterogeneous network (HetNet) comprises of a
Macro cell whose coverage and capacity is augmented by a variety of small cells to meet
the QoS guarantees. Figure 3 shows a typical example of LTE heterogeneous network. The
characteristics of a variety of small cells are listed in Table 2 and a precise description of
several types of small cells is presented below.

Table 2: Characteristics of heterogeneous cells in 4G and 5G

Technology

Placement

Transmit Power

Macro BS
Pico or Micro cell
RRH

Relay

Femotcell

LAA [67,69]

NR-U

Outdoor
Outdoor
Outdoor or In-
door
Outdoor or In-
door
Indoor

Outdoor or In-
door
Outdoor or In-
door

46 dBm
30 dBm
30-35 dBm

30-35 dBm

20-23 dBm

20-23 dBm

20-23 dBm

Backhaul Charac-
teristic
Dedicated wireline
Dedicated wireline
Dedicated wireline

Number of
Users
1000-2000
100-200
100-200

Wireless out-of-band
or in-band
Residential or enter-
prise broadband
Residential or enter-
prise broadband
Residential or enter-
prise broadband

60-100

10-30

10-30

10-30

– Pico or Micro BS: A Pico BS transmits at 30 dBm, which is lower than the transmission
power of a Macro BS. It is primarily deployed outdoors environment to oﬀer coverage
to an area of radius up to 300 m. It is connected to the Macro cell, through a dedicated
X3 backhaul connection for eﬃcient co-ordination as illustrated in Figure 3.

– Relay: The Relay BS serves as a repeater by boosting and re-transmitting the signal
from the Macro BS, to the users connected to the Relay. Generally, cellular operators
prefer to deploy Relay BSs to extend the Macro coverage and improve signal strength,
especially in inaccessible terrain such as rural and hilly regions.

– RRH: RRH diﬀers from a typical BS, in that it is a radio transceiver component. It’s role
is limited to receiving and transmitting the In-phase Quadrature (IQ) samples. The rest
of processing that usually happens at the BS is performed by a Baseband Unit (BBU) at
a centralized cloud in a data center. Centralization of the core BS processing, oﬀers the
advantages of lower cost, therby lowering the CAPEX and OPEX of cellular operators.
– LAA: Unlike traditional Femtocells, LAA operates on the 5 GHz unlicensed spectrum,
which does implement an LBT protocol similar to that used by Wi-Fi, with diﬀerent
values for parameters such as sensing threshold and transmission intervals.

8

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Fig. 3: 4G and 5G Heterogeneous Network

– NR-U: Unlike LAA cells, NR-U operates on the 6 GHz unlicensed spectrum, which
implements an LBT protocol to fair share the spectrum protect the incumbent users.

The advantage of HetNets is as follows.

1. Cell range expansion (CRE): The possibility of increasing or decreasing the transmit
power of small cell, and therefore its coverage region, depending on the traﬃc load
signiﬁcantly enhances overall network throughput [30].

2. Integrating Macro and small cells: HetNets pave the way for a smooth integration of
Macro and small cells that, oﬀering dual connectivity to each device (i.e., a Macro and
a small cell), improving the end-user QoS experience.

3. Self organizing network (SON): Given the large number of Macro and small cells de-
ployed in a HetNet, to ensure seamless conﬁguration and negligible down-times, SON
capabilities are provided to every small cell within the HetNet. This not only reduces
manual intervention required in installation and conﬁguration process, but also opti-
mizes the network performance automatically by reducing collisions at the UE during
cell-selection. The SON paradigm of HetNets simpliﬁes the OAM (operation, adminis-
tration, management) aspects of complex and dense network.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

9

2.1 LTE Femtocell Networks

The existing Macro Base Stations (MBS) cannot satisfy mobile users because of most users’
huge data demand and indoor locality. Reports by Cisco tell that 70% of the traﬃc is gen-
erated in indoor environments such as homes, enterprise buildings, and hotspots. Hence,
mobile operators must improve coverage and capacity‘[13] of indoor environments. But the
basic problem with the existing MBS (or small outdoor cells with shorter coverage) is that
they can only boost data rates of Outdoor User pieces of equipment (OUEs). But, they
cannot do the same for Indoor User pieces of equipment (IUEs) because it is diﬃcult for
electromagnetic signals to penetrate through walls and ﬂoors. Owing to numerous obstacles
in the communication path between MBS and IUEs inside the building, radio signals at-
tenuate faster with an increase in the distance. Thus, IUEs receive low signal strength (i.e.,
Signal-to-Noise Ratio, SNR) compared to outdoor users. Hence, mobile operators must im-
prove coverage and capacity in indoor environments.

As a solution, Femtocells are being deployed by both operators and end customers.
Femtocell is a low-cost, low-power consuming cellular base station that operates only in
a licensed spectrum and designed for outdoor and indoor communication. The range of
Femtocell is 100-150 meters for enterprise environments consuming 100 mW power. A
home-based Femto (HeNB) can serve 4-5 users, whereas an oﬃce-based Femto can serve
a maximum of 64 users. Each Femto requires a backhaul connection to the evolved packet
core (EPC). Advantages of using Femtos are described as follows:

Operator Advantages :

1. The operator can increase the network capacity.
2. The operator can reduce Operational expenditure (OPEX) and Capitational expenditure

(CAPEX).

3. The operator can reduce Backhaul cost.
4. The operator can reduce Traﬃc overload on MBSs.

User Advantages :

1. Improved Quality of Experience (QoE).
2. Improved energy eﬃciency/battery life.

2.2 Architecture of Indoor LTE Femto cells

In the LTE HetNet system’s architecture, Femtos are deployed inside the building and con-
nected to a Femto Gateway (F-GW) over the S1 interface. F-GW is mainly used to reduce
the load on MME. It acts as a virtual core network to Femtos. The F-GW gets assigned with
an eNB ID, and thus F-GW is considered another eNB by the MME. The X2 interface [92,
93,94,95,96] is introduced between Femtos of enterprise Femtocell networks to avoid inter-
cell interference and directly route the data and signaling messages among Femtos, thereby
reducing the load on LTE core network and oﬀering better coordination among Femtos.

2.3 Access Modes in Femto

Since Femtos [36] are deployed for oﬀering high data rates to indoor (paid) users in enter-
prise and residential buildings, each Femto is conﬁgured with a list of subscribers called

10

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Subscriber Group (SG) such that only the users in the SG can access the Femto. The users
not belonging to this list are called Non-SG (NSG), and they may not be served by the Femto
even when they are close to the Femto. Following access modes are deﬁned for Femtos:

– Open access: The open-access mode allows all users (i.e., SG & NSG) to access the

Femto without any restriction.

– Closed access : The fast-access mode permits only authorized users (i.e., SG) to access

the Femto.

– Hybrid access: The hybrid access [26] is the combination of both open and closed
access. It allows all users (i.e., SG & NSG) by providing preferential access for SG users
over NSG users.

2.4 LTE Licensed Assisted Access

3GPP speciﬁes LTE-LAA in Release 13 adopted the LBT approach for coexistence with
Wi-Fi and supported only DL transmissions in the unlicensed band: a secondary cell (sCell)
aggregated with a licensed primary cell (pCell). Enhanced LAA (eLAA), as speciﬁed in
Release 14, supports UL operation in the unlicensed band. However, the legacy LTE UL
schedule continued to be used in eLAA, thus increasing the processing delay in schedul-
ing grants due to LBT procedures. Hence, in April 2017, 3GPP started the "further eLAA"
(FeLAA) working group (in Release 15) to improve LAA DL and UL performance through
enhanced support for autonomous UL transmissions. In the proposed FeLAA, a UL trans-
mission ought to receive a grant from the eNB before the transmission, which solves the
constraint imposed by the legacy eLAA. Most of these features have not been tested in the
ﬁeld before deployment. As LTE-LAA deployments are being rolled out in major cities in
the US, they oﬀer an opportunity for real-world testing.

2.5 5G Small Cell in Unlicensed Deployment

The coexistence of small-cell LTE-U [70, 71,72, 73,74,75,76, 77] and Wi-Fi networks in
unlicensed bands at 5 GHz is a topic of active interest [25,27], primarily driven by industry
groups aﬃliated with the two (cellular and Wi-Fi) segments. In contrast, there is a body
of analytical work [78,79,80,87] exploring the coexistence of LTE-U and Wi-Fi, our focus
in this project has been on real-time measurements [107,108] and real-time deployment
aspects of such coexisting networks. Coexistence is a topic that has seen little traction in
the existing literature. As per the scope of this project, we actively design, analyze, and
implement wireless network algorithms in simulation (using ns-3), in a real-time National
Instrument (NI) unlicensed coexistence test-bed [31,35] and also conduct measurements
and analysis on recently deployed LAA in the Chicago area.

In our previous work [31,35], we investigated various aspects of coexistence between
the two principle variants of LTE in the unlicensed bands, LTE-U and LAA, and Wi-Fi [110].
For LTE-U, we analyzed the eﬀect of the LTE-U duty cycle [88,89,90,91] on the perfor-
mance of the association of Wi-Fi. We demonstrated [47,48,49,55] that using a high duty
cycle adversely impacted Wi-Fi’s ability to access the channel due to the Wi-Fi beacon trans-
mission process’s disruption. Therefore, we recommended using a lower duty cycle even if
there was no Wi-Fi present in the channel to enable fair access to a new Wi-Fi access point
that may wish to use the channel. We also developed machine-learning-based algorithms to
determine the number of Wi-Fi APs on the air to enable an appropriate duty cycle setting.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

11

Fig. 4: Co-tier and Cross-tier Interference in HetNet Small Cell Network

However, since LTE-U is not considered for wide deployment by industry, we switched our
attention to evaluating LAA coexistence.

We have made tremendous progress toward understanding Wi-Fi and LAA’s coexistence
behavior in our previous work’s unlicensed bands. Our theoretical analysis, corroborated by
detailed system-level simulations using ns-3 and use of software-deﬁned-radios, demon-
strates that coexistence is improved substantially when the two systems treat each other
symmetrically. That is when Wi-Fi and LAA use the same detection threshold to defer to
each other. In our recent work [63], we added a new dimension by performing detailed
measurements of deployed LAA networks by the three major carriers, Verizon, AT&T, and
T-Mobile, in Chicago. We conducted these measurements using oﬀ-the-shelf and custom-
designed apps to extract detailed network information via APIs on Android smartphones.
We believe this to be the ﬁrst such exercise in academia and the measurements revealed
several interesting new directions, which we will continue to research. Two such topics are:
(i) Though most LAA deployments are outdoors and Wi-Fi’s are indoors, the client de-
vices that connect to these networks can be used outdoor/indoor; this results in hidden-node
scenarios worse by the fact that two systems do not decode each other’s signals (ii) Most
academic analyses have focused on coexistence in a single 20 MHz channel, Whereas our
measurements reveal that LAA usually aggregates three unlicensed channels, therefore in-
creasing Wi-Fi’s impact. These results have been presented to the industry as well and been
incorporated into recommendations by Cisco.

3 Small Cell deployments: History, Associated Challenges, and Existing Solutions

This section discusses the various challenges and problems faced while deploying small
cells in LTE HetNets. It also discuses the existing solutions to address them which primar-
ily focus on enhancing the overall system performance. The major challenges are outlined
below:

1. Placement of Small Cells in 4G LTE

Femto cells have been deployed at a large scale in enterprise/oﬃce settings and the main
constraints that operators face are a lack of space and low power consumption [14,10,

UE1UE2F1F2F3MacroInterferenceSignal12

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

11]. Due to spatial constraints, operators often resort to a sub-optimal arbitrary deploy-
ment of Femto cells. This causes coverage gaps and increases the number of Femtos
required, leading to increased CAPEX and OPEX. Moreover, arbitrary placement in-
volves human resource expenses incurred in ﬁeld testing. A feasible solution to these
problems is to ensure an optimal placement of Femto cells [12,62]. An optimal place-
ment guarantees a robust SINR and high network capacity while ensuring that there
are no coverage holes within the building [14,42,58]. However, there are additional
challenges that need to be addressed. Solutions proposing optimal deployment of single
Femto cell are often not scalable to oﬀer coverage to entire enterprise/oﬃce buildings.
Further, proposed placement strategies often fail to consider architectural parameters of
the built environment such as wall-thickness and dynamic power transmission. Femtos
may also inadvertently create coverage holes for indoor users when the operate in the
closed access mode and there are non-subscriber UEs in close proximity. Consequently,
some solutions have been proposed to minimize coverage gaps through eﬃcient Femto
placement and power control strategies [15,16,17].

In a HetNet, like most wireless networks, the dominant factor governing the system
throughput is the interference. Two types of interference aﬀect a HetNet system viz., in-
terference between two or more Femtos, and interference between a Macro and a Femto.
A detailed description of each is provided below:

(a) Co-tier Interference: Reusing spectrum for maximal utilization invariably leads to
interference from the neighboring small cells. This phenomenon is called co-tier in-
terference [45,19,60]. For example, UE2 is getting served by the Femto BS (F2), but
it is receiving interference from the neighboring Femto BSs (F1) as shown in Fig. 4.
The conventional approach to mitigating co-tier interference in a cellular network
is through a mechanism known as Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC). The
ICIC approach allows all BSs to communicate cooperatively using the X2 interface.
While it succeeds in ensuring eﬃcient allocation of RBs to users at the cell-edge, it
leads to a signiﬁcant increase in the signaling overhead.

(b) Cross-tier Interference: This is the interference caused by transmission conﬂicts
between a Macro BS and a small cell
[18,19,20]. For example, UE1 is getting
served by the Macro BS, but it is receiving interference from small cells (i.e., Fem-
tocell F1 as shown in Fig. 4). The enhanced ICIC (eICIC) approach is the conven-
tional solution to the problem of cross-tier interference [23, 24,61]. It mitigates the
transmission conﬂicts between an MBS and a Femto BS by muting a few sub-frames
(Almost Blank Sub-frame) in MBS when the Femto BS is transmitting. Doing so,
alleviates the interference and enhances HetNet system capacity.

The spatial reuse of the spectrum enhances eﬃciency and capacity of a HetNet system,
but the co-tier and cross-tier interference cused by obstacles inside buildings are unin-
tended consequences that adversely aﬀect the signal strength and throughput of indoor
devices. In the outdoor setting, in a building under the coverage of LTE HetNet Macro
BSs, signal leaks occur around its edges/corners, creating a High Interference Zone (HI-
Zone) in its vicinity. This leads to cross-tier interference and causes similar performance
bottlenecks for OUEs. However, the challenge of cross-tier interference for HIZone
UEs (HIZUEs) has not been adequately addressed dynamically i.e., by considering the
UE occupancy level within the HIZone. However, studies indicate that an active power
control strategy at the Femtos is very likely to reduce the cross-tier interference in the

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

13

HIZone.

2. Scheduling or Radio Resource Allocation

Femtos deployed in enterprise and residential buildings guarantee high bandwidth ser-
vices to a speciﬁc list of paid indoor users/subscribers called the Subscribers Group
(SG) [26]. Each Femto allows access to users only in the SG and the indoor users not
in the list are known as Non-subscriber Group (NSG), which are served by the MBSSs,
regardless to their proximity to a Femto. This subscriber-only access is known as closed
access. In sharp contrast, Femtos conﬁgured to operate in the open access mode do not
discriminate between SG and NSG users, and allow access to all indoor UEs depending
on their proximity to the Femto. The pitfall is that, the open access mechanism may be
unable to meet the QoS guarantees for all indoor LTE/5G users during the peak-traﬃc
hours. Consequently, hybrid access has been conceptualized as a trade-oﬀ between the
two mechanisms. Hybrid Access Femtocells (HAFs) prioritize the QoS requirements
of SG users over NSG users, by oﬀering preferential access to radio resources to the
former. This mechanism also simultaneously improves the overall capacity of the LTE
HetNet by serving the NSG users in proximity of a HAF. Consequently, several re-
warding strategies have been put forward to make hybrid access mode attractive to the
operators. However, the challenges of optimal placement of HAFs and eﬃcient splitting
of radio resources between SG and NSG indoor users need better solutions [98,99,100,
101,102].

3. Improving Data Rates in LTE Small Cells and D2D Communication

Deployment of indoor Femtos signiﬁcantly enhances network performance and capac-
ity, but it also triggers a new set of problems. The resulting HetNet has to overcome the
challenges of co-tier and cross tier-interference, frequent handovers, and signal leakage
around the building’s corners [45,113]. The cross-tier interference in the HIZone close
to the building adversely impacts the performance of outdoor UEs served by the one
of the MBSs in the HetNet. Further, arbitrary or sub-optimal placement of Femtos often
leads to high co-channel cross-tier interference among Femtos [56,57]. It is also respon-
sible for the existence of coverage holes in the indoor spaces. Moreover, lack of adequate
power control mechanisms in Femtos leads to a surge in power consumption and also
exacerbates inter-cell interference in large HetNets deployments. These problems are
usually addressed through well-designed LTE small cell architecture, optimal Femto
deployment, and smart power control to maintain a SINR threshold in Indoor environ-
ment. The D2D paradigm can also be leveraged by utilizing the idle IUEs connected to
a Femto as relays to forward downlink data plane traﬃc to other UEs connected to MBS.

4. Asymmetric Vs. Symmetric ED threshold on LAA and Wi-Fi

With the exponential rise in the number of mobile end-users, the mobile data demand
on cellular and Wi-Fi infrastructure has also grown exponentially. Thus, it has become
imperative that the licensed (cellular) and unlicensed (Wi-Fi) spectrum are utilized ef-
ﬁciently. Given the scarcity of spectrum for radio communication, cellular industry has
actively pursued technological advancements that enable cellular networks to operate
in the unlicensed spectrum as well. This, however, would require a fair coexistence of
cellular technologies and Wi-Fi in the unlicensed spectrum. The IEEE 802.11 standard

14

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

has prescribed an energy detection (ED) threshold of -62 dBm for Wi-Fi, whereas the
LTE-LAA standard speciﬁes that LTE-LAA nodes should detect Wi-Fi at -72 dBm. The
impact of this asymmetry in the ED threshold has serious ramiﬁcations on fairness of
LTE-WiFi coexistence [27]. It has been demonstrated that lowering the Wi-Fi ED thresh-
old from the prescribed -62 dBm improves performance of both Wi-Fi and LTE-LAA
subsystems. Therefore, instead of treating LTE-LAA/LTE-U as noise, if Wi-Fi considers
the coexisting LTE nodes as if they were overlapping Wi-Fi nodes, the performance of
coexistence network improves signiﬁcantly [27].

5. Facilitating LAA/Wi-Fi Coexistence Using Machine Learning Approach

Several aspects of LTE-WiFi coexistence networks have been studied and analyzed in
the current body of academic and industry research literature. However, analysis of real-
world coexistence deployment data to study the performance and behavior of these de-
ployments is acutely lacking. The problem of “fair coexistence" of LTE-LAA and Wi-Fi,
cell-selection in an LAA HetNet as compared to LTE HetNets, and performance pre-
diction of LTE and LAA components in coexistence deployments are open probelms.
Fortunately, with the fast roll-out of LAA deployments globally, LAA data can be col-
lected and analyzed to analyze coexistence performance in the real-world. Some recent
studies have adopted this approach and tried to address these problems. In [63], several
issues of LAA-WiFi coexistence in real-world deployments of multiple cellular oper-
ators in downtown Chicago, have been explored. Aspects analyzed included the type
of mobile traﬃc (e.g., data, video, and live streaming), extent of small cell coverage
(Femto/LAA) coverage, and presence of secondary unlicensed carriers, among others.
The study pointed out that a static channel allocation strategy of an LAA BS, leads to
a particular channel being occupied for longer duration, adversely impacting the Wi-Fi
APs as they face resource crunch due to the dynamic channel allocation strategy. An
ML inspired channel assignment by analyzing the collected LAA data was proposed for
the LAA BS and was shown to have a minimal adverse impact on Wi-Fi users. Like-
wise, deployment data of three LAA operators was analyzed to ascertain the impact of
cell-selection mechanisms on LAA performance [111]. Further, a data-driven network
hybrid optimization model for LAA networks was proposed in [112].

6. Association Issues in LTE-U/Wi-Fi Coexistence

There are several challenges in ensuring association fairness in LTE-WiFi unlicensed
coexistence in the same channel in the 5 GHz band. Beacon transmission is the initial
step in the association process in Wi-Fi, so the association fairness can be deﬁned in
terms of how fair LTE-U in letting Wi-Fi transmit beacons on a shared channel that
LTE-U has occupied through multiple duty cycles [32,33]. As per the LTE-U speciﬁ-
cation, when the LTE-U BS ascertains that the channel is vacant, it can transmit for a
duration up to 20ms and then turn OFF for only 1 ms, thereby resulting in a duty cycle of
95%. However, a sizeable LTE-U duty cycle is likely to have an immense adverse impact
on the association fairness, especially during Wi-Fi beacon transmission and reception.
Studies have shown using NI USRP based experiments that a huge proportion of Wi-Fi
beacons are neither transmitted in a timely manner nor are they received at the LTE-U
BS [32, 33]. An innovative Carrier Sense Adaptive Transmission (CSAT) approach was
proposed in [52,53,54] that aims to solve the challenges in Wi-Fi client association in a

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

15

dense coexistence deployments while ensuring a fair spectrum access and sharing.

7. Optimal Scaling of LTE-U Duty cycle in LTE-U/Wi-Fi Coexistence

Machine learning (ML) techniques oﬀer eﬃcient solutions to complex engineering prob-
lems and tasks such as video and image recognition, genome analysis, recommender
systems, logistics, and automation of industrial operations. Given the potential of ML
tools in solving non-linear problems, it is desirable to apply to the challenges encoun-
tered in spectrum sharing between unlicensed LTE (LAA/LTE-U) and Wi-Fi [47,48,
49,55,111,112,113]. For example, LTE-U Forum has standardized the duty-cycle ap-
proach for fair coexistence of LTE-U and Wi-Fi. However, the problem of identifying
the precise number of APs by the LTE-U BS is not adequately addressed. If LTE-U BS
can learn the exact numbers of Wi-Fi APs beforehand, it is possible to scale the LTE-U
duty cycle optimally. However, this is a non-trivial problems as in order to detect the
number of Wi-Fi APs operating on the same channel in real-time, Wi-Fi packets need
to be decoded which will require a Wi-Fi receiver at the LTE-U BS. Solutions to this
problem has been put forward using innovative ML-based techniques which analyze
power/energy levels observed in the channel during the LTE-U OFF duration. ML pow-
ered techniques oﬀer higher accuracy when compared to the existing solutions based on
auto-correlation (AC) and energy detection (ED) [43,46].

4 Future NR-U Small Cell in 6 GHz

The current research (on Spectrum Sharing on 5 GHz) has opened many exciting possi-
bilities to solve the research challenges for LTE/Wi-Fi coexistence in 6 GHz used as an
unlicensed band [50,51]. In the following, we outline some of my future directions on the
spectrum, sharing small cells.

4.1 Fair Coexistence of NR-U and Wi-Fi in 6 GHz Spectrum [106]:

Since the licensed spectrum is a limited and expensive resource, its optimal utilization may
require spectrum sharing between multiple network operators/providers of diﬀerent types.
Increasingly licensed-unlicensed sharing is being contemplated to enhance network spectral
eﬃciency beyond the more traditional unlicensed-unlicensed sharing. As the most common
unlicensed incumbent, Wi-Fi is now broadly deployed in the unlicensed 5 GHz band in
North America, where approximately 500 MHz of bandwidth is available. However, these
5 GHz unlicensed bands are also seeing the increasing deployment of cellular services such
as LTE-LAA. Recently, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) sought to open
up 1.2 GHz of additional spectrum for unlicensed operation in the 6 GHz [106,105] band
through a Notice of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM) [103,104,59] as shown in Fig. 5. Thus,
this spectrum allocation for the unlicensed operation will only accelerate the need for other
coexistence solutions among heterogeneous systems. Hence it is clear that regulatory author-
ities worldwide are paying close attention to the 6 GHz band as the next spectrum band that
will continue to enhance unlicensed services across the world. However, it is also clear that
this band, like the 5 GHz band, will see both Wi-Fi and cellular systems being deployed, and
hence the coexistence issues played out in the 5 GHz band will repeat in this new frequency
as well. In recognition of this, the two principal stakeholder standardization entities, IEEE

16

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Fig. 5: Bandwidth Allocation on 6 GHz Spectrum [103]

and 3GPP, held a coexistence workshop in July 2019 [105] to discuss methods to address
this before the next generation standards being speciﬁed. This section discusses the recent
activities on FCC’s 6 GHz NPRM and IEEE & 3GPP eﬀorts towards coexistence in the 6
GHz band.

4.2 6 GHz Coexistence: Deployment Scenarios, and Channel Access

Although several industry entities were not in favor of a re-evaluation, IEEE recommended
that coexistence evaluations for NR-U should include 802.11ac (in 5 GHz), 802.11ax (in 6
GHz), and 802.11ad (in 60 GHz). Fig 6 shows the possible interference scenario in the 6GHz
spectrum band, where the traditional licensed 6GHz link communication happens between
transmitter and reception. But the diﬀerent future use case applications (in 6GHz link) such
as indoor AP with low power transmission (LPI), Google glass with very low power (VLP),
outdoor AP with AFC database, and NR-U AP with database can potentially create the
interference. For the sub-6 GHz bands, coexistence evaluations will be technology-neutral
(e.g., channel access mechanism) and performed in random carrier frequencies in the 5 GHz
band. These evaluations also necessitate devising suitable 11ac/ax coexistence topologies
with a signiﬁcant number of links below -72 dBm.

4.3 Future NR-U: Deployment Scenarios

The NR-U work item recently approved by 3GPP supports the existing unlicensed 5 GHz
band and the new unlicensed "greenﬁeld" 6 GHz band. Industry players such as Qualcomm

5.9256.4256.5256.8757.125U-NII-5U-NII-6U-NII-7U-NII-8Frequency in GHz01000200030004000# of assignments per MHzCommon carrierOperational fixed serviceLocal television transmission serviceBroadcast auxiliary serviceCable television relay serviceHeterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

17

Fig. 6: Interference Scenario on 6GHz Spectrum[103]

expect that other unlicensed and shared spectrum bands, including mmWave, will be added
to this list in future releases. Researchers will study the following deployment scenarios to
investigate the functionalities needed beyond the operation speciﬁcations in an unlicensed
spectrum. The 3GPP forum propose diﬀerent varieties of NR-U deployments as shown in
Fig. 7.

– Carrier aggregation between licensed band NR (PCell) and NR-U (SCell): (a) NR-U

SCell with both DL and UL. (b) NR-U SCell with DL-only.

– Dual connectivity between licensed band LTE (PCell) and NR-U (PSCell)
– Stand-alone NR-U
– An NR cell with DL in the unlicensed band and UL in licensed band
– Dual connectivity between licensed band NR (PCell) and NR-U (PSCell)

The Legacy cellular operators oppose the NR-U stand-alone scenario and want 3GPP to
drop it. They fear stiﬀ competition from new players who can use NR-U stand-alone for
limited cellular operation. NR-U is likely to be a more potent competitor to 802.11 than
LAA as it will have a more ﬂexible and eﬃcient PHY/MAC marked by a shorter symbol du-
ration, shorter HARQ Round Trip Time (RTT), etc. Further, NR-U can be deployed in every
conﬁguration where 802.11 is currently operational if both stand-alone and dual connection
is approved. Also, unlike 802.11, NR-U will be capable of deploying the same PHY/MAC
with ﬂexible conﬁgurations across all current and future unlicensed bands.

4.4 ML Based approaches to Solve Issues in Current and Future Spectrum Sharing:

We have listed some of the interesting problems on LAA/Wi-Fi coexistence solved through
an ML-based approach (as shown in Fig. 8):

– Narrowband vs. Wideband LBT in 6 GHz: The LBT mechanism is used by a device
to avoid collisions by ensuring that no other transmissions are concurrently active in the
channel. LTE-LAA follows CAT 4 LBT for most of its transmissions, while CAT 2 LBT
is used for about 5% of DL transmissions. NR-U is likely to adopt a mechanism similar
to the LAA LBT. NR-U Release 16, like its predecessor, the NR Release 15, supports
component carriers up to the maximum limit of 100 MHz bandwidth. Besides, it sup-
ports the aggregation of several inter and intraband component carriers. Multi-carrier
LBT channel access as deﬁned in 5 GHz is assumed i.e., the Type A LBT in 3GPP

NR-U AP with AFCOutdoor AP with AFCTxRxIndoor AP with LPIGoogle Glass with VLP6 GHz LinkInterferenceCoexistence18

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

Fig. 7: NR-U Deployment Scenarios

TS37.213, where each channel performs its independent LBT procedure. Consequently,
there is bound to be high complexity when the operation bandwidth is wide. The alterna-
tive Type B LBT in 3GPP TS37.213 can reduce this complexity by performing a single
LBT on multiple channels. The wideband LBT could simplify the implementation of
wideband operation when it identiﬁes that the channel is free of narrowband interfer-
ence i.e., limiting the narrowband signal (20 MHz) certain sub-bands or by long/short
term measurements and LBT bandwidth adaption. Hence, wideband LBT is beneﬁcial
for systems operating with wide bandwidth as it simpliﬁes LBT implementation.

– Intelligent Selection of Unlicensed Channel by LAA BS: While analyzing the col-
lected data in real-time on LAA/Wi-Fi coexistence [63], we found that in an incredibly
dense deployment scenario, multiple LAA operators contest for the unlicensed channel.
However, numerous unlicensed channels are available, but choosing a particular channel
and estimating the duration to occupy the track, with the vision of not aﬀecting the Wi-
Fi users and multiple LAA operators, is challenging. To solve this problem, we propose
to use a Q-learning based ML solution so that a channel and its occupancy time decided
intelligently based on the parameters such as interference from other operators, load on
the channels, channel activities of Wi-Fi users, etc.

– Intelligent Channel Selection by Wi-Fi AP in LTE/Wi-Fi Coexistence: In a multi-AP
setting, an AP selects the channel for the operation of the expected capacity of the exist-
ing links. The traditional way is to take the SINR-based capacity estimate into account.
However, this capacity model may sometimes fail to represent the complex interactions
between PHY and MAC layers due to the presence of LAA, as it makes the scenario
heterogeneous. As a result, decisions regarding channel selection may be delayed or in-
accurate. To solve this problem, we propose to use supervised learning as a tool to model
the complex interactions between PHY and MAC layers based on factors such as power
and PHY rate of a neighboring Wi-Fi link.

 gNB (NR)eNB (LTE)gNB (NR)gNB (NR-U)gNB (NR-U)gNB (NR-U)gNB (NR-U)gNB (NR-U)DL + ULDL + ULDL + ULDL + ULDL + UL(a) Carrier Aggregation(b) LTE NR dual connectivity(d) DL-UL(e) NR NR dual connectivity(c) StandaloneHeterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

19

Fig. 8: Machine learning based approaches in spectrum sharing

– Eﬃcient Radio Resource Allocation Using Reinforcement Learning: In the ﬁfth-
generation (5G) of mobile broadband band systems, Radio Resources Management
(RRM) has reached unprecedented levels of complexity. To cope with the ever more
sophisticated RRM functionalities and to make prompt decisions required in 5G, eﬃ-
cient radio resource scheduling will play a critical role in the RAN system. Depend-
ing on tasks’ purposes, the scheduling process is divided into three steps: prioritiza-
tion, resource number determination, and resource allocation. However, to support a
diverse range of applications such as ultra-reliable low latency applications, IoT appli-
cations, V2X applications, AR/VR applications, massive multimedia applications, etc.,
the scheduling process’s steps become more complex. As a solution, we propose to use
deep reinforcement learning tools to get feedback about the traﬃc in real-time so that
eﬃcient scheduling decisions and optimal use of radio resources are made.

– Indoor and Outdoor classiﬁcation for spectrum sharing: The speciﬁcations for 6
GHz [103] provide two diﬀerent power regimes for unlicensed UEs. Devices within the
built environment or IUEs are expected to stick to lower transmit powers, but do no have
to seek permission to use a channel by ﬁrst accessing an Automatic Frequency Control
(AFC) database. On the other hand, outdoor devicesor OUEs, are allowed to transmit
at higher power levels, but are required to seek permission through AFC access prior to
transmitting on a channel, so as to ensure that the OUE is not excluded from the par-
ticular channel. However, determination of a UEs location, i.e., whether it is indoors or
outdoors is a non-trivial problem. Therefore, speciﬁcations prescribed a few more re-
strictions. UEs which are able to connect to an indoor AP but could be situated outdoors
are subjected to the constraint of a 6 dB lower transmit power threshold. Further, indoor
APs can not be battery powered, must be equipped with detachable antennas, or should
have a weatherized exterior. However, these constraints result in a sub-optimal spectrum
eﬃciency. For example, an IUE always has to transmit at a lower power. Further, UEs are
not permitted to communicate directly with each other without ﬁrst connecting through
a Wi-Fi AP. More importantly, not permitting APs to be battery powered erodes net-
work resilience and robustness. Thus, it is of extreme importance that the environment
of a wireless device is reliably detected so as to ensure optimal spectrum utilization, en-
hanced resilience, and improved system capacity. It is noteworthy that the ambient RF
environment, diﬀers markedly in an indoor setting as compared to outdoors, in terms
of the signal strength. This is true for all commercially used communications bands,
such as 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi, 5 GHz Wi-Fi, 6 GHz Wi-Fi (in the future), several low cellu-
lar (< 1 GHz), mid cellular (1 GHz - 6 GHz) and high cellular (> 24 GHz) bands. As
highlighted earlier, measuring the signal strengths in these diﬀerent environments and

Wideband  LBTNarrowbandLBTChannelSelection  by LAAMachineLearning Algorithms ChannelSelection byWi-FiRadio Resource AllocationIndoor orOutdoor ?20

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

analyzing the data using ML algorithms, intelligent models and methods for the predic-
tion of device-environment can be designed. Doing so will enhance spectrum usage and
oﬀer security and resilience, not only in the 6 GHz, but also in future bands such as the
12 GHz satellite band.

5 Conclusions

A few important conclusions and inferences can be drawn from the discussion presented in
this work. Clearly, the best way to improve spectrum eﬃciency, and in turn network per-
formance, is by intelligently reusing the scarce radio bands to the maximal extent possible.
Deploying small cells is one way to achieve the spatial reuse of spectrum. Thus, Pico cells
and Femto cells are deployed in indoor and outdoor settings and are designed to optimize
transmission power and perform interference management through techniques such as Full
reuse, Soft reuse, Hard reuse, and Strict reuse. Small cell deployments can also leverage the
state-of-the-art antenna technology at their disposal such as directional and omni-directional
antennas. With the the help of these technologies, small cell deployments in LTE/5G are vi-
tal to delivering high capacity and fault-tolerant networks to the end-user. Further, this work
outlined several open challenges and problems in the current (5GHz) and the future (6GHz,
NR-U) unlicensed spectrum sharing. Rapid proliferation and adoption of latest Wi-Fi stan-
dard, i.e., 802.11ax, and the latest cellular technology, i.e., 5G NR-U, is expected. Further,
unlike LAA, 5G NR-U will be capable of transmitting data in both uplink and downlink
in the unlicensed band. Likewise, unlike 802.11ac in 5 GHz, 802.11ax in 6 GHz will em-
ploy Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA). Together, 802.11ax and
5G NR-U coexistence will spawn new challenges and problems in unlicensed coexistence.
Thus, all future research in unlicensed coexistence is likely to be focused on fair and eﬃcient
LTE-WiFi coexistence deployments in the 6 GHz unlicensed band.

References

1. M. K. Giluka, N. Rajoria, A. C. Kulkarni, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Class based dynamic priority
scheduling for uplink to support m2m communications in lte,” in 2014 IEEE World Forum on Internet
of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 313–317, IEEE, 2014.

2. R. Chaganti, V. Sathya, S. A. Ahammed, R. Rex, and B. R. Tamma, “Eﬃcient son handover scheme
for enterprise femtocell networks,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and
Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2013.

3. V. Sathya, H. V. Gudivada, H. Narayanam, B. M. Krishna, and B. R. Tamma, “Enhanced distributed
resource allocation and interference management in lte femtocell networks,” in 2013 IEEE 9th Inter-
national Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob),
pp. 553–558, IEEE, 2013.

4. B. M. Krishna, M. Siddula, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “A dynamic link aggregation scheme for

hetregenous networks,” 2014.

5. S. Madhuri, V. Sathya, B. R. Tamma, et al., “A dynamic link aggregation scheme for heterogeneous
wireless networks,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Computing and Communi-
cation Technologies (CONECCT), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.

6. L. Wei, R. Q. Hu, Y. Qian, and G. Wu, “Key elements to enable millimeter wave communications for

5g wireless systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 136–143, 2014.

7. M. Agiwal, H. Kwon, S. Park, and H. Jin, “A survey on 4g-5g dual connectivity: Road to 5g implemen-

tation,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 16193–16210, 2021.

8. M. Polese, M. Giordani, M. Mezzavilla, S. Rangan, and M. Zorzi, “Improved handover through dual
connectivity in 5g mmwave mobile networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 2069–2084, 2017.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

21

9. R. Alkhansa, H. Artail, and D. M. Gutierrez-Estevez, “Lte-wiﬁ carrier aggregation for future 5g sys-
tems: A feasibility study and research challenges,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 34, pp. 133–140,
2014.

10. V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Joint placement and power control of lte femto base
stations in enterprise environments,” in 2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and
Communications (ICNC), pp. 1029–1033, IEEE, 2015.

11. M. Tahalani, V. Sathya, U. Suhas, R. Chaganti, and B. R. Tamma, “Optimal femto placement in enter-
prise building,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommunica-
tions Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–3, IEEE, 2013.

12. H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Phantom cell realization in lte and its performance anal-
ysis,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommuncations Systems
(ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2014.

13. R. V. Sathya and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic spectrum allocation in femto based lte network,” in 2013 Fifth
International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), pp. 1–2, IEEE,
2013.

14. M. Tahalani, R. V. Sathya, U. Suhas, C. Ramaraju, and B. R. Tamma, “Optimal femto placement in

enterprise femtocell networks,” 2014.

15. H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Phantom cell architecture for lte and its application in

vehicular iot environments,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Ubiquitous Environments, 2015.

16. V. Sathya, K. Bala Murali Krishna, and B. R. Tamma, “Eﬃcient interference management scheme for

lte femtocell networks,” ACM Mobihoc (Poster), 2013.

17. A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, V. Venkatesh, R. Ramji, and B. R. Tamma, “Energy-eﬃcient femtocell

placement in lte networks,” 2015.

18. V. Sathya, A. Ramamourthy, M. Tahalani, and B. R. Tamma, “On femto placement and decoupled
access for downlink and uplink in enterprise environments,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Ubiquitous
Environments (Future Internet), 2015.

19. V. Sathya, V. Venkatesh, R. Ramji, A. Ramamourthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Handover and sinr optimized
deployment of lte femto base stations in enterprise environments,” Wireless Personal Communications
(WPC), pp. 1–25, 2016.

20. V. Sathya, A. Kumar, A. Ramamourthy, S. Kumar, and B. R. Tamma, “Maximizing dual cell connec-
tivity opportunities in lte small cells deployment,” in National Conference on Communications (NCC),
IEEE, 2016.

21. S. Dama, T. Valerrian, V. Sathya, and K. Kuchi, “A novel rach mechanism for dense cellular-iot deploy-

ments,” in Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), IEEE, 2016.

22. A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Franklin, and B. R. Tamma, “On improving capacity of full-

duplex small cells with d2d,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07198, 2016.

23. M. K. Giluka, M. S. A. Khan, G. Krishna, T. A. Atif, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “On handovers
in uplink/downlink decoupled lte hetnets,” in 2016 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

24. M. K. Giluka, M. S. A. Khan, V. Sathya, and A. A. Franklin, “Leveraging decoupling in enabling
energy aware d2d communications,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks
and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

25. A. M. Baswade, V. Sathya, B. R. Tamma, et al., “Unlicensed carrier selection and user oﬄoading in
dense lte-u networks,” in 2016 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

26. S. Ghosh, V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, B. Akilesh, and B. R. Tamma, “A novel resource allocation and
power control mechanism for hybrid access femtocells,” Computer Communications, vol. 109, pp. 53–
75, 2017.

27. M. Iqbal, C. Rochman, V. Sathya, and M. Ghosh, “Impact of changing energy detection thresholds
on fair coexistence of wi-ﬁ and lte in the unlicensed spectrum,” in 2017 Wireless Telecommunications
Symposium (WTS), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2017.

28. S. Y. Kumar, V. Sathya, and S. Ramanath, “Enhancing spectral eﬃciency in lte-d2d networks,” in 2017
9th International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), pp. 401–402,
IEEE, 2017.

29. B. Akilesh, V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “A novel scheduling algorithm to maximize
the d2d spatial reuse in lte networks,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Networks
and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

30. D. Martolia, V. Sathya, A. K. Rangisetti, B. R. Tamma, and A. A. Franklin, “Enhancing performance
of victim macro users via joint absf and dynamic power control in lte hetnets,” in 2017 Twenty-third
National Conference on Communications (NCC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017.

31. M. Mehrnoush, V. Sathya, S. Roy, and M. Ghosh, “Analytical modeling of wi-ﬁ and lte-laa coexistence:
Throughput and impact of energy detection threshold,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 26,
no. 4, pp. 1990–2003, 2018.

22

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

32. V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Association fairness in wi-ﬁ and lte-u coexistence,”

in 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.

33. V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Analysis of csat performance in wi-ﬁ and lte-u co-
existence,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops),
pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2018.

34. S. Dama, V. Sathya, K. Kuchi, and T. V. Pasca, “A feasible cellular internet of things: Enabling edge
computing and the iot in dense futuristic cellular networks,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 66–72, 2016.

35. M. Mehrnoush, S. Roy, V. Sathya, and M. Ghosh, “On the fairness of wi-ﬁ and lte-laa coexistence,”
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 735–748, 2018.

36. R. Vanlin Sathya and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic spectrum allocation in femto based lte network,” 2013.
37. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, M. P. K. Reddy, and B. R. Tamma, “icalm: A topology agnostic socio-inspired
channel assignment performance prediction metric for mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 24th
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 702–704, 2018.

38. A. Ramamurthy, V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Franklin, and B. R. Tamma, “Dynamic power control and
scheduling in full duplex cellular network with d2d,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 104,
no. 2, pp. 695–726, 2019.

39. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Exploring the relationship between socio-inspired calm
and network capacity through regression analysis,” in 2018 International Conference on Advances in
Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 2369–2374, IEEE, 2018.

40. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. S. Magdum, T. V. K. Buyakar, H. Lokhandwala, and B. R. Tamma, “Designing
infrastructure-less disaster networks by leveraging the alljoyn framework,” in Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking, pp. 417–420, 2019.

41. H. Lokhandwala, V. Sathya, and B. R. Tamma, “Eai endorsed transactionspreprint research arti-

cle/editorial,”

42. V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “On placement and dynamic power control of femtocells
in lte hetnets,” in 2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pp. 4394–4399, IEEE, 2014.
43. V. Sathya, M. Merhnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Energy detection based sensing of multiple wi-ﬁ
bsss for lte-u csat,” in 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–7, IEEE,
2018.

44. S. M. Kala, W. K. Seah, V. Sathya, and B. Lala, “Statistical relationship between interference estimates

and network capacity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12125, 2019.

45. V. Sathya, On Improving Data Rates of Users in LTE HetNet. PhD thesis, IIT Hyderabad, 2016.
46. Y. Kumar, V. Sathya, and S. Ramanath, “Enhancing spectral utilization by maximizing the reuse in lte

network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05201, 2019.

47. V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Auto-correlation based sensing of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss
for lte-u csat,” in 2019 IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Fall), pp. 1–7, IEEE,
2019.

48. M. G. Adam Dziedzic, Vanlin Sathya and S. Krshnan, “Detection of multiple wi-ﬁ bsss for lte-u csat

using machine learning approach,” 2019.

49. V. Sathya, A. Dziedzic, M. Ghosh, and S. Krishnan, “Machine learning based detection of multiple wi-ﬁ
bsss for lte-u csat,” in 2020 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications
(ICNC), pp. 596–601, IEEE, 2020.

50. G. Garg, V. Reddy, V. Sathya, R. T. Bheemarjuna, et al., “An sla-aware network function selection

algorithm for sfcs,” in 2019 IEEE 2nd 5G World Forum (5GWF), pp. 524–527, IEEE, 2019.

51. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. S. Magdam, and B. R. Tamma, “Odin: Enhancing resilience of disaster net-

works through regression inspired optimized routing.,” Telecommunications Systems, 2019.

52. V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Wi-ﬁ/lte-u coexistence: Real-time issues and solu-

tions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 9221–9234, 2020.

53. S. Manas Kala, V. Sathya, M. Reddy, B. Lala, and B. Reddy Tamma, “A socio-inspired calm approach
to channel assignment performance prediction and wmn capacity estimation,” arXiv, pp. arXiv–1808,
2018.

54. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, S. W. KG, and B. R. Tamma, “Cirno: Leveraging capacity interference rela-
tionship for dense networks optimization,” in 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2020.

55. A. Dziedzic, V. Sathya, M. I. Rochman, M. Ghosh, and S. Krishnan, “Machine learning enabled spec-
trum sharing in dense lte-u/wi-ﬁ coexistence scenarios,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology,
vol. 1, pp. 173–189, 2020.

56. A. K. Rangisetti and V. Sathya, “Qos aware and fault tolerant handovers in software deﬁned lte net-

works,” Wireless Networks, pp. 1–19, 2020.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

23

57. V. Sathya, R. Madhumathi, and R. Radhakrishnan, “Modiﬁed aco algorithm for resource allocation in

cloud computing environment,”

58. V. Sathya, S. Ghosh, A. Ramamurthy, and B. R. Tamma, “Small cell planning: Resource management
and interference mitigation mechanisms in lte hetnets,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 115,
no. 1, pp. 335–361, 2020.

59. V. Sathya, S. M. Kala, M. I. Rochman, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Standardization advances for cellu-
lar and wi-ﬁ coexistence in the unlicensed 5 and 6 ghz bands,” GetMobile: Mobile Computing and
Communications, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 5–15, 2020.

60. V. Sathya, S. M. Kala, S. Bhupeshraj, and B. R. Tamma, “Raptap: a socio-inspired approach to resource
allocation and interference management in dense small cells,” Wireless Networks, pp. 1–24, 2020.
61. V. Sathya, A. Ramamurthy, M. I. Rochman, and M. Ghosh, “Qos guaranteed radio resource scheduling

in stand-alone unlicensed multeﬁre,” in IEEE 5G World Forum, 2020.

62. “Optimal femto placement in enterprise building,” in IEEE ANTS.
63. V. Sathya, M. I. Rochman, and M. Ghosh, “Measurement-based coexistence studies of laa & wi-ﬁ

deployments in chicago,” IEEE Wireless Communication Magazine, 2020.

64. M. Ghosh, V. Sathya, M. Iqbal, M. Mehrnoush, and S. Roy, “Coexistence of lte-laa and wi-ﬁ: Analysis

simulation and experiments,” in P802. 11 Coexistence SC Workshop, 2019.

65. S. C. Liew, C. Kai, H. C. Leung, and P. Wong, “Back-of-the-Envelope Computation of Throughput
Distributions in CSMA Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 9, no. 9,
pp. 1319–1331, 2010.

66. G. Bianchi, “Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination Function,” IEEE Jour-

nal on selected areas in communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 535–547, 2000.

67. Z. Jiang and S. Mao, “Harmonious Coexistence and Eﬃcient Spectrum Sharing for LTE-U and Wi-Fi,”
in Proc. of International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), pp. 275–283,
IEEE, 2017.

68. I. S. Association et al., “802.11-2012-IEEE Standard Part 11: Wireless LAN MAC and PHY Speciﬁca-

tions,” Retrived from http://standards. ieee. org/about/get/802/802.11. html, 2012.

69. L.-U. Forum, “LTE-U SDL Coexistence Speciﬁcations.” LTE-U Forum, http://www.lteuforum.

org/documents.html, 2015.

70. C. Chen, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, “Downlink performance analysis of LTE and WiFi coexistence in
unlicensed bands with a simple listen-before-talk scheme,” in Proc. of Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC) Spring, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2015.

71. A. M. Baswade, T. A. Atif, B. R. Tamma, and A. A. Franklin, “On the Impact of Duty Cycled LTE-
U on Wi-Fi Users: An Experimental Study,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communication
Systems and Networks, pp. 196–219, Springer, 2018.

72. Y. Gao, X. Chu, and J. Zhang, “Performance analysis of laa and wiﬁ coexistence in unlicensed spectrum
based on markov chain,” in Proc. of Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2016.

73. A. M. Baswade, L. Beltramelli, F. A. Antony, M. Gidlund, B. R. Tamma, and L. Guntupalli, “Modelling
and analysis of wi-ﬁ and laa coexistence with priority classes,” in Proc. of International Conference on
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2018.
74. Qualcomm, “LTE in Unlicensed Spectrum: Harmonious Coexistence with Wi-Fi.” Qualcomm White

Paper, June 2014.

75. 3GPP, “3GPP-TSG-RAN-WG1; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA),” Tech. Rep.

TR 36.814 V9.0.0, March 2010.

76. J. Jeon, H. Niu, Q. C. Li, A. Papathanassiou, and G. Wu, “LTE in the Unlicensed Spectrum: Evaluating
Coexistence Mechanisms,” in Proc. of Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2014, pp. 740–745, IEEE,
2014.

77. E. Almeida, A. M. Cavalcante, R. C. Paiva, F. S. Chaves, F. M. Abinader, R. D. Vieira, S. Choudhury,
E. Tuomaala, and K. Doppler, “Enabling LTE/WiFi coexistence by LTE blank subframe allocation,” in
Proc. of International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 5083–5088, IEEE, 2013.

78. A. Abdelfattah and N. Malouch, “Modeling and Performance Analysis of Wi-Fi Networks Coexisting
with LTE-U,” in Proc. of Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2017.
79. P. C. Ng and S. C. Liew, “Throughput analysis of ieee802.11 multi-hop adhoc networks,” IEEE/ACM

Transactions on networking, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 309–322, 2007.

80. Y. Gao, D.-M. Chiu, and J. Lui, “Determining the end-to-end Throughput Capacity in Multi-hop
Networks: Methodology and Applications,” in ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review,
vol. 34, pp. 39–50, ACM, 2006.

81. Cisco, “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traﬃc Forecast Update, 2017-2022.”

Cisco White Paper, Feb 2019.

24

Vanlin Sathya, Srikant Manas Kala, and Kalpana Naidu

82. K. Medepalli and F. A. Tobagi, “Towards Performance Modeling of IEEE 802.11 based Wireless Net-
works: A Uniﬁed Framework and its Applications,” in Proc. of International Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2006.

83. A. M. Cavalcante, E. Almeida, R. D. Vieira, S. Choudhury, E. Tuomaala, K. Doppler, F. Chaves, R. C.
Paiva, and F. Abinader, “Performance Evaluation of LTE and Wi-Fi Coexistence in Unlicensed Bands,”
in Proc. of Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2013.

84. S. Sagari, I. Seskar, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Modeling the coexistence of lte and wiﬁ heterogeneous
networks in dense deployment scenarios,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communication
Workshop (ICCW), pp. 2301–2306, IEEE, 2015.

85. R. Ratasuk, M. A. Uusitalo, N. Mangalvedhe, A. Sorri, S. Iraji, C. Wijting, and A. Ghosh, “License-
exempt lte deployment in heterogeneous network,” in Proc. of International Symposium on Wireless
Communication Systems (ISWCS), pp. 246–250, IEEE, 2012.

86. T. Nihtilä, V. Tykhomyrov, O. Alanen, M. A. Uusitalo, A. Sorri, M. Moisio, S. Iraji, R. Ratasuk, and
N. Mangalvedhe, “System performance of lte and ieee 802.11 coexisting on a shared frequency band,”
in Proc. of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1038–1043,
IEEE, 2013.

87. S. Sagari, S. Baysting, D. Saha, I. Seskar, W. Trappe, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Coordinated Dynamic
Spectrum Management of LTE-U and Wi-Fi Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), pp. 209–220, IEEE, September 2015.

88. LTE-U Forum, “LTE-U Technical Report.” [Online] http://www.lteuforum.org/documents.

html, 2015.

89. Y. Li, F. Baccelli, J. G. Andrews, T. D. Novlan, and J. C. Zhang, “Modeling and analyzing the coex-
istence of Wi-Fi and LTE in unlicensed spectrum,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 6310–6326, 2016.

90. C. Cano and D. J. Leith, “Coexistence of WiFi and LTE in unlicensed bands: A proportional fair allo-
cation scheme,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), pp. 2288–
2293, IEEE, 2015.

91. 3GPP, “TSGRAN; Study on Licensed-Assisted Access to Unlicensed Spectrum,” Tech. Rep. TR 36.889

V13.0.0, June 2015.

92. M. Sawahashi, Y. Kishiyama, A. Morimoto, D. Nishikawa, and M. Tanno, “Coordinated multipoint
transmission/reception techniques for lte-advanced,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 3,
p. 26, 2010.

93. S. Brueck, L. Zhao, J. Giese, and M. A. Amin, “Centralized scheduling for joint transmission coor-
dinated multi-point in lte-advanced,” in 2010 International ITG Workshop on Smart Antennas (WSA),
pp. 177–184, IEEE, 2010.

94. D. Bladsjö, M. Hogan, and S. Ruﬃni, “Synchronization aspects in lte small cells,” IEEE Communica-

tions Magazine, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 70–77, 2013.

95. R. Mendrzik, R. A. J. Castillo, G. Bauch, and E. Seidel, “Interference coordination-based downlink
scheduling for heterogeneous lte-a networks,” in 2016 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2016.

96. M.-Y. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Zhou, Y. Yang, H. Hu, and H. Wang, “Coordination method between access

points using unlicensed frequency band,” Apr. 16 2019. US Patent 10,264,603.

97. V. Sathya, M. Mehrnoush, M. Ghosh, and S. Roy, “Wi-Fi/LTE-U Coexistence: Real-Time Issues and

Solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 9221–9234, 2020.

98. R. Liu, Q. Chen, G. Yu, G. Y. Li, and Z. Ding, “Resource Management in LTE-U Systems: Past, Present,

and Future,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 1, pp. 1–17, 2019.

99. P. Charalampou, I. Giannoulakis, E. Kafetzakis, and E. D. Sykas, “Experimenting on LTE-U and WiFi
coexistence,” in 2019 4th South-East Europe Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer
Networks and Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.

100. R. Biswas and J. Wu, “Co-existence of LTE-U and Wi-Fi with Direct Communication,” in ICC 2019-

2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.

101. S. Zinno, G. Di Stasi, S. Avallone, and G. Ventre, “On a fair coexistence of LTE and Wi-Fi in the

unlicensed spectrum: A Survey,” Computer Communications, vol. 115, pp. 35–50, 2018.

102. A. M. Voicu, L. Simi´c, and M. Petrova, “Survey of spectrum sharing for inter-technology coexistence,”

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1112–1144, 2018.

103. FCC, “FCC Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Unlicensed Use of the 6 GHz Band.” [Online] https:

//docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-18-147A1.pdf, 2018.

104. S. Methley and W. Webb., “Wi-Fi Spectrum Needs Study, Final Report to Wi-Fi Alliance 3rd ed.”

[Online] http://www.wi-fi.org, 2017.

105. IEEE 802.11 coexistence workshop., “IEEE 802.11 coexistence workshop..” [Online] https://

grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/, 2019.

Heterogenous Networks: From small cells to 5G NR-U

25

106. N. Patriciello, S. Lagén, B. Bojovi´c, and L. Giupponi, “Nr-u and ieee 802.11 technologies coexistence
in unlicensed mmwave spectrum: Models and evaluation,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 71254–71271, 2020.
107. D. Xu, A. Zhou, X. Zhang, G. Wang, X. Liu, C. An, Y. Shi, L. Liu, and H. Ma, “Understanding op-
erational 5g: A ﬁrst measurement study on its coverage, performance and energy consumption,” in
Proceedings of the Annual conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication on
the applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communication, pp. 479–494,
2020.

108. A. Narayanan, E. Ramadan, R. Mehta, X. Hu, Q. Liu, R. A. Fezeu, U. K. Dayalan, S. Verma, P. Ji, T. Li,
et al., “Lumos5g: Mapping and predicting commercial mmwave 5g throughput,” in Proceedings of the
ACM Internet Measurement Conference, pp. 176–193, 2020.

109. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, M. P. K. Reddy, B. Lala, and B. R. Tamma, “A socio-inspired calm approach
to channel assignment performance prediction and wmn capacity estimation,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 42–66, 2019.

110. F. Wilhelmi, S. Barrachina-Muñoz, B. Bellalta, C. Cano, A. Jonsson, and G. Neu, “Potential and pitfalls
of multi-armed bandits for decentralized spatial reuse in wlans,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 127, pp. 26–42, 2019.

111. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, E. Yamatsuta, H. Yamaguchi, and T. Higashino, “Operator data driven cell-
selection in lte-laa coexistence networks,” in International Conference on Distributed Computing and
Networking 2021, pp. 206–214, 2021.

112. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, K. Dahiya, T. Higashino, and H. Yamaguchi, “Optimizing unlicensed coexistence

network performance through data learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07583, 2021.

113. S. M. Kala, V. Sathya, W. K. Seah, H. Yamaguchi, and T. Higashino, “Evaluation of theoretical inter-
ference estimation metrics for dense wi-ﬁ networks,” in 2021 International Conference on COMmuni-
cation Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), pp. 351–359, IEEE, 2021.

