An Open Platform for Research about Cognitive Load in Virtual Reality

Olivier Augereau*
Lab-STICC CNRS UMR6285
ENIB, Brest, France

Gabriel Brocheton †
ENIB, Brest, France

Pedro Paulo Do Prado Neto” ‡
ENIB, Brest, France

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

7
1

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
7
2
6
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
The cognitive load can be used to assess if someone is struggling
while performing a task. It can be used in many different situations
such as in driving, piloting, studying, playing, working, etc. This
information can help to design better systems and even to create
interactive systems that can be aware of the user’s cognitive load
and adapt itself to the user. We propose an open source platform
that can be used for doing research about cognitive load in virtual
reality (VR). Our platform can be used for stimulating cognitive load
through several VR scenes and for analyzing cognitive load through
objective and subjective measurements.

Index Terms: H.5.1 [INFORMATION INTERFACES AND PRE-
SENTATION]: Multimedia Information Systems—Artiﬁcial, aug-
mented, and virtual realities; J.4 [SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL
SCIENCES]: Psychology—

1 INTRODUCTION
Virtual Reality (VR) is a promising technology that the industry is
starting to use more and more for professional training. Systems that
are expensive, dangerous or not easily available can be modeled and
inexperienced users can practice with them safely. VR is also a use-
ful tool for psychologists as they can reproduce speciﬁc experiments
to analyze the user’s mind and behavior. Detecting automatically the
mental workload in real time can help to design interactive systems
that can adapt themselves to the user’s needs. But it is still a re-
search challenge, and open source platforms implementing cognitive
load measurements and giving access to prefabricated scenes will
hopefully help researchers.

In this paper we present a platform that can be used for stimulating
and measuring cognitive load in virtual reality (VR). Our platform
is open source and available on two GitLab repositories: one with
a detailed documentation for developers1 and another one ready to
use for standard users2.

The following sections will present what kind of measurements
can be done with the proposed platform and then the VR scenes that
have been implemented in the platform to stimulate the cognitive
load.

2 COGNITIVE LOAD MEASUREMENT
The cognitive load theory is based on human cognition and is char-
acterized by the central assumption that the amount of knowledge
acquisition depends on the efﬁciency of the use of available cog-
nitive resources in working memory. A person’s cognitive load is
the mental effort associated while performing a task or engaging in
a learning process. The cognitive load measurements are usually
divided into two main categories: subjective measures and objective
measures.

*e-mail: augereau@enib.fr
†e-mail:g7broche@enib.fr
‡e-mail:p1paulod@enib.fr

1https://git.enib.fr/g7broche/vr-ppe
2https://git.enib.fr/g7broche/vr-ppe-build

Figure 1: A visualization of the NASA-TLX questionnaire implemented
in our VR platform.

2.1 Subjective measures

Most research on cognitive load is using the subjective measurement
to obtain the participant’s mental effort. It is subjective because is
related to the user’s own perception of the amount of mental effort
used while performing a task. The user is asked to answer some
questions in order to estimate their level of cognitive load.

One of the most famous subjective rating scales is the NASA
Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) [3]. The NASA-TLX is a subjective
rating scale, originally designed to analyze the mental and physical
demands of aircraft pilots, with six different items : mental demand,
physical demand, temporal demand, performance, effort, and frus-
tration level. The Fig. 1 shows the NASA-TLX implemented in our
platform.

Another commonly used scale is the one proposed by Paas [5]. It
consists of one item for task difﬁculty and one item for mental effort
on a 9-point Likert scale. These scales are placed for the participant
to answer after each completed task.

The advantage of subjective measures is that the person who
performed the task is the only one who can estimate the difﬁculty
of the task faced, and the effort to complete it. However, there
are technical measurement problems with regard to the objectivity,
validity and reliability of the participants’ own responses.

2.2 Objective measures

The objective measurement is a way to obtain the user’s amount
of mental effort by direct methods. These direct methods can be
obtained through participant’s physiological information [2, 4] or a
dual-task performance [1, 6].

The analysis of physiological data obtained from the participant,
such as brain activity, pupil movement and dilation, heart rate, elec-
trodermal activity, etc. can be used to indicate the amount of mental
effort made by the user. Physiological data can be an accurate indi-
cator of the cognitive load, but the sensor’s raw data usually need to
be processed, features need to be extracted and sometimes machine
learning models need to be trained before being able to predict the
amount of mental effort based on these signals. Our platform exports
all the physiological signals available from the VR headset for this
purpose.

The dual-task performance method is another approach where

 
 
 
 
 
 
the participants are engaged in two different tasks. When the perfor-
mance of the secondary task is reduced, it indicates an increase of
the participant’s amount of mental effort, imposed by the primary
task. Lower performances are typically reﬂected by a larger number
of errors or a larger response time.

The values obtained by the dual-task paradigm are objectives,
so analysis, and interpretation of data are measured independently
of a self-report rating. The problem of the dual-task methods is
a possible interference between the primary and secondary tasks,
when one of the tasks somehow prevents the execution of the other.
Our platform logs the number of errors and the response time.

3 COGNITIVE LOAD STIMULATION
Our VR platform was developed using the ”Unity” game engine. Our
platform is packaged as a single application composed of different
scenes. The scenes are themselves composed of several phases (in
our case two) each followed by a break where the NASA-TLX is
displayed to the user. Each phase has its own set of tasks, all aimed
at stimulating the user’s cognitive load.

The tasks require users to use logical reasoning, concentration
and to perform some simple mathematical calculations. They will
be detailed in the following subsections. During the tasks the user
will hear audio beeps and is asked to press a button as soon as it is
heard. This reaction time will be used as an objective measure of
the cognitive load.

The game can be started by a unique executable ﬁle and the
preferences of the game must be settled before launching the game,
using a conﬁguration ﬁle. The conﬁguration ﬁle allow to set some
parameters such as: the user information, the scene that will be
played, the execution order of the phases, the duration time of each
phase and the pause, the use (or not) of NASA-TLX scale, the use
(or not) of a tutorial, the repetition rate of audio beeps, etc.

All the data emitted by the VR headset sensors are recorded in
a comma-separated values (CSV) ﬁle. In the same ﬁle, events that
occur during the execution of scenes (phase start and end, task start
and end, task completion or failure) are also recorded. A text (TXT)
ﬁle is also generated during the game. It will be ﬁlled with the user’s
NASA-TLX answers, the average secondary task response time, and
the average value of cognitive load. Both the CSV ﬁle and TXT ﬁle
can be accessed at the end of the game. This information can then
be used for future analysis.

We will now present the two main scenes available in the platform:

the progressive task scene and the dual-task scene.

3.1 Progressive task
The aim of the progressive task scene is to stimulate the user’s
cognitive load progressively through a sequence of increasing hard
phases. We implemented a mathematical calculation task where
the user needs to point at a numeric keyboard to enter the result of
the displayed calculation. In the ﬁrst phase, only arithmetic sums
between numbers of maximum two digits will be displayed while
during the second phase the sums can be between numbers of three
digits.

3.2 Dual-Task
In this scene the user starts with a single task during the ﬁrst phase,
and then has to perform two different tasks at the same time in the
second phase. During the ﬁrst phase, the user needs to keep a line
that is moving inside a deﬁned interval by pressing a controller’s
button. During the second phase, the user keeps doing the same
task plus another one. In our case he will have to perform a simple
calculation (as described in the previous subsection).

4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a VR platform that can be used for stimulating and
measuring the cognitive load in various ways.

Figure 2: A visualization of the dual-task scenario. The user needs
to do a mental calculation and to maintain a line in a speciﬁc interval
at the same time. The application logs the user’ errors, physiological
signals, NASA-TLX answers, and the response time to audio beeps.

For now, our platform is only compatible with the VR headset
”HP reverb G2 Omnicept”3, but further work will be done to integrate
other headsets such as the ”HTC Vive Pro Eye”.

The HP reverb G2 Omnicept is build in with a Tobii eye tracker,
a photoplethysmogram sensor (it detects the blood volume changes
such as the heart beat), a face camera located on the bottom of
the headset pointing at user’s mouth, and an inertial measurement
unit including 3-axis accelerometers and 3-axis gyroscopes. The
headset also has a machine learning model that can predict the user’s
cognitive load as a continuous value ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.

One of the purposes of building this platform is to check if the
cognitive load value given by the headset is usable and to which
extent. In order to do this we will start an experiment and collect
data of some users to see if the value is correlated to other cognitive
load measurements available in our platform such as the reaction
time, the NASA-TLX of the dual-task performances.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been done in the European Center of Virtual Reality
(CERV)4, a research platform of ENIB. We would like to thank the
support of other CERV members and especially Nathalie Le Bigot
for her expertise in psychology.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Br¨unken, S. Steinbacher, J. L. Plass, and D. Leutner. Assessment
of cognitive load in multimedia learning using dual-task methodology.
Experimental psychology, 49(2):109, 2002.

[2] E. Haapalainen, S. Kim, J. F. Forlizzi, and A. K. Dey. Psycho-
physiological measures for assessing cognitive load. In Proceedings of
the 12th ACM international conference on Ubiquitous computing, pp.
301–310, 2010.

[3] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland. Development of nasa-tlx (task load
index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In Advances in
psychology, vol. 52, pp. 139–183. Elsevier, 1988.

[4] C. S. Ikehara and M. E. Crosby. Assessing cognitive load with physio-
logical sensors. In Proceedings of the 38th annual hawaii international
conference on system sciences, pp. 295a–295a. IEEE, 2005.

[5] F. G. Paas. Training strategies for attaining transfer of problem-solving
skill in statistics: a cognitive-load approach. Journal of educational
psychology, 84(4):429, 1992.

[6] B. Park and R. Bruenken. The rhythm method: A new method for
measuring cognitive load—an experimental dual-task study. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 29(2):232–243, 2015.

3https://www.hp.com/us-en/vr/reverb-g2-vr-headset-omnicept-

edition.html

4cerv.enib.fr

