LEAVE THIS PAGE BL ANK
DO NOT DELETE THIS PAGE

REALIGNMENTS

1

BIM LOD + Virtual Reality

Using Game Engine for Visualization in  
Architectural & Construction Education

Hassan Anifowose
Texas A&M University

Wei Yan

Texas A&M University

Manish Dixit

Texas A&M University

ABSTR ACT
Architectural Education faces limitations due to its tactile approach to learning in class-
rooms with only 2-D and 3-D tools. At a higher level, virtual reality provides a potential for 
delivering more information to individuals undergoing design learning. This paper investi-
gates a hypothesis establishing grounds towards a new research in Building Information 
Modeling (BIM) and Virtual Reality (VR). The hypothesis is projected to determine best 
practices for content creation and tactile object virtual interaction, which potentially can 
improve learning in architectural & construction education with a less costly approach and 
ease of access to well-known buildings. We explored this hypothesis in a step-by-step game 
design demonstration in VR, by showcasing the exploration of the Farnsworth House and 
reproducing assemblage of the same with different game levels of difficulty which corre-
spond with varying BIM levels of development (LODs). The game design prototype equally 
provides an entry way and learning style for users with or without a formal architectural 
or construction education seeking to understand design tectonics within diverse or cross-
disciplinary study cases. This paper shows that developing geometric abstract concepts 
of design pedagogy, using varying LODs for game content and levels, while utilizing newly 
developed features such as snap-to-grid, snap-to-position and snap-to-angle to improve 
user engagement during assemblage may provide deeper learning objectives for architec-
tural precedent study. 

Keywords: Work in Progress, Computational Publics, Spatial Computing, Sensing, and VR/
AR/MR, Construction Education, Building Information Modeling

2

ACADIA 2021

INTRODUCTION
The integration of interactive building anatomy modeling 
into the construction education system improves learning 
while enabling effective knowledge transfer to learners 
(Park et al. 2016). The COVID-19 pandemic proved educa-
tion’s over-reliance on classroom to be inadequate and 
adaptation to future demands is overdue. Researchers indi-
cated in previous works that interactive gaming improves 
learning and motivation (Kharvari and Höhl 2019) and it is 
also acknowledged that BIM provides the framework for 
developing 3D geometric data which can be used in the 
generation of levels and maps in games (Yan, Culp, and Graf 
2011). Virtual Reality (VR) on the other hand is technology 
which is fast gaining adoption, however, with limitations 
based on extra work required to visualize BIM models 
(Zaker and Coloma 2018).

We used an empirical research method by developing a 
simple demonstration to test the hypothesis. The overall 
objective is to study how building anatomy modelling 
process combined with varying levels of development 
(LODs) help the learning process for architectural prec-
edents. Evidence shows that using an anatomical approach, 
varying LODs provided in geometric form holds a potential 
to improve interaction and overall learning while studying 
architectural precedents. This demonstration shows the 
significance of new features for improved engagement in 
VR.

STATE OF THE ART
VR provides full scale perception of spaces while accurately 
representing materiality in deeper levels of immersion 
when compared to desktop screens and projection systems 
(Angulo 2015). VR’s common use is to enhance walking 
experiences inside and around a virtual structure, however, 
it has been used to evaluate form and design of a building 
(Abdelhameed 2013). 

Increasing the feeling of presence has been determined 
to improve overall VR experiences, which must be accom-
panied with an increased level of realism within VR (Du et 
al. 2016). Outside environment realism, there are limi-
tations of accessibility to data from BIM environments, 
requiring improvement (Kieferle and Woessner 2015). 
Our research towards gamification aims to help users 
create and manipulate objects within the VR environment 
thereby limiting dependence on the BIM environment for 
new objects generated in a game scene. Designing and 
providing content, interface design alongside coding and 
programming are some of the identified issues to overcome 
(Maghool, Moeini, and Arefazar 2018).

VR + Architectural Education

The exploration of existing architectural projects, prec-
edents or case studies is at the core of architectural 
education. Design students are generally expected to 
provide clarity of understanding of such precedents’ 
abstract principles and tectonics before tendering design 
proposals during studio sessions. Visiting architectural 
precedents can become very costly for students and insti-
tutions depending on various factors. Additionally, there are 
no layers of interactivity involved in local visits, therefore, 
retention varies between students (Bourdakis and Charitos 
1999; Kharvari and Höhl 2019).

Learning within Virtual Environments (VEs) can be devel-
oped to create a foundation for learning about Virtual 
environment design. Pushing learning in VE further within 
tutored environments, is proven to “benefit young archi-
tects on their first step towards understanding the essence 
of architecture” (Kamath, Dongale, and Kamat 2012). The 
speed of learning in architectural education has been 
attributed to students’ ability to detect their errors faster 
and learn from them (Dvorak et al. 2005; Abdelhameed 
2013). Moloney indicated that “The advantages of working 
in a real-time environment where early design iterations 
can be tested from multiple points of view” which has 
been established alongside limitations of communicating 
while wearing a VR device (Moloney and Harvey 2004; 
Milovanovic et al. 2017).

VR + Construction Education

The study of building composition in construction education 
is limited by teaching strategies. The Interactive Building 
Anatomy Modeling (IBAM) research has indicated that an 
anatomical approach can deliver better learning outcomes 
in construction education via assemblage and gamified 
techniques (Park et al. 2016; P. Wang et al. 2018 ). This 
motivates our research idea for a virtual precedent study 
environment combined with BIM to provide an avenue 
where students apply their education to solve real prob-
lems. However, various settings for VEs require testing in 
order to determine which situation provides flexibility as 
well as improve virtual construction learning (Ghosh 2012). 
Gamifying construction learning is one method of continu-
ously engaging the younger population (Generation Y) who 
have difficulties in engaging with traditional educational 
methods (Goedert et al. 2011). 

TOPIC (ACADIA team will fill in)

REALIGNMENTS

3

The combination of building models in VR alongside a 
game process for learning, may hold considerable impact 
on learning when applied to education. As indicated in a 
research, learning in VR provides an experiential outcome 
which is obvious in the learner’s behavior (R. Wang, Newton, 
and Lowe 2015). 

METHODS
Gamification for Studying Architectural Precedents

Various classifications for Virtual Reality (VR) in Education 
have been established (Motejlek and Alpay 2019). These 
are - purpose of the application, technology of delivery, 
user interaction, user experience, system interaction and 
gamification types. Gamification is largely unexplored for 
developing learning experiences of Architectural prec-
edents. Beyond the conventional methods, this paper 
showcases new techniques for studying architectural 
pedagogy through a new lens, i.e. Virtual Reality. To achieve 
cross-disciplinary, simplified learning for users without 
prior design knowledge, we utilized varying levels of devel-
opment (LODs).  
This study seeks answers to -

•  What are best game design practices recommended to 
enhance playability in a BIM+VR game development? 

Pre-Game - Prototype Development

A prototype development provides an extensive tool for 
teaching varying LODs from concept design to final detailed 
design. Users explore a collaborative virtual environment 
and embark on design activities thereafter. For this study, 
we used the Farnsworth House.

Stage 1: Modeling– Detailed modelling of the building 
was completed in Autodesk Revit for studying (Figure 1). 
Abstract concepts are modeled in Rhinoceros and merged 
in Unity Game Engine using SteamVR plugin for gameplay 
and interactions.

The illustration (Figure 2), shows different concept schemes 
which provide learning about underlying design pedagogy. 

Stage 2: Precedent Exploration – Users are introduced to 
the architectural precedent and allowed 10minutes for 
exploration (Figure 3).  

Thereafter, users proceed to the game area for an assem-
blage exercise to test their knowledge.

Stage 3: Studio Setup, Practice Areas – In the VR environ-
ment, we developed a studio setup comprising an in-game 
projector screen which played a video narrating the 

1

2

3

1  Completed detailed model of the 

2  Abstract Concept modeling of 

building in Autodesk Revit.

the Farnsworth House showing 
top left to bottom right, (a) 
full geometry, (b) structure, 
(c) lighting and (d) circulation 
respectively.

3  Precedent exploration in 

4  Stairs: LOD 200 (left) and LOD 

First Person View in the VR 
environment.

300 (right).

4

ACADIA 2021

BIM LOD + VIRTUAL REALITY  Anifowose, Yan, Dixit

 
 
4

5
5

6

5  Steel Stanchion: LOD 200 (left) 

6  Floor Slab: LOD 200 (left) and 

and LOD 300 (right).

LOD 300 (right).

architectural precedent while the game player explored 
the precedent and environment including interacting with 
abstract concept models in one case. The practice area in 
level 1 allows the player to get accustomed to object inter-
action and manipulation techniques required for the game 
challenge in level 2. 

Stage 4: Gamification & Level Development – Borrowing 
from universally established BIM Level of Developments 
standard classifications (TrueCADD 2021), game levels 
were designed to correspond with increasing LOD. For the 
purpose of this research, we have classified the building 
construction components into game artifacts via two 
classes of LODs. The lowest LOD used is LOD 200 (approxi-
mate geometry represented by LEGO) while the highest LOD 
used is LOD 300 (precise geometry of the building). LEGO 
was used because of its geometric simplicity and popularity 
for low detail geometry assemblage. The classification 
is created specifically for this game based on geometry 

7

8

7  Completed Game Level 1 with 

8  Game Challenge in progress for 

LOD 200.

LOD 300.

complexity and similar to the universal BIM LOD defini-
tion. Users are presented with each game level to complete 
assemblage tasks after the precedent explorations and 
pre-exercise stages. The assemblage task comprises of 
components with varying level of development (Figure 4, 
Figure 5, Figure 6). 

Game level 1 features the player, assembling the building 
with LOD 200 construction components generated from 
Mecabricks web-based application with LEGO parts (Figure 
7). Upon completion, the player proceeds to level 2 where 
they complete the assemblage with LOD 300 components 
(Figure 9) which are precise geometry.

TOPIC (ACADIA team will fill in)

REALIGNMENTS

5

experience, user behavior, level of object interaction and 
knowledge retention. We observed that the game players 
were enthusiastic to learn about the architectural prec-
edent. Player 2 had significant shorter time to reproduce 
the assemblage while also reporting a higher level under-
standing and motivation for learning and reproducing the 
building than Player 1.  This indicates that having abstract 
concepts in precedent study virtual environments other 
than only the building geometry provides an opportunity 
for better knowledge retention. Players also indicated 
increased depth of understanding with the voice/video 
narration during the exploration stage. Especially important 
given the ongoing travel restrictions due to the pandemic, 
the BIM+VR prototype developed in this research using 
virtual game development modalities, provides a less 
costly approach and improved accessibility to well-known 
architectural precedents with a potential for learning and 
engagement. Institutions may adopt this strategy to provide 
rich learning objectives for both design-related and cross-
disciplinary studies.

To improve user interaction and overall engagement, new 
features were created for the game which increased the 
intuition level for interacting with the assemblage compo-
nents and increased the users’ abilities to complete the 
assemblage tasks. By developing an object-spawning 
system (Figure 11) using the Bolt Visual Scripting tool, the 
dependence on importing heavy BIM files is drastically 
reduced thereby increasing adoption possibilities of this 
game’s approach to learning in Virtual Reality. This tool 
was used in developing the embedded features saving 
time beyond the conventional C# scripting tools. This 
demonstration enabled us establish a case scenario for 
application within the design and construction education 
environment. As shown in (Figure 12), the BIM LOD + VR 
game research is grouped into four major stages of work. 
The first two stages and a portion of the third stage are 
reported in this paper. 

CONCLUSION
Virtual reality can potentially eliminate the need for local 
and international travel in architectural studies. This 
paper investigated the possibilities of using BIM+VR in a 
gamified LOD test case, as a way of increasing effective 
learning objectives in architectural forms and tectonics. 
Feedback from the demonstration indicated that higher 
understanding of the main architectural precedent could 
be gained by studying the developed abstract concepts in 
geometric form with varying LODs inside the game before 
attempting the assemblage task. In diverse cases where 
the user has no previous knowledge of architecture or 
construction, the BIM+VR approach provides learning 

9

10

9  Completed Game Level 2 with LOD 300.

10  Game scene showing the base model and geometric abstract concepts 

(Circulation-to-use and Natural Lighting) in the exploration mode.

In-Game - Implementation and Prototype Testing

Our in-lab demonstration involved two players. We received 
immediate feedback on playability, implemented features 
and overall comfort within the VR environment. Player 1 
explored the game with a studio environment setup, an 
in-game video narrative, and was presented with the 
assemblage task. Player 2 explored the game with all the 
features from Player 1’s experience including interacting 
with the geometric abstract concepts (Figure 10). A new VR 
object-snapping feature developed for the game allowed 
both players to complete the tasks with the same levels 
of difficulty. Each player spent 10 minutes exploring the 
precedent and 10 minutes assembling the parts in the 
exercise area. The game was live demonstrated to a team of 
researchers at a college symposium. Demonstration video 
is available on https://youtu.be/_le_EpDeS9s

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Feedback was collected from the two demonstra-
tion players based on four categories namely; player 

6

ACADIA 2021

BIM LOD + VIRTUAL REALITY  Anifowose, Yan, Dixit

11  Object spawning system for game artifacts using Bolt Visual Scripting

11

alternative beyond reading technical drawings; a task 
typically difficult for the majority in other fields of study. 
Developed features such as snap-to-grid, snap-to-angle 
and snap-to-position are also necessary to improve user 
engagement during the assemblage phase of the game. By 
generalizing results, we can confirm that this approach 
could provide a deeper knowledge of architectural prec-
edents while simulating a design studio and modeling 
environment inside virtual reality. Limitations experi-
enced included difficulty in generating custom scripts, 
and retention of BIM geometry data inside Unity software 
while converting objects from native Revit to game objects. 
More challenges were faced in developing mechanics for 
improved game performance. This was overcome by devel-
oping object spawning systems.

A larger scale experiment is currently being developed 
for construction education to enable researchers answer 
questions as to how well effective learning can occur using 
BIM and VR with varying LODs and also, determine which 
gamification features enhance interaction while contrib-
uting to effective learning. This will be carried out as a full 
study with a larger group of human subjects. With the find-
ings in this research, gamification is expected to make its 
way into Architectural and Construction Education both in 
the classroom and on the field. 

TOPIC (ACADIA team will fill in)

REALIGNMENTS

7

REFERENCES
Abdelhameed, Wael A. 2013. "Virtual Reality Use in Architectural 

Design Studios: A Case of Studying Structure and Construction." 

Procedia Computer Science 25: 220-230. https://doi.org/https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.11.027. http://www.sciencedirect.

com/science/article/pii/S1877050913012325.

Angulo, Antonieta. 2015. "Rediscovering Virtual Reality in the 

Education of Architectural Design: The immersive simulation of 

spatial experiences." Ambiances. Environnement sensible, architec-

ture et espace urbain (1).

Bourdakis, Vassilis, and Dimitrios Charitos. 1999. "Virtual 

Environment Design-Defining a New Direction for Architectural 

Education."

Du, Jing, Yangming Shi, Chao Mei, John Quarles, and Wei Yan. 2016. 

"Communication by Interaction: A Multiplayer VR Environment for 

Building Walkthroughs." Construction Research Congress 2016.

Dvorak, J, V Hamata, J Skacilik, and B Benes. 2005. "Boosting up 

architectural design education with virtual reality."  5: 95-200.

Ghosh, Arundhati. 2012. "Virtual Construction+ Collaboration Lab: 

Setting a new paradigm for BIM education." American Society for 

Engineering Education.

Goedert, James, Yong Cho, Mahadevan Subramaniam, Haifeng Guo, 

and Ling %J Automation in Construction Xiao. 2011. "A framework 

for virtual interactive construction education (VICE)."  20 (1): 76-87.

Kamath, R. S., T. D. Dongale, and R. K. Kamat. 2012. "Development 

of Virtual Reality Tool for Creative Learning in Architectural 

Education." International Journal of Quality Assurance in 

Engineering and Technology Education (IJQAETE) 2 (4): 16-24. 

https://doi.org/10.4018/ijqaete.2012100102. http://services.

igi-global.com/resolvedoi/resolve.aspx?doi=10.4018/

ijqaete.2012100102.

Kharvari, F., and W. Höhl. 2019. "The Role of Serious Gaming using 

Virtual Reality Applications for 3D Architectural Visualization." 11th 

International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Games for Serious 

12

Applications (VS-Games).

Kieferle, Joachim, and Uwe Woessner. 2015. "BIM interactive-

about combining BIM and virtual reality-a bidirectional interaction 

method for BIM models in different environments."

Maghool, Sayyed Amir Hossain, Seyed Hossein Iradj Moeini, and 

Yasaman Arefazar. 2018. "An educational application based 

on virtual reality technology for learning architectural details: 

challenges and benefits." ArchNet-IJAR: International Journal of 

12  Diagram showing 4 stages of this research and features of each stage.

8

ACADIA 2021

BIM LOD + VIRTUAL REALITY  Anifowose, Yan, Dixit

Architectural Research 12 (3): 246.

Hassan Anifowose An Architect and 3D Visualization expert 

with several years of experience in Design, Construction and 

Milovanovic, Julie, Guillaume Moreau, Daniel Siret, and Francis 

Entrepreneurship. Hassan is a PhD Student at Texas A&M 

Miguet. 2017. "Virtual and Augmented Reality in Architectural 

University where he is constantly working on the edge with 

Design and Education An Immersive Multimodal Platform 

interests spanning across a wide range of subjects including user 

to Support Architectural Pedagogy." Future Trajectories of 

experience, game design and human building interaction. He has 

Computation in Design, 17th International Conference, CAAD 

won 8 scholarships during his PhD Program including the AIA's 

Futures, Istanbul, Turkey.

David Lakamp Scholarship. Hassan is presently exploring new 

frontiers of BIM and Virtual Reality applications for improved 

Moloney, Jules, and Lawrence Harvey. 2004. "Visualization 

project performance on construction projects and aims to improve 

and'auralization'of architectural design in a game engine 

productivity in the construction industry with technology. 

based collaborative virtual environment." Proceedings. Eighth 

International Conference on Information Visualisation, 2004. IV 

Wei Yan Dr. Wei Yan, Mattia Flabiano III AIA/Page Southerland 

2004.

Page Endowed Professor of Architecture at Texas A&M University, 

with expertise in Computational Methods in Design, Building 

Motejlek, Jiri, and Esat Alpay. 2019. "A Taxonomy for Virtual and 

Information Modeling, Augmented Reality, etc. He has led research 

Augmented Reality in Education." arXiv preprint arXiv:.12051.

projects funded by the National Science Foundation, the National 

Park, Chan Sik, Quang Tuan Le, Akeem Pedro, and Chung Rok Lim. 

Prize in Design Computing and Cognition '06. He was named a 

2016. "Interactive building anatomy modeling for experiential 

Texas A&M Presidential Impact Fellow in 2017. Yan was educated at 

building construction education." Journal of Professional Issues in 

the University of California, Berkeley (Ph.D. in Architecture and M.S. 

Engineering Education 142 (3): 04015019.

in Computer Science), ETH Zurich, and Tianjin University.

Endowment for the Humanities, etc. He received the Best Paper 

TrueCADD. 2021. "BIM Level of Development - LOD 100, 200, 300, 

Manish Dixit PhD, LEED AP. Dr. Dixit is Associate Professor in 

350, 400, 500 Experts." TrueCADD. Last Modified 16 February 

Construction Science at Texas A&M University with over 10 years 

2021. Accessed 02/16/2021. https://www.trace-software.com/

of experience in the design and commercial construction industry. 

blog/the-level-of-detail-and-the-level-of-development-in-the-bim-

His research interests include life-cycle energy and environmental 

environment/.

modeling, green building materials, embodied energy modeling, 

3-D printing in construction, Building Information Modeling (BIM) 

Wang, Peng, Peng Wu, Jun Wang, Hung-Lin Chi, Xiangyu %J 

and facilities’ performance assessment. He served as National 

International journal of environmental research Wang, and public 

Participant in Annex57 of the International Energy Agency (IEA) and 

health. 2018. "A critical review of the use of virtual reality in 

endorsed as an expert in embodied energy analysis field by the US 

construction engineering education and training."  15 (6): 1204.

Department of Energy (USDOE). He represents the nation in Annex 

72 (IEA) focusing on life cycle energy assessment and optimization 

Wang, Rui, Sidney Newton, and Russell Lowe. 2015. "Experiential 

of buildings.

learning styles in the age of a virtual surrogate." ArchNet-IJAR: 

International Journal of Architectural Research 9 (3): 93-110.

Yan, Wei, Charles Culp, and Robert Graf. 2011. "Integrating BIM 

and gaming for real-time interactive architectural visualiza-

tion." Automation in Construction 20 (4): 446-458. https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.autcon.2010.11.013. http://www.sciencedirect.

com/science/article/pii/S0926580510001925.

Zaker, Reza, and Eloi Coloma. 2018. "Virtual reality-integrated 

workflow in BIM-enabled projects collaboration and design 

review: a case study." Visualization in Engineering 6 (1). https://doi.

org/10.1186/s40327-018-0065-6.

All drawings and images by the authors.  

TOPIC (ACADIA team will fill in)

REALIGNMENTS

9

