2
2
0
2

n
a
J

8
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
7
0
7
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

VibroWeight: Simulating Weight and Center of Gravity Changes of
Objects in Virtual Reality for Enhanced Realism

Xian Wang1, Diego Monteiro2, Lik-Hang Lee3, Pan Hui1, and Hai-Ning Liang4,∗

Abstract— Haptic feedback in virtual reality (VR) allows
users to perceive the physical properties of virtual objects (e.g.,
their weight and motion patterns). However, the lack of haptic
sensations deteriorates users’ immersion and overall experience.
In this work, we designed and implemented a low-cost hardware
prototype with liquid metal, VibroWeight, which can work in
complementarity with commercial VR handheld controllers.
VibroWeight is characterized by bimodal feedback cues in VR,
driven by adaptive absolute mass (weights) and gravity shift. To
our knowledge, liquid metal is used in a VR haptic device for the
ﬁrst time. Our 29 participants show that VibroWeight delivers
signiﬁcantly better VR experiences in realism and comfort.

I. INTRODUCTION

Virtual reality (VR) head-mounted displays (HMDs) have
gained increasing popularity [1]. Although users can receive
enriched immersive visual experiences in VR, now even
at their homes or ofﬁces, current VR devices only sup-
port simple vibration haptic feedback, limiting users’ sense
of presence and their immersion in virtual environments
(VEs)
[2]. Weight properties of virtual objects are crucial
to achieving a greater sense of presence, as they allow these
objects to be felt just like their physical counterparts [3]. Not
sensing weight properties could negatively impact the sense
of presence, primarily due to the absence of muscle stress [4].
Researchers have proposed several solutions to leverage
vibrations and pseudo-haptic to emulate the weight of virtual
objects [5]–[7]. However, neither simple vibration feedback
nor pseudo-haptic approaches can sufﬁciently simulate the
weight properties of virtual objects with the necessary level
of accuracy and realism. As such, when experienced by
users, the interaction process run into the risk of producing
sensory conﬂicts which can degrade user performance and
experience [2], [8]. Therefore, it is worthwhile to investigate
alternative interactive haptic devices that can simulate the
weight of virtual objects in VR, including shifts in their
center of gravity.

In this research, we have designed and implemented a
hardware prototype, VibroWeight, that enables users to sense
the weight properties of objects in VR. VibroWeight offers
detailed granularity for VR objects with various weight
properties and dynamic changes of manipulated objects, such
as (1) varied weightings of rocks with different sizes; (2) a

1X. Wang and P. Hui are with the Hong Kong University of Science and

Technology, Hong Kong, China.

2D. Monteiro is with Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK.
3L.-H. Lee is with Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

(KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea.

4H.-N. Liang is with Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China.
∗Corresponding author (haining.liang@xjtlu.edu.cn)

water spray gun with frequent changes in its weight; and (3)
the shift in the center of gravity of a wobbling stick or other
cylinder-shaped objects. VibroWeight is designed to be easily
integrated into commercially available VR HMDs (like the
the Oculus Rift S used in our experiments). VibroWeight is
effective in augmented haptic sensations of virtual objects,
resulting in enhanced realism and comfort.

The contribution of this research is twofold. (1) The imple-
mentation and evaluation of a prototype, VibroWeight, that is
based on low-cost materials and can be used to provide both
haptic and vibration feedback during user-VR interaction. (2)
A ﬁrst exploration of liquid metal as an alternative material
(e.g., against water) to provide ﬂuid-based passive haptic
feedback dynamically in VR environments. Our two user
studies show that by leveraging both vibration feedback
and ﬂuid-based passive haptic feedback, VibroWeight can
emulate changes in weights and center of gravity of virtual
entities with detailed granularity in VR environments.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Vibration Force Feedback

Kim et al. [9] proposed a portable haptic device that
sends vibration and heat to the ﬁngertips. The user feels the
size of a virtual object through the intensity of the device’s
vibrations. Wu et al. [10] used microspeakers to create sim-
ulated vibrations to emulate key touch feedback in a virtual
environment. Choi et al. [11] proposed Grabity, a device that
allows users to feel different magnitudes of weight and force
by exerting various amplitudes of asymmetric vibrations.
Miyakami et al. developed Hapballoon [12], by which users
can achieve improved touch and grasp of virtual objects
with the bi-modal feedback of vibrations and temperature.
PseudoBend [13] leverages a single 6-DOF force sensor
and a vibrotactile actuator to render particle vibrations dur-
ing object deformation, through changing force levels and
torques, speciﬁcally for object deformation. Pezent et al.
[14] proposed Tasbi, a multisensory haptic wristband that
combines squeeze vibration and pseudo-tactile techniques.
White et al. [15] combine vibration feedback with a weighted
baseball prop to enhance the realism of virtual games.

The above prior studies have some limitations, such as (1)
very narrow application scenarios [9], [15], (2) noisy device
[11], and (3) the simulated vibration feedback does not
correspond well with virtual objects [16]. Inspired by [10]
and [13], we have been exploring alternative mechanisms
of haptic feedback, which can work together with the most
typical feedback driven by vibration signals [9], [12], [16].
Our approach is based on ﬂuid-driven haptic and, to our

 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge, is the ﬁrst to use liquid metal to provide dynamic
changes in the weight and center of gravity of virtual objects.

B. Force Feedback for Weight Simulation

Force being exerted on the human skin is an alternative
solution to offer an illusion of weight to users. As shown in
prior work [17], [18], external force from such devices on
the user’s ﬁngers can stretch the skin surface, and the sight
deformation of the skin produces an illusion of the object’s
weighting. However, such haptic simulators may not be
practical and could be expensive to produce a wider range of
user interactions in VR. For instance, in [17], the emulation
of full-hand grasping of 3D shapes would need a full array
of sensors on the user’s palm. Another device, PuPoP [19],
utilizes an air pump to inﬂate an airbag. As such, users with
PuPoP can sense the shape of virtual entities through the
expanded airbag. However, PuPoP does not provide gravity
as user feedback cues.

On the other hand, the changes in users’ muscles when
interacting with virtual objects make them more realistic,
and design strategies that elicit muscle changes include on-
device ﬁxed weights matching those of tangible objects [15],
and user-driven stretched-and-ﬂexed muscles detected by
electromyography [4]. Additionally, our exhaustive search
indicates that other recent solutions, such as Shifty [8], Aero-
plane [20], Drag:on [21], SWISH [22] and Transcalibur [23],
leverage weight, as well as the center of gravity, to emulate
weighting sensations of virtual entities. However, these solu-
tions cannot adapt their absolute mass to various scenarios in
VR, i.e., they only serve one particular purpose or a speciﬁc
scenario.

Instead of employing ﬁxed absolute mass, liquid can serve
as a feasible alternative to change the absolute weights of
the simulating devices. Liquid is a ﬂexible material and by
controlling its ﬂow in and out of a receptacle, it is possible to
control its volume. One example of this type of device is, for
instance, GravityCup [24]. However, ﬂuid-driven solutions
in current devices have three key drawbacks: (1) they cannot
simulate changes in the center of gravity of objects [24],
[25], (2) the noise generated due to ﬂuid movements [20],
[21], [26], and (3) a delayed response to user actions leading
to deteriorated or inferior user experience and immersion
levels [20], [27]. As we show in our device and user experi-
ments, the above drawbacks can be improved by employing
liquid-state metal materials instead of water [24].

Of the two common types of haptic devices, vibratory and
ﬁxed-weight, the former can be used to provide a sense of
gravity shifts of objects but it is not useful for providing
realistic feelings of the objects’ weights [8]. On the other
hand, ﬁxed-weight devices [15] cannot adapt to a wider range
of VR scenarios. Similarly, it is important to note that ﬂuid-
driven haptic devices can handle weight adjustments but not
gravity shift. When designing VibroWeight we looked into
the possibility of laying the groundwork for both adaptive
weight changes and gravity shifts through bimodal cues
driven by both vibration and force feedback. Remarkably,
VibroWeight is a ﬁrst case that explores the use of liquid-

state metal, which leads to a better performance (than
water) and help reinforce our understanding of such bimodal
feedback cues in gaming and non-gaming scenarios in VR.

III. METHODOLOGY

This section explains our testbed virtual environment,
hardware prototype, vibration and weight feedback, as well
as system control.

A. Virtual Environment (VE)

We built our VE with Unity3D. As shown in Fig. 1,
the VE consisted of a stone table and four virtual objects
(VOs) representing different weights. The objects’ weight
was proportional to their size and composition materials, and
were meant to resemble real-life objects. Accordingly, users
with VibroWeight could interact with these VOs and engage
with other objects like the dummy (Fig. 1.(2)) and ﬁreplace
(Fig. 1.(7)).

(1) The overview of the VE; (2) Game area, from left to right: a)
Fig. 1.
dummy, b) ﬁreplace; (3) Stone table with 4 items; (4) Stones, from left to
right: (a) ball shaped stone, (b) square shaped stone; (5) Sword; (6) Water
gun, from top to bottom: (a) not spraying water, (b) spraying water; (7) Fire
place, top to bottom: (a) with ﬁre, (b) without ﬁre.

B. Simulating Weight with VibroWeight

Fig. 2.
(a) Components of the VibroWeight prototype: (1) syringes, (2)
bottle, (3) 42-step motors, (4) pushrod, (5) 9-42VDC encoder, (6) ESP8266s,
(7) battery, (8) 3D-printed connector, (9) balloons as liquid receptacles, and
(10) servo motor; (b) A user with VibroWeight, components other than
(2)&(8-10) can be loaded into the backpack; (c) Detailed view of component
#8, the piece that connects the haptic device to the VR handheld controller.

1) Hardware Prototype: Fig. 2 depicts the parts and
components of VibroWeight and the connections among the
components. It also shows a user holding a VR controller
with the haptic device attached to it. Component #8 was
modeled using 3DMAX and printed with a SLA 3D printing

material (i.e., photosensitive resin) and can be adpated to
other types of VR controllers. All parts and components
feature good heat-resistance, have stable structure, and are
light-weight (130.0 grams (g) before injecting the ﬂuids).
The structure can afford up to 902.8 g.

2) User Interaction and Fluid Control: When the user
picks up a VO in the VE, the ﬂuid is then injected into the
balloons by the pushrod at a speed of 60mm/s. The pushrod
is controlled by a 42 stepper motor and a 9-42VDC encoder.
Vibration feedback is realized by a small servo MG90
motor. The single-chip microcomputer ESP8266 controls the
decoder and the servo to communicate with the computer
that drives the VR HMD through Wi-Fi. Considering that
user interaction with varied VOs can trigger different weight
simulations, the ﬂuid is injected into the separate balloons
(Fig. 3) to emulate weight distributions of VOs and changes
in their center of gravity. As our results show, this design
works well to give users realistic feelings.

Fig. 3.
Schematic diagram of simulated weight and center of gravity
changes: the balloons are ﬁlled with different volumes of ﬂuid to allow
sensing these changes. (1) Simulates light objects whereas (2) heavy objects.
(3) The object’s center of mass is on the side away from the hand whereas
(4) the object’s center of mass is on the side close to the hand.

Since VibroWeight uses open-loop ﬂuid control, we eval-
uated its robustness as follows. We deﬁned ﬁve targeted
weights (10g, 20g, 30g, 40g, and 50g) and measured the
deviation from the target with 60 repetitions (i.e., 5 tar-
gets ×60 repetitions). Measurements were made using an
electronic scale with an accuracy of 0.1g, and the weight
measured was the weight of the equipment held in the user’s
hand minus the weight of the empty device. The weight
of the empty device was measured separately. Fig. 4 shows
that VibroWeight was able to maintain a stable performance,
with a deviated weight of just 4.4%. Heavier weight of 50g
resulted in higher erroneous ﬂuid injection but no more than
2g (out of 50g).

ﬁnd an alternative that could improve performance further.
It is an eutectic alloy composed of 68.5% Ga, 21.5% In
and 10% Sn (by weight) [28]. The melting point of this
metal is -19◦ C and it conserves its liquid state at room
temperature [28]. The viscosity of Galinstan is 24×10−4 ·Pa·
s, which is less than milk, while its density is 6.44 (5.44 times
greater than water). These two properties are important and
indicate that Galinstan can maintain extremely high ﬂuidity
even under pressure. Remarkably, Galinstan is non-toxic [28]
and hence guarantees user safety in case of ﬂuid leakage.

C. Vibration Feedback

The weight feedback works in complement with vibration
feedback, for instance, simulating a cylinder-shaped object in
the real world which has both weight and center of gravity
changes. Eq. 1 depicts the law of motion that describes the
device vibrations according to the relationship between mass
and moving acceleration. Eq. 2 describes Damping Sine Wave
to deliver the sense of gravity shift of objects in the VE,
e.g., a rod that hits a virtual object. VibroWeight triggers the
vibration as oscillatory feedback, when the acceleration value
of VOs exceeds the threshold of 800 m/s2. Fig. 5 illustrates
the acceleration and feedback cues when a sword in the VE
is swung from one side to another.

TABLE I
SYMBOLS USED IN THE FORMULAS

Symbol
F
m
a
y(t)

Meaning
Volume
Mass
Density
Height or plunger distance

Symbol
A
λ
φ
ω

Meaning
Plunger radius
Decay constant
Phase angle at some arbitrary point
Angular Frequency

F = ma

y(t) = A · e−λt · (cos(ωt + φ ) + sin(ωt + φ ))

(1)

(2)

Fig. 5. The acceleration of one of the participants while swinging a sword
left-right in the VE. When the acceleration reaches 800, the oscillatory
feedback is triggered.

Fig. 4. Measurements of VibroWeight’s stability. Each speciﬁc weight was
repeated 60 times.

D. System Control

3) Liquid Materials: VibroWeight’s ﬂuid materials were
tested with both water and Galinstan, as part of a follow-
up user experiment (Experiment B). The two ﬂuid materials
were chosen because water is easily accessible and com-
monly used in VR weight simulations [24]. Galinstan was
employed to be compared with water because we wanted to

Figure 6 shows the control logic of the bimodal feedback
system. ESP8266 receives user interaction via a Wi-Fi re-
ceiver and controls the hardware components such as the
servo and stepper motors that control the ﬂuid volume in
and out of the device. Our application run in Unity retrieves
the data of user interaction with VOs in the VE, and makes
real-time changes in weight and vibration accordingly. For

example, when a user picks up a sword in the VE, Unity can
detect this information and send the message ”SwordPickup”
to ESP8266, which then with its Arduino board processes
this information and controls the pushrod to inject a speciﬁc
amount of liquid into the balloons to adjust the device’s
weight.

Fig. 6. An overview of the system control for bimodal feedback. The
microcontroller ESP8266 detects the current state and activates the transfer
mechanism. The Unity application informs the controller regarding the
anticipated changes of weight and vibration information.

IV. USER EVALUATION

To explore whether vibroWeight is effective and if Galin-
stan is a viable alternative liquid-state material, we con-
ducted two experiments to understand users’ perception of
VibroWeight with two liquid settings: (1) Water and (2)
Galinstan (Sec. III-B.3). In both experiments, we evaluated
three types of controllers: (1) a typical commercial VR con-
troller (which in our case is the one for the Oculus Rift S and
represents the baseline condition); (2) VibroWeight without
oscillating feedback; and (3) VibroWeight with oscillating
feedback (i.e., vibration, see Section III-C). The participants
had to complete two tasks in two scenarios, namely No
Game and Game. The two tasks serve to examine whether
VibroWeight could improve the sense of presence in both
gaming or non-gaming scenarios in VR. In No Game, partic-
ipants only interacted with the four VOs on the table (Fig. 1).
In Game, participants threw stones or swung a sword to
attack the dummy and used a water gun to extinguish a ﬁre in
the ﬁreplace. In other words, six conditions (2 Liquid Types
× 3 Controller Types) were assigned to each participant. We
applied Latin Square design to counterbalance the conditions
and mitigate any carry-over effects. Participants had to ﬁll
in a questionnaire after each condition (6 questionnaires in
total). As shown in Table II, three qualitative metrics were
used to measure the sense of presence, namely Realism,
Comfort and Enjoyment. An identical user questionnaire was
employed in the two experiments to ensure consistency in the
data collection.

The study aimed to examine the following: (1) whether
VibroWeight could simulate weight and center of gravity
changes; (2) whether VibroWeight with oscillating feedback
could enhance user experience; (3) whether Galinstan as
the ﬂuid could provide better simulation and performance

QUESTIONNAIRE USED IN THE EXPERIMENT (5-POINT LIKERT SCALE)

TABLE II

Metrics

Realism

Comfort

Enjoyment

Questions
I felt like I was holding the same object I was seeing
I forgot I was holding a controller
Even if I had my eyes closed, I could imagine the virtual object I was holding
I was concerned the virtual object could affect my body
I was concerned I could break the virtual object
I was concerned the virtual object could affect others around me
My arms were tired; I was tired in general
The device was heavy/loud; I was bothered by the device
Using the device was really enjoyable; The VE was enjoyable
The controller and device really added to the experience
I wish I could keep using the device in other VE; I could feel changes in the VOs

than water; (4) the effectiveness and feasibility of integrating
VibroWeight into VR gaming and non-gaming scenarios. To
this end, we recruited two groups of participants from a local
university for the experiment (A: with Water) [participant
number = 16 (10M /6F), age = 22.06, age-range = 19 – 29]
and (B: with Galinstan) [participant number = 13 (6M /7F),
age = 21.69, age-range = 20 – 28]. None of them reported a
history of physical or muscular discomfort. They had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision. 82.76% of them had some
VR experiences. Their participation was entirely voluntary
and based on informed consent. The study falls under the
low risk research category. It was reviewed and approved by
the University Ethics Committee at Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool
University.

A. Experiment A: Water as the Liquid Material

Fig. 7.
The average scores of the three controllers with water setting
in the three aspects of Realism, Comfort and Enjoyment; (Controller 1:
commercial VR controller; Controller 2: VibroWeight without oscillating
feedback; Controller 3: VibroWeight with oscillating feedback); asterisk
indicate statistically signiﬁcant differences (p < .05 (∗), p < .01 (∗∗)).

1) Comparison of the three controllers: The data were
analyzed using both statistical inference methods and data
visualizations. First, we conducted a Shapiro-Wilk test to
check the normality of the data. As all data were classiﬁed
as normally distributed, they received a parametric analysis.
Also, we conducted Mauchly’s Sphericity Test to verify if
the assumption of sphericity had been violated. Finally, we
ran Repeated Measures ANOVA (RM-ANOVA) with Bon-
ferroni correction to detect signiﬁcant main effects. When
the assumption of sphericity was violated, we employed
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction to adjust the Degrees of
Freedom.

Figure 7 summarizes the main results of participants’
perceptions of VibroWeight with water according to the three
controllers. RM-ANOVA indicated statistical signiﬁcance in

Realism among the three controllers (F1.779,26.682 = 28.213,
p < .0005), and post-hoc analysis using Bonferroni correc-
tion showed that VibroWeight without oscillatory feedback,
i.e., Controller 2, signiﬁcantly outperformed the baseline
controller, Controller 1 (p = .003). It also showed that
VibroWeight with oscillatory feedback, i.e., Controller 3,
signiﬁcantly outperformed its counterpart without oscillatory
feedback, i.e., Controller 2 (p = .005).

Regarding Comfort, statistical signiﬁcance was found
among the three controllers (F1.387,20.805 = 30.875, p <
.0005). Participants indicated that (1) Controller 2 led to a
higher level of comfort than Controller 1 (p < .0005) and
(2) Controller 3 outweighed Controller 2 (p = .049). As for
Enjoyment, we found a main effect (F1.640,24.602 = 10.573, p
= .001) among the three controllers (Controller 3 > 2 (p =
.098, but not signiﬁcant) and Controllers 2 > 1 (p = .047)).
The above ﬁndings show that, in general, VibroWeight (using
water) offers a better sense of presence to users, in terms
of all the three metrics. The additional vibration feedback
further enhanced the user experience of VibroWeight (than
without it, especially for Realism and Comfort).

Fig. 9. The average scores of the three controllers in the Galinstan setting
with the same three aspects as in Experiment A; asterisk indicate statistically
signiﬁcant differences (p < .05 (∗), p < .01 (∗∗)).

> Controller 2 > Controller 1. In other words, Controller
2 brought signiﬁcantly higher Realism and Comfort than
Controller 1 (both p = .029), while Controller 3 (with
vibration) led to signiﬁcant enhancement in Enjoyment over
the baseline controller (Controller 1, p = .010) and Controller
2 (VibroWeight without vibration, p = .033).

Fig. 8. The average scores of the three controllers (using water) compared
in NO Game (only interacting with the VOs but not within a game setting)
and Game (playing game-like activities with the VOs, e.g., using the sword,
stones to interact with dummy, and water gun to extinguish ﬁre) conditions
in the two aspects of Realism and Comfort.

2) Impact of game interaction: As illustrated in Fig. 8,
we ran RM-ANOVA to analyze two scenarios: No Game
and Game, and found signiﬁcant main differences in Realism
(F1,15 = 7.559, p = .015) but not in Comfort (F1,15 = 1.947,
p = .183) between the two (game/no game) conditions. It is
important to note that the average scores of Game task(s) are
slightly higher than their counterpart of NO Game. In line
with previous work [29], participants with VibroWeight in
gaming scenarios feel a strong sense of realism than in the
non-gaming situations.

B. Experiment B: Metal (Galinstan) as the Liquid Material

1) Comparison of

the three controllers: We ran RM-
ANOVA with a Greenhouse-Geisser correction and found
statistically signiﬁcant differences in all three metrics: Re-
alism (F1.212,14.542 = 8.940, p = .007), Comfort (F1.104,13.252
= 11.201, p = .004), and Enjoyment (F1.641,19.696 = 7.248,
p = .006). As Figure 9 shows, VibroWeight with Galinstan
led participants to enhanced user experiences in all metrics.
Similar to Experiment A, VibroWeight now with Galinstan
achieved the same results for all three metrics: Controller 3

Fig. 10. Comparison of the average scores of the three controllers in the
Galinstan experiment for the same two aspects as in Experiment 1 in the
NO game and Game conditions.

2) Impact of game interaction: Using the same approach
as in Experiment 1, RM-ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant effect
on Comfort F1,12 = 9.709, p = .009) but not on Realism
(F1,12 = 2.782, p = .121). Figure 10 shows the results of
participants’ perceptions under both No Game and Game
scenarios.

C. A Comparison: Water vs. Metal

Fig. 11. Estimated Marginal Means for water and liquid metal.

We further examined the metrics in Experiments 1 and 2
with the two types of liquids. We ran a Mann-Whitney test
to check the effect of ﬂuid type on participants’ experience.
As shown in Fig. 11, the three metrics under Metal generally
achieved higher mean values than Water. We also found a
signiﬁcant difference in Realism in particular (U = 61.5, p =
.031 (1-tailed)) between the Metal and Water.

D. Key Implications and Limitations

Our research has presented a viable hardware prototype
which uses a ﬂuid-driven system and vibration haptic feed-
back to enable users to sense weight and center of grav-
ity changes of virtual objects and thus a higher sense of
presence. Our prototype has led to comfort metrics that
are higher than a typical commercial VR controller. In
general, VibroWeight outperforms a typical controller and is
helpful for both gaming and non-gaming scenarios. Including
oscillatory feedback further enhances its usefulness while
using liquid metal seems to have provided a greater sense
of realism than with water. Our tailor-made metal ﬂuid,
Galinstan composed of monomers of gallium, indium and tin,
can be easily purchased online at a low price of $0.3 USD/g,
which is cheaper than similar compounds used by other
researchers (e.g., $0.6 USD/g in [25]). As such, metal-state
liquids represent viable alternatives for ﬂuid-driven haptic
devices.

Regarding the limitations of this work, our focus is on
low-cost materials and, if cost is not an issue, other smaller
components can be explored to make the overall device
smaller and lighter so that it can be more mobile. In addition,
we have not explored the use of VibroWeight in other types
of VR games and applications where objects’ weight and
oscillatory feedback is useful, for example when lifting
objects in an authentication system [30], holding different
types of small excavation tools in an exploratory game [31],
or manipulating 3D objects in a modelling environment [32].
While it is possible to simulate the weight and center of
gravity changes of such virtual objects, further research is
needed to assess the performance, stability, and suitability
of haptic devices like VibroWeight in these VR scenarios.

V. CONCLUSION

This paper presented our explorations of a new hardware
prototype, VibroWeight, that leverages both oscillatory vi-
bration and liquid based force haptic to provide bimodal
feedback cues for weight and center of gravity changes
of objects in virtual reality (VR). Our experiments show
that users with VibroWeight can achieve an enhanced sense
of presence in virtual environments, especially for realism
and comfort. Our device can be developed using low-cost
materials and can be integrated in a typical VR controller,
like the Oculus. Our design is the ﬁrst to show the practicality
of using liquid metal in a haptic device for VR with positive
results.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors want to thank the participants for their time
and the reviewers for their insightful comments. This work
was supported in part by Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Key Special Fund (#KSF-A-03).

REFERENCES

[1] J. Kelly et al., “Who are virtual reality headset owners? a survey and
comparison of headset owners and non-owners,” in IEEE VR & 3D
UIs, 2021, pp. 687–694.

[2] C. Bermejo et al., “Exploring button designs for mid-air interaction
in virtual reality: A hexa-metric evaluation of key representations and
multi-modal cues,” Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 5, no.
EICS, May 2021.

[3] D. Monteiro, H.-N. Liang, X. Wang, W. Xu, and H. Tu, “Design and
development of a low-cost device for weight and center of gravity
simulation in virtual reality,” in Proc. 2019 Int. Conf. Multimodal
Interact., 2021, pp. 453—-460.

[4] M. Rietzler et al., “Virtual muscle force: Communicating kinesthetic
forces through pseudo-haptic feedback and muscle input,” in Proc. of
the 32nd Annual ACM Symp. on UIST, ser. UIST ’19. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2019, p. 913–922.

[5] Y. Hirao et al., “Comparing motion-based versus controller-based
pseudo-haptic weight sensations in vr,” in 2020 IEEE Conf. on VR
& 3D UIs (VRW), 2020, pp. 305–310.

[6] V. van Polanen et al., “Visual delay affects force scaling and weight
perception during object lifting in virtual reality,” J. of neurophysiol-
ogy, vol. 121, no. 4, pp. 1398–1409, 2019.

[7] M. Samad et al., “Pseudo-haptic weight: Changing the perceived
weight of virtual objects by manipulating control-display ratio,” in
Proc. of the 2019 CHI Conf., 2019, pp. 1–13.

[8] A. Zenner et al., “Shifty: A weight-shifting dynamic passive haptic
proxy to enhance object perception in virtual reality,” IEEE Trans. on
Vis. & Comp. Graphics, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1285–1294, 2017.

[9] M. Kim et al., “A study on immersion and presence of a portable hand
haptic system for immersive virtual reality,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 5,
p. 1141, 2017.

[10] C.-M. Wu et al., “A virtual reality keyboard with realistic haptic
feedback in a fully immersive virtual environment,” Virtual Reality,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 19–29, 2017.

[11] I. Choi et al., “Grabity: A wearable haptic interface for simulating
weight and grasping in virtual reality,” in Proc. of the 30th Annual
ACM Symp. on UIST, 2017, pp. 119–130.

[12] M. Miyakami et al., “Hapballoon: Wearable haptic balloon-based
feedback device,” in SIGGRAPH Asia 2019, 2019, pp. 17–18.
[13] S. Heo et al., “Pseudobend: Producing haptic illusions of stretching,
bending, and twisting using grain vibrations,” in Proc. of the 32nd
Annual ACM Symp. on UIST, 2019, pp. 803–813.

[14] E. Pezent et al., “Tasbi: Multisensory squeeze and vibrotactile wrist
haptics for augmented and virtual reality,” in 2019 IEEE World Haptics
Conf. (WHC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[15] M. White et al., “The case for haptic props: Shape, weight and vibro-
tactile feedback,” in Motion, Interaction and Games, 2019, pp. 1–10.
[16] I. Choi et al., “Augmenting perceived softness of haptic proxy objects
through transient vibration and visuo-haptic illusion in virtual reality,”
IEEE Trans. on Vis. & Comp. Graphics, 2020.

[17] K. Minamizawa et al., “Gravity grabber: wearable haptic display to
present virtual mass sensation,” in ACM SIGGRAPH, 2007, pp. 8–es.
[18] C. Stellmacher, “Haptic-enabled buttons through adaptive trigger re-
sistance,” in IEEE Conf. on VR & 3D UIs (VRW), 2021, pp. 201–204.
[19] S.-Y. Teng et al., “Pupop: Pop-up prop on palm for virtual reality,” in
Proc. of the 31st Annual ACM Symp. on UIST, 2018, pp. 5–17.
[20] S. Je et al., “Aero-plane: A handheld force-feedback device that
renders weight motion illusion on a virtual 2d plane,” in Proc. of
the 32nd Annual ACM Symp. on UIST, 2019, pp. 763–775.

[21] A. Zenner and A. Kr¨uger, “Drag: on: A virtual reality controller
providing haptic feedback based on drag and weight shift,” in Proc.
of the 2019 CHI Conf., 2019, pp. 1–12.

[22] S. Sagheb et al., “Swish: A shifting-weight interface of simulated
hydrodynamics for haptic perception of virtual ﬂuid vessels,” in Proc.
of the 32nd Annual ACM Symp. on UIST, 2019, pp. 751–761.
[23] J. Shigeyama et al., “Transcalibur: dynamic 2d haptic shape illusion
of virtual object by weight moving vr controller,” in ACM SIGGRAPH
2018 Posters, 2018, pp. 1–2.

[24] C.-H. Cheng et al., “Gravitycup: a liquid-based haptics for simulating
dynamic weight in virtual reality,” in Proc. of the 24th ACM Symp.
on VRST, 2018, pp. 1–2.

[25] R. Niiyama et al., “Weight and volume changing device with liquid
metal transfer,” in Proc. of the 8th Int. Conf. on TEI, 2014, pp. 49–52.
[26] S. Heo et al., “Thor’s hammer: An ungrounded force feedback device
utilizing propeller-induced propulsive force,” in Proc. of the 2018 CHI
Conf., 2018, pp. 1–11.

[27] S. Ban and K. H. Hyun, “Directional force feedback: Mechanical force
concentration for immersive experience in virtual reality,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 9, no. 18, p. 3692, 2019.

[28] T. Liu et al., “Characterization of nontoxic liquid-metal alloy galin-
stan for applications in microdevices,” J. of Microelectromechanical
Systems, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 443–450, 2011.

[29] M. Krcmar et al., “The effects of video game realism on attention,
retention and aggressive outcomes,” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 432–439, 2011.

[30] I. Olade, C. Fleming, and H.-N. Liang, “Biomove: Biometric user
identiﬁcation from human kinesiological movements for virtual reality
systems,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 10, 2020.

[31] Y. Liu, Y. Lin, R. Shi, Y. Luo, and H.-N. Liang, “Relicvr: A
virtual reality game for active exploration of archaeological relics,”
in Extended Abstracts of the 2021 Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction in Play, 2021, p. 326–332.

[32] D. Yu, X. Lu, R. Shi, H.-N. Liang, T. Dingler, E. Velloso, and
J. Goncalves, “Gaze-supported 3d object manipulation in virtual
reality,” 2021.

