A Comprehensive Survey on Radio Frequency (RF)
Fingerprinting: Traditional Approaches, Deep
Learning, and Open Challenges

Anu Jagannath, Jithin Jagannath, and Prem Sagar Pattanshetty Vasanth Kumar

1

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
6

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

3
v
0
8
6
0
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Fifth generation (5G) network and beyond envision
massive Internet of Things (IoT) rollout to support disruptive
applications such as extended reality (XR), augmented/virtual
reality (AR/VR), industrial automation, autonomous driving, and
smart everything which brings together massive and diverse IoT
devices occupying the radio frequency (RF) spectrum. Along with
the spectrum crunch and throughput challenges, such a massive
scale of wireless devices exposes unprecedented threat surfaces.
RF ﬁngerprinting is heralded as a candidate technology that can
be combined with cryptographic and zero-trust security measures
to ensure data privacy, conﬁdentiality, and integrity in wireless
networks. Motivated by the relevance of this subject in the future
communication networks, in this work, we present a compre-
hensive survey of RF ﬁngerprinting approaches ranging from
a traditional view to the most recent deep learning (DL)-based
algorithms. Existing surveys have mostly focused on a constrained
presentation of the wireless ﬁngerprinting approaches, however,
many aspects remain untold. In this work, however, we mitigate
this by addressing every aspect - background on signal intelli-
gence (SIGINT), applications, relevant DL algorithms, systematic
literature review of RF ﬁngerprinting techniques spanning the
past two decades, discussion on datasets, and potential research
avenues - necessary to elucidate this topic to the reader in an
encyclopedic manner.

Index Terms—Radio Fingerprinting, Deep Learning, Signal
Intelligence, Wireless Security, Emitter Identiﬁcation, Signal and
Modulation Classiﬁcation.

I. INTRODUCTION

R ADIO frequency (RF) ﬁngerprinting - a form of signal

intelligence - refers to the methodology whereby the
hardware intrinsic characteristics of the transmitter which are
unintentionally embedded in the transmitted waveform are
extracted to aid the identiﬁcation of the transmitter hardware
by a passive receiver. Due to its unique ability to identify
transmitting device, RF ﬁngerprinting is envisioned as a key
enabler for device authentication and access control to reduce
the vulnerability of beyond 5G wireless networks to node
forgery or insider attacks [1].

With the proliferation of wireless devices and the increased
adoption of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices for smart home,
industrial automation, smart metering, etc., the beyond 5G
network is expected to support ultra-dense device connectivity

Anu Jagannath is with Northeastern University and ANDRO’s Marconi-

Rosenblatt AI/ML Innovation Laboratory.

Jithin Jagannath is with University at Buffalo and ANDRO’s Marconi-

Rosenblatt AI/ML Innovation Laboratory..

Prem Sagar Pattanshetty Vasanth Kumar is with ANDRO’s Marconi-

Rosenblatt AI/ML Innovation Laboratory.

which is 10× that of 5G [2]. Moreover, with such over-
whelming device density the threat surfaces of the network
are bound to increase. Therefore, security and privacy are
the crucial inevitable aspects beyond 5G (6G) will need to
address. Especially the 6G enabling technologies such as ultra-
massive multiple-input multiple-output (UM-MIMO), visible
light communication (VLC), terahertz (THz) communication,
among others, introduce new realm of security challenges.
Even in 5G networks, the OpenFlow implementation of the
software deﬁned network (SDN) makes it vulnerable to attacks
from malicious applications. Further, the network function
virtualization (NFV) presents security risks as the function
is being migrated from one platform to another [3]. With
the envisioned device density of the beyond 5G network,
such vulnerabilities will only increase. The security threats
can perhaps be best attributed to two causes; massive device
density and diversity with respect to the applications as well
as the hardware.

The hardware intrinsic features of device form the ﬁnger-
print or the signature unique to that device. RF ﬁngerprinting
is consequently viewed as the prospective enablers to address
and mitigate the access control and device authentication
challenges of the beyond 5G network. For the purpose of
clarity, we deﬁne RF ﬁngerprinting as a composite of three
steps; feature identiﬁcation, feature extraction, and device
identiﬁcation. It must be emphasized that these features are
location-independent and ingrained to the chipset. Speciﬁcally,
the imperfections in manufacturing the microcircuit parts such
as power ampliﬁers, ﬁlters, clocks, etc., lead to broad varia-
tions in the phase offset, clock skew, among others. Another
aspect that could serve as features are the vendor-speciﬁc
implementations of wireless standards [1]. But such features
could easily vary with ﬁrmware and software upgrades of the
chipset. Clearly, the device-speciﬁc features would serve as a
pronounced invariant feature set.

Despite several device ﬁngerprinting works, a comprehen-
sive survey encompassing the evolution of ﬁngerprinting algo-
rithms from principled to deep learning based approaches is
lacking. The contributions and scope of this article is discussed
in detail here to portray its relevance in the present era of
evolving wireless networks.

A. Scope of the Article

The objective of this article is to present a comprehen-
sive view of the state-of-the-art wireless device ﬁngerprinting

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Fig. 1: Overview of the organization of the article

algorithms while also provide sufﬁcient background on the
subsidiary signal intelligence domains - modulation and wire-
less protocol classiﬁcation. Although there has been numerous
articles on deep learning for other RF signal
intelligence
approaches (modulation and wireless protocol classiﬁcation)
[4]–[14], a comprehensive presentation spanning conventional
principled approaches as well as supervised deep learning for
RF ﬁngerprinting is lacking. We attempt to bridge this gap by
discussing the following key aspects:

1) A succinct and categorized layout of the related research
in the ﬁeld of RF signal intelligence (SIGINT) to provide
relevant background to the reader. Here, we present a
preview of the various methods - spanning conventional
and deep learning - for automatic modulation classi-
ﬁcation (AMC), wireless protocol recognition, before
going to a illustrative discussion on the RF ﬁngerprinting
applications as well as approaches.

2) Some of the key application domains of RF signal in-
telligence in this emerging revolutionary communication
era where billions of wireless devices including diverse
IoT emitters coexist. This aspect presents the viewer with
critical wireless network application areas for a practical
insight of the presented RF signal intelligence methods.
3) A qualitative discussion on the traditional approaches for
RF ﬁngerprinting categorized into modulation, statistical,
transient, wavelet, and other approaches.

4) A deep dive into the state-of-the-art deep learning meth-
ods for RF ﬁngerprinting including an overview of the
prominent deep learning approaches in order to assist
researchers in applying them for RF signal intelligence.
5) A detailed account of the various open-source datasets

tailored to equip researchers with comprehensive knowl-
edge to delve into applied RF ﬁngerprinting research.
6) We motivate further research in this realm by presenting

open research challenges and future directions.

We emphasize here that unlike existing surveys, our article
is comprehensive in presenting all aspects of RF ﬁnger-
printing comprising a glance into background on RF signal
intelligence, the evolution towards deep learning approaches
for RF ﬁngerprinting including the progress on conventional
principled methods. For completeness and to beneﬁt beginners,
we provide a tutorial of the relevant deep learning techniques.
Most of the existing surveys related to RF ﬁngerprinting
presents only a narrow scope. Speciﬁcally, a qualitative analy-
sis of all RF signal intelligence aspects including AMC, wire-
less protocol recognition, and a quantitative discussion on key
deep learning approaches have not been widely investigated to
date in the current literature. In [15], the various techniques
of identifying a mobile phone by ﬁngerprinting the built-
in components, such as camera, micro-electro-mechanical
systems, speakers, microphone, and RF frontends have been
discussed. In contrast, we attempt to cover all RF emitters such
as software-deﬁned radios (SDRs), unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), and other consumer-off-the-shelf (COTS) devices
including mobile phones. The survey in [16] presents a short
account of the RF ﬁngerprint extraction and authentication
methods with an emphasis on device authenticity - legal
or illicit. Another survey in [17] reviews spoofer detection
methods that leverages RF ﬁngerprinting with special empha-
sis on Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) emitters.
Although this work presents a broader scope in contrast to
[15] and [16], it lacks a thorough presentation of all aspects

Organization of Core ContentsIntroductionGlance into RF SIGINTApplicationsTraditional RF FingerprintingDL for RF FingerprintingResearch Challenges & DirectionsScope of the ArticleSurvey OrganizationAutomatic Modulation ClassificationRF Signal RecognitionRF Device Identification & AuthenticationLocalization, Tracking, and NavigationIntrusion DetectionApplication DomainsModulation-basedStatistical ApproachesTransient-based ApproachesOther ApproachesOverview of DL techniquesCNN-based approachesGAN-based techniquesProbabilistic Neural Network approachesOpen RF Fingerprinting Datasetsof RF signal intelligence. One other survey in [18] discusses
the taxonomy of wireless device ﬁngerprinting along with
brief account on ﬁngerprinting algorithms that are classical
white-list and unsupervised learning-based. Our article goes
beyond these works in providing the reader all aspects of
RF signal intelligence including crossovers between traditional
and deep learning based RF signal intelligence approaches.
Unlike existing surveys which only provides a very brief (2-3
sentences) discussion on the reviewed articles, we dive into
the reviewed works in the vast literature to provide a succinct
excerpt on each. Further, the application scope of these signal
intelligence techniques are not elaborated in any other existing
surveys. The ultimate objective of this article is to provide an
encyclopedic guide of RF ﬁngerprinting that encompasses the
basics of key supervised deep learning techniques as well as an
extensive review of the state-of-the-art RF signal intelligence.

B. Survey Organization

We structure our article in an organized hierarchical man-
ner: Section II introduces the readers to the two subsidiary
domains of RF signal intelligence and reviews the traditional
as well as deep learning based automatic modulation and
wireless protocol classiﬁcation. The key application areas of
the discussed RF ﬁngerprinting methods are brieﬂy discussed
in section III to supplement practical insight to the researchers
and practitioners allowing them to explore the applicability.
We begin the RF ﬁngerprinting survey by elaborating on the
principled approaches ﬁrst in section IV. We have categorized
the traditional approaches based on the ﬁngerprinted character-
istics into modulation, statistical, transient, wavelet, and other
miscellaneous methods to enable a sectioned and comparative
discussion of the vast literature on traditional techniques. Next,
we present an illustrative discussion on the state-of-the-art
deep learning-based RF ﬁngerprinting techniques in section V.
We have segmented this section into two where the ﬁrst part
reviews the key deep learning concepts to present contextual
walk-through for the readers, followed by the second part
which shows how these deep learning techniques are applied to
the RF ﬁngerprinting domain. Further, we educate the readers
on the available open-source datasets for training deep learning
models to perform RF ﬁngerprinting. Finally, we aim to spur
future research in this domain by summarizing a few open
questions and challenges in section VI. We also layout the
organization in a pictorial manner in Figure 1.

II. GLANCE INTO RF SIGNAL INTELLIGENCE

RF signal intelligence is deﬁned as the ﬁeld of research
and application that focuses on extracting signal characteristics
such as modulation, bandwidth, center frequency, protocols,
emitter identity, among others from unknown RF signals in the
spectrum of interest. This extraction can be performed under
various levels of cooperation or prior knowledge based on the
application at hand. The most challenging version is under
the assumption of no prior information or cooperation which
is often referred to as blind RF signal intelligence.

This area of research is further divided into different cate-
gories based on the task performed. Perhaps the most popular

3

and widely researched task is that of AMC and then wireless
signal/protocol classiﬁcation. One common theme between
these classiﬁcation tasks are the fact that the signals itself
are evidently different from each other in these classiﬁcation
tasks making them a relatively easier task compared to RF
ﬁngerprinting where identical devices could be transmitting
same waveform with identical conﬁgurations. Here for the
beneﬁt of the readers, we provide the background information
of the two most common signal intelligence classes (AMC
and signal type classiﬁcation). This is also for the readers to
relate to the overall RF signal intelligence research domain
while reviewing the more in-depth survey of RF ﬁngerprinting
approaches.

A. Automatic modulation classiﬁcation

As discussed earlier, due to the extensive attention this area
of research has garnered, we organize this section based on
the evolution seen in AMC techniques depicted in Figure 2.

Fig. 2: Evolution of AMC Approaches

Traditional Approaches: AMC can be broadly categorized
into two classes; (i) likelihood-based methods [19]–[24] and
(ii) feature-based [25]–[28]. There have been several attempts
to combine the two approaches to possibly extract the beneﬁts
of both approaches [29]. Likelihood-based approaches can pro-
vide optimal performance in the Bayesian sense but are often
computationally demanding [29], [30]. On the other hand,
feature-based classiﬁers can provide near optimal performance
while being computationally efﬁcient if carefully designed.
Note here that the requirement of being “carefully designed" is
perhaps the weakness of traditional feature-based approaches.
It is often possible to design the classiﬁer which performs
extremely well under certain assumptions in simulations or
laboratory settings but fail under real-world scenarios or when
the operational environment changes. In other words, for AMC
to be suitable for real-world approaches, it is important for the
classiﬁers to generalize well to various operating scenarios and
environments.

Neural network with expert-feature: Since the problem
structure of feature-based classiﬁers are similar to the function
approximation schema of the recently revitalized supervised
machine learning, it was inevitable for these techniques to be
leveraged for AMC. Consequently, in recent years, different
machine learning techniques have been employed to determine
the modulation format of the unknown signal via classiﬁcation.
During the initial stages of applying supervised learning
for AMC, feature-engineered methodology was adopted as

Traditional ApproachesNeural Network + Expert-FeatureNeural Network + Raw IQSingle Model to extract more than modulation!Traditional ApproachesNeural Network + Expert-FeatureNeural Network + Raw IQopposed to utilizing raw in-phase and quadrature (IQ) samples.
This includes the use of support vector machines (SVMs)
[31] and ANNs [6], [32], [33]. In [32], the authors perform
a twelve-class modulation classiﬁcation with high accuracy
over a wide range of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values using a
multilayer perceptron (MLP). In [33], the authors evaluate two
different ANN architectures trained by the backpropagation
method using the standard gradient descent (GD) learning
algorithm by using six features. Similarly, [6] achieves high
accuracy under low SNR conditions in identifying eight modu-
lation schemes. All these studies are limited to simulations and
not evaluated on actual hardware. In [30], authors elaborate the
confronted challenges while transitioning their solution from
simulation to hardware implementation. In short, due to the
assumptions and unanticipated signal distortions that are over-
looked during simulations, over-the-air performance of AMC
techniques may experience degradation in real deployment.

The superior feature extraction capability of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) in contrast to ANNs led to several
works leveraging CNNs for modulation or signal classiﬁcation
[5], [9], [10], [34]–[37]. The authors of [34] evaluated the
performance of CNNs - GoogLeNet [38] and AlexNet [39]
architectures - in predicting modulation formats on a dataset
comprising eight classes by feeding constellation images as
input. However, the models demonstrated sensitivity to image
preprocessing factors such as image resolution, cropping size,
selected area, etc., and achieved an accuracy below 80% at 0
dB SNR. We profess and attribute that this could be due to
the adoption of heavy architectures suited for computer vision
problems rather than for the RF application. A feed-forward
feature-based neural network [40] was shown to achieve a
classiﬁcation accuracy of 98% on seven modulations on a
USRP software-deﬁned radio testbed. Time-frequency images
were used as input for a CNN architecture to identify seven
radar waveform classes in [41]. Along a similar trend, cyclic
spectrum images were used as CNN input to obtain a seven-
class modulation recognition accuracy of 95% at SNRs above
2 dB in [35]. We would like to emphasize here that these
works rely on handcrafted features to train the neural network
which limits the generalization capability of the network as it
could have from raw IQ samples.

Neural network with raw IQ: A CNN architecture which
classiﬁes 5 communication waveforms by utilizing raw IQ
samples was explored in [4]. Although the model achieves a
100% accuracy it considers very limited number of waveforms
of the same carrier frequency and bandwidth. The authors of
[5] trained a CNN to achieve an accuracy of 83.4% at 18 dB
in classifying 11 modulations by feeding raw IQ samples. In
[36], a modiﬁed ResNet architecture was shown to achieve a
95.6% accuracy at 10 dB by learning from raw IQ samples in
identifying 24 modulation classes.

B. RF signal recognition

Wireless signal recognition is a signal (wireless standard or
protocol) recognition method which involves identifying the
wireless standard with which the RF waveform is generated.
The authors of [9] studied wireless interference detection by

4

performing a 15-class identiﬁcation comprising three wireless
standards - IEEE 802.11 b/g, IEEE 802.15.4, and IEEE
802.15.1 - occupying different frequency channels. In a similar
sense, [10] adopted a CNN architecture to address the spec-
trum crunch in the industrial, scientiﬁc, and medical (ISM)
band by classifying seven classes belonging to Zigbee, WiFi,
Bluetooth, and their cross-interferences. However, the model
required operation in a high SNR regime for a 93% accuracy.
In [42], the authors use a distance-based support vector data
description (SVDD) algorithm to recognize low, slow, and
small unmanned aerial vehicles (LSSUAVs) among the signals
in the 2.4 GHz band by generating a hash ﬁngerprint. The pro-
posed method recognized LSSUAV signals without any mis-
takes and falsely recognized IEEE 802.11b and IEEE802.11n
signals as LSSUAV 13.5% and 0% of the time respectively in
an indoor environment. Similarly, the authors [43] investigate
recognition of UAV video signals in the presence of WiFi
interference. Using random forest classiﬁer, the authors show
that the method can recognize UAV video signal in presence
of WiFi interference with an accuracy of 100% indoors and
96.26% when the UAV is 2 km from the receiver. In [7],
the authors implement a CNN model to identify the presence
of radar signals in the radio spectrum with interference from
LTE and WLAN signals. The authors achieve a classiﬁcation
accuracy of 99.6% while using amplitude and phase shift
components of the signals in the dataset. The authors in [44]
train CNN classiﬁers using time domain features to recognize
WiFi, Zigbee, and Bluetooth devices operating in the 2.4 GHz
band. The results demonstrate that the proposed method is
capable of recognizing with an accuracy ≥ 95% for SNR
greater then 5 dB.

C. Single model to extract more than modulation

A multi-task learning (MTL) model that can learn to rec-
ognize more than one task - modulation and signal (protocol)
recognition - was proposed for the ﬁrst time in [45], [46]. This
was the ﬁrst work to consider both radar and communication
waveforms to address the diverse and heterogeneous signal
types encountered in practical deployment. Here, the authors
train a CNN to perform two related tasks based on a single raw
IQ input. The two tasks are assigned weights to formulate the
weighted sum loss function and the model was trained with
backpropagation. The authors emphasize the signiﬁcance of
designing lightweight models from the inception and provide
real-world experimental evaluation with over-the-air collected
waveforms under varying signal strengths. The evaluations
demonstrated high-speed inferences The lightweight MTL
performs faster inferences at the rate of 8.4 ms on an Intel
Core i5-3230M CPU, consuming up to 90.5% lesser memory
requirement in contrast to the benchmark. Further, the model
was further compressed by performing INT8 quantization to
showcase the computational savings for resource-constrained
edge deployment platforms. The uncompressed 32-bit ﬂoating
point (FP32) model was compressed 11.8× by INT8 quanti-
zation with no signiﬁcant accuracy loss to report.

III. APPLICATIONS

B. Localization, Tracking, and Navigation

5

A. RF Device Identiﬁcation and Authentication

Fig. 3: Flowgraph for Identiﬁcation, Authentication and Au-
thorization

Device identiﬁcation and authentication are essential parts
of managing wireless network. The proliferation of wireless
devices in our environment is making this a daunting task
due to the ever growing attack surfaces in the context of
the burgeoning IoT economy. It is also often the case that
identiﬁcation and authentication are inaccurately used inter-
changeably causing further confusion [47]. First, we provide
deﬁnition for identiﬁcation, authentication, and authorization
along with Figure 3 to encompass the overall process. Identi-
ﬁcation can be seen as a subtask of the overall authentication
and authorization process. The deﬁnitions are provided below
[48],

1) Identiﬁcation is the ability to uniquely identify a user
or device based on a unique ID such as MAC address,
IMEI (International Mobile Equipment Identity) or MEID
(Mobile Equipment Identiﬁer) for phones.

2) Authentication is the ability to prove that a user/device

is genuinely who that user or device claims to be.

3) Authorization is the process of evaluating whether a
authenticated user/device has legitimate permission to
access a resource or service.

Traditionally, authentication involves handshake process be-
tween the device that intends to gain access and the network
component that veriﬁes the authentication message to grant
access [49]. For example, using a secret key 𝑆, Alice may
transmit a message to Bob using cryptography checksum
which is a function of the message and the secret key. Bob
can use the function and key to verify the authenticity of Alice
while an intruder who tried to modify the message of the
function will not be authenticated unless the secret key has
been compromised. While this is not the sole method used in
the industry for authentication, it is a typical representative
example to demonstrate that
the traditional authentication
approach is active, i.e., it involves control message exchange
and depends on secret keys. As one can imagine this leads to
increased overhead due to the active nature of the authentica-
tion process. While secret keys are used for authentication
process,
is still a point of vulnerability that could be
compromised allowing illegitimate users gaining access to
the network. Since the RF ﬁngerprinting is hardware-speciﬁc
and often unintentional characterization imparted at the analog
component level, it is hard to mimic. Therefore, it could be
argued that RF ﬁngerprinting could be incorporated into more
robust identiﬁcation and authentication [49]. We explore the
vulnerabilities of RF ﬁngerprinting in section VI.

it

As RF ﬁngerprinting gains ﬁdelity and robustness, it could
be extended to or integrated with other applications such as
assisting with outdoor or indoor localization, navigation, and
even tracking of speciﬁc veriﬁed emitters. This could be highly
beneﬁcial for tactical applications, law enforcement, and ﬁrst
responders. For example, in search and rescue applications
victims or rescue operators could be uniquely tracked based
on the unique RF ﬁngerprint emitted by their devices. There
are several other examples of applications where such tracking
can be highly beneﬁcial. For example, there has been interest
from the National Institute of Justice in using RF ﬁngerprint-
ing for contraband wireless devices tracking in correctional
facilities [50]. Similarly, in most cases, it is useful to track
the warﬁghters during the mission to monitor their progress,
instantaneous location, and provide assistance when required.
First responders often encounter tough situations but in most
cases rely on wireless communication devices. Thus, if these
communication signals can be used to identify and track the
ﬁrst responders, it can greatly enhance the efﬁciency and safety
of these operations.

It is important to point out that there is an added advantage
that no speciﬁc packets need to be emitted to help with the
tracking since it can be done implicitly by overhearing the
communication signals. This could decrease the overall over-
head required for command and control of such operations.
This technology like many others is a double-edged sword, one
could imagine security vulnerabilities where modern devices
could be identiﬁed by illegitimate entities and then used to
track leading to privacy and security concerns. This implies
there is a whole new emerging area of research and analysis
that may aim at mitigating such security vulnerabilities.

C. Intrusion detection

We discussed some of the security vulnerabilities that could
arise from the misuse of RF ﬁngerprinting but at the same
time, it is a powerful tool to detect intrusions and/or imitation
attacks. With the proliferation of wireless devices ranging from
5G mobile devices to low-cost IoT devices, it is becoming
difﬁcult to secure the ever-expanding threat surfaces. While
there are millions of devices they all depend on a few wireless
protocols or standards such as 5G, WiFi, BLE, LoRa, among
there will also be several
others essentially implying that
devices that transmit the same kind of signals. Therefore, it is
becoming imperative to have the ability to distinguish between
legitimate and illegitimate users on-the-ﬂy even if they transmit
the same signals. More importantly, intruders often mimic
or perform replay attacks. Just like traditional ﬁngerprints
enable some of the security systems to detect intruders, RF
ﬁngerprinting can serve the same purpose for commercial
and tactical applications. For example, before a squadron
is deployed into a mission, each of them could have RF
ﬁngerprint information of their fellow warﬁghters. In this way,
each device will be able to alert the presence of an intruder
who is not part of the signature database. There are many
commercial buildings where unauthorized wireless devices
are prohibited, in such commercial secure environments, the

YesRejectedIdentificationAuthenticationAuthorizationCross-check identificationValidate IdentificationAccess AuthorizedValidate usage rightsInputRejectedRejectedYesNoNoNosecurity ofﬁcers could deploy a similar methodology where
every approved device is registered using their RF ﬁngerprint.
Once the system is activated, the intruder detection system
will be able to alert the operator of unauthorized transmission
even if they resort to replay or imitation attacks.

D. Application Domains

Beyond 5G network or 6G envisions revolutionary appli-
cation domains [2], [51]–[54]. However, with such immersive
applications security and privacy of users as well as assets
become paramount [55]–[59]. In this section, we shed some
light on the envisioned applications for RF ﬁngerprinting in
the context of 6G as shown in Figure. 4.

1) Intelligent Telehealth: Intelligent and real-time health-
care will witness a paradigm shift with the 6G net-
work. Real-time health monitoring, hospital-to-hospital
services, Internet-of-Medical-Things (IoMT) also known
as Healthcare IoT will collectively present dynamic and
responsive health services [54], [60]. Body area networks
(BAN) with interconnected IoMT will advance and per-
sonalize telehealth monitoring and management. Remote
health services with holographic teleconferencing with
the ultra low latency 6G communication holds immense
potential in democratizing healthcare services. Security
and privacy for such an interconnected healthcare system
that maintains the patient database and vital healthcare
provider information is the backbone in realizing the
tactile 6G healthcare. Wireless device ﬁngerprinting so-
lutions that resides on edge IoMT devices will be key to
the real-time secure 6G IoT-based healthcare. We foresee
that such solutions in conjunction with distributed ledger
based multifactor authentication can secure the integrity
and privacy of the users from spooﬁng, denial-of-service
(DoS), identity theft attacks, among others.

2) Autonomous UAV and V2X: Aerial base stations and
swarms of UAV can revolutionize and democratize wire-
less connectivity. Especially, setting up infrastructureless
networks can provide emergency response, healthcare
services, etc., by connecting remote and austere locations.
Such concepts have been explored in the past [61] and
will be a potential 6G use case [52], [53], [62]. Similarly,
connected autonomous vehicles as in a V2X scenario
would involve the vehicles communicating with nearby
networks along its route. In these applications, handover
from one network to another based on location and
mobility is a necessity. Accordingly a robust, fast, and
lightweight device authentication will be a key enabler
to account for the diversity and mobility of devices
accessing the network. RF ﬁngerprinting which inherently
involves no control overhead and merely uses hardware
signatures embedded in the unintentional emissions will
be an ideal candidate for such lightweight authentication
schemes.

3) Smart Grid 2.0 Smart grids are IoT-based electrical
network for remote monitoring and control of power
systems. With the advent of 6G, the smart grids will be
able to support higher density of IoT devices for ultra low

6

latency and high reliability communication enabling real-
time anomaly detection and mitigation over distributed
grid lines and stations. Conﬁdentiality of the information
managed in these power grids pertaining to user infor-
mation, power metering, electrical usage patterns, billing
details, among others are indispensable and primary tar-
gets of cybersecurity attacks. Moreover, smart grid 2.0
envisions intelligent pricing, automated grid management
including energy trading among unknown parties in a
point-to-point manner which further exposes the threat
surfaces [52]. Device ﬁngerprinting based authentication
and grid access for secure energy trading will therefore
gain popularity to realize smart grid 2.0.

4) Extended Reality: Extended reality (XR) is a blanket term
to refer all real and virtual environments including virtual
reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), mixed reality, and
everything in between [63], [64]. 6G will support ad-
vanced XR for various use cases such as military tactical
training, video conferencing, online gaming, etc. In such
applications along with meeting the latency and rate
requirements, user privacy will be an equally necessary
and challenging prerequisite. Consequently, user (device)
authentication and access control will play a pivotal role
here.

IV. TRADITIONAL APPROACHES FOR RF FINGERPRINTING

A. Modulation domain based Approach

1) PARADIS: The authors in [65] propose a radiometric
signature-based device identiﬁcation called PARADIS (Passive
RAdiometic Device Identiﬁcation System). This approach is
based on the concept of radiometric identity - taking advantage
of minor variations of transmitter hardware leading to peculiar
features in the transmitted signal - to identify the origin. The
authors demonstrate the accuracy of PARADIS to be greater
than 99% for classifying more than 130 802.11 Network
interface cards (NICs). The system quantiﬁes the transmitter’s
radiometric identity by comparing the signal with an ideal
signal in the modulation domain on a frame-by-frame basis.
Modulation domain metrics such as frequency error, SYNC
correlation, IQ offset, magnitude error, and phase error are
used as the features for determining the radiometric identity of
the device. The features resulting from hardware imperfections
will be apparent over multiple frames. Therefore, calculating
the statistical averages of these variations over multiple frames
will magnify the artifacts caused by the hardware while at the
same time reducing the effects of noise and channel. Following
this, these ﬁve modulation domain metrics are classiﬁed using
a classiﬁer to identify the source. Two radiometric signature
classiﬁers are implemented and evaluated, one using the SVM
algorithm and the other using the k-nearest neighbors (k-NN)
algorithm. The SVM classiﬁer is built using LIBSVM [66],
the model takes a single radiometric signature as input and
outputs the most likely identity of the source with the measure
of conﬁdence. A k-NN classiﬁer is implemented using a group
of rankers, where each NIC has one ranker that calculates
the similarity between a given signal and the template of its
signature computed during training.

7

Fig. 4: Application Domains for RF ﬁngerprinting

The authors evaluated PARADIS on the ORBIT indoor
wireless testbed facility [67]. They collected data from 138
Atheros NICs conﬁgured as 802.11b access points on channel
1. Agilent 89641S vector signal analyzer was used as the
PARADIS sensor to capture the frames from the transmitters.
Overall, PARADIS using the SVM algorithm had an error rate
of 0.0034%, and the system using the k-NN algorithm had an
error rate of 3% in classifying 138 identical NICs.

2) IQ Imbalance: In [68], the authors proposed a method
to extract RF ﬁngerprint features based on the IQ imbalance
of the quadrature modulation signals. The IQ imbalance is
caused due to the hardware imperfections in the IQ quadrature
modulator. In the proposed method, the features are extracted
by performing autocorrelation on the received signals. Real
and imaginary parts of the autocorrelation form the RF ﬁnger-
print feature, and the SNR is estimated using the traditional
least squares algorithm. To evaluate the method, the authors
simulate ﬁve analog modulators (emitters) by varying the gain
and orthogonal IQ imbalance and generate 400 signals from
each emitter. The ﬁngerprint feature vector is extracted using
the proposed method and an SVM classiﬁer is trained using
half of the dataset. This method performs with an accuracy
greater than 90% for SNR ≥ 15dB and greater than 99% for
SNR ≥ 20dB.

3) Modulation shape and spectral features: The work in
[69] proposes a method for identifying Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation Devices (RFID) by extracting the RF ﬁngerprint
from modulation shape and spectral features of the signal
emitted by the transponder when subjected to an RFID reader.
The proposed method is able to identify 50 identical RFID
transponders from the same manufacturer with an error rate

of 2.43%.

The authors use a purpose-built RFID reader to transmit to
the target transponder for capturing the signals. It consists of
two signal generators for envelope and modulation generation
to the RFID transponder.
and a PCB antenna to transmit
The response from the RFID transponder is captured using
an antenna and oscilloscope. Using this setup, the authors
collected data from 50 JCOP NXP 4.1 smart cards and 8
electronic passports via the following four methods;

• Method 1: Capturing the response of the transponder
when subjected to ISO/IEC 14443 standard Type A and
B protocols.

• Method 2 (Varied 𝐹𝑐): Capturing the response of the
transponder when subjected to out of speciﬁcation (carrier
frequency only) ISO/IEC 14443 standard Type A and B
protocols.

• Method 3 (Burst): Capturing the response of

the
transponder when subjected to bursts of RF energy (10
cycles of non-modulated 5 MHz carrier at 10V peak-to-
peak).

• Method 4 (Frequency sweep): Capturing the response
of the transponder when subjected to linear sweep of a
non-modulated carrier from 100 Hz to 15 MHz (at 10 V
peak-to-peak).

Modulation-shape features for data captured using methods 1
and 2 and spectral principal component analysis (PCA) for
methods 3 and 4 are extracted. Modulation-shape features
are extracted by performing Hilbert transformation on the
captured signals. The starting point of the modulation in the
transformed signal is located using a variance-based threshold
detection algorithm [70]. Standardized Euclidean distance is

Smart Health CareRemote patient monitoring, data analytics, appointment reservation, IoMT communicationSmart EducationDigital Attendance, tracking, lab safety monitoring, smart access , AR/VR/XR applications.Smart TransportationIntelligent VANET, highway monitoring, Autonomous UAV, V2X. Smart BuildingEnergy efficiency, security, smart lighting, attendance monitoring, industrial automationSmart GridEnergy efficiency, monitoring, fault detection, online billing and usage tracking. Smart InfrastructureSmart lighting, automatic weighing, toll management, fault detection Smart HomeHome security, smart appliance, security system, assistance devices.obtained by matching the extracted ﬁngerprint feature with the
reference ﬁngerprint [71]. Similarly, the Mahalanobis distance
is evaluated by matching the reference ﬁngerprint features to
the test features. The spectral PCA features are extracted using
a modiﬁed PCA for higher dimension data [72].

To evaluate the classiﬁcation capabilities of the proposed
techniques, the authors consider signals captured from 8 e-
passports and 50 JCOP NXP 4.1 cards. Both classiﬁcation
techniques, one using modulation features and the other using
spectral features, perform with an error rate of 0% when
classifying signals into three classes (two countries, JCOP
NXP card). The authors evaluate the identiﬁcation capabilities
of the method by using data collected through methods 3
and 4 consisting of data from 50 identical JCOP NXP 4.1
cards. The proposed method performs with an accuracy of
95% in identifying 50 RFID cards when spectral features from
data collected through methods 3 and 4 are used individually.
Finally, when the spectral features from data collected through
methods 3 and 4 are combined, the accuracy increases to
97.5%.

In [73],

4) Weighted Voting-Based Classiﬁcation of Modulation Do-
main Signals:
the authors propose the use of a
committee of weak classiﬁers to provide a strong classiﬁcation
by using weighted voting to combine results of multiple weak
classiﬁers. Physical characteristics of the radio like frequency
offset, modulation phase offset, in-phase/quadrature-phase off-
set, and magnitude are extracted from signals generated by six
different radios in Wireless Open-Access Research Platform
(WARP). Differential Quadrature phase-shift keying (DQPSK)
modulation signals are generated and transmitted by the six
radio cards. A total of 14 ML classiﬁers are built using the
following signal characteristics:

• Frequency difference (1 classiﬁer): The distance between

the actual transmission and ideal carrier frequency.

• Magnitude difference (4 classiﬁers): The distance be-
tween the magnitude of transmitted and ideal carrier
symbols.

• Phase difference (4 classiﬁers): The angular distance
between the transmitted and the ideal symbol in the IQ
domain.

• Distance vector (4 classiﬁers): Vector distance between

the transmitted and the ideal symbol.

• IQ origin offset (1 classiﬁer): Distance between the origin
of the ideal IQ plane and the origin of the transmitted
symbol in the IQ domain.

The 14 classiﬁers are trained with the ﬁrst 200 frames of 1844
random QPSK symbols from each board, then the outputs of
the classiﬁers are combined using weighted voting to get the
ﬁnal radio identity. The weighted voting-based classiﬁer has
an average accuracy of 88% in detecting six radio cards.

5) Constellation Error Features: The authors in [74] pro-
pose an RF ﬁngerprinting approach based on constellation er-
ror features. Transmitter imperfection that is reﬂected in error
between the received constellation and the ideal constellation
is used as the feature for RF ﬁngerprinting. These features are
extracted using subclass discriminant analysis (SDA). Burst
QPSK modulated signals from seven TDMA satellite terminals
are captured to construct the dataset for testing. The received

8

signal is synchronized for time and frequency before building
the modulation constellation, following which the constellation
errors are computed. Feature vectors containing 41 features
are extracted and classiﬁed for each of the signals using SDA
feature extraction. The proposed method performs with an
accuracy greater than 95% for the bin size of the SDA feature
extraction method greater than 12.

As we conclude this section, we summarize the reviewed

literature in Table I for easy comparison for the reader.

B. Statistical Approach

1) Non-Parametric Feature:

In [75], the generation and
use of non-parametric features like mean, median, mode, and
linear model coefﬁcients (slope and intercept are estimated by
linear regression) for identifying ZigBee devices is proposed.
Complex IQ signals from four Texas Instruments ZigBee
CC2420 devices are captured using Agilent E3238S receiver.
The phase variable of the received signal is generated and
the preamble region of the phase variables is divided into 32
equal sized Regions of Interest (ROIs). Following this, the non-
parametric features are generated for each ROI. The signals
are classiﬁed using a random forest classiﬁer with 1000 trees.
Each of the four non-parametric features is used individually
to classify the device. The results show that the classiﬁcation
accuracy for each of the non-parametric features is above
97% for SNR≥ 10dB. At lower SNR, linear model coefﬁcient
features perform better than the other non-parametric features.
The author also compares the performance of using the non-
parametric features over parametric features by computing the
parametric features (variance, skewness, and kurtosis) for each
ROI. The same random forest classiﬁer is used to classify
the features individually. The non-parametric features show
improvements by upto 9% at SNR= 8dB over the parametric
features.

2) RF-DNA based features: In [76], the authors propose a
RF distinct native attribute (RF-DNA) based RF ﬁngerprinting
for identifying ultra-wideband (UWB) noise radar emitting
devices. RF-DNA ﬁngerprint features,
including variance,
skewness, and kurtosis, are extracted for the time-domain
response of the signals. Additionally, the authors also ex-
tract normalized power spectral density (PSD) and discrete
Gabor transform from the spectral-domain response of the
signals. The signals are classiﬁed using multiple discriminant
analysis with maximum likelihood (MDA/ML) classiﬁer and
generalized relevance learning vector quantization-improved
(GRLVQI) classiﬁers. MDA/ML classiﬁer is a combination
of multiple discriminant analysis (MDA) that aims to reduce
the dimensionality of a multi-dimensional dataset and maxi-
mum likelihood (ML) classiﬁer. The GRLVQI classiﬁer is a
supervised machine learning method that enlarges generalized
learning vector quantization (GLVQ) by adding weighting
factors to the input dimensions [77]. These factors allow
for appropriate scaling of the input dimensions according to
their relevance and are adapted automatically during training
according to the speciﬁc classiﬁcation task.
The classiﬁcation performance is evaluated on signals captured
by transmitting UWB noise radar waveforms using a log-
periodic antenna placed one meter from the receiver in an

≥ 90% for SNR
≥ 15dB

100% classiﬁcation
accuracy and
97.5%
identiﬁcation
accuracy.
88% identiﬁcation
accuracy and
12.8% false alarm
rate

Work

Brik et al. [65]

Radiometric
Parameter
frequency error,
SYNC correlation,
IQ offset,
magnitude error,
and phase error

Classiﬁcation
technique
k-NN & SVM

RF emitters

Performance

138 802.11 NICs

SVM→ 99.9%
k-NN→ 97%

9

Zhuo et al. [68]

IQ Imbalance

SVM

Danev et al. [69]

Modulation-shape
and spectral PCA
features

Mahalanobis
distance

MATLAB
simulated 5 analog
modulators

8 e-passports and 5
JCOP NXP 4.1
cards

Candore et al. [73]

Huang et al. [74]

frequency offset,
modulation phase
offset, in-
phase/quadrature-
phase offset, and
magnitude
constellation-error

weighted
voting-based
classiﬁer

Six WARP radio
cards

SDA feature
extraction

seven TDMA
satellite terminals

95% identiﬁcation
accuracy

TABLE I: Modulation-domain based RF ﬁngerprinting works

anechoic chamber. By varying the termination load of the
transmitting antenna, three classes of waveforms are captured.
Additionally, an attenuator is used to increase the number
of classes. For the three-class case using only time-domain
ﬁngerprint features, the proposed method has a classiﬁcation
accuracy of 99.7% and 98.25% for MDA/ML and GRLVQI
classiﬁers, respectively. In the case of the seven-class dataset
using only time-domain ﬁngerprint features,
the proposed
method has an average classiﬁcation accuracy of 81% and
75% for MDA/ML and GRLVQI classiﬁers, respectively. Sim-
ilarly, for the three-class dataset using only spectrum-domain
ﬁngerprint features, the proposed method has a classiﬁcation
accuracy of 91.97% and 94.47% for MDA/ML and GRLVQI
classiﬁers, respectively. Lastly, using a combination of time
and frequency domain features, the classiﬁcation accuracy for
the three-class data is 97.65% and 93, 79% for MDA/ML and
GRLVQI classiﬁers, respectively.

C. Transient-based Approach

Transient-based approach involves identifying distinctive
features present in the radio turn-on transients, which appear
at the start of the transmission. The transient is the section
of the signal where the amplitude rises from channel noise to
signal amplitude. Identiﬁcation of devices using this process
consists of three steps: detection of transients, extraction
of features, and classiﬁcation. A brief overview of the two
key approaches of transient detection: Threshold [78] and
Bayesian step-change detector [79] is discussed in [80]. Both
of which exploit the amplitude characteristics of the signal

for transient detection. They also propose a new approach for
transient detection using the phase characteristic of the signal
to improve performance when the transient gradient is gradual.
1) Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)-based Fisher features:
The authors of [81] propose the use of FFT-based Fisher
features to identify wireless nodes. In this approach, the RF
ﬁngerprint (feature template) of the signals is computed by
ﬁrst detecting the start point and extracting the transient of the
signals using a variance-based threshold detection algorithm
[70]. The relative difference between the adjacent FFT spectra
is determined by applying a 1-D Fourier Transform on the tran-
sients. Following which the Fisher feature vector that forms
the feature template is extracted using a Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) matrix. The LDA matrix is derived by a
standard procedure based on scatter matrices [82]. Lastly, the
ﬁngerprint is matched by calculating the Mahalanobis distance
between the reference and test signals feature template.

Over 600 IEEE 802.15.4 signal samples from 50 consumer-
off-the-shelf (COTS) Tmote sky sensor nodes with the same
manufacturer signature are collected to evaluate the proposed
technique. The system identiﬁes the 50 sensors with an ac-
curacy higher than 99.5%. This work also investigates the
effects of parameters such as distance, antenna polarization,
and voltage on the performance of the system.

The results of these investigations suggest the system is
robust against distance, multipath propagation, and voltage
changes. But a change in the polarization of the signal alters
the shape of the transient perturbing the frequency information
present in the transient consequently leading to a drop in

recognition accuracy. They also investigate the practicality of
the system on attacks such as hill-climbing and DoS. Hill-
climbing attack is a common impersonation attack where
the attacker repeatedly submits data to the algorithm with
slight modiﬁcation. Modiﬁcations that improve or preserve
the matching score are preserved. Over time, the attacker can
achieve a score higher than the designed threshold resulting
in a successful impersonation. The system can be vulnerable
to an impersonation attack when the number of signals used
to build the ﬁngerprint feature template is low. This work
investigates the vulnerability of the system to jamming-based
DoS attacks. Due to the superposition of the original and the
jamming signals, the system is unable to recognize the device.
The authors suggest that this type of attack can be used as a
security measure against an attacker.

2) Hilbert-Huang transform-based time-frequency-energy
distribution features: The authors propose a speciﬁc emit-
ter identiﬁcation (SEI) method based on the transient sig-
nal’s time-frequency-energy distribution (TFED) obtained by
Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT) [83]. HHT is a self-adaptive
signal analysis method it involves Empirical Mode Decompo-
sition (EMD) and Hilbert transform [84]. The EMD method
decomposes a given signal into a set of a ﬁnite number of
intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). Applying Hilbert transform
on the IMFs yields the TFED. The start of the signal is
detected using a phase-based method [80] and the endpoint
is detected by forming the energy trajectory of the signal
from TFED. Following thirteen features are extracted from
the TFED:

• Three features from overall features: Sum of energy,
duration of transient signal, and duration of the maximum
energy point.

• Four energy distribution features along the frequency-

axis: entropy, kurtosis, skewness, and center.

• Four energy distribution features along the time-axis:

entropy, kurtosis, skewness, and center.

• Two energy distribution features of the overall

time-

frequency plane: entropy and center.

The authors use PCA to reduce the dimension of the feature
vector and use an SVM to classify the devices. The authors
collect transient signals from eight GSM mobile phones (four
Nokia 5230, two Motorola Me525, and two Xiaomi-1) using
a Leroy 8500A digital oscilloscope connected to a digital
receiver with a Yagi antenna. The SVM classiﬁer is trained
with 50 transient signals from each device, and the system
is tested with 100 transient signals from each device. The
proposed method attains an accuracy of 100% in classifying
the eight mobile devices.

3) Energy envelope features:

In [85], features extracted
from the energy envelope of the transient signal are used as
RF ﬁngerprints to identify Bluetooth devices. The transients
are extracted from the normalized signals using variance-
based threshold method [70]. The energy envelope is then
extracted using the spectrogram which is deﬁned as the
squared magnitude of Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT).
The spectrogram computes a three-dimensional TFED that
is then sliced with respect to the instantaneous frequency at
the maximum energy value to obtain the smoothed energy

10

envelope curve. Finally,
is formed by
extracting the following features from the energy envelope
curve:

the RF ﬁngerprint

• Area under the normalized curve.
• Duration of transient.
• Maximum slope of the curve.
• Kurtosis of the curve.
• Skewness of the curve.
• Variance of the transient envelope.

Bluetooth device discovery mode signals from seven built-
in Bluetooth transceivers of cell phones are captured using
an oscilloscope and an Agilent spectrum analyzer. A total of
300 signals from each of the seven Bluetooth transceivers are
captured and the RF ﬁngerprint features are extracted. A k-
NN classiﬁer with 3 nearest neighbors is used to classify the
feature vector. Fifty signals from each of the seven devices are
used to train the classiﬁer, and the remaining 250 signals are
used for testing. The proposed method classiﬁes the devices
with an accuracy of 99.9%. Further, the authors investigated
the effect of sampling rate on classiﬁcation accuracy. Because
the energy envelope of the transient does not change with
the sampling rate, the accuracy of identifying devices remains
99.9% for a sampling rate of 4 GSps, 1 GSps, 512 MSps, 256
MSps, 128 MSps, and 32 MSps.

The above discussed transient-based RF ﬁngerprinting lit-

erature are also summarized in Table II.

D. Wavelet-based approach

1) Dual-tree complex wavelet

transform (DT-CWT): A
wavelet domain (WD) approach based on DT-CWT features
extracted from the non-transient preamble response of 802.11a
signals is proposed by the authors of [86]. The effective-
ness of WD ﬁngerprinting is demonstrated using Fisher-
based MDA/ML classiﬁcation. Also, this work considers the
effect of varying channel SNR, burst detection error, and
dissimilar SNRs for MDA/ML training and classiﬁcation. WD
ﬁngerprinting with DT-CWT features achieves classiﬁcation
accuracy of 80% for signals with SNR up to 8 dB and performs
superior to time-domain RF ﬁngerprinting.

DT-CWT is an extension of discrete wavelet

transform
(DWT) which decomposes a time-domain signal into wavelets
that are localized in frequency and time domain. DT-CWT
addresses the necessity of shift-invariance that is not present
in DWT. DT-CWT is implemented using two real-valued ﬁlter
banks represented as tree1 and tree2 in Figure 5 [87]. The
wavelet and scaling functions for tree1 ﬁlter banks - 𝜓(𝑡) and
𝜙(𝑡) - are given by,

𝜓(𝑡) =

√
2

𝜙(𝑡) =

√

2

∑︁

𝑛
∑︁

𝑛

ℎ1 (𝑛)𝜙(2𝑡 − 𝑛),

ℎ0(𝑛)𝜙(2𝑡 − 𝑛)

(1)

(2)

and the corresponding functions for tree2 ﬁlter banks are
Hilbert transforms of Equations (1) and (2) given by,

𝜓 (cid:48)(𝑡) =

√
2

∑︁

𝑛

1 (𝑛)𝜙(cid:48)(2𝑡 − 𝑛),
ℎ(cid:48)

(3)

11

Cited literature

Danev et al. [81]

Transient detection
method
Variance-based
threshold

Classiﬁcation
technique
Mahalanobis
distance

Yuan et al. [83]

Rehman et al. [85]

Phase-based
method

Variance-based
threshold

SVM

k-NN

RF emitters

performance

50 COTS Tmote
Sky sensor (IEEE
802.15.4)

8 GSM Mobile
phones

7 built-in Bluetooth
transceivers

≥ 99.5%

100%

99.9%

TABLE II: Transient based RF ﬁngerprinting works

𝜙(cid:48)(𝑡) =

√
2

∑︁

𝑛

0 (𝑛)𝜙(cid:48)(2𝑡 − 𝑛).
ℎ(cid:48)

(4)

1 (𝑛), and ℎ(cid:48)

The ﬁlter coefﬁcients ℎ1(𝑛), ℎ0 (𝑛), ℎ(cid:48)
0 (𝑛) are im-
plemented directly as analysis ﬁlters. For a real-valued input,
the DT-CWT ﬁlter bank outputs a real-valued WD component
𝐼𝑙
𝑊 𝐷 and an imaginary component 𝑄𝑙
𝑊 𝐷. From this, a complex
WD signal can be expressed as,
𝑊 𝐷 (𝑛) = 𝐼𝑙
𝑠𝑙

𝑊 𝐷 (𝑛) + 𝑗𝑄𝑙

𝑊 𝐷 (𝑛).

(5)

To mitigate the excessive need for computation time and data
processing when using fundamental signal characteristics such
as amplitude 𝛼(𝑛), phase 𝜙(𝑛), and frequency 𝑓 (𝑛), as the
classiﬁcation features. The authors propose to use the statisti-
cal properties of the fundamental signals for the classiﬁcation
of devices. These statistics include variance, skewness, and
kurtosis.

The authors collect

the IQ samples from laptops with
802.11a Cisco personal computer memory card international
association cards using an Agilent-based RF signal intercept
and collection system in an anechoic chamber. To simulate
the various SNR conditions, an "analysis signal" is gener-
ated by adding a random complex additive white Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) signal to the collected complex signal. Before
adding, the noise signal is ﬁltered and power-scaled to achieve
desired SNR for the analysis signal. Next, the starting location
(sample number) of the RF burst is visually determined and
is used to locate the preamble region. The analysis signals
are divided into three subregions for ﬁngerprint generation. A
ﬁve-level DT-CWT is performed for each of these subregions,
and the complex WD signal for each of the levels is computed
for all the subregions using (5), followed by the calculation
of signal characteristics and statistical classiﬁcation features
resulting in a total of 135 features per analysis signal, which is
then used for Fisher-based MDA/ML classiﬁcation with Monte
Carlo simulation and 𝐾-fold validation.

To compare the proposed WD ﬁngerprints with time-domain
(TD) ﬁngerprints,
the authors generated WD and TD ﬁn-
gerprints for each analysis signal. The TD ﬁngerprints are
generated similarly to WD ﬁngerprints but without performing
DT-CWT, which consists of three signal characteristic features
and three statistical features for each of the three subregions.
For each analysis signal, TD ﬁngerprints are composed of 27
features, and WD ﬁngerprints are composed of 135 features.

Both techniques performed identically for SNR ≥ 25 dB and
the WD technique was superior for −2 <SNR< 24 dB. WD
ﬁngerprints achieves an accuracy of 80% at SNR ≈ 11 dB.
This performance increase when using WD ﬁngerprinting is
to equivalent
a gain of approximately 7 dB with respect
TD ﬁngerprinting. To evaluate whether the classiﬁer takes
advantage of the larger number of features in WD ﬁngerprints,
the authors decided to choose a subset of 27 selected WD
features from the 135 features. Classiﬁcation with 27-feature
WD ﬁngerprinting shows that the WD technique outperforms
the 27-feature TD ﬁngerprinting only for 0 < SNR < 20 dB
with a performance gain of approximately 2 dB relative to 27-
feature TD ﬁngerprinting. This increase in performance, given
equal dimensionality, suggests that the classiﬁer exploits the
additional information present in DT-CWT features.

2) Dynamic wavelet: A dynamic wavelet ﬁngerprint
method to identify unique RFID tags using supervised pattern
classiﬁcation techniques is presented in [88]. In this study,
146 individual RFID tags of three types: Avery-Dennison
AD 612, Avery-Dennison Runway Gen 2, and Alien Omni-
Squiggle, are used. RF signals from each of the tags are
captured by writing the same code onto the tag using Thing
Magic Mercury 5e RFID Reader and reading the response with
an omnidirectional antenna through a vector signal analyzer.
From the captured complex-valued signals, amplitude, phase,
and instantaneous frequency are computed and used for ex-
tracting RF ﬁngerprint feature vector. In this work, the authors
propose using a feature vector that is a combination of features
extracted from dynamic wavelet ﬁngerprint (DWFP), wavelet
packet decomposition (WPD), and higher-order statistics.

The authors use the DWFP technique [89] that applies
wavelet transform on the original TD signal and generates
a "ﬁngerprint-like" binary image. Image processing routines
are performed on the binary image to extract signal’s RF
ﬁngerprint. Feature selection is performed on the features ex-
tracted by the image processing steps using Euclidean distance
metric to indicate the most highly separable interclass distance.
Next, ﬁngerprint features are extracted by performing WPD
[90], which is done by applying a wavelet packet transform
(WPT) on the RF signal to generate a tree of coefﬁcients.
Wavelet packet energy is calculated for the terminal nodes
of the WPT tree and the highest energy is selected as the
feature. Finally, higher-order statistics are performed on the

12

Fig. 5: Five level dual-tree complex wavelet transform

unﬁltered waveform to extract the following features: mean
of EPC, maximum cross-correlation with another EPC from
the same tag, variance, Shannon entropy, second central mo-
ment, skewness, and kurtosis. A combination of the features
extracted with the three methods is used as the feature vector
for the classiﬁer. The proposed feature vector is tested with
four types of classiﬁers for identifying RFID tags: Linear and
Quadratic discriminant classiﬁers (LDC and QDC), k-NN, and
SVM. All of the four classiﬁers perform with an accuracy of
99% in identifying the RFID tags.

In [91],

3) Wavelet domain-based Bayes approach:

the
authors propose a WD-based Bayes approach to detect the
presence of micro-UAVs and signal energy transient to identify
the type of micro-UAV. The proposed detection method ﬁrst
converts the RF signals from the UAV controllers into WD
using three-stage wavelet decomposition followed by differen-
tiating noise (non-UAV signals) and micro-UAV signals using
a naive Bayes approach based on the Markov model. The
transformation of RF signals to the WD removes the bias and
reduces the size of the data. If micro-UAV is detected using
the proposed method, the classiﬁcation of the signal is carried
out. For the proposed classiﬁcation method, the TD RF signal
is ﬁrst transformed into the energy-time-frequency domain
and is represented as a spectrogram. The spectrogram is the
squared magnitude of the discrete STFT of the signal. Energy
transient is estimated by detecting the abrupt change in the
energy trajectory from the spectrogram. The energy transient
is then used to extract the statistical RF ﬁngerprints (feature
set) such as skewness, variance, energy spectral entropy, and
kurtosis. The dimensionality of the feature set
is reduced
using Neighborhood Component Analysis (NCA). NCA is a
supervised learning method for feature selection, transforming
the primary data into a lower-dimensional space [92]. The
reduced feature sets are used to train four machine learning

algorithms: k-NN, discriminant analysis (DA), SVM, and
neural networks (NN).

RF signals from 14 micro-UAV controllers operating at
2.4 GHz are captured indoors using Keysight MSOS604A
oscilloscope. An omnidirectional antenna is used to capture
the RF signal at a close distance and a grid antenna is used for
far-ﬁeld signal capture. A total of 100 RF signals is captured
from each micro-UAV controller to form the dataset, which
is split randomly with a ratio of 4:1 for training and testing.
The authors show that the proposed detection method has an
accuracy of 84% in detecting the presence of micro-UAV for
a given SNR of 10 dB and 100% accuracy for SNR≥ 12
dB. Once the UAV is detected, the RF signal is classiﬁed
to identify the UAV. The classiﬁcation accuracy of k-NN,
SVM, DA, and NN classiﬁcation methods are 96.3%, 96.84%,
88.15%, and 58.49%, respectively. Accuracy of classiﬁcation
increases with an increase in SNR. The authors clearly state
that the hyperparameters of the NN algorithm were not op-
timized in this work, leading to the poor performance of the
NN algorithm. If the hyperparameters of the NN algorithm are
optimized and tuned correctly, the NN algorithm could have
a high classiﬁcation accuracy.

These discussed wavelet-based approaches are tabulated in

Table III.

E. Other Approaches

1) Steady State Frequency Domain Approach: The authors
of [93] present a technique for radio transmitter identiﬁcation
based on frequency domain characteristics. This approach
employs frequency domain analysis with a traditional discrim-
inatory classiﬁer - k-NN - for RF ﬁngerprinting and device
identiﬁcation. This work demonstrates an accuracy of 97% at
30 dB SNR and 66% accuracy at 0 dB SNR in identifying
eight identical USRP transmitters.

↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2↓2h0 (n)h0 (n)h0 (n)h0 (n)h1(n)h1(n)h1(n)h1(n)h'1(n)h'1(n)h'1(n)h'1(n)h'0(n)h'0(n)h'0(n)h'0(n)I1WDI2WDI3WDI4WDI5WDQ1WDQ2WDQ3WDQ4WDQ5WDTree 2Tree 1Input13

Work

Wavelet method

Kelin et al [86]

Bertoncini et al.
[88]

Ezuma et al. [91]

dual-tree complex
wavelet transform
(DT-CWT)

dynamic wavelet
ﬁngerprint (DWFP)
[89], wavelet
packet
decomposition
(WPD) [90]

three-stage wavelet
decomposition

Classiﬁcation
technique
Fisher-based
MDA/ML

LDC, QDC, k-NN
and SVM

k-NN, discriminant
analysis (DA),
SVM,and neural
networks (NN)

RF emitters

Performance

802.11a Cisco
PCMCIA cards

50 Avery-Dennison
AD 612, 50
Avery-Dennison
Runway Gen 2,
and 50 Alien
Omni-Squiggle

14 micro-UAV
controllers

80% at 11db SNR
and ≥ 98% at SNR
≥ 25dB

99%

k-NN→ 96.3%,
SVM→ 96.84%,
DA→ 88.15%, and
NN→ 58.49%

TABLE III: Wavelet-based RF ﬁngerprinting methods

For demonstration, the authors consider the Random Access
Channel (RACH) preamble in UMTS. The IQ samples of the
preamble are captured and down-converted from transmit band
to baseband. The baseband signal is bandpass sampled by
the analog-to-digital converter (ADC) at the Nyquist rate and
downsampled using a sum of absolute values window function
followed by carrier frequency offset correction and amplitude
normalization. Spectral analysis of the entire preamble signal
is performed using the FFT and is fed as the input for the k-NN
classiﬁer. The dataset is divided into training and testing sets.
In the training step, the k-NN algorithm maps the training
preamble signals set into a multidimensional feature space,
divided into regions based on the class. During testing, the
preamble is determined to belong to the class with the most
frequent label among the k-nearest preambles from training.
To evaluate the method UMTS RACH preamble are gen-
erated using MATLAB and transmitted using USRPs with
identical speciﬁcations. An Anritsu Signature MS2781A spec-
trum analyzer is used to capture the IQ samples from eight
USRPs individually and 300 preamble samples are captured
from each of the eight USRPs. For training the k-NN algo-
rithm, 150 preamble samples from each USRP is used and
the remaining is used for testing the system. The system
achieves a classiﬁcation accuracy of 97% for preamble signals
above 25 dB SNR and accuracy of 66% for 0 dB SNR.
The authors also test the effect of binning on classiﬁcation
accuracy by varying the number of bins used to determine the
spectral energy features. At lower SNR, binning reduces the
overall classiﬁcation performance and the accuracy reaches its
maximum at around 200 bins for SNR 15 dB - 30 dB.

2) Permutation Entropy:

In [94], the authors propose a
multidimensional permutation entropy-based RF ﬁngerprinting
method. Permutation entropy is the measure of complexity for
a given time series. Accordingly, it can extract and amplify
the minuscule changes in the given time signal. The proposed
method involves ﬁrst capturing the radio signals and extracting
the envelopes of the signal, then calculating the multidimen-

sional permutation entropy of the signal envelope to form the
RF ﬁngerprint feature vector. An SVM classiﬁer with an radial
basis function (RBF) kernel is used to classify the feature
vector. To evaluate the method, the authors collect 100 sets
of data from three AKDS700 radios using a digital receiver
and an oscilloscope. Multidimensional permutation entropy is
computed for all the signals captured using a multidimensional
vector. The SVM trained for these features performs with an
average accuracy of 90% for SNR≥ 10 dB in recognizing the
three radios.

3) Received Signal Strength: A Multi-Fingerprint and
Multi-Classiﬁer Fusion (MFMCF) localization method for RF
ﬁngerprinting is proposed in [95]. The proposed technique
aims to increase the localization accuracy of WiFi Access
Points (APs) by constructing composite ﬁngerprints and com-
bining multiple classiﬁers. The authors construct a composite
ﬁngerprint set (CFS) consisting of received signal strength
(RSS), signal strength difference (SSD), and hyperbolic lo-
cation ﬁngerprint (HLF) features. In this method, a decision
structure with three classiﬁers k-NN, SVM, and random forest
is used to obtain a more accurate location estimate.

The authors collect RSS data of seven APs at 35 points
in an indoor location, each at least 1.2 meters apart. A total
of 100 RSS data is recorded for each of the APs at each
location. Grubbs method [97] based on the mean and standard
deviation is used to detect outliers in RSS data. The outliers are
replaced with a Gaussian random number generated using the
mean and variance of the non-abnormal data. SSD and HLF
ﬁngerprints are constructed based on the collected RSS. SSD is
the difference in RSS values observed by two APs, and HLF is
the ratio of RSS between pairs of APs. The three ﬁngerprints,
RSS, SSD, and HLF are combined to form the CFS. Linear
discriminant analysis is used to reduce the dimensions of CFS.
Using the reduced CFS, the three classiﬁers (K-NN, SVM, and
random forest) are trained. In the testing stage, the entropy of
each of the classiﬁers is calculated and the classiﬁer with the
least entropy is used to estimate the location.

Work

Kennedy et al. [93]

Radiometric
Parameter
FFT

Classiﬁcation
technique
k-NN

8 USRPs

RF emitters

Performance

14

Deng et al. [94]

Yuan at al. [95]

Baldini et al. [96]

multidimensional
permutation
entropy
RSS, SSD, and
HLF features

Permutation
entropy and
Dispersion entropy

SVM

3 AKDS700 radios

MFMCF

7 APs

k-NN, SVM, and
decision tree

9 nRF24LU1+

TABLE IV: Other traditional RF ﬁngerprinting works

97% identiﬁcation
accuracy at
SNR>25 dB and
66% at 0 dB SNR
90% identiﬁcation
accuracy at
SNR≥10 dB
probability of zero
positioning error is
96.5%.
k-NN up to 82.3%,
SVM up to 82.1%,
and Decision tree
up to 81.4%.

To evaluate the proposed MFMCF technique, the authors
use LDA to select 12 features from 49 features in CFS, which
covers more than 95% of the information. The probability
of zero positioning error of MFMCF is 96.5%, which is an
increase of 4.2%, 6.4%, and 7.7% compared with RSS, SDD,
and HLS, respectively, when used as independent ﬁngerprint
features for classiﬁcation. To compare MFMCF with indepen-
dent classiﬁers, CFS was used to train and test individual clas-
siﬁers. The probability of zero positioning errors of MFMCF,
RF, k-NN, and SVM were 96.5%, 90.2%, 92.9%, and 94.8%,
respectively. The authors also show that the proposed MFMCF
technique has the lowest average localization error of 0.14m.
4) Permutation entropy and Dispersion entropy: The au-
thors in [96] propose an RF ﬁngerprinting method for iden-
tifying IoT devices using entropy-based statistical features
called Permutation Entropy (PE) and Dispersion Entropy (DE).
In this work, nine nRF24LU1+ IoT devices are used for
evaluating the proposed method. The RF signals from these
devices are captured using an N210 USRP with XCVR2450
frontend. All nine devices are conﬁgured to transmit ﬁxed
payloads based on MySensors speciﬁcations. MySensors [98]
is a free and open-source software framework for DIY (do-
it-yourself) wireless IoT devices that allows devices to com-
municate using radio transmitters. The real-valued IQ samples
are captured using the USRP followed by synchronization and
normalization to obtain the burst of trafﬁc associated with the
payload.

The following statistical features are then computed for
each received payload: variance, skewness, kurtosis, Shannon
entropy,
log entropy, PE (order=4, and delay=1), PE (or-
der=5, and delay=1), DE (embedding dimension=3, classes=5,
and delay=1), DE (embedding dimension=4, classes=5, and
delay=1), and DE (embedding dimension=5, classes=5, and
delay=1). The authors train three classiﬁers: k-NN, SVM, and
decision tree with a subset of the ten features listed above.
The authors show that the classiﬁer trained using PE and
DE features along with statistical features has an accuracy
of 24% to 30% higher than the classiﬁer trained with just

statistical features (Shannon entropy and log entropy). Using
just the PE feature along with statistical features leads to a
good improvement in accuracy in contrast to using Shannon
entropy and log entropy. Finally, the authors show that all
three classiﬁers performed with similar classiﬁcation accuracy
when trained with PE and DE features along with statistical
features.

The works discussed in this section are also condensed in

a tabular form in Table IV.

V. DEEP LEARNING FOR RF FINGERPRINTING
Deep learning based techniques have been slowly invading
this ﬁeld of research and becoming the state of the art. This is
primarily due recent revival of machine learning fueled from
rapid growth of computational capabilities and the availability
of digital data. Keeping that in mind and for the beneﬁt of
reader who might be relatively new to deep learning, we
provide a brief tutorial regarding the core techniques used
for RF ﬁngerprinting. For a more comprehensive review we
recommend the readers to [99].

A. Overview on Supervised Deep Learning

1) Feedforward Neural Networks: Feedforward neural net-
works (FNN) also referred to as multilayer perceptrons are
directed layered neural networks with no internal feedback
connections. In the mathematical sense, an FNN maps input
vector x to output 𝑦, i.e.,
𝑓 : x −→ 𝑦. An N-layered FNN
is a composite function 𝑦 = 𝑓 (x; Γ) = 𝑓𝑁 ( 𝑓𝑁 −1 (· · · 𝑓1 (x)))
mapping input vector x ∈ R𝑚 to a scalar output 𝑦 ∈ R. Here, Γ
represents the neural network parameters such as the weights
and biases. Depth and width of the neural network are related
to the number of layers in the neural network and number
of neurons in the layers respectively. The layers in between
the input and output layers for which the output does not
show are collectively referred to as the hidden layers. A 3-
layered FNN accepting a two-dimensional input vector x ∈ R2
approximating it to a scalar output 𝑦 ∈ R is illustrated in Figure
6.

15

the network. Therefore,
to its fully connected
in contrast
feedforward counterpart, CNNs are more efﬁcient and easier
to train.

CNN architecture would often involve convolution, pooling,
and output layers. The convolution layer convolve the input
tensor X ∈ R𝑊 ×𝐻 ×𝐷 of width 𝑊, height 𝐻, and depth 𝐷 with
the kernel (ﬁlter) F ∈ R𝑤×ℎ×𝐷 of width 𝑤, height ℎ, and of the
same depth as the input tensor to generate an output feature
map M ∈ R𝑊1×𝐻1×𝐷1. The dimension of the feature map is a
function of the input as well as kernel dimensions, the number
of kernels 𝑁, stride 𝑆, and the amount of zero padding 𝑃.
Likewise, the feature map dimensions can be derived as 𝑊1 =
(𝑊 − 𝑤 + 2𝑃) /𝑆 + 1, 𝐻1 = (𝐻 − ℎ + 2𝑃) /𝑆 + 1, 𝐷1 = 𝑁. In other
words, there will be as many feature maps as the number of
kernels. Kernel refers to the set of weights and biases. The
kernel operates on the input slice in a sliding window manner
based on the stride - the number of steps with which to slide
the kernel along with the input slice. Hence, each depth slice
of the input is treated with the same kernel or in other words,
shares the same weights and biases - parameter sharing. A
feature map illustration from a convolution operation on an
input slice x by a kernel f is demonstrated in Figure 7. Here,
𝑏 represents the bias associated with the kernel slice and 𝛾 (◦)
denotes a non-linear activation function.

The resulting output from the convolution operation is
referred to as the feature map. Each element of the feature map
can be visualized as the output of a neuron which focuses on a
small region of the input - receptive ﬁeld. The neural depiction
of the convolution interaction is shown in Figure 8.

It is evident that each neuron in a layer is connected locally
to the neurons in the adjacent layer - sparse connectivity.
Hence, each neuron is unaffected by variations outside of
its receptive ﬁeld while producing the strongest response for
spatially local input pattern. The feature maps are propagated
to subsequent layers until it reaches the output layer for a
regression or classiﬁcation task. Pooling is a typical operation
in CNN to signiﬁcantly reduce the dimensionality. It operates
on a subregion of the input to map it to a single summary
statistic depending on the type of pooling operation - max,
mean, 𝐿2-norm, weighted average, etc. In this way, pooling
downsamples its input. A typical pooling dimension is 2 × 2.
Larger pooling dimensions might risk losing signiﬁcant infor-
mation. Figure 9 shows max and mean pooling operations.

A pooling layer of dimensions 𝑊 𝑝 × 𝐻 𝑝 upon operating
over an input volume of size 𝑊1 × 𝐻1 × 𝐷1 with a stride of
𝑆1 will yield an output of volume 𝑊2 = (cid:0)𝑊1 − 𝑊 𝑝(cid:1) /𝑆1, 𝐻2 =
(cid:0)𝐻1 − 𝐻 𝑝(cid:1) /𝑆1, 𝐷2 = 𝐷1. Pooling imparts invariance to transla-
tion, i.e., if the input to the pooling layer is shifted by a small
amount, the pooled output will largely be unaffected [109].

The three essential characteristics of CNNs that contribute
to the statistical efﬁciency and trainability are parameter shar-
ing, sparse connectivity, and dimensionality reduction. CNNs
have demonstrated superior performance in computer vision
tasks such as image classiﬁcation, object detection, semantic
scene classiﬁcation, etc. Accordingly, CNNs are increasingly
used for UAS imagery and navigation applications [110].
Most notable CNN architectures are LeNet-5 [102], AlexNet
[39], VGG-16 [103], ResNet [108], Inception [101], and

Fig. 6: Three-layered FNN

Here, each node represents a neuron and each link between
the nodes 𝑖 and 𝑗 are assigned a weight 𝑤𝑖 𝑗 . The composite
function of the 3-layered FNN is

𝑦 = 𝑓 (x; Γ) = 𝑓3( 𝑓2 ( 𝑓1 (x)))

(6)

In other words, the 3-layer FNN in Figure 6 is the directed
acyclic graph equivalent of the composite function in equation
(6). The subscript 𝑛 of 𝑓𝑛 indicates the layer number. The
mapping in the ﬁrst layer is

L1 = 𝑓1 (x) = 𝛾1 (W1x + b1)
where 𝛾1(◦) is the activation function, b1 is the bias vector,
and W1 represents the weight matrix between the neurons in
the ﬁrst and second layers. Here, the weight matrix W1 is
deﬁned as the link weights between the neurons in the input
and second layer

(7)

W1 =

(cid:20)𝑤𝑎𝑏 𝑤𝑑𝑏
𝑤𝑎𝑒 𝑤𝑑𝑒

(cid:21)

.

Similarly, the second layer mapping can be represented as

L2 = 𝑓2 (L1) = 𝛾2 (W2L1 + b2)

Finally, the output is

(8)

(9)

𝑦 = 𝑓3 (L2) = 𝛾3(W3L2 + b3)

(10)

The weight matrices in the second and ﬁnal layers are
(cid:21)

and W3 = (cid:2)𝑤𝑐𝑜 𝑤 𝑓 𝑜(cid:3) .

W2 =

(cid:20) 𝑤𝑏𝑐 𝑤𝑒𝑐
𝑤𝑏 𝑓 𝑤𝑒 𝑓

The neural network parameters Γ = {W1, W2, W3, b1, b2, b3}
comprise the weight matrices and bias vectors across the
layers. The objective of the training algorithm is to learn the
optimal Γ∗ to get the target composite function 𝑓 ∗ from the
available samples of x.

2) Convolutional Neural Networks: Convolutional net-
works or convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a special-
ized type of feedforward neural network known for its spatial
mapping capability. A CNN performs convolution operation
in at least one of its layers. The feature extraction capability
of CNNs mimics the neural activity of the animal visual
cortex [100]. The convolution operation in CNNs emulates
the scene perception characteristic of the brain’s visual cortex
whereby they are sensitive to sub-regions of the perceived
scene. Accordingly, CNNs have been widely used for com-
puter vision problems [39], [101]–[108]. The convolution is
an efﬁcient method of feature extraction that reduces the
data dimension and consequently reduces the parameters of

𝑎𝑑𝑏𝑒𝑐𝑓𝑜𝑥1𝑥2(1)(2)(3)𝑦16

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

, x𝑡 ; 𝚪

(13)

(14)

Fig. 7: Convolution of input slice with kernel

h𝑡−2, x𝑡−1; 𝚪

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

F

F

= F

= F

(cid:16)

F

(cid:17)

, x𝑡 ; 𝚪
(cid:17)

h𝑡−3, x𝑡−2; 𝚪

, x𝑡−1; 𝚪

Fig. 8: Neural representation of convolution

Fig. 9: Max and mean pooling on input slice with stride 1

SqueezeNet [104].

3) Recurrent Neural Networks: Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) [111] is a specialized feedforward neural network
tailored to capture temporal dependencies from sequential
data by leveraging internal memory states and recurrent
connections. Consequently, RNNs are well suited to solve
sequential problems by exploiting the temporal correlation of
data rendering them suitable for image captioning, video pro-
cessing, speech recognition, and natural language processing
applications. Moreover, unlike CNN and traditional feedfor-
ward neural networks, RNNs can handle variable-length input
sequences with the same model.

RNNs operate on input sequence vectors at varying time
steps x𝑡 and map it
to output sequence vectors y𝑡 . The
recurrence relation in an RNN parameterized by 𝚪 can be
expressed as

(cid:16)

h𝑡 = F

h𝑡−1, x𝑡 ; 𝚪

(cid:17)

(11)

where h𝑡 represents the hidden state vector at time 𝑡. The
recurrence relation represents a recursive dynamic system. By
this comparison, RNN can be deﬁned as a recursive dynamic
system that is driven by an external signal, i.e, input sequence
x𝑡 . The equation (11) can be unfolded twice as

The unfolded equations show how RNN processes the whole
past sequences x𝑡 , x𝑡−1, · · · , x1 to produce the current hidden
state h𝑡 . Another notable inference from the unfolded repre-
sentation is the parameter sharing. Unlike CNN, where the
parameters of a spatial locality are shared, in an RNN, the
parameters are shared across different positions in time. For
this reason, RNN can operate on variable-length sequences
allowing the model to learn and generalize well to inputs
of varying forms. On the other hand, traditional feedforward
network does not share parameters and have a speciﬁc param-
eter per input feature preventing it from generalizing to an
input form not seen during training. At the same time, CNN
share parameter across a small spatial location but would not
generalize to variable-length inputs as well as an RNN. A
simple many-to-many RNN architecture which maps multiple
input sequences to multiple output sequences is shown in
Figure 10.

Fig. 10: Many-to-many RNN architecture

For a simple representation, let us assume the RNN is
parameterized by 𝚪 and 𝜙 with input-to-hidden, hidden-
to-hidden,
and hidden-to-output weight matrices being
W𝑖ℎ, Wℎℎ, and Wℎ𝑜 respectively. The hidden state at time
𝑡 can be expressed as

(cid:16)

h𝑡 = F

(cid:17)

h𝑡−1, x𝑡 ; 𝚪
(cid:16)

= 𝛾ℎ

Wℎℎh𝑡−1 + W𝑖ℎx𝑡 + bℎ

(cid:17)

.

(15)

(16)

where 𝛾ℎ (◦) is the activation function of the hidden unit and
bℎ is the bias vector. The output at time 𝑡 can be obtained as
a function of the hidden state at time 𝑡,

y𝑡 = G

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

h𝑡 ; 𝜙
(cid:16)

= 𝛾𝑜

Wℎ𝑜h𝑡 + b𝑜

(cid:17)

(17)

(18)

(cid:16)

h𝑡 = F

h𝑡−1, x𝑡 ; 𝚪

(cid:17)

(12)

where 𝛾𝑜 (◦) is the activation function of the output unit and

𝑥11𝑥12𝑥13𝑥21𝑥22𝑥23𝑥31𝑥32𝑥33𝑘11𝑘12𝑘21𝑘22*Kernel=𝑚11=𝛾(𝑥11𝑘11+𝑥12𝑘12+𝑥21𝑘21+𝑥22𝑘22+𝑏)𝑚12=𝛾(𝑥12𝑘11+𝑥13𝑘12+𝑥22𝑘21+𝑥23𝑘22+𝑏)𝑚21=𝛾(𝑥21𝑘11+𝑥22𝑘12+𝑥31𝑘21+𝑥32𝑘22+𝑏)𝑚22=𝛾(𝑥22𝑘11+𝑥23𝑘12+𝑥32𝑘21+𝑥33𝑘22+𝑏)Input SliceFeature Map𝑥11𝑥12𝑥13𝑥21𝑥22𝑥23𝑥31𝑥32𝑥33𝑚11𝑚12𝑚21𝑚22530122103452265𝟐×𝟐Max Pool=Input Slice30345265Pooled Output461281203𝟐×𝟐Mean Pool=Input Slice5433Pooled Output𝐱𝑡−1𝐱𝑡𝐱𝑡+1𝐲𝑡−1𝐲𝑡𝐲𝑡+1𝐡𝑡−1𝐡𝑡𝐡𝑡+1b𝑜 is the bias vector. RNN could take different forms such
as many-to-one, one-to-many, and one-to-one as illustrated in
Figure 11.

The RNN architectures discussed here captures only hidden
states from the past. Some applications would also require
future states in addition to past. This can be accomplished
by a bidirectional RNN [112]. In simple words, bidirectional
RNN combines an RNN that depends on past states (i.e., from
h1, h2, h3, · · · , h𝑡 ) with that of an RNN which looks at future
states (i.e., from h𝑡 , h𝑡−1, h𝑡−2, · · · , h1). In RF applications,
RNNs may be used with time series data for spectrum fore-
casting, spectrum usage pattern analysis, anomaly detection,
among others.

4) Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs): GANs is
a machine learning framework that consists of two neural
networks that compete against each other [113]. The two
networks are called the Generative network (Generator G)
and Discriminative network (Discriminator D) as shown in
Figure 12. The generator G generates samples from the model
distribution and learns to deceive the discriminator D, while
the discriminator learns to distinguish between samples from
dataset and samples from generator. The generative model
generates samples by passing random noise through an FNN,
and the discriminative model
is also built using an FNN
and outputs a scalar 𝐷 (𝑥) that represents the probability that
the samples are from the dataset. Generative model G is
represented by 𝐺 (𝑧; Γ𝑔), where 𝜃𝑔 is the FNN paremeters
and 𝑧 is the input noise variable with probability distribution
𝑝𝑧 (𝑧). The discriminator model D is represented as 𝐷 (𝑥; 𝜃𝑑)
where 𝜃𝑑 is the FNN parameters and 𝑥 is the input data
samples. D is trained to maximize the probability of assigning
correct label to the samples from dataset and G is trained to
minimize log(1 − 𝐷 (𝐺 (𝑧))). The value function 𝑉 (𝐺, 𝐷) of
this minimax game of D and G is given by,

min
𝐺

max
𝐷

𝑉 (𝐷, 𝐺) = E𝑥∼ 𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡 𝑎 ( 𝑥) [log 𝐷 (𝑥)]

+ E𝑧∼ 𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡 𝑎 (𝑧) [log(1 − 𝐷 (𝐺 (𝑧)))]

(19)

In each training epoch, the discriminator is trained ﬁrst for a
ﬁxed number of steps by inserting real and fake data samples,
and update the discriminator by ascending the stochastic
gradients by keeping the generator ﬁxed. Once the discrim-
inator is trained for a ﬁxed number of steps, the generator is
updated by descending its stochastic gradient while keeping
its discriminator ﬁxed and inserting fake data with fake labels
to deceive the discriminator.

B. CNN based RF ﬁngerprinting

1) ORACLE: The authors propose a CNN framework for
RF ﬁngerprinting called ORACLE (Optimized Radio clAssi-
ﬁcation through Convolutional neuraL nEtworks) [114]. This
work provides one of the most extensive evaluations where
they demonstrate up to 99% classiﬁcation accuracy on more
than 100 consumer-of-the-shelf (COTS) WiFi devices. They
also demonstrate similar results on 16 bit-similar USRP X310
SDRs. Other key contributions of this work include the study

17

of hardware-driven features occurring in the transmit chain
that causes IQ sample variation. They study both static and
dynamic channel environment. In the case of the dynamic
channel, they explore how feedback-driven transmitter-side
modiﬁcations that use channel estimation at the receiver can
increase the differentiability for the CNN classiﬁer. Essentially,
introducing perturbations/imperfections on the transmitter-side
to aid classiﬁcation while minimizing the impact on bit error
rates.

Speciﬁcally, in the context of studying the effects of hard-
ware driven RF impairments, the authors focus on IQ im-
balance and DC offset. They use MATLAB Communications
System Toolbox to generate IEEE 802.11a standard compliant
packets. The transmitter in this case was a USRP X310 and the
receiver was a USRP B210. They also use an external database
which consisted of raw IQ collected from 140 devices which
included phones, tablets, laptops, and drones belonging to 122
manufacturers.

For the case of static channel, the authors used the following

architecture;

• Input: Raw IQ with length 128. This was formatted into

two-dimensional real value tensor of size 2 × 128

• Network: Two convolutional layers and two fully con-

nected layers each with 256 and 80 neurons.

• Kernels: 1st layer consists of 50 1×7 ﬁlters, second layer

consists 50 2 × 7 ﬁlters

• Activation Function: Each convolution layer is followed

by ReLU activation

• Output: A softmax is used in the last layer for classiﬁ-

cation.

This architecture provided a median classiﬁcation accuracy
of 99% when up to 100 different devices were used and the
performance dropped slightly to 96% for 140 devices. For the
dataset collected using 16 X310 radios, the accuracy was close
to 98.6%.

The authors clearly highlight the challenge put forth by
dynamic channels and propose introducing controlled impair-
ments to the transmitter as a solution to alleviate it. While
this may work in a setting where one can make such impair-
ments to the transmit chain, in many commercial and tactical
applications this is not an option at the physical layer. It can
be further argued at that point one is not exactly exploiting
the "unique" RF ﬁngerprint of the device but rather assigning
the device an artiﬁcial tag/id/ﬁngerprint. This is certainly an
interesting area of research that may have its application and
advantages but will also have limitations and disadvantages.
2) Unmanned Aerial Vehicles With Non-Standard Transmit-
ter Waveforms: The authors propose a multi-classiﬁer-based
RF ﬁngerprinting for UAVs [115]. This work aims to combine
outputs of multiple deep neural networks trained on a different
portion of the training set. The authors create a dataset by
collecting signals from 7 identical DJI M100 UAVs using an
USRP X310 equipped with a UBX 160 daughterboard in an
RF anechoic chamber. The IQ signals are captured by ﬂying
the UAVs at a distance of 6, 9, 12, and 15 feet from the
receiver. They collect four bursts of 2 seconds, each burst
containing ∼140 data sequences (examples) for all the UAVs
at the four different distances individually. The authors use

18

Fig. 11: RNN architectures. (a) Many-to-one, (b) One-to-many, and (c) One-to-one

malizing the training batch according to the mean and standard
deviation of the whole dataset. The normalized dataset is then
passed through the DA block where it
is convolved with
a block of multi-tap complex FIR ﬁlters. The use of DA
improved the accuracy of the multi-classiﬁer technique by
up to 95%. This work also proposes a method for detect-
ing new UAVs (UAVs not included in the training dataset).
Using the proposed multi-classiﬁer with a data augmentation
scheme, the authors show an accuracy of 99% in detecting
new UAVs. The authors clearly state that the improvement in
the accuracy when using the multi-classiﬁer approach comes
with no increase in model size compared to single ResNet1D
architecture but at the cost of a longer testing/training process.
However, one can claim that the data capture in an anechoic
chamber eliminates the rich multipath propagation effects as
in the real-world settings.

3) SEI using the bispectrum: In [118], the authors propose
a deep learning-based SEI using the bispectrum of the received
signal as the feature. The bispectrum is estimated by calcu-
lating the third-order cumulant of the RF signal. Further, the
bispectrum dimensions are reduced (bispectrum compression)
using the projection method in [119]. The reduced bispectrum
is then fed into a CNN consisting of three convolution layers
(30 kernels of size 3 × 3), a fully connected layer with 128
neurons, and a ﬁnal softmax layer that maps the outputs to
their respective classes.

Signals are collected from ﬁve USRPs including, one E310,
three B210, and one N210, and the authors show that the
proposed method has an accuracy of 75% in identifying
the ﬁve USRPs. They also collect signals from ten emitters
modeled using a memory polynomial model that consists of
multiple delays and nonlinear functions [120]. The proposed
model has an accuracy of 85% in identifying ten modeled
emitters and 87% in identifying ﬁve modeled emitters.

4) Differential Constellation Trace Figure (DCTF): The
authors of [121] propose the use of DCTF to extract RF
ﬁngerprint features and use a CNN to identify different devices
using the DCTF features. The DCTF is a 2D representation of
the differential relation of the time-series signal. DCTF-based
feature extraction was ﬁrst proposed in [122] where they used
a minimum distance classiﬁer to achieve an accuracy of 90%
in identifying 16 CC2530 ZigBee modules at SNR≥ 15 dB.
In this work, the authors aim to use CNN as a classiﬁer to
improve classiﬁcation accuracy. The DCTF ﬁgure is highly
inﬂuenced by the hardware imperfections that are related to
the RF ﬁngerprint features. These images are classiﬁed using a

Fig. 12: Simple Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
structure

1D modiﬁed versions of AlexNet (AlexNet1D) and ResNet50
(ResNet1D) neural network architectures for classiﬁcation.
AlexNet1D is a forward CNN with ﬁve blocks (consisting of
two 1D convolutional layers with 128 ﬁlters of sizes 7 and 5
respectively, followed by a MaxPooling layer) stacked on top
of 2 fully connected layers of sizes 256 and 128 respectively.
This work is the ﬁrst to show the effect of aerial hovering of
UAVs on the accuracy of DL-based RF ﬁngerprinting. When
the network is trained with all 4 bursts of the UAVs dataset,
the network performs well in identifying the UAVs. But when
the network is trained using the ﬁrst three bursts and tested
on burst 4, both the network architectures perform with an
accuracy of 50%. This drop in accuracy shows the effect
of continuous channel variation and minute UAV movements
when hovering. To overcome this effect, the authors propose
a multi-classiﬁer scheme in which the burst signals from the
dataset are partitioned to form non-overlapping sets and each
of these partitions is used as training sets for identical but
independent AlexNet1D Neural Networks. The outputs of the
neural networks are then combined using a two-level score-
based aggregation method. They also propose an algorithm
for determining the number of neural networks to be used in
the multi-classiﬁer scheme. To evaluate the proposed method,
the authors choose to use 12 neural networks. The proposed
multi-classiﬁer technique improves the classiﬁcation accuracy
from 50% when using a single classiﬁer to 91% when the
network is trained using the ﬁrst three bursts and tested using
the fourth burst.

The authors also propose a Data Augmentation (DA)
scheme for training individual neural networks in the multi-
classiﬁer technique. DA is the method of expanding the
training dataset by modifying the original samples in a proper
manner [116], [117]. In this work, DA is performed by nor-

𝐱𝑡−1𝐱𝑡𝐱𝑡+1𝐲𝐡𝑡−1𝐡𝑡𝐡𝑡+1𝐱𝐡𝑡−1𝐡𝑡𝐡𝑡+1𝐲𝑡−1𝐲𝑡𝐲𝑡+1𝐲𝐡𝑡−1𝐡𝑡𝐡𝑡+1𝐱(a)(b)(c)GeneratorDiscriminatorReal datasetsamplesOutput coditionHyper-parameter tuning feedbackfake samplesRandomVariableCNN to identify the devices. To evaluate the performance of
the DCTF-CNN, the authors capture signals from 54 Texas
Instruments CC2530 ZigBee modules using a USRP. The
DCTF is computed for each of the signals and classiﬁed using
a network consisting of three convolutional layers and one
fully connected layer. The three convolutional layers are of
sizes 16, 32, and 64, respectively, with a kernel size of 3 × 3.
A 2 × 2 max pooling is applied to each of the outputs of the
convolutional layers.

The performance of the DCTF-CNN method is evaluated
for different DCTF image quality and SNR. DCTF image
quality depends on the size of the DCTF size. Lower size
DCTF images perform poorly because of blurring of features,
whereas larger size DCTF images have better performance
but with the drawback of requiring more samples and higher
complexity. In this work, the best performance for the designed
CNN is achieved by using a DCTF image of size 65x65. Using
the ﬁxed DCTF image size, the authors further investigate the
effect of SNR on performance. The DCTF-CNN achieves a
classiﬁcation accuracy of 93.8% at SNR of 15dB and 99.1%
at SNR 30dB.

5) RF signal spectrum: In [123], the authors propose the
use of a CNN to identify the devices from the RF signal
spectrum. A dataset consisting of 10,000 signals from each
of the ﬁve transmitters at an SNR of 20 dB generated by
Monte Carlo experiments with random AWGN and multipath
channels is used. The RF signals are processed by an STFT
to convert the time domain signals to time-frequency domain
thereby generating the RF signal spectrum. RF signal spectrum
reﬂects the characteristics of the signal
in the frequency
domain and the change of the frequency domain of the signal
over time. The RF signal spectrum is then fed into the CNN
to classify the signal.

The authors use a modiﬁed version of the VGG-16 model
to classify the signals. VGG-16 network model consists of
thirteen convolution layers with a kernel of 3 × 3 and two
fully connected layers interlaced with ﬁve maxpool layers, as
shown in Figure 13. The output of the ﬁnal layer is fed to a
softmax layer to generate transmitter class tags distribution.
The VGG-16 is modiﬁed by adding a Batch Normalization
(BN) operation after each convolutional layer and a random
dropout layer after the ﬁrst two fully connected layers. BN
helps in speeding up the model’s convergence during training,
and the dropout layer discards random neurons leading to a
more sparse feature map thereby helping in reducing overﬁt-
ting. The network is trained with 1000 signals from each of
the ﬁve transmitters using an Adam optimizer to minimize the
loss. The proposed method achieves an accuracy of 99.7% in
identifying ﬁve devices.

6) A Massive Experimental Study: A large-scale RF ﬁn-
gerprinting study on a DARPA dataset - 400 GB of WiFi
and Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B)
waveforms from 10,000 devices - is presented in [124]. This
is the ﬁrst large-scale study which elaborates the effect of
device population, burst
type, environmental, and channel
effects on CNN-based RF ﬁngerprinting architectures. The
authors present two architectures: 1) A baseline model inspired
by AlexNet comprising ﬁve stacks followed by four fully

19

Fig. 13: VGG-16 Network

connected layers. Each stack is composed of two convolution
layers (128 kernels each with kernel sizes 1 × 7 and 1 × 5
respectively) and a max pooling layer, 2) A ResNet-50-1D
which is a modiﬁed ResNet-50 architecture such that it can
accommodate one-dimensional time series IQ samples. The
WiFi dataset include emissions from 5117 devices with 166
transmissions on average from each device while the ADS-B
dataset contains 5000 emitters of 76 average emissions. The
authors preprocess the WiFi dataset with band ﬁltering and
partial equalization and adopt a sliding window approach to
transform signals in both datasets to a ﬁxed form suitable for
the CNNs.

The authors conduct an extensive RF ﬁngerprinting study
in parts by forming multiple learning tasks for the CNN
classiﬁers. In order to ease the readers into these 22 learning
tasks, we succinctly list the broad task categories below:

1) Task 1 - network performance with scaling device popu-

lation grouped into four categories (A to D).

2) Task 1M - similar to Task 1 but under multiburst setting
where each device may emit multiple transmissions for
joint classiﬁcation. Here again there are four subtasks (A
to D).

3) Task 2 - effect of training set size on classiﬁer perfor-

mance. This task has three subtasks (A to C).

4) Task 3 - effect of channel by collecting captures under
varying time frames and environmental conditions (in-
door vs outdoor). This task has four subtasks (A to D).
5) Task 4 - assess the effect of SNR on classiﬁcation

accuracy by four subtasks (A to D).

6) Task 5 - with 19 bitwise identical emitters.

The dataset is grouped into different subsets to suit the
aforementioned tasks. With the above task assessments, the
authors reported that both baseline and ResNet-50-1D models
scale gracefully on Task 1. The multiburst predictions, i.e.,
Task 1M along with Task 5 demonstrated signiﬁcantly higher
accuracy. Task 2 evaluation indicated improvement in model

Conv2D, 64Conv2D, 64maxpoolConv2D, 128Conv2D, 128Conv2D, 128maxpoolConv2D, 256Conv2D, 256Conv2D, 256maxpoolConv2D, 512Conv2D, 512Conv2D, 512maxpoolConv2D, 512Conv2D, 512Conv2D, 512maxpoolFC, 4096FC, 4096FC, 1000SoftmaxInputaccuracy with the inclusion of more transmissions in the train-
ing set. Finally, the Tasks 3 and 4 exhibited that the predictions
were affected by environmental and channel conditions. The
authors state that the ADS-B emitter classiﬁcation manifested
as a simpler classiﬁcation problem in contrast to WiFi in light
of the higher accuracy. Finally, the baseline model which
is the modiﬁed AlexNet demonstrated superior performance
in comparison to ResNet-50-1D in several of the learning
tasks, indicating deeper is not always better. These results
are also discussed in [125] where evaluation on a custom
dataset collected by the authors in a laboratory setting is also
presented. This custom dataset is a 7 TB dataset comprising
emissions from 20 USRP radios. We elaborate on this dataset
in section V-F.

7) Trust in 5G Open RANs: Reus-Muns et al. in [126]
propose the use of CNNs augmented with triplet loss to detect
speciﬁc emitters through RF ﬁngerprinting. The authors aim
to combat the adversarial impact of the wireless channel by
using a neural network with a triplet-loss function. A dataset
consisting of signals from Basestations that emit standards-
compliant WiFi, LTE, and 5G New Radio (NR) waveforms
is used to evaluate the proposed network. The dataset
is
described in detail in Section.V-F6. The dataset is used to
train two CNN classiﬁers: baseline CNN and Triplet network.
The baseline CNN architecture consists of four convolutional
layers (with 40 ﬁlters of size 1 × 7, 1 × 5, 2 × 7, and 2 × 5,
respectively) followed by three fully connected layers and a
ﬁnal softmax classiﬁer layer. The Triplet network architecture
is similar to the baseline CNN except a triplet loss function is
employed. The triplet loss [127] is designed to enforce class
separation into embedding space and is trained on a series of
triples - anchor, positive, and negative. The triplet loss function
aims to train the neural network to maximize the separation
between the anchor and the negative labels while minimizing
the distance between the anchor and the positive classes.

The proposed baseline and triplet loss CNN are trained
and tested with the WiFi transmissions from the dataset and
the overall classiﬁcation accuracy is 92.92% and 99.98%,
respectively. Next, the authors propose three step algorithm
that returns a quantitative measure of trust in a Base Station
(BS). This approach assigns a trust category based on the
softmax probability range of the chosen class. For softmax
range ≤ 80% the device is assigned No Trust, for the range
[80%, 99%] the device is tagged as Partial Trust, and for
≥ 99% the device will fall under Trusted category.

8) Dilated Causal Convolutional Model: The authors pro-
pose an augmented dilated causal convolution (ADCC) net-
work that combines a stack of dilated causal convolution
layers with traditional convolutional layers to classify wireless
devices based on their RF ﬁngerprints [14]. In this work, the
authors train and evaluate the proposed model on transmis-
sions from up to 10,000 devices consisting of WiFi (IEEE
802.11a and 802.11g) and ADS-B signals. The authors use the
data provided by Radio-Frequency Machine Learning Systems
(RFMLS) research program [128]. It consists of 103 million
transmissions from over 53,000 WiFi devices and 3.5 million
ADS-B transmissions from over 10,000 devices.

A dilated convolution is a type of convolution where the

ﬁlter is applied over an area larger than its length by skipping
input values with a certain step as shown in Figure 14 [129].

20

Fig. 14: Dilated Causal Convolutional Network

The proposed ADCC model consists of two main compo-
nents, the residual blocks, and the traditional convolution, and
pooling blocks. The model consisted of eight residual blocks
in series, each made up of a gated convolution operation that is
causal and dilated (GDCC) followed by a causal convolution
layer with a kernel size of one. Before the ﬁrst residual block,
the input is passed through a DCC layer with dilation rate
of one. Skip connections from each of the eight residual
blocks are summed and used as the input for the traditional
convolution and pooling blocks, consisting of three stacks of
two convolution layers and a pooling layer each. The ﬁrst
1600 IQ values are processed by the ADCC model to generate
2500 features. To extract additional features from ID-speciﬁc
information about the device, the authors propose to extract
2500 features from twenty subsequences of size 200 IQ values
uniformly distributed throughout the rest of the signal. Each
of the twenty subsequences is processed by two blocks with
causal convolution and pooling layer, individually. The feature
map from each of the twenty processes is then input to an
average pooling resulting in 2500 features. The 2500 features
from the ADCC block, and the 2500 features extracted from
the twenty subsequences are concatenated together and passed
as the input to the dense classiﬁcation layer.

The authors evaluate the proposed method by conducting
the learning tasks Task 1 through Task 4 as in section V-B6.
It was noted that for Task 1 the performance scaled linearly
in the logarithm of the device population. The multiburst
accuracy was shown to be better than single burst accuracy
implying performance gains with coherent processing. Similar
to the [124], the accuracy of ADS-B device ﬁngerprinting
was higher in contrast to WiFi which the authors state could
be due to the open air propagation of ADS-B. The Task
2 experiments further revealed only 2% drop in accuracy
when training size is reduced from 501 to 313 suggesting
the network efﬁciency with small training size. The authors
note drastically reduced performance under Task 3 evaluations
when the channel differs between the training and validation
sets implying the sensitivity of ﬁngerprint features to the
propagation effects. The evaluation in Task 4 exhibited lower
accuracy when the training SNR was higher than the validation
SNR, and higher accuracy when validation SNR was higher
than the training SNR.

In a more recent work [130], the authors adopt a multi-burst
approach towards improving the ﬁngerprinting accuracy for
large-scale ﬁngerprinting involving greater population sizes.
Speciﬁcally, the multi-burst processing utilizes multiple bursts

InputHiddenlayerHiddenlayerHiddenlayerOutputDilation = 1Dilation = 2Dilation = 4Dilation = 8of the signal from the same but unknown device (i.e., sharing
same label) to drive the noise level down. The inference is
performed on multiple bursts and the class probability vectors
from the inference on each bursts are combined to derive a
ﬁnal class prediction. The authors report a prediction accuracy
in upwards of 95% across different signal types (WiFi and
ADS-B).

To conclude this discussion on RF ﬁngerprinting using
CNNs, we have enlisted the reviewed works in a tabular form
in Table V for easy reference.

C. Generative Adversarial Networks

1) Classiﬁcation based on Auxiliary Classiﬁer Wasserstein
GANs: The authors propose a RF-based UAV classiﬁcation
system based on Auxiliary Classiﬁer Wasserstein Generative
Adversarial Networks (AC-WGAN) in [133]. In this work,
the authors collect wireless data from four different types
of UAVs (including Phantom, Mi, Hubsan, and Xiro) using
Agilent (DSO9404A) oscilloscope with antenna for indoor
environment and USRP N210 with CBX daughterboard for an
outdoor environment. The authors show the proposed system
achieves an accuracy of 95% for recognizing UAVs in an
indoor environment.

In this work, the authors improve the discriminative network
of the auxiliary classiﬁer generative adversarial nets (AC-
GAN) proposed in [134] to modify it to classify wireless
signals collected from UAVs and also improve the AC-GAN
model following the Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [135] model
to make the proposed model more stable during training. RM-
SProp is chosen as the loss function instead of Adam due to
its better performance in nonstationary problems [136]. During
training, samples (training samples) are fed to the generator
and the discriminator networks to update the negative critic
loss by ascending its stochastic gradient. Then, the testing
samples are classiﬁed by the discriminator according to the
value of negative critic loss.

The authors capture the wireless signals from the UAVs
and apply a bandpass ﬁlter to get the wireless signal in the
2.4-2.5 GHz band, after which the start point of the signal is
detected, and the amplitude envelope is extracted. To reduce
the dimensionality of the UAV’s wireless signals, the authors
propose to use a modiﬁed PCA. Using the signals captured
indoors from the 4 UAVs and WiFi signal, the authors test the
proposed model and show that the accuracy of classiﬁcation
of different UAVs is greater than 95% at SNR of 5 dB. They
also show that the proposed classiﬁcation using AC-WGANs
with PCA performs better than the standard SVM and AC-
GAN models and are also suited for real-time classiﬁcation
over long distances in the range 10 m to 400 m.

2) GANs with Adversarial learning: In [137], an adver-
sarial learning technique for identifying RF transmitters is
implemented using generative adversarial nets (GANs). The
authors also implement a CNN and DNN based classiﬁer that
exploits the IQ imbalance present in the received signal to
learn the unique ﬁngerprint features for classifying the devices.
The dataset used in this work consists of QPSK modulation
signals from eight USRP B210s received using an RTL-SDR

21

and are considered as signals from trusted transmitters. With
the help of an adversary, the generator model generates random
signals with noise and is passed to the discriminative model as
input. The discriminative models of the GANs take input from
both the generator model and trusted transmitters and improve
the random signal to imitate the real data by giving feedback
to the generator model for tuning the hyperparameters. The
generator model network consists of two fully connected
layers with 512 and 1024 nodes, and the discriminative model
network is made of three fully connected layers with 1024,
512, and 2 nodes with dropout layers between the ﬁrst two
fully connected layers. The GANs is modeled to identify if
the signal is from a trusted transmitter. The proposed GANs
model identiﬁes the 8 trusted transmitters with an accuracy of
99.9%.

To classify the signals to identify the transmitters,
the
authors design and implement a CNN and a DNN. The CNN
as shown in Figure 15a has three Conv2D layers of size 1024,
512, and 256 ﬁlters with a kernel of size 2 × 3, followed by
three fully connected layers of 512, 256, and 8 nodes. A
MaxPooling2D layer of size 2 × 2 is applied after each of
the three convolution layers and a dropout layer is applied
after each of the convolution and fully connected layers. The
DNN as shown in Figure 15b has three fully connected layers
with 1024, 512, and 8 nodes with dropout layers between
the ﬁrst two fully connected layers. The proposed CNN and
DNN have a classiﬁcation accuracy of 89.07% and 97.21%,
respectively, for classifying four devices and 81.59% and
96.6%, respectively, for eight USRP devices. The classiﬁcation
accuracy of DNN is improved to 99.9% by using the proposed
GANs model to distinguish trusted transmitters from fake ones
before classifying them.

(b) DNN

(a) CNN

Fig. 15: Proposed CNN and DNN networks to classify signals

InputConv2D, 1024Conv2D, 512Conv2D, 256FlattenFC, 512FC, 256FC, 8MaxPooling & DropoutMaxPooling & DropoutMaxPooling & DropoutMaxPooling & DropoutDropoutDropoutDropoutOutputInputFC, 1024FC, 512FC, 8OutputDropoutDropout22

Work
Sankhe et al. [114]

RFF feature
IQ imbalance & DC
offset

RF emitters
140 devices (phones,
tablets, laptops, &
drones)

Performance
99% up to 100 devices,
96% up to 140 devices &
98.6% for dataset [131]

Soltani et al. [115]

Multiple data bursts

7 DJI M100 UAVs

up to 99%

Ding et al. [118]

Bispectrum

1 E310, 3 B210s, & 1
N210

up to 87%

Peng et al. [121]

DCTF

54 Texas Instruments
CC2530 ZigBee modules

93.8% at 15dB SNR and
99.1% at 30dB SNR

Zong et al. [123]

RF signal spectrum

5 simulated transmitters

99.7%

Jian et al. [124]

Time-domain RF Signal

5117 WiFi devices and
5000 ADS-B devices

Amani Al-Shawabka et
al. [125]

Time-domain RF Signal

Guillem Reus-Muns et
al. [126]
Josh et al. [14]

Time-domain RF Signal

Time-domain RF Signal

20 National Instruments
SDR (12 NI N210 and 8
NI X310)

4 BSs in the POWDER
Platform [132]
53k WiFi and 10k
ADS-B devices

TABLE V: CNN architectures for RF ﬁngerprinting

Per-transmission ADS-B
accuracy of
91.9%, 76.8%, 92.5%
with 100 devices for
Task 1D, 2C, and 4F,
respectively.

Training and Testing on
the same day ≥ 87.41%

99.98% for 10 slices
using majority voting
Top-ﬁve accuracy of
97%, 95%, 99%, 98%
with 100 devices for
Task 1D, 2C, 3E, and
4F, respectively.

D. Probabilistic Neural Network

1) Energy spectrum based approach: The authors in [138]
propose a transient-based RF ﬁngerprinting approach for
extracting the unique characteristics of the wireless device
from part of the energy spectrum of the transient signal.
The work aims at reducing the computational complexity of
feature extraction compared to techniques based on spectral
ﬁngerprinting. The proposed method is evaluated using data
collected from eight IEEE 802.11b WiFi transceivers.

In this work, the instantaneous amplitudes of the captured
signals are used to detect the transient. The starting point of
the transient is estimated by using a Bayesian ramp change
detector [139], and the endpoint is estimated by using a sliding
window to calculate the average instantaneous amplitude of
the samples. The ﬁrst peak before the next steady state
signal starts is chosen as the end point. Then the energy
spectrum is obtained using discrete Fourier transform (DFT).
By examining the frequency domain energy spectrum of these
transients, the authors deduce that most of the information is
concentrated in low-frequency components of the spectrum.
Hinging on these observations, the authors propose that the

number of energy spectral coefﬁcients (𝐾) that carry the
characteristic information can be calculated as,

𝐾 =

(cid:21)

(cid:20) 𝑊
Δ 𝑓

(20)

where [·] denotes integer part of 𝐾, 𝑊 is the transmission
bandwidth, and Δ 𝑓 is frequency resolution of the DFT given
by

Δ 𝑓 =

1
𝑇𝑑

=

1
𝑁𝑇𝑠

=

𝑓𝑠
𝑁

(21)

where 𝑁 is the transient duration (in samples), 𝑇𝑑 is average
transient duration in seconds, 𝑇𝑠 is sampling period, and 𝑓𝑠 is
sampling frequency. Lastly, the classiﬁcation is carried out by
using a probabilistic neural network (PNN) classiﬁer. A PNN
is a feedforward neural network that estimates the probability
density function (PDF) of each class using the Parzen window
[140]. Then, using the PDF of each class for the given input,
the class with the highest posterior probability is estimated
using Bayes’ rule.

The classiﬁcation performance of the proposed technique
was carried out using a dataset collected from eight different

IEEE 802.11b WiFi devices with 100 transmissions from each
device. An average transient duration was calculated for the
data in the training set for a sampling rate of 5 GSps to
determine the spectral feature length using equations (20) and
(21). The proposed method has a classiﬁcation accuracy of
90% and 97.91% at 0 dB and 25 dB, respectively.

2) Effect of Sampling Rate on Transient-based ﬁngerprint-
ing: The authors in [141] investigate the effect of sampling
rate on the classiﬁcation performance of a transient-based RF
ﬁngerprinting method. A Bayesian ramp detector is employed
to detect turn-on transient and amplitude features (instanta-
neous amplitude responses), and its dimensionality reduced
PCA features are extracted and used as the input features to
train a PNN classiﬁer to identify devices. The authors collect
data from eight different IEEE 802.11b WiFi transmitters at a
sampling rate of 5 GSps. A total of 100 transmissions are
captured from each of the eight transmitters. To study the
effect of sampling rate, authors use the decimation process
to downsample the 5 GSps to 2.5 GSps, 1 GSps, 500 MSps,
200 MSps, 100 MSps, 50 MSps, and 28 MSps.
The classiﬁcation accuracy is evaluated by conducting two
experiments. In the ﬁrst experiment, downsampling was per-
formed after detection of the transient at a higher sampling
rate. In the second experiment, transient detection was per-
formed after downsampling the original signal. The average
classiﬁcation accuracy of both amplitude and PCA features
at all the sampling rates was 97.7% and 97.5% for the ﬁrst
and second experiment, respectively, indicating that sampling
rates have very little to no impact for transient based RF
ﬁngerprinting of WiFi transmitters.

E. Attentional Learning

Attention mechanism was ﬁrst introduced for RF ﬁnger-
printing in [142]. The authors adopt a cross-domain attentional
architecture that extracts spatio-temporal, temporal, and time-
frequency features from 1024 × 1 raw IQ input samples. A
1D/2D CNN architecture in conjunction with gated recurrent
units (GRUs) and STFT processing were adopted to extract the
multiple domain features from the raw IQ samples. Further,
the capability of the model to perform multiple tasks (emitter
and protocol recognition) were demonstrated with the MTL
version of the proposed architecture. The authors perform
real-world experimental evaluation under single day train-test
(TTSD) and mixed days train-test (TTMD) scenarios. Here,
the authors consider real-world IoT devices such as Raspberry
Pis and Lenovo laptops with combo chipsets (emitting Blue-
tooth and WiFi waveforms from a single chipset) and achieve
a ﬁngerprinting accuracy of 84.3% and 63.8% under the TTSD
and TTMD scenarios respectively (while performing 100%
protocol recognition) in identifying emissions from 10 COTS
chipsets.

A recent work in attentional learning for Bluetooth ﬁn-
gerprinting was reported in [143]. Here, the authors tuned
into 2 MHz of the challenging frequency hopping Bluetooth
spectrum for identifying 10 COTS Bluetooth emitters. A
scalable, hybrid CNN-GRU architecture with ability to support
input tensor length of up to 1 MS is proposed. The authors

23

demonstrate the computational efﬁciency of the proposed
architecture in contrast to the benchmark model and report
a 16.9× fewer ﬂoating point operations (FLOPs) and 7.5×
lesser trainable parameters. The signiﬁcance of processing
greater sample lengths in identifying the challenging frequency
hopping Bluetooth waveform was elaborately studied with
reported accuracy of up to 91% in identifying 10 COTS
emitters.

F. Open RF Fingerprinting Dataset

A soaring issue in the applied AI/ML for RF realm, unlike
other prominent ﬁelds such as computer vision and natural
language processing, is the lack of availability and uniformity
of diverse and large-scale datasets which can be integrated
as well as easily ported to AI/ML frameworks such as Keras
[144], PyTorch [145], TensorFlow [146], etc. A few datasets
have been released recently to aid deep learning for wireless
communications [36], [147]–[149] for modulation and pro-
tocol classiﬁcation, however, due to the lack of momentum
and a common standard to organize the datasets in contrast to
computer vision and NLP in AI/ML, these are not integrated
yet with such frameworks. Another factor contributing to the
dataset inaccessibility is the obliviousness of practitioners in
this ﬁeld of the available datasets, although limited. Accord-
ingly, here we present a summarized excerpt on each of
the openly available RF ﬁngerprinting dataset to educate the
reader.

1) Large-scale Bluetooth dataset from 86 smartphones: In
[150], the authors present an elaborate database comprising
Bluetooth RF recordings from COTs smartphones of differ-
ent makes and models captured at different sampling rates.
The dataset contains recordings captured over the period of
several months since the unique ﬁngerprint from hardware
impairments do not vary signiﬁcantly over short time spans
- days, weeks, or months. The smartphones were kept at a
ﬁxed distance of 30cm from the receiving antenna connected
to a high sampling rate oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS7404)
along with a low resolution 8-bit ADC. Since the Bluetooth
operate at the ISM2400 band, a COTS antenna operating in
this frequency range was utilized. The edge detection mode
of the oscilloscope was leveraged to record the samples of
duration 10𝜇s into a text format (.txt). The recorded samples
are real-valued time series (voltage/times). The entire database
is split into sub-datasets comprising Bluetooth signals sampled
at 5 GSps, 10 GSps, 20 GSps, and 250 MSps. Corresponding
to each dataset,150 Bluetooth signals from each device was
recorded yielding a total of 12,900 captures from 86 smart-
phones. The authors also note that the spur signals introduced
by the oscilloscope were removed by band pass ﬁltering.
Moreover, the ﬁltered samples are normalized such that the
samples are in the range of -1 to +1.

2) Dataset containing RF signals from 17 drone remote
controllers: The authors of [151] released a RF signal dataset
to enable researchers to develop UAV identiﬁcation techniques
based on the signal captured from the remote controllers. The
communication between UAV and the remote controller can
enable AI/ML frameworks to effectively ﬁngerprint UAVs.

The captures were recorded by placing the drones in an idle
state such that only the remote controller data is captured.
The receiver frontend comprised a 6 GHz bandwidth Keysight
MSOS604A oscilloscope, 2.4 GHz 24 dBi grid parabolic
antenna, and a low-noise ampliﬁer operating from 2 GHz to
2.6 GHz. The distance between the drone remote controller
and the receiving antenna was varied from 1m to 5m. The RF
signal is recorded as digitized voltage vs time samples at a
sampling rate of 20 GSps with 5 Million samples per signal.
The waveforms comprise emissions from 17 drone remote
controllers from eight different manufacturers. The database
is containerized in a MATLAB (.mat) format.

3) Real world ADS-B signals dataset from over 140 com-
mercial aircrafts: A real world dataset containing ADS-B
signal emissions from more than 140 commercial aircrafts to
air trafﬁc control (ATC) centers is provided by the authors of
[153], [157]. Commercial aircrafts broadcast their geograph-
ical coordinates along with their unique International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) identiﬁers to the ATC centers
using ADS-B standard. The ADS-B signals are captured with
a USRP B210 receiver tuned to 1090 MHz and at a 8 MSps
sampling rate over a period of 24 hours at
the Daytona
Beach international airport. The authors decoded the ADS-
B messages to extract the aircraft identity codes and utilized
the messages from over 140 most frequently seen aircrafts to
form the dataset. The authors have another dataset of ADS-
B waveforms from 100 aircrafts at [152] received with a
BladeRF SDR. Both datasets are containerized into MATLAB
(.mat) format.

4) ORACLE RF Fingerprinting Dataset of IEEE802.11a
from 16 emitters: The authors of [131] present a WiFi IEEE
802.11a emitter dataset to detect unique radios using ORACLE
RF ﬁngerprinting approach. The dataset contains two sets:
Dataset#1 and Dataset#2. Dataset#1 consists of IEEE 802.11a
standard Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) frame IQ
samples from 16 USRP X310 SDRs collected using a USRP
B210 Radio sampling at a rate of 5 MSps at a center frequency
of 2.45 GHz. For each of the 16 transmitters, the IQ samples
are captured at a varying transmitter-receiver distance from 2
ft - 62 ft in steps of 6 ft. Dataset#2 consists of demodulated
IQ symbols with intentional
introduction such
that the synthetic hardware impairments dominate the channel
effects. Accordingly, the authors use the GNU Radio function
set_iq_balance to introduce intentional IQ imbalance (16 IQ
imbalance conﬁgurations corresponding to 16 emitters) to
the transmit chain of the RF daughterboard. The recording
are the demodulated IQ symbols after equalizing over-the-
cable transmissions from USRP X310s collected using USRP
B210 Radio. Both the datasets are formatted according to
SigMF speciﬁcations wherein each data ﬁle in binary format
is accompanied by a JSON metadata ﬁle.

impairment

5) Non-standard Waveforms from 7 Hovering Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs): In [154], the authors create a dataset
for RF ﬁngerprinting of hovering UAVs. The dataset consists
of signals collected from 7 identical DJI M100 UAVs in an RF
anechoic chamber. Signals are captured using an USRP X310
with UBX 160 USRP daughterboard. The receiver is tuned
to the 10 MHz of downlink channel centered at 2.4065 GHz.

24

The signals are captured by ﬂying the UAVs individually at
distances of 6, 9, 12, and 15 ft from the receiver. Each capture
consists of 4 cycles of recording IQ samples for ∼ 2 seconds
and pausing for ∼ 10 seconds, resulting in 4 non-overlapping
bursts with ∼ 140 interleaved short periods of data and noise
in each burst. Accordingly, with a total of 7 UAVs where each
are ﬂew at 4 distances with 4 bursts (each of ∼ 140 examples)
at each distance, the dataset provides over 13k examples of ∼
92k IQ samples per example. The dataset is in SigMF format
with data of each capture stored in binary format accompanied
by a JSON ﬁle with the metadata of the capture.

6) RF Fingerprinting on the POWDER Platform with 4
emitters: The authors of [155] provide a dataset from 4
different emitters transmitting waveforms belonging to 3 wire-
less standards to demonstrate and evaluate feasibility of RF
ﬁngerprinting of base stations with a large-scale over-the-
air experimental POWDER platform [132]. Using a ﬁxed
endpoint (Humanties) USRP B210 receiver, IQ samples are
collected from four emitters in the POWDER Platform: MEB,
Browning, Beavioral, and Honors. The emitters are bit-similar
USRP X310 radios which transmit standard compliant IEEE
802.11a, Long Term Evolution (LTE), or 5G New Radio (5G-
NR) frames generated using WLAN, LTE, and 5G toolboxes
from MATLAB, respectively. The USRP B210 receiver is
tuned to record 2.685 GHz (Band 7) at a sampling rate of
5 MSps for WiFi and 7.69 MSps for LTE and 5G. On two
independent days, ﬁve sets of 2 s of IQ samples are recorded
from each of the links. Consequently, the dataset is organized
into a Day-1 and Day-2 sets. The dataset follows the SigMF
speciﬁcations.

7) Exposing the Fingerprint Dataset: Al-Shawabka et al.
create and share a dataset [156] for experimenting and eval-
uating radio ﬁngerprinting algorithms. WiFi standard IEEE
802.11a/g signals are collected from 20 National Instruments
SDR (12 NI N210 and 8 NI X310) running GNU Radio. Four
datasets are created with three different channel conditions
and two different environments. Dataset "Setup 1" consists
of signals captured from 20 transmitting SDRs with each
transmitter using a dedicated Ettus VERT2450 antenna and
varying distance from the receiver. The dataset collection
process is repeated on ten days. Dataset "Setup 2" is captured
similarly to "Setup 1", but all the SDR use a common Ettus
VERT2450 antenna making all 20 devices equidistant from the
receiver. This leads to all transmissions experiencing similar
channel and multi-path conditions. The dataset collection
process is repeated on two different days. Dataset "Setup 3" is
collected by capturing the WiFi signals from 20 transmitters
using a single coaxial RF SMA cable and a 5 dB attenuator.
Thereby, all signals experience the same channel conditions
and eliminate any multipath conditions. The dataset collection
process is repeated on two different days. Datasets "Setup 1",
"Setup 2", and "Setup 3" are collected in an arena "in the wild"
environment. Dataset "Setup 4" is collected similar to "Setup
2" but in an anechoic chamber with each transmitter connected
to the same antenna. All the "Setup 4" IQ samples are collected
on one day. The following three IQ samples are collected: Raw
IQ before FFT, Raw IQ after FFT, and Equalized IQ for all the
datasets. Each of the IQ sample ﬁles is labeled using SigMF

25

TABLE VI: Summary table of open RF ﬁngerprinting datasets

Dataset Waveform

[150]

Bluetooth

[151]

Non-standard

Emitter
count

86

17

Emitter type Receiver

Smartphones

Tektronix
TDS7404

Drone remote
controllers

Keysight
MSOS604A

Dataset
format

Generated /
Real-world

Frequency

.txt

Real-world

2.4 GHz

.mat

Real-world

2.4 GHz

[152]

ADS-B

100

Commercial
aircraft

[153]

ADS-B

> 140

Commercial
aircraft

BladeRF

.mat

Real-world

1090 MHz

USRP B210

.mat

Real-world

1090 MHz

[131]

IEEE 802.11a

16

USRP X310 USRP B210

SigMF

Generated

2.45 GHz

[154]

Non-standard

[155]

IEEE 802.11a,
LTE, 5G-NR

7

4

DJI M100

USRP X310 SigMF

Generated

2.4065 GHz

USRP X310 USRP B210

SigMF

Generated

2.685 GHz

[156]

IEEE 802.11a/g

20

USRP X310
USRP N210

USRP N210 SigMF

Generated

2.432 GHz

and is accompanied by a JSON ﬁle containing the metadata
of each of the transmission settings.

A tabular summary of the openly available RF ﬁngerprinting
datasets is presented in Table VI to allow the reader to contrast
the distinguishing features. Although the datasets [131], [154]–
[156] are synthetically generated, they follow the SigMF spec-
iﬁcations allowing easy integration into AI/ML frameworks
in contrast to the other discussed real-world datasets which
would require speciﬁc import scripts requiring MATLAB or
csv readers.

VI. RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTION

In so far, we have seen the various wireless device ﬁnger-
printing approaches and how it plays a role in wireless security.
For completeness of the presented subject, in this section,
we motivate future research in this direction by identifying
a few key open research problems and opportunities towards
developing a robust radio frequency ﬁngerprinting system
(RFFS). These challenges are also illustrated in an IoT network
setting in Figure 16 to ease the reader into the potential
research avenues.

Impact of receiver hardware: Similar to how the transmitter
hardware introduce unique distortions, the receiver hardware
that captures and processes these emissions for ﬁngerprinting
can impact the ﬁngerprinting approach. Speciﬁcally, the phase
noise, clock offsets, ﬁlter distortions, IQ imbalance, etc.,
introduced by the receiver hardware could etch its own unique
ﬁngerprint to transform the transmitter ﬁngerprint to appear as
from a rogue or unidentiﬁed emitter. The ADC sampling rate
as well as bandwidth of low pass ﬁlter (LPF) play an equally
important role in retaining the ﬁngerprint features that reside
in the side lobes of the power spectrum density (PSD). Higher
sampling rates were shown to retain the ﬁngerprint features at
a cost of increased noise using actual MicaZ sensors [158].
Moreover, the effect of antenna polarization and orientation

at the transmitter and receiver end can cause ﬂuctuations in
radiation pattern affecting the ﬁngerprint extraction perfor-
mance. The imperfection of emitter antenna hardware can
also contribute to the ﬁngerprint feature set enabling wireless
emitter identiﬁcation [69]. We argue here that the number
of receiver antennas, type, their orientation, and polarization
can impact the classiﬁcation performance of the ﬁngerprinting
system.

One way to tackle this in a supervised learning setting would
be to incorporate captures from multiple receiver hardwares
corresponding to an emitter in the dataset. Such a larger dis-
tribution of training data would allow the model to generalize
and differentiate the emitter ﬁngerprint from the recorded
waveforms. The independence of ﬁngerprinting algorithm can
be assessed by training on samples captured by a particular
receiver hardware and evaluating the learned emitter features
by testing on samples from another receiver hardware.

Vulnerabilities of RFFS: The broadcast nature of wireless
emitters renders them exposed and susceptible to identity
spooﬁng. Few such attacks are DoS, impersonation, bandwidth
theft, etc. It is often overlooked that passive receiver threats
can build up their own dataset of emissions from speciﬁc
transmitters to build cognitive RFFS. Developing or perturb-
ing the emitter ﬁngerprint such that it cannot be extracted
by passive listeners while allowing only legit receivers to
extract or identify the signature is another interesting research
problem to enhance wireless security. Generally, it is assumed
that RF ﬁngerprinting is robust to impersonation attacks due
to the difﬁculty in reproducing the frontend impairments
with replay attacks since that will introduce the hardware
defects of the replaying device. This area is pristine and
the research here is limited currently. In literature, it was
shown that transient-based RF ﬁngerprinting is more resilient
to impersonation attacks in contrast to modulation-based RF
ﬁngerprinting [159]. Another work in [160] analyzed the effect

of several low-end receivers (manufactured with inexpensive
analog components) on the resilience of modulation-based RF
ﬁngerprinting to impersonation attacks. Their evaluation re-
vealed that the RF ﬁngerprint from a speciﬁc transmitter varies
across the receivers. The receiver’s hardware imperfections as
we have discussed above contributes to the ﬁngerprint feature
set. Further, they exploit this fact to thwart the impersonation
attacks and state that the impersonator would not be able
to extract the ﬁngerprint features contributed by the receiver
hardware, rendering an even robust RFFS. Another threat that
can disrupt the RFFS are jamming DoS attacks whereby the
intruder can continuously transmit in the operating frequency.
This area will require more analysis to evaluate the resiliency
of RFFS to such DoS attacks.

On the ﬂip side, jamming can also be used as a defense
strategy to mask the RF ﬁngerprint of transmitters for covert
and conﬁdential operations. RF ﬁngerprint obfuscation - such
that the ﬁngerprint can only be extracted by the legitimate
receiver while remaining undetectable to others - was experi-
mentally studied on WiFi signals in [161]. The authors achieve
this by introducing randomized phase errors such that only the
legitimate receivers with a preshared key and randomization
index can decode the message as well as the ﬁngerprint.

Robustness in realistic operation environment The ﬁnger-
printing literature to date (at the time of writing this article)
has only looked at the problem of identifying emitter signature
when only one emitter is active. An even challenging problem
would be when multiple emitters are active, this is typical
of a real-world setting. Such a scenario would require the
ﬁngerprinting algorithm to separately distinguish and extract
the signatures of each emitters from the received signal clutter.
Another challenge involved in studying such a scenario would
be the availability of a dataset that incorporates multiple active
emitters. Each emitter transmission creates its own propagation
path from the transmitting antenna to the radio frontend of the
receiver hardware. The effect of multipath propagation effects
and location of the emitter relative to the receiver is enough to
create a unique signature which would vary with location and
wireless channel effects. These dynamic fading and location
effects due to its inherent randomness could mask the pure
emitter signature leading to false alarms and misclassiﬁcation.
In [158] authors demonstrate the effect of small scale and
large scale fading on the PSD. It was illustrated that the side
lobes of the PSDs that carry the most identity information were
signiﬁcantly distorted due to multipath channel effects when
the sensors were far apart than when they were in close prox-
imity to the receiver. Equalization at the receiver that would
compensate for the multipath effects without deteriorating the
ﬁngerprint features is still an open research problem.

Simulation-reality gap: An equally important point
to
consider is the realism in the generated or synthetic data.
The generalization of deep learning models to actual radio
emissions after being trained on synthetic data is difﬁcult to
achieve. Such a capability gap arises from the assumptions
in terms of the transmitter hardware imperfections and fading
channel while generating the synthetic dataset in contrast to
the actual hardware and environmental effects.

A towering issue that leads to generating synthetic data is

26

Fig. 16: Wireless IoT ﬁngerprinting challenges

the lack of or limited access to real-world data from actual
IoT sensors and radios. This is not the case in more popular
machine learning ﬁelds such as natural language processing
(NLP) and computer vision (CV) where a plethora of large-
scale datasets such as MNIST [162], Stanford sentiment [163],
IMDb [164], Sentiment140 [165], etc., are readily available.
As highlighted in section V-F, there are several recent efforts
to mitigate this challenge. Further,
the lack of a uniform
standard for the dataset structure and organization stymies
the adoption of existing datasets to different machine learning
frameworks. We state here that training the neural networks
with a larger distribution of data is the key to a generalized
performance. Generalization is the ﬁrst step to deployment-
ready ﬁngerprinting solutions.

VII. CONCLUSION

This article presented a systematic review of the RF ﬁnger-
printing approaches over the past two decades by ﬁrst broadly
classifying them into traditional and DL-based followed by
dissecting each in a categorized manner. We ﬁrst provided
context to the reader by introducing and summarizing the
three pillars of SIGINT - modulation recognition, protocol
classiﬁcation, and emitter identiﬁcation. We present an invalu-
able and concise discussion on the diverse applications of RF
ﬁngerprinting to highlight the practical use cases of the subject
under study. To elucidate and dilute the vast literature on
traditional and DL-based ﬁngerprinting approaches, we present
a categorized and clear layout of each. We have also provided
tabular comparative study of the reviewed works wherever
applicable for summarizing in a straightforward manner. In
order to equip the reader with the essential toolkit to delve
into this topic, we reviewed the most relevant DL approaches
in a tutorial manner prior to diving into the DL-based ﬁn-
gerprinting techniques. Since the knowledge of and access
to openly available datasets are key to practice the reviewed
approaches, we have provided an elaborate discussion on the
most relevant RF ﬁngerprinting datasets. Finally, in order to
stimulate future research in this realm, we present a roadmap
of potential research avenues in an illustrative manner.

REFERENCES

[1] Q. Xu, R. Zheng, W. Saad, and Z. Han, “Device ﬁngerprinting in wire-
less networks: Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 94–104, 2016.

RFF systemMultipath with obstaclesPassive spoofer replay attack Diverse IoT emitters:Body wearables and other emittersSimultaneous emissionsHow can we capture realism in synthetic data ?Receiver imperfectionsAI/ML decision engineJamming attack[2] A. Jagannath, J. Jagannath, and T. Melodia, “Redeﬁning Wireless
Communication for 6G: Signal Processing Meets Deep Learning with
Deep Unfolding,” IEEE Transaction on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2021.

[3] M. Wang, T. Zhu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Yu, and W. Zhou, “Security
and privacy in 6g networks: New areas and new challenges,” Digital
Communications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 281–291, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2352864820302431

[4] Y. Xu, D. Li, Z. Wang, G. Liu, and H. Lv, “A deep learning method
based on convolutional neural network for automatic modulation clas-
siﬁcation of wireless signals,” in Machine Learning and Intelligent
Communications, X. Gu, G. Liu, and B. Li, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 373–381.

[5] A. P. Hermawan, R. R. Ginanjar, D. Kim, and J. Lee, “Cnn-based
automatic modulation classiﬁcation for beyond 5g communications,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1038–1041, 2020.

[6] J. J. Popoola and R. v. Olst, “Effect of training algorithms on per-
formance of a developed automatic modulation classiﬁcation using
artiﬁcial neural network,” in Proc. of IEEE AFRICON, Pointe-Aux-
Piments, Mauritius, Sept 2013.

[7] A. Selim, F. Paisana, J. A. Arokkiam, Y. Zhang, L. Doyle, and
L. A. DaSilva, “Spectrum monitoring for radar bands using deep
convolutional neural networks,” in GLOBECOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[8] J. Jagannath, N. Polosky, A. Jagannath, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia,
“Neural Networks for Signal Intelligence: Theory and Practice,,” in
Machine Learning for Future Wireless Communications, ser. Wiley -
IEEE Series, F. Luo, Ed. John Wiley & Sons, Limited, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://books.google.com/books?id=3EI2vAEACAAJ
[9] M. Schmidt, D. Block, and U. Meier, “Wireless interference identiﬁ-
cation with convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE Intl.
Conf. on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2017, pp. 180–185.

[10] N. Bitar, S. Muhammad, and H. H. Refai, “Wireless technology
identiﬁcation using deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. of
Intl Symp. on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Comms. (PIMRC),
2017, pp. 1–6.

[11] T. J. O’Shea, J. Corgan, and T. C. Clancy, “Convolutional radio
modulation recognition networks,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1602.04105, 2016.
[12] J. Jagannath, N. Polosky, A. Jagannath, F. Restuccia, and T. Melodia,
“Machine learning for wireless communications in the internet of
things: A comprehensive survey,” Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier), vol. 93,
p. 101913, 2019.

[13] A. Jagannath and J. Jagannath, “Multi-task Learning Approach for
Automatic Modulation and Wireless Signal Classiﬁcation,” in Proc. of
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Montreal,
Canada, June 2021.

[14] J. Robinson, S. Kuzdeba, J. Stankowicz, and J. M. Carmack, “Dilated
causal convolutional model for rf ﬁngerprinting,” in Proc. of 10th
Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference
(CCWC), 2020, pp. 0157–0162.

[15] G. Baldini and G. Steri, “A survey of techniques for the identiﬁcation
of mobile phones using the physical ﬁngerprints of the built-in com-
ponents,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp.
1761–1789, 2017.

[16] X. Guo, Z. Zhang, and J. Chang, “Survey of mobile device au-
thentication methods based on rf ﬁngerprint,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2019 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[17] W. Wang, I. Aguilar Sanchez, G. Caparra, A. McKeown, T. Whitworth,
and E. S. Lohan, “A survey of spoofer detection techniques via
radio frequency ﬁngerprinting with focus on the gnss pre-correlation
sampled data,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 9, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/9/3012

[18] Q. Xu, R. Zheng, W. Saad, and Z. Han, “Device ﬁngerprinting in wire-
less networks: Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 94–104, 2016.

[19] F. Hameed, O. Dobre, and D. Popescu, “On the likelihood-based
approach to modulation classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 5884–5892, December 2009.
[20] J. Zheng and Y. Lv, “Likelihood-based automatic modulation classiﬁca-
tion in ofdm with index modulation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8192–8204, 2018.

[21] T. Wimalajeewa, J. Jagannath, P. K. Varshney, A. Drozd, and W. Su,
“Distributed asynchronous modulation classiﬁcation based on hybrid
maximum likelihood approach,” in Proc. of IEEE Military Communi-
cations Conference (MILCOM), Tampa, FL, Oct 2015.

27

[22] Y. Zhang, N. Ansari, and W. Su, “Optimal Decision Fusion Based Au-
tomatic Modulation Classiﬁcation by Using Wireless Sensor Networks
in Multipath Fading Channel,” in Proc. of IEEE Global Telecommuni-
cations Conference (GLOBECOM), Houston, TX, Dec 2011.

[23] B. Dulek, O. Ozdemir, P. K. Varshney, and W. Su, “Distributed
Maximum Likelihood Classiﬁcation of Linear Modulations over Non-
identical Flat Block-Fading Gaussian Channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 724–737, Feb 2015.
[24] O. Ozdemir, T. Wimalajeewa, B. Dulek, P. K. Varshney, and W. Su,
“Asynchronous Linear Modulation Classiﬁcation with Multiple Sen-
sors via Generalized EM Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 6389–6400, Nov 2015.

[25] A. Hazza, M. Shoaib, S. AlShebeili, and A. Fahd, “Automatic modu-
lation classiﬁcation of digital modulations in presence of HF noise.”
EURASIP Journal on Adv. in Signal Processing, vol. 2012, p. 238,
2012.

[26] D. C. Chang and P. K. Shih, “Cumulants-based modulation classiﬁ-
cation technique in multipath fading channels,” IET Communications,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 828–835, 2015.

[27] S. Majhi, R. Gupta, W. Xiang, and S. Glisic, “Hierarchical hypothesis
and feature-based blind modulation classiﬁcation for linearly modu-
lated signals,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66,
no. 12, pp. 11 057–11 069, 2017.

[28] L. Han, F. Gao, Z. Li, and O. Dobre, “Low Complexity Automatic
Modulation Classiﬁcation Based on Order-Statistics,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
[29] J. Jagannath, D. O’Connor, N. Polosky, B. Sheaffer, L. N. Theagarajan,
S. Foulke, P. K. Varshney, and S. P. Reichhart, “Design and Evaluation
of Hierarchical Hybrid Automatic Modulation Classiﬁer using Software
Deﬁned Radios,” in Proc. of IEEE Annual Computing and Communica-
tion Workshop and Conference (CCWC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, January
2017.

[30] S. Foulke, J. Jagannath, A. Drozd, T. Wimalajeewa, P. Varshney, and
W. Su, “Multisensor Modulation Classiﬁcation (MMC): Implementa-
tion Considerations – USRP Case Study,” in Proc. of IEEE Military
Communications Conference (MILCOM), Baltimore, MD, Oct 2014.

[31] H.-Y. Liu and J.-C. Sun, “A modulation type recognition method using
wavelet support vector machines,” in Proc. of IEEE Intl. Congress on
Image and Signal Processing (CISP), Tianjin, China, Oct 2009.
[32] J. J. Popoola and R. v. Olst, “A novel modulation-sensing method,”
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 60–69, Sept
2011.

[33] M. M. Roganovic, A. M. Neskovic, and N. J. Neskovic, “Application
of artiﬁcial neural networks in classiﬁcation of digital modulations for
software deﬁned radio,” in Proc. of IEEE EUROCON, St. Petersburg,
Russia, May 2009.

[34] S. Peng, H. Jiang, H. Wang, H. Alwageed, Y. Zhou, M. M. Sebdani,
and Y. Yao, “Modulation classiﬁcation based on signal constellation
diagrams and deep learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 718–727, 2019.

[35] R. Li, L. Li, S. Yang, and S. Li, “Robust automated vhf modulation
recognition based on deep convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Com-
munications Letters, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 946–949, 2018.

[36] T. J. O’Shea, T. Roy, and T. C. Clancy, “Over-the-air deep learning
based radio signal classiﬁcation,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 168–179, 2018.

[37] A. Jagannath, J. Jagannath, Y. Wang, and T. Melodia, “Deep neural
network goes lighter: a case study of deep compression techniques on
automatic rf modulation recognition for beyond 5g networks,” in Big
Data IV: Learning, Analytics, and Applications, vol. 12097.
SPIE,
2022, pp. 58–69.

[38] C. Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov,
D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with
convolutions,” in Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 1–9.

[39] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. of the 25th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume
1, ser. NIPS 12, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.

[40] J. Jagannath, N. Polosky, D. O. Connor, L. Theagarajan, B. Sheaffer,
S. Foulke, and P. Varshney, “Artiﬁcial Neural Network based Automatic
Modulation Classiﬁer for Software Deﬁned Radios,” in Proc. of IEEE
Intl, Conf. on Communications (ICC), Kansas City, USA, May 2018.
[41] C. Wang, J. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Automatic radar waveform recog-
nition based on time-frequency analysis and convolutional neural
network,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017, pp. 2437–2441.

[42] Z. Shi, M. Huang, C. Zhao, L. Huang, X. Du, and Y. Zhao, “Detection
of lssuav using hash ﬁngerprint based svdd,” in 2017 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Communications (ICC), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[43] M. Zuo, S. Xie, X. Zhang, and M. Yang, “Recognition of uav video
signal using rf ﬁngerprints in the presence of wiﬁ interference,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 88 844–88 851, 2021.

[44] M. Kulin, T. Kazaz, I. Moerman, and E. De Poorter, “End-to-end
learning from spectrum data: A deep learning approach for wireless
signal identiﬁcation in spectrum monitoring applications,” IEEE Ac-
cess, vol. 6, pp. 18 484–18 501, 2018.

[45] A. Jagannath and J. Jagannath, “Multi-task Learning Approach for
Automatic Modulation and Wireless Signal Classiﬁcation,” in Proc. of
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Montreal,
Canada, June 2021.

[46] ——, “Multi-task Learning Approach for Modulation and Wireless
Signal Classiﬁcation for 5G and Beyond: Edge Deployment via Model
Compression,” Physical Communications (Elsevier), vol. 54, p. 101793,
2022.

[47] P. E. Manning, “Device ﬁngerprinting identiﬁcation and authentication:
A two-fold use in multi-factor access control schemes,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Iowa State University, 2016.
Identiﬁcation
[On-
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-mq/7.5?topic=

Corporation.
line]. Available:
mechanisms-identiﬁcation-authentication

authentication.

[48] I.

and

[49] J. Bassey, X. Li, and L. Qian, “Device authentication codes based on rf
ﬁngerprinting using deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08742,
2020.

[50] “RF Fingerprinting for Contraband Wireless Devices Identiﬁcation,
Detection and Tracking in Correctional Facilities.” https://nij.ojp.gov/
funding/awards/2018-75-cx-k002.

[51] L. Mucchi, S. Jayousi, S. Caputo, E. Paoletti, P. Zoppi, S. Geli,
and P. Dioniso, “How 6g technology can change the future wireless
healthcare,” in Proc. of 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT), 2020,
pp. 1–6.

[52] P. Porambage, G. GÃ¼r, D. P. M. Osorio, M. Liyanage, A. Gurtov, and
M. Ylianttila, “The roadmap to 6g security and privacy,” IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 1094–1122, 2021.
[53] M. Kishk, A. Bader, and M.-S. Alouini, “Aerial base station deployment
in 6g cellular networks using tethered drones: The mobility and
endurance tradeoff,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 103–111, 2020.

[54] S. Nayak and R. Patgiri, “6g communication technology: A vision on

intelligent healthcare,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2005.07532, 2021.

[55] Y. Wu, A. Khisti, C. Xiao, G. Caire, K.-K. Wong, and X. Gao, “A
survey of physical layer security techniques for 5g wireless networks
and challenges ahead,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 679–695, 2018.

[56] K. Ramezanpour, J. Jagannath, and A. Jagannath, “Security and Privacy
vulnerabilities of 5G/6G and WiFi 6: Survey and Research Directions
from a Coexistence Perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14997,
2022.

[57] I. Ahmad, S. Shahabuddin, T. Kumar, J. Okwuibe, A. Gurtov, and
M. Ylianttila, “Security for 5g and beyond,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3682–3722, 2019.

[58] K. Ramezanpour and J. Jagannath, “Intelligent Zero Trust Architecture
for 5G/6G Networks: Principles, Challenges, and the Role of Machine
Learning in the context of O-RAN,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.01478,
2022.

[59] J. Jagannath, K. Ramezanpour, and A. Jagannath, “Digital Twin Vir-
tualization with Machine Learning for IoT and Beyond 5G Networks:
Research Directions for Security and Optimal Control,” in Proc. of
ACM Workshop on Wireless Security and Machine Learning (WiseML),
San Antonio, Texas, USA, May 2022.

[60] I. D.P., S. S., and R. E.B, SDN-Based Trafﬁc Management
for Personalized Ambient Assisted Living Healthcare System,.
Springer Singapore, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-981-15-5285-4_38

[61] J. Jagannath, S. Furman, A. Jagannath, L. Ling, A. Burger, and
A. Drozd, “HELPER: Heterogeneous Efﬁcient Low Power Radio
for Enabling Ad Hoc Emergency Public Safety Networks,” Ad Hoc
Networks, 2019.

[62] X. Jiang, M. Sheng, N. Zhao, C. Xing, W. Lu, and X. Wang,
“Green uav communications for 6g: A survey,” Chinese Journal
of Aeronautics, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1000936121001801

[63] Y. Siriwardhana, P. Porambage, M. Liyanage, and M. Ylianttila, “A
survey on mobile augmented reality with 5g mobile edge computing:

28

Architectures, applications, and technical aspects,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1160–1192, 2021.

[64] F. Tariq, M. R. A. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran, M. Bennis,
and M. Debbah, “A speculative study on 6g,” IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 118–125, 2020.

[65] V. Brik, S. Banerjee, M. Gruteser, and S. Oh, “Wireless device
identiﬁcation with radiometric signatures,” in Proceedings of the 14th
ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
2008, pp. 116–127.

[66] C. chung Chang and C. jen Lin, “Libsvm : a library for support vector

machines,” http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.

[67] “Open-access research testbed for next-generation wireless networks

(orbit),” https://www.orbit-lab.org/.

J.

in

and

vol.

chen,

“Radio

[68] F.

Science,

Information

frequency
zhuo, Y. Huang,
radio emitter based on i/q imbalance,”
ﬁngerprint extraction of
Procedia Computer
2017,
pp.
Technology:
advances
Information and
Proceedings of 7th International Congress of
Communication Technology
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050917303678
[69] B. Danev, T. S. Heydt-Benjamin, and S. Capkun, “Physical-layer
identiﬁcation of rﬁd devices.” in USENIX security symposium, 2009,
pp. 199–214.

107,
and Communication

(ICICT2017).

472–477,

[70] K. Bonne Rasmussen and S. Capkun, “Implications of radio ﬁngerprint-
ing on the security of sensor networks,” in 2007 Third International
Conference on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks and
the Workshops - SecureComm 2007, 2007, pp. 331–340.

[71] B. F. Manly and J. A. N. Alberto, Multivariate statistical methods: a

primer. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2016.

[72] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer,

2006.

[73] A. Candore, O. Kocabas, and F. Koushanfar, “Robust stable radiomet-
ric ﬁngerprinting for wireless devices,” in 2009 IEEE International
Workshop on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust, 2009, pp. 43–49.
[74] Y. Huang and H. Zheng, “Radio frequency ﬁngerprinting based on
the constellation errors,” in 2012 18th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on
Communications (APCC), 2012, pp. 900–905.

[75] H. Patel, “Non-parametric feature generation for rf-ﬁngerprinting on
zigbee devices,” in 2015 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelli-
gence for Security and Defense Applications (CISDA), 2015, pp. 1–5.
[76] M. Lukacs, P. Collins, and M. Temple, “Classiﬁcation performance
using ’rf-dna’ ﬁngerprinting of ultra-wideband noise waveforms,”
Electronics Letters, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 787–789, 2015. [Online].
Available: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/
el.2015.0051

[77] B. Hammer and T. Villmann, “Generalized relevance learning vector
quantization,” Neural Networks, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1059–1068, 2002.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0893608002000795

[78] D. Shaw and W. Kinsner, “Multifractal modelling of radio transmitter
transients for classiﬁcation,” in IEEE WESCANEX 97 Communications,
Power and Computing. Conference Proceedings, 1997, pp. 306–312.

[79] O. Ureten and N. Serinken, “Detection of radio transmitter turn-on
transients,” Electronics Letters, vol. 35, no. 23, pp. 1996–1997, 1999.
[80] J. Hall, M. Barbeau, E. Kranakis et al., “Detection of transient in
radio frequency ﬁngerprinting using signal phase,” Wireless and Optical
Communications, pp. 13–18, 2003.

[81] B. Danev and S. Capkun, “Transient-based identiﬁcation of wireless
sensor nodes,” in 2009 International Conference on Information Pro-
cessing in Sensor Networks, 2009, pp. 25–36.

[82] A. Martinez and A. Kak, “Pca versus lda,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 228–
233, 2001.

[83] Y. Yuan, Z. Huang, H. Wu, and X. Wang, “Speciﬁc emitter
identiﬁcation based on hilbert-huang transform-based time-frequency-
energy distribution features,” IET Communications, vol. 8, no. 13, pp.
2404–2412, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-com.2013.0865

[84] N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng, N.-
C. Yen, C. C. Tung, and H. H. Liu, “The empirical mode decomposition
and the hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series
analysis,” Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series A:
mathematical, physical and engineering sciences, vol. 454, no. 1971,
pp. 903–995, 1998.

[85] S. Ur Rehman, K. Sowerby, and C. Coghill, “Rf ﬁngerprint extraction
from the energy envelope of an instantaneous transient signal,” in 2012

Australian Communications Theory Workshop (AusCTW), 2012, pp.
90–95.

[86] R. W. Klein, M. A. Temple, and M. J. Mendenhall, “Application of
wavelet-based rf ﬁngerprinting to enhance wireless network security,”
Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 544–555,
2009.

[87] I. Selesnick, R. Baraniuk, and N. Kingsbury, “The dual-tree complex
wavelet transform,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 22, no. 6,
pp. 123–151, 2005.

[88] C. Bertoncini, K. Rudd, B. Nousain, and M. Hinders, “Wavelet ﬁnger-
printing of radio-frequency identiﬁcation (rﬁd) tags,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 4843–4850, 2012.
[89] J. Hou and M. K. Hinders, “Dynamic wavelet ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation
of ultrasound signals,” Materials evaluation, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 1089–
1093, 2002.

[90] R. E. Learned and A. S. Willsky, “A wavelet packet approach to
transient signal classiﬁcation,” Applied and Computational Harmonic
Analysis, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 265–278, 1995. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1063520385710196
[91] M. Ezuma, F. Erden, C. K. Anjinappa, O. Ozdemir, and I. Guvenc,
“Micro-uav detection and classiﬁcation from rf ﬁngerprints using
machine learning techniques,” in 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference,
2019, pp. 1–13.

[92] J. Goldberger, G. E. Hinton, S. Roweis, and R. R. Salakhutdinov,
“Neighbourhood components analysis,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 17, 2004.

[93] I. O. Kennedy, P. Scanlon, F. J. Mullany, M. M. Buddhikot, K. E. Nolan,
and T. W. Rondeau, “Radio transmitter ﬁngerprinting: A steady state
frequency domain approach,” in 2008 IEEE 68th Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2008, pp. 1–5.

[94] S. Deng, Z. Huang, X. Wang, and G. Huang, “Radio frequency
ﬁngerprint extraction based on multidimension permutation entropy,”
International Journal of Antennas and Propagation, vol. 2017, 2017.
[95] Y. Yuan, X. Liu, Z. Liu, and Z. Xu, “Mfmcf: A novel indoor location
method combining multiple ﬁngerprints and multiple classiﬁers,” in
2019 3rd International Symposium on Autonomous Systems (ISAS),
2019, pp. 216–221.

[96] G. Baldini, R. Giuliani, G. Steri, and R. Neisse, “Physical layer au-
thentication of internet of things wireless devices through permutation
and dispersion entropy,” in 2017 Global Internet of Things Summit
(GIoTS), 2017, pp. 1–6.

[97] F. E. Grubbs, “Procedures for detecting outlying observations in

samples,” Technometrics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–21, 1969.

[98] “MySensors,” http://www.mysensors.org/.
[99] J. Jagannath, A. Jagannath, S. Furman, and T. Gwin, “Deep learning
and reinforcement learning for autonomous unmanned aerial systems:
Roadmap for theory to deployment,” arXiv preprint 2009.03349, 2020.
[100] I. Kuzovkin, R. Vicente, M. Petton, J. Lachaux, M. Baciu, P. Kahane,
S. Rheims, J. R. Vidal, and J. Aru, “Activations of deep convolutional
neural networks are aligned with gamma band activity of human visual
cortex,” Communications Biology, vol. 1, 2018.

[101] C. Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov,
D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with
convolutions,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 1–9.

[102] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.

[103] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” in Proc. of 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds.,
2015.

[104] F. N. Iandola, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, S. Han, W. Dally,
and K. Keutzer, “Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer
parameters and <1mb model size,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1602.07360, 2017.
[105] Y. LeCun, K. Kavukcuoglu, and C. Farabet, “Convolutional networks
and applications in vision,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium
on Circuits and Systems, 2010, pp. 253–256.

[106] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards
Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 39,
no. 6, pp. 1137–1149, 2017.

[107] F. Nasse, C. Thurau, and G. A. Fink, “Face detection using gpu-
based convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. of the 13th International
Conference on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, ser. CAIP
’09. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 83–90.

29

[108] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.

[109] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT

Press, 2016.

[110] A. Carrio, C. Sampedro, A. Rodriguez-Ramos, and P. Campoy, “A
review of deep learning methods and applications for unmanned aerial
vehicles,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2017, 2017.

[111] D. E. Rumelhart, P. Smolensky, J. L. McClelland, and G. E. Hinton,
“Schemata and sequential thought processes in pdp models,” in Parallel
Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure, Vol. 2:
Psychological and Biological Models. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT
Press, 1986, pp. 7–57.

[112] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 45, no. 11, pp.
2673–2681, 1997.

[113] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 27, 2014.

[114] K. Sankhe, M. Belgiovine, F. Zhou, S. Riyaz, S. Ioannidis, and
K. Chowdhury, “Oracle: Optimized radio classiﬁcation through convo-
lutional neural networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications.

IEEE, 2019, pp. 370–378.

[115] N. Soltani, G. Reus-Muns, B. Salehi, J. Dy, S.

Ioannidis, and
K. Chowdhury, “Rf ﬁngerprinting unmanned aerial vehicles with non-
standard transmitter waveforms,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 15 518–15 531, 2020.

[116] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on image data augmen-
tation for deep learning,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–48,
2019.

[117] N. Soltani, K. Sankhe, J. Dy, S. Ioannidis, and K. Chowdhury, “More is
better: Data augmentation for channel-resilient rf ﬁngerprinting,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 66–72, 2020.
[118] L. Ding, S. Wang, F. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Speciﬁc emitter iden-
tiﬁcation via convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2591–2594, 2018.

[119] Y. Xu, G. Feng, and Y. Zhao, “One improvement

to two-
dimensional locality preserving projection method for use with face
recognition,” Neurocomputing, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 245–249, 2009.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231209003348

[120] A. S. Sappal, “Simpliﬁed memory polynomial modelling of power am-
pliﬁer,” in 2015 International Conference and Workshop on Computing
and Communication (IEMCON), 2015, pp. 1–7.

[121] L. Peng, J. Zhang, M. Liu, and A. Hu, “Deep learning based rf
ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation using differential constellation trace ﬁgure,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1091–
1095, 2020.

[122] L. Peng, A. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Yan, and C. Zhu, “A differential constella-
tion trace ﬁgure based device identiﬁcation method for zigbee nodes,”
in 2016 8th International Conference on Wireless Communications
Signal Processing (WCSP), 2016, pp. 1–6.

[123] L. Zong, C. Xu, and H. Yuan, “A rf ﬁngerprint recognition method
based on deeply convolutional neural network,” in Proc. of IEEE
5th Information Technology and Mechatronics Engineering Conference
(ITOEC), 2020, pp. 1778–1781.

[124] T. Jian, B. C. Rendon, E. Ojuba, N. Soltani, Z. Wang, K. Sankhe,
A. Gritsenko, J. Dy, K. Chowdhury, and S. Ioannidis, “Deep learning
for rf ﬁngerprinting: A massive experimental study,” IEEE Internet of
Things Magazine, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 50–57, 2020.

[125] A. Al-Shawabka, F. Restuccia, S. D’Oro, T. Jian, B. C. Rendon,
N. Soltani, J. Dy, K. Chowdhury, S. Ioannidis, and T. Melodia, “Ex-
posing the Fingerprint: Dissecting the Impact of the Wireless Channel
on Radio Fingerprinting,” Proc. of IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2020.

[126] G. Reus-Muns, D. Jaisinghani, K. Sankhe, and K. Chowdhury, “Trust
in 5g open rans through machine learning: Rf ﬁngerprinting on the
powder pawr platform,” in IEEE Globecom 2020-IEEE Global Com-
munications Conference.

IEEE, 2020.

[127] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “Facenet: A uniﬁed
embedding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2015.
frequency

[128] “Radio

machine

learning
(rfmls).”
systems
https://www.darpa.mil/program/

[Online].
radio-frequency-machine-learning-systems

Available:

[129] A. van den Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals,
A. Graves, N. Kalchbrenner, A. Senior, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Wavenet:
A generative model for raw audio,” 2016.

[130] J. Robinson and S. Kuzdeba, “Riftnet: Radio frequency classiﬁcation
for large populations,” in Proc. of IEEE 18th Annual Consumer
Communications & Networking Conference (CCNC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[131] “ORACLE RF Fingerprinting Dataset,” https://genesys-lab.org/oracle.
[132] J. Breen, A. Buffmire, J. Duerig, K. Dutt, E. Eide, A. Ghosh, M. Hibler,
D. Johnson, S. K. Kasera, E. Lewis, D. Maas, C. Martin, A. Orange,
N. Patwari, D. Reading, R. Ricci, D. Schurig, L. B. Stoller, A. Todd,
J. Van der Merwe, N. Viswanathan, K. Webb, and G. Wong, “Powder:
Platform for open wireless data-driven experimental
research,”
Computer Networks, vol. 197, p. 108281, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128621003017
[133] C. Zhao, C. Chen, Z. Cai, M. Shi, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Classiﬁ-
cation of small uavs based on auxiliary classiﬁer wasserstein gans,” in
2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2018,
pp. 206–212.

[134] A. Odena, C. Olah, and J. Shlens, “Conditional image synthesis with
auxiliary classiﬁer GANs,” in Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 70. PMLR, 2017, pp. 2642–2651. [Online].
Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/odena17a.html

[135] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 70. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017, pp. 214–223.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/arjovsky17a.html
and
A. Courville, “Improved training of wasserstein gans,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.00028, 2017.

[136] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V. Dumoulin,

[137] D. Roy, T. Mukherjee, M. Chatterjee, and E. Pasiliao, “Detection of
rogue rf transmitters using generative adversarial nets,” in 2019 IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2019,
pp. 1–7.

[138] M. Köse, S. Ta¸scio˘glu, and Z. Telatar, “Rf ﬁngerprinting of iot devices
based on transient energy spectrum,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 18 715–
18 726, 2019.

[139] O. Ureten and N. Serinken, “Bayesian detection of wi-ﬁ transmitter rf

ﬁngerprints,” Electronics Letters, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 373–374, 2005.

[140] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern classiﬁcation, second

edition, 2nd ed., 2012.

[141] S. Ta¸scio˘glu, M. Köse, and Z. Telatar, “Effect of sampling rate on
transient based rf ﬁngerprinting,” in 2017 10th International Confer-
ence on Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ELECO), 2017, pp.
1156–1160.

[142] A. Jagannath and Z. Kane and J. Jagannath, “RF Fingerprinting Needs
Attention: Multi-task Approach for Real-World WiFi and Bluetooth,”
in Proc. of IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM),
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, December 2022.

[143] A. Jagannath and J. Jagannath, “Embedding-assisted attentional deep

learning for real-world rf ﬁngerprinting of bluetooth,” 2022.

[144] K. Team. Keras Datasets. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io/api/

datasets/

[145] T. Contributors. TorchVision Datasets.

[Online]. Available: https:

//pytorch.org/vision/stable/datasets.html

[146] T. Team. TensorFlow Datasets: a collection of ready-to-use datasets.

[147] M.

Schmidt, D.

[Online]. Available: https://www.tensorﬂow.org/datasets
Block,
dataset
(v.
https://crawdad.org/owl/interference/20190212, Feb. 2019.

and U. Meier,
2019-02-12),” Downloaded

owl/interference

“CRAWDAD
from

[148] Tekbiyik, Kursat and Kececi, Cihat and Ekti, Ali Riza and Gorcin,
Ali and Karabulut Kurt, Gunes, “HisarMod: A new challenging mod-
ulated signals dataset,” https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/hisarmod-
new-challenging-modulated-signals-dataset, 2019.

[149] A. Jagannath and J. Jagannath, “Dataset for modulation classiﬁcation
and signal type classiﬁcation for multi-task and single task learning,”
Computer Networks (Elseier), 2021.

[150] E. Uzundurukan, Y. Dalveren, and A. Kara, “A database for the radio
frequency ﬁngerprinting of bluetooth devices,” Data, vol. 5, no. 2,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2306-5729/5/2/55

[151] Ezuma, Martins and Erden, Fatih and Anjinappa, Chethan K. and
Ozdemir, Ozgur and Guvenc, Ismail, “Drone Remote Controller RF
Signal Dataset,” https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/ss99-8d56, 2020.
[152] Liu, Yongxin and Wang, Jian and Niu, Shuteng and Song, Houbing,
“ADS-B signals records for non-cryptographic identiﬁcation and incre-
mental learning.” https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/1bxc-ke87, 2021.

30

[153] Liu, Yongxin and Wang, Jian and Song, Houbing and Niu, Shuteng
and Yang, Thomas, “A 24-hour signal recording dataset with labels for
cybersecurity and IoT,” https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/gt9v-kz32, 2020.

[154] “on-standard Waveforms from Hovering Unmanned Aerial Vehicles

(UAVs) Dataset,” https://genesys-lab.org/hovering-uavs.

[155] “Datasets for RF Fingerprinting on the POWDER Platform,” https:

//genesys-lab.org/powder.

[156] “Datasets Release: An IEEE 802.11 a/g (WiFi) massive-scale and
labeled datasets for Radio Fingerprinting,” https://www.northeastern.
edu/wiot/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/dataset_release.pdf.

[157] Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Li, H. Song, T. Yang, S. Niu, and Z. Ming, “Zero-
bias deep learning for accurate identiﬁcation of internet-of-things (iot)
devices,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 4. [Online].
Available: https://par.nsf.gov/biblio/10213235

[158] W. Wang, Z. Sun, S. Piao, B. Zhu, and K. Ren, “Wireless physical-
layer identiﬁcation: Modeling and validation,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 2091–2106,
2016.

[159] B. Danev, H. Luecken, S. Capkun, and K. El Defrawy, “Attacks on
physical-layer identiﬁcation,” in Proc. of the Third ACM Conference
on Wireless Network Security, ser. WiSec ’10. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp. 89–98. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1741866.1741882

[160] S. U. Rehman, K. W. Sowerby, and C. Coghill, “Analysis of
impersonation attacks on systems using rf ﬁngerprinting and low-end
receivers,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 80, no. 3,
pp. 591–601, 2014, special Issue on Wireless Network Intrusion.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0022000013001220

[161] L. F. Abanto-Leon, A. Bäuml, G. H. A. Sim, M. Hollick, and
A. Asadi, “Stay connected, leave no trace: Enhancing security and
privacy in wiﬁ via obfuscating radiometric ﬁngerprints,” Proc. ACM
Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 4, no. 3, nov 2020.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3428329

[162] Y. LeCun and C. Cortes, “MNIST handwritten digit database,” 2010.

[Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/

[163] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Ng,
and C. Potts, “Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality
over a sentiment treebank,” in Proc. of Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2013.

[164] A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and
C. Potts, “Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in Proc.
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. Portland, Oregon, USA:
Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2011, pp. 142–150.
[Online]. Available: http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P11-1015
[165] A. Go, R. Bhayani, and L. Huang, “Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation
using distant supervision,” pp. 1–6, 2009. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.stanford.edu/~alecmgo/papers/TwitterDistantSupervision09.pdf

Anu Jagannath currently serves as the Founding
Associate Director of Marconi-Rosenblatt AI/ML
Innovation Lab at ANDRO Computational Solu-
tions, LLC. She received her MS degree from State
University of New York at Buffalo in Electrical
Engineering. She is also a part-time PhD candidate
and is with the Institute for the Wireless Internet
of Things at Northeastern University, USA. Her
research focuses on MIMO communications, deep
machine learning, reinforcement learning, adaptive
signal processing, software deﬁned radios, spectrum
sensing, adaptive physical layer, and cross layer techniques, medium access
control and routing protocols, underwater wireless sensor networks, and signal
intelligence. She has rendered her reviewing service for several leading IEEE
conferences and Journals. She is an IEEE Senior Member. She is the co-
Principal Investigator (co-PI) and Technical Lead in multiple Rapid Innovation
Fund (RIF) and SBIR/STTR efforts involving applied AI/ML for wireless
communications. She is also the inventor on 6 US Patents (granted and
pending).

31

Jithin Jagannath is the Chief Scientist of Tech-
nology and Founding Director of
the Marconi-
Rosenblatt AI/ML Innovation Lab at ANDRO Com-
putational Solutions. He is also the Adjunct Assistant
Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineer-
ing at the University at Buffalo, State University of
New York. Dr. Jagannath received his B. Tech in
Electronics and Communication from Kerala Uni-
versity; M.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from
University at Buffalo, The State University of New
York; and received his Ph.D. degree in Electrical
Engineering from Northeastern University. Dr. Jagannath was the recipient
of 2021 IEEE Region 1 Technological Innovation Award with the citation,
"For innovative contributions in machine learning techniques for the wireless
domain”. He is also the recipient of AFCEA International Meritorious Rising
Star Award for achievement in engineering and AFCEA 40 Under 40 award.
Dr. Jagannath heads several of the ANDRO’s research and development
projects in the ﬁeld of Beyond 5G, signal processing, RF signal intelligence,
cognitive radio, cross-layer ad-hoc networks, Internet-of-Things, AI-enabled
wireless, and machine learning. He has been the lead and Principal Investigator
(PI) of several multi-million dollar research projects. This includes a Rapid
Innovation Fund (RIF) and several Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR)s for several customers including the U.S. Army, U.S Navy, Department
of Homeland Security (DHS), United States Special Operations Command
(SOCOM). He is currently leading several teams developing commercial
products such as SPEARLink™, DEEPSPEC™ among others. He is an
IEEE Senior Member and serves on the IEEE Signal Processing Society’s
Applied Signal Processing Systems Technical Committee. Dr. Jagannath’s
recent research has led to several peer-reviewed journal and conference
publications. He is the inventor of 12 U.S. Patents (granted and pending).
He has been invited to give various talks including Keynote on the topic
of machine learning and Beyond 5G wireless communication. He has been
invited to serve on the Technical Program Committee for several leading
technical conferences.

Prem Sagar Pattanshetty Vasanth Kumar is an
Associate Scientist/Engineer of Marconi-Rosenblatt
AI/ML Innovation Lab at ANDRO Computational
Solutions, LLC. He received his Bachelor of Engi-
neering degree in Electronics and Communication
from Visvesvaraya Technological University and a
Master of Science degree in Electrical Engineering
from State University of New York at Buffalo. His
areas of research interests include machine learning,
reinforcement
learning, neural networks, software
deﬁned radios, physical layer, and wireless commu-

nications.

