2
2
0
2

b
e
F
6
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
0
2
3
1
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

Wen-Jie Tseng
LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
wen-jie.tseng@telecom-paris.fr

Mohamed Khamis
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland, UK
mohamed.khamis@glasgow.ac.uk

Elise Bonnail
LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
elise.bonnail@telecom-paris.fr

Eric Lecolinet
LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
eric.lecolinet@telecom-paris.fr

Mark McGill
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, Scotland, UK
mark.mcgill@glasgow.ac.uk

Samuel Huron
CNRS i3 (UMR 9217)
Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
samuel.huron@telecom-paris.fr

Jan Gugenheimer
LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris
Palaiseau, France
jan.gugenheimer@telecom-paris.fr

ABSTRACT
“Virtual-Physical Perceptual Manipulations” (VPPMs) such as redi-
rected walking and haptics expand the user’s capacity to interact
with Virtual Reality (VR) beyond what would ordinarily physically
be possible. VPPMs leverage knowledge of the limits of human
perception to effect changes in the user’s physical movements, be-
coming able to (perceptibly and imperceptibly) nudge their physical
actions to enhance interactivity in VR. We explore the risks posed
by the malicious use of VPPMs. First, we define, conceptualize
and demonstrate the existence of VPPMs. Next, using speculative
design workshops, we explore and characterize the threats/risks
posed, proposing mitigations and preventative recommendations
against the malicious use of VPPMs. Finally, we implement two
sample applications to demonstrate how existing VPPMs could be
trivially subverted to create the potential for physical harm. This
paper aims to raise awareness that the current way we apply and
publish VPPMs can lead to malicious exploits of our perceptual
vulnerabilities.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Virtual reality; Human com-
puter interaction (HCI).

KEYWORDS
virtual-physical perceptual manipulation, VPPM, physical harm,
VR security

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517728

ACM Reference Format:
Wen-Jie Tseng, Elise Bonnail, Mark McGill, Mohamed Khamis, Eric Lecolinet,
Samuel Huron, and Jan Gugenheimer. 2022. The Dark Side of Perceptual
Manipulations in Virtual Reality. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517728

1 INTRODUCTION
A particular direction of research at the intersection of Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) and Virtual Reality (VR) explores tech-
niques that we define as Virtual-Physical Perceptual Manipulations
(VPPMs). VPPM refers to Extended Reality (XR) driven exploits that
alter the human multi-sensory perception of our physical actions and
reactions to nudge the user’s physical movements 1 (e.g., the position
of body and hands). These techniques are often grounded in some
threshold of the human perception (e.g., visual dominance [43, 63])
and designed to overcome physical limitations of the current VR
technology, enabling new types of interaction. Research focuses
predominantly on positive intents, either discovering new VPPMs
[10, 31, 34] or presenting positive application scenarios for known
VPPMs. For example, redirection techniques are used to provide
haptic feedback by changing the user’s arm movement [3, 23] or to
enable a larger play area by steering the VR user’s walking direction
[44, 60].

However, a VPPM technique may vary in terms of prior consent
and knowledge, and may also impact the user’s ability to discern
whether they are being manipulated. The user may be subjected
to manipulation knowingly or unknowingly and the manipulation
may or may not be perceptible to the user. Even if a user consents
to being manipulated by VPPMs, they might not be aware of the
consequences of their physical actions because most VPPMs are
designed to be imperceptible to the user (i.e., below the perception
threshold). Crucially, regardless of consent or knowledge, the intent

1We consider this definition to be one of the outcomes of this paper. It was derived
from insights from our workshop and discussions among all the authors. We present
this definition early on in our paper (rather than in the results section) to make it
easier for the reader to follow.

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

behind a VPPM is open to abuse (e.g., disguising an attack as legiti-
mate redirected walking) and may be opaque or covert to the user.
This ambiguity, in terms of consent to, awareness of, knowledge of,
and intent behind a given VPPM is what gives rise to the significant
potential for harm. Nothing is stopping malicious third parties from
pursuing unknown, potentially harmful outcomes to the VR user
using the perception thresholds published beforehand. The lack of
a common definition has lead to a blind spot in research, where
VPPMs are proposed and published without due consideration as
to their potential for harm.

In this paper, we focus on what is arguably the worst-case sce-
nario — imperceptible VPPMs are applied to the user unknowingly,
without consent. In particular, we focus on the potential for harm
at an individual level, where one VR user’s physical actions (i.e.,
body motions) are manipulated to a physically abusive end. We
defined this physically abusive outcome as physical harm — an
action that causes hurt or damage relating to the VR user’s body.
The user is perceptually manipulated into physical action, and they
perceive their agency while performing physical actions. Note that
we focus on perceptual manipulation as opposed to physical ma-
nipulation. This means that approaches that physically manipulate
the user through external devices such as Electrical Muscle Stim-
ulation (EMS) [33] and exoskeletons are out of the scope of this
paper. We exclude physical manipulations because these systems
can physically direct or override the user’s physical actions. Thus
the user is implicitly aware of, having consented to this possibility
through fitting these devices to their body. Whereas with VPPMs,
any physical actions are the result of a reaction to the presented
perceptual stimuli, introducing the ambiguity around agency, in-
tent, and consent of applying a VPPM. Based on this definition, we
explore what potential physical harm could be provoked to the VR
user by manipulating their physical actions through VPPMs, and
how malicious actors could potentially abuse VPPMs to provoke
physical harm.

The paper explores the risks posed by VPPMs as follows. First,
we demonstrate the potential threat of provoking physical harm
using VPPMs by presenting a threat model. A malicious actor wants
to inflict physical harm on the VR user, and they can compromise
the VR system by tricking the VR user into installing malware or a
malicious app. Second, to be able to deeper understand these types
of threats, we conduct a speculative design workshop using focus
groups [24, 39]. Because the physical harm exploited by VPPMs
is a novel phenomenon, our goal is to broadly explore the space
and to promote discussion between participants. Using a design
workshop [18, 22, 48] helps us to generate ideas and identify prob-
lems around the potential impact of the malicious use exploited by
VPPMs. We ran the workshop twice. The process of the workshops
was video-recorded, transcribed, and coded using thematic analy-
sis [7], unveiling 1) classifications of two main classes of attacks
(puppetry and mismatching) using VPPMs in VR and 2) the charac-
terization of potential physical harm. Based on this classification
of attacks, we present key publications in the HCI and VR commu-
nity employing VPPMs and note the lack of consideration given
to malicious, subversive appropriation of this research. Finally, to
demonstrate the process of subverting VPPMs from existing publi-
cations in the field of HCI, we implement two sample applications
(SteppingOn and HittingFace) based on two prior CHI publications,

Haptic Retargerting [3] and Breaking the Tracking [45]. We use
both applications to demonstrate and reflect on our process, show-
ing how concepts from VPPM research could be trivially subverted
to inflict malicious harm. We end this paper by discussing routes to-
wards mitigating against, and preventing, malicious use of VPPMs
for practitioners and the research community.

This work has three contributions: 1) the definition of Virtual-
Physical Perceptual Manipulation (VPPM), classification of attacks,
and characterization of physical harm that could be provoked by
VPPMs derived by two speculative design workshops (n=8); 2) two
applications showing how we can trivially appropriate existing
results of VPPM research towards harmful intent; 3) mitigations and
preventative recommendations for practitioners and the research
community on how to deal with VPPMs in the future.

2 THREAT MODEL
In our threat model, an attacker wants to inflict physical harm on
the VR user, and they can compromise the VR system. This can be
done, for example, by tricking the VR user into installing malware
or a malicious app. Similar to how smartphone spyware can use
the affected smartphone sensors (e.g., as done in the Pegasus spy-
ware2), the attacker can access information about the real-world
environment around the VR user. This information can be extracted
from tracking devices like the front-facing headset camera(s) used
for inside-out tracking. The attacker can also exploit the sensors
inside the VR headset and the controllers to understand the user’s
movement in real-time, or access all the standard APIs that are
normally available to VR applications. A sample scenario is that
a user is tricked into installing a malicious VR app that contains
VPPMs that do not specify their intent and are disguised as a part
of the application. The user is thus presented with a VR setup that
manipulates them imperceptibly (e.g., walking, reaching objects).
Because the attacker has access to information about the user’s mo-
tion and the safety boundaries (e.g., Oculus Guardian), the attacker
can inflict physical harm on the user through the setup. Examples
of harm include tripping, hitting a wall, holding something danger-
ous, or walking into a dangerous area in the context of accidents
[15] and bystander abuse [41]. Such harms may have significant
implications on the user including even death [68].

3 RELATED WORK
Our work builds on prior research in presence, perceptual manipu-
lations, ethics and security in VR.

3.1 VR Technologies and Experiences
VR technologies track the user’s physical actions in a 3-D space
using Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs) and controllers, providing
stimuli (e.g., visual, auditory, haptic) to enable embodied interac-
tions. Through these technologies, VR elicits strong immersive
experiences that allow the user to have a subjective feeling of being
present in a virtual environment and act realistically, despite the
VR user consciously knowing that the virtual environment does
not physically exist. The sense of being in a virtual environment
is called presence [16, 52, 57] in VR. For example, participants tend
to take a longer path on the simulated ground rather than walking

2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pegasus_(spyware)

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

over a virtual pit [37]. VR users can also feel that the events hap-
pening in the virtual environment are real (e.g., plausibility illusion
[50, 55]) and that the virtual body parts or even a full-body avatar
have become a part of their own (e.g., embodiment illusion [58]).
These illusory states in VR are the outcomes of our perception and
do not directly affect our higher cognitive functions [17]. Enhancing
the immersive experience and presence in VR becomes a common
goal for designing new VR interaction or locomotion techniques.
The existence of these illusions and the fact that they are working
so well, is one of the main reasons why VPPMs can be applied so
effortless to a variety of application scenarios.

3.2 Perceptual Manipulations in VR
VR is an excellent platform for applying perceptual manipulation.
While VPPMs can apply across the reality-virtuality continuum,
we focus on VR because of its greater capacity for inducing an
illusion of non-mediation. The simulated content occupies the VR
user’s visual sensory input, and VR HMDs block the user’s view
of the outside world to enhance immersion. These features allow
designers to make use of the visual dominance [43, 63] and the
unawareness of sensory discrepancy [64, 66].

Research in HCI and VR develops techniques to manipulate the
mapping between virtual and physical environments. Most of the
time, they are below the human perception threshold, making them
imperceptible. Previous research found that one can induce the
pseudo-haptic feedback by controlling the visual input [31, 34]
and that VR users are less sensitive to the visual-proprioceptive
conflict [10]. Although there is a difference between the virtual
and physical environment, our perceptual system interprets the
sensory information from VR, and the brain-body system reacts
immediately to perform the physical actions [17].

Practitioners and researchers then start “hacking” human per-
ception to overcome several limitations in current VR systems (e.g.,
limited tracked space, lack of haptic feedback). A popular example
of such technique is redirected walking [44, 60, 61], steering the VR
user’s physical walking path by interactively and imperceptibly ro-
tating the virtual scene. One can use slow-speed translation/rotation
gain below the user’s perception threshold or manipulate the stereo
image in a see-through HMD [21] to achieve the effect. Redirected
touching [23] and redirected haptics [3, 13] re-purpose the VR
user’s hand to a passive haptic prop by manipulating the visual of
the user’s arm or the virtual scene. These manipulations can also
be applied to reduce physical movements and fatigue by improving
ergonomics in VR [38], changing VR user’s posture unobtrusively
[53], and inducing a sensation of weight [45, 49].

While the aforementioned are applications of VPPMs that had
positive intents, VPPMs can also be exploited maliciously to pro-
voke harm on the VR user. The adversaries in that case can be VR
developers who intentionally (or unintentionally) manipulate the
user’s perception in a way that has harmful consequences. Our
method is to articulate how VPPMs in VR can be — and likely will
be — abused in the future.

3.3 The Potential Harm and Attacks in VR
VR induces strong sensory feedback on our perception. Previous
work discussed the ethical implications of conducting VR research

[5, 35] and of realism in VR and Augmented Reality (AR) [56]. In our
work, we focus on uses of VR that are highly persuasive for benefits
(e.g., training), but could also be used for malicious purposes. An
example would be to incite a VR user to do something they would
not normally do, which in turn leads to harming the VR user.

Through the VPPM techniques, one can change the VR user’s
perception of their physical actions. Current VR applications are
dominantly achieved through embodied motions for enhancing
presence [62]. Compared to interaction with desktop or mobile
devices, VR involves a larger-scale of 3-D space, which means that
the VR user is more likely to encounter physical harm caused by
their actions. An example is to elicit the user to sit on a virtual chair
that does not have a counterpart in the real world. More examples,
like colliding or hitting real-world objects and falling over, have
been identified in a recent work on common VR fails that happen
to users at home [15].

Recently, security researchers started to explore the potential
for immersive VR attacks. Casey et al. [11], presented a software
vulnerability and were able to manipulate the visuals of the safety
guardians of an HTC VIVE. Using this, the authors identified what
they called the “Human Joystick Attack”, which allows directing
an immersed user’s physical movement to a location without the
user’s knowledge. This attack falls under one of the five categories
we identify in our classification of malicious VPPM use. Our work
extends this previous research by understanding the larger class
of attacks that could be possible using VPPMs. While the secu-
rity community started to explore potential vulnerabilities in XR
technologies, the current main focus is on finding and closing new
factors of attack on the software and hardware [1, 40]. However,
in this work we are not focusing on the technical weak spots but
are actually exploring human weak spots. We argue that the HCI
community is at the perfect intersection of computer science, psy-
chology, cognitive science and design, to combine knowledge from
those fields who are mostly publishing VPPMs.

4 METHOD: SPECULATIVE DESIGN

WORKSHOP

Because we want to understand what malicious exploits of VPPM
might look like in the future, we refer to methods such as specu-
lative design [2] and design fiction [36]. These approaches allow
us to both critique current practices and reflect on future technolo-
gies and their ethical implications. We broadly explore this space
through a speculative design workshop using focus groups [24, 39]
with researchers and designers. Participants had to a) brainstorm
scenarios in which VPPMs can be used to induce physical harm to
the VR user; b) identify one (or more) dimension upon which the
scenarios from the brainstorming can be contextualized (e.g., the
severity of physical harm); and c) rate the relevance of each dimen-
sion for studying and preventing future physical harms caused by
VPPMs in VR.

4.1 Participants
We used snowball sampling and reached out to people from the
mailing list. Eight participants (age: 𝑀 = 28.3, 𝑆𝐷 = 2.1) were
recruited (Table 1). All researchers worked on VR/XR topics, pub-
lishing peer-reviewed papers in top-tier conferences like CHI and

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

Table 1: The background of participants. We asked partici-
pants to self-describe their profession and VR expertise.

ID

Gender

Profession

W1P1
W1P2
W1P3
W1P4
W2P5
W2P6
W2P7
W2P8

F
M
M
M
M
F
F
F

HCI researcher
HCI researcher
HCI researcher
XR/HCI designer
curator/designer
design researcher
HCI researcher
graphic/interaction designer

VR Expertise

expert
above average
above average
expert
below average
average
above average
average

UIST. To get a more diverse group of people, ideas and perspec-
tives, we additionally recruited participants that identified their
work to be dominantly on design rather than on research or de-
velopment. We argue there is a benefit in having a range of exper-
tise as experts alone may be overly constrained in their thinking
based on their knowledge of technical constraints or prior research
[14]. Therefore it was important to have that blend of expert and
non-expert/familiar participants. We also want to clarify that none
of our participants were novices in the field of XR. Most of our
participants rated their VR expertise to be at least average and
mostly above average and expert. Overall, they had at least aver-
age and above-average experience with VR (5-point Likert scale,
𝑀 = 3.75, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.03). We ran the speculative design workshop
twice with four participants each time.

The goal was to explore scenarios using VPPMs to provoke physi-
cal harm. With our introduction in the workshop, participants could
design a malicious scenario using VPPM. P1, P2, P3, and P7 had
a Computer Science background and worked on HCI and VR/XR
research. P4 worked as an XR/HCI designer from the industry, who
develops VR training platforms for surgeries. P5, P6, and P8 were de-
signers who have a design background working in design research.
A designer could think about diverse contexts and consequences
of the abusive scenario, and a researcher could deep dive into the
technical details if they consider it is necessary. Both workshops
included researchers and designers, the first one (W1) was more
researcher-focused, and the second one (W2) was more designer-
focused. This setup allowed each workshop to enable discussions
with different perspectives and elicit valid outcomes.

4.2 Procedure
Figure 1 shows the structure of our speculative design workshop.
The workshop consisted of four steps: instruction, brainstorming,
synthesizing, and voting. In the instruction step, we first introduced
the VPPMs in VR by presenting examples in HCI and VR research,
such as Haptic Retargeting [3], Body Follows Eye [53], and redi-
rected walking [21, 61]. Next, we presented our goal — speculate on
the potentially abusive VPPMs that could manipulate the VR user’s
body motions to induce physical harm. This part took 15 minutes
to complete.

In the brainstorming step, we presented the following assump-
tion: “In 10 to 20 years, VR technology has full body tracking and
understands the physiological states of the VR user. People can use VR

Figure 1: The steps, tasks and outcomes of the speculative
design workshop.

in open space, and VR application becomes more than gaming and
lab experiments. VPPMs are able to manipulate whole-body motions
and are imperceptible to the VR user.” Based on this assumption, we
introduced the task:

Brainstorming Task: Speculate on a scenario ma-
nipulating the VR user’s body motions to provoke
physical harm.

Participants had to describe how they use VPPMs to elicit physical
actions that provoke physical harm. One restriction in the brain-
storming was that the VR user has to perceive agency on their
physical actions. We do not consider body motions created by an
external device (e.g., EMS or exoskeleton) as VPPMs because the
VR user knows the motion is done by the system. Participants had
10 minutes time to brainstorm as many scenarios as they could
individually. Afterwards, each participant presented their ideas and
discussed it with the other participants (15 minutes).

After participants presented their scenarios, we continued with

the third step:

Synthesizing Task: Identify one (or more) specific
dimension to position the presented scenarios.

The goal of synthesizing was to understand the potential harm in
more detail that could happen using VPPMs. We asked participants
to find one or more specific dimension that can be used to position
all the presented scenarios on (including the ones from other par-
ticipants). The goal was to find terms and variables that are helpful
to understand the potential harm. One example could be to use
“amount of pain” as the variable and position scenarios that create
little pain further on the left than scenarios that create more pain.
Participants created dimensions individually for 10 minutes and
took turns to present their outcomes altogether for 10 minutes.

Finally, in the voting step, we asked participants to rate the

relevance of each dimension created in the synthesizing step:

Voting Task: Please rate the relevance of each di-
mension for studying and preventing future physical
harm caused by VPPMs in VR.

The rating was a 5-point Likert scale ranging from strongly ir-
relevant to strongly relevant. Note that the two workshops had
different scenarios and dimensions. The W1 participants rated the
dimensions created in W1 and the same for W2. Here we were

1/ instruction2/ brainstorming3/ synthesizing4/ votingSpeculating on the scenario of manipulating the VR user's body motions to provoke physical harm.steptaskIdentify one (or more) specific dimension to position the presented scenarios.Please rate the relevance of each dimension for studying and preventing future physical harm caused by VPPMs in VR.Present the motivation and structure of the workshop.outcome19 scenarios 12 dimensionsrating of each dimension from two workshopsThe Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

interested in the consensus of the participants in each workshop.
This part took five minutes to complete.

All participants engaged in the discussion during both the brain-
storming and synthesizing steps. The discussion allowed partici-
pants to collaborate in groups to discuss the scenarios and dimen-
sions they created. Therefore participants worked together to create
the outcome. All of them contributed to the question about the po-
tential malicious use of VPPMs (scenarios in the brainstorming
step) and the range of the presented scenarios (dimensions in the
synthesizing step). Participants worked on miro3 remotely, and the
both workshops lasted two hours. We recorded the brainstorming
and the synthesizing steps.

5 WORKSHOP RESULTS
In this section, we first introduce the analysis of the results from
our speculative design workshops. Next, the collected data and
extracted results (e.g., including the classification of attacks and
the characterization of physical harm) are presented. Finally, we
summarize the observations from the workshop.

5.1 Data Analysis
Figure 1 (the right column) shows the outcome of each step of
the workshop. Participants from the two workshops created 19
scenarios and 12 dimensions. The video footage of the workshops
was transcribed and anonymized. The transcripts and scenarios
were then iterated and coded by three authors in joint sessions.
Participants did not take part in the analysis. We applied thematic
analysis [7] to investigate the underlying themes of the transcribed
data. The coding was always done together in nine sessions, each of
which took on average two hours. Several sessions were re-watched
during the coding sessions to arrive at a consistent interpretation
consisting of categories and general themes. Conflicts were resolved
by discussing each individual coding.

5.2 Scenarios
Figure 2 presents 19 scenarios: names, descriptions, techniques used
to induce them, and the potential physical harm caused in them.
Technique Used and Physical Harm are the codes identified in the
thematic analysis. Several scenarios apply redirection techniques
to affect the user’s physical movements or actions and bring them
to harmful consequences: Magic Maze, Window Game, Bad Surprise,
Minecraftish, Danger Food, Getting Robbed, and Catch a Ride. Three
scenarios try to break the habituation and trust of using a system to
provoke physical harm (Apartment Hack, Falsely Mapped Apartment,
Moving Platform). Some scenarios occlude the physical world with
virtual content so the VR user is unaware of the physical harm:
Getting Robbed, Start a Fight, Safari, Ocean VR. Insult simulator uses
game instructions to make inappropriate gestures to insult the by-
standers. The rest of the five scenarios are not directly associated
with VPPMs. Technical Repair and Warming Down provide false
information to induce harm. Spanning the City is a scenario about
advertisement in VR. Double Kayaking Simulator does not spec-
ify the technique, and Long Lasting Use of VR is about overusing
VR. The description of seven selected scenarios are presented in
Appendix A as a representation of those using similar techniques.

3https://miro.com/ (Last access: 9th Apr. 2021)

5.3 Classification of Attacks
To find some commonalities and a potential classification of attacks,
we applied open and axial coding on the Technique Used that was
presented with each scenario (the label that described how par-
ticipants wanted to achieve the effect). The identified codes were
shown in Figure 2, the Attack(s) column. We identified two main
classes of attacks: puppetry attacks and mismatching attacks. For
the scenarios that did not reach a greater theme, we coded them as
miscellaneous. They provided different insights like accidents (S05,
S13) or social interaction (S11). Two scenarios (S02 and S19) were
coded as unclassified because they were too specific and missed
the technical detail. In the following, we focus on the definition of
puppetry and mismatching attack and how they are integrated into
the scenarios.

5.3.1 Puppetry Attacks. These attacks control physical actions
of different body parts of an immersed user. We argue that VPPMs
allow controlling different body parts precisely as the technology
and research progress. Therefore we use the term “puppetry” to
represent the potential impact that this attack could happen on
different levels of body parts in the future.

Walking Puppetry Attack. By applying redirected walking VPPMs,
the malicious actor can steer the VR user’s walking direction (Fig-
ure 3a). The walking puppetry attack was mentioned in several
scenarios, including Magic Maze (S03), Window Game (S04), Getting
Robbed (S08), Catch a Ride (S09), and Bad Surprise (S17). Participants
applied this attack to make a VR user go to a location for provoking
potential physical harm (e.g., falling, going to a dangerous area).

Arm-Movement Puppetry Attack. The arm-movement puppetry
attack controls the physical actions of the VR user’s arm. Redirected
haptic techniques [3, 23] are the underlying VPPMs. By applying
this attack, one can direct a VR user’s hand to interact and break
the user’s property (Minecraftish, S12) or to reach a physical object
that could be harmful during interaction (Danger Food, S15).

5.3.2 Mismatching Attacks. Mismatching attacks are manipula-
tions in which the adversary exploits a difference of information
between a virtual object and its physical counterpart to elicit mis-
interpretation for the VR user. Here the environment for a VR
user is true-positive, where each virtual object has a one-to-one
representation in the real world.

False-Positive Attack. In Figure 3b, the false-positive attack cre-
ates virtual content that has no physical counterpart (e.g., a virtual
chair) in a true-positive environment. The VR user habituates this
one-to-one mapping environment therefore they believe the false-
positive chair exists in the room. Interacting with these content
could lead to physical harm (e.g., sitting on a virtual chair and falling
on the floor). Scenarios using the false-positive attack are Falsely
Mapped Apartment (S10) and Apartment Hack (S06). They require a
perfectly mapped environment and a certain degree of trust from
the user towards the VR environment. This trust, most of the time,
builds upon how much a VR user is accustomed to the environment
or interaction. In fact, the habituation can be achieved through
repeating a single task. Once the user is used to the task and starts
performing it without conscious attention, a false-positive attack
becomes dangerous and impactful.

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

Figure 2: An overview of 19 scenarios we collected, including the name, description, technique used, physical harm, and clas-
sified attack of each scenario.

False-Negative Attack. In this attack, the malicious actor deliber-
ately hides the information from the physical environment. There-
fore, the VR user is unaware of incoming dangers. For example,
overriding traffic noise (Catch a Ride, S09) makes the user unaware
of approaching vehicles, which in turn makes them vulnerable. In
Falsely Mapped Apartment (S10), malicious actors provoke collision
with the environment by removing an virtual object from a fully-
mapped apartment. The false-negative attack could happen when
using VR in an open space because the system needs to constantly

detect the surroundings. If the attack hides or disguises a physical
object (e.g., hiding an opened window), the attacker could make
the VR user even fall or jump out of this window (Window Game,
S04). Which could even lead to a fatal outcome.

Swapping Attack. The swapping attack happens in the True-
Positive situation where each virtual object maps to a physical
object. However, the application renders a different virtual image
that does not represent the identity of the physical object. Therefore,

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Figure 3: We illustrate the attacks by showing the sketching of three selected scenarios. For the color code, the blue outline
represents the physical world, pink stands for the virtual content, and green shows how attack works. (a) The VR user is
in Magic Maze scenario and thinks they walk along the direction to the physical door (the purple arrow). Malicious actors
apply the walking puppetry attack to steer the VR user’s walking direction and make them fall off a stairway. (b) The VR
user locates in a fully-mapped apartment (Falsely Mapped Apartment). Malicious actors apply the false-positive mismatching
attack to introduce a virtual chair. The user assumes the virtual chair is fully-mapped. So they sit on the chair, but end up
falling on the floor. (c) A VR user is playing a zombie game where they have to fight with zombies using bare hands. Malicious
actors use the swapping mismatching attack render the virtual zombie over a bystander and makes them start a fight.

the VR user believes they are interacting with the virtual one but in-
advertently cause physical harm to themselves or to others. In Start
a Fight (S07), the bystanders were rendered as the enemy avatars
in a fighting VR game, which resulted in the VR user attacking
bystanders (Figure 3c).

5.3.3 Reflection on VPPM research and Potential Attacks. While
some of the presented scenarios may stretch the imagination, we
want to emphasize that for the most part these scenarios already
exist in some prior work that started to work towards the potential
VPPM and potential abuse. To demonstrate this we selected for
every type of attack a few example publications from the field of
HCI. We selected publications that were either working towards a
VPPM, or presented a new application of VPPMs which could be
used to reproduce the work. We want to emphasize that this is by
far not an exhaustive list but should only work as en example.

For puppetry attacks, we select seven papers [21, 26, 27, 44, 46, 60,
61] in which the walking attack is possible, and four [3, 23, 45, 49]
in which the arm-movement attack is possible. These publications
mainly investigated redirection techniques and are often published
at AR/VR conferences such as ISMAR, IEEE VR and UIST. In these
papers, there are few hardware requirements (although some do
need eye-tracking) and the implementations are described in de-
tail. The thresholds of applying VPPMs are also provided in these
publications. For mismatching attacks, we selected the following
publications (false-positive: [12, 32, 70], false-negative: [19, 32],
swapping: [20, 51, 54]). Among the selected publications, only Opti-
cal Marionette [21] mentioned the safety concern of manipulating
the user’s walking in the real world. There is a lack of consideration
given to malicious, subversive appropriation of VPPM research.

5.4 Characterizing Physical Harm
In the synthesizing step, we asked participants to identify one (or
more) specific dimension to position the presented scenarios. We
report two dimensions (severity of physical harm and perceived
agency) that received the highest score in the voting step of each
workshop. Note that each workshop had a different output of sce-
narios and dimensions. Therefore, the consensus of the voting is
within each workshop. Finally, we report on our last analysis of
characterization of the physical harm we found in the workshop.

Severity of the Physical Harm. Overall, 16 instances of phys-
ical harm were mentioned, in which falling and punching each
appeared four times. The severity of the physical harm is the most
reported dimension in the synthesizing step (6 out of 12 dimen-
sions). We interpret severity as how bad the physical harm can be
on a VR user and can the VR user recover from the given physical
harm. Figure 4a, from the left, the physical harm is a low, brief
moment of discomfort (e.g., eyestrain, falling, punches). From the
right, the physical harm becomes more unrecoverable (e.g., broken
teeth, get driven over), and the extreme form of severity is death.

Perceived Agency. The Perceived Agency (D2) is one of the di-
mensions reported by participants in the synthesizing step (Figure
4b). The Perceived Agency is to what degree VR users consider
the harm is caused by themselves. No agency means the VR user
interprets the system (or application) caused the physical harm.
For instance, If a user finds out the system blocks all the auditory
information from outside but does not maneuver this setting, he
perceives no agency in this case. On the other hand, full agency
means VR users perceive the harmful consequence is done by them-
selves. The implication from the perceived agency dimension is
whether a VR user falls into the same trick again. Nevertheless,

cbaCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

Figure 4: We reported two dimensions selected from the syn-
thesizing step. (a) Severity of the Physical Harm shows how
bad physical harm can be and can a VR user recover from
the given harm. This dimension varies from mild pain and
discomfort (e.g., eyestrain, cramp) to the extreme case (e.g.,
drowning, get driven over). (b) The Perceived Agency indi-
cates to what degree a VR user considers that the physical
harm (or consequence) is caused by themselves.

because the VPPM’s manipulation may or may not be perceptible,
a malicious exploit of VPPM can hide their maneuver on the user
and make them blame themselves.

The Origin of Harm Created. Similar to how we coded the
Technique Used to classify types of attacks, we now coded Physical
Harm to find a classification of harm.

We find in the dimension of severity that physical harm can be
caused by the user (e.g., fall down into stairway) or by others (e.g.,
someone punches the VR user). This was also mentioned in the
origin of physical harm done (D6) in the synthesizing step. Therein,
participants described who committed the physical harm in each
scenarios. We extend this concept in our coding process and present
a 2 × 2 matrix (Figure 5) to categorize physical harm by 1) VR user
provokes/receives the harm and 2) is the other party an organism
or non-organism.

Scenarios with the gray background fit into two quadrants at the
same time. Because our task focused on inducing physical harm to
the single VR user, most scenarios locate in the quadrant of receiving
harm from non-organism (e.g., falling down a stairway, get driven
over a car). Although we asked participants to create physical harm
related to the VR user’s body, damage to non-organism still came
up during the workshop. For example, hitting furniture, breaking
personal property by throwing them. We categorize these property
damages into VR user provokes harm to non-organism. The VR user
also provokes physical harm to organism (e.g., punching bystanders
in Start a Fight, throwing a pet in Minecraftish). Finally, the VR
user can also get hurt from organism. An example would be get
stabbed in Get Robbed or bitten by wild animals in Safari. This
matrix indicating physical harm could be extended to more than
one VR user in the future.

5.5 Observations from the Workshop
Among all the scenarios, seven (7/19=37%) of them applied puppetry
attacks as a part of the technique used to provoke physical harm

Figure 5: The matrix categorizes the physical harm by 1) VR
user provokes/receives the physical harm and 2) whether
the other party is an organism or non-organism. Scenarios
with the gray background fit into two quadrants.

to the VR user. The puppetry attack was several times combined
with mismatching attacks (e.g., Catch A Ride: false-negative + walk-
ing puppetry) and easier to apply and deploy in VR applications.
Therefore, they have the potential to become of the first archetypes
of malicious attacks using VPPMs.

Game Mechanisms and Narratives. Most scenarios applied
some form of narratives and game mechanics to bring the user
into the context of VR. Using enriched narratives is associated with
increased presence [67]. Current gaming applications in VR have
already “remote-controlled” the VR user’s physical actions through
the game design. For example, VR rhythm games make the user do
dancing poses originating from the song [65], or players have to
maintain different poses by putting their head and hands in the right
spot, which can be dabbing, lunges, squats, or even choreography
(e.g., OhShape [25]). Because the VR user is immersed in the game
and unaware of what their physical actions represent in the real
world, malicious actor can make them do inappropriate posture to
confront bystanders as described in Insult Simulator.

Habituation and Trust. In a discussion during W1, P2 men-
tioned, “because I believe any application we are talking about right
now here requires a degree of trust.” This trust in a VR application
(system) can be built by the habituation to the environment or inter-
action. An example would be Falsely Mapped Apartment where the
VR user is used to a fully mapped place. Malicious attacks remove
or add a virtual object at one point to break this habituation and
trust in the system. Another example is Moving Platform where the
user interacts with a haptic display, and suddenly the system stops
(accidentally or deliberately) to provoke physical harm. The VR
user gets used to the interaction and is fully committed to the action
they are doing. Then comes the moment to break the habituation
and provoke physical harm.

6 DEMONSTRATING THE POTENTIAL FOR

VPPM HARM

The workshop illustrates the significant scope and scale of physical
harm potentially enabled by VPPMs. However, it would be easy to

aseverity of physical harmmild pain, discomfortdeathdrowningget driven overfallget punchedbroken teetheyestrainembarrassedmuscle issue (cramp)get robbedget stabbedbperceived agencyno agencyfull agencyblock information from outsideundermining the mental model of position/orientation in relation to physical environmentcannot distinguish the real and physical worldmagic maze (S03)window game (S04)get robbed (S08)catch a ride (S09)safari (S01)non-organismorganismVR userprovokes VR user receives moving platform (S05)insult simulator (S11)technical repair (S13)danger food (S15)minecraftish(S12)apartment hack (S06)falsely mapped apartment (S10)start a fight (S07)double kayaking simulator (S19)ocean VR (S02)The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Figure 7: (a) A VR user tests several baseball caps on his
avatar in VR. (b) The concept of HittingFace is to change the
offset between the virtual and physical movements while
the user moving the controller closer to the HMD. (c) Be-
cause of the trajectory of the controller changes during the
movement, HittingFace is able to provoke collision.

in VR (Figure 6b). SteppingOn always redirects the user toward
the same physical stair while having the impression of visiting a
different virtual stair each time. When the user drops an apple and
turns their head to go back to the stairs, we rotate the VR scene. The
rotation of the scene is imperceptible. Once the virtual stair aligns
with the physical one, we stop rotating to prevent the alignment
from being exceeded. Finally, we add two game mechanics (score
and time limit) to make the user commit to grab the apples and
climb the stairs. The user must collect as many apples and as fast
as they can.

During the game, the application randomly turns off the redi-
rection so that the user deviates from the targeted physical stair
and makes a missing step (Figure 6c). This effect is similar to the
moment when climbing stairs, where we think there is one more
tread, but we are already standing at the landing, therefore, making
an additional step. The missing step effect sometimes triggers small
forms of a stumble and can be easily increased using a higher stair.
The setup was inspired by Haptic Retargeting [3] and the concept
of redirected walking [44].

6.2 HittingFace: Changing the Trajectory of

Controller Movement to Provoke Collision
with the HMD

HittingFace is a short example application that manipulates the
trajectory of hands by adding an offset between the virtual and
physical position of the controller to provoke collision between the
controller and HMD. Figure 7a shows the scenario of HittingFace
where the VR user puts on different baseball caps on their avatar
to test their outfit. When the user selects a cap with controller,
the application records the controller position (𝑃𝑐 ) as the starting
position (𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 ). Next, we calculate (𝑃ℎ𝑚𝑑 − 𝑃𝑐 )/(𝑃ℎ𝑚𝑑 − 𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 )
as an indicator of how close the controller and the headset are.
When the VR user puts on the baseball cap in VR, the controller is
closer to the HMD. We add an offset to the the direction of facing-
forward. The application increases the offset abruptly, shifting the
visual of controller away from the real one. Then the VR user
moves the controller even closer to the HMD (Figure 7b), provoking
collision in Figure 7c. This application was inspired by Breaking

Figure 6: (a) The SteppingOn setup has one physical and
three virtual stairs. The application redirects the VR user
to match the stepping feedback on the physical stair while
(b) walking back and forth for collecting apples. (c) The ap-
plication randomly turns off redirection to create a missing
step.

write off many of these attacks as infeasible or impractical since our
main method was grounded in speculative design and workshops.
To demonstrate that the potential for physical harm related to
VPPMs is both plausible and pressing, we introduce two implemen-
tations of VPPM concepts. These implementations are grounded in
two recent publications from CHI [3, 45]. We deliberately choose
two publications from our community to emphasize the responsibil-
ity we carry when creating such techniques. Our two implementa-
tions are meant to demonstrate that with the information from the
paper and some basic computer science knowledge, we were able to
create two applications that are using the puppetry and mismatch-
ing attacks. These two applications could potentially be uploaded to
open stores such as SideQuest and cause a certain amount of harm
to the current early adopter population of VR technology. While
they could be counteracted with simple additions to the publication
process or platform-level mitigation (see section 7, Mitigations and
Countermeasures), these are currently not in place. The existence
of these current weak spots should be an additional call to action
to platform developers and markets. Two applications (SteppingOn
and HittingFace) are mainly leveraging the predominant form of
VPPM (puppetry attack) exemplifying how VPPMs can be easily
subverted and provoke physical harm to the VR user.

6.1 SteppingOn: Provoking Missing Steps Using

Redirected Walking

SteppingOn enables the haptic feedback of stepping on a stair to
collect virtual items in VR. The setup (Figure 6a) contains one
physical stair functioning as a prop in the real world to support the
haptic feedback of three virtual stairs in VR. The user has to walk
towards the three virtual stairs to pick apples from the trees and
return to the original point to put the apple at a certain position

virtual stairsphysicalstairapplemissingstepacbdeviating from the staircabcolliding with the HMDPc= PstartPhmdCHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

the Tracking [45] that simulates the feedback of weight in VR by
using perceptible tracking offsets.

6.3 Reflection
We started by defining the physical harm we wanted to provoke
(e.g., fall, collision with the HMD). Next, we were thinking about
incorporating physical harm into the physical movements and some
game mechanics. Inspired by habituation, the applications exploit
the manipulations after the user becomes familiar with the interac-
tion. At one point, the applications start to nudge the user’s physical
movement (e.g., walking direction, hand movement trajectory) and
provoke the physical harm we chose. Implementing these sam-
ple applications (SteppingOn and HittingFace) shows how current
concepts from VPPM research can be trivially subverted.

We did not evaluate both applications due to the high risk of hurt-
ing participants. The implication of presenting both applications is
to show how easy it can be to subvert an existing VPPM to provoke
physical harm. Both demonstrations may seem easy to counter. An
example would be detecting the discrepancy between the virtual
and physical movements as a threshold to stop a VPPM technique.
However, the malicious use of VPPMs and its countermeasure are
both unexplored spaces for researchers and practitioners currently.
The goal of the two applications is to raise awareness and initiate
discussions in the HCI and VR communities. We further discuss
mitigations and preventative recommendations for the malicious
use of VPPMs from the end-user to the platform level in section 7.

7 MITIGATIONS AND COUNTERMEASURES
We have discussed the potential attacks, physical harm, and how
to provoke them using VPPMs. In this section, we reflect on mitiga-
tions and preventative recommendations against the malicious use
of VPPMs for practitioners and researchers.

Awareness and Consent of VR Users. When applying VPPMs,
the user may be subjected to manipulation knowingly or unknow-
ingly, and the manipulation may or may not be perceptible to the
user. This notion is one possibility of how malicious actors hide
their intention and provoke physical harm to the VR user. Given
this, it would be reasonable to suggest future VR applications using
VPPMs should at-a-minimum disclose that such an approach is
being used and particularly the intent behind its usage.

Where a VPPM might be particularly risky or open to abuse, we
would suggest it should be described to the user in sufficient detail
to seek informed consent for applying such manipulations and
perceptual hacks. For example, applications should be transparent
about what kinds of actions are manipulated using VPPM, how
these actions are represented, and the possible effects on VR users
[8, 9]. At the same time, VR users are freely able to select different
levels of deception provided by VPPMs [56]. This concept originates
from reducing the realism of an XR application if a user only wants
to try a little taste of the virtual environment. By providing this
option, VR users can voluntarily choose to what degree they want
to be manipulated by VPPMs if they feel comfortable with the
manipulation. Applications using VPPMs also need to respect the
VR user’s right to withdraw anytime by providing an opt-out option
for stopping the VPPM technique [6, 56].

Validation / App Store Protections. App platforms (e.g., Steam,
Oculus Store, SideQuest) also need to verify what type of and how
much VPPM is used in an application. In the same way that ma-
licious actors have access to reference implementations and per-
ceptual thresholds, so do the platforms that profit off of selling
XR applications and experiences. Thus we assert the responsibility
should, in part, fall on their shoulders to seek out ways to detect the
presence of such manipulations in applications that they provide.
In the long run, these platforms should build a standardized rat-
ing system for induced contents [59, 69] and VPPMs as additional
information for end-users.

Platform-Level Mitigations: Provision and Detection. We an-
ticipate that platform-level APIs (e.g., OpenXR4) could provide
access to safe, permitted, and validated VPPMs that tie into mecha-
nisms for awareness and consent. An example would be an OpenXR
software library of redirection techniques that could prevent mali-
cious implementations.

Considering the pipeline of AR/VR technology, a device requires
sensing the raw data, extract information for the recognition of
high-level semantics, and rendering on top of the HMD [47]. Plat-
forms could implement low-level protections against the unper-
mitted usage of VPPMs in the sensing and rendering. For example,
the discrepancy between virtual and physical movements could be
monitored [28, 29]. If the physical movement deviates significantly
from the virtual movement, this could reveal some types of VPPM
(e.g., the gain-type ones). Similarly, one could imagine the platform
detects the dangerous overlap between virtual contents and the
physical environment. An example would be a virtual target over-
laid on a physical lamp, which sounds like a risk of non-organism
damage. This type of mitigation can be a part of reality-aware head-
sets where the virtual and physical context needs to be considered
in making the experience safer for users.

Lastly, on the device level, one can apply permission-based se-
curity with access control lists [4]. Therefore a VR system may
prevent a malicious third-party application from abusing access to
the sensory data. For example, blocking the access to the captured
image of cameras to avoid incorporating bystanders as an enemy
avatar in Start A Fight.

Community-led Regulations and Guidelines. In time, we
would expect that regulations could be formed around our pro-
posed mitigations and preventative measures. There are a number
of routes that could accomplish this. Most immediately, we propose
such regulation could be formulated by not-for-profit organizations
in this space (e.g., XRSI5), creating voluntary guidelines that could
guide the actions both of app platforms and app developers [42].
Eventually, one could imagine firmer legal protections being put
in place. An example would be an equivalent of GDPR6 such as an
extended reality protection regulation (XRPR) that would include
the right to perceptual integrity. As recent works discussed on hu-
man rights of neurotechnology (e.g., [72, 73], and The NeuroRights
Foundation7), XRPR also has to include the right to agency and
consent to choose one’s own actions while using VPPMs.

4https://www.khronos.org/openxr/
5https://xrsi.org/
6https://gdpr-info.eu/
7https://neurorightsfoundation.org/

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

The Role of the Research Community: Anticipation and
Disclosure. VPPMs offer obvious advantages to interaction de-
sign and locomotion in particular, having been repeatedly pursued
by research. Consequently, the implementation details of VPPMs
and the perception thresholds found are open to everyone. How-
ever, this information is also available to malicious actors. This
early insight gives malicious actors the chance to abusively exploit
published results and concepts, for example, using VPPMs to enact
harmful consequences on VR users. Fundamentally, the current
way we apply and publish VPPMs is hacking human perception.
We consider this hack as exposing a weak spot of our perceptual
vulnerabilities. One can provide patches to fix the software back-
door, as we have previously discussed, but there is no patch to fix
the hack of our perception directly.

In our view, these risks necessitate a change of approach re-
garding how we disseminate novel research related to VPPMs. We
suggest that the research community should publish VPPM with
the potential threats/risks in mind. The community should con-
sider the perceptibility of a given VPPM instead of only optimizing
for presence, immersion, and other usability measurements (e.g.,
performance). This approach would ensure one could apply VPPM
always above the perception threshold during VR interaction, al-
lowing VR users to know they are interacting with a certain degree
of manipulation. This idea is already starting to get explored in the
field of locomotion. Rietzler et al. [46] proposed using perceptible
thresholds to reduce the space requirement for redirected walking,
which could also benefit a transparent usage of VPPM. Finally, we
suggest if a VPPM publication has the potential to enable abusive
outcomes (e.g., if it has the potential to facilitate one of the attacks
identified herein), then the author(s) should include discussion
regarding the potential threat/risk posed at-a-minimum.

8 DISCUSSION
Our goal with this paper was to start the first exploration into
how dangerous current VPPMs could become in the future. While
we are able to observe current applications of VPPMs, we needed
to apply speculative design methods to try to predict how these
current VPPMs could be subverted in the future. Applying this
method allowed us to present a definition of VPPMs and a set
of speculative scenarios which we used to derive a classification
of attacks and gain a better understanding of the characteristics
of the potential harm arising from the VPPMs. We identified five
potential attacks (puppetry: walking, arm-movement; mismatching:
false-positive, false-negative, swapping), a categorization of harm
(provoke/receive matrix), and two variables that participants found
particularly important when thinking about VPPMs (severity of
physical harm and perceived agency).

Physical harm is a novel problem that arises at the intersection
of HCI, XR, and Security/Safety research. This unique combina-
tion aims at using methods from security research, combined with
insights from HCI which are then applied to applications in XR.
Additionally, XR may become an “ideal” platform to abuse percep-
tual vulnerabilities and manipulate the user’s motion. The ability
to manipulate the VR user’s physical movements and actions could
have way more impact than only hitting a piece of furniture.

Pursuing positive outcomes (e.g., speed, accuracy, enjoyment) is
usually a common goal for HCI research. VPPMs help in overcom-
ing the limitations of VR technologies. They also expose a weak
spot of VR users who are particularly vulnerable because of losing
connection with the real world. Our intention is to raise the aware-
ness that the interaction design in VR using VPPMs could be used
for malicious intention as well. Although examples shown in the
applications may be easily thwarted, this is currently not the case
because VPPMs are mostly used inside research. Meanwhile, it is
necessary to ensure that developers are aware of these potential
attacks and that they take measures to prevent or mitigate them.
We want to emphasize the importance of the safety and security
of the VR user, with a particular focus on physical harm done by
human perception hacking. To our best knowledge, we are the first
to establish the term, organize the knowledge in this domain, and
lay out suggestions on how to deal with VPPMs (i.e., section 7).

8.1 Limitations
Our work encounters a methodological situation known as the
Collingridge dilemma8. The malicious use of VPPMs cannot be
easily predicted until they are extensively developed and widely
used. However, at the point we can do that, the control or change
to affect the usage of VPPMs is difficult because the technology has
become entrenched. Therefore, we chose speculative design as our
approach to both critique current practices, and reflect on future
technologies and their implications.

The resulting scenarios show the possibilities of potential harm
exploited by VPPMs. Using a speculative design workshop allows
us to broadly explore this space. However, one outcome that we
are not able to assess with the current method is the likelihood
of malicious attacks using VPPMs and the occurrence of physical
harm in the everyday usage of VR. Nonetheless, surveying the in-
the-wild VR phenomena (e.g., VR fails [15] or interactions between
VR users and bystanders [41]) could provide one route towards
early detection of these attacks happening in practice, and such
research would be aided by our findings.

Our participants were from HCI research and design research
background. The resulting scenarios were more interaction design
research oriented. We did not interpret the results depending on the
participant’s expertise because participants collaborated during the
workshop to create outcomes (scenarios, dimensions). VPPMs are
mainly used inside research currently. Therefore inputs from our
participants are valid because it reflects on how research communi-
ties perceive the malicious use of VPPM and how we can mitigate
it in the future. However, we acknowledge that our current results
show only one perspective of the malicious use of VPPMs. Future re-
search should consider similar studies and experiments with people
from the safety and security area, technical VR/XR, and dark design
patterns to provide in-depth technical details in this direction.

8.2 Future Work
Our work is a first exploration into a topic that could potentially
grow exponentially in its risk at the moment when we have always-
on XR devices. Based on our current findings, we open the door

8https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collingridge_dilemma

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

to further research into the malicious potential of perceptually
manipulating users in the context of XR.

Intent beyond Physical Harm. Currently, this paper focus on
the physical harm, but we want to point out that the malicious user
of VPPMs could accomplish more than ‘just’ provoking physical
harm. The realism of VR technology can induce certain behavioral
changes (e.g., given the virtual representation in VR, users with
taller avatars negotiated more aggressively than users with shorter
avatars [71]). Slater and colleagues [56] discussed the psychologi-
cal realism of AR/VR and its possible impact on the user. In both
workshops, participants (P2 and P5) mentioned the possibility of
exploiting psychological harm to the user (e.g., VR application in-
troduces a phobia to the VR user and make them forever be afraid
of using an HMD). Unlike perceptually manipulating the physical
movements, the psychological harm cannot only provoke immedi-
ate effect and reaction but also the long-term impact (e.g., trauma
or phobia).

Harm beyond the VR User, and the Here-and-Now. Although
we focus on provoking harm to one VR user, malicious attacks
could easily go beyond that. We already find some examples in our
workshops. For instance, Start a Fight (S07) renders bystanders as
enemies in VR and makes the VR user punch them or vice versa.
The other example is Minecraftish (S12) that the VR user throws
an object at pedestrians. In the results of synthesizing step, P3
presented the social involvement dimension (D5) that starts with
“harm yourself” to “harm others”. Harm others could be exploited in
several ways such as hitting bystanders (S07), insulting people (S11),
or let others watch the VR user suffering or even dying (S04 and
S09). The target of malicious actors varies from a VR user, multiple
VR users, bystanders, to objects and organisms in the environment.
VPPMs could also be used to create the circumstances for harm in
the future, e.g., using the VR user to manipulate elements in the
physical environment that might cause harm to bystanders later.
We have examined only a narrow scope of the potential harms
that could be made possible by VPPMs in the future, and suggest
consideration be given to further understanding multi-user VPPMs,
harm beyond the VR user, and creating the circumstances for harm
beyond the VR session.

Challenges of VPPMs in AR and XR. We anticipate that re-
searchers and practitioners can also apply VPPMs to AR and XR
in the future. As an example, Optical Marionette [21] applied redi-
rected walking on video see-through HMDs. In video see-through
HMDs, malicious actors are still able to apply both puppetry and
mismatching attacks since they still have full control over the vi-
suals of the user. However, when using optical see-through HMDs
(e.g., deceptive holograms [30]), applying puppetry attacks becomes
more challenging because the user can observe their physical move-
ments at the same time. Future VR, AR, and XR technologies would
allow the user to break free the static play space towards moving
around freely in the world. The safety risk may be amplified, and
mismatching attacks are still able to trick the user (e.g., substitute
the virtual and physical content on video/optical see-through HMDs
to provoke falling over). Future research could continue to explore
the novel attacks using VPPMs in this direction, understanding the
common attacks shared across XR devices.

Broadly, whilst it would be understandable if there was still some
scepticism regarding the prescience of the risks posed by VPPMs, it
is our view that we have only just begun to understand the extent
to which XR users are exposed to risks through these techniques.
As XR technology and its requisite sensing grow in capability, so
too will a malicious actors ability to exploit this technology for
harmful intent. Consequently, it is paramount that research to this
end be considered and acted upon before real harm is inflicted upon
real users.

9 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we define VPPM as XR-driven exploits that alter
the human multi-sensory perception of our physical actions and
reactions to nudge the user’s physical movements. Through specu-
lative design workshops, we collect a set of harmful scenarios using
VPPMs, identify two main classes (puppetry and mismatching) of
potential attacks, and characterize physical harm. Two sample ap-
plications (SteppingOn and HittingFace) are implemented as an
demonstration to show how current concepts from VPPM research
can be trivially subverted. Finally, we propose platform-level miti-
gations and preventative recommendations for practitioners and
researchers against the malicious use of VPPMs. Our work opens
new research directions at the intersection between HCI, XR, and
security research. We want to raise awareness that the current way
we apply and publish VPPMs can lead to malicious use of our per-
ceptual vulnerabilities. We consider the current practice provides
a dangerous leak of human perceptual weak spots — human per-
ception thresholds that cannot be patched — which can be used
by future malicious actors. Overall, we argue that VPPMs do have
the potential to be misused to provoke physical harm in the future
and HCI as an academic discipline should become more cautious
publishing such work and also reflect on the potential for abuse.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially conducted within the HARMFULVR JCJC
project (ANR-21-CE33-0013) funded by French National Research
Agency (ANR). We appreciate all the anonymous reviewers for
their advice to improve this paper, and we thank the workshop
participants for their contributions and time.

A DESCRIPTIONS OF SELECTED SCENARIOS
[Magic Maze (S03), exploits: redirected walking, physical harm:
fall]. Magic Maze is an application where the VR user explores
a virtual maze in their apartment or a building. The application
applies redirected walking to the VR user to control their walking
direction in this space. As the application steers the VR user towards
a stairway, they are unaware of the height difference and fall.

[Start a Fight (S07), exploits: swapping, physical harm: punch other,
get punched]. In this scenario, a VR user plays a game in a public
space where the goal is to fight enemies. The VR application detects
bystanders in the real world and maps the enemy’s avatar onto
bystander so that the VR user punches them. This would result in
harm to bystanders and potential harm for the users.

[Getting Robbed (S08), exploits: redirected walking, physical harm:
get robbed, stabbed]. Getting Robbed shows that a VR user is in a

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

game like Pokemon Go and needs to walk around in VR to collect
items. The items are located in dangerous places in the real world,
and all the physical surroundings are replaced by the virtual game
view. This results in a practically blindfolded user walking and not
knowing where they are headed. This will then be abused once
the victim was lured into a dangerous area (e.g., being robbed or
physically attacked in an alley).

[Catch a Ride (S09), exploits: redirected walking, overplay audio
feedback, physical harm: get driven over]. Catch A Ride is where a
VR user is immersed in a VR game at an open space. The game
has loud audio feedback that can overplay the sound from the real
world. The game redirects the user onto an open road so they get
hit by a car since they are not able to see or hear the traffic noise.

[Falsely Mapped Apartment (S10), exploits: remove or add virtual
object in an one-to-one mapped environment, physical harm: fall or
collision]. In this scenario, a future VR technology allows users to
re-create a fully-mapped apartment in VR. The VR user can touch
anything and sit anywhere as they do in the real world, believing
that this mapping matches their real world home. The user habitu-
ates to this environment as each real-world object is mapped to a
VR one. Malicious actors may exploit this by adding or removing
virtual objects. Adding VR objects may result in injuring the user
by, for example, sitting on a VR chair that has no physical counter-
part. Similarly, removing VR objects may result in collisions with
real-world objects, such as real-world tables that do not have coun-
terparts in VR. The idea in this scenario is to first make accustomed
to having a one-to-one mapping between the virtual and the real
world and trust that this is the case, and then introduce/remove
objects to unexpectedly break this mapping.

[Insult Simulator (S11), exploits: game mechanics, physical harm:
insult bystanders, get punched]. In this scenario, the VR user plays
a game in an open space where people are around, and the game
mechanics lead the user to perform physical actions that appear
insulting for onlookers without enough context. In an illustrated
example by our participants, a user follows the narratives in VR to
reach out with bare hands but may seem like they are performing
a Nazi salute from outside. A bystander that does not know what
the VR user is doing may feel insulted/offended as a result.

[Minecraftish (S12), exploits: redirected haptics and swapping,
physical harm: throwing objects at others]. Minecraftish is another
scenario that uses redirected haptics to make the VR user grab
a real-world object that they think resembles a counter part in a
Minecraft-style VR game. The application can access information
captured by the VR headset, and at some point, it redirects the VR
user to grab an object (or a pet) resembling the virtual content in
the environment. Because the VR user thinks they are doing the
task in VR and do not perceive the difference, they stack up or even
throw a potentially harmful object (e.g., hot drink or sharp object)
outside the window and hit pedestrians. The physical harm in this
scenario affects the personal objects or other organisms (e.g., pet,
bystander) in the environment.

REFERENCES
[1] Nadisha-Marie Aliman and Leon Kester. 2020. Malicious Design in AIVR, False-
hood and Cybersecurity-oriented Immersive Defenses. In 2020 IEEE International

Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality (AIVR). IEEE, Utrecht,
Netherlands, 130–137. https://doi.org/10.1109/AIVR50618.2020.00031

[2] James Auger. 2013. Speculative design: crafting the speculation. Digital Cre-
ativity 24, 1 (March 2013), 11–35. https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2013.767276
Publisher: Routledge _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2013.767276.
[3] Mahdi Azmandian, Mark Hancock, Hrvoje Benko, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D.
Wilson. 2016. Haptic Retargeting: Dynamic Repurposing of Passive Haptics for
Enhanced Virtual Reality Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, San Jose, California, USA, 1968–1979. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.
2858226

[4] David Barrera, H. Güneş Kayacik, Paul C. van Oorschot, and Anil Somayaji. 2010.
A methodology for empirical analysis of permission-based security models and
its application to android. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer
and communications security (CCS ’10). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 73–84. https://doi.org/10.1145/1866307.1866317

[5] Katharina-Maria Behr, Andreas Nosper, Christoph Klimmt, and Tilo Hartmann.
2005. Some Practical Considerations of Ethical Issues in VR Research. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 14, 6 (Dec. 2005), 668–676. https://doi.
org/10.1162/105474605775196535

[6] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, Gabriella Giannachi, Brendan Walker, Joe
Marshall, and Tom Rodden. 2012. Uncomfortable interactions. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2005–2014. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2207676.2208347

[7] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006.

Using thematic analysis in
psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (Jan. 2006), 77–101.
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Publisher: Routledge _eprint:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.

[8] Philip Brey. 1999. The ethics of representation and action in virtual reality. Ethics
and Information Technology 1, 1 (March 1999), 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1010069907461 Company: Springer Distributor: Springer Institution: Springer
Label: Springer Number: 1 Publisher: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

[9] Philip Brey. 2014. Virtual Reality and Computer Simulation.

In Ethics and
Emerging Technologies, Ronald L. Sandler (Ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK, London,
315–332. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137349088_21

[10] E. Burns, S. Razzaque, A. T. Panter, M. C. Whitton, M. R. McCallus, and F. P.
Brooks. 2005. The hand is slower than the eye: a quantitative exploration of visual
dominance over proprioception. In IEEE Proceedings. VR 2005. Virtual Reality,
2005. IEEE, Bonn, Germany, 3–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2005.1492747 ISSN:
2375-5334.

[11] P. Casey, I. Baggili, and A. Yarramreddy. 2019. Immersive Virtual Reality Attacks
and the Human Joystick. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing
18, 2 (2019), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2019.2907942 Conference Name:
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing.

[12] L. Cheng, E. Ofek, C. Holz, and A. D. Wilson. 2019. VRoamer: Generating On-The-
Fly VR Experiences While Walking inside Large, Unknown Real-World Building
Environments. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces
(VR). IEEE, Osaka, Japan, 359–366. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2019.8798074 ISSN:
2642-5254.

[13] Lung-Pan Cheng, Eyal Ofek, Christian Holz, Hrvoje Benko, and Andrew D.
Wilson. 2017. Sparse Haptic Proxy: Touch Feedback in Virtual Environments
Using a General Passive Prop. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery,
Denver, Colorado, USA, 3718–3728. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025753

[14] Nigel Cross. 2004. Expertise in design: an overview. Design Studies 25, 5 (Sept.

2004), 427–441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2004.06.002

[15] Emily Dao, Andreea Muresan, Kasper Hornbæk, and Jarrod Knibbe. 2021. Bad
Breakdowns, Useful Seams, and Face Slapping: Analysis of VR Fails on YouTube.
In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445435

[16] John V. Draper, David B. Kaber, and John M. Usher. 1998. Telepresence. Human
Factors 40, 3 (Sept. 1998), 354–375. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872098779591386
Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.

[17] Mar Gonzalez-Franco and Jaron Lanier. 2017. Model of Illusions and Virtual
Reality. Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.
01125

[18] Kim Halskov and Peter Dalsgård. 2006. Inspiration Card Workshops. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (University Park, PA,
USA) (DIS ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2–11.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142409

[19] Jeremy Hartmann, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D. Wilson. 2019.
RealityCheck: Blending Virtual Environments with Situated Physical Reality. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3290605.3300577

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Tseng, et al.

[20] Anuruddha Hettiarachchi and Daniel Wigdor. 2016. Annexing Reality: Enabling
Opportunistic Use of Everyday Objects as Tangible Proxies in Augmented Reality.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, San Jose, California, USA, 1957–
1967. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858134

[21] Akira Ishii, Ippei Suzuki, Shinji Sakamoto, Keita Kanai, Kazuki Takazawa, Hiraku
Doi, and Yoichi Ochiai. 2016. Optical Marionette: Graphical Manipulation of
Human’s Walking Direction. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’16). Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA, 705–716. https://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984545
[22] Robert Jungk and Norbert Müllert. 1987. Future Workshops: How to create desirable

futures. Inst. for Social Inventions, UK.

[23] L. Kohli. 2010. Redirected touching: Warping space to remap passive haptics. In
2010 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). IEEE, Waltham, MA, USA,
129–130. https://doi.org/10.1109/3DUI.2010.5444703

[24] Richard A. Krueger and Mary Anne Casey. 2015. Focus groups: a practical guide
for applied research (5th ed. ed.). Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
[25] Odders Lab. 2020. OhShape, a New VR Rhythm Game. https://ohshapevr.com/
[26] E. Langbehn, P. Lubos, G. Bruder, and F. Steinicke. 2017. Bending the Curve:
Sensitivity to Bending of Curved Paths and Application in Room-Scale VR. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 23, 4 (April 2017), 1389–1398.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2657220 Conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics.

[27] Eike Langbehn, Frank Steinicke, Markus Lappe, Gregory F. Welch, and Gerd
In the blink of an eye: leveraging blink-induced suppression
Bruder. 2018.
for imperceptible position and orientation redirection in virtual reality. ACM
Transactions on Graphics 37, 4 (July 2018), 66:1–66:11. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3197517.3201335

[28] Kiron Lebeck, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2016. How to Safely
Augment Reality: Challenges and Directions. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications (St. Augustine,
Florida, USA) (HotMobile ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1145/2873587.2873595

[29] Kiron Lebeck, Kimberly Ruth, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2017.
Securing Augmented Reality Output. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP). IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, 320–337. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.13
ISSN: 2375-1207.

[30] Kiron Lebeck, Kimberly Ruth, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Franziska Roesner. 2018.
Towards Security and Privacy for Multi-user Augmented Reality: Foundations
with End Users. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, San
Francisco, CA, USA, 392–408. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2018.00051

[31] A. Lecuyer, S. Coquillart, A. Kheddar, P. Richard, and P. Coiffet. 2000. Pseudo-
haptic feedback: can isometric input devices simulate force feedback?. In Pro-
ceedings IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No.00CB37048). IEEE, New Brunswick, NJ,
USA, 83–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2000.840369 ISSN: 1087-8270.

[32] David Lindlbauer and Andy D. Wilson. 2018. Remixed Reality: Manipulating
Space and Time in Augmented Reality. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173703

[33] Pedro Lopes, Alexandra Ion, and Patrick Baudisch. 2015. Impacto: Simulating
Physical Impact by Combining Tactile Stimulation with Electrical Muscle Stim-
ulation. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software & Technology (UIST ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 11–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/2807442.2807443

[34] Anatole Lécuyer, Jean-Marie Burkhardt, and Laurent Etienne. 2004. Feeling
bumps and holes without a haptic interface: the perception of pseudo-haptic
textures. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 239–246.
https://doi.org/10.1145/985692.985723

[35] Michael Madary and Thomas K. Metzinger. 2016. Real Virtuality: A Code of
Ethical Conduct. Recommendations for Good Scientific Practice and the Con-
sumers of VR-Technology. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 3 (2016), 3.
https:
//doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2016.00003

[36] Thomas Markussen and Eva Knutz. 2013. The poetics of design fiction. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Designing Pleasurable Products
and Interfaces (DPPI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 231–240. https://doi.org/10.1145/2513506.2513531

[37] Michael Meehan, Brent Insko, Mary Whitton, and Frederick P. Brooks. 2002.
Physiological measures of presence in stressful virtual environments. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques
(SIGGRAPH ’02). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
645–652. https://doi.org/10.1145/566570.566630

[38] Roberto A. Montano Murillo, Sriram Subramanian, and Diego Martinez Plasencia.
2017. Erg-O: Ergonomic Optimization of Immersive Virtual Environments. In
Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, Québec City, QC,
Canada, 759–771. https://doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126605

[39] David Morgan. 1996. Focus groups as qualitative research (2nd ed. ed.). Sage

Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.

[40] Blessing Odeleye, George Loukas, Ryan Heartfield, and Fotios Spyridonis. 2021.
Detecting framerate-oriented cyber attacks on user experience in virtual reality.
In 1st International Workshop on Security for XR and XR for Security. VR4Sec,
Vancouver, B.C., Canada, 1–5.

[41] Joseph O’Hagan, Julie R. Williamson, Mark McGill, and Mohamed Khamis. 2021.
Safety, Power Imbalances, Ethics and Proxy Sex: Surveying In-The-Wild In-
teractions Between VR Users and Bystanders. In 2021 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR). IEEE, Bari, Italy, 211–220.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR52148.2021.00036

[42] Kavya Pearlman. 2020. Virtual Reality Brings Real Risks: Are We Ready? https://
www.usenix.org/conference/enigma2020/presentation/pearlman Accessed: 2010-
12-01.

[43] Michael I. Posner, Mary J. Nissen, and Raymond M. Klein. 1976. Visual dominance:
An information-processing account of its origins and significance. Psychological
Review 83, 2 (1976), 157–171. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.83.2.157 Place:
US Publisher: American Psychological Association.

[44] Sharif Razzaque, David Swapp, Mel Slater, Mary C. Whitton, and Anthony Steed.
2002. Redirected walking in place. In Proceedings of the workshop on Virtual
environments 2002 (EGVE ’02). Eurographics Association, Goslar, DEU, 123–130.
[45] Michael Rietzler, Florian Geiselhart, Jan Gugenheimer, and Enrico Rukzio. 2018.
Breaking the Tracking: Enabling Weight Perception using Perceivable Tracking
Offsets. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, Montreal QC, Canada,
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173702

[46] Michael Rietzler, Jan Gugenheimer, Teresa Hirzle, Martin Deubzer, Eike Langbehn,
and Enrico Rukzio. 2018. Rethinking Redirected Walking: On the Use of Curvature
Gains Beyond Perceptual Limitations and Revisiting Bending Gains. In 2018 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR). IEEE, Munich,
Germany, 115–122. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2018.00041 ISSN: 1554-7868.
[47] Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi Kohno, and David Molnar. 2014. Security and
privacy for augmented reality systems. Commun. ACM 57, 4 (April 2014), 88–96.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2580723.2580730

[48] Daniela K. Rosner, Saba Kawas, Wenqi Li, Nicole Tilly, and Yi-Chen Sung. 2016.
Out of Time, Out of Place: Reflections on Design Workshops as a Research Method.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work &amp; Social Computing (San Francisco, California, USA) (CSCW ’16).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1131–1141. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820021

[49] Majed Samad, Elia Gatti, Anne Hermes, Hrvoje Benko, and Cesare Parise. 2019.
Pseudo-Haptic Weight: Changing the Perceived Weight of Virtual Objects By
Manipulating Control-Display Ratio. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’19). Association for Computing
Machinery, Glasgow, Scotland Uk, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300550
[50] Maria V. Sanchez-Vives and Mel Slater. 2005. From presence to consciousness
through virtual reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6, 4 (April 2005), 332–339.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1651 Number: 4 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[51] Lior Shapira and Daniel Freedman. 2016. Reality Skins: Creating Immersive
and Tactile Virtual Environments. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR). IEEE, Merida, Mexico, 115–124. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2016.23

[52] Thomas B. Sheridan. 1992. Musings on Telepresence and Virtual Presence. Pres-
ence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 1, 1 (Jan. 1992), 120–126. https:
//doi.org/10.1162/pres.1992.1.1.120

[53] Joon Gi Shin, Doheon Kim, Chaehan So, and Daniel Saakes. 2020. Body Follows
Eye: Unobtrusive Posture Manipulation Through a Dynamic Content Position in
Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376794

[54] Adalberto L. Simeone, Eduardo Velloso, and Hans Gellersen. 2015. Substitutional
Reality: Using the Physical Environment to Design Virtual Reality Experiences.
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
3307–3316. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702389

[55] Mel Slater. 2009. Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in
immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences 364, 1535 (Dec. 2009), 3549–3557. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2009.0138 Publisher: Royal Society.

[56] Mel Slater, Cristina Gonzalez-Liencres, Patrick Haggard, Charlotte Vinkers, Re-
becca Gregory-Clarke, Steve Jelley, Zillah Watson, Graham Breen, Raz Schwarz,
William Steptoe, Dalila Szostak, Shivashankar Halan, Deborah Fox, and Jeremy
Silver. 2020. The Ethics of Realism in Virtual and Augmented Reality. Frontiers in
Virtual Reality 1 (2020), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3389/frvir.2020.00001 Publisher:
Frontiers.

[57] Mel Slater and Sylvia Wilbur. 1997. A Framework for Immersive Virtual En-
vironments (FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environ-
ments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 6 (Dec. 1997), 603–616.
https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603

The Dark Side of Perceptual Manipulations in Virtual Reality

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

[58] Bernhard Spanlang, Jean-Marie Normand, David Borland, Konstantina Kilteni,
Elias Giannopoulos, Ausiàs Pomés, Mar González-Franco, Daniel Perez-Marcos,
Jorge Arroyo-Palacios, Xavi Navarro Muncunill, and Mel Slater. 2014. How to
Build an Embodiment Lab: Achieving Body Representation Illusions in Virtual
Reality. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 1 (2014), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.
2014.00009 Publisher: Frontiers.

[59] James S. Spiegel. 2018. The Ethics of Virtual Reality Technology: Social Hazards
and Public Policy Recommendations. Science and Engineering Ethics 24, 5 (Oct.
2018), 1537–1550. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-017-9979-y

[60] F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, J. Jerald, H. Frenz, and M. Lappe. 2010. Estimation of
Detection Thresholds for Redirected Walking Techniques. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 16, 1 (Jan. 2010), 17–27. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TVCG.2009.62 Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics.

[61] Qi Sun, Anjul Patney, Li-Yi Wei, Omer Shapira, Jingwan Lu, Paul Asente, Suwen
Zhu, Morgan Mcguire, David Luebke, and Arie Kaufman. 2018. Towards virtual
reality infinite walking: dynamic saccadic redirection. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 37, 4 (July 2018), 67:1–67:13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3197517.3201294
[62] Martin Usoh, Kevin Arthur, Mary C. Whitton, Rui Bastos, Anthony Steed, Mel
Slater, and Frederick P. Brooks. 1999. Walking &gt; walking-in-place &gt; flying,
in virtual environments. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques (SIGGRAPH ’99). ACM Press/Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., USA, 359–364. https://doi.org/10.1145/311535.311589

[63] R. J. van Beers, A. C. Sittig, and J. J. Gon. 1999. Integration of proprioceptive
and visual position-information: An experimentally supported model. Journal of
Neurophysiology 81, 3 (March 1999), 1355–1364. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1999.
81.3.1355

[64] Robert J van Beers, Daniel M Wolpert, and Patrick Haggard. 2002. When Feeling
Is More Important Than Seeing in Sensorimotor Adaptation. Current Biology 12,
10 (May 2002), 834–837. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(02)00836-9
[65] VR Fitness Insider. 2018. Beat Saber - GANGNAM STYLE PERFECT. https:

//www.youtube.com/watch?v=SijuABl2nsY

[66] D. H. Warren and W. T. Cleaves. 1971. Visual-proprioceptive interaction under
large amounts of conflict. Journal of Experimental Psychology 90, 2 (Oct. 1971),
206–214. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0031545

[67] Séamas Weech, Sophie Kenny, Markus Lenizky, and Michael Barnett-Cowan. 2020.
Narrative and gaming experience interact to affect presence and cybersickness in
virtual reality. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 138 (June 2020),
102398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102398

[68] Tyler Wilde. 2017.

Man dies in VR accident, reports Russian news
https://www.pcgamer.com/man-dies-in-vr-accident-according-to-

agency.
russian-news-agency/ Accessed: 2021-09-01.

[69] Graham Wilson and Mark McGill. 2018. Violent Video Games in Virtual Reality:
Re-Evaluating the Impact and Rating of Interactive Experiences. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI
PLAY ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 535–548.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3242671.3242684

[70] Jackie (Junrui) Yang, Christian Holz, Eyal Ofek, and Andrew D. Wilson. 2019.
DreamWalker: Substituting Real-World Walking Experiences with a Virtual
Reality. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (UIST ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New
Orleans, LA, USA, 1093–1107. https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347875
[71] Nick Yee, Jeremy N. Bailenson, and Nicolas Ducheneaut. 2009. The Proteus
Effect: Implications of Transformed Digital Self-Representation on Online and
Offline Behavior. Communication Research 36, 2 (Jan. 2009), 285–312. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0093650208330254 Publisher: SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los
Angeles, CA.

[72] Rafael Yuste, Jared Genser, and Stephanie Herrmann. 2021. It’s Time for Neuro-
Rights. , 154–165 pages. https://www.cirsd.org/en/horizons/horizons-winter-
2021-issue-no-18/its-time-for-neuro--rights Accessed: 2021-12-01.

[73] Rafael Yuste, Sara Goering, Guoqiang Bi, Jose M Carmena, Adrian Carter, Joseph J
Fins, Phoebe Friesen, Jack Gallant, Jane E Huggins, Judy Illes, et al. 2017. Four
ethical priorities for neurotechnologies and AI. Nature News 551, 7679 (2017),
159.

