     Evoking realistic affective touch experiences in virtual reality  
Sofia Seinfeld1†*, Ivette Schmidt1, & Jörg Müller1 

1Institute of Computer Science, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany 

 † Present address: Centre de la Imatge i Tecnologia Multimèdia, Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain  

* Corresponding author: 
Dr. Sofia Seinfeld  
sofia.seinfeld@citm.upc.edu 

Abstract 
This study aims to better understand the emotional and physiological correlates of being caressed in 
VR depending on the type of multisensory feedback provided and the animate or inanimate nature of 
the  virtual  representation  that  touches  an  embodied  virtual  body.  We  evaluated  how  pleasure, 
arousal, embodiment, and the illusion of being touched in VR were influenced by the inclusion of only 
visual  feedback  compared  to  visuotactile  stimulation  conditions,  where  participants,  in  addition  to 
seeing an avatar or feather caressing their virtual bodies, also perceived congruent mid-air ultrasonic 
tactile stimulation or real interpersonal touch. We found that visuotactile feedback, either based on 
ultrasound or real interpersonal touch, boosts the illusion of being affectively touched and embodied 
in a virtual body compared to conditions only based on visual feedback. However, real interpersonal 
touch  led  to  the  strongest  behavioral  and  emotional  responses  compared  to  the  other  conditions. 
Moreover, arousal and the desire to withdraw the caressed hand was highest when being touched by 
a female avatar compared to a virtual feather. Female participants reported a stronger illusion of being 
caressed  in  VR  compared  to  males.  Overall,  this  study  advances  knowledge  of  the  emotional  and 
physiological impact of affective touch in VR. 

Keywords: Affective Touch, Virtual Reality, Embodiment, Haptics, Emotional Responses 

1.  Introduction 

Touch is the first sense to develop in the human embryo and it is a vital communication channel in 
parent-infant  interactions  (Parsons  et  al.,  2017).  During  all  stages  of  life,  tactile  perception  plays  a 
prominent  role  in  the  exploration  of  the  environment  and  in  social  bonding.  For  instance,  touch 
enables us to perceive textures, pleasure, and pain, as well as to express emotions such as happiness, 
intimacy, love, insecurity, and threat (Andersen & Guerrero, 2008; Schirmer & Adolphs, 2017). Several 
studies  have  demonstrated  the  detrimental  consequences  of  touch  deprivation  on  physical  and 
psychological health (Field, 2010; Jakubiak & Feeney, 2017). Despite the importance of touch in our 
everyday  life,  a  significant  amount  of  the  worldwide  population  lacks  meaningful  and  rich  social 
interactions  including  interpersonal touch  (Beßler  et al.,  2019).  In  fact,  social  isolation  has  become 
more evident with the COVID-19 crisis due to the required social distancing rules (Armitage & Nellums, 
2020; Bavel et al., 2020). A potential solution to provide social touch experiences when real touch is 
not  possible  due  to  physical  distance  restrictions  is  through  mediated  social  communication.  The 
combination of immersive Virtual Reality (VR) systems with carefully designed tactile feedback is an 
ideal candidate for accomplishing interactions including social touch despite the artificial nature of the 
sensory stimuli used to achieve these illusions. Furthermore, recent studies have proposed that VR is 
an  ideal  medium  to  simulate  and  better  understand  interpersonal  touch,  since  this  type  of  touch 
frequently involves sensitive and intimate aspects that are impossible to replicate under laboratory 
conditions (Fusaro et al., 2021). However, until now there has been scarce research on how to achieve 
realistic affective touch in VR and its corresponding subjective and physiological correlates depending 

1 

 
 
on the type of multisensory feedback delivered and the animate or inanimate nature  of the virtual 
objects that touch an embodied artificial body (Haans & IJsselsteijn, 2006; Huisman, 2017; van Erp & 
Toet, 2015). 

VR  provides  experimental  settings  with  high  ecological  validity  and  internal  control,  making  it  an 
especially  suitable  technology  to  understand  the  role  played  by  touch  in  different  psychological, 
neurological,  and  social  phenomena.  For  instance,  de  Jong  et  al.  (2017)  and  Carey  et  al.  (2021) 
investigated whether affective touch enhanced the full-body ownership illusion using VR or a physical 
mannequin,  finding  inconclusive  evidence  for  both  types  of  artificial  bodies.  These  results  stand  in 
contrast with other studies showing that affective touch modulates the strength of the rubber hand 
illusion, where spatiotemporal congruent visuotactile stimulation leads to the perceptual illusion that 
a fake hand is part of the real body (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998; Crucianelli et al., 2013). In these studies, 
affective touch is defined as slow velocity (i.e., 1 to 10 cm/s) pleasant touch that is specifically coded 
by C-fiber tactile unmyelinated afferents (CT afferents) located in the non-glabrous skin, while non-
affective  touch  is  characterized  by  faster  velocities  of  touch  (Olausson  et  al.,  2002).  However,  the 
notion that CT afferents are only present in non-glabrous skin has been challenged by the evidence 
provided  by  recent  studies  showing  that  CT  afferents  can  be  also  found  in  glabrous  non-hairy  skin 
(McGlone  et  al.,  2012;  Watkins  et  al.,  2021).  Moreover,  other  models  of  affective  touch  have 
highlighted that the perception of touch as pleasant is not only modulated by bottom-up factors, such 
as CT afferents and sensory processing, but also by top-down factors which focuses on the cognitive 
interpretation of contextual social and affective cues related to the touch experience (Watkins et al., 
2021). For instance, a top-down factor which might have influenced the results of some past studies 
related to affective touch is that frequently tactile stimulation is delivered using a brush and not based 
on direct skin-to-skin contact. In this regard, Kress et al. (2011) has shown that interpersonal touch 
compared  to  being  touched  by  inanimate  objects  (e.g.,  a  brush)  results  in  different  brain 
somatosensory  and  insular  cortex  responses.  Therefore,  it  is  still  unclear  whether  affective  touch 
modulates body ownership for an artificial body, and also how embodiment and arousal are influenced 
by the method and object used to deliver the touch (i.e., touch by a human or object). 

In relation to arousal and pleasure feelings, Fusaro et al. (2019) capitalized on VR to investigate how 
painful  and  pleasurable  tactile  experiences  were  impacted  by  the  visual  perspective  and  cognitive 
stance  of  the  perceiver.  This  study  found  that  top-down  factors  modulate  pleasure  and  pain 
perceptions, with first-person perspective (1PP) and a self-oriented cognitive stance leading to more 
intense touch experiences compared to adopting a third-person perspective and an others-oriented 
mental  mode.  In  a  further  study,  using  a  similar  paradigm,  Fusaro  et  al.  (2021)  found  that  mere 
observation of visually presented touch on an embodied virtual body is sufficient to evoke increased 
skin  conductance  responses  (SCRs).  Interestingly,  the  strength  of  these  SCRs  were  dependent  on 
factors such as the part of the virtual body being touched (e.g., touch on arms compared to touch on 
taboo  body  parts),  participants’  sexual  orientation,  and  the  gender  of  the  touching  avatar. 
Interestingly, in that study, high-level factors that modulate behavioral and physiological responses to 
social touch in real life, such as sexual orientation, also influenced responses to virtual touch in VR 
(Harjunen  et  al.,  2017).  Both  of  these  studies  exploited  proprioceptive  and  visual  congruency  in 
relation to the real body in order to induce the illusion of interpersonal touch, i.e., seeing a collocated 
virtual body from 1PP being caressed or harmed by a needle. However, none of these studies included 
concomitant tactile feedback on the participants’ real body, so it is also still unclear how affective touch 
in VR is influenced by the further inclusion of additional tactile feedback when compared to the mere 
observation of touch.  

The  main  goal  of  the  present  study  is  to  further  investigate  the  principles  underlying  affective 
interpersonal  touch  in  VR.  We  address  whether  there  is  a  difference  on  perceived  pleasantness, 

2 

 
autonomic responses, and body ownership, when participants experience a life-size virtual body from 
a 1PP and are caressed either by another virtual agent or an inanimate object (i.e., virtual feather). 
Moreover, we also evaluate the strength of subjective and physiological responses to affective touch 
in  VR  when  only  the  visual  modality  is  exploited  to  simulate  a  virtual  caress  compared  to  the 
simultaneous presentation of visual and tactile feedback. Finally, we also assess whether ultrasonic 
mid-air haptic stimulation might be used to induce realistic affective touch illusions in VR in comparison 
to control conditions based on the real touch of a human or a feather. The decision of using ultrasound-
based haptics to simulate affective touch was based on evidence showing that this type of feedback 
conveys various emotions (Obrist et al., 2015) and can be used to represent different tactile patterns 
on the hand (Paneva et al., 2020; Wilson et al., 2014). 

2.  Methods 
2.1. 

Participants 

A total of 24 participants took part in the study after providing signed consent (12 males; all right-
handed, Mean Age=24.75, SD=3.19). All participants were German, except four (i.e., 3 Indian and 1 
Ukrainian).  Participants  were  students  recruited  from  around  the  university  campus.  The  exclusion 
criteria  for  this  study  was  the  intake  of  psychoactive  medications,  suffering  from  any  type  of 
neurological  or  sensory  impairment,  and  having  not  corrected  vision  difficulties.  This  study  was 
approved by the Ethics Committee of the XXXX and followed ethical standards according to the Helsinki 
Declaration. All participants received economic compensation for their participation. The experiment 
was carried out before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

2.2. 

Experimental Design 

This study was based on a 2x3 within-group experimental design. The first factor of the design was the 
Type of Virtual Representation with two levels: a) observing a virtual body experienced from 1PP being 
caressed  on  the  hand  either  by  a  female  avatar  or  b)  by  a  virtual  feather  (Figure  1  A–C;  see 
Supplementary Video). The second factor was the Type of Multisensory Feedback with three levels: a) 
the only visual touch condition, where participants only visually perceived a female avatar or virtual 
feather  softly  caressing  the  palm  of  their  left  virtual  hand  (Figure  1A),  b)  the  ultrasound  touch 
condition, where participants saw a female avatar or virtual feather touching the palm of their virtual 
hand, while  simultaneously perceiving spatiotemporal congruent ultrasound-based tactile  feedback 
on the palm of their real hand (Figure 1B), and c) the real touch control condition, where participants 
also  saw  a  female  avatar  or  feather  touching  the  palm  of  their  virtual  hand,  while  simultaneously 
perceiving spatiotemporal congruent tactile feedback on the palm of their real hand delivered by a 
real human (i.e., experimenter touching the hand of the participants) or with a physical feather (Figure 
1C).  

The order of conditions was fully randomized for the factor Type of Virtual Representation (i.e., being 
caressed  by  an  avatar  or  feather).  With  respect  to  the  Type  of  Multisensory  Feedback  factor,  we 
randomized the order of presentation of the visual touch condition (Figure 1A) and the ultrasonic mid-
air haptic stimulation condition (Figure 1B), however the real touch condition was always presented 
at the end of the experiment. Since the real touch condition consisted in the perception of real skin-
to-skin contact or touch with a physical feather (Figure 1C), we considered that it was important to 
always present it at the end of the experiment based on two main reasons: 1) to serve as a baseline of 
the  subjective  feelings  and  physiological  reactions  evoked  by  the  most  realistic  experience  the 
participants could experience, while still taking into account the virtual and immersive nature of the 
scene; 2) to avoid potential order effects based on the influence and judgment bias that the real touch 
condition could have on the rest of conditions which tried to simulate real touch in an artificial way 
(Schwarz, 1994). However, in the real touch condition, we also randomized the order of presentation 

3 

 
between the  avatar and  feather  conditions.  Each  experimental  condition was separated  by  a  short 
break, where participants took off the head-mounted display (HMD) and were requested to answer 
questions related to the experimental condition that they had just experienced.  

Figure 1. A) In the only visual touch condition, participants saw that their virtual body was being touched by either a female 
avatar or a virtual feather, while no concomitant tactile feedback was delivered; B) In the ultrasonic mid-air haptic 
stimulation condition, participants saw that their virtual body was being touched by a female avatar or a virtual feather, 
while simultaneously perceiving congruent ultrasound-based tactile feedback on their real hand; C) In the real touch 
condition, participants saw that their virtual body was being touched by a female avatar or feather while the experimenter 
caressed the participant’s hand at the same time and location either with her hand or a physical feather. 

2.3. 

Measures 

Bodily and Touch Illusion Questions 
We  included  questions  to  evaluate  different  aspects  related  to  bodily  and  touch  illusions  in  the 
immersive virtual environment, which are summarized in Table 1. The questions were answered on a 
7-point  Likert  scale,  where  1  meant  “completely  disagree”  and  7  “completely  agree”  with  the 
statement. The questionnaire items Ownership, Control, Agency, and SelfLoc focused on measuring the 
degree that participants felt embodied in the virtual body, hence experiencing the illusion that the 
virtual body was their own real body (Gonzalez-Franco & Peck, 2018; Serino et al., 2013). Furthermore, 
the  questionnaire  items  Caressed,  Touched,  Withdraw,  TouchLocation,  and  TouchLocation  (Control 
Question) aimed to assess to what degree participants experienced the illusion of being caressed and 

4 

 
 
touched in VR by the avatar and feather in the different experimental conditions. Similar subjective 
reports were used by Fusaro et al. (2016) and (2021). The detailed questionnaire items are listed in 
Table 1. 

Table 1. Questionnaire items asked to participants after each experimental condition 

Ownership 

Control 

Agency 

SelfLoc 

Caressed  
Touched 

Withdraw 

TouchLocation 

TouchLocation (Control Question) 

Bodily Illusions Questions 

I felt as if the virtual hand I saw when I looked down 
was my hand. 
It felt like I could control the virtual hand as if it was 
my own hand. 
The movements of the virtual hand were caused by 
my movements. 
I felt as if my hand was located where I saw the 
virtual hand. 
Touch Illusion Questions 

I felt as if my hand had been caressed. 
It seemed as if the touch I felt was caused by the 
avatar/feather touching my virtual hand. 
When the avatar/feather stroked me, I felt the instinct 
to withdraw my hand. 
It seemed as if I felt the touch of the stroking 
hand/feather in the location where I saw my virtual 
hand being touched. 
It seemed as if the touch I felt was located 
somewhere between my physical hand and my virtual 
hand. 

Pleasantness and Arousal Rating Scale 
After each experimental condition, participants also rated the Pleasantness of the touch using a scale 
from  0  (not  at  all  pleasant)  to  100  (extremely  pleasant).  They  also  rated  the  degree to  which they 
judged the touch as Unpleasant from 0 (not at all unpleasant) to 100 (extremely unpleasant) and as 
Arousing with a scale from 0 (not arousing at all) to 100 (extremely arousing). Similar rating scales were 
used by Crucianelli et al. (2013). 

Skin Conductance 
Skin conductance  is a  widely used measure of emotional arousal, which directly  depends on sweat 
glands innervated by the autonomic nervous system (Critchley, 2002; van Dooren et al., 2012). SCRs 
have been used in past studies to assess threat-related responses towards an embodied mannequin 
or  virtual  body  (Petkova  &  Ehrsson,  2008;  Tieri  et  al.,  2015).  However,  SCR  has  also  been  used  to 
measure arousal in response to being visually touched by an avatar by Fusaro et al. (2021). In their 
study, they found that seeing a virtual body being touched in intimate areas (i.e., genitals or breasts) 
from 1PP leads to higher SCR when compared to being touched in neutral or less erogenous virtual 
body areas. The authors attribute this enhanced physiological reactivity to the erogenous value given 
to the virtual touch on intimate body parts. In the present study, we further evaluated how SCRs are 
modulated  depending  on  being  touched  either  by  an  avatar  or  inanimate  object  (feather)  and 
depending  on  the  type  of multisensory  feedback  provided  during the  virtual touch  experience.  For 
instance, there is evidence that human touch leads to enhanced SCR compared to being touched by 
an object or not being touched at all (Hazem et al., 2018). In the present study, we aim to further assess 
whether these results are also replicated in VR. Moreover, Etzi & Gallace, (2016) found that tactile 
presentation of textures leads to higher SCR compared to the mere visual representation of textures. 
Thereafter, through this study we also aimed to analyze whether arousal differed depending on the 

5 

 
 
inclusion of only visual feedback compared to conditions including visual and tactile feedback either 
based on ultrasound or real touch. 

2.4. 

Virtual Reality Scene, avatar animation, and ultrasound haptics calibration 

The virtual scene was programmed using Unity 3D and experienced through an HTC Vive HMD. The 
immersive virtual environment consisted of a room with chairs, table, television, sofa, window, and a 
couple of paintings. During the experiment, participants were requested to remain seated in front of 
a physical table, while simultaneously seeing a virtual body from 1PP sitting down in front of a virtual 
table in the same position. All participants were embodied in the same avatar, which was neutrally 
dressed  (i.e.,  wearing  a  pair  of  jeans  and  t-shirt)  in order  to minimize  the  presence  of  prototypical 
features  related  to  either  the  male  or  female  gender.  We  also  enabled  hand  and  finger  tracking 
through  a  Leap  Motion  sensor  in  order  to  enhance  the  sense  of  embodiment  through  visuomotor 
correlations  at  specific  parts  of  the  experiment,  i.e.  the  virtual  hands  moved  according  to  the 
movements executed by the participants with their real hands. 

We animated the caresses of the female avatar or feather based on real-time motion capture using a 
PhaseSpace  Impulse  X2E,  MotionBuilder,  and  Blender.  The  animation  consisted  of  either  a  female 
avatar or feather softly caressing the palm of the left hand of the avatar that participants embodied 
from  a  1PP  during  the  experiment.  More  specifically,  at  the  start  of  each  experimental  condition 
participants saw their virtual left hand lying on a virtual table, while their real physical left hand was 
lying in the same position on a physical table. In the same virtual room, in the female avatar conditions, 
they saw a virtual woman sitting on the opposite side of the table. The face of the female avatar was 
covered with a virtual translucent glass. Since the translucent glass was placed at the height of the 
chest of the female avatar, it was still possible to directly see the female avatar's hands and body, but 
not her face. Therefore, participants could see the female avatar extending her right hand to caress 
them, however it was impossible to see her facial expressions. We opted to use this translucent glass 
to  hide  the  avatar’s  face,  because  we  were  primarily  interested  in  the  impact  of  social  touch  (i.e., 
caressing), without the additional influence of emotional cues provided by facial expressions which 
play a role in how touch experiences are judged in VR (Harjunen et al., 2017). Furthermore, we also 
wanted to avoid the possible occurrence of an uncanny valley effect related to the feelings of revulsion 
or uneasiness that might arise when a humanoid avatar imperfectly resembles an actual human being 
(Shin et al., 2019).  In the  feather  condition, instead of an avatar, participants saw  a virtual feather 
floating in mid-air and slowly moving while touching the palm of their left hand. See Supplementary 
Video for the VR scenarios. 

We decided to deliver the touch on the palm of a participant’s left hand in the different experimental 
conditions, since this body area is more sensitive to the perception of ultrasound waves due to the 
presence  of  high-density  A-beta  fibers  which  are critical  for  discriminative  touch,  but  also  because 
recently it has been shown that CT afferents, which are important for affective and affiliative touch, 
are also present in this body area (Watkins et al., 2021). For the experimental conditions where tactile 
feedback was based on ultrasound, we previously calibrated the ultrasonic waves according to the size 
of the participant’s hand. This was done in order to avoid mismatches between the seen virtual touch 
and the felt ultrasonic tactile feedback on the palm of the hand. For this, we created a reference image 
of  the  left  hand,  where  three  positions  were  marked  to  illustrate  the  trajectory  that  the  haptic 
feedback  should  follow,  based  on  the  position  where  the  animation  of  the  avatar  and  the  feather 
started and ended caressing the palm of the virtual hand. This calibration phase was performed before 
participants entered the VR scene, without revealing any details of the actual experiment, therefore 
at this point participants were ignorant of the purpose of perceiving ultrasound on their hands. At this 
stage, we only requested that participants place their left hand on top of a table with the palm of their 
left hand facing upwards. An ultrasound board was built on top of the table in order to stand above 

6 

 
the participants’ palms. The structure to hold the ultrasound board on top of the table was specifically 
designed and built for this experiment using a 3D printer (see Figure 2). Once participants had their 
left hand lying on the table in the correct position, we started with the calibration process by making 
participants  perceive  two  points  of  tactile  stimulation  on  their  left  palm.  These  two  points 
corresponded  to the  start  and  end  points  of  the  stimulation.  Importantly,  at  this  calibration stage, 
participants were able to control and move the location where they felt this tactile stimulation through 
the  use  of  keys  on  a  keyboard  that  they  controlled  with  their  right  hand.  We  requested  that 
participants match the location where they felt the two points of tactile stimulation on the palm of 
their real hand, with the start and end reference points that they observed in the reference image of 
a left hand. Once participants reported that the location of the perceived tactile feedback matched 
with the reference image, we recorded the locations of this reference points in order to define the 
trajectory  that  the  ultrasound  waves  should  follow  in  order  to  be  synchronized  with  the  visual 
animations of the avatar and feather. These positions were transformed into velocities by subtracting 
their value from the  lower point that was felt during the emission of the two simultaneous points. 
These  velocities  varied  depending  on  the  palm  size  since  the  stroking  animation  was  always  2.3 
seconds  long,  so  for  instance  assuming  that  the  palm  size  of  a  specific  participant  was  10  cm,  the 
velocity of the stroking was approximately 4.3 cm/s, and for a palm size of 9 cm, the velocity of the 
stroking was 3.9 cm/s. Overall, stroking velocities always ranged between 1–10cm/s, considered to be 
optimal velocities to stimulate C-fiber tactile (CT) afferents which are important receptors in affective 
touch experiences (Olausson et al., 2002). 

The results of this calibration were transmitted to the ultrasound board through the Unity console, 
and  the  calibration  reference  points  could  be  copied  and  pasted  to  adjust  the  emission  velocities 
accordingly.  Ultrasound  intensity,  frequency,  and  distance  were  parameters  that  we  kept  constant 
throughout  the  different  experimental conditions. Despite  the  start  and end  location values  of  the 
ultrasonic haptics being adapted to participant  hand size,  these values did not vary much between 
individuals, and they provide a good synchronization of haptics and visuals based on a pilot study we 
performed before running the actual experiment. 

SCRs was measured using a ProComp Infiniti Encoder (Thought Technologies Ltd) connected to a PC 
through a serial port and based on the placement of two galvanic skin response sensors (i.e., SA9309M 
bipolar electrodes) on the middle and index fingers of a participant’s right hand. Participants used the 
SCR electrodes throughout all the experiments. The signal was sampled at 256 Hz and low-pass filtered 
with a cut-off frequency of 1 Hz. The data was preprocessed using MATLAB and analyzed using SPSS. 
Before the analysis, SCR data was visually inspected to detect possible undesired noise and artifacts 
due to motion. The experiment was programmed to send an event marker to the SC signal as soon as 
either  the  avatar  or  feather  started  caressing  the  participant  for  60  seconds  in  each  experimental 
condition. 

7 

 
Figure 2. Image of the equipment used for the experiment. In addition to the head-mounted display which had a Leap 
Motion attached in front of precise hand tracking, we also 3D printed a special structure to mount on top of the table in 
order to place the ultrasound board that delivered the haptic feedback in some experimental conditions. 

2.5. 

Procedure 

Upon arrival in the laboratory, participants were given basic information about the study and signed a 
consent form if they were willing to participate. Participants were requested to sit at a table during the 
study. For all the experiments, we decided to have the same female experimenter executing the study, 
in order to match the  gender  of the avatar that caressed the participants. Before starting with the 
actual  experiment,  we  followed  the  procedure  described  in  the  previous  section  to  calibrate  the 
ultrasound-based haptics according to the size of the participant’s left palm. SCR sensors were then 
placed  on  the  middle  and  index  fingers  of  the  participant’s  right  hand.  Finally,  participants  were 
requested to wear a HMD with a Leap Motion sensor attached to it. 

When the VR scene started, participants saw themselves immersed in a virtual living room that had a 
virtual table located in front of them. They also saw a virtual counterpart of their hands, which moved 
according to their real hand movements. To familiarize  participants  with the virtual scene, we first 
asked them to briefly describe their surroundings (i.e., the virtual room) and their new virtual bodies. 
Here we explicitly asked participants to look down at their virtual body and to move their virtual hands 
and look at them. Subsequently, we asked participants to relax, remain silent, and breathe slowly for 
2  minutes,  to  record  a  baseline  measure  of  their  physiological  state.  When  the  recording  of  the 
physiological baseline ended, the scene vanished (i.e., turned black). 

Before  the  start  of  the  first  experimental  condition,  with  the  HMD  screen  still  blacked  out,  the 
experimenter  took  the  participant's  real  left  hand,  and  placed  it  in  the  same  position  used  in  the 
calibration  phase  of  the  ultrasonic  haptics,  based  on  a  drawing  of  the  silhouette  of  the  real  hand 
performed in that phase on top of the physical table. Therefore, in all the experimental conditions, the 
left hand was always placed in the same position. We asked participants to closely look at their left 
hand when the scene appeared again. When the scene reappeared, depending on the experimental 
condition,  participants  either  saw  a  virtual  feather  or  female  avatar  caressing  their  hand.  The 

8 

 
 
stimulation lasted a total of 60 seconds, and then the scene vanished again (i.e., turned black). When 
each experimental condition ended, there was a short break where participants took the HMD off and 
filled  out  questionnaires  on  a  tablet  device  about  the  VR  experimental  condition  they  just  had 
experienced.  This  same  procedure  was  followed  for  all  the  experimental  conditions.  Before  each 
experimental  condition  started,  participants  were  requested  to  closely  look  at  their  left  hand, 
something that the experimenter could verify through a screen where she could see the participant 
view  of  the  VR  scene.  So  in  all  experimental  conditions,  we  ensured  that  participants  were  paying 
attention to the different types of stimulation. 

2.6. 

Statistical Analysis 

Embodiment and affective valence questionnaire items were analyzed using multilevel mixed-effects 
ordered logistic regressions using Stata 16.1 software. In the multilevel ordered logistic regressions, 
Type of Multisensory Feedback  (i.e., only visual touch, ultrasound touch, and real touch condition), 
Type of Virtual Representation (i.e., avatar or feather), and Gender, as well as their interaction terms, 
were introduced as fixed factors. Participants’ IDs were set as random effects in the model in order to 
control for the within-group nature of the experiment. We decided to include the additional factor 
Gender in the analysis to control for the potential influence of participants being either male or female 
in the results. 

SCR data was first tested for normality using a Shapiro-Wilk test. Based on the normal distribution of 
the data, a 2x3 repeated measures ANOVA with factors Type of Virtual Representation (i.e., avatar or 
feather) and Type of Multisensory Feedback (i.e., only visual touch, ultrasound touch, and real touch 
condition) was performed. Moreover, we also included Gender (i.e., female and male) as a between-
group factor in the analysis. In all the analysis carried out, Gender was subsequently excluded from the 
analyses if it yielded no significant differences.  

3.  Results 

Embodiment Questions 
The results indicate that the inclusion of visuotactile feedback enhances the feeling of embodiment 
when  compared  to  conditions  that  only  included  mere  visual  stimulation.  Specifically,  we  found 
significantly higher body ownership (i.e., Ownership) scores when tactile feedback was delivered either 
through real touch (z=5.66, p<0.01, CI=1.59 – 3.27) or ultrasound haptics (z=3.02, p<0.01, CI=0.40 – 
1.88) compared to conditions only based on the perception of visual feedback. The same was true for 
self-location (SelfLoc), where participants felt a higher sense of being located within the virtual body 
in the conditions including real tactile feedback (z=3.48, p<0.01, CI=0.77 – 2.77) and ultrasonic mid-air 
haptic stimulation (z=2.87, p<0.01, CI=0.44 – 2.36), compared to the only visual touch condition. Body 
ownership  was  also  significantly  higher  in  the  real  touch  condition  than  in  the  ultrasonic  haptics 
condition (z=3.18, p<0.01, CI=0.49 – 2.08). The sense of Control of the virtual hand was significantly 
higher in the real touch condition compared to the only visual touch condition (z=3.19, p<0.01, CI=0.53 
– 2.21). Similarly, the perception of Agency was significantly higher in the ultrasound haptics condition 
compared to the only visual touch condition (z=2.37, p=0.02, CI=0.20 – 2.07). 

No  significant  main  effect  of  Type  of  Virtual  Representation  (i.e.,  avatar  or  feather)  was  found  in 
Ownership,  Control,  Agency  and SelfLoc. Moreover, no significant  effect  for the  Gender was  found, 
indicating  that  the  gender  of  the  participants  does  not  seem  to  play  a  role  in embodiment related 
questions. Detailed results can be seen in Table 2 and Figure 3. 

9 

 
Figure 3. Boxplots of the different embodiment related questions. 

Table 2. Results of the multilevel order logistic regression on the embodiment questions related to the type of multisensory 
feedback delivered. 

Ownership 

Control 

Agency 

SelfLoc 

RealTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=5.66, p<0.01, 
CI=1.59-3.27 
z=3.19, p<0.01, 
CI=0.53-2.21 
z=1.55, p=0.12, 
CI=-.19-1.59 
z=3.48, p<0.01, 
CI=-0.77-2.77 

RealTouch vs 
UltrasoundTouch 
z=3.18, p<0.01, 
CI=0.49-2.08 
z=1.51, p=0.13,  
CI=-0.17-1.30 
z=-0.76, p=0.45, CI=-
1.08-0.47 
z=0.66, p=0.51, CI=-
0.55-1.11 

UltrasoundTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=3.02, p<0.01, 
CI=0.40-1.88 
z=1.13, p=0.258,  
CI=-.34-1.28 
z=2.37, p=0.02,  
CI=0.20-2.07 
z=2.87, p<0.01,  
CI=-0.44-2.36 

Touch Illusion Questions 
In relation to the perceptual illusion of being touched by an avatar or feather, we have found that the 
inclusion of  additional tactile  feedback clearly enhances the illusion of being caressed and touched 
compared  to  the  inclusion  of  mere  visual  feedback.  Specifically,  participants  reported  a  stronger 
illusion  of  being  Caressed  by  the  avatar  and  feather  when  real  (z=8.79,  p<0.01,  CI=5.31  –  8.35)  or 
ultrasonic mid-air haptic stimulation (z=6.66, p<0.01, CI=2.35 – 4.30) were included compared to the 
only visual condition. The same was true for the Touched question where higher scores were reported 
for the real touch (z=6.18, p<0.01, CI=1.93 – 3.72) or ultrasound-based haptics (z=4.19, p<0.01, CI=0.87 
– 2.39) conditions, compared to the only visual condition. However, still a significantly higher illusion 
of being Caressed (z=5.68, p<0.01, CI=1.94 – 3.98) and Touched (z=2.70, p<0.01, CI=0.29 – 1.85) was 
reported in the real touch condition compared to the ultrasound-based tactile condition. Participants 
also reported a significantly higher desire to withdraw their real hand when the avatar or feather was 
touching  the  virtual  hand  in  conditions  including  real  tactile  feedback  compared  to  the  condition 
including only visual feedback (z=2.75, p<0.01, CI=0.35 – 2.11). Moreover, participants also indicated 
a stronger illusion of being touched in the location where they saw the touch on the virtual hand in 

10 

 
 
 
 
those conditions including real touch (z=7.27, p<0.01, CI=2.71 – 4.72) or ultrasound tactile feedback 
(z=6.41, p<0.01, CI=2.07 – 3.90) compared to the only visual condition. Details of the results found in 
the Type of Multisensory Feedback can be seen in Table 3. 

In addition to the aforementioned result, we also found a main effect of Gender only in the Caressed 
question  and  of  Type  of  Virtual  Representation  (i.e.,  avatar  or  feather)  in  the  Withdraw  question. 
Female participants reported higher scores in the illusion of being Caressed in VR compared to male 
participants  (z=2.44,  p=0.01,  CI=0.24-2.19),  independently  of  the  type  of  feedback  delivered. 
Moreover,  in  the  different  experimental  conditions  participants  also  reported  a  stronger  desire  to 
Withdraw their hand when touched by an avatar compared to a virtual feather (z=-3.54, p<0.01, CI=-
2.05-0.59). No other significant differences in relation with Gender and Type of Virtual Representation 
were found. See Figure 4 for more details. 

Figure 4. Boxplots of the touch related questions. 

Table 3. Results of the multilevel order logistic regression on the touch related questions in relation to the type of 
multisensory feedback delivered. 

Caressed  

Touched 

Withdraw 

TouchLocation 

TouchLocation 
(Control Question) 

RealTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=8.79, p<0.01, 
CI=5.31-8.35 
z=6.18, p<0.01, 
CI=1.93-3.72 
z=2.75, p<0.01, 
CI=0.35-2.11 
z=7.27, p<0.01, 
CI=2.71-4.72 
z=-1.64, p=.10, 
CI=-1.48-0.13 

RealTouch vs 
UltrasoundTouch 
z=5.68, p>0.01, 
CI=1.94-3.98 
z=2.70, p<0.01, 
CI=0.29-1.85 
z=1.08, p=0.28,  
CI=-0.33-1.14 
z=1.69, p=0.09,  
CI=-.11-1.45 
z=-1.40, p=0.16,  
CI=-1.27-0.21 

UltrasoundTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=6.66, p<0.01, 
CI=2.35-4.30 
z=4.19, p<0.01,  
CI=0.87-2.39 
z=1.48, p=0.14,  
CI=-0.22-1.55 
z=6.41, p<0.01, 
CI=2.07-3.90 
z=0.06, p=0.95,  
CI=-0.75-0.80 

11 

 
 
 
 
Affective Valence Questions 
Overall,  conditions  that  included  visuotactile  feedback  compared  to  conditions  that  only  included 
visual  feedback  resulted  in  increased  Pleasantness  and  Arousal.  We  found  significantly  higher 
Pleasantness scores in the real (z=5.50, p<0.01, CI=1.45-3.06) and ultrasonic mid-air haptic stimulation 
(z=2.51, p=0.01, CI=0.20-1.66) conditions compared to the only visual condition. Moreover, reported 
Pleasantness  was  higher  in  the  real  touch  condition  compared  to  the  ultrasonic  mid-air  haptic 
stimulation. Similar results were found in the Arousing rating scale, with significantly higher scores for 
the real (z=7.26, p<0.01, CI=0.96-2.55) and ultrasound haptics condition (z=4.32, p<0.01, CI=0.96-4.29) 
compared to the only visual condition. However, higher Arousing responses were also found for the 
real touch condition compared to the ultrasonic haptics condition (z=3.01, p<0.01, CI=0.38-1.81). No 
significant differences were found in the Unpleasantness rating scale. Details of the results found in 
the Type of Multisensory Feedback can be seen in Table 4. 

We also found a main effect of Type of Virtual Representation in Arousing (z=-2.08, p=0.04, CI=-1.26- -
0.36),  showing  that  higher  arousal  scores  were  reported  when  being  touched  by  a  female  avatar 
compared to a virtual feather. No main effect of Gender was found in any of these rating scales. See 
Figure 5 for more details. 

Figure 5. Boxplots of the affective valence questions. 

Table 4. Results of the multilevel order logistic regression on the affective valence questions in relation to the type of 
multisensory feedback delivered. 

Pleasantness 

Unpleasantness 

Arousing 

RealTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=5.50, p<0.01, 
CI=1.45-3.06 
z=-1.23, p=0.22, 
CI=-1.29-0.30 
z=7.26, p>0.01, 
CI=0.96-2.55 

RealTouch vs 
UltrasoundTouch 
z=3.19, p<0.01, 
CI=0.46-1.92 
z=-0.19, p=0.85,  
CI=-0.78-0.65 
z=3.01, p>0.01,  
CI=0.38-1.81 

UltrasoundTouch vs 
NoTouch 
z=2.51, p=0.01, 
CI=0.20-1.66 
z=-0.47, p=0.64,  
CI=-0.96-0.59 
z=4.32, p>0.01,  
CI=0.96-4.29 

12 

 
 
 
 
Physiological Reactions 
A  repeated  measures  ANOVA  indicated  that  there  was  a  significant  main  effect  of  the  Type  of 
Multisensory Feedback (F(2,22)=7.70, p<0.01, np2=0.41), showing that those conditions that included 
tactile feedback (i.e., real touch or ultrasound haptics) resulted in a higher percentage of change in 
SCRs  compared  to  the  only  visual  touch  condition  (i.e.,  NoTouch)  which  did  not  include  additional 
tactile feedback as can be seen in Figure 6. Moreover, we also found a significant interaction between 
Type of Multisensory Feedback and Type of Virtual Representation (F(2,22)=6.27, p<0.01, np2=0.36), 
indicating that the  real touch condition led to a stronger physiological  response  denoted by higher 
changes in SCRs when participants were touched by a female avatar and simultaneously touched by 
the female experimenter compared to seeing the touch of a virtual feather and simultaneously feeling 
the touch of a physical feather (Figure 6). Interestingly, these significant differences were not observed 
when tactile feedback was based on ultrasonic mid-air haptics or in the condition only based on visual 
feedback (i.e., only visually seeing the touch). 

Figure 6. Percentage of change of Skin Conductance Responses (SCR) during the first 30 seconds of each experimental 
condition. 

4.  Discussion 
The present study further contributes to a better understanding of some of the  emotional and 
physiological correlates of simulating affective  touch in immersive VR. Our results indicate that the 
inclusion of congruent spatio-temporal visuotactile feedback, compared to mere visual stimulation, 
boosts the illusion of being affectively touched and embodied in an artificial body in VR, as well as 
increases  feelings of pleasantness, arousal, and physiological responses. Importantly, we show that 
bodily related illusions (i.e, perception of owning a virtual body or being caressed) are enhanced either 
by the presence  of real interpersonal touch (i.e., skin-to-skin or physical feather contact) or by the 
simulation of touch using ultrasonic mid-air haptic stimulation. However, the condition based on real 
interpersonal skin-to-skin contact while seeing a female avatar touching the embodied virtual body 
always  led  to  the  maximal  level  of  experienced  illusory  affective  touch  (i.e.,  being  caressed), 
embodiment, and physiological response. In line with past evidence, these results highlight the critical 

13 

 
 
 
role  played  by  somatosensory  stimuli  when  evoking  bodily-related  and  affective  touch  illusions 
(Crucianelli et al., 2013; Maselli & Slater, 2013, 2014). The present study also underscores a series of 
challenges  faced  when  aiming  to  replicate  realistic  social  touch  in  simulated  virtual  immersive 
environments  (van  Erp  &  Toet,  2015).  In  the  following  paragraphs,  we  discuss  in  more  detail  the 
implications and results of the present study with respect to relevant past evidence. 

One  of  the  main  findings  of  the  present  study  is  that  the  illusion  of  being  caressed  and  the 
experienced level of arousal and pleasantness in response to being touched by an avatar or virtual 
feather were enhanced with the inclusion of tactile feedback. Past research assessed the impact of 
seeing a virtual body from 1PP being affectively touched by other avatars, however these studies did 
not  include  the  delivery  of  simultaneous  tactile  stimulation  on  participants’  real  bodies,  while 
concurrently observing touch on the embodied virtual body. Interestingly, these past studies found 
that the single observation of touch on an embodied body was enough to induce vicarious feelings of 
somatosensory stimuli on one's body, which evoked different emotional responses depending on high-
order factors (Fusaro et al., 2019; Fusaro et al., 2021). For instance, Fusaro et al. (2021) showed that 
the erogenous value attributed to being visually touched in VR was modulated by participants’ sexual 
orientation (e.g., being touched by a female or male avatar) and the area of the virtual body being 
touched  (Fusaro  et  al.,  2021).  Moreover,  the  single  observation  of  a  painful  (i.e.,  injection  with  a 
needle) or pleasurable stimulus (i.e., caress)  exerted to a virtual body seen from 1PP led to strong 
emotional and physiological responses (Fusaro et al., 2019). The results of the present study partially 
support these past findings, since despite also observing that the single observation of virtual touches 
evoked changes in emotional response, these reactions were significantly more vivid and intense in 
the experimental conditions that included additional tactile stimulation, as evidenced by subjective 
reports and physiological responses. These results are in line with a past study that found significantly 
higher SCR during the tactile presentation of textures rather than their mere visual presentation (Etzi 
&  Gallace,  2016).  The  enhanced  emotional  responses  found  in  the  present  study  when  including 
visuotactile feedback compared to only visual feedback is an important aspect to take into account in 
future studies when trying to simulate social touch experiences in VR, and also in studies that exploit 
VR as a medium to better understand real-world social interactions that include interpersonal touch. 

Another  interesting  finding  is  that  despite  participants  reporting  a  strong  illusion  of  being 
touched either by a female avatar (i.e, humanoid representation) or feather (i.e., inanimate object), 
the desire of participants to withdraw their virtual hand and their level of experienced arousal was 
higher  when  they  were  caressed  by  a  female  avatar  in  comparison  to  being  touched  by  a  virtual 
feather. This result was confirmed through more objective physiological measures, where the highest 
level of SCR was elicited by being touched by a female avatar in the visuotactile conditions, especially 
in  the  ones  based  on  real  skin-to-skin  touch,  compared  to  the  other  experimental  conditions. 
Interestingly, in a past study that addressed the impact of the simultaneous presentation of visual and 
tactile stimuli, Etzi et al. (2018) did not find significant differences in electrodermal responses between 
skin-to-skin contact  and textures during the concurrent  observation of images with different visual 
emotional valences. Nevertheless, the authors argued that the lack of differences between conditions 
was  potentially  related  to  the  artificial  nature  of  the  experimental  setup,  which  was  far  from  the 
natural conditions of social interaction. In the present study, where VR was used to simulate scenes 
including  touch  interactions  with  high  ecological  validity,  we  did  find  that  skin-to-skin  contact 
compared to other conditions, as well as the addition of visuotactile stimulation compared to only 
visual feedback, leads to an increased emotional and physiological response. On a neural level, this 
finding could potentially be related to larger somatosensory and insula responses evoked by skin-to 
skin contact, compared to being touched with inanimate objects (Kress et al., 2011), an effect which 
also seems to occur in immersive virtual environments, based on the present findings.  

14 

 
In terms of how embodiment is modulated by being affectively touched in VR, we also found that 
the inclusion of visuotactile feedback compared to only visual feedback resulted in the highest levels 
of embodiment. Higher levels of embodiment were reached with respect to the only visual conditions, 
despite  the  tactile  feedback  being  based  on  ultrasonic  mid-air  haptics  or  real  interpersonal  touch. 
However,  higher  levels  of  embodiment  were  reported  in  the  real  interpersonal  touch  conditions 
compared to the conditions where touch was simulated using ultrasonic airwaves. The degree of body 
ownership, self-location, and agency experienced did not differ significantly between being touched 
by a humanoid virtual representation (i.e., female avatar) or virtual feather, suggesting that the type 
of virtual representation that caressed the embodied virtual body did not play a differential role in the 
degree of experienced embodiment. In a past study, Fusaro et al., (2019) found similar results, since 
body ownership was enhanced when seeing a caress of a virtual body experienced from 1PP, an effect 
not observed with painful or neutral stimuli. However, no additional tactile feedback was included in 
this study and touch was simulated only exploiting the visual modality. The present research further 
shows that although embodiment is already enhanced with the mere observation of affective touch, 
this effect is more evident when additional somatosensory stimuli are included in the VR experience. 
Another interesting aspect is that Fusaro et al., (2019) stressed the importance of using natural human 
kinematics  to  emulate  the  caresses,  since  in  a  previous  study  in  which  they  used  unnatural 
preprogrammed avatar movements to simulate a caress, embodiment was not enhanced (Fusaro et 
al., 2016). This is an important aspect that deserves further research, since in the present study we 
also took special care in animating the movement of the avatar and feather using full body motion 
tracking recordings, and replicated the earlier results obtained by Fusaro et al. (2019) with respect to 
embodiment. Therefore, it is possible that the naturalness of the motion of an avatar that interacts 
with us in VR also plays a role in how we perceive our virtual body and environment.  

Despite the findings summarized above showing the potential role of affective touch in enhancing 
the sense of body ownership, evidence so far in relation to this topic is inconclusive, possibly due to 
the  use  of  different  definitions  of  affective  touch  and  experimental  setups.  For  instance,  while 
Crucianelli  et  al.  (2013)  findings  suggested  that  affective  touch  enhanced  illusory  ownership  of  an 
artificial rubber hand compared to non-affective touch, de Jong et al. (2017) did not replicate this effect 
when evoking a full body ownership illusion in VR, nor did Carey et al. (2021) when evoking a body 
ownership  illusion  towards  a  mannequin  body.  Importantly,  in  these  studies  affective  touch  was 
defined as slow touch (1-10 cm/s) applied to non-glabrous hairy skin, while non-affective touch was 
defined  as  touch  administered  with  faster  velocities.  Interestingly,  these  studies  also  found  that 
sensory and spatial congruency seem to be more critical for strengthening body ownership illusions 
when compared to the affective components of touch (Crucianelli et al., 2013), which is  also in line 
with the results of the present study, since conditions that achieved the highest embodiment were 
those  with  the  highest visuotactile  congruency  based  on  prior  knowledge,  i.e.,  seeing  an  avatar or 
feather touching the virtual body, while simultaneously perceiving a real human or a feather stroke. A 
critical  aspect  in  relation  to  these  past  studies  is  that  the  authors  only  administered  slow  stroking 
affective  touch  on  hairy  skin,  since  until  recently  it  was  thought  that  only  non-glabrous  skin  was 
innervated with slow-conducting unmyelinated tactile fibers (i.e., CT afferents) which have shown to 
be critical in social bonding and for experiencing touch as pleasant (McGlone et al., 2012; Olausson et 
al., 2002). Conversely, this assumption has been challenged by recent evidence showing that highly 
pleasant  experiences  in  response  to  touch  might  be  also  accomplished  when  being  touched  on 
glabrous skin (Ackerley et al., 2014; Watkins et al., 2021) and also by a recent microneurography study 
showing that CT afferents also innervate glabrous skin (Watkins et al., 2021). Therefore, the pleasure 
felt when touched on glabrous skin does not seem to be a simple by-product of top-down processing, 
but  a  much  more  complex  process  also  implicating  bottom-up  information.  In  the  present  study, 
somatosensory  stimulation  was  administered  to  glabrous  skin  (i.e.,  palm  on  the  hand),  and  in 

15 

 
accordance with this recent evidence we found that this tactile stimulation led to increased arousal 
and emotional response, which also seems to have strengthened embodiment in an artificial body. 
These results point out the need for further studies researching how embodiment varies depending 
on the parts of a virtual body where touch is delivered and the affective qualities of touch. The decision 
of applying touch on the palm of the hand in this study was based on the use of ultrasonic mid-air 
haptic  stimulation,  which  has  been  shown  to  be  best  perceived  and  to  induce  a  stronger  body 
ownership  illusion  when  administered  in  the  palmar  surface  of  the  hand  compared  to  the  dorsal 
surface (Freeman et al., 2014; Paneva et al., 2020; Pittera et al., 2019; Salagean et al., 2021). 

In the present study, we also found that participants’ gender might play a role in affective touch 
perception in VR. Specifically, we found that female participants reported a stronger illusion of being 
caressed by a female avatar or feather when compared to male participants. In line with this result, 
Fusaro et al. (2019) also observed a stronger illusion of vicarious touch in female participants compared 
to male participants when being caressed by a female avatar instead of a male avatar. Further research 
should investigate the underlying mechanisms explaining these observed gender differences in body-
related illusions, despite that it is quite likely that these differences are driven by top-down factors 
(i.e.,  cultural  and  social  norms),  rather  than  by  bottom-up  factors,  since  for  instance  there  is  no 
evidence that gender modulates phenomena such as mirror-touch synesthesia (Ward et al., 2018) or 
the strength of bodily illusions (Tacikowski et al., 2020).  

Finally, we have also found that ultrasonic mid-air haptics might be a good candidate for simulating 
realistic affective touch in VR or social touch interactions in mediated communications. Although real 
skin-to-skin contact or physical contact with a feather led to the strongest level of illusory touch, the 
subjective  ratings  reported  in  relation  to  having  the  illusion  of  being  touched  or  caressed  in  the 
conditions including mid-air ultrasonic tactile stimulation were still very high (median 6 in a 7-point 
Likert scale). These results have implications for studies and applications which aim to provide richer 
sensory  feedback  in  immersive  virtual  environments  designed  for  rehabilitation,  education,  or 
entertainment. This is a particularly relevant topic in light of the huge recent interest raised by the 
COVID-19 pandemic of adding touch interactions to VR experiences in order to improve technology 
mediated social experiences (Ahmed et al., 2016; Andersen & Guerrero, 2008; van Erp & Toet, 2015). 
Past  studies  have  simulated  social  touch  experiences  in  VR  to  assess  whether  it  could  increase 
compliance  for  other  avatars’  decisions  (Bourdin  et  al.,  2013;  Harjunen  et  al.,  2017;  Świdrak  & 
Pochwatko,  2019),  increase  human  likeness  of  agents  (Hoppe  et  al.,  2020),  or  evoke  different 
emotional  reactions  depending  on  the  type  of  virtual  social  touch  in  multiuser  interactions  in  VR 
(Sykownik  &  Masuch,  2020).  However,  none  of  these  studies  specifically  focused  on  assessing  the 
impact of virtual caresses based on providing different types of multisensory stimulation and being 
touched by different virtual representations. Based on the results of the present study, we propose 
that the addition of visuotactile feedback in VR scenarios simulating social interactions has enormous 
potential in areas such as psychological therapy (Kim et al., 2019), motor rehabilitation (Zakharov et 
al.,  2020),  pain  treatment  (Donegan  et  al.,  2020;  Matamala-Gomez  et  al.,  2019),  and  VR-based 
videoconferences (Fermoselle et al., 2020), areas that should be researched in more detail in the near 
future. 

The  present  study  did  not  directly  address  some  aspects  that  should  be  further  researched  by 
future studies. First, we only investigated the impact of being touched by a female avatar compared 
to a virtual inanimate object (i.e., feather), however we did not include a condition where participants 
were touched by a male avatar. Although this has already been researched by Fusaro et al. (2021) in a 
study where participants perceived vicarious touch in VR either delivered by a female or male avatar, 
that study did not include additional tactile stimulation. Interestingly, Fusaro et al. (2021) found that 
vicarious touch of a female avatar in intimate areas results in higher arousal than being touched by a 

16 

 
male avatar, further corroborating that the gender of the toucher is a top-down factor that modulates 
reactions to virtual touches. Moreover, we only used mid-air ultrasonic tactile stimulation to artificially 
simulated  touch,  despite  the  existence  of  other  haptic  technologies  (i.e.,  pin  arrays,  mechanical 
vibrators,  water  flow,  among  others).  Future  research  should  investigate  whether  such  haptic 
technologies  can  also  be  used  to  effectively  simulate  affective  touch  and  how  they  compare  to 
ultrasonic airwaves. Moreover, to match as closely as possible the visual animations of being touched 
in VR with the ultrasonic mid-air tactile stimulation we had to calibrate the ultrasound-based haptics 
for  each  hand  size,  resulting  in  slight  variations  of  the  velocities  of  touch  experienced  by  each 
participant. However, velocities were always in the range of what is considered slow velocity affective 
touch by past research (i.e., 1 to 10 cm/s). It would be interesting that future studies investigate if the 
present results vary when using constant velocities, as well as if there are critical velocities ranges for 
touch to be considered pleasant or unpleasant in VR. Finally, as already noted, in the present study we 
only stimulated the glabrous skin of the palmar side of the hand due to its higher tactile sensitivity, 
however further research is needed to better understand whether bodily-related illusions (i.e., illusion 
of  being  touched  and  embodiment)  are  differently  impacted  when  participants  are  touched  on 
different body parts with glabrous and non-glabrous skin. Moreover, in this study we researched the 
impact of being caressed in VR without the inclusion of a control condition based on the perception of 
nociceptive stimuli or neutral non-affective touch. It would be beneficial for future studies to include 
such  types  of  control  conditions  and  compare  them  to  being  caressed  in  VR  while  simultaneously 
perceiving congruent visuotactile feedback. 

5.  Conclusion 

The  present  study  aimed  to  better  understand  the  emotional,  behavioral  and physiological 
correlates of being virtually caressed in VR either by an avatar or inanimate virtual object (feather), 
depending  on  the  type  of  sensory  feedback  provided.  Our  results  indicate  that  congruent 
spatiotemporal visuotactile feedback, compared to single visual feedback, boosts the illusion of being 
affectively touched in VR, as well as increases embodiment, pleasantness, arousal, and physiological 
response. This was true for the administration of tactile stimulation, based on ultrasound waves or real 
physical interpersonal contact, while simultaneously observing the touch of an avatar or virtual feather 
on an embodied virtual hand. However, the highest levels of illusory affective touch, pleasantness, and 
arousal, were evoked by conditions including real interpersonal contact (i.e., skin-to-skin or physical 
feather) compared to the other experimental conditions. With respect to being touched by an avatar 
or feather, we show that arousal and the desire to withdraw the caressed virtual hand is highest when 
touched by an avatar compared to an inanimate object. Finally, female participants reported a stronger 
illusion of being caressed in VR when compared to male participants. This study further contributes to 
the understanding of the emotional and physiological impact of affective touch in VR depending on 
factors  such  as  sensory  feedback  provided  and  the  virtual  representations  that  touch  a  user  in  an 
immersive virtual environment. Moreover, it also highlights new opportunities for the design of richer 
and more realistic social interactions in VR, finding that mid-air ultrasonic stimulation might be a good 
candidate to simulate relatively realistic affective touch in VR, despite not reaching the same level of 
realism when compared to real interpersonal touch. 

Declaration of interest: None 

Funding: This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement #737087 (Levitate).  

Authors Contributions: Conceived, designed, and supervised the experiments: S.S. and J.J. 
Implemented Technical Setup and Run Experiments: I.S. Analyzed the data: S.S. Wrote the paper: 
S.S., with the help of J.J and I.S. 

17 

 
6.  References 

Ackerley, R., Carlsson, I., Wester, H., Olausson, H., & Backlund Wasling, H. (2014). Touch perceptions 
across skin sites: differences between sensitivity, direction discrimination and pleasantness. 
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 0(FEB), 54. https://doi.org/10.3389/FNBEH.2014.00054 

Ahmed, I., Harjunen, V., Jacucci, G., Hoggan, E., Ravaja, N., & Spapé, M. M. (2016). Reach out and 

touch me: Effects of four distinct haptic technologies on affective touch in virtual reality. ICMI 
2016 - Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, 341–
348. https://doi.org/10.1145/2993148.2993171 

Andersen, P. A., & Guerrero, L. K. (2008). Haptic behavior in social interaction. In Human Haptic 

Perception: Basics and Applications (pp. 155–163). Birkhauser Verlag AG. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7643-7612-3_12 

Armitage, R., & Nellums, L. B. (2020). COVID-19 and the consequences of isolating the elderly. The 

Lancet Public Health. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2468-2667(20)30061-x 

Bavel, J. J. Van, Baicker, K., Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., Crockett, M. J., Crum, 
A. J., Douglas, K. M., Druckman, J. N., Drury, J., Dube, O., Ellemers, N., Finkel, E. J., Fowler, J. H., 
Gelfand, Mi., Han, S., Haslam, S. A., Jetten, J., … Willer, R. (2020). Using social and behavioural 
science to support COVID-19 pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(5), 460–471. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z 

Beßler, R., Bendas, J., Sailer, U., & Croy, I. (2019). The “Longing for Interpersonal Touch Picture 
Questionnaire”: Development of a new measurement for touch perception. International 
Journal of Psychology, ijop.12616. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijop.12616 

Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see. Nature, 391(6669), 756. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/35784 

Bourdin, P., Sanahuja, J. M. T., Moya, C. C., Haggard, P., & Slater, M. (2013). Persuading people in a 
remote destination to sing by beaming there. Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual 
Reality Software and Technology, VRST, 123–132. https://doi.org/10.1145/2503713.2503724 

Carey, M., Crucianelli, L., Preston, C., & Fotopoulou, A. (2021). The role of affective touch in whole-

body embodiment remains equivocal. Consciousness and Cognition, 87, 103059. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONCOG.2020.103059 

Critchley, H. D. (2002). Electrodermal responses: What happens in the brain. In Neuroscientist (Vol. 8, 
Issue 2, pp. 132–142). SAGE Publications Inc. https://doi.org/10.1177/107385840200800209 

Crucianelli, L., Metcalf, N. K., Fotopoulou, A. (Katerina), & Jenkinson, P. M. (2013). Bodily pleasure 

matters: velocity of touch modulates body ownership during the rubber hand illusion. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 4(OCT), 703. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00703 

de Jong, J. R., Keizer, A., Engel, M. M., & Dijkerman, H. C. (2017). Does affective touch influence the 

virtual reality full body illusion? Experimental Brain Research, 235(6), 1781–1791. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-017-4912-9 

Donegan, T., Ryan, B. E., Swidrak, J., & Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2020). Immersive Virtual Reality for 

Clinical Pain: Considerations for Effective Therapy. Frontiers in Virtual Reality, 0, 9. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/FRVIR.2020.00009 

Etzi, R., & Gallace, A. (2016). The arousing power of everyday materials: an analysis of the 
physiological and behavioral responses to visually and tactually presented textures. 
Experimental Brain Research, 234(6), 1659–1666. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4574-z 

18 

 
 
Etzi, R., Zampini, M., Juravle, G., & Gallace, A. (2018). Emotional visual stimuli affect the evaluation of 
tactile stimuli presented on the arms but not the related electrodermal responses. Experimental 
Brain Research 2018 236:12, 236(12), 3391–3403. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00221-018-5386-0 

Fermoselle, L., Gunkel, S. N., ter Haar, F., Dijkstra-Soudarissanane, S., Toet, A., Niamut, O., & van der 
Stap, N. (2020). Let’s Get in Touch! Adding Haptics to Social VR. ACM International Conference 
on Interactive Media Experiences. https://doi.org/10.1145/3391614 

Field, T. (2010). Touch for socioemotional and physical well-being: A review. In Developmental 

Review (Vol. 30, Issue 4, pp. 367–383). Academic Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2011.01.001 

Freeman, E., Brewster, S., & Lantz, V. (2014). Tactile feedback for above-device gesture interfaces: 
Adding touch to touchless interactions. ICMI 2014 - Proceedings of the 2014 International 
Conference on Multimodal Interaction, 419–426. https://doi.org/10.1145/2663204.2663280 

Fusaro, M., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2016). Seeing pain and pleasure on self and others: behavioral 

and psychophysiological reactivity in immersive virtual reality. 
Https://Doi.Org/10.1152/Jn.00489.2016, 116(6), 2656–2662. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/JN.00489.2016 

Fusaro, M., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2019). Influence of cognitive stance and physical perspective on 
subjective and autonomic reactivity to observed pain and pleasure: An immersive virtual reality 
study. Consciousness and Cognition, 67, 86–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2018.11.010 

Fusaro, Martina, Lisi, M. P., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2021). Heterosexual, gay, and lesbian people’s 
reactivity to virtual caresses on their embodied avatars’ taboo zones. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 
2221. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81168-w 

Fusaro, Martina, Lisi, M., Tieri, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (n.d.). Touched by vision: how heterosexual, gay, 
and lesbian people react to the view of their avatar being caressed on taboo body parts. 
https://doi.org/10.31234/OSF.IO/DKZJ5 

Gonzalez-Franco, M., & Peck, T. C. (2018). Avatar Embodiment. Towards a Standardized 

Questionnaire. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 5, 74. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2018.00074 

Haans, A., & IJsselsteijn, W. (2006). Mediated social touch: A review of current research and future 

directions. In Virtual Reality (Vol. 9, Issues 2–3, pp. 149–159). Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-005-0014-2 

Harjunen, V. J., Spapé, M., Ahmed, I., Jacucci, G., & Ravaja, N. (2017). Individual differences in 

affective touch: Behavioral inhibition and gender define how an interpersonal touch is 
perceived. Personality and Individual Differences, 107, 88–95. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2016.11.047 

Hazem, N., Beaurenaut, M., George, N., & Conty, L. (2018). Social Contact Enhances Bodily Self-

Awareness. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22497-1 

Hoppe, M., Rossmy, B., Neumann, D. P., Streuber, S., Schmidt, A., & MacHulla, T. K. (2020). A Human 
Touch: Social Touch Increases the Perceived Human-likeness of Agents in Virtual Reality. 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 20. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376719 

Huisman, G. (2017). Social Touch Technology: A Survey of Haptic Technology for Social Touch. IEEE 
Transactions on Haptics, 10(3), 391–408. https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2017.2650221 

Jakubiak, B. K., & Feeney, B. C. (2017). Affectionate Touch to Promote Relational, Psychological, and 
Physical Well-Being in Adulthood: A Theoretical Model and Review of the Research. Personality 

19 

 
and Social Psychology Review : An Official Journal of the Society for Personality and Social 
Psychology, Inc, 21(3), 228–252. https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868316650307 

Kim, Y. I., Jung, S.-Y., Min, S., Seol, E., Seo, S., Hur, J.-W., Jung, D., Lee, H.-J., Lee, S., Kim, G. J., Cho, C.-
Y., Choi, S., Lee, S.-M., & Cho, C.-H. (2019). Visuo-Haptic-Based Multimodal Feedback Virtual 
Reality Solution to Improve Anxiety Symptoms: A Proof-of-Concept Study. Psychiatry 
Investigation, 16(2), 167. https://doi.org/10.30773/PI.2018.12.25.1 

Kress, I. U., Minati, L., Ferraro, S., & Critchley, H. D. (2011). Direct skin-to-skin versus indirect touch 
modulates neural responses to stroking versus tapping. NeuroReport, 22(13), 646–651. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0b013e328349d166 

Maselli, A., & Slater, M. (2013). The building blocks of the full body ownership illusion. Frontiers in 

Human Neuroscience, 7, 83. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00083 

Maselli, A., & Slater, M. (2014). Sliding perspectives: dissociating ownership from self-location during 

full body illusions in virtual reality. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 693. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00693 

Matamala-Gomez, M., Donegan, T., Bottiroli, S., Sandrini, G., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., & Tassorelli, C. 

(2019). Immersive Virtual Reality and Virtual Embodiment for Pain Relief. In Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience (Vol. 13, p. 279). Frontiers Media S.A. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00279 

McGlone, F., Olausson, H., Boyle, J. A., Jones-Gotman, M., Dancer, C., Guest, S., & Essick, G. (2012). 

Touching and feeling: differences in pleasant touch processing between glabrous and hairy skin 
in humans. European Journal of Neuroscience, 35(11), 1782–1788. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08092.x 

Obrist, M., Subramanian, S., Gatti, E., Long, B., & Carter, T. (2015). Emotions mediated through mid-
air haptics. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2015-April, 
2053–2062. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702361 

Olausson, H., Lamarre, Y., Backlund, H., Morin, C., Wallin, B. G., Starck, G., Ekholm, S., Strigo, I., 

Worsley, K., Vallbo, B., & Bushnell, M. C. (2002). Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and 
project to insular cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 5(9), 900–904. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn896 

Paneva, V., Seinfeld, S., Kraiczi, M., & Müller, J. (2020). HaptiRead: Reading Braille as Mid-Air Haptic 

Information. Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236 

Parsons, C. E., Young, K. S., Stein, A., & Kringelbach, M. L. (2017). Intuitive parenting: understanding 
the neural mechanisms of parents’ adaptive responses to infants. In Current Opinion in 
Psychology (Vol. 15, pp. 40–44). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.02.010 

Petkova, V. I., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2008). If I Were You: Perceptual Illusion of Body Swapping. PLoS ONE, 

3(12), e3832. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0003832 

Pittera, D., Gatti, E., & Obrist, M. (2019). I’m sensing in the rain: Spatial incongruity in visual-tactile 

mid-air stimulation can elicit ownership in VR users. Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - Proceedings. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300362 

Salagean, A., Hadnett-Hunter, J., Finnegan, D., de Sousa, A., & Proulx, M. (2021). A virtual reality 

application of the rubber hand illusion induced by ultrasonic mid-air haptic sttimulation -ORCA. 
ACM Transactions on Applied Perception. https://orca.cardiff.ac.uk/143639/ 

Schirmer, A., & Adolphs, R. (2017). Emotion Perception from Face, Voice, and Touch: Comparisons 
and Convergence. In Trends in Cognitive Sciences (Vol. 21, Issue 3, pp. 216–228). Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.001 

20 

 
Serino, A., Alsmith, A., Costantini, M., Mandrigin, A., Tajadura-Jimenez, A., & Lopez, C. (2013). Bodily 
ownership and self-location: Components of bodily self-consciousness. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 22(4), 1239–1252. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONCOG.2013.08.013 

Shin, M., Kim, S. J., & Biocca, F. (2019). The uncanny valley: No need for any further judgments when 

an avatar looks eerie. Computers in Human Behavior, 94, 100–109. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.01.016 

Świdrak, J., & Pochwatko, G. (2019). Being touched by a virtual human. Proceedings of the 19th ACM 
International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents. https://doi.org/10.1145/3308532 

Sykownik, P., & Masuch, M. (2020). The Experience of Social Touch in Multi-User Virtual Reality. 26th 
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385956 

Tacikowski, P., Fust, J., & Ehrsson, H. H. (2020). Fluidity of gender identity induced by illusory body-
sex change. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 14385. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71467-z 

Tieri, G., Tidoni, E., Pavone, E. F., & Aglioti, S. M. (2015). Body visual discontinuity affects feeling of 

ownership and skin conductance responses. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 17139. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep17139 

van Dooren, M., de Vries, J. J. G. G. J., & Janssen, J. H. (2012). Emotional sweating across the body: 
Comparing 16 different skin conductance measurement locations. Physiology and Behavior, 
106(2), 298–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2012.01.020 

van Erp, J. B. F., & Toet, A. (2015). Social Touch in Human-Computer Interaction. Frontiers in Digital 

Humanities, 2, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2015.00002 

Ward, J., Schnakenberg, P., & Banissy, M. J. (2018). The relationship between mirror-touch 
synaesthesia and empathy: New evidence and a new screening tool. Cognitive 
Neuropsychology, 35(5–6), 314–332. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2018.1457017 

Watkins, R. H., Dione, M., Ackerley, R., Wasling, H. B., Wessberg, J., & Löken, L. S. (2021). Evidence for 

sparse C-tactile afferent innervation of glabrous human hand skin. 
Https://Doi.Org/10.1152/Jn.00587.2020, 125(1), 232–237. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/JN.00587.2020 

Wilson, G., Carter, T., Subramanian, S., & Brewster, S. (2014). Perception of ultrasonic haptic 

feedback on the hand: Localisation and apparent motion. Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - Proceedings, 1133–1142. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557033 

Zakharov, A. V., Bulanov, V. A., Khivintseva, E. V., Kolsanov, A. V., Bushkova, Y. V., & Ivanova, G. E. 

(2020). Stroke Affected Lower Limbs Rehabilitation Combining Virtual Reality With Tactile 
Feedback. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 0, 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/FROBT.2020.00081 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
