Title:  Interactivity:  the  missing  link  between 
virtual  reality  technology  and  drug  discovery 
pipelines  

Authors: Rebecca K. Walters (1), Ella M. Gale (1), Jonathan Barnoud (1), David R. Glowacki (2) and 
Adrian J. Mulholland (1) 

((1) Centre for Computational Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK, (2) 
CiTIUS Intelligent Technologies Research Centre, Santiago de Compostela 15705, Spain) 

The potential of virtual reality (VR) to contribute to drug design and development has been recognised 
for many years. Hardware and software developments now mean that this potential is beginning to be 
realised, and VR methods are being actively used in this sphere. A recent advance is to use VR not only 
to  visualise  and  interact  with  molecular  structures,  but  also  to  interact  with  molecular  dynamics 
simulations of ‘on the fly’ (interactive molecular dynamics in VR, IMD-VR), which is useful not only 
for flexible docking but also to examine binding processes and conformational changes. iMD-VR has 
been shown to be useful for creating complexes of ligands bound to target proteins, e.g., recently applied 
to peptide inhibitors of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease. In this review, we use the term ‘interactive 
VR’ to refer to software where interactivity is an inherent part of the user VR experience e.g., in making 
structural modifications or interacting with a physically rigorous molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, 
as  opposed  to  simply  using  VR  controllers  to  rotate  and  translate  the  molecule  for  enhanced 
visualisation.  Here,  we  describe  these  methods  and  their  application  to  problems  relevant  to  drug 
discovery, highlighting the possibilities that they offer in this arena. We suggest that the ease of viewing 
and manipulating molecular structures and dynamics, and the ability to  modify structures on the fly 
(e.g., adding or deleting atoms) makes modern interactive VR a valuable tool to add to the armoury of 
drug development methods. 

1. Introduction  
Human perception, intuition, creativity, and expertise are central to computer-aided drug discovery and 
design (CADD)  [1-5]. This is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future, despite recent significant 
and rapid advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence. The three-dimensional (3D) structure 
of molecules is essential to their function and recently drugs have started to ‘escape from flatland’ as 
molecules with more complex 3D structure are found higher up the drug development pathway due to 
the better solubility [6] and lower toxicity [7] they exhibited. The human mind has evolved to visualize 
and understand 3D space, and to interact with and manipulate objects in this world. In psychologist and 
computer scientist J. C. R. Licklider’s 1960 essay ‘Man-computer symbiosis’ [8], he postulates that 
humans  and  computers  will  develop  a  symbiotic  relationship,  where  the  different  strengths  will 
complement each other, e.g., human spatial reasoning and computer speed and accuracy. 

Many CADD applications that examine molecular models, allow modification of structures, and run 
simulations of 3D biomolecules use two-dimensional (2D) interfaces such as a monitor, using controls 
such  as  a  mouse,  meaning  we  cannot  fully  utilise  our  human  3D  intelligence.  Virtual  reality  (VR) 
provides a platform for 3D visualisation of complex biomolecular structures and, with the addition of 
interactivity via using our hands and fine motor control to directly manipulate objects, allows ways to 
interact,  such  as  modifying  structures  ‘on  the  fly’  (e.g.  chemical  changes)  or  directing  simulations 
towards a solution easily visible to a human. Thus, interactive VR is intuitive to use and enables humans 
to focus on the areas of the drug discovery process that benefit from human intuition, e.g., chemical 
intuition,  visualizing  chirality,  predicting  how  proteins  and  ligands  fit  together,  the  effects  of  a 
conformational  change,  or  which  alterations  to  the  chemical  structure  might  improve  affinity  or 
specificity. This should also speed development.  

1 

 
VR is the use of artificial sense stimuli and manual interaction with a computer program to ‘trick’ our 
mind  into  both  perceiving  a  virtual  world  and  feeling  embodied  in  that  world  [9].  It  allows  for  the 
addition  of  extra  modalities,  such  as  depth,  touch,  and  sound,  to  human  interaction  with  computer 
software. To be fully immersed in VR is to feel disconnected from real-world stimuli, and to feel fully 
engaged with the simulated world [10]. Although VR has been around for many years [11-16], recent 
improvements  to  hardware  and  software  have  made  VR  a  technology  that  is  ready  for  widespread 
scientific use. Advances include low cost, high resolution, fast refresh screens (for visualising VR e.g., 
through lenses in a VR headset), fast graphics processing units (GPUs), high-level 3D graphics engines, 
and scientific VR software. Some examples of using VR in science and engineering for 3D visualisation 
are: virtual restoration of archaeological finds [17]; virtual exploration and cartography [18]; viewing 
the sea bed [19]; safety training in chemical manufacturing [20]; sport psychology [21]; telepresence 
for  clinicians  [22];  teaching  anatomy  [23,24];  investigating  the  molecular  structures  related  to  the 
SARS-CoV-2 virus [25] to name a few.  

The promise of VR in drug discovery has been recognised for many years [26-28] and offers several 
potential  benefits.  Firstly,  VR  allows  the  researcher  to  visualise  drug  molecules  and  their 
macromolecular targets in full 3D, which allows a deeper understanding of these complex systems , and 
thus  informs  design  and  modification  of  ligands  in  the  process  of  structure-based  design  and 
development  [29,30].  Secondly,  VR  allows  interaction with  molecules  through  VR  controllers.  The 
controllers can be thought of as a kind of ‘virtual pair of hands’, allowing the user to grasp parts of a 
molecule  or  molecules  as  easily  as  if  they  were  tangible,  real-world  objects.  Thirdly,  recent 
developments  of  interactive  VR  allow  users  to  interact  with  a  running  molecular  dynamics  (MD) 
simulation on the atomic level [31], allowing them to manipulate the system, modifying its structure 
and interactions ‘on the fly’ (Fig. 1). Finally, some VR software allows multiple users to occupy the 
same virtual space [30,31] for collaboration and, e.g., for teaching (collaborative VR). In other words, 
modern  VR  technology  (hardware  and  software)  is  not  merely  an  update  with  better  graphics:  the 
addition of molecular motion via MD simulations, the ability to directly manipulate those simulations, 
to work together virtually, and to create and modify molecular structure from within the program turns 
VR from a visualisation method to a research tool in its own right.  

We use the phrase ‘interactive VR’ to refer to programs that allow the user to interact with and change 
the  molecular  system,  and  not  those  programs  where  the  interactivity  is  limited  to  merely  using  the 
controllers to move or rotate the view. In this review, we discuss current VR hardware and some relevant 
VR  software  relevant  for  structure-based  drug  design.  We  give  examples  of  how  interactive  VR  is 
currently being used to visualise and manipulate biomolecules, addressing features that are useful in 
terms of CADD.  

2 

 
Figure  1:  Interactivity  in  the  VR  software  Narupa  IMD  [31,32].  A)  A  protein-drug  system  of  influenza  neuraminidase 
complexed with the neuraminidase inhibitor oseltamivir loaded into the interactive molecular dynamics in virtual reality (IMD-
VR) software Narupa IMD, where all atoms are rendered by the default ball and stick renderer. The VR controllers are also 
rendered in VR, where the orange circle represents the point of interaction from the controller (like a cursor on a mouse). B) 
Rendering of all atoms changed from, ball and stick to lines and a different colour scheme. C) The protein is now rendered in 
the 'cartoon' renderer and coloured in rainbow, where red represents the start of the protein and violet represents the end. 
The drug is now rendered in the ‘cpm’ renderer and using atomistic colours to differentiate it from the protein. D) By grabbing 
single atoms from the drug molecule using each VR controller, the user can apply a force to coax the drug out of the active 
site.  The  force  from  the  VR  controllers  is  shown by  the  two  light  yellow  sine  waves  between  the  controller  and  the  drug 
molecule. E) The drug has now started to unbind from the protein following interaction from the user in VR. F) A view of the 
VR user in real life, where the monitor is showing what the user sees in VR.  

2. VR Hardware and Software 
There are many different types of hardware currently available that provide a VR platform, with varying 
levels  of  immersion  and  interactivity.  Low-cost  solutions  such  as  cardboard  viewers  that  hold  a 
smartphone in front of the user’s eyes offer a low-cost way of experiencing VR [33-35], however, the 
field of view is restricted in this case, and there is limited interactivity. At the expensive end of the 
spectrum lies the Cave Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE), a room-size virtual environment first 
developed 30 years ago that tracks the user via CAVE controllers and glasses [36] (there are also state 
of the art VR systems that track the user's entire body from head to feet such as  Vicon Origin [37], but 
these are primarily used for entertainment applications so are not discussed here). A CAVE consists of 
multiple screens that project the simulated space onto either 4 or 6 walls. The user(s) experiences VR 
through stereoscopic LCD shutter glasses that display a 3D image and can also interact using CAVE 
compatible  wireless  controllers  [38].  CAVE  set-ups  have  been  used  for  drug  discovery  in  the  past, 

3 

 
 
however they are expensive, costing hundreds of thousands of dollars for a high-end set-up [39,40], and 
can have issues with immersion if the glasses do not cover the peripheral vision. Head-mounted displays 
(HMD), such as the Oculus Quest 2, HTC Vive Pro, and the Valve Index, are generally used with the 
VR  software  discussed  in  this  review.  The  advantages  of  using  HMDs  are  that;  (i)  they  are  now 
relatively cheap (between $300-$1,600 USD at the time of writing for all the necessary VR equipment, 
not including the computer) [41-43]; (ii) they are portable and lightweight; (iii) users experience a wider 
field of view than the smartphone and CAVE (ranging between 90 and 130 degrees in the horizontal 
dimension);  (iv)  they  have  good  spatiotemporal  resolution;  and  (v)  the  experience  can  be  fully 
immersive  (more  immersive  than  a  CAVE  system,  which  can  have  issues  with  ventilation  and 
claustrophobia [44]).  

Typically, HMDs allow either 3- or 6- degrees of freedom (DoF). HMDs with 3-DoF allow tracking of 
rotational motion about the x, y, and z axes (known as pitch, yaw, and roll), but do not track translational 
movement.  Examples  of  3-DoF  HMDs  include  the  Oculus  Go,  Samsung  Gear  VR,  and  Google 
Daydream. This is the simplest kind of tracking and is achieved by sensors built into the headset. HMDs 
that  allow  6-DoF  track  both  rotational  and  translational motion  in  the  x,  y,  and  z  directions.  6-DoF 
HMDs may require external trackers positioned within the room, while the newer HMDs, such as the 
Oculus Quest 2 and Oculus Rift S, are capable of 6-DoF through sensors and image processing within 
the  headset.  This  kind  of  tracking  approach  seems  to  be  the  most  common  with  the  latest  HMDs, 
indicating this is where the industry is heading. The advantage of utilizing 6-DoF in VR is that the user 
can exploit their full range of motion to explore the simulated environment, by walking, crouching, and 
bending to achieve the best view.  

There are several articles that discuss and compare the specifications of the most common HMDs in 
detail,  including  resolution,  refresh rate, and  pixel  density  [45,46].  For  biomolecular  modelling  and 
manipulation, a commodity HMD is often the most affordable and practical solution; current examples 
include the HTC Vive Pro [47], Valve Index [48], and Oculus Quest 2 [49]. The Google Daydream was 
recently discontinued [50]. Facebook recently renamed itself to Meta [51], after the ‘metaverse’ (first 
coined  in  the  novel Snow  Crash  [52]  as  an  online  VR  world  accessible and  manipulable  by  users), 
indicating a high likelihood of continuing production of their VR range, Oculus. Valve [48] owns the 
gaming  platform  Steam™  and  is  therefore  likely  to  maintain  their  headset  line  so  as  to  be  able  to 
continue  with  their  core  business,  and  HTC  has  been  in  the  area  for  a  long  time  having  made 
collaborations with large corporations. All three of these headsets are reasonable choices, however we 
recommend the user checks whether their HMD is compatible with the interactive VR program they 
wish  to  use.  Different  programs  mentioned  in  this  review  offer  different  capabilities.  Some  allow 
topological changes to the protein or ligand, some offer different renderers, some allow interaction with 
a physically rigorous MD simulation directly, from within the VR environment.  

3. Tools for interactive VR: Controllers, gloves, and hands  
There  is  a  natural  desire  to  reach  out  and  touch  simulated  objects  when  they  are  presented  in  an 
immersive setting. VR controllers, such as those which can be bought as a set with HMDs, provide the 
user  with  a  virtual  ‘pair  of  hands’.  The  user  can  interactively  and  intuitively  grasp  and  manipulate 
structures as if they were physical objects in the real world. This allows a more extensive exploration 
of structures than manipulation on a 2D screen [53] as it is facilitated by the 6 degrees of rotational and 
translational  freedom  and  the  depth  perception  afforded  by  VR  (although  it  should  be  noted  that 
attempts to improve visualisation of 3D molecules have been made without the use of VR, e.g., stereo 
viewers  and  3D  printing  of  molecules  [54,55]).  Compared  to  using  a  mouse  to  interact  with  the 
simulation, which only permits a single interaction at a time via a mouse click, some VR software allow 
interaction  from  two  controllers  per  user  simultaneously,  resulting  in  greater  control  over  the 
simulation. This can be important when exploring large molecules or studying an area of the system 
that may be non-trivial to navigate e.g., a buried binding cavity.  

4 

 
However, there is still the limitation that a VR controller does not have the same range of motion as a 
real pair of hands, provided by the flexibility of human thumbs, fingers, and wrists. The development 
of VR gloves allows the incorporation of the complex motions that hands are capable of. There has been 
some advancement in VR gloves specifically for molecular manipulation [56]. 

Hand  tracking  is an alternative  approach.  Molecular  Rift  [57]  is  an  example  of  VR  software  that  is 
focused on manipulation of biomolecules in 3D space using hand tracking rather than VR controllers. 
Their  gesture  recognition  software  [58]  allows  basic  structure  manipulation  such  as  rotation  and 
translation of the molecule through a series of predetermined hand gestures. While hand tracking has 
the potential to be the most instinctive way for humans to manipulate molecules in VR—it removes the 
need for using specific hardware—a focus group of Molecular Rift users found learning the gestures to 
be a lengthy process as some were not immediately obvious [57].  

An exciting direction is the incorporation haptic feedback (i.e., the modality of touch) into the virtual 
world [59,60]. Specialist haptic systems have already been developed [61-67], however they can be 
very expensive or not easily available to the consumer. Haptic feedback in VR has been explored for 
use in surgical simulations [68-70], where a prospective surgeon can, for example, feel the resistance 
of body tissue beneath their simulated surgical tool. As this kind of physical sensation is well defined, 
it is relatively easy to mimic in a VR setting. Haptic feedback in terms of molecular simulation presents 
a different type of challenge [71-73] because there is no reference for what kind of feedback is ‘realistic’ 
or  intuitively  useful  when  manipulating  these  objects.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  possibility  of 
exploiting a phenomenon known as ‘pseudo-haptics’ to ‘feel’ molecules in VR. This phenomenon is 
where the user experiences the illusion of feeling things within the simulation [73]; there is no actual 
physical force. A recent experiment showed that users of the interactive VR software Narupa IMD (see 
below)  could  distinguish  molecular  properties  using  this  pseudo-haptic  feedback  [74].  The  study 
involved  users  interacting  with  an  interactive  molecular  dynamics  (IMD)  simulation,  where  three 
Buckminster fullerene (C60) molecules were simulated in the same virtual space, all with different bond 
force  constants.  The  force  constants affected  how  rigid the  molecule appeared  in  VR:  a  large force 
constant meant the molecule was stiff and inelastic, and a small force constant meant the molecule was 
more flexible. Most participants were able to notice a difference between how the molecules behaved 
in the simulation, and correctly rank the C60 molecules according to ‘elasticity’ (bond force constants). 
There  is  potential  for  the  sensation  of  pseudo-haptic  feedback  to  be  exploited  for  drug  design.  For 
example, an IMD-VR user could estimate the barrier to dissociation of a drug from a protein based on 
how ‘easy’ or ‘difficult’ it feels to remove the drug from the binding site. 

4. Applications of VR relevant to drug discovery 
Although this review focuses on interactive VR, non-interactive VR of biomolecular structures clearly 
has uses in drug discovery, as noted above. VR provides depth perception which improves how the 
molecules are perceived in 3D and, as the screens are directly in front of your eyes, VR offers advantage 
of being able to view molecules with an increased field of view (compared to viewing on a screen or 
through  stereoglasses)  and  as  simply  as  moving  your  head,  making  the  technology  excellent  as  a 
graphical display.  

The developers of ProteinVR (an example of a protein viewed in ProteinVR is shown in Fig. 2.4) tested 
how visualising a protein-ligand complex in ProteinVR compares to a 2D molecular viewer (VMD) 
[75]. The complex chosen (T. brucei RNA editing ligase 1, known as REL1, and V2, a naphthalene-
based inhibitor) has a binding pocket that lies in a deep, narrow cavity. The structure of the complex 
used had been generated using the automated docking program AutoDock Vina [76]. The users found 
that, by viewing the molecule in VR, it allowed intuitive exploration of the narrow binding pocket cavity 
by the user moving their head. They even hypothesized that the AutoDock Vina pose may be incorrect 
and  suggested  interactions  which  could  be  more  favourable  to  binding.  This  is  an  excellent 

5 

 
demonstration of how users can utilise their spatial awareness in VR to note irregularities in the structure 
that might otherwise go unnoticed on a 2D screen.  

Molecules are fundamentally dynamic [77], and therefore it can be important to consider molecular 
motion when designing drugs, e.g., to see how a protein and drug candidate interact with each other 
over  time.  MD  simulations  [78-81]  are  increasingly  widely  used  in  drug  design  and  development. 
Popular programs currently used for visualizing molecular dynamics trajectories  include VMD [75], 
Pymol [82], and Chimera [83]. However, as these are typically projecting 3D motion onto a 2D screen, 
information is lost. Interactive VR software such as Nanome [30] and ChimeraX [84,85] can visualize 
molecular  dynamics  trajectories  (Fig.  2.1).  Features  such  as  the  ability  to  play,  pause,  rewind,  fast-
forward, slow down, and speed up the simulation that are available in traditional molecular viewers are 
also available in VR software.  

Figure 2: Scenes from VR software for molecular modelling. 1) A scene from the interactive molecular dynamics tutorial from 
the Nanome software, where the user is inspecting the first frame of a trajectory. 2) UnityMol software showing a cartoon 
and hyperball representation of the influenza neuraminidase protein (PDB 3TI6). 3) Hydrogen bonding (rendered as white 
glowing interactions) between a 20 amino acid long polypeptide in the software, Peppy. 4) The SARS-CoV Mpro (PDB 2Q6G) 
in a rainbow cartoon representation using the web-based VR software ProteinVR. 

Just  as  with  more  standard  screen-based  GUIs,  it  is  useful  to  visualise  molecular  properties  and 
interactions  such  as  hydrogen  bonds  and  the  electrostatic  potential  of  the  molecule(s)  in  VR.  
Electrostatic  interactions  such  as  hydrogen  bonds,  salt  bridges,  and  charge-dipole  interactions 
contribute greatly to protein structure and stability, and ligand binding [86,87]. Drug binding relies on 
favourable interactions between the drug and the receptor, therefore viewing and understanding these 
interactions is crucial to drug design and development [88,89]. Many interactive VR programs such as 
Molecular Rift, Nanome, and Peppy include a toggle for switching hydrogen bond visualisation on and 
off.  By  viewing  these  interactions  in  3D,  the  user  can  utilise  their  depth  perception  to  inspect  the 
distance  and angle  between  interacting  groups.  This  is  valuable  for  suggesting  where  modifications 
could be made to the drug or protein to generate additional hydrogen bonds. Molecular Rift and Peppy 
offer a striking visualisation of this type of interaction, portraying the contact between the donor and 
acceptor atoms as a bright, dynamic cloud (Fig. 2.3). In contrast to the flat dotted line, which is often 
used to indicate a hydrogen bond in 2D molecular visualisation software, this makes it obvious to the 
user when a hydrogen bond is present because it is visually distinct from the rest of the biomolecule. 

6 

 
 
Nanome (version 1.22.1) also provides the option to measure the distance and angle manually in VR, 
by clicking on the measuring tool and physically selecting atoms of interest. The value of the distance 
or angle is then displayed above the selected atoms. Finally, the ability to simply move your head and 
inspect the molecule from a different angle may be helpful when looking at hydrogen bonds (or other 
non-covalent interactions) between atoms buried below the surface of the molecule, where the structure 
is more labyrinthine. 

In  addition  to  visualising  electrostatic  interactions,  it  may  also  be  important  view  the  overall 
electrostatic potential of the molecule(s), as this can aid predictions in how and where a drug may bind 
to  a  receptor  [90].  The  visualisation  of  electrostatic  potentials  using  computer  graphics  was  first 
introduced by Weiner et al. in 1982 [91], who proposed that this kind of visualisation may be beneficial 
for  drug  design.  Indeed,  the  visualisation  of  electrostatic  surfaces  has  proven  to  be  useful  for 
investigating  protein-ligand  association  for  CADD  [92-94].  Software  such  as  adaptive  Poisson-
Boltzmann  solver  (APBS)  [95,96]  and  PDB2PQR  [97]  facilitate  electrostatic  calculations  of 
biomolecules for visualisation.  

The developers behind UnityMol (example of interface shown in Fig. 2.2) have created a VR platform 
for  simultaneous  calculation  and  visualisation  of  electrostatic  properties  of  molecules,  named 
UnityMol-APBS  [98]. The advantages that this programme has over APBS with a 2D viewer is that 
the user (i) has increased depth perception and field of view for examining the molecule, and (ii) can 
prepare APBS input files from within the virtual interface, using a graphical user interface (GUI) to 
send the input files directly to APBS tools. By simply reaching out, selecting the atoms of interest, and 
then clicking a button in the GUI, the user can seamlessly perform calculations within VR using the 
interface  with  APBS.  The  combination  of  the  virtual  interface  with  the  APBS  toolkit  significantly 
reduces the time needed to manually prepare input files, which can often be verbose and rely on the 
user having prior knowledge of the software’s language and formatting style. Here, the need for learning 
a completely new software is removed and replaced by a few easy gestures. 

To  investigate  the  utility  of  VR  for  exploring  electrostatic  surface  potentials,  the  UnityMol-APBS 
developers examined a particular enzyme (Torpedo californica acetylcholinesterase, known to operate 
quickly due to its electrostatic properties) and a substrate molecule. In VR, with a large field of view 
and ability to translate, rotate, and scale  the size of the molecule, it was immediately clear from the 
cluster of animated electrostatic field lines—which represent the electrostatic potential gradient—where 
the active site was situated. The immersive nature of VR also provides a sense of spatial awareness, 
meaning the user can grab the substrate and translate it as a rigid body through the binding cavity. In 
this way, users can get a sense of how feasible the pathway is.  

5. On-the-fly modification 
Drug design has been described as both a science and an art [99], and therefore, creativity and ingenuity 
are integral to success. A study investigating the relationship between creativity and factors relating to 
creativity (such as flow of work and attention) of individuals tasked with a clothing design challenge 
found (via EEG measurements of brainwaves) that a VR environment allows participants to focus more 
on the challenge at hand. Users reported that the ability to walk about and observe their creation from 
different angles inspired new ideas for improvement, compared to designing their product with a pencil 
and paper [100,101]. Furthermore, the ability to interact with complex 3D structures in VR inspires 
creative discussion around what interactions contribute to drug binding, and what could be altered to 
improve these interactions [30]. Many programs used in CADD are focused on building and structural 
modification of small drug candidates and proteins. As the orientation of functional groups can be vital 
in terms of drugs binding, performing complex 3D modelling on a flat screen could lead to some error. 
This  raises  the  question:  what  if  we  could  perform  these  modifications  ‘on-the-fly’  in  a  3D  space, 
obtaining immediate answers to our hypotheses and thus driving intellectual discussion?  

7 

 
Since the function of many proteins relies on the structure they adopt, the capacity to perform structural 
modifications  could  be  enormously  powerful  [102].  The  interactive  VR  chemistry  educational  tool 
Peppy allows such modifications and a cohort of undergraduate chemists used it to perform a range of 
3D modelling tasks: from creating short chain polypeptides to constructing α-helices and β-sheets with 
complex hydrogen bonding networks to teach them the fundamentals of protein structure [103]. The 
study  showed  that  students  using  interactive  VR  were  enthusiastic  and  creative  when  building  and 
scrutinizing polypeptides. Some students also reported that interacting with polypeptides in VR cleared 
up previous misconceptions they had from learning protein structure in 2D [103]. The developers of 
Peppy state that, while their primary aim is teaching secondary structure of proteins to undergraduate 
students, they also recognise its potential use in research [103]. They also highlight that the goal of 
designing a tool capable of on-the-fly modifications and mutations was to encourage engagement and 
creativity, as well as inspiring a deeper exploration of biomolecular structures than a 2D builder would 
allow. A limitation of this software is that it does not currently support larger proteins (currently, the 
maximum is 32 residues). Nanome allows modifications of much bigger proteins.  

The ability to make on-the-fly modifications to both the internal structure (such as rotating functional 
groups) and the chemical structure (like mutating a functional group) allows rapid testing of hypotheses 
and inspires creative thinking, as previous studies of GUIs etc have shown  [100,101]. Nanome [30] 
allows building and modifying drug-like molecules within a VR environment. Researchers were able 
to  build  a  small  molecule  inhibitor from  scratch  in  the active  site  of  an  RIP2  kinase (PDB  5W5O), 
achieving an RMSD of 1.8 Å with respect to the crystal structure [104] (around 2 Å is considered by 
docking programmes to be a sensible cut-off for finding the ‘correct’ pose). Furthermore, starting from 
the crystal structure, users were tasked with making chemical alterations to the drug, where the objective 
was to form additional hydrogen bonds with the enzyme to achieve a more tightly bound pose [30]. 
This shows that, not only were users of Nanome able to produce sensible drug-protein structures similar 
to crystal structures, but they could also make predictions for more favourable interactions and trial 
them directly. Nanome also provides an energy minimisation feature that can remove human induced 
artefacts,  such  as  unrealistically  long  chemical  bonds,  and  return  a  more  energetically  reasonable 
structure. In another test case, a VR session was held where four Nanome users (chemists) were tasked 
with  pointing  out  sites  for  macrocyclization  of  an  active  starting  compound  [30].  The  aim  was  to 
preserve activity of the compound while improving physicochemical properties. Within minutes the 
users had become accustomed to the software and were discussing how they could alter the structure 
they  were  given.  The  group  were  successful  in  creating  structures  with  improved  physicochemical 
properties, whilst retaining activity.  

The  interactive  VR  tool  Narupa  Builder  (Fig.  3),  an  application  of  the  interactive  VR  framework 
Narupa, developed at the University of Bristol, also allows the creation and manipulation of molecules. 
Fig. 3 shows a drug structure (oseltamivir carboxylate, an influenza neuraminidase inhibitor) and the 
steps taken by a user to create the drug in an interactive VR environment. While this small drug was 
generated atom by atom, Narupa Builder also has a built-in library that contains common molecular 
fragments,  such  as  amino  acids  and  aromatic  rings,  that  allow  the  rapid  building  of  much  larger 
molecules. There is also an energy minimisation feature, like Nanome, and the ability to export the 
resulting  structure  to  a  MOL2  format.  The  Narupa  Builder  is  freely  available  for  download  via 
https://irl.itch.io/narupa-builder. 

8 

 
Figure 3: Constructing oseltamivir using the Narupa Builder. 1) The structure of the target drug (oseltamivir carboxylate, 
commonly known as Tamiflu, an influenza drug) to be built using Narupa Builder. 2) Building the first carbon atoms of the 6 
membered  ring.  The  green  axes  represent  the  possible  sites  for  a  new  atom  to  be  bonded  to  the  carbon.  3)  The  carbon 
backbone of the drug, without any hydrogens. 4) Changing from a carbon atom to an oxygen atom to be added to the drug. 
5)  Creating  the  carboxylate  functional group.  6)  Changing  the bond order  between  two  carbon  atoms  from a  single  to a 
double bond. 7) Finally, adding hydrogens to all the possible sites of hydrogenation. 8) The resulting structure. 

6. Interactive Molecular Dynamics in Virtual Reality (IMD-VR) 
One of the most exciting recent developments in this area is the combination of interactive molecular 
dynamics simulations with virtual reality (IMD-VR) [31], allowing researchers to literally reach into 
their MD simulations and orchestrate the pathway of molecular motion [105]. IMD [106-111] has some 
similarities to  steered MD (SMD) [112] which uses small forces applied over a long simulation time 
to simulate atomic force microscopy (AFM) experiments or biological structural change. IMD differs 
as large forces are applied by the user, and the experiments are very fast to run at the cost of a decrease 
in accuracy [113]. In IMD, the user steers the system to drive rare/high barrier events such as protein 
conformational changes and ligand binding. Various scientific problems have been tackled with IMD 
including: ligand binding  [114], protein engineering [115], polymers [107], colloids  [108],  transport 
through membrane proteins [116], fitting X-ray crystallography [111], education [117,118] and even 
small  ~(40  atoms)  ab  initio  calculations  [119].  However,  performing  complex  3D  tasks  with  a  2D 
interface  can  be  challenging.    Although  IMD  had  been  around  during  the  early  VR  era  [107],  the 
breakthrough  year  was  2001  when  Stone,  Gullingsrud,  and  Schulten  [106]  interfaced  the  graphical 
display  capabilities  of  VMD  with  the  molecular  mechanics/dynamics  engine  NAMD  [120]  and 
contemporary  others  did  IMD  in  java  [108].  Interactivity  was  recognised  as  important,  and  since 
interaction with the simulation is via applied forces, further work in this area concentrated on adding 
haptic interfaces [106,113,115]: for example, force-feedback gloves combined with  MD simulations 

9 

 
 
via IMD were used in VR to design proteins for their stiffness and mechanical properties [115]. Some 
groups even combined IMD, VR, and haptics [114,116], however, those software permit only one user 
at a time to interact with the simulation. 

The IMD-VR software Narupa IMD [32] allows users to interact with MD simulations (utilising the 
OpenMM physics engine [121]) on-the-fly in a fully immersive VR space. The purpose of OpenMM 
here is to propagate the MD; that is, the user supplies the force that moves the atoms, and  OpenMM 
numerically integrates Newton’s equations of motion and provides the new positions of the atoms. For 
every timestep, this process is repeated until we have a trajectory that an IMD-VR user has effectively 
produced. This means that the user can interact directly with molecules in VR, manually applying forces 
that propagate the simulation. It should be noted that other force engines can be used with Narupa IMD, 
users  do  not  have  to  use  OpenMM.  In  a  recent  human-computer  interaction  (HCI)  study  [53], 
participants were tasked with performing a range of molecular manipulation assignments (threading 
methane through a nanotube, changing helical screw sense, and tying a knot in a protein) using either a 
mouse and keyboard, a touchscreen, or IMD-VR. The participants were able to complete these complex 
3D  tasks  faster  using  IMD-VR  and  with  a  higher  success  rate.  IMD-VR  has  also  been  used  as  an 
undergraduate  chemistry  teaching  tool,  where  students were  tasked  with  performing  small  chemical 
rearrangements and docking tasks [122]. Feedback from students suggested that visualizing molecules 
in an interactive VR setting was more engaging than the traditional computer and mouse set-up they 
had previously used and allowed them to grasp chemistry concepts more quickly. 

Automated docking of small molecules, fragments, and potential drugs is a popular CADD method due 
to its capacity to rapidly predict binding poses of small molecules to a target receptor molecule [123-
126]. This provides insight into both the structural orientations (binding poses) of the small molecules 
as well as the corresponding binding affinities. Docking flexible molecules still poses a challenge for 
CADD. Deeks et al. investigated the use of Narupa IMD as an accurate approach for flexible, human 
driven, protein-ligand docking [127]. The experimental protocol involved testing whether expert and 
novice  Narupa  IMD  users  were  able  to  interactively  guide  ligands  (benzamidine,  oseltamivir,  and 
amprenavir) in and out of the binding pockets of three viral enzymes (trypsin, neuraminidase, and HIV-
1  protease, respectively),  and recreate  their respective  crystallographic  protein-ligand  binding  poses 
(within 2.15 Å RMSD of crystal structure) in 5–10 minutes of real time. A bound structure from the 
interactive  MD  was  then  extracted  and  a  short  amount  of  MD  was  performed  to  test  whether  the 
structures created with IMD-VR were stable. By utilising human ability at 3D spatial  manipulation, 
after only a short amount of time in VR (40 minutes, including time spent learning how to operate the 
VR equipment), non-expert users (most of whom were also not experts in drug docking) were able to 
produce docked structures of three viral enzymes with FDA approved drugs [127].  

In a separate study [128], expert Narupa IMD users generated structures of a small molecule inhibitor 
and an 11-amino acid oligopeptide substrate complexed to the SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro), an 
enzyme involved in replication of the virus that causes COVID-19 [129]. Various protocols were tested 
during  the  IMD-VR  docking  process,  including  running  the  simulation  with  and  without  backbone 
restraints on the enzyme. The expert users were able to produce structures that replicate experimentally 
observed crystal structures. The results emphasised the importance of formation of important hydrogen 
bonds  and  led  to  the  recommendation  to  focus  on  forming  such  interactions  to  create  stable  bound 
structures. The expert users were also able to interactively dock the inhibitor and the substrate to an apo 
form of the Mpro, following the same procedure of forming key hydrogen bonds. The docked structures 
generated from apo Mpros remained stable in MD. A further study that compared docked structures of 
peptide-Mpro complexes generated from AutoDock CrankPep (a popular automated docking program), 

10 

 
Pymol, and IMD-VR showed that bound structures from all three methods were in good agreement with 
each other [130]. This was extremely encouraging. 

Narupa IMD can save frames of the trajectory generated by the user. For example, if a user were to 
interactively grab a drug bound to an enzyme and pull it out into the solvent space, the user can save 
the frames of this trajectory using OpenMM, just like any other standard MD engine would allow. In a 
matter of minutes of real time, users can simulate a rare event such as drug unbinding [127,128,130]. 
Capturing these rare events may otherwise require a large amount of computational time and resources, 
as well as expert knowledge of the biological system prior to simulation. IMD-VR can allow users to 
sample a substantial range of the rugged energy landscape of a protein in an intuitive manner, using 
human spatial and chemical intuition to guide movements. IMD-VR allows manipulations on the atomic 
scale and observe how molecular systems evolve in real-time. This could provide an interesting first 
pass to how we expect a simulation to behave following a perturbation, e.g., when a drug binds to a 
protein, how does the protein respond to allow the drug to bind? It should be noted that the forces that 
a  user  exerts  on  the  simulation  may  be  high  (this  is  a  non-equilibrium  simulation).  This  should  be 
considered when generating IMD-VR trajectories. 

Currently,  the  biggest  limitation  of  Narupa  IMD  is  the  number  of  atoms  in  the  system  that  can  be 
simulated  and  rendered  at  an  appropriate  framerate.  While  it  is  possible  to  reach  several  hundred 
thousand atoms for a static structure (where no MD engine is attached and we are just observing the 
structure, e.g., LSD molecule bound to a membrane embedded HT2B human serotonin receptor using 
Narupa, see https://vimeo.com/420035802), dynamically rendering the positions of all these atoms as 
an MD simulation propagates is a current limitation. However, this also depends on the hardware being 
used for the simulation, and so advances in hardware will also improve issues with framerates. 

IMD-VR has great potential to be used for drug design and development. As discussed above, the ability 
to observe how a molecule responds to a perturbation in real time could be a useful step in the drug 
discovery pipeline. For example, when manipulating a drug using IMD-VR, does a loop in the protein 
have to move for the drug to bind? Is there a key conformational changed that must happen? Perhaps a 
particular group of atoms in the drug can be modified to create more favourable interactions? Being 
able to simply reach out and create binding poses and pathways of drug binding on-the-fly, using human 
spatial and chemical intuition, has the potential to be a key step in drug development.  

7. Conclusions 
VR software will not replace other CADD methods; many of the features described in this review are 
already available in non-VR biomolecular manipulation software and have been useful for a long time. 
Instead, interactive VR offers an alternative way of modelling and manipulating biomolecules and can 
be used in conjunction with other CADD methods. For example, it may be useful to use VR to visualise 
a docked structure created from automated docking, employing the depth perception and immersion to 
deepen your understanding of the structure. Additionally, the interactive nature of the VR allows you 
to explore the structure in an intuitive manner, using simple gestures to grab and manipulate the system 
easily.  

We encourage readers to try out these VR programs themselves. The ease of use of modern interactive 
VR programs, the immersion that they allow in 3D molecular space, and the ability to ‘touch’ molecules 
cannot be described adequately here; it’s necessary to experience them. Despite the wealth of anecdotal 
evidence of VR tools improvement over non-VR visualisation and manipulation programs [131-133], 
there is a pressing need for well thought out and rigorously tested user studies and HCI experiments to 
quantify  this  improvement.  In  this  review  we  have  only  mentioned  VR;  as  headsets  shrink  in  size, 
weight and cost, the related technology of  augmented reality, AR, (VR with an optical pass-through 
such that the user sees both the virtual and real worlds simultaneously) will  grow in popularity. It is 
easy  to  see  how  both  collaborative  VR  and  AR could  be  invaluable  tools  for  teaching  and  research 

11 

 
collaboration, with collaborative VR being especially useful for distance learning. The only modalities 
discussed at length here were vision, manual interactivity, and touch, there are more that can be added 
to VR. For example, InteraChem [117] is an interactive VR program built on Narupa IMD-VR for use 
as a teaching tool. It includes an interesting modality of atomic ‘happiness’ that encodes the energetic 
feasibility of a particular bonding arrangement and it is represented by emojis drawn on atoms. This 
approach co-opts the part of the brain that deals with human social interaction and makes high-level 
concepts incredibly easy to understand. Temperature feedback (of controllers or gloves) has also been 
raised as a possible method of information communication in IMD [115]. Colour is part of how we see 
the world and can be used to encode information easily and intuitively. VR also includes the ability to 
play sounds and here extra information can be passed to the user. There is room for significant creativity 
in including these aspects here: what colour is a wavefunction and how does this change as a molecule 
binds?  How  does  the  sound  of a  molecule’s  vibrations change  as  it  goes  through a  transition  state? 
Getting good answers to these questions will allow interactive VR to be even more intuitive for human 
users and the easier the technology is to use, the more we can harness human creativity efficiently. 

8. Expert Opinion  
Interactive VR is an emerging area that offers tremendous potential in drug design and development. 
State-of-the-art  VR  software  and  hardware  can  harness  interactivity  to  manipulate  and  modify 
biomolecules on-the-fly, using human chemical and spatial intuition in practical and accessible ways. 
While humans cannot defeat computers in terms of speed and efficiency for producing results, human 
perception remains a vital part of drug design and discovery. The ability to be present within a molecular 
simulation and interact with it holds great promise.  

Sophisticated VR hardware is now widely available and not very expensive. Currently, this includes 
HMDs and controllers. More ‘natural’ (i.e., hand-like) controllers such VR gloves are emerging and 
allow a more tactile exploration of biomolecular structures. It is also possible to harness senses other 
than just sight, e.g., touch: haptic feedback could be potentially very useful for drug design e.g., feel 
the energy change and identify the bottleneck to pulling a drug out of a binding site. Other human senses 
such  as  sound  could  be  utilised  to  aid  exploring  molecular  systems,  adding  new  ways  to  convey 
information about a model and its responses, and indeed this is being investigated [134-136]. 

A particularly interesting emerging frontier is IMD in VR. While IMD is by no means a new concept, 
the concept of humans interacting with real time MD simulations in a VR is still relatively new. Since 
molecules  are  inherently  dynamic,  molecular  motion  is  important  to  consider  when  modelling 
biomolecules. Since some dynamics that are important to drug design occur on the order of nanoseconds 
to microseconds, e.g., loop opening and drug binding, it may be useful to coax the system to explore 
areas of high energy using IMD-VR that may not otherwise be reached using standard MD simulations. 
While  this  kind  of  biased  MD  is  not  exclusive  to  VR  (there  are  many  non-VR  enhanced  sampling 
techniques available such as metadynamics, umbrella sampling, the string method, etc.), being able to 
physically reach out and manoeuvre molecules to find binding modes and pathways for drugs  holds 
immense potential.  

Finally, the collaborative nature of interactive VR means that many users can occupy the same virtual 
space, and even interact with the simulated molecules all at once. This means that scientists across the 
globe can inhabit the same simulation and observe the same molecular phenomena. This could be useful 
for sharing new drug candidates or protein structures with colleagues, where you can physically walk 
them through your findings, whilst also feeling like the other person(s) are in the same room as you.  

Interactive VR is a rapidly developing area. The VR programs for molecular modelling mentioned in 
this review were published within the last 6 years, with the majority being published in the last 3 years. 
VR software and hardware will evolve rapidly. In the next ten years, it is likely that a VR setup will be 
a staple for drug designers, structural biologists, and medicinal and computational chemists. VR will 

12 

 
also allow research teams to collaborate virtually. With the ease of viewing and manipulating 3D static 
and dynamical molecular properties, the ability to interact MD simulations, and the ability to change 
structures  on  the  fly,  interactive  VR  will  be  an  increasingly  important  tool  in  the  armoury  of 
computational drug design and development.  

Bibliography  
1. 

roles  of  computation 

in  drug  discovery.  Science. 

Gund P, Andose JD, Rhodes JB, et al. Three-dimensional molecular modeling and drug design. 
Science. 1980;208(4451):1425-1431. 
Marshall GR. Computer-aided drug design.  Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology. 
1987;27(1):193-213. 
Van  Drie  JH.  Computer-aided  drug  design:  the  next  20  years.  Journal  of  computer-aided 
molecular design. 2007;21(10):591-601. 
Macalino  SJY,  Gosu  V,  Hong  S,  et  al.  Role  of  computer-aided  drug  design  in  modern  drug 
discovery. Archives of pharmacal research. 2015;38(9):1686-1701. 
Jorgensen  WL.  The  many 
2004;303(5665):1813-1818. 
Lovering F, Bikker J, Humblet C. Escape from flatland: increasing saturation as an approach to 
improving clinical success. Journal of medicinal chemistry. 2009;52(21):6752-6756. 
Lovering  F.  Escape  from  Flatland  2:  complexity  and  promiscuity.  MedChemComm. 
2013;4(3):515-519. 
Licklider JC. Man-computer symbiosis. IRE transactions on human factors in electronics. 1960 
(1):4-11. 
Wright WG. Using virtual reality to augment perception, enhance sensorimotor adaptation, 
and change our minds. Frontiers in systems neuroscience. 2014;8:56. 
Biocca F, Delaney B. Immersive virtual reality technology. Communication in the age of virtual 
reality. 1995;15(32):10-5555. 
Sutherland  IE,  editor  A  head-mounted  three  dimensional  display.  Proceedings  of  the 
December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I; 1968. 
Krueger  MW,  Gionfriddo  T,  Hinrichsen  K,  editors.  VIDEOPLACE—an  artificial  reality. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems; 1985. 
Lanier  J.  Virtual  reality:  The  promise  of  the  future.  Interactive  Learning  International. 
1992;8(4):275-79. 
Fisher  SS,  McGreevy  M,  Humphries  J,  et  al.,  editors.  Virtual  environment  display  system. 
Proceedings of the 1986 workshop on Interactive 3D graphics; 1987. 
Lippman A. Movie-maps: An application of the optical videodisc to computer graphics. Acm 
Siggraph Computer Graphics. 1980;14(3):32-42. 
Sutherland I. The ultimate display. 1965. 
Shakya S. Virtual  restoration of damaged archeological  artifacts obtained  from expeditions 
using 3D visualization. Journal of Innovative Image Processing (JIIP). 2019;1(02):102-110. 
Lütjens  M,  Kersten  TP,  Dorschel  B,  et  al.  Virtual  reality  in  cartography:  Immersive  3D 
visualization of the Arctic Clyde Inlet (Canada) using digital elevation models and bathymetric 
data. Multimodal Technologies and Interaction. 2019;3(1):9. 
Li R. Dynamic three-dimensional visualization system of sea area flow field based on virtual 
reality technology. Ccamlr Science. 2019;26(1):23-29. 
Poyade  M,  Eaglesham  C,  Trench  J,  et  al.  A  transferable  psychological  evaluation  of  virtual 
reality applied to safety training in chemical manufacturing. ACS Chemical Health & Safety. 
2021;28(1):55-65. 
Bird  JM.  The  use  of  virtual  reality  head-mounted  displays  within  applied  sport  psychology. 
Journal of Sport Psychology in Action. 2020;11(2):115-128. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 
17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

13 

 
22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

Hilty  DM,  Randhawa  K,  Maheu  MM,  et  al.  A  review  of  telepresence,  virtual  reality,  and 
augmented  reality  applied  to  clinical  care.  Journal  of  Technology  in  Behavioral  Science. 
2020;5(2):178-205. 
Moro C, Štromberga Z, Raikos A, et al. The effectiveness of virtual and augmented reality in 
health sciences and medical anatomy. Anatomical sciences education. 2017;10(6):549-559. 
Desselle MR, Brown RA, James AR, et al. Augmented and virtual reality in surgery. Computing 
in Science & Engineering. 2020;22(3):18-26. 
Calvelo M, Piñeiro Á, Garcia-Fandino R. An immersive journey to the molecular structure of 
SARS-CoV-2: Virtual reality in COVID-19. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal. 
2020. 
Tse C-M, Li H, Leung K-S, et al., editors. Interactive drug design in virtual reality. 2011 15th 
International Conference on Information Visualisation; 2011: IEEE. 
Zonta N, Brancale A. Virtual reality applications in antiviral drug design. Antiviral Research. 
2009;82(2):A74. 
Kleinberg  ML,  Wanke  LA.  New  approaches  and  technologies  in  drug  design  and  discovery. 
American Journal of Health System Pharmacy. 1995;52(12):1323-1336. 
Cassidy KC, Šefčík J, Raghav Y, et al. ProteinVR: Web-based molecular visualization in virtual 
reality. PLoS computational biology. 2020;16(3):e1007747. 
Kingsley LJ, Brunet V, Lelais G, et al. Development of a virtual reality platform  for effective 
communication  of  structural  data  in  drug  discovery.  Journal  of  Molecular  Graphics  and 
Modelling. 2019;89:234-241. 
O’Connor MB, Bennie SJ, Deeks HM, et al. Interactive  molecular dynamics in virtual  reality 
from  quantum  chemistry  to  drug  binding:  An  open-source  multi-person  framework.  The 
Journal of chemical physics. 2019;150(22):220901. 
Jamieson-Binnie AD, O'Connor MB, Barnoud J, et al. Narupa iMD: A VR-Enabled Multiplayer 
Framework for Streaming Interactive Molecular Simulations.  ACM SIGGRAPH 2020 Immersive 
Pavilion2020. p. 1-2. 
Paper VR: VR Storm Studio; 2021 [18/10/2021]. Available from: https://vrstorm.hu/en/paper-
vr/ 
Samsung 
2021 
VR: 
https://www.samsung.com/global/galaxy/gear-vr/ 
Google 
Google; 
Cardboard: 
https://arvr.google.com/cardboard/ 
Cruz-Neira C, Sandin DJ, DeFanti TA, et al. The CAVE: audio visual experience automatic virtual 
environment. Communications of the ACM. 1992;35(6):64-73. 
ORIGIN 
https://www.vicon.com/applications/location-based-virtual-reality 
Liu X-H, Wang T, Lin J-P, et al. Using virtual reality for drug discovery: a promising new outlet 
for novel leads. Expert opinion on drug discovery. 2018;13(12):1103-1114. 
Gaudiosi J. Dassault Systèmes Uses HTC Vive to Replace CAVE Virtual Reality Tech. Fortune. 
2016. 
Arcane. Immersive Projection-Based Virtual Reality (VR) for Everyone, Mobile and Tailor-Made 
2022 [31/01/2022]. Available from: https://arcanetech.io/produit/vr-cave/ 
Robertson A. OCULUS RIFT S REVIEW: A SWAN SONG FOR FIRST-GENERATION VR: The Verge; 
2019 
from: 
https://www.theverge.com/2019/4/30/18523941/oculus-rift-s-review-vr-headset-price-
specs-features 
Valve. 
Valve 
https://store.steampowered.com/sub/354231 
Vive. 
https://www.vive.com/uk/product/#pro%20series 

[31/01/2022]. 

[31/01/2022]. 

[18/10/2021]. 

[18/10/2021]. 

[31/01/2022]. 

[31/01/2022]. 

Steam2022 

Samsung; 

Vive2022 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

VICON; 

VICON: 

Series 

from: 

from: 

from: 

from: 

Index 

from: 

2021 

Gear 

VIVE 

Pro 

VR 

Kit 

BY 

14 

 
44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 
48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 
53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 
61. 

2021 

2021 

Valve 

from: 

from: 

Quest 

Index: 

Available 

Available 

Software; 

[13/09/2021]. 

[13/09/2021]. 

Mestre  DR.  CAVE  versus  head-mounted  displays:  ongoing  thoughts.  Electronic  Imaging. 
2017;2017(3):31-35. 
Angelov  V,  Petkov  E,  Shipkovenski  G,  et  al.,  editors.  Modern  virtual  reality  headsets.  2020 
International  Congress  on  Human-Computer 
Interaction,  Optimization  and  Robotic 
Applications (HORA); 2020: IEEE. 
Mehrfard A, Fotouhi J, Taylor G, et al. A comparative analysis of virtual reality head-mounted 
display systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:191202913. 2019. 
HTC Vive Pro: Vive; 2021 [13/09/2021]. Available from: https://www.vive.com/uk/product/ 
Valve 
https://www.valvesoftware.com/en/index 
Oculus 
VR; 
Oculus 
2: 
https://www.oculus.com/quest-2/ 
Gandhi HA, Jakymiw S, Barrett R, et al. Real-Time Interactive Simulation and Visualization of 
Organic Molecules. ACS Publications; 2020. 
Introducing Meta: A Social Technology Company: Meta; 2021 [12/11/2021]. Available from: 
https://about.fb.com/news/2021/10/facebook-company-is-now-meta/ 
Stephenson N. Snow Crash. United States: Bantam Books; 1992.  
O’Connor M, Deeks HM, Dawn E, et al. Sampling molecular conformations and dynamics in a 
multiuser virtual reality framework. Science advances. 2018;4(6):eaat2731. 
Hušák  M,  editor  The  use  of  stereoscopic  visualization  in  chemistry  and  structural  biology. 
Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems XIII; 2006: International Society for Optics 
and Photonics. 
Zhu X, Li H, Huang L, et al. 3D printing promotes the development of drugs. Biomedicine & 
Pharmacotherapy. 2020;131:110644. 
Freire R, Glowacki BR, Williams RR, et al. Omg-vr: Open-source mudra gloves for manipulating 
molecular simulations in vr. arXiv preprint arXiv:190103532. 2019. 
Norrby M, Grebner C, Eriksson J, et al. Molecular rift: virtual reality for drug designers. Journal 
of chemical information and modeling. 2015;55(11):2475-2484. 
Microsoft 
https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/kinect/ 
Stone  RJ,  editor  Haptic  feedback:  A  brief  history  from  telepresence  to  virtual  reality. 
International Workshop on Haptic Human-Computer Interaction; 2000: Springer. 
Burdea GC. Force and touch feedback for virtual reality. 1996. 
Chinello F, Malvezzi M, Prattichizzo D, et al. A modular wearable finger interface for cutaneous 
interaction:  control  and  evaluation.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Industrial 
and  kinesthetic 
Electronics. 2019;67(1):706-716. 

[29/10/21]. 

Microsoft; 

Available 

Kinect: 

from: 

2021 

63. 

64. 

62.  Whitmire E, Benko H, Holz C, et al., editors. Haptic revolver: Touch, shear, texture, and shape 
rendering  on  a  reconfigurable  virtual  reality  controller.  Proceedings  of  the  2018  CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 2018. 
Al Maimani A, Roudaut A, editors. Frozen suit: designing a changeable stiffness suit and its 
application to haptic games. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems; 2017. 
Al-Sada M, Jiang K, Ranade S, et al. HapticSnakes: multi-haptic feedback wearable robots for 
immersive virtual reality. virtual reality. 2020;24(2):191-209. 
Spagnoletti  G,  Meli  L,  Baldi  TL,  et  al.,  editors.  Rendering  of  pressure  and  textures  using 
wearable haptics in immersive vr environments. 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 
3D User Interfaces (VR); 2018: IEEE. 
Pacchierotti C, Sinclair S, Solazzi M, et al. Wearable haptic systems for the fingertip and the 
hand: taxonomy, review, and perspectives. IEEE transactions on haptics. 2017;10(4):580-600. 
HaptX  Gloves  DK2:  HaptX  Inc.;  2021  [29/10/21].  Available  from:  https://haptx.com/virtual-
reality/ 

67. 

66. 

65. 

15 

 
68. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

87. 

Kreimeier J, Hammer S, Friedmann D, et al., editors. Evaluation of different types of haptic 
feedback influencing the task-based presence and performance in virtual reality. Proceedings 
of  the  12th  ACM  International  Conference  on  PErvasive  Technologies  Related  to  Assistive 
Environments; 2019. 
Alaker  M,  Wynn  GR,  Arulampalam  T.  Virtual  reality  training  in  laparoscopic  surgery:  a 
systematic review & meta-analysis. International Journal of Surgery. 2016;29:85-94. 
Vaughan  N,  Dubey  VN,  Wainwright  TW,  et  al.  A  review  of  virtual  reality  based  training 
simulators for orthopaedic surgery. Medical engineering & physics. 2016;38(2):59-71. 
Pusch  A,  Lécuyer  A,  editors.  Pseudo-haptics:  from  the  theoretical  foundations  to  practical 
system  design  guidelines.  Proceedings  of the  13th  international  conference  on  multimodal 
interfaces; 2011. 
Lécuyer A, Coquillart S, Kheddar A, et al., editors. Pseudo-haptic feedback: can isometric input 
devices simulate force feedback? Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No. 00CB37048); 
2000: IEEE. 
Lécuyer A. Simulating haptic feedback using vision: A survey of research and applications of 
pseudo-haptic feedback. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments. 2009;18(1):39-
53. 
Roebuck  Williams  R,  Varcoe  X,  Glowacki  BR,  et  al.,  editors.  Subtle  Sensing:  Detecting 
Differences in the Flexibility of Virtually Simulated Molecular Objects. Extended Abstracts of 
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 2020. 
Humphrey  W,  Dalke  A,  Schulten  K.  VMD:  visual  molecular  dynamics.  Journal  of  molecular 
graphics. 1996;14(1):33-38. 
Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new 
scoring  function,  efficient  optimization,  and  multithreading.  Journal  of  computational 
chemistry. 2010;31(2):455-461. 
Karplus M, Kuriyan J. Molecular dynamics and protein function. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences. 2005;102(19):6679-6685. 
Hernández-Rodríguez M, C Rosales-Hernández M, E Mendieta-Wejebe J, et al. Current tools 
and  methods  in  molecular  dynamics  (MD)  simulations  for  drug  design.  Current  medicinal 
chemistry. 2016;23(34):3909-3924. 
Durrant JD, McCammon JA. Molecular dynamics simulations and drug discovery. BMC biology. 
2011;9(1):1-9. 
Liu X, Shi D, Zhou S, et al. Molecular dynamics simulations and novel drug discovery. Expert 
opinion on drug discovery. 2018;13(1):23-37. 
De Vivo M, Masetti M, Bottegoni G, et al. Role of molecular dynamics and related methods in 
drug discovery. Journal of medicinal chemistry. 2016;59(9):4035-4061. 
DeLano  WL.  Pymol:  An  open-source  molecular  graphics  tool.  CCP4  Newsletter  on  protein 
crystallography. 2002;40(1):82-92. 
Pettersen  EF,  Goddard  TD,  Huang  CC,  et  al.  UCSF  Chimera—a  visualization  system  for 
exploratory  research  and  analysis.  Journal  of  computational  chemistry.  2004;25(13):1605-
1612. 
Goddard  TD,  Huang  CC,  Meng  EC,  et  al.  UCSF  ChimeraX:  Meeting  modern  challenges  in 
visualization and analysis. Protein Science. 2018;27(1):14-25. 
Pettersen  EF,  Goddard  TD,  Huang  CC,  et  al.  UCSF  ChimeraX:  Structure  visualization  for 
researchers, educators, and developers. Protein Science. 2021;30(1):70-82. 
Radić Z, Kirchhoff PD, Quinn DM, et al. Electrostatic influence on the kinetics of ligand binding 
to acetylcholinesterase: Distinctions between active center ligands and fasciculin. Journal  of 
Biological Chemistry. 1997;272(37):23265-23277. 
Zhou  H-X,  Pang  X.  Electrostatic  interactions  in  protein  structure,  folding,  binding,  and 
condensation. Chemical reviews. 2018;118(4):1691-1741. 

16 

 
88. 

89. 

90. 

Náray‐SzabÓ  G.  Electrostatics  in  computer‐aided  drug  design.  International  Journal  of 
Quantum Chemistry. 1989;36(S16):87-99. 
Rathi PC, Ludlow RF, Verdonk ML. Practical high-quality electrostatic potential surfaces for 
drug  discovery  using  a  graph-convolutional  deep  neural  network.  Journal  of  medicinal 
chemistry. 2019;63(16):8778-8790. 
Fried  SD,  Boxer  SG.  Electric  fields  and  enzyme  catalysis.  Annual  review  of  biochemistry. 
2017;86:387-415. 

91.  Weiner  PK,  Langridge  R,  Blaney  JM,  et  al.  Electrostatic  potential  molecular  surfaces. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

100. 

101. 

102. 
103. 

104. 

105. 

106. 

107. 

108. 

109. 

110. 

acids 

Nucleic 

calculations. 

electrostatics 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 1982;79(12):3754-3758. 
Bauer MR, Mackey MD. Electrostatic complementarity as a fast and effective tool to optimize 
binding  and  selectivity  of  protein–ligand  complexes.  Journal  of  medicinal  chemistry. 
2019;62(6):3036-3050. 
Nakamura  H,  Komatsu  K,  Nakagawa  S,  et  al.  Visualization  of  electrostatic  recognition  by 
enzymes for their ligands and cofactors. Journal of Molecular Graphics. 1985;3(1):2-11. 
Keil  M,  Marhofer  RJ,  Rohwer  A,  et  al.  Molecular  visualization  in  the  rational  drug  design 
process. Front Biosci. 2009;14:2559-2583. 
Jurrus E, Engel D, Star K, et al. Improvements to the APBS biomolecular solvation software 
suite. Protein Science. 2018;27(1):112-128. 
Unni S, Huang Y, Hanson RM, et al. Web servers and services for electrostatics calculations 
with APBS and PDB2PQR. Journal of computational chemistry. 2011;32(7):1488-1491. 
Dolinsky TJ, Nielsen JE, McCammon JA, et al. PDB2PQR: an automated pipeline for the setup 
of 
research. 
Poisson–Boltzmann 
2004;32(suppl_2):W665-W667. 
Laureanti J, Brandi J, Offor E, et al. Visualizing biomolecular electrostatics in virtual reality with 
UnityMol‐APBS. Protein Science. 2020;29(1):237-246. 
Loging  WT.  The  art  and  science  of  the  drug  discovery  pipeline:  History  of  drug  discovery. 
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology in Drug Discovery and Development. 2016:1. 
Chang  Y-S,  Chou  C-H,  Chuang  M-J,  et  al.  Effects  of  virtual  reality  on  creative  design 
performance and creative experiential learning. Interactive Learning Environments. 2020:1-
16. 
Yang X, Lin L, Cheng P-Y, et al. Examining creativity through a virtual reality support system. 
Educational Technology Research and Development. 2018;66(5):1231-1254. 
Berg JM, Tymoczko JL, Stryer L. Biochemistry. New York: WH Freeman; 2002.  
Doak DG, Denyer GS, Gerrard JA, et al. Peppy: A virtual reality environment for exploring the 
principles of polypeptide structure. Protein Science. 2020;29(1):157-168. 
Pagadala  NS,  Syed  K,  Tuszynski  J.  Software  for  molecular  docking:  a  review.  Biophysical 
reviews. 2017;9(2):91-102. 
Juárez-Jiménez  J,  Tew  P,  Llabres  S,  et  al.  A  Virtual  Reality  Ensemble  Molecular  Dynamics 
Workflow to Study Complex Conformational Changes in Proteins. 2020. 
Stone  JE,  Gullingsrud  J,  Schulten  K,  editors.  A  system  for  interactive  molecular  dynamics 
simulation. Proceedings of the 2001 symposium on Interactive 3D graphics; 2001. 
Rapaport  D.  Interactive  molecular  dynamics.  Physica  A:  Statistical  Mechanics  and  its 
Applications. 1997;240(1-2):246-254. 
Vormoor  O.  Quick  and  easy  interactive  molecular  dynamics  using  Java3D.  Computing  in 
Science & Engineering. 2001;3(5):98-104. 
Knoll  P,  Mirzaei  S.  Development  of  an  interactive  molecular  dynamics  simulation  software 
package. Review of scientific instruments. 2003;74(4):2483-2487. 
Schroeder DV. Interactive molecular dynamics. American Journal of Physics. 2015;83(3):210-
218. 

17 

 
111. 

112. 

113. 

114. 

115. 

116. 

117. 

118. 

119. 

120. 

121. 

122. 

123. 

124. 

125. 

126. 

127. 

128. 

129. 

130. 

131. 

132. 

133. 

Croll  TI,  Andersen  GR.  Re-evaluation  of  low-resolution  crystal  structures  via  interactive 
molecular-dynamics  flexible  fitting  (iMDFF):  a  case  study 
in  complement  C4.  Acta 
Crystallographica Section D: Structural Biology. 2016;72(9):1006-1016. 
Izrailev  S,  Stepaniants  S,  Isralewitz  B,  et  al.  Steered  molecular  dynamics.    Computational 
molecular dynamics: challenges, methods, ideas: Springer; 1999. p. 39-65. 
Grayson  P,  Tajkhorshid  E,  Schulten  K.  Mechanisms  of  selectivity  in  channels  and  enzymes 
studied with interactive molecular dynamics. Biophysical Journal. 2003;85(1):36-48. 
Ai Z, Fröhlich T, editors. Molecular  dynamics simulation in virtual environments. Computer 
Graphics Forum; 1998: Wiley Online Library. 
Hamdi M, Ferreira A, Sharma G, et al. Prototyping bio-nanorobots using molecular dynamics 
simulation and virtual reality. Microelectronics Journal. 2008;39(2):190-201. 
Dreher M, Piuzzi M, Turki A, et al. Interactive molecular dynamics: Scaling up to large systems. 
Procedia Computer Science. 2013;18:20-29. 
Seritan S, Wang Y, Ford JE, et al. InteraChem: Virtual Reality Visualizer for Reactive Interactive 
Molecular Dynamics. Journal of Chemical Education. 2021. 
Ferrell JB, Campbell JP, McCarthy DR, et al. Chemical exploration with virtual reality in organic 
teaching laboratories. Journal of Chemical Education. 2019;96(9):1961-1966. 
Luehr N, Jin AG, Martínez TJ. Ab initio interactive molecular dynamics on graphical processing 
units (GPUs). Journal of chemical theory and computation. 2015;11(10):4536-4544. 
Phillips  JC,  Braun  R,  Wang  W,  et  al.  Scalable  molecular  dynamics  with  NAMD.  Journal  of 
computational chemistry. 2005;26(16):1781-1802. 
Eastman P, Swails J, Chodera JD, et al. OpenMM 7: Rapid development of high performance 
algorithms for molecular dynamics. PLoS computational biology. 2017;13(7):e1005659. 
Bennie SJ, Ranaghan KE, Deeks H, et al. Teaching enzyme catalysis using interactive molecular 
dynamics in virtual reality. Journal of Chemical Education. 2019;96(11):2488-2496. 
Schneider  G,  Böhm  H-J.  Virtual  screening  and  fast  automated  docking  methods.  Drug 
discovery today. 2002;7:64-70. 
Goodsell  DS,  Morris  GM,  Olson  AJ.  Automated  docking  of  flexible  ligands:  applications  of 
AutoDock. Journal of molecular recognition. 1996;9(1):1-5. 
Blaney JM, Dixon JS. A good ligand is hard to find: Automated docking methods. Perspectives 
in Drug Discovery and Design. 1993;1(2):301-319. 
Goodsell DS, Olson AJ. Automated docking of substrates to proteins by simulated annealing. 
Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics. 1990;8(3):195-202. 
Deeks  HM,  Walters  RK,  Hare  SR,  et  al.  Interactive  molecular  dynamics  in  virtual  reality  for 
accurate flexible protein-ligand docking. Plos one. 2020;15(3):e0228461. 
Deeks HM, Walters RK, Barnoud J, et al. Interactive Molecular Dynamics in Virtual Reality Is an 
Effective Tool for Flexible Substrate and Inhibitor Docking to the SARS-CoV-2 Main Protease. 
Journal of chemical information and modeling. 2020;60(12):5803-5814. 
Zhang L, Lin D, Sun X, et al. Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for 
design of improved α-ketoamide inhibitors. Science. 2020;368(6489):409-412. 
Chan HH, Moesser MA, Walters RK, et al. Discovery of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro Peptide Inhibitors 
from Modelling Substrate and Ligand Binding. bioRxiv. 2021. 
C4X  Discovery.  The  4Sight  project:  using  VR  in  the  drug  discovery  space:  Immerse  UK; 
[31/01/2022]. Available from: https://www.immerseuk.org/case-study/c4x-discovery/ 
Castellanos  S.  Virtual  Reality  Puts  Drug  Researchers  Inside  the  Molecules  They  Study.  Wall 
Street Journal. 2021.  
Dutton  G.  DEMO:  Nanome  Triggers  Deep  Drug  Development  Insights  Via  Virtual  Molecule 
Design: BioSpace; 2021 [31/01/2022].  

134.  Mitchell TJ, Jones AJ, O'Connor MB, et al., editors. Towards molecular musical instruments: 
interactive sonifications of 17-alanine, graphene and carbon nanotubes. Proceedings of the 
15th International Conference on Audio Mostly; 2020. 

18 

 
135. 

136. 

Arbon  RE,  Jones  AJ,  Bratholm  LA,  et  al.  Sonifying  stochastic  walks  on  biomolecular  energy 
landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:180305805. 2018. 
Shannon  RJ,  Deeks  HM,  Burfoot  E,  et  al.  Exploring  human-guided  strategies  for  reaction 
network  exploration:  Interactive  molecular  dynamics  in  virtual  reality  as  a  tool  for  citizen 
scientists. The Journal of Chemical Physics. 2021;155(15):154106. 

19 

 
 
