JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

1

Metaverse: Security and Privacy Concerns

Ruoyu Zhao, Yushu Zhang, Youwen Zhu, Rushi Lan, and Zhongyun Hua

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
8

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
5
8
3
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The term “metaverse”, a three-dimensional virtual
universe similar to the real realm, has always been full of
imagination since it was put forward in the 1990s. Recently, it is
possible to realize the metaverse with the continuous emergence
and progress of various technologies, and thus it has attracted
extensive attention again. It may bring a lot of beneﬁts to human
society such as reducing discrimination, eliminating individual
differences, and socializing. However, everything has security
and privacy concerns, which is no exception for the metaverse.
In this article, we ﬁrstly analyze the concept of the metaverse
and propose that it is a super virtual-reality (VR) ecosystem
compared with other VR technologies. Then, we carefully analyze
and elaborate on possible security and privacy concerns from
four perspectives: user information, communication, scenario,
and goods, and immediately, the potential solutions are corre-
spondingly put forward. Meanwhile, we propose the need to
take advantage of the new buckets effect to comprehensively
address security and privacy concerns from a philosophical
perspective, which hopefully will bring some progress to the
metaverse community.

I. INTRODUCTION

C AN Alice engage in immersive interaction with her

friends who live thousands of miles away? Can Bob
seamlessly move from the movie theater to the shopping center
in an instant? Can Peter who has a leg disability stand and run
like a normal person? Many people around the world may have
such similar questions every day.

A recently popular term, metaverse, may be able to address
these questions easily, and in fact, it is not a newborn but
a palingenesis. The term “metaverse” was ﬁrst invented in a
novel named Snow Crash in 1992 [1], which was a combi-
nation of two words, “meta” and “verse”. The former means
beyond reality, i.e., in a virtual environment; the latter refers to
the universe, which means that people can immerse themselves
in this environment for living like reality. Since the term was
put forward, its deﬁnition has been very diverse [2], e.g.,
lifelogging, future social networks, next generation Internet,
and virtual world, which makes it cast a layer of mystery.
Overall, however, a consensus is that users living in the real
world link to and operate their avatars who are in the metaverse
through access terminals in order to immerse themselves into
a three-dimensional (3D) virtual world as shown in Fig. 1.

In a nutshell, various information including instructions of
users is collected by sensors to sent the terminal; the terminal

R. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhu are with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nan-
jing 211106, China (e-mail: zhaoruoyu@nuaa.edu.cn; yushu@nuaa.edu.cn;
zhuyw@nuaa.edu.cn).

R. Lan is with Guangxi Key Laboratory of Image and Graphic Intelligent
Processing, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
(e-mail: rslan2016@163.com).

Z. Hua

is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
huazhongyun@hit.edu.cn).

Fig. 1. The basic infrastructure of the metaverse.

synthesizes the information from sensors and then sends it to
the server by Internet to control the corresponding avatar in the
metaverse; servers comprehensively process the information of
a large number of users and reﬂect it in the 3D virtual world;
each legal avatar activity sent by users is executed. Conversely,
the status in the metaverse when avatars execute activities is
fed back to servers, e.g., if a work of art is created by an avatar,
its information such as content needs to be told to servers;
servers record and generate the corresponding 3D virtual sce-
nario that is broadcasted all user terminals; terminals display
the real-time scenario in the metaverse to users after receiving
server information and further send detailed instructions to
sensors; each sensor sends a corresponding signal according
to the instruction to immerse users into it. For example, it
will be more realistic for the user if the sensor on the hand
responds appropriately when the corresponding avatar shakes
hands with others in the metaverse.

The metaverse can bring a lot of beneﬁts to people in the
real universe. The problems mentioned at the beginning of
this article can be well addressed in the metaverse owing to
the characteristic of virtuality. Meanwhile, the long-standing
problem of discrimination in the reality may be alleviated.

…SensorTerminal3D Virtual World…ActivityShoppingFinanceCreatingSocializingAvatarUser 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

2

For instance, people with physical disabilities can move like
ordinary people in the metaverse as long as they are conscious;
there is no difference in physical strength between the elderly
and the young; gender is no longer innate; looks can change at
will; and skin color and race are no longer have to be known
to others.

On the other hand, the metaverse is confronted with new
and serious security and privacy concerns despite its obvious
value. First, more important and sensitive information in the
real world through terminals may be stolen by malicious
others since avatars have a closer relationship with users than
other virtual worlds such as online games. Second, avatars
have a lot of interaction with other avatars and non-player
characters, which are not all intended to be understood by
others. Third, there will inevitably be scenarios in the universe
that make some people feel inappropriate due to the differences
of culture and others, not even excepting the metaverse, and
not to mention malicious avatar behaviors such as harassment.
Fourth, the ownership, illegal copy, and transaction of goods
in the metaverse are also thorny challenges. The simplest way
to solve the security and privacy concerns of the metaverse is
to prohibit users from entering it [3], but this crudest method
completely gives up the its beneﬁts that is just throwing out
the baby with the bath water. In this article, we focus on
the potential emerging security and privacy concerns of the
metaverse itself and then propose alternative solutions that do
not completely damage the interests. The key points of this
article can be summarized as follows:

• We analyze the concept of the metaverse and propose that
it is a super 3D virtual-reality (VR) ecosystem compared
with other VR technologies.

• The serious challenges of security and privacy concerns

in the metaverse are pointed out and summarized.

• Some potential solutions for these security and privacy
concerns in the metaverse are proposed correspondingly.
• The new buckets effect is applied to think philosophically
about how to deal with security and privacy concerns in
a comprehensive way in the metaverse.

II. OVERVIEW OF METAVERSE

Intuitively, the boundary between the metaverse and VR,
augmented reality (AR), and mixed reality (MR) appears to
be hazy. In fact, the metaverse can be highly summarized
as a super virtual-reality ecosystem based on the Internet,
which is composed of inter-disciplinary technologies as shown
in Fig. 2, e.g., VR, AR, MR, artiﬁcial intelligence, machine
learning, computer vision, speech recognition, blockchain, and
the Internet of things. By contrast, VR/AR/MR is only a
kind of virtualized and digitized technology, and it does not
necessitate a comprehensive ecosystem, rules, and the Internet,
despite being an important component of the metaverse.

The term “ecosystem” implies that the components of the
metaverse interact and restrict each other, and are in a relative
stable dynamic equilibrium state, forming a persistent and
uniﬁed virtual world. Meanwhile, a large number of users are
the foundation of the ecosystem. If there are no users, it can
only be labeled a 3D virtual vision system rather than be called

Fig. 2. An illustration of the main technology composition of the metaverse.

“verse” no matter how perfect it is. Just like a place with all
kinds of goods but without customers who pay the bill, it can
only be called a warehouse rather than a shopping mall. In
truth, users create demand to stimulate the development of
the metaverse, which in turn attracts users to enter, resulting
in a positive ecosystem. In other words, a metaverse without
users is doomed to failure, which also implies that perhaps
only a few metaverse platforms will eventually ﬂourish and the
others will die. This trend is already evident on current Internet
platforms, e.g., people prefer to choose Instagram for sharing
pictures and Tiktok for short videos, despite the availability of
alternative ones.

There are two main reasons why the metaverse recently can
be palingenesis after this concept was put forward many years.
First, the COVID-19 epidemic has trained people to be familiar
with the virtual digital world and promoted the socializing to
shift from ofﬂine to online to some extent [4]. Second, the
recent signiﬁcant progress like Big Bang of the above related
technologies as shown in Fig. 2 makes it possible to build a
metaverse technically.

III. SECURITY AND PRIVACY CONCERNS

The development of anything is inevitably accompanied
by security and privacy concerns with no exception to the
metaverse. Speciﬁcally, these concerns can be divided into four
categories:

• User information: multi-sensor fusion is one of the char-
acteristic of the metaverse as shown in Fig. 1, making a
large amount of user information to be collected. There
is no doubt that sensors are necessary since they help
users to improve the experience resulting in immersing
themselves in the metaverse. On the other hand, although
many users may not be noticed or even realized the
problem [3], some user information collected by sensors,
e.g., related physiological, physical, biometric, and social,

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

3

is too personal. If it is leaked, it will greatly endanger the
security and privacy of users [5]. Hence, it is critical that
user information is protected.

• Communication: one of the features of the metaverse
is its high interactivity and sociality, and thus a lot of
communication inevitably takes place. Many activities,
e.g., sharing, cooperating, and increasing mutual trust and
understanding, in the metaverse are difﬁcult to be done
without the help of communication. Although it may not
contain the above-mentioned user information, most users
are nevertheless unwilling to tell those who are non-
communicators since communication content is highly
private and sensitive. As a result, it is important to protect
communication and it should be done in such a way that
non-communicators are prevented from comprehending
and recovering the contents of the communication while
legal communicators can.

• Scenario: it is conceivable to encounter the same security
and privacy concerns as the real realm since the metaverse
is a surreal universe. There are two main aspects to be
considered: the scenario itself and avatars in the scenario.
For the former, as a great number of users are clustered
on a metaverse platform (and in fact there are not many
alternative platforms to pick from), their understanding
of cultures, religions, and so on will inevitably vary.
Therefore, the scenario will not meet everyone’s wish
and even cause misunderstanding for some avatars. For
the latter, the inﬂux of users will inevitably introduce
some malicious and immoral ones who may insult, track,
or even sexually harass other avatars in the metaverse,
and these activities have appeared in online games [6].
• Goods: the metaserve has the characteristics of imagina-
tion, high creativity, high degree of degree of freedom,
and high personalization. Thus, avatars can create all
kinds of goods, such as the character modeling, appear-
ance, costumes, buildings, and artworks, according to
personal wishes. These goods can be applied by creators
or sold, i.e., they are either created through efforts or
at
they may also be
freely given by friends), implying that they include both
spiritual and ﬁnancial values. Avatars do not wish the
value to be illegally damaged, e.g., an avatar tailors a
personalized dress for themselves and may not want to
see it on others. Meanwhile, goods transactions may also
be damaged by malicious users and avatars also have a
demand to anonymize rights in the transactions. Hence, it
is important for the secure protection of goods themselves
and transactions in the metaserve.

the cost of money (of course,

IV. USER INFORMATION

User information has always been a very important and
sensitive concern related to security and privacy in modern
society. More detailed user information in the metaverse will
be collected than previous platforms such as society networks
due to the characteristics of the immersion, the indistinguisha-
bility of virtual and reality, and multi-sensor. This makes
illegal third parties more interested in this information and may

Fig. 3. An illustration of the metaverse being attacked by the attacter.

attack through the network as shown in Fig. 3. Meanwhile,
the information is no longer directly under the actual physical
control of users as long as it is transmitted out from the
terminal, which implies that information is at risk after leaving
the terminal, and in other words,
the protection of user
information needs to be carried out at the terminal.

It is worth noting that everyone has vary views on privacy
since everyone has different cultural habits and acceptance. In
addition, any solution cannot protect all information without
paying any price. Therefore, the solution should be targeted
protection for the goal that users want to achieve, and no one
can perfectly prevent from all risks except to give up the use
directly. Next, we will state some solutions to protect user
information in the metaverse.

For single accurate signal information such as heartbeat
information obtained by the sensor, it can be protected by only
shielding the signal and prohibiting transmission. On the other
hand, visual multimedia including image and video, which
occupy the mainstream in the metaverse, contains a lot of
sensitive information and much accurate information can also
be extracted from it, e.g., heart rate [7], health, and social
status. It can not be simply shielded since visual multimedia
is inextricably related to the application of the metaverse.
Therefore, speciﬁc treatment and protection are needed, which
can be classiﬁed into three categories: generalized, white-list,
and black-list.

Generalized protection means that users desire to protect
some visual content since they feel there is probably a privacy
issue. It is protected in a general way without considering

…AttackerSensorAccess the MetaverseJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

4

Fig. 4. An illustration of the communication being protected.

speciﬁc and ﬁne privacy compared with the solutions of white-
list and block-list. In the multimedia visual content, only
one part may be needed and other parts are redundant. For
example,
it only needs people to appear and background
which may reveal too much information is unnecessary in
the video conferencing in the metaverse. This problem can
be solved by matting, i.e., the visual content can be divided
into those that need to be preserved and abandoned and then
processed accordingly. It has been applied in practice, e.g.,
Zoom and Tencent Conference have allowed users to choose
virtual background options a year ago. Similarly, the solutions
such as face swapping and 3D model replacement can be
applied in light of the privacy risk that faces may pose.

White-list protection refers to that everything is processed
and protected in addition to the information selected by
users (which similar to the white list), and this is a targeted
protection compared with the above. As a simple example, a
smile competition is organized in the metaverse and the avatar
with the brightest smile can win the game. The face content of
the user is required for participating in the competition, but the
user may only wish to employ the facial content for analysis
smile. Hence, the face in the multimedia should not contain
any information except smile. For this problem, Wu et al.
proposed a solution to train a model through machine learning
to protect visual content, which only retains the usability of
speciﬁc information but other will be deleted and cannot be
extracted [8].

Black-list protection implies that nothing about the visual
content
in the multimedia is processed except what users
choose (which similar to the black list). This kind of protection
often aims at the face, resulting in a highly accurate with
good visual observability. For such protection, faces are often
destructed into speciﬁc vectors for further accurate processing
and each vector represents a signal. Such vectors are typically
separated into two classes: identity and attributes. Some vec-
tors pertaining to the information that users desire to protect
are processed to be protected while the rest remain unchanged.
Then, these vectors are integrated and reconstructed into the
protected face by generating models called anonymization and
attribute protection, respectively, depending on whether the
identity or attribute is processed.

Fig. 5. An example of the scenario shielded according to user selection.

V. COMMUNICATION

Interaction and social are required in the metaverse and thus
frequent communication occurs. Communication is carried out
by avatars on the surface but it is actually controlled by users.
For the participants in the communication, they only want the
target party, i.e., legitimate receiver, to know the content of the
communication, while the third party is unaware. It indicates
that the content can not be directly eliminated in the solution,
as in the case of user information, but it must be able to be
recovered for the target party.

A powerful solution to this goal is encryption as shown in
Fig. 4, i.e., the sender sends the information after encrypting
with the key and the legitimate receiver decrypts it employing
the correct key after receiving it. Thus,
the meaningless
ciphertext is transmitted in the course of communication and
attackers cannot decrypt it as long as they do not have the
correct key even if the ciphertext is intercepted. By the way,
the key and encryption algorithm are primarily responsible
for the security of the ciphertext, i.e., the ability to prevent
attackers without the correct key from breaking the ciphertext.
For the key, it should be long enough, i.e., the key space is
large enough, to prevent the attacker from using exhaustive
attack, and meanwhile, the communication will be in danger
once the key is leaked and thus the key should be kept

EncryptingDecryptingEncryptingDecryptingShielding Settings…Character A …Character ACharacter AJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

5

conﬁdential and replaced on a regular basis. For the encryption
algorithm, it should go through enough cryptographic tests and
analysis to prevent possible attacks, and then the algorithm
that meets the corresponding security standards is selected
according to the actual needs.

Although general encryption schemes for visual multimedia
including video and image, converting the meaningful visual
content into useless noise-like one, have been able to meet
the needs of security and privacy, they do not think about
visual obeservability. In fact, this feature may be important for
enjoying the communication. Senders share a large number of
encrypted images that are all noise-like ones and cannot be
distinguished by browsing, and in other words, they cannot be
selected unless all of them are decrypted, which may be a poor
experience for receivers. Thumbnail-preserving encryption can
be applied to alleviate the contradiction between privacy
security and visual observability [9], which erases the ﬁne
details of the visual content but preserves the coarse one. The
ﬁnal result is similar to the mosaic effect, which implies that
certain visual information can be obtained by browsing the
ciphertext but the details cannot be learned until decrypting.

VI. SCENARIO

Some conﬂicts arise from time to time in the real world,
such as those arising from religious, political, gender, and sex-
ual minorities, as a results of various cultures and ideas from
different people. This phenomenon is even more severe in the
virtual world due to lack of distance and other restrictions, e.g.,
cyberbullying on social networks and scale violence in online
games, which will undoubtedly degrade the experience and
create discomfort. But for users of current network platforms,
they can escape from these unpleasant places and form small
virtual communities with people who have similar interests
and opinions so as to avoid some negative effects. However,
this way does not seem to exist for the metaverse since itself
is a complete universe and it is difﬁcult for a tiny group of
individuals to make a fresh start. Meanwhile, just as in the
real world, there are malicious avatars in the metaverse who
are evil to others, such as harassment and stalking [3].

For a user-friendly metaverse environment, a setting window
should be provided to allow users to set to prevent some
scenarios around their avatars. For example, a propaganda
video of a political ﬁgure is playing outside a building, but
some avatars dislike him/her and thus they choose to shield
him out as shown in Fig. 5. It is worth noting that the scenario
does not disappear from the metaverse but can not be seen for
the speciﬁc avatar, which can also be called as the personalized
scenario presentation. Similarly, for the offensive and insulting
content of other avatars’ speeches and texts, speciﬁc keywords
can also be set to detect them through the voice and text
detection model for shielding.

On the other hand, this solution is difﬁcult to detect avatar
aggressive and bullying behavior. First, the meaning of avatar
behaviors is often subtle and whether it is malicious needs to
be combined with the actual situation and context. Second,
behaviors themselves are highly diverse and many malicious
ones have no clear deﬁnition compared with the speech and

text. For example, it is not always deemed malicious for an
avatar to play with a gun, but it is malicious if the gun
points towards other avatars, making it is impossible to judge
whether there is malicious by simply detecting the gun unless
supplemented with speciﬁc circumstances. According to re-
searches, the detection of malicious bullying by the avatar can
combine multiple factors such as body-pose, facial emotion,
hand gesture, object, and social, resulting in a satisfactory
outcome [10].

For the harassment and stalking, the preceding solution is
not useful since even though these avatars are shielded in our
own scenario, we still exist in malicious avatar scenarios and
they can still do this kind of activity. A good solution for
it is to disappear suddenly, e.g., cloaking and teleportation
[3], and as a result, the malicious avatars cannot ﬁnd the
target one. Furthermore, a user can create multiple avatars
and randomly select different ones each time when he/she
accesses the metaverse to prevent some ill-intentioned avatars
from looking for patterns over time.

VII. GOODS

As Lee et al. pointed out [2], creation is an important part of
the sustainable development of the metaverse. In addition, the
high degree of freedom and open environment of the metaverse
also greatly encourages the emergence of the creation activity
driven by individualized psychological needs or money, which
means that a large number of goods produced by creation will
appear. No matter what the motivation, the owner of the goods
will not want others to illegally copy and abuse it. Based on
this point, it is necessary to take methods to protect it.

A viable solution is invisible watermarking, a technique
aimed at embedding a speciﬁc mark related to identity in
the goods as they are created or the ownership is transferred.
It will not affect
the visual effect of its own goods in
the metaverse owing to invisibility, and can be extracted or
detected when needed. Therefore, some functions, including
content protection, authentication, and tamper-resistance, are
realized [11], which further deters malicious avatars from
stealing and illegally copying goods. Moreover, compared with
the real-world scenario, watermarking is more suitable for the
metaverse. In the real world, it is essentially a modiﬁcation
of visual content no matter how invisible it is, which will
destroy some physical features, and thus the existence of
watermarking can be illegally detected by some technical
means. This difﬁculty, however, does not exist in the metaverse
which is a generative digital scenario rather than a physical
one, and it is difﬁcult to detect it by existing means even if
the watermarking is made on it.

The blockchain is an excellent solution to the problems of
ownership, traceability, and transfer of goods, which has the
following characteristics: decentralization,
tamper resistant,
and anonymity [12]. Decentralization enables each avatar to
participate in blockchain activities fairly, leading that avatars
are able to register the ownership of each goods by themselves,
which is the premise of protection. Tamper resistant is due
to the fact that tampering with the blockchain require more
than 51% of the computing power support in the system. It

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

6

contract are met, it begins to be executed automatically and
is not changed by human will. Hence, the transaction of the
ownership of goods in the metaverse can be carried out safely.

VIII. NEW BUCKETS EFFECT

There is no doubt that the above solutions can achieve a
protective effect in dealing with their corresponding security
and privacy concerns when standing at the angle of the raised
problem. Meanwhile, it is common for researchers to notice
the shortcoming of existing solutions and strive to contin-
uously improve them to achieve better effects, like classic
buckets effect, in which each board can be enlarged to contain
more water. However, there are gaps between each board, and
if it is not fastened, no matter how much water is contained,
it will leak. Similarly, if people simply study a single problem
in isolation and turn a blind eye to others, they may be able
to put forward corresponding and effect solutions, but they
are not very helpful to mitigate the security and privacy of
the whole ecosystem as shown in the top panel of Fig. 6. For
example, when an avatar chats with others in the mataverse,
he/she may disclose trivial daily in unexpected ways, and
then expose his/her user information from the real world. If
the intentional avatar takes advantage of this and deliberately
communicates with the avatar, the user information may be
successfully obtained in this way.

Therefore, it is necessary to add a lock ring on the bucket
to minimize water leakage, i.e., new buckets effect. Similarly,
a comprehensive rather than peer-to-peer consideration of
how to address security and privacy concerns, coming up a
package of solutions, is necessary. It should be to allow users
to choose and execute multiple and closely related solutions
simultaneously, which may effectively alleviate concerns in
the metaverse as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 6. The
statement may help better protect the security and privacy
of the metaverse, but it also poses a greater challenge for
researchers, which makes them need to design a systematic
and coherent solutions based on the thinking of comprehensive
and global.

IX. CONCLUSION

Security and privacy concerns are inevitable in the de-
velopment of everything and need to be solved. In this
article, the concept of the metaverse is ﬁrst reﬁned and the
security and privacy concerns of the metaverse are analyzed
and summarized involving user information, communication,
scenario, and goods. Then,
through reﬂecting on the key
problems we summarized, corresponding potential solutions
based on shielded, machine learning, encryption, watermark-
ing, blockchain, and so on are proposed, which adhere to
the user-centered, allowing users to choose personalized and
appropriate ones to address these concerns. Last,
through
this article puts forward the idea
philosophical reﬂection,
of drawing lessons from the new barrel effect for compre-
hensively and effectively alleviating the security and privacy
concerns of the ecosystem. We hope that the relevant concerns
we raised can attract attention in the metaverse community and
provide some assistance in mitigating them.

Fig. 6. An example of the new buckets effect for protecting security and
privacy.

is not the interests of those with a lot of computing power
since they need to maintain the stability of the system to
obtain the maximum beneﬁts. Therefore, there is no need
to be concerned about its effectiveness following ownership
registration. Anonymity allows the avatar not to worry about
disclosing who has the ownership after registration, nor about
the exposure of its identity during a transaction. Furthermore,
the blockchain has an effective tool, the smart contract [13],
which can prevent both parties from defaulting in the transac-
tion of goods. Speciﬁcally, the two sides of the transaction
need to reach an agreement in advance and then draw up
to sign. Once the conditions stipulated in the
a contract

Security & PrivacyCommunicationScenarioGoodsSecurity & PrivacyCommunicationScenarioGoodsUserInformationUserInformationJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

7

REFERENCES

[1] N. Stephenson, Snow crash: A novel. Spectra, 2003.
[2] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about metaverse: A
complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and
research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05352, 2021.

[3] B. Falchuk, S. Loeb, and R. Neff, “The social metaverse: Battle for
privacy,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 52–61, 2018.
[4] Z. Chen, H. Cao, Y. Deng, X. Gao, J. Piao, F. Xu, Y. Zhang, and
Y. Li, “Learning from home: A mixed-methods analysis of live streaming
based remote education experience in chinese colleges during the covid-
19 pandemic,” in Conf. Hum. Fact. Comput. Syst. Proc., ser. CHI ’21,
2021.

[5] H. Liu, X. Yao, T. Yang, and H. Ning, “Cooperative privacy preservation
for wearable devices in hybrid computing-based smart health,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1352–1362, 2019.

[6] J. Fox, M. Gilbert, and W. Y. Tang, “Player experiences in a massively
multiplayer online game: A diary study of performance, motivation, and
social interaction,” New Media Soc., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 4056–4073,
2018.

[7] Q. Zhu, M. Chen, C.-W. Wong, and M. Wu, “Adaptive multi-trace
carving for robust frequency tracking in forensic applications,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensic Secur., vol. 16, pp. 1174–1189, 2021.

[8] H. Wu, X. Tian, Y. Gong, X. Su, M. Li, and F. Xu, “DAPter: Preventing
user data abuse in deep learning inference services,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., 2021, pp. 1017–1028.

[9] Y. Zhang, R. Zhao, X. Xiao, R. Lan, Z. Liu, and X. Zhang, “HF-TPE:
High-ﬁdelity thumbnail-preserving encryption,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., in press, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3070348, 2021.
[10] N. Vishwamitra, H. Hu, F. Luo, and L. Cheng, “Towards understanding
and detecting cyberbullying in real-world images,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. Appl., 2021.

[11] M. Begum and M. S. Uddin, “Digital image watermarking techniques:

A review,” Information, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 110, 2020.

[12] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things:
A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094, 2019.
[13] S. Lee, M. Kim, J. Lee, R.-H. Hsu, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Is blockchain
suitable for data freshness? an age-of-information perspective,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 96–103, 2021.

