Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review 

Elif Hilal Korkut 

 and Elif Surer 

Abstract Rapidly growing virtual reality (VR) technologies and techniques have gained importance over the past few years, 
and academics and practitioners have been searching for efficient visualizations in VR. To date, emphasis has been on the 
employment of game technologies. Despite the growing interest and discussion, visualization studies have lacked a common 
baseline in the transition period of 2D visualizations to immersive ones. To this end, the presented study aims to provide a 
systematic literature review that explains the state-of-the-art research and future trends on visualization in virtual reality. The 
research framework is grounded in empirical and theoretical works of visualization. We characterize the reviewed literature 
based on three dimensions: (a) Connection with visualization background and theory, (b) Evaluation and design considerations 
for virtual reality visualization, and (c) Empirical studies. The results from this systematic review suggest that: (1) There are 
only  a  few  studies  that  focus  on  creating  standard  guidelines  for  virtual  reality,  and  each  study  individually  provides  a 
framework  or  employs  previous  studies  on  traditional  2D  visualizations;  (2)  With  the  myriad  of  advantages  provided  for 
visualization and virtual reality, most of the studies prefer to use game engines; (3) Although game engines are extensively 
used, they are not convenient for critical scientific studies; and (4) 3D versions of traditional statistical visualization techniques, 
such as bar plots and scatter plots, are still commonly used in the data visualization context. This systematic review attempts 
to add to the literature a clear picture of the emerging contexts, different elements, and their interdependencies. 

Keywords virtual reality · visualization · game technologies · systematic review 

1 Introduction 

The  word  “visualization”  has  been  an  overloaded  term 
even before being established as a scientific field and has a 
prolonged  usage  with  different  meanings  in  different 
contexts. Since the visualization structures and types that can 
be  presented  in  immersive  environments  are  very  diverse, 

Elif Hilal Korkut 
E-mail: elif.korkut@metu.edu.tr 

Elif Surer 
E-mail: elifs@metu.edu.tr 

Graduate School of Informatics, Department of Modeling and  
Simulation, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, 06800, 
Turkey 

immersive  visualization  is  placed  in  the  convergence  of 
different  research  areas.  In  immersive  environments,  data 
can  be  presented  with  3D  models,  3D  graphs  and  plots, 
simulations,  and  multiple  2D  representations.  The  data 
source  can  be  statistics,  medicine,  computer  sciences, 
heritage,  and  many  others.  Its  scope 
includes  both 
technology-related  areas,  such  as  multisensory  interfaces, 
interaction,  navigation,  collaborative  aspects,  rendering 
techniques, and domain-specific subjects. 

Without  a  definitive  starting  event,  the  history  of 
visualization  includes  many  discussions  collected  around 
themes  of  design,  purpose,  or  intent.  Geometric  diagrams, 
tables,  and  navigational  graphics  are 
astronomical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
considered  the  first  visualization  attempts,  and  prominent 
subjects  of  the  field  differ  according  to  the  era’s  problems 
and fields of interest. The increase in practical applications 
in the 17th century was closely related to interest in physical 
measurements, which led to more line graphs, astronomical 
graphics,  and  maps.  For  example,  the  first  known  weather 
map,  a  theoretical  curve  relating  barometric  pressure  to 
altitude by Edmund Halley, and the plot of “life expectancy 
vs.  age”  by  Christian  Huygens  were  produced  in  that  era 
(Chen  et  al.,  2014). In  addition  to  the  increase  in  practical 
applications, with the collection of social data, demographic 
and  economic  visualizations  were  produced  within  the 
methods of ‘political arithmetic.’ The 18th century brought 
new domains and graphic forms, such as abstract graphs and 
thematic  mapping.  Joseph  Priestley  produced  a  more 
convenient  timeline  (1765)  and  a  detailed  history  chart 
(1769). With the creative combinations of the  fundamental 
forms,  first-line  graph  and  bar  chart  (1786),  pie  chart  and 
circle graph (1801) were invented by William Playfair that 
are  graphical  representations  still  commonly  used  today 
(Friendly, 2007). 

Most  of  the  data  representations  used  today  took  their 
form in the 19th century with the developments in statistical 
graphs. With the recognition of graphical representation by 
official and scientific spheres, graphical analyses were used 
in scientific publications and state planning. Together with 
the  other  innovative  works  of  Charles  Joseph  Minard,  his 
famous visual storytelling, the fate of the armies of Napoleon 
and Hannibal, are examples of the social and political uses 
of graphics which later gained the appreciation of most of the 
important  names  in  the  field  (Rendgen,  2018).  Among 
others,  Nightingale’s  coxcomb  plot,  Jon  Snow’s  Cholera 
map  to  enhance  public  health,  statistical  graphics  and 
weather  patterns  of  Francis  Galton,  and  works  of  Karl 
Pearson are also typical examples of historic visualizations. 
After  a  fertile  period,  the  early  1900s  were  defined  as  the 
modern dark ages of visualization. Analyses over time in the 
relational database of Milestone Project show a steady rise in 
the 19th century followed by a decline of the 20th century 
and  until  1945,  and  continue  with  a  steep  rise  to  today 
(Friendly et al., 2017). 

The insufficiency of traditional 2D representations leads 
the  visualization  community  to  search  for  more  effective 
solutions.  Recently,  the  interest  in  virtual  reality  (VR) 
technology  and  the  contribution  of  interdisciplinary  fields 
created new possibilities for application and implementation. 
VR is an immersive experience in an artificial environment. 
Throughout  time,  different  methods  and  setups  have  been 
suggested  for  VR.  The  simplest  version  of  VR  is  Desktop 
VR, a monitor display. Fish Tank VR includes both monitors 

I 

2 

technology  consisting  of 

and  special  glasses  for  stereoscopic  viewing  and  uses  the 
keyboard  as  the  primary  source  of  input.  The  Cave 
Automatic  Virtual  Environment  (CAVE)  is  a  surround-
room-scale 
screen  display 
projection  surfaces  to  facilitate  immersive  virtual  reality 
designed for exploration and interaction. The used projection 
technique  allows  users  to  see  all  directions.  Immersive 
systems  are  mostly  used  with  the  help  of  Head-Mounted 
Displays (HMDs) today. HMDs are stereoscopic devices that 
display two images in front of the eyes to create a sense of 
depth.  Depending  on  the  technology  used,  interaction 
techniques can vary. Techniques can include head tracking, 
eye  tracking,  and  motion  tracking.  Head-mounted  devices 
present  an  opportunity  for  new  data  exploration  and 
interaction methods. 

In  immersive  environments,  visual  signals  indicate  an 
existence  of  a  body  movement  while  there  is  no  actual 
movement,  and  as  a  result  of  this  sensory  conflict,  cyber-
sickness occurs. Different hardware has different frequency 
requirements to induce cyber-sickness. Degrees of Freedom 
(DoF) is a term used to describe the moving capabilities of 
an  object.  While  basic  HMDs  provide  3  DoF  for  moving 
along the x, y, z-axis, more advanced devices offer 6 DoF, 
including  the  translational  movement  in  physical  space, 
surge, heave and sway. There are different interaction modes 
for  VR.  Users  can  have  only  a  passive  role  or,  most 
commonly, move with a pre-defined trajectory. Exploratory 
VR allows users to locomote themselves. In the interaction 
mode,  users  can  explore  the  environment  and  interact  to 
manipulate  the  environment,  which  is  the  most  common 
interaction  mode  for  immersive  visualizations.  Due  to 
limitations  of  physical  spaces,  HMDs  provide  seated 
configurations, allowing users to move with controllers and 
room-scale  VR.  VR  recreates  a  spatial  environment  and 
builds  three-dimensional  spatial  awareness  via  visual  cues 
and sounds. 

Immersive environments generally refer to certain terms, 
such  as  presence,  immersion,  and  embodiment.  Sense  of 
embodiment depends on the spatial components provided for 
the  user,  such  as  awareness  of  location  and  virtual  body. 
Presence is related to being in the virtual environment, and 
immersion can be considered as the result of  this presence. 
The combination of immersion, presence, and embodiment 
contributes  to  the  user’s  experience  and  determines  its 
quality.  Therefore,  they  are  widely  used  to  evaluate  and 
develop  VR  experiences.  Most  of  the  studies  employ 
questionnaires to measure presence and immersion. 

Other  than  the  building  setups,  creating  large-scale  VR 
environments  was  problematic  due  to  the  absence  of 
software  tools.  Recently,  game  engines  Unity  and  Unreal 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

3 

to  build 

Engine  have  been  widely  used  to  build  VR  environments. 
Rapid production offered by game engines has allowed many 
areas 
immersive  visualizations.  Condense 
information extracted from data  needs to be  presented in a 
visual form. This form can be animated, static, or interactive. 
The definition of data type and selection of visualization and 
interaction  techniques  is  crucial  to  create  efficient  and 
accurate  visualizations.  The  selection  of  appropriate 
presentation  techniques  depends  mainly  on  the  user. 
Therefore,  visualization  techniques  depend  on  perception 
and cognitive theories to convey the data efficiently. 

large  volume  data 

As an interactive communication  method, visualizations 
are  expected  to  provide  certain  features  and  tasks,  such  as 
presentation  of  the  data  and  confirmatory  and  exploratory 
analysis.  Data  visualization  and  exploratory  data  analysis 
have  gained  tremendous  importance  in  recent  years  due  to 
the increasing amount of data. Extracting information from 
high  dimensional  and 
required 
to  employ  different  automation 
visualization  domain 
techniques  such  as  machine  learning  algorithms.  Recent 
advances  in  immersive  technologies  and  computational 
power present new possibilities for data exploration methods 
that aim to provide interaction with high-dimensional data to 
gain  fundamental  insights.  With  the  increasing  capabilities 
of the hardware and software and the necessities of the time, 
VR  devices  have  become  more  useful  and  affordable. 
Immersive 
technologies  change  data  experiences  and 
decision-making press processes. It allows users to analyze 
the complex and dynamic dataset and change their passive 
roles to active ones. 

Visualization subfields, besides common problems of VR, 
have  domain-specific  design  problems.  The  creation  of 
information  visualizations 
includes  a  decision-making 
process regarding abstraction methods, visual encoding, and 
design principles. Scientific visualizations need to deal with 
the problems of scalability, accuracy, and precision. Visual 
Analytics  (VA)  is  concerned  about  activities  that  can  be 
performed through  visualizations, such as decision  making 
and  reasoning.  Immersive  Analytics  (IA)  focuses  on  using 
display  and 
to  support  better 
analytical reasoning and decision-making processes. 

technologies 

interface 

Visualization and interaction opportunities provided new 
ways to express ideas and propose new interaction methods 
for a wide range of research domains and disciplines (Figure 
1).  With  recent  technological  advances,  the  invention  of 
several  libraries,  tools,  and  devices,  VR  facilitates  the 
manipulation and analysis of data by using the advantages of 
3D environments. Combining VR and haptic or kinaesthetic 
techniques  and 
interfaces  enable  various 
immersive 
maximize  efficiency.  The  generation  of 

interaction 

visualizations has further improved various domains in terms 
of  practicability,  education,  and  cost-effectiveness.  Digital 
city technology allows users to create more sustainable and 
effective  solutions  for  urban  environments.  Providing 
reusable  and  safe  environments  for  experiments  and 
education, virtual environments provide training  in diverse 
areas. 

for 

visualizations.  The 

VR  and  3D  immersive  environments  are  perception-
related technologies that need to have their visual language. 
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  building  theoretical 
approaches.  Ensemble  of  studies  has  the  power  to  lead  a 
groundwork 
bidirectional 
contribution and the influence between games, video games, 
and VR have propelled the extension of VR into scientific, 
artistic  or  informational,  and  educational  domains.  While 
most VR studies embrace a ludic approach, VR has created 
an  ocean  of  possibilities  that  contain  new  mechanics, 
narratives,  and  interactions  for  the  game  industry.  Zyda 
(2005)  strongly  advises  VR  researchers  to  study  games  to 
improve their design and stay up-to-date. 

While a wide range of areas adopts this technology, it is 
crucial to think critically about the solution for challenges, 
visualization  specifications,  and  design  guidelines.  Most 
existing surveys on visualization in virtual reality focus on a 
specific  domain  or  specific  visualization  structure.  For 
example,  Zimmermann  (2008)  focuses  on  the  automotive 
industry  and  design  aspects.  Seth  et  al.  (2011)  explained 
assembly  methods  for  prototyping,  Radianti  et  al.  (2017) 
focused  on  higher  education,  Wang  et  al.  (2018)  surveyed 
training 
construction  engineering  from  education  and 
perspectives,  El  Jamiy  and  Marsh  (2019)  inspected  depth 
estimation,  Caserman  et  al.  (2019)  provided  studies  and 
analysis on full-body motion reconstruction, and Ferdani et 
al.  (2019)  analyzed  the  studies  on  archaeology.  However, 
considering 
immersive 
technologies,  visualization  techniques  that  are  used  in 
different  domains  are  closely  interrelated  and  have  the 
potential to create a mutual relationship to solve problems of 
immersive  technologies.  Previously,  while  data  collection 
was  the  problem,  knowledge  extraction  and  presentation 
became ubiquitous due to massive data. To fully achieve the 
visual 
the  construction  of 
visualization  methods  depends  on  various  areas,  from 
psychology  to  machine  learning.  Therefore,  we  survey 
techniques  from  a  broader  perspective  to  extract  the 
relations, similarities, and shared problems in visualization 
in VR. We think that this approach can help developers find 

representation  objectives, 

requirements  of 

the  specific 

 
I 

4 

Figure 1 Co-occurrence Keyword Network Produced with VOSviewer 

solutions  in  other  domains  and  give  a  direction  to  more 
concrete guidelines. This paper aims to present an overview 
of existing literature and discuss the common problems and 
methods used in different domains to provide a basis for the 
immersive 
a 
visualization 
comprehensive and consistent structure. 

construct 

domain 

to 

The remainder of this study is structured as follows. While 
Section II presents background concepts, Section III briefly 
describes  the  methodology,  Section  IV  summarizes  the 
results, and Section V presents the conclusion. 

2  Background  concepts:  Visual  Analytics  and 

Immersive Analytics 

The emerging field of visual analytics is explained as 
“the  science  of  analytical  reasoning  facilitated  by 
interactive visual interfaces” (Keim et al., 2008). With the 
massive  volumes  of  information  waiting  for  human 
judgment, it is seen as a critical technology to handle big 
data  (Mehrotra  et al., 2017).  The urgent  need  to  analyze 
complex data leads to the integrated work of the user and 
the  computer.  For  example,  visual  analytics  systems  are 
actively studied in medicine to provide better healthcare. 

As part of the Electronic Health Records (EHRs), clinical 
decision  support  systems  (CDSS)  (Moon  and  Galea, 
2016), interpretable machine learning for recurrent neural 
networks  (Kwon  et  al.,  2018),  supporting  comparative 
studies  of  patient  records  (Guo  et  al.,  2020),  and 
applications  such  as  OutFlow  (Wongsuphasawat  and 
Gotz,  2011),  CarePre  (Jin  et  al.,  2020)  and  EventAction 
(Du  et  al.,  2016)  are  used.  To  provide  a  better 
understanding,  convolutional  neural  networks  (CNNs) 
were also studied with visual analytics systems (Liu et al., 
2016;  Jacovi  et  al.,  2018;  Chawla  et  al.,  2020).  While 
visual  analytics  is  more  concerned  with  getting  insights, 
detecting 
interesting  patterns,  and  gaining  a  deep 
understanding from visually represented data, a new term 
has  emerged  with  the  development  of  3D-based  data 
exploration tools. Chandler et al. (2015) define the phrase 
'Immersive  Analytics' as  “the use  of engaging embodied 
analysis tools to support data understanding and decision 
making.”  Combining  data  visualization  and  visual 
analytics  with  technological  developments,  immersive 
analytics  aims  to  remove  the  obstacles  between  humans 
and data for making all processes available for everyone. 

 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

5 

The  increase  in  the  use  of  immersive  and  spatially 
oriented  technologies,  including  virtual,  augmented,  and 
mixed  reality  (VR/AR/MR)  devices,  creates  a  desire  to 
explore  the  potential  for  complex  data  sets  within  a 
collaborative  and  interactive  environment.  With  the 
increased  accessibility  to  the  technology,  those  devices 
have  started  to  be  used  by  non-specialists  who  create  a 
need for the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), 
where  psychology  and  computer  science  blend  together. 
Although Ivan Sutherland demonstrated virtual reality and 
augmented  reality  prototypes  in  the  late  1960s,  the 
practical,  interactive  virtual  reality  systems  had  to  wait 
until the 1990s (Dwyer et al., 2018). In 1992, Cruz-Neira 
et  al.  (1992)  reported  the  CAVE  system  as  an  early 
reality  system. 
immersive  virtual 
example  of  an 
Enthusiasm  for  interaction  with  virtual  content  followed 
by  a  series  of  events.  Thereby,  as  a  unifying  term, 
immersive  analytics  had  a  chance  to  merge  the  areas  of 
Immersive  Information  Visualization,  Visual  Analytics, 
virtual and augmented reality, and Natural User Interfaces 
successfully. 

for 

interaction 

Recent  research  includes  the  development  of  new 
techniques 
and 
visualizations, 
collaboration,  evaluation  of  perception  and  systems, 
proposals  for  frameworks  and  tools  definition,  and 
categorization  of  challenges.  For  instance,  by  extending 
the work Brehmer and Munzner’s (Brehmer and Munzner, 
2013)  What-Why-How 
immersive 
analytics,  Marriott  et  al.  (2018)  propose  to  use  Where-
What-Who-Why-How questions as a basis. 

framework 

for 

reality.  The 

ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, SpringerLink, Science 
Direct, Google Scholar, Elsevier, and Web of Science.  We 
broke  the  query  down  into  the  major  research  fields  to 
perform the search. The primary terms were ‘virtual reality ’ 
and  ‘visualization.’  After  considering  alternative  spellings, 
search  terminology  included  related  areas  combined  with 
strings  were: 
resulting 
virtual 
visualization/visualisation  AND  virtual  reality,  virtual 
reality  AND 
(“data  visualization”  OR  “information 
visualization”  OR  “information  visualization”),  immersive 
visualization,  immersive  AND  visual  analytics,  virtual 
reality  AND  game. We searched for the title, abstract,  and 
keywords with this query. The search process was carried out 
between August 2019 and February 2022, and the timeframe 
for publications was between 2015 and 2022 (Figure 2). 

search 

3.1 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 

After performing the searches, due to the importance of 
the selection phase, each candidate study was subjected to 
a  set  of  stages  composed  of  inclusion  and  exclusion 
criteria. Publications were selected from 2015 onward, and 
the systematic review included journal articles, conference 
proceedings, 
scientific 
magazines. Online presentations were excluded. Initially, 

in-progress 

research, 

and 

3 Materials and Methods 

This  study  offers  a  systematic  literature  review  of  the 
studies related to immersive visualizations in virtual reality. 
The research questions of this study are: 

RQ1: What are the most preferred visualization types and 

structures for VR visualization? 

RQ2:  What  methodologies/theories  are  being  used  to 

research VR visualization? 

RQ3: What are the research gaps in VR visualization? 
RQ4: What are the existing approaches and techniques? 
RQ5: Which software and hardware have been preferred 

for different types of visualizations? 

We  have  performed  a  systematic  literature  review 
following  the  guidelines  proposed  by  Kitchenham  and 
Charters  (2007)  to  answer  the  abovementioned  research 
questions. To find relevant research that has been published 
since 2015, we selected seven primary academic databases: 

Figure 2 PRISMA Flow Diagram for systematic records selection 

 
 
we assess the relevance of literature according to the titles 
and the abstracts, looking for papers that described either 
virtual reality visualization or its indicators. Papers that do 
include  ques  about  visualization  elements  or 
not 
techniques  were  excluded.  Secondly,  we  retrieved  each 
study, read it entirely, and critically appraised it based on 
similar  criteria  as  stated  above.  Then,  validated  studies 
were  grouped  according  to  association  levels  with 
visualization  subfields.  Finally,  we  removed  duplicate 
papers  or  preliminary  versions  of  works  already  being 
analyzed. A total of 1067 papers were obtained by running 
the query in the databases. Out of these 1067 papers, 474 
papers passed the first stage. After removing non-relevant 
papers, 220 papers contained related studies, and 94 were 
found  as  primary  sources.  Additional  to  those  papers, 
studies  published  before  2015  were  included,  which 
present  a  theoretical  proposal  to  explain  the  motivation 
behind the implementation studies.  

I 

6 

3.2 Types of Contributions and Division 

two 

The  review  distinguished  between 

types  of 
contributions.  The  first  type  includes  the  papers  that 
contributed  a  theoretical  proposal  or  a  framework.  The 
second  type  involves  most  papers  that  describe  the 
implementation of visualization. Papers that contributed a 
combination  of  a  theoretical  framework  and  a  subsequent 
implementation  were  included  in  different  sections  of  the 
results. Sections of this survey were constructed according 
to  condensed  areas  or  extensively  used  terms  (Figure  3). 
Although  in  some  cases  category  of  the  study  is  clear  or 
defined  by  the  authors,  due  to  interwoven  feature  of 
visualization, a study can belong to more than one section. 
For  such  cases,  the  category  of  the  study  was  clarified 
according to definitions of the terms given in the studies of 
Rhyne  et  al.  (2003)  and  Kosara  et  al.  (2003).  After  an 
extensive  literature  search  and  review,  the  resulting 
research  papers  were  grouped  around  ten  main  categories 

Figure 3 Distribution of studies Produced with RawGraphs 

 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

7 

according  to  their  contribution,  domain,  and  visualization 
category.  

4 Results and Analysis 

4.1 Tools, Toolkits, and Frameworks 

license, 

operating 

Visualization  tools  can  be  generally  standalone,  web-
based  presentations,  web-based  development  mainly 
consisting  of  software  libraries  (APIs),  or  programming 
language  modules (e.g., Python or Java module). They  can 
also  be  categorized  in  terms  of  software,  visualization 
structure, 
scalability, 
system, 
extendibility, or latest release date. According to the criteria 
above,  Caldarola  and  Rinaldi  (2017)  reported  36  software 
tools grouped into four subsections; scientific visualization, 
data  visualization,  information  visualization,  and  business 
and  GUI-based 
intelligence 
applications provide “direct manipulation principle” such as 
Microsoft Excel, Amazon Quicksight, and Microsoft Power 
BI. Although they are widely used, since they are out of the 
scope  of  this  article,  further  detail  will  not  be  given. 
Visualization construction  tools are generally criticized for 
preventing creativity due to fixed properties; however, they 
are  preferred  since  they  provide  easy-to-use  environments 
without requiring programming. 

tools.  Database-related 

reduce 

libraries 

Although 

the  visualization 

the 
complexity,  they  still  require  experience.  In  addition  to 
those,  there  are  development  platforms  and  existing  cross-
platform tools whose scope involves multiple areas. Need for 
easy-to-use and flexible graphical systems to support visual 
thinking paved the way for further developments. Beginning 
with  Bertin’s  Semiology  of  Graphics  (Bertin,  1983), 
formalization of the graphing techniques has started, which 
later  transformed  into  structural  theories  of  graphics  to 
establish a bond between computer graphics and information 
theories.  Cleveland  and  McGill  (1984) 
visualization 
experimented  with  retinal  variables  (position,  color,  and 
size).  More  recently,  the  ideas  and  theories  of  Wilkinson 
(2012)  provide  a  basis  for  visualization  interfaces  Lyra 
(Satyanarayan and Heer, 2014) and VegaLite (Satyanarayan 
et  al.,  2017),  and  grammar-based  systems  such  as  Polaris 
(Stolte et al., 2002), which extends the pivot table interface. 
such  as  Lyra  and 
Visualization  production 
iVisDesigner  (Ren  et  al.,  2014)  enable  the  creation  of  a 
variety  of  customized  graphic  visualization  based  on 
conceptual  modularity  without  writing 
code. 
Unfortunately, they support only a small set of visual forms 
and parameters that limit users. 

tools 

any 

Drawing 

from  Wilkinson’s  grammar  with 

the 
formalization  of 
the  grammar  of  graphics,  many 
visualization grammars, toolkits, and frameworks have been 
implemented.  Those  declarative  languages  are  generally 
grouped into low-level grammars and high-level grammars. 
Low-level grammars such as D3 (Bostock et al., 2011), Vega 
(Satyanarayan  et  al.,  2015),  Protovis  (Bostock  and  Heer, 
2009), are expressive grammars to help designers to create 
explanatory  and  highly  customized  graphics  with  fine-
grained  control  for  data  visualization  where  all  mapping 
elements  need  to  be  specified.  More  recently,  D3  became 
very popular, especially for web development. Protovis is an 
embedded  domain-specific 
in 
JavaScript, and defining graphical marks such as bars, lines, 
and  labels  helps  users  specify  data  bindings  to  visual 
properties. Vega is similar to Protovis and D3, but it provides 
transformation  on  scales  and  layout  with  support  modules, 
and interactive connection between input data and properties 
of the marks allow users to share and reuse the product. On 
the  other  hand,  high-level  declarative  grammars  such  as 
Vega-Lite,  and  ECharts  (Li  et  al.,  2018)  are  better  for 
exploratory  visualization,  and  by  encapsulating  details  and 
properties, 
rapid  production  of 
visualizations.  A declarative  statistical  visualization library 
for Python was developed named Altair (Satyanarayan et al., 
2017). 

implemented 

focus  on 

language 

they 

the 

Creating  visualizations  using  APIs  requires  background 
knowledge,  and  it  is  a  grueling  process.  Therefore, 
frameworks  have  been  created  for  rapid  and  better 
abstractions. After introducing InfoVis, toolkits that provide 
a  collection  of  visualization  tools  similar  to  Java-based 
visualization libraries were developed, such as Prefuse (Heer 
et  al.,  2005).  In  addition  to  provided  operators  and 
abstractions of libraries, Prefuse and Flare (Gal et al., 2014) 
allow  users  to  define  new  ones  and  with  fine-grained 
monolithic units to provide the customization. GPU-powered 
visualizations  have  been  widely  used 
in  scientific 
visualization,  and  their  use  in  information  visualization 
increased in recent years due to improvements in rendering 
performance.  For  example,  Stardust  (Ren  et  al.,  2017) 
utilizes  those  improvements.  It  does  not  provide  a  new 
visualization grammar, but it  is a complementary  work for 
previous tools with more user-friendly building blocks, and 
it  enables  the  creation  of  both  2D  and  3D  visualizations. 
Pointing out the gap between artists and the expert coders, a 
programmable  integrated  development  environment  (IDE) 
named VisComposer (Mei et al., 2018) has been developed, 
which uses tree-based visual structures similar to D3. VisAct 
(Wu et al., 2020) is another interactive visualization system 
that provides a high-level grammar for semantic actions and 

 
 
guides the users by including a wizard panel and a wide range 
of visual forms. 

itself 

limited 

environments 

suitable  3D 

The effort to construct interactive toolkits or systems for 
to  2D 
information  visualization  had 
representations  that  are  more  traditional.  Therefore,  with 
immersive 
already 
for 
the 
to 
environments,  scientific  visualization  has 
development  of  virtual  reality  systems.  A  widely  used 
framework targeted at scientific visualization applications is 
the Visualization Toolkit (VTK) (Hanwell et al., 2015), an 
extensive  library  for  displaying  and  interacting  with  data. 
Using VTK in the VR environment became possible with the 
development  of  OpenVR.  This  API  supports  SteamVR 
developed  by  Valve.  Thus, 
framework  became 
compatible with Oculus Rift and the HTC Vive.  

led 

the 

to 
Researchers  have  recently  paid  more  attention 
exploring  immersive  environments  for  non-spatial  data. 
Although designed for gaming applications, the Unity game 
engine has become a standard platform to develop immersive 
environments.  Both  IATK  (Cordeil  et  al.,  2019)  and  DXR 
(Sicat  et  al.,  2019)  toolkits  were  developed  for  building 
immersive  data  visualizations  based  on  the  Unity  game 
engine. DXR is a toolkit that uses a declarative framework 
inspired  by  Vega-Lite  and  provides 
interaction  and 
extendable  visualizations  with  additional  classes  and 
applications  that  can  be  exported  to  various  platforms, 
including  mixed  reality  (MR)  on  Microsoft  HoloLens,  and 
VR headsets. On the other hand, the API of IATK is similar 
to  D3,  and  using  a  grammar  of  graphics  allows  easy 
construction of visualizations. Emerging from the previous 
applications like ImAxes (Immersive Axes) (Cordeil et al., 
2017a)  and  FiberClay  (Hurter  et  al.,  2018),  IATK  allows 
users to create visualizations by three-dimensional axes, but 
it does not provide collaboration. Fiberclay, being a flagship 
example,  was  evaluated  with  air  traffic  controllers,  and  it 
displays  large-scale  spatial  trajectory  data  in  3D,  where  it 
provides  selections  of  3D  beams  for  constructing  queries. 
ImAxes is an open-source information visualization tool that 
implements scatterplots, histograms, and parallel coordinates 
that  are  explorable  based  on  manipulating  reconfigurable 
axes using natural interactions. 

4.2 Data Visualization 

Data  visualization  represents  data  or  information  in  a 
graphical  format  that  enables  the  audience  to  identify 
patterns, pull insights, grasp the true meaning of information, 
and communicate more quickly and efficiently (Aparicio and 
Costa, 2015). While diverse areas benefit from the graphic 
representation  of  data,  data  visualization  also  feeds  on 

I 

8 

in  various  domains  eliminates 

several disciplines. Transformation of the data into compact 
and understandable information in pictorial format became 
possible  with  the  contribution  of  psychology,  computer 
sciences,  statistics,  graphic  design,  and  many  other 
disciplines.  Flourishing  with  the  knowledge  from  multiple 
backgrounds,  adaptability  and  scalability  of  the  data 
visualizations  have  increased.  For  example,  continuously 
accumulated  data 
the 
traditional methods, which are currently insufficient for large 
batches  of  data.  Different  methods,  such  as  machine 
learning, can be applied to conduct analyses and create more 
efficient visualizations with varying attributes. Existing 2D 
methods  of  data  visualization  can  contain  only  a  small 
number  of  correlations  between  a  few  metrics.  Thus,  to 
perform analyses on high-dimensional data, many individual 
charts  are 
for  comprehensive  presentation, 
eventually  preventing  comprehending  correlations  and 
patterns.  

required 

Direct  conversion  to  3D  does  not  offer  enough  clarity 
since  problems  of  3D  such  as  occlusion  and  perspective 
distortion may lead to wrong interpretation in analytical use 
cases.  Although  3D  graphics  can  be  effective,  they  can  be 
considered unnecessary according to data and visualization 
structure. To enhance the data visualization experience, it is 
necessary 
to  display 
information  in  greater  depth.  For  example,  according  to  a 
survey (Fonnet and Prie, 2021), position and visual channels 
such as textures, colors, and shapes are  commonly  used to 
encode multidimensional data. 

to  have  additional 

techniques 

Interactivity  is  one  of  those  aspects  that  enhance  3D 
environments. Virtual reality changes how we interact with 
and interpret data, and visualizations should support several 
activities.  VR  should  enable  an  exploratory  analysis  to 
discover  the  input  data  and  its  features,  tendencies,  and 
relations. To help the user to reject or accept the constructed 
hypothesis, 
it  must  offer  confirmatory  analysis.  The 
presentation of data should be given in a structured manner 
to reveal the hidden features which cannot be presented via 
other mediums or platforms. 

Sun  et  al.  (2019)  provided  dynamic  visualization  of  the 
time  series  along  with  geographical  attributes  and  made 
visualizations  available  to  observe  the  relation  between 
accumulation, wind direction, time, and location. They used 
an aggregation table, calendar view, day bar graph, and line 
plots to visualize data coming from air sampling sensors and 
meteorological data. In the study of Okada et al. (2018), the 
visualization  system  generated  for  spatio-temporal  data  is 
composed  of  two  layers.  The  first  layer  presents  a  spatial 
model with an adjustable scale according to worldview and 
minimap options. The second layer represents the frequency 

 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

9 

with  cubes  with  different  colors  and  transparency.  The 
combination  of  multiple  visualization  techniques  in  single 
VR visualization improves the information flow and creates 
more engaging experiences. 

lead 

the  data  or 

functionality.  Graph 

As a communication medium, another critical element of 
visualization  is  interpretation.  Design  and  interpretation 
choices  of  visualization  can  alter  the  users’  ability  to 
comprehend 
to  misunderstandings. 
Therefore,  a  good  visualization  should  protect  the  balance 
between  aesthetics  and 
layout 
algorithms and clustering algorithms are extensively used for 
complex network visualizations. Clustered data needs to be 
converted into comprehensible visualizations. For example, 
Drogemuller et al. (2017) preferred spheres for entities, lines 
for relationships, and circles for cluster nodes to construct a 
network  visualization  using  a  spring  embedder  layout. 
Clustering algorithms help users detect patterns quickly and 
assist 
inspecting  high-dimensional  datasets. 
However,  utilized  algorithms  may  have  poor  performance 
because  of  dimensionality  or  noisy  data.  Therefore,  while 
presenting  a  refined  version  of  the  Immersive  Parallel 
Coordinates Plots (IPCP) system, Bobek et al. (2022) prefer 
to  use  a  wide  range  of  clustering  algorithms  for 
multidimensional datasets. Also, they show the importance 
of  feature  selection  by  testing  multiple  feature  selection 
methods. 

them 

in 

in  new  ways.  The  ability 

Unlike  the  2D  data  visualizations,  where  the  data  is 
always  presented  from  one  perspective,  VR  exhibits 
potential  uses  for  switching  between  perspectives.  This 
creates  different  embodied  cognition  cases  for  users  to 
interpret  data 
to  change 
perspectives creates more immersive experiences and precise 
insights.  The  focal  point  changes  according  to  the  user’s 
movement  in  a  virtual  reality  environment.  Therefore, 
according to the user’s perspective, the perceived distance of 
contents varies. The layout of the presented data can provide 
equivalent  perception  and  ensure  distribution  in  spherical 
space;  Kwon  et  al.  (2015)  employ  a  space-filling  curve 
layout  together  with  spherical  edge  bundling.  Different 
strategies,  algorithms,  alternative  ideas,  and  presentations, 
the 
the  combination  of 
visualization. The creation of  elaborative  interpretations of 
complex data allows users to gain a deep understanding by 
seeing data in different ways. 

techniques  enhanced 

those 

4.3 Information Visualization 

Exploring  the  design  space  of  spatial  mappings  for 
abstract  data  became  a  key  theme  of  a  new  sub-field  of 
visualization  called  Information  Visualization  (InfoVis). 

statisticians, 

Information  visualization  was  built  upon  graphic 
designers, 
human-computer-interaction 
(HCI) researchers, and many others. The interdisciplinary 
field  has  been  exploring  the  effective  use  of  computer 
graphics for abstract data visualization and its interactive 
exploration (Figure 4). 

4.3.1 Art, Heritage, and Architecture 

sufficient  documentation 

Thanks  to  the  gaming  industry,  with  the  recent 
development  of  low-cost  devices  which  can  provide 
powerful  VR  and  augmented  reality  (AR)  applications, 
cultural heritage institutions have started the digitalization 
era.  3D  representations  of  cultural  heritage  artifacts  and 
structures  have  affected  many  areas,  such  as  virtual 
cultural  heritage  tourism  and  research  on  urban  history. 
Development  of  the  technology  which  can  capture  and 
document  the  heritage  sites  offer  new  techniques  that 
substitute the human interpretation, which requires more 
time  and  workload.  After  the  first  3D  documentation  of 
archeological objects was realized by Leo Biek (Gettens, 
1964),  many  artifacts  started  to  be  exported  to  digital 
for 
environments.  With 
transmitting  the  cultural  heritage  to  future  generations, 
which  cannot  be  protected  due  to  natural  and  artificial 
disasters,  preservation  in  digital  mediums  has  become  a 
reliable method. Final products of the digitization process 
do  not  only  serve  for  archaeological  and  architectural 
documentation,  but 
they  also  provide  educational 
opportunities,  exhibitions,  virtual  tourism,  experimental 
studies on space, and analyses on artifacts. On the  other 
hand,  preparation,  presentation,  and  interaction  of  3D 
digital contents require meticulous work. According to the 
complexity, scale, and location of the subject of 3D digital 
representation, different methodologies can be used, such 
as  laser  scanning  and  photogrammetry.  Also,  several 
techniques have been developed to reconstruct an artifact, 
such as sculptures and paintings. These techniques include 
image  sequencing,  volume-based  methods,  structured 
form motion algorithm (Sooai et al., 2017). The problem 
is  that  generated  models  are  generally  complex  due  to 
graphic  requirements  of  details.  Several  geometric 
optimizations  and  compression  methods  have  been 
developed to solve technical problems such as  managing 
millions of polygons or processing time, while their main 
aim is not to comprise details and realism. For example, 
Fernandez-Palacios  et  al.  (2017)  offered  a  pipeline 
including  many  optimization  techniques  to  create  an 
immersive  VR  experience  with  digitally  reconstructed 
heritage  scenarios.  Their  work  includes  normal  maps  to 

 
 
 
I 

10 

closeness,  centralities,  and  shortest  paths  in  the  urban 
design domain. However, the city scale and components 
generate  graphs  that  are  not  workable  to  explore  or 
understand.  One  way  to  solve  this  clutter  problem  is 
simplification and division of graphs. For example, Huang 
et  al.  (2016)  generated  a  visual  analytics  system  called 
TrajGraph to study and plan urban networks. They applied 
a graph partitioning algorithm to divide graphs into several 
chunks  while  conserving  the  necessary  relations  for 
objectives. The smart city concept is proposed to optimize 
urban  systems  and  form  sustainable  and  efficient 
environments. According to Lv et al. (2016) construction 
of  a  smart  city  is  composed  of  information,  digitization, 
and  intelligence  stages.  Broucke  and  Deligiannis  (2019) 
propose a VR platform on Brussels’ smart city data, which 
shows  a  reduction  in  frustration  level  in  exploratory 
experiences of participants. Dong et al. (2022) conducted 
a  detailed  analysis 
reality 
requirements for multilayered data of cities. In parallel to 
the results of their analysis, they constructed a digital city 
simulation  model  based  on  multiple  components  and 
subsystems,  such  as  model  editing  and  restructuring 
models (MERM) and scene creation and roaming system 
(SCCM). Their process starts with the data collection, and 
it  convolves  into  different  formats  to  create  a  consistent 
platform. Most smart city projects aim to improve urban 
life  and  create  environments  to  support  efficient  and 
effortless  interaction  for  urban  dwellers.  The  smart  city 
concept also can be  helpful in urban construction. In the 
construction  process,  it  is  crucial  to  foresee  practical 
issues.  It  is  also  essential  to  understand  spatial  order, 
functions that are applicable, technical requirements, and 
production process. Considering the parameters and scale 
of a city, 3D visualizations and simulations can orient the 
decision-making process. 

to  understand  virtual 

To  make  art  experiences  more  accessible,  immersive, 
and engaging, digitally-based strategies such as AR, VR, 
and Web3D have been employed. Recent projects mainly 
focus  on  the  recreation  of  an  artifact  in  a  virtual 
environment. Even though the results of many studies are 
promising,  the  process  of  implementing  an  artist’s 
universe is not an easy task. For example, transmitting a 
2D art form into VR experience requires developers to add 
the parts of the painting not included in the original work, 

reducing 

transmit  details  to  low-resolution  models,  unwrapping 
techniques  to  decrease  the  texture  load,  and  the  use  of 
software  tools  to  decrease  the  resolution  for  geometric 
quality. 
optimization  without 
Choromanski  et  al.  (2019) established  a  VR  system  that 
utilizes terrestrial laser scanning, and photographic images 
belong  to  a  baroque  palace.  They  also  tested  various 
texture mapping algorithms to simplify the mesh geometry 
of models constructed with data gathered through different 
methods. 

visible 

Another  way  of  protecting  and  maintaining  cultural 
heritage with digitization is virtual museums. Schweibenz 
(1998) defines virtual museums as a collection of relevant 
digital  objects  to  disseminate  objects  and  information 
without  real  place  or  space.  The  construction  of  virtual 
museums is  challenging due  to its requirements, such as 
user interaction, environment  and content,  and design of 
the experience. The museum can be designed in realistic 
form, duplicate an actual museum, or alternative methods 
can  be  used,  but  the  final  product  should  convey  the 
intended  information  (Skamantzari,  2018).  For  example, 
besides the realistic models, the virtual museum design of 
Kersten  et  al.  (2017)  includes  guided  viewpoints  for 
essential  positions  and  detailed  information  menus. 
Monaco  et  al.  (2022)  created  a  customizable  virtual 
museum where users can have a more active role in virtual 
exhibitions.  Their  construction  process  allows  users  to 
select  data  using  Knowledge  Graphs  (KGs),  personalize 
the  museum  by  changing 
layout,  and  select 
annotations. Knowledge is a set of entities, properties, and 
relations between them. Entities, relations, and properties 
can  form  a  graph  of  nodes  and  edges,  making  graph 
structure  a 
representation  of  knowledge. 
Combining virtual exhibitions with the graph abstractions 
enhanced the interactivity and made the complex relations 
of knowledge understandable in a context that cannot be 
presented in traditional museums. They also reported that 
construction time is highly related to the lighting settings 
after users’ selections since it requires heavy computation. 
Therefore, they offer alternative lighting options. 

realistic 

the 

The  assemblage  of  VR  technology  and  geographic 
information  system  (GIS)  generated  a  new  information 
system  called  VRGIS.  VRGIS  can  support  spatial  data 
query,  processing,  storage,  and  analysis  functions. 
Combining  multiple  technologies,  such  as  Internet  of 
Things  (IoT) 
technology,  VR,  and  3D  geographic 
information  system  (3D  GIS),  provides  new  ways  for 
producing  sustainable  urban  environments.  Compound 
use  of  visual  analytics  and  GIS  systems  allows 
understanding  important  features,  such  as  betweenness, 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

11 

Figure 4 Distribution of Information Visualization studies Produced with RawGraphs 

construction 

in  safety  planning,  design 

and duplication requires every detail to be modeled in 3D. 
Raya  et  al.  (2021)  reconstructed  two  paintings  for  VR, 
where  the  paintings  became  available  for  users  to 
experience  kinesthetic  textures  with  an  introductory 
approach.  According  to  a  review  paper  (Zhang  et  al., 
2020),  VR  technologies  are  employed  in  architectural 
domains 
interpretation, 
collaboration, 
project  management, 
education, planning, and human behavior and perception. 
In  recent  years,  integrating  Computer-Aided  Design 
(CAD) and Building Information Modelling (BIM) tools 
with  VR  has  been  promoted  to  maintain  efficient 
communication and design processes and avoid conflicts 
for  the  areas  listed  above.  Architects  and  engineers  use 
BIM for efficient design, management, construction, and 
the  effects  of 
operation  stages.  For  example,  on 
daylighting,  Akin  et  al.  (2020)  developed  an  immersive 

design tool integrating BIM technology to improve visual 
perception and awareness during the design process. The 
3D CAD models contain a large amount of information in 
3D models, 2D drawings, and charts (Ivson et al., 2020). 
Munster  et  al.  (2020)  offer  an  automated  pipeline  to 
construct 4D city models from historical images to create 
browser-based  VR  applications  for  mobile,  where  the 
fourth  dimension  here 
time.  Utilizing  a  CNN 
is 
architecture,  they  generated  models  of  buildings  from 
images  based  on  their  floor  plans.  Attempts  to  engraft 
different fields also led to a wide range of subfields, such 
as  immersive  urban  analytics.  For  example,  Chen  et  al., 
2017 proposed a  method  to apply  visual analytics in the 
urban  context  using  the  exploded  views  and  principles 
explained by Li et al. (Li et al., 2008). 

 
 
4.3.2 Computer Sciences 

Different  visualization  techniques  have  been  offered  to 
better understand software architectures, various algorithms, 
and computer science concepts. Studies focus on interpreting 
complex  structures  to  understand  different  features  and 
concepts  related  to  the  field.  For  example,  visualization 
techniques  have  been  employed  to  better  understand  and 
explain  artificial  intelligence  (AI).  Explainable  Artificial 
Intelligence  (XAI)  is  a  recently  developed  technology 
aiming to enhance the understanding of AI from the eyes of 
humans. As part of this study, Selvaraju et al. (2017) offered 
to  use  Gradient-weighted  Class  Activation  Mapping 
(GradCAM),  which  is  a  visualization  method  that  benefits 
from  the  gradient  of  the  target  and  produces  localization 
maps  on  Deep  Reinforcement  Learning  (DRL)  algorithms. 
With the analysis of their study on Atari Games that includes 
visualizations of input states and selected output action, the 
role of the CNN layer can be understood. Another study that 
focuses  on  visualizing  neural  networks  is  Caffe2Unity 
(Aamir et al., 2022). Combining the Caffe framework with 
the  Unity  game  engine  provides  real-time  interaction  with 
the  neural  network  on  the  image  classification  task.  Their 
interaction  method  allows  users  to  gain  better  insight  into 
complex structures of neural networks. 

High dimensional visualizations with 3D representations 
benefit  from  metaphors 
that  make  knowledge  more 
accessible  and  understandable.  An  essential  constituent  in 
computer sciences is the use of metaphors. The assessment 
of the metaphor is related to the properties of the visualized 
field and approximation of the notions of the related field. 
Design  of  the  components  related  to  specific  features  is 
crucial  in  this  approach.  One  of  the  extensively  used 
metaphors  in  computer  sciences  is  the  city  metaphor.  For 
example, the EvoStreets technique (Steinbeck et al., 2019) 
uses a city metaphor that visualizes hierarchical relations as 
software  streets.  VR  City  (Vincur  et  al.,  2017)  consists  of 
different  layers  to  hold  various  entities  using  a  layout 
algorithm. It includes connection layers for relationships, an 
authors’ layer to show recent activities with waypoints, a city 
layer to represent classes, a code space layer to scan codes, 
and  a  UI  space  layer  for  possible  actions.  Oberhauser  and 
Lecon  (2017)  provide  space,  terrestrial,  custom  metaphors 
for  fly-through  experience 
to  encourage  exploratory, 
analytical,  and  descriptive  cognitive  processes  on  code 
information.  In  IslandViz,  Misiak  et  al.  (2018)  utilize  an 
island  metaphor  to  visualize  the  software  architecture  of  a 
software  system  based  on  the  Open  Service  Gateway 
Initiative (OSGI) in VR. 

I 

12 

4.4 Scientific Visualization  

The recognition of graphics as a distinct field actualized 
with 
the  achievements  of  powerful  computers  and 
photorealistic renderings has made scientists available to use 
visualization  for  scientific  studies  (Figure  5).  Visualizing 
scientific  data  is  crucial  for  experts  working  on  scientific 
domains  and  communicating  with  a  general  audience  and 
students.  Scientific  visualizations  were  limited  to  two-
dimensional  representations.  With  the  development  of 
rendering  techniques,  it  is  now  possible  to  visualize  and 
interact with scientific data in a 3D virtual world. This allows 
users  to  explore  and  interact  with  real-like  representations 
that improve the comprehension capabilities of students and 
enhance public engagement. 

Scientific  visualization  scans  can  be  very  complex  and 
hard  to  compute  according  to  the  dataset  due  to  high-
dimensional and abstract data. They might require exclusive 
visualizations instead of traditional computer ones. Different 
2D  sections  implemented  with  conventional  desktop  and 
mouse may not be sufficient to construct 3D understanding, 
which also differs according to the user. Unlike a monocular 
system  like  traditional  2D  screens,  binocular  systems  in 
virtual  reality  display  provide  a  true  sense  of  depth 
perception and spatial relations. Thus, many industries have 
adopted  these  systems  to  test  real-life  scenarios  as  in 
training. Serving for the  mining industry  software  module, 
the  block  cave  mining  system  visualizer  was  developed  to 
contribute  to  the  block  cave’s  management  cycle  and 
operation.  Allowing  a  collaborative  environment  and 
converting the complex context of the mining system into a 
graphical  representation  improves  the  understanding  of 
seismic  data  (Tibbett  et  al.,  2015).  Interactive  3D  data 
visualizations are also used in High Energy Physics (HEP) 
experiments.  ATLASrift  project  (Riccardo  Maria  et  al., 
2019) aims to create an immersive experience for the atlas 
detector and experiment site. Utilizing Unreal Engine, they 
offer  three  levels  with  different  modes  of  interaction. 
Although  game  engines  are  widely  used  for  visualization 
when  there  is  a  need  for  an  external  library,  as  in  the 
theATLASrift project, external libraries can be challenging 
to integrate into the game engines. 

4.4.1 Meteorology and Earth Sciences 

Helbig  et  al.  (2014)  used  VR  to  visualize  atmospheric 
cloud data that allows their heterogeneous data in different 
dimensions to be visualized with the relationships between 
variables that otherwise cannot be easily understood by only 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

13 

Figure 5 Distribution of Scientific Visualization studies Produced with RawGraphs 

showing the numbers. Advancing over prior meteorological 
visualization  systems,  MeteoVis  (Li  et  al.,  2020)  offers 
concurrent spatiotemporal meteorological data streams from 
multiple  sources  with  a  wide  range  of  manipulation  and 
exploration features. Challenges of geosciences are generally 
related  to  visual  requirements  such  as  size,  shape,  and 
structure. The shader interface provided by game engines is 
used to visualize the terrain within the geophysical context. 
This allows rendering higher resolution meshes in the field 
of view to give details and conserve the extended view with 
low-resolution  meshes.  Bonali  et  al.  (2022)  reconstructed 
selected  geological  environments  using  photogrammetry 
techniques. According to their extensive user tests, most of 
the students and academics agreed on the usefulness of VR 

technology. They also draw attention to the accessibility of 
data and experience by promoting immersive technologies. 
Planetary-related  models  are  inherently  multilayered; 
therefore, maintaining a holistic approach for one-to-one 3D 
models may not be adequate. VRGE (Ardulov and Pariser, 
2017)  addresses 
this  problem  with  surface  viewing, 
volumetric  grid  data,  cross-section  viewing,  and  surface 
editing.  Presenting  various  species  under  climate  change 
scenarios,  Huang  et  al.  (2019)  provide  perspective  views 
from  different  heights  and  filters  to  retrieve  information. 
Subjectivity, artistic elements, use of ornaments have always 
been  burning  questions  of 
the  visualization  sphere. 
Especially for scientific visualizations, the presentation must 
preserve  the  data’s  accuracy,  integrity,  and  credibility.  On 
the other hand, some examples used argumentative elements 

 
without spoiling the data’s essence, contrarily enriching it by 
engaging. For instance, Rehme (2018) employed artistic and 
cinematic  elements  such  as  shaders,  shadows,  camera 
new 
and 
movements, 
functionalities to the end product. 

slow-motion,  which 

bring 

4.4.2 Nanosciences 

With 

the  development  of  advanced 

techniques, 
nanoscience  has  been  proliferated.  In  the  context  of 
nanosciences,  virtual  reality  has  been  employed  for 
chemistry (Ferrell et al., 2019), materials sciences (Drouhard 
et  al.,  2015),  biomedicine  (Pajorov´a  et  al.,  2018), 
bioinformatics (Martinez and Baaden, 2020; Sommer et al., 
2018), solution finding for medicine, and health care (Gradl 
et  al.,  2018).  Visualization  and  transfer  of  the  structural 
properties of nanostructures require different techniques. 

Being  an  advanced  approach, 

scanning  electron 
microscopy (SEM) is one of those techniques in which the 
obtained  data  can  be  transferred  to  virtual  environments. 
There are several approaches to convert scientific knowledge 
to  interactive  3D  VR  environment  format.  Conversion  can 
consist of artistic representations, direct visualization of data 
using  technologies  like  electron  microscopy,  or  simplified 
3D models. As in the case of geosciences, different artistic 
features provided by game engines are employed to amplify 
certain features of small-scale structures. GEARS (Horton et 
al.,  2019)  utilizes  surface  shader  properties  to  emphasize 
selected features of confocal microscopy data. There are also 
different  rendering  techniques  available  for  rendering.  For 
instance,  while  ray-traced  volumetric  rendering  composes 
the object via simulating the light, geometric rendering takes 
advantage of 2D sections to construct a 3D model. 

to  overcome 

Material sciences extensively rely on volume rendering. 
Therefore, 
latency,  optimized  rendering 
algorithms are employed. To create intuitive interaction and 
natural  controls  before  transmitting  volumetric  point  cloud 
representation  to  a  game  engine,  Drouhard  et  al.  (2015) 
offered the use of extraction methods to reduce the size and 
provide better optimization. 

4.4.3 Medicine and Biology 

Medical  visualizations  are  generally  composed  of  2D 
mediums  such  as  cross-sectional  images  and  magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Therefore, 3D geometric 
models are reconstructed from individual slices (Reddivari 
et al., 2017; Soeiro et al., 2016; Juanes et al., 2016). Another 
method  is  image  segmentation,  which  helps  separate  the 
pixels  of  the  specified  parts  from  the  overall  image. 
Ciganek and Kepesiova (2020) propose a segmentation and 

I 

14 

3D  model  reconstruction  method  based  on  machine 
learning  algorithms.  Visualizations  of  medical  or 
anatomical  models  consist  of  many  complex  subparts 
(Liimatainen et al., 2020). Thus, studies designed interfaces 
that include different features such as labeling, highlighting 
(Marks et al., 2017), distinct colors, selective visualization 
(Soeiro et al., 2016), and navigators (Juanes et al., 2016). 
Also,  to  solve  depth  perception  problems  in  rendering 
photography  effects,  depth-of-field  (DOF)  (Martinez  and 
Baaden, 2020) and gradient shading (Usher et al., 2017) are 
used  to  sustain  depth  cues.  Virtual  reality  can  assist  the 
diagnosis process by providing appropriate conditions. To 
reduce the diagnostic errors in radiology, Sousa et al. (2017) 
designed a virtual reading room where the reader can adjust 
the  illumination  and  ambient  light  while  displaying 
luminance.  

Some studies include different approaches and subjects 
such  as  medicine  education(Huang  et  al.,  2016),  hand 
smartphone 
(Reddivari  et  al.,  2017), 
recognition 
applications for anatomy (Juanes et al., 2016; Soeiro et al., 
2016), and biofeedback (Gradl et al., 2018). Although game 
engines are employed by most of the studies due to graphics 
performance, physics, and ease of deployment to VR, game 
engines may not be proper for scientific visualizations, as 
examined  in  the  study  of  Elden  (2017).  Elden  (2017)’s 
study includes three demos; artery, rat brain, and genome. 
According  to  the  requirements  of  the  demos,  different 
representation techniques were chosen. Thereby, the study 
became convenient to construct guidelines. As reported by 
the  study,  game  engines  are  designed  for  geometric 
visualizations, and their priority is not accuracy but speed, 
which makes game engines unreliable. 

4.5 Collaborative VR 

Collaborative  Virtual  Environments  (CVEs)  provide 
remote  and  collaborative 
interaction  on  various  data 
the  users’  physical 
representations,  independent  from 
location. Within a comprehensive spatial environment, they 
allow  users  to  train,  review  and  discuss  using  different 
information  channels  (Churchill  and  Snowdon,  1998). 
Previous  CVEs 
information  visualization, 
teleconferencing,  simulation,  and  social  events.  To  design 
CVEs,  the  most  commonly  employed  technologies  were 
large spatial immersion displays and Virtual Environments 
(VEs), such as CAVEs and HMDs. These technologies have 
many differences, such as resolution, presence, and freedom 
of movement. Cordeil et al. (2017b) conducted a user study 
consisting of a series of tasks on 3D network visualizations 
to compare those in VR platforms. According to the results, 

included 

 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

15 

while  there  is  no  major  difference  in  accuracy  and 
experience,  HMDs  offer  faster  interaction.  Therefore, 
modern  HMDs  are  preferable  for  immersive  visualizations 
instead  of  expensive  CAVE-style  facilities.  CVEs  aim  to 
provide enjoyment,  social interaction, and presence,  which 
provide cognitive benefits.  

interaction  possibilities 

Collaborative environments aim to connect multiple users 
more naturally and increase users’ awareness to break down 
the isolation. The environment can require participants to be 
co-located or remote and present different interaction levels, 
such  as  symmetric  or  asymmetric.  Co-located  studies  are 
preferable  due  to  network  limitations.  However,  they 
enhance people’s interactions within a single space and limit 
VR opportunities. Asymmetric applications do not offer the 
to  all  participants.  For 
same 
example,  while  one  user  interacts  with  using  a  VR  head-
mounted  display,  another  user  might  experience  the  VR 
through traditional screens. The interdependence of users is 
inextricably linked to the special demands of visualization. 
Therefore, depending on the visualization and collaboration 
mechanics,  different  degrees  of  asymmetry  can  be  used  in 
the setup. The use of different devices has already produced 
an  asymmetry  in  terms  of  visualization.  According  to  the 
roles  of  the  participants,  this  asymmetry  arising  from 
hardware differences can be a conscious design choice. For 
instance, ShareVR (Gugenheimer et al., 2017a) presents an 
experience  where  Non-HMD  and  HMD  users  can  interact 
with  each  other  and  the  environment  together.  They 
implemented  several  cases  to  construct  guidelines  for  co-
located asymmetric VR experiences. According to the results 
of their study, shared physical space and physical interaction 
enhance the experience and enable novel interaction methods 
for VR and VR games. 
important 

the 
determination  of  viewpoint.  This  decision  can  be  divided 
into two parts for collaborative environments. The first step 
is determining where a user is looking in the scene, and the 
second step is the decision of independence between users. 
Although  the  general  tendency  is  to  use  the  “what  I  see  is 
what  you  see”  principle  with  only  one  shared  view,  the 
environment  can  require  or  provide  multiple  views  for 
different users either synchronously or asynchronously. For 
example, PlottyVR (Brunhart-Lupo et al., 2020) is composed 
of various statistical tools and libraries and offers a myriad 
of visualizations. Providing multiple viewpoints for different 
users  enables  each  user  to  utilize  different  types  of 
visualization.  In  some  cases,  the  environment  facilitates 
asymmetric collaboration and multiple viewpoints. Pointing 
out this requirement in design and architecture, Ibayashi et 
al.  (2015)  propose  a  system  named  Dollhouse  VR  that 

interaction 

decision 

Another 

is 

consists of a multi-touch tabletop device  to manipulate  the 
environment and HMDs to provide an internal view. Xia et 
al.  (2018a)  created  a  scene  editing  tool  to  support 
collaborative  workflow.  The  tool,  Spacetime,  introduces 
three 
to  easily 
manipulate the environment: container, parallel object, and 
avatar objects.  

interaction  concepts 

to  enable  users 

Companies  that  use  the  advantages  of  remote  working 
have  also  implemented  virtual  reality  to  benefit  from 
interaction  possibilities  that  existing  communication  tools 
can  not  offer.  Therefore,  commercial  virtual  tools  for 
teamwork  have  emerged,  such  as  VISIONxR  (Xia  et  al., 
2018b).  It  allows  multiple  users  in  multiple  locations,  on 
multiple devices. These virtual platforms aim to improve the 
quality  and  effectiveness  and  create  easily  adaptable 
environment options and interfaces. Virtual collaboration is 
still less effective than sharing the same physical location in 
terms  of  expressive  communication,  including  voice  gaze, 
gestures,  facial  expressions,  or  full-body  movements. 
According to Fussell and Setlock (2014), visual actions are 
way  more  important  than  speaking  for  communication  in 
virtual  environments.  Therefore,  to  convey  messages  and 
provide more effective and efficient communication, avatars 
and  hand  gestures  were  started  to  be  used  in  virtual 
environments  to  replace  the  expressions  belonging  to  the 
physical  world.  To  increase  the  sense  of  physical  co-
presence,  Amores  et  al.  (Amores  et  al.,  2015)  present  an 
immersive mobile platform, ShowMe. Using depth sensors 
and  cameras  enables  users  to  see  their  hand  gestures  and 
hands, making it easier to collaboratively work on a physical 
task.  

VR  devices  need  their  hardware  equipment;  thus, 
collaborative  environments  are  composed  of  not  one  but 
several worlds, each for one user. This situation creates two 
types of users; authorized users and connected users. While 
the  authorized  user  has  direct  control  over  the  world  with 
local  machines,  the  world  of  the  connected  user  is 
continuously synchronized. This separation is an opportunity 
Hoppe et al. (2021) presented ShiSha, which uses shifted but 
shared  perspective  modification  for  the  remote  virtual 
environment. Therefore, it can enable users to observe from 
the  same  point  of  view  while  they  can  see  other’s  virtual 
avatars in their virtual worlds. Having multiple users share a 
virtual space requires virtual representations of individuals. 
Another work that accentuates the potential of visualizations 
of avatars is Multi-User Cell Arena (MUCA), where (Bailey 
et al., 2019) offer customizable avatars. Embodiment is the 
foundation  of  many  social  VR  experiences  and  positively 
affects presence. Customizable VR avatars have the potential 
to increase the sense of belonging. 

 
4.6 Training and Simulation 

VR  provides  the  capability  of  training  people  from 
different  professions  to  deal  with  complex  situations  and 
prepare  them  for  their  roles  in  real  environments.  It  has 
become  an  essential  training  tool  for  soldiers,  doctors, 
drivers, and pilots. Also, it is used for patient rehabilitation 
and  disaster  management.  According  to  Ott  and  Freina  ( 
2015), the main motivation to use VR is its ability to provide 
experiences for context or environment that are inaccessible, 
problematic, or dangerous. Collection of reviews in the study 
of Mikropoulos and Natsis (Mikropoulos and Natsis, 2011) 
reported that in comparison with other systems, VR is more 
advantageous by an only sense of presence and dynamic 3D 
content, which have a positive impact on learning. Majority 
of  the  studies  on  training  collected  around  the  areas  of 
medicine (Chang and Weiner, 2016), safety (Xu et al., 2017; 
Jeelani et al., 2020a), industry (Grabowski and Jankowski, 
2015), and crisis and emergency management (Ronchi et al., 
2016; Kwok et al., 2019; Molka-Danielsen et al., 2015; Surer 
et al., 2021), and rehabilitation (Joo et al., 2020; Yates et al., 
2016).  

As  VR  training  scenarios  mainly  involve  computer-
generated 3D graphics, 3D modeling is important in creating 
virtual training environments. There are several options for 
developers to create related content. Advanced 3D modeling 
software, such as 3ds Max, Rhinoceros, Maya, and Blender, 
provide  developers  to  create  realistic  environments.  In 
addition to those tools, asset stores of the game engines and 
3D  model  libraries  present  a  variety  of  options.  The 
reusability  and  customizability  of  3D  models  decrease  the 
cost  of  systems.  To  achieve  high  levels  of  immersion  and 
presence  essential  for  a  training  environment,  artificial 
generation of actual information needs to stimulate the major 
senses. Therefore, to sustain  a fully  immersive experience, 
stereoscopic displays,  motion tracking hardware, and input 
devices  are  employed.  The  release  of  motion-sensing 
controllers primarily developed for games such as Nintendo 
Wii Balance Board, Sony Playstation Move, and Microsoft 
Kinect  has  promoted  the  evolution  of  training.  With  the 
contribution of additional devices, VR training has expanded 
to a larger sphere, including dance training, aircraft controls, 
and  rehabilitation.  Investigation  of  virtual  reality  for 
practical use gave birth to new terms such as virtual factories, 
which are simulated models that consist of many sub-models 
to  represent  the  cells  of  a  factory.  This  integration  offers 
planning, improvement of product, efficient planning phase, 
decision support, testing, and controlling the systems. In the 
context  of  Industry  4.0,  different  visualization  techniques, 

I 

16 

dynamic  virtual  models,  and  types  of  simulation,  such  as 
discrete  event  or  3D  motion  simulation,  are  employed  by 
automotive engineering, aerospace engineering, mechanical 
engineering,  and  medicine.  VR  training  is  often  preferable 
for  medicine  since  it  offers  emergency  management,  cost-
effectiveness,  recursiveness  for  tasks,  and  remote  surgical 
training,  which  requires  haptic  devices  due  to  physical 
procedures.  

in  virtual 

To  manipulate  virtual  objects  via  haptic  devices,  in 
addition  to  geometry-based  modeling,  medical  procedures 
require  physics-based  modeling  to  simulate  deformable 
objects  (Escobar-Castillejos  et  al.,  2016).  However,  the 
animation  of  deformable  objects 
reality 
environments is still a challenging problem, and an efficient 
physics-based method for virtual object interaction requires 
computational complexity. The physical interaction with the 
virtual  objects  needs  to  be  realistically  simulated  to  be 
convincing.  This  is  especially  important  for  the  training 
scenarios  that  require  detailed  hand  interaction,  such  as 
surgical  training.  Actual  hand  motion  leads  to  unstable 
results in physics engines which cause interpenetration. Most 
proposed  interaction  approaches  are  simplified  to  avoid 
realistic simulations’ complexity and error margin. 

together 

took  shape 

from  neuromotor 

difficulty.  According 

Recently,  virtual  reality  has  started  to  substitute 
traditional rehabilitation  methods. Proposed methods for 
this transition blend the various hypotheses coming from 
different  areas.  For  example,  based  on  hypotheses 
rehabilitation,  game 
stemming 
development  and  design 
in 
Rehabilitation  Gaming  System  (RGS)  and  Personalized 
Training Module (PTM), which was developed to adjust 
task 
results, 
rehabilitation 
visualization 
techniques. For example, within the development of motor 
function awareness, vision is competent to give feedback, 
and  also  neuromotor  rehabilitation  may  depend  upon 
movement  and  environment  visualization  (Tsuji  and 
Ogata,  2015).  To  meet  these  requirements,  TRAVEE 
(Voinea et al., 2015) offers 3D scenes used for neuromotor 
rehabilitation and a user-friendly interface that positively 
affects users’ processes. 

to 
specialized 

intended 

requires 

Emergencies  are  unexpected  events  that  require  a  rapid 
and  effective  response.  To  improve  human  behavior  under 
artificial and natural disasters, simulations such as hurricane 
flood  for  analysis  and  control,  fire  safety,  and  earthquake 
simulations  to  assess  human  perception  and  behavior 
(Gamberini et al., 2015) have been designed and used. For a 
successful  pre-evacuation  or  action,  evaluation  of  the 
situation and the reaction time are key factors. Simulations 
of different emergency cases provide anticipation  to assess 

 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

17 

the  situation,  awareness,  and  improvements  in  action  time 
and  behavior.  For  example,  according  to  (Rosero,  2017), 
most participants present unsuccessful fire growth estimation 
results.  The  learning  approach  and  nature  of  virtual 
environments  made  interaction  an  essential  characteristic, 
including  multifaceted  features  such  as  manipulation 
navigation.  Additional  to  those  features,  personalization 
approaches and adaptive technologies should be preferred to 
increase  the  effectiveness  of  VR-based  training  (Jeelani  et 
al., 2020b).  

Despite  the  advantages  of  contributing  to  cognitive  and 
psychomotor  skills  and  helping  users  gain  control  over 
emotional  response,  virtual  reality-based  simulators  that 
train individuals for high-risk industries remain questionable 
due  to  cybersickness  and  technological  challenges.  Areas 
such  as  aviation,  fire-fighting,  military,  medicine,  and 
manufacturing  require  a  high  level  of  realism  to  reach  a 
certain  level  of  success.  Simulators  may  not  efficiently 
represent uncertainties that result in oversimplified training 
environments.  Another  problem  is  that  simulators  are 
developed by software developers who are not experts on the 
selected subject most of the time. Therefore, the majority of 
studies in this branch focus on these problems. Vahdatikhaki 
et al. (2019) criticize most  construction training simulators 
as  unrealistic  due  to  static  site  representations.  Their 
framework  offers  four  stages;  context  capture,  context 
generation,  context-user 
interaction,  and  context-based 
assessment.  Although 
this  process  was  proposed  for 
construction site simulations, it is applicable for a wide range 
of cases that require context-realistic environments. Besides, 
the ease of use and reason behind the extensive use of game 
engines  is  achievements  in  approximation  to  reality, 
especially with the particles system tools offered. Examining 
fire simulations, it is certain that smoke’s realistic spread and 
diffusion  process  is  crucial.  Smoke  visualization  requires 
high  computer  performance  and  a  high  level  of  realism, 
which can be provided through game engines. 

Utilizing the advantages of game engines, Shamsuzzoha 
et al. (2019) propose a framework consisting of five stages 
from  database  to  evaluation  for  industrial  training  and 
maintenance.  Their  prototype  includes  minimaps,  blinking 
exclamation marks for attention, realistic visual effects, and 
an  IoT  screen  to  interact  with  the  system,  which  are 
visualization  preferences  that  make  the  interaction  and 
information flow possible. 

4.7 Web VR 

Web  services  have  become  the  primary  data  source, 
providing  access  to  information  anywhere  and  anytime. 

However, web browsers are limited in many cases, and most 
of the studies focus on solving those limitations. Due to the 
rendering capability of web browsers, presenting large-scale 
and  real-time  visualization  demands  a  great  deal  of  work. 
Yan  et  al.  (2020)  employed  different  online  real-time  fire 
training  techniques  to  solve  this  problem.  They  prefer 
downloading the data gradually while the viewpoint changes 
and converting virtual people to lightweight versions. They 
employed  a  technique  called  “clone”  rendering.  In  situ 
visualization or processing, the techniques where the data is 
visualized in real-time as simulation  generates it, are  used. 
Therefore, it does not involve storage resources; it is a natural 
solution for data transfer. Since it is a real-time generation, 
users can interfere with analyzing immediate effects. 

VRSRAPID (Mascolino et al., 2019) web application uses 
extensible  3D  virtual  reality  models  (X3D)  for  interactive 
scientific  computing.  It  is  a  collaborative  and  interactive 
environment  designed  for  nuclear  systems  supported  with 
real-time  simulations.  Traditional  nuclear  modeling  and 
simulation  tools  are  mostly  built  upon  deterministic  or 
statistical  methods.  Deterministic  solutions  are  memory 
intensive and require significant computation resources. On 
the  other  hand,  statistical  approaches,  such  as  the  Monte 
Carlo method, may lead to statistical uncertainties.  

To  build  an  accurate  and  real-time  model,  they  use 
RAPID  Code  System  and  generate  the  X3D  models  at  the 
end  of  the  calculation.  Aiming  to  explore  visualization 
methods  for  health  data,  Hadjar  et  al.  (2018)  propose  a 
prototype application that utilizes several libraries and an A-
Frame  framework.  Web  analytics  include  charts,  graphs, 
diagrams, animations integrated into visualization systems, 
and the combination of other visualization techniques. Using 
A-Frame allows developers to create interactivity based on 
the  objects  for  efficiently 
ray-casting  and  animating 
interpreting a multidimensional dataset. 

the  Shneiderman  mantra, 

Libraries  allow  users  to  construct  3D  visualizations  by 
mapping the datasets that are obtained from external sources. 
the  web-based 
Following 
ExplorViz (Fittkau et al., 2015) tool presents a software city 
metaphor  with  gesture  recognition  for  translation,  rotation, 
zoom, selection, and reset tasks. Vria (Butcher et al., 2019) 
prefers 3D bar charts for data exploration and analysis due to 
their simplicity. With  the increased importance of  network 
environments based on VRGIS, the WebVRGIS engine (Lv 
et al., 2016) offers support for data publishing, transmission, 
and multiple users using and solving the problems of peer-
to-peer  (P2P)  technology.  Spatial  analysis  requires  three-
dimensional  visualization  of  a  largescale  and  multi-source 
urban landscape. Due to computation workload and required 
memory, rendering massive data in real-time is troublesome. 

 
 
 
technologies  such  as 

They used an interactive rendering system and visualization 
optimization 
texture  mapping, 
automatic  level  of  detail,  occlusion  culling,  and  frustum 
culling to solve this problem. On top of this work, Li et al. 
(2016)  offer  to  use  the  WebVRGIS  engine  to  analyze  and 
visualize real-time dynamic traffic data. As it is understood 
in  the  previous  sections,  most  scientific  visualizations  rely 
on volumetric  visualizations,  especially in  medical  studies. 
To  visualize  mesh  and  volumetric  data  captured  using  3D 
medical  scanning  in  VR,  Kokelj  et  al.  (2018)  developed  a 
web-based  application. Using the rendering pipeline  of the 
Med3D  framework,  they  used  the  volumetric  ray  casting 
technique, which performs calculations using output images.  
NeuroCave (Keiriz et al., 2018) is a visual analytics tool 
that offers interactive methods and visualization choices for 
exploration. It enables users to distinguish regions and their 
functions  using  a  color  scheme.  Instead  of  using  realistic 
rendering  methods,  they  construct  a  connectome  using 
different platonic solids. To simplify the rendering process, 
ProteinVR (Cassidy et al., 2020) utilizes game-like camera 
movements where the objects are stable and only the camera 
can  move.  Thus,  they  were  able  to  use  pre-calculated 
shadows  and  textures  to  advance  the  performance  in  the 
browser. 

4.8 Games, Visualization and VR 

Video  games  are  a  collection  of  information  and 
extensively  rely  on  the  presentation  of  information  which 
holds  various  attributes  that  change  according  to  state. 
Possessing  a  large  amount  of  data,  games  played  in  the 
digital world are more complex and have different needs than 
games  played  in  the  physical  world  that  are  easily 
comprehensible. Data visualization has been used in games 
for generations to create continuous communication. While 
visualization  components 
in  older  games  are  more 
straightforward  and  generally  serve  to  transmit  gameplay 
data,  they  are  used  for  multiplexed  situations  in  modern 
games.  Representations  like  bar  graphs  and  tree  diagrams 
related to information visualization widely occur in games; 
however,  especially  the  entertainment  aspect  creates  a 
difference  in  implementation.  Beyond  the  implementation 
details,  the  utilization  of  virtual  reality  in  the  video  game 
industry  has  created  the  need  for  more  radical  differences. 
Although  pioneering  commercialized  virtual  reality  video 
games presented with the release of Sega VR and Nintendo’s 
Virtual  Boy,  they  were  considered  unsuccessful  in  the 
nineties. The process began in 2016 and was followed by the 
introduction of various products such as Gear VR (Oculus), 
HTC  Vive  (HTC  and  Valve),  PlayStation  VR  (Sony 

I 

18 

Interactive  Media),  and  Samsung  Gear  VR,  had  achieved 
massive success by offering major novelties for video games.  
Virtual reality games differ from traditional video games 
in  terms  of  the  level  of  immersion  and  type  of  interaction 
with virtual content.  Decrease of connection-level between 
outer  world  and  inclusion  of  body  and  hand  movements 
provide innovative gaming experiences, which require new 
techniques  for  visualization  of  the  virtual  world.  The 
interaction does not only occur between HMD users, but co-
located  participants  can  also  interact.  VR  game  ShareVR 
(Gugenheimer  et  al.,  2017b)  offers  asymmetric  interaction 
between  HMD  and  Non-HMD  users.  Recent  visualization 
researches and studies involve additional interface features, 
adaptive  hints,  context-sensitive  tutorials,  new  approaches 
for player navigation. To make 3D manipulation easier in VR 
games, Rachevsky et al. (2018) offer to graphically represent 
the player’s gestures as a part of the interface. According to 
(Polys  and  Bowman,  2004),  instead  of  focusing  on  utility, 
visualizations  in  games  should  be  functional  and  pleasing. 
Their  developed  framework  proposes  five  elements  to 
identify  visualization  techniques:  primary  purpose,  target 
audience, temporal usage, visual complexity, and immersion. 

4.8.1 Visual Realism and Presence 

Slater  et  al.  (2009)  proposed  a  division  between 
components of realism as geometric and illumination. While 
geometric realism considers the properties of virtual objects, 
illumination realism deals with the convenience of lighting. 
Most  of  the  existing  studies  and  discussions  recently 
conducted ground on Slater’s theoretical  framework of the 
place illusion (PI) and the plausibility illusion (PSI) in virtual 
reality  and 
the  sub-components  of  geometric  and 
illuminations  realism.  Slater  has  argued  on  responses  and 
defined two types of illusions based on the credibility of the 
events  and  the  places.  The  PI  mechanism  in  VR  games 
endeavors  to  present  game  objects  and  places  to  increase 
presence. PSI mechanism offers persuasive game events and 
activities  while  the  player  actively  engages  with  the 
simulated environment with a large field of vision. Beyond 
the  visual,  VR  systems  should  offer  auditory  and  haptic 
displays to sustain PI and PSI effectively. Impact levels of PI 
and  PSI  can  vary  according  to  the  main  objective  of  the 
environment.  For  example,  Lynch  and  Martins’  (2015) 
survey  study  examined  the  fright  experience  in  immersive 
VR  games.  Later  further  categorized  fear  elements  and 
identified the strategies and reactions towards fear elements. 
According to the results of their study, PSI elements trigger 
a  higher  level  of  fear  response  than  PI  elements.  Another 
study conducted upon works of Slater complements (Hvass 

 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

19 

et  al.,  2018),  the  suggestions  on  effects  of  visual  realism. 
Results of the physiological measures and self-reports of the 
participants  revealed  that  a  higher  degree  of  geometric 
realism  induces  a  stronger  sensation  of  presence  and 
emotional responses. 

4.8.2 Gameplay Data 

Gameplay-related data in the textual format is processed 
and presented through graphical representations that enable 
users  to  absorb  the  data.  According  to  literature  surveys 
(Sevastjanova et al., 2019; Wallner and Kriglstein, 2013) on 
gameplay  data,  charts  and  diagrams,  heat  maps,  different 
types  of  movement  visualizations,  self-organizing  maps 
(SOMs),  and  node-link  representations  are  the  most  used 
types.  Selection  of  the  most  efficient  and  convenient 
approach  according  to  information  to  be  represented  is  a 
crucial  step.  Although  they  can  be  interpreted  in  different 
forms,  charts  and  diagrams  are  more  suitable  for  direct 
demands than exploratory tasks. 

According to the taxonomical study of Kriglstein (2019), 
there  are  two  ways  to  collect  gameplay  data.  Observation-
based  data  can  be  collected  by  either  observing  the  player 
interactions  or  using  questionnaires  and  interviews,  and  it 
helps  developers  understand  the  players’  motivations, 
behaviors,  and  preferences.  Data  can  be  collected  through 
developed  mediums  automatically.  One  of 
the  main 
differences between these approaches is that while the first 
one  presents  qualitative  outputs,  the  second  one  produces 
quantitative data, which is more available for visualization. 
The  data  can  be  spatial,  non-spatial,  or  temporal.  The 
taxonomy  of  Kriglstein  (2019)  presents  six  different 
categories:  comparison,  distribution,  relationships,  time, 
space, and flow, based on tasks and types of data. 

To  our  knowledge,  unfortunately,  there  is  not  enough 
research  to  build  a  concrete  understanding  for  building 
visualization  for  gameplay  data  in  virtual  reality  yet. 
Visualization  studies  related  to  the  presentation  of  the 
gameplay  data  mostly  focus  on  traditional  video  games. 
Taxonomies 
information 
techniques  built 
visualization are not available to adapt because of the unique 
needs of game data. 

and 

for 

4.8.3 Game Analytics 

The increasing complexity of games and audience called 
for  new  fields  instead  of  traditional  methods  like  user 
testing, play  testing, surveys,  and videotaping to evaluate 
player  behavior.  Designers,  programmers,  marketers, 
executives,  and  players  are  all  using  gameplay  data  in 

various  ways  and 
for  different  purposes.  Using 
visualization  is  an  inevitable  option  to  digest  data 
collectively. Although information visualization techniques 
are  used,  video  games  give  various  audiences  a  new 
direction  to  analytics  with  unique  visual  experiences. 
InfoVis  community  already  has  defined  systems  used  for 
data  analysis  where  analytics  is  not  only  focused,  as 
“Casual  Information  Visualization”  (Pousman  et  al. 
2007)—belonging  to  this  category,  ambient,  social,  and 
artistic  information  visualizations  are  criticized  for  being 
unproductive.  Visualizations  integrate  the  play  with  data 
analysis  considered  as  Playful  InfoVis.  Medler  and 
Magerko  (2011)  have  offered  to  broaden  the  scope  and 
capabilities of Playful InfoVis. 

Due  to  the  nature  of  VR,  analytics  has  become  a  vital 
component  of  VR  games.  Analytics  helps  developers 
increase  performance  by  providing  real-time  information, 
fine-tuning  via  data  presented,  realizing  problems  in  the 
design phase, and understanding player segments, players’ 
engagement level, and playing style. Like gameplay data, 
game  analytics  are  also  not  studied  in  the  immersive 
visualization  domain.  Distinctively,  game  analytic 
visualizations produced for traditional environments can be 
used  in  immersive  environments  within  the  information 
visualization domain. 

4.8.4 Gamification and Gameful Concepts 

Even though it is not a new concept, “gamification” has 
always  been  considered  a  contentious  term,  and  parallel 
terms  are  continued  to  be  introduced  in  the  game 
community.  Deterding  et  al.  (2011)  proposed 
the 
definition  of  “gamification”  as  the  use  of  game  design 
elements  in  non-game  contexts.  Later  in  their  survey, 
Seaborn  and  Fels  (2015)  define  gamification  as  “the 
intentional use of game elements or a gameful experience 
of non-game tasks and contexts.” Gamification uses game 
elements such as points, unlocking, achievements, leader 
boards,  levels,  virtual  items,  quests,  avatars,  collections, 
competition,  or  cooperation  in  non-game  applications  to 
strengthen  user  motivation.  On  the  other  hand,  serious 
games  are  designed  for  additional  non-entertainment 
purposes.  Previous  studies  verify  that  visual  properties 
affect  the  user’s  motivation  in  citizen  science  games 
(Curtis, 2015; Miller et al., 2019). EyeWire (Tinati et al., 
2017)  is  a  web-based  gamified  citizen  science  platform 
that  encourages  users  to  perform  complex  tasks  by 
transforming  them  into  more  manageable  tasks  in  a 
gamified environment. 

 
 
According to a study (Tinati et al., 2016), gamification 
elements  such  as 
individual  points, 
leaderboards, 
customizable roles, and visual appliances increase  users’ 
engagement.  Foldit  (Curtis,  2015)  is  another  citizen 
science game that is a puzzle game that contains molecular 
visualizations  on  protein  folding.  Analysis  of  game-play 
data  on  view  options  settings  displays  significant 
differences  in  the  visualization  choices  of  experts  and 
novices according to tasks (Miller et al., 2019). 

With VR, AR, and MR technologies, data visualization 
transforms  from  passive  to  more  interactive  exploration. 
Combining  the  interactive  nature  of  gameful  design 
concepts  with  data  visualization  can  reduce  cognitive 
overload while immersing the players in the content. For 
this purpose, Wanick et al. (2019) provide two case studies 
on  orbital  visualization  and  earth  data  visualization  for 
scientific data where they combine game design concepts 
and data worlds with VR technologies. To test the usability 
of VR game interactions in scientific domains, Bergmann 
et al. (2017) developed visualizations belonging to fields 
of  particle  physics,  biology,  and  medical 
imaging 
appropriate for game interaction techniques in VR. They 
reported that although VR  game strategies include  some 
difficulties,  such  as  simulation  sickness,  they  offer  a 
myriad of opportunities and a high level of immersion for 
scientific  domains.  GamefulVA  (Sevastjanova  et  al., 
2019) is proposed for fostering motivation by combining 
gameful design concepts with visual analytics. 

Another  genre  that  combines  video  games  with  other 
domains is exergames. Exergames aim to blend physical 
exercise  and  video  games,  requiring  players  to  move 
physically due to gameplay mechanics. Beyond the non-
immersive exergames played with controllers such as Wii 
Remote  and  Microsoft  Kinect  sensor,  there  are  also 
pervasive  games  such  as  Ingress  and  Pokemon  Go  that 
also  encourage  physical  activities.  With  the  recent 
developments,  VR  has  become  more  efficient 
in 
engagement and performance. Therefore, video games are 
converted  into  VR  format,  and  new  games  that  require 
body  movement  were  released,  such  as  Fruit  Ninja  VR, 
Hot Squat, Holopoint, and Portal Stories: VR. According 
to  an  evaluation  study  (Gugenheimer  et  al.,  2017b),  VR 
games reduce the perceived exertion, motivating people to 
exercise  more.  Additional  to  opportunities  presented 
directly  with  VR,  some  studies  focus  on  personalization 
and  difficulty  adjusting  adaptable  interfaces  to  keep  the 
player  engaged.  Different  strategies  have  been  proposed 
for  the  visualization  of  physical  activity.  In  an  abstract 
information  display  named  HappyFit  (Yoo  et  al.,  2017), 
they  prefer  to  keep  visualizations  abstract,  nonintrusive, 

I 

20 

positive  via  colors,  shapes,  metaphors  to  give  consistent 
information  and  keep  the  players  engaged.  The  primary 
aim behind this strategy is to encourage physical activity 
in the short and long term by increasing awareness, which 
creates a personal response. 

4.9 Design Considerations and User Interactions 

This section of the article aims to explain the importance 
of the evaluation methods and results with advice for design 
considerations  in  previous  studies.  The  visualization  field 
tends  to  rely  on  assumptions  that  are  not  proven  but  are 
firmly  rooted.  Kosara  (2016)  defines  this  situation  as  an 
“empire built on sand” and explains with his studies that even 
assumptions on most commonly used visualizations can be 
wrong. Questioning and testing assumptions repetitively  to 
reach  evidence  is  crucial  to  create  a  solid  foundation  for 
development  and  evolution  (Kosara,  2016).  As  collective 
responsibility of the community, in the literature, hundreds 
of  authors  can  be  found  who  used  and  developed  various 
metrics,  taxonomies,  and  typologies,  proposed  guidelines, 
and created models for the multi-level understanding process 
behind  and  making  assessments  for  different  aspects  of 
visualizations. 

4.9.1 Visual Perception 

Although perception is extensively studied in VR, new 
perceptual  challenges  continue  to  proliferate.  Those 
challenges not only include the 3D visualization features 
such  as  depth  and  distances,  shapes,  sizes,  colors,  and 
contrasts but also involve hardware-related problems. 3D 
human  visual  perception  is  closely  related  to  depth 
perception,  which  also  can  define  the  effectiveness  and 
comfort  level  of  3D  visualizations  (Dede,  2009).  Visual 
cues provide depth perception in 3D environments, such 
as occlusion, rotation, shadows, and shading. Viewing 3D 
the 
visualization 
understanding  of  the  data.  Unfortunately,  rotational 
aspects  are  not  suitable  for  data  presented  in  textual 
format. According to Bertin (1983), three levels of human 
visual  perception  can  be  described.  Individual  elements, 
groups of elements, or whole images can be the subject of 
focus.  The  ability  of  focus  sustains  users  to  complete 
specific  tasks.  According  to  the  density  of  the  data,  raw 
data  should  be  converted  in  a  way  that  helps  users’ 
focusing  abilities.  To  achieve  this,  methods  can  include 
visual  attributes  like  color,  position,  size,  shape,  and 
techniques, such as different perspectives or clustering. 

through  multiple  angles  enhanced 

 
 
 
 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

21 

related 

their  experiments 

Visual perception in virtual environments generally has 
been studied  with the lenses  of Gibson’s theory. Gibson 
(1977) stated that the environment offers different action 
possibilities to actors, called affordance. According to this 
idea,  actor  and  environment  coexist,  and  perception  is 
directly 
this  perspective, 
to  action.  From 
researchers  have  studied  perceptions  of  affordance  for 
different situations, height, and depth perception. Cliquet 
et al. (2017) analyzed the perception of affordances while 
standing  on  a  slanted  surface  in  VR,  and  also  they 
considered the effects of different materials. According to 
the  results  of 
in  VR,  although 
participants could discriminate the angles appropriate for 
upright  positions,  the  approximate  critical  angle  for  an 
upright  posture  determined  by  participants  is  lower  than 
the results of the studies conducted in real environments. 
Nagao et al. (2018) designed an interface for infinite stair 
demonstration  with  passive  haptic  slats  and  markers  to 
increase  a  sense  of  presence  and  riser  height.  Later,  to 
examine  height  perception  while  moving,  Asjad  et  al. 
(2018)  designed  an  infinite  ascending  staircase  for  the 
virtual environment, which shares exact dimensions with 
a staircase in the physical world. According to their study, 
virtual  shoes  positively  affect  presence  and  error 
estimation. 

4.9.2 Movement 

Sustaining efficient  navigation for users in the virtual 
environment  has  been  a  challenge.  Although  the  most 
natural  virtual  locomotion  technique  is  mapping  users' 
physical  movements  directly,  different 
locomotion 
techniques have been offered due to the limited physical 
space.  

Teleportation is a locomotion technique that generally 
requires the user to aim for the target location in a virtual 
environment.  Although  it  overcomes  spatial  constraints 
and provides users to travel in  multi-user experiences, it 
may cause confusion and lack of constant feedback due to 
spatial discontinuity of users due to teleportation. To solve 
this problem and maintain communication between users, 
Thanyadit  et  al.  (2020),  considering  time  efficiency, 
traceability,  intuitiveness,  and  recognizability,  propose 
four different visualizations: hover, jump, fade, and portal. 
Those  representations  of  movements  aim  to  create 
traceable visualization to give feedback to other users to 
avoid  confusion.  The  cues  such  as  traces  are  helpful  for 
users to understand their location and decrease the spatial 
cognitive cost. Cherep et al. (2022) conducted a study to 

understand  the  effects  of  teleportation  interfaces  on 
different individuals. Their results suggest that the design 
of the  interface and individual differences create  diverse 
spatial cognition cases, and concerning those parameters, 
users’  awareness  of  location  changes.  This  study  points 
out  the  importance  of  defining  the  target  audience  and 
knowing  the  effects  of  design  choices  in  immersive 
environments. 

4.9.3 Interaction 

Immersive  technologies  have  introduced  many  new 
challenges  to  researchers.  Interaction  techniques  can  make 
the experience more effortless or cumbersome. Meaningful 
interaction  between  the  audience  and  the  visualized  data 
enhances  the  immersion  in  a  virtual  world  where  the 
audience  can  see  the  data  and  explore  different  aspects. 
Research has produced a myriad of interaction techniques for 
VR,  such  as  selection,  manipulation,  and  locomotion. 
Researchers are searching for creative ways for visualization 
tasks to interact with data. 

Onorati  et  al.  (2018)  developed  an  immersive  bubble 
chart, especially to get information from unstructured data. 
Their  work  includes  category  bubbles  that  semantically 
group  individual  bubbles  and  allow  users  to  explore  data 
through words. An experience designed in Unity allows the 
user  to  grab,  zoom,  remove  and  merge  bubbles  and  keep 
track of previous views. A First-Person Shooter (FPS) game 
for both HMD with specialized controls and non-immersive 
games that utilize monitors and have traditional controls was 
developed and evaluated by Rachevsky et al. (2018), and the 
different versions of the game were tested. While the free aim 
version has better results than the immersive one, since the 
users  moved the camera  with the keyboard in the  free aim 
version, the fixed aim version has better results for the non-
immersive  versions.  In  terms  of  usability,  results  are 
different for immersive and non-immersive cases, and they 
agree  that  more  natural  and  intuitive  interactions  are 
necessary for immersive games. 

4.10 Comparative Studies 

Design  and  implementation  decisions  have  significant 
importance for data presentation. The process starts with the 
raw data, and until it takes the final form, many choices have 
to be made. The emergence of new technologies, techniques, 
and ideas requires continuous analyses to create a concrete 
background. Unfortunately, immersive visualizations suffer 
from the lack of standard guidelines to build upon. To prove 
the  rationale  behind  the  preferences,  comparative  studies 

 
 
 
 
 
were  examined.  Immersive  technologies  imply  specific 
outcomes when they are tested for user experience. There is 
a  threshold  requirement  to  pass  to  choose  immersive 
visualizations over traditional ones. This threshold is closely 
related to  widely studied questions in HCI,  which are  user 
experience  and 
technology  acceptance.  For  example, 
Shrestha et al. (2016) recreated historical sites in Nepal for 
the  CAVE  environment  to  compare  with  the  Paper-Based 
Artifacts. Results indicated that participants had difficulties 
solving complex problems in VR. This struggle can be the 
reason  and  result  from  the  resistance  originating  from  not 
being accustomed to new technologies.  

response 

Ren  and  Hornecker  (2021)  conducted  a  user  study  to 
compare virtual and physical data representations by creating 
two  equivalent  representations  of  the  same  data  set  for 
physical  and  virtual  environments.  This  study  showed  that 
while  physicalization  helps  decrease 
time, 
participants tend to move slowly in the VR environment due 
to VR lag, which affects the quality of experience. According 
to a study conducted by Millais et al. (2018) on scatterplots, 
the workloads of traditional visualizations and visualizations 
in VR are almost equal. They reported that users feel more 
satisfied and successful when using VR for data exploration. 
Task-based  comparisons  of  the  2D  and  3D  versions  of 
visualizations give more diverse results. According to results 
of a comparative study (Kraus et al., 2020),  which  utilizes 
visualization tasks taxonomy by Brehmer and Munzner for 
the overview tasks, 2D heat maps gave better results while 
reading and comparing single data items, and 3D heat maps 
tested  in  virtual  reality  environment  showed  lower  error 
rates.  This  situation  leads  researchers  to  use  hybrid 
techniques.  

In  their  study,  Roberts  et  al.  (2022)  discuss  different 
visualization techniques using case studies to identify the key 
features  to  create  diverse  3D  visualizations.  Their  results 
show  that  using  multiple  views  and  different  viewpoints 
enhanced  the  understanding.  However,  each  visualization 
technique  requires  solving  a  variety  of  problems.  Those 
problems  are  not  always  related  to  the  structure  of  the 
visualization.  Immersive  visualizations  require  optimizing 
time.  Beyond  those 
the  same 
several  parameters  at 
comparisons, finding the effective use of space to represent 
data in immersive environments is another research subject. 
A Meta-analysis study (Akpan and Shanker, 2019) consists 
of 162 synthesized studies. VR offers more effective model 
development,  verification,  and  validation  performance  on 
DES  task  performance  when  compared  with  the  2D 
visualizations. There are several approaches to guide users in 
virtual environments.  

I 

22 

in 

example, 

annotations 

Guidance  can  occur  via  sounds,  visual  cues,  or 
animations.  For 
virtual 
environments are generally represented in abstract gestures, 
texts, or simple objects for indication. Alternative guidance 
can  be  based  on  imitation  using  a  virtual  tutor,  which 
demonstrates the task that needs to be done. Based on three 
different tasks, Lee et al. (2019) compared the effectiveness 
of  Annotation  and  Tutor.  According  to  overall  results, 
Annotation  was  found  more  helpful  for  accuracy  and  time 
performance.  On  the  other  hand,  using  a  tutor  improves 
recalling the pattern. 

5 Discussion 

Due to vast options and lack of common ground, selecting 
or creating methods and techniques to visualize a particular 
type of information is challenging. Although the main aim 
of all visualization techniques is communication via visual 
medium  according  to  data,  user,  defined  tasks,  and 
presentation techniques starting from the data gathering, the 
whole process requires different techniques. Most scientific 
visualization  data  are  obtained  through  devices  such  as 
sensors,  microscopes,  cameras,  or  via  simulations  volume 
rendering,  slicing  to  extract  sections.  Therefore,  data  is 
already suitable to be transferred to virtual 3D environments. 
Data visualization studies are more related to abstract data 
and focus on presentation and analysis aspects. Considering 
studies,  according  to  the  subject,  information  visualization 
can include aspects of both. For example, techniques used in 
art  and  architecture  domains  have  more  similarities  with 
scientific visualization techniques, while computer sciences 
deal with similar problems with data visualization. Specific 
requirements of the domains create different discussions on 
subjects.  For  example,  nano-sciences  and 
various 
architectural  heritage  domains  already  have  3D  physical 
forms  to  transform.  For  this  transformation,  discussion 
topics  can  be  clustered  around  the  level  of  abstraction, 
interaction  techniques  for  the  model,  or  presentation  of 
textual data. On the other hand, if statistical data on cultural 
heritage is subjected to visualization, this time, data does not 
have  a  physical  equivalent  to  display  it  visually.  Physical 
attributes  will  be  attended  to  features  of  data  and  design 
principles;  color  and  perception  theories  may  have  a  more 
dominant role.  

Physical  attributes  and  perception  theories  are  widely 
used for abstraction. Considering the interaction possibilities 
presented  by  data  itself,  generally,  there  is  a  correlation 
between  abstraction 
interaction 
capabilities.  Abstract  visualizations  are  more  open  to 
manipulation and interaction and more suitable for analysis. 

level  and  presented 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

23 

in  both 

On  the  other  hand,  more  literal  and  realistic  visualizations 
are more representative. Scientific visualizations mostly rely 
on  3D  volumetric  data  combined  with  abstract  elements. 
Although domain and subject are different according to data 
type,  common  visualization  structures  can  be  used.  The 
combination of dynamic visualizations with time-series data 
information  and  scientific 
is  widely  used 
visualizations.  3D  versions  of  bar  graphs,  line  and  scatter 
plots  are  still  the  most  commonly  used  visualizations  in 
various domains. The common objective is finding the best 
user-friendly  navigation  and  interaction  techniques  in  an 
immersive  environment.  Therefore,  studies  belonging  to 
different  research  areas  have  common  problems  and 
challenges considering visualization. In general, most of the 
of 
research 
representation,  perception,  interaction,  locomotion,  and 
decision-making.  

questions 

concepts 

gathered 

around 

collaborative 

studies  present 

In  the  information  visualizations  community,  cultural 
heritage  and  construction  popularity  is  increasing  due  to 
CAD-based  and  BIM-based  models.  Therefore,  interaction 
with the integrated models gains importance. In addition to 
interaction  with  3D  models  and  multi-dimensional 
visualization, 
various 
opportunities  to  users.  Most  real-world  cases  require 
possessing sophisticated and expensive equipment or being 
in  a  dangerous  environment.  Scientific  visualizations, 
simulations, and  visualizations built  for training serve  as a 
replacement  for  real-world  equipment  and  situations. 
Educational  visualizations  are  also  expanding  their  scope, 
and  including  game  elements,  they  create  more  active  and 
dynamic  relations.  Gamification  motivates  learners,  and  a 
combination  of  visual  senses 
together  with  physical 
interaction improves  users’ recall  mechanism. Movements, 
embodiment,  and  gestures  also  increase  the  level  of 
understanding  and  provide  more  active  roles.  The  learners 
have  the  opportunity  to  interact  with  objects  of  different 
scales.  VR  breaks  space  limitation:  therefore,  the  chosen 
subject can include objects of any size. The scale of the data 
representations can be arbitrary and controlled by the user to 
interact  with  the  representation  at  different  levels.  While 
users can prefer large-scale visualizations that surround them 
or manipulate them more quickly for a specific task, data can 
be room-scale or smaller. By changing the scale, users move 
between egocentric and exocentric approaches, suitable for 
different  tasks.  Egocentric  visualizations  provide  more 
immersive  experiences  since  data  surround  the  user,  fly 
through  it,  and  demand  less  cognitive  load.  On  the  other, 
exocentric  visualization  gives  better  results  in  analytical 
tasks. 

As the interaction methods are developed, chronological 
observation  of  visualization  taxonomies  shows  that  the 
scope,  the  number  of  tasks,  and  primary  objectives  also 
continuously  expand.  A  correlation  can  be  constructed 
between this expansion and new data extraction techniques 
and technology development. For example, while advanced 
techniques provide new data types, technologies like haptic 
devices,  sensors,  AR,  VR,  MR  define  new  interaction 
techniques.  There 
is  no  comprehensive  visualization 
taxonomy study specialized in VR to our knowledge. At the 
same  time,  even  though  previous  taxonomies  have  certain 
limitations due to similarities, they can be used as a base to 
construct taxonomies for VR. 

Virtual  reality  technologies  (Figure  6)  increase  the 
number of interaction techniques and transform the existing 
ones. For example, hands-free pointing either by eye gaze or 
with  a  head  pose  is  an  interaction  method  that  comes  into 
literature with VR—presenting the third axis rotary motion 
together  with  physical  immersion.  Users  can  perform 
locomotion  by  walking  in  the  physical  environment,  using 
controllers  or  teleportation  methods.  VR  comes  with 
additional  aspects  that  need  analysis  and  classification  to 
broaden 
taxonomies.  The  visualization 
community  needs  more  comparative  studies  showing  the 
clear 
visualization 
techniques  and  VR  visualizations  to  create  objective  rules 
and a baseline for design decisions. 

the  existing 

distinctions 

traditional 

between 

Classifying  and  defining  the  target  users  are  crucial  for 
taxonomies,  guidelines,  and  classifications  to  be  produced. 
According  to  cognitive  capabilities,  technology  use,  and 
special  situations  of  the  users,  decisions  should  be  taken 
considering interaction and visualization preferences. There 
is a need for comparative studies to identify common patterns 
and specific groups to construct such knowledge. As can be 
seen in the related section, collaborative studies can produce 
controversial  results.  Especially,  different  results  in  the 
studies  that  compare  VR  visualizations  with  desktop 
environments  stand  out.  Even  the  effect  of  different 
visualization  mediums  on  spatial  understanding  is  still 
debatable. This  situation  may  stem  from  the  differences  in 
participants’  or  design-specific  problems.  Therefore,  until 
the  results  converge  at  the  same  point,  they  should  be 
repeated.  The  user-centered  design  process  is  essential  for 
visualization tasks. 

After  determining  guidelines,  tools  can  be  produced  to 
create more accurate visualizations. This way, visualization 
studies  can  gain  speed  and  find  a  common  language  and 
visual consistency. Having previously tested and proved de 
facto  standards  is  also  helpful  to  accustom  users  to  new 

 
I 

24 

Figure 6 The proportion of VR visualization tools among the selected studies 

technologies  and  switch  between  them.  Unfortunately, 
developed tools are limited to specific data and visualization 
types. For example, most toolkits are produced to represent 
quantitative  data,  and  their  scope  is  limited  to  quantitative 
analysis. Also, it is a more complicated task to create toolkits 
for the qualitative analysis. Tools need to be flexible to create 
possible  solutions  and  different  interaction  methods  since 
design preferences also direct the user behavior.  

Virtual  reality  still  suffers  from  technology  acceptance 
and,  due  to  hardware  requirements,  it  is  still  not  common. 
WebVR, VR games, and collaborative studies  are essential 
in  breaking  the  acceptance  barrier.  Recent  trends  are 
promising  for  the  increase  in  virtual  reality  systems. 
Especially  recent  orientation  towards  remote  collaboration 
paved the way for VR versions. Other examples can create a 
high  degree  of  immersion,  such  as  free-viewpoint  video 
technologies  that  can  be  adapted  for  both  WebVR  and 
smartphone  visualizations.  Smartphones  are  being  widely 
used  in  almost  all  aspects  of  our  daily  activities.  Also, 
creating mobile versions of visualizations resolves the need 
for hardware.  Simpler hardware such as Google Daydream 

is  not  suitable 

and  Samsung  Gear  VR  offer  controllers  for  mobile  VR. 
However,  mobile  VR 
for  complex 
visualizations  due  to  technological  requirements  since  the 
smartphones. 
performance 
Unfortunately, applications using the web browser also have 
rendering and speed limitations. Even so, for specific areas, 
they can be beneficial. 

entirely 

based 

on 

is 

Exergames  take  the  lead  in  visualization  studies  in  the 
game  domain.  Most  studies  encourage  users  to  exercise 
regularly  and  engage  with  the  activity.  Since  they  target 
users  with  specific  needs,  visualization  and  interface 
requirements are variable and require elaboration. To reach 
further potentials of VR integration in daily life activities, as 
in the exergames, can overcome the usage barriers. 

Another  subfield  open  to  further  developments  to 
overcome  acceptance  problems  is  collaboration  studies. 
They  can  include  a  combination  of  synchronous  or 
asynchronous,  on-site  or  remote,  and  symmetric  or 
asymmetric 
remote 
approaches.  Asynchronous 
collaboration is crucial for scientists working together on the 
same  project.  Synchronous  and  on-site  ones  are  primarily 

and 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

25 

used in training and architectural studies. Asynchronous and 
on-site version is the less common version, but their scope 
can  include  architectural  projects.  For  example,  to  create 
more  efficient  smart  cities,  users  can  engage  through 
visualizations in specific hubs in the city. The combination 
of  synchronous  and  remote  allows  collaborators  to  work 
together  in  real-time  while  they  are  in  different  locations. 
The synchronous aspect of the collaboration helps users not 
to feel isolated. Therefore, the acceptance problem is one of 
the  essential  features  to  overcome.  Multi-user  experiences 
have more positive effects on users compared to single-user 
versions. It increases the users’ engagement and success rate. 
The  combination  of  Web,  collaboration,  and  mobile 
technologies  can  provide  quick  and  easy  dissemination  of 
information. 

this  approach  works 

Although  most  of  the  studies  provide  solutions  for 
particular  problems  of  VR,  problems  relating  to  virtual 
reality hardware have not been solved completely. Most of 
the time, problems of cybersickness, latency in tracking, low 
refresh rates disturb the users and break presence. Studies try 
to  fixate  the  experience  on  a  fast  frame  rate  to  avoid  VR 
simple 
sickness.  While 
visualizations, they follow different complex visualizations 
and  simulations  techniques.  Allowing  users  to  transport 
physically in a consistent environment allows VR to create 
complete immersion that makes it distinctive. However, the 
design of the visualization can also create fluctuations in the 
user’s  sense  of  presence  and  break  the  immersion.  Inside 
VR, the user is only able to see computer-generated imagery. 
Therefore,  the  objects  the  user  stares  at  should  be  more 
apparent than objects farther away or nearer. 

for 

Visualizations can also use focusing techniques to create 
hierarchy  levels  to  differentiate  essential  aspects  of  data. 
Geometric realism affects the presence in VR and can create 
a  strong  presence  and  emotional  response.  Polygon  count 
and texture resolution are generally increased to create more 
realistic  environments.  However,  intended  realism  levels 
require powerful hardware. Therefore, different techniques 
are used, such as foveate rendering and occlusion culling. In 
immersive  environments,  the  user  can  see  all  directions; 
therefore, different from the 2D representations, 3D mapping 
techniques  can  be  applied  to  data.  Visibility  of  the 
presentation is also vital for the user. When the data includes 
complex relations, developers can use different rendering or 
layering  techniques.  For  example,  edges  and  nodes  can  be 
dense if a network visualization represents the data. To lower 
the occlusion level, developers can prefer to play with scale, 
line width, or divide the data into more layers. The crucial 
point is conveying the data without deterioration. To ensure 

correct  and  practical  interpretation  of  data,  proper  and 
explicit visual encoding of the information is crucial.  

Scale  is  another  aspect  that  should  be  taken  into 
consideration  for precision.  For example, large-scale  maps 
are designed for estimation or extraction value tasks; some 
parts  can  be  diminished  according  to  visual  encoding. 
Perceived objects sizes are also changed according to avatar 
realism  and  scale.  The  effectiveness  of  a  graph 
representation  of  a  dataset  can  be  objectively  evaluated 
according to visual features. The features of association and 
selection enable people to perceive and discriminate against 
particular  objects  or  features.  Visual  features  should  be 
consistent  throughout  the  whole  visualization  experience. 
Graphical  perception 
that  measure  users’ 
studies 
performances  across  visualization  designs  and  different 
displays offer other studies to new insight into the utility of 
depth, color, geometries, and scale. 

To  encode  spatial  data  according  to  positional  aspects, 
data elements can be placed in the virtual coordinate system 
or placed on constructed maps or globe view,  according to 
data. In parallel to this selection, developers select different 
interaction methods. Globe visualizations include rotational 
movement. However, users can only see a particular part of 
the globe. Therefore, while information visualization prefers 
to use placement on maps, scientific visualizations  employ 
exact  shapes  or  coordinate  systems  due  to  the  accuracy 
aspect.  Different  3D  shapes,  colors,  opacity  levels,  and 
textures  are  used  to  represent  located  elements.  There  are 
also  data-specific  preferences,  such  as  a  combination  of 
rotational models with a network diagram. Spatio-temporal 
visualizations  are  mainly  used  for  simulations.  One  of  the 
most  used  visualization  techniques  for  multi-dimensional 
data  is  3D  scatterplots.  Most  of  the  immersive  tools  and 
toolkits  provide  immersive  scatterplots  construction.  Since 
they  are  already  available  for  various  visual  channels,  the 
encoding  process  does  not  require  additional  techniques. 
However, it is not suitable for complex datasets for specific 
tasks due to visual clutter. To solve this problem, filtering 
methods are used. For selection tasks, ray casting is still the 
most used  method. These methods allow a user to select a 
single object, draw a bounding box, or brush multiple objects 
that can be selectable. Interactive visualizations always need 
to give necessary feedback and visual cues to point out the 
possible interactions.  For example, selected objects should 
be visually identifiable. 

Data  quality,  handling  with  data  streams,  and  semantic 
relation  extraction  from  raw  data  remain  a  challenge. 
Although  machine  learning  algorithms  are  promising, 
inaccurate 
automatization  of 
visualizations. Providing compact representations  for large 

the  process  may  yield 

 
volumes  of  multivariate  data  is  still  waiting  for  more 
advanced  techniques.  Although  studies  generally  employ 
supervised  and  unsupervised  machine  learning  algorithms 
and  dimensionality  reduction  techniques,  they  also  report 
that  the  results  can  be  misinterpreted  or  poorly  handled. 
Thus,  efficient  and  effective  methods  for  compression  and 
feature  extraction  are  needed.  For  scientific  visualizations, 
accuracy  gains  more  importance  to  filter  data  or  calculate 
probability.  Generally,  fine-tuning  the  hyper-parameters  is 
used to arrange the sensitivity of the algorithm. 

6 Conclusion 

Following the protocols for a systematic review, sources 
related  to  immersive  visualizations  were  identified  and 
filtered out. The resulting articles were further analyzed, and 
relevant studies were grouped according to the most common 
problem domains and represented in different sections. We 
presented the overview of existing literature, discussed the 
strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  described  methods,  and 
pointed out unsolved problems and challenges. The results 
of our study show that there is a growing body of research 
examining  immersive  visualizations  in  a  wide  variety  of 
problem domains. However, while most of the studies have 
been  gathering  around  the  development  of  immersive 
visualizations,  only  a  minority  have  focused  on  building 
theoretical 
developed 
visualizations based on data type and domain and later tested 
for  the  visualization  tasks.  However,  those  tasks  also  have 
certain  specifications.  Using  tasks  only  to  evaluate  the 
visualizations  eliminates  possible  integration  options  and 
task-specific design decisions. Studies use similar interaction 
methods  provided  by  controllers.  This  situation  is  not 
sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  of  specific  areas.  New 
interaction  paradigms  that  exploit  full-body  interactions 
should be searched. 

background.  Most 

studies 

I 

26 

rise  to  new  research  questions,  followed  by  usability, 
interactivity, and reliability issues. 

2D visualizations still protect their ground in displaying 
statistical  and  abstract  data  in  information  visualizations, 
while  3D  visualizations  are  commonly  used  in  physical 
sciences, engineering, and design. 3D versions of traditional 
statistical  visualization  techniques,  such  as  bar  plots  and 
scatter  plots,  are  still  commonly  used  in  data  visualization 
contexts.  However,  only  a  few  studies  focus  on  creating 
standard  guidelines  for  virtual  reality,  and  each  study 
individually  provides  a  framework  or  employs  previous 
studies on traditional 2D visualizations. 

With the myriad of advantages provided for visualization 
and virtual reality, most studies prefer to use game engines. 
However,  accuracy  requirements  are  not  convenient  for 
critical  scientific  studies.  Due  to  occlusion  problems, 
perceptual  distortion,  absence  of  a  common  baseline,  and 
noneffective 3D representations of abstract data on standard 
2D  monitors,  validation  of  3D  is  still  waiting  for  further 
research  and  alternative  approaches  for  solving  design 
challenges. As in the life sciences, a more holistic approach 
is  their  hybrid  use,  which  can  compensate  for  each  other. 
Virtual  Reality  visualizations  have  made  some  compelling 
advancements in recent years, but there is still plenty of room 
for  improvement  and  further  exploration.  Many  research 
questions are waiting for comprehensive studies: Which data 
types and visual structures are more suitable for VR, and are 
they 
the  performance  of  qualitative  and 
quantitative  data  analysis?  Is  there  a  need  for  analytical 
methods specific to VR, and how can they be produced? 

increasing 

The  constant  changes  in  the  underlying  technology 
require  repeated  studies  and  constant  development  in 
theories  behind  the  empirical  studies.  Together  with  the 
promising  nature  of  VR,  the  quality  and  sophistication  of 
visualizations are waiting for further improvements. 

Within the realm of visualization, the most mature areas 
of research have come from training, architecture, and game 
technologies. One of the most striking results is that although 
game engines are widely used in various domains, only a few 
studies  target  gameplay  data  visualizations  for  VR  games. 
Many studies focused on how VR could be used for training 
and  the  requirements  for  increasing  effectiveness.  Already 
having  a  3D  presentation,  most  of  the  architectural  studies 
have accomplished the transition process. Especially, the use 
of immersive systems to maintain cultural heritage in digital 
mediums  is  increasing.  Most  of  the  visualization  studies 
utilize  games  technologies  and  novel  techniques  derived 
from  computer  graphics  and  human-computer  interaction. 
With these technologies, the visualization domain has given 

References 

Aamir  A,  Tamosiunaite  M,  W ̈org ̈otter  F  (2022)Caffe2unity: 
Immersive  visualization  and  interpretation  of  deep  neural 
networks. Electronics 11(1):83. 

Akin,  S.,  Ergun,  O.,  Surer,  E.,  &  Dino,  I.  G.  (2020).  An 
immersive  performative  architectural  design 
tool  with 
daylighting  simulations:  a  building  information  modeling-
based approach. Engineering, Construction and Architectural 
Management. 

Akpan IJ, Shanker M (2019) A comparative evaluation of the 
effectiveness of virtual reality, 3D visualization and 2D visual 
interactive 
simulation:  an  exploratory  meta-analysis. 
Simulation 95(2):145–170. 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

27 

Amores  J,  Benavides  X,  Maes  P  (2015)  Showme:  A  remote 
collaboration  system 
immersive  gestural 
that  supports 
communication.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  33rd  Annual  ACM 
Conference  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems, pp 1343– 1348. 

Aparicio  M,  Costa  CJ 

(2015)  Data  visualization. 

Communication design quarterly review 3(1):7–11. 

Ardulov  V,  Pariser  O  (2017)  Immersive  data  interaction  for 
planetary  and  earth  sciences.  Proceedings  -  IEEE  Virtual 
Reality pp 263–264. 

Asjad  NS,  Adams  H,  Paris  R,  Bodenheimer  B  (2018) 
Perception  of  height  in  virtual  reality:  a  study  of  climbing 
stairs.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  15th  ACM  symposium  on 
applied perception, pp 1–8. 

Bailey BJ, Lilja A, Strong C, Moline K, Kavallaris M, Hughes 
RT,  McGhee  J  (2019)  Multi-user  immersive  virtual  reality 
prototype for collaborative visualization of microscopy image 
data.  Proceedings  -  VRCAI  2019:  17th  ACM  SIGGRAPH 
International Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and 
its Applications in Industry. 

Bergmann T, Balzer M, Hopp T, van de Kamp T, Kopmann A, 
Jerome  NT,  Zapf  M  (2017)  Inspiration  from  vr  gaming 
technology:  Deep  immersion  and  realistic  interaction  for 
scientific visualization. In:VISIGRAPP (3: IVAPP), pp 330–
334. 

Bertin  J  (1983)  Semiology  of  graphics;  diagrams  networks 

maps. Tech. rep. 

Bobek S, Tadeja SK, Struski  L, Stachura P, KipourosT, Tabor 
J,  Nalepa  GJ,  Kristensson  PO  (2022)Virtual  reality-based 
parallel coordinates plots en-hanced with explainable ai and 
data-science  analytics 
for  decision-making  processes. 
Applied Sciences12(1):331. 

Bonali FL, Russo E, Vitello F, Antoniou V, MarcheseF, Fallati 
L, Bracchi V, Corti N, Savini A, Whit-worth M, et al. (2022) 
How academics and the public experienced immersive virtual 
reality for geoeducation. Geosciences 12(1):9. 

Bostock  M,  Ogievetsky  V,  Heer  J  (2011)  D3  datadriven 
documents. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer 
graphics 17(12):2301–2309. 

Brehmer  M,  Munzner  T  (2013)  A  multi-level  typology  of 
transactions  on 
tasks. 

abstract  visualization 
visualization and computer graphics 19(12):2376–2385. 

IEEE 

Broucke  SV,  Deligiannis  N  (2019)  Visualization  of  real-time 
heterogeneous smart city data using virtual reality. In: 2019 
IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), IEEE, pp 
685–690. 

Brunhart-Lupo  N,  Bush  B,  Gruchalla  K,  Potter  K,  Smith  S 
(2020) Collaborative exploration of scientific datasets using 
immersive  and  statistical  visualization.  Tech.  rep.,  National 
Renewable  Energy  Lab.(NREL),  Golden,  CO  (United 
States). 

Butcher PW, Ritsos PD, John NW (2019) VriA - A framework 
for immersive  analytics on the  web. Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings pp 2–7. 

Caldarola EG, Rinaldi AM (2017) Big data visualization tools: 

a survey. Research Gate. 

Caserman P, Garcia-Agundez A, Gobel S (2019) A survey of 
full-body motion reconstruction in immersive virtual reality 
applications. 
transactions  on  visualization  and 
IEEE 
computer graphics26(10):3089–3108. 

Cassidy KC, Sefcık J, Raghav Y, Chang A, Durrantˇ JD (2020) 
ProteinVR:  Web-based  molecular  visualization  in  virtual 
reality. PLoS Computational Biology 16(3):1–17. 

Chandler  T,  Cordeil  M,  Czauderna  T,  Dwyer  T,  Glowacki  J, 
Goncu C, Klapperstueck M, Klein K, Marriott K, Schreiber 
F, et al. (2015) Immersive analytics. In: 2015 Big Data Visual 
Analytics (BDVA), IEEE, pp 1–8. 

Chang  TP,  Weiner  D  (2016)  Screen-Based  Simulation  and 
Virtual  Reality  for  Pediatric  Emergency  Medicine.  Clinical 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine 17(3):224–230. 

Chawla P, Hazarika S, Shen HW (2020) Token-wise sentiment 
decomposition for convnet: visualizing a sentiment classifier. 
Visual Informatics 4(2):132– 141. 

Chen, M., Floridi, L., & Borgo, R. (2014). What is visualization 
really for?. In The Philosophy of Information Quality (pp. 75-
93). Springer, Cham. 

Chen  Z,  Qu  H,  Wu  Y  (2017)  Immersive  Urban  Analytics 
through  Exploded  Views.  Workshop  on 
Immersive 
Analytics:  Exploring  Future  Visualization  and  Interaction 
Technologies for Data Analytics. 

in 

teleporting 

Cherep  LA,  Kelly  JW,  Miller  A,  Lim  AF,  Gilbert  SB  (2022) 
through  virtual 
Individual  differences 
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied. 
Choromanski K, L obodecki J, Puchal a K, Ostrowski W (2019) 
Development  of  virtual  reality  application  for  cultural 
from  multi-source  3d  data. 
heritage 
International  Archives  of  the  Photogrammetry,  Remote 
Sensing & Spatial Information Sciences. 

visualization 

Churchill  EF,  Snowdon  D  (1998)  Collaborative  virtual 
environments: An introductory review of issues and systems. 
Virtual Reality 3(1):3–15. 

Ciganek J, Kepesiova Z (2020) Processing and visualization of 
medical images using machine learning and virtual reality. In: 
2020 Cybernetics & Informatics (K&I), IEEE, pp 1–6. 

Cleveland WS, McGill R (1984) Graphical perception: Theory, 
experimentation,  and  application  to  the  development  of 
graphical  methods.  Journal  of  the  American  statistical 
association 79(387):531– 554. 

Cliquet G, Perreira M, Picarougne F, Pri´e Y, Vigier T (2017) 
Towards  hmd-based  immersive  analytics.  In:  Immersive 
analytics Workshop, IEEE VIS 2017. 

Cordeil M, Cunningham A, Dwyer T, Thomas BH, Marriott K 
(2017a) Imaxes: Immersive axes as embodied affordances for 
interactive multivariate data visualisation. In: Proceedings of 
the  30th  Annual  ACM  Symposium  on  User  Interface 
Software and Technology, pp 71–83. 

Cordeil M, Dwyer T, Klein K, Laha B, Marriott K, Thomas BH 
(2017b)  Immersive  Collaborative  Analysis  of  Network 
Connectivity: CAVE-style or HeadMounted Display? IEEE 
Transactions  on  Visualization  and  Computer  Graphics 
23(1):441–450. 

Cordeil  M,  Cunningham  A,  Bach  B,  Hurter  C,  Thomas  BH, 
Marriott  K,  Dwyer  T  (2019)  Iatk:  An  immersive  analytics 

 
toolkit. In: 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D 
User Interfaces (VR), IEEE, pp 200–209. 

Cruz-Neira  C,  Sandin  DJ,  DeFanti  TA,  Kenyon  RV,  Hart  JC 
(1992)  The  cave:  audio  visual  experience  automatic  virtual 
environment. Communications of the ACM 35(6):64–73. 
Curtis V (2015) Motivation to participate in an online  citizen 
science  game:  A  study  of  foldit.  Science  Communication 
37(6):723–746. 

Dede  C  (2009)  Immersive  interfaces  for  engagement  and 
10. 

323(5910):66–69, 

Science 

DOI 

learning. 
1126/science.1167311. 

Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R, Nacke L (2011) From game 
design elements to gamefulness: defining” gamification”. In: 
Proceedings  of  the  15th  international  academic  MindTrek 
conference:  Envisioning  future  media  environments,  pp  9–
15. 

Dong H, Liang X, Liu Y, Wang D (2022) 5g virtual reality in 
the design and dissemination  of contemporary urban image 
system  under 
the  background  of  big  data.Wireless 
Communications andMobileComputig 2022. 

Drogemuller A, Cunningham A, Walsh J, Ross W, Thomas BH 
(2017)  VRige  :  Exploring  Social  Network  Interactions  In 
Immersive  Virtual  Environments.  Big  Data  Visual  and 
Immersive Analytics. 

Drouhard M, Steed CA, Hahn S, Proffen T, Daniel J, Matheson 
M (2015) Immersive visualization for materials science data 
analysis  using  the  Oculus  Rift.  Proceedings  -  2015  IEEE 
International Conference on Big Data, IEEE Big Data 2015 
pp 2453–2461. 

for 

event 

temporal 

analytics 

Du F, Plaisant C, Spring N, Shneiderman B (2016) Eventaction: 
Visual 
sequence 
recommendation.  In:  2016  IEEE  Conference  on  Visual 
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), IEEE, pp 61–70. 
Dwyer T, Marriott K, Isenberg T, Klein K, Riche N, Schreiber 
F, Stuerzlinger W, Thomas BH (2018) Immersive analytics: 
an 
in  Computer  Science 
(including subseries Lecture  Notes in  Artificial Intelligence 
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11190 LNCS:1–23. 
El Jamiy F, Marsh R (2018) Survey on depth perception in head 
mounted  displays:  distance  estimation  in  virtual  reality, 
augmented reality, and mixed reality. IET image processing 
13, 5 (2019), 707–712. 

introduction.  Lecture  Notes 

Elden M (2017) Implementation and initial assessment of VR 
for  scientific  visualisation:  Extending  Unreal  Engine  4  to 
visualise scientific data on the HTC Vive. MSc Thesis p 108. 
Escobar-Castillejos D, Noguez J, Neri L, Magana A, Benes B 
(2016)  A  Review  of  Simulators  with  Haptic  Devices  for 
Medical Training. Journal of Medical Systems 40(4):1–22. 
Ferdani D, Demetrescu E, Cavalieri M, Pace G, LenziS (2020) 
3d  modelling  and  visualization  in  field  archaeology.  from 
survey to interpretation of the past using digital technologies. 
Groma Documenting archaeology. 

Fernandez-Palacios  BJ,  Morabito  D,  Remondino  F  (2017) 
Access  to  complex  reality-based  3d  models  using  virtual 
reality solutions. Journal of cultural heritage 23:40–48. 

Ferrell JB, Campbell JP, McCarthy DR, McKay KT, Hensinger 
M, Srinivasan R, Zhao X, Wurthmann A, Li J, Schneebeli ST 

I 

28 

(2019) Chemical Exploration with Virtual Reality in Organic 
Teaching  Laboratories.  Journal  of  Chemical  Education 
96(9):1961– 1966. 

Fittkau F, Krause A, Hasselbring W (2015) Exploring software 
cities in virtual reality. 2015 IEEE 3rd Working Conference 
on Software Visualization,VISSOFT 2015 - Proceedings pp 
130–134. 

Fonnet A, Prie Y (2021) Survey of Immersive Analytics. IEEE 
Transactions  on  Visualization  and  Computer  Graphics 
27(3):2101–2122. 

Freina L, Ott M (2015) A literature review on immersive virtual 
reality in education: state of the art and perspectives. In: The 
international scientific conference elearning and software for 
education, vol 1, pp 10–1007. 

Friendly M (2007) A.-m. guerry’s” moral statistics of france”: 
Challenges  for  multivariable  spatial  analysis.  Statistical 
Science pp 368–399. 

Friendly M, Sigal M, Harnanansingh D (2017) The milestones 
project:  a  database  for  the  history  of  data  visualization.  In: 
Visible  Numbers:  Essays  on  the  History  of  Statistical 
Graphics, Routledge, pp 219–234. 

Fussell  SR,  Setlock  LD 

(2014)  Computer-mediated 
communication.  Handbook  of  Language  and  Social 
Psychology, The name of the publisher, Oxford University, 
pp 471–490. 

Gal R, Shapira L, Ofek E, Kohli P (2014) Flare: Fast layout for 
augmented reality applications. In: 2014 IEEE International 
Symposium  on  Mixed  and  Augmented  Reality  (ISMAR), 
IEEE, pp 207–212. 

Gamberini  L,  Chittaro  L,  Spagnolli  A,  Carlesso  C  (2015) 
Psychological  response  to  an  emergency  in  virtual  reality: 
Effects  of  victim  ethnicity  and  emergency  type  on  helping 
behavior  and  navigation.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior 
48:104–113. 

Gettens  R  (1964)  Archaeology  and  the  microscope.  the 
scientific  examination  of  archaeological  evidence.  leo  biek. 
lutterworth, london, 1963. 287 pp. illus. 

Gibson  JJ  (1977)  The  concept  of  affordances.  Perceiving, 

acting, and knowing. 

Grabowski  A,  Jankowski  J  (2015)  Virtual  realitybased  pilot 
training for underground coal miners. Safety science 72:310–
314. 

Gradl S, Wirth M, Zillig T, Eskofier BM (2018) Visualization 
of heart activity in virtual reality: A biofeedback application 
using  wearable  sensors.  In:  2018  IEEE  15th  international 
conference  on  wearable  and  implantable  body  sensor 
networks (BSN), IEEE, pp 152–155. 

Gugenheimer  J,  Stemasov  E,  Frommel  J,  Rukzio  E  (2017a) 
ShareVR: Enabling co-located experiences for virtual reality 
between HMD and Non-HMD users. Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings 2017-May:4021–
4033. 

Gugenheimer  J,  Stemasov  E,  Frommel  J,  Rukzio  E  (2017b) 
Sharevr:  Enabling  co-located  experiences  for  virtual  reality 
between hmd and non-hmd users. In: Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
pp 4021–4033. 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

29 

Guo R, Fujiwara T, Li Y, Lima KM, Sen S, Tran NK, Ma KL 
(2020)  Comparative  visual  analytics  for  assessing  medical 
records  with  sequence  embedding.  Visual  Informatics 
4(2):72–85. 

Jeelani  I,  Han  K,  Albert  A  (2020a)  Development  of  virtual 
reality  and  stereo-panoramic  environments  for  construction 
safety training. Engineering, Construction and Architectural 
Management. 

Hadjar  H,  Meziane  A,  Gherbi  R,  Setitra  I,  Aouaa  N  (2018) 
WebVR based interactive visualization of open health data. 
ACM International Conference Proceeding Series pp 56–63. 
Hanwell MD, Martin KM, Chaudhary A, Avila LS (2015) The 
visualization toolkit (vtk): Rewriting the rendering code for 
modern graphics cards. SoftwareX 1:9–12. 

Heer J, Card SK, Landay JA (2005) Prefuse (January):421. 
Heer  J  (2009)  Protovis:  A  graphical  toolkit  for  visualization. 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 
15(6):1121–1128. 

Helbig C, Bauer HS, Rink K, Wulfmeyer V, Frank M, Kolditz 
O  (2014)  Concept  and  workflow  for  3d  visualization  of 
atmospheric  data  in  a  virtual  reality  environment  for 
analytical  approaches.  Environmental  earth 
sciences 
72(10):3767–3780. 

Hoppe  AH,  van  de  Camp  F,  Stiefelhagen  R  (2021)  ShiSha: 
Enabling Shared Perspective With Faceto-Face Collaboration 
Using Redirected Avatars in Virtual Reality. Proceedings of 
the 
Interaction 
4(CSCW3):251:1–251:22. 

Human-Computer 

ACM 

on 

Horton  BK,  Kalia  RK,  Moen  E,  Nakano  A,  ichi  Nomura  K, 
Qian  M,  Vashishta  P,  Hafreager  A  (2019)  Game-Engine-
Assisted  Research  platform 
for  Scientific  computing 
(GEARS) in Virtual Reality. SoftwareX 9:112–116. 

Huang  J,  Lucash  MS,  Scheller  RM,  Klippel  A  (2019) 
Visualizing  ecological  data  in  virtual  reality.  26th  IEEE 
Conference  on  Virtual  Reality  and  3D  User  Interfaces,  VR 
2019 Proceedings pp 1311–1312. 

Huang  Y,  Zhai  X,  Ali  S,  Liu  R  (2016)  Design  and 
implementation  of  traditional  chinese  medicine  education 
visualization platform based on virtual reality technology. In: 
2016  8th 
Information 
International  Conference  on 
Technology  in  Medicine  and  Education  (ITME),  IEEE,  pp 
499–50. 

Hurter  C,  Riche  NH,  Drucker  SM,  Cordeil  M,  Alligier  R, 
Vuillemot  R  (2018)  Fiberclay:  Sculpting  three  dimensional 
trajectories to reveal structural insights. IEEE transactions on 
visualization and computer graphics 25(1):704–714. 

Hvass J, Larsen O, Vendelbo K, Nilsson N, Nordahl R, Serafin 
S (2018) Visual realism and presence in a virtual reality game. 
3DTV-Conference 2017June:1–4. 

Ibayashi H, Sugiura Y, Sakamoto D, Miyata N, Tada M, Okuma 
T, Kurata T, Mochimaru M, Igarashi T (2015) Dollhouse vr: 
a multi-view, multi-user collaborative design workspace with 
vr 
technology.  In:  SIGGRAPH  Asia  2015  Emerging 
Technologies, pp 1–2. 

Ivson P, Moreira A, Queiroz F, Santos W, Celes W (2020) A 
Systematic Review of Visualization in Building Information 
Modeling. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 26(10):3109–3127. 

Jacovi  A,  Shalom  OS,  Goldberg  Y  (2018)  Understanding 
convolutional  neural  networks  for  text  classification.  arXiv 
preprint arXiv:180908037. 

Jeelani  I,  Han  K,  Albert  A  (2020b)  Development  of  virtual 
reality  and  stereo-panoramic  environments  for  construction 
safety training. Engineering, Construction and Architectural 
Management 27(8):1853–1876. 

Jin Z, Cui S, Guo S, Gotz D, Sun J, Cao N(2020) Carepre: An 
intelligent  clinical  decision  assistance  system.  ACM 
Transactions on Computing for Healthcare 1(1):1–20. 

Joo  SY,  Cho  YS,  Lee  SY,  Seok  H,  Seo  CH  (2020)Effects  of 
virtual  reality-based  rehabilitation  on  burned  hands:  a 
prospective,  randomized,  singleblind  study.  Journal  of 
clinical medicine 9(3):731. 

Juanes  JA,  Ruisoto  P,  Briz-Ponce  L  (2016)  Immersive 
visualization  anatomical  environment  using  virtual  reality 
devices.  In:  Proceedings  of 
the  Fourth  International 
Conference  on  Technological  Ecosystems  for  Enhancing 
Multiculturality, pp 473–477. 

Keim DA, Mansmann F, Schneidewind J, Thomas J, Ziegler H 
(2008) Visual analytics: Scope and challenges. In: Visual data 
mining, Springer, pp 76–90. 

Keiriz  JJ,  Zhan  L,  Ajilore  O,  Leow  AD,  Forbes  AG  (2018) 
Neurocave:  A  web-based  immersive  visualization  platform 
for  exploring  connectome  datasets.  Network  Neuroscience 
2(3):344–361. 

Kersten TP, Tschirschwitz F, Deggim S (2017) Development of 
a  virtual  museum  including  a  4D  presentation  of  building 
history  in  virtual  reality.  International  Archives  of  the 
Photogrammetry,  Remote  Sensing  and  Spatial  Information 
Sciences ISPRS Archives 42(2W3):361–367. 

Kitchenham  B,  Charters  S  (2007)  Guidelines  for  performing 

systematic literature reviews in software engineering. 

Kokelj  Z,  Bohak  C,  Marolt  M  (2018)  A  web-based  virtual 
reality  environment  for  medical  visualization.  2018  41st 
International Convention on Information and Communication 
Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics, MIPRO 2018 
- Proceedings pp 299–302. 

Kosara R (2016) An empire built on sand: Reexamining what 
we think we know about visualization. In: Proceedings of the 
sixth  workshop  on  beyond  time  and  errors  on  novel 
evaluation methods for visualization, pp 162–168. 

Kosara R, Healey C, Interrante V, Laidlaw D, Ware C (2003) 
Visualization  viewpoints.  IEEE  Computer  Graphics  and 
Applications 23(4):20–25. 

Kraus M, Angerbauer K, Buchmu¨ller J, Schweitzer D, Keim 
DA,  Sedlmair  M,  Fuchs  J  (2020)  Assessing  2D  and  3D 
Heatmaps  for  Comparative  Analysis:  An  Empirical  Study. 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  - 
Proceedings pp 1–14. 

Kriglstein S (2019) A taxonomy of visualizations for gameplay 
in  Gaming  and 

data.  Data  Analytics  Applications 
Entertainment 223. 

Kwok  PK,  Yan  M,  Chan  BK,  Lau  HY  (2019)  Crisis 
management  training  using  discrete-event  simulation  and 

 
virtual 
reality 
Engineering 135:711–722. 

techniques.  Computers  & 

Industrial 

Kwon BC, Choi MJ, Kim JT, Choi E, Kim YB, Kwon S, Sun J, 
Choo J (2018) Retainvis: Visual analytics with interpretable 
and  interactive  recurrent  neural  networks  on  electronic 
medical  records.  IEEE  transactions  on  visualization  and 
computer graphics 25(1):299–309. 

Kwon OH, Muelder C, Lee K, Ma KL (2015) Spherical layout 
and  rendering  methods  for  immersive  graph  visualization. 
IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium 2015-July:63–67. 
Lee H, Kim H, Monteiro DV, Goh Y, Han D, Liang HN, Yang 
HS, Jung J (2019) Annotation vs. Virtual tutor: Comparative 
analysis  on  the  effectiveness  of  visual  instructions  in 
immersive  virtual  reality.  Proceedings 
-  2019  IEEE 
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, 
ISMAR 2019 pp 318–327. 

Li D, Mei H, Shen Y, Su S, Zhang W, Wang J, Zu M, Chen W 
(2018)  Echarts:  a  declarative 
rapid 
construction  of  web-based  visualization.  Visual  Informatics 
2(2):136–146. 

framework 

for 

I 

30 

collaborative  virtual  reality  exploration  in  immersive  3d 
environments. bioRxiv. 

Mascolino V, Haghighat A, Polys N, Roskoff NJ, Rajamohan S 
(2019) A collaborative virtual reality system (VRS) with X3D 
visualization  for  RAPID.  Proceedings  -  Web3D  2019: 24th 
International ACM Conference on 3D Web Technology. 
Medler  B,  Magerko  B  (2011)  Analytics  of  play:  Using 
information  visualization  and  gameplay  practices  for 
visualizing video game data. Parsons Journal for Information 
Mapping 3(1):1–12. 

Mehrotra C, Chitransh N, Singh A (2017) Scope and challenges 
of  visual  analytics:  A  survey.  In:  2017  International 
Conference on Computing, Communication and Automation 
(ICCCA), IEEE, pp 1229–1234. 

programmable 

Mei H, Chen W, Ma Y, Guan H, Hu W (2018) Viscomposer: A 
for 

visual 
information visualization. Visual Informatics 2(1):71–81. 
Mikropoulos  TA,  Natsis  A  (2011)  Educational  virtual 
environments:  A  ten-year  review  of  empirical  research 
(1999–2009). Computers & Education 56(3):769–780. 

environment 

composition 

Li  D,  Lee  E,  Schwelling  E,  Quick  MG,  Meyers  P,  Du  R, 
Varshney  A  (2020)  Meteovis:  Visualizing  meteorological 
events in virtual reality. In: Extended Abstracts of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
pp 1–9. 

Li  W,  Agrawala  M,  Curless  B,  Salesin  D  (2008)  Automated 
generation of interactive 3d exploded view diagrams. ACM 
Transactions on Graphics (TOG)27(3):1–7. 

Li  X,  Lv  Z, Wang W, Zhang B, Hu J, Yin  L, Feng S (2016) 
WebVRGIS based traffic analysis and visualization system. 
Advances 
93:1–8,  DOI 
10.1016/j.advengsoft. 2015.11.003. 

in  Engineering  Software 

Liimatainen  K,  Latonen  L,  Valkonen  M,  Kartasalo  K, 
Ruusuvuori P (2020) Virtual reality for 3d histology: multi-
scale  visualization  of  organs  with 
interactive  feature 
exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:200311148. 

Liu M, Shi J, Li Z, Li C, Zhu J, Liu S (2016) Towards better 
analysis  of  deep  convolutional  neural  networks.  IEEE 
transactions  on  visualization  and  computer  graphics 
23(1):91–100. 

Lv Z, Yin T, Zhang X, Song H, Chen G (2016) Virtual Reality 
Smart  City  Based on  WebVRGIS. IEEE  Internet of  Things 
Journal 3(6):1015–1024. 

Lynch  T,  Martins  N  (2015)  Nothing  to  fear?  an  analysis  of 
college students’ fear experiences with video games. Journal 
of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 59(2):298–317. 

Marks  S,  White  D,  Singh  M  (2017)  Getting  up  your  nose:  A 
virtual  reality  education  tool  for  nasal  cavity  anatomy.  In: 
SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 symposium on education, pp 1–7. 
Marriott K, Chen J, Hlawatsch M, Itoh T, Nacenta MA, Reina 
G, Stuerzlinger W (2018) Just 5 questions: toward a design 
framework  for  immersive  analytics.  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer  Science  (including  subseries  Lecture  Notes  in 
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 
11190 LNCS:259–288. 

Martinez  X,  Baaden  M  (2020)  Fair  sharing  of  molecular 
visualization  experiences:  from  pictures  in  the  cloud  to 

Millais P, Jones SL, Kelly R (2018) Exploring data in virtual 
reality: Comparisons with 2d data visualizations. Conference 
on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  -  Proceedings 
2018-April:5–10. 

Miller JA, Lee V, Cooper S, Seif El-Nasr M (2019)Large-scale 
analysis of visualization options in a citizen science game. In: 
Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction  in Play Companion Extended Abstracts, 
pp 535–542. 

Misiak M, Schreiber A, Fuhrmann A, Zur S, Seider D, Nafeie 
L (2018) Islandviz: A tool for visualizing modular software 
systems in virtual reality. In: 2018 IEEE Working Conference 
on Software Visualization (VISSOFT), IEEE, pp 112–116. 
Molka-Danielsen  J,  Prasolova-Førland  E,  Hokstad  LM, 
Fominykh  M  (2015)  Creating  safe  and  effective  learning 
environment  for  emergency  management  training  using 
virtural reality. Norsk konferanse for organisasjoners bruk av 
IT 23(1). 

Monaco  D,  Pellegrino  MA,  Scarano  V,  Vicidomini  L  (2022) 
Linked open data in authoring virtual exhibitions. Journal of 
Cultural Heritage 53:127–142. 

Moon  JD,  Galea  MP  (2016)  Overview  of  clinical  decision 
in  healthcare.  In:  Improving  health 
support  systems 
management through clinical  decision support systems, IGI 
Global, pp 1–27. 

Munster  S,  Maiwald  F,  Lehmann  C,  Lazariv  T,  Hofmann  M, 
Niebling  F  (2020)  An  automated  pipeline  for  a  browser-
based, city-scale mobile 4d vr application based on historical 
images. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Structuring 
and Understanding of Multimedia heritAge Contents, pp 33–
40. 

Nagao  R,  Matsumoto  K,  Narumi  T,  Tanikawa  T,  Hirose  M 
(2018) Ascending and descending  in  virtual reality: Simple 
and safe system using passive haptics. IEEE transactions on 
visualization and computer graphics 24(4):1584–1593. 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

31 

Oberhauser  R,  Lecon  C  (2017)  Gamified  Virtual  Reality  for 
Program  Code  Structure  Comprehension.  International 
Journal of Virtual Reality 17(2):79– 88. 

Okada K, Yoshida M, Itoh T, Czauderna T, Stephens K (2018) 
VR System for spatio-Temporal visualization of tweet data. 
Onorati  T,  Dıaz  P,  Zarraonandia  T,  Aedo  I  (2018)  The 
immersive  bubble  chart:  a  semantic  and  virtual  reality 
visualization  for  big  data.  In:  The  31st  Annual  ACM 
Symposium  on  User  Interface  Software  and  Technology 
Adjunct Proceedings, pp 176–178. 

but  equal  or  happy  together  at  last.  In:  Visualization 
Conference, IEEE, IEEE Computer Society, pp 115–115. 
Riccardo Maria B, Adam Bourdarios C, Hovdesven M, Vukotic 
I (2019) Virtual Reality and game engines for interactive data 
visualization and event displays in HEP, an example from the 
ATLAS experiment. EPJ Web of Conferences 214:02013. 
Roberts  JC,  Butcher  PW,  Ritsos  PD  (2022)  One  view  is  not 
enough:  review  of  and  encouragement  for  multiple  and 
alternative 
immersive 
31isualization. Computers 11(2):20. 

representations 

and 

3d 

in 

Pajorova  E,  HluchyL,  Kostic  I,  Pajorova  J,  Bacakova  M, 
Zatloukal M (2018) A Virtual Reality Visualization Tool for 
Three-Dimensional  Biomedical  Nanostructures.  Journal  of 
Physics: Conference Series 1098(1). 

Ronchi E, Nilsson D, Koji ́c S, Eriksson J, Lovreglio R, Modig 
H,  Walter  AL  (2016)  A  Virtual  Reality  Experiment  on 
Flashing Lights at Emergency Exit Portals for Road Tunnel 
Evacuation. Fire Technology 52(3):623–647. 

Polys  NF,  Bowman  DA  (2004)  Design  and  display  of 
enhancing  information  in  desktop  information-rich  virtual 
environments:  challenges  and  techniques.  Virtual  Reality 
8(1):41–54. 

Pousman  Z,  Stasko  J,  Mateas  M  (2007)  Casual  information 
visualization:  Depictions  of  data  in  everyday  life.  IEEE 
transactions  on  visualization  and  computer  graphics 
13(6):1145–1152. 

Rachevsky DC, Souza VCD, Nedel L (2018) Visualization and 
interaction  in  immersive  virtual  reality  games:  A  user 
evaluation  study.  Proceedings  -  2018  20th  Symposium  on 
Virtual and Augmented Reality, SVR 2018 (2014):89–98. 
Radianti J, Majchrzak TA, Fromm J, WohlgenanntI (2020) A 
systematic  review  of  immersive  virtual  reality  applications 
for higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and 
research agenda. Computers & Education 147:103778. 

Raya  L,  Garcia-Rueda  JJ,  L´opez-Fern´andez  D,  Mayor  J 
(2021)  Virtual  Reality  Application  for  Fostering  Interest  in 
Art. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 41(2):106–
113. 

Reddivari S, Smith J, Pabalate J (2017) Vrvisu: a tool for virtual 
reality  based  visualization  of  medical  data.  In:  2017 
IEEE/ACM  International  Conference on  Connected Health: 
Applications,  Systems  and  Engineering  Technologies 
(CHASE), IEEE, pp 280–281. 

Rehme M (2018) Using cinematic effects to visualize the deep 
water  impact  data  set.  2018  IEEE  Scientific  Visualization 
Conference, SciVis 2018 Proceedings (October):82–84. 

Ren  D,  Hollerer  T,  Yuan  X  (2014)  ivisdesigner:  Expressive 
interactive  design  of 
information  visualizations.  IEEE 
transactions  on  visualization  and  computer  graphics 
20(12):2092–2101. 

Ren  D,  Lee  B,  Hollerer  T  (2017)  Stardust:  Accessible  and 
Transparent  GPU  Support  for  Information  Visualization 
Rendering. Computer Graphics Forum 36(3):179–188. 

Ren  H,  Hornecker  E  (2021)  Comparing  Understanding  and 
Memorization in Physicalization and VR Visualization. TEI 
2021 - Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction. 

Rendgen, S. (2018). The minard system: the complete statistical 

graphics of Charles-Joseph Minard. Chronicle Books. 

Rosero  F  (2017)  Assessment  of  people’s  perception  of  fire 

growth: A virtual reality study. 

Satyanarayan  A,  Heer  J  (2014)  Lyra:  An 

interactive 
visualization  design  environment.  In:  Computer  Graphics 
Forum, Wiley Online Library, vol 33, pp 351–360. 

Satyanarayan A, Russell R, Hoffswell J, Heer J (2015) Reactive 
vega:  A  streaming  dataflow  architecture  for  declarative 
interactive  visualization.  IEEE  transactions  on  visualization 
and computer graphics 22(1):659–668. 

Satyanarayan A, Moritz D, Wongsuphasawat K, Heer J (2017) 
Vega-Lite:  A  Grammar  of  Interactive  Graphics.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Visualization  and  Computer  Graphics 
23(1):341–350. 
Schweibenz  W 

(1998)  The”  virtual  museum”:  New 
perspectives for museums to present objects and information 
using  the  internet  as  a  knowledge  base  and  communication 
system. Isi 34:185–200. 

Seaborn K, Fels DI (2015) Gamification in theory and action: 
A  survey.  International  Journal  of  human-computer  studies 
74:14–31. 

Selvaraju  RR,  Cogswell  M,  Das  A,  Vedantam  R,  Parikh  D, 
Batra  D  (2017)  Grad-cam:  Visual  explanations  from  deep 
networks via gradient-based localization pp 618–626. 

Seth  A,  Vance  JM,  Oliver  JH  (2011)  Virtual  reality  for 
assembly  methods  prototyping:  a  review.  Virtual  reality 
15(1):5–20. 

Sevastjanova  R,  Schafer  H,  Bernard  J,  Keim  D,  ElAssady  M 
(2019) Shall we play?–extending the visual analytics design 
space  through  gameful  design  concepts.  In:  MLUI  2019: 
Machine  Learning  from  User  Interactions  for  Visualization 
and Analytics, IEEE VIS 2019 workshop. 

Shamsuzzoha A, Toshev R, Vu Tuan V, Kankaanpaa T, Helo P 
(2019)  Digital  factory–virtual  reality  environments  for 
industrial  training  and  maintenance.Interactive  Learning 
Environments pp 1–24. 

Shrestha  S,  Mohamed  MA,  Chakraborty  J  (2016)  A 
comparative  pilot  study  of  historical  artifacts  in  a  CAVE 
automatic  virtual  reality  environment  versus  paper-based 
artifacts. Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 
Human-Computer  Interaction  with  Mobile  Devices  and 
Services Adjunct, MobileHCI 2016 pp 968–977. 

Rhyne TM, Tory M, Munzner T, Ward M, Johnson C, Laidlaw 
DH (2003) Information and scientific visualization: Separate 

Sicat R, Li J, Choi J, Cordeil M, Jeong WK, Bach B, Pfister H 
(2019)  DXR:  A  Toolkit  for  Building  Immersive  Data 

 
Visualizations.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Visualization  and 
Computer Graphics 25(1):715– 725. 

Skamantzari  M  (2018)  3d  visualization  for  virtual  museum 

development. 

Usher W, Klacansky P, Federer F, Bremer PT, Knoll A, Yarch 
J,  Angelucci  A,  Pascucci  V  (2017)  A  virtual  reality 
visualization  tool  for  neuron  tracing.  IEEE  transactions  on 
visualization and computer graphics 24(1):994–1003. 

I 

32 

Slater M, Khanna P, Mortensen J, Yu I (2009) Visual realism 
enhances 
immersive  virtual 
environment.  IEEE  computer  graphics  and  applications 
29(3):76–84. 

response 

realistic 

in  an 

Soeiro J, Cl´audio AP, Carmo MB, Ferreira HA (2016) Mobile 
solution for brain visualization using augmented and virtual 
reality.  In:  2016  20th  International  Conference  Information 
Visualisation (IV), IEEE, pp 124–129. 

Sommer B, Baaden M, Krone M, Woods A (2018) From Virtual 
Reality to Immersive Analytics in Bioinformatics. Journal of 
integrative bioinformatics 15(2):1–6. 

Sooai  AG,  Nugroho  A,  Al  Azam  MN,  Sumpeno  S,  Purnomo 
MH (2017) Virtual artifact: Enhancing museum exhibit using 
3d  virtual 
In:  2017  TRON  Symposium 
(TRONSHOW), IEEE, pp 1–5. 

reality. 

Sousa  M,  Mendes  D,  Paulo  S,  Matela  N,  Jorge  J,  Lopes  DS 
(2017)  Vrrrroom:  Virtual  reality  for  radiologists  in  the 
reading room. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems, pp 4057–4062. 

Steinbeck  M,  Koschke  R,  Rudel  MO  (2019)  Comparing  the 
evostreets  visualization 
three-
dimensional  environments  a  controlled  experiment.  IEEE 
International Conference on Program Comprehension 2019-
May:231–242. 

technique 

two-and 

in 

Stolte  C,  Tang  D,  Hanrahan  P  (2002)  Polaris:  A  system  for 
query,  analysis,  and  visualization  of  multidimensional 
relational databases. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics 8(1):52– 65. 

Sun  B,  Fritz  A,  Xu  W  (2019)  An  immersive  visual  analytics 
platform  for  multidimensional  dataset.  Proceedings  -  18th 
IEEE/ACIS  International  Conference  on  Computer  and 
Information Science, ICIS 2019 pp 24–29. 

Surer, E., Erkayaoğlu, M., Öztürk, Z. N., Yücel, F., Bıyık, E. 
A.,  Altan,  B.,  ...  &  Düzgün,  H.  Ş.  (2021).  Developing  a 
scenario-based  video  game  generation  framework  for 
computer  and  virtual  reality  environments:  a  comparative 
usability study. Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, 15(4), 
393-411. 

Thanyadit  S,  Punpongsanon  P,  Piumsomboon  T,  Pong  TC 
(2020)  Substituting  Teleportation  Visualization 
for 
Collaborative Virtual Environments. Proceedings - SUI 2020: 
ACM Symposium Spa User Interaction. 

Tinati R, Luczak-Roesch M, Simperl E, Hall W (2016) Because 
science  is  awesome:  studying  participation  in  a  citizen 
science game. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on 
Web Science, pp 45–54. 

Tinati  R,  Luczak-Roesch  M,  Simperl  E,  Hall  W  (2017)  An 
investigation  of  player  motivations  in  eyewire,  a  gamified 
citizen  science  project.  Computers  in  Human  Behavior 
73:527–540. 

Tsuji  T,  Ogata  K  (2015)  Rehabilitation  systems  based  on 
visualization  techniques:  A  review.  Journal  of  robotics  and 
mechatronics 27(2):122–125. 

Vahdatikhaki  F,  Langroodi  AK,  Makarov  D,  Miller  S  (2019) 
Context-realistic virtual reality-based training simulators for 
asphalt  operations. 
the 
International  Symposium  on  Automation  and  Robotics  in 
Construction, IAARC Publications, vol 36, pp 218–225. 

ISARC.  Proceedings  of 

In: 

Vincur J, Navrat P, Polasek I (2017) Vr city: Software analysis 
in  virtual  reality  environment.  In:  2017  IEEE  international 
conference  on  software  quality,  reliability  and  security 
companion (QRS-C), IEEE, pp 509–516. 

Voinea  A,  Moldoveanu  A,  Moldoveanu  F  (2015)  3D 
visualization  in  IT  systems  used  for  post  stroke  recovery: 
Rehabilitation  based  on  virtual  reality.  Proceedings  -  2015 
20th  International  Conference  on  Control  Systems  and 
Computer Science, CSCS 2015 pp 856–862. 

Wallner,  G.,  &  Kriglstein,  S.  (2013).  Visualization-based 
literature. 

analysis  of  gameplay  data–a 
Entertainment Computing, 4(3),143-155. 

review  of 

Wang  P,  Wu  P,  Wang  J,  Chi  HL,  Wang  X  (2018)  A  critical 
review of the use of virtual reality in construction engineering 
education and training. International journal of environmental 
research and public health 15(6):1204. 

Wanick V,  Castle J, Wittig  A (2019) Applying  games design 
thinking  for  scientific  data  visualization  in  virtual  reality 
environments. 

Wilkinson L (2012) The grammar of graphics. In: Handbook of 

computational statistics, Springer, pp 375–414. 

Wongsuphasawat  K,  Gotz  D  (2011)  Outflow:  Visualizing 
patient flow by symptoms and outcome. In: IEEE VisWeek 
Workshop  on  Visual  Analytics  in  Healthcare,  Providence, 
Informatics 
Rhode 
Association, pp 25–28. 

Island,  USA,  American  Medical 

Wu H, Shi D, Chen N, Shi Y, Jin Z, Cao N (2020) VisAct: a 
visualization  design  system  based  on  semantic  actions. 
Journal of Visualization 23(2):339–352. 

Xia  H,  Herscher  S,  Perlin  K,  Wigdor  D  (2018a)  SpaceTime: 
Enabling fluid individual and collaborative editing in virtual 
reality.  UIST  2018  - Proceedings  of  the  31st  Annual  ACM 
Symposium  on  User  Interface  Software  and  Technology 
(February):853–866. 

Xia  H,  Herscher  S,  Perlin  K,  Wigdor  D  (2018b)  Spacetime: 
Enabling fluid individual and collaborative editing in virtual 
reality. 

Xu  J,  Lin  Y,  Schmidt  D  (2017)  Exploring  the  Influence  of 
Simulated  Road  Environments  on  Cyclist  Behavior. 
International Journal of Virtual Reality 17(3):15–26. 

Yan  F,  Hu  Y,  Jia  J,  Ai  Z,  Tang  K,  Shi  Z,  Liu  X  (2020) 
Interactive  WebVR  visualization  for  online  fire  evacuation 
training.  Multimedia  Tools  and  Applications  79(41-
42):31541–31565. 

Yates  M,  Kelemen  A,  Sik  Lanyi  C  (2016)  Virtual  reality 
gaming  in  the  rehabilitation  of  the  upper  extremities  post-
stroke. Brain Injury 30(7):855–863. 

 
 
Visualization in virtual reality: a systematic review  

33 

Yoo  S,  Xue  L,  Kay  J  (2017)  HappyFit:  Time-aware 
visualization  for  daily  physical  activity  and  virtual  reality 
games.  UMAP  2017  -  Adjunct  Publication  of  the  25th 
and 
Conference 
Personalization pp 391–394. 

User  Modeling,Adaptation 

on 

Zhang Y, Liu H, Kang SC, Al-Hussein M (2020) Virtual reality 
applications  for the built environment:  Research trends and 
opportunities. Automation in Construction 118:103311. 
Zimmermann P (2008) Virtual reality aided design. A survey 
of  the  use  of  vr  in  automotive  industry.  In:Product 
Engineering, Springer, pp 277–296. 

Zyda M (2005) From visual simulation to virtual reality to 

games. Computer 38(9):25–32. 

 
