The…Tinderverse?: Opportunities and Challenges for User 
Safety in Extended Reality (XR) Dating Apps 

Sarath S. Shanker 
Computer Science and Engineering 
 Oakland University 
 Rochester, Michigan, USA 
 sshanker@oakland.edu  

Douglas Zytko 
 Computer Science and Engineering 
Oakland University 

 Rochester, Michigan, USA                  

zytko@oakland.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Dating  apps  such  as  Tinder  have  announced  plans  for  a  dating 
metaverse: the incorporation of XR technologies into the online 
dating process to augment interactions between potential sexual 
partners  across  virtual  and  physical  worlds.  While  the  dating 
metaverse is still in conceptual stages we can forecast signiﬁcant 
harms that it may expose daters to given prior research into the 
frequency and severity of sexual harms facilitated by dating apps 
as  well  as  harms  within  social  VR  environments.  In  this 
workshop  paper  we  envision  how  XR  could  enrich  virtual-to-
physical  interaction  between  potential  sexual  partners  and 
outline  harms  that  it  will  likely  perpetuate  as  well.  We  then 
introduce  our  ongoing  research  to  preempt  such  harms:  a 
participatory  design  study  with  sexual  violence  experts  and 
demographics  at  disproportionate  risk  of  sexual  violence  to 
produce  mitigative  solutions  to  sexual  violence  perpetuated  by 
XR-enabled dating apps.  

CCS CONCEPTS 
•Human-centered  computing~Virtual  reality~Mixed/augmented 
reality~Participatory design 

KEYWORDS 
Metaverse, social VR, online dating, dating app, sexual violence, 
Tinder, Tindeverse, extended reality 

Reference format: 

This  paper  is  part  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  1st  Workshop  on  Novel 
Challenges  of  Safety,  Security  and  Privacy  in  Extended  Reality  at  the 
2022  ACM  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems. 
Cite as: 

Sarath S. Shanker and Douglas Zytko. 2022. The…Tinderverse?: 
Opportunities and Challenges for User Safety in Extended Reality (XR) 
Dating Apps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15120 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.15120  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be 
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI EA ’22, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Novel Challenges of Safety, 
Security and Privacy in Extended Reality, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, 
USA 
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 

1  Introduction 
In this workshop paper we highlight the emergence of the dating 
metaverse [7,8], or incorporation of XR technologies into tinder 
and  other  dating  apps,  such  as  social  VR  environments  for 
potential sexual partners to interact before meeting face-to-face 
[2]. While XR provides ample potential for enriching interaction 
between  potential  romantic  and  sexual  partners,  it  can  also 
exacerbate sexual harms that dating apps are already known to 
perpetuate—and introduce new ones. 

In  the  following  sections  we  ﬁrst  introduce  the  concept  of  the 
dating metaverse and recent design progress from leading dating 
app companies such as Tinder. We then elucidate opportunities 
for XR to protect users during online-to-oﬄine interaction with 
strangers as well as looming harms. We conclude by introducing 
our  ongoing  research 
into  designing  safety-conscious  XR 
technologies  for  online  dating,  which  we  hope  will  spark 
discussion amongst workshop attendees regarding the role of XR 
in  perpetuating  and  also  mitigating  interpersonal  harm  across 
virtual and physical world settings. 

2  The Dating Metaverse 
The  notion  of  applying  XR  technologies  to  online  dating  to 
enrich  interaction  between  potential  romantic  and  sexual 
partners  has  been  considered  for  some  time.  Previous  works 
have  evinced  keen  user  interest  and  demand  for  platforms 
that convene intimate avatar experiences, especially romantic 
activities  occurring  through  XR  [13].      As  early  as  2008,  in 
response  to  user  frustrations  with  assessing  compatibility  with 
potential romantic partners through the standard dating website 
design, Frost and colleagues created a prototype VR environment 
that  allowed  users  to  go  on  “virtual  dates”  in  a  museum  [4]. 
More  recently  in  2015  Zytko  and  Freeman  envisioned  diﬀerent 
ways  that  augmented  reality  (AR)  could  scaﬀold  face-to-face 
dates  between  users  [10].  Now  with  the  proliferation  of  mass 
market  VR  headsets  and  mobile  devices  these  ideas  for  XR-
enriched  online  dating  do  not  have  to  stay  relegated  to 
prototypes and design concepts in the literature. 

Near  the  end  of  2021  Tinder  announced  plans  for  the 
“Tinderverse,”  or  the  leveraging  of  VR  and  AR  technology  for 

 
 
 
 
“blurring  the  boundaries  between  oﬄine  and  online”  [8].  They 
are  already  beta  testing  a  social  VR  environment  for  online 
daters  in  Seoul,  Korea  called  Singletown  in  which  users 
manipulate audio-enabled avatars and can go on virtual dates at 
a  “piano  bar”  and  other  settings  [2].  An  in-app  currency  called 
Tinder  Coins  is  also  being  beta  tested  in  Europe  [7]  that  the 
company  claims  will  be  used  for  purchasing  “virtual  goods.”  
These  announcements  follow  a  succession  of  new  interactive 
experiences  within  the  dating  app  expedited  by  the  COVID-19 
pandemic  such  as  Swipe  Nights  –  an  interactive  in-app  video 
series, and Explore – a new method of discovering nearby daters 
that is reminiscent of TikTok. Tinder is not the only dating app 
pursuing XR integration. Bumble has indicated plans to expand 
“in  the  metaverse  and  in  the  Web  3.0  world”  [5],  and  new  VR-
only dating apps such as Planet Theta are emerging. 

3  Challenges and Opportunities for Safety in 

the Dating Metaverse  

Dating apps are well known as facilitators of sexual harm. They 
have been repeatedly linked to sexual violence such as rape [e.g., 
9],  as  well  as  online  sexual  harms  such  as  harassment  [e.g,  1]. 
The inclusion of XR technologies into the online dating process 
may mitigate some of these harms. For example, prior work has 
reported on user struggles with assessing compatibility through 
dating apps [4], which has led some users to meeting face-to-face 
purely  to  collect  more  information  about  a  potential  dating 
partner [12]. Richer interaction aﬀorded through social VR could 
allow  users  to  bypass  face-to-face  encounters  and  the  risks  of 
harm  that  come  with  them.  AR-equipped  devices  could  also  be 
used  to  help  users  navigate  away  from  unsafe  face-to-face 
encounters  or  direct  bystanders  to  intervene  in  sexual  harm 
occurring  nearby  (extending  panic  button-related  functionality 
that we currently see in mobile apps). 

XR-enabled dating apps may also exacerbate harm. For example, 
social  VR  environments  like  Tinder’s  Singletown  will  provide  a 
new context for harm to occur. Prior HCI research has elucidated 
various  types  of  harassment  that  users  face  in  social  VR 
environments  including  verbal  harassment,  virtual  groping  of 
their avatars, and environmental harms such as posting of lewd 
imagery  [3,6].  These  harms  will  surely  translate—and  likely 
escalate—in social VR environments intended for dating, laying a 
foundation  for  online  harm  more  vivid  and  more  severe  than 
that that currently occurring over messaging and other relatively 
less-rich media used by online daters today. 

Most  concerning  is  the  potential  for  sexual  violence  across 
virtual  and  physical  worlds  that  XR-enabled  dating  apps  may 
amplify.  Our  recent  research  at  CSCW  has  demonstrated  how 
experiences within dating apps can shape one’s understanding of 
appropriate  sexual  behavior  and  sexual  agency  (their  perceived 
right  to  decline  a  sexual  advance)  [11].  For  example,  the 
frequency  of  harassment  in  dating  apps  has  lead  users  to 
perceive  this  behavior  as  normal,  and  the  frequency  of  sexual 
requests in dating apps has developed a perceived “obligation” in 

some  users  to  perform  sexually  when  meeting  other  online 
daters  face-to-face.  Richer  interaction  aﬀorded  through  XR  can 
deepen  the  severity  and  frequency  of  such  experiences,  which 
can  lead  young  and  impressionable  users  to  normalize  the 
behavior and develop detrimental perceptions of sexual agency.   

Our prior work has also elucidated ways in which users interpret 
content  received  in  dating  apps  as  signals  of  consent  to  sex  – 
they  subsequently  make  sexual  advances  during  face-to-face 
encounters  without  conﬁrming  that  their  partner  desires  sex 
because they believe consent has already been conveyed online. 
Incorporation of social VR-based interaction prior to face-to-face 
meeting,  as  well  as  AR-enabled  content  during  face-to-face 
interaction,  can  increase  risk  of  users  misinterpreting  others’ 
agreement  to  a  sexual  activity.  Other  concerns  relating  to 
safety are the virtual crimes relating by exposure of sensitive 
user data and inadequate privacy and security policies. [14] 

Ultimately, given that users of current social VR environments as 
well  as  dating  apps  skew  to  younger  age  ranges,  XR-enabled 
dating  apps  may  inadvertently  foster  harmful  practices  and 
perceptions  around  sexual  consent  exchange  if  not  designed  to 
intentionally mitigate this inﬂuence. 

4  Designing a Harm-Mitigative Dating 

Metaverse  

Participatory  design  has  long  been  championed  within  HCI 
research  as  a  method  to  incorporate  diverse  stakeholders  in 
technology  design  and  decision-making.  We  are  currently 
conducting  a  participatory  design 
study  with  various 
stakeholders  related  to  sexual  violence  to  produce  novel  XR 
design patterns for preventing sexual harms in online dating. In 
line with best practices in public health, we pursue preventative 
solutions so as to help users avoid the signiﬁcant psychological 
and physical trauma that is incurred through sexual violence. 

Stakeholders  that  we  are  recruiting  include  sexual  violence 
experts  (nurse  practitioners,  operators  of  sexual  violence 
shelters,  and  researchers  of  sexual  violence)  as  well  as 
demographics  at  disproportionate  risk  of  sexual  violence  (e.g., 
women,  members  of 
the  LGBTQIA+  community).  Our 
participatory  design  sessions  diﬀer  slightly  based  on  the 
stakeholders.  Sessions  with  sexual  violence  experts  involve 
collaborative discussions to forecast sexual violence that may be 
facilitated  through  XR-enabled  dating  apps  and  expected 
antecedents/facilitators of such harm as informed by the expert’s 
professional  experience.  Challenges  of  these  sessions  pertain  to 
priming  experts  of  XR  technologies  which  they  are  typically 
unfamiliar  with.  Sessions  with  at-risk  demographics  involve 
reﬂections  on  their  past  experiences  of  sexual  harm  online,  as 
well  as  storyboard  scenarios  to  familiarize  them  with  potential 
XR-enabled  harms.  Challenges  with  these  sessions  pertain  to 
participant care: ensuring that the process of participation does 
not  incur  re-traumatization  or  otherwise  cause  harm  to  the 
participant.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

ayGPqiXolOe1xKbo4Qu7v_ATkPQTdjaoC45VfHnrzpcL94THs594jm5T
WQIJ8xmR7F-aDNgv4EFJGB8MeY99 
Lindsay Blackwell, Nicole Ellison, Natasha Elliott-Deflo, and Raz 
Schwartz. 2019. Harassment in Social Virtual Reality: Challenges for 
Platform Governance. Proc. ACM Human-Computer Interact. 3, CSCW 
(November 2019), 1–25. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3359202 
Jeana H Frost, Zoe Chance, Michael I Norton, and Dan Ariely. 2008. 
People are experience goods: Improving online dating with virtual dates. 
J. Interact. Mark. 22, 1 (2008), 51–61. 
Kristin Majcher. 2021. Bumble is swiping right on Web 3.0 and the 
metaverse. The Block. Retrieved from 
https://www.theblockcrypto.com/post/124094/bumble-is-swiping-right-
on-web-3-0-and-the-metaverse 
Divine Maloney, Guo Freeman, and Andrew Robb. 2020. A Virtual Space 
for All: Exploring Children’s Experience in Social Virtual Reality. In 
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in 
Play, 472–483. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3410404.3414268 
Sarah Perez. 2021. Match Group details plans for a dating ‘metaverse,’ 
Tinder’s virtual goods-based economy. TechCrunch. Retrieved from 
https://techcrunch.com/2021/11/03/match-group-details-plans-for-a-
dating-metaverse-tinders-virtual-goods-based-economy/ 
Reuters. 2021. Dating in the metaverse? Tinder’s CEO expresses interest 
in entering the virtual reality world. euronews.next. Retrieved from 
https://www.euronews.com/next/2021/12/03/dating-in-the-metaverse-
tinder-s-ceo-expresses-interest-in-entering-the-virtual-reality-wo 
Janine Rowse, Caroline Bolt, and Sanjeev Gaya. 2020. Swipe right: the 
emergence of dating-app facilitated sexual assault. A descriptive 
retrospective audit of forensic examination caseload in an Australian 
metropolitan service. Forensic Sci. Med. Pathol. (2020), 1–7. 
Doug Zytko, Guo Freeman, Sukeshini A Grandhi, Susan C Herring, and 
Quentin Gad Jones. 2015. Enhancing evaluation of potential dates online 
through paired collaborative activities. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing, 
1849–1859. 
Douglas Zytko, Nicholas Furlo, Bailey Carlin, and Matthew Archer. 2021. 
Computer-Mediated Consent to Sex: The Context of Tinder. Proc. ACM 
Human-Computer Interact. 5, CSCW1 (2021), 27. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3449288 
Douglas Zytko, Sukeshini A. Grandhi, and Quentin Jones. 2014. 
Impression management struggles in online dating. In Proceedings of the 
18th international conference on supporting group work, 53–62. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2660398.2660410 
Divine Maloney, Guo Freeman, 2020 Falling Asleep Together: What 
Makes Activities in Social Virtual Reality Meaningful to Users DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3410404.3414266 
Devon Adams, Maloney, Alseny Bah. 2018 Ethics emerging: the story of 
privacy and security perceptions in virtual reality 

for 

tools 

After  these  initial  activities  we  subsequently  moderate  design 
exercises for XR-enabled sexual violence mitigation by providing 
participants  with  various 
creating  physical 
constructions of potential XR design patterns, such as moldable 
clay,  Lego  sets,  arts-and-crafts  boxes,  and  “mechanic  cards” 
(specially designed cards by our research team that each include 
a  potential  feature/idea  that  could  be  incorporated  into  the 
stakeholder’s  design).  We  have  erred  away  from  having 
participants  design  directly  within  VR  environments  due  to 
reluctance  of  some  participants—particularly  sexual  violence 
experts—to engage with technical tools for ideation. 

5  Author Bios  

in 

Sarath S. Shanker  is  a  PhD  student  in  the  Oakland  HCI  Lab, 
situated 
the  Department  of  Computer  Science  and 
Engineering at Oakland University. Having lived in eastern and 
western  parts  of  the  globe  and  experiencing  various  facets  of 
both  cultures,  he  is  a  proponent  of  Diversity  and  Inclusion  in 
technology  design.  Both  his  research  interests  and  personal 
advocacy  work  are  tuned  towards  making  technology-enabled 
social interactions safer, more equitable, and discrimination-free. 
His research typically uses participatory design to involve at-risk 
and  marginalized  demographics  in  the  design  of  emerging 
technologies. 

lab 

into  online-to-oﬄine  harm.  The 

Douglas Zytko  is  an  Assistant  Professor  in  the  Department  of 
Computer Science and Engineering at Oakland University. He is 
also Director of the Oakland HCI Lab, a hub for interdisciplinary 
research 
integrates 
researchers  in  human-computer  interaction,  XR,  human-robot 
interaction,  AI,  psychology,  and  nursing  to  leverage  emerging   
technologies  for  the  prevention  of  harms  that  emerge  through 
the  combination  of  computer-mediated  and 
face-to-face 
interaction.  Most  relevant  to  this  workshop,  Doug’s  research 
explores how XR technologies can be used to foster adoption of 
harm-mitigative  behaviors,  such  as  responsible  drinking 
practices  and  consent  exchange  practices  that  mitigate  sexual 
violence.  His  work  typically  leverages  participatory  design 
methods to put at-risk stakeholders in position to articulate new 
use  cases  for  emerging  technologies  pursuant  to  safety.  The 
research  also  coalesces  harm  experts  in  clinical  and  research 
contexts  to  produce  theory-informed  technologies  for  altering 
behavior of potential perpetrators. 

REFERENCES 
[1] 

[2] 

Monica Anderson, Emily A. Vogels, and Erica Turner. 2020. The virtues 
and downsides of online dating. Pew Research Center report. Retrieved 
from https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2020/02/06/the-virtues-and-
downsides-of-online-dating/ 
Yaёl Bizouati-Kennedy. 2021. Tinder and Bumble Enter the Metaverse — 
How Crypto and NFTs Could Become Essential to Virtual Dating Apps. 
Yahoo! Retrieved from https://www.yahoo.com/now/tinder-bumble-
enter-metaverse-crypto-
123113480.html?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29
vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAACzb9JJazs2mo9IsZ2DqU4W
bynaROqDTL-
3teu54G1zCf5Sm9waKON4LghddemSQgCmDtRzYEFrmtDUSp_PAWfPv

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
