MIDAS: Multi-sensorial Immersive Dynamic 
Autonomous System Improves Motivation of Stroke 
Affected Patients for Hand Rehabilitation 

Fok-Chi-Seng Fok Kow, Anoop Kumar Sinha, Zhang Jin Ming, Bao Songyu, Jake Tan Jun Kang, Hong Yan Jack 
Jeffrey, Galina Mihaleva, Nadia Magnenat Thalmann and Yiyu Cai

Abstract—Majority  of  stroke  survivors  are  left  with  poorly 
functioning  paretic  hands.  Current  rehabilitation  devices  have 
failed  to motivate  the  patients enough  to  continue  rehabilitation 
exercises.  The  objective  of  this  project,  MIDAS  (Multi-sensorial 
Immersive Dynamic Autonomous System) is a proof of concept by 
using  an  immersive  system  to  improve  motivation  of  stroke 
patients  for  hand  rehabilitation.  MIDAS  is  intended  for  stroke 
patients  who  suffer  from  light  to  mild  stroke.  MIDAS  is 
lightweight  and  portable.  It  consists  of  a  hand  exoskeleton 
subsystem,  a  Virtual  Reality  (VR)  subsystem,  and  an  olfactory 
subsystem.  Altogether,  MIDAS  engages  four  out  of  five  senses 
during rehabilitation. To evaluate the efficacy of MIDAS a pilot 
study  consisting  of  three  sessions  is  carried  out  on  five  stroke 
affected patients. Subsystems of MIDAS are added progressively 
in  each  session.  The  game  environment,  sonic  effects,  and  scent 
released is carefully chosen to enhance the immersive experience. 
60% of the scores of user experience are above 40 (out of 56). 96% 
Self Rehabilitation Motivation Scale (SRMS) rating shows that the 
participants are motivated to use MIDAS and 87% rating shows 
that  MIDAS 
for  rehabilitation.  Participants 
experienced elevated motivation to continue stroke rehabilitation 
using MIDAS and no undesired side effects were reported. 

is  exciting 

Index Terms— Rehabilitation, hand exoskeleton, virtual reality, 
immersive  game,  olfactory  device,  pilot  study,  user  experience, 
self-rehabilitation motivation 

I. INTRODUCTION 

that 

to  ensure 

the  rehabilitation  process 

Stroke rehabilitation is a long and taxing process that requires 
commitment and de- termination from patients. Therefore, it is 
important 
is 
stimulating. One key factor is motivation, which is an essential 
factor that contributes to the exercise adherence and outcome of 
stroke rehabilitation. Researchers distinguish between intrinsic 
and  extrinsic  motivation  [1].  Intrinsic  motivation  refers  to 
behavior  that  is  driven  by  internal  rewards  [2].  On  the  other 
hand, extrinsic motivation refers to behavior that is driven by 
external rewards, such as money, fame, grades, and praise [3,4]. 

(Corresponding  author:  Yiyu  cai).  Fok-Chi-Seng  Fok  Kow  and  Anoop 

Kumar Sinha are co-first authors. 

This work involved human subjects in its research. Approval of all ethical 
and  experimental  procedures  and  protocols  was  granted  by  the  Nanyang 
Technological university review board. 

Fok-Chi-Seng Fok Know, Zhang Jin Ming, Bao Songyu, Jake Tan Jun Kang, 
Hong Yan Jack Jeffrey, and Galina Mihaleva are with School of Art, Design 
and  Media,  Nanyang  Technological  University,  Singapore 
(e-mail: 
jason.fokkow@ntu.edu.sg;  zjm5252@gmail.com;  songyu_bao@hotmail.com; 
JXKETAN@gmail.com; 
JeffreyHong@ntu.edu.sg; 
galinacouture@gmail.com).  

Most  patients  have  extrinsic  motivation  during  stroke 
intrinsic 
rehabilitation.  It 
motivation,  which  can  be  enhanced  by design  features  of  the 
rehabilitation task that the patient is performing [5].  

is  essential 

increase 

their 

to 

Many  laboratories  have  created  exoskeletons  and  serious 
games that utilizes bioengineering and robotics in autonomous 
or  semi-autonomous  systems  for  stroke  rehabilitation.  In  [6], 
authors reported development of an electromyography (EMG) 
controlled serious game for rehabilitation. In this study subjects 
were instructed to control the cursor on computer screen with 
their  non-dominant  hand.  The  BRAVO  hand  exoskeleton 
reported  in  [7],  is  an  EMG-driven  hand  exoskeleton  for 
grasping cylindrical objects. A distinctive feature of BRAVO 
hand exoskeleton design is its intrinsic adaptability to patient’s 
hand  size.  The  BRAVO  hand  exoskeleton  uses  2  electric 
actuators, 1 to cause flexion and extension of the thumb and the 
other for remaining fingers of the subject’s hand. NREX [8], is 
a  low-cost  exoskeleton  robot  developed  for  upper  limb 
rehabilitation from elbow to wrist. It uses two motorized axes 
for elbow and wrist joints. Authors claim that it can assist in 
reaching  and  drinking  tasks.  Another  system  by  Hong  Kong 
Polytechnic University [9], enables stroke affected subjects to 
perform  hand  training  at  different  intensities.  Subject’s 
intention  from  the  hemiplegic  side  is  captured  using  surface 
electromyography  (sEMG)  signals.  The  exoskeleton  hand 
robotic  training  then  assists  in  hand  opening  or  hand  closing 
functional  tasks.  In  [10],  authors  presented  a  wearable 
exoskeleton.  This  exoskeleton  is  designed  as  an  anterior-
support  type  device  to  achieve  palmar  extension.  The  bend 
angle data extracted using a glove with strain gauges from the 
non-paretic hand is transferred to the exoskeleton on the paretic 
hand  to  mimic  the  movements  of  the  non-paretic  hand. 
HERCULES,  a  3  degrees  of  freedom  (DoF)  pneumatically 
operated exoskeleton arm upper limb rehabilitation is reported 

Anoop  Kumar  Sinha  and  Yiyu  Cai  are  with  School  of  Mechanical  and 
Aerospace  Engineering,  Nanyang  Technological  University,  Singapore  (e-
mail: sinh0003@ntu.edu.sg; myycai@ntu.edu.sg ). 

Nadia  Magnenat  Thalmann  is  with  School  of  Mechanical  and  Aerospace 
(e-mail: 

Engineering,  Nanyang  Technological  University,  Singapore 
nadia.thalmann@gmail.com)/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electrooculography 

in  [11].  The  exoskeleton  arm  provides  elbow  flexion  and 
extension,  shoulder  flexion  and  extension,  and  shoulder 
semi-autonomous  hybrid 
abduction  and  adduction.  A 
electroencephalography/ 
(EEG/EOG) 
controlled  whole  arm  exoskeleton  is  presented  in  [12].  The 
whole arm exoskeleton consisted of a shoulder-elbow module 
and wrist- hand module. The authors report that the new hybrid 
paradigm  combining  EEG  and  EOG  is  user-friendly.  A 
limitation  of  most  rehabilitation  devices  is  non-portability. 
Authors  in  [13],  suggest  avoiding  conventional  materials  for 
manufacturing that could make the robot bulky, expensive and 
difficult to transport.  

Current efforts to increase motivation include creating video 
games [14,15], inventing interactive game-based rehabilitation 
tools  [16–19],  and  inventing  immersive  escape  room  games 
[20,21]. Move-IT [22] is a game designed for upper limb stroke 
patients. It uses Oculus Rift Head Mounted Display (HMD) and 
a Leap Motion hand tracker. Authors in this study showed that 
subjects were pleased with the system after the session. It also 
motivated  the  subjects  to  perform  rehabilitation  exercises.  A 
low-cost  wearable  device,  integrated  to  VR  environments for 
better rehabilitation process in patients with motor disabilities 
is presented in [23]. The device translates the movement of the 
subject’s  arm  into  the  virtual  jigsaw  puzzle  environment.  A 
comparison between VR technology and conventional therapy 
for  physical  rehabilitation  among  patients  with  neurological 
deficits  is  presented  in  [24].  In  this  study,  the  patients  were 
divided  into  two  groups.  One  group  used  a  VR  instrument 
called Medical Interactive Rehabilitation Assistant (MIRA) for 
rehabilitation, and the other group used traditional therapy. The 
intrinsic motivation of the patients was assessed by a 22-item 
task  evaluation  questionnaire.  It  was  reported  that  the  VR 
session had a constructive influence on patients and empowered 
the patient to perform tasks autonomously. On the other hand, 
conventional  exercises  were  boring,  which  decreased  the 
motivation of patients for continuing treatment. In [25], authors 
established  that  integrating  research  in  game  design,  motor 
learning,  and  neurophysiology  changes  with  rehabilitation 
science can greatly improve the quality of rehabilitation. 

Past  research  approaches  include  engaging  multiple  senses 
with  tactile,  visual,  and  sometimes  audio  feedback,  but  none 
offers an immersive experience. Tapping on the physiological 
phenomenon  of  neural  plasticity 
and  psychological 
reinforcement,  MIDAS  engages  4  of  our  5  primary  senses: 
tactility,  visual,  auditory,  and  olfactory.  In  this  paper,  we 
present  the  design  and  development  of  MIDAS.  MIDAS  is 
intended  to  be  a  portable  immersive  system  inclusive  of  an 
exoskeleton, a smell releasing device, and a VR game that will 
help  stroke  patients  feel  more  motivated  during  a  hand 
rehabilitation  session.  MIDAS  uses  EMG  signals  taken  from 
the subject’s forearm to predict their intention before activating 
physical  assistance  (tactile)  in  the  opening  or  closing  of  the 
fingers of their hand. To evaluate the performance of MIDAS, 
a pilot study is done using established tools to quantify the user 
experience, comfort, pleasure, and motivation of the subjects in 
using MIDAS for rehabilitation exercises. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  II 

focuses on system description of MIDAS. Section III presents 
the protocols and tools for pilot study of MIDAS. Section IV 
presents  our  method  of  data  collection  for  pilot  study  of 
MIDAS. In section V, we report the results of the pilot study. 
Finally, section VI concludes the paper. 

II. OVERVIEW OF MECHATRONIC DESIGN OF MIDAS 

MIDAS consists of 3 subsystems, each of which engages one 
or more senses. The first subsystem is the hand exoskeleton that 
engages the patient’s sense of touch through the opening of the 
hand. This function is achieved by capturing the user’s intention 
to open their hand using an EMG signal sensor module placed 
on their forearm muscle belly. The second subsystem is the VR 
subsystem consisting of an VR headset (Oculus Quest 2), a VR 
game, and a VR-controller device. This subsystem engages the 
user’s  sense  of  sight  and  hearing.  The  last  subsystem  is  the 
olfactory subsystem consisting of a face shield-cum-olfactory 
device and a circuit board. This subsystem engages the sense of 
smell. An overview of the design specifications of MIDAS is 
presented in Table I.  

TABLE I 
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS OF MIDAS 

Hand exoskeleton subsystem 

Weight 
Force and motion 
transmission system 
Material 

Actuator 

Securing method 

EMG sensors 

VR headset 
VR handheld control 
device 
VR Game 

Covid-19 preventive 
face shield 
Scent 
Mechanism of scent 
release 

748 g 
Linkage mechanism 

PLA 3D printed rigid parts and Smooth-on 
Dragon Skin 20 silicon soft pads 
One MG-996R servomotor (Operating 
Voltage = +5V, Stall Torque = 9.4 kg/cm, 
Operating speed = 0.17 s/60°, Rotation = 0°-
180°, Weight = 55gm) to cause flexion and 
extension of subject’s fingers. 
Cord-lock design for securing on the fingers 
and double-sided velcro straps for securing on 
the forearm and wrist 
Surface EMG sensors 

VR subsystem 
Oculus Quest 2 
Provided with Oculus Quest 2 

Number of stages = 5, duration of each stage 
= 3 min, game environment scenes = natural 
location views for outdoor environment and 
earthly colour palette for indoor environment, 
sonic effects = Cheerful music, bird chirps, 
sound of mouse character, and pentatonic 
scales-high-pitched chimes 

Olfactory subsystem 
Curved PET frame 

Mixture of lemon and bergamot scent 
Piezoelectric transducer vibrating at ultrasonic 
frequency breaks the liquid scent into fine 
mist 
Control System 
Adafruit Feather nRF52832 
SSD1306 128x32OLED 

Microcontroller 
Graphic display 
Voltage step up module  MT3608 DC-DC step up module 
Power supply unit 

2 X 3.7 V rechargeable Li-ion Panasonic 
NCR18650B batteries 

A. The MIDAS Hand Exoskeleton Subsystem 
The exoskeleton is the primary subsystem of the MIDAS as it 
not  only  performs  the  rehabilitation  task  but  also  acts  as  the 
the  other  subsystems.  It 
central  network 

that  controls 

 
compromises of two modules: the exoskeleton itself and sEMG 
sensors.  

1)  The MIDAS Hand Exoskeleton Subsystem 

by 

achieved 

While the essential requirement of an exoskeleton is to 
be  able  to  actuate  the  stroke  patient’s  hand  with  a 
significant range of motion, works of literature and user 
feedback research further suggest that the device must be 
safe, comfortable, lightweight, easy to wear, and small 
[26]. These are necessary to deliver an unobtrusive user 
experience and to improve the patient’s motivation to use 
the  device.  These  design  objectives  were  kept  in  mind 
while  proposing  the  design  of  MIDAS  exoskeleton. 
They  were 
complying  with 
anthropomorphic  design,  appropriate  sizing  of  the 
components,  and  proper  material  selection  for  each 
component of MIDAS exoskeleton. 
The  MIDAS  exoskeleton  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The 
exoskeleton uses a linkage mechanism to provide flexion 
and extension of the patient’s fingers. The rotary motion 
of a servo motor (MG-996R) is translated into a shaft’s 
linear motion, which is then split four ways to actuate the 
mechanism on each finger. The rotary motion introduces 
interpolation into the linear movement, reducing sudden 
start  and  stop,  allowing  MIDAS  to  be  less  obtrusive 
while aiding the patient. To account for the difference in 
finger  phalanx  lengths  and  bone  structures  of  each 
patient,  the  links  connecting  the  shaft  to  the  finger 
mechanism have been designed in such a way to allow 
two degrees of freedom (DoF). This prevents the device 
from  moving  the  patient’s  fingers  in  an  unnatural  way 
and reduces the mechanical parts’ stress, resulting in safe 
usage.  In  order  to  make  MIDAS  hand  exoskeleton 
compact and lightweight, we choose to actuate the fore, 
middle, ring, and little finger by using one servomotor. 
This makes the MIDAS hand exoskeleton compact and 
lightweight. In order to facilitate quick prototyping of the 
exoskeleton hand, which is essential to the development 
of the MIDAS, 3D printing with Polylactic acid (PLA) 
is  preferred.  PLA  has  a  good  strength-to-weight  ratio, 
hence  allowing  for  a  design  that  is  lightweight  and 
compact. The total weight for the exoskeleton is around 
748  grams.  Casted  silicone  pads  are  provided onto  the 
parts  of  the  device  in  contact  with  the  patient’s  skin. 
These parts are namely the finger nodes, hand nodes, and 
wrist nodes. The soft material protects the patient’s skin 
from  the  rough  surface  of  the  3D  printed  parts  and 
prolongs the duration the device can be worn. Silicone 
pads  fabricated  from  Smooth-On  Dragon-Skin  20 
silicone  is  used  as  it  is  skin-safe  and  easily  produced. 
Finally,  attachments  are  provided 
the 
exoskeleton on the patient’s hand. For the wrist and hand 
nodes,  a  double-sided  Velcro  strap  design  that  wraps 
around  the  forearm  and  hand  is  used.  A  tab  has  been 
stitched at the end of each Velcro strap to prevent it from 
coming off the lug. Providing a tab also eliminates the 
need  to  slide  the  straps  through  the  lug  and  allows  a 
faster and easier securing process. For the finger nodes, 
a cord-lock design, explicitly developed for MIDAS, is 
used. The  cord is  tightened around the finger by using 
the cord-locks. 

to  secure 

Fig. 1. MIDAS Exoskeleton. 

2)  The EMG Sensor Module 

In  order  to  capture  the  patient’s  intention  of  hand 
movement,  non-invasive  Myoware  sEMG  sensor 
electrodes  are  used.  The  three  electrodes  of  the  sEMG 
sensors are placed on the forearm of the patient. The two 
electrodes  of  the  sMG  sensor  are  placed  at  the  middle 
and  end  of  a  muscle  belly  group.  The  third  electrode, 
which is the reference electrode, is placed on an inactive 
muscle group. The module has a duo mode, allowing the 
user to switch back and forth between a flexion mode and 
an  extension  mode,  targeting  two  different  muscle 
groups  depending  on  the  user’s  stroke  condition.  In 
extension mode for users with clenched hands, the sensor 
electrodes  are  placed  on  the  lateral  flexor  digitorum 
superficialis, while in flexion mode for motor-impaired 
patients, the sensor electrodes are placed on the medial 
flexor digitorum superficialis. These muscle groups were 
chosen  due  to  their  functionality  of  gripping  and 
releasing. 
The sEMG sensor signals are sampled at a baud rate of 
115200. In order to actively filter the noise from signals, 
a standard moving average algorithm is then applied, in 
which it goes through an array of specified 50 units to 
derive the real-time signals. 

B. The MIDAS VR Subsystem 
The  VR  subsystem  of  MIDAS  includes  an  Oculus  Quest  2 
headset, a handheld VR controller device, and a VR game. The 
VR subsystem is intended to engage user’s sense of sight and 
hearing.  The  environments  in  the  game,  indoor  and  outdoor, 
have been designed to allow the patient to feel relax and calm  

 
 
 
stroke  affected,  but  fingers  of  the  hand  do  not  curl  into 
themselves.  The  mechanism  of  the  game-play  to  score  is  by 
squeezing  the  lemons.  It  is  based  on  the  duration  of  both the 
contraction and extension of the patient’s fingers. The number 
of squeezes increase as the game progresses. In each stage as 
the cups are filled with lemonade, they change to become bigger 
variations of cups. Patients can visually associate their progress 
to  familiar  household  objects  and  their  real-world  properties. 
This association allows for patients, who would typically not be 
exposed to VR technologies, to easily integrate into this reality 
and accept the environment and situation. 
Game  sound  is  also  an  essential  feature  for  immersive 
experience. Game sound, referring to all the sonic aspects of a 
game-ambient 
sound  effects, 
sounds,  dialog,  discrete 
background  music  and  interface  sounds,  has  long  been 
established  as  an  indispensable  part  of  modern  video  game 
[28,29]. It moves the narrative forward, convey emotions and 
enrich  the  experience  of  the  player.  Game  music  has  the 
potential  to  be  much  more  than  a  passive  element  of  the 
background.  By  tightly  linking  the  content  of  game  play  and 
background music, the player becomes much more immersed 
in  the  gaming  experience.  To  enhance  game  immersion  and 
elevate  motivation  of  participants  to  keep  using  our  device, 
different  layers  of  game  sounds  were  incorporated  into  the 
game,  including  cheerful  background  music,  bird  chirping, 
sound of a mouse character, the sound of squeezing lemon and 
pentatonic scales-high-pitched chimes after completing a stage. 

C. The MIDAS Olfactory Subsystem 
Smell  plays  a  vital  role  in  the  psychophysiological  effects  of 
stress,  mood  and  working  capacity.  Studies  show  that  the 
inhalation of smells affects brain function via receptors in the 
central nervous system [30,31]. Moreover, many studies have 
suggested that olfactory stimulation have immediate effects on 
physiological aspects of humans, such as muscle tension, pupil 
dilation, blood pressure, pulse rate, skin temperature, and brain 
activity [32]. 
Due  to  the  positive  psychophysiological  effects  of  smell  on 
humans, a smell component is integrated into MIDAS for mood 
alteration,  stress  reduction,  and  enhancement  of  immersive 
experience of VR game. A mixture of lemon and bergamot is 
used  to  simulate  the  smell  of  lemon  in  the  VR  game.  The 
inhalation  of  bergamot  essential  oil  creates  a  relaxed  mental 
state  [33]  and  relieves  work-related  stress  [34].  The  lemon 
smell, on the other hand, increases theta waves in the brain [35], 
produces  sedative  effects  [36],  and  exerts  positive  effects  on 
anxiety and self-esteem [37]. 
The olfactory subsystem comprises two modules: a face shield-
cum-olfactory device and a circuit board that connects the latter 
to  the  processing  unit  (see  Fig.  3).  This  subsystem  works  in 
conjunction  with  the  exoskeleton  and  the  VR  subsystem  by 
diffusing a lemon and bergamot scent when activated. In line 
with keeping a safe operation during Covid-19, the face shield 
is included, as patients will have their face masks removed to 
smell the scent. The Fig. 3 (a) shows the exploded view of the 
main  olfactory  device.  It  consists  of  a  3D  printed  lid  and 
container  holding  in  place  a  piezoelectric  transducer  and  a 
cotton  pod  soaked  in  lemon  and  bergamot  scent  liquid. 
Alternating  current  (AC)  voltage  makes  the  piezoelectric 
transducer vibrate at a very high frequency and generates  

Fig. 2. VR subsystem of MIDAS. 

Fig. 3. Olfactory subsystem of MIDAS. 

while playing the game. To accomplish this, natural locations 
such as the forest and the beach were chosen for the  outdoor 
environments,  while  an  earthy  color  palette  was  adopted  for 
indoor  environments  to  emulate  nature.  In  line  with  the 
environment design direction, a toon shader was applied to all 
models to keep the game fun, simple, and casual. 
The game consists of five stages with different environments. 
Each stage in the game has a duration of 3 minutes. Fig. 2 shows 
the MIDAS VR headset, handheld control device, and the five 
stages  of  the  game.  Patients  will  attempt  to  squeeze  their 
physical hand and through the other networking systems, allows 
for the digital VR hand to also squeeze. This parallax motion 
happens in real time and is sampled by each device at 115200 
baud  rate  and  communicated  via  Bluetooth.  This  allows  for 
patients to associate physical motor nerve movements of their 
parable hand to not just haptic response with the exoskeleton, 
but also create motor imagery associations [27]. 
The  mechanisms of the game-play designed to work for both 
types  of  stroke  patients,  i.e.,  patients  with  clenched  hands 
(patients show flexion finger contractures) and patients who are 

   
 
 
 
 
Fig.  4.  Circuitry  behind  MIDAS  for  communication between 
the EMG sensors and exoskeleton actuator. 

ultrasonic sound. The ultrasonic sound breaks the scented liquid 
into a fine mist, which is instantaneously distributed in the face 
shield.  As  for  the  face  shield,  a  conventional  Polyethylene 
Terephthalate (PET) frame is used. A cord on each end of the 
sheet is provided. When it is pulled, the PET frame forms curve. 
To wear the device, the cords are passed through a cord lock to 
create a loop, which can then be put around the neck. 

D. Control Scheme 
The  MIDAS  circuit  for  communication  between  hand 
exoskeleton and EMG sensors is shown in Fig. 4. The chosen 
interface between the 3D printed exoskeleton and the user was 
commercially  available  microcontroller  circuit  boards.  In  our 
case, the Adafruit Feather system was chosen due to its compact 
size  and  built-in  functionalities.  The  circuitry  runs  on  the 
Adafruit  Feather  nRF52832  microcontroller,  SSD1306 
128x32OLED graphic display, MG996 servo motor, MT3608 
DC-DC  voltage  step  up  module,  Adafruit  MicroSD  SPI  card 
breakout board, rotary potentiometer, an electrical switch and 2 
sets of 2 Panasonic NCR18650B batteries. The overall network 
diagram showing channel for communication between different 
subsystems  of  MIDAS  is  shown  in  Fig.  5.  The  MIDAS 
exoskeleton  circuitry  receives  its  commands  from  the  EMG 
sensor  module  and 
the 
microprocessor where it will process the data through cleaning 
up the noise and applying an averaging algorithm, saving the 
data on the MicroSD card, sending the PWM data to MG996  
servo to actuate the exoskeleton and, sending the real time data 
acquired  to  the  VR  subsystem  and  Olfactory  subsystem.  The 
microchip-based  microcontroller  (model  Adafruit  Feather 
NRF52832)  is  ARM  based,  contains  the  latest  Bluetooth 
technologies  and  extremely  energy  efficient,  all  thanks  to  its 
single chip architecture. By utilizing the latest nRF52832 MCU, 
it  not  only  allows  for  faster  and  more  efficient  data  transfer 
between  Bluetooth  peripherals,  but  also  allows  for  the 
microcontroller to behave as a central connection between other  

information 

relays 

this 

to 

Fig. 5. Flow chart of information processing in MIDAS system. 

multiple Bluetooth peripherals. This central hub mode is still in 
its early stages of development but has since made this project 
possible with almost no more external networking peripherals. 

III. PROTOCOLS AND TOOLS FOR PILOT STUDY OF MIDAS 

Since  this  is  a  preliminary  test,  only  5  post-stroke  patients 
were recruited to test the functionality and applicability of the 
device. The post-stroke patients were chosen according to the 
following criteria: 

(1) 
(2) 
(3) 

age from 21 to 65 
diagnosed with light to mild stroke and still recovering 
passed the rapid cognitive screening (rapid cognitive 

screen score > 7). 

A. Recruitment 
The research team put up posters at local stroke rehabilitation 
organizations.  Interested  participants  contacted  the  research 
team for participation. Consent was taken after the researchers 
conducted  screening  tests  and  briefly  explained  the  study 
objectives to patients. The process of data collection was 

 
 
 
 
 
DEMOGRAPHIC DETAILS OF STROKE PATIENTS 

TABLE II 

Subject 
number 

Gender 

Age  
(years) 

Level of education 

Marital status 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Male 
Female 
Female 
Male 
Male 

56 
52 
27 
61 
46 

Between secondary and tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 
Tertiary 

Married 
Single 
Married 
Married 
Single 

Severity of 
stroke 

Mild 
Mild 
Light 
Mild 
Light/mild 

Impaired 
side 

Time since stroke 
onset (months) 

Left 
Left 
Right 
Left 
Right 

38 
36 
17 
162 
114 

carried out from the end of February 2021 to the end of March 
2021 at the participant’s house or a place agreed upon by both 
the researchers and the participant. 
Out of the 5 participants recruited, 3 were male. 3 were married 
and  living  with  their  partner.  4  participants  received  tertiary 
education. 3 of them were impaired on the left side and suffered 
from mild stroke. The youngest participant was 27 years old; 
the oldest was 61. The time since stroke onset ranged from 17 
months  to  162  months.  The  demographic  data  relating  to  the 
stroke patients are mentioned in Table II. 

B. Tools of Data Collection 
1)  Structured Interviewing Questionnaire Form 

questionnaire 

The 
socio-demographic 
characteristics  (i.e.,  age,  sex,  marital  status,  educational 
level and occupation) and medical diagnosis. 

includes 

2)  Motor Assessment Scale (MAS) 

To evaluate motor function in recovering stroke patients, 
the MAS presented in [38], is used in this study. The MAS 
uses tasks related to activities of daily living to measure the 
full  range  of  functional  motor  performance  in  stroke 
survivors. These consist of 9 items which are supine to side 
lying, supine to sitting over the side of the bed, balanced 
sitting,  sitting  to  standing,  walking,  upper-arm  function, 
hand  movements,  advanced  hand  activities,  and  general 
tonus. Items (with the exception of the general tonus item) 
are  assessed  using  a  7-point  scale  (0  to  6).  A  score  of  6 
indicates  optimal  motor  behavior.  Item  scores  (with  the 
exception of the general tonus item) are summed to provide 
an overall score (out of 48 points). For the general tonus 
item,  the  score  is  based  on  continuous  observations 
throughout  the  assessment.  A  score  of  4  on  this  item 
indicates a consistently normal response, a score less than 
4 indicates persistent hypertonus, and a score greater than 
4 indicates various degrees of hypotonus. 

3)  Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 

MoCA  is  developed  as  a  rapid  screening  instrument  for 
mild  cognitive  dysfunction  [39].  It  assesses  different 
cognitive domains: attention and concentration, executive 
functions,  memory,  language,  visuoconstructional  skills, 
conceptual  thinking,  calculations,  and  orientation.  It 
consists  of  7  parts:  visuospatial/executive,  naming, 
memory,  attention,  language,  abstraction,  delayed  recall, 
and orientation. 
The maximum score for this tool is 30 points. A final total 
score of 26 and above is considered normal. One point is 
added for an individual who has 12 years or fewer of formal 
education. 

4)  WHOQOL-BREF 

TABLE III 

USER EXPERIENCE SCORING SYSTEM 
Score 

Obstructive 
Complicated 
Inefficient 
Clear 
Boring 
Uninteresting 
Conventional 
Usual 

  Supportive 
  Easy 
  Efficient 
  Confusing 
  Exciting 

Interesting 
Inventive 
  Leading 
edge 

It is an abbreviated version of the WHOQOL-100, which was 
developed by the WHO- QOL Group in 1994 [40]. It is to cross-
culturally  assess  quality  of  life.  It  consists  of  4  domains: 
physical  health,  psychological,  social  relationships,  and 
environment. It is a generic instrument to assess the positive and 
negative aspects of quality of life. The questions relating to the 
4  facets  i.e.,  physical  pain  and  discomfort  experienced, 
psychological  positive  or  negative  feelings  about  life,  social 
relationships such as companionship, love, and support desired 
in the personal relationship, and environmental such as patient’s 
financial resources to live a healthy and comfortable life were 
asked. The raw scores from the questions of these domains were 
then assigned. 
5)  User Experience Questionnaire 

To evaluate the user experience of MIDAS in this study, an 
the  original  user  experience 
adapted  version  of 
questionnaire reported in [41], is used. It contains 8 items, 
namely  obstructive  or  supportive,  complicated  or  easy, 
inefficient  or  efficient,  clear  or  confusing,  boring  or 
exciting,  non-interesting  or  interesting,  conventional  or 
inventive, and usual or leading edge. Each item is rated on 
a 7-point Likert scale. Table III shows the scoring system 
for user experience questionnaire. 

6)  Stroke Rehabilitation Motivation Scale (SRMS) 

The original SRMS, which consisted of 28 questions, was 
presented  in  [42].  It  is  used      to  measure  internal  and 
external factors on motivation among stroke patients to re- 
habilitate.  A  shorter  version  was  also  developed  by  the 
original  creators  of  the  scale.  It  comprises  7  questions 
which  are  correlated  with  the  original  28  questions  from 
the  original  SRMS.  For  this  study,  the  shorter  version  is 
adapted, and the 7 questions are: 

a) 

If you have choices, do you feel like choosing to 
do rehabilitation using our device? 

b)  Do you feel like your motivation for participating 
in rehabilitation has gotten higher after trying our 
device? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV 

SAM SCORING SYSTEM 

Scale  Valence rating 

Arousal rating 

5 
4 
3 
2 
1 

Pleasant 
Pleased 
Neutral 
Unsatisfied 
Unpleasant 

Excited 
Wide-awake 
Neutral 
Dull 
Calm 

Dominance 
rating 
Dependent 
Powerlessness 
Neutral 
Powerful 
Independent 

c)  Do you feel the device could be useful in helping 

you to exercise your hand? 

d)  Do you want to participate in rehabilitation with 
our device if you see other stroke patients getting 
better through rehabilitation? 

e)  Would you perform rehabilitation with our device 

even if no one is enforcing it on you? 

f)  Do  you  find  participating  in  rehabilitation  with 

our device exciting? 

g)  Does  doing  rehabilitation  with  our  device  help 
you feel like you are achieving something? 
h)  Each  item  is  rated  in  a  5-point  Likert  scale.  A 
score of 1 = completely disagree to a score of 5 = 
completely agree. The score ranges from 7 to 35. 
A higher score means higher motivation. 

7)  Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) 

SAM has been devised to assess the emotional response of 
a person to an object or event. Although there is ongoing 
debate  regarding  what  defining  features  should  be 
considered to capture a person’s emotions, authors in [43] 
have presented three dimensions namely pleasure, arousal, 
and  dominance  associated  with  a  person’s  effective 
reaction to a stimulus to measure a person’s emotions. In 
this  study,  a  5-point  scale  is  used  to  measure  a  person’s 
emotional response to MIDAS. Table IV shows the scoring 
system for this tool. 

IV. METHOD OF DATA COLLECTION 

The  data  for  the  pilot  study  of  MIDAS  was  collected  in  3 
sessions. The three subsystems of MIDAS were included in the 
study  progressively  in  each  session,  one  by  one.  In  the  1st 
session, the patients were asked to wear the hand exoskeleton 
with  the  Myoware  sEMG  Sensors.  The  patient’s  response  to 
using  the  device  was  then  recorded.  The  second  session 
included  recording  the  patient’s  response  when  the  hand 
exoskeleton along with the VR subsystem is used. In the third 
session,  all  the  subsystems  of  MIDAS,  i.e.,  the  hand 
exoskeleton, the VR, and the olfactory subsystem, were used, 
and  the  patient’s  response  was  recorded.  This  was  done  to 
evaluate the performance of MIDAS in engaging one or more 
senses  of  the  patients  in  stages  and  its  acceptability  by  the 
patients.  In the 2nd and 3rd session, the patients were asked to 
play the VR game. Fig. 6 (a) shows the VR game and Fig. 6 (b) 
-  (d)  shows  the  patients  using  MIDAS  subsystems  in  the  3 
different sessions. 

Fig. 6. VR game  environment and pilot study of MIDAS 
during the three sessions. 

V. RESULTS 

In  this  section,  the  results  of  the  pilot  study  of  MIDAS  are 
presented. 

 A. MAS, MoCA, and QOL 
As shown from the MAS (see Fig. 7 (a)), the motor functions 
of  subjects  vary  greatly,  ranging  from  21  to  54.  There  is  no 
significant difference of motor functions between and first and 
last sessions. MoCA results in Fig. 7 (b) indicate that all  
participants  are  cognitively  intact  (with  MoCA  score  greater 
than 26). The quality of life of participants also varies greatly 
(see  Fig.  7  (c)).  The  lowest  and  highest  scores  are:  38/94 
(physical),  50/88  (psychological),  50/94  (social  relationship), 
56/94 (environmental). 

B. User Experience Feedback 
Fig. 8 shows the overall user experience scores given by each 
subject. Table V shows the ratings provided the subjects during 
the 1st and 3rd session for each category of the user experience 
questionnaire. The user experience feedbacks of the 3rd session 
are higher than those of the 1st session for all subjects. 60% of 
the scores are above 40 (out of 56). Most subjects gave higher 
ratings on the 3rd session than they did on the 1st session. 80% 
of participants found the device complicated to use during the 
1st session.  However, during the 3rd session only 1 participant 
reported  that  the  device  is  complicated.  This  difference  may 
have occurred because they were more familiar with the device 
during  the  last  sessions.  During  the  1st  session  only  1 
participant  completely  agreed  that  the  device  is  inventive. 
However,  during  the  3rd  session  60%  of  the  participants 
completely agree that device is inventive. This shift may have 
occurred  because  of  subsequent  addition  of  the  VR  and 
olfactory subsystem of MIDAS during the 2nd and 3rd session,  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. MAS, MoCA, and QOL scores of all subjects considered in this pilot study for session 1 and session 3. 

respectively.  The  ratings  for  system  being  efficient  also 
increased on the 3rd session. 

C. Self-rehabilitation Motivation of the Subjects 
Fig. 9 shows the SRMS scores of the subjects for all sessions. 
Self-assessed  motivation  varied  greatly,  depending  on  each 
participant. Across all 3 sessions, 2 participants gave decreasing 
scores, 2 participants gave increasing scores, 1 participant gave 
full marks for all session. This indicates that 3 participants out 
of five were motivated to use MIDAS. Table  VI shows the 7 
questions adopted for this study. The data in the table indicates 
the  SRMS  Likert  response/percentage  of  subjects  in  each 
category for each question. It can be seen from the Table VI that 
all  participants  would  choose  our  device  to  do  rehabilitation 
(rated as somewhat agree or completely agree). 73% of ratings 
showed  that  participant’s  motivation  had  gotten  higher  after 
trying our device. 80% of ratings show that the participants find 
MIDAS useful in performing exercises for hand rehabilitation. 
94% rating show that the participants are willing to use MIDAS 
without anybody enforcing it on them. 87% rating shows that 
the  MIDAS  is  exciting  for  rehabilitation  and  60%  of  ratings 
showed that participants felt they achieved something with our 
device. 

D. SAM 
Fig.  10  shows  the  variation  in  emotional  response  of  the 
subjects towards using MIDAS during the three sessions. The 
results indicate that there was no significant change in pleasure 
ratings after the device trial during the 1st session. During the 
2nd  session,  2  subjects  reported  increased  pleasure  after  the 

Fig. 8. User experience feedback of subjects for session 1 
and session 3. 

Fig. 9. SRMS score of subjects for all sessions. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSE OF THE SUBJECTS TO THE USER EXPERIENCE QUESTIONNAIRE 
Slightly agree  Agree 

Disagree 

Slightly 
disagree 

Neither agree 
nor disagree 

Completely  
disagree 

TABLE V 

Item 
Supportive 
Easy 
Efficient 
Clear 
Exciting 
Interesting 
Inventive 
Leading edge 

1st/3rd 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
1/0 
0/0 

1st/3rd 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
0/0 
1/0 

1st/3rd 
0/0 
4/1 
2/1 
1/0 
0/1 
0/0 
1/0 
0/0 

1st/3rd 
2/0 
0/1 
1/1 
1/1 
2/1 
1/1 
0/0 
0/1 

1st/3rd 
1/1 
0/0 
2/2 
2/1 
0/1 
0/2 
0/0 
1/0 

1st/3rd 
2/3 
1/2 
0/0 
1/2 
2/0 
2/0 
2/2 
2/3 

RESPONSE OF THE SUBJECTS TO THE SRMS QUESTIONNAIRE 

TABLE VI 

Completely 
agree 

1st/3rd 
0/1 
0/1 
0/1 
0/1 
1/2 
2/2 
1/3 
1/1 

Somewhat 
agree 

completely 
agree 

Questions 

Completely 
disagree 

Disagree 

If you have choices, do you feel like choosing 
to do rehabilitation using our device? 
Do you feel like your motivation for 
participating in rehabilitation has gotten 
higher after trying our device? 
Do you feel the device could be useful in 
helping you to exercise your hand? 

Do you want to participate in rehabilitation 
with our device if you see other stroke patients 
getting better through rehabilitation? 
Would you perform rehabilitation 
with our device even if no one is 
enforcing it on you? 
Do you find participating in rehabilitation 
with our device exciting? 

Does doing rehabilitation with our device help 
you feel like you are 
achieving something? 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

1/7 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

0/0 

Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
0/0 

4/27 

3/20 

1/7 

9/60 

6/40 

5/30 

8/53 

1/7 

7/47 

2/13 

5/33 

6/40 

5/33 

6/40 

5/33 

7/50 

6/40 

7/47 

7/47 

4/27 

device  usage.  However,  during  the  3rd  session,  1  subject 
reported  decreased  pleasure,  2  subjects  reported  increased 
pleasure, remaining 2 subjects reported no change in pleasure. 
Arousal ratings also varied during the three sessions. 1 subject 
reported  increase  in  arousal  during  the  1st  session  while  the 
remaining  subjects  showed  no  significant  increase  in  arousal 
rating.  During  the  2nd  session,  2  subject  reported  increase  in 
arousal.  While  during  the  3rd  session,  1  subject  reported 
increased arousal. Although dominance ratings did not change 
at all during the 3rd session, 2 subjects in 1st and 2nd session 
reported increased dominance after the device trial. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

this  paper,  a  Multi-sensorial 

Immersive  Dynamic 
In 
Autonomous  System  called  MIDAS  is  presented.  In  order  to 
influence user’s experience and behavior, MIDAS increases the 
number of stimuli for rehabilitation by engaging four out of five 
senses. It consists of three subsystems, i.e., a hand exoskeleton, 
a  VR  headset  with  a  handheld  controller,  and  an  olfactory 
device. Since most components of MIDAS are 3D printed, they 
can be easily reproduced in any research laboratory for further 
research. MIDAS is lightweight and portable. This allowed us 

to meet the subjects during each session at their house or a place 
agreed upon and perform the pilot study for this research. 
Every  component  in  the  subsystems  of  MIDAS  is  carefully 
designed  to  provide  maximum  immersive  experience  and 
pleasure  to  the  user.  The  MIDAS  hand  exoskeleton  is 
comfortable and easy to wear. The natural location views in the 
VR game environment with cheerful music, bird chirps, and a 
mouse  character  keep  the  user  engaged  and  motivated.  The 
olfactory  subsystem  releases  lemon  and  bergamot  scent  each 
time the subject squeezes the lemon in the game. This keeps the 
subject relaxed and stable. 
MIDAS  is  a  novel  system  that  provides  a  more  immersive 
experience  for  hand  rehabilitation  of  stroke-affected  patients. 
The user experience study of MIDAS indicates that it is easy 
for  users  to  familiarize  themselves  with  it.  The  subjects  also 
reported  that  the  device  is  inventive  and  effective  in  hand 
rehabilitation.  Most  subjects  gave  higher  ratings  at  the  3rd 
session  than  they  did  at  the  1st  session.    SRMS  ratings  of 
MIDAS  indicate  that  the  device  increased  the  subject’s 
motivation to use it for hand rehabilitation. The subjects find it 
exciting and are willing to use MIDAS for rehabilitation. 
MIDAS  sets  an  example  for  the  researchers on  how  multiple 
senses  of  patients  can  be  engaged  during  rehabilitation 

 
 
 
 
intrusive during the rehabilitation. To reduce this disturbance, 
silent relays could be used to trigger the scent. Different types 
of fruits, along with its corresponding smell, can also be used 
in each stage to further make the game more engaging. 
Although  no  substantial  improvements  in  participant’s  hand 
functions were noticed at the end of the pilot study, participants 
found  MIDAS  interesting,  exciting  and  are  supportive  of  it. 
This  pilot  study  provides  preliminary  data  suggesting  that  a 
device  like  MIDAS,  which  intends  to  engage  more  patients’ 
senses  and  provide  an 
immersive  experience  during 
rehabilitation exercises, is more effective than the conventional 
simple hand exoskeleton devices. A limitation of this study was 
fewer  participants  and  a  small  number  of  sessions.  Future 
studies  need  to  be  done  with  a  bigger  sample  size,  increased 
number of sessions, and the duration of each session 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  research  is  supported  by  Accelerating  Creativity  and 
Excellence  (ACE)  grant;  and  Institute  for  Media  Innovation 
(IMI), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 

REFERENCES 

of 

video 

psycho-structural 

[1] J. Tranquillo and M. Stecker, “Using intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in 
continuing professional education,” Surgical neurology international, vol. 7, no. 
Suppl 7, p. S197, 2016. 
[2]  R. M. Ryan  and E.  L.  Deci, “Intrinsic  and  extrinsic  motivations:  Classic 
definitions  and  new  directions,”  Contemporary  educational  psychology,  vol. 
25, no. 1, pp. 54–67, 2000. 
[3] E. L. Deci, W. F. Cascio, and J. Krusell, “Cognitive evaluation theory and 
some comments on the calder and staw critique.” 1975. 
[4] R. T. Wood, M. D. Griffiths, D. Chappell, and M. N. Davies, “The structural 
characteristics 
analysis,” 
games:  A 
CyberPsychology & behavior, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2004. 
[5]  R.  Colombo,  F.  Pisano,  A.  Mazzone,  C.  Delconte,  S.  Micera,  M.  C. 
Carrozza,  P.  Dario,  and  G.  Minuco,  “Design  strategies  to  improve  patient 
motivation during robot-aided rehabilitation,” Journal of neuroengineering and 
rehabilitation, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2007. 
[6]  M.  Ghassemi,  K.  Triandafilou,  A.  Barry,  M.  E.  Stoykov,  E.  Roth,  F.  A. 
Mussa-Ivaldi, D. G. Kamper, and R. Ranganathan, “Development of an emg 
controlled  serious  game  for  rehabilitation,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Neural 
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 283–292, 2019. 
[7]  D.  Leonardis,  M.  Barsotti,  C.  Loconsole,  M.  Solazzi,  M.  Troncossi,  C. 
Mazzotti, V. P. Castelli, C. Procopio, G. Lamola, C. Chisari et al., “An emg-
controlled  robotic  hand  exoskeleton  for  bilateral  rehabilitation,”  IEEE 
transactions on haptics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 140–151, 2015. 
[8] W.-K. Song,W.-J. Song, and J.-Y. Jung, “Nrex: Nrc robotic exoskeleton,” 
in  2013  10th  International  Conference  on  Ubiquitous  Robots  and  Ambient 
Intelligence (URAI). IEEE, 2013, pp. 454–456. 
[9] N. Ho, K. Tong, X. Hu, K. Fung, X. Wei, W. Rong, and E. Susanto, “An 
emg-driven  exoskeleton  hand  robotic  training  device  on  chronic  stroke 
subjects:  task  training  system  for  stroke  rehabilitation,”  in  2011  IEEE 
international conference on rehabilitation robotics. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5. 
[10]  Y.-K.  Ou,  Y.-L.  Wang,  H.-C.  Chang,  and  C.-C.  Chen,  “Design  and 
development  of  a  wearable  exoskeleton  system  for  stroke  rehabilitation,”  in 
Healthcare, vol. 8, no. 1. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2020, 
p. 18. 
[11  M.  Burns,  Z.  Zavoda,  R.  Nataraj,  K.  Pochiraju,  and  R.  Vinjamuri, 
“Hercules:  A three  degree-of-freedom pneumatic upper  limb exoskeleton  for 
stroke  rehabilitation,”  in  2020  42nd  Annual  International  Conference  of  the 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 
4959–4962.] 
[12] M. Nann, F. Cordella, E. Trigili, C. Lauretti, M. Bravi, S. Miccinilli, J. M. 
Catalan,  F.  J.  Badesa,  S. Crea,  F. Bressi et al.,  “Restoring activities  of daily 
living  using  an  eeg/eog-controlled  semiautonomous  and  mobile  whole-arm 
exoskeleton in chronic stroke,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 2314–
2321, 2020. 

Fig. 10. SAM scores of subjects for session 1, session 2 and 
session 3. 

exercises.  It  provides  proof  of  increased  motivation  in 
rehabilitation by making the rehabilitation exercise exciting and 
highly immersive. 
Future researchers must keep in mind that needs and conditions 
vary  for  each  stroke  patient  depending  on  their  age,  medical 
condition, and severity of stroke. Hardly can a device meet the 
needs  of  all  stroke  survivors.  The  first  major  area  of 
improvement in MIDAS is the hand exoskeleton. High torque 
and power output from the motor would increase the range of 
movement of the patient's fingers. This would also increase the 
range of stroke patients who can use the system. However, for 
this  to  be  possible,  there  are  two  prerequisites.  The  first  is  a 
higher power supply, as a stronger motor means a higher power 
demand.  The  second  is  a  more  robust  material  for  the 
exoskeleton so that it can withstand higher stress. One possible 
material is resin. It performs well under high stress while also 
being  cheap  and  fast  to  produce  compared  to  other  materials 
like Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) or carbon fiber. In 
our current design of the olfactory subsystem, a click sound can 
be  heard  before  and  after  the  scent's  release.  This  might  be 

  
 
 
[13]  A.  Demofonti,  G.  Carpino,  L.  Zollo,  and  M.  J.  Johnson,  “Affordable 
robotics  for  upper  limb  stroke  rehabilitation  in  developing  countries:  a 
systematic review,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics, 
2021. 
[14]  N.  Shah,  A.  Basteris,  and  F.  Amirabdollahian,  “Design  parameters  in 
multimodal  games  for  rehabilitation,”  GAMES  FOR  HEALTH:  Research, 
Development, and Clinical Applications, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 13–20, 2014. 
[15] J. W. Burke, M. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. H. Crosbie, and 
S.  M.  McDonough,  “Optimising  engagement  for  stroke  rehabilitation  using 
serious games,” The Visual Computer, vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1085– 1099, 2009. 
[16] R. Proffitt and B. Lange, “Considerations in the efficacy and effectiveness 
of  virtual  reality  interventions  for  stroke  rehabilitation:  moving  the  field 
forward,” Physical therapy, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 441–448, 2015. 
[17]  J.  Deutsch  and  S.  W.  McCoy,  “Virtual  reality  and  serious  games  in 
neurorehabilitation  of  children  and  adults:  prevention,  plasticity  and 
participation,” Pediatric physical therapy: the official publication of the Section 
on Pediatrics of the American Physical Therapy Association, vol. 29, no. Suppl 
3 IV STEP 2016 CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS, p. S23, 2017. 
[18] D. B. Mekbib, J. Han, L. Zhang, S. Fang, H. Jiang, J. Zhu, A. W. Roe, and 
D.  Xu, “Virtual  reality therapy  for upper  limb  rehabilitation  in patients  with 
stroke: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials,” Brain injury, vol. 34, no. 
4, pp. 456–465, 2020. 
[19] H.-S. Lee, J.-H. Lim, B.-H. Jeon, and C.-S. Song, “Non-immersive virtual 
reality rehabilitation applied to a task-oriented approach for stroke patients: A 
randomized controlled trial,” Restorative neurology and neuroscience, vol. 38, 
no. 2, pp. 165–172, 2020. 
[20] A. Rollings and E. Adams, Andrew Rollings and Ernest Adams on game 
design. New Riders, 2003. 
[21] R. C. C. Leung, H. Zhang, and X. Tao, “Serious game design for stroke 
rehabilitation,” International Journal of Information Technology, vol. 23, no. 1, 
2017. 
[22]  M.  AlMousa,  H.  S.  Al-Khalifa,  and  H.  AlSobayel,  “Move-it:  a  virtual 
reality  game  for  upper  limb  stroke  rehabilitation  patients,”  in  International 
Conference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs. Springer, 2020, 
pp. 184–195. 
[23] M. M. Jurioli, A. F. Brandao, B. C. S. G. Martins, E. do Valle Sim˜oes, 
and C.  F. M.  Toledo,  “Wearable  device  for  immersive virtual  reality control 
and  application  in  upper  limbs  motor  rehabilitation,”  in  International 
Conference on Computational Science and Its Applications. Springer, 2020, pp. 
741–756. 
[24] U. E. Syed and A. Kamal, “Video game-based and conventional therapies 
in  patients  of  neurological  deficits:  an  experimental  study,”  Disability  and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 332–339, 2021. 
[25] K. Lohse, N. Shirzad, A. Verster, N. Hodges, and H. M. Van der Loos, 
“Video  games  and  rehabilitation:  using  design  principles  to  enhance 
engagement in physical therapy,” Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy, vol. 
37, no. 4, pp. 166–175, 2013. 
[26]  T.  B¨utzer,  O.  Lambercy,  J.  Arata,  and  R.  Gassert,  “Fully  wearable 
actuated soft exoskeleton for grasping assistance in everyday activities,” Soft 
Robotics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 128–143, 2021. 
[27] M. Ietswaart, M. Johnston, H. C. Dijkerman, C. L. Scott, S. A. Joice, S. 
Hamilton, and R. S. MacWalter, “Recovery of hand function through mental 
practice: a study protocol,” BMC neurology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2006. 
[28] A. Wharton and K. Collins, “Subjective measures of the influence of music 
customization  on  the  video  game  play  experience:  A  pilot  study,”  Game 
Studies, vol. 11, no. 2, 2011. 
[29] L. E. Nacke, M. N. Grimshaw, and C. A. Lindley, “More than a feeling: 
Measurement of sonic user experience and psychophysiology in a first person 
shooter game,” Interacting with computers, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 
336–343, 2010. 
[30] A. K. Kutlu, E. Yılmaz, and D. C¸ ec¸en, “Effects of aroma inhalation on 
examination anxiety,” Teaching and Learning in Nursing, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 125–
130, 2008. 
[31] K. Touhara and L. B. Vosshall, “Sensing odorants and pheromones with 
chemosensory receptors,” Annual review of physiology, vol. 71, pp. 307– 332, 
2009. 
[32] F. Angelucci, V. Silva, C. Dal Pizzol, L. Spir, C. Praes, and H. Maibach, 
“Physiological effect of olfactory stimuli inhalation in humans: An overview,” 
International journal of cosmetic science, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 117–123, 2014. 
[33] 
relaxing  essential  oils  on 
inhalation  of 
electroencephalogram activity,” International Journal of New Technology and 
Research, vol. 2, no. 5, 2016. 
[34]  S.-H.  Liu,  T.-H.  Lin,  and  K.-M.  Chang,  “The  physical  effects  of 
aromatherapy in alleviating work-related stress on elementary school teachers 

I.  Lee,  “Effects  of 

in  taiwan,”  Evidence-Based  Complementary  and  Alternative  Medicine,  vol. 
2013, 2013. 
[35] W. Klemm, S. Lutes, D. Hendrix, and S. Warrenburg, “Topographical eeg 
maps of human responses to odors,” Chemical senses, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 347–
361, 1992. 
[36]  M.  Kawakami,  S.  Aoki,  and  T.  Ohkubo,  “A  study  of  “fragrance”  on 
working  environment  characteristics  in  vdt  work  activities,”  International 
journal of production economics, vol. 60, pp. 575–581, 1999. 
[37] K.-H. Rho, S.-H. Han, K.-S. Kim, and M. S. Lee, “Effects of aromatherapy 
massage on anxiety and self-esteem in korean elderly women: a pilot study,” 
International Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 116, no. 12, pp. 1447–1455, 2006. 
[38] J. H. Carr, R. B. Shepherd, L. Nordholm, and D. Lynne, “Investigation of 
a new motor assessment scale for stroke patients,” Physical therapy, vol. 65, no. 
2, pp. 175–180, 1985. 
[39]  Z.  S.  Nasreddine,  N.  A.  Phillips,  V.  B´edirian,  S.  Charbonneau,  V. 
Whitehead,  I.  Collin,  J.  L.  Cummings,  and  H.  Chertkow,  “The  montreal 
cognitive  assessment,  moca:  a  brief  screening  tool  for  mild  cognitive 
impairment,”  Journal  of  the  American  Geriatrics  Society,  vol.  53,  no.  4,  pp. 
695–699, 2005. 
[40]  W.  Group, “Development  of the  whoqol:  Rationale and  current  status,” 
International Journal of Mental Health, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 24–56, 1994. 
[41] A. Hinderks, M. Schrepp, and J. Thomaschewski, “A benchmark for the 
short version of the user experience questionnaire.” in WEBIST, 2018, pp. 373–
377. 
[42]  G.  White,  D. Cordato,  F.  O’Rourke, R. Mendis,  D.  Ghia,  and  D. Chan, 
“Validation of the stroke rehabilitation motivation scale: a pilot study,” Asian J 
Gerontol Geriatr, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 80–7, 2012. 
[43]  T.-M.  Bynion  and  M.  T.  Feldner,  Self-Assessment  Manikin.  Cham: 
Springer  International  Publishing,  2017,  pp.  1–3.  [Online].  Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28099-877 -1 

Fok-Chi-Seng Fok Kow received his BFA 
in  Product  Design  from 
the  Nanyang 
Technological  University  (NTU).  He  is 
currently a Research Assistant at the NTU, 
School of Art, Design and Media exploring 
Singapore  as  a  method  for  inclusivity.  He 
has previously been nominated for the ADM 
Sustainability Award and has done multiple 
exhibitions.  His  research  interests  lie  in  parametric  and 
sustainable design. 

from 

Anoop  Kumar  Sinha  received  B.Tech 
degree in mechanical engineering from Dr. 
A.P.J.  Abdul  Kalam  Technical  University, 
Lucknow,  India  and  M.Tech  degree  in 
mechatronics  engineering 
Indian 
Institute  of  Technology  (IIT)  Patna,  India. 
He  is  currently  working  toward  the  Ph.D. 
degree  in  mechanical  engineering  with 
School  of  Mechanical  and  Aerospace 
Engineering,  Nanyang  Technological  University  (NTU), 
Singapore.  
   He has invented 2 patents (one granted and second pending 
approval) in the area of biaxial stretching device and cryogenic 
micromachining of soft materials. His current research interest 
includes prostheses, sensor feedback, human robot interaction 
and mechatronics.  

in  psychology 

Zhang  Jinming  received  his  bachelor’s 
degree 
from  National 
in  2019.  His 
University  of  Singapore 
research  interests  are  subliminal  message, 
hypnosis, and human perception of art.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
in 

arts 

Bao  Songyu  is  a  kinetic  media  artist  and 
prototype designer and is currently pursuing 
his  master’s 
at  Nanyang 
Technological  University.  He  received  his 
BFA Degree in Interactive Media and Minor 
in  Entrepreneurship  in  2019.    Bao’s  work 
ranges 
to  kinetic 
sculptures  with  elements  of  robotics  and 
artificial life. He aims to continue experimenting with different 
materials  used  in  3D  printing  and  production  to  further  his 
understanding of materials and their applications. 

installations 

from 

Jake Tan Jun Kang is a New Media Artist, 
Adjunct  Lecturer  at  Temasek  Polytechnic 
School  of  Design  and  Founder  of  Serial 
Communication,  a  studio  that  focuses  on 
Research  &  Development  of  proprietary 
digital  assets  in  the  fields  on  Creative 
Technology  and  Extended  Reality  (XR). 
Serial Communication is 1 of the 2 selected 
Start-ups that was selected for an incubation 
program by Nanyang Technological University, School of Art, 
Media and Design, Singapore, where he also received his BFA 
degree  in  Interactive  Media  in  2020,  and  MiniMasters  in 
General Management in Nanyang Business School. His R&D 
platforms 
the  physical  platforms  of 
microcontrollers,  electronics,  3D  printing  and  scanning, 
through  programming,  AR/VR/MR  production 
digitally 
through  game  engines  and  intangibly  through  projection 
mapping and XR focused user interface and experience design. 
His artistic practice encompasses topics of intersection between 
nature, technology and society, where he has exhibited and was 
part of artistic residencies in Singapore, Austria and Germany. 

typically 

lie 

in 

collections of one of kind designs. Her art and design work have 
been shown in festivals, galleries and museums across United 
States, Asia, Central and South America and Europe. In 2007 
she was nominated for the best design award at Cooper-Hewitt 
Design Museum. Galina received the Rumi award in USA and 
the first place at the Tiffany’s Paris fashion week in 2016.  
   Her  resent  interests  and  explorations  are  in  the  area  of 
Fashionable Technology, which refers to the intersection of 
design, fashion, science, and technology. 

from 

doctorates 

and  master's  degrees 

Nadia  Magnenat  Thalmann  received 
in 
bachelor's 
disciplines  such  as  psychology,  biology, 
chemistry,  and  computer  science,  and 
completed her PhD in quantum physics at 
the University of Geneva. She has received 
honorary 
Leibniz 
University of Hannover and the University 
of  Ottawa  in  Canada.  Since  1989,  she  is  a  Professor  at  the 
University of Geneva where she founded the interdisciplinary 
research group MIRALab. She is presently Director of the IMI 
in NTU, Singapore.  Her global domain of research is Virtual 
Humans and Social Robots.  
   She revolutionized social robotics by unveiling the first social 
robot Nadine  at NTU. She has authored dozens of books and 
published  with  her  students  more  than  700  papers  on  Virtual 
Humans/Virtual Worlds and social Robots. She is the chair of 
major conferences as CGI, CASA, and has delivered more than 
300 keynote addresses, some of them at global events such as 
the World Economic Forum in Davos.  
    Prof.  Thalmann  is  Editor-in-Chief  of  the  Visual  Computer 
and Associate editor of many other scientific journals. She is a 
life  member  of  the  Swiss  Academy  of  Engineering  Sciences. 
She is a recipient of the prestigious Humboldt Research Award 
in Germany. wikipedia/Nadia_Magnenat_Thalmann. 

Hong  Yan  Jack  Jeffrey  is  currently  a 
Lecturer for  the  Product  Design pathway  at 
the  School  of  Art,  Design,  and  Media  at 
Nanyang  Technological  University 
in 
Singapore. Trained in architecture, industrial 
design and human factors engineering, he has 
worked on multi-disciplinary design projects 
ranging  from  consumer  product  design, 
interaction design, exhibition design, and transportation design. 

Galina Mihaleva is an Associate Professor 
at  the  school  of  Art,  Design  and  Media  at 
Nanyang  Technological  University,  where 
she  teaches  Wearable  Technology,  Fashion 
and  Design.  Her  work  and  research  deal 
primarily  with  the  dialogue  between  body 
and dress, driven by the idea of having both 
a  physical  and  a  psychological  relationship 
with a garment as a responsive clothing - wearable technology. 
   Prior  to  joining  NTU,  Galina  thought  at  Arizona  State 
University for more than 15 years costume and fashion design 
and  collaborated  with  world  renown  choreographers  in  USA, 
ASIA  and  Europe.  She  is  the  founder  of  Galina  Couture  in 
Scottsdale  Arizona,  where  her  team  develops  exclusive 

training 

Yiyu  Cai  did  his  Ph.D. 
in 
Engineering,  M.Sc.  training  in  Computer 
Graphics  &  Computer-aided  Geometry 
Design,  and  B.Sc.  training  in  Math.  He  is 
currently a tenured faculty with the School 
of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering in 
NTU Singapore, Program Director of The 
Strategic  Research  Program  of  Virtual 
Reality  and  Soft  Computing,  Professor  in  Charge  of  The 
Computer-aided Engineering Labs.  

He  has  edited  8  books  and  5  journals  special  issues,  and 
published  over  200  papers  in  peer-reviewed  international 
journals or international conferences. He has also invented or 
co-invented  6  patents  (granted  or  pending  approval).  His 
research interest includes 3D based design, simulation, serious 
games, virtual reality, etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
