A Systematic Review on Interactive Virtual Reality 
Laboratory 

1st Fozlur Rahman 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
shahariarahmed834@gmail.com 

3rd Feekra Baset Baishakhi 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
feekrabaset@gmail.com 

5th  Md.  Kishor Morol 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
kishor@aiub.edu 

Abstract—Virtual  Reality  (VR)  has  became  a  significant  el- 
ement  of  education  throughout  the  years.  To  understand  the 
quality  and  advantages  of  these  techniques,  it’s  important  to 
understand  how  they  were  developed  and  evaluated.  Since 
COVID-19, the education system has drastically changed a lot.   It 
has shifted from being in a  classroom  with  a  whiteboard  and 
projectors to having your own room in  front  of  your  laptop in a 
virtual meeting. In this  respect,  virtual  reality  in the laboratory 
or Virtual Laboratory is the main focus of this research, which is 
intended to comprehend the work done  in quality education from 
a  distance  using  VR.  As  per the findings  of  the  study,  adopting 
virtual  reality  in  education  can  help  students  learn  more 
effectively  and  also  help  them  increase  perspective,  enthusiasm, 
and  knowledge  of  complex  notions  by  offering  them  with  an 
interactive experience in which they can engage and learn  more 
effectively.  This  highlights  the  importance  for  a  significant 
expansion  of  VR  use  in  learning,  the  majority  of  which  employ 
scientific comparison approaches to compare students who use VR 
to  those  who  use  the traditional  method for  learning. 

Index Terms—: Distance Education, Student Learning, Virtual 

Reality, Virtual Laboratory, Virtual Learning, Virtual Labs. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Technology is an ever-developing variant, there is no proba- 
ble finishing line of ever-so innovations in this field. For years 
thousands of developments have amazed us. The use of tech- 
nology in education has been really popular in recent years. ICT 
has contributed to activities in the educational sphere, with the 
help  of  technology  interaction  with  a  virtual  environment  is 
possible now with being a part of the environment in real- time 
[8].  The  sector  of  Virtual  Reality  is  also  one  of  the  major 
developments. Virtual reality has many potential extremities to 

2nd Marium Sana Mim 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
mariumsana55@gmail.com 

4th Mahmudul Hasan 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
American International University-Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
shawkatkhanztuhin0022@gmail.com 

uncover  and  so  does  augmented reality.  Although augmented 
has to stay in a fixed place, virtual is spread out, but both have 
their unique advantages. 

instructional  materials 

Students  are  more  engaged  in  learning  when  they  expe- 
rience something in real life which can help them enhance  and 
solidify their knowledge [1]. Virtual Reality can help students 
experience  real-life  environments and allow  students  to  learn 
more  visually,  which  is  a  more  effective  learning  method. 
Virtual Reality has the potential to alter  students’ perceptions 
of  learning  [2].  Students  can  study  visually  while  interacting 
with a  specific  setting  in  VR.  VR helps  them  to  develop  and 
reinforce  their  knowledge.  Virtual  Reality  allows  students  to 
access 
anywhere  using 
contemporary  gadgets  [3].  With  virtual  reality  extending  to 
places where real life fails, Virtual Reality is a platform where 
people can be in their own comfort zone and still be able       to 
access  other  dimensions  per  se.  Virtual  Reality  has  been 
making many advancements since the beginning, and although 
it  takes  a  lot  of  input,  the  results  are  worth  it.  Basically,  VR 
expands the  level  of  creativity  in a  virtual  platform,  enabling 
people  to  run  things  according  to  their  ways  in  a  simulated 
dimension. Virtual Reality is slowly making more development 
towards perfecting its voids. As VR is still lacking in this area, 
the  progress  might  seem  very  slow,  all  of  it,  though,  has  an 
influence. 

from 

Students sometimes face lots of issues in traditional classes 
while  doing  risky  laboratory  experiments,  but  we  may  easily 
overcome these obstacles with the aid of Virtual Laboratories 
[1]. With the help of the Virtual Laboratory, we don’t have 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  worry  about  budgetary  issues  or  lack  of  facilities  in  labo- 
ratories as the majority of schools and universities are unable 
to  create  them.  Virtual  Reality  in  Laboratories  have  been 
described  as  one  of  the  best  teaching  methods that may  keep 
students  engaged  during  learning  sessions.  By  using  virtual 
reality, we can reduce the expense of laboratory experiments. 
But  the  main  goal  of  Virtual  Laboratory  is  to  give  users  an 
experience of a 3D environment that depicts actual or imagined 
information and allows users to interact with them in real- time. 
In  other  words,  it  allows  students  to  experience  realistic 
laboratories  in a  virtual  world  where  they  can  easily  conduct 
experiments to solve issues in a manner similar to a traditional 
physical laboratory [7]. 

Although  Virtual  Reality  or  VR-based  technology  shows 
great  potential  for  Student  Learning  and  Laboratory  settings. 
But  we  are  all  aware  Virtual  Reality  is  still  a  developing 
technology and with only a few VR applications created in  the 
education  sector  [4]  [5]  and  VR  has  sparked  widespread 
interest. So, in the case of the laboratory settings, virtual reality 
shows lots of potential, but there are also a lot of variables, such 
as  the  cost  of  the  system  design,  as  well  as  its  robustness, 
usability, and maintainability becomes a significant task [6].As 
a  result,  to  optimize  Virtual  Reality’s  contributions  in 
laboratory  settings,  some  instructional  methods  must  be 
established. 

Our paper focuses on a specific part of virtual reality, which 
is,  creating  virtual  platforms  where  students  can  interact  for 
their lab performances be it chemistry, physics, or biology. In 
addition,  the  paper  will  discuss  some  relevant  works  in  the 
realm of virtual learning systems. The laboratory experiments 
and evaluation of the results are also included in the study paper 
from the developer’s perspective. Although we are going to be 
emphasizing  more  on  Virtual  Laboratory,  hopefully,  our 
findings  and  methods  can  also  be  used  for  the  other  science 
subjects. We will also be going through technological and ped- 
agogical requirements,  such  as  different  objects,  different  OS 
systems,  different  resources,  Oriented  Systems,  and  how  VR 
methods  can  improve  in  the  development  of  these  processes, 
and how we can update the developed system in the future  [5]. 
The following is the paper’s structure: In Section II, we talk 
about  previous  literature  and  reviews,  in  section  III,  we  talk 
about materials and methods, in section  IV, we talk about the 
study questions and discussion, and in section V, we talk about 
the conclusion 

II.  LITERATURE  REVIEW 

In  this  section,  we’ll  go  through  all  of  the  prior  work  on 

Virtual Laboratories that has been done. 

Several  studies  on  Virtual  Reality  have  been  published  in 
educational sections. The most recent was done by Jensen and 
Konradsen (2018) [9], who conducted a thorough analysis on 
the  use  of  virtual  reality.  Their  research  provides  a  thorough 
examination  of  various  learning  outcomes  as  well as  the  user 
experience in Virtual Reality. Jensen and Konradsen (2018) [9] 
conducted research that demonstrates all 21 distinct qualitative 

and  quantitative  paper  analyses  that  bring  out  both  student 
learning  and  experience.  When  compared  to  less  immersive 
technologies,  the  effectiveness  of  HMDs  in  the  learning  of 
analytic and operative skills was shown to be restricted in the 
paper. But due to the poor quality of research included, which 
made it really difficult to find any clear outcome regarding the 
educational usefulness of Virtual Reality [9]. 

A virtual based experiment  was  conducted  in  Indonesia at 
the  University  of  Pendidikan  Indonesia  as  a  laboratory 
experiment-based  learning  proved  to  be  highly  efficient  in 
teaching chemistry to students due to a lack of laboratories and 
equipment in some schools in Indonesia. One group was asked 
to  answer  20  multiple-choice  questions  in  the  virtual-  based 
experiment.  Students  in  grade  XII  science  at  Bulukumba 
Regency’s  senior  high  schools  in  South  Sulawesi  Province, 
Indonesia,  were  the  targeted  group.  The  experiment’s  major 
objective  was  to  assess  the  efficacy  of  Virtual  Reality  in  the 
chemistry  laboratory.  10  male  and  20  female  students  were 
chosen from the group for the experiment. The average results 
of the students’ experiment were 42.5 and 81.33, respectively, 
after  the  experiment  was  completed.  There  were  25  students 
that received scores of 75 or above, resulting in a completion 
rate  of  83.33  percent.  Finally,  all  of  the  data  analysis  results 
satisfied the above-mentioned efficacy requirements. To put it 
another  way,  the  virtual  laboratory  is  put  to  good  use  in  a 
laboratory setting [10]. 

According to the current research In Nigeria, some students 
were tasked with doing volumetric analysis and responding to 
questions. The collected data were analyzed, and the findings 
reveal that there is a significant difference among both physical 
and virtual chemistry laboratory participants. The students who 
practiced  in  virtual  chemistry  laboratories  fared  considerably 
better  than  those  who  just  practiced  in  real  chemistry  lab- 
oratories. It showed that three-dimensional interactive nature is 
very  effective  and  efficient  and  also  familiar  with  the  actual 
procedures  at  work.  Virtual  chemistry  laboratories  solve  the 
issue of insufficiency  of  facilities. As a result, practicing in a 
virtual chemistry laboratory is more supportive and beneficial 
in  terms  of  improving  students’  comprehension  and  success 
[11]. 

A study was conducted at University College Copenhagen in 
Denmark. The main goal of the study was  to  see  if  Virtual 
Reality  can  be  used  as  a  simulation  setting  in  practical 
education. The main objective was to improve new techniques 
to inspire students and improve their learning. The study  was 
conducted  on  78  students  where  various  assessed  educational 
elements of Virtual Laboratories were used in a 2-week course. 
Students perceived the ability to apply experimental simulation 
as well as the specific scenarios they were studying. The Virtual 
Laboratories appear to assist and help students apply theory to 
cellular functions, and also extensive laboratory techniques and 
equipment methods that should be practiced and visualized. As 
per the results of the study, the use  of virtual reality in learning 
has  the  potential  to  enhance students’  study engagement and 
interest. Virtual Reality is a really useful addition. This setting 
helps students move from  traditional 

study methods to more advanced study methods [12]. 

A system was introduced named VR2E2C for Virtual Real- 
ity Remote Education in Chemistry. The main goal of the sys- 
tem design was to improve intellectual curiosity among public 
school  and  high  school  students  by  offering  an  enhanced 
education in conceptual and applied chemistry. In the system, 
there is a laboratory alternation option where disabled students 
can  easily  perform  chemical  experiments  that  have  restricted 
mobility for regular use or experimentation. The program can 
be  run  in  3  ways.  One  option  provides  an  intelligent  robot 
controlled by the user to complete the task, which can perform 
the task by itself. The result can also be viewed by users in real-
time. The system demonstrates how the newest Virtual Reality 
technology  can  help 
teaching  by 
providing  remote  teaching  with  safe  experimental  outcomes 
[14]. 

traditional  chemistry 

Some  researchers  from  Spain  conducted  a  bibliometric 
analysis in which they used two bibliometric approaches: 
performance analysis and scientific mapping. Researchers sur- 
veyed  the  VR  lab  with  specific  years  of  data  ranging  from 
2015  to  2021  in  order  to  add  more  advanced  investigations 
and examine how those subjects have evolved over time. They 
acquired bibliometric data from various digital libraries. [15]. 
In  2021,  several  researchers  released  an  article  addressing 
the inadequacy of involvement among distant  learners  and 
instructors in higher education. Students must  be properly 
instructed in order to complete the laboratory activity. Students 
must have  fundamental and  advanced  understanding in  order 
to conduct experimental tasks. As described in  COVID-19, 
people from all over the world are trapped in a distant place. 
Everything  is  done  online  these  days,  and  the  remote  lab  is 
one of them. So the researchers used the Transitional  Dis- 
tance  Theory  to  improve  communication  and,  by  contrasting 
traditional laboratory platforms and remotely active platforms, 
a  case  study  on  testing  machines  was  performed.  When  the 
platform  was  integrated  into  regular  learning,  different  users 
finished  work  in  less  time  and  boosted  scores  by  more  than 
200  percent [16]. 

Research was conducted about a multi modal virtual chem- 
istry  laboratory.  Multi  modal  virtual  chemistry  laboratory 
actually provides the specifics of a chemical object’s physical 
and chemical qualities. The 3D interaction interface allows the 
user to effortlessly engage with MMVL. In this research, there 
are  some  questionnaires  filled  out  by  two  groups  of  students. 
One is an MMVL trained group, and the other is an untrained 
group.  Primarily,  they  have  identified  the  range  of  effects, 
equipment, and their activities, as well as correctly performed 
experiments  in  a  practical  situation.  When  evaluating  the 
MMVL  instructed  group  to  the  unskilled  group,  there  is  a 
significant difference in overall percentages. According to the 
findings,  untrained  students  learn  at  a  rate  of  32.7  percent, 
whereas  trained  students  learn  at  a  rate  of  83.5  percent. 
Experiments show that students who received MMVL training 
have higher levels of confidence in the practical area than those 
who did not [17]. 

An interactive data integration feature of the architecture 

is highlighted in  a  study  released  by  several  researchers  on 
the  design  of  a  virtual  laboratory  setting,  as  well  as  a 
demonstration  of  its  use  in  the  practical  biology  sector.  Re- 
searchers are placing more emphasis on the remote laboratory 
project, which began at the University of Berlin and aimed to 
develop a hardware system proposal framework as well as an 
accessible, versatile, and customized laboratory framework to 
aid  scientists  and  researchers  in  their  exploratory  work.  The 
researchers explain the VL framework, its capabilities, and how 
they may be structured to make full use of its potential [19]. 

In  a  very  recent  paper  published  by  University  of  Kanju- 
ruhan  Malang,  the  researchers  discuss  the  factual  improvisa- 
tions  of  the  subjective  matter  ”Virtual laboratory  for  primary 
school  students.” In  scientific  education,  experimental  activi- 
ties are sometimes limited by a lack of tools, finances, settings, 
and availability. These constraints inhibit the accumulation of 
scientific evidence, theories, and perceptions.  The  focus  of 
the thesis was to construct an immersive  environment  that 
could  be  used  as  a  learning  tool.  When  developing  a  virtual 
lab, the procedure was to:  identify  the  problems,  operate 
the  system,  develop,  evaluate,  run,  and  maintain  the  system, 
and  conduct  analysis.  In  primary  school  science  lessons,  this 
medium is dependable and straightforward to use. Observation 
and questionnaires were utilized as tools in this research. The 
study’s participants were fourth-grade pupils. Expert validation 
and  practitioner  feedback revealed  that this medium  is  viable 
and suitable for use in scientific education. For  elementary 
school children, virtual laboratory learning tools allow them to 
visualize abstract notions of material or occurrences  into more 
tangible conceptions. Students’ interest in  studying  science 
may be sparked via engaging and tangible learning tools. [20] 
Some researchers published a paper on the effectiveness of 
e-learning  with  virtual  laboratories  considering  the  pandemic 
situation  of  2020.  The purpose  of  this research  is  to  see  how 
effective a VR lab is in an educational setting. The study’s goal 
is to look at how a virtual lab might improve students’ learning 
abilities and their knowledge of ideas in Chennai schools. The 
research also seeks to determine if the virtual lab aids students 
in  increasing  their  self-paced  learning.  Surveys  and  expert 
interviews were used as research approaches. The results of the 
survey indicated that a high percentage of students are familiar 
with virtual laboratories and appreciate them highly. According 
to the report, virtual laboratories should be used in schools  to 
encourage pupils to think beyond the box [21]. 

III.  MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Different phases were conducted to reflect the study accord- 
ing  to  the  approach  for  systematically  analyzing  research.  In 
this section, we’ll go over the stages. [18]: 

A.  Research  Questions 

In order to acquire the essential data, research questions were 
devised with the goal of knowing the emphasis of the study that 
is  being  conducted.  The  study  questions  we’ve  outlined  are 
related to Virtual Reality. 

TABLE I 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 

Research Questions 
How many studies on VR Laboratory have been performed 
throughout  the years? 

In which areas of knowledge do students’ believe Virtual Reality 
in laboratories should be employed in educational Institutes? 

What is the evaluation method of VR users’ 
learning and what is the learning outcome? 

Which technological equipment can be used in the development 
of an interactive virtual laboratory? 

What varieties of design tools are available for development 
and use in the  study? 

What will be the architecture of the Virtual Reality 
Laboratory if the research was implemented? 

What are the limitations in the use of VR 
in  the Laboratory? 

B.  Review of the Objective 

The Review of the Objective will be evaluated a set of rules. 
They  are  Audience,  Interaction,  Comparisons,  Results,  and 
Context. 

•  Audience: The Audience of the Research is Universities 

and Students of different educational institutes. 

•  Interaction: Making Virtual reality a learning Environ- 

ment 

•  Comparisons: We really cannot compare technologies. 
•  Resultss: Understanding of Virtual Reality experience, 

knowledge, and technology outcome. 

•  Contextt: Evaluation of users’ Virtual Reality experience. 

C.  Database and Search keywords 

A literature search in an online database is one of the initial 
stages in every research project. As a result, in November 2021, 
We  used  a  scientific  database  to  do  our  search.  To  find 
publications  about  Laboratory  Education  in  virtual  apps  or 
games, we used a collection of search phrases. The search string 
or  phrases  such  as  “Virtual  Reality”,  “VR”,  “Virtual 
Laboratory”,  “Laboratory  Experiment”,  ”Learning”,”  Virtual 
Learning” was created with the help of the Research Questions 
we created. The database was chosen using digital sources since 
they offer a powerful search engine, which is required for the 
study. Between  2016  and  2021, the  search  was  done utilizing 
the following databases: ACM, IEEE, BU library, Springer, and 
ScienceDirect. The combination of search terms that have been 
used  are: 

•  (”virtual reality” OR ”VR”) AND (”laboratory” OR 

”lab”) 

•  (”virtual reality” OR ”VR”) AND (educational OR 

”learning”) 

•  (”virtual reality” OR ”VR”) AND (” Virtual laboratory” 
OR ”VR lab”) AND (””educational” OR ”learning”) 
Table II illustrates the digital library and the search string or 
phrase  used  to  identify  relevant  articles and researches  based 
on title, abstract, and author Keywords. 

TABLE II 
DATABASE SEARCH STRINGS 

Source 
ACM 
Digital 
Library 

IEEE 
Xplore 

Science 
Direct 
BU 
library 

Springer 

(”Abstract 

Search Phrase or String 
[[Title: ”virtual reality”] OR [Title: ”vr”]] AND [[Ti- 
tle: educational] OR [Title: ”learning”]]  AND [[Ab- 
stract:  ”virtual  reality”]  AND  [[Keywords:  ”virtual 
reality”]  OR  [Keywords:  ”vr”]]  AND  [[Keywords: 
”laboratory”]  OR  [Keywords:  ”lab”]]  AND  [[Title: 
educational] OR [Title: ”learning”]] 
(”Title”:”virtual reality” OR ” Title”:”VR”) AND 
(”Title”:”laboratory”  OR 
”  Title”:”lab”)  OR 
(”Abstract”:”virtual  reality”  OR  ”Abstract”:”VR”) 
AND 
Keywords”:educational 
OR 
”Abstract  Keywords”:”learning”)  AND 
(”Abstract  Keywords”:”laboratory”  OR  ”Abstract 
Keywords”:”lab”) OR (”Author”:”virtual reality” OR 
”Author”:”VR”)  AND  (”Author”:educational  OR 
”Author”:”learning”)  AND  (”Author”:”laboratory” 
OR ”Author”:”lab”) 
(”virtual reality” OR ”VR”) AND (”laboratory” OR 
”lab”) AND (”educational” OR ”learning”). 
keywords (”virtual reality” OR ”VR”) AND key- 
words (”laboratory” OR ”lab”) AND keywords (”Ed- 
ucation” OR ”Educational” OR ”Learning”) 
’Virtual Reality AND VR AND laboratory AND 
learning AND ”Virtual Reality laboratory” AND 
(VR)’ 

Table  III  displays  the  overall  number  of  publications  and 
papers  connected  to  our  issue  based  on  search  keywords 
employed  in  various  digital  liberties,  which  is  a  total  of  235 
articles. 

TABLE III 

SEARCH RESULT OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES 

Source 
ACM Digital Library 
IEEE Xplore 
Springer 
Science Direct 
BU library 

Search Phrase or String 
2 
11 
47. 
70 
106 

D.  Study Selection 

These criteria were prepared for the operation of collecting 
articles related to the study’s topic are displayed in table below. 

E.  Quality Evaluation 

The evaluation criteria for the reduced number of papers are 
discussed  in  this  section.  We took  into account the  following 
questions to judge the papers for their quality: 

•  Are the article’s goals related to virtual reality labs? 
•  Are the methods accurately explained for reaching the 

study’s actual goal? 

•  Are all the results appropriately elaborate for a good 
overview  of the carried research work of the study? 

•  Is  the  study  experimental  or  theoretical? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criteria 
Accounted 

Unaccounted 

TABLE IV 
ACCOUNTED AND UNACCOUNTED 

Criteria Description 

•  Articles from journals and relevant confer- 

ences emphasize the topic. 

•  Articles with contents being all in the English 

language 

•  Articles consisting of information about Vir- 
tual Reality  Laboratories in their research 
•  Theoretical papers with no applied   research 
•  Articles with systematic reviews 
•  Articles that cited  the  main paper  chosen 
•  Articles that included past researches done on 

Virtual Reality 

•  Articles prior 2016 
•  Articles that  were not about  Virtual Reality 
•  Articles that did not contain anything about 

Virtual reality in Education 

•  Articles that had less information on Virtual 

Laboratories 

•  Articles that excluded VR  Labs 
•  Articles with less resourceful  data 
•  Articles that are  focused  on  Mixed  Reality 
•  Articles that contained duplicated  database 

•  Articles which does not concentrate on either ”Education” 

or ”laboratory Education” are  discarded. 

•  Articles which does not concentrate on Virtual Learning 

are  discarded. 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

This  research  has  a  lot  of  potential  in  terms  of  student 
learning, and the  VR  Laboratory  has  a  lot  of  potential  in the 
future. We begin by responding to research questions based  on 
32  papers  obtained  from  different  digital  library  studies’ 
findings in this study of Virtual Reality in Education. 

A. RQ1: How many studies on VR Laboratory have been 
performed over the years? 

Out of many papers skimmed, there were 32 relevant papers 
that  were  published  between  2016  and  May  2021  that  were 
relevant  to  the  study  topic.  9  studies  were  published  in  2016 
(28.125%), 3 were published in 2017 (9.375%), 7 studies were 
published in 2018 (21.875%), 4 studies were published in 2019 
(12.50%), 5 studies were published in 2020 (15.625%), and 4 
studies were published up to May 2021 (12.50%) [Figure 1]. 

•  Was the study able to give an insightful end result or 

conclusive  theory? 

The Articles that were evaluated on the basis of these ques- 

tions were eventually narrowed down to articles selectively. 

F.  Data  Extraction 

The following stages were constructed in order to acquire 

research data: 

Stage  1:  The  first  stage  of  the  article  selection  procedure 
involves  assessing  all  236  articles  based  on  their  titles,  pub- 
lication  year,  and  language.  In  the  first  stage  of  the  article 
selection process, 17 papers are eliminated. 

•  Taking out the research that was exactly the same. 
•  Non-English studies are being  eliminated. 
•  Reviewing and confirming the publishing year from 2016 

to  2021. 

Stage 2: The second step focuses on rejecting any research 
papers  that  do  not  integrate  Virtual  Reality  Laboratory  or 
Virtual Reality in student learning, as well  as  any  studies that 
are irrelevant. In the second phase, 129 papers were eliminated. 

•  The studies that centered on augmented reality were 

discarded. 

•  Discarding papers from independent research. 
•  Research  articles  that  do  not  include  a  Virtual  Reality 
laboratory  or  Virtual  Reality  in  student  learning  were 
discarded. 

Stage 3: The third stage entails a thorough examination of 
the selected papers, during which 58 articles were eliminated. 
•  Effectively removing study papers that merely have the 
phrase ”VR Lab” on them, but not using them anyhow. 

Fig. 1. Study on VR in education by year 

B.  RQ2: In which areas of knowledge do students believe Vir- 
tual Reality in laboratories should be employed in educational 
institutions? 

In our research survey, we have received different responses 
from  school,  college,  and  university  students.  We  have  re- 
ceived  a  total  of  110  responses  [Figure  2]  From  university 
students, we have received 46  responses,  which  is  41.8%  of 
the  survey  population.  Among   the   46  responses,  77.8% of 
students knew about virtual reality and 54.1% of the students 
used  VR  devices.  41.9%  of  students  think  that  virtual  reality 
can be employed in graphic-related courses. 40.3% of students 
think  that  virtual  reality  can  be  employed  in  EEE  courses. 
33.9% of students think that virtual reality can be employed in 
programming  courses.  46.8%  of  students  think  that  virtual 
reality  can  be  employed  in  chemistry  courses.  37.1%  of 
students think that virtual reality can be employed  in biology 
courses.  30.6%  of  students  think  that  virtual  reality  can  be 
employed  in physics  courses  [Figure  5]. 

From  college  students,  we  have  31  responses.  From  the 
response,  72.5%  of  students  know  about  virtual  reality  and 
27.5% of students have used VR devices. 53.8% of students 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
think that virtual reality can be employed in chemistry courses. 
55.8% of students think that virtual reality can be employed in 
biology courses. 40.4% of students think that virtual reality can 
be employed in physics courses. 36.5% of students think that 
virtual reality can be employed in ICT courses [Figure 4]. 
From school students of the 8th to 10th standard, we have 
received 33 responses. 90.9% of students know about virtual 
reality and 16.1% of students have used VR devices. 54.5% of 
students think that virtual reality can be employed in chemistry 
courses. 30.3% of students think that virtual reality can be 
employed in biology courses. 45.5% of students think that 
virtual reality can be employed in physics courses [Figure 3]. 

Fig. 5. Survey on University students 

Fig. 2. Survey on different institutes 

Fig. 6. Evaluation Methods 

users’ VR learning. Table V lists the evaluation procedures as 
well as all of the necessary evaluation papers. Questionnaires 
performed the majority of the evaluation, as seen in the table. 
From  2016  to  2021,  17  papers  were  assessed,  and  Figure 
6 demonstrates that questionnaires with open and closed- ended 
questions account for 61.5% of the entire assessment technique. 
Polls, on the other hand, are the second-best way of analyzing 
VR users’ experiences. According to the graph, polls were used 
for 19.2% of the evaluation. Another technique of evaluation is 
through  surveys.  After  the  polls,  surveys  show  an  11.5% 
turnout. Students’ thoughts on the learning experience 

TABLE V 
EVALUATION METHODS BY YEAR 

2016 

2017  2018 

2019  2020 

2021 

Evaluation 
methods 
Surveys 

Questionnaires 

[24] 

[22] 

[25] 
[26] 
[27] 

[28] 
[29] 

Polls 

[24] 

[28] 
[29] 

[25] 
[26] 
[27] 

Problem- 
solving 

[45] 

[39] 

[39] 

[30] 
[31] 
[32] 
[33] 
[34] 

[30] 
[31] 
[32] 
[33] 
[34] 

[23] 

[35] 
[36] 
[37] 
[38] 

[35] 
[36] 
[37] 
[38] 

[46] 
[47] 

Fig. 3.   Survey on School students 

Fig. 4.   Survey on Collage students 

C.  RQ3: What is the evaluation method of VR users’ learning 
and  what  is  the  learning  outcome? 

Questionnaires, polls, surveys, and problem solving tech- 
niques will be used to determine the evaluation technique of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were  gathered  through  surveys.  Finally,  7.7%,  or  the  lowest 
evaluation,  was  done  through  problem-solving,  which  should 
not be so low, but according to the 17 papers examined for the 
research questions, only three articles were completed, one in 
2017 and two in 2020. The problem is, it is unquestionably one 
of the greatest ways of appraisal, but not in this case. However, 
virtual reality is a relatively new technology, and while many 
papers have been published over the years, the majority of them 
lack problem-solving strategies, resulting in a 7.7% figure. 

D.  RQ4:  Which  technological  equipment  can  be  used  in  the 
development of an interactive virtual laboratory? 

TABLE VII 
DESIGN TOOLS 

Programming 
language 
Softwares 

Application 

Others 

C++, C JAVA, JavaScript, Python, Swift 

Unity, Amazon Sumerican Overview, UnrealEngine, 
Blender, 3ds Max, Maya, Oculus Medium, Matlab, 
AutoDesk3D 
Labster, Eonreality, Merck, VlabAcademy, IVF Lab- 
oratory VR, MEL VR 

InMindVR 2, TitanOfSpace, Anatomyou, KingTut 
VR, Unimersiv, TheBodyVR, 4Danatomy, ClassVR, 
DiscoveryVR, TiltBrush 

Learning.The majority of VR software development was done 
using C and JAVA, the majority of VR software development 
was  done  using  C  and  Java.  The  review  also  reveals  that 
UNITY3D is the most popular and user-friendly programming 
software.  Although  MAYA  and  BLENDER  were  the  most 
popular  software  for  object  creation  and  texture  design.  The 
most specialized software for VR development is UNITY3D, 
Blender, and MAYA. 

F.  RQ6:  What  will  be  the  architecture  of  the  Virtual  Reality 
Laboratory if the research was  implemented? 

TABLE VI 
VR LABORATORY EQUIPMENTS 

Gears 
HP REvarb 

Pimax 8k 

2016 

2017  2018 

2019  2020 

2021 

[24] 
[40] 

[25] 
[43] 

[38] 

[48] 

[23] 

[37] 

[30] 
[32] 

Oculus 
Quest 

[49] 

Gear VR 

STEAM 

[26] 
[27] 
[42] 

[27] 

[29] 

[37] 

[36] 

[27] 

[44] 

[46] 

Valve Index 

[49] 

[23] 

[48] 

Table  VI  depicts  the  various  technologies  that  can  be 
employed  in  the  building and research  of  virtual reality  labs. 
From  2016  through  2021,  the  table  covers  the  analyses  con- 
ducted using various VR headsets. According to the table, 20%t 
of the work was done with HP REvarb, 16.7% with Pimax 8k, 
20%  with  Oculus  Quest,  8.3%  with  Gear  VR,  12.5%  with 
STEAM VR, and 12.5% with Valve Index. These devices were 
employed in the creation of the Virtual Reality Laboratory as 
well  as  research  projects.  From  2016  to  2021,  many  VR 
technologies were developed and various designs were applied 
using  various  VR  devices  and  gears.  The  table  provides 
thorough  information  on  all  of  the  gears  utilized  in  the 
Evaluation method’s 17  papers. 

E.  RQ5:  What  varieties  of  design  tools  are  available  for 
development and  use  in the  study? 

Table  VII  lists  the  tools  required  for  designing  a  VR 
laboratory. Table VII is divided into four  categories.  The table 
below lists the software and programming  languages that aid 
in  the  development  of  a  virtual reality  system. The  table  also 
lists the applications that are available on Virtual Laboratory, 
and  the  Others  section  lists  all  of  the  Virtual  Reality 
applications that are related to either education  or 

Fig. 7. Virtual Reality Laboratory architecture 

The Architecture for the Virtual Reality Laboratory should 

be divided into six components. 

•  Connection  Plugin 
•  Data Analysis Module 
•  Mathematical  Models 
•  System  Database 
•  VR  System 
•  User  Module 
The Connection Plugin is the first stage of the architecture, 
and  it  can  communicate  with  the  User  Module.  The  VR 
Connection  Plugin  has  access  to  the  user’s  actions  when 
controlling the VR system. Because the Connection Plugin can 
control and interact with the User Module, it is linked to the VR 
System’s Data Analysis Module. The Data Connection Module 
serves  as  a  link  between  the  user  and  the  VR  system.  The 
Analysis Module will be linked to a database, which will assist 
the  Analysis  Module  in  distinguishing  between  users  and 
keeping  track  of  the  users’  entries  for  the  VR  System. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Both the Analysis Module and the Database will  interact  with 
mathematical  models.  The  equations  and  data  from  the 
mathematical model will be used to build all of the equations 
and distinct  experimental developments. The  VR  system  will 
then  serve  as  the  primary  virtual  representation  of  various 
laboratory experiments. During this period, The virtual reality 
system  serves  as  the  user’s  environment.  With  the  help  of  a 
connection plugin, users can experience a virtual environment. 
The system connection plugin will be triggered when the user 
runs.  The  Connection  Plugin  provides  data  through  a  data 
collection model that interacts with mathematical systems and 
databases and then displays the results on a VR display for  the 
user [50] [Figure7]  . 

G.  RQ7:  What  are  the  limitations  on  the  use  of  VR  in  the 
laboratory? 

TABLE VIII 
VR LABORATORY LIMITATIONS 

2016 

2017  2018 

2019 

2020 

2021 

Limitations 
Gear 
use 
problem 

[40] 

[31] 

Understanding 
time 

[40] 

Gear Cost 

Nausea 

[49] 

[36] 

[36] 

[35] 
[37] 
[48] 

[37] 
[35] 

[35] 
[38] 

[44] 

[37] 

[36] 

Connection 
Issues 

Technical Is- 
sues 

[22] 
[26] 

[21] 

Table VIII shows the limitations of using the VR laboratory. 
The limitations include the gear use problem, which is 31.6%. 
Users face various gear  usage  problems.  Another  problem is 
the understanding  time,  which  is  21.1%.  The  gear  cost is 
one other big limitation, at 15.8%. Some users also face nausea, 
which  happens  to  be  15.8%.  Internet  issues  are  10.5%,  and 
technical issues like software or hardware errors are  5.4%. The 
data  was  obtained  from  17  papers  included  in  the  evaluation 
methods.  After  the  paper  review,  these  limitations  were 
identified  in  the  papers.  There  are  also  other  limitations 
involved with using VR gear and VR lab equipment, such     as 
communication  issues,  fewer  users,  not  having  the  proper 
equipment  or gears, and lack  of  budget. 

V.  CONCLUSIONS 

Based on studies published between 2016 and 2018, Virtual 
Reality (VR) has a lot of potential in laboratory education.  We 
found 72 papers in which Virtual Reality was used in a variety 
of  educational  contexts,  and  we  looked  into  how  these 
approaches were created and  assessed. 

Between  2016  and  2021  VR  matured,  and  it  made  signif- 

icant contributions in the realm of education. Almost every 

study looked at used at least one educational method or theory, 
the  most  common  being  Collaborative  Learning,  Multimedia 
Learning, and Inquiry-based Learning. The development of VR 
has  changed  the  way  of  learning.  It has  changed the  learning 
experience  of  students.  With  3D  imaging  and  virtual  world 
interaction  and  the    use  of    interactive  virtual    objects,    it  is 
another major aspect discovered in the analysis of the papers. 
Virtual  Reality  (VR)  has  quickly  become  one  of  the  most 
advanced  technologies  that  may  be  utilized  in  a  variety  of 
educational settings, which corresponds to the findings of the 
New Media Consortium’s most recent Horizon Report on the 
technology’s development. 

The VR laboratory is one of the most promising technolog- 
ical  advancements  in  the  educational  setting.  The  paper  dis- 
cusses how VR labs can change student learning environments 
and experiences. The paper also focuses on designing a VR lab 
and  describes how  open-ended  and  close-ended  questions are 
the  most  effective  evaluation  methods  for  VR  laboratory 
design. The studies done from 2016 to 2021 show VR gears are 
really  effective  in  terms  of  laboratory  experimental  learning. 
Among  the  VR  gear  used,  HP  REvarb  is  one  of  the  most 
popular and used gear. Through  the  study,  we  get  an  idea of 
VR  applications and  programming  languages  to    build  a  VR 
laboratory  program.  This  study  gives  the  architecture  for  VR 
laboratory design. There are different ways to develop      a VR 
program, but one of the most popular programs is UNITY3D. 
With  the  help  of  UNITY3D,  it  is  possible  to  follow  the 
Architecture of the VR Lab and develop a VR system. Although 
there  are  lots  of  limitations  that  have  been  discussed  in  the 
paper, the study gives us a clear picture of VR laboratory design 
and development. For the evaluation of the student experience 
of  VR  interaction  and  use,  different  surveys  have  been 
conducted, which also formed a great focus of this research as 
well. 

Although VR has developed significantly over the years, in 
the  field  of  education  it is  still  in  the  development  phase  and 
others’  findings.  Different  VR  lab  applications  are  currently 
accessible for many smart devices, including iOS and Android. 
However,  there  are  not  many  in  educational  contexts.  The 
absence  of  adoption  of  a  development  strategy  reflects  the 
platforms’ lack of unanimity. 

Finally,  the  data  analysis  indicated  that  when  it  comes  to 
educational multimedia resources in VR  that  are  available for 
interaction, few VR techniques are keeping up with the constant 
evolution of technology and new requirements from users. In 
actuality, 60 to  80  percent  of  research  is  based  on out-of-
date resources such as photographs and phrases. This gives us 
an idea of how a VR lab is necessary in the   field of education 
and  for  the  change  of  learning  experiences.  However,  we 
observed  that  in  order  to  create  and  enhance  Virtual  Reality 
Laboratories  in  educational  contexts,  more  efficient  and 
trustworthy resources and data are necessary. 

VI.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The authors would like to express their appreciation to all of 

the  people  who participated  in the  study. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

[1]  H.  Temel,  B.  Oral,  and  Y.  Avanoglu,  Kimya  ogrencilerinin  deneye 
yonelik  tutumlari titrimetri  deneylerini  planlama  ve uygulamaya iliskin 
bilgi  ve  becerileri  arasndaki  liskinin  degerlendirilmesi.,  Cagdas  Egitim 
Dergisi., 264, 32-38., 2000. 

[2]  Elmqaddem,  N.  (2019).  Virtual  reality  in  education.  Myth  or  reality? 
International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning, 14(3), 234–
242. 

[3]  Hanafi,  H.  F.,  Said,  C.  S.,  Wahab,  M.  H.,  Samsuddin,  K.  (2017). 
Improving Students’ Motivation in Learning ICT Course with the Use of 
a  Mobile  Augmented  Reality  Learning  Environment.  International 
Research and Innovation Summit,  226. 

[4]  Clark,  D.  B.,  Tanner-Smith,  E.  E.,  Killingsworth,  S.  (2016).  Digital 
Games, Design, and Learning: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. 
Review  of Educational Research, 86, 79-122. 

[5]  Potkonjak,  V., Gardner, M., Callaghan,  V., Mattila, P., Guetl, C.,  Petro- 
vic, V.  M., Jovanovic, K. (2016). Virtual Laboratories for Education    in 
Science,  Technology,  and  Engineering:  A  Review.  Computers  and 
Education, 95, 309-327. 

[6]  Anton Sigitov., Andre´ Hinkenjann., Thorsten Roth (2013). Towards VR- 

based  systems  for  school  experiments. Pages 201-210. 

[7]  M.  Hachet,  Interaction  avec  des  environnements  virtuels  affiches  au 
moyend’  interfaces  de  visualisation  collective.  PhD  thesis,  Universit’e 
Bordeaux I., 2003. 

[8]  Guillermo, O. E. P. (2016). Use of Virtual Labs Learning in Hydraulics 
and Fluid Mechanics in Engineering (162 p.). Ph.D. Thesis, Porto Alegre: 
Federal  University of Rio Grande do  Sul. 

[9]  Jensen, L., Konradsen, F.  (2018). A review of  the  use  of  virtual reality 
head-mounted  displays  in  education  and  training.  Education  and 
Information Technologies, 23, 1515–1529. 

[10]  Alqadri, Z. (2018).  USING  VIRTUAL  LABORATORY  IN  DI- RECT 
INSTRUCTION  TO  ENHANCE  STUDENTS’  ACHIEVE-  MENT. 
IJAEDU- International E-Journal of Advances in Education, 4, 100-108. 
[11]  F. Aliyu and C. A. Talib , ”Virtual Chemistry Laboratory: A Panacea to,” 
International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT), 
vol. 8,  no. 5C,  pp. 544-549, September 2019. 

[12]  de Vries,  L.E.,  May,  M.  (2019).  Virtual  laboratory  simulation  in  the 
education  of  laboratory  technicians–motivation  and  study  intensity. 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  Education, 47. 

[13]  Kolil,  Vysakh  Kani et al. “Virtual  experimental platforms in  chemistry 
laboratory  education  and  its  impact  on  experimental  self-efficacy.” 
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education  17 
(2020): 1-22. 

[14]  Lu, Yihua, Yao Xu and Xi Zhu. “Designing and Implementing VR2E2C, 
a  Virtual  Reality  Remote  Education  for  Experimental  Chemistry  Sys- 
tem.” Journal of Chemical Education (2021). 

[15]  Heradio,  Ruben,  Luis  de  la  Torre,  Daniel  Galan,  Francisco  Javier 
Cabrerizo,  Enrique  Herrera-Viedma  and  Sebastia´n  Dormido.  “Virtual 
and remote labs in  education:  A bibliometric analysis.” Comput. Educ. 
98 (2016): 14-38. 

[16]  Achuthan, Krishnashree, Dhananjay Raghavan, Bala Shankar, Saneesh P. 
Francis and Vysakh Kani Kolil. “Impact of remote experimentation, in- 
teractivity and platform effectiveness on laboratory learning outcomes.” 
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education 18 
(2021): n. pag. 

[17]  Numan  Ali;Sehat  Ullah;Ihsan  Rabbi;Aftab  Alam,  ”The  Effect  of  Mul- 
timodal  Virtual  Chemistry  Laboratory  on  Students’  Learning  Improve- 
ment,” International Conference on Augmented and Virtual Reality, vol. 
8853, pp. 65-76, 2014. 

[18]  S. E. Group, “Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature Reviews 

in Software Engineering,” 2007. 

[19]  H.  Afsarmanesh,  E.C.  Kaletas,  A.Benabdelkader,  C.  Garita,  L.O. 
Hertzbergeer, “A reference architecture for scientific virtual laboratories” 
Future Generation Computer Systems,  2001. 

[20]  F  N  Kumala,  I  Sugiarti,  C  I  Rahayunita,  P  R  Shaleha,  M  N  Hudha, 
“Virtual Laboratory of science o symbiotic material for primary school” 
Universitas  Kanjuruhan  Malang, Jl.  S. Supriadi  no. 48,  Malang 65148, 
Malang, Indonesia, 2021. 

[21]  Lavanya Rajendran, Ramachandran Veilumuthu, Divya. J “A study on the 
effectiveness  of  virtual  lab  in  Elearning”,  International  Journal  on 
Computer  Science and Engineering  Vol. 02, No. 06, 2010, 2173-2175 

[22]  N. A. Zulkanain and E. E. A. Rahim, “A Guideline for the Development 
of  Blended  Learning  Platform  Based  on  the  Observation  of  Students’ 
Reaction in a Virtual World,” Proc. - Int. Conf. Dev. systems Eng. DeSE, 
pp. 115–119, 2018. 

[23]  H.  McFaul and E.  FitzGerald,  “A realist evaluation  of  student use  of a 
virtual reality smartphone application in undergraduate legal education,” 
Br. J. Educ. Technol.,  vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–589, 2020. 

[24]  H.  Tu¨ zu¨ n  and  F.  O¨ zdinc¸,  “The  effects  of  3D  multi-user  virtual  environ- 
ments  on  freshmen university  students’ conceptual and  spatial  learning 
and presence in  departmental  orientation,”  Comput. Educ.,  vol. 94, pp. 
228–240, 2016. 

[25]  S.  Xiang  and  L.  C.  Wang,  “VGLS:  A  virtual  geophysical  laboratory 
system  based  on  C  and  viustools  and  its  application  for  geophysical 
education,” Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 335–344, 2017. 
[26]  G.  Bujdoso,  O.  C.  Novac,  and  T.  Szimkovics,  “Developing  cognitive 
processes for improving inventive thinking in system development using 
a  collaborative  virtual  reality  system,”  8th  IEEE  Int.  Conf.  Cogn. 
Infocommunications,  CogInfoCom  2017  -  Proc.,  vol.  2018-Janua,  no. 
CogInfoCom, pp. 79–84, 2017. 

[27]  D. Rivas  et al., “Virtual reality applied to  physics  teaching,”  ACM Int. 

Conf.  Proceeding  Ser.,  no. June 2020, pp. 27–30, 2017. 

[28]  M. D. Smith, S. Getchell, and M.  Weatherly, “Human Connectedness to 
Nature: Comparison  of Natural  vs.  Virtual Experiences,”  in Innovative 
Technologies and Learning, 2018, pp. 215–219. 

[29]  Z. Lischer-Katz, M. Cook, and K. Boulden, “Evaluating the impact of   a 
virtual  reality  workstation  in  an  academic  library:  Methodology  and 
preliminary findings,” Proc. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 
300–308, 2018. 

[30]  H. C. S. Lin, S. J. Yu, J. C. Y. Sun, and M. S. Y. Jong, “Engaging university 
students in a library guide through wearable spherical video- based virtual 
reality: effects on situational interest and cognitive load,” Interact. Learn. 
Environ.,  vol. 0,  no. 0, pp. 1–16, 2019. 

[31]  F. Ta, A. Valentine, S. Male, and G. M. Hassan, “Piloted online training 
module to teach on-site safety in engineering,” ASCILITE 2019 - Conf. 
Proc. - 36th Int. Conf. Innov. Pract. Res. Use Educ. Technol. Tert. Educ. 
Pers. Learn. Divers. Goals. One Hear., no. December, pp. 292–301, 2019. 
[32]  M. Goryll, T. J. Thornton, C. Wang, S. M. Phillips, and D. Allee, “Online 
Undergraduate  Laboratories  in  Electrical  Engineering,”  Proc.  -  Front. 
Educ. Conf. FIE,  vol. 2019-Octob, 2019. 

[33]  B. Salah, M. H. Abidi, S. H. Mian, M. Krid, H. Alkhalefah, and A. Abdo, 
“Virtual  reality-based  engineering  education  to  enhance  manufacturing 
sustainability in  industry 4.0,” Sustain., vol. 11, no. 5,  pp. 1–19, 2019. 
[34]  G. Makransky, R. E. Mayer, N. Veitch, M. Hood, K. B. Christensen, and 
H.  Gadegaard,  “Equivalence  of  using  a  desktop  virtual  reality  science 
simulation  at  home  and  in  class,”  PLoS  One,  vol.  14,  no.  4,  pp.  1–14, 
2019. 

[35]  H.  McFaul and E.  FitzGerald,  “A realist evaluation  of  student use  of a 
virtual reality smartphone application in undergraduate legal education,” 
Br. J. Educ. Technol.,  vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–589, 2020. 

[36]  C.  L.  Dunnagan,  D.  A.  Dannenberg,  M.  P. Cuales,  A.  D.  Earnest,  R. 
M. Gurnsey, and M. T. Gallardo-Williams, “Production and Evaluation 
of a Realistic Immersive Virtual Reality Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
Experience: Infrared Spectroscopy,” J. Chem. Educ., vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 
258–262, 2020. 

[37]  S. H.  Urueta and T. Ogi,  A tefl virtual reality  system  for high-presence 

distance learning, vol. 1036. Springer International Publishing, 2020. 

[38]  T. Krupnova, O. Rakova, A. Lut, E. Yudina, E. Shefer, and A. Bulanova, 
“Virtual Reality in Environmental Education for Manufacturing Sustain- 
ability in Industry 4.0,” Proc. - 2020 Glob. Smart Ind. Conf. GloSIC 2020, 
pp. 87–91, 2020. 

[39]  S. H. Urueta and T. Ogi, “3D Vr180 Livestreaming System for SemiSyn- 
chronous Distance Learning in Tefl Applications,” Call-Ej, vol. 22, no. 1, 
pp. 180–200, 2021. 

[40]  S. P. Anstadt, B. Bruster, and S.  B. Girimurugan, “Using  virtual  world 
simulators  (Second  Life)  in  social  work  course  assignments,”  Int.  J. 
Learn. Technol.,  vol. 11, no. 1,  pp. 66–90, 2016. 

[41]  S.  Xiang  and  L.  C.  Wang,  “VGLS:  A  virtual  geophysical  laboratory 
system  based  on  C  and  viustools  and  its  application  for  geophysical 
education,” Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 335–344, 2017. 
[42]  K.  Stepan  et  al.,  “Immersive  virtual  reality  as  a  teaching  tool  for 
neuroanatomy,”  Int.  Forum  Allergy  Rhinol.,  vol.  7,  no.  10,  pp.  1006– 
1013, 2017. 

[43]  N. A. Zulkanain and E. E. A. Rahim, “A Guideline for the Development 
of  Blended  Learning  Platform  Based  on  the  Observation  of  Students’ 
Reaction in a Virtual World,” Proc. - Int. Conf. Dev. eSystems Eng. DeSE, 
pp. 115–119, 2018. 

[44]  C.  Zizz,  A.  Starr,  D.  Hudson,  S.  S.  Nuguri,  P.  Calyam,  and  Z.  He, 
“Towards a social  virtual  reality learning  environment in  high  fidelity,” 
arXiv, 2017. 

[45]  G.  Bujdoso,  O.  C.  Novac,  and  T.  Szimkovics,  “Developing  cognitive 
processes for improving inventive thinking in system development using 
a  collaborative  virtual  reality  system,”  8th  IEEE  Int.  Conf.  Cogn. 
Infocommunications,  CogInfoCom  2017  -  Proc.,  vol.  2018-Janua,  no. 
CogInfoCom, pp. 79–84, 2017. 

[46]  J. Qian, Y. Ma, Z.  Pan, and  X. Yang, “Effects of  Virtual-real  fusion  on 
immersion, presence, and learning performance in laboratory education,” 
Virtual Real. Intell. Hardw.,  vol. 2, no. 6,  pp. 569–584, 2020. 

[47]  H.  McFaul and E.  FitzGerald,  “A realist evaluation  of  student use  of a 
virtual reality smartphone application in undergraduate legal education,” 
Br. J. Educ. Technol.,  vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–589, 2020. 

[48]  A.   Verdes,   C.   Navarro,   and   P.   A´ lvarez-Campos,   “Mobile   learning 
applications to improve invertebrate zoology online teaching,” Invertebr. 
Biol., vol. 140, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2021. 

[49]  N.  Rodriguez,  “Teaching  virtual  reality  with  affordable  technologies,” 
Lect.  Notes  Comput.  Sci.  (including  Subser.  Lect.  Notes  Artif.  Intell. 
Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 9731, no. July 2016, pp. 89–97, 2016. 
[50]  Agbonifo,  O.  C.,  Sarumi,  O.  A.,  Akinola,  Y. M.  (2020).  A  chemistry 
laboratory  platform  enhanced  with virtual reality  for  students’ adaptive 
learning. Research in Learning Technology, 28. 

