Using Virtual Reality to Design and Evaluate a Lunar Lander:
The EL3 Case Study
Flavie Rometsch
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Cologne, Germany
flavie.rometsch@dlr.de

Andrea E. M. Casini
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Cologne, Germany
andrea.casini@esa.int

Tommy Nilsson
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
tommy.nilsson@esa.int

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
5
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
4
9
3
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Enrico Guerra
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
enricoguerra@outlook.com

Leonie Becker
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
leonie2.becker@student.uni-
siegen.de

Andreas Treuer
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
andreas.treuer@rwth-aachen.de

Paul de Medeiros
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
hello@pauldemedeiros.nl

Hanjo Schnellbaecher
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
hanjo.schnellbaecher@ext.esa.int

Anna Vock
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
annalvock@gmail.com

Aidan Cowley
European Space Agency (ESA)
Cologne, Germany
aidan.cowley@esa.int

Figure 1: VR rendering of the lunar south pole, along with a prospective configuration of the EL3 lander.

ABSTRACT
The European Large Logistics Lander (EL3) is being designed to
carry out cargo delivery missions in support of future lunar ground
crews. The capacity of virtual reality (VR) to visualize and interac-
tively simulate the unique lunar environment makes it a potentially
powerful design tool during the early development stages of EL3,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9156-6/22/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519775

as well as other relevant technologies. Based on input from the
EL3 development team, we have produced a VR-based operational
scenario featuring a hypothetical configuration of the lander. Rely-
ing on HCI research methods, we have subsequently evaluated this
scenario with relevant experts (n=10). Qualitative findings from
this initial pilot study have demonstrated the usefulness of VR as
a design tool in this context, but likewise surfaced a number of
limitations in the form of potentially impaired validity and gen-
eralizability. We conclude by outlining our future research plan
and reflect on the potential use of physical stimuli to improve the
validity of VR-based simulations in forthcoming design activities.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → User studies; Visualization
design and evaluation methods.

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Nilsson et al.

KEYWORDS
virtual reality, human factors, ergonomics, human spaceflight,
aerospace engineering

ACM Reference Format:
Tommy Nilsson, Flavie Rometsch, Andrea E. M. Casini, Enrico Guerra,
Leonie Becker, Andreas Treuer, Paul de Medeiros, Hanjo Schnellbaecher,
Anna Vock, and Aidan Cowley. 2022. Using Virtual Reality to Design and
Evaluate a Lunar Lander: The EL3 Case Study. In CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts (CHI ’22 Extended
Abstracts), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519775

1 INTRODUCTION
50 years since humans last walked on the Moon, a renewed interna-
tional interest coalescing around the Artemis programme seeks to
send astronauts back to the lunar surface, aiming to establish a per-
manent human presence on the Moon by 2028 [37]. The feasibility
of this undertaking will be preconditioned by the development of re-
liable logistics supply solutions in support of human expeditions. To
meet this need, the European Space Agency (ESA), along with part-
ners from the industry and academia, are currently preparing the
development of the European Large Logistics Lander (EL3). Specif-
ically, the EL3 is being designed as a multipurpose autonomous
lander capable of carrying out a range of prospective missions,
including the delivery of crew supplies and heavy machinery, such
as unpressurised rovers, to the lunar surface [17].

Designing such systems for human lunar missions demands
taking into account the challenges and constraints posed by pro-
grammatic, physical and environmental factors. This means one
must not only design for established terrestrial usability and er-
gonomics factors, but likewise account for a host of other conditions,
including the lunar gravity, regolith (moondust) mitigation, limited
field of view and range of motion due to extravehicular activity
(EVA) suits, mental and physical fatigue, thermal and atmospheric
conditions, limited capability for redundancy and extreme lighting
conditions, such as pitch black shadows [12].

Lunar lighting conditions in particular have emerged as a promi-
nent consideration during the ongoing design and preparatory
activities. Notably, the tilt of the lunar axis creates a unique setting
on the Moon’s south pole, with elevated areas experiencing near
permanent illumination, whilst the very low Sun angle simulta-
neously also blocks out all sunlight in recessed areas. Indeed, the
access to persistent illumination (and the resulting availability of
solar power), along with water ice preserved in permanently shad-
owed areas, was a key factor leading to the selection of the Moon’s
south polar region as the likely location of the next human landing
and the subsequent construction of the Artemis Base Camp [43].
Given its ability to visualize any environment and interactively
simulate hypothetical design solutions [42], virtual reality (VR)
stands, at least in theory, well positioned to help inform the design
of EL3. At the same time, as noted by Aylward et al., VR research is
still in its infancy and is lacking many critical components to evaluate
the reliability, validity, and generalizability of its methods and results
[1].

Our work seeks to address this limitation. Herein we have pro-
duced a relevant VR-based scenario and evaluated it with experts

in the field of human spaceflight. By reflecting on our preliminary
findings, we provide an assessment of the potential offered by VR
as an enabling technology in future studies of operational perfor-
mance and human factors in the early stages of a lunar surface
system’s design and development.

2 RELATED WORK
Prior use of VR has demonstrated its viability as a research tool
for studying user interactions with a range of prospective tech-
nologies, including autonomous cars [40], healthcare solutions [26]
and complex robotic systems [29]. The benefits associated with the
employment of VR span across fields and disciplines. For instance,
VR-based engineering analyses and design reviews conducted early
on in a development process have been found to enable designers to
uncover potential product flaws which would have otherwise led to
additional costs if manufactured [24]. Similarly, VR-based interac-
tive visualizations and simulations have proven useful in enabling
the assessment of scenarios that would otherwise be too dangerous,
expensive or impractical to evaluate in the real world [19]. Such
enquiries have demonstrated the capacity of VR to elicit rich in-
sights and help predict and assess a range of aspects surrounding
prospective design solutions, including usability [11], human fac-
tors and ergonomics [44], user’s perceived sense of security [38] as
well as acceptance levels [14].

Nevertheless, the extent to which findings made in VR may be
applicable to the real world have frequently been contested. For
example, studies comparing driving in VR simulators to that in the
real world have found that perceived danger and immersion are
lower in VR [23], while sleepiness appears to be higher [18].

Such findings can be seen as troubling in domains concerned with
human safety. Engineers and designers in the space industry have to
cope with particularly stringent reliability and safety requirements.
Consequently, in spite of being prone to innovation, the space
sector, and the human spaceflight domain especially, have been
traditionally conservative in introducing novel design tools when
compared to other industrial domains.

The first uses of VR in the context of human spaceflight were pri-
marily serving training purposes. Notably, in 1993 NASA pioneered
the use of this tool when training the Hubble space telescope flight
team for a repair mission [25].

Not until the 21st century did VR and virtualization begin to
gradually gain a firm foothold in space system design. Virtual en-
vironments have since then been employed, for instance, to help
prevent misalignments and incorrect data flow in the International
Space Station’s Columbus module [4], to assist with general satel-
lite assembly troubleshooting [15] and to analyze the replacement
procedure of a Columbus cabin filter [22].

A key strand of the Artemis programme advocates the creation
of pathways to advancing low-technology readiness level (TRL)
solutions and helping adapt these to the unique operational require-
ments of the coming moon landing endeavor [43]. Following this
call, VR has also been employed to validate ergonomics, assembly
schemes and maintenance for the Orion lunar spacecraft [33], as
well as to collect astronaut feedback for an ergonomic assessment
of the Gateway lunar space station modules [39]. In a more direct
application of user centered design at the earliest stages of planning

Using Virtual Reality to Design and Evaluate a Lunar Lander: The EL3 Case Study

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

and development, VR was likewise utilized to give users a chance
to reflect on and influence the design of hypothetical future lunar
outposts [7], as well as in-situ resource utilization solutions for the
Moon [28].

Our work seeks to carry on in this vein of inquiry. As laid out in
the following section, by employing VR to evaluate the prospective
EL3 lander with expert users, we aim to shed further light on its
viability and validity as a design tool in this context.

3 METHODOLOGY
In order to assess an early digital concept design of the EL3 and
to elicit actionable reflections that could realistically help steer its
future design direction, our group adopted an approach centered
around the use of VR scenarios [6, 27].

3.1 The VR Scenario
Our scenario consisted of two key building blocks: a virtual lu-
nar landscape (or ‘moonscape’), and an agnostic 3D model of a
theoretical EL3 configuration.

Based on topographic maps captured by the Lunar Reconnais-
sance Orbiter [36], we recreated virtually an area of 64 km2 in close
vicinity of the Shackleton crater on the Lunar south pole (89.9°S
0.0°E). We selected this area due to having previously been iden-
tified as one of the candidate landing sites for the first Artemis
human landing mission [43], thus providing a sufficiently plausible
backdrop to our scenario. Due to the original map‘s pixel scale of
100 meters, smaller details (e.g. boulders) were added manually
using 3D modeling software. The virtual moonscape was subse-
quently textured procedurally using a set of custom terrain shaders.
This work was primarily guided by reference photos acquired from
NASA’s image gallery [30]. Additionally, a lunar geologist from our
organization assisted us during this process to ensure authenticity.
Finally, the virtual environment was instantiated using the Unreal
Engine 4 game engine. The sun was placed in the direction of north,
at an angle of 1.5° above the horizon and its intensity set to 1.37
kW/m2 to mimic the lighting conditions on the lunar south pole
[41]. All forms of indirect lighting and light scattering were disabled
in order to recreate the pitch black shadows stemming from the
lack of lunar atmosphere.

The development of our agnostic EL3 model was guided by a
series of internal workshops in close collaboration with the EL3
project management and the responsible engineering teams. Based
on their input, we created a model which represents a generic design
that could meet the requirements outlined by the EL3’s invitation
to tender [5]. The design of the model was made to evaluate and
explore general usability, operations and human factors challenges
and constraints, which are likely to apply to most potential designs
which might result from the EL3 team’s own work. On top of the
virtual lander’s descent element, we designed and implemented a
hypothetical cargo unloading solution in the form of a pulley system
that would rely on lunar gravity to drop payload containers from the
cargo deck at the top of the lander (see figure 2). The concept was
validated via consultations with the EL3 team to assure our model
could be used in a scenario which would provide actionable and
relevant insights into the use of the lander and its cargo deployment
system. Other potential solutions, including an autonomous robotic

arm or a fully manual approach, were also discussed but not further
pursued in this study.

Our EL3 mockup carrying two payload containers was then
placed in the middle of our virtual moonscape. A cargo drop-off
point was placed 30 meters away from the lander and marked by
a flag planted in the ground. Our scenario thus conveyed a basic,
yet plausible, situation with users being tasked to approach the
lander, retrieve the two containers and transport these to the nearby
drop-off point.

The VR experience was run on a desktop computer with an
RTX 2080 GPU, providing smooth framerate. We used the Pimax
VR headset coupled with a pair of HTC Vive base stations and
controllers. Walking and turning was handled via the controller
trackpads, while the controller triggers were used for interacting
with objects in the virtual environment (e.g. lifting up payload con-
tainers). Users could also look around the environment by moving
their head. To further improve authenticity of the scenario, users
were embodied in a 3D model of a spacesuit. Specifically, we em-
ployed the Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit (xEMU) EVA
suit [32]. Users had their heads encapsulated inside the xEMU hel-
met to accurately restrict their field of view. The xEMU helmet was
likewise equipped with a headlamp. This VR scenario then formed
the focal point of our engagement with participants.

3.2 Participants
Given the niche character of our study, we recruited participants
by hand-picking and extending invitations to staff and associates
from ESA, ensuring that all participants had expertise in a field
relevant to the subject of our inquiry. The study is currently on-
going, with 10 participants having completed a test session at the
time of writing. These initial 10 participants are of varying levels
of seniority, ranging from research students to International Space
Station (ISS) ground segment engineers, and cover a spectrum of
disciplines from space medicine to lunar science (see Table 1 for
details). Only one of the 10 initial participants was female, future
sessions will correct for this imbalance. None of the participants
was directly involved in the design and development of the EL3. All
of them did, however, have prior knowledge of the EL3 and were
aware of the overarching goals it is being designed to meet.

3.3 Procedure
Participants were invited individually to complete our VR scenario.
Every session began with the given participant being briefed about
the purpose of our study and the task to be completed in the VR
scenario, after which the participant was asked to provide consent
to taking part in the study. This was followed by a quick demonstra-
tion of the VR controllers. Participants were then given freedom to
navigate through the virtual environment and approach the con-
tainer transportation objective in whichever way they preferred,
as long as they did not stray too far away from the EL3 landing
site. Drawing on the think aloud protocol [13], we encouraged our
participants to verbalize their reasoning while completing the task.
Once the payload containers were successfully retrieved and trans-
ported, we asked our participants to stay in the virtual environment

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Nilsson et al.

Figure 2: 3D model of the hypothetical EL3 configuration employed in our study

Participant Gender
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10

male
male
male
male
male
male
male
male
male
female

Job title
PhD student
Intern
Science Advisor
National trainee
Intern
National trainee
ISS ground segment engineer
Science and operations manager
ISS ground segment engineer
Graduate trainee

Expertise
Oxygen extraction from regolith
Regolith-based additive manufacturing
Aerospace engineering
Lunar in-situ resource utilization
Microwave regolith processing
Space medicine research
Spaceflight ops, avionics
Lunar science
Aerospace engineering
Aerospace engineering

Table 1: An overview of the study participants. Areas of expertise were self-reported.

for a little longer while answering a set of semi-structured inter-
view questions. These questions were all open-ended and prompted
participants to share their reflections and comment on any aspect
of their experience. In particular we enquired about various fea-
tures of the lunar lander, such as the cargo unloading mechanism,
antenna placement, and the design of the ladder. Participants were
also asked to identify potential safety hazards and suggest design
improvements. Any unusual behaviors or actions exhibited by the
participants were likewise explored.

Finally, upon completing the semi-structured interview, partici-
pants were instructed to take off the VR headset and fill in a post-
task questionnaire which quantitatively assessed their perceived
mental workload using the NASA-TLX standard [20] as well as
their perceived presence in the virtual environment [35]. This was
to support a future comparative analysis. Due to the limited sample
size at this stage of our study, quantitative data will however not
be reported on in this paper.

At the end of each session, the participant was debriefed and
asked whether they would be happy to have their data included in

the analysis. No time limits were applied during the study. Instead,
we sought to provide each participant with as much (or as little)
time as they needed to complete the scenario and to answer our
questions. Consequently, the total length of the conducted sessions
ranged widely from 20 to 60 minutes.

4 PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
Participant responses were recorded in the form of notes, audio
recordings and questionnaire replies. The dataset was indepen-
dently coded by three of our researchers, with any inconsistencies
being addressed through a discussion, and subsequently synthe-
sized into a qualitative thematic analysis [3].

The majority of our participants had either none or very limited
experience with VR (self-reported on a 5-point scale). Nevertheless,
they had no difficulty coming to grips with the VR controllers
and completing the scenario. Only one participant (P10) reported
discomfort in the form of dizziness caused by VR. All in all, the cargo
transportation task was seen as very accessible, being frequently
described as “straightforward” (P8) or “extremely easy” (P7). This,

Using Virtual Reality to Design and Evaluate a Lunar Lander: The EL3 Case Study

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

however, did not prevent our participants from making numerous
reflections relevant to the EL3.

4.1 Key Challenges
The unique lighting conditions on the lunar south pole were fre-
quently brought up as the most immediate issue endangering the
EL3 and the ground crew. The sun’s position near the lunar horizon
resulted in a situation where every terrain feature casted protracted
shadows, shrouding much of the environment in pitch darkness. As
noted by P8, the shadows casted by players in VR were themselves
deep enough to occlude any terrain inside them, which introduces
the risk of stumbling on boulders or other surface objects. This
became a particularly pressing problem when navigating directly
away from the sun. Similarly, P3 argued that, should the lander
be standing in a shadowed area, one could easily trip on its land-
ing legs. P7 also noted that poor lighting conditions contribute to
payload containers and other vital equipment being hard to find.

While the built-in headlamp of the xEMU suit was seen as helpful,
all participants agreed that in its current form it would be too weak
to adequately support crews during extravehicular activity. P2 and
P5, for instance, both favored making the headlamp stronger, while
P10 advocated the addition of a secondary ‘chest lamp’ on the xEMU
suit.

Several features of the EL3 itself also appeared in need of being
redesigned with greater visibility in mind. P6 argued that key ele-
ments of the lander should be highlighted via LED strips, reflective
tapes or other warning signs. P3 proposed small low-energy light
bars attached to the lander legs, while P9 argued that the EL3 should
make better use of colors contrasting to the lunar environment,
such as yellow or red, as a way of supporting astronaut orientation
in poor lighting conditions. In order to make the EL3 more notice-
able from greater distance, P4 and P10 also advocated it should be
equipped with flashing navigation lights, not too different from
those found on modern airplanes.

The importance of equipping the EL3 with additional light
sources got further amplified as our participants began to spec-
ulate about more complex interactions between astronauts and the
EL3, such as the performance of various maintenance or repair tasks.
Numerous hypothetical situations were postulated that would, for
instance, require an astronaut to make use of the ladder and climb
up on top of the EL3, including a conveyor belt jammed by regolith
sediments (P1), a tangled cargo winch (P9) or a misaligned antenna
(P10).

Using the ladder to climb up on the cargo deck was seen as haz-
ardous by all of our participants. Not just due to suited astronauts
being at danger of tripping during their climb (P2) but also due to
the risk of them unwittingly damaging equipment when operating
in the cramped space on top of the lander (P5). To aggravate matters
further, the near zero angle of sunlight resulted in half of the EL3
being occluded. When faced by the prospect of having to climb up
on the ‘dark half’ of the lander, our participants agreed that appro-
priate placement of artificial lights would be critical. P8 and P9, for
instance, advocated adding LED lights on the individual steps of
the ladder, while P7 proposed two rings of lights looping around
the lander to highlight its contour; one below the solar panels and
another one above them.

When examining the interplay of shadows and highlights on
the EL3, as rendered in our VR scenario, P4 reached a somewhat
different conclusion. Whilst he concurred that climbing up on the
cargo deck from the shadowed side of the lander would indeed
constitute a safety hazard, he argued that the source of this hazard
would not be the absence of light (the headlamp would compensate
for that adequately). Rather, the problem would be the sunlight
which would hit astronauts in the face as soon as they reached the
top of the ladder and gazed across the edge of the EL3 lander. In
order to stop astronauts from getting blinded, P4 argued the helmet
would need some kind of an automatic anti-glare visor that would
be pulled down as a protection. The transition from pitch darkness
to blinding light would in this sense be so fast, and come at such a
sensitive moment, that future design efforts will likely need to take
this into consideration.

4.2 Criticism
While our scenario did succeed in eliciting a range of suggestions
concerning potential design improvements of the EL3, it is cru-
cial to acknowledge that some of the technical limitations of our
VR simulation likely also played a role in shaping the feedback
we received. Indeed, our participants frequently pointed this out
themselves.

By way of example, existing VR headsets cannot fully recreate
the blinding intensity of the sun as it would be experienced in a
real lunar environment. There was, however, no clear consensus
amongst our participants whether this limitation impedes the va-
lidity of our VR simulation. Whilst P4, for instance, argued that
the simulated sun is bright enough to convey the idea, P8 argued it
should be brighter still.

The inability of our VR scenario to accurately simulate the full
effects of low gravity was seen as an even greater problem. P3 and
P4, for example, were adamant about the unrealistic ease of player
movement. In reality, they explained, the reduced lunar gravity
would force astronauts to hop around, rather than move smoothly.
Walking would thus be significantly more challenging than what
our simulation propounded.

Similarly, the lack of haptic feedback emerged as another po-
tentially significant limitation, as became evident when lifting and
manipulating equipment, such as payload containers. Nearly all
participants noted the lack of weight, with P1 going as far as stating
that the containers feel as if "made from paper". Whereas our sce-
nario made such interactions seem effortless, multiple participants
noted that in reality they might require a major effort, or potentially
even be prohibitively difficult to carry out. This was not simply due
to the lack of simulated weight in VR, but also due to other factors,
such as inertia, as P7 explained when reflecting on the notion of
having to manually relocate the EL3 ladder: “Don’t underestimate
the fact that on the Moon weight is a lot less than on Earth, but the
inertia is still there. You have the same problem in microgravity. . .
have you seen the astronauts on ISS moving the big life support racks?
It might seem easy, but in fact it’s hell. Because the rack is weightless,
but it has an immense amount of inertia. Which means that if you
need to stop its motion, or if you need to rotate it, it’s difficult, it’s
really difficult. And this is a big ladder. A big, big ladder. And I’m not

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Nilsson et al.

sure whether you could comfortably take it out and put it somewhere
else.”

The lack of realism, at least in part ingrained in contemporary VR
technology, was in this sense seen as risking to trivialize potentially
significant design challenges surrounding lunar human-machine
interactions, which could in worst case lead to their inadvertent
derogation.

5 DISCUSSION
Virtual reality is enjoying growing popularity in a range of indus-
tries due to enabling fast, flexible and cost-efficient design processes.
Following this trend, the ambition of our ongoing enquiry is to as-
sess its viability in the unique context of the current lunar landing
programme. Using the EL3 project as our arena, we have carried out
a preliminary evaluation of a VR-based cargo unloading scenario
featuring an expert group of participants.

Our participant’s qualitative experiences have demonstrated the
capacity of VR to elicit and invoke a range of potentially actionable
reflections concerning ergonomics, safety and crew performance
issues surrounding a low TRL concept. Whilst such findings are
largely congruent with similarly aimed research that has taken
place in other domains (e.g. [16], [31]), the lunar south pole setting
introduces a number of unique factors. Predominantly, our study
has surfaced a range of design considerations stemming from the
lunar sui generis lighting conditions. Given that these lighting con-
ditions will inevitably interface with nearly every facet of future
human operations on the lunar surface, developing efficient means
for their subsumption into forthcoming prototyping and design
activities will be critical. With regards to our findings, then, we
feel compelled to argue that the near absolute control over light
behavior offered by modern VR engines, coupled with the opportu-
nity to experience relevant scenarios immersively and interactively,
uniquely qualifies VR for this particular purpose.

Equally important, however, is to take into account some of the
limitations impairing the use of VR in other areas. Accurate simu-
lation of physical interactions in VR, for instance, remains a major
technological challenge [21]. The lack of perceived lunar gravity,
weight and inertia were explicitly identified as drawbacks by our
participants and likely altered the outcomes of our study at least
to some extent. Whether such deficits could partially invalidate
the findings made during VR-based user studies is still up for de-
bate. Nevertheless it does seem likely that they might leave a host
of potential design challenges underexposed. There is a risk, in
other words, that an overly strong reliance on VR may unintention-
ally brush over major human and technical problems, leading to
misplaced or misguided design priorities. More work is therefore
needed to better understand the impact of such deficits and to es-
tablish a clear rationale for employing virtual reality during the
design of future lunar solutions.

5.1 Future Directions and the Problem of

Validity

Moving forward, our study will carry on with additional expert
participants. This initial pilot testing phase will culminate late
in Q1 2022, with our VR scenario being evaluated by astronauts
with actual EVA experience. Such expert input will allow us to

further elaborate and better understand potential utilization of VR
in relevant user centered design activities.

Moreover, our group is currently collaborating on the develop-
ment of a 700 m2 lunar surface testbed area enabling high-fidelity
replication of Moon surface conditions [8]. The testbed facility
will feature variable and adjustable lighting capable of simulating
lunar illumination, along with a gravity offload system to mimic
partial weight of astronauts or hardware. Relying on a life-size EL3
mockup, we aim to emulate our VR scenario inside the testbed
environment and subsequently carry out a comparative analysis,
with our original VR study serving as baseline.

Such a comparative analysis will allow us to gain a better un-
derstanding of the strengths and weaknesses of virtual reality in
comparison to more conventional design platforms. By exploring
room for any potential synergies, we likewise hope to identify
means to compensate for some of the limitations of VR, includ-
ing the lack of physical interactions, by combining the two [2, 10].
Indeed, studies such as Shaw et al. have shown that combining
audiovisual stimulation with that of additional sensory modalities
can measurably improve validity of observations made in VR sce-
narios [34]. The notion of fusing real and virtual environments has
already shown promise in practice. Military pilots, for instance,
have made use of VR headsets while flying real planes to train tasks
such as mid-flight refueling [9]. Ideally, such forms of mixed reality
would in this sense merge the best of both worlds, facilitating more
authentic experiences than what could be achieved using VR alone.

6 CONCLUSIONS
Our evaluation of a prototypical implementation of the EL3 has
surfaced unique capabilities possessed by VR in the context of lu-
nar surface system design. In particular, we have argued that the
capacity of VR to accurately simulate lighting conditions is alone
a sufficiently powerful incentive for its employment in relevant
design activities. On the other hand, we likewise came across situa-
tions where technical limitations of VR appeared to impede the va-
lidity of participant’s observations. We have argued that additional
modes of sensory stimulation should be explored to compensate
for this. Although it may never be feasible to fully recreate the
extreme conditions of the lunar south pole in a lab, by identifying
and efficiently amalgamating the strengths of available tools and
methods, we may provide designers with the best means possible to
elicit valid reflections and consequently better anticipate the many
contingencies faced by future lunar expeditions. It is the aspiration
of our work to bring us closer to this goal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the European Astronaut Center in Cologne
for providing us with expert participants for our study. We are also
thankful to Ludovic Duvet and his EL3 team for overseeing our
prototyping activities.

REFERENCES
[1] Katie Aylward, Joakim Dahlman, Kjetil Nordby, and Monica Lundh. 2021. Using
operational scenarios in a virtual reality enhanced design process. Education
Sciences 11, 8 (2021), 448.

[2] Leonie Becker. 2021. Evaluation of Haptic Collision Feedback and Haptic Guidance

for Robotic Teleoperation. Ph. D. Dissertation. Universität Siegen.

Using Virtual Reality to Design and Evaluate a Lunar Lander: The EL3 Case Study

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

[3] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.

Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.

[4] M Cardano, M Ferrino, M Costa, and P Giorgi. 2009. VR/AR tools to support on
orbit crew operations and P/Ls maintenance in the ISS pressurized Columbus
module. In 60th International Astronautical Congress, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
12–16.

[5] William C. Carey, Ludovic Duvet, Nick Gollins, Rogier Schonenborg, Alexander
Cropp, Giorgio Cifani, Keith Stephenson, Philipp B. Hager, Yannick Le Deuff, Kim
Nergaard, Thorsten Graber, Jennifer Reynolds, Giorgio Magistrati, Sandra Ma-
gunsong, Jorge Alves, Francesca McDonald, and Nadine Boersma. 2021. European
access to the lunar surface: EL3 mission options. 72nd International Astronautical
Congress (IAC).

[6] John M Carrol. 1999. Five reasons for scenario-based design. In Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences. 1999. HICSS-32.
Abstracts and CD-ROM of Full Papers. IEEE, 11–pp.

[7] Andrea EM Casini, Paolo Maggiore, Nicole Viola, Valter Basso, Marinella Ferrino,
Jeffrey A Hoffman, and Aidan Cowley. 2018. Analysis of a Moon outpost for Mars
enabling technologies through a Virtual Reality environment. Acta Astronautica
143 (2018), 353–361.

[8] Andrea EM Casini, Petra Mittler, Aidan Cowley, Lukas Schlüter, Marthe Faber,
Beate Fischer, Melanie von der Wiesche, and Matthias Maurer. 2020. Lunar
analogue facilities development at EAC: the LUNA project. Journal of Space
Safety Engineering 7, 4 (2020), 510–518.

[9] Monroe Conner. 2015. Fused Reality: Making the Imagined Seem Real.
[10] Martial Costantini, Flavie Rometsch, Andrea Emanuele Maria Casini, Aidan
Cowley, Stephen Ennis, Christopher Scott, Stephan Ghiste, Jonathan Scott, and
Lionel Ferra. 2021. eXtended Reality applications for human spaceflight: the
ESA-EAC XR Lab. In Proceedings of the International Astronautical Congress, IAC.
[11] Tobias Drey, Jan Gugenheimer, Julian Karlbauer, Maximilian Milo, and Enrico
Rukzio. 2020. Vrsketchin: Exploring the design space of pen and tablet interaction
for 3d sketching in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.

[12] Dean B Eppler. 1991. Lighting constraints on lunar surface operations. NASA

STI/Recon Technical Report N 91 (1991), 23014.

[13] K Anders Ericsson and Herbert A Simon. 1980. Verbal reports as data. Psycholog-

ical review 87, 3 (1980), 215.

[14] Stephanie G Fussell and Dothang Truong. 2021. Using virtual reality for dynamic
learning: an extended technology acceptance model. Virtual Reality (2021), 1–19.
[15] Jie Geng, Ying Li, Ranran Wang, Zili Wang, Chuan Lv, and Dong Zhou. 2017. A
virtual maintenance-based approach for satellite assembling and troubleshooting
assessment. Acta Astronautica 138 (2017), 434–453.

[16] David Goedicke, Jamy Li, Vanessa Evers, and Wendy Ju. 2018. Vr-oom: Virtual
reality on-road driving simulation. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–11.

[17] Nick Gollins, Shahrzad Timman, Max Braun, and Markus Landgraf. 2020. Building
a European Lunar Capability with the European Large Logistic Lander. In EGU
General Assembly Conference Abstracts. 22568.

[18] David Hallvig, Anna Anund, Carina Fors, Göran Kecklund, Johan G Karlsson,
Mattias Wahde, and Torbjörn Åkerstedt. 2013. Sleepy driving on the real road
and in the simulator—A comparison. Accident Analysis & Prevention 50 (2013),
44–50.

[19] Peter A Hancock, Dennis A Vincenzi, John A Wise, and Mustapha Mouloua. 2008.

Human factors in simulation and training. CRC Press.

[20] Sandra G Hart. 2006. NASA-task load index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later. In
Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting, Vol. 50.
Sage publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 904–908.

[21] Zhenyi He, Fengyuan Zhu, and Ken Perlin. 2017. Physhare: Sharing physical
interaction in virtual reality. In Adjunct Publication of the 30th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 17–19.

[22] Kaj Helin. 2017. Augmented reality for AIT, AIV and operations. In Space Engi-

neering and Technology Final Presentation Days.

[23] Arne Helland, Gunnar D Jenssen, Lone-Eirin Lervåg, Andreas Austgulen Westin,
Terje Moen, Kristian Sakshaug, Stian Lydersen, Jørg Mørland, and Lars Slørdal.
2013. Comparison of driving simulator performance with real driving after
alcohol intake: A randomised, single blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial.
Accident Analysis & Prevention 53 (2013), 9–16.

[24] Jason Jerald. 2015. The VR book: Human-centered design for virtual reality. Morgan

& Claypool.

[25] R Bowen Loftin and P Kenney. 1995. Training the Hubble space telescope flight

team. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 15, 5 (1995), 31–37.

[26] Keith R Lohse, Courtney GE Hilderman, Katharine L Cheung, Sandy Tatla, and
HF Machiel Van der Loos. 2014. Virtual reality therapy for adults post-stroke: a
systematic review and meta-analysis exploring virtual environments and com-
mercial games in therapy. PloS one 9, 3 (2014), e93318.

[27] Wendy E Mackay, Anne V Ratzer, and Paul Janecek. 2000. Video artifacts for
design: Bridging the gap between abstraction and detail. In Proceedings of the
3rd conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and
techniques. 72–82.

[28] Paolo Maggiore, Alessio Cataudella, and Andrea Emanuele Maria Casini. 2018.

Fuel cell test rig reconfiguration for a space energy provision system. (2018).

[29] Nadine E Miner and Sharon A Stansfield. 1994. An interactive virtual reality
simulation system for robot control and operator training. In Proceedings of the
1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 1428–1435.

[30] NASA. 2022. NASA Image Gallery. https://images.nasa.gov/
[31] Anke Verena Reinschluessel, Joern Teuber, Marc Herrlich, Jeffrey Bissel, Melanie
van Eikeren, Johannes Ganser, Felicia Koeller, Fenja Kollasch, Thomas Mildner,
Luca Raimondo, et al. 2017. Virtual reality for user-centered design and evalua-
tion of touch-free interaction techniques for navigating medical images in the
operating room. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2001–2009.

[32] Amy Ross, Richard Rhodes, and Shane McFarland. 2018. NASA’s advanced extra-
vehicular activity space suit pressure garment 2018 status and development plan.
48th International Conference on Environmental Systems.

[33] Kendall Russell. 2017. Lockheed Martin on cutting costs with virtual reality -
via satellite. https://www.satellitetoday.com/innovation/2017/04/20/lockheed-
martin-cutting-costs-virtual-reality/

[34] Emily Shaw, Tessa Roper, Tommy Nilsson, Glyn Lawson, Sue VG Cobb, and
Daniel Miller. 2019. The heat is on: Exploring user behaviour in a multisensory
virtual environment for fire evacuation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[35] Mel Slater. 2018. Immersion and the illusion of presence in virtual reality. British

Journal of Psychology 109, 3 (2018), 431–433.

[36] David E Smith, Maria T Zuber, Gregory A Neumann, Erwan Mazarico, Frank G
Lemoine, James W Head III, Paul G Lucey, Oded Aharonson, Mark S Robinson,
Xiaoli Sun, et al. 2017. Summary of the results from the lunar orbiter laser
altimeter after seven years in lunar orbit. Icarus 283 (2017), 70–91.

[37] Marshall Smith, Douglas Craig, Nicole Herrmann, Erin Mahoney, Jonathan Krezel,
Nate McIntyre, and Kandyce Goodliff. 2020. The artemis program: An overview of
nasa’s activities to return humans to the moon. In 2020 IEEE Aerospace Conference.
IEEE, 1–10.

[38] Lior Somin, Zachary McKendrick, Patrick Finn, and Ehud Sharlin. 2021. Breach-
Mob: Detecting Vulnerabilities in Physical Environments Using Virtual Reality.
In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Tech-
nology. 1–6.

[39] Thales Alenia Space. 2021. ESA astronauts Alexander Gerst and Luca Parmitano
use their avatars to check out future habitation accommodation on Lunar Gate-
way. https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/worldwide/space/news/esa-astronauts-
alexander-gerst-and-luca-parmitano-use-their-avatars-check-out

[40] Daniele Sportillo, Alexis Paljic, Mehdi Boukhris, Philippe Fuchs, Luciano Ojeda,
and Vincent Roussarie. 2017. An immersive Virtual Reality system for semi-
autonomous driving simulation: a comparison between realistic and 6-DoF
controller-based interaction. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Computer and Automation Engineering. 6–10.

[41] Benjamin Vanoutryve, Diego De Rosa, Richard Fisackerly, Berengere Houdou,
James Carpenter, Christian Philippe, Alain Pradier, Aliac Jojaghaian, Sylvie Es-
pinasse, and Bruno Gardini. 2010. An analysis of illumination and communication
conditions near lunar south pole based on Kaguya Data. In Proceedings of Inter-
national Planetary Probe Workshop, Barcelona.

[42] Marcel Walch, Julian Frommel, Katja Rogers, Felix Schüssel, Philipp Hock, David
Dobbelstein, and Michael Weber. 2017. Evaluating VR driving simulation from a
player experience perspective. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2982–2989.

[43] RC Weber, SJ Lawrence, BA Cohen, JE Bleacher, JW Boyce, MR Collier, D Draper,
AL Fagan, CI Fassett, L Gaddis, et al. 2021. The Artemis III Science Definition
Team Report. In Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 1261.

[44] Carolin Wienrich, Nina Döllinger, Simon Kock, Kristina Schindler, and Ole Traupe.
2018. Assessing user experience in virtual reality–a comparison of different mea-
surements. In International Conference of Design, User Experience, and Usability.
Springer, 573–589.

