2
2
0
2

y
a
M
3

]

M
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
3
8
5
1
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Explore of Virtual Reality for Awareness of the
Climate Change Crisis: A Simulation of Sea Level
Rise

Zixiang Xu
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
zixiang.xu@ucdconnect.ie

Yuan Liang
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
yuan.liang@ucdconnect.ie

Abraham G. Campbell
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
abey.campbell@ucd.ie

Soumyabrata Dev
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
soumyabrata.dev@ucd.ie

Abstract—Virtual Reality (VR) technology has been shown to
achieve remarkable results in multiple ﬁelds. Due to the nature
of the immersive medium of Virtual Reality it logically follows
that it can be used as a high-quality educational tool as it offers
potentially a higher bandwidth than other mediums such as text,
pictures and videos. This short paper illustrates the development
of a climate change educational awareness application for virtual
reality to simulate virtual scenes of local scenery and sea level
rising until 2100 using prediction data. The paper also reports on
the current in progress work of porting the system to Augmented
Reality (AR) and future work to evaluate the system.

Index Terms—virtual reality, climate change, environmental

education, human-computer-interaction, augmented reality

I. INTRODUCTION

Climate change is accelerating, bringing the world ‘danger-
ously close’ to irreversible change [1] and even potentially
affected the psychological wellbeing [2] of people around the
world. However, large portions of the public still believe that
global warming is not happening [3], and only a minority
believe it will impact them and their families severely over
the next ﬁfteen years [4]. This has much to do with the
fact that the effects of climate change are ”gradual” rather
than ”immediate”, which may make people feel undecided or
uncertain [5]. A substantial segment of the public ignore the
urgency of climate change because of its inconspicuousness.
This paper details a unique case study that has targeted a
population where within 50 years their homes will be under
water. This is within their or their children’s lifetimes so has
a direct effect on them but still many are skeptical. It is
hoped that through visualization in a VR application which
dynamically simulates the sea level rise, ﬁnally it will become
apparent how serious the problem is. For the families within
this target group,
this education will aid them in making
the difﬁcult but necessary decisions for their future and their
children future.

978-1-7348995-2-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 Immersive Learning Research Network

Compared with traditional media and educational media,
Virtual Reality (VR), as an emerging science and technology,
has an incomparable capability of information transmission
due to its immersive nature. In 2018, Markowitz,D. M. et
al. [6] tested the efﬁcacy of immersive VR as an education
medium for teaching the consequences of climate change
(Fig.1), and got positive results that displayed more positive
attitudes toward the environment after comparing pre- and
post-test assessments.

Fig. 1. Markowitz,D. M. et al.

[6] are testing their project.

While Markowitz et al.

tried to simulate an immersive
underwater world to show the process and effects of rising
sea water acidity, this work is targeted at a much more local
level. Speciﬁcally a local residential area, Portrane (a seaside
settlement located in North County Dublin, Ireland). The aim
of this work is to give a Virtual Reality experience of sea level
rising along the coast within the residential environment. This
work mirrors work in VR [7] that has been used to highlight
sea level rise in another coastal communities such as Santa
Cruz,California.

Section 2 gives the development and implementation of
the application. Section 3 will discuss the experiments so
far that have taken place and the plan of further ones. It
also highlights future work including a demonstration of an

 
 
 
 
 
 
Augmented Reality application that was ported from the VR
project. Conclusion will be given in section 4.

II. VR APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT AND
IMPLEMENTATION

A. Application design with Unity3D and Oculus Quest

360° immersive video applications offer the potential to
provide vivid experiences especially in Cultural Heritage ed-
ucation which has been proven in past studies [8], [9] .This
project origins come from a 360-degree ﬁxed scene that is
combined with a 360 video and a simulated 3D ocean model
(Fig.2). This initial demo was developed to illustrate the simple
sea level changing at a ﬁxed view point and it can run on
both mobile and Head-Mounted Device (HMD) like Oculus
Quest and provide elementary immersive scene. But the ﬁxed
point limitation could not provide an immersive experience
and a large number of panoramic video shooting and complex
simulation of sea level change would have been required for
every new viewpoint, and this tech is less responsive, less
interactive than virtual reality [10], Therefore, we chose a VR
application with virtual scenes as a better solution.

residential views was built. These points were chosen due to
their previously identiﬁcation as points of scenic beauty in
the area. The home menu page provides a map with these 5
points of interests (Fig.4 (b)). The user interface interaction is
based on the virtual laser that starts from the right controller
and achieve the operations through the interactive buttons on
the user interface pointed by the laser, in actual operation,
users can achieve interaction by push button ”A” on right
controller when the laser hit
the button on the interface.
Users can pick any one of 5 point of interests to explore the
virtual scenes, view the ocean level in speciﬁc year and learn
about the corresponding ecological information (Fig.4 (e)&(f))
for each different point of interests. The information shows
as text, audio and video, contains special local ecosystem,
local characteristics, species, the impact of climate change
and how to make environmental protection. The controlling
of ocean level rise simulation is designed as a slider for a
easy and dynamic show of the sea level height. Speciﬁcally,
the slider bar is designed to be divided into 80 consecutive
points, each of which represents a year and pass a value for
which a simulation model of the ocean will take in and rise
to its corresponding position, users can also directly jump
to 2021, 2050 or 2100 using the buttons below the slider
bar (Fig.4 (c)&(d)). In addition, a rotating compass is also
added to the upper right corner of the user interface based
on the geographical direction of the real world to indicate the
direction in the virtual environment, helping users to better
connect the virtual scene with the information in the real scene.
Immersion in consideration, the lower left corner of the user
interface adds a ”hide UI” button, the user can at any time
through the button to hide in addition to the button all the
interactive interface, and click again to display, in order to in
a selected years of rising sea levels scenarios to achieve better
immersive experience.

Fig. 2. The 360-degree scene viewer based on punctuation video and ocean
model.

This application is developed with Unity3D game en-
gine [11] and can run on the Oculus Quest platform [12]
(Fig.3). Oculus Quest 1 is the device used for development
and it provides 1440 × 1600 resolution and the max offers a
maximum refresh rate of 72fps. As a VR all-in-one headset
machine,
it doesn’t need external computing or rendering
support, but uses a Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 SoC with 4
GB of RAM (Three of the four 2.3 GHz CPU cores of the chip
are reserved for software) and a Adreno 540 GPU to compute
and render by its own, this is close to the graphics power of
mid-low end mobile phones on the market. The controllers of
Oculus Quest can provide all the interaction requirements in
this application.

Five points of interests in the beach area of Portrane were
picked to be included, and based on each a virtual scene with

Fig. 3.
application and make interaction with user interface.

Using Oculus Quest Head-Mounted Device (HMD) to run the

B. Scenes and Ocean Simulation with Geography Information
System

For the sea level simulation of each point of interest,
before generated the ocean model, this project combined the
prediction data ﬁles with local Digital Elevation Model (DEM)

in QGIS (an Open-source cross-platform desktop geographic
information system), based on overlapping regions and geo-
graphical location coordinates to determine the results of sea
level rise simulation (Fig.5).

Afterwards, on the generated terrain model with DEM, the
texture from satellite imagery is added to help constructing
the residential objects (Fig.6). Then with reference to local
photos and the speciﬁc locations marked from satellite imagery
texture,
the buildings and plants of the community were
modeled and put on the terrain model to constitute the land
the ocean
models part. After land models were ﬁnished,
models generated with animated sea surface visual effect can
dynamically be changed to the position speciﬁc year from
2021 to 2100 generated according to the relative positions
obtained from the geographic information system (Fig.7).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5. The DEM and prediction data overlapping.

(e)

(f)

Fig. 6. Generated terrain model.

(g)

(h)

Fig. 4.
(a) operation instructions, (b) menu map for choosing point of
interests, (c) the sea level in example position at 2021, slider is interacted with
the laser from controller, (d) sea level changed till 2100, achieved by dragging
the slider button through laser pointing, (e) UI sub information main panel for
relevant environmental information selection, (f) expanded text information
panel example, (g) user interface before clicking ’hide UI’ button, (f) user
interface after clicking ’hide UI’ button.

Fig. 7. Built residential scene in Unity3D.

Finally, to achieve a fully integrated scene, additional rel-
evant geographical and ecological information was added to
the sub-panel, along with sound simulation of the changes
in the sound of waves rising and falling with the sea level,
which further enhanced the user’s sense of immersion. The
importance of sound in human-computer-interaction is often
ignored but critical when you are fully immersing a user within
a virtual space [13].

III. EXPERIMENTS AND FUTURE WORK

Because of the Covid-19, only one initial feedback session
was done with our council partners which included around
ten people under strict COVID restrictions. The feedback
season was in Fingal county council building in Swords,
Dublin, Ireland and no participants tested positive for COVID
subsequently,
this does not deﬁnite prove that our safety
regime was successful but helped advise us in our preparation
for an experiment with both local residence and members
of the public in the future. The feedback session used a
CX 1 CleanBox which uses Ultra violet(UV) light to clean
a Head Mounted Display(HMD). The HMD’s used in this
experiment where also pretreated with an Superhydrophobic
nanoparticle solution that allowed them to be cleaned just
using UV between users. All full experiment is planned in
Q2 of 2022. This experiment will be conducted with local
residents in Portrane to test whether they can have a clearer
understanding of the climate change education and how their
attitude towards climate change would change assisted by
virtual reality, with the control group of individuals who will
not be directly effected.

A. Abbreviations and Acronyms

Deﬁne abbreviations and acronyms the ﬁrst time they are
used in the text, even after they have been deﬁned in the
abstract. Abbreviations such as IEEE, SI, MKS, CGS, ac, dc,
and rms do not have to be deﬁned. Do not use abbreviations
in the title or heads unless they are unavoidable.

Meanwhile, based on the user interface and the predicted ge-
ographic location information of ocean, an Augmented Reality
mobile application is under developing now (Fig.8), it is also
developed with Unity3D game engine and uses ARFoundation
and Global Position System (GPS) to realize the plane detect
and simulated ocean model placement in actual location of
Portrane. The user interfaces and application structure logic
are migrated from VR project in order to ensure the function
consistency of the projects. This application will be tested
in 2022 and further experiments will be conducted to allow
for a comparison between the VR and AR versions of this
application.

The experimental survey content is being designed in order
to learn the advantages and disadvantages of such platform
transplantation from user feedback, as well as what speciﬁc
adjustments should be made to the user interface design at the
human-computer interaction level to adapt to the operation
scenarios of AR and VR respectively. Xuanhui Xu et al.
[14] (Fig.9) designed a experiment questionnaire based on a
project of achieving the conversion of a veterinary teaching
workstation VR tool to mobile devices and initially explores
the performance, this is a very good demonstration and can
be used to conduct experimental investigations based on this
design.

Uses this approach based on quantitative analysis of the
feedback data, an evaluation will be then conducted to assess
application applicability to help more intuitively bring the

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 8. AR mobile application demo. (a) menu page of the app, (b) navigation
function that can lead the user to the preset target position of selected point
of interests, (c) ocean simulation function that generates the ocean model to
cover the real sea surface to show the sea level rise prediction, (d) inherited
from the VR version of the information display function.

Fig. 9. Experiment questionnaire design from Xuanhui Xu et al. [14].

urgency of the climate change crisis to people who will be
effect in the next 50 years.

IV. CONCLUSION

Education is critical to raise awareness on climate change
[15], and to help the public understand sometimes quite com-
plex concepts within Environmental Sciences, visualization
is the key. This work has illustrated how an environmental
AR/VR educational application can be created and how an
initial feedback session was conducted during strict COVID
restrictions.

Currently the next step for this project is to evaluate an
AR version of the application and subsequently explore if
VR and/or AR is a superior medium than other mediums for
climate education.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research forms part of the CONSUS Programme which
is funded under the SFI trategic Partnerships Programme
(16/SPP/3296) and is co-funded by Origin Enterprises Plc.

REFERENCES

[1] H.

Fountain,

“Climate
world ’dangerously close’
[Online].
Available:
climate-change-acceleration.html

is

change
to irreversible

bringing
change,” Dec 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/04/climate/

accelerating,

[2] S. Clayton, “Climate anxiety: Psychological

responses to climate
change,” Journal of Anxiety Disorders, vol. 74, p. 102263, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0887618520300773

[3] A. Leiserowitz, E. Maibach, S. Rosenthal, J. Kotcher, P. Bergquist,
M. T. Ballew, M. Goldberg, and A. Gustafson, “Climate change in the
american mind: November 2019,” 2020.

[4] M. Banks, “Westerners don’t believe climate change is critical,”
https://www.eupoliticalreport.eu/

Nov
[Online]. Available:
westerners-dont-believe-climate-change-is-critical/

2020.

[5] M. K. A. Schuldt Jonathon P. and B. S. E., “Communicating about ocean
theoretical and practical considerations,” Royal Society, vol.

health:
371, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0214

[6] D. M. Markowitz, R. Laha, B. P. Perone, R. D. Pea, and J. N.
Bailenson, “Immersive virtual reality ﬁeld trips facilitate learning about
climate change,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 9, no. NOV, 2018, cited
By :107. [Online]. Available: www.scopus.com

[7] J. Calil, G. Fauville, A. C. M. Queiroz, K. L. Leo, A. G. N. Mann,
T. Wise-West, P. Salvatore, and J. N. Bailenson, “Using virtual reality
in sea level rise planning and community engagement—an overview,”
Water, vol. 13, no. 9, p. 1142, 2021.

immersive video applications:

[8] L. Argyriou, D. Economou, and V. Bouki, “Design methodology
a
the
tour,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
[Online]. Available:

for 360°
cultural heritage virtual
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 843–859, Dec 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-020-01373-8

study of

[9] F. ˇSkola, S. Rizvi´c, M. Cozza, L. Barbieri, F. Bruno, D. Skarlatos, and
F. Liarokapis, “Virtual reality with 360-video storytelling in cultural
heritage: Study of presence, engagement, and immersion,” Sensors,
vol. 20, no. 20, p. 5851, 2020.

case

[10] A. Conroy, “The bbc and virtual reality,” Mar 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/blog/2016-06-the-bbc-and-virtual-reality
[11] U. Technologies, Unity3D (2019.4.24f1), 2021. [Online]. Available:

http://http://unity3d.com

[12] Oculus, Oculus Quest, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://http://oculus.com
[13] K. Rogers, G. Ribeiro, R. R. Wehbe, M. Weber, and L. E. Nacke, “Van-
ishing importance: studying immersive effects of game audio perception
on player experiences in virtual reality,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2018, pp. 1–13.
[14] X. Xu, D. Kilroy, E. Mangina, and A. Campbell, “Adapting a virtual
reality anatomy teaching tool for mobility: Pilot study,” 06 2020.
[15] UNESCO, “Education for sustainable development: A roadmap,” 2020.

