2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2

]

R
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
1
9
0
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Realistic soft-body tearing under 10ms in VR

Manos Kamarianakis
kamarianakis@uoc.gr
FORTH - ICS, University of Crete, ORamaVR
Greece

Michail Tamiolakis
michalis.tamiolakis@oramavr.com
University of Crete, ORamaVR
Greece

Antonis Protopsaltis
aprotopsaltis@uowm.gr
University of Western Macedonia, ORamaVR
Greece

George Papagiannakis
papagian@ics.forth.gr
FORTH - ICS, University of Crete, ORamaVR
Greece

Figure 1: (Left) The vertices of a 3D model are clustered in particles, to allow soft-body characteristics. (Middle) A continu-
ous tear is performed on the model. (Right) The particles of the torn model are updated, allowing further proper soft-body
deformations.

KEYWORDS
Real-Time, Tear, Cut, Soft-Bodies, Virtual Reality

1 INTRODUCTION
Rigged animated models are one of the most researched areas in
computer graphics and have been vastly adopted in Virtual Reality
(VR) applications. VR experts experiment with various animation
and deformation techniques that can yield realistic real-time out-
puts. To cover the needs that arise from a variety of use cases, our
research revolves around the ability to perform realistic tears, i.e.,
small cuts, on the surface of a model. Current bibliography [1, 7]
describes diverse ways on how to cut a 3D model, but most of these
methods are not suitable for VR, since the specific calculations must
be performed in a real-time manner within a few ms to preserve
user immersion. Furthermore, to avoid the uncanny valley in VR,
we emulate realistic effects while performing cuts on certain mate-
rials, such as a sponge or human tissues, that one would expect to
occur in real life.

Latest developments [2] allow for basic operations, such as cut-
ting, tearing or drilling on a rigged mesh model, to be run in near
real-time. Furthermore, the replication of the physical behaviour of
soft bodies, when applying external forces to them in VR, would
greatly increase the overall realism of the simulation [3]. The ongo-
ing research for increased realism in virtual environments heavily
impacts educational-oriented applications, especially the ones re-
garding VR medical training [5].

2 OUR APPROACH
Overview. Our approach is based on the techniques of [2], where
the authors describe simple cut, tear and drill operations on a 3D
mesh using basic geometric operations. Our optimized tearing mod-
ule allows for continuous uninterrupted operation, i.e., the user
can freely perform tears successively, similar to a surgeon’s tearing
gesture. Furthermore, we have developed a suitable particle decom-
position on the model’s vertices that can be used to emulate soft
bodies, as in [4]. Via suitable optimizations, we are able to perform
real-time continuous tears on a soft-body model and update the
underlying particle decomposition to obtain high-realistic results
in VR. Our methods were designed with the lowest possible com-
plexity in terms of needed calculations that yield real-time results
even in untethered Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs), with limited
GPU and CPU capabilities. Lastly, proper handling and weight as-
signment [2] to the tear-generated vertices allow us to tear not
only rigid but also skinned models, where in the latter case, further
animation is still feasible.

Methodology for the Tear algorithm In order to achieve real-
time tearing results, we have opted for basic geometric primitives,
e.g., face-plane intersections and face ray casting, as basic building
blocks for our algorithms. This approach allows for fast identifica-
tion of the faces affected by the tear.

In our implementation, the tear width is user defined. In non-
zero settings, a destructive tear takes place: triangles that fall in the
tear-gap are completely or partially clipped, i.e., removed from the
model. Partially clipped faces are calculated by their intersections

 
 
 
 
 
 
Kamarianakis, Protopsaltis, Tamiolakis, et al.

Applying our methods on the Stanford bunny (3365 vertices),
the tearing times were varying between 7-16ms depending on the
region torn. The average time for tears as the ones shown in Figure
1 was 10ms. The results were obtained without employing GPU or
parallel processing, using an Intel core i7 7700HQ at 2.8GHZ with an
Nvidia GTX 1050ti m (8GB RAM) graphics card and a Desktop VR
- HTC Vive. The model’s vertices were clustered into 78 particles,
using range 𝑑 = 0.1, by an offline process that took 456ms.

Comparison with other methods Methods accomplishing
similar results are implemented in the discontinued Nvidia Flex
physics engine (developer.nvidia.com/flex) and the Flex-based Unity3D
plugin uFlex that has not been updated in the past 6 years (still
in beta). These methods do not support rigged models in their
particle decomposition. They support cloth tearing but not surgical-
like tearings as the ones described in our work. In conclusion, our
method remains the only active, game-engine compatible, solution.

3 CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a novel integration of a real-time continuous
tearing algorithm for 3D meshes in VR along with a suitable particle
decomposition that allows soft-body deformations on both the
original and the torn model. Our methods are based on simple
geometric primitives and therefore are suitable even for untethered
HMDs of low specifications. The proposed techniques are already
implemented in the MAGES SDK, running on Unity3D, publicly
available for free.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The project was partially funded by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements
No 871793 (ACCORDION) and No 101016509 (CHARITY).

REFERENCES
[1] Cynthia D Bruyns, Steven Senger, Anil Menon, Kevin Montgomery, Simon Wilder-
muth, and Richard Boyle. 2002. A survey of interactive mesh-cutting techniques
and a new method for implementing generalized interactive mesh cutting using
virtual tools. The journal of visualization and computer animation 13, 1 (2002),
21–42.

[2] Manos Kamarianakis and George Papagiannakis. 2021. An All-in-One Geometric
Algorithm for Cutting, Tearing, and Drilling Deformable Models. Advances in
Applied Clifford Algebras 31 (Jul 2021), 58.

[3] Miles Macklin, Matthias Müller, Nuttapong Chentanez, and Tae-Yong Kim. 2014.
Unified Particle Physics for Real-Time Applications. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 33, 4 (2014), 104.

[4] Andrew Nealen, Matthias Müller, Richard Keiser, Eddy Boxerman, and Mark
Carlson. 2006. Physically based deformable models in computer graphics. In
Computer graphics forum, Vol. 25. Wiley Online Library, 809–836. Issue 4.

[5] George Papagiannakis, Manos Kamarianakis, Thomas C. Sauter, Alan Chalmers,
Joan Lasenby, Daniele Di Lernia, and Walter Greenleaf. 2022. Editorial: New
Virtual Reality and Spatial Computing Applications to Empower, Upskill and
Reskill Medical Professionals in a Post-Pandemic Era. Frontiers in Virtual Reality
3 (2022).

[6] George Papagiannakis, Paul Zikas, Nick Lydatakis, Steve Kateros, Mike Kentros,
Efstratios Geronikolakis, Manos Kamarianakis, Ioanna Kartsonaki, and Giannis
Evangelou. 2020. MAGES 3.0: Tying the Knot of Medical VR. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2020 Immersive Pavilion (Virtual Event, USA) (SIGGRAPH ’20). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 6, 2 pages.

[7] Jun Wu, Christian Dick, and Rüdiger Westermann. 2013. Efficient collision detec-
tion for composite finite element simulation of cuts in deformable bodies. The
Visual Computer 29, 6 (June 2013), 739–749.

Figure 2: Our methods applied on a cactus rigged model.
Using particles we can simulate soft-body simulations, as
shown in the cactus holding the ball. The skinned model
can be torn and redeformed as shown on the right cactus.
The model’s 2976 vertices were clustered into 110 particles,
using 𝑑 = 0.1.

with the tear-gap surrounding box which initially is considered as
a finite part of a plane, defined and bounded by the intersections of
the scalpel’s initial and final positions with the model.

As the user moves the scalpel, freely tearing the model, we
sample the scalpel’s positions at specific time or distance intervals
and perform multiple consecutive tears. To avoid jagged edges on
the tearing path we make sure that consecutive bounding boxes do
not overlap by utilizing non axis-aligned boxes instead.

Methodology for the Particle Decomposition To accomplish
the so-called soft-body mesh deformation [6], the vertices of the
mesh are clustered into groups, called particles. Each particle is
positioned at the centroid of each group of vertices. A vertex may
belong to multiple particles. In our method, every particle contains
vertices within a model dependent, euclidean range of 𝑑 units. A
small range results in more particles, hence more accurate defor-
mations, but yields worse running times. Since a high range will
have the opposite effects, a balanced range should be identified per
model (see Figure 2).

When a user applies a force to a particle, its position changes and
this movement affects the position of all vertices of the particle. The
particle’s velocity is changed, proportionally to the displacement,
always pointing to its initial position (simulating elasticity); in the
case of skinned models, the current pose is also considered. Physics
calculations are natively handled by the employed game engine.

After a tearing operation, the clustering map is updated by
adding or removing vertices to the involved particles. To allow
fast updates and produce physically correct deformation results,
simple directives were also introduced, e.g., vertices belonging to
opposite sides of a tear, although close enough, cannot belong to
the same particle.

Results Our optimized methods run on top of UNITY3D game
engine and are incorporated within the MAGES SDK [6], developed
by ORamaVR, publicly available for free.

