Increasing Fault Tolerance and Throughput with
Adaptive Control Plane in Smart Factories

Cao Vien Phung and Admela Jukan
Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany
Email: {c.phung, a.jukan}@tu-bs.de

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
5
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
5
0
3
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Future smart factories are expected to deploy an
emerging dynamic Virtual Reality (VR) applications with high
bandwidth wireless connections in the THz communication
bands, where a factory worker can follow activities through
360°video streams with high quality resolution. THz communi-
cations, while promising as a high bandwidth wireless commu-
nication technology, are however known for low fault tolerance,
and are sensible to external factors. Since THz channel states are
in general hard to estimate, what is needed is a system that can
adaptively react to transceiver conﬁgurations in terms of coding
and modulation. To this end, we propose an adaptive control
plane that can help us conﬁgure the THz communication system.
The control plane implements a workﬂow algorithm designed
to adaptively choose between various coding and modulation
schemes depending on THz channel states. The results show that
an adaptive control plane can improve throughput and signal res-
olution quality, with theoretically zeroed bit error probability and
a maximum achievable throughput in the scenarios analayzed.

I. INTRODUCTION

Future smart factory scenarios are envisioned with the
downlink applications using high bandwidth wireless links
able to provide high throughput and fault tolerance. A typical
scenario, as illustrated in Fig. 1a, includes several robots,
a factory worker is using an augmented or virtual reality
(VR) and high quality resolution device (as a receiver), and
a Base Station (BS) (as a transmitter). The high data rate of
communications in Gb/s is today achievable with Terahertz
(THz) frequency band (0.3−10 THz). A system that can com-
bine THz communications, and virtual- and augmented reality
will enable several advanced features in the manufacturing
process, such as the real-time placement of images onto the
real working environment to see the proper instructions on how
to assemble a particular product or a component, hands-free
[1]. Such applications in general are expected to improve the
manufacturing efﬁciency, decrease the training time of factory
works, and enhance the safety.

To guarantee high throughput and fault tolerance, the system
needs to be able to adaptively respond to changed trans-
mission and applications conditions. First, this is necessary
since VR users move, leading to the outdated channel states,
making static system conﬁguration obsolete. Second, and more
critically, THz band is sensitive to molecular absorption [2],
leading to an easily deteriorated Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR),
i.e., a high Bit Error Rate (BER). Thus, to provide the desired
robustness, the adoption and development of the adequate
coding schemes are subject of ongoing research [3]. In regard
to coding, a few FEC codes with redundant data are under

discussion for THz communication to protect original data
against losses, such as Low Density Parity Check (LDPC),
RS or Polar code [4], [5]. To increase the transmission
performance, data can also be transferred with either a higher
modulation formats, or over longer paths, which also is a
major challenge in THz spectrum. Previous work analyzed
time-varying channel modeling and tracking for THz indoor
communications [6]. Papers [7] and [8] analyzed to this end
different mobility scenarios in THz indoor communications.

In this paper, we conceptualize the need to provide an
adaptive system conﬁguration in response to mobility and
channel state changes, with the aim of improving throughput
and fault tolerance. To this end we propose data and control
plane architectures, akin to what
is known in high speed
networks, e.g., [9]. In the control plane, we design a workﬂow
feedback loop algorithm which can adaptively update the
channel states and generate adaptive coding and modulation
THz system conﬁgurations. In the data plane, we consider four
modulation schemes: BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK and 16QAM. For
coding, the system can choose between and Multidimensional
Parity Check (MDPC) [10] and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes
[11]. The reasons for the above selections is because these
modulations and coding schemes are well known and can be
analyzed, though our approach is applicable to other schemes
as they emerge. The results show an adaptive control plane
can choose the best coding and modulation schemes with
the lowest transmission overhead, and the highest code rate
and throughput, therefore improving the system performance
with theoretically zeroed bit error probability and a maximum
achievable throughput in the scenarios analayzed.

II. SYSTEM DESIGN

A. THz data plane

The THz data plane includes the transmitter (Tx), also
referred to as THz base station, and the receiver (Rx) module,
here corresponding to the VR device. In our model we assume
that Rx (VR) can move, whereas Tx (BS) is static. At the
Transmitter (Tx) (THz base station), the data source with a
long bit stream is split into substreams. Each substream is re-
ferred to as a coding generation of K bits, whereby the coding
generation includes a set of bits coded and decoded together.
Based on channel condition, K can be adaptively chosen and
all Ks are temporarily stored at the coding cache for the
coding process. A coding generation of K bits generates R
redundant bits from the coding process, where R bits are used

 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) An augmented reality smart factory application with wireless communications in THz band; (b) A THz control
plane architecture with feedback loop workﬂow protocol.

to support for correcting error bits from K bits. We consider
two coding schemes: RS code, and MDPC(nD/mL) code with
n dimensions (D) and the same length (L) of m bits for
each dimension, whereby the original bits stay unchanged after
coding, meaning that only redundant coded bits are generated
by coding. The control plane can choose one of these two
schemes adaptively, based on an algorithm.

If MDPC(nD/mL) code is chosen, the encoding process
for R = (m + 1)n − mn parity bits [10] generated from
K = mn bits can be performed as follows: A special case of
MDPC(nD/mL) code with n = 2 has column and row parity
bits in the last row and column of the two-dimensional matrix,
respectively. The original data bits are put at the remaining
columns and rows of the matrix. Data bits in the column of
the matrix and in the row of the matrix are secured by one
column parity bit in the last row and by one row parity bit in
the last column, respectively. The parity check bit on check bits
for securing column and row parity bits is at the bottom right
corner of the matrix. The construction of MDPC(nD/mL) code
with n ≥ 3 is a multidimensional hypercube combined from
basic three-dimensional parity check cubes. A parity check
cube of three dimensions is a set of the two-dimensional parity
matrices layered into a third dimension and the parity bits
across the layers of data bits belong to the last layer.

s

If RS code is chosen, the related coding mechanism as well
known from [11] can be performed as follows: The original
data M (X) with the size of K bits is operated on the coding
process with the modulo-g(X) function to create the redundant
i.e., CK(X) = X R
data CK(X),
s · M (X) mod g(X),
whereby X R
represents the displacement shift, s is the
coding symbol size in bits, R is the size of redundant coded
information bits and g(X) represents the generator. Therefore,
the RS code word C(X) = X R
s · M (X) + CK(X) includes
the redundant data CK(X) appended systematically onto
the original data M (X), i.e., K original bits are increased
to K + R bits during the coding process. R + K bits are
divided into symbols of s bits each and all coding operations
are performed via ﬁnite ﬁeld F2s. The maximum codeword

length of RS code is K+R
s = 2s − 1. If R is ﬁxed and
K+R
< 2s − 1,
then Z zero padding symbols can be
s
added into K
s original symbols by the encoder so that the
codeword length K+R
s + Z = 2s − 1 can be achieved, and R
s
redundant coded symbols are generated. These zero padding
symbols will not be sent out of transmission channels, but the
decoder needs to use them for the decoding process. After the
coding process, K + R data bits are modulated to generate X
modulation symbols. The control plane can choose one of the
four modulation schemes: BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK and 16QAM,
depending on the THz channel state. After the modulation
process, X modulation symbols are sent over the THz channel.
At the Receiver (Rx) side (VR device), we collect X sym-
bols to demodulate. X modulation symbols are demodulated
to re-create K original data bits and R redundant bits, for
decoding. K + R bits will be then delivered to the decoding
block. As large amount of data arrives at the same time, a re-
ceiving buffer is necessary to temporally store all arriving data
for the decoding process, whereby the decoded generations
are serialized. If MDPC(nD/mL) code is used, the iterative
decoding method can be applied [10] to correct the data bits
with the highest error probability in each decoding iteration.
All parity bits and their related data bits are checked in each
decoding iteration, and then we will count a failed dimension
marker (FDM). The FDM of the arbitrary bit is set to k, if
that bit discovers a parity check error in the k dimension.
If the FDM reaches the highest value less than 2, then the
decoding process stops. Otherwise, all bits are inverted with
the highest FDM value. In the next step, the iteration number
limit is checked to decide whether the decoding process stops
or all steps are repeated in the next iteration, based on the
if F DMmax = 0
predeﬁned maximum iteration. Finally,
after the decoding process, the frame is considered error-free.
Otherwise, we face an uncorrectable error.

If RS code [11] is chosen, the data of RS code is decoded
as follows. The syndrome components are calculated from the
received word at the ﬁrst stage. The second stage is to calculate
the error-locator word from the syndrome components. At

VR userTHz BaseStationfrequency 300.24 GHz over different transmission distances
and modulation schemes conducted using the Simulator for
Mobile Networks (SiMoNe) in Fig. 2 from [12], e.g., if we
have BERm or BERf is approximately equal to 0.0579, then
the transmission distance is estimated to be d = 20 m with
using BPSK, whereby BERm and BERf can be deduced
for the current transmission distance and previous transmission
distance, respectively. At the beginning, we store the value of 0
in the buffer. The values BERm are periodically updated from
the receiver module at a constant time interval t. We assume
that a small moving speed of a pedestrian is at 1 m/s, i.e., a
footstep of worker with 0.5 m will take 0.5 s. So, to estimate
the moving of receiver, we recommend setting the constant
time interval t = 0.5 s for periodically updating BERm.

In Fig. 2, on the other hand, the ﬂuctuations of channel state
are continuous when the receiver is moving to different trans-
mission distances. Hence, the adaptive conﬁguration module
only generates the new conﬁgurations, when the receiver is
predicted to stop at a certain position. This can be explained as
follows: The channel state changes so fast, when the receiver
is moving. So, the new conﬁgurations have not been able
to actuate yet, and are already obsolete. Also, too frequent
channel state update can cause an extremely large overhead
in each transmitted frame. At the beginning, let us assume
that we set up the system using RS code (224, 240) and the
main THz channel using 16QAM, and they are known by
transmitter, receiver and adaptive conﬁguration module.

C. Adaptive Algorithm

To generate new states, an Algorithm 1 is used. For line 1,
the Selection function includes BERm periodically updated
by the receiver module. For line 2-line 3, we compare BERm
with the other previous BER values BERf s stored in the
buffer. If there exists at least a difference of BERm and
any BERf stored in the buffer B, where that difference is
more than or equal to ε, then it is likely that the receiver
is moving, whereby ε > 0. For example, based on BER
values over different distances and modulation schemes in Fig.
2, if the difference between BERm and BERf is at least
ε ≈ 7.646 · 10−8 for BPSK, ε ≈ 6.649 · 10−9 for QPSK,
ε ≈ 9.375 · 10−7 for 8PSK and ε ≈ 2.992 · 10−7 for 16QAM
for bandwidth 8.64 GHz at center frequency 300.24 GHz, then
the receiver is predicted to be moving. When the receiver is
moving, BERms will be continuously changed. Therefore,
BERf s previously stored in the buffer will be removed, and
then the new BERm is added into the buffer. The reason
for the deletion is that when the receiver is moving, BERf s
become outdated. If |BERm − BERf | < ε, ∀BERf ∈ B
(line 4), then it is likely that the receiver stops at a certain
position. However, no new conﬁguration is generated because
we are not totally sure that whether the receiver keeps walking
or not, i.e., we need more BERm updates to give a decision
of generating new conﬁgurations. If the buffer B is not full
(line 5), then we add the new BERm into it (line 6). We
keep adding new BERms, which satisfy the condition of line
4, until the buffer is full (line 7).

Figure 2: BW 8.64 GHz at center frequency 300.24 GHz.
the third stage, the error locations are calculated from the
error-locator numbers which are from the error-locator word.
The fourth stage is for calculating the error values from the
syndrome components and the error-locator numbers. Finally,
we calculate the decoded code word from the received word,
the error locations, and the error values.

B. THz Control Plane

The control plane module includes the two main com-
ponents referred to as Transmitter Controller and Adaptive
Conﬁguration Module. In between, a messaging protocol
(feedback messaging protocol) is used for communications
over a wireless channel. The latter can be either in THz or
out of THz band, and is not critical in the overall design due
to its low bandwidth required.

Adaptive conﬁguration module generates new system con-
ﬁgurations when the channel state changes. This module
collects the necessary measurements (e.g., BER) used for
estimating the receiver performance as well as channel state
information. Such measurements are not foreseen at the trans-
mitter module, here THz BS, but can be easily added to the
system. For instance, transmitter can measure the noise levels
and calibrate the transmitting power as the noise increases
(e.g., due to equipment aging or heat). The arrow labelled
with the message "Retrieve BER value BERm" illustrated
that the measured BER value is periodically updated from
the receiver module to the adaptive conﬁguration module.
The messaging arrows labelled as "Set demodulation scheme"
and "Set decoding scheme: RS(K, s)/MDPC(K)" illustrate the
actuation messaging to inform the data plane when the best
demodulation and decoding schemes are chosen, respectively.
This messages are sent out after the new system conﬁgurations
are generated by the adaptive conﬁguration module.

It is important to note that a buffer needs to be deﬁned
sufﬁciently large for the system to work and store the messages
about the system states. Let us deﬁne a buffer B with an
enough size for N messages. This buffer is used to save
measured BER values BERm (before decoding) sent by the
receiver. BERm after buffering is denoted to be BERf . The
BERf s stored in the buffer are used to anticipate the status
of the receiver (e.g., moving or standing idly at a certain
position), or the transmission distance. For example, changed
BERf s mean that it is likely that the receiver is moving.
Consider the BER values of bandwidth 8.64 GHz at center

the current

For line 8-10,

the adaptive conﬁguration module starts
generating new adaptive conﬁgurations because highly likely
the receiver stops moving. Based on BERm received with
the current modulation scheme used by the transmitter and
the BER database over different transmission distances and
modulation schemes stored in this module, we can approx-
transmission distance between
imately predict
the transmitter and receiver (line 8). Based on the current
distance of THz transmission channel and the BER database
over different transmission distances and modulation schemes
stored in this module, we can approximately predict the bit
error probability pe, if the transmitter uses modulation scheme
e ∈ { BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK,16QAM } at that transmission
distance of main THz channel (line 9). Next, we discuss line
10. First of all, we consider the number of error bits tM DP C
corrected by MDPC code and the number of error symbols
tRS corrected by RS code:

,

(1)

(cid:26)tM DP C = 2n−1 − 1,
tRS = R
2s
whereby tV (V ∈ {MDPC code, RS code}) is assumed to be
ﬁxed. On the other hand, we consider two parameters: Code
rate RF and coding system throughput T H deﬁned to be the
number of useful data bits transferred by the THz transmission
system to a certain destination per unit of time. These two ones
with formulas are expressed by:
(cid:26)

RF = K
T H = RF · D · (1 − P V

K+R ,

re),

(2)

where D is the data transmission rate and P V
re is the residual
bit error probability after decoding. With ﬁxed value tM DP C
(Eq. (1)) and pe from four modulation schemes considered
from line 9, we can choose 4 optimized values of K = mn
original bits with R = (m + 1)n − mn redundant bits from
4 modulation schemes for MDPC code, where m, n ∈ N, so
that they satisfy the eqution as:

(m + 1)n · pe ≤ tM DP C.

(3)

At the same time, similarly, with ﬁxed value tRS (Eq. (1))
and pe from four modulation schemes considered from line
9, we can choose 4 optimized values of K original bits with
R redundant bits from 4 modulation schemes for RS code, so
that they satisfy the eqution as:

(4)

(cid:26) K+R
s
2s−1 ≤ K

· Ps ≤ tRS ; K ≥ 0
s ≤ 2s − 1

,

s + R
where Ps = 1 − (1 − pe)s is the symbol error probability on
the main THz channel and the maximum codeword length of
RS code is K+R
s = 2s − 1. Note that the values of K, R or s
chosen from Eq. (3) for MDPC code and Eq. (4) for RS code
over different modulation schemes, the total number of error
bits/symbols occurred is lower than or equal to the ability of
correcting bit/symbol errors by MDPC(nD/mL) and RS code,
when K + R bits or K+R
symbols are sent over the main
THz channel with the bit error probability pe or symbol error
probability Ps, with the aim of optimizing the fault tolerance

s

system. Theoretically, with this approach, the residual bit error
probability P V
re after decoding is approximately equal to 0.
From eight optimized values of K original bits/symbols with
R redundant bits/symbols of MDPC and RS code over four
modulation schemes, we can choose the best coding and mod-
ulation scheme with the highest code rate RF and throughput
T H, based on Eq.(2). As the adaptive conﬁgurations are
chosen, the THz data transmission can achieve high throughput
and code rate with an optimized system fault tolerance. If
BERm arrives when the buffer of adaptive conﬁguration
module is full and |BERm − BERf | < ε, ∀BERf ∈ B
(line 12), then we only remove the oldest BERf stored in
the buffer, and then add BERm into it. In this case, we
do not generate any new system conﬁgurations because the
receiver does not still change its position, i.e., the current
channel state is similar to the previous one with the adaptive
conﬁgurations already generated from line 7 to line 10. Note
that
this module generates the
conﬁguration: MDPC(K), whereby K is the size of original
input data. Else if, RS code is chosen, this module generates
the conﬁguration: RS(K, s), whereby s is the size of coding
symbol in bits.

if MDPC code is chosen,

1) Analysis of algorithm complexity: In this subsection, we
calulate the overhead for generating a new adaptive conﬁgura-
tion, when a BERm is updated at the adaptive conﬁguration
module. As analyzed from line 5-line 10 in Algorithm 1,
this module only generates new conﬁgurations, if the new
BERm arrives at the time when the buffer B stores N − 1
BERf messages. Assume that a computation for the process
of generating adaptive conﬁgurations is counted as one unit
and we ignore the simple processes of removing or storing
from the bufffer. We need N −1 units to compare BERm and
BERf at line 2. At line 8, we need one unit for predicting
the transmission distance of VR user. At line 9, we need
M = 4 units for predicting the bit error probability for four
modulation schemes. Finally, for each coding scheme, we
need M · 3 = 12 units at line 10 because we have M = 4
values of bit error probability pe applied for 3 equations (Eqs.
(2), (3), (4)) to ﬁnd the best coding and throughput with the
highest code rate and throughput. As a result, in general, we
need N + M (1 + 3C) units for generating a new system
conﬁguration, where M is the number of modulation schemes
considered and C is the number of coding schemes considered.

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we show the performance results in the
smart factory applications shown, considering THz data and
control planes proposed. All data including over the THz
channel, which has bandwidth 8.64 GHz at center frequency
300.24 GHz. For the BER values, we make use of the data
shown in Fig. (2). These BER values are used to estimate
the transmission distance between VR user and THz BS and
bit error probability pe over different modulations under the
Algorithm 1. To estimate the moving of VR user, we assume
setting the constant time interval t = 0.5 s for periodically
updating BERm from VR user to the adaptive conﬁguration

(a) Transmission distance.

(b) Code rate.

(c) Transmission overhead.

Figure 3: BER vs. distance without coding, transmission distance randomly chosen, code rate and transmission overhead.

(a) Chosen coding scheme.

(b) Chosen modulation scheme.

(c) Throughput.

Figure 4: Theoretical results. For chosen coding scheme, 1 and 2 denote chosen RS code and MDPC code, respectively. For
chosen modulation scheme, 4, 5, 6 and 7 represent chosen BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK and 16QAM, respectively..

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Workﬂow Conﬁguration Algorithm

Table I: List of main values applied for evaluation.

if ∃ |BERm − BERf | ≥ ε, ∀BERf ∈ B then
Remove all BERf s, and buffering BERm;

1: function SELECTION(BERm)
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:

if B is not full then

else

Add BERm into the buffer;
if B is full then

7:
8:
9:

10:

11:
12:
13:
14:

Based on BERm → transmission distance.
Based on transmission distance → bit error
probabilities pe, if using BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK or 16QAM.
Using pe from four modulation schemes,
tV ﬁxed and Eqs. (2), (3), (4) → chosen coding and
modulation scheme with the highest RF and T H.

end if

else

Remove the oldest BERf , and buffer BERm;

end if

end if

15:
16: end function

module. Note that at the beginning, we store temporally the
value 0 in the buffer and use RS code (224, 240) with the
modulation scheme of 16QAM. The adaptive conﬁguration
module only generates the new conﬁgurations, when VR user
stops at a certain position. As discussed in Algorithm 1,

Values

Meaning

tM DP C = 1
tRS = 1
N = 4
t = 0.5
ε ≈ 7.646 · 10−8
ε ≈ 6.649 · 10−9
ε ≈ 9.375 · 10−7
ε ≈ 2.992 · 10−7
D = 7.04
D = 14.08
D = 21.12
D = 28.16

Number of bits can be corrected by MDPC code.
Number of symbols can be corrected by RS code.
Maximum number of messages stored in buffer B.
Time for periodically updating BERm in second.
Likely VR user is moving if using BPSK.
Likely VR user is moving if using QPSK.
Likely VR user is moving if using 8PSK.
Likely VR user is moving if using 16QAM.
Data transmission rate for BPSK in Gbps.
Data transmission rate for QPSK in Gbps.
Data transmission rate for 8PSK in Gbps.
Data transmission rate for 16QAM in Gbps.

based on the database of BER values from Fig. 2, we deﬁne
ε ≈ 7.646 · 10−8 for BPSK, ε ≈ 6.649 · 10−9 for QPSK,
ε ≈ 9.375 · 10−7 for 8PSK and ε ≈ 2.992 · 10−7 for 16QAM
to predict whether the VR user is moving or stops at a certain
place. The data transmission rate D for BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK
and 16QAM is 7.04 Gbps, 14.08 Gbps, 21.12 Gbps and 28.16
Gbps, respectively.

Fig. 3a shows the different standing positions (transmis-
sion distances) of VR user around 60600 s, where they are
randomly chosen between 0.5 m and 20.0 m in steps of
0.5 m from the transmitter. When VR user moves between
two positions, the channel state changes. Assume that based
on BERm periodically updated from the VR user (line 8
in Algorithm 1). Based on the channel states in Fig. 3a,

our adaptive algorithm can choose the best coding scheme
(Fig. 4a) and modulation scheme (Fig. 4b) with the lowest
transmission overhead (Fig. 3c), the highest code rate (Fig.
3b) and throughput (Fig. 4c). Assume that the time when
the VR user is idly standing at any position is randomly
chosen in [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] minutes. We assume R redundant bits
are generated from K original bits so that the number of
bits can be corrected to be tM DP C = 1 bit for MDPC code
and to be tRS = 1 symbol for RS code. The reason for this
assumption is because with a low redundant coding data, the
coding and decoding time is optimized with a low latency,
while it can still satisfy the optimized fault tolerance with
high code rate and throughput, as discussed in section II-C.
Assume that the processing time for the feedback controller
and adaptive conﬁguration module is small and ignored.

Fig. 3b, Fig. 3c, Fig. 4a, Fig. 4b and Fig. 4c theoretically
show the code rate, transmission overhead, chosen coding
and modulation scheme and throughput, respectively, where
the throughput is observed in the time interval, when VR
user idly stands at a speciﬁc position. 1 and 2 denote the
chosen coding scheme, respectively. 4, 5, 6 and 7 denote
the chosen modulation scheme of BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK and
16QAM, respectively. Based on the standing positions of VR
user predicted in Fig. 3a (line 8 in Algorithm 1), we can
approximately estimate four bit error probabilities pe from the
database of BER values over different transmission distances
and modulation schemes in Fig. 2, stored at the adaptive
conﬁguration module, if THz BS uses BPSK, QPSK, 8PSK
or 16QAM (line 9 in Algorithm 1). With four bit error
probabilities from four modulation schemes if used by THz BS
(line 9 in Algorithm 1), tM DP C = 1 bit and tRS = 1 symbol,
we will ﬁnd four values of K for MDPC code satisfying
Eq. (3) and four values of K and s for RS code satisfying
Eq. (4). Theoretically, if we can choose a reasonable value
of input data K (section II-C), then the residual bit error
probability P V
re ≈ 0 after decoding. Therefore, the throughput
is equivalent to the information bit rate, i.e., based in Eq.
(2), T H = RF · D. With R redundant bits deduced from
tM DP C = 1 bit and tRS = 1 symbol by Eq. (1), and eight
values of K are previouly found, all of them are applied from
Eq. (2). As a result, the adaptive conﬁguration module will
ﬁnd the best coding scheme (Fig. 4a) and modulation scheme
(Fig. 4b) with the highest code rate (Fig. 3b) and throughput
(Fig. (4c)). The transmission overhead in Fig. (3c) is given by:
θ = 1 − RF , where RF is code rate.

For code rate in Fig. 3b, 0.25 ≤ RF ≤ 1, i.e., 0 ≤ θ ≤ 0.75
in Fig. 3c; the longer the transmission distance, the lower
the code rate For the chosen coding scheme in Fig. 4a, RS
code performs better than MDPC. For the chosen modulation
scheme in Fig. 4b, 16QAM is the best, while BPSK is the
lowest selection because its data transmission rate is the
lowest. We see that no modulation scheme 8PSK is chosen in
our scenario. This can be explained since BER of 8PSK and
16QAM are quite similar, while the data transmission rate of
16QAM is higher than that of 8PSK. Therefore Algorithm 1
always chooses the coding and modulation scheme with the

code rate and throughput as the highest. As discussed above,
with the suitable code rates or transmission overheads chosen
from the best coding and modulation schemes in Fig. 3b and
Fig. 3c over different channel states, we can theoretically
improve the system fault tolerance with the residual bit error
probability P V
re ≈ 0, the throughput can
achieve the information bit rate T H = RF · D, and due to the
ﬂexibility in choosing the best coding and modulation schemes
with the highest code rate, sometime we can theoretically get
a maximum throughput of 28.16 Gbps in Fig. 4c, equivalent
to data transmission rate of 16QAM.

re ≈ 0. Also, since P V

IV. CONCLUSION

We proposed a THz data and control plane system architec-
ture for VR applications in smart factories. The results shows
that an adaptive design system can improve throughput and
fault tolerance, whereby the residual bit error probability is
P V
re ≈ 0 after decoding and we get can theoretically get
a maximum throughput of 28.16 Gbps, equivalent to data
transmission rate of 16QAM. Future work needs to address
algorithm computation ofﬂoading and its response time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support by the Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research, Germany, program
"Souveran. Digital. Vernetzt." project 6G-RIC, 16KISK031
and partial support by the DFG Project Nr. JU2757/12-1.

REFERENCES

[1] Boeing,

“Boeing

fac-
augmented
tory.” [Online]. Available: https://www.boeing.com/features/2018/01/
augmented-reality-01-18.page

reality

tests

the

in

[2] F. Moshir and S. Singh, “Rate adaptation for terahertz communications,”
in 2016 13th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications Networking
Conference (CCNC), Jan 2016, pp. 816–819.

[3] N. Wehn and O. Sahin, “Next-Generation Channel Coding Towards

Terabit/S Wireless Communications,” Aug. 2018.
Towards
2018.

[4] Next-Generation Channel Coding
Zenodo, Aug.

Communications.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1346686

Terabit/s Wireless
[Online]. Available:

[5] N. Wehn, “Channel coding for tb/s communications,” Aug. 2019.

[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3360520

[6] S. Nie and I. F. Akyildiz, “Three-dimensional dynamic channel modeling
and tracking for terahertz band indoor communications,” in 2017 IEEE
28th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile
Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[7] R. Singh and D. Sicker, “Parameter modeling for small-scale mobility
in indoor thz communication,” in 2019 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[8] B. Peng, K. Guan, and T. Kürner, “Cooperative dynamic angle of arrival
estimation considering space-time correlations for terahertz communi-
cations,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6029–6041,
2018.

[9] M. Chamania and A. Jukan, Dynamic Control of Optical Networks.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 535–552. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16250-4_15

[10] I. Vertat and L. Dudacek, “Multidimensional cross parity check codes
as a promising solution to cubesat low data rate downlinks,” in 2019
International Conference on Applied Electronics (AE), 2019, pp. 1–5.

[11] I. S. Reed and X. Chen, Reed-Solomon Codes. Boston, MA: Springer

US, 1999, pp. 233–284.

[12] B. K. Jung, C. Herold, J. M. Eckhardt, and T. KÃ¼rner, “Link-level and
system-level simulation of 300 ghz wireless backhaul links,” in 2020
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP), 2021,
pp. 619–620.

