A Novel Position-based VR Online Shopping 
Recommendation System based on Optimized 
Collaborative Filtering Algorithm 

Jianze Huang  
School of Computer and Data 
Engineering  
Ningbo Tech University  
Zhejiang Province, China 

Xin Yu  
School of Computer and Data 
Engineering  
Ningbo Tech University  
Zhejiang Province, China 
line 5: email address  or ORCID

Hao Lan Zhang*  
School of Computer and Data 
Engineering  
Ningbo Tech University  
Zhejiang Province, China 
haolan.zhang@nit.zju.edu.cn 

Shaoyin Li  
School of Computer and Data 
Engineering  
Ningbo Tech University  
Zhejiang Province, China 
line 5: email address  or ORCID

Huanda Lu  
School of Computer and Data 
Engineering  
Ningbo Tech University  
Zhejiang Province, China  

line 1: 6th Given Name Surname 
line 2: dept. name of organization ) 
line 3: name of organization  
line 4: City, Country 
line 5: email address or ORCID  

Abstract—This  paper  proposes  a  VR  supermarket  with  an 
intelligent recommendation, which consists of three parts. The 
VR supermarket, the recommendation system, and the database. 
supermarket  provides  a  360-degree  virtual 
The  VR 
environment  for  users  to  move  and  interact  in  the  virtual 
environment through VR devices. The recommendation system 
will make intelligent recommendations to the target users based 
on  the  data  in  the  database.  The  intelligent  recommendation 
system is developed based on item similarity (ICF), which solves 
the cold start problem of ICF. This allows VR supermarkets to 
present real-time recommendations in any situation. It not only 
makes  up  for  the  lack  of  user  perception  of  item  attributes  in 
traditional  online  shopping  systems  but  also  VR  Supermarket 
improves the shopping efficiency of users through the intelligent 
recommendation  system.  The  application  can  be  extended  to 
enterprise-level systems, which adds new possibilities for users 
to do VR shopping at home. 

Keywords—Virtual  Reality,  Unity,  Collaborative  filtering 

(ICF), Virtual Environment 

I.  INTRODUCTION  

Today,  virtual  reality  (VR)  has  become  one  of  the  most 
promising  technology  megatrends  across  digital  domains. 
According  to  IDC  2021,  the  augmented  global  reality  and 
virtual reality (AR/VR) headset market grew 92.1% year over 
year in 2021. Shipments of AR/VR headsets are forecast to 
grow  46.9%  year-over-year  in  2022,  reaching  double-digit 
growth  by  2026.  VR  has  three  main  features:  360-degree 
visual  freedom,  interactivity,  and  real-time[1].  360-degree 
visual freedom is the key feature of  VR[2], which means that 
users  can  move  their  view  freely  in  360  degrees  and 
experience 
is 
characterized by real-time,  which  means that objects in the 
virtual environment are running in real-time to immerse the 
user.  The  third  feature,  interactivity,  refers  to  the  extent  to 
which  the  user  can  manipulate  objects  in  the  simulated 
environment  and  the  natural  degree  of  feedback  received 
from the environment, i.e., if the user touches an object in the 
virtual  space  and  moves  it,  the  object's  position  and  state 
should also change. So far, VR technology has been used in 
several  fields,  such  as  VR  conferencing[3],  advertising[4], 
tourism [5]  and so on. With the development of technology, 

feeling.  The 

immersive 

second 

the 

VR devices are not as expensive as they used to be, such as 
Google's  Cardboard,  which  allows  users  to  interact  with 
objects  in  the  virtual  environment  through  gaze  control.  In 
September  2020,  Facebook  released  the  Oculus  Quest2, 
which  supports  wireless  streaming  mode,  allowing  users  to 
walk  around  virtual  scenes  more  freely.  More  importantly, 
young  people  nowadays  maintain  a  strong  interest  in  VR 
technology. This means that the time is ripe for research and 
development of immersive VR. 

Virtual  shopping  is  the  most  promising  area  for  VR 
business model[6-9]; eBay (virtual reality department store), 
Alibaba  (Buy  +),  IKEA  (virtual  reality  kitchen  showroom) 
and  other  business  giants  are  trying  to  embed  business 
services into virtual reality in an attempt to revolutionize the 
business  shopping  model  again.  VR  shopping  creates  an 
opportunity  for  users  to  enter  any  shopping  environment, 
anytime, anywhere, addressing space and time constraints[10] 
and  improving  the  overall  efficiency  of  users'  shopping. 
However,  this  virtual  shopping  software  cannot  make 
personalized recommendations to users. So to overcome this 
difficulty,  a  recommendation  system  is  a  good  choice. 
Collaborative  filtering  (CF)  is  the  most  widely  known 
technique  for  this  system  [11,12].  Collaborative  filtering 
algorithms  are  divided  into  User  Collaborative  Filtering 
(UCF)  and  Item  Collaborative  Filtering  (ICF).  Both 
algorithms have a recommendation system  model based on 
the user-item rating  matrix.  However, the difference is  that 
ICF analyzes the similarity between items and then takes the 
items with higher similarity to the target user's rating as the 
result  of  the  recommendation  list.  At  the  same  time,  UCF 
selects  people  with  similar  tastes  to  the  target  user  in  the 
massive  user  data  and  then  recommends  items  to  the 
Recommend  items  to  target  users.  Related  report[13]  show 
that the recommendation system increases sales for Amazon 
by more than 30%. 

The inability of people to gather offline on a large scale 
due to the impact of the new coronavirus has prompted people 
to enter the online environment for online shopping. However, 
the inability of 2D shopping to interact with the products due 
to its limitations and the lack of user perception of product 
attributes has led to the inability of online shopping to surpass 

 
 
 
the  user  experience  of  physical  stores  in  this  regard. 
Therefore, this paper designs a VR supermarket software that 
uses collaborative filtering as a recommendation system. The 
software enables users to interact with products in a virtual 
world  through  VR  technology  to  enhance  their  shopping 
experience.  It  provides  personalized  recommendations  for 
through  a  recommendation  system  using 
target  users 
collaborative filtering algorithms. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

1.  Recommendation System 

"Collaborative  filtering"  was  first  introduced  by  Dave 
Goldberg  et  al.  in  1992[14].  The  recommendation  of  the 
target  user  is  based  on  the  similarity  of  the  target  user's 
preferences  with  other  users,  i.e.,  (UCF).  However,  at  this 
time, collaborative filtering still has the following defects. 

User-to-user  preference  similarities  (UCF)  must  be 
constantly recalculated, and performance is very poor when 
UCF scale to millions of users。Therefore, in 2001, Badrul 
Sarwar et al. pioneered the "item-item" collaborative filtering 
algorithm, i.e., (ICF)[15]. Since ICF recommends products to 
users by the similarity between items based on their historical 
behaviour  of  selecting  items,  the  similarity  calculation 
requires very little calculation 

Traditional 

In  order  to  improve  the  recommendation  performance 
under cold start conditions, Hyung Jun Ahn [16] proposed a 
new  similarity  measure  called  PIP  since  the  system  cannot 
accurately  provide  users  with  satisfactory  recommendation 
results without a large amount of data (cold start). Moreover, 
by comparing the performance experiments of five measures, 
COR, COS, CPC, SRC, and PIP, the effectiveness of the PIP 
similarity measure is demonstrated. 
recommendation 

the 
intrinsic connection between user preferences and time. Cui 
et  al.  [17]proposed  a  model  based  on  the  time  correlation 
they 
coefficient.  Using 
improved the K-means algorithm (CSK-means) to design an 
effective  personalized  recommendation  model  (PTCCF) 
based  on  preference  patterns.  Extensive  experiments  were 
conducted on two real datasets, MovieLens and Douban, and 
the  accuracy  of  PTCCF  was  improved  by  about  5.2% 
compared  with  the  MCoC  model.  The  effectiveness  of  the 
model was demonstrated. 

the  cuckoo  search  algorithm, 

systems 

ignore 

We 

initially 

implemented  an  apriori  algorithm 
recommendation system in python. We packaged it as an exe 
file,  but  the  algorithm  needed  to  recalculate  the  strong 
correlation of the data each time it made a recommendation, 
which  led  to  performance  degradation.  Moreover,  the 
recommendation results of the apriori algorithm were poor, 
with higher confidence and support than some normal values 
(depending on the strong correlation of the data), and many 
data did not show any recommendation. In addition, since it 
is a c# call to exe file, there is some lag when the software 
runs  the  recommendation  system  for  the  first  time  (mainly 
affected by the first c# call to exe file to establish the channel). 
Therefore, we use a coroutine to establish the channel when 
the  software  is  started  for  the  first  time,  implement  the 
collaborative  filtering  algorithm  (ICF)  in  python  language, 
and  propose  the  ICF-STR  algorithm  to  solve  the  cold  start 
problem of ICF. 

2.  VR supermarket 

VR  technology  has  great  potential  in  business.  VR 
technologies  usually  use  large  screen[18]  or  head-mounted 
displays  to  provide  users  with  an  immersive  sensory 
experience in real-time. Two classic examples are the CAVE 
projection  system  and  head-mounted  displays.  CAVE  was 
first introduced in 1992 by C. Cruz-Neira et al. [19],CAVE is 
an  immersive  VR  system  based  on  the  projection  of  room 
sizes.  The  projector  is  aligned  with  three  to  six  projection 
walls when entering the system. Using a 3D tracker, the user 
can get close to virtual 3D objects in a system surrounded by 
projection walls or roam the "real" virtual environment at will. 
However, the price of the device and the space required for 
the  device  are  obstacles  to  the  diffusion  of  such  a  user 
experience.  Another  example  is  the  head-mounted  display; 
the device, through the eye, the output further visual feedback, 
giving users a sense of 3D experience.   

In  2016,  eBay  partnered  with  Myer  to  launch  the  first 
virtual 
reality  department  store  app.  eBay's  virtual 
department store app is available on cell phones and can be 
used  with  headset  devices  such  as  the  Samsung  Gear  VR. 
Instead  of  controlling  the  handle,  users  gaze  at  the  target 
product for product selection. Alibaba also released Buy+ in 
the same year, allowing users to enter the streets of Japan, the 
United States and Australia and see local stores. Users need 
to  follow  prompts  to  click  and  buy  products  in  panoramic 
mode. In VR mode, users put on a VR device and stare at the 
product for more than 3s to see the product information and 
make a purchase. In other words, view the product - buy it 
now  -  confirm  the  order  -  confirm  the  payment  -  and  pay 
successfully.  However,  the  downside  is  that  Buy+  cannot 
recommend  products, 
category 
recommendations  cannot  meet  the  needs  of  increasingly 
sophisticated users. 

simple 

eBay's 

and 

Therefore, this paper embeds the improved collaborative 
filtering recommendation algorithm into the VR supermarket 
as the recommendation system of this supermarket. This VR 
supermarket  will  make  personalized  recommendations 
according  to  different  users'  demands  for  products,  thus 
improving users' shopping experience. 

III.  PROPOSED DESIGN 

The  VR  program  system  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The 
system consists of the VR application, the recommendation 
system, and the external database. 

Figure 1 Software design flow chart 

As shown in Figure 1, when a user starts to enter the VR 
supermarket system and picks up an item, the user will see 
the  information  panel  for  that  item.  If  the  user  does  not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
purchase  the  item,  he/she  can  choose to check  out directly, 
and the information about the purchased item will be added 
to  the  database.  If  the  user  purchases  the  item,  the 
recommendation system will use the item information in the 
database  to  calculate  the  similarity  between  the  item  just 
purchased and other items, as well as the similarity between 
the items already purchased in the shopping cart (combined) 
and other items, and combine the user's evaluation to predict 
the items the user may purchase, and finally recommend them 
to the user in the form of a recommendation panel. 

The  Unity  game  engine  and  input  develop  the  VR 
supermarket  system  through  VR  devices.  The  system  is 
designed with an interface for passing information data to the 
recommendation system. The recommender system analyzes 
the data provided by the VR supermarket system based on the 
data from the external database. It transmits the analyzed data 
back to the VR supermarket system, and the user can get the 
data feedback from the recommender system through the VR 
headset.  As  the  recommendation  system  (ICF)  needs  to 
analyze from two dimensions, one is the similarity between 
different  goods  and  the  other  is  the  user's  evaluation.  The 
recommendation system can use the cosine similarity formula 
to  calculate  the  similarity  between  products.  For  the  user's 
evaluation system, the following scoring rules are designed 
in this paper. As shown in Table 1. 

Table 1 Scoring Judgment Criteria 

After viewing the panel 
results 
Purchase of goods 
No purchase of goods 
Buy Recommended 
Products 
Do not buy recommended 
products 

Extra credit  

+1 
-1 

+1.5 

-0.5 

IV.  METHOD 

1.  VR supermarket and recommendation system  

In this paper, we use the Unity game development engine 
and  SteamVR  (plug-in)  to  develop  a  VR  supermarket 
together and use HTC Vive as the device to experience the 
VR supermarket. The experience flow of the user wearing the 
device is shown in Figure 2. 
2.  Recommended System Improvements       

that  can  be  used  as  algorithms 

A recommender system is often defined as a system that 
can provide intelligent recommendations based on the user's 
preferences and interests. At VR Supermarket, we have three 
for 
approaches 
recommendation systems. They are the apriori algorithm, the 
user-based  UCF  algorithm,  and  the  product-based  ICF 
algorithm. In order to verify which of these three algorithms 
is more suitable for the recommendation system, we used the 
dataset of MovieLens as the dataset of the recommendation 
system  and  conducted  an  experimental  comparison.  The 
Apriori algorithm is formulated as follows: 

￿
￿￿￿
퐷(푥, 푦) = (∑

￿
(푥￿ − 푦￿)

￿
￿
)

                                                        (1) 

The x and y in the formula represent the two products 
for which product similarity is to be calculated, respectively. 
When  p=2,  the  Euclidean  distance  (Euclidean  distance) 
distance  is  obtained,  which  is  the  straight-line  distance 
between  two  points  (hereafter  referred  to  as  Euclidean 
distance). Each feature parameter in the Euclidean distance is 
equally weighted. 

Figure 2 User Flow Chart. 

In  order  to  choose  the  most  suitable  recommendation 
algorithm,  we  not  only  experimented  with  the  Apriori 
algorithm but also with ICF and UCF. The core of the ICF 
algorithm and UCF algorithm is to calculate user similarity 
and product similarity, respectively. The common methods to 
calculate  similarity  include  Pearson  correlation  coefficient, 
cosine similarity, and Euclidean distance. Since the accuracy 
and  practicality  of  cosine  similarity  recommendation  are 
relatively  high,  this  paper  adopts  the  cosine  similarity 
formula  to  calculate  the  similarity  between  products.  The 
formula for calculating the cosine similarity is as follows: 

푠푖푚(푥, 푦) = 푐표푠휃 =

￿|￿|￿∙￿|￿|￿ =

￿￿

∑

￿
￿￿￿ ￿￿
￿￿
￿
￿∫ (￿￿)
￿￿￿

￿
￿
￿∫ (￿￿)
￿￿￿

(2) 

￿

The x and y in the formula represent the two products or 
users for which similarity is to be calculated. The larger the 
result calculated by the cosine similarity  formula, the  more 
similar these two products or users are.  

The apriori algorithm requires strongly correlated data 
to  make  recommendations,  so  in  practical  situations,  this 
algorithm  does  not  recommend  well.  Although  the  UCF 

 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
algorithm improves the disadvantage of the apriori algorithm 
that requires strongly correlated data, this UCF algorithm is 
only suitable for computing a small number of users, and the 
cost of maintaining the user similarity matrix increases as the 
number  of  users  increases,  so  we  finally  adopted  the  ICF 
algorithm. 

The  formula  (2)  shows  that  the  traditional  cosine 
similarity  requires  data  from  user  feedback  to  calculate  the 
product similarity. When the  product data is insufficient or 
the user rating is low, it will lead to the "cold start" problem 
of the recommendation system. In this paper, we propose two 
solutions to this problem, which are used to ensure that the 
recommendation interface appears every time a user buys a 
product. 

1) When a user buys an item directly without stopping 
at any shelf and does not give any recommendation list, the 
recommendation system  generates several random  numbers 
to recommend random items in the supermarket. 

2) When the user stays on one or more shelves for more 
than 10s and does not buy any goods on this shelf, the system 
will record the information of the goods that the user did not 
buy  on  this  shelf.  When  more  than  one  shelf  information 
meets  this  requirement,  the  system  will  only  take  the  most 
recent shelf information as a recommendation to buy the next 
cold start problem goods. The shelf specific stay range refers 
to the following chart: 

recommendation systems. The dataset on MovieLens is quite 
large,  with  the  training  set  consisting  of  800168  user-rated 
movie records and the test set consisting of 200042 user-rated 
movie  records.  We  will  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the 
improved  ICF  algorithm  as  an  algorithm  for  the  VR 
supermarket  recommendation  system  from  the  following 
three experiments. The CPU used in this paper is i7-11800H. 
1. Recommended rate of the algorithm: 

Algorithm 
Apriori(min_support=0.7) 
Apriori(min_support=0.15) 
ICF 
UCF 
ICF-STR 

Recommended speed 
0.21s 
7.45s 
0.0029s 
0.0019s 
0.0031s 

Table 2 Speed Comparison 

Min_support  represents  the  minimum  support  of  the 
Apriori  algorithm.  According  to  Table  II,  the  Apriori 
algorithm  runs  the  slowest  at  a  support  degree  of  0.15. 
Although the Apriori algorithm runs fast at a support degree 
of  0.7,  there  is  no  strongly  correlated  data,  i.e.,  no  product 
recommendations appear. Therefore, the Apriori algorithm is 
not  suitable  for 
the  recommendation  system  of  VR 
supermarket. 
2. Model training speed： 

Algorithm 
ICF 
UCF 
ICF-STR 

Training rate 
180.25s 
381.27s 
180.25s 

Table 3 Model Rate Comparison 

The dataset used in this paper has 3952 movies and 6040 
user ratings. As can be seen from Table 3, the model training 
rate of the UCF algorithm is significantly lower than that of 
the  ICF  algorithm.  This  is  because  the  time  complexity  of 
UCF is approximately equal to the square of the number of 
users,  and  when  the  number  of  users  becomes  larger,  it 
becomes  increasingly  difficult  to  calculate  the  similarity 
between users. Since the VR supermarket has to recommend 
in  real-time  if  the  user  is  a  new  user,  the  system  has  to 
recalculate the similarity between each user and the new user 
for each new item purchased, and the amount of calculation 
will keep increasing as the number of users increases, so the 
UCF algorithm is not suitable for the recommendation system 
of VR supermarket. 
3. Recommendations under Cold Start 

We packaged the algorithms as exe and called them in 
VR supermarket. When the system has no data set or only a 
small amount of data set, the results of each recommendation 
algorithm are shown in the table below： 
1. Did not stop at any shelf 

Algorithm 
Apriori 
ICF 
UCF 
ICF-STR 

Recommended Results 
NULL 
NULL 
NULL 
Showergel 

Table 4   Random recommendation results 

According  to  Table  4,  traditional  recommendation 
algorithms cannot recommend any product without a dataset. 

Figure 3 Area determination map 

The  red  range  in  the  image  indicates  that  the  system 

determines that the user is standing in front of this shelf. 

V.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

To  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the  improved  ICF 
algorithm  as  a  recommendation  system  algorithm,  we  used 
the dataset from MovieLens. Since the dataset on MovieLens 
is a dataset with a rating nature, it can be generalized to the 
dataset  collected  by  VR  supermarkets  as  a  way 
to 
demonstrate that the improved ICF algorithm can be used as 
supermarket 
a 

recommendation 

algorithm 

for  VR 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As shown in Figure 5, when the recommendation panel 
appears,  users  can  see  the  basic  information  of  the 
recommended items, as well as the purchase situation, click 
to buy, the recommended items will be added to the shopping 
cart,  and  click  the  next  page  users  can  view  other 
recommended items.    

VI.  CONCLUSION 

The traditional online shopping model, where users are 
unable  to  interact  with  the  products,  as  well  as  the  lack  of 
perception  of  product  attributes,  results  in  online  shopping 
being unable to surpass the user experience of physical stores 
in  these  aspects.  VR  supermarkets  can  make  up  for  this 
deficiency and increase the shopping experience of users. An 
intelligent  recommendation  system,  which  can  effectively 
recommend specific products to target users, improves their 
purchasing efficiency. Thus the VR supermarket system has 
great  potential  compared  to  traditional  purchasing  models. 
VR  supermarkets  can  be  customized  for  different  sizes  of 
supermarkets and or specific needs. On this basis, it can be 
combined with voice narration or NPC interaction to further 
enhance the user's shopping experience. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work is partially supported by Humanity and Social 
Science  Foundation  of  the  Ministry  of  Education  of  China 
(21A13022003),  Zhejiang  Provincial  Natural  Science  Fund 
(LY19F030010),  Zhejiang  Provincial  Social  Science  Fund 
(20NDJC216YB),  Zhejiang  Provincial  Educational  Science 
Scheme  2021  (GH2021642)  and  National  Natural  Science 
Foundation  of  China  Grant  (No.  72071049),  Ningbo  public 
welfare science and technology plan Grant No. 2021S093. 

In  this  case,  ICF-STR  solves  this  drawback.  When  a  user 
picks up a product directly without stopping at any shelf, the 
system will make a random recommendation. 
2. Staying in front of the shelf: 

Figure 4 The user stands on the shelf 

As in Figure 4, when the user stands in the red area and 
stays for more than 10 s. The system will use the products on 
this  shelf as the recommended content. The specific results 
are as follows： 

Algorithm 
Apriori 
ICF 
UCF 
ICF-STR 

Recommended Results 
NULL 
NULL 
NULL 
Mug, band-aid, disinfectant, 
coffee, slippers 

Table 5 Shelf recommendation 

As can be seen from Table 5, only ICF-ST appears with 
specific  recommendations,  and  the  recommendations  are 
what is on the shelf. This approach can recommend products 
to users more effectively than random recommendations. 

The result of running in VR Supermarket is as follows: 

Figure 5 VR supermarket recommended results 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 

the 

filtering 

in  Proceedings 

B.  Smith  and  G.  Linden,  "Two  Decades  of 
Recommender  Systems  at  Amazon.com,"  IEEE 
Internet Computing, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 12-18, 2017. 
D. Goldberg, D. Nichols, B. M. Oki, and D. Terry, 
"Using  collaborative 
to  weave  an 
information tapestry," Communications of the Acm, 
vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 61-70, Dec 1992. 
B.  Sarwar,  G.  Karypis,  J.  Konstan,  and  J.  Riedl, 
"Item-based collaborative filtering recommendation 
algorithms," 
10th 
international conference on World Wide Web, 2001, 
pp. 285-295. 
H.  J.  Ahn,  "A  new  similarity  measure  for 
collaborative filtering to alleviate the new user cold-
starting  problem,"  Information  Sciences,  vol.  178, 
no. 1, pp. 37-51, 2008/01/02/ 2008. 
Z.  Cui  et  al.,  "Personalized  Recommendation 
System  Based  on  Collaborative  Filtering  for  IoT 
Scenarios," 
Services 
Computing,  vol.  13,  no.  4,  pp.  685-695,  Jul-Aug 
2020. 
N.  Zikic,  "Evaluating  relative  impact  of  VR 
components  screen  size,  stereoscopy  and  field  of 
view  on  spatial  comprehension  and  presence  in 
architecture," Citeseer, 2007. 
C.  Cruz-Neira,  D.  J.  Sandin,  T.  A.  DeFanti,  R.  V. 
Kenyon, and J. C. J. C. o. t. A. Hart, "The CAVE: 
audio 
virtual 
experience 
environment," vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 64-73, 1992. 

Ieee  Transactions 

automatic 

visual 

on 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

REFERENCES 

imagination,  co-creation, 

Y. Xing, Z. Liang, J. Shell, C. Fahy, K. Guan, and 
B. Liu, "Historical Data Trend Analysis in Extended 
Reality  Education  Field," 
in  2021  IEEE  7th 
International Conference on Virtual Reality (ICVR), 
2021, pp. 434-440. 
M. Speicher, B. D. Hall, and M. Nebeling, "What is 
mixed  reality?,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  2019  CHI 
conference on human factors in computing systems, 
2019, pp. 1-15. 
S. N. B. Gunkel, M. D. W. Dohmen, H. Stokking, 
and  O.  Niamut,  "360-Degree  Photo-realistic  VR 
Conferencing,"  2019  IEEE  Conference  on  Virtual 
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 946-947, 
23-27 March 2019. 
L. De Gauquier, M. Brengman, K. Willems, and H. 
Van  Kerrebroeck,  "Leveraging  advertising  to  a 
higher  dimension:  experimental  research  on  the 
impact  of  virtual  reality  on  brand  personality 
impressions," Virtual Reality, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 235-
253, Sep 2019. 
D. A. Guttentag, "Virtual reality: Applications and 
implications  for  tourism,"  Tourism  Management, 
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 637-651, 2010/10/01/ 2010. 
K. Cowan and S. Ketron, "A dual model of product 
involvement  for  effective  virtual  reality:  The  roles 
of 
telepresence,  and 
interactivity,"  Journal  of  Business  Research,  vol. 
100, pp. 483-492, 2019/07/01/ 2019. 
V.  K.  Ketoma,  P.  Schäfer,  and  G.  Meixner, 
"Development  and  evaluation  of  a  virtual  reality 
grocery  shopping  application  using  a  multi-Kinect 
International 
approach," 
walking-in-place 
Conference  on 
Intelligent  Human  Systems 
Integration, 2018, pp. 368-374: Springer. 
A. Moes and H. v. Vliet, "The online appeal of the 
physical  shop:  How  a  physical  store  can  benefit 
from a virtual representation," Heliyon, vol. 3, no. 6, 
p. e00336, 2017/06/01/ 2017. 
E. Sikström, E. R. Høeg, L. Mangano, N. C. Nilsson, 
A. De Götzen, and S. Serafin, "Shop'til you hear it 
drop: influence of interactive auditory feedback in a 
virtual  reality  supermarket,"  in  Proceedings  of  the 
22nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality Software 
and Technology, 2016, pp. 355-356. 
B.  Serrano,  R.  M.  Baños,  and  C.  Botella,  "Virtual 
reality  and  stimulation  of  touch  and  smell  for 
inducing relaxation: A randomized controlled trial," 
Computers  in  Human  Behavior,  vol.  55,  pp.  1-8, 
2016/02/01/ 2016. 
J. Bu, X. Shen, B. Xu, C. Chen, X. He, and D. Cai, 
"Improving  Collaborative  Recommendation  via 
User-Item  Subgroups,"  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 
2363-2375, 2016. 

in 

[12]  W. S. Hwang, J. Parc, S. W. Kim, J. Lee, and D. Lee, 
"“Told you i didn't like it”: Exploiting uninteresting 
items for effective collaborative filtering," in 2016 
IEEE  32nd  International  Conference  on  Data 
Engineering (ICDE), 2016, pp. 349-360. 

 
