The Body Scaling Effect and its Impact on
Physics Plausibility
Matti Pouke ∗, Evan G. Center, Alexis P. Chambers, Sakaria Pouke, Timo Ojala
and Steven M. LaValle
1Center for Ubiquitous Computing, Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland

Correspondence*:
Matti Pouke
matti.pouke@oulu.ﬁ

ABSTRACT

In this study we investigated the effect of body ownership illusion-based body scaling on
physics plausibility in Virtual Reality (VR). Our interest was in examining whether body ownership
illusion-based body scaling could affect the plausibility of rigid body dynamics similarly to altering
VR users scale by manipulating their virtual interpupillary distance and viewpoint height. The
procedure involved the conceptual replication of two previous studies. We investigated physics
plausibility with 40 participants under two conditions. In our synchronous condition, we used
visuo-tactile stimuli to elicit a body ownership illusion of inhabiting an invisible doll-sized body
on participants reclining on an exam table. Our asynchronous condition was otherwise similar,
but the visuo-tactile stimuli were provided asynchronously to prevent the onset of the body
ownership illusion. We were interested in whether the correct approximation of physics (true
physics) or physics that are incorrect and appearing as if the environment is ﬁve times larger
instead (movie physics) appear more realistic to participants as a function of body scale. We
found that movie physics did appear more realistic to participants under the body ownership
illusion condition. However, our hypothesis that true physics would appear more realistic in the
asynchronous condition was unsupported. Our exploratory analyses revealed that movie physics
were perceived as plausible under both conditions. Moreover, we were not able to replicate
previous ﬁndings from literature concerning object size estimations while inhabiting a small
invisible body. However, we found a signiﬁcant opposite effect regarding size estimations; the
object sizes were on average underestimated during the synchronous visuo-tactile condition
when compared to the asynchronous condition. We discuss these unexpected ﬁndings and the
potential reasons for the results, and suggest avenues for future research.

Keywords: Virtual Reality, Perception, Scaling, Embodiment, Human Factors

1 INTRODUCTION

Understanding size and distance perception in virtual reality (VR) has been seen as a relevant research
topic, not only because of scientiﬁc interest, but also since incorrect estimations inside virtual environments
(VEs) might lead to unwanted effects in various VR-based training, design and visualization applications
(Renner et al., 2013). It is a known phenomenon that familiar size cues affect the perception of sizes and
distances in both real life and VR. As we see familiar objects, their known size acts as a reference in
which we can compare less known features of the environment. The ”body scaling effect” refers to the
phenomenon of our own body acting as a familiar size cue; our own limbs act as a perceptual ruler in

1

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

0
3

]

M
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
2
5
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

which we base the proportions of our surroundings and nearby objects (eg. (Linkenauger et al., 2010;
Ogawa et al., 2017)). The body ownership illusion refers to an artiﬁcial or virtual body appearing as one’s
own, similarly to the rubber hand illusion (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998). This illusion has been used to
manipulate perception of sizes and distances by making participants embody virtual bodies of different
sizes in VR; as the size of the virtual body changes, the body scaling effect causes perceived sizes and
distances to scale into the opposite direction (Van Der Hoort et al., 2011; Van der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2014;
Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2016; Banakou et al., 2013; Weber et al., 2020). Based on their studies, van
der Hoort and Ehrsson explain that the body-scaling effect is not dependent on just the visual appearance
of our body, but also purely proprioceptive information manipulated by the body ownership illusion which
can cause the perceptual effects of scaling sizes and distances even when visual information of the body is
lacking (Van der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2014; Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2016). In their latter experiment,
this was demonstrated by eliciting a body-ownership illusion of an invisible body using a stereoscopic
camera system and visuo-tactile stimuli, and examining the illusion’s effect on size estimations.

Another way to signiﬁcantly affect our perception of sizes and distances is by artiﬁcially manipulating
our interpupillary distance (IPD), for example, by using virtual reality (Kim and Interrante, 2017). A room
modeled at human scale in virtual reality essentially appears 10 times larger when we reduce our IPD by a
factor of ten by manipulating the distance of the virtual cameras acting as our eyes in VR (Pouke et al.,
2020). Manipulating our perception of sizes and distances also causes interesting effects regarding the
perception of physical phenomena, such as rigid body dynamics. For example, an object dropped from a
height of 1.5 m reaches the ground in 0.55 s whereas an object dropped from 15 cm reaches the ground
in only 0.17 s. Although this behavior seems natural in everyday life, the phenomenon appears greatly
unnatural when viewed at abnormal scales in VR, even when we are fully aware of being scaled (Pouke
et al., 2020, 2021). Difﬁculties in perceiving physics at abnormal scales have been shown to increase
difﬁculties in, for example, robotic teleoperation at micro- and nanoscopic scales (Millet et al., 2008; Sitti,
2007; Zhou et al., 2000).

1.1 Perception of sizes and distances

As discussed above, the size cues of an environment affect our perception of sizes and distances. Previous
research has suggested that egocentric distances are generally underestimated in VR due to a multitude of
factors. For example, richer environmental cues and realistically modeled environments generally seem
to improve the accuracy of distance judgements (Renner et al., 2013) and sensitivity to height perception
(Deng and Interrante, 2019). Langbehn et al. (2016) studied mismatching size cues in virtual environments
and found that participants generally relied on their own bodies when judging the correct scale. An
exception, however, was the presence of multiple virtual characters, when the scale of the virtual characters
was perceived as the correct one.

Previous research also suggests that our own action capabilities can affect our perception. For example,
wearing a heavy backpack makes a hill appear steeper since the heavy backpack alters our perceived
affordances (Bhalla and Profﬁtt, 1999). However, these studies have been criticized, claiming instead that
the identiﬁed affordance-based perceptual effects have been due to demand characteristics and not to actual
changes in perception (eg. (Hutchison and Loomis, 2006)).

The body-scaling effect refers to the phenomenon of our own body, real or virtual, affecting the perception
of sizes and distances. Linkenauger et al. (2010) manipulated the retinal size of objects using magnifying
and ”minifying” goggles and found that placing a hand next to these objects appeared to scale the objects
back towards their normal size. Ogawa et al. (2017) found that not only can our hand size affect the

2

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

perceived size of objects, but familiar sized objects can also affect the perceived size of hands in VR. In a
follow-up study, Ogawa et al. (2019) reported that the strength of the body-scaling effect can be altered by
the visual realism of the virtual hand.

The body ownership illusion refers to the sensation of a virtual or artiﬁcial body appearing as one’s
own body, similarly to the rubber hand illusion (Botvinick and Cohen, 1998). In previous research, one
of the most popular ways of achieving the body ownership illusion has been through the application of
synchronous visuo-tactile stimuli, for example by touching the artiﬁcial body simultaneously with the
corresponding location in the participant’s own body. Typically, asynchronous stimulation, performing the
touches out of sync, has been the control condition in these types of experiments. According to Maselli and
Slater (2013), visuomotor synchrony and appearance of the virtual body can also be utilized to elicit the
illusion. In addition, the body ownership illusion can even take place purely without visuo-tactile stimuli;
however, including visuo-tactile stimuli can be helpful for eliciting the illusion when other properties of
the illusion (such as ﬁrst person perspective or the visual appearance of the virtual body) are violated (
Maselli and Slater 2013).

The effect of a full body ownership illusion (Slater et al., 2009) for size and distance perception has been
the focus of multiple studies. Van der Hoort and Ehrsson embodied participants as dolls and giants using
head-mounted displays (HMDs), stereoscopic cameras, and synchronous visuo-tactile stimuli, and found
that body ownership illusions signiﬁcantly affected the perceived sizes of nearby objects. Later, Banakou et
al. used VR to embody participants in a child’s body and found it not only affecting the perceived size of
objects, but also participants’ associated personality traits (Banakou et al., 2013). Serino et al. found that
embodying bodies of extreme sizes affected participants’ judgements of the properties of their own bodies
(Serino et al., 2020).

According to later studies by van der Hoort and Ehrsson, the body scaling effect caused by the body
ownership illusion exists even when the body is not visible, suggesting that the effect is more related to
proprioception than vision (Van der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2014; Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2016). In the
latter study, which is conceptually replicated in this paper, illusions of inhabiting small and large invisible
bodies were elicited among participants. The participants were lying down on a bed wearing HMDs, which
streamed a stereoscopic image from two cameras placed on a bed in a laboratory. The participants’ legs
were then stroked while simultaneously moving a brush in front of the camera either 60-80 cm away
(small body) or 300-400 cm away (large body). The experimenters then found an inverse relationship
between the body size and estimated object sizes during synchronous stimuli, whereas this effect did not
exist in the control condition in which the touch and brush movement were asynchronous. The work of
Banakou et al. (2013) found a similar perceptual effect when the body ownership illusion was controlled
by visuomotor synchrony. The work of Weber et al. (2020) found object sizes were estimated differently
across three different body size conditions; however, they did not ﬁnd differences between synchronous and
asynchronous stimulus conditions. This is in line with the ﬁndings of Maselli and Slater that a synchronous
visuo-tactile stimulus is not necessary for the body ownership illusion in cases where a visible body
is experienced from a ﬁrst-person perspective (Maselli and Slater, 2013). Moreover, according to their
ﬁndings, even asynchronous stimuli can be perceived as real when other properties for body ownership
illusion are taking place.

We are not aware of any study that would have investigated this perceptual effect with an invisible body
in VR. Moreover, we are, as of now, unaware of any studies that would have investigated the effect of body
scaling on the perception of physics, as the studies of Pouke et al. (2020, 2021) utilized IPD-based scaling
and not body scaling.

3

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

1.2 Perception of physics

In terms of perceiving rigid body dynamics, different scales appear similar to being under the inﬂuence
of non-earth gravity. When perceiving object velocities and accelerations, being ten times smaller appears
essentially the same as if gravity had turned tenfold, while scales further away than one order of magnitude
introduce even more peculiarities (see for example (Zhou et al., 2000)). However, it appears that humans
have the tendency to instinctively expect rigid body dynamics to behave similarly to human-scale under
normal gravity conditions. McIntyre et al. (2001) studied this phenomenon by experimenting with astronauts
performing in zero gravity and found that their ability to catch vertically moving balls was less accurate
in comparison to normal gravity conditions. Human capacities for intercepting moving objects under
various directions and accelerations was further analyzed by Senot et al. (2005) in a VR experiment. They
also found evidence of humans being more capable of intercepting objects behaving as if under normal
gravity, even if best success rate was achieved in intercepting objects under constant velocity. J¨orges and
L´opez-Moliner (2017) argued that normal earth gravity is a strong Bayesian prior in human perceptual
processes, and therefore any contradicting evidence is perceived as false. This bias then leads to generally
poor human performance in non-normal gravity conditions and renders adaptation difﬁcult.

In the ﬁeld of VR research, ﬁdelity is referred to as the extent to which the VR system faithfully
simulates the real world. Plausibility illusion, on the other hand, refers to an illusion of realism experienced
subjectively by the user (Skarbez et al., 2017a). Fidelity does not necessarily lead to plausibility, as
plausibility depends on the expectations of the user instead of physical realism, and can be affected by
priming as well as the context of the virtual environment (VE). Skarbez et al. (2017b) suggested a concept
called coherence, which, instead of ﬁdelity, refers to the properties of the VE that affect the onset of
plausibility illusion. In our previous research (Pouke et al., 2020), we have studied the plausibility of physics
models at abnormal scales by virtually scaling participants both ten times smaller and ten times larger by
manipulating their IPD, viewpoint height and motion controller interaction distance. Participants dropped
and threw objects and their plausibility was estimated under two physics conditions: realistic approximation
of physics (a higher ﬁdelity model dubbed true physics) and an inaccurate model that functioned as if
the world had changed in size and participants remained at normal scale (a lower ﬁdelity model dubbed
movie physics equaling 0.1G at small scale and 10G at large scale, see Fig 1). As a result of scaling, true
physics appeared as fast object accelerations and short throwing distances in the small-scale study, and
slow accelerations and large throwing distances in the large-scale study. We queried plausibility using two
forced-choice questions. The ﬁrst question queried which one of the models the participants considered
matching actual reality, whereas the second question asked which one of the models the participants
considered matching their expectations better. Movie physics was chosen as the realistic model by roughly
70% of participants. Interestingly, however, in the small scale study, roughly 90% of participants considered
movie physics to better match their expectations, whereas in the large scale study neither movie physics nor
true physics were chosen signiﬁcantly more often as the model matching expectations better. This could
mean that in the small-scale study, there were participants who considered true physics surprising even if
they considered it to be more realistic. In the large-scale study, however, the opposite appeared to happen;
some participants found true physics to match their expectations better even if they ultimately considered
movie physics as the more realistic model. In any case, it can be roughly summarized that in these studies,
participants perceived high ﬁdelity settings as having low coherence and low ﬁdelity settings as having
high coherence. Pouke et al. (2020, 2021)

In this paper, we present our results of investigating whether body ownership illusion-based body scaling
can alter the perception of physics similarly to IPD based scaling as reported by Pouke et al. (2020). This

4

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Figure 1. A ﬁgure depicting conditions reported by Pouke et al. (2021) to illustrate the relationship
between gravity and scale among various pairs. In the true physics condition, gravity behaved realistically
at each scale (left). In the movie physics conditions, gravity was manipulated so that free-fall speeds of
objects (and rigid body dynamics in general) matched that of human height, regardless of scale (right).

work extends the previous work of Pouke et al. (2020, 2021), generating new knowledge on plausibility
of physics perception by investigating previously unexplored factors. In addition, this work acts as a
conceptual replication study for the work of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016), investigating whether the
invisible body illusion replicates in VR.

2 MATERIALS AND METHODS

The motivation for this study was to follow up on our two previous studies to address unexplored factors
regarding perception of physics in scaling. Our objective was to investigate whether body scaling caused
by body ownership illusion could affect the perceived naturalness of object motions similarly to IPD-based
scaling.

We designed a VR experiment based on the invisible-body illusion experiment reported by Van Der Hoort
and Ehrsson (2016) as well as the scaled-down physics perception experiment by Pouke et al. (2020). We
adopted our physics conditions from the work of Pouke et al. (2020), with true physics serving as the
realistic approximation of physics, and movie physics representing physics that behaved as though the
environment had been scaled up instead (’movie’ referring to physical behavior typical in Hollywood
movies depicting scaled-down characters and their physical surroundings). We chose to utilize the visuo-
tactile induced invisible body illusion in the vein of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) as a way to
investigate the body ownership illusion and body scaling while avoiding possible confounds related to
having a visible body. As in the original experiment, we controlled the invisible body illusion using either
synchronous or asynchronous visuo-tactile stimuli. Using a visible body, however, it would have become
possible that the participants would have experienced the body ownership illusion also in the asynchronous
condition due to merely seeing the virtual body (for example, (Maselli and Slater, 2013; Weber et al.,
2020)).

5

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

2.1 Conditions and hypotheses

Our conditions followed the experimental protocol of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016), providing
either synchronous or asynchronous visuo-tactile stimuli to control the onset of an invisible body illusion of
possessing a small body, and an object size estimation task to assess the strength of the body scaling effect.
To investigate the effect of body scaling on physics perception, we added a physics plausibility estimation
task similar to Pouke et al. (2020) into both syncronous and asynchronous conditions before each object
size estimation task. To keep the experimental conditions from deviating too much from the protocol of
Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016), we asked the participants to observe a virtual character performing the
interaction task instead of asking the participants to interact with the objects themselves, similarly to our
previous studies. Also, differing from our previous studies, we utilized only one forced-choice question,
instead of two, to query for plausibility: more speciﬁcally, we asked the participants to state the model that
better matched their expectations. This choice was made because we wanted the participants to speciﬁcally
report on their ﬁrst impressions, instead of stopping to consider which one of the models should be real.
There would have been little point asking about realism, given that the physics estimation task in both
synchronous and asynchronous conditions was visually identical. Other differences between this study
and the aforementioned studies can be summarized as follows: Unlike Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016),
our experiment utilized VR instead of physical cameras and objects. In addition, we only considered a
small-body condition rather than both small-body and large-body conditions to keep the total number of
counterbalanced conditions manageable (please see the details about our preregistration at the end of this
subsection). Finally, differing from Pouke et al. (2020), our scale of interest was only 5 times smaller than
human scale since a 10 times smaller invisible body made the visuo-tactile stimuli too difﬁcult to observe
without manipulating IPD. This made our invisible body roughly between 30-40 cm in size, depending
on the height of the participant, which was roughly the same size as the smallest doll body used by Van
Der Hoort et al. (2011).

Our hypotheses were as follows:

H1: After synchronous visuo-tactile stimuli, subjects will consider movie physics to appear more real.

H2: After asynchronous visuo-tactile stimuli, subjects will consider true physics to appear more real.

These predictions are driven by the idea that participants should use their perceived body scale to predict
their environment’s physics. Thus, when they are instilled with the illusion of inhabiting a small body,
they should estimate movie physics to be more plausible, whereas when they are left with their normal
body scale, they should estimate true physics to be more plausible. In addition to physics plausibility
observations, we also collected object size estimations for estimating the effect of body scaling, as well
as presence and background data for exploratory purposes. We preregistered our procedure and analysis
methods at osf.io 1. It should be noted that our preregistration also includes two additional hypotheses that
are related to two additional conditions regarding physics perception at abnormal scales. In response to
reviewer feedback and efforts to improve clarity, however, the results and other details regarding these two
hypotheses and are reported in a separate manuscript instead (Pouke et al., in preparation).

2.2 Participants

The experiment was a within-subject design with 40 participants (20 females and 20 males) naive to
the purposes of the experiment. The participants gave written informed consent in accordance with the

1 https://osf.io/4gjv3/?view_only=b20e3e383852456eafb1225e34a85617

6

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

local ERB. The sample size was based on our previous studies on perception of physics plausibility (Pouke
et al. (2020), Pouke et al. (2021)). This sample is also twice as large as what was reported as necessary
to detect the perceptual effects of body scaling by Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). We had to replace
4 participants due to signiﬁcant differences in experimental conditions due to researcher and software
errors, bringing the total number of participants we ran to 44. The participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 46,
the average age being 27,5. The participants self-reported their VR and video game experience using a
scale from from one (no experience) to seven (daily use). Using this quantiﬁcation, their average VR and
video game experience was reported as 1.8 and 4.15, respectively. For Covid-19 related precautions, all
equipment and surfaces were disinfected using alcohol wipes. The Cleanbox device was used to disinfect
the HMD between participants 2. Researchers were wearing masks throughout the experiment. Masks and
hand sanitizer were also available for participants.

2.3 Experimental apparatus and protocol

Using Unreal Engine 4, we prepared an experimental application designed to loosely mimic the laboratory
conditions reported in the work of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). The virtual environment depicted a
simple room with a bed on one side, and a door, bookshelf and a nightstand at the opposite side of the room
(see Fig. 2 top left). The virtual camera was placed on a virtual exam table looking towards the door. The
height of the camera was set so that it matched the reclined angle in which the participants were sitting, but
at 0.2 scale.

As stated in previous sections, the physics conditions were demonstrated by an animated robot. We
chose to use a robot instead of a human-looking avatar to help maintain more consistent size cues for
the environment; we believed an animated robot could be perceived as something akin to an animatronic
puppet. In addition, we considered using the default game engine assets where possible for the beneﬁt
of the replicability of this study. The animations of the robot were captured using Vive Trackers and the
Unreal Engine Vive MoCap plugin. A researcher wearing the Vive Trackers performed a sequence of
picking up and dropping three tabs and throwing two. The MoCap plugin was used to target this sequence
into the Unreal Engine default mannequin that acted as our robot. The same animation sequence was used
for all subjects and all conditions to prevent confounds. The rigid body dynamics of the pop tabs was
simulated using the built-in physics engine in Unreal Engine. Similarly to Pouke et al. (2021), physics were
controlled by manipulating gravity; the prototype switched between physics conditions according to the
experiment protocol by loading identical-looking levels with different World Gravity settings. For true
physics, gravity was set at 1g whereas for movie physics it was set at 0.2g, essentially scaling rigid body
dynamics of objects as if the doll-sized robot was human-sized. Using animation Notify States, the robot
was programmed to pick up and release the pop tabs at speciﬁc animation frames utilizing the default ’grab’
and ’throw’ events that are preprogrammed inside the Unreal Engine VR ”Motion Controller” template for
interactive picking up and throwing in VR. This means that the pop tab objects were attached to the robot
arm after a ’grab’ event and detached during ’throw’ events, after which the physics engine simulated their
trajectory according to the object velocity at time of release. This made the simulation of throwing and
dropping the tabs similar to how object throwing and dropping was simulated in our previous studies, with
the only exception being that the physical dropping and throwing motions were prerecorded instead of
performed by each participant individually. As in our previous studies, we also assumed the mass of the
pop tab light enough not to affect the physical arm motions due to inertia or lack of muscle strength (Cross,
2004).

2 https://cleanboxtech.com/

7

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Figure 2. Virtual environment as seen by participants: during stimulation and cube estimation phases
(left), during physics estimation task (right).

For VR hardware, we used a Valve Index HMD and controllers.

2.3.1 Stimuli

During the synchronous condition, the participant received synchronous visuo-tactile stimuli while
reclined on an exam table. The stimuli were provided in an attempt to provide an invisible-body illusion
with a body scaled down at 20% of original size. The stimuli were provided using a motion controller and
a tennis ball. Previous research (eg. Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson 2016) has stated that visuo-tactile stimuli
administered to the feet and lower legs are useful for eliciting a full-body illusion and we also followed this
procedure. While we touched the participants’ lower legs and feet, a yellow ball was moving within the
virtual environment. However, the transformations of the virtual ball were scaled down and offset so that
while the participants legs were touched with the physical tennis ball, the virtual ball appeared to be only
tens of centimeters away from the participant’s head. The offset required for the transformations of the
virtual tennis ball was derived using a avatar scaled down to 0.2 from human size reclined on the virtual
exam table; this avatar was obviously deleted during the actual experiment. In addition, the location of
the ball was calibrated prior each participant to accommodate for participants of different heights. The
asynchronous condition was identical to the synchronous with the exception that the visuo-tactile stimulus
was asynchronous, moving the controller and the physical tennis ball independently of each other, to break
the correspondence between visual and tactile senses. In both conditions, we utilized a combination of
sweeps and taps at different locations of the participants’ feet and lower legs while making an effort to
keep the movements of the ball somewhat random and unpredictable (inspired by the procedure described
by Slater et al. 2008). In the asynchronous condition, the experimenter was holding the controller in one
hand and the ball in another, so that he, or she could produce both temporal delays as well as spatial
asynchronicity between the visual and physical stimuli in a randomized manner while otherwise mimicking
the characteristics of the taps and sweeps introduced in the synchronous condition (please see the video
link appearing later in this section).

After 90 seconds of stimulus presentation, the virtual ball was hidden, and a table, a scaled-down robot, a
stack of books and a set of soda can tabs appeared (See Fig. 2 right). Each participant then experienced
animation sequences of a doll-sized robot (similar in size to the simulated invisible body) handling pop tabs
for the purposes of physics plausibility estimation. The robot picked up and dropped three tabs, and threw
two across the book. The animation was presented twice, with the behavior of tabs following either true
physics or movie physics, depending on the order of conditions.The order of the true and movie physics

8

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Figure 3. Participants were resting on an exam table during synchronous and asynchronous visuo-tactile
conditions (left) and using VR controllers to estimate cube sizes (right).

presentations, as well as the synchronous and asynchronous conditions in which they were nested, were
counterbalanced among participants. For full details regarding the counterbalancing scheme, including
conditions participants subsequently experienced as part of protocols for Pouke et al. (in preparation), see
Appendix 1. After viewing both types of physics, the participant was asked to perform a verbal judgement
on the perceived plausibility of the tabs behavior using the question adapted from Pouke et al. (2020):
”Thinking back how the pull tabs were behaving, which matched your expectations, the ﬁrst or the second
time?”.

After the verbal judgement, the physics perception related objects were again hidden, and 60 seconds
of stimuli were provided. After this, the participant was given the motion controllers, and presented with
three green cubes (10 cm, 20 cm and 30 cm) appearing in randomized order at a distance of 15 cm. After a
cube had gone out of sight, we asked the participant to show the apparent size of the cube bimanually (see
Fig. 3, right) and to click a trigger button to save their response, which was followed by the presentation of
the next cube. After estimating the size of three cubes, the participant removed the HMD and controllers
and ﬁlled out an illusion strength questionnaire adapted from Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). The
procedure was then repeated for either the synchronous or asynchronous condition, depending on the
counterbalancing order. A video demonstrating the experimental conditions, including the administration
of both synchronous and synchronous stimuli, can be viewed at: https://youtu.be/IxLSxH6ZqvU.

After ﬁnishing both conditions, the participant removed the HMD and ﬁlled in a post-experiment
questionnaire consisting of the Slater-Usoh-Steed presence questionnaire (SUS) Slater et al. (1994); Usoh
et al. (2000) and a background questionnaire. At the conclusion of the experiment, the participant was
debriefed and compensated with a gift card worth 20 C.

9

Pouke et al.

3 RESULTS

3.1 Conﬁrmatory analysis

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

We obtained unexpected results regarding the effect of body scaling on the perception of physics
plausibility. We predicted that movie physics would appear more realistic in the synchronous condition
and that true physics would appear more realistic in the asynchronous condition. However, according to
responses to the main question, movie physics were selected by a majority in both conditions (synchronous
28/40, asynchronous 30/40). Following the preregistered procedure, we tested both hypotheses using the
binomial test (one-tailed) against the null proportion (20/40). According the results of the tests, H1 was
supported (condition A, p = 0.008) while H2 was unsupported (condition B, p = 1.00).

While the evidence in favor of H1 technically indicates that movie physics do indeed appear more real
while embodied, the lack of support for H2 raises questions whether the body scaling effect was the actual
reason why movie physics were preferred. Since rigid body dynamics under normal earth gravity are usually
perceived as natural (eg. J¨orges and L´opez-Moliner (2017)), it seems likely that the physics perception was
modulated by something other than the visuo-tactile stimuli.

3.2 Exploratory analysis

Here we present further analyses that were not preregistered, along with Bayes factors (reported as BF )
to accompany each measure. Unlike frequentist statistics, an advantage of the Bayesian approach is that it
can estimate support for the null hypothesis in addition to support for the alternative (eg., see (Wagenmakers
et al., 2017)). Bayes factors provide evidence on a continuous scale, though conventionally, a value of 3 or
more is considered support for the alternative hypothesis, 0.33 or less is considered support for the null
hypothesis, and values between these limits signal that the data are insensitive to distinguishing between
hypotheses, with values between 1 and 3 and values between 0.33 and 1 considered merely anecdotal
evidence in favor of the alternative or null hypothesis, respectively (Jeffreys, 1961; Lee and Wagenmakers,
2014). We used R statistical software to estimate Bayes factors for proportion tests (Morey and Rouder,
2021), Wilcoxon signed-rank tests and Spearman’s ρ (van Doorn et al., 2020), and binomial regression
models (B¨urkner, 2017; Makowski et al., 2019) using function-default priors, unless otherwise noted.

We performed an additional two-tailed binomial test to investigate whether movie physics were also
preferred in the asynchronous condition. The test revealed that movie physics were signiﬁcantly preferred
(p = .002). Therefore, movie physics were signiﬁcantly preferred across both conditions (synchronous
BF = 6.18; asynchronous BF = 32.75). Furthermore, if we update our prior such that the ratio of
preference for true physics in the asynchronous condition matches that of movie physics in the synchronous
condition, we ﬁnd very strong support for the alternative hypothesis (BF > 100). This further conﬁrms that
contrary to our predictions, movie physics were preferred by a signiﬁcantly greater number of participants
regardless of condition.

3.2.1 Estimation of cube sizes

The purpose of the cube estimation task was to investigate whether the synchronous condition affected
the perception of sizes similarly to Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). To replicate their protocol, we
ﬁrst re-scaled all estimates to the level of the largest cube (30 cm), and then standardized the estimates to
each participant’s average estimate across all six conditions. This transformation allowed us to investigate
deviations of estimates in percentages relative to each participant’s perceptual mean, rather than in raw
centimeters, thus producing the same ”deviation from mean” measure touted in the original study. Negative

10

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Figure 4. Boxplots for cube size estimation data. Deviations from mean across conditions per individual
cubes (left) and total deviation from mean across condition (right).

values on this scale represent underestimations of object sizes relative to a participant’s perceptual mean,
whereas positive values represent overestimations. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the difference of the
standardized distributions indicated that the data was non-normal (D = 0.67, p < .001), thus we used
non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests to analyze the differences between estimations. Surprisingly,
we found effect opposite to the one found in (Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2016); the estimates for cube
sizes were signiﬁcantly larger in the asynchronous condition (Z = 2.82, p = .005, r = .45, BF = 5.91)
(see Fig. 4), meaning that participants tended to overestimate object sizes in the condition in which the
body ownership illusion should have been absent, yet underestimate when it should have been present.

Investigating the estimations across different cube sizes, it appears the smallest cube (10 cm) was
overestimated in both conditions, the overestimation being larger in the asynchronous condition. As for
medium (20 cm) and large (30 cm) cubes, however, it appears that the cubes were approximated closer to
their actual size in the asynchronous condition, while the sizes were underestimated during the synchronous
condition. Boxplots for cube estimation data can be seen in Fig. 4.

The results of the size estimation tasks were thus surprising, as well. It appeared that the visuo-tactile
stimulation did have a signiﬁcant perceptual effect in line of Van Der Hoort et al. (2011); Van der Hoort and
Ehrsson (2014); Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). However, some unforeseen aspect of the experiment
reversed the expected outcome.

3.2.2 Illusion strength

We utilized the illusion strength questionnaire from Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) to investigate
the strength of the invisible body illusion in synchronous and asynchronous conditions. Similarly to their
ﬁndings, Wilcoxon signed-rank tests revealed a signiﬁcant difference in statements 1 (Z = 4.99, p <
.001, r = .79, BF > 100) and 3 (Z = 4.53, p < .001, r = .72, BF > 100) and no difference in control

11

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

statements 4-6 (all ps > .05; q4 BF = 0.25, q5 BF = 0.18, q6 BF = 0.18). Surprisingly, there was no
signiﬁcant difference in statement 2, ”I had invisible legs”, the median response being 6 in both conditions
(Z = 1.48, p = .14, r = .23, BF = 0.42). Boxplots for illusion strength questionnaire data can be seen
in Fig. 5. The illusion strength questionnaire results are mostly in line with the results reported by Van
Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). This implies that the application of both synchronous and asynchronous
stimuli were experienced as intended; the participants experienced being touched by the virtual ball despite
the virtual ball being offset much closer to them than their real feet. In addition, this illusion was not
experienced during the asynchronous condition. Curiously, however, the responses to statement 2 suggest
that the participants might have felt ownership towards an invisible body regardless of stimulus condition.
Here an examination of the pattern of support for null hypotheses regarding illusion strength questionnaire
statements may aid interpretation. Notably, the associated Bayes factors provide moderate support for the
lack of a true difference between synchronous and asynchronous conditions for statements 4-6, yet only
weakly support the same lack of an effect for statement 2.

We also investigated the relationship between cube size estimations and illusion strength using the method
described in Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016). Each participant’s perceptual effect was quantiﬁed as the
mean of their synchronous condition size estimates minus the mean of their asynchronous condition size
estimates, divided by their overall estimation mean. Likewise, each participant’s embodiment effect was
quantiﬁed as the mean of their responses to illusion strength questionnaire items 1-3 minus the mean of
their responses to items 4-6. Participants were rank ordered for each effect dimension, respectively, and the
association between the effect ranks was analyzed using Spearman’s rank correlation. However, unlike
Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016), we found no correlation between the strength of the invisible body
illusion and the perceptual effect (p = .17, BF = 0.34; see Fig. 6). This outcome suggests that the strength
of the invisible body illusion was not closely tied to the strength of the perceptual effect experienced by the
participants, although the associated Bayes factor was not strong enough to provide more than anecdotal
evidence in favor of the null hypothesis.

3.2.3 SUS and background

Similarly to Pouke et al. (2020, 2021), we collected PI data using the extended version of the SUS
questionnaire (Slater et al., 1994; Usoh et al., 2000) as well as background information, to investigate
whether these factors inﬂuenced the preference of physics choices. We computed the SUS score as the sum
of 6 and 7 responses per participant. The background data included age, gender as well as video game and
virtual reality experience quantiﬁed as scores between 1 and 7. Similarly to our previous studies, we found
none of these factors predicted the physics preferences; there were no signiﬁcant associations among any
of the physics choices and SUS or any of the demographics variables in binomial regression models (all
ps > .05; however, data were insensitive as all BF s fell between 0.3 and 3.0 relative to null models).

4 DISCUSSION

Our main analyses provided evidence for H1. However, we found no support for H2. Our exploratory
analysis found that movie physics were perceived as more realistic across both conditions. Thus, in all
likelihood, the body ownership illusion was not the primary driver behind the outcome of H1.

4.1 Physics judgement

The preference for the movie physics in the asynchronous condition came as a surprise to us. In the
synchronous condition, we anticipated that the body-ownership illusion based body-scaling effect would

12

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Figure 5. Boxplots of the ratings for each statement in the illusion strength questionnaire.

Figure 6. Correlation plot between invisible body illusion (Q1-Q3) and perceptual effect. No signiﬁcant
correlation was found neither when inspecting the overall correlation across all questions nor per individual
questions.

affect the perception of physics plausibility, making movie physics appear more real. In the asynchronous
condition, however, there was no intended manipulation of size and distance perception, yet the outcome
was the same as in the synchronous condition. In addition, had the inducement of the body-ownership
illusion somehow failed, we would have anticipated true physics to become the preferred physics model.

While additional experiments will be necessary to fully account for the popularity of the incorrect
physics judgements, we can speculate some of the reasons that might explain the results. An obvious
question is whether the preference towards movie physics could be explained by the fact that statement

13

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

2 of the illusion strength questionnaire, ”I had invisible legs” received high scores in both conditions. If
the participants experienced the body ownership illusion in both conditions, it could, in principle, explain
why movie physics were experienced as plausible in both conditions. However, the associated Bayes factor
for statement 2 revealed only anecdotal support for equality between the synchronous and asynchronous
conditions (BF = 0.42), and furthermore, the perceptual effects regarding object size estimations do not
seem to support this interpretation as the body scaling effect appears to have reversed.

Another explanation might be that we used a humanoid robot performing the object manipulation tasks.
Langbehn et al. (2016) reported that the existence of virtual characters acted as a strong size cue in their
experiment, even overriding the participant’s own virtual body. In our experiment, the only visible body
was the one belonging to the robot. It could be that in our experiment the participants did not relate the
trajectories of objects to their own (real or virtual) bodies, but to the robot’s body instead, even when
the robot was obviously smaller than their physical selves (the robot was also surrounded by size cues
indicating its size, such as a stack of books and a table). Therefore, it was the robot body that became the
perceptual ruler to the participants, at least in relation to object motions. This is similar to the ﬁndings
from our previous studies Pouke et al. (2021), in the sense that the participants preferred object motions
according to which the handler of the objects (controlled by themselves in our previous study) would have
been at human scale, despite other size cues telling otherwise (in our previous studies, we also directly told
the participants they are up/downscaled). It would appear as if participants in all three studies considered
the environment scaled, and the source of object motions unscaled, when judging object motions, even if
they ”know” that the environment should be unscaled.

Another potential factor is related to the animation performed by the robot which is based on motion
capture (as explained in Section 3.3). Since the robot was animated using rather natural-looking human
motions, it might reinforce the illusion that all motions are taking place in human scale. Perhaps, if the
animation was more artiﬁcial-looking, ”robot-like” or resembling the motions of a mouse-sized creature
(especially regarding the speed of which the robot’s limbs are moving), the naturalness of true physics
would have become more apparent. In addition, if the object motions were caused entirely by some
non-humanoid entity, the plausibility of object motions might have been perceived differently.

4.2 Object size estimation

We also collected object-size estimation data to conﬁrm that the body-ownership illusion we were causing
was affecting the participants’ perception of sizes. These results were surprising as well. Instead of the
synchronous condition making objects appear larger, it appears as if they were underestimated in that
condition, instead. This also warrants future studies in order to explain what caused the inverse effect.

We can look at the differences between this study and that of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) to
speculate on what caused the inverse effect. Firstly, this study took place in VR whereas the original study
used a stereoscopic camera system instead. However, the body-scaling effect is known to exist in VR as well.
Banakou et al. (2013) also found object sizes appearing larger to participants when embodying the virtual
body of a 4-year old child. Weber et al. (2020) also used VR to replicate an earlier study on body ownership
illusion-based body scaling (Van Der Hoort et al., 2011). While Weber et al. (2020) found signiﬁcant effects
between different body sizes, similarly to our results, they were not able to replicate the difference of
judgements between synchronous and asynchronous conditions. However, they did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
difference between the two conditions whereas we found an effect that was inverse to the original study.
Maselli and Slater (2013) reported that under favorable conditions, even asynchronous stimuli can appear
as real to the participants. However, as we did not have any other requirements of the body ownership

14

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

illusion in place, it seems unlikely that our participants would have somehow experienced the asynchronous
condition as more real than the synchronous condition. In fact, participants often commented on the stimuli
appearing to the wrong leg, or ”delayed” when we were beginning the application of the asynchronous
stimuli. As of now, we are unaware of other VR studies that have attempted to investigate the body-scaling
effect using an invisible-body illusion.

Another difference between this study and that of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) is that our invisible
body was twice as small as to the original. One can speculate whether there is a lower-limit to the size of a
virtual invisible body that can be inhabited through visuo-tactile stimulus. This lower limit seems unlikely,
though, since in their earlier article van der Hoort and Ehrsson Van Der Hoort et al. (2011) demonstrated
being able to elicit both the ownership illusion and the perceptual effects using a visible 30 cm body. A
limitation of our study compared to that of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) is that we only considered
the illusory ownership of a small invisible body instead of having both small and large bodies. It would have
been interesting to see if our setup would have caused inverse results regarding the large body condition as
well, replicated earlier results, or if some order effects could have appeared.

One can speculate whether the appearance of the robot manipulating pop tabs somehow caused the inverse
effect. However, the robot was hidden most of the time, appearing only during the physics estimation
task and disappearing again before the second round of the stimulus and the object size estimation task.
In addition, the robot was also accompanied by additional size cues (books, table, pop tabs) so that the
participants could clearly see it was doll-sized. Moreover, the robot appeared the same in both synchronous
and asynchronous conditions.

It is possible, however, that something in the visual appearance of the scene made the difference even if
we tried to mimic the layout of the laboratory room presented in the work of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson
(2016). Judging from the images presented in the original study, it is difﬁcult to estimate how far the edge
of the bed was from the camera, or how exactly it appeared to the participants. It could be that the edge
of our virtual exam table was so close to the camera that this (see Fig. 2 top left and right), together with
the sensation of laying on the physical exam table, gave participants the sensation of having very short
legs from the very beginning of the simulation, even before any stimulus was presented. After this, the
visuo-tactile stimulus could have merely scaled up the perceived size of the legs instead of scaling them
down as intended. This explanation might be feasible in the sense that Ogawa et al. (2017) also reported
that environmental cues can also affect perceived size of body cues and not only the reverse, depending on
whichever is presented ﬁrst. In any case, however, further experiments are necessary to explain the inverse
result we found.

5 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper we investigated the effect of the body ownership illusion on the perception of physics
plausibility. We explored the perception of physics plausibility under two conditions that were related
to either the presence or lack of a body ownership illusion caused by synchronous visuo-tactile stimuli.
Using the visuo-tactile stimuli, we attempted to elicit the illusion of inhabiting an invisible body roughly
the size of a doll (30-40 cm). Similarly to previous research (eg. Van Der Hoort et al. (2011); Van der
Hoort and Ehrsson (2014); Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016), we used asynchronous stimuli as a control
condition. Our goal was to examine whether correct approximation of physics (true physics) or physics
that are incorrect and appearing as if the environment is ﬁve times larger instead (movie physics) appeared
more realistic to the participants. We were able to conﬁrm that movie physics did seem to appear more

15

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

realistic to the participants under the body ownership illusion. However, we were unable to conﬁrm that
true physics would have appeared more realistic when the body-ownership illusion was lacking. Our
exploratory analysis found out that movie physics was instead perceived as real under both conditions.

Moreover, we were not able to replicate the results of Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2016) concerning
object size estimations when inhabiting a small invisible body. However, we found a signiﬁcant opposite
effect regarding size estimations; the object sizes were underestimated during the synchronous visuo-tactile
condition when compared to the asynchronous condition.

Even though the results were unexpected, they present new information as well as open up avenues for
future work regarding the perception of physics, sizes and distances in VR. So far, all our previous studies
(Pouke et al., 2020, 2021) as well as this one have resulted in movie physics appearing as the plausible
physics model. This is especially surprising in this study because it included a condition in which neither
the scale of the participants nor their perception of sizes and distances, were not manipulated on purpose.
We suspect that these results were not due to the existence or lack of a body-ownership illusion, but due the
visual appearance and human-like motions of the virtual character. In order to understand the phenomenon
regarding plausibility of small-scale rigid body dynamics, it is necessary to conduct more studies involving
conditions in which participants are expected, for all intents and purposes, to choose true physics as the
plausible model. Another surprise was the inverse result regarding object size estimations as the result
of body scaling. For this, we suspect that a visual property of the VE, perhaps the length of the virtual
exam table, interfered with the participants’ sense of their own body size. An obvious follow-up study to
examine the relationship between body-scaling and physics plausibility would be to utilize visible ﬁrst
person avatars of different sizes. Our results show, however, that a different way to represent the physics
models is necessary than the one used in this study. In conclusion, further experiments are needed to
discover the reasons why unexpected results were obtained regarding both physics plausibility estimations
and the inverse effect found in object size estimations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank all our participants for volunteering in this study. This work was supported by the
Academy of Finland projects PIXIE 331822, PERCEPT 322637, SRC of Academy of Finland project
COMBAT 293389, Business Finland project HUMOR 3656/31/2019, and the European Research Council
project ILLUSIVE 101020977. Click here for the published version of this article (Frontiers).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue
reservation.

REFERENCES

Banakou, D., Groten, R., and Slater, M. (2013).

Illusory ownership of a virtual child body causes
overestimation of object sizes and implicit attitude changes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 110, 12846–12851

Bhalla, M. and Profﬁtt, D. R. (1999). Visual–motor recalibration in geographical slant perception. Journal

of experimental psychology: Human perception and performance 25, 1076

Botvinick, M. and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’touch that eyes see. Nature 391, 756–756

16

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

B¨urkner, P.-C. (2017). brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan. Journal of

Statistical Software 80, 1–28. doi:10.18637/jss.v080.i01

Cross, R. (2004). Physics of overarm throwing. American Journal of Physics 72, 305–312
Deng, Z. and Interrante, V. (2019). Am i ﬂoating or not?: Sensitivity to eye height manipulations in

hmd-based immersive virtual environments. In Acm symposium on applied perception 2019. 1–6

Hutchison, J. J. and Loomis, J. M. (2006). Does energy expenditure affect the perception of egocentric
distance? a failure to replicate experiment 1 of profﬁtt, stefanucci, banton, and epstein (2003). The
Spanish journal of psychology 9, 332–339

Jeffreys, H. (1961). Theory of probability, harold jeffreys. International series of monographs on physics.
J¨orges, B. and L´opez-Moliner, J. (2017). Gravity as a strong prior: implications for perception and action.

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 11, 203

Kim, J. and Interrante, V. (2017). Dwarf or giant: the inﬂuence of interpupillary distance and eye height
on size perception in virtual environments. In 27th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality and
Telexistence, ICAT 2017 and the 22nd Eurographics Symposium on Virtual Environments, EGVE 2017
(Eurographics Association), 153–160

Langbehn, E., Bruder, G., and Steinicke, F. (2016). Scale matters! analysis of dominant scale estimation
in the presence of conﬂicting cues in multi-scale collaborative virtual environments. In 2016 IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI) (IEEE), 211–220

Lee, M. D. and Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2014). Bayesian cognitive modeling: A practical course (Cambridge

university press)

Linkenauger, S. A., Ramenzoni, V., and Profﬁtt, D. R. (2010). Illusory shrinkage and growth: Body-based

rescaling affects the perception of size. Psychological Science 21, 1318–1325

Makowski, D., Ben-Shachar, M. S., and L¨udecke, D. (2019). bayestestr: Describing effects and their
uncertainty, existence and signiﬁcance within the bayesian framework. Journal of Open Source Software
4, 1541. doi:10.21105/joss.01541

Maselli, A. and Slater, M. (2013). The building blocks of the full body ownership illusion. Frontiers in

human neuroscience 7, 83

McIntyre, J., Zago, M., Berthoz, A., and Lacquaniti, F. (2001). Does the brain model newton’s laws?

Nature neuroscience 4, 693–694

Millet, G., L´ecuyer, A., Burkhardt, J.-M., Haliyo, D. S., and R´egnier, S. (2008). Improving perception and
understanding of nanoscale phenomena using haptics and visual analogy. In International Conference
on Human Haptic Sensing and Touch Enabled Computer Applications (Springer), 847–856

Morey, R. D. and Rouder, J. N. (2021). BayesFactor: Computation of Bayes Factors for Common Designs.

R package version 0.9.12-4.3

Ogawa, N., Narumi, T., and Hirose, M. (2017). Distortion in perceived size and body-based scaling in
virtual environments. In Proceedings of the 8th Augmented Human International Conference (ACM),
35

Ogawa, N., Narumi, T., and Hirose, M. (2019). Virtual hand realism affects object size perception in
body-based scaling. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) (IEEE),
519–528

Pouke, M., Mimnaugh, K. J., Chambers, A. P., Ojala, T., and LaValle, S. M. (2021). The plausibility

paradox for resized users in virtual environments. Frontiers in Virtual Reality 2, 48

Pouke, M., Mimnaugh, K. J., Ojala, T., and LaValle, S. M. (2020). The plausibility paradox for scaled-down
users in virtual environments. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR)
(IEEE), 913–921

17

Pouke et al.

Body Scaling and Physics Plausibility

Renner, R. S., Velichkovsky, B. M., and Helmert, J. R. (2013). The perception of egocentric distances in

virtual environments-a review. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 46, 1–40

Senot, P., Zago, M., Lacquaniti, F., and McIntyre, J. (2005). Anticipating the effects of gravity
when intercepting moving objects: differentiating up and down based on nonvisual cues. Journal
of Neurophysiology 94, 4471–4480

Serino, S., Scarpina, F., Chirico, A., Dakanalis, A., Di Lernia, D., Colombo, D., et al. (2020). Gulliver’s
virtual travels: Active embodiment in extreme body sizes for modulating our body representations.
Cognitive Processing 21, 509–520

Sitti, M. (2007). Microscale and nanoscale robotics systems [grand challenges of robotics]. IEEE Robotics

& Automation Magazine 14, 53–60

Skarbez, R., Brooks, F. P., Jr, and Whitton, M. C. (2017a). A survey of presence and related concepts.

ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 50, 1–39

Skarbez, R., Neyret, S., Brooks, F. P., Slater, M., and Whitton, M. C. (2017b). A psychophysical experiment
regarding components of the plausibility illusion. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics 23, 1369–1378

Slater, M., P´erez Marcos, D., Ehrsson, H., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2008). Towards a digital body: the

virtual arm illusion. Frontiers in human neuroscience 2, 6

Slater, M., P´erez Marcos, D., Ehrsson, H., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2009). Inducing illusory ownership

of a virtual body. Frontiers in neuroscience 3, 29

Slater, M., Usoh, M., and Steed, A. (1994). Depth of presence in virtual environments. Presence:

Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 3, 130–144

Usoh, M., Catena, E., Arman, S., and Slater, M. (2000). Using presence questionnaires in reality. Presence

9, 497–503

Van der Hoort, B. and Ehrsson, H. H. (2014). Body ownership affects visual perception of object size
by rescaling the visual representation of external space. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 76,
1414–1428

Van Der Hoort, B. and Ehrsson, H. H. (2016). Illusions of having small or large invisible bodies inﬂuence

visual perception of object size. Scientiﬁc reports 6, 1–9

Van Der Hoort, B., Guterstam, A., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2011). Being barbie: the size of one’s own body

determines the perceived size of the world. PloS one 6, e20195

van Doorn, J., Ly, A., Marsman, M., and Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2020). Bayesian rank-based hypothesis
testing for the rank sum test, the signed rank test, and spearman’s ρ. Journal of Applied Statistics 47,
2984–3006

Wagenmakers, E.-J., Verhagen, J., Ly, A., Matzke, D., Steingroever, H., Rouder, J. N., et al. (2017). The
need for bayesian hypothesis testing in psychological science. Psychological science under scrutiny:
Recent challenges and proposed solutions , 123–138

Weber, S., Mast, F. W., and Weibel, D. (2020). Body size illusions inﬂuence perceived size of objects: a

validation of previous research in virtual reality. Virtual reality 24, 385–397

Zhou, Q., Kallio, P., and Koivo, H. N. (2000). Virtual environment for operations in the microworld. In
Microrobotics and Microassembly II (International Society for Optics and Photonics), vol. 4194, 56–64

18

