Interaction Design for VR Applications: Understanding Needs
for University Curricula

Oloff C. Biermann∗
ocbier@cs.ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Daniel Ajisafe∗
dajisafe@cs.ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Dongwook Yoon
yoon@cs.ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

ABSTRACT
As virtual reality (VR) is emerging in the tech sector, developers
and designers are under pressure to create immersive experiences
for their products. However, the current curricula from top institu-
tions focus primarily on technical considerations for building VR
applications, missing out on concerns and usability problems spe-
cific to VR interaction design. To better understand current needs,
we examined the status quo of existing university pedagogies by
carrying out a content analysis of undergraduate and graduate
courses about VR and related areas offered in the major citadels of
learning and conducting interviews with 7 industry experts. Our
analysis reveals that the current teaching practices underemphasize
design thinking, prototyping, and evaluation skills, while focusing
on technical implementation. We recommend VR curricula should
emphasize design principles and guidelines, offer training in pro-
totyping and ideation, prioritize practical design exercises while
providing industry insights, and encourage students to solve VR
design problems beyond the classroom.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Computing education; •
Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in interac-
tion design; Human computer interaction (HCI); Empirical
studies in HCI.

KEYWORDS
VR; VR Design; Design Education; HCI Education; Design Pedagogy

1 INTRODUCTION
As a growing technology, virtual reality (VR) offers an unlimited
set of possible interactions in 3D environments and has become an
active area of interest in building immersive consumer products [6,
16]. According to Statista [20], the sales of virtual and augmented
reality headsets are expected to reach over 26 million units by 2023,
which presents an opportunity for interaction designers to develop
more immersive 3D experiences.

However, designing for VR can be quite challenging as new tools
evolve rapidly and different modalities emerge [19]. Understand-
ing the fundamental principles of human-centered interaction is
key to building real-world VR experiences. Current curricula in
institutions are more focused on teaching software and develop-
ment practices for VR applications than designing for user inter-
actions in VR. This is problematic as designing good immersive
experiences requires teaching fundamental design principles and

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

guidelines [8, 18]. There is an increasing need in education for in-
teraction design principles and guidelines for VR. If formal training
from learning institutions is fragmented, there is a danger that the
next generation of designers will not be equipped to meet the re-
quirements that current and future VR interaction design demands.
While the current curriculum covers design education in HCI in
general [11, 13, 23, 24]However, it is not clear to what extent these
skills are taught within the VR context. Therefore, we ask the fol-
lowing research question: "To what extent do the current curricula
about VR and related areas prepare students to meet the requirements
for designing VR applications?"

In this study, we acknowledge that there are significant inter-
plays between VR and AR design, and some design principles and
guidelines are transferable across the two domains. However, there
are design problems that are specific to fully immersive environ-
ments in VR. Therefore, we streamline our study to specifically
focus on fully immersive environments and the unique design chal-
lenges they present for future designers to meet demands in the
real world. We note that exploring the use of VR for instruction
is not the goal of this study. Rather, we focus on teaching interac-
tion design education topics for VR in a way that prepares future
designers to meet real-world demands.

First, we conducted a wide-scope overview of institutions pub-
lishing VR research in some of the top HCI and VR venues, in-
cluding CHI [5] and IEEE VR [22]. Aside from these venues, we
also included top-ranked institutions in the liberal arts. Thus, we
carried out an extensive content analysis on the courses from these
institutions and extracted key findings related to current pedagogi-
cal methods. We defined pedagogical methods as major means of
teaching. These were mainly classified as lecture materials, the-
oretical/reading assignments, and practical exercises. To further
explore these findings, we also conducted an interview study with
VR industry and academic experts, thereby obtaining a more di-
verse view of the needs in the current curricula. Finally, we propose
a clear set of recommendations to improve the current pedagogy.
Our study ultimately makes three empirical contributions [25]:
1) Identifying the current learning activities in the curricula about
VR and the teaching strategies that are used, 2) revealing the needs
for VR interaction design in current curricula, and 3) proposing a
set of recommendations for an improved curriculum covering VR
design.

2 RELATED WORKS
Studies on interaction design education for VR and immersive tech-
nologies have been relatively limited. In 2004, Burdea conducted
a survey of general VR education which found that only 148 uni-
versities globally had VR courses [3]. Burdea’s survey continued

VR Course Keywords
Virtual Reality, VR, Augmented Reality,
AR, Immersive Environments,
HCI, Human-Computer Interaction, Graphics
Table 1: List of keywords to identify VR courses

3.1 Methods
3.1.1 Data Sources for Institution Selection. We sought to in-
clude a wide range of institutions for conducting our initial search,
described in 3.1.2. Additionally, we wanted to avoid introducing
subjectivity into the selection, as individuals may have different
perceptions of what constitutes a "top" institution or department in
a particular domain. Therefore, rather than basing our selection on
personal opinion, we utilized three data sources for institution se-
lection to equally represent top institutions in liberal arts in general,
as well as HCI and VR in particular.

Our first goal was to include top university departments in HCI.
Thus, we chose universities with the top average number of CHI
publications between 2017 and 2020 [21], inclusive. We used CHI
as the community standard for ranking departments in terms of
their standing in the field of HCI. Similarly, given our focus on VR,
we used the average number of IEEE VR publications between 2017
to 2020 [1], inclusive, for selecting our second set of institutions.
Finally, we chose a third set of institutions from the Times Higher
Education ranking of top liberal arts institutions [7]. This allowed
us to broaden the scope of our search to include institutions that
are not prominent in research relating to HCI or VR but are highly
ranked in terms of teaching. Our selection approach ultimately
allowed us to create a diverse set containing 63 institutions. This is
comprised of both public and private institutions. Course data was
then extracted from online syllabi and course materials.

3.1.2 Scoping Search of Courses. Starting with the final list of
institutions, we performed a search to find all undergraduate and
graduate courses that covered topics directly related to VR. We
continued this search until we reached a total of 50 courses.

An obvious choice was to include courses directly focused on
VR in our search. However, we also aimed to include other areas
related to VR, such as computer graphics. To this end, we developed
several keywords to form a set of uniform selection criteria which
can be seen in Table 1. We followed a relatively permissive strategy
to avoid excluding courses. Therefore, we included any courses
where the course title or course syllabus included at least one of
the keywords.

3.1.3
In-depth Meta-review of Curricula. After conducting
the scoping search to identify our target set of courses, we per-
formed an in-depth meta-review of a randomly sampled subset of
20 courses to analyze the online syllabus and course content of
each. We synthesized data on the usage of pedagogical methods
and topics within which VR is framed. Our analysis consisted of
three stages: 1) a first pass to synthesize common topics and meth-
ods, 2) a second pass for extraction and organization, and 3) a third
pass for detailed review of course content. This was an iterative,
collaborative process with frequent cross-checking between the
authors.

Figure 1: Mean Weeks Per VR Topic. Topics are: Alternative
Interaction Modalities, Graphics, Socio-cultural Impacts of
VR, Background of VR, User Properties, VR Hardware, Ap-
plications of VR, VR Interface Design, and Development
Principles.

informally until 2008 to eventually include a total of 273 courses
[4]. There has not been a more recent survey on this topic since
then. In [10], the authors conducted a high-level search of global
universities to evaluate assessment methods and learning activities
in augmented reality (AR), analyzing the course content in a small
subset consisting of 17 courses. Notably, they found that practical
projects were the most commonly used learning activity. By con-
trast, [14] documents the analysis of a single practical project-based
VR course. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study that
performs a survey on education about VR, specifically regarding
interaction design topics.

Unlike education for VR, training in interaction design and HCI
in general has been somewhat more widely studied [11–13, 23, 24].
In general, some programs and courses emphasize formal iterative
design (e.g., human-centered design), while others focus on the
creative design process. Thus, the pedagogical methods being used
in courses vary significantly and there is a lack of integration be-
tween the two design approaches [23]. Considering methodology,
the closest work that aligns with our study is [17], which aims
to understand the coverage of voice user interface design in HCI
pedagogy and advocates for an improved curriculum in traditional
learning institutions similar to [2, 9, 15]. Unlike [17], we also in-
corporate semi-structured interviews to enrich our findings and
illustrate how the coverage of interaction design in the current
curricula fails to meet VR designers’ needs.

3 CURRICULA ANALYSIS OF VR COURSES
To establish an understanding of the current state of VR curricula,
we conducted an extensive analysis of courses taught at top insti-
tutions around the world. We started our analysis by choosing a
set of learning institutions (see 3.1.1) and then performing a high-
level scoping search (explained in 3.1.2) to identify relevant courses.
Finally, we performed an in-depth meta-review of the content of
syllabi, as described in 3.1.3.

2

Course Name
C1: Virtual Reality Systems
C2: AR/VR Capstone
C3: Introduction to AR/VR
Application Design
C4: Developing AR/VR
Experiences
C5: Virtual Reality
C6: 3D User Interfaces
C7: Introduction to Mobile XR

C8: Introduction to VR

C9: Virtual Reality

University Name
University of Washington
University of Washington

University of Michigan

University of Michigan

Stanford University
Georgia Institute of Technology
University of MaryLand
University of California
(Irvine)
University of California
(Berkeley)

C10: Augmented Reality - Medical
AR
C11: Perception and Learning in
Robotics and Augmented Reality

University of Munich

University of Munich

C12: VR

C13: VR AR
C14: Virtual Reality and
Physically-Based Simulation
C15: Introduction to 3D
Animation and Virtual Reality
C16: Introduction to
Human-Computer Interaction
C17: Emergent Interface
Technologies
C18: Mobile Computing
C19: 3D User Interfaces and
Augmented Reality
C20: Interaction Design for
Virtual and Augmented Reality

University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign
Purdue University

University of Bremen

Harvard University

Yale University

The University of Chicago

The University of Chicago

Columbia University

National University of Singapore

Table 2: List of analyzed courses and corresponding institu-
tions where they are offered.

During the first pass, we identified pedagogical methods across
all courses by examining the online syllabi. We then synthesized
a representative set of pedagogical methods and a taxonomy of
main topics (see Appendix A) based on the methods and subtopics
we identified within each course. In the second pass, we utilized
our established list of pedagogical methods and topic taxonomy to
extract course data. We revisited the specific pedagogical methods
in each course and then classified them on a per-course basis (sum-
marized in Table 3). We then analyzed the topic coverage for each
course based on our taxonomy of main topics and the subtopics
covered in these courses. Specifically, we classified the subtopics in
each course identified in the first pass for each course according to
our taxonomy and recorded the number of weeks devoted to each
category. Finally, we calculated the mean number of weeks devoted
to each area across all courses. The outcome is presented in Figure 1.
On the surface, these results would seem to indicate that practical
development and design receive roughly equal coverage within
the current curricula. The results also indicate that the subtopic
of alternate interaction modalities receives very little coverage. To
investigate our outcome further, we conducted a detailed analysis

3

Course
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20

LM

TA

X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

PE

X
X

X

X

Table 3: Pedagogical Methods Related to VR Interaction De-
sign in each course where LM = Lecture Material, TA = The-
oretical/Reading Assignment, and PE = Practical Exercises.
Each column shows whether the corresponding pedagogical
method was used.

of the content within each course in our third pass. The findings
from this analysis are presented in the following section.

3.2 Findings
In this section, we expand on the varied findings we extracted from
our meta-review and content analysis. Table 2 shows the list of
20 courses reviewed. Based on our content analysis, we identified
the following prevalent themes describing our findings about the
curricula: 1) Pedagogical methods related to VR interaction design;
2) Coverage for VR interaction design topics; 3) Formulation of
current VR interaction design topics.

Three of the main types of pedagogical methods in the courses
that are specifically relevant to VR interaction design included 1) lec-
ture materials, 2) theoretical/reading assignments, and 3) practical
exercises. The lectures are either instructor-led classes or seminar-
based presentations given by guest speakers or a combination of
both. The theoretical assignments generally included group discus-
sions, reading responses to relevant papers or additional reading
materials related to interaction design and principles. Lastly, the
practical exercises were typically weekly or bi-weekly assignments
given to the students to implement important concepts discussed
in class. Our analysis revealed the following findings:

Theoretical assignments and practical exercises underem-
phasize design training. Of all 3 pedagogical methods identified,
theoretical assignments and practical exercises had the least design-
related activity (see Table 3). Out of 20 courses, 12 had no formal
theoretical activity on interaction design principles for VR (C1, C2,

C4, C5, C9, C10-C13, and C15-C18). This reveals the lack of the-
oretical considerations for design principles and guidelines. For
example, in C10, no reading material on interaction design was
given, and the readings mainly focus on computer vision, and track-
ing technologies. We found that only 6 courses (C6-C8, C12, C14,
and C19) had reading activities related to interaction design in the
VR context. For example, C7 provided related readings on designing
UX for VR apps. The last 2 courses (C3 and C20) did not disclose
their reading activity.

Considering practical exercises, only 4 out of 20 courses (C3, C4,
C10, and C20) focused specifically on design thinking and equip-
ping students with the fundamental tools/techniques for building
good user experience in VR. For example, C3 provided learning
activities on critical design thinking, physical and digital proto-
typing. Out of 12 assignments for this course, more than half of
them are interaction design-centric. However, 8 of the 20 courses
(C5-C8, C12-C14, and C17) were largely focused on building VR
applications, with the assumption that students would learn good
design practices through development, hence overlooking the need
for a formal teaching on design guidelines. Finally, 5 of 20 courses
(C1, C2, C11, C15, and C18) had no practical activity related to VR
interaction design, while C16 and C19 focused on general HCI and
AR respectively. Thus, interaction design principles and guidelines
are underemphasized in VR curricula.

Lecture materials do not favor interaction design content.
Based on the pedagogical methods identified in Table 3, the lecture
material remains a core component of teaching. Therefore, we
determine the extent of interaction design coverage in the lecture
material for each of the courses. We found that 8 of the 20 courses
devote no lectures to interaction design principles and guidelines in
VR (C1, C2, C5, C11, C15, C16, C18, and C19). For example, C5 was
heavily centered on building devices and had no formal lectures
on interaction design principles. Although C16 gave lectures on
design thinking, research methods, prototyping and tangible user
interfaces, their focus was not on VR but HCI in general. We saw
that C7 and C17 devote only 1 lecture to VR interaction design, C9,
C13, and C14 focus 2 lectures on this area, while C4, C8, and C12
devote 3 lectures to VR design and C10 had 4 lectures covering this
topic. Finally, C3 and C20 strongly emphasized the importance of
design principles in VR. C20 also invited industry experts to teach
students how to build good user experiences for VR, which was
lacking in other courses.

Interaction design topics are either framed as special, evolv-
ing, or explorative. We also aimed at understanding how interac-
tion design topics were being discussed. Both C3 and C4 explained
interaction design as an "evolving" paradigm. Specifically, C3 ex-
tensively discusses new design principles, current development
approaches and VR interface evaluation. C6 covers immersive 3D
interfaces and interactions but from a graphical user interface per-
spective. Computer Graphics is required as a pre-requisite to this
course, and it makes no distinction between GUI and VR interac-
tion design as part of the course goals. C9 frames its lecture on
"Locomotion and Motion Sickness" as a "special" topic, while C14
expresses interaction design as an "explorative space" in VR.

4 EXPERT INTERVIEW STUDY
To understand the perception of what interaction design topics
curricula should include and how students can be prepared for
future industrial positions, we conducted an expert interview study.

4.1 Methods
4.1.1 Participant Selection. The participants were selected based
on background, experience, ease of access, and availability. Recruit-
ment followed a purposive sampling scheme. We interviewed 7
experts (𝑃1 to 𝑃7). Participants are experts either working in indus-
try (𝑃1, 𝑃3, 𝑃4, 𝑃6, and 𝑃7) or academics with industry experience
in the VR space (𝑃2 and 𝑃5). They had a minimum of 4 years of
experience and a maximum of 19 years of experience, with 7 years
on average. Our interviewees were: a senior UX/XR designer, a
VR/AR designer, a UX design manager, a senior research scien-
tist, a principal research scientist, an assistant professor, and an
associate professor. Unfortunately, all responses to our interview
request were from men. We provide additional information on the
recruitment process in Appendix B.

4.1.2 Procedure. Each interview began with a brief introduction
of the interview agenda. We generated a list of 8 questions (see
Appendix C) to gain each participant’s perspective on the extent
to which the curricula in VR-related courses prepare students to
handle the concerns and usability problems specific to interaction
design. Interviews were conducted via an online conferencing plat-
form and transcribed via a commercial transcription service.

First, we inquired from the interviewees as to which topics they
considered most important to interaction design. Following this
question, we probed further for topics that are not sufficiently
covered in curricula, and pedagogical methods that could be applied
to teach these topics. To develop an understanding of participants’
opinion about the different aspects of instruction, we asked them to
describe their perspectives about concepts, design methods, tool use,
and practical development skills such as project-based learning. We
specifically asked participants to describe aspects of their training
that helped them in their current work.

4.1.3 Analysis. To acquire a more comprehensive picture of in-
terviewees’ views on the current needs in VR interaction design
education and potential approaches to addressing these needs, the
authors closely read through the interview transcriptions. During
this process, a set of topics and subtopics were identified which
formed the basis for the coding scheme. These codes were then
used to iteratively combine and refine elements from the interview
data.

4.2 Findings
We synthesized the following findings supported by rich evidence
from interview analysis and our course meta-review.

Interaction designers are currently facing a moving target
problem. One of the key issues raised by 3 of our participants was
that VR design education cannot keep up with rapid changes in
the VR space. P5 noted that VR is the "next frontier of computing"
which provides a platform with endless opportunities. However,
P1 compared VR to the "Wild West", given that there is still a lack
of robust, standardized design guidelines in VR such as those that

4

are common in more established areas like web design. This new
frontier presents an exciting opportunity for researchers to explore
but it is still difficult to establish a consistent VR design curriculum.
Thus, as P1 stated, "VR design is far from mainstream within univer-
sity programs today". With the understanding that VR is currently
an emerging technology, P5 emphasized that this will change. They
maintained that students currently see VR as being novel but much
like desktop PCs and WIMP GUIs, it will become a standard form
of interaction in the next wave of computing.

Prototyping is currently an underrepresented skill in the
VR curriculum. In order to help students design and evaluate
solutions in a new domain, prototyping is a key activity. It offers
designers the ability to communicate ideas quickly with the tools
they have available, as described by P6. However, both P3 and P6
indicated that practical prototyping skills receive little coverage
in VR curricula. This agrees with the findings from our content
analysis. P6 continued by saying students are often obliged to learn
prototyping skills outside of their formal training.

The main challenge in supporting VR prototyping is that there
is not a smooth transition between low fidelity to high fidelity
prototypes. Medium to high fidelity VR prototypes often require
programming proficiency and knowledge of 3D frameworks, and
there are only a few tools available to support this transition. Indeed,
P1 went so far as to say "I would not be able to do prototyping [in
VR] if I didn’t learn how to code." Therefore, it has been challenging
to integrate a formal way of transiting between the low-to-high
and medium-to-high fidelity prototyping into the VR curriculum.
Design thinking is largely missing from VR designers’ for-
mal education. General design thinking methodology is an impor-
tant approach to interaction design. It allows designers to clearly
articulate problems they are trying to address and iteratively refine
solutions. Despite the importance of design thinking in understand-
ing user needs, it does not currently receive sufficient coverage in
the training available to VR designers based on our course analysis.
Moreover, P1, P6, and P7 all maintained that they felt education
in design thinking is limited in current university programs and
reported they had needed to learn how to apply this methodology af-
ter completing their studies. In the case of P6 and P1, both indicated
that design thinking was largely missing from their education.

One notable subtopic which emerged in the discussion of de-
sign thinking and user-centered design was the balance between
education in design methodology and technical development train-
ing. Almost all participants indicated that both areas are highly
important for VR designers but both P4 and P7 maintained that ad-
equate training in design methods is more important than training
in technical development skills.

Some aspects of professional VR development are not suffi-
ciently covered. While some participants indicated that training in
design methods is highly important, several others emphasized the
value of technical development skills for VR designers. P3 specifi-
cally emphasized the need for technical competency to understand
development concerns such as maintainability, compatibility with
existing systems, and performance for designers in industrial posi-
tions. They indicated that they felt this was missing from current
university curricula. Moreover, P6 and P1 both indicated that de-
signers without these technical skills would have limited agency to
implement their designs.

5

Competence in evaluation methods is essential but is not
provided by the current curriculum. Besides training VR de-
signers in prototyping and design thinking, another key theme that
emerged in the interviews was the importance of system evaluation
skills. The ability to understand how well a solution meets user
needs is crucial for VR interaction design. However, both P3 and
P7 expressed concerns that adequate evaluation techniques were
missing from the VR designers’ education. P7 stated, "getting actual
feedback from people in the real world is something that is not really
taught in school." Moreover, P3 described how, many types of user
evaluation methods were not intuitive, and designers were often not
adequately trained during their education to perform user studies.
This deficiency is significant considering that iterative refinement
is unlikely to be successful without properly assessing the efficacy
of a solution.

5 RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on our course analysis and interview study, it is clear that the
education in VR interaction design is very fragmented. While a few
courses are covering this emerging area relatively well, there is still
not a clear focus on this topic in general. The current curricula do
not provide students with sufficient background needed to be suc-
cessful VR interaction designers. To address the current problems in
VR education, we have generated the following recommendations:
R1: Practical design exercises should be used as a key teach-
ing tool. A central recommendation for addressing the deficiencies
we identified is to add practical design exercises to the current VR
curriculum. These exercises should allow students to apply design
thinking, prototyping, and user evaluation as part of their learning
objectives. Ultimately, the goals are to enable students to work
with closely related real world problems, develop the ability to
understand user needs, and iteratively turn ideas into solutions.

To this end, it is important that the exercises teach students what
questions to ask to understand user needs. After forming an initial
definition of user needs, students should then perform prototyping
and user evaluations to iteratively refine their solution and update
their understanding of the user requirements by incorporating
the results of their evaluations. As expressed by both P3 and P7,
observing users (which could be their colleagues) interacting with
the prototype gives students a practical insight into design issues
in the real world.

R2: Students should be taught fundamental design princi-
ples and guidelines. While the focus should be on practical design
exercises as the primary pedagogical method, it is important that
students should also develop a basic understanding of the tech-
niques they will be applying. Therefore, the design curriculum in
VR should cover the basics of design thinking and user-centered de-
sign. There should be an emphasis on the principles of prototyping
and user evaluation. This is particularly important in solving the
moving target problem for interaction design. While tools come
and go, and new technologies emerge and evolve quickly, the funda-
mental principles of design that are applicable to a particular space
remain the same. Understanding and applying these principles is
key to staying on top. Thus, students should be provided with a
strong background in design principles and guidelines.

R3: Students should be trained in prototyping and ideation
tools. In order to effectively support prototyping, it is also impor-
tant that students should receive sufficient training in the required
tools that would help them bring ideas to life quickly. This can in-
clude simple low-fidelity techniques such as sketching and physical
3D prototyping, as well as high fidelity techniques. In the case of
the latter, it is more helpful to train students in high fidelity proto-
typing technologies such as DraftXR1 which have a lower barrier
of entry in terms of programming compared to 3D frameworks
like Unity. This would help students focus on thinking more about
the design problem than struggling first with challenges that come
with technical implementation.

R4: Courses should provide students with industry

insights. Exposure to the real world is a great advantage to any
learning endeavor, particularly for students who would like to work
in the industry. Only a few of the schools in this study had sessions
where industry professionals gave talks about what they were cur-
rently building in their organizations. Unlike student internships,
experiences gained from such talks are part of in-class pedagogy.
Integrating such professional talks into the curriculum would give
students a diverse perspective to their training and bridge the gap
between their desired future and their current state of learning.

R5: Education should not be limited to the classroom. Learn-
ing outside of the confines of the classroom encourages students
to solve practical problems. This offers an advantage to the teach-
ing and learning outcomes for both teachers and students. As P6
suggested, "I would try to tell them to find a problem that they
have around them, maybe at their home...and be creative about it".
Experiential-based learning beyond the classroom is essential as
it enforces connections with the real world that are needed “to
recreate either a digital twin of the world or a new spatial experience
that is immersive.” (P6)

6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In our approach to selecting institutions, we have endeavored to
limit the effect of investigator’s bias. We aimed to represent a di-
verse set of institutions across different communities of learning,
including those that are prominent in either research or teaching.
However, we acknowledge that our approach still has the potential
to exclude certain institutions that may have instruction covering
VR interaction design. Also, our course data overrepresents West-
ern institutions, particularly universities from the United States.
This may restrict insights into educational needs in other contexts.
As a potential future direction, it would be informative to explore a
wider range of schools outside of those regarded as top tier and in
different regions to investigate the generalizability of our findings
and identify additional needs.

Course data was collected from online syllabi and course mate-
rials. However, the information provided by some of the courses
may have excluded topics that were discussed in class. In future
work, interviewing course instructors could highlight instructors’
insights and augment our findings with information not provided
in the course content and syllabi.

In conclusion, our findings reveal that the current VR curriculum
lacks theoretical and practical consideration of interaction design

1https://www.draftxr.com

6

guidelines in VR. Therefore, we see the primary beneficiaries of
our study to be course instructors and stakeholders developing
educational content in universities and other learning institutions.
While it was infeasible to tackle the resource-intensive task of
developing a new curriculum within the scope of this study, we
hope that our contributions will lead to an improved curriculum
for VR interaction design in the future.

REFERENCES
[1] Emery Berger. 2020. CSRankings: Computer Science Rankings. http://csrankings.

org/#/fromyear/2017/toyear/2021/index?none&world

[2] Elizabeth Buie, Susan Dray, Keith Instone, Jhilmil Jain, Gitte Lindgaard, and Arnie
Lund. 2010. How to bring HCI research and practice closer together. In CHI ’10
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Atlanta, Georgia,
USA). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3181–3184. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753846.
1753951

[3] Grigore C. Burdea. 2004. Teaching Virtual Reality: Why and How? Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 13, 4 (Aug. 2004), 463–483. https://doi.
org/10.1162/1054746041944812

[4] Grigore C. Burdea. 2008. World-wide Survey of Universities Teaching Virtual

Reality. http://vrtechnology.org/resources/public/survey.html

[5] CHI. 2021. The ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.

https://chi2021.acm.org/

[6] Pietro Cipresso, Irene Alice Chicchi Giglioli, Mariano Alcañiz Raya, and Giuseppe
Riva. 2018. The Past, Present, and Future of Virtual and Augmented Reality Re-
search: A Network and Cluster Analysis of the Literature. Frontiers in Psychology
9:2086 (2018), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02086

[7] Times Higher Education. 2020. Best Universities for Arts and Humanities De-
grees. https://www.timeshighereducation.com/student/best-universities/best-
universities-arts-and-humanities-degrees

[8] Nicolai Brodersen Hansen and Kim Halskov. 2018. Teaching Interaction Design by
Research through Design. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on
Computer-Human Interaction (Melbourne, Australia) (OzCHI ’18). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 421–431. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3292147.3292159

[9] Zayira Jordan, Jose Abdelnour Nocera, Anicia Peters, Susan Dray, and Stephen
Kimani. 2016. A Living HCI Curriculum. In Proceedings of the First African
Conference on Human Computer Interaction (Nairobi, Kenya) (AfriCHI’16). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 229–232.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2998581.2998623

[10] Alexandra Klimova, Anna Bilyatdinova, and Andrey Karsakov. 2018. Existing
Teaching Practices in Augmented Reality. Procedia Computer Science 136 (2018),
5–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/1047124.1047415

[11] Panayiotis Koutsabasis and Spyros Vosinakis. 2012. Rethinking HCI Education
for Design: Problem-Based Learning and Virtual Worlds at an HCI Design Studio.
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 28, 8 (Aug. 2012), 485–499.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2012.687664

[12] Jonathan Lazar, Jenny Preece, Jean Gasen, and Terry Winograd. 2002. New
Issues in Teaching HCI: Pinning a Tail on a Moving Donkey. In CHI ’02 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA) (CHI EA ’02). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
696–697. https://doi.org/10.1145/506443.506551

[13] Sus Lundgren, Eva Eriksson, Lars Hallnäs, Peter Ljungstrand, and Olof Torg-
ersson. 2006. Teaching Interaction Design: Matters, Materials and Means. In
Proceedings of WonderGround - 2006 Design Research Society International
Conference. CEIADE – Centro Editorial do IADE, Lisbon, Portugal, 1–7.
[14] Tuukka M. Takala, Lauri Malmi, Roberto Pugliese, and Tapio Takala. 2016. Em-
powering Students to Create Better Virtual Reality Applications: A Longitudinal
Informatics in Education 15, 2 (Oct. 2016),
Study of a VR Capstone Course.
287–317. https://doi.org/10.15388/infedu.2016.15

[15] Murni Mahmud, Idyawati Hussein, Abu Osman Md Tap, and Nor Laila Md
Noor. 2013. HCI Knowledge - Missing in Practice?. In Proceedings of
the 25th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation,
Application, Innovation, Collaboration (Adelaide, Australia) (OzCHI ’13). As-
https:
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 511–514.
//doi.org/10.1145/2541016.2541077

[16] Bernard Marr. 2021. 5 Important Augmented And Virtual Reality Trends For
2019 Everyone Should Read. https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2019/
01/14/5-important-augmented-and-virtual-reality-trends-for-2019-everyone-
should-read/?sh=673e9ebe22e7
ISSN: [Online] Publication Title: [Online].
Accessed on: Apr 27, 2021.

[17] Christine Murad and Cosmin Munteanu. 2020. Designing Voice Interfaces: Back to
the (Curriculum) Basics. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA) (CHI ’20). Association

for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3313831.3376522

[18] Keiichi Sato and William Verplank. 2000. Panel: Teaching Tangible Interaction
Design. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems:
Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (New York City, New York, USA)
(DIS ’00). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 444–445.
https://doi.org/10.1145/347642.347807

[19] Jacob Shriar. 2021. Creative professionals are struggling to implement aug-
mented reality. https://blogs.unity3d.com/2019/06/18/creative-professionals-
are-struggling-to-implement-augmented-reality/ ISSN: [Online] Publication
Title: [Online]. Accessed on: Apr 27, 2021.

[20] Statista. 2020. Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) headset shipments
https://www.statista.com/statistics/653390/

worldwide from 2020 to 2025.
worldwide-virtual-and-augmented-reality-headset-shipments/#:~:text=
Estimates%20suggest%20that%20in%202020,units%20per%20year%20by%202023
ISSN: [Online] Publication Title: [Online]. Accessed on: Apr 24, 2021.

[21] Kashyap Todi. 2020. CHI 2020 Data and Statistics. https://whatthehci.com/chi20/
[22] IEEE VR. 2021. International Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces.
https://ieeevr.org/ ISSN: [Online] Publication Title: [Online]. Accessed on: Apr
24, 2021.

[23] Lauren Wilcox, Betsy DiSalvo, Dick Henneman, and Qiaosi Wang. 2019. Design
in the HCI Classroom: Setting a Research Agenda. In Proceedings of the 2019 on
Designing Interactive Systems Conference (San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS’19). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 871–883. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3322381

[24] Lauren Wilcox, Betsy DiSalvo, Richard Henneman, and Lindsay Kelly. 2018.
Design and the Future of the HCI Classroom: Lessons Learned from an Interna-
tional Survey on HCI Education. In ACM CHI 2018 Workshop on HCI Education
(Montreal, Quebec, Canada). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–4.

[25] Jacob O. Wobbrock and Julie A. Kientz. 2016. Research Contributions in Human-
Computer Interaction. Interactions 23, 3 (May + June 2016) (2016), 38–44. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2907069 Place: New York, NY, USA Publisher: Association for
Computing Machinery.

7

Appendices

A TOPIC TAXONOMY OF VR TOPIC LABELS

AND CORRESPONDING SUBTOPICS

Taxonomy Labels

Alternative
tion Modalities

Interac-

Graphics

VR Interface Design

User properties and
limitations

Applications of VR

Sociocultural impacts
of VR

Background of VR

Practical development
in VR

VR hardware

Subtopics
Sound, haptics, haptic devices, multimodal
interaction, sound simulation, spatial audio,
voice control in VR
Object modeling, graphics engines, physics,
the graphics pipeline, graphics frameworks
(OpenGL, Vulkan, DirectX), geometry, ren-
dering, physics engines, physics of motion,
photometric registration
Adaptive interfaces, VR world design, contex-
tual interfaces, developing VR interactions,
multimodal interfaces, human-centered inter-
face design in VR, VR interaction design tech-
niques, presence and imnersiveness
Visual perception, motion sickness, the hu-
man visual system, human psychological pro-
cesses, spatial cognition, human sensation
and perception, task load, user movement, se-
lection and manipulation
3D dataviz, architecture design, gaming, ther-
apy,
in-car interfaces, 3D geospatial VR,
emerging technologies, location Based and
context-aware systems, embedded intelli-
gence/smart Objects, immersive video
Ethical concerns, cultural concerns, career
pathways, remote collaboration, social inter-
action
History of VR, Introduction to VR systems,
Current state of VR, Frontiers of VR
VR frameworks (Unity, A-Frame, etc.), pro-
gramming languages, Git, tracking motion
and position, inertial measurement, 3D cap-
turing, VR video capture, state machines,
game development in VR, processing 3D data
3D HMDs, AR displays, display optics, Direct-
View Light Field Displays, sensors, rendering
hardware

B PILOT EMAIL
We contacted 22 professionals with industry experience for an
interview using a pilot email (14 E-mails, 8 LinkedIn In-mails).
We got 5 out of 14 Emails and 2 out of 8 LinkedIn contacts who
responded timely and favorably to our request. Our interview was
scheduled on Zoom teleconferencing platform. We include a sample
of our pilot email here and a list of questions asked during the
interview in Appendix C).

Dear X,

Greetings to you! My name is {anonymous identity}, ****

As part of our ongoing *********, we are conducting interviews with experts
in the field of Virtual Reality with a focus on Interaction Design. The interviews

8

are essentially gaining your perspectives on what VR curriculum with a focus
on Interaction Design topics in Universities should include and how they can
prepare potential students for future industrial positions.

Given your background and expertise, we would really be grateful to have
the opportunity to conduct an interview with you. The interview should take
only 20 minutes and your unique perspective would help us formalize the
insights we have developed so far. We would be happy to share an anonymized
version of the interview findings with you.

We are looking forward to hearing from you. If you find this interesting, we
would be happy to know your preferred days and times and get some advice
from you.

Thank you very much for taking the time to read our email and we hope to

hear from you.

Best regards
{anonymous identity }

C INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
Hello thanks for joining **** today, ____. I’m {anonymous identity} Now before
we start, we would just like to ask if it would be okay to record this interview
session? (Response) Thank you.

Q1. Which aspects of instruction in VR interaction design do you feel is the most
important for students? (options in case they can’t remember any: i) Design
Process, ii) Design thinking, Ethics and Guidelines iii) Storyboarding and Physi-
cal Prototyping iii) Digital Prototyping and iv) Evaluation of VR experiences etc

Q2. In carrying out your day-to-day tasks, what tools and methods do you
typically use for interaction design in VR?

Q3. Do you feel the topics you learned in school gave you enough foundation
to perform your day-to-day job when you are designing VR applications?

Q4. If you acquired a skill from your current work that you never learned at
school, can you describe how you taught yourself this skill?

Q5. From the experience you have gained in the work you do currently, what
topics would you like to be included in Interaction (VR) design that is taught
in schools today?

Q6. What practical exercises would be good for students who are potential
interaction designers in VR?

Q7. Which usability problems in interaction design (VR) do you find the hardest
to solve?

Q8. Finally, to what extent do you think the current curricula in VR and related
courses prepare students to handle the concerns and usability problems specific
to interaction design and why?

Demographic Q: Approximately, how many years of industrial experience do
you have in interaction design (VR)?

