A Study on the Effectiveness of Using Telepresence and Multiple
Cameras in Remote Physical Therapy

Hanseul Jun*
Stanford University

Husam Shaik†
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Michael Lewek ‡
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Henry Fuchs §
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Jeremy Bailenson ¶
Stanford University

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
9
0
4
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Captures of a patient performing exercises (left and middle) and a therapist watching the patient through a VR headset
(right).

ABSTRACT

The present research investigates the effectiveness of using a telep-
resence system compared to a video conferencing system and the
effectiveness of using two cameras compared to one camera for
remote physical therapy. The telepresence system that was used is
Telegie, which allows users to see a place in 3D through a VR head-
set. Using two cameras with a video conferencing system allows
users to see a place from multiple angles and provides additional spa-
tial information. These two approaches of providing users additional
spatial information were examined and compared in the context of
remote physical therapy through a user study with 11 physical thera-
pists who had subject matter expertise and 76 participants who acted
as physical therapy patients. We conducted detailed interviews of
therapists at the end of their participation. Results showed that none
of the main effects of using telepresence and using two cameras
were supported via t-tests. However, additional analyses using linear
mixed models with individual differences of participants controlled
revealed a marginally signiﬁcant positive effect of using two cam-
eras on assessment scores from the therapists. The ﬁndings of this
paper indicate that video ﬁdelity of remote communication systems
matters and therefore suggest telepresence systems should provide
sufﬁcient video clarity. Spatial ability of patients was found as a
strong predictor of therapist assessments.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Interaction para-
digms—Virtual reality; Human-centered computing—Human com-
puter interaction (HCI)—Empirical studies in HCI

1 INTRODUCTION

With the advent of new media, more types of information become
available for remote communication. For interpersonal communica-

*e-mail: hanseul@stanford.edu
†e-mail: hshaik@cs.unc.edu
‡e-mail: michael lewek@med.unc.edu
§e-mail: fuchs@cs.unc.edu
¶e-mail: bailenso@stanford.edu

tion, video conferencing (VC) followed telephony [14], which has
become a widespread medium recently.

As the Media Ecology theory [20, 27] points out, that a new
medium never fully replaces the existing medium, rather it is adopted
in use cases where it excels over the existing medium. For example,
while VC is quickly gaining popularity as a new medium for remote
interpersonal communication, it is unlikely VC will ever fully re-
place telephony. VC is being used for circumstances that would
beneﬁt from having video. For example, VC was found effective
for corporate meetings with equivocality compared to emails [15]
and for communication between multidisciplinary teams at hospitals
when discussing issues about patients compared to telephony [4].

For remote communication, a strong candidate as the next step is
the support of the 3D space. Currently, when we use VC systems,
viewers see others from the perspective of the camera. Telepres-
ence (TP) describes experiences that provide the feeling of being
there [33]. TP systems provide users a 3D scene of other places the
users can freely move around.

This paper aims to examine TP as a potential successor to VC
in addition to the effectiveness of using VC with two cameras to
capture the space from another angle through an empirical study.
Adding another camera is adopted as an easy technique to provide
spatial information as adding a secondary camera shares a similar
goal with TP and is not harder to adopt than using TP.

Remote physical therapy has been chosen as the task for the study
as it would very likely beneﬁt from additional spatial information,
ﬁtting as a use case that TP will replace VC in the perspective of
the Media Ecology theory. Previous works [22, 30] have introduced
systems built to help remote physical therapy by providing additional
3D information based on the same belief that remote physical therapy
will beneﬁt from additional 3D information.

Telegie1 was used as the TP system for the following empirical
study. The system runs on RGBD cameras (e.g., Azure Kinect)
and VR headsets (e.g., Meta Quest 2) both of which are publicly
available and easy to use.

In this paper, we describe design and implementation details of a
telepresence system, report a user study examining the effects using
telepresence and using two cameras, and provide implications for
designing and studying telepresence systems.

1https://telegie.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 RELATED WORK

2.1 Telepresence Systems

Among the many attempts to deliver the TP experience, we will
concentrate on the ones that utilize RGBD cameras and AR/VR
headsets.

In 2011, Maimone and Fuchs [18] implemented a TP system using
RGBD cameras and autostereoscopic monitors. In a subsequent
iteration of the system with the adoption of AR headsets [19], the
autostereoscopic displays were replaced with AR headsets, using
projectors to supplement the brightness of AR headsets as displays.
In 2012, Steed et al. [32] introduced Beaming, a TP system that
supports an asymmetric setting of a single person beaming into a
group of people. This asymmetric TP system has a VR system,
called the transporter, for one particular user, to face many people
on the other side.

In 2015, Robertset al. [29] introduced the withyou system. Users
of their system are inside cubic immersive displays based on projec-
tors and surrounded by multiple cameras. Also in 2015, Kowalski et
al. [13] introduced LiveScan3D, a 3D data acquisition system using
Kinect 2 devices. In 2017, the same scholars released an application
for HoloLens devices to render point clouds from LiveScan3D2.

In 2016, Room2Room [25] and Holoportation [24] were intro-
duced. Room2Room allows remote communication between people
in two different rooms. It captures a room using an RGBD cam-
era and displays it in the other room using a projector. In their
study where participants were asked to perform a collaborative as-
sembly task, the researchers found their system superior to video
chat in completion time, presence, and communication efﬁciency.
Holoportation captures users with multiple RGBD cameras to re-
construct them into high-quality textured meshes. Through these
meshes displayed on AR headsets, the system allows dyadic remote
communication.

In 2018, Kolkmeier et al. [12] introduced OpenIMPRESS, a
software toolkit for mixed reality remote collaboration systems.
With this system, a person can wear a VR headset with a hand
tracking system attached to communicate with a person at a remote
location who is wearing an AR headset.

2.1.1 Applications of Virtual Reality for Physical Therapy

There are many VR applications built for physical therapy, though
not many of them use VR for a TP experience. Most of them rather
apply ”solo” VR to provide instructions to the physical therapy
patients without having a therapist in place. A subset of these sys-
tems allows remote therapists to monitor physical therapy patients.
Many VR applications being introduced in this section will utilize
other hardware they consider VR, but not headsets. In these cases,
the researchers only aimed to utilize VR as 3D content, but not its
immersiveness.

With three adolescents with hemiplegic cerebral palsy, Golomb et
al. [7] conducted a clinical pilot study for 6 to 11 months using a
VR telerehabilitation application for their treatment. For using the
system, patients wore sensing gloves that could measure their hand
movements. Wearing these gloves, patients were able to practice
hand movements following gamiﬁed instructions from computer
monitors. The main lesson from the study the researchers state is
that ”remote electronic monitoring is not enough; humans must be
heavily involved in remote monitoring. Human contact and human
understanding are key to the success of telerehabilitation” [7, p. 27].
One approach for VR applications to provide physical therapy
instructions is through gamiﬁcation. Lange et al. [16] introduced
JewelMine, a game built for rehabilitation, utilizing the Kinect to
measure patient movements. Applying this VR gamiﬁcation ap-
proach for rehabilitation to the older population, Rendon et al. [28]
applied VR (i.e., Nintendo Wii Fit) and gamiﬁcation on improving

the balancing of older adults. In their study with 40 participants
between 60 and 95 years of age, the researchers found participants
who had used their application did signiﬁcantly better in the 8-foot
Up & Go test and the Activities-speciﬁc Balance Conﬁdence Scale.
VR has not only been used for providing instructions but also for
building instruction programs. Camporesi, Kallmann, and Han [5]
built a VR system that allows therapists to build new therapy pro-
grams intuitively by direct demonstration and automatic delivery of
these programs to the patients. Using the Kinect, their system can
capture movements from the therapist and record them as a therapy
program. Therapists can also monitor the activity of the patients.
This work has been further improved in subsequent research [11]. In
this system, patients can see the difference between their own move-
ments and therapists’ movements recorded for the therapy program
by visualization of joint angle errors.

In their effort to apply VR to treating Parkinson’s Disease patients,
Feng et al. [6] compared VR-based therapy to conventional physical
therapy in their 12-week study with 28 Parkinson’s Disease patients.
In this study, the researchers found that the group who used VR
outperformed the control group in terms of balance and gait after the
12 weeks compared to the group who received conventional physical
therapy.

While the existing systems are mostly for solo use, our study
will be based on a system built for remote communication between
therapists and patients. Our system also leverages the immersiveness
of VR headsets.

3 SYSTEM

The Telegie system consists of two applications: transmitter and
viewer. The transmitter sends RGBD streams from cameras to the
viewer, and the viewer renders the incoming RGBD streams to the
users as a point cloud. We render each point as a quad scaled to
correctly represent the ﬁeld of view of the RGBD camera. The
transmitter is supported for Windows 10 computers connected to
Azure Kinect and iOS devices equipped with RGBD cameras. The
viewer was built as a web application3 that can run on any device
with a web browser including VR headsets.

A TP call between two people—equivalent to a video conference
call—happens in three steps. First, one user creates a room using
their transmitter and obtains a room ID. Then the second user joins
the same room with their own transmitter using the obtained room
ID. Finally, both users enter the room using their viewers and start
communicating.

3.1 Number of External Cameras

For a TP system to work, there should be a way for the system to
capture its users to render them in front of others. While operating
without any external cameras would be ideal in terms of simplicity,
cameras attached on AR or VR headsets are too poorly positioned to
exclude all external cameras. The attached cameras are all right next
to the heads of their users that makes them much worse at capturing
bodies of the users than external cameras. For this reason, we chose
to have an external RGBD camera, but require only one external
RGBD camera per user to keep the installation of the system as easy
as possible. As it will be demonstrated in the following study, using
multiple cameras is supported to provide better visual quality, but
only as an option, not as a requirement.

3.2 Distances between People

TP systems can and should set the distance between people. With
recent AR studies with virtual humans ﬁnding similarity between
behavior towards real people and virtual humans [17, 21], personal
space literature [8] sheds light on this issue ﬁnding social context
as a major factor deciding which distance is the most preferable.

2https://github.com/MarekKowalski/LiveScan3D-Hololens

3https://telegie.com

For example, people prefer to maintain larger distances towards
strangers than towards their friends and, of course, than towards
their signiﬁcant others. Based on this contextual nature of distances,
we decided to provide a user interface to set the distances.

3.3 Transmitter-Viewer Pipeline
The transmitter-viewer pipeline of Telegie delivers color, depth, ﬂoor,
and audio information from a transmitter to a viewer. Color, depth,
and ﬂoor information form a video message for every camera frame.
For color information, color pixels get encoded in VP8 using libvpx4.
For depth information, depth pixels go through optional background
removal, mapping to the color camera’s coordinate system, and
Temporal RVL compression [10]. Floor information gets extracted
from depth pixels and audio information is encoded in the Opus
codec5 and gets sent separately from video messages.

3.4 Networking Between Transmitter and Viewer
For users to see each other, network packets including video mes-
sages should be sent from transmitters to viewers. To support view-
ers running on web browsers and connections outside of local net-
works, across routers and ﬁrewalls, we utilized libdatachannel6—an
implementation of WebRTC data channels. Unreliable data chan-
nels were used for real-time communication with lower latency. To
handle packet loss, our system adopted a fountain code—Wirehair7.
After splitting video messages into packets and encoding them in
Wirehair, Telegie transmitters send packets with 50% of redundancy.

4 STUDY
The study examined remote communication systems in the context
of remote physical therapy. There were two independent variables
with two conditions each: media type (VC vs. TP) and the number
of cameras (one camera vs. two cameras). With media type as a vari-
able, the effectiveness of a TP system (i.e., Telegie) was compared
to a VC system (i.e., Google Meet) in the context of general inter-
personal communication and as a tool for remote physical therapy.
With the number of cameras as a variable, using one camera for a
remote communication system—showing one angle of the patient
to the therapist was compared to having two cameras—providing
two angles to the therapist—in the context of general interpersonal
communication and as a tool for remote physical therapy.

4.1 Method
4.1.1 Participants

There were two types of participants: therapists and patients. For
therapists, 11 physical therapy students were recruited from a US
East Coast University. All therapist participants were enrolled in
a clinical Doctor of Physical Therapy curriculum. All completed
coursework relevant to their role, including therapeutic exercise, The
average age of the therapists was 24.455 years old (SD = 1.508).
Eight of them were female and three of them were male. Every
therapist was scheduled to meet eight patients.

Seventy-six participants were recruited from a US West Coast
University as patients. The participants were not actual patients
but received instructions from the physical therapists as they were
patients. The average age was 25.711 years old (SD = 6.685) across
47 female and 29 male patients. Nineteen patients were assigned for
the VC1 (VC with one camera) condition, 20 patients for the TP1
(TP with one camera) condition, 19 patients for the VC2 (VC with 2
cameras) condition, and 18 patients for the TP2 (telepresence with 2
cameras) condition. The recruitment and experiment processes were
approved by IRBs.

4https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libvpx
5https://opus-codec.org/
6https://github.com/paullouisageneau/libdatachannel
7https://github.com/catid/wirehair

4.1.2 Materials and Apparatus

Therapists and patients met each other for the physical therapy
sessions through monitors or VR headsets (i.e., Meta Quest 2). In
VC conditions, therapists saw patients on a TV screen, and in TP
conditions, therapists saw patients through a VR headset. Patients
interacted with the therapist through a tablet (i.e., iPad).
In all
conditions, therapists were captured by a webcam for the patients to
see. Patients were also captured by webcams in the VC conditions.
In the TP conditions, patients were captured by both webcams and
RGBD cameras (i.e., Azure Kinect) but only the RGBD streams
were shown to the therapist. There was a microphone placed in front
of both the therapists and patients.

4.1.3 Design and Procedure

This study was 2x2 factorial with the medium type (VC vs. TP) and
the number of cameras (one camera vs. two cameras) as its indepen-
dent variables. Due to the scarcity of therapists as participants, it was
a within-participant study for therapists and a between-participant
study for patients. Each therapist was scheduled for eight exper-
imental sessions, two sessions per each of the four experimental
conditions. The order of the conditions for the ﬁrst four sessions was
assigned based on the 4x4 Latin square. The latter four of the eight
sessions were the former four conditions repeated in the reverse
order. After the fourth therapist, the conditions were repeated by the
ﬁrst therapist.

Before the experiment, all participants answered questions on
demographics, prior VR experience, and were tested on their spatial
ability. Patients also answered whether they had prior physical
therapy experience. As the familiarity to the conditions may largely
differ (therapists likely had experience using VC1 but not with VC2
or the TP conditions), therapists spent 10 minutes getting used to the
experimental conditions before participating in the sessions. Patients
did not go through this step as they always saw the therapists through
a VC system with one camera on a tablet screen.

During the experimental sessions, the lab for the therapists had
only one webcam in front of the therapists. From the patient-side,
the lab had two webcams for VC and two RGBD cameras. One
webcam and an RGBD camera faced the front side of the patients
and another webcam and an RGBD camera faced the right side of
the patients at a 90 degree angle. During the sessions, all webcams
and microphones were recorded.

For the VC1 condition, the camera stream from the side camera
of the patient was hidden to the therapist. For the VC2 condition,
all camera streams were visible to the both type of participants. For
the TP conditions, the therapist was wearing a VR headset, thus was
not able to see the TV screen in front of them, effectively hiding
the VC camera streams from the therapists. For the TP1 condition,
the therapist was able to see the patient through the RGBD camera
placed in front of the patient. For the TP2 condition, the therapist
was able to see the patient through the front RGBD camera and the
side RGBD camera through their VR headset. Figure 1 demonstrates
how patients looked like to the therapists wearing VR headsets in
the TP1 condition.

During each session, the therapist gave instructions on six ex-
ercises for ﬁfteen minutes. Figure 2 includes captures of a person
performing the six exercises. Diverse exercises were chosen to
examine VC and TP from various different aspects. For example,
lunge requires the therapist to make sure the patient performs leg
movements with proper joint angles. Plank requires the therapist to
see whether the patient’s back is straight. The exercises were chosen
as they require the therapists to evaluate them from different planes
and angles simultaneously and would likely beneﬁt from having
3D spatial information.The therapists instructed two sets of each
exercise for the patients. After each session, both the therapists and
patients answered a post-questionnaire.

When therapists were done with all eight sessions, they were

interviewed by the experimenter who ran the study at their site. The
therapists answered questions comparing experimental conditions
with follow-up questions based on their answers.

Figure 2: Every session consists of six exercises: (1) lunge, (2)
elastic band bilateral horizontal abduction, (3) plank, (4) ball bridge
upper back, (5) side lying external rotation, and (6) squat.

4.1.4 Measures

Prior VR Experience Participants were asked whether they
have prior VR experience as it may affect the TP conditions. We only
asked whether they have prior experience, not the amount of prior
experience. Two out of the 11 therapists had prior VR experience
and 49 out of the 76 patients had prior VR experience.

Prior Physical Therapy Experience Patients were asked
whether they have prior physical therapy experience as familiar-
ity with physical therapy was expected to affect their performance.
We only asked whether they have prior experience, not the amount of
prior experience. Forty-ﬁve out of the 76 patients had prior physical
therapy experience.

Spatial Ability We measured the spatial ability of the individ-
uals through a mental rotation test [26, 31]. Five questions were
asking whether two ﬁgures are the same except for their orientations.
Spatial ability was predicted to relate to the task performance of
therapists and patients as they have to observe and evaluate body
movements from multiple viewpoints simultaneously. The average
score of therapists was 4.545 out of 5 (SD = 0.688), and the average
score of patients was 4.500 (SD = 0.825).

Interpersonal Communication After each experimental ses-
sion, participants were asked the level of social presence [9], com-
munication satisfaction [23], interpersonal liking [23], and Inclusion
of Other in the Self (IOS) [1] they have experienced during the
session. Due to being highly correlated with each other, these four
measures were examined together with their average as the interper-
sonal communication response (Cronbach’s α = 0.758 for therapists;
Cronbach’s α = 0.788 for patients). When taking the average, IOS
was rescaled to 1-5 from its original scale of 1-7 as other three
measures were asked by a 5-point Likert scale.

Video Clarity Participants were asked how clear the video
stream was after each experimental session in a 5-point Likert scale
question. The video clarity levels were asked as the TP system does
not have the same video quality as the VC system, mainly due to the
VC system being a mature commercial system and the TP system
being a relatively experimental system. The mean value was 3.066
(SD = 1.215) from the therapists and 3.829 (SD = 0.806) from the
patients.

Perceived Patient Motivation Therapists were asked how mo-
tivated the patient was in the experimental session in a 5-point Likert
scale question. The perceived patient motivation levels were asked
in an effort to capture the difference between the patients that cannot
be fully captured by measuring their spatial ability. The mean value
was 3.829 (SD = 0.839).

Therapist Assessments Leveraging that the therapists are
domain experts who can provide relatively objective measures of
the quality of the sessions, they were asked how well the patients
learned in terms of accuracy and quickness on 5-point Likert scales
per each exercise, which means 6 pairs of responses for each session.
While it was planned to examine accuracy and quickness separately,
due to their high correlation (Cronbach’s α = 0.917), they have been
merged as the therapist assessment. The mean value of therapist
assessments was 4.427 (SD = 0.543).

Physical Therapy Questionnaire for Patients Patients were
asked about their physical therapy experience after each experimen-
tal session. The 16 questions are originally from Bailenson et al. [2].
The responses were coded responses with higher levels representing
responses with more positive valence and their average score was
analyzed as the physical therapy evaluation from patients. The 16
questions were highly correlated to each other (Cronbach’s α =
0.895) and mean value was 3.623 (SD = 0.545).

Interviews Interviews of therapists were conducted and audio
recorded. The interview questions asked for comparison between
the experimental conditions.

4.2 Hypotheses and Research Question
Based on previous literature, it has been predicted TP to outperform
VC and that using two cameras to outperform using one camera.
Based on this, we predicted eight hypotheses expecting positive out-
comes from TP and using two cameras to four dependent variables
of interpersonal communication responses from therapists, interper-
sonal communication responses from patients, therapist assessments,
and physical therapy evaluations from patients. For example, be-
tween TP and interpersonal communication responses from ther-
apists, we hypothesized the level of interpersonal communication
responses from therapists will be higher in TP than in VC.

Additionally, whether the inclusion of extra variables—prior VR
experience, prior physical therapy experience, spatial ability of the
participants, video clarity of the media, or level of motivation of the
patients perceived by the therapists—to the previous hypotheses can
change the answers to the hypotheses was tested. This forms the
following research question:

• RQ1: Does including the following variables in the analyses
corresponding to the eight hypotheses affect their results: prior
VR experience, prior physical therapy experience, spatial abil-
ity of the participants, video clarity of the media, or level of
motivation of the patients perceived by the therapists?

5 RESULTS
At the beginning of this chapter, there will be an overview of the
measures, followed by the tested hypotheses. In Section 5.1 and 5.2,
the research question will be explored. In Section 5.3, interviews
with therapists and open-ended responses from patients will be
summarized.

Figure 3 provides the distributions of all four dependent variables
across experimental conditions. For the mean values and standard
deviations of the accuracy and quickness assessment of exercises
from therapists, see Table 1. The accuracy and quickness of the
patients were highly correlated in the positive direction (ρ = 0.788)
based on the assessments from the therapists.

All eight hypotheses proposed in Section 4.2 were tested, but none
of them were supported. In brief, no positive effects of TP or using
two cameras were found. See Table 2 for the results of the statistical

tests for the hypotheses. Each row of the table corresponds to one of
the four dependent variables we are examining. The columns TP and
Cameras contain cells with t and p-values from t-tests corresponding
to hypotheses.

Therapist Interpersonal
Communication
Patient Interpersonal
Communication

Therapist Assessment

Patient Physical
Therapy Evaluations

TP
t(73.451)=-1.025
p=0.309
t(73.061)=0.245
p=0.807
t(72.057)=-0.578
p=0.565
t(73.836)=0.854
p=0.396

Cameras
t(72.947)=0.408
p=0.684
t(72.238)=-0.449
p=0.655
t(73.981)=0.407
p=0.685
t(73.870)=-0.434
p=0.665

Table 2: The summary of statistical tests corresponding to the eight
hypotheses.

Figure 3: The distributions of the four dependent variables across
the experimental conditions.

Exercises
Lunge
Band
Plank
Ball
Rotation
Squat
Average

Accuracy
4.408 (0.751)
4.500 (0.663)
4.566 (0.660)
4.197 (0.966)
4.487 (0.622)
4.434 (0.736)
4.432 (0.551)

Quickness
4.368 (0.763)
4.408 (0.715)
4.553 (0.737)
4.171 (0.929)
4.526 (0.599)
4.500 (0.792)
4.421 (0.572)

Table 1: The mean values (and standard deviations) of therapist
assessments.

In the following, to ﬁnd the reason the initial expectations were
not supported, linear mixed models are used to explore the data. For
the computation of linear mixed models, we used lme4 1.1-27.1 [3].
Given all hypotheses were not supported, additional variables were
added to these models to understand why the hypotheses were not
supported. First, the analyses of therapist assessments are presented,
followed by analyses that expand on the other three dependent vari-
ables.

5.1 Therapist Assessments

Individual differences of both therapists and patients likely inﬂu-
enced therapist assessments. Figure 4 visualizes the cross-therapist
variation of the assessment scores.

Given the cross-therapist variation was larger than the cross-
condition variation (see Figure 3), to understand the effects of ex-
perimental conditions, there is a need to control the cross-therapist
variation. Therefore, a linear mixed model with the experimental
conditions as the ﬁxed effects and therapist identity added as a ran-
dom effect was examined. In this model, using two cameras was

Figure 4: The distributions of assessment scores from each of the
therapists.

found to have a marginally signiﬁcant positive effect (b = 0.246,
p = 0.093) on the assessment scores. The interaction between TP
and using two cameras was found to have a marginally signiﬁcant
negative effect (b = -0.358, p = 0.085).

5.1.1 Video Clarity

In the comparison between the TP system and the VC system that
were used for this study, the gap between video resolutions was
noticeable. The TP system (i.e., Telegie) had a lower resolution than
the VC system (i.e., Google Meet). As this difference was not an
inherent limitation of TP systems, but due to the lack of technical
maturity of the system, there is value in controlling the video clarity
levels of the two media.

As this video resolution difference was apparent prior to conduct-
ing the study, a question about the video clarity level was included in
the post-questionnaire. As expected, the video clarity level reported
by the therapists was highly correlated in the negative direction (ρ
= -0.75) with TP. The level reported from patients did not show
any correlation (ρ = 0.05), as patients were always watching the
tablet regardless of the experimental condition. See Figure 5 for the
distribution of video clarity per conditions. Figure 6 demonstrates
the positive slopes on assessment scores from both video clarity
levels.

The effects of experimental conditions with the inﬂuence of video
clarity controlled were examined with a linear mixed model with
video clarity levels as additional ﬁxed effects. In this model, TP had a
signiﬁcant positive effect (b = 0.384, p = 0.048), and the interaction
between TP and using two cameras had a marginally signiﬁcant
negative effect (b = -0.340, p = 0.097). Using two cameras did not
have a signiﬁcant effect (b = 0.177, p = 0.226). The video clarity
level reported by the therapists had a signiﬁcant positive effect (b
= 0.169, p = 0.026) on the assessment scores. Moreover, the video
clarity level reported by the patients had a marginally signiﬁcant
positive effect (b = 0.119, p = 0.078) on the assessment scores.

tested. Noticeably, only the spatial ability was found as a signiﬁcant
positive effect (b = 0.155, p = 0.021). The effects from experimental
conditions were no longer statistically signiﬁcant with the spatial
ability added to the model.

5.1.3 Perceived Patient Motivation

When the individual ability of a patient inﬂuences a physical therapy
session, not only their objective capability (e.g., spatial ability) but
also their motivation level during the session would matter. For
example, a patient with sufﬁcient capability to learn an exercise may
not show motivation, and due to this, have difﬁculty learning the
exercise. In their post-questionnaire, the therapists were asked to
report how motivated the patients seemed. The perceived patient
motivation level reported from therapists negatively correlated with
TP (ρ = -0.24) and positively correlated with therapist assessments
(ρ = 0.41). See Figure 8 for the distributions of reported motivations
levels per experimental conditions and the relationship between
motivation levels and assessment scores.

Figure 8: The distributions of perceived patient motivation levels
reported by therapists per condition (left) and the linear model from
perceived patient motivation levels reported by therapists to therapist
assessments (right).

To examine the effects of the experimental conditions with this
perceived motivation level controlled, a linear mixed model with
therapists’ perceived motivation level as an additional ﬁxed effect
was examined. In this model, using two cameras (b = 0.275, p =
0.062) and the interaction between TP and using two cameras (b
= -0.391, p = 0.060) showed the effects in the same directions they
showed in the model without the motivation level controlled. The
perceived motivation level had a signiﬁcant positive effect. In other
words, adding perceived patient motivation to the model did not
make a difference for the experimental conditions as effects, while
itself was found to have a signiﬁcant positive effect on therapist
assessments.

The effects of the genders of participants, prior VR experience,
and prior PT experience were also examined with adding them as
additional ﬁxed effects. However, no statistically signiﬁcant effect
was found from them.

5.2 Expansion to Other Dependent Variables

In the above Section 5.1, only therapist assessments were analyzed
leaving three other dependent variables to be examined: physical
therapy evaluations from the patients, interpersonal communication
responses from the therapists, and interpersonal communication
responses from the patients. In this section, the analyses on therapist
assessments will be expanded to the three other dependent variables.
Across Section 5.1, the inﬂuence of variables that have the po-
tential to affect the assessments scores were examined using linear
mixed models with the variables added as additional ﬁxed effects.
This approach to examining inﬂuences on the original model that

Figure 5: The distributions of video clarity levels reported by thera-
pists and patients per experimental condition.

Figure 6: Visualization of the linear models from video clarity levels
reported by therapists and patients on therapist assessments.

5.1.2 Spatial Ability

Individual abilities matter to task performance. Since the patient
was different for every physical therapy session of this study, the
individual ability of the patients should have inﬂuenced therapist
assessments. To examine this, the spatial ability of patients was
measured during the pre-questionnaire of the study with ﬁve spa-
tial ability questions. Figure 7 shows the positive slopes from the
measured spatial ability to the assessment scores. While the spatial
ability of therapists could have also inﬂuenced results, the measure-
ment of the spatial ability of the therapists lacked variation. There
was only one therapist who scored 3 out of the 11 therapists. Given
this, we concentrate on the spatial ability of the patients in the below
analysis.

Figure 7: Visualization of the linear models from spatial ability
levels of therapists and patients to therapist assessments.

To examine the effects of experimental conditions with the level
of spatial ability of the patients controlled, a linear mixed model
with the spatial ability of the patients added as a ﬁxed effect was

Additional
Fixed Effect
(Corresponding
Section)

None
(5.1)

Therapist
Video Clarity
(5.1.1)

Patient
Spatial Ability
(5.1.2)

Fixed Effect

TP
Cameras
TP × Cameras

TP
Cameras
Therapist Video Clarity
TP × Cameras

TP
Cameras
Patient Spatial Ability
TP × Cameras

Perceived
Patient Motivation
(5.1.3)

TP
Cameras
Perceived Patient Motivation
TP × Cameras

Therapist
Assessment

Patient
Physical
Therapy

Therapist
Interpersonal
Communication

Patient
Interpersonal
Communication

0.101
0.246†
-0.357†

0.403*
0.198
0.173*
-0.341

0.039
0.191
0.155*
-0.266

0.202
0.275†
0.225*
-0.391†

0.162
0.002
-0.093

0.329
-0.026
0.098
-0.080

0.174
0.012
-0.030
-0.110

0.198
0.012
0.089
-0.103

-0.130
0.088
-0.006

0.384*
0.008
0.297*
0.024

-0.157
0.064
0.069
0.035

0.088
0.154
0.496*
-0.080

-0.034
-0.163
0.181

0.043
-0.175
0.045
0.186

0.004
-0.137
-0.074
0.138

-0.056
-0.172
-0.054
0.189

Table 3: Estimated slopes and their p-values of the ﬁxed effects from the linear mixed models as the expansion of Section 5.1 to all four
dependent variables. Each column represents a dependent variable. (*: p < 0.050, †: p < 0.100)

only contains the effects of experimental conditions on the assess-
ment scores was expanded to the three other dependent variables.
See Table 3 for the estimated slopes of all linear mixed models that
resulted from this expansion. Video clarity level from therapists
was found to have the same inﬂuence on the interpersonal commu-
nication responses from therapists as it did on the physical therapy
assessment scores. Interestingly, the spatial ability level of patients
did not inﬂuence the interpersonal communication responses from
therapists whereas their perceived motivation level did. No signiﬁ-
cant effect was found for both patient responses to physical therapy
and interpersonal communication as dependent variables.

5.3 Open-ended Responses

5.3.1 Therapist Interviews

During their participation, all therapists were able to accumulate
experience across all four experimental conditions. And before the
interviews, they were immersed in our study for three hours. Lever-
aging this, we asked the therapists about their experience including
a comparison between the experimental conditions.

The most common issue of TP the therapists mentioned is that
they could not see themselves. This has been mentioned by all thera-
pists. Therapist #10 said, ”[I]f I was asked to do like a completely
new exercise, it would be very hard.” Therapist #11 said, ”I will say
that, surprisingly, easier to like, show the exercises without the VR
because I could also see myself in the zoom.”

Another issue mentioned by 10 therapists on TP was pixelation.
These comments were toward the insufﬁcient resolution of the depth
pixels, which was an issue since the resolution was downsampled
into half for both width and height to get low network latency guar-
anteed across the whole study. Therapist #3 said, ”around the knees,
like I can really only see like a knee cap.” Therapist #6 said, ”one
thing that I noticed when we are in the pixelation was you like can’t
that felt weird to me when she can’t see their face facial expression
or anything.”

Two therapists compared the issues of not being able to see them-
selves and pixelation. Both therapists found pixelation a larger issue
than not being able to see themselves. Therapist #8 said, ”I think the
pixelation was more frustrating. Because I just couldn’t really fully
see them. And like, what all their different positions.”

Four therapists said VC was better than TP. For example, Thera-
pist #4 said ” “And I will say that with a VR, it deﬁnitely was harder.
Like with it being pixelated, it was harder from like, my mindset
of like a therapist to pick out the things that I want to ﬁx. Because
it just wasn’t quite as clear to be like, oh, like, I can’t tell if I need
to have them move their feet a little bit further apart, or if that like

positioning wise, or if that’s what I’m seeing or what they’re actually
doing.”

Five therapists said TP2 is better than TP1 and three mentioned
they are similar. Describing TP2 as more preferred, therapist #6 said,
”I did notice the two cameras system. One, even though we’re still
having them turn to their side it was it was a clear image.”

Seven therapists mentioned that they preferred VC2 over VC1,
and two therapists said they prefer VC2 the most out of all condi-
tions. Therapist #3, mentioning their preference of VC2 over VC1,
said, ”Like when I was ﬁrst doing the two cameras, I was almost
exclusively looking at head on camera. So I feel like I was under
utilizing the second camera. Especially with the static movements.
Once we were getting into like the squat and lunge and stuff like
that. It was kind of nice to have that second camera to see the side,
which can be adjusted. You can just make the patient rotate. Yeah,
exactly. But you can’t see real time. So I think it was helpful to have
the second camera but maybe not like essential.” Describing VC2
as impersonal, Therapist #11 said, ”I also think the one felt more
impersonal, surprisingly. And I don’t have a speciﬁc reason for that
other than the fact that’s heating them on to just felt a little bit more
like I was there than seeing them just on like one screen. Yeah,”

Two therapists said they did not ﬁnd VC2 much better than VC1.
Therapist #7 said, ”Um, honestly, I was ﬁne with the one video like
the one camera. I don’t think the second camera added all that much.
Like there was a couple times where, you know, it was helpful to
have like ask the participant to go on a couple different positions.
But I don’t feel like there was that it only took like a couple seconds.
And it wasn’t didn’t seem like too much of a hassle.”

Six therapists said they felt higher social presence in TP. One
therapist said they felt lower social presence in TP due to the headset
covering their face. Therapist #5 said, ”[Y]ou almost want to like
reach towards the patient.” Therapist #9, mentioning lower social
presence, said, ”because of just of the pixels and the fact that I didn’t
like that half of my face was covered and goggles when I was trying
to talk to the patient.”

Five therapists mentioned having higher resolution would im-
prove TP. Therapist #9 said, ”I don’t know if that’s like, like a cost
and beneﬁt type thing. But I did think about that. If it could be more
high resolution that would be that would be even better.”

Five therapists said VR experience may help using TP. Therapist
#3 said, ”I think it was a lot more effective towards the end from
having practice. But also, yeah, I think I just felt more comfortable
with the VR in general.”

One therapist said the assessment questions did not work well
since many patients already knew the exercises. The therapist said,
”I think just a, maybe just a broad comment about the survey. It

did seem like a lot of the participants came in with a pretty good
understanding of mostly exercises. And so the question asking how,
how, like, well, they, they learned the exercise didn’t seem to be very
representative of the situation because I like if they already came in
knowing the exercise, there wasn’t a great way to answer like, how,
how, like, well, or quickly, they learned it.”

5.3.2 Patient Open-ended Responses

Patients were asked to leave additional comments, if they have any,
at the end of their post-questionnaire. As each patient only experi-
enced one condition, their comments did not include the comparison
between conditions.

Nineteen out of the 76 patients pointed out the tablet they used
for watching the therapist was too small or was placed too low. Two
out of the 76 patients mentioned the audio quality between them and
their therapists was poor.

6 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we examined the effect of using a TP system compared
to using a VC system and using two cameras to better capture the
patient for remote physical therapy. A large group of participants
were recruited given the study required the presence of a physical
therapist and two sites synchronously prepared to run the study.
There were 76 patients and 11 therapists.

Based on previous literature, positive effects were expected for
using the TP and two cameras for remote physical therapy. However,
none of the eight hypotheses were statistically signiﬁcant. Conse-
quently, we further explored regarding which additional variables
would affect the statistical tests conducted for the hypotheses. In
Section 5.1, With individual differences from therapists controlled,
we found a positive marginally signiﬁcant effect of using two cam-
eras and a negative marginally signiﬁcant effect from the interaction
between TP and using two cameras on therapist assessments.

In Section 5.1.1, we found using TP had a signiﬁcant positive
effect when the level of video clarity was controlled. Also, a positive
signiﬁcant effect from video clarity itself was found. In Section 5.1.2,
spatial ability of patients was found as a strong predictor therapist
assessments. In Section 5.1.3, it has been found that perceived pa-
tients’ motivation level reported by therapists predicts the assessment
scores.

With these analyses expanded to other dependent variables in
Section 5.2, the inﬂuences on therapist assessments were partially
replicated on interpersonal communication responses from therapists.
When video clarity was added as an additional ﬁxed effect to the
model on interpersonal communication responses from therapists,
again, TP showed a signiﬁcant positive effect.

With spatial ability controlled for the model on interpersonal
communication responses from therapists, unlike the model on ther-
apist assessments, there was no signiﬁcant effect. There are two
possible explanations of spatial ability improving the assessment
scores. One is that effects on both outcomes were coming from
the general ability of individuals and the other is that spatial ability
and task performance were actually relevant to each other. This
lack of an effect from spatial ability to interpersonal communica-
tion responses supports the latter explanation that spatial ability and
therapist assessments are actually relevant to each other.

None of the additional variables had signiﬁcant inﬂuence to re-
sponses from patients on physical therapy or interpersonal commu-
nication.

After the sessions, therapists were interviewed. Most of them
found the low resolution (10 out of 11 therapists) and the inability
to see themselves (all 11 therapists) in TP systems an issue. Four
therapists stated they prefer TP over VC. Five therapists said they
prefer using two cameras for TP having one camera and seven
therapists said they prefer having the additional camera for VC.

In interviews, therapists preferred to use a VC system with two
cameras than one camera. This matches the results from the linear
mixed model in Section 5.1 regarding the experimental conditions on
therapist assessments. However, this preference was shown clearer
in the interviews than found in the quantitative analyses. Also in the
interviews, many therapists preferred VC over TP.

Using two cameras with the TP system did not result in positive
outcomes compared to using one camera for TP, unlike in VC. To
better understand the reason, an independent rater was asked to
watch video recordings of the TP sessions with two cameras and
report the ratio the therapists were watching the patients from the
side. In other words, the rater checked whether the therapists actually
took the advantage of having the side camera. The independent rater
reported that the therapist was watching from the side 13.546%
of the time during the sessions. During seven sessions out of the
eighteen TP sessions with two cameras, therapists utilized the side
camera less than 10% of the time during the sessions. See the right
panel of Figure 1 to see a which regions of the video recordings
were counted by the raters as the therapists seeing the patients from
the side. When the therapists stayed in the regions outside of the
yellow markers, therapists were counted as utilizing the side camera.

6.1 Limitations

The video resolution of Telegie was lower than it could be. To
provide stable streaming, we downsampled both the color and depth
pixels captured by the Azure Kinect device into half per dimension.
The assessment scores from the therapists likely suffered from a
ceiling effect, having their average scores above 4 out of 5. A more
difﬁcult set of exercises should have been chosen.

The sample size of the study could have been larger. Due to the
difﬁculty of setting up a remote dyadic study across different time
zones with one in the dyad needing to be a physical therapist, the
sample size of the study is lower than ideal. With a larger sample
size, for example, the marginally signiﬁcant effects in Section 5.1
could have been analyzed in a clearer way.

6.2 Future Directions

In this study, due to the difﬁculty of setting up the TP system, we
did not ﬁnd a bidirectional TP condition realistic. As a result, only
the therapists wore VR headsets. The setup of the TP system can
be simpliﬁed. For example, calibration of the system when working
with multiple cameras should be automatic.

While we found patients’ spatial ability to predict their task perfor-
mance evaluated by therapists, we did not measure other abilities of
the patient that are not spatial ability. Other types of abilities should
be measured to tell whether it was the spatial ability in particular
that predicted the evaluation scores from therapists.

Measuring the impact of providing sufﬁcient TP experience to
the therapists can also be seen as a direction to explore. In our study,
most of the therapists were not only new to the TP system, many of
them did not have prior experience using VR. With experience, for
example, therapists may have better utilized the information from
the side cameras in TP.

6.3 Implications

From this study, the most obvious inﬂuence was found from video
clarity levels reported from the participants. With video clarity level
controlled across the experimental variables, TP had a positive effect,
while there was no positive effect without such control. Also, 10 out
of the 11 therapists mentioned low resolution as an issue of TP in
their interviews. From these observations, it is clear that ﬁdelity is a
factor that TP systems should not take lightly.

As a system for remote physical therapy, the goal should be having
enough resolution to capture facial expressions and exact positions
of the limbs. Another lesson from the interviews is the importance

[21] M. R. Miller, H. Jun, F. Herrera, J. Yu Villa, G. Welch, and J. N. Bailen-
son. Social interaction in augmented reality. PloS one, 14(5):e0216290,
2019.

[22] A. K. Mishra, M. Skubic, and C. Abbott. Development and preliminary
validation of an interactive remote physical therapy system. In 2015
37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 190–193. IEEE, 2015.
[23] C. Oh, F. Herrera, and J. Bailenson. The effects of immersion and
real-world distractions on virtual social interactions. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 22(6):365–372, 2019.

[24] S. Orts-Escolano, C. Rhemann, S. Fanello, W. Chang, A. Kowdle,
Y. Degtyarev, D. Kim, P. L. Davidson, S. Khamis, M. Dou, et al.
Holoportation: Virtual 3d teleportation in real-time. In Proceedings of
the 29th annual symposium on user interface software and technology,
pp. 741–754, 2016.

[25] T. Pejsa, J. Kantor, H. Benko, E. Ofek, and A. Wilson. Room2room:
Enabling life-size telepresence in a projected augmented reality envi-
ronment. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer-
supported cooperative work & social computing, pp. 1716–1725, 2016.
[26] M. Peters, B. Laeng, K. Latham, M. Jackson, R. Zaiyouna, and
C. Richardson. A redrawn vandenberg and kuse mental rotations
test-different versions and factors that affect performance. Brain and
cognition, 28(1):39–58, 1995.

[27] N. Postman. Media ecology: Communication as context. 1974.
[28] A. A. Rendon, E. B. Lohman, D. Thorpe, E. G. Johnson, E. Medina,
and B. Bradley. The effect of virtual reality gaming on dynamic balance
in older adults. Age and ageing, 41(4):549–552, 2012.

[29] D. J. Roberts, A. J. Fairchild, S. P. Campion, J. O’Hare, C. M. Moore,
R. Aspin, T. Duckworth, P. Gasparello, and F. Tecchia. withyou—an
experimental end-to-end telepresence system using video-based re-
construction. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing,
9(3):562–574, 2015.

[30] E. Saraee, S. Singh, K. Hendron, M. Zheng, A. Joshi, T. Ellis, and
M. Betke. Exercisecheck: remote monitoring and evaluation platform
for home based physical therapy. In Proceedings of the 10th inter-
national conference on PErvasive technologies related to assistive
environments, pp. 87–90, 2017.

[31] R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler. Mental rotation of three-dimensional

objects. Science, 171(3972):701–703, 1971.

[32] A. Steed, W. Steptoe, W. Oyekoya, F. Pece, T. Weyrich, J. Kautz,
D. Friedman, A. Peer, M. Solazzi, F. Tecchia, et al. Beaming: an asym-
metric telepresence system. IEEE computer graphics and applications,
32(6):10–17, 2012.

[33] J. Steuer. Deﬁning virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepres-

ence. Journal of communication, 42(4):73–93, 1992.

of letting the TP users see themselves. This suggests usage of
augmented reality technology for improvement of TP systems.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Aron, E. N. Aron, and D. Smollan. Inclusion of other in the self scale
and the structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 63(4):596, 1992.

[2] J. Bailenson, K. Patel, A. Nielsen, R. Bajscy, S.-H. Jung, and G. Kurillo.
The effect of interactivity on learning physical actions in virtual reality.
Media Psychology, 11(3):354–376, 2008.

[3] D. Bates, M. M¨achler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. Fitting linear mixed-
effects models using lme4. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823, 2014.
[4] S. R. Bolle, F. Larsen, O. Hagen, and M. Gilbert. Video conferencing
versus telephone calls for team work across hospitals: a qualitative
study on simulated emergencies. BMC Emergency Medicine, 9(1):1–8,
2009.

[5] C. Camporesi, M. Kallmann, and J. J. Han. Vr solutions for improving
physical therapy. In 2013 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 77–78. IEEE,
2013.

[6] H. Feng, C. Li, J. Liu, L. Wang, J. Ma, G. Li, L. Gan, X. Shang,
and Z. Wu. Virtual reality rehabilitation versus conventional physical
therapy for improving balance and gait in parkinson’s disease patients:
a randomized controlled trial. Medical science monitor: international
medical journal of experimental and clinical research, 25:4186, 2019.
[7] M. R. Golomb, M. Barkat-Masih, B. Rabin, M. Abdelbaky, M. Huber,
and G. Burdea. Eleven months of home virtual reality telerehabilitation-
lessons learned. In 2009 Virtual Rehabilitation International Confer-
ence, pp. 23–28. IEEE, 2009.

[8] L. A. Hayduk. Personal space: where we now stand. Psychological

bulletin, 94(2):293, 1983.

[9] F. Herrera, S. Y. Oh, and J. N. Bailenson. Effect of behavioral real-
ism on social interactions inside collaborative virtual environments.
Presence, 27(2):163–182, 2020.

[10] H. Jun and J. Bailenson. Temporal rvl: a depth stream compression
In 2020 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user
method.
interfaces abstracts and workshops (VRW), pp. 664–665. IEEE, 2020.
[11] M. Kallmann, C. Camporesi, and J. Han. Vr-assisted physical reha-
bilitation: Adapting to the needs of therapists and patients. In Virtual
realities, pp. 147–168. Springer, 2015.

[12] J. Kolkmeier, E. Harmsen, S. Giesselink, D. Reidsma, M. Theune,
and D. Heylen. With a little help from a holographic friend: The
openimpress mixed reality telepresence toolkit for remote collaboration
systems. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology, pp. 1–11, 2018.

[13] M. Kowalski, J. Naruniec, and M. Daniluk. Livescan3d: A fast and
inexpensive 3d data acquisition system for multiple kinect v2 sensors.
In 2015 international conference on 3D vision, pp. 318–325. IEEE,
2015.

[14] R. E. Kraut and R. S. Fish. Prospects for video telephony. Telecommu-

nications Policy, 19(9):699–719, 1995.

[15] C. T. Kydd and D. L. Ferry. Managerial use of video conferencing.

Information & Management, 27(6):369–375, 1994.

[16] B. Lange, S. Koenig, E. McConnell, C.-Y. Chang, R. Juang, E. Suma,
M. Bolas, and A. Rizzo. Interactive game-based rehabilitation using
the microsoft kinect. In Virtual Reality Conference, IEEE, pp. 171–172.
IEEE Computer Society, 2012.

[17] M. Lee, G. Bruder, T. H¨ollerer, and G. Welch. Effects of unaugmented
periphery and vibrotactile feedback on proxemics with virtual humans
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
in ar.
24(4):1525–1534, 2018.

[18] A. Maimone and H. Fuchs. Encumbrance-free telepresence system
with real-time 3d capture and display using commodity depth cameras.
In 2011 10th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality, pp. 137–146. IEEE, 2011.

[19] A. Maimone, X. Yang, N. Dierk, A. State, M. Dou, and H. Fuchs.
General-purpose telepresence with head-worn optical see-through dis-
plays and projector-based lighting. In 2013 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR),
pp. 23–26. IEEE, 2013.

[20] M. McLuhan. Understanding media: The extensions of man. 1964.

