© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

Action-Speciﬁc Perception & Performance on a Fitts’s Law Task
in Virtual Reality: The Role of Haptic Feedback

Panagiotis Kourtesis, Sebastian Vizcay, Maud Marchal, Member, IEEE,
Claudio Pacchierotti, Senior Member, IEEE, Ferran Argelaguet

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
0
4
7
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Illustration of the Action-Speciﬁc Effects on Size, Distance, and Time Perception.

Abstract—While user’s perception and performance are predominantly examined independently in virtual reality, the Action-Speciﬁc
Perception (ASP) theory postulates that the performance of an individual on a task modulates this individual’s spatial and time
perception pertinent to the task’s components and procedures. This paper examines the association between performance and
perception and the potential effects that tactile feedback modalities could generate. This paper reports a user study (N=24), in which
participants performed a standardized Fitts’s law target acquisition task by using three feedback modalities: visual, visuo-electrotactile,
and visuo-vibrotactile. The users completed 3 Target Sizes × 2 Distances × 3 feedback modalities = 18 trials. The size perception,
distance perception, and (movement) time perception were assessed at the end of each trial. Performance-wise, the results showed that
electrotactile feedback facilitates a signiﬁcantly better accuracy compared to vibrotactile and visual feedback, while vibrotactile provided
the worst accuracy. Electrotactile and visual feedback enabled a comparable reaction time, while the vibrotactile offered a substantially
slower reaction time than visual feedback. Although amongst feedback types the pattern of differences in perceptual aspects were
comparable to performance differences, none of them was statistically signiﬁcant. However, performance indeed modulated perception.
Signiﬁcant action-speciﬁc effects on spatial and time perception were detected. Changes in accuracy modulate both size perception
and time perception, while changes in movement speed modulate distance perception. Also, the index of difﬁculty was found to
modulate all three perceptual aspects. However, individual differences appear to affect the magnitude of action-speciﬁc effects. These
outcomes highlighted the importance of haptic feedback on performance, and importantly the signiﬁcance of action-speciﬁc effects on
spatial and time perception in VR, which should be considered in future VR studies.

Index Terms—Spatial perception, time perception, accuracy, reaction time, electrotactile, vibrotactile, Fitts Law.

1 INTRODUCTION

Virtual reality is considered an effective tool to study perception [71]
and performance [2]. However, VR studies either examine perceptual
processes (e.g., [6, 32, 78]) or performance-related aspects (e.g., [35,
58, 65]). In contrast with this trend in VR studies, the Action-Speciﬁc
Perception (ASP) theory, based on Gibson’s ecological approach to
perception [26], postulates that the ability of an individual to perform a
task modulates the individual’s perception of this task’s components
and procedures (see Fig. 1) [73]. Furthermore, since the ability of an
individual changes over time, due to various reasons, this individual’s

• P. Kourtesis, S. Vizcay, and F. Argelaguet are with Inria, Univ Rennes, IRISA,

CNRS – 35042 Rennes, France. E-mail: name.surname@inria.fr.

• M. Marchal is with the Univ Rennes, INSA, IRISA, Inria, CNRS – 35042

Rennes, France and Institut Universitaire de France.

• C. Pacchierotti is with the CNRS, Univ Rennes, IRISA, Inria – Rennes 35042,

France.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

perception is altered correspondingly. However, the ability is not the
only factor affecting perception. The difﬁculty of the task or required
effort (e.g., climbing a hill with a heavy backpack and without it) also
modulates perception [54]. In VR, the only study that examined ASP is
that of Laitin et al., [41]. However, this study examined only the effect
of the observer’s perceived effort/difﬁculty on distance perception, and
it did not assess performance and/or interaction in VR (e.g., walking
to the hill), nor other perceptual aspects (e.g., size or time perception).
Thus, it has not been examined whether ASP is valid also in VR. If
ASP’s validity in VR would be conﬁrmed (i.e., how well the user
interacts with the virtual environment alters the user’s perception of
the virtual environment), it would affect how the components of and
the interactions within the virtual environment should be designed,
especially when an adaptive and/or personalized design is desired.

In VR, haptic feedback devices have been used to improve user expe-
rience and performance [55]. Passive haptic feedback has been found to
increase performance on Fitts’s law tasks [33, 64]. Similarly, an electro-
vibration haptic interface/display was observed to improve performance
on a Fitts’s law task [79]. Though, passive haptic feedback and haptic
displays are not preferred in VR, since VR applications require haptic
devices with increased wearability and portability [16, 45, 47, 49]. In
this respect, vibrotactile handheld devices are the most widely used

1

Size Perception & AccuracyDistance  Perception & SpeedTime Perception & AccuracyPerception of Target's Size When User is More AccurateActual SizePerception of Target's SizeWhen User is Less AccuratePerception of Distance When User Moves Faster  Actual DistancePerception of Distance When User Moves SlowerActual Time Passage1.25 sec0.75 sec1 secPerceived Time Passage When User is More AccuratePerceived Time PassageWhen User is Less Accurate 
 
 
 
 
 
haptic feedback devices in VR for improving user experience and per-
formance [55].

However, the vibrotactile has scarcely been examined against other
haptic modalities in VR. Vibrotactile has mechanical elements which
make it less wearable, more power-consuming, and slower [18, 34, 49].
An effective alternative to vibrotactile, could be the electrotactile feed-
back that is both portable and wearable, with lower power consumption
and a high spatial and temporal resolution [18, 34, 37]. However, elec-
trotactile and vibrotactile have not yet been compared in terms of user’s
performance in VR.

Electrotactile feedback has been seen as a promising haptic medium
for implementations in VR [37]. However, its application in VR has not
been extensively scrutinized. Pamungkas and Ward [51] used electrotac-
tile feedback to render thermal (e.g., heat) and textural (e.g., roughness)
tactile sensations. Hummel et al., [28] observed that electrotactile
feedback substantially improved grasping accuracy. Finally, Vizcay et
al., [69] found that unimodal and bimodal (visuo-) electrotactile had
a signiﬁcant positive impact on contact accuracy. However, electro-
tactile has not yet been compared with vibrotactile, especially on a
standardized target acquisition (Fitts’s law) task.

While it is considered that vibrotactile improves performance, there
are discrepant ﬁndings in the literature. Some studies reported that
vibrotactile improves reaction time but not accuracy [13]. Some other
studies reported worse reaction time [9, 40] or accuracy [15, 17] when
using vibrotactile. Lastly, some studies indicated that there is no effect
(positive or negative) at all [67, 70]. Also, vibrotactile feedback was
found to facilitate worse performance than visual feedback [15, 17].
However, these discrepancies may have emerged due to the use of di-
verse non-standardized tasks with substantially different requirements.
The implementation of a standardized task such as a Fitts’s law
task would have enabled an examination of the performance beneﬁts
mediated from the use of each haptic feedback, as well as a scrutiny
of any related action-speciﬁc effects on perception. Fitts’s law tasks
are traditional target acquisition tasks in human-computer interaction
(HCI) that can assess performance in terms of both speed and accuracy,
and also consider the (objective) index of difﬁculty of the task [44].
While Fitts’s law was initially developed and examined in 2D spaces,
its applicability in 3D spaces [46, 48] and VR HMDs [7, 19] has been
conﬁrmed. Also, a Fitts’s law task is standardized by the ISO 9241-
400:2007 [31] for the ergonomics of human-system interaction.

This paper offers a users’ performance (accuracy and reaction time)
comparison amongst visuo-electrotactile, visuo-vibrotactile, and visual-
only feedback on a Fitts’s law task in VR, and a scrutiny of the per-
formance (accuracy and speed) and task’s difﬁculty effects on size,
distance, and (movement) time perception. The contributions of this
paper and user study (N=24) can hence be summarized as follows:

• Conducted the ﬁrst comparison of the effects of the electrotactile,
vibrotactile, and visual-only feedback modalities on performance.

• Conducted the ﬁrst comprehensive examination of the ASP in

VR, based on the performance on a Fitts’s law task.

• Provided evidence that the ASP assessment is a more parsimo-
nious method for evaluating the impact of haptic and input devices
on performance.

• Provided evidence that the user’s performance, concerning the
interaction with the components of a virtual environment, affects
how the user perceives the virtual environment.

• Provided a new utility of the index of difﬁculty of Fitts’s law for
predicting and explaining action-speciﬁc effects on perception.

2 RELEVANT WORK
Fitts’s law is a predictive model of human movement that has been
widely used in HCI and ergonomics [44]. Based on the Shan-
non–Hartley theorem for information transmission, Paul Morris Fitts
[25], and later, Scott Mackenzie [44] proposed an equation (see Equa-
tion 1), where the width of targets (W ) and the distance between targets

(D) in a pointing selection task, deﬁne the required human movement
in units of bits, which also resembles the task’s index of difﬁculty
(ID). The Fitts’s law task and metrics have been adopted by the ISO
9241-400:2007 of the International Organization for Standardization,
regarding the ergonomics of human-system interaction [31]. A Fitts’s
law task hence is a standardized way to assess performance facilitated
by various input devices and haptic devices. However, the electrotac-
tile feedback has never been examined in a Fitts’s law task, and the
vibrotactile has not been extensively examined in such tasks, albeit its
extensive application in VR.

ID = log2

(cid:18) D
W

(cid:19)

+ 1

(1)

2.1 Performance & Vibrotactile Feedback in VR

In the literature, there are discrepant results regarding the performance
beneﬁts of vibrotactile feedback. In a meta-analysis of visuo-tactile
feedback on human performance, the authors concluded that the ad-
dition of vibrotactile improves reaction time, but not accuracy [13].
However, the meta-analysis also indicated the presence of several dis-
agreements amongst the ﬁndings of diverse studies. In contrast with
the meta-analysis conclusions, two studies found that the vibrotactile
increases reaction time (i.e., slower) instead of improving it [9, 40].
Also, the vibrotactile was found to enable a worse accuracy compared
to the visual feedback [15, 17]. However, the discrepancies amongst
the ﬁndings may be attributed to the use of diverse displays or tasks,
with substantially different requirements.

In contrast, Fitts’s law tasks are standardized tasks, which may
provide more reliable inferences and conclusions. In a Fitts’s law task in
non-immersive VR, the vibrotactile has been found to improve selection
time compared to none feedback conditions (i.e., also an absence of
visual feedback) [66]. However, this study did not provide visual
feedback to facilitate comparison against vibrotactile, and it was in
normal screen display (non-VR). In contrast, using a Fitts’s law task in
VR (stereoscopic display), the visual feedback facilitated a substantial
better selection time than the visuo-vibrotactile condition [12]. The
study that seems more proximal to ours, is the study of Ariza et al., [5].
In their study, no signiﬁcant differences were detected among visual,
vibrotactile, and visuo-vibrotactile conditions in performance on a
Fitts’s law task in VR. However, signiﬁcantly longer correction phases
were in vibrotactile condition, which may indicate slower reaction
times.

2.2 Performance & Electrotactile Feedback in VR

Electrotactile feedback involves the application of a mild electrical
stimulation to the skin, that bypasses the skin’s mechanoreceptors, and
directly activates the nerve endings, which then elicit corresponding
tactile sensations [18, 34, 37]. A local subdermal polarization by two
or more electrodes produces an electrical current, which then activates
the nerve endings. This electrotactile stimulation thus requires the
placement of thin electrodes at the sensation point (e.g., the ﬁngertip).
Due to its reduced requirements (i.e., a single stimulator for multiple
contact points, and the respective number of electrodes), compared to
other haptic devices, the electrotactile devices have more potential to
achieve enhanced wearability and portability.

The literature pertinent to electrotactile feedback in VR is limited
since the technology has recently re-emerged. Also, the electrotactile
feedback has not been examined before in a Fitts’s law task. Previous
implementations of electrotactile feedback in VR facilitated substantial
improvements in users’ performance [37]. In a drilling teleoperation
task in VR, the use of electrotactile feedback showed improved ac-
curacy and speed [50]. Similarly, in another robotic teleoperation in
VR, the performance while using electrotactile feedback was compa-
rable to the physical real-life control via exoskeleton [56]. Also, in
the follow-up study, where there was not any teleoperation involved,
the electrotactile feedback assisted the users to have a more accurate
grasping performance in VR [28].

Finally, the study of Vizcay et al., [69] seems to be the closest to
our study. In their study, the users performed a contact task in VR.

2

© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

The electrotactile feedback signiﬁcantly improved the contact accuracy,
while the visuo-electrotactile feedback facilitated the best accuracy.
However, the performance beneﬁts were detected only after the 2nd
calibration of electrotactile feedback, suggesting that a suitable intensity
of electrotactile feedback is required to observe performance beneﬁts.

2.3 ASP, Performance, & Task’s Difﬁculty

The ASP theory suggests that performance and the difﬁculty of a task
modulate the perception of the task’s components and procedures [26,
73]. However, a crucial point is that the action-speciﬁc effects are
signiﬁcant only when there is an intention to act or the act has already
been performed [72]. In VR, we could say that the interactability of the
components of a virtual environment is the prerequisite to observing
action-speciﬁc effects on perception. Moreover, these action-speciﬁc
effects have been repeatedly identiﬁed and conﬁrmed in sports. More
accurate soft-ball players perceived the ball as bigger [75]. Also, tennis
players who were more efﬁcient and accurate while returning the ball,
perceived the ball’s travelling time as slower [76]. In hiking, hikers
with a heavy backpack perceived the distance as longer [54]. Note that
the aforementioned action-speciﬁc effects are two-directional (e.g., less
accurate soft-ball hitters perceived the ball as smaller).

However, ASP is not valid only in sports. The action-speciﬁc effects
on perception have also been detected in other populations and settings.
Individuals who were weighted more [63] and chronic pain patients [74]
perceived distances longer. Also, while playing a custom version of
the videogame Pong, participants perceived the ball’s movement faster
when the paddle was smaller (i.e., increased difﬁculty) and they were
less accurate, while when the paddle was larger and the participants
were more accurate, then they perceived the ball’s movement slower
[77]. However, this study used a non-standardized 2D task, where
they manipulated only 2 levels of difﬁculty with large differences
between them (i.e., the paddle’s height was either 1.86 cm or 9.28 cm),
and they investigated only size perception (of the paddle). Also, this
study substantially differs from VR, where the interaction is facilitated
directly by hand movements with 6 DoF. The only study of ASP study
that was conducted in VR was that of Laitin et al., [41]. However,
in this study, the VR users were just observers of hills. The walking
distances over steep hills were perceived by the participants as longer.
Nevertheless, this study examined only the effect of difﬁculty (i.e.,
steep hills) on distance perception of observers in VR, and it did not
examine users’ performance. Hence, this study did not investigate the
user’s performance or interaction with the virtual environment, and it
did not provide evidence of whether the user’s performance affects the
user’s perception of the virtual environment.

Nevertheless, the over-conﬁrmatory ASP ﬁndings and their repli-
cation has raised criticism that the observed action-speciﬁc effects on
perception (or some of them) have been by-products of a response-
bias [23, 41]. To address this criticism, the El Greco evaluation method
has been suggested for detecting ﬁndings mediated from response-
biases [23,24]. This method takes its name from the famous renaissance
painter who used to draw thin and long ﬁgures in his paintings. The
rationale is that if El Greco had a sight or brain-related issue, then he
would also see the canvas elongated. So, if he had seen the real-world
elongated, then he would have also seen his painting elongated, so the
one effect would have cancelled the other effect, and the ﬁgures on his
paintings would have been normally portrayed, and not elongated.

A comparable logic has been implemented in ASP studies to eval-
uate action-speciﬁc effects. Hence, if an action-speciﬁc effect on a
target object’s perception is truly present, then it should also be present
for the reference object. Consequently, after an initial evaluation of
the action-speciﬁc effects on the target (e.g., asking participants to
indicate the size of an object that they have previously interacted with),
providing explicit feedback (i.e., a reference object) to the participants,
by showing them the target object in its true form, would cancel the
related action-speciﬁc effects, and then the participants would change
their responses to match the reference object. If there is a signiﬁcant
difference between the initial evaluation and the El Greco evaluation,
then this conﬁrms the existence of action-speciﬁc effects on the percep-
tion of the target object. Inversely, a non-signiﬁcant difference between

the initial evaluation and the El Greco evaluation suggests the existence
of response biases.

2.4 Summary
Based on this literature review, the performance beneﬁts of electrotac-
tile and vibrotactile feedback in VR have not been previously compared,
especially on a standardized task like a Fitts’s Law target acquisition
task. Also, the performance gains of using electrotactile feedback in
VR have scarcely been investigated. Notably, electrotactile feedback
effects on a Fitts’s law task have not been previously evaluated. Simi-
larly, the ASP has not been investigated comprehensively on one task
(i.e., one performance affects the size, distance, and time perception).
Notably, the ASP has not yet been examined whether it is valid in
VR. Moreover, the evidence supporting ASP is derived from either
real-world cases that are considered extreme (e.g., professional sports
players and disabled patients) or from extreme digital cases (e.g., tiny
or large paddles, and steep hills). The VR users are not extreme cases
(e.g., patients or professional players) and the interactable objects in the
virtual environments do not have enormous size differences. Thus, the
current study attempts to address all the above gaps by evaluating and
comparing the performance facilitated by electrotactile and vibrotactile
feedback on a Fitts’s Law task; examining the ASP comprehensively
(i.e., size, distance, and time) and whether the ASP is valid in VR; and
investigating whether the ASP is valid in non-extreme populations and
situations.

3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
This experiment will endeavour a comparison amongst visuo-
electrotactile, visuo-vibrotactile, and visual feedback in terms of perfor-
mance (accuracy, selection and reaction time) on a Fitts’s law task and
action-speciﬁc effects on perception. Importantly, we aim to scrutinize
the effects of performance and index of difﬁculty of Fitts’s law on size,
distance, and time perception in VR.

3.1 Fitts’s Law Task
3.1.1 User-Centred Design
Gaming and/or computing ability may affect the performance of users.
However, this has predominantly been seen in controller-based inter-
action. In contrast, ergonomic and naturalistic interactions have been
found to signiﬁcantly mitigate the effects of gaming ability on perfor-
mance, facilitating a comparable performance between gamers and
non-gamers [39]. Consequently, we opted for an ergonomic and natu-
ralistic interaction for performing the selection task, where the user has
a virtual hand with a predeﬁned pose (i.e., a slightly ﬁrm ﬁst with the
index ﬁnger pointing; see Fig. 2) that is being collocated with user’s
physical hand by using a Vive tracker v2.0 placed on their wrist.

In selection tasks, an important point of consideration is the “Heisen-
berg effect”, which suggests that a conﬁrmation action (e.g., pressing a
button on the controller) simultaneously with the pointing action (i.e.,
maintaining the pointer on the target) may affect the accuracy of the
selection [3]. To avoid a “Heisenberg effect”, the conﬁrmation in the
selection task is automatic. The user is just required to point at the
target for a predeﬁned time (i.e., a second) to select the target.

Furthermore, another factor that may affect performance is the occlu-
sion of the target, which especially occurs in cluttered environments [3].
To address this issue, we ensured that the ﬁeld of view from the seated
position of the users is well beyond the task area. Hence, the user
always sees all the 12 targets. Also, the smallest target’s width was
deﬁned to be 2 cm to avoid being occluded by the virtual index ﬁnger.
Finally, to avoid confusion about the next target, we used a yellow
highlight (see Fig. 2) that informs the user which the next target is.

Additionally, the virtual hand representation may affect both the
sense of presence and performance [36]. A realistic virtual hand that
is also well collocated with the physical hand can elicit a strong sense
of hand agency and ownership [4]. However, the hand’s gender should
match the user’s gender [57]. Correspondingly, we used two realistic
virtual hands, one for each gender, which were collocated (see mention
to tracker above) with the user’s hand. Also, there was a left or right
virtual hand for each gender to match their dominant hand. Finally,

3

to consolidate realism, the virtual hands could not interpenetrate the
virtual objects (i.e., they were colliding, with respective hand-bending
animations).

Finally, the use of color-blind friendly colors addresses accessibility
issues pertinent to color-blind individuals, as well as facilitates a further
improvement of the ease of access to non- color-blind individuals that
may ameliorate their performance [29]. For this target selection task,
we used 4 colors from the Okabe-Ito palette, which have previously
been found effective for providing a color-blind friendly discrimination
amongst them [29]. Thus, black was used for the background of the
task, orange for the targets, blue for the visual feedback (i.e., a loading
circle around the target, indicating that it is being selected), and yellow
for the highlight circle indicating the next target (see Fig. 2).

the dominant hand. The communication with the PC was made through
an Bluetooth 3.0 at 115.2 bps. The electrical stimulation consists of
square pulses with a pulse width of 500 µs and being delivered at a
frequency of 200 Hz. This electrotactile device has effectively been
implemented in other studies (e.g., [30, 69]).

For the vibrotactile feedback, we used a standard commercial 5mm
vibration motor [1] capable of vibrating at a frequency between 120
and 280 Hz, which was also placed at the ﬁnger pad of the dominant
hand and controlled (vibration’s amplitude) by an Atmega 328 micro-
controller attached on the Arduino board. The communication with the
PC was through an RN42 Bluetooth module (v 3.0) connected to an
Arduino mini pro 3.3 V. This vibrotactile device has efﬁciently been
implemented in other studies (e.g., [14, 21]).

3.2.2 Dynamic vs Binary Feedback

The electrotactile device has been previously used to offer dynamic
feedback proportionally to the contact’s accuracy [69]. So, we intended
to implement a similar mechanism, where the feedback’s intensity
would be stronger when the contact point (with the target) is closer
to the target’s centre. Also, the visual-feedback (i.e., a blue loading
circle around the target; see Fig. 2) could offer dynamic feedback,
where the speed (0-1) of loading was analogous to the distance from the
centre. We thus conducted a pilot study (N=5) to explore whether the
vibrotactile can offer dynamic feedback comparable to the electrotactile
one. Unfortunately, all participants reported an effortless identiﬁcation
of latency among the various amplitude changes. This noticeable delay
was attributed to the mechanical parts of the vibrotactile device that
require more time to change the vibration’s frequency (i.e., strength).
However, there was no perceived latency regarding a binary mode
(i.e., activation/deactivation) of feedback. For this reason, we opted to
offer a binary mode of feedback for every type (visual, electrotactile,
and vibrotactile), where the feedback is either activated or deactivated,
to provide a comparable tactile sensation, which will allow a fairer
comparison between them. The results of our pilot and the preference
for a binary type of feedback are in line with the ﬁndings of Ariza et
al., [5], where the binary vibrotactile feedback enabled a substantially
better performance on a Fitts’s law task, compared to the dynamic
vibrotactile feedback. Consequently, in our study, the feedback is
provided (activated) when the user’s index ﬁnger is colliding with the
target until the selection of the target. At the selection of the target, the
target disappears, which automatically deactivates all types of feedback.

3.2.3 Calibration

The amplitude of the electrical stimulation was determined by the par-
ticipant via a calibration procedure to ensure a perceivable and not
unpleasant sensation. To guarantee an optimal intensity of the elec-
trotactile feedback during the task’s performance, the calibration was
performed twice, once at the very beginning of the VR exposure (initial
calibration), and then just before the electrotactile condition (actual
calibration). During calibration, participants could set the intensity
to any value between 0.1 and 9.0 mA. Since the vibrotactile is a very
familiar sensation (e.g., extensively used on smartphones and tablets), it
was calibrated just once. Comparably to the electrotactile feedback, just
before the vibrotactile condition, participants performed a calibration to
determine the strength of the vibrotactile feedback that they prefer. The
calibration of electrotactile and vibrotactile was performed in VR by
interacting with a VR slider bar (see Fig. 3), where movement towards
the right side was increasing the intensity, and towards the left side was
decreasing it.

3.3 ASP Evaluation

The action-speciﬁc effects were assessed directly after the completion
of the Fitts’s law task in each trial. The participants by using a plus,
a minus, and a conﬁrmation button, could correspondingly increase,
decrease, and conﬁrm their responses (see Fig. 4). The participants had
to indicate the target size, the distance between the targets, and the time
required to go from one target to the other.

Fig. 2. Fitts’s Law Task (Top) and Visual Feedback (Bottom).

3.1.2 Task Design & Index of Difﬁculty

The task was designed by following the guidelines of ISO 9241-
400:2007 [31]. Correspondingly, the targets were placed in a vertical
plane to offer the optimal ergonomics for seated participants. The
Fitts’s law task included 12 targets placed in a circular form with equal
distances, from one to the next target. The hand movement trajectory
for selecting all the targets was forming a star-like shape (see Fig. 2).
The user had to select each target twice, thus, the user had to complete
two rounds in each trial. The targets in each trial had a different width.
There were 3 target sizes: 1) small (diameter = 2 cm); 2) medium (di-
ameter = 3 cm); 3) large (diameter = 4 cm). Also, the distance between
the targets had two different lengths: 1) Short = 40 cm; 2) Long = 80
cm. Using the Fitts’s Law equation (see Equation 1) [25], we calculated
six (3 target sizes × 2 distances) indexes of difﬁculty, one for each
combination of target size with distance length. The calculated IDs are:
Long-Small = 4.4; Long-Medium = 4.1; Long-Large = 3.8; Short-Small
= 3.5; Short-Medium = 3.2; Short-Small = 2.9.

3.2 Feedback Design

3.2.1 Tactile Feedback Devices

For the electrotactile feedback, we used a multichannel electrical stim-
ulator with an electrode placed at the ﬁnger pad of the index ﬁnger of

First, the participants had to change and indicate the size of two
targets with a starting diameter = 1cm. In each press, the plus and

4

Hand Movement Trajectory                                        Fitts Law Task                                                  Target Selection - Visual Feedback         Yellow Highlight For Next Target© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

score, 13 participants were above the median of 6.5 (i.e., skilled), and 11
participants were below it (i.e., low skills or no experience). Likewise,
the participants had a gaming frequency (range = 1 − 6) mean(SD) =
3.46(2.11), ability (range = 1 − 6) mean(SD) = 3.50(1.51), and an
overall gaming experience (range = 2 − 12) mean(SD) = 7.18(3.42).
Based on the gaming experience score, 14 participants were skilled
(i.e., gamers above the median score of 6.5) and 10 were poorly skilled
(i.e., non-gamers) below the median.

Set Up: We followed the ISO 9241-400:2007 [31] for offering an
ergonomic interaction for seated participants. The distance between the
seated position of the participant to the Fitts’s Law or ASP task was 50
cm. The height of the centre of the tasks was 110 cm to approximate the
head’s height in a seated position (see Fig. 5). We used a valve index
HMD with v2 lighthouse stations to immerse and track the participants’
dominant hands and heads. A v2 Vive tracker was placed on the wrist
of participants to track their hand and collocate it with the virtual
hand. The electrotactile stimulator was attached to the participants’
forearms by using an armband. Similarly, the vibrotactile actuator
was attached to the forearm (behind the electrotactile stimulator) by
using another armband (see Fig. 5). The participants had both the
electrotactile stimulator and the vibrotactile actuator attached to their
forearm in all conditions to mitigate any confounding factors pertinent
to ergonomics. By using tape, the electrode and the vibro-motor were
attached either to the index ﬁnger pad (i.e., distal phalanx) or the
thumb’s ﬁnger pad, based on the experimental block. For example, in
the vibrotactile condition, the vibro-motor was attached to the index and
the electrode to the thumb. Also, an adjustable Velcro was used during
the electrotactile condition, to maintain a mild yet constant pressure,
and ensure good contact between the skin and the electrode.

Fig. 5. Experimental Set Up: Haptic Devices & Tracking (Left) and
Participant Performing the Fitts’s Law Task (Right).

3.4.1 Procedure
The experiment was developed in Unity 3D. Amazon Polly’s neural text-
to-speech was used for creating audio ﬁles for the verbal instructions
in VR. Before getting immersed, the participants ﬁlled out a question-
naire with their demographic data, such as age, sex, educational level,
frequency of and ability in playing videogames, and frequency of and
ability in using VR. Also, the experimenter described the experimental
procedures to the participants and emphasized the importance of perfor-
mance in terms of both speed (moving fast from one target to the other)
and accuracy (aiming at the centre of the target). In VR, the participants
ﬁrstly calibrated the electrotactile feedback (initial calibration). Then,
the participants went through an audio-visual (i.e., video and verbal
instructions) tutorial about the Fitts’s Law task and ASP task. The
participants also completed a practice trial for each task.

There were 3 blocks, one for each feedback type: visual-only, visuo-
electrotactile, visuo-vibrotactile. At the beginning of each block, the
experimenter was placing the respective tactile compartment (i.e., elec-
trode or vibro-motor) at the participant’s index pad, before allowing
(pressing the space bar) the participant to continue. During the place-
ment of the electrode, the experimenter was checking whether there
is moisture (i.e., sweat), to wipe it accordingly. Then, the participant
could proceed with the calibration (actual) of the tactile feedback (for
electro- and vibrotactile), followed by a practice trial (only for the
Fitts’s Law task) speciﬁc to the block’s type of feedback.

Fig. 3. VR Calibration System for Electrotactile and Vibrotactile.

minus buttons changed the size (diameter) of both targets by 0.1cm.
Secondly, the participants had to change and indicate the distance
between the targets, with a starting distance = 10cm. In each press,
the plus and minus buttons increased the distance by 1cm. Lastly, the
participants had to change and indicate the required movement time,
with a starting time at 0s. With each press, the plus and minus buttons
changed the time by 0.1s. Note that the participants could keep the
plus or minus button pressed to increase or decrease the values faster.
After releasing, by single presses, they could specify their responses,
and ﬁnally, they could press the conﬁrm button to validate them.

At the end of each trial, this procedure was completed twice, once
for the initial evaluation, and once for the El Greco evaluation. The
initial evaluation was performed immediately after the completion and
disappearance of the Fitts’s law task. In the initial evaluation, the
participants did not have any visual cues or feedback about the size of
the targets and the distance between them. After the initial evaluation,
the participants performed the El Greco evaluation, which was destined
to cancel any action-speciﬁc effects by providing explicit feedback on
the target size and distance between the targets. During the El Greco
evaluation, the participants could see the actual target size and distance
between them, under the blue line (see Fig. 4). Besides the display
of the reference targets for informing the participants about the actual
target’s size and distance between them, the procedure of the El Greco
evaluation was identical to the initial one.

3.4 Participants & Procedures

Participants: All participants signed an informed consent form to
participate in this study. A meticulous hygiene protocol (use of anti-
viral gels and sprays, cleaning of apparatuses and HMDs, use of pro-
tective covers, and wearing masks) was followed to ensure augmented
hygiene standards due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The study followed
Helsinki guidelines, and it was approved by the institution’s ethical
committee. We recruited a total of 24 participants (10 Females, 14
Males) with an age (years) mean(SD) = 27.12(4.41), range = 21 − 39,
an education (years) mean(SD) = 17(1.66), range = 14 − 21. The par-
ticipants had a frequency of using VR (range = 1 − 6) mean(SD) =
3.12(1.88) (3 = A few times a month), and a self-reported ability in
using VR (range = 1 − 6) mean(SD) = 3.63(1.54) (3 = Average, 4
= Skilled). Their experience on VR (i.e., frequency + ability) was
(range = 2 − 12) mean(SD) = 7(3.34). Based on the VR experience

Fig. 4. ASP: Initial Evaluation (Left) & El Greco Evaluation (Right)

5

Initial Evaluation El Greco Evaluation Participant's ResponsesUser InterfaceUser InterfaceParticipant's ResponsesActual Size & DistanceEach block was comprised of 3 target sizes × 2 distances = 6 trials,
where in each trial the participant performed the Fitts’s Law task, and
then the ASP evaluation. Before each trial, a written (label) and a
verbal (audio) reminder was given to the participants to be both fast
and accurate. Also, the participants were reminded that could rest as
much as they want since the trial was commencing only when they
touch the 1st target. In total, the participants completed 3 target sizes
× 2 distances × 3 feedback conditions = 18 trials.
In each trial,
the participants selected 12 targets × 2 rounds = 24. Hence, each
participant made 24 × 18 = 432 selections in the whole experiment.

After the VR exposure, the participants ﬁlled out an evaluation ques-
tionnaire (7-point Likert scale) regarding the types of feedback (visual,
electrotactile, and vibrotactile) in terms of pleasantness, helpfulness
(overall, speed, accuracy), alertness, salience, and coherence. Speciﬁ-
cally, the questions were ”Please rate how much X was each type of
feedback:” (X = pleasant, alarming, salient, or coherent with your
actions); ”Please rate how much helpful was each type of feedback
for X :” (X = performing EFFECTIVELY the task, being ACCURATE
in the task, or being FAST in the task). The available responses were
respectively Not at All X, A little bit X, Somewhat X, X, Very X, Very
much X, and Extremely X. Also, they evaluated the dominance of vi-
brotactile and electrotactile against visual feedback. The questions
were Please rate how much dominant was X against Visual Feedback:
(X = Vibrotactile or Electrotactile). The available responses ranged
from Visual Feedback was Totally Dominant to X was Totally Domi-
nant. Then, the participants responded to the NASA Task Load Index
questionnaire, which indicates perceived workload in terms of mental,
physical, temporal, performance, and effort demands [27]. Finally, the
cybersickness symptoms were assessed pre- and post- VR exposure,
by using the CSQ-VR questionnaire, which has shown a very good
structural validity [38], and a robust convergent validity against SSQ,
while it is faster to administer with more interpretable scores [62]. None
of the participants experienced cybersickness symptoms.

3.5 Variables & Hypotheses

The variables were selected based on both their generalizability and
their relationship with ASP theory.

Performance: For performance, we considered the accuracy index,
the selection time, and the reaction time. The selection time is the time
required from the moment that the target is selected until the selection
of the next target. The reaction time is the time required to accelerate
and leave the area of the target that was selected. The accuracy index
was calculated based on the effective width of Fitts’s law equation [25].
The average distance from the target centre (DC), while interacting
with it, was subtracted from the effective width (We) to calculate the
accuracy index (AI; see Equation 2). A higher accuracy index hence
indicates better accuracy, and vice versa, while it can also have negative
values (e.g., when the average distance is greater than the effective
width). Finally, the independent variable for performance was the
feedback type.

We = 4.133 × SDDC
AI = We − DC

(2)

ASP: For ASP, we considered the difference between perceived
(initial evaluation) and actual size, distance, and (average) movement
time in each trial. Hence, we ended up with 3 dependent variables
pertinent to ASP, respectively. Regarding the independent variables,
they were the feedback type, the index of difﬁculty from Fitts’s law,
the movement time (average time to just go from one target to the next
one), and the accuracy index.

Hypotheses: Based on the relevant studies, we formulated the

following hypotheses:

• [H1] Visuo-electrotactile feedback will facilitate a signiﬁcantly
better accuracy than the visual and the vibrotactile, while the
speed will be comparable to the visual feedback condition.

• [H2] Visuo-vibrotactile feedback will offer a comparable accu-
racy to the visual feedback, while the reaction time will be slower
than the visual condition.

• [H3] The performance advantages attributed to each haptic feed-
back will be reﬂected in the action-speciﬁc effects on size, dis-
tance, and time perception.

• [H4] Accuracy will affect both size and time perception, while

speed (movement time) will affect distance perception.

• [H5] Index of difﬁculty will affect size, distance and time percep-

tion.

4 RESULTS
The normality assumption of the distribution of DVs was exam-
ined. Both performance and ASP variables violated the assumption
check. The data were thus transformed and centralized by using the
bestNormalize R package [53]. The DVs were then normally dis-
tributed. One-way Repeated-Measures ANOVA analyses were per-
formed to explore the effect of the type of haptic feedback on the DVs.
The Greenhouse Geisser’s correction was applied in the cases where
the sphericity assumption was violated. Post-hoc comparisons were
then executed for exploring the potential differences among them. The
Bonferroni correction was used to amend p-values’ inﬂation due to
multiple comparisons. The Hedge’s g and the ω 2 are reported since
they are more parsimonious and reliable metrics of effect sizes for the
ANOVA analyses and posthoc comparisons, respectively [42].

The self-reports on each feedback’s utility were compared by using
the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test. The relationships between DVs, self-
reports, and demographics were assessed by conducting Pearson’s R
and Spearman’s Rho correlational analyses for continuous and ordinal
variables correspondingly. Also, the ASP was checked by comparing
the initial and the El Greco estimation. The ASP aspects were further
scrutinized by Pearson’s R and multivariate regression analyses. The
multivariate regression analyses were evaluated in terms of χ 2 prob-
ability for signiﬁcance, and the R2 for effect size (i.e., percentage of
the variance explained by the model). Since the regression models are
pertaining to perceptual processes and effects, the interpretation of R2
was based on the recommendations of Cohen [20] for psychological
sciences. The a f ex (ANOVA analyses; [59]), ggstatsplot (plots, t-tests,
and post hoc comparisons; [52]), and lme4 (regression analyses; [10])
R packages were used.

4.1 Performance
Accuracy Index:

In support of H1 & H2,

the main effect
of the type of feedback on accuracy was statistically signiﬁcant
F(1.99, 284) = 25.16, p < .001 indicating a substantial difference
amongst the feedback types. However, the effect size was small
ω 2 = .010, 95% CI[0, 1]. In support of H1, the post-hoc comparisons
revealed signiﬁcant differences between the feedback types, where
electrotactile feedback appeared to facilitate substantially better accu-
racy (see Fig. 6). Compared to Visual-only, the electrotactile feedback
had a substantially improved accuracy, though, with a small effect
size g = .16, p < .001, Comparably, against the vibrotactile, the elec-
trotactile feedback facilitated a signiﬁcantly better accuracy, with a
small effect size g = .27, p < .001. Interestingly, yet in disagreement
with H2, the visual-only showed signiﬁcantly better accuracy than the
vibrotactile, while the effect size was small g = .12, p = .01.

Selection & Reaction Time: The ANOVA analyses surfaced
signiﬁcant main effects for both selection time F(1.90, 272) = 3.77,
p = .03 and reaction time F(1.76, 251) = 4.30, p = .02. However,
the effect sizes were very small for both selection ω 2 = .003, 95%
CI[0, 1] and reaction time ω 2 = .008, 95% CI[0, 1]. In line with H1,
the post-hoc comparisons (see Fig. 6) showed that the electrotactile
feedback did not signiﬁcantly differ from visual-only and vibrotactile
feedback conditions. However, the reaction and selection time in the
electrotactile feedback condition were closer to the visual-only rather
than the vibrotactile condition. In agreement with H2, compared to

6

© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

Visual

Vibrotactile

Electrotactile

Median Range Median Range

p-value Median Range

p-value

Pleasantness

Helpfulness-Overall

Helpfulness-Accuracy

Helpfulness-Speed

Alarming

Salience

Coherence

Dominance

3

4

3

3

2

3

4

NA

1-5

1-6

0-6

1-6

0-6

1-6

2-6

NA

4

5

4

4

4.5

5

4.5

4

1-6

2-6

0-6

1-6

.09

.24

.03*

1

2-6 <.001***

4-6

1-6

0-6

.002**

1.00

NA

3

5

4

3.5

4.5

5.5

5

3.5

0-5

2-6

0-6

1-6

.43

.33

.04*

.59

3-6 <.001***

2-6

2-6

0-6

.005**

1.00

NA

Table 1. Self-Reports on each Feedback’s Utility. Maximum Score = 6;
p-values are related to the comparison against Visual feedback.

perception, the comparison between El Greco mean(SD) = 0.01(0.37)
and initial mean(SD) = 0.04(0.48) estimation showed that the El Greco
was substantially closer g = .18, p = .008 to the actual movement time
required to go from one target to the other. These results conﬁrmed
that there were indeed action-speciﬁcs effects on perception during the
initial estimation, which were then efﬁciently cancelled by the El Greco
estimation.

Haptic Feedback’s Effect: Discrepantly to H3, the ANOVA
analyses for the action-speciﬁc effects on perception of target’s
size F(1.88, 269) = 1.86, p = .16, distance between the targets
F(1.99, 285) = 1.61, p = .20, and movement time between the tar-
gets F(1.98, 283) = 1.40, p = .25 revealed an absence of a signiﬁcant
main effect of feedback’s type on them. Correspondingly, the posthoc
comparisons did not reveal any signiﬁcant difference between the types
of feedback. However, as displayed in Fig. 7 and aligned with H3,
the patterns of action-speciﬁc effects are similar to the observed per-
formance differences amongst types of feedback. In the electrotactile
condition, where the participants were more accurate, they also per-
ceived the target larger than its actual size. Also, in the electrotactile
and visual-only conditions, where the users were faster, they observed
the distance smaller.

Fig. 7. Action-Speciﬁc Effects on Perception per Type of Feedback:
Size (Left), Distance (Centre), and Movement Time (Right).

4.3.1 Regression Analyses

The accuracy did not correlate with the movement time, and the ef-
fect size was diminutive r = .03, p = .59, suggesting an absence of
interdependence between movement speed and accuracy. However,
the index of difﬁculty was signiﬁcantly correlated with both accuracy
r = −.35, p < .001 and movement time r = .71, p < .001 with medium
and large effect sizes respectively, suggesting less accuracy and greater
movement time as the index of difﬁculty increases. Nevertheless, these
associations were expected, since the index of difﬁculty is deﬁned by
the size of targets and the distance between the targets.

7

Fig. 6. Comparisons between the Types of Feedback in terms of
Accuracy (Left), Selection Time (Centre), and Reaction Time (Right).
** < .001, **< .01, and *< .05

the visual-only condition, the selection time g = .14, p = .01. and the
reaction time g = .25, p = .003. were both substantially slower in the
vibrotactile condition (see Fig. 6). However, the effect sizes of these
differences were small.

4.2 Demographics & Self-Reports
The demographics (age, sex, education) did not show any correlation
with the performance or the ASP variables. Similarly, the ability,
frequency, and experience in playing video games or using VR did not
correlate with any of the performance or the ASP variables. Also, none
of the weighted scores of NASA-TLX (i.e., perceived workload) was
correlated with the performance or the ASP variables. Equally, the
intensities of electrotactile feedback and vibrotactile feedback did not
show any correlation with the performance.

Self-Reports on Feedback’s Utility: The self-reports on electro-
tactile and vibrotactile indicated that they helped the participants to
perform better. However, only the vibrotactile sensation was found
to be pleasant, while the electrotactile and visual were found to be
”somewhat pleasant”. Nonetheless, no signiﬁcant differences were
detected between vibrotactile and electrotactile. Signiﬁcant differences
were identiﬁed only against visual feedback. In Table 1, there are dis-
played the descriptive data and the signiﬁcant differences against visual
feedback. Aligned with H1, compared to visual only, the electrotactile
feedback was reported that signiﬁcantly assisted the participants to be
accurate. However, in disagreement with H2, compared to visual, the
self-reports indicated that the vibrotactile assisted signiﬁcantly more
than participants with being accurate. Discrepantly to our H2, the self-
reports did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference in terms of helpfulness
for performing fast the task.

Furthermore, both the electrotactile and vibrotactile were evaluated
as substantially more alarming than visual feedback, postulating that the
two haptic feedback systems assist with increasing the vigilance of the
user. Comparably, the two haptic feedback systems were reported to be
signiﬁcantly more salient than the visual feedback. However, all types
of feedback were equally coherent (to very coherent). Lastly, there
was no signiﬁcant difference between electrotactile and vibrotactile
in terms of dominance against the visual feedback. However, the
vibrotactile was reported as more dominant than visual feedback, while
the electrotactile feedback was reported as marginally more dominant
(i.e., the median between neither/both and more dominant).

4.3 Action-Speciﬁc Perception
For the target size perception, compared to the initial estimation
mean(SD) = −0.06(0.56),
the El Greco estimation mean(SD) =
0.03(0.14) was signiﬁcantly closer g = .20, p < .001 to the actual target
size. For the targets’ distance perception, compared to the initial estima-
tion mean(SD) = 3.37(10.86), the El Greco estimation mean(SD) =
0.09(3.36) was substantially closer g = −.30, p < .001 to the actual
distance between the targets. Lastly, regarding the movement time

420-2-4420-2-4420-2-4********Accuracy IndexSelection TimeReaction Time**** Electrotactile             Vibrotactile           Visual-OnlyElectrotactile    Vibrotactile   Visual-OnlyElectrotactile    Vibrotactile  Visual-OnlyElectrotactile    Vibrotactile   Visual-Only420-2-4     Electrotactile  Vibrotactile  Visual-Only     Electrotactile  Vibrotactile  Visual-Only     Electrotactile  Vibrotactile  Visual-Only420-2-4420-2-4Diﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual SizeDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual DistanceDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual Movement Time Electrotactile             Vibrotactile           Visual-OnlyIn line with H4 & H5, the action-speciﬁc effects on perception were
signiﬁcantly correlated with the performance (see Table 2). Speciﬁcally,
the improved accuracy was associated with perceiving the target bigger
and the movement time longer (i.e., perceiving the time passage slower).
Also, faster movement, from the selected target to the next one, was
related to perceiving the distance as smaller and the time as shorter (i.e.,
faster time passage). Lastly, the larger index of difﬁculty, as deﬁned by
the Fitts’s law equation, was correlated with perceiving the target as
smaller, the movement time shorter, and the distance between the targets
longer. Overall, the effect sizes of the signiﬁcant correlations with the
difference between perceived and actual size, as well as movement time,
were of small size. For the associations with the difference between
perceived and actual distance, the effect sizes were of medium size.

Nonetheless, beyond the correlations, which just indicate two-way
relationships between the variables, the multivariate regression models
postulated a signiﬁcant impact of the predictors on the action-speciﬁc
effects (see Table 3). All the models (single predictor + random effects)
were signiﬁcantly better than their respective null models (i.e., including
only the random effects), except for the movement time model for the
action-speciﬁc effect on time perception. Also, the effect sizes of all
models were moderate-to-large (e.g., R2 = .22) to extremely large (e.g.,
R2 = .82). In agreement with H4, the accuracy models appeared as
the best (i.e., greater R2 and β ; variance explained and impact) for
target’s size perception, as well as time perception. Aligned with H5,
the movement time model was seen as the best for the perception
of distance between the targets. Finally, given that the responses for
movement time were being given after responding for the distance
between the targets, we also checked whether the distance difference
affected the time difference. The results showed that this model was not
better than the null model, and the impact was minuscule (β = 0.01),
suggesting that the action-speciﬁc effects on time were not affected by
the action-speciﬁc effects on distance.

ASP Variable

Task Variable

Pearson’s r

95% CI

t(430)

p-value

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Size

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Distance

Accuracy Index

Index of Difﬁculty

Movement Time

Index of Difﬁculty

Movement Time

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Movement Time

Accuracy Index

Index of Difﬁculty

.12

-.13

.32

.36

-.19

.13

-.13

[.03, .22]

2.07

.040*

[-.22, -.04]

-2.79

.006**

[.23, .40]

6.92 <.001***

[.27, .44]

7.95 <.001***

[-.28, -.10]

-4.05 <.001***

[.04, .22]

2.70

[-.23, -.01]

-2.82

.007**

.005**

Table 2. Correlations of Accuracy, Speed, and Index of Difﬁculty with
Action-Speciﬁc Perception (ASP) Effects.

Accuracy’s Effect on Perception: For the action-speciﬁc effect
on the target’s size, the accuracy index model was signiﬁcantly better
than the null model, which contained only the random effects per par-
ticipant as a predictor (see Table 3). The null model explained 19%
of the variance that indicates the implication of individual differences
(i.e., random effects per participant) in the action-speciﬁc effects on the
target’s size perception. However, the addition of the accuracy index
as a predictor in the respective model explained substantially a larger
variance (25%). Moreover, the accuracy index had the largest β (i.e.,
the amount of the change of the perception of size, when the accuracy
increases by 1 unit), postulating a larger impact on the target’s size
perception. These results suggest that better accuracy inﬂuences the
perception of the target as larger than its actual size, while inaccuracy
induces to perceive it as smaller (see Fig. 8). However, the effect of ac-
curacy was even greater on time perception. The null model explained
73% of the action-speciﬁc effect on movement time perception, sug-
gesting the involvement of individual differences. The accuracy model
explained a signiﬁcantly larger amount of the variance (82%). Similarly,
accuracy’s β was the largest, postulating an important impact on time
perception. The outcomes pinpointed that improved accuracy affects
the time passage perception to be slower, while decreased accuracy
inﬂuences the time passage perception to be faster.

Predicted

Predictor

F (1,430)

t(430)

p (>|t|)

β coefﬁcient

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Size

Random Effects

Accuracy Index

Index of Difﬁculty

Random Effects

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Distance

Movement Time

NA

5.62

9.56

NA

97.3

NA

2.37

NA

.01**

-3.09 <.001***

NA

NA

9.86 <.001***

Difference: Perceived vs Actual Movement Time

Index of Difﬁculty

72.28

8.50 <.001***

Random Effects

Accuracy Index

Movement Time

NA

22.77

2.72

NA

NA

4.77 <.001***

-1.65

.08

Index of Difﬁculty

31.31

-5.60 <.001***

NA

0.16

-0.13

NA

0.46

0.36

NA

0.22

-0.05

-0.13

p(>χ2)

NA

.01**

.002**

NA

R2

.19

.25

.22

.11

<.001*** .40

<.001*** .25

NA

.73

<.001*** .82

.07

.75

<.001*** .77

Table 3. Multivariate Regression Models of Action-Speciﬁc Effects on
Perception. The Random Effects model was treated as the Null model.
Random effects are included in every model. β = standardized regression
coefﬁcient. The p(>χ 2) pertains to the comparison against the null model.
R2x100 = the percentage of explained variance by the model. Based on
Cohen [20], R2 = .02 - Small; R2 =.15 - Medium; R2 = .35 - Large.

Movement Time’s Effect on Perception: Regarding the predic-
tion of the action-speciﬁc effects on the perception of the distance
between the targets, the movement time model was substantially im-
proved compared to the null model (see Table 3). The null model
explained 11% of the variance, indicating a moderate effect of indi-
vidual differences on perceiving the distance. On the contrary, the
inclusion of the movement time in the model signiﬁcantly increased
the explained variance (40%). Also, the movement time has the largest
β , postulating a substantial impact on the perception of the distance
between the targets. Taking them together, these outcomes suggest that
the increased speed of movement between two points inﬂuences the
perception of this distance as smaller. Equally, a slower speed of move-
ment affects the perception of this distance to be longer (see Fig. 8).
Nevertheless, regarding time perception, the movement time model was
not signiﬁcantly better than the null model. While the movement time
model explained 75% of the variance, only the random effects explained
73%. Finally, the β of movement time was diminutive, indicating a
minor effect on time perception.

Fig. 8. Adjusted Predictions of Action-Speciﬁc Effects on Perception: Ac-
curacy on Size Perception (Left), Accuracy on Time Perception (Centre-
Left), Movement Time on Distance Perception (Centre-Right), Movement
Time on Time Perception (Right).

Index of Difﬁculty on Perception: The index of difﬁculty of
Fitts’s law efﬁciently explained 86% of the variance of performance
(i.e., selection time) on the task, validating the expected increase of
selection time (i.e., slower completion) as the difﬁculty incrementally
augments (see Fig. 9). Interestingly, the index of difﬁculty was also a
signiﬁcant predictor of the action-speciﬁc effects on perception. The

8

-2                   -1                  0                   1                    2-2    -1      0      1      2Diﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual SizeDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual TimeDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual DistanceDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual Time-2                   -1                  0                   1                    2-2                   -1                  0                   1                    2-2                   -1                  0                   1                    2-2    -1      0      1      2-2    -1      0      1      2-2    -1      0      1      2Accuracy IndexMovement Time© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

index of difﬁculty’s models were all signiﬁcantly better than the cor-
responding null models. The respective index of difﬁculty model
explained a substantial amount of the variance of action-speciﬁc effects
on the perception of the target’s size (22%), the distance between the
targets (25%), and movement time (77%; see also Fig. 9), albeit that
none of these models was the one which explained the greatest amount
of variance. Comparably, the β of the index of difﬁculty indicated an
important impact on the perception of the target’s size, the distance be-
tween the targets, and movement time (see Table 3). In agreement with
H5, these ﬁndings postulate that the increase of difﬁculty inﬂuences
perceiving the target smaller, the distance longer, and the time shorter
(see Fig. 9).

Fig. 9. Adjusted Predictions of Index of Difﬁculty of Fitts’s Law on Perfor-
mance & Perception: Selection Time (Left), Size Perception (Centre-Left),
Distance Perception (Centre-Right), Time Perception (Right).

5 DISCUSSION

5.1 Performance

Selection and Reaction time was found to be substantially slower in
visuo-vibrotactile feedback condition. These ﬁndings are in agreement
with the ﬁndings in the study of Bricker et al., [12], where the visuo-
haptic condition showed signiﬁcantly slower selection times on a Fitts’s
law task in VR. Also, our ﬁndings align with the observation of Ariza
et al., [5], where the vibrotactile showed longer correction phases on
Fitts’s law task in VR. Considering that there are several discrepancies
amongst studies which had used non-standardized tasks, we may infer
that the examination of the effects of tactile modalities on performance
can be assessed more reliably by implementing standardized tasks.
This methodological approach may hence alleviate the frequency of
producing discrepant outcomes.

Furthermore, the accuracy in visuo-vibrotactile condition was found
to be considerably lower than in visual condition. This ﬁnding agrees
with the observations in previous studies [15, 17]. However, these stud-
ies implemented different non-standardized tasks. We may infer that
the agreement among the observations in three different tasks postu-
lates that the reason for decreased accuracy by vibrotactile feedback
is not task-speciﬁc. A possible reason could be the uncanny haptic
effect that occurs in incongruent bi- or multi-modal feedbacks [11].
However, this adverse effect on performance should be further explored
on both standardized and non-standardized tasks, and by using diverse
vibrotactile devices.

Comparably to the previous studies (i.e., [28, 50, 56, 69]), electrotac-
tile feedback was found to facilitate improved accuracy in VR. However,
our ﬁndings were observed on a standardized target acquisition (Fitss’s
law) task. Notably, the observed improvement in accuracy was de-
tected against the visuo-vibrotactile and visual feedback. In our study,
the accuracy in visuo-electrotactile condition was signiﬁcantly better
than in visual-only and visuo-vibrotactile conditions. However, the
effect sizes were not moderate-to-large like in the study of Vizcay
et al., [69]. This may be attributed to the fact that the electrotactile

9

feedback was binary, and not dynamic as in their study. The imple-
mentation of dynamic electrotactile feedback could have enabled a
further improved accuracy, which could have a large effect size against
other feedback modalities. Nonetheless, this should be examined in
future endeavours.Finally, the self-reports of participants on the utility
of electrotactile feedback, in terms of accuracy, alarming, and salience,
agreed with the observed gains in accuracy. However, the self-reports
showed a comparable utility of vibrotactile in the same terms, while
the accuracy in visuo-vibrotactile condition was substantially worse
than in visual and visuo-electrotactile conditions. This disagreement
between objective (measured performance) and subjective (self-report)
outcomes may be attributed to the fact that vibrotactile feedback is
a very familiar sensation which has broadly been used by the partici-
pants. This ﬁnding also shows the signiﬁcant effect of subjectivity on
self-reports. Comparably to Slater’s recommendations for investigating
presence in VR [60], the self-reports on performance should be only
considered as complementary to the objective metrics.

5.2 ASP

The El Greco evaluations of size, distance, and time were all signiﬁ-
cantly different from the initial evaluations. Also, the direction of the
differences in El Greco evaluation was always towards the actual size,
distance, or time. This outcome conﬁrms that the observed effects were
indeed action-speciﬁc effects on spatial and time perception, and not
a by-product of response bias. Nevertheless, the effect size of the dif-
ference between the initial and El Greco evaluation of time perception
was not as large as the effect size in size and distance perception. This
may be a result that for time perception was not any explicit feedback
besides the change of target’s size and distance between them. In future
endeavours, explicit temporal feedback should be offered to the partici-
pants during the El Greco evaluation to achieve effect sizes comparable
to the size and distance perception.

Although performance increases and decreases per feedback con-
dition were reﬂected in the action-speciﬁc effects in each feedback
condition, the differences between the mediated action-speciﬁc effects
were not signiﬁcant. This absence of signiﬁcant differences, regarding
action-speciﬁc effects on perception, may be attributed to the small
effect sizes of performance differences, albeit signiﬁcant. This out-
come agrees with the argumentation of Dragicevic [22] that effect sizes
are of augmented importance in HCI, compared to p-values. In this
study, due to the inability of the vibrotactile actuator to deliver dynamic
feedback without a perceivable latency, a binary approach was adopted
for every feedback condition. Previously, dynamic electrotactile [69]
and visual [5] feedback had demonstrated moderate and large effect
sizes. Thus, the implementation of dynamic feedback types may detect
signiﬁcant differences in action-speciﬁc effects. Though, this has to be
examined in future experiments.

In support of the ASP theory, we found signiﬁcant effects of perfor-
mance and task difﬁculty on size, distance, and time perception. In line
with [75] increases in accuracy inﬂuence participants to perceive the
target’s size as larger, while decreases in accuracy inﬂuence participants
to perceive it as smaller. Furthermore, aligned with [76, 77], increased
accuracy modulated a slower time passage, while decreased accuracy
in a faster one. Also, faster hand movements affected participants to
perceive the distance as shorter, while slower hand movements affected
participants to perceive it as longer. This ﬁnding is in accordance with
the ﬁndings in chronic pain patients [74], hikers [54], and individuals
with extra weight [63], as well as the uphill experiment in VR [41].
However, these studies were not focused on the effects of performance
(i.e., movement speed) on perception, but rather on the task’s difﬁculty
effect on perception.

Indeed, our ﬁndings postulated that the objective metric of Fitts’s
law’s index of difﬁculty had an important impact on the size, distance,
and time perception. Our ﬁndings are in utter accordance with the
outcomes of previous studies on the effect of task difﬁculty on distance
perception [41, 54, 63], as well as size and time perception [77]. Our
study has hence highlighted a new dimension of the index of difﬁculty
of Fitts’s law. Beyond performance, the index of difﬁculty can therefore
be used for assessing and predicting perception, since it asserts an effect

Index of Diﬃculty of Fitts' Law  2.9  3.2  3.5  3.8  4.1 4.4 2.9  3.2   3.5  3.8  4.1 4.42.9   3.2   3.5   3.8  4.1 4.42.9   3.2   3.5  3.8  4.1  4.4-2                   -1                     0                      1                      2-2                    -1                      0                      1                      2-2                    -1                      0                      1                      2Selection TimeDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual SizeDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual DistanceDiﬀerence: Perceived vs Actual  Time-2                    -1                      0                      1                     2on task-related perceptual processes.

As mentioned earlier, the ASP is signiﬁcant when the intention to
act is present [72]. In VR and HCI, we would call this state, the in-
teractability of the components of a virtual environment with the user.
Since interaction is the cornerstone of VR applications and studies, the
action-speciﬁc effects of performance or task difﬁculty on perception
should be considered. ASP can contribute in several aspects, such
as the design of user interfaces and the personalization of VR expe-
riences. For example, based on ASP, when a user is highly accurate
in pressing the buttons of a cluttered user interface, the user perceives
the targets/buttons as larger. Thus, the targets/buttons can be further
decreased in size (e.g., proportionally to the effective width) which
can either decrease the clutteredness of the user interface or increase
the quantity of the available targets of the user interface. Since ASP
changes within an individual (e.g., when the user is faster, then dis-
tances are perceived shorer; when the user is slower, then the distances
are perceived longer), a machine learning algorithm can be used to
detect these changes in performance and modulate the components of
the virtual environment respectively (e.g., increase decrease distances
and sizes of the targets).

As mentioned above, the effect sizes are really important in HCI [22].
Since the magnitude of ASP was found to be modulated by the effect
sizes, the ASP can be used as a parsimonious evaluation of perfor-
mance improvements, and input devices’ efﬁciency. In our study, while
the binary electrotactile feedback was found to facilitate signiﬁcantly
better accuracy, yet with a small size effect, this difference was not
replicated in the ASP, which led us to infer that dynamic feedback
could have been a better option to increase the magnitude of the effect.
Similarly, beyond just detecting signiﬁcant differences, the ASP can be
used to parsimoniously assess the impact of other input devices (e.g.,
VR gloves) or techniques (e.g., gaze interaction) on improving users’
performance.

Our ﬁndings bring also implications to the study of presence and
embodiment. One of the illusions that enhances the sense of presence
in VR is the plausibility illusion [61]. The intention to act and the
performance of inter-actions are central to both plausibility illusion
and the ASP. Thus, the ASP (e.g., stronger action-speciﬁc effects on
perception) could be an indicator of how strong the plausibility illusion
is, which also indicates that the user experiences a stronger sense of
presence. Future VR studies should attempt to scrutinize this overlap
and the potential relationship between ASP, plausibility illusion, and
presence.

Similarly, in embodiment studies, researchers have seen perceptual
alterations that have been attributed to the strength of the embodiment
(e.g., [43, 68]). For example, Banakou et al., [8] found that the embodi-
ment of a child-like avatar modulates an overestimation of the objects.
However, the participants were interacting with these objects. Consid-
ering our results and ASP theory, the observed over-estimation could
have been attributed to or modulated by an action-speciﬁc effect on size
perception due to the increased difﬁculty to interact with the objects,
while having child-size hands. Thus, we cannot conclude whether this
is purely attributed to the strength of embodiment illusion, ASP, or the
interaction between the two. The effects of ASP during embodiment,
as well as the interaction between embodiment and ASP, should also
be examined in future VR studies on the embodiment illusion.

5.3 Limitations

The present study also suffers from certain limitations. The imple-
mented visuo-electrotactile feedback was binary and not dynamic,
while previous studies indicated the performance gains of dynamic
electrotactile feedback. As a result, while we observed statistically
signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy, the magnitude of these improve-
ments was small. Future studies should attempt to investigate the
performance beneﬁts of uni- or bi-modal dynamic electrotactile feed-
back on standardized tasks in VR. Furthermore, there was no explicit
feedback on movement time during the El Greco evaluation of action-
speciﬁc effects on time perception. Despite that the difference between
the initial and the El Greco evaluation of time perception was statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, the effect size of this difference was small. Given that

the effect sizes of the differences between the evaluations of size and
distance were large, future studies should attempt to provide explicit
feedback on time, to efﬁciently achieve effect sizes comparable to the
spatial perception.

6 CONCLUSION

The electrotactile was identiﬁed as the feedback type that facilitates
the best accuracy while having reaction times comparable to visual
feedback. However, the improvement in accuracy was of a small size.
While the performance differences of feedback types were reﬂected in
ASP, the differences were not signiﬁcant, which postulates that the ASP
is a more parsimonious method to evaluate the impact of haptic and
input devices on performance. However, performance (accuracy and
speed) and task difﬁculty had signiﬁcant effects on size, distance, and
time perception. Our research outcomes suggest that the user’s ability,
in interacting with the components of a virtual environment, affects
how the virtual environment is perceived. Our ﬁndings also surfaced
a new utility of the index of difﬁculty of Fitts’s law for predicting
and explaining action-speciﬁc effects on perception. ASP should be
considered in future VR studies, especially for systems evaluation,
sense of presence, and embodiment. Future studies should strive to
scrutinize further the role of ASP in VR and its relationships with
user performance in diverse scenarios, and aspects of presence such as
plausibility and embodiment illusions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-
search and innovation program under grant agreement No. 856718
(TACTILITY).

REFERENCES

[1] Precision MicroDrives 5mm Vibration Motor Model 304-116.
[2] D. Allcoat and A. von M¨uhlenen. Learning in virtual reality: Effects on
performance, emotion and engagement. Research in Learning Technology,
26, 2018. doi: 10.25304/rlt.v26.2140

[3] F. Argelaguet and C. Andujar. A survey of 3d object selection techniques
for virtual environments. Computers & Graphics, 37(3):121–136, 2013.
doi: 10.1016/j.cag.2012.12.003

[4] F. Argelaguet, L. Hoyet, M. Trico, and A. Lecuyer. The role of interaction
in virtual embodiment: Effects of the virtual hand representation.
In
2016 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pp. 3–10, 2016. doi: 10.1109/VR.2016.
7504682

[5] O. Ariza, G. Bruder, N. Katzakis, and F. Steinicke. Analysis of proximity-
based multimodal feedback for 3d selection in immersive virtual envi-
ronments. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User
Interfaces (VR), pp. 327–334, 2018. doi: 10.1109/VR.2018.8446317
[6] N. S. Asjad, H. Adams, R. Paris, and B. Bodenheimer. Perception of
height in virtual reality: A study of climbing stairs. In Proceedings of the
15th ACM Symposium on Applied Perception, SAP ’18. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3225153
.3225171

[7] P. Bækgaard, J. P. Hansen, K. Minakata, and I. S. MacKenzie. A ﬁtts’ law
study of pupil dilations in a head-mounted display. In Proceedings of the
11th ACM Symposium on Eye Tracking Research & Applications, ETRA
’19. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019.
doi: 10.1145/3314111.3319831

[8] D. Banakou, R. Groten, and M. Slater. Illusory ownership of a virtual child
body causes overestimation of object sizes and implicit attitude changes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(31):12846–12851,
2013. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1306779110

[9] T. Bao, L. Su, C. Kinnaird, M. Kabeto, P. B. Shull, and K. H. Sienko.
Vibrotactile display design: Quantifying the importance of age and various
factors on reaction times. PLOS ONE, 14:1–20, 08 2019. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0219737

[10] D. Bates, M. M¨achler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. Fitting linear mixed-
effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1):1–48,
2015. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01

[11] C. C. Berger, M. Gonzalez-Franco, E. Ofek, and K. Hinckley. The uncanny
valley of haptics. Science Robotics, 3(17):eaar7010, 2018. doi: 10.1126/
scirobotics.aar7010

10

© 2022 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

[12] D. Brickler, R. J. Teather, A. T. Duchowski, and S. V. Babu. A ﬁtts’
law evaluation of visuo-haptic ﬁdelity and sensory mismatch on user
performance in a near-ﬁeld disc transfer task in virtual reality. ACM Trans.
Appl. Percept., 17(4), dec 2020. doi: 10.1145/3419986

[13] J. L. Burke, M. S. Prewett, A. A. Gray, L. Yang, F. R. B. Stilson, M. D.
Coovert, L. R. Elliot, and E. Redden. Comparing the effects of visual-
auditory and visual-tactile feedback on user performance: A meta-analysis.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Multimodal Inter-
faces, ICMI ’06, p. 108–117. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 2006. doi: 10.1145/1180995.1181017

[14] D. Cehajic, S. Endo, M. Aggravi, D. Prattichizzo, and S. Hirche. Spatial
guidance of the human arm motion using vibrotactile feedback. In IEEE
World Haptics 2017, Jun 2017.

[15] L.-T. Cheng, R. Kazman, and J. Robinson. Vibrotactile feedback in
delicate virtual reality operations. In Proceedings of the Fourth ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, MULTIMEDIA ’96, p. 243–251.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1997. doi:
10.1145/244130.244220

[16] F. Chinello, M. Malvezzi, D. Prattichizzo, and C. Pacchierotti. A modular
wearable ﬁnger interface for cutaneous and kinesthetic interaction: Control
and evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 67(1):706–
716, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TIE.2019.2899551

[17] R. Cholewiak and C. McGrath. Vibrotactile targeting in multimodal
systems: Accuracy and interaction. In 2006 14th Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pp. 413–420,
2006. doi: 10.1109/HAPTIC.2006.1627100

[18] V. Chouvardas, A. Miliou, and M. Hatalis. Tactile displays: Overview and
recent advances. Displays, 29(3):185–194, 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.displa.
2007.07.003

[19] L. D. Clark, A. B. Bhagat, and S. L. Riggs. Extending ﬁtts’ law in three-
dimensional virtual environments with current low-cost virtual reality tech-
nology. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 139:102413,
2020. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102413

[20] J. Cohen. A power primer. Psychological bulletin, 112(1):155, 1992. doi:

10.1037//0033-2909.112.1.155

[21] L. Devigne, M. Aggravi, M. Bivaud, N. Balix, C. S. Teodorescu, T. Carlson,
T. Spreters, C. Pacchierotti, and M. Babel. Power wheelchair navigation
IEEE Transactions on
assistance using wearable vibrotactile haptics.
Haptics, 13(1):52–58, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2019.2963831

[22] P. Dragicevic. Fair Statistical Communication in HCI, pp. 291–330.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319
-26633-6 13

[23] C. Firestone and B. J. Scholl. “top-down” effects where none should be
found: The el greco fallacy in perception research. Psychological Science,
25(1):38–46, 2014. doi: 10.1177/0956797613485092

[24] C. Firestone and B. J. Scholl. Cognition does not affect perception: Evalu-
ating the evidence for “top-down” effects. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
39:e229, 2016. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X15000965

[25] P. M. Fitts. The information capacity of the human motor system in con-
trolling the amplitude of movement. Journal of experimental psychology,
47(6):381, 1954.

[26] J. J. Gibson. The ecological approach to visual perception: classic edition.

Psychology Press, 2014. doi: 10.4324/9781315740218

[27] S. G. Hart. Nasa-task load index (nasa-tlx); 20 years later. Proceedings of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 50(9):904–
908, 2006. doi: 10.1177/154193120605000909

[28] J. Hummel, J. Dodiya, G. A. Center, L. Eckardt, R. Wolff, A. Gerndt,
and T. W. Kuhlen. A lightweight electrotactile feedback device for grasp
improvement in immersive virtual environments. In 2016 IEEE Virtual
Reality (VR), pp. 39–48, 2016. doi: 10.1109/VR.2016.7504686

[29] Y. G. Ichihara, M. Okabe, K. Iga, Y. Tanaka, K. Musha, and K. Ito. Color
universal design: the selection of four easily distinguishable colors for all
color vision types. In R. Eschbach, G. G. Marcu, and S. Tominaga, eds.,
Color Imaging XIII: Processing, Hardcopy, and Applications, vol. 6807,
pp. 206 – 213. International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2008.
doi: 10.1117/12.765420

[30] M. Isakovic, J. Malesevic, M. Kostic, S. Dosen, and M. Strbac. The impact
of size and position of reference electrode on the localization of biphasic
electrotactile stimulation on the ﬁngertips. IEEE Transactions on Haptics,
pp. 1–1, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2022.3141187

[31] ISO Central Secretary. Ergonomics of human—system interaction – Part
400: Principles and requirements for physical input devices. Standard ISO
9241-400:2007, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva,

CH, 2007.

[32] J. A. Jones, J. E. Hopper, M. T. Bolas, and D. M. Krum. Orientation
perception in real and virtual environments. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics, 25(5):2050–2060, 2019. doi: 10.
1109/TVCG.2019.2898798

[33] R. D. Joyce and S. Robinson. Passive Haptics to Enhance Virtual Reality

Simulations. doi: 10.2514/6.2017-1313

[34] K. Kaczmarek, J. Webster, P. Bach-y Rita, and W. Tompkins. Electrotactile
and vibrotactile displays for sensory substitution systems. IEEE Trans-
actions on Biomedical Engineering, 38(1):1–16, 1991. doi: 10.1109/10.
68204

[35] N. Khenak, J. V´ezien, and P. Bourdot. Spatial presence, performance, and
behavior between real, remote, and virtual immersive environments. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(12):3467–3478,
2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3023574

[36] K. Kilteni, I. Bergstrom, and M. Slater. Drumming in immersive virtual
reality: The body shapes the way we play. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 19(4):597–605, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.
2013.29

[37] P. Kourtesis, F. Argelaguet, S. Vizcay, M. Marchal, and C. Pacchierotti.
Electrotactile feedback applications for hand and arm interactions: A
systematic review, meta-analysis, and future directions. IEEE Transactions
on Haptics, pp. 1–18, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2022.3189866

[38] P. Kourtesis, S. Collina, L. A. A. Doumas, and S. E. MacPherson. Valida-
tion of the virtual reality neuroscience questionnaire: Maximum duration
of immersive virtual reality sessions without the presence of pertinent
adverse symptomatology. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 2019.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00417

[39] P. Kourtesis and S. E. MacPherson. How immersive virtual reality methods
may meet the criteria of the national academy of neuropsychology and
american academy of clinical neuropsychology: A software review of the
virtual reality everyday assessment lab (vr-eal). Computers in Human
Behavior Reports, 4:100151, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.chbr.2021.100151
[40] J. Kreimeier, S. Hammer, D. Friedmann, P. Karg, C. B¨uhner, L. Bankel,
and T. G¨otzelmann. Evaluation of different types of haptic feedback
inﬂuencing the task-based presence and performance in virtual reality.
In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on PErvasive
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, PETRA ’19, p. 289–298.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019. doi:
10.1145/3316782.3321536

[41] E. L. Laitin, M. J. Tymoski, N. L. Tenhundfeld, and J. K. Witt. The
uphill battle for action-speciﬁc perception. Attention, Perception, & Psy-
chophysics, 81(3):778–793, 2019.

[42] D. Lakens. Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative
science: a practical primer for t-tests and anovas. Frontiers in Psychology,
4, 2013. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00863

[43] S. A. Linkenauger, H. H. B¨ulthoff, and B. J. Mohler. Virtual arm’s reach
inﬂuences perceived distances but only after experience reaching. Neu-
ropsychologia, 70:393–401, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.
10.034

[44] I. S. MacKenzie.

in
human-computer interaction. 7(1):91–139, mar 1992. doi: 10.1207/
s15327051hci0701 3

Fitts’ law as a research and design tool

[45] M. Maisto, C. Pacchierotti, F. Chinello, G. Salvietti, A. De Luca, and
D. Prattichizzo. Evaluation of wearable haptic systems for the ﬁngers in
augmented reality applications. IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 10(4):511–
522, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2017.2691328

[46] M. McGee, B. Amento, P. Brooks, and H. Harley. Fitts and vr: Evaluating
display and input devices with ﬁtts’ law. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 41(2):1259–1262, 1997.
doi: 10.1177/1071181397041002119

[47] L. Meli, S. Scheggi, C. Pacchierotti, and D. Prattichizzo. Wearable haptics
and hand tracking via an rgb-d camera for immersive tactile experiences.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2014, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2614217.2614262
[48] A. Murata and H. Iwase. Extending ﬁtts’ law to a three-dimensional
pointing task. Human Movement Science, 20(6):791–805, 2001. doi: 10.
1016/S0167-9457(01)00058-6

[49] C. Pacchierotti, S. Sinclair, M. Solazzi, A. Frisoli, V. Hayward, and D. Prat-
tichizzo. Wearable haptic systems for the ﬁngertip and the hand: Taxon-
omy, review, and perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Haptics, 10(4):580–
600, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2017.2689006

[50] D. Pamungkas and K. Ward.

Immersive teleoperation of a robot arm
using electro-tactile feedback. In 2015 6th International Conference on

11

eds., ICAT-EGVE 2021 - International Conference on Artiﬁcial Reality
and Telexistence and Eurographics Symposium on Virtual Environments.
The Eurographics Association, 2021. doi: 10.2312/egve.20211331
[70] B. Wang and P.-L. P. Rau. Effect of vibrotactile feedback on simulator
sickness, performance, and user satisfaction with virtual reality glasses. In
Cross-Cultural Design. Methods, Tools and User Experience, pp. 291–302.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019.

[71] C. J. Wilson and A. Soranzo. The use of virtual reality in psychology: A
case study in visual perception. Computational and mathematical methods
in medicine, 2015, 2015. doi: 10.1155/2015/151702

[72] J. Witt, D. Profﬁtt, and W. Epstein. How and when does action scale
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 36(5):1153e1160, 2010. doi: 10.1037/a0019947

[73] J. K. Witt. Action’s effect on perception. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 20(3):201–206, 2011. doi: 10.1177/0963721411408770
[74] J. K. Witt, S. A. Linkenauger, J. Z. Bakdash, J. S. Augustyn, A. Cook, and
D. R. Profﬁtt. The long road of pain: Chronic pain increases perceived
distance. Experimental Brain Research, 192(1):145–148, 2009. doi: 10.
3758/s13414-018-01652-w

[75] J. K. Witt and D. R. Profﬁtt. See the ball, hit the ball: Apparent ball size
is correlated with batting average. Psychological Science, 2005. doi: 10.
1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01640.x

[76] J. K. Witt and M. Sugovic. Performance and ease inﬂuence perceived
speed. Perception, 39(10):1341–1353, 2010. doi: 10.1068/p6699
[77] J. K. Witt, N. L. Tenhundfeld, and M. J. Tymoski. Is there a chastity belt
on perception? Psychological Science, 29(1):139–146, 2018. doi: 10.
1177/0956797617730892

[78] A. Zenner and A. Kr¨uger. Shifty: A weight-shifting dynamic passive haptic
proxy to enhance object perception in virtual reality. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(4):1285–1294, 2017. doi: 10
.1109/TVCG.2017.2656978

[79] L. Zhao, Y. Liu, D. Ye, Z. Ma, and W. Song. Implementation and evalua-
tion of touch-based interaction using electrovibration haptic feedback in
virtual environments. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D
User Interfaces (VR), pp. 239–247, 2020. doi: 10.1109/VR46266.2020.
00043

Automation, Robotics and Applications (ICARA), pp. 300–305, 2015. doi:
10.1109/ICARA.2015.7081164

[51] D. S. Pamungkas and K. Ward. Electro-tactile feedback system to enhance
virtual reality experience. International Journal of Computer Theory and
Engineering, 8(6):465–470, 2016. doi: 10.7763/IJCTE.2016.V8.1090

[52] I. Patil. Visualizations with statistical details: The ’ggstatsplot’ approach.
Journal of Open Source Software, 6(61):3167, 2021. doi: 10.21105/joss.
03167

[53] R. A. Peterson and J. E. Cavanaugh. Ordered quantile normalization: a
semiparametric transformation built for the cross-validation era. Journal
of Applied Statistics, 47(13-15):2312–2327, 2020. doi: 10.1080/02664763
.2019.1630372

[54] D. R. Profﬁtt, J. Stefanucci, T. Banton, and W. Epstein. The role of effort
in perceiving distance. Psychological Science, 14(2):106–112, 2003. doi:
10.1111/1467-9280.t01-1-01427

[55] I. Rakkolainen, A. Farooq, J. Kangas, J. Hakulinen, J. Rantala, M. Turunen,
and R. Raisamo. Technologies for multimodal interaction in extended
reality: A scoping review. Multimodal Technologies and Interaction, 5(12),
2021. doi: 10.3390/mti5120081

[56] M. Sagardia, K. Hertkorn, T. Hulin, S. Sch¨atzle, R. Wolff, J. Hum-
mel, J. Dodiya, and A. Gerndt. Vr-oos: The dlr’s virtual reality sim-
ulator for telerobotic on-orbit servicing with haptic feedback. In 2015
IEEE Aerospace Conference, pp. 1–17, 2015. doi: 10.1109/AERO.2015.
7119040

[57] V. Schwind, P. Knierim, C. Tasci, P. Franczak, N. Haas, and N. Henze.
”These Are Not My Hands!”: Effect of Gender on the Perception of Avatar
Hands in Virtual Reality, p. 1577–1582. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2017.

[58] V. Schwind, J. Leusmann, and N. Henze. Understanding visual-haptic
integration of avatar hands using a ﬁtts’ law task in virtual reality. In
Proceedings of Mensch Und Computer 2019, MuC’19, p. 211–222. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019. doi: 10.
1145/3340764.3340769

[59] H. Singmann, B. Bolker, J. Westfall, F. Aust, and M. S. Ben-Shachar. afex:
Analysis of Factorial Experiments, 2021. R package version 1.0-1.
[60] M. Slater. How Colorful Was Your Day? Why Questionnaires Can-
not Assess Presence in Virtual Environments. Presence: Teleopera-
tors and Virtual Environments, 13(4):484–493, 08 2004. doi: 10.1162/
1054746041944849

[61] M. Slater. Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour
in immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1535):3549–3557, 2009. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2009.0138

[62] A. Somrak, M. Pogaˇcnik, and J. Guna. Suitability and comparison of
questionnaires assessing virtual reality-induced symptoms and effects and
user experience in virtual environments. Sensors, 21(4), 2021. doi: 10.
3390/s21041185

[63] M. Sugovic, P. Turk, and J. K. Witt. Perceived distance and obesity: It’s
what you weigh, not what you think. Acta Psychologica, 165:1–8, 2016.
doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2016.01.012

[64] R. J. Teather, D. Natapov, and M. Jenkin. Evaluating haptic feedback
in virtual environments using iso 9241–9. In 2010 IEEE Virtual Reality
Conference (VR), pp. 307–308, 2010. doi: 10.1109/VR.2010.5444753

[65] H. Tu, S. Huang, J. Yuan, X. Ren, and F. Tian. Crossing-based selection
with virtual reality head-mounted displays. In Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’19, p.
1–14. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019.
doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300848

[66] B. ¨Uz¨um and M. G¨okt¨urk. The effect of vibrotactile feedback on novice
older adults in target selection tasks. In M. M. Robertson, ed., Ergonomics
and Health Aspects of Work with Computers, pp. 171–179. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.

[67] E. van Breda, S. Verwulgen, W. Saeys, K. Wuyts, T. Peeters, and S. Truijen.
Vibrotactile feedback as a tool to improve motor learning and sports
performance: a systematic review. BMJ Open Sport & Exercise Medicine,
3(1), 2017. doi: 10.1136/bmjsem-2016-000216

[68] B. Van der Hoort and H. H. Ehrsson. Body ownership affects visual
perception of object size by rescaling the visual representation of external
space. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 76(5):1414–1428, 2014.
doi: 10.3758/s13414-014-0664-9

[69] S. Vizcay, P. Kourtesis, F. Argelaguet, C. Pacchierotti, and M. Marchal.
Electrotactile Feedback For Enhancing Contact Information in Virtual
Reality – Best Paper Award. In J. Orlosky, D. Reiners, and B. Weyers,

12

