2
2
0
2

l
u
J

3
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
4
3
6
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A guideline proposal for minimizing cybersickness
in VR-based serious games and applications

1st Thiago Porcino, 2nd Derek Reilly
Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Canada
thiago@dal.ca
reilly@cs.dal.ca

3rd Esteban Clua, 4th Daniela Trevisan
Institute of Computing
Universidade Federal Fluminense
Niteroi, Brazil
esteban@ic.uff.br
daniela@ic.uff.br

Abstract—Head-mounted displays (HMDs) are popular immer-
sive tools in general, not limited to entertainment but also for
education, military, and serious games for health. While these
displays have strong popularity, they still have user experience
issues, triggering possible symptoms of discomfort to users. This
condition is known as cybersickness (CS) and is one of the
most popular research topics tied to virtual reality (VR) issues.
We ﬁrst present the main strategies focused on minimizing
cybersickness problems in virtual reality. Following this, we
propose a guideline framework based on CS causes such as
locomotion, acceleration, the ﬁeld of view, depth of ﬁeld, degree of
freedom, exposition use time, latency-lag, static rest frame, and
camera rotation. Additionally, serious games applications and
broader categories of games can also adopt it. Additionally, we
categorized the imminent challenges for CS minimization into
four different items. Conclusively, this work contributes as a
consulting reference to enable VR developers and designers to
optimize their VR users’ experience and VR serious games.

Index Terms—head-mounted displays, virtual reality, cyber-

sickness, VR-based serious games, challenges

I. INTRODUCTION

Games and Virtual Reality may be efﬁcient environments
for teaching and training in numerous ﬁelds, such as education,
military, and health. In particular, dedicated applications for
health retain the purpose of training health professionals and as
tools to minimize health disorders. For example, serious games
can be developed for rehabilitation processes and therapies
[12], [38]. Besides, with the immersive contribution of popular
XR (extended reality) supplies, such as head-mounted displays
(HMDs) and the popularity of immersive environments over
the last years, serious games that can employ immersive virtual
conditions and gaming mechanics maintain a promising future,
supported by the market of vast hardware availability for
immersive games [11].

HMDs devices are used for various purposes in the industry
such as in games that focus on health [10] and serious
games [11]. However, VR consumers are often complaining
about frequent manifestations of discomfort in these devices

[25]. This situation is known as cybersickness (CS) and is a
condition that has been intrinsic in HMDs. CS can also trigger
a scope of symptoms of discomfort in users.

The discomfort effect can negatively impact the VR treat-
ment and, in some cases, even present dangerous situations
for the current patient. For example, while a VR-based game
for upper limb rehabilitation [15] can be used as an excellent
therapy tool, it also can produce discomfort in patients im-
mersed in a virtual environment hearing HMDs. In addition,
CS symptoms can vary across individuals; some people are
more susceptible than others. In summary, we start from the
principle that CS symptoms are a side effect of any immersive
application (including immersive serious games) that does not
follow protocols to minimize the CS.

In this work, we propose a guideline to improve the user ex-
perience and minimize cybersickness symptoms. Additionally,
we categorized the main challenges in this context. To build
this guideline, we focus on immersive environments, including
immersive serious games for health-based treatments, VR
entertainment games, and VR applications. Furthermore, we
highlight some recent immersive serious games that focus on
rehabilitation but do not apply any strategy to produce a better
user experience related to minimizing cybersickness in their
application. We believe our guideline can improve patients’
experience using immersive serious games and head-mounted
displays. More importantly, we look forward to answering the
following research questions:

• Which are the main strategies reported in the literature

to minimize CS in VR serious games?

• Which are the main challenges for mitigating CS in VR

environments?

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 clariﬁes the
literature review presenting the necessary background knowl-
edge to understand the types of VR-related illnesses. Section
3 explains the related works highlighting the importance of
using strategies to avoid CS in VR-based serious games for
rehabilitation. Section 4 describes our proposed guideline to

 
 
 
 
 
 
mitigate discomfort in VR-based environments and serious
games, presenting the strategies to overcome CS. Section 5
points out the main challenges to minimizing CS in head-
mounted displays. Section 6 presents a discussion of this
work’s ﬁndings. Finally, section 7 describes the conclusion
and future work.

II. CS BACKGROUND

This section presents a fundamental understanding of mo-
tion perception concerning motion sickness’s (MS) primary
distinctions and subcategories. MS manifests itself because
of the information divergence emitted by the human sensory
system. This occurs when conﬂicts between the sensory organs
deﬁne an individual’s orientation and spatial positioning. MS is
deﬁned as the discomfort felt during a forced visual movement
without equivalent body movement, such as those present in
the airplane, boats, or land vehicles locomotions [21].

This discomfort also occurs in virtual environments and
is called visually induced motion sickness (VIMS). Merhi et
al. [37] deﬁned the event of VIMS during experiments with
video games as a game disease (gaming sickness). Moreover,
in VR, articles usually label VIMS that occurs in VR as
CyberSickness (CS) [35]. In contrast, VIMS that occurs during
ﬂight or drive simulators is often called simulator sickness
[5]. Overall, MS can be split into two subcategories [21]:
transportation sickness, which is tied to the real world, and
simulator sickness, which is associated with the virtual world
and includes cybersickness (CS).

Cybersickness symptoms, in turn, are comparable with MS
symptoms occurring in the real world, such as nausea, ver-
tigo, dizziness, and upset stomach [19]. CS Symptoms occur
mainly with VR Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs) [55]. [25]
described more than 40 possible VIMS causes. These factors
were grouped into simulator,
task, and individual factors.
[56] expanded Kolasinski’s work by tabling and dividing
potential factors for CS manifestations. Rebenitsh [56] stated
that many factors and conﬁgurations related to discomfort are
still unknown.

III. RELATED WORKS

CS attenuation for different users and games is not triv-
ial. The ﬁrst problem is the lack of a unique variable for
discomfort levels. VR users may experience multiple symp-
toms. Besides, serious games focused on treatment use VR
environments and equipment (such as HMDs) to improve user
experience and patient engagement in therapy.

However, the lack of CS mitigation strategies in VR-based
serious games may impair therapy results, generating side
effects on their patients. For example,
the CS symptoms
generated in a VR-based game for therapy could be a negative
side effect in a VR game without CS minimization strategies.
For this reason, in this section, we separated related works
considering works focused on CS minimization and VR-based
serious games for rehabilitation.

A. CS minimization in VR

Several studies have been conducted using deep learning
models, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
recurrent neural networks (RNNs). [23], proposed a deep
learning architecture to estimate the cognitive state using brain
signals and how they are related to CS levels. Their approach
is based on deep learning models, such as long short-term
memory (LSTM), RNN, and CNN [18], [30], [58]). The
models learn the individual characteristics of the participants
that lead to the manifestation of CS symptoms when playing
a VR game.

In a previous work [49], we propose an approach to identi-
fying causes of cybersickness in different virtual reality games
using head-mounted displays. We used symbolic classiﬁers
to analyze the causes of cybersickness during the gameplay
experience. Once the cause is identiﬁed, game designers can
select an adequate strategy to mitigate the impacts of CS.

Langbehn et al. [28], Farmani et al. [13], and Sarupuri et
al. [61] concentrates efforts on strategies to resolve CS tied to
locomotion in virtual reality environments. Besides, Berthoz et
al., [2] Pavard et al., [43] and Bouyer et al. [4] applied haptic
feedback to cover this issue. Our proposed guideline (section
IV) detail these and other works considering their strategies.

B. VR-based serious games

In healthcare, serious games aimed at patient rehabilitation
are top-rated for many reasons [59]. In these rehabilitation ac-
tivities, frequent patients give up long-term treatments (such as
physiotherapy) because they feel tedious after many exercise
sessions [39]. The serious games can motivate patients during
the rehabilitation tasks, mainly in long-term treatments where
the patient needs to train their motor abilities [7].

Some studies [15], [31] designed virtual reality-based se-
rious games to enhance the execution of these movements
using virtual reality and HMDs. In Ferreira et al. [15] work,
they developed a serious VR-based game for upper limb
rehabilitation. In this case, the primary purpose of the devel-
oped games is to keep patients engaged without developing
any frustration or boredom during the gameplay. They used
an immersive Tetris-like game to execute movements that
strengthen patients’ muscles of the arm and shoulder, stimulate
their cognitive activity, and stimulate the patient’s sensory
inputs. The 15 participants were exposed to a VR-based game
for an average of 28 minutes and 46 seconds.

Liao et al. [31] also proposed a serious VR-based game for
upper limb therapy. The serious game developed is composed
of three mini-games, where each one is designed for a speciﬁc
rehabilitation task related to daily life or a joint event (i.e.,
ﬁshing). They use a scoring system to reward patients after
completing tasks in games. The authors did not mention the
number of participants and the exposure time in their VR-
based game.

Pereira et al. [45] developed the Stable-Hand VR, a serious
game developed to help patients in hand rehabilitation pro-
cesses. This system uses an HMD to render immersive content
and a leap controller to track and manage the patient hand’s

movements. This serious VR-based game’s tasks are generally
aimed at pinching gestures. The experiment process in this
work was made with 7 participants (in both works) in two 20
minutes sessions with one day break. According Pereira et al.
[45], 3 participants mentioned discomfort tied to HMD use,
speciﬁcally during the transition between scenes in the game
menu.

Luo et al. [34] designed the VR driving serious game
focused on rehabilitation of patients with Hemiplegia, a con-
dition caused by brain harm that results in weakness, stiffness
in one side of the body.
(spasticity), and lack of control
They use a VR serious game to create rehabilitation sessions
associated with upper limp recovery treatment. In summary,
the patient has the task of controlling a virtual car to collect
coins and avoid virtual obstacles. The game has two different
play modes, one with a ﬁxed speed and the other with a
controllable speed (similar to conventional race games). They
produced two modes to adapt the application with different
limb disorder levels. Also, the application has an HMD and
3D annular projection screen modes. According to the authors,
compared to traditional rehabilitation activities, the VR game
increased the interest and conﬁdence of patients during the
rehabilitation processes, but no CS mitigation technique was
applied.

Although all

the related works are focused on patient
rehabilitation (and related to health), only the work by Pereira
et al. [45] mentioned the concern with symptoms of the
discomfort of their patients during the use of HMD device.
In addition, none of the studies mentioned applied one or
more strategies to avoid discomfort in their patients during
HMDs use. Additionally, a recent study related an option to
use the same developed VR-based game in a non-immersive
way (with a standard screen) and the same controllers (VR
motion controllers) to avoid CS [29].

The studied serious games in this work do not endeavor
to avoid CS using strategies. On the other hand, commercial
games essentially use CS minimization techniques. We assume
that VR-based serious games for rehabilitation and traditional
VR games have similar gameplay, design, and development
bases. For this reason, we propose a guideline framework with
strategies to combat CS in VR-based games (including those
for rehabilitation).

IV. PROPOSED GUIDELINE FRAMEWORK

As previously mentioned, many related works have in-
vestigated the inﬂuence of CS aspects in VR environments.
However, in this study, we are interested in investigating how
such aspects of CS have impacted the user experience with
virtual reality serious games and how game designers could
mitigate such impacts.

Following a previous review of the literature [52], [53], we
propose a guideline strategy that may be used as a framework
for avoiding CS in VR applications and games. In this sec-
tion, we present our proposed guideline framework based on
causes described in a previous work [50], [53]. Based on the
referenced serious games for health applications activities, we

propose here that the causes of CS may be inﬂuenced by the
following variables: locomotion, acceleration, the ﬁeld of view,
depth of ﬁeld, degree of control, duration use time, latency-
lag (including rendering optimization), static rest frame, and
camera rotation. Our framework ﬁrst suggests identifying
when these situations are present in the application, marking
them as necessarily desirable or optional, according to the
serious game required activities. We also suggest listing these
situations in a priority list to give more attention to those at the
top of the list. Our framework suggests the designer consider
the following guidelines for each of these variables.

A. Locomotion

We start our framework with the consideration of the user
movement. In this sense, Teleportation strategies are one of the
most effective strategies for avoiding CS related to translation,
and our solution claims that developers should ﬁrst consider
if teleportation ﬁts the application’s requirements (Figure 1).

Fig. 1. Example of teleportation strategy. (1) The user point to an speciﬁc
location in VR. (2) User are immediately transported to the aimed location.

In teleportation, users can travel great distances by specify-
ing the trip’s destination point with the help of a marker [28].
This strategy works as follows: using a controller, the user
points to the destination location and squeezes a trigger button,
which immediately transports the user to the new location,
also called ”pointing and teleport”. Another strategy called
”trigger walk” uses the concept of natural walking to reach
a destination. In this case, the user uses VR control triggers
instead of legs to move around. Each user’s hands handle each
control in a relaxed and comfortable position (with minimum
energy consumption). The user moves closer to the direction
indicated at each pull of the trigger [61]. The VR-based serious
games that able players to virtually walk need to attempt
locomotion techniques to avoid CS.

B. Acceleration

Following locomotion, we suggest continuing the design
process considering acceleration issues. According to [2], it
is possible to induce a sensation of movement using a visual
response (haptic feedback example in Figure 2) [57].

According to [43], the human visual system can adapt to
illusive motion but not acceleration. Various applications of
VR (e.g., games and training applications) require support
for haptic perception. This is because haptic perceptions
can induce the sensation of acceleration in its users. When
correctly applied, artiﬁcial acceleration sensation can help
avoid sensory conﬂict. In some virtual environments (racing

the focus elements required for that action. Developers should
avoid presenting new elements to the application during this
moment. This strategy is required to improve locomotion tech-
niques if the VR-based therapy players have to walk virtually.
Additionally, VR-based therapies with camera movements can
also beneﬁt from this strategy.

D. Depth of ﬁeld

Some studies include a depth of ﬁeld simulation (Figure
4) agent with image blur to minimize the convergence and
accommodation problems [9], [47].

Fig. 4.
application using depth of ﬁeld focusing on the fountain [68].

(1) A VR application without depth of ﬁeld effect. (2) The VR

The solution presented by [9] pointed to decreased discom-
fort in HMD applications. Speciﬁcally, they suggested a GPU-
based solution to simulate depth of ﬁeld in these applications.
In our initial work, we developed a focus and region of interest
dynamics model for the visualization of objects in VR [47].
Unlike Carnegie, we used the term ”dynamic” to suggest that
the model moves the region of interest in the 3D scene using
the application. This prototype simulates a visual focus self-
extraction tool, limiting the region of interest in the visual
to determine
ﬁeld. The model uses the region of interest
the depth of ﬁeld effects in real-time, minimizing discomfort
when using HMD. Additionally, we designed a methodological
guide for CS minimization on VR application [53]. On the
other hand, ﬁeld depth simulation strategies can produce low
frame rates, inducing high latency, thereby causing CS. In the
work of [26] and [42], an approach was adopted to apply a
simulated depth of ﬁeld using an external interface, solving
the problem of low frame rate. However, such a strategy is
contingent on the application of speciﬁc hardware. A recent
work reduced the spatial resolution in the HMD’s peripheral
regions (using foveated rendering) and applied the depth of
ﬁeld simulation effect [20]. Most observed VR-based serious
games for rehabilitation render sharp images in HMDs, that
trigger CS. In VR therapy, the lack of correct simulation of
DoF can negatively affect the VR therapy, causing discomfort
in the patient.

E. Duration use time

Fig. 2. The virtual reality game (1) and a (2) HTC Vive controller enhanced
with haptic feedback actuators in Ryge et. al [57].

games), it is possible to minimize CS problems using haptic
responses. Haptics is a way of transmitting physical sensations
to the user, which are compatible with those captured by the
user’s visual system. [4] used haptic feedback outside a VR
environment while still managing to provide users with an
enhanced sense of reality. According to [46], measuring CS
acceleration using electro-dermal activity (EDA) is possible.
Plouzeau et al. changed and adjusted the acceleration to visual-
ize EDA changes. When EDA values increase, the acceleration
decreases proportionately. According to research [64],
the
more predictable the camera movement and acceleration, the
lesser the CS effects will be. When accelerations situations are
necessary for the required simulation, our framework suggests
building or including proper interfaces, such as real ergonomic
bicycles, adapted wheelchairs, or adapted mats.

C. Field of view

Applying strategies that manipulate the ﬁeld of view (FoV)
in commercial games is quite common [65]. Vignette is a
strategy to shorten the FoV gradually, thus reducing discomfort
in VR environments [14]. This strategy is a variation applied
in [3], where the size of the vignette and dynamic FoV is
related to the camera acceleration values. Tunnel or Tunneling
(illustrated in Figure 3) is also used to solve locomotion
problems.

Fig. 3.
(1) A VR race gameplay on a curved track with no appliance of
guidelines. (2) The race gameplay using rotational blurring and tunneling,
activated during the gameplay in [49].

Such a strategy reduces the size of the user’s FoV at the
moment of the locomotion, thereby minimizing sensory con-
ﬂict problems. Similar to the vignette, the tunnel signiﬁcantly
reduces the FoV. However, it is only applied during locomo-
tion. Design projects should select all the translation stages
and mark when such strategies could be used, considering

The study by [36] relates the exposure time with discomfort
manifestation and suggests short-term or interval virtual expe-
riences. This principle suggests that VR applications could
avoid CS symptoms if paused periodically. Consequently, the
application should allow users to interrupt the experience to
take a rest and then be able to return to the exact point

paused before. According to [63], CS can be minimized by
exposing non-experienced users gradually to VR, which means
a VR experienced user can have less susceptibility to CS than
non-experienced users. Our framework suggests measuring the
required time for the activities, and in cases when they take
more than 10 minutes [54], we suggest to divide activities
into time slots that may be interrupted without any immersive
breakthrough.

F. Degree of freedom (control)

Degrees of freedom (3-Dof or 6-Dof) is an essential concept
in VR that allows natural human movement to be converted
into simulated movement in the VR application [41]. Low-
cost HMDs (such as Google Cardboard, Oculus Go, and
Samsung Gear VR) has 3 degrees of freedom tracking (3Dof).
In other words, it is possible to look at 360 degrees, for
example, looking left or right, rotating their head up or down,
and pivoting left or right. Consequently, the user can feel
disorientation by the limited movement. For 3-Dof HMDs,
anticipating and preparing the user’s visual motion experience
can reduce the lack of control by the user and, consequently,
the discomfort. Having a virtual guiding avatar, which prepares
the user’s visual motion experience in the virtual environment,
is a result of VIMS reduction on Lin et al. [32] (illustrated in
Figure 5).

(1) Design of the Virtual guiding 3D avatar by [32]. (2) A view
Fig. 5.
of guiding avatar (3d arrows) use in ﬁrst person perspective, and (3) a
map of virtual environment showing multiple guiding arrows around the VR
environment [8].

G. Latency-lag

The asynchronous time warp is a method for overcoming
HMD’s latency [21] by improving a rendered (warped) image
based on the latest head-tracking data. According to [66] ,
this method is based on augmented reality ”CamWarp” (that
is applied in see-through augmented reality devices) and also
reduces discomfort in VR environments. In other words, this
strategy drives the user to see their movement in VR without
diverging between the physical movement (made by the user’s
body) and the virtual movement (visualized by the user’s eyes
on the HMD display).

Moreover, foveated rendering is a performance optimization
based on the well-known degradation of peripheral visual
acuity (illustrated in Figure 6).

This strategy reduces the computational costs by rendering
a high-resolution image in the user’s center of attention (foveal
region) and a low-resolution image in the periphery [1]. In VR,
foveated rendering is an excellent graphics optimization that
helps to reduce system latency and virtual reality application

Fig. 6. Albert et al. [1] produced a scene with different foveation strategies.
In (1) the original render without any effect, and in (2) they exaggerated the
magnitude of foveation to illustrate the effect. The center of gaze (in yellow)
is the region with high-resolution.

performance. Similar to ”CamWarp” strategy,
the ”Time-
Warped Foveated Rendering” [16] strategy produces a visually
plausible result if compared to regular rendering. In sum-
mary, Franke et al. [16] produced a foveated rendered scene
without being noticeable to the observer’s eye with a speed-
up of almost 1.6X than the original render. Consequently,
both strategies contribute to minimizing CS effects tied to
latency. While VR-based serious games for rehabilitation are
simpler than commercial entertainment games in the context of
computational complexity (that affects the game performance),
in VR-based therapy, the game performance is also critical
because it directly affects the patient’s health in case of
triggering CS symptoms.

H. Static rest frame

According to studies [24], [62], people show longer toler-
ance to discomfort during experiences based on VR projec-
tions (example: Cave Automatic Virtual Environment [40]).
One of the biggest differences between VR and projection-
based systems is rest frames. In projection-based systems,
the screen edges and visible real-world elements beyond the
screens act as rest frames. This raises the hypothesis that the
simulation of rest frames in virtual environments (Figure 7)
can create comfortable experiences [32].

Fig. 7. (1) A VR application without static rest frame. (2) The VR application
using static layer as rest frame [8].

However, adding elements to create a false rest frame that
hides part of the screen may not be a good strategy for all VR
applications. It can work well for racing games, where the
player is naturally inserted into a car. However, this approach
may not work well for games with ﬁrst-person cameras, as they
create strange circumstances for the player. Our framework
suggests that the designer consider when this can be possible
or not during the experience.

I. Camera rotation

Several other works applied various strategies such as head
movement ampliﬁcation, whereby individual movements are
ampliﬁed in VR [27], [46]. Another example is the blur-
ring rotation (Figure 8), a strategy implemented by [6] that
uniformly applies Gaussian blurs based on the magnitude of
acceleration and rotation values. There are also experiments
deploying more basic strategies that lock the users’ heads to
avoid rotational movements.

According to [22], such a strategy reduces the CS man-
ifested during rotation by 30% compared with the use of
controls to perform rotational movements. Nevertheless, the
authors concluded that participants found the strategy non-
intuitive because it reduced the sensation of presence in the
virtual environment. It is worth noting that both this strategy
and rotation blurring only apply to rotational movements. We
suggest using the blurring effect in a virtual reality experience
during a rotation movement.

Fig. 8. From (1) to (4), a blurring effect application during a rotation
movement in virtual reality environment [6].

V. CHALLENGES TO MINIMIZE CS

While many signs of progress related to immersion in VR
had been achieved in computer graphics visualization, audio,
smart devices, video tracking, and interfaces between many
systems, there are still many remaining challenges to minimize
CS in HMDs, primarily related to the early identiﬁcation of sit-
uations that cause discomfort in the user. This section presents
challenges such as CS prediction, data labeling for machine
learning studies, the lack of underrepresented groups’ data
analysis, and the variability of tasks in virtual environments.

1) Cybersickness prediction - Although deep learning
classiﬁers are the most suitable approach for CS predic-
tion, deep neural networks are black boxes that are very
difﬁcult to grasp. On the other hand, symbolic machine
learning algorithms enable a straight understanding of
decision paths [50]. The human-readable characteristic
of symbolic machine learning models such as decision
tree and random forest can help understand the discom-
fort manifestation reasons [48]. Additionally, a recent
approach applies strategies to make deep learning mod-
els explainable [67], although the literature is still scarce
on the topic. Explainable AI can be an excellent way
to better the two worlds: the human understanding of

symbolic machine learning with the accurate prediction
of deep neural networks.

2) Data labeling - Another critical problem in CS research
is associated with data labeling. Researchers generally
collect verbal [23], [50], haptic, or brain signal feedback
to construct the ground truth of sickness. While verbal
feedback is highly subjective and different for each
participant, collecting haptic feedback when participants
are in discomfort can often be corrupted by the delay
associated with participant feedback.

3) Data from underrepresented groups - Another not re-
solved challenge is acquiring data considering underrep-
resented user-proﬁles [44] such as speciﬁc impairments
or health issues [33].

4) Tasks in VR - A recent work [17] pointed out that
speciﬁc tasks can produce different results of CS for
different user proﬁles and groups. Additionally, in a
recent work [49] we suggested the importance of a
better understanding of the correlation between proﬁle
attributes (such as gender, age, XR experience, and other
individual characteristics) and gameplay elements, and
also how outcomes obtained from proﬁle attributes can
be used to tag XR experiences according to distinct
groups of users. In this context, studies involving ma-
chine learning models combined with an evaluation of
individual tasks associated with CS causes in XR games
may produce a more profound study isolating any other
XR possible inﬂuences on CS results.

VI. DISCUSSION

Although several strategies minimize cybersickness, it is
still impossible to eliminate all symptoms from HMD users.
This problem occurs because each user has a different level
of susceptibility to discomfort, leading many researchers to
look for solutions involving machine learning (deep neural
networks), as seen in this work.

The immersive serious games described in the related works
did not use any strategy to minimize CS. This problem worsens
when the serious game is associated with some recovery
therapy. While the treatment in a virtual reality environment
can be beneﬁcial for the patient, it can generate feelings of
discomfort in users if CS issue is not considered, as reported
by Pereira et al. [45]. For this reason, immersive serious games
(especially those related to health) must follow guidelines to
improve their users’ experience in VR environments.

Moreover, we did not ﬁnd any standard methodology for
CS data recording or experiments conducted along with this
study. Creating a standard methodology to collect CS data
can be challenging because the same sickness level can differ
among different participants. In other words, considering a
scale from 0 to 3 (none, slight, moderate, and severe), one
person can consider scale one as slight, but another, more
susceptible, will fall as three or severe.

Furthermore, collecting haptic feedback while participants
are feeling discomfort, this data can be corrupted by delayed
(i.e., CS cases delays in response time) or random responses.

In other words, the moment the participant feels the pain may
not be the exact moment the CS cause was triggered in the
participant. Additionally, monitoring methodologies used to
record the human brain’s electrical activity (such as Elec-
troencephalography) have more accurate data, as they capture
more precise data of the user’s physical and mental state, and
many diseases and brain problems are diagnosed through the
evaluation of such devices’ data [60]. However, these medical
tools are expensive and unavailable to the general public.

In summary, it is necessary to standardize the procedures,
equipment, and materials to collect CS data and the methods
used to classify it.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This work proposes an objective guideline process based
on an extensive literature review to avoid CS using software
and hardware approaches. Besides, CS can be triggered due
to different factors [48]. Eventually, a single cause might
inﬂuence more in triggering CS than others. For this reason,
different combinations of strategies can be applied according
to the game content or user susceptibility to CS. In other
words, different VR-based serious games could lead to dif-
ferent strategy recommendations.

We covered the main strategies reported in the literature
to minimize CS in VR compatible with immersive serious
games. Additionally, we categorize the main challenges to
minimizing CS into 4 different items, although others might
be. Speciﬁcally, this classiﬁcation is not exhaustive, and many
other aspects could also be included in future works, such as
human behaviors, hardware, interface, and other related issues.
A straightforward way is to explore gender differences. A
recent work [17] pointed out that speciﬁc tasks can produce
different results of discomfort for different user proﬁles and
user groups, regarding and not limited to: gender, age, or
health issues. Our symbolic machine learning approach can
also help to further analysis.

For this reason, the next step of this research is to propose
a virtual reality game that explores speciﬁc tasks individually
tied to speciﬁc CS causes and strategies with a long exposure.
We intend to conduct an evaluation study, considering individ-
ual tasks associated with CS causes and strategies. We believe
it is possible to produce a more profound study isolating any
other VR possible inﬂuences on CS results [48], [51].

At this moment, we believe this work can contribute to
designers and researchers to enable the right strategy to avoid
CS in VR serious games and other VR applications.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Albert, A. Patney, D. Luebke, and J. Kim. Latency requirements
for foveated rendering in virtual reality. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP), 14(4):1–13, 2017.

[2] A. Berthoz, B. Pavard, and L. Young. Perception of linear horizontal
self-motion induced by peripheral vision (linearvection) basic charac-
teristics and visual-vestibular interactions. Experimental brain research,
23(5):471–489, 1975.

[3] M. Bolas, J. A. Jones, I. McDowall, and E. Suma. Dynamic ﬁeld of
view throttling as a means of improving user experience in head mounted
virtual environments, May 9 2017. US Patent 9,645,395.

[4] G. Bouyer, A. Chellali, and A. L´ecuyer. Inducing self-motion sensations
in driving simulators using force-feedback and haptic motion. In Virtual
Reality (VR), 2017 IEEE, pages 84–90. IEEE, 2017.

[5] J. O. Brooks, R. R. Goodenough, M. C. Crisler, N. D. Klein, R. L. Alley,
B. L. Koon, W. C. Logan Jr, J. H. Ogle, R. A. Tyrrell, and R. F. Wills.
Simulator sickness during driving simulation studies. Accident Analysis
& Prevention, 42(3):788–796, 2010.

[6] P. Budhiraja, M. R. Miller, A. K. Modi, and D. Forsyth. Rotation
blurring: Use of artiﬁcial blurring to reduce cybersickness in virtual
reality ﬁrst person shooters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.02599, 2017.
[7] J. W. Burke, M. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. H. Crosbie,
and S. M. McDonough. Optimising engagement for stroke rehabilitation
using serious games. The Visual Computer, 25(12):1085–1099, 2009.

[8] Z. Cao, J. Jerald, and R. Kopper. Visually-induced motion sickness
reduction via static and dynamic rest frames. In 2018 IEEE Conference
on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pages 105–112. IEEE,
2018.

[9] K. Carnegie and T. Rhee. Reducing visual discomfort with hmds using
IEEE computer graphics and applications,

dynamic depth of ﬁeld.
35(5):34–41, 2015.

[10] M. Carri´on, M. Santorum, J. Benavides, J. Aguilar, and Y. Ortiz.
Developing a virtual reality serious game to recreational therapy using
iplus methodology. In 2019 International Conference on Virtual Reality
and Visualization (ICVRV), pages 133–137. IEEE, 2019.

[11] D. Checa and A. Bustillo. A review of immersive virtual reality
serious games to enhance learning and training. Multimedia Tools and
Applications, 79(9):5501–5527, 2020.

[12] D. Deponti, D. Maggiorini, and C. E. Palazzi. Droidglove: An android-
In 2009 International Con-
based application for wrist rehabilitation.
ference on Ultra Modern Telecommunications & Workshops, pages 1–7.
IEEE, 2009.

[13] Y. Farmani. Discrete Viewpoint Control to Reduce Cybersickness in

Virtual Environments. PhD thesis, Carleton University, 2018.

[14] A. S. Fernandes and S. K. Feiner. Combating vr sickness through subtle
dynamic ﬁeld-of-view modiﬁcation. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D
User Interfaces (3DUI), pages 201–210. IEEE, 2016.

[15] B. Ferreira and P. Menezes. An adaptive virtual reality-based serious

game for therapeutic rehabilitation. 2020.

[16] L. Franke, L. Fink, J. Martschinke, K. Selgrad, and M. Stamminger.
In Com-
Time-warped foveated rendering for virtual reality headsets.
puter Graphics Forum, volume 40, pages 110–123. Wiley Online Li-
brary, 2021.

[17] S. Grassini and K. Laumann. Are modern head-mounted displays sexist?
a systematic review on gender differences in hmd-mediated virtual
reality. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 2020.

[18] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton. Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks. In 2013 IEEE international conference
on acoustics, speech and signal processing, pages 6645–6649. IEEE,
2013.

[19] P. Howarth and P. Costello. The occurrence of virtual simulation
sickness symptoms when an hmd was used as a personal viewing system.
Displays, 18(2):107–116, 1997.

[20] R. Hussain, M. Chessa, and F. Solari. Mitigating cybersickness in
virtual reality systems through foveated depth-of-ﬁeld blur. Sensors,
21(12):4006, 2021.

[21] A. Kemeny, J.-R. Chardonnet, and F. Colombet. Getting Rid of
Cybersickness: In Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, and Simulators.
Springer Nature, 2020.

[22] A. Kemeny, P. George, F. M´erienne, and F. Colombet. New vr navigation
techniques to reduce cybersickness. Electronic Imaging, 2017(3):48–53,
2017.

[23] J. Kim, W. Kim, H. Oh, S. Lee, and S. Lee. A deep cybersickness
predictor based on brain signal analysis for virtual reality contents. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 10580–10589, 2019.

[24] K. Kim, M. Z. Rosenthal, D. Zielinski, and R. Brady. Comparison of
desktop, head mounted display, and six wall fully immersive systems
using a stressful task. In 2012 IEEE Virtual Reality Workshops (VRW),
pages 143–144. IEEE, 2012.

[25] E. M. Kolasinski. Simulator sickness in virtual environments. Technical

report, DTIC Document, 1995.

[26] R. Konrad, N. Padmanaban, K. Molner, E. A. Cooper, and G. Wetzstein.
Accommodation-invariant computational near-eye displays. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):88, 2017.

[27] R. Kopper, C. Stinson, and D. Bowman. Towards an understanding of
the effects of ampliﬁed head rotations. In The 3rd IEEE VR Workshop
on Perceptual Illusions in Virtual Environments, volume 2, 2011.
[28] E. Langbehn, P. Lubos, and F. Steinicke. Evaluation of locomotion
techniques for room-scale vr: Joystick,
teleportation, and redirected
walking. In Proceedings of the Virtual Reality International Conference-
Laval Virtual, page 4. ACM, 2018.

[29] D. Lanzoni, A. Vitali, D. Regazzoni, and C. Rizzi. Design of customized
virtual reality serious games for the cognitive rehabilitation of retrograde
Journal of Computing and Information
amnesia after brain stroke.
Science in Engineering, 22(3), 2022.

[30] S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, A. C. Tsoi, and A. D. Back. Face recognition:
A convolutional neural-network approach. IEEE transactions on neural
networks, 8(1):98–113, 1997.

[31] K.-L. Liao, M. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. Wu, R. Yang, J. Zhang, and L. Wang.
A virtual reality serious game design for upper limb rehabilitation.
In 2021 IEEE 9th International Conference on Serious Games and
Applications for Health (SeGAH), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2021.

[32] J. J. Lin, H. Abi-Rached, and M. Lahav. Virtual guiding avatar: An effec-
tive procedure to reduce simulator sickness in virtual environments. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 719–726. ACM, 2004.

[33] M.-C. Lorenzini, A. M. H¨am¨al¨ainen, and W. Wittich. Factors related
to the use of a head-mounted display for individuals with low vision.
Disability and Rehabilitation, 43(17):2472–2486, 2021.

[34] T. Luo, N. Cai, Z. Li, Z. Pan, and Q. Yuan. Vr-dlr: a serious game
of somatosensory driving applied to limb rehabilitation training.
In
International Conference on Entertainment Computing, pages 51–64.
Springer, 2020.

[35] M. E. McCauley and T. J. Sharkey. Cybersickness: Perception of self-
motion in virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 1(3):311–318, 1992.

[36] M. Melo, J. Vasconcelos-Raposo, and M. Bessa. Presence and cyber-
sickness in immersive content: effects of content type, exposure time
and gender. Computers & Graphics, 71:159–165, 2018.

[37] O. Merhi, E. Faugloire, M. Flanagan, and T. A. Stoffregen. Motion
sickness, console video games, and head-mounted displays. Human
factors, 49(5):920–934, 2007.

[38] A. Min, H. Min, and S. Kim. Effectiveness of serious games in nurse
education: A systematic review. Nurse education today, 108:105178,
2022.

[39] B. Moy`a Alcover, A. Jaume-i Cap´o, J. Varona, P. Martinez-Bueso, and
A. Mesejo Chiong. Use of serious games for motivational balance
In The proceedings of the
rehabilitation of cerebral palsy patients.
13th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and
accessibility, pages 297–298, 2011.

[40] M. A. Muhanna. Virtual reality and the cave: Taxonomy, interaction
challenges and research directions. Journal of King Saud University-
Computer and Information Sciences, 27(3):344–361, 2015.

[41] Y. K. Nakka, R. C. Foust, E. S. Lupu, D. B. Elliott, I. S. Crowell, S.-J.
Chung, and F. Y. Hadaegh. A six degree-of-freedom spacecraft dynamics
simulator for formation control research. 2018.

[42] N. Padmanaban, R. Konrad, T. Stramer, E. A. Cooper, and G. Wetzstein.
Optimizing virtual reality for all users through gaze-contingent and
adaptive focus displays. Proceedings of
the National Academy of
Sciences, page 201617251, 2017.

[43] B. Pavard and A. Berthoz. Linear acceleration modiﬁes the perceived
velocity of a moving visual scene. Perception, 6(5):529–540, 1977.
[44] T. C. Peck, L. E. Sockol, and S. M. Hancock. Mind the gap: The
underrepresentation of female participants and authors in virtual reality
research. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
26(5):1945–1954, 2020.

[45] M. F. Pereira, E. Oliveira, N. F. Rodrigues, M. Bressler, J. Kolbenschlag,
and C. Prahm. Hand rehabilitation with virtual reality: preliminary
learning results. In 2021 IEEE 9th International Conference on Serious
Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2021.
[46] J. Plouzeau, J.-R. Chardonnet, and F. Merienne. Using cybersickness
indicators to adapt navigation in virtual reality: A pre-study. In 2018
IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pages
661–662. IEEE, 2018.

[47] T. Porcino, E. Clua, C. Vasconcelos, and D. Trevisan. Dynamic
focus selection for ﬁrst-person navigation with head mounted displays.
SBGames, 2016.

[48] T. Porcino, E. O. Rodrigues, F. Bernardini, D. Trevisan, and E. Clua. A
symbolic machine learning approach for cybersickness potential-cause
estimation. In International Conference on Entertainment Computing,
pages 115–126. Springer, 2021.

[49] T. Porcino, E. O. Rodrigues, F. Bernardini, D. Trevisan, and E. Clua.
Identifying cybersickness causes in virtual reality games using symbolic
machine learning algorithms. Entertainment Computing, 41:100473,
2022.

[50] T. Porcino, E. O. Rodrigues, A. Silva, E. Clua, and D. Trevisan.
Using the gameplay and user data to predict and identify causes of
cybersickness manifestation in virtual reality games. In 2020 IEEE 8th
International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health
(SeGAH), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2020.

[51] T. Porcino, D. Trevisan, and E. Clua. Minimizing cybersickness in head-
mounted display systems: causes and strategies review. In 2020 22nd
Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality (SVR), pages 154–163.
IEEE, 2020.

[52] T. Porcino, D. Trevisan, and E. Clua. A cybersickness review: causes,
strategies, and classiﬁcation methods. Journal on Interactive Systems,
12(1):269–282, 2021.

[53] T. M. Porcino, E. Clua, D. Trevisan, C. N. Vasconcelos, and L. Valente.
Minimizing cyber sickness in head mounted display systems: design
In Serious Games and Applications for
guidelines and applications.
Health (SeGAH), 2017 IEEE 5th International Conference on, pages
1–6. IEEE, 2017.

[54] A. Ramsey, S. Nichols, and S. Cobb. Virtual reality induced symptoms
and effects (vrise) in four different virtual reality display conditions.
In Proceedings of HCI International (the 8th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction) on Human-Computer Interaction:
Ergonomics and User Interfaces-Volume I-Volume I, pages 142–146. L.
Erlbaum Associates Inc., 1999.

[55] L. R. Rebenitsch. Cybersickness prioritization and modeling. Michigan

State University, 2015.

[56] H. Renkewitz and T. Alexander. Perceptual issues of augmented and
virtual environments. Technical report, FGAN-FKIE WACHTBERG
(GERMANY), 2007.

[57] A. Ryge, L. Thomsen, T. Berthelsen, J. S. Hvass, L. Koreska,
C. Vollmers, N. C. Nilsson, R. Nordahl, and S. Seraﬁn. Effect on
high versus low ﬁdelity haptic feedback in a virtual reality baseball
simulation. In 2017 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), pages 365–366. IEEE,
2017.

[58] H. Sak, A. W. Senior, and F. Beaufays. Long short-term memory
recurrent neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling.
2014.

[59] M. Sandlund, S. McDonough, and C. H¨ager-Ross. Interactive computer
play in rehabilitation of children with sensorimotor disorders: a system-
atic review. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 51(3):173–
179, 2009.

[60] S. Sanei and J. A. Chambers. Eeg signal processing. 2007.
[61] B. Sarupuri, M. L. Chipana, and R. W. Lindeman. Trigger walking: A
low-fatigue travel technique for immersive virtual reality. In 2017 IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI), pages 227–228. IEEE, 2017.
[62] S. Sharples, S. Cobb, A. Moody, and J. R. Wilson. Virtual reality induced
symptoms and effects (vrise): Comparison of head mounted display
(hmd), desktop and projection display systems. Displays, 29(2):58–69,
2008.

[63] K. M. Stanney and R. S. Kennedy. The psychometrics of cybersickness.

Communications of the ACM, 40(8):66–68, 1997.

[64] H. T. Tran, N. P. Ngoc, C. T. Pham, Y. J. Jung, and T. C. Thang. A
subjective study on qoe of 360 video for vr communication. In 2017
IEEE 19th International Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing
(MMSP), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.

[65] Ubisoft. Eagle ﬂight. https://www.ubisoft.com/en-us/game/eagle-ﬂight.

Accessed: 2022-03-14.

[66] J. Van Waveren. The asynchronous time warp for virtual reality on
consumer hardware. In Proc. 22nd ACM Conference on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology, pages 37–46, 2016.

[67] N. Xie, G. Ras, M. van Gerven, and D. Doran. Explainable deep learn-
ing: A ﬁeld guide for the uninitiated. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14545,
2020.

[68] T. Zhou, J. X. Chen, and M. Pullen. Accurate depth of ﬁeld simulation
in real time. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 26, pages 15–23.
Wiley Online Library, 2007.

