Leaning-Based Control of an Immersive-Telepresence Robot

Joona Halkola, Markku Suomalainen, Basak Sakcak, Katherine J. Mimnaugh,
Juho Kalliokoski, Alexis P. Chambers, Timo Ojala and Steven M. LaValle
Center for Ubiquitous Computing, Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland*

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2
2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
1
6
0
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we present an implementation of a leaning-based con-
trol of a differential drive telepresence robot and a user study in
simulation, with the goal of bringing the same functionality to a
real telepresence robot. The participants used a balance board to
control the robot and viewed the virtual environment through a head-
mounted display. The main motivation for using a balance board as
the control device stems from Virtual Reality (VR) sickness; even
small movements of your own body matching the motions seen on
the screen decrease the sensory conﬂict between vision and vestibu-
lar organs, which lies at the heart of most theories regarding the
onset of VR sickness. To test the hypothesis that the balance board
as a control method would be less sickening than using joysticks, we
designed a user study (N=32, 15 women) in which the participants
drove a simulated differential drive robot in a virtual environment
with either a Nintendo Wii Balance Board or joysticks. However, our
pre-registered main hypotheses were not supported; the joystick did
not cause any more VR sickness on the participants than the balance
board, and the board proved to be statistically signiﬁcantly more
difﬁcult to use, both subjectively and objectively. Analyzing the
open-ended questions revealed these results to be likely connected,
meaning that the difﬁculty of use seemed to affect sickness; even
unlimited training time before the test did not make the use as easy
as the familiar joystick. Thus, making the board easier to use is a
key to enable its potential; we present a few possibilities towards
this goal.

Index Terms: Telepresence robot—VR sickness—Balance board—
User comfort

1 INTRODUCTION
Immersive telepresence, the ability to be and feel present in a re-
mote location through technology, has the potential to enable hybrid
meetings (including both remote and local participants) where the
remote attendees feel like they really were there; it has been shown
that with current regular screen-based telepresence robots, the re-
mote users operating the robot speak less and consider group work
more difﬁcult [30]. A probable reason for this type of (unnatural)
behavior observed in remote participants is the lack of presence [29],
the feeling of ”being there”, which in virtual environments (VEs)
makes users behave more naturally [26]. It has been shown that
regular, non-immersive screens do not make users feel as present as
an Head-Mounted Display (HMD) [27]. Thus, further research on
users embodying a physical robot is warranted.

Besides a more immersive screen, another piece shown to increase
the feeling of presence is the ability to embody a robot that one can
move, instead of a stationary camera [24]. However, immersive
telepresence needs more contemplation than simply attaching a 360°
camera to a mobile robot to drive around. The user must be able
to control the robot with little effort but without succumbing to

*email: ﬁrstname.lastname@oulu.ﬁ

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Virtual environment used in the user study. (b) The
model of the telepresence robot’s base, into which the pole with
a camera and other equipment is attached. (c) An experimenter
standing on a Wiiboard for leaning-based control of a telepresence
robot, he is slightly leaning forward.

VR sickness [15]. Whereas there is a vast library of research on
locomotion in VR, the case of travelling aboard a moving ground
vehicle is often avoided; this kind of motion, especially rotations, has
been shown to signiﬁcantly contribute to VR sickness [11, 12] and is
often replaced with teleportation in virtual environments. However,
when controlling physical systems, teleportation is not an option and
more research is needed.

In this paper we explore the use of a balance board, particularly
the Nintendo Wii Balance Board (Wiiboard), for leaning-based con-
trol of a telepresence robot while being immersed in an HMD. The
study is done as a simulation in a Virtual Environment (VE) using
an accurate virtual model of the mobile robot at the research group’s
disposal (Probot Dolly differential drive robot, see Fig.1b). Even
though we acknowledged that participants will be unfamiliar with
the Wiiboard and it might provide various physical challenges, we
hypothesized that the use of body to control the robot would make
the experience less sickening than the joystick due to the ability to
mitigate sensory mismatches. However, it turns out that we under-
estimated the difﬁculty of using the balance board, partly based on
earlier work which reports using it as easy [7]. In our study, the
joystick was found statistically signiﬁcantly easier to use than the
balance board, both subjectively and objectively. Furthermore, we
found that the leaning-based control method using Wiiboard induced
more VR sickness; open-ended answers reveal that difﬁculty of the
Wiiboard may have also played a role in the sickness results. We
also discuss the ﬁndings about presence across control methods.

The novelty in this paper is the development of a control mapping
to drive a telepresence robot using a balance board, and a rigorous

 
 
 
 
 
 
user study done in a VE using a virtual model of a real telepresence
robot. Even though the results were not in favor of using this partic-
ular board in the way we imagined, the user study results show the
potential of the method with better hardware and more training time
than what was allowed in this study.

is still complex [17]; thus, it is difﬁcult to predict whether having
to balance on purpose can have a causal effect on VR sickness, and
whether this has a stronger effect on VR sickness than the decrease
of the sensory mismatch.

2 RELATED WORK

3 SYSTEM

There is a rising interest in HMD-based immersive telepresence,
due to its potential in enabling hybrid meetings. The motivation
for HMD-based telepresence instead of using current commercial
telepresence robots, such as the Double and Gobe, stems from the
observation that participants through such telepresence robots are
much less engaged in, for example, group work [30]. This is likely
related to presence, a well researched concept in VR showing that the
immersion of an HMD gives you a better sense of ”being there” than
a regular screen [27]. Thus, there is increasing interest in immersive
telepresence: recent use cases include, for example, education [5],
earthquake rescue [21] and social interaction [8].

There is a wide variety of different locomotion methods for virtual
environments, with well established advantages and disadvantages;
for a comprehensive survey see, e.g., [1]. With a scalable method
also usable in smaller spaces in mind when considering choices
for HMD-based control of a telepresence robot, we decided not
to consider walking (redirected or regular) but instead opted for
leaning-based methods, keeping in mind the popular Segway robots,
which the leaning-based methods mimic (even though the experience
without actual motions is quite different). There are various methods
for implementing leaning-based navigation for VR; by harnessing
the user, methods such as the human joystick [19] can allow leaning
that properly resembles falling. Another popular method is simply
tracking the HMD to detect leaning, or stepping, with different tactile
feedback from the ground to help the user [6, 22], which has been
shown to increase presence and decrease VR sickness over joystick;
similar methods have also been shown to work while sitting [10].

Of the works using Wiiboard, de Haan et al. [7] described the
technical methods and positive initial user feedback for using Wii-
board for locomotion in VR. Valkoc et al. [32] then used Wiiboard
as a component in their navigation system, however, they did not
compare Wiiboard to another control method. Thus, especially with
the symmetries between Wiiboard, Segway, and Differential Drive
Robot (DDR) (rotation is performed with different speeds on each
wheel, which can be controlled with the pressure on each foot), we
believe it is necessary to properly test a balance board in this use;
comparing with the stepping motion, we hypothesize that small ad-
justments to the robot’s direction would be easier to do with just
weight adjustment on the board when compared to trying to make
the same adjustment in the head-tracking with the whole body, as
in [6, 22]. However, there is little previous work on VR sickness
using a balance board, for either virtual environments or immersive
telepresence; regardless of the vast literature on VR sickness in
virtual environments (see, e.g., [25]), in such ground-based motions
VR sickness is often mitigated by teleportation, which is infeasible
for telepresence. For autonomous motions of a telepresence robot
with an HMD, several considerations were given to VR sickness
in [2, 31]; however, there was no consideration on the actual con-
trol of the robot, since users often want to control the robot also
manually, especially for short distances.

In using a balance board for controlling a robot, there are both
potential mitigating and escalating factors for VR sickness. From
one point of view, having to move yourself may mitigate sensory
mismatch between the visual system and the vestibular organs, which
should prevent VR sickness. However, another issue to consider
is the postural stability, deterioration of which has been shown to
have the potential to predict the onset of VR sickness [17], even
with Wiiboard as the measurement device when watching a movie
through the HMD [4]. However, the order of cause and consequence

The system comprised a VE (see Sec. 5.2 for a more detailed de-
scription) including a simulated robot (Fig.1b) moving within the
environment A virtual 360° camera is attached 1.5 meters above the
robot base, from which the user sees the virtual world through an
HMD; this is a height suggested by [14] for 360° videos. The posi-
tion of the camera is ﬁxed with respect to the robot while allowing 3
Degrees of Freedom (DOF) in rotation as determined by the headset
tracking. The robot can translate and rotate in a two-dimensional
plane determined by the user input. In total, the robotic system
has 5DOF since the camera height is ﬁxed. The robot motion was
controlled directly by the users through the inputs given using a
Wiiboard or the joysticks on the Oculus Quest 2 controllers. The
user input was mapped to reference angular velocities for the robot
wheels. The maximum attainable wheel angular velocity was set
to approximately 573◦ per second to limit the robot forward speed
to a maximum of 0.75m/s. The reason for this choice was moti-
vated by [20] presenting that 1m/s is a suitable speed; however,
we used a slightly lower value compared to precedents to increase
comfort in controlling the robot using a device (Wiiboard) that most
participants would be unfamiliar with.

3.1 Wiiboard control method

The Wiiboard has four pressure sensors, one at each corner of the
board, and communicates with a computer via Bluetooth (see Fig. 2).
We used the WiiBuddy Unity Asset of BitLegit [3] to establish the
connection between the Wiiboard and the PC together with [18] to
stabilize the connection.

Forward movement with Wiiboard was achieved by leaning for-
ward, and turning while moving forward by leaning towards either
of the front corners. The initial implementation followed the guide-
lines of [7]. However, due to the observed difﬁculty during initial
tests of backward motion (by putting pressure on both heels) and
rotation in place (by putting pressure on the heel with one foot and
toe on the other), we decided for a simpler implementation, with
further motivation being the low probability of needing backward
motion for a telepresence robot. Thus, we implemented rotation in
place by putting weight towards one of the back corners, which was
reasonable to achieve by turning the upper body towards the desired
corner, similarly to reaching for an object behind you.

Figure 2: The Nintendo Wii Balance Board with the four force
sensors at the corners marked.

The sensor readings, corresponding to the applied pressure on
each corner, were used to calculate the two components that con-
stitute the total motion: go forward ( f wd) and turn (turn). These
were calculated according to the equations, in which F· is the force
measured by the sensor at the respective corner, (see Fig. 2 for the

meaning of each index term)

f wd = max

(cid:18) (FT L + FT R) − (FBL + FBR)
(FT L + FT R) + (FBL + FBR)

(cid:19)

, 0

turn =

FT R − FT L
FT R + FT L

.

H1: Less VR sickness in WB condition as indicated by lower total
weighted Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) score.

(1)

H2: No difference in how far the participants get during the four
minutes driving time and no difference in the number of crash
events.

Note that f wd and turn lie within the ranges [0, 1] and [−1, 1], re-
spectively. In case of a collision with the environment, the forward
motion was disabled and the user was expected to rotate in place
until the robot was free to move forward. In that case, the turn
component was calculated as

turn =

FBR − FBL
FBR + FBL

(2)

and f wd was set to 0. Respective reference wheel rotational veloci-
ties were calculated as

ωL = c f f wd + ct turn, ωR = c f f wd − ct turn

(3)

in which ωL and ωR are the reference velocities for the left and
right wheels, and c f and ct are the respective weights. The weights
were selected considering limits on forward and turning speeds and
ensuring that ωL, ωR ≤ ωmax. In case of rotate in place motion, used
for getting out of a collision state, ωmax = 75deg/s was used to
avoid uncomfortably fast rotations. This value was selected among
three candidates (132deg/s, 103deg/s, 75deg/s) by testing it on six
people.

For each user, the Wiiboard was calibrated to account for varying
weight distribution patterns during standing still and leaning. This
way, the mapping from sensor readings to robot controls was made to
adjust Wiiboard for each user individually. In the calibration process,
values from the sensors are measured for six different cases: standing
still, leaning forward, and leaning towards each of the four corners.
Measurements corresponding to standing still are used as offsets
to ensure that the robot does not move at this posture since f wd
and turn are zero only when the weight is equally distributed (see
Eqs (1) and (2)). The rest of the cases were used to ﬁnd maximum
values achieved for f wd and turn when the participants leaned as
much as they felt comfortable. These values are then mapped to
the [−1, 1] interval so that when the participant was at an extreme
posture the robot speed was the highest. Since most users leaned too
much when calibrating (even when told to “lean as much as you feel
comfortable”), sensor readings corresponding to maximum speeds
were calculated by taking 60% of the calibration values.

3.2 Joystick control method
Two joysticks on the Oculus Quest 2 controllers were used as an
alternative to contrast the Wiiboard control method. Whereas one
joystick was used to control the forward speed ( f wd), the other one
was used to control the turning speed and direction (turn). The
joystick position on the horizontal axis (moving the joystick left-
right) was mapped to intervals [0, 1] and [−1, 1] corresponding to
f wd and turn, respectively. Robot motion is achieved by tracking
the reference wheel rotational speeds, calculated in terms of f wd
and turn using Eq.(3). Participants were standing still when using
the joystick in the study.

4 HYPOTHESES
We pre-registered the following three hypotheses, together with the
procedure and analyses to be used in the study, in Open Science
Foundation (OSF)1. From now on we will refer to the Wii Bal-
ance Board control method (WB) condition as WB and Joystick
control method (JS) condition as JS.

1https://osf.io/6rxby/?view_only=

9990df8e0c104ac9b4bbc03ac72515a8

H3: No difference in cognitive load as indicated by no difference in
NASA-TLX scores in any dimension except the physical load.

We hypothesized H1 based on the evidence that incorporating
some form of vestibular stimulation can potentially mitigate sensory
conﬂict in VR, as described in Section 2. Even though there is
a slight mismatch between the vestibular and visual stimuli (such
as forward-leaning being circular and not linear motion, and the
rotations providing only an impulse of the motion that then further
carries on visually in VR while the vestibular stimulation from the
bodily motion ends), we believe that some amount of vestibular
stimuli should ameliorate VR sickness as even random stimulation
of the vestibular organs has been shown to help [33]. H2 stems
from the work of de Haan el al. [7], who reported subjects found
the Wiiboard to be easy to use; however, due to our expectation that
our sample would have some familiarity with using a joystick, we
predicted that there would not be any difference in performance. We
postulated H3 for similar reasons; the Wiiboard clearly needs more
physical effort, but otherwise, based on the ease of use reported
in [7], we expected there would be no difference in cognitive load.

5 USER STUDY
5.1 Procedure
Two conditions with two different starting positions (either ends
of the path shown in Fig. 3) were tried by the participants in a
counterbalanced order such that each pair of starting position and
control method was experienced as ﬁrst and second equal number of
times. The participant was welcomed by a researcher upon arrival
and asked to sign a consent form. To pre-screen already sick-feeling
people, the participants were asked if they felt nauseous or had a
headache, and asked to reschedule if they did. After this, they were
instructed to take their shoes off, stand on the Wiiboard, and place
their feet in the middle of the textured areas of the Wiiboard (see
Fig. 2).

Next, the researcher gave instructions about the practice session
to the participant; if the control method was the Wiiboard, the par-
ticipant was ﬁrst shown an instruction video on how to calibrate the
balance board, after which the researcher instructed the participant
how to put on the HMD and told the participant to complete the
calibration. Next, the participant was told to take off the HMD
and a second instruction video was shown to the participant which
explained how to use the Wiiboard; this was done because the cali-
bration was better to do with the HMD on to get realistic values to
use with the HMD, but practicing with the HMD on would likely
have caused too much VR sickness on the participants. If the control
method was the joysticks, the researcher read out instructions on how
to use the joysticks to move the robot. Finally, the researcher read
out the instructions for the practice session, which were identical for
both control methods: the participant was told to complete the prac-
tice session without the HMD and follow the robot movement from a
monitor in front of them. The participant was speciﬁcally instructed
to crash into a wall to test out the turn-in-place feature and learn how
to recover from a collision. After the practice, the participant was
asked how conﬁdent they felt using the control method on a scale
from 1 to 7 and the researcher marked down the answer. Then, the
participant was told to put back on the HMD, follow the direction of
the white line on the ground and count the sailboat paintings on the
walls.

After the participant completed the run, they were told to take
off the HMD and controllers and ﬁll out questionnaires on a laptop,

were run both with all participants (N = 32) and the subset who did
not get stuck for more than 30s (N = 25). On average, participants
were stuck for 21.05s in WB condition and 0.87s in JS condition
for N=32; averages were 7.39s in WB condition and 0.32s in JS
condition for N=25. Each session lasted exactly 4 minutes.

5.4 Measures

Two sets of questionnaires were presented to the participant after
ﬁnishing each of the sessions. The latter part of the second ques-
tionnaire contained post-experiment questions. Both questionnaires
started with SSQ [13] and SSQ total score was used to measure
sickness. SSQ is an established questionnaire for measuring sick-
ness in VR by presenting 16 possible sickness symptoms, which
the participants gauge on a scale none (0) to severe (3). The SSQ
total score is calculated by weighting the answers for a maximum
score of 236. Higher scores indicate greater levels of sickness ex-
perienced. Consequently, NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX)
questionnaire [9] was administered, which is used to measure six
dimensions of workload (mental demand, physical demand, tempo-
ral demand, performance, effort, and frustration) of the task. Each
dimension was rated on a scale of 1 to 20 and higher values indicate
that the task is more demanding in that aspect. Additionally, we used
7-point Likert-scale questions, forced-choice questions comparing
the two methods, and open-ended questions about reasons for some
choices and demographic questions.

To measure the participants’ conﬁdence in using each control
method we asked how conﬁdent the participant felt (on a 7-point
Likert-scale) after each training session about the condition that they
would try next. Their answer was then registered by the experi-
menter.

For each session, the path executed by the robot was recorded in
world coordinates and how far along the reference path (see Fig. 3
for the reference path) the participant got was calculated projecting
the ﬁnal robot position onto the reference path. We also recorded
the number of times the robot collided with the obstacles (including
walls) and the total length of time spent in a collision-state.

6 RESULTS

All statistical tests were run in SPSS with signiﬁcance levels set to
0.05 and with a 95% conﬁdence interval.

6.1 Conﬁrmatory results

All conﬁrmatory analyses were performed ﬁrst using the whole
dataset (N = 32) and then using only the data corresponding to the
participants who were not in a collision-state for longer than 30s.

Less VR sickness in JS condition (H1 rejected) A Wilcoxon
Signed-Ranks test (two sided) was performed to compare the differ-
ences between the total weighted SSQ scores for JS (Mean = 32.02)
and WB (Mean = 40.44) conditions (N = 32). The test indicated
that JS elicited signiﬁcantly lower SSQ scores compared to WB,
Z = −2.32, p = .02, r = 0.41. We also checked for potential effect
of getting stuck for more than 30s on sickness and run the test again
using only the participants who did not get stuck or got stuck less
than 30s (N = 25). We did not observe any signiﬁcant difference
between the total weighted SSQ scores for JS (Mean = 29.92) and
WB (Mean = 37.84) conditions when participants who got stuck
were excluded from the analysis, as indicated by a Wilcoxon Signed-
Ranks test (two sided), Z = −1.84, p = .066, r = 0.369.
Participants reached farther along the path in JS condition (H2
rejected) A paired t-test was run to determine whether in one condi-
tion the participants reached farther along the path (N = 32). The to-
tal path length was 186.6 meters and none of the participants reached
the end (we ensured this by selecting the path length and the time
limit on each session so that all participants have equal exposure to
the VE). The distances in both conditions were normally distributed,
as indicated by a Shapiro-Wilk test, W (32) = 0.956, p = .214 for

Figure 3: Birds-eye view of the path (white line) the participants
should follow in the main task. The other lines have been removed
for clarity.

after which the same procedure was repeated for the second control
method. At the end, the participant was rewarded with a 12 C gift
voucher to Amazon and given a short debrief about the study.

5.2 Virtual environment and tasks

VE for the study was loosely based on parts of the local university;
the VE and the path in the environment that the participants were
asked to follow can be seen in Fig. 3. Each participant ran into
opposite direction on the second attempt (combinations of directions
and conditions were also counterbalanced). The environment had
ﬁve differently colored lines on the ﬂoor as shown in Fig. 1a, from
which the participants were told to follow the white line during the
test. This served as a sidetask to test whether the participants could
still pay attention to the environment while commanding the robot.
Another sidetask was the counting of six sailboat paintings scattered
around the VE. The training area was an empty hall with a line
drawn on the ﬂoor to work as reference.

A basic collision-avoidance method is implemented that stops the
robot if it is too close to an obstacle (a wall or an object). In case
of such an event, the forward motion was disabled and only turn-in-
place motion was allowed, until the robot was heading sufﬁciently
away from the obstacle. The system measures the total amount of
time spent being stuck in collision states.

5.3 Participants

Sample size for the study was 32 participants and we aimed at
having an equal split of male and female participants. However, due
to difﬁculties of getting enough female participants we ended up with
17 male and 15 female participants. All participants reported having
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and none of the participants
were colorblind.

VR system usage reported by the participants was: 12.5% never,
40.6% once or just a couple of times, 25.0% once or twice a year,
15.6% once or twice a month, 3.1% once or twice a week, and 3.1%
every day. Responses to how often they play computer games were:
12.5% never, 15.6% once or just a couple of times, 9.4% once or
twice a year, 18.8% once or twice a month, 21.9% once or twice a
week, 12.5% several times a week, and 9.4% every day.

Initially, we pre-registered that we would exclude all participants
who got stuck against the walls for more than 30 seconds; the time
limit was based on the same initial test that we used to choose the
rotation speed. However, the number of participants who exceeded
this limit were higher than what we expected. Due to the difﬁculties
in recruiting participants, we decided to relax this limit and used also
the data corresponding to the participants who were stuck for more
than 30 seconds but otherwise completed the required tasks (4 males,
3 females among 32 participants). The pre-registered hypotheses

JS, W (32) = 0.966, p = .398 for WB, and there were no outliers
in the data, as assessed by inspection of the boxplots. The mean
distance was higher in JS condition (162.39 ± 13.52) compared to in
WB condition (124.86 ± 26.53); a statistically signiﬁcant increase
of 37.54 (95% CI, 30.30 to 44.78), t(31) = 10.58, p = .00. We
removed the data corresponding to participants who were stuck,
and ran the same test again. The distances conformed to a normal
distribution in both conditions as indicated by a Shapiro-Wilk test
(W (25) = 0.944, p = .182 for JS and W (25) = 0.954, p = .301 for
WB) and there were no outliers. A paired samples t-test indicated
that there was a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the distances that
the participants reached within a given time frame in JS condition
from 132.83 ± 23.45 to 165.17 ± 11.93; an increase of 32.33 (95%
CI, 24.73 to 39.94), t(24) = 8.776, p = .00.
Less collisions in JS condition (H2 rejected) The number of
crash events in JS condition (m = 0.4) were lower than the number
of crash events in WB condition (m = 1.4) for N = 32, this decrease
was statistically signiﬁcant as indicated by a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks
test (two sided), Z = −3.477, p = .001, r = 0.615. This tendency in
having less collisions persisted also when the data corresponding to
the people who got stuck in a collision-state for longer than 30s was
removed N = 25. There were signiﬁcantly less crash events in JS
condition (m = 0.4) as opposed to in WB condition (m = 1.2), as
indicated by a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test (two sided), Z = −2.862,
p = .004, r = 0.572.
Higher perceived workload in WB condition (H3 rejected) For
each subscale of NASA-TLX, a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test (two
sided) was performed to compare the ratings for JS and WB con-
ditions considering both the data with and without exclusions (see
Table 1 for respective means and the corresponding standardized
test statistics, signiﬁcance values, and effect sizes). With N = 32
there was a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the TLX scores in
all dimensions other than performance. When the same test was
performed with N = 25, we observed that TLX scores were higher
in all dimensions except performance and temporal demand.

6.2 Exploratory results
We performed an exploratory analysis of all 32 participants to get a
deeper insight into our results.

6.2.1 Quantitative Data

Participants felt more conﬁdent in using the JS condition To
measure participants’ conﬁdence in using either control method, we
asked them to rank their conﬁdence in Likert-scale (1 − 7) after each
training session. People felt statistically signiﬁcantly more conﬁdent
in using JS (Mean = 6.25) as opposed to WB condition, as indicated
by a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test (two-sided), Z = 4.478, p = .00,
r = 0.79.
JS condition was found easier to use We measured the relative
ease-of-use by explicitly asking: Which control method was easier
to use? 30 out of 32 participants (94%) found JS condition easier to
use. This bias towards JS condition was statistically signiﬁcant in an
exact binomial test with exact Clopper-Pearson 95% CI and had a
95% CI of 79.2% to 99.2%, p = .00 (two-sided). In addition to the
forced-choice question we also asked 7-point Likert-scale questions
to measure ease-of-use. Comparing the ratings in JS condition
(Mean = 6.03) with the ones in WB condition (Mean = 3.59), we
found that JS elicited a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the comfort
rankings, as indicated by a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test (two sided),
Z = 4.783, p = .00, r = 0.846.
JS condition was preferred When asked explicitly which con-
dition did the participants prefer, 26 out of 32 participants (81%)
picked JS condition. An exact binomial test with exact Clopper-
Pearson 95% CI indicated that this bias towards JS condition was sta-
tistically signiﬁcant and had a 95% CI of 63.6% to 92.8%, p = .001
(two-sided).

(a) Ease-of-use

(b) Preference

Figure 4: Frequent codes found in open-ended questions regarding
ease-of-use and preference together with their occurrences.

WB condition did not increase presence When asked “Thinking
back to both of the experiences, which one gave a better sense
of being in the robot’s location?” 19 participants (59%) picked
the WB condition, though this bias towards WB condition was
not statistically signiﬁcant in an exact binomial test (two-sided),
p = .377.

6.2.2 Qualitative data

The open-ended data was analyzed using the thematic analysis
method with inductive approach [23]. Fig. 4a presents the frequent
codes found in the data related to ease-of-use, divided by which con-
dition was found easier to use. These codes are then grouped into
three themes: expectations and previous experience, less (physical)
effort, and control. The ﬁrst theme refers to the previous experience
of people in terms of moving in VR or in the real world and their ex-
pectations based on that. It encompasses the codes realistic, learning
curve, and familiarity containing 11 comments in total. Codes less
(physical) effort (12 occurrences) and control (7 occurrences) are
themes of their own referring to less required physical effort to use a
control method and the sense of control over the robot, respectively.
The majority of people who found JS condition easier thought so
because it required less physical effort (“It only required the move-
ments of my thumbs, no more was required.”). This is followed by
reasons related to their expectations and previous experience with
VR. In particular, they felt JS was familiar and that it was easier to
learn (coded as learning curve). Finally, some people thought JS was
easier to use because they had more control over the robot with this
method (“You feel more in control with this method”). Responses
given by the two participants who found WB easier stemmed from
their expectations and previous experience; they thought it was more
realistic, that is, similar to moving in the real world (“Personal
choice of use by feet than hand, more realistic”).

Codes and their frequencies related to the data on reasons for
participants’ preferences can be found in Fig. 4b. The codes are
grouped under the themes: bodily feelings encompassing less phys-
ical demand and less sickening containing 11 comments, expecta-
tions and previous experience encompassing realistic and familiarity
containing 7 comments, emotions encompassing fear and exciting
containing 9 comments, and ﬁnally easier being an important theme
of its own. The most popular reason given by the participants who
preferred JS condition was because it was easier to use (19 occur-
rences in JS condition, for example, “I didn’t have to focus as much
on how to use the control method on the ﬁrst one...”). This was
followed by the reasoning that fell under the theme bodily feelings,
meaning that it induced less negative physiological response or that
it was physically less demanding (“...The second one caused more
motion sickness-like symptoms.”). Some people who preferred JS
thought that it made them feel better emotionally (falling under the
theme emotions), compared to WB, especially since they did not
experience a fear of falling down (“I didn’t feel like falling”). People
who preferred the WB condition named the biggest factor as it being
realistic based on their expectations and previous experience (for

TLX subscale

Mental demand
Physical demand
Temporal demand
Performance
Effort
Frustration

Means (N=32)
JS
7.88
4.035
4.5
6.31
5.9
3.78

WB
11.22
11.09
6.81
7.81
11.62
8.22

Test summary (N=32)

Z = −3.73, p = .00, r = 0.659
Z = −4.63, p = .00, r = 0.819
Z = −2.64, p = .008, r = 0.467
Z = −1.40, p = .16, r = 0.248
Z = −4.55, p = .00, r = 0.804
Z = −4.38, p = .00, r = 0.774

Means (N=25)
JS
7.28
4.96
4.08
6.44
5.6
3.48

WB
10.56
6.48
10.28
7.60
11.12
7.88

Test summary (N=25)

Z = −3.47, p = .001, r = 0.694
Z = −4.02, p = .00, r = 0.804
Z = −1.82, p = .069, r = 0.364
Z = −1.02, p = .307, r = 0.204
Z = −3.96, p = .00, r = 0.792
Z = −3.93, p = .00, r = 0.786

Table 1: Means and the respective results of a Wilcoxon Signed-Ranks test (two-sided) for the NASA-TLX subscales corresponding to N = 32
and N = 25 datasets.

example, ”Despite being more physically challenging it gives more
movement and feels almost like real movement.”). Other reasons
stated fell under having better emotions (“It was cool and made me
feel more in the place.”) and having less bad bodily feelings (“And I
also felt really nauseous doing the task with the controllers but not
nauseous at all doing it with the balance board”) .

7 DISCUSSION

7.1 Original hypotheses

On average, JS condition induced less VR sickness measured using
the SSQ total score. Thus, refusing H1. The answers to open-ended
questions reveal interesting insights and possible reasons for this
result on VR sickness. Moreover, in the open-ended questions the
less sickening code was used as a reason by 5 participants who
preferred the JS and only once by who preferred the WB, hinting
towards participants suffering more from VR sickness while using
the board than with the joystick. Similarly, H2 and H3 were rejected
too; participants reached farther along the path while using the
joystick as opposed to the Wiiboard, and the NASA-TLX scores
showed that the participants perceived controlling the robot using
joysticks less demanding.

Further examination of the answers to the open-ended questions
reveals a potential relation between perceived difﬁculty and VR
sickness. Two of the participants who preferred the JS condition
because it induced less sickness stated that “Not having to look at
ﬂoor while leaning prevents nausea” and “I didn’t have to focus as
much on how to use the control method on the ﬁrst one. The second
one caused more motion sickness-like symptoms.” Since staring at
the ﬂoor would result in more optical ﬂow, and thus likely induce
more VR sickness, if participants looked at the ﬂoor more with the
Wiiboard, it may likely have increased their VR sickness levels.

A potential relation between difﬁculty and VR sickness was fur-
ther indicated by looking at the conﬁdence scores of the participants
who commented their respective method to be less sickening. The
participant who found the Wiiboard less sickening gave a conﬁdence
score of 7 (on a 7-point Likert-scale) for using the WB, whereas the
average of the conﬁdence scores given by the 5 people who found
WB more sickening was 5.2. Similarly, one participant who men-
tioned that the WB condition was less sickening rated its ease-of-use
as 5 (out of 7), whereas the average of the ease-of-use ratings given
by the 5 participants who found the board more sickening was 2.6.
Despite being based on a small sample size, these insights further
strengthen the implication of difﬁculty causing more VR sickness.
The other possible cause for increased VR sickness with the board is
the postural instability caused by the control motions, even though,
as mentioned, the order of cause and consequence is unclear [17]
and not researched when leaning is used for control.

Interestingly, earlier papers [7] described the board feeling “easy”
when used among the researchers and colleagues. Similarly, all our
pre-pilot users did prefer the board and effectively used it to control
the robot. However, during the study, regardless of the unlimited
training time, the participants still perceived using board as more
difﬁcult (Mean = 3.59 on a 7-point Likert-scale). We expected that
participants would ﬁnd using the board more difﬁcult compared to

joystick; this was in part due to the well known result in 3D user
interfaces such that that using a high DOF input to control a lower
DOF system is typically challenging [16], and in part due to the
familiarity of the general population with the joystick. However,
we did not expect to see a difference in the perceived difﬁculty
of using the Wiiboard to the extent that we observed (statistically
signiﬁcant difference in favor of JS in almost all dimensions of
the NASA-TLX). Besides VR sickness, the difﬁculty had a major
impact on preference: 20 out of 32 participants, stated ”easiness”
as their reason for preferring a particular method, among which 1
person stated it in preference of the Wiiboard and 19 in favor of the
joystick. Additionally, when asked why one method felt easier than
the other, three people speciﬁcally noted the steep learning curve for
the Wiiboard (“The second method is a bit harder to get used to”)
and six people mentioned that their familiarity with joysticks may
have helped (“Joysticks are a familiar method and very intuitive too.
Balancing takes more effort”).

7.2 Exploratory data

Chen et al. [6] found, in an old study, that stepping-based (head-
tracked, with steps taken at each direction to move towards that
direction) navigation caused less VR sickness and induced a (mod-
erately) greater feeling of presence than a joystick. However, there
are several differences between their study and ours. First, Chen
et al. considered 6D-navigation without physical limits. Moreover,
all of their 20 participants were experienced with VR, and it was
not explained how much prior experience they had with the system;
also, they used a different kind of joysticks. Thus, even though
there is evidence that self-rotation, easily achieved by the stepping
method, reduces VR sickness and increases the feeling of presence
and spatial awareness [22], it is not clear which method in general
would be more useful for telepresence robot navigation. A method
combining leaning and self-rotations could probably provide best of
both worlds.

We decided to make participants undergo a training session with-
out the HMD. We wanted to give the participants as much time
as they needed and did not want to limit the training duration be-
cause we expected that they would not be familiar with the board
and that using the board would employ a steeper learning curve.
Our expectations were supported by the participants’ comments; for
example, “More exciting and would “become” easier after many
practices.”, “I’m used to moving in VR with joysticks, the balance
board was a bit harder to get used to especially because the HMD
made it a bit harder to balance myself.”. However, a longer train-
ing with the HMD on could have caused excessive sickness and
potential differences in training times could have corrupted the SSQ
data. Despite mitigating these potential issues, practicing without
the HMD caused a shortcoming in our approach, mentioned also in
the comment above, that is, using WB with the HMD was slightly
different than using it without. It would be interesting to perform a
smaller-sample qualitative long-term study with the board, where we
give participants ample time to practice on the board on the scale of
days or weeks, and then compare the differences and SSQ scores; we
suspect that this kind of study would better bring out the strengths

of the leaning-based control using a balance board.

REFERENCES

We also wondered whether the body-based locomotion would
make participants feel more present; whereas it is well established
that having an actual virtual body that tracks your motions increases
presence [26], there is, to the knowledge of the authors, no clear
evidence whether having “a bit more realistic” body-based control
should increase the feeling of presence (in [28] simply moving the
body increased presence, but the comparison was standing still, not
moving via a joystick or similar). There were hints towards the board
making participants feel more present; four participants preferred the
Wiiboard because it felt more realistic (”It was cool and made me
feel more in the place. Although it was easier with the ﬁrst method
and I think that I also accomplished the task better with the ﬁrst
method (like no bumping into the wall).”), and some participants
who preferred joystick at the end still stated the positives of the
Wiiboard towards that direction (“Because I could accomplish the
task with the ﬁrst one and with the second I got stuck. However, the
second one was more fun and I felt more engaged.”). However, the
forced-choice question about presence was not signiﬁcant (even if
leaning towards that direction), and the SUS showed no signiﬁcant
difference either. Nonetheless, there seems potential for more studies
on presence with body-based locomotion.

7.3 Limitations and future work

A clear limitation of the study was the hardware: the Wiiboard is
an old technology and has limited sensors, which are not extremely
accurate. This could have been a reason for nine people mentioning
better control of the robot with the joystick as a reason for ﬁnding
it easier. Also, altogether 5 participants reported fear of falling off
the board as a reason for preferring the joystick; it seems that a thin
mattress, or carpet, with sensors would be better to alleviate this fear.
Additionally, such a system would allow rotating the robot also via
rotating the whole body, which has been shown useful in reducing
VR sickness and enhancing spatial awareness [22]. Such a com-
bination of the strengths of the methods could provide interesting
results.

These results could also be used as a stepping stone to ﬁnd out
the relationship between postural instability and VR sickness; does
active destabilization of the posture, in the form of leaning, con-
tribute to VR sickness? With a more accurate pressure mat, we may
be able to differentiate between wanted and unwanted postural sway,
and correlate them with the (perhaps continuously measured) VR
sickness and HMD tracking data; additionally, if the pressure sensor
was used to measure the postural instability also when controlling
via the joystick, this comparison could reveal interesting facets about
wanted and unwanted postural instability.

8 CONCLUSION

The study presented in this paper reveals that leaning-based methods
on a balance board have potential, but the unfamiliarity and difﬁculty
of the Wiiboard prevented the possible positive effects of reducing
VR sickness. We identiﬁed several reasons making the board so
difﬁcult, such as not enough responsiveness, steep learning curve
requiring more training than a few minutes before the actual study,
training with the headset on even with the chance of inducing VR
sickness during training, and the height of the board causing a fear of
falling. A more responsive and larger or ﬂat board, which could also
allow self-rotations, could be tested for chances of improvement.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a European Research Council Ad-
vanced Grant (ERC AdG, ILLUSIVE: Foundations of Perception
Engineering, 101020977), Academy of Finland (projects PERCEPT
322637, CHiMP 342556), and Business Finland (project HUMOR
3656/31/2019).

[1] M. Al Zayer, P. MacNeilage, and E. Folmer. Virtual locomotion: a
survey. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
26(6):2315–2334, 2018.

[2] I. Becerra, M. Suomalainen, E. Lozano, K. J. Mimnaugh, R. Murrieta-
Cid, and S. M. LaValle. Human perception-optimized planning for
comfortable vr-based telepresence. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 5(4):6489–6496, 2020.

[3] BitLegit. WiiBuddy API. [Accessed Dec. 3, 2019].
[4] J. E. Bos, W. D. Ledegang, A. J. Lubeck, and J. F. Stins. Cinerama
sickness and postural instability. Ergonomics, 56(9):1430–1436, 2013.
[5] J. Botev and F. J. Rodr´ıguez Lera. Immersive robotic telepresence for
remote educational scenarios. Sustainability, 13(9):4717, 2021.
[6] W. Chen, A. Plancoulaine, N. F´erey, D. Touraine, J. Nelson, and
P. Bourdot. 6dof navigation in virtual worlds: comparison of joystick-
based and head-controlled paradigms. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, pp. 111–114,
2013.

[7] G. de Haan, E. J. Grifﬁth, and F. H. Post. Using the wii balance board™
as a low-cost vr interaction device. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
symposium on Virtual reality software and technology, pp. 289–290,
2008.

[8] J. Du, H. M. Do, and W. Sheng. Human–robot collaborative control in
a virtual-reality-based telepresence system. International Journal of
Social Robotics, pp. 1–12, 2020.

[9] S. G. Hart. Nasa-task load index (nasa-tlx); 20 years later. Proceed-
ings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
50(9):904–908, 2006. doi: 10.1177/154193120605000909

[10] A. M. Hashemian, A. Adhikari, E. Kruijff, M. Von der Heyde, and
B. E. Riecke. Leaning-based interfaces improve ground-based vr
locomotion in reach-the-target, follow-the-path, and racing tasks. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2021.

[11] S. Hu, K. A. McChesney, K. A. Player, A. M. Bahl, J. B. Buchanan, and
J. E. Scozzafava. Systematic investigation of physiological correlates
of motion sickness induced by viewing an optokinetic rotating drum.
Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 1999.

[12] A. Kemeny, P. George, F. M´erienne, and F. Colombet. New VR
navigation techniques to reduce cybersickness. Electronic Imaging,
2017(3):48–53, 2017.

[13] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilienthal.
Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying
simulator sickness. The international journal of aviation psychology,
3(3):203–220, 1993.

[14] T. Keskinen, V. M¨akel¨a, P. Kallioniemi, J. Hakulinen, J. Karhu,
K. Ronkainen, J. M¨akel¨a, and M. Turunen. The effect of camera
height, actor behavior, and viewer position on the user experience of
360 videos. In 2019 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user
interfaces (VR), pp. 423–430. IEEE, 2019.

[15] J. J. LaViola Jr. A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments.

ACM Sigchi Bulletin, 32(1):47–56, 2000.

[16] J. J. LaViola Jr, E. Kruijff, R. P. McMahan, D. Bowman, and I. P.
Poupyrev. 3D user interfaces: theory and practice. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2017.

[17] S. Litleskare. The relationship between postural stability and cybersick-
ness: It’s complicated–an experimental trial assessing practical impli-
cations of cybersickness etiology. Physiology & Behavior, 236:113422,
2021.

[18] R. L. Lynch. Permanently Pair Wiimote/Wii Balance Board. [Accessed

Dec. 16, 2019].

[19] M. Marchal, J. Pettr´e, and A. L´ecuyer. Joyman: A human-scale joystick
for navigating in virtual worlds. In 2011 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), pp. 19–26. IEEE, 2011.

[20] K. J. Mimnaugh, M. Suomalainen, I. Becerra, E. Lozano, R. Murrieta-
Cid, and S. M. LaValle. Analysis of user preferences for robot motions
in immersive telepresence. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 4252–4259. IEEE.
[21] F. Negrello, A. Settimi, D. Caporale, G. Lentini, M. Poggiani,
D. Kanoulas, L. Muratore, E. Luberto, G. Santaera, L. Ciarleglio,
et al. Humanoids at work: The walk-man robot in a postearthquake

scenario. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 25(3):8–22, 2018.
[22] T. Nguyen-Vo, B. E. Riecke, W. Stuerzlinger, D.-M. Pham, and E. Krui-
jff. Naviboard and navichair: Limited translation combined with full
rotation for efﬁcient virtual locomotion. IEEE transactions on visual-
ization and computer graphics, 27(1):165–177, 2019.

[23] M. Q. Patton. Qualitative research. Encyclopedia of statistics in

behavioral science, 2005.

[24] I. Rae, B. Mutlu, and L. Takayama. Bodies in motion: mobility,
presence, and task awareness in telepresence. In Proceedings of the
32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pp. 2153–2162. ACM, 2014.

[25] L. Rebenitsch and C. Owen. Review on cybersickness in applications

and visual displays. Virtual Reality, 20(2):101–125, 2016.

[26] M. Slater. Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour
in immersive virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1535):3549–3557, Dec.
2009. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0138

[27] M. Slater. Immersion and the illusion of presence in virtual reality.

British Journal of Psychology, 109(3):431–433, 2018.

[28] M. Slater, A. Steed, J. McCarthy, and F. Maringelli. The inﬂuence
of body movement on subjective presence in virtual environments.
Human factors, 40(3):469–477, 1998.

[29] M. Slater and S. Wilbur. A framework for immersive virtual environ-
ments (ﬁve): Speculations on the role of presence in virtual environ-
ments. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 6(6):603–616,
1997.

[30] B. Stoll, S. Reig, L. He, I. Kaplan, M. F. Jung, and S. R. Fussell. Wait,
can you move the robot? examining telepresence robot use in collab-
orative teams. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, pp. 14–22, 2018.

[31] M. Suomalainen, B. Sakcak, A. Widagdo, J. Kalliokoski, K. J. Mim-
naugh, A. P. Chambers, T. Ojala, and S. M. LaValle. Unwinding
rotations improves user comfort with immersive telepresence robots.
In 2022 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Inter-
action (HRI), 2022.

[32] D. Valkov, F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, and K. H. Hinrichs. Traveling in 3d
virtual environments with foot gestures and a multi-touch enabled wim.
In Proceedings of virtual reality international conference (VRIC 2010),
pp. 171–180, 2010.

[33] S. Weech, J. Moon, and N. F. Troje. Inﬂuence of bone-conducted vibra-
tion on simulator sickness in virtual reality. PloS one, 13(3):e0194137,
2018.

