Virtual Reality Simulator for Fetoscopic Spina Biﬁda Repair Surgery

Przemysław Korzeniowski1, Szymon Płotka1,2, Robert Brawura-Biskupski-Samaha3, Arkadiusz Sitek1

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

0
3

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
6
1
0
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Spina Biﬁda (SB) is a birth defect developed
during the early stage of pregnancy in which there is incomplete
closing of the spine around the spinal cord. The growing interest
in fetoscopic Spina-Biﬁda repair, which is performed in fetuses
who are still in the pregnant uterus, prompts the need for
appropriate training. The learning curve for such procedures
is steep and requires excellent procedural skills. Computer-
based virtual reality (VR) simulation systems offer a safe,
cost-effective, and conﬁgurable training environment free from
ethical and patient safety issues. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there are currently no commercial or experimental
VR training simulation systems available for fetoscopic SB-
repair procedures. In this paper, we propose a novel VR
simulator for core manual skills training for SB-repair. An
initial simulation realism validation study was carried out by
obtaining subjective feedback (face and content validity) from
14 clinicians. The overall simulation realism was on average
marked 4.07 on a 5-point Likert scale (1 - ‘very unrealistic’,
5 - ‘very realistic’). Its usefulness as a training tool for SB-
repair as well as in learning fundamental laparoscopic skills
was marked 4.63 and 4.80, respectively. These results indicate
that VR simulation of fetoscopic procedures may contribute
to surgical training without putting fetuses and their mothers
at risk. It could also facilitate wider adaptation of fetoscopic
procedures in place of much more invasive open fetal surgeries.

I. INTRODUCTION

Spina Biﬁda (SB) is the most common congenital birth
defect affecting the central nervous system [1]. It usually
manifests with sacs covered with skin in the lumbar region
of the fetus back. However, in the most severe form of SB
a section of the spinal cord can protrude through the back
of the baby so that the spinal cord is fully exposed. This
causes serious neurological disabilities after birth, which
are related to the location and severity of the defect. The
prevalence of SB is about 3.4 per 10000 live births in the
USA [2]. Newborns with untreated SB can have permanent
nerve damage and live with major disabilities, including
paralysis and bowel and bladder dysfunction [3]. About 10%
of newborns with a severe form of SB die [4].

Prenatal repair of SB, which is performed in fetuses who
are still in the pregnant uterus, has shown better outcomes
compared to treatment of the condition after birth [5].
Although the efﬁcacy of prenatal SB repair is well-proven,

1Przemysław Korzeniowski, Szymon Płotka and Arkadiusz Sitek
are with Sano Centre for Computational Medicine, Czarnowiejska
{p.korzeniowski, s.plotka,
36,
a.sitek}@sanoscience.org

Cracow,

Poland

2 Szymon Płotka is with Quantitative Healthcare Analysis (qurAI)
group, Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands s.s.plotka@uva.nl

3 Robert Brawura-Biskupski-Samaha is with II Department of Ob-
stetrics and Gynaecology, The Medical Centre of Postgraduate Education,
Marymoncka 99/103, Warsaw, Poland robertsamaha@gmail.com

Fig. 1: Depiction of SB. The top of SB is covered only with
dura mater for the most severe type of SB myelomeningo-
cele. Figure adopted from *.

it is a complex and difﬁcult medical intervention consisting
of multiple stages. During the ﬁrst stage, a monopolar
thermocoagulation (i.e. diathermy) is applied to make a
circumferential incision around the placode (Fig. 2 left).
Next, the surrounding tissue is resected using a grasper and
scissors (Fig. 2 middle left) and the skin is undermined
and cleaned using irrigation (Fig. 2 middle right). Finally,
myofascial ﬂaps are sutured with a patch (Fig. 2 right). For
more details regarding the SB repair procedure we refer the
reader to [6] and [7].

In addition to the complexity of the repair, the condition is
relatively rare. Hence, there is a limited number of surgeons
who are capable of performing such prenatal procedures. As
a result, access to medical care for those affected with SB is
limited. To improve this, increasing the training level of the
surgeons is important. In this paper, we propose a prototype
VR simulator for core manual skills training of fetoscopic
SB-repair, which we developed in close collaboration with
an expert fetoscopic surgeon.

Multiple specialities in surgery have found minimally
invasive physical trainers alongside virtual reality (VR) sim-
ulators useful for the improvement of surgical skills and
conﬁdence. As early as 2002 in a seminal work by Seymour
et al. [8] the VR simulator was shown to signiﬁcantly
improve the performance of residents during laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. In more recent work, Yiannakopoulou [9]
reported that VR simulators have similar efﬁciency in im-
proving surgical skills to physical task trainers. However,

*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spina_bifida

 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2: Fetoscope images taken at various stages of SB repair. From the left diathermy, cutting, irrigation, and patching.

task trainers lack the real-life effect of a complete surgery as
well as physiological behaviour. Although there is undisputed
potential value in VR simulators there is a need for thorough
investigations that ideally use a series of realism validation
trials of such systems [10] that conﬁrms their usefulness in
training curricula.

Most of the work on VR simulators is focused on the adult
population. The usefulness of VR technology in pediatric
surgery was demonstrated by Korzeniowski et al. [11] who
recently presented a validated VR simulator for laparoscopic
paediatric inguinal hernia repair. The development of a
physical trainer for SB-repair has been previously reported
in the literature. Most recently, Joyeux et al. [12] used the
animal model to simulate the BS repair. However, to the best
of our knowledge, the system presented here is the ﬁrst VR
simulator for fetoscopic SB repair. In this article, besides the
simulation system description we also report the results of
the initial realism evaluation. Our main contributions are:

1) Development of the ﬁrst VR simulation system for SB

repair.

2) Establishing the face and content validity of the devel-

oped simulator.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we describe real-time physics-based simulation software
components and algorithms used to develop virtual SB
surgery. In Section III we describe our validation protocol
and provide results of the simulation realism validation study.
Section IV discusses the research carried out,
identiﬁes
limitations of the approaches used, and outlines possible
future work.

II. METHODS
A. Description of Virtual Procedure

The virtual procedure starts with laparoscopic instruments
inserted into the uterus inﬂated with carbon dioxide gas. The
simulation visualizes the exposed lumbar region of the fetus
back. The ﬁrst stage of the simulation is to use a monopolar
thermocoagulation (i.e. diathermy) to make a circumferential
incision around the virtual placode (Fig. 4 left). Next, the
surrounding tissue is resected using virtual grasper and
scissors (Fig. 4 center and Fig. 4 right). At this development
stage, the simulator does not provide irrigation and suturing

Fig. 3: The overview of our setup. The hardware setup of
the VR simulator for fetoscopic SB-repair consist of laptop,
two Geomagic Touch haptic devices linked with Virtual
Laparoscopic Interface.

of myofascial ﬂaps with a patch. In this paper, we solely
focus on the realistic implementation of tissue dissection and
resection using diathermy and scissors tools. Due to a small
laparoscopic work-space and complex non-linear behaviour
of thin tissues, realistic simulation of such procedure, espe-
cially in real-time at haptic interactive rates, is challenging.

B. Simulation System Overview

The experimental apparatus consisted of real-time software
running on a laptop PC (Ryzen 7 5800H@3.2 GHz CPU,
32GB RAM and NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU). Two Geomagic
Touch input devices (3DSystems, US) combined with Vir-
tual Laparoscopic Interface (VLI, Immersion, US) to mimic
the laparoscopic instrumentation were used. The simulation
setup is presented in Fig. 3.

The Unity3D engine (Unity Technologies, San Francisco,
USA) was used as a development platform in combination
with an in-house medical simulation framework. A multi-
threaded Gauss-Seidel [13] physics solver was implemented
in C/C++. Despite the high computational demands refresh

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4: Placode dissection with monopolar diathermy (left), tissue resection with scissors and grasper (center and right).

rates of up to 1.5 kHz were obtained and allowed for small
simulation time steps (0.75ms – 1.0ms), which are essential
for accurate simulation at the haptic interactive rates.

C. Simulation Framework

To tackle the complexity of the simulation of the non-
linear behaviour of tissues and the simulation of the haptic
response, we used the Position-Based Dynamics (PBD) [14]
as our simulation method. Due to the local nature of the
non-linear Gauss-Seidel process, PBD avoids many pitfalls
of global, matrix-based solvers, allowing for stable handling
of equality and inequality constraints. Moreover, several
more recent papers turned PBD into a serious competitor
of more advanced methods in terms of accuracy, stabil-
ity, speed, and simplicity. Following the work of [13] we
used Extended PBD (XPBD), which addressed PBD’s long-
standing problem of stiffness constraint dependence on the
number of solver iterations and the size of the time step. This
relatively minor modiﬁcation allowed for an accurate and
efﬁcient simulation of arbitrary elastic and dissipative energy
potentials in an implicit manner. In addition, XPBD provides
constraint force estimates important in surgical simulations,
which require accurate haptic force-feedback calculations.

We split every time step into n equal time sub-steps and
perform a single constraint iteration of XPBD in each sub-
step. This is following the work of [15] who observed that
performing a single large time-step with n constraint solver
iterations is less effective than computing n smaller time-
steps, each with a single constraint solver iteration. This
approach was further validated in [16] with authors imple-
menting a fully-ﬂedged rigid body solver that handles surface
contacts, a variety of joint types and the interaction with soft
objects in a uniﬁed way. This is particularly interesting in the
context of surgical robotics, as it allows for straightforward
interactions of robots’ rigid surgical tools with soft-tissues.
In [13] and [15] the authors compared XPBD with sub-
stepping to more sophisticated solvers, both implicit or
explicit, and stated that it produces visually similar results.
This was achieved while maintaining the implementation
straightforwardness of the original PBD method and being
non-sensitive to matrix ill-conditioning.

Fig. 5: On the left: Volume discretization using tetrahedral
mesh. On the right: Cut-through the tetrahedral mesh

D. Implementation Details

1) Soft tissue modelling: The virtual anatomy of SB tissue
was modelled as a volumetric tetrahedral mesh consisting
of approximately 40k elements (Fig. 5). As soft-tissues are
nearly incompressible, we used Neo-Hookean constitutive
model proposed in [17] as it provides better volume con-
servation than co-rotational ﬁnite element or St. Venant-
Kirchoff models. Moreover, the Neo-Hookean model recov-
ers from inverted states (i.e. ﬂipped tetrahedrons) and does
not require polar decomposition. The energy-based deﬁnition
of the Neo-Hookean model is as follows:

µ
2

λ
2

ΨNeo =

(det(F) − 1)2 +

(cid:0)tr(F T F) − 3(cid:1) = ΨH + ΨD,
(1)
where F is a 3 × 3 matrix of the deformation gradient and
λ , µ are the Lam´e parameters. ΨH is the hydrostatic energy
resisting expansion and compression. ΨD is the deviatoric
energy resisting distortion. For more details, please refer to
[17].

In this simulator, we used a constraint-based formulation
of the Neo-Hookean energy as recently presented in [17].
It avoids problems typical for Newton method-based ap-
proaches, which require computation of Hessian matrices,
their Eigen-decomposition and a sophisticated linear solver.
Instead, [17] decomposes the energy into hydrostatic (volume

preserving) and deviatoric (distortional) constraints.

This approach applies XPBD’s iterative constrained opti-
mization methods, which require only ﬁrst-order gradients.
Constraints are deﬁned by function C(x) and can be turned
into energy using:

ΨC =

1
2

α −1C(x)2

The force fC is then:

fC = −α −1C(x)

∂C(x)T
∂ x

,

(2)

(3)

where α is the compliance (inverse stiffness) of the con-
straint. In XPBD, the constraints are enforced via Lagrange
multipliers λelastic:

λelastic = −α −1C(x),

(4)

where α = α/∆t2, where ∆t is simulation time-step.

Taking all the above into consideration, the constraints
equations in the XPBD physics simulation framework for
the Neo-Hookean Hydrostatic and Deviatoric constraints are
as follows:

CH (F) = det(F) − 1

CD(F) =

(cid:113)

tr (F T F)

(5)

(6)

The compliance parameters α of both hydrostatic and
deviatoric constraints were visually tuned to approximate
the behaviour of the real anatomy based on the judgement
of senior clinicians interacting with the virtual anatomy
through the laparoscopic device, whilst achieving real-time
performance at high physics refresh rate.

2) Collision detection and response: For broad-phase
collision detection, we used a dynamic bounding volumes
hierarchy of axis-aligned bounding boxes. For the narrow-
phase between the virtual tissue and fetoscopic instruments,
Signed Distance Fields (SDFs) were applied. Due to their
computational performance and robustness, SDFs are popular
shape representations for collision detection. It has been well
established in the literature how to check individual points
against intersections with SDFs. However, until [18], it was
unclear how to test continuous surfaces such as triangular and
tetrahedral meshes for penetration with SDF. We followed
Macklin [18] who proposed a per-element local optimization
scheme to ﬁnd the closest points between SDF’s iso-surface
and convex elements such as points, edges, triangles and
tetrahedrons. This enabled an accurate collision handling
between tissues and sharp and pointy surgical tools.

For each intersecting element-SDF pair, an XPBD colli-
sion constraint was generated. It pushed the tissue elements
out of the collisions with the instrument’s SDF according to
penetration depth and normal vectors. We used a Colombian
friction approximation, taking into consideration positions
from the previous and the current physics steps to approxi-
mate the velocities needed for friction calculations [16] .

III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

We performed face validation of the simulation of the
SB repair procedure described in section III-A. Fourteen
physicians participated and the validation was done using
the questionnaire described in Section III-B. We present the
results in Section III-C

A. VR SB Repair Simulation Procedure

The virtual procedure started with a simulated view of a
virtual Spina Biﬁda (Fig. 4). The participants were required
to partially perform three SB-repair procedures, one at a time.
Prior to performing their ﬁrst procedure, participants’ de-
mographic data (age and gender), operative experience, and
interest in virtual reality simulation were obtained through
an online questionnaire. Next, all participants were provided
with technical instructions outlining the simulation system.
The aim was to give a brief overview of the equipment, tasks
and factors, which will differ from real life owing to the lim-
itations of performing the procedure in a simulated setting.
The instructions did not instruct on the particular challenges
of performing an SB repair. Next, participants were allowed
a maximum of 2 minutes to familiarize themselves with how
to operate the instruments. Prior to commencing their ﬁrst
procedure, participants were given the opportunity to ask
questions relating to the practicalities of the simulation but
were not allowed to request any technical advice as to how
best to perform the procedure. No time limit was set for the
procedures.

B. Questionnaire

Face and content validity were evaluated by asking par-
ticipants to complete the aforementioned questionnaire after
ﬁnishing their last procedure. The questionnaire assessed the
behaviour of tools and tissues, graphical appearance, and
overall realism (face validity), as well as the perceived utility
of the simulator as a training tool for fetoscopic SB-repair
(content validity). The speciﬁc questions were as follows:

(A) Rate the realism of the behaviour of virtual tissue,
(B) Rate the realism of the behaviour of virtual laparo-

scopes,

(C) Rate the realism of the interactions between virtual

laparoscopes and tissues,

(D) Rate the realism of the laparoscopic hardware (how

realistic it feels),

(E) Rate the visual realism of the simulator (how realistic

it looks),

(F) Rate the overall realism of the simulator.

In the questionnaire we used a 5-point Likert scale where
1 corresponded to very unrealistic/not at all useful and 5
to very realistic/very useful. The average score was calcu-
lated by multiplying these scale values by the number of
participants who chose the corresponding value and dividing
the result by the total number of participants, the standard
deviation was calculated by treating the responses as the
ordinal data.

Fig. 6: Face validation results. (A) Rate the realism of the behaviour of virtual tissue, (B) Rate the realism of the behaviour of
virtual laparoscopes, (C) Rate the realism of the interactions between virtual laparoscopes and tissues, (D) Rate the realism
of the laparoscopic hardware (how realistic it feels), (E) Rate the visual realism of the simulator (how realistic it looks), (F)
Rate the overall realism of the simulator.

C. Face validation results

In total, 14 participants took part in the study (4 male and
10 female). Eight classiﬁed their speciality as Gynecology
and four as Neonatology. Two of the participants stated
their speciality as Gynecologic Surgery. The average age
was 42 years old (SD = 12). Half of the participants (7)
had previously used a laparoscopic simulator. Most of the
participants stated (85.7% agreed or strongly agreed) that
they are interested in the concept of VR simulation in surgery
and 71.4% that they are interested in simulation in fetoscopic
surgery. Four participants (28.6%) stated that they are not
interested in fetoscopic surgery, 3 were neutral and the rest
expressed their interest (4) or strong interest (3) in such
surgery.

Regarding face validity summarized in Fig. 6, the overall
simulation realism average score was 4.07 (SD = 0.47) on
a 5-point Likert scale described in Section III-B. The par-
ticipants were most satisﬁed with the laparoscopic hardware
interface (average score 4.64, SD = 0.5), whereas, the realism
of virtual laparoscopes scored on average 4.14 (SD = 0.66).
The average score of visual realism was 4.21 (SD = 0.7). The
participants were most critical about the interactions between
virtual laparoscopes and virtual tissue was 3.78 (SD = 0.8)
and the behaviour of virtual tissue, which was marked on
average at 3.93 (SD = 0.73).

The simulator showed very good content validity. Its
usefulness as a training tool for SB-repair as well as in
learning fundamental laparoscopic skills was marked 4.63
(SD = 0.6) and 4.8 (SD = 0.44), respectively. Finally, the
vast majority of the participants (85.7%) would recommend
the simulator to others, whilst 78.6% of participants found

SB-repair simulation as a useful tool in surgical training
curricula.

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

We have developed a prototype VR simulator for core
manual skills training for fetoscopic Spina Biﬁda repair
procedures. The simulator currently consists of a circum-
ferential thermocoagulation in the SB tissue followed by
its resection using scissors and a grasper. Our goal is to
enable surgical trainees to gain their operative skills in a safe
environment and provide them with objective feedback on
their performance before they consolidate them on patients.
The initial validation study rated the simulator as realistic,
recognising its usefulness as a training tool for fetoscopic
laparoscopic skills.
procedures and learning fundamental
This indicates a potential for further development and pos-
sible adoption in resident training.

Virtual Reality simulation of fetoscopic procedures can
contribute to training and improving the educational experi-
ence of surgery residents without putting fetuses and their
mothers at risk. It could also facilitate wider adaptation of
fetoscopic procedures in place of much more invasive open
fetal surgeries. However, for an improved educational out-
come, such virtual training should be still supplemented by
practice on laparoscopic box trainers and/or animal models.
Furthermore, we believe that realistic simulation of surgi-
cal procedures will be indispensable for the development of
future autonomous surgical robots. Methods such as Rein-
forcement Learning (RL) can be used to train fully- or semi-
autonomous surgical robots in virtual environments orders of
magnitude faster and for a fraction of the cost than in the

ABCDEFWeighted Average3,934,143,784,644,214,07012345Face Validity[6] G. G. Heuer, N. S. Adzick, and L. N. Sutton, “Fetal myelomeningo-
cele closure: technical considerations,” Fetal diagnosis and therapy,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 166–171, 2015.

[7] D. A. Lapa, G. L. Ac´acio, R. T. Gonc¸alves, R. A. M. S´a, R. A.
Brandt, R. Chmait, E. Kontopoulos, and R. A. Quintero, “Percutaneous
fetoscopic closure of large open spina biﬁda using a bilaminar skin
substitute,” Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, vol. 52, no. 4,
pp. 458–466, 2018.

[8] N. E. Seymour, A. G. Gallagher, S. A. Roman, M. K. O’brien, V. K.
Bansal, D. K. Andersen, and R. M. Satava, “Virtual reality training im-
proves operating room performance: results of a randomized, double-
blinded study,” Annals of surgery, vol. 236, no. 4, p. 458, 2002.
[9] E. Yiannakopoulou, N. Nikiteas, D. Perrea, and C. Tsigris, “Virtual
reality simulators and training in laparoscopic surgery,” International
Journal of Surgery, vol. 13, pp. 60–64, 2015.

[10] A. Moglia, V. Ferrari, L. Morelli, M. Ferrari, F. Mosca, and
A. Cuschieri, “A systematic review of virtual reality simulators for
robot-assisted surgery,” European urology, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 1065–
1080, 2016.

[11] P. Korzeniowski, C. S. Chacon, V. R. Russell, S. A. Clarke, and
F. Bello, “Virtual reality simulator for pediatric laparoscopic inguinal
hernia repair,” Journal of Laparoendoscopic & Advanced Surgical
Techniques, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1322–1330, 2021.

[12] L. Joyeux, A. Javaux, M. P. Eastwood, F. R. De Bie, G. Van den
Bergh, R. S. Degliuomini, S. Vergote, T. Micheletti, G. Callewaert,
S. Ourselin, et al., “Validation of a high-ﬁdelity training model for
fetoscopic spina biﬁda surgery,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.
1–10, 2021.

[13] M. Macklin, M. M¨uller, and N. Chentanez, “Xpbd: Position-based

simulation of compliant constrained dynamics,” 10 2016.

[14] M. M¨uller, B. Heidelberger, M. Hennix, and J. Ratcliff, “Position based
dynamics,” Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representa-
tion, vol. 18, pp. 109–118, 04 2007.

[15] M. Macklin, K. Storey, M. Lu, P. Terdiman, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke,
and M. M¨uller, “Small steps in physics simulation,” 07 2019, pp. 1–7.
[16] M. M¨uller, M. Macklin, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke, and T. Kim, “De-
tailed rigid body simulation with extended position based dynamics,”
Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, pp. 101–112, 12 2020.

[17] M. Macklin and M. Muller, “A constraint-based formulation of stable
neo-hookean materials,” in Motion, Interaction and Games, 2021, pp.
1–7.

[18] M. Macklin, K. Erleben, M. M¨uller, N. Chentanez, S. Jeschke, and
Z. Corse, “Local optimization for robust signed distance ﬁeld colli-
sion,” Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, vol. 3, pp. 1–17, 04 2020.

[19] J. Johnson, J. Li, and Z. Chen, “Reinforcement learning: An introduc-
tion: R.s. sutton, a.g. barto, mit press, cambridge, ma 1998, 322 pp.
isbn 0-262-19398-1.” Neurocomputing, vol. 35, pp. 205–206, 01 2000.
[20] F. Richter, R. K. Orosco, and M. C. Yip, “Open-sourced reinforce-
learning environments for surgical robotics,” arXiv preprint

ment
arXiv:1903.02090, 2019.

[21] Y. Barnoy, M. O’Brien, W. Wang, and G. Hager, “Robotic surgery
with lean reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.01006,
2021.

[22] E. Tagliabue, A. Pore, D. Dall’Alba, E. Magnabosco, M. Piccinelli, and
P. Fiorini, “Soft tissue simulation environment to learn manipulation
tasks in autonomous robotic surgery,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2020,
pp. 3261–3266.

real world. RL is currently widely used in robotic research
to solve a variety of complex problems [19]. However, the
vast majority of this work pertains to robots interacting with
rigid bodies. At the moment, the research in the application
of RL to manipulate soft-bodies is scarce and even scarcer
in surgical applications [20], [21], [22]. SB repair poses an
interesting case for RL. Although it concerns only a single
tissue in a relatively small operative ﬁeld, it requires many
fundamental and ubiquitous surgical actions such as tissue
grasping and pulling with a grasper, circumferential thermo-
coagulation, resection with scissors, irrigation, and suturing.
Moreover, these tasks are sequential, one after another, which
makes it easier to deﬁne rewards and penalties for RL. In
future work, we plan to further explore the application of
RL in our simulator.

Our work describes a prototype and, as such,

it has
limitations. The study participants in their free-comments
reported realism ﬂaws in collision response between tissues
and laparoscopes as well as in haptic feedback. Therefore,
we plan to replace our current hardware setup based on
generic 3-DoF Geomagic Touch haptic devices with a high-
ﬁdelity laparoscopic interface such as Haptic Avatar (Follou
AB, Sweden), with 4-DoF haptics. We hope that such an
upgrade alone will considerably improve the realism of our
simulator. We also plan to further improve the realism of
tissue simulation. Finally, we would like to add irrigation
and patch suturing tasks to offer a complete SB-repair ex-
perience. Larger usability studies, such as construct validity
and transfer of skills, are envisaged as the prototype is further
developed.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank the study participants. This
work is supported in part by the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement Sano No. 857533 and the International Research
Agendas programme of the Foundation for Polish Science,
co-ﬁnanced by the EU under the European Regional Devel-
opment Fund.

REFERENCES

[1] E. R. Detrait, T. M. George, H. C. Etchevers, J. R. Gilbert, M. Veke-
mans, and M. C. Speer, “Human neural tube defects: developmental
biology, epidemiology, and genetics,” Neurotoxicology and teratology,
vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 515–524, 2005.

[2] S. L. Boulet, Q. Yang, C. Mai, R. S. Kirby, J. S. Collins, J. M.
Robbins, R. Meyer, M. A. Canﬁeld, J. Mulinare, and N. B. D. P.
Network, “Trends in the postfortiﬁcation prevalence of spina biﬁda
and anencephaly in the united states,” Birth Defects Research Part A:
Clinical and Molecular Teratology, vol. 82, no. 7, pp. 527–532, 2008.
[3] L. E. Mitchell, N. S. Adzick, J. Melchionne, P. S. Pasquariello, L. N.
Sutton, and A. S. Whitehead, “Spina biﬁda,” The Lancet, vol. 364, no.
9448, pp. 1885–1895, 2004.

[4] S. M. Manning, R. Jennings, and J. R. Madsen, “Pathophysiology,
prevention, and potential treatment of neural tube defects,” Mental
retardation and developmental disabilities research reviews, vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 6–14, 2000.

[5] N. S. Adzick, E. A. Thom, C. Y. Spong, J. W. Brock, P. K. Burrows,
M. P. Johnson, L. J. Howell, J. A. Farrell, M. E. Dabrowiak, L. N.
Sutton, N. Gupta, N. B. Tulipan, M. E. D’Alton, and D. L. Farmer, “A
randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningo-
cele,” New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 364, no. 11, pp. 993–
1004, 2011.

