2
2
0
2

g
u
A
4

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
4
2
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Vibrotactile Feedback to Make Real Walking in
Virtual Reality More Accessible

M. Rasel Mahmud, Michael Stewart, Alberto Cordova, and John Quarles

Abstract—This research aims to examine the effects of various vibrotactile feedback techniques on gait (i.e., walking patterns) in
virtual reality (VR). Prior studies have demonstrated that gait disturbances in VR users are signiﬁcant usability barriers. However,
adequate research has not been performed to address this problem. In our study, 39 participants (with mobility impairments: 18,
without mobility impairments: 21) performed timed walking tasks in a real-world environment and identical activities in a VR
environment with different forms of vibrotactile feedback (spatial, static, and rhythmic). Within-group results revealed that each form of
vibrotactile feedback improved gait performance in VR signiﬁcantly (p < .001) relative to the no vibrotactile condition in VR for
individuals with and without mobility impairments. Moreover, spatial vibrotactile feedback increased gait performance signiﬁcantly (p <
.001) in both participant groups compared to other vibrotactile conditions. The ﬁndings of this research will help to make real walking in
VR more accessible for those with and without mobility impairments.

Index Terms—Virtual Reality, accessibility, usability, vibrotactile feedback, gait improvement, Head-Mounted Displays, HMDs.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

T He use of virtual reality (VR) is inaccessible to a sig-

niﬁcant number of individuals with disabilities [1], [2],
[3], [4], [5]. It is estimated that over one billion, or 15% of
the global population, suffer from a disability [6]. However,
research and development in VR rarely consider these in-
dividuals, leading to exclusive and inaccessible experiences.
Speciﬁcally, many users experience gait disturbances caused
by VR, which ultimately limits its usability and beneﬁts [1],
[3], [4]. This issue can be particularly challenging for persons
with mobility impairments (MI), as they suffer from func-
tional gait disorders, which make it increasingly difﬁcult
for them to use VR technologies. For example, individuals
who suffer from MI and other disabilities may ﬁnd it very
challenging to perform various locomotor movements in VR
without fear of falling or injuring themselves. Despite these
challenges, little research has been conducted in order to
mitigate them. Research in the ﬁeld of assistive technologies
has revealed that some multimodal feedback techniques [7],
[8] can assist individuals with MI with their daily activities
as well as improve gait and balance. A number of studies
have been conducted with the aim of improving balance and
gait for persons with disabilities using assistive technology
based on visual feedback [9], [10], [11], [12]. However, one
of the major issues with visual feedback is that it interferes

• M. Rasel Mahmud is with the Department of Computer Science, Univer-

sity of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78249.
E-mail: mrasel.mahmud@my.utsa.edu

• Michael Stewart is with the Department of Kinesiology, University of

Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78249.
E-mail: michael.stewart@utsa.edu

• Alberto Cordova is with the Department of Kinesiology, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, One UTSA Circle, San
Antonio, TX, USA 78229-3901
E-mail: alberto.cordova@utsa.edu
John Quarles is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78249.
E-mail: john.quarles@utsa.edu.

•

with the presence in VR more than the vibrotactile feedback
[13]. Nevertheless, vibrotactile feedback to improve gait and
balance in VR has received very little attention. Our study
investigated the mitigation of gait disturbance issues by
implementing various vibrotactile feedback techniques (e.g.,
spatial, static, and rhythmic) in VR for participants with and
without MI. We conducted a timed walking task using a
pressure-sensitive walkway (GAITRite) for the purpose of
quantitative gait analysis. However, these feedback effects
on gait performance were not measured post-study. The
purpose of this study was to make real walking in im-
mersive VR more accessible by using vibrotactile feedback,
as well as to examine its effectiveness in enhancing gait
efﬁciency.

2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1 Gait Disturbances in VR

The use of VR has been shown to cause instability and gait
disturbances in previous studies. Additionally, the use of
head-mounted displays (HMDs) can result in individuals
losing stability as a result of end-to-end latency and illu-
sory impressions of their body movements. HMDs block
visuals from the real world due to the obstructing of visual
feedback [14], [15]. Additionally, long-term exposure to VR
caused postural instability [16]. As a result of these postural
instabilities, walking in a virtual environment (VE) can lead
to gait instability [17]. In addition, Riem et al. [18] found that
step lengths were signiﬁcantly affected by VR in comparison
to baseline settings (p < .05). In other studies [19], imbalance
and gait disturbance in VR have also been reported. A study
conducted by Horsak et al. [20] examined the gait differ-
ences of 21 participants (male: 9, female:12, age: 37.62 ± 8.55
years) during walking in an HMD-based VE. Their ﬁndings
revealed that walking speed was reduced by 7.3% in the
HMD-based VE. A study by Canessa et al. analyzed the
differences between real-world walking and immersive VR

 
 
 
 
 
 
walking while wearing an HMD [21]. Based on their results,
they found that walking velocity decreased signiﬁcantly (p
< .05) in immersive virtual reality when compared to the
real world. A VR HMD with continuous multidirectional
visual ﬁeld perturbation was used by Martelli et al. [22]
in order to study how healthy young adults’ gaits were
modiﬁed and altered as they walked in a VE while using
a VR Headset. Twelve healthy young adults walked for six
minutes on a pathway in four different settings. As a result
of perturbation of the visual ﬁeld, stride length, width, and
variability of stride were reduced. Despite these gait distur-
bance issues in VR, few attempts have been made in the past
to address it. Thus, we investigated these gait disturbance
issues in order to ease the experiences of walking in VR and
make VR more accessible.

2.2 Gait Improvement After VR Intervention

Despite the focus of our research on VR accessibility and gait
improvement while in VR, it is important to examine how
VR rehabilitation applications have previously been used to
foster balance and gait improvement that persists after the
VR experience has ended [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28].

A study by Walker et al. [29] investigated the effec-
tiveness of a low-cost VR system in improving walking
and balance abilities among seven post-stroke patients.
By displaying a television screen in front of a treadmill,
participants were able to experience walking along a city
street. Head-mounted position sensors were used to collect
postural feedback. During the study, all participants were
supported by an overhead suspension harness. In the study,
participants were within a year after stroke and had previ-
ously received traditional rehabilitation but had signiﬁcant
gait problems as well. The study included results from six
participants (mean age 53.5 years, range 49-62 years) and
excluded one participant due to sickness. According to the
results of the study, there was a signiﬁcant improvement (p
< .05) in balance, walking speed, and gait functionality after
the study. They reported 10% improvements in Berg Balance
Scale (BBS), 38% improvements in walking speed, and 30%
improvements in Functional Gait Assessment (FGA) scores.
In a study conducted by Janeh et al. [30], 15 male patients
with Parkinson’s disease were recruited to investigate the
effectiveness of a VR-based gait manipulation approach
aimed at adjusting step length in order to achieve gait sym-
metry. By using visual and proprioceptive signals, they were
able to compare natural gait with walking situations when
performing VR-based gait activities. In comparison to nat-
ural gait, VR gait activities increased step width and swing
time. Furthermore, Janeh et al. reported that VR might
improve the gait of persons with neurological disorders
after experiencing it. As a result of their observations, they
stressed the importance of using virtual walking approaches
in rehabilitation [31].
Nevertheless,

the majority of gait rehabilitation ap-
proaches did not use VR techniques. In our study, we
investigated immersive VR-based walking where the VEs
were rendered using HMDs.

2

2.3 Gait Disturbances Associated With HMDs for Par-
ticipants With MI

A study by Winter et al. [32] recruited 36 participants (Male:
10, Female: 26) without a history of MI and 14 patients
(MS: 10, Stroke: 4) with MI to investigate the effect of an
immersive, semi-immersive, and no VR environment on
gait during treadmill training. Participants ﬁrst completed
the treadmill training without VR. In the semi-immersive
VR condition, participants were presented with a virtual
walking path on a monitor. In the immersive VR condi-
tion, the participants experienced the same VR scenario via
HMDs. The results of the study indicated that immersive
VR during gait rehabilitation increased walking speed more
signiﬁcantly (p < .001) than semi-immersive and no VR
conditions for both participant groups. VR conditions did
not cause cybersickness or an increase in heart rate.

In addition, Guo et al. [33] examined the effect of VEs
on gait in both participants with and without MI. It was
found that MI participants responded differently in terms
of walking speed, step length, and stride length when
compared to non-MI participants. Despite this, other gait
parameters did not differ signiﬁcantly between participants
with and without MI.

Ferdous et al. [3] analyzed the effects of HMDs and vi-
sual components on postural stability in VR for participants
with multiple sclerosis (MS) using visual feedback. How-
ever, they did not examine the effect of vibrotactile feedback
on gait, as in most previous studies on immersive VR with
HMDs. Therefore, the impact of vibrotactile feedback on
gait in immersive VR with HMDs has received insufﬁcient
attention. Also, most prior studies have primarily focused
on individuals without MI [34], [35], [36], [37], [38]. These
led us to examine the vibrotactile feedback effect on gait for
participants with and without MI using immersive VR with
HMDs.

2.4 Vibrotactile Feedback for Gait Improvement in the
Real World

Prior studies reported that visual feedback [39], auditory
feedback [40], or vibrotactile feedback [41] in real-world ap-
plications reduced postural instability and gait disturbances
for participants with balance and gait impairments [42], [43],
[44]. Vibrotactile feedback is generally favored over other
helpful feedback modalities because it is considered to inter-
act less with other senses, such as seeing or hearing, which
may be restricted by visual or auditory feedback [45], [46].
A few research have studied the use of vibrotactile feedback
to enhance balance and gait in real-world applications (e.g.,
rehabilitation).

For example, Rust et al. examined the impact of vibrotac-
tile feedback on trunk sway in ﬁfteen MS patients in the real
world [47]. The participants wore a headband containing
eight 150 Hz vibrators spaced at 45-degree intervals. Vibra-
tors were turned on when a sway threshold in the vibrator’s
direction was exceeded. In four weeks, participants per-
formed a variety of training, gait, and balancing activities.
The authors initially assessed trunk sway as a baseline.
Using the SwayStar device, they detected trunk sway with
vibrotactile input. After one and two weeks of training
with vibrotactile feedback, there was a large decrease in

trunk sway (p <.02) compared to the baseline. The authors
measured a carry-over effect in the fourth week following
three weeks of no training. In addition, they discovered
a considerable carry-over improvement (p <.02). In their
experiment, standing with eyes closed on a foam pad had
the most signiﬁcant results, with a 59% reduction in pitch
sway (p <.002).

Ballardini et al. [48] recruited 24 participants (11 males,
13 females) to examine the inﬂuence of vibrotactile feedback
on standing balance and gait performance. They designed
a system that provides vibrotactile feedback using two vi-
bration motors located on the front and rear of the body.
An accelerometric measurement encoding that combines
the position and acceleration of the body in the anterior-
posterior direction was synced with the vibration. The ob-
jective was to examine two different encoding techniques:
1) constant vibration and 2) vibration with a dead zone (i.e.,
silence when the signal was below the given threshold).
Using vibrations unrelated to the actual postural oscilla-
tions, they determined whether the informative quality of
the input altered these effects (sham feedback). Nine par-
ticipants experienced the vibration always on and sham
feedback, while ﬁfteen received vibration with a dead zone.
According to the results, synchronized vibrotactile feedback
lowered postural sway signiﬁcantly in the anterior-posterior
and medial-lateral directions. In terms of reducing postural
sway, there was no signiﬁcant difference between the two
encoding methods. The presence of sham vibration feedback
enhanced postural sway, highlighting the signiﬁcance of the
encoded data.

Thirty-nine participants with an imbalance and mobil-
ity issues due to the severe bilateral vestibular loss were
recruited by Kingma et al. to examine how vibrotactile
feedback impacts balance and movement in the real world
[49]. The participants wore a vibrotactile belt around their
waists for two hours each day for one month. If they were in
motion, they had to wear the belt. The belt’s 12 motors were
actuated by a microprocessor. Before and after one month of
daily usage of the belt, participants were asked to verbally
assess their balance and mobility on a 0 to 10 scale. The
average ratings for mobility and balance grew signiﬁcantly
(p <.00001) when compared to those obtained without the
belt.

While these studies explored balance and gait in the real
world, we investigated the effects of various vibrotactile
feedback on gait in VR for both participants with and
without MI.

3 HYPOTHESES

This research investigated the effects of three vibrotactile
feedback conditions (spatial, static, and rhythmic) on gait
in a VR environment. We were inspired by three types of
audio feedback that were proven to be successful in VR [50]
and non-VR contexts [51], [52], [53], [54], [55]. Further, based
on previous research on vibrotactile feedback for assistive
technology, the following hypotheses were investigated:

H1: Compared to non-VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback condition, VR baseline without vibrotactile feed-
back will exhibit gait disturbances.

3

H2: Three VR-based vibrotactile feedback conditions
(spatial, static, and rhythmic) will improve gait metrics more
than the condition with no vibrotactile feedback in VR.

H3: Spatial vibrotactile feedback will enhance gait met-

rics more than static and rhythmic vibrotactile feedback.

H4: While experiencing the vibrotactile feedback in VR,
participants with MI will encounter greater gait improve-
ment (e.g., velocity) compared to participants without MI.

4 METHODS

4.1 Participants, Selection Criteria, and Screening Pro-
cess

In order to investigate gait improvement using vibrotactile
feedback in VR, 39 participants (male: 18, female: 21) were
recruited from multiple sclerosis support groups and the
local community. In this study, 18 participants (male: 6,
female: 12) had MI due to MS. Among the participants with
MI, 44.44% were White, 25.56% were Hispanic, 4.44% were
Asian, and 25.56% were African American. Furthermore, we
recruited a group of twenty-one participants without MI
(male: 11; female: 10). Participants without MI constituted
18.18% White, 22.73% Hispanic, 50% African American,
4.55% American Indian, and 4.54% Asian. Descriptive statis-
tics (mean and standard deviation of age, height, weight,
etc.) of participants in both groups can be found in Table 1.
Exclusion criteria for participants included those with cogni-
tive impairments, severe vision impairments, cardiovascular
or respiratory conditions, or those unable to walk without
assistance. We intentionally recruited people with MI due
to MS because this population is rarely considered during
VR development, which may lead to inaccessible and non-
inclusive experiences.

TABLE 1: Descriptive statistics for participants

Participant
Group

MI
Without MI

Participants Age (years) Height (cm) Weight (kg)

Male Female Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
45.89 10.18 165.60 10.26 83.86 28.27
47.29 12.09 166.12 10.05 88.26 16.05

6
11

12
10

Screening Process: Several methods were used to recruit
participants, including telephone calls, email lists, and ﬂy-
ers. The eligibility of participants was determined via a tele-
phone pre-screening process. In order to determine whether
a participant could be included or excluded from the study,
we asked about their general demographics, health, and
medical histories. As an example, we conﬁrmed that the
individual could visit the on-campus lab and participate
throughout the study. Additionally, we assessed the partici-
pants’ history of MI and their ability to walk independently.
In order to minimize participant characteristic imbalances,
we ensured that the age, height, and weight of both partici-
pants were proportionally the same (see Table 1).

4.2 System Description

The study used a variety of equipment to ensure the safety
of participants and collect data.

4.2.1 Vibrotactile Equipment:

4.2.4 Safety Equipment:

4

We used the following vibrotactile equipment from bHap-
tics (https://www.bhaptics.com):

Vest: Participants wore a wireless vest with 40 indepen-
dently controlled Eccentric Rotating Mass (ERM) vibrotac-
tile motors. Twenty vibrotactile motors were placed ante-
riorly on the vest, and the remaining twenty were placed
posteriorly. The vest was ﬁtted with shoulder snap buttons
that allowed it to be adjusted. The total weight of the vest
was 1.6 kg.

Arm Sleeves: The participants wore arm sleeves located
between the wrist and elbow that had adjustable straps. The
arm pieces contained six ERM vibration motors. The arm
pieces weighed 0.30 kg each.

Forehead: Six ERM vibrotactile motors were attached
to the HMD and were positioned on each participant’s
forehead. It had a weight of 0.08 kg.

Fig. 1 depicts the placement of the vibration motors.

For the safety of our participants, we used a Kaye Prod-
ucts Inc. suspension walking system consisting of a body
harness, thigh cuffs, and suspension walker.

4.2.5 Gait Analysis:

We collected gait metrics from participants using the
GAITRite walkway system. The system consists of a
portable 12 feet pressure sensor pad capable of measuring
the gait metrics of participants during a walking test. The
GAITRite walkway system has the capability to provide
spatial and temporal gait data of the participants.

4.2.6 Environment:

A controlled lab environment was used during the study
(>600 square feet.). The participants and researcher were
the only individuals present in the room in order to mini-
mize any noise or other disruptions from the surrounding
environment. A comparison of the real-world and virtual
environments for the timed walking task can be seen in Fig.
2.

Fig. 1: Vibration motors positions.

4.2.2 Computers, VR Equipment, and Software:

The VEs were developed using Unity3D software. The HTC
Vive wireless HMD was used for our experiment, which
had a pixel resolution of 2160 x 1200, a 90 Hz refresh rate,
and a 110-degree ﬁeld of view. To track the position of the
bHaptics vest, we installed a Vive tracker on the back of
the vest. A computer with an Intel Core i7 processor (4.20
GHz), 32 GB DDR3 RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
2080 graphics card was used to render the VE and record
the data.

4.2.3 Audio-to-Vibrotactile Software:

A vibrotactile output is generated from corresponding audio
input with this software. First, we attached the audio input
to the Unity scenes. Then with the help of the bHaptics
Unity plugin, we delivered the audio input to bHaptics
audio-to-vibrotactile software, which converted the audio
input to the corresponding vibration. White noise was used
to generate audio input rather than music or other user-
selected tones as white noise has been shown to change the
signal-to-noise ratio and increase balance performance due
to the stochastic resonance phenomenon [56]. Furthermore,
bHaptics software allowed us to control the intensity of the
vibrations. We adjusted vibration intensity until participants
stated it was a comfortable intensity.

Fig. 2: Comparison between real environment (top) and
virtual environment (bottom) for timed walking task.

4.3 Study Conditions

We evaluated three kinds of VR-based vibrotactile feedback
techniques and a condition without vibrotactile feedback
to assess how vibrotactile feedback affects gait in VR. The
audio-to-vibrotactile software from bHaptics converted the
audio into corresponding vibrotactile feedback for each
feedback condition (see section 4.2.3).

4.3.1 Non-VR Baseline Trials

Participants performed the timed walking task using the
GAITRite system without VR and without receiving any
vibrotactile feedback to record participants’ baseline gait
metrics.

4.3.2 VR Baseline Trials

A VR baseline measurement for participants was established
by performing the same timed walking task without the
application of any vibrotactile feedback in VR. HMDs and
the bHaptics equipment pieces were worn by participants
during this condition.

4.3.3 Spatial Vibrotactile Feedback

To generate spatial vibrotactile feedback, the audio was used
to set the vibrotactile feedback patterns. We used Google
resonance audio SDK in Unity for audio spatialization since
the plugin uses head-related transfer functions (HRTFs) to
replicate 3D sound more precisely than Unity’s default [57],
[58]. The spatial audio in our research was simulated [59]
rather than recorded ambisonic audio [60]. The spatialized
audio simulation was then sent to the audio-to-vibrotactile
software, which created spatial vibrotactile feedback. The
forehead bHaptics equipment vibrated to varying degrees
as the user rotated their head. The vibration of the vest was
altered based on its position as sensed by the Vive tracker.
The X, Y, and Z coordinates of the 3D audio source and
participant in the VE were 0, 1, 0, and 0, 0, 0, respectively,
indicating that the audio source was positioned directly in
front of the participant.

4.3.4 Static Vibrotactile Feedback

We transmitted white noise to the audio-to-vibrotactile soft-
ware of bHaptics in order to provide static vibrotactile
feedback. All the vibration motors in the forehead, arm
sleeves, and vest were vibrated continuously. The user’s
location had no inﬂuence on the feedback. This technique
has been shown in non-VR studies to improve the balance
of adults [53].

4.3.5 Rhythmic Vibrotactle Feedback

We transmitted a white noise beat at 1-second intervals
to the bHaptics audio-to-vibrotactile software in order to
generate rhythmic vibrotactile feedback. All the vibration
motors in the forehead, arm sleeves, and vest were vibrated.
The length of the rhythmic feedback beat was also 1 sec-
ond. The previous study has shown that experiencing a
steady beat may improve balance and gait in both those
with neurological impairments and older people in non-VR
environments [55].

4.3.6 No Vibrotactile Feedback

This was used to measure participants’ balance in VR with-
out vibrotactile input. In order to remain coherent with pre-
vious conditions, participants continued to wear the HMD,
bHaptics suit, arm sleeves, and forehead component, but no
vibrotactile input was supplied.

4.4 Study Procedures

Fig. 3 is the ﬂowchart of the whole study procedure.

We ﬁrst sanitized all the lab equipment (including the
HMD, Vive tracker, bHaptics devices, safety harness, and
suspension system). A COVID-19 symptom screening ques-
tionnaire was completed when participants entered the lab.
The research procedures were then explained to the partici-
pants, and formal consent was documented.

5

Fig. 3: Study procedure

4.4.1 Pre-Study Questionnaires

There were two questionnaires completed at the begin-
ning of the study: an Activities-speciﬁc Balance Conﬁdence
(ABC) form [61] and an SSQ questionnaire [62]. We re-
quested that participants take off any footwear that could
interfere with the GAITRite system. Study approval was
granted by the Institutional Review Board (IRB).

4.4.2 Real World Walking

A GAITRite walkway was used to measure gait metrics in
this study. To prevent fall-related injuries, participants were
securely fastened to safety harnesses and suspension walker.
Participants were instructed to walk on the GAITRite at
a speed that they found comfortable. In addition, we in-
structed them to complete 180-degree turns at both ends.
The GAITRite software requires participants to step off
between trials, as the system cannot accurately assess turns.
Three timed walking trials were conducted [63] while a
stopwatch was used to measure the walking time of the
participants.

4.4.3 Virtual Environment Walking

We replicated the walking task in a VE with various vi-
brotactile feedback conditions in order to simulate the real-
world walking environment. We used the same harness
and suspension system as in the real-world environment to
prevent sudden falls. During the study, participants were
instructed to walk on the virtual GAITRite, which was
layered over the physical GAITRite. HMDs were used to
observe the VE while the vibrotactile feedback was applied
through the bHaptics equipment. Three timed walking trials
were performed in VR for each vibrotactile condition (e.g.,

6

- Toe-In/Toe-Out (Left/Right): The angle (degrees) between the
progression line and footprint’s midline. Toe-in means that
the center-line of the footprint is inside the line of progres-
sion. Toe-out denotes that the center-line of the footprint is
outside the line of progression.
The GAITRite manual has further details on Gait metrics
[64].

5.2 Activities-speciﬁc Balance Conﬁdence (ABC) Scale

Participants were assessed on their balance, mobility, and
physical functionality using the Activities-speciﬁc Balance
Conﬁdence Scale (ABC). Sixteen items are used in this ques-
tionnaire to determine whether an individual is conﬁdent
in performing daily functions without losing balance [61].
Each participant is asked to rate their level of conﬁdence
in each speciﬁc activity on a scale of 0% (not conﬁdent) to
100% (most conﬁdent). ABC Scale scores are calculated by
dividing the sum of the ratings (0-1600) by 16. ABC scores
below 50 indicate low functioning. Additionally, ABC scores
between 50-80 indicate moderate levels of functioning, and
ABC scores above 80 indicate high levels of functioning.

5.3 Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ)

Cybersickness of the participants resulting from virtual en-
vironment exposure was measured by the Simulator Sick-
ness Questionnaire (SSQ). The SSQ assesses participants’
physiological discomfort due to cybersickness using 16
symptoms that are organized into three different categories
(disorientation, nausea, and oculomotor disturbance) [62].

6 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For each investigated gait metric, the Shapiro-Wilk test (p >
.05), histograms, normal Q-Q plots, and box plots revealed
that the data was normally distributed for both participants
with and without MI. Then, we performed a 2×5 mixed-
model ANOVA with two between-subject factors (partici-
pants with MI and participants without MI) and ﬁve within-
subject factors (ﬁve study conditions: baseline, spatial, static,
rhythmic, and no vibrotactile) to identify any signiﬁcant
difference in study conditions. When there was a signiﬁcant
difference, post-hoc two-tailed t-tests were performed for
pairwise within and between-group comparisons to ﬁnd
the speciﬁc differences between two study conditions. For
cybersickness analysis, we also used two-tailed t-tests com-
paring pre-session and post-session SSQ scores for each par-
ticipant group. Additionally, we conducted two-tailed t-tests
comparing the ABC scores of both participant groups to as-
sess the difference in physical ability. Bonferroni corrections
were applied to all tests involving multiple comparisons.

7 RESULTS

Seven of the twelve studied gait metrics (walking velocity,
cadence, step length, stride length, step time, cycle time,
and swing time) improved signiﬁcantly under varied vibro-
tactile feedback conditions, but the other ﬁve gait metrics
improved insigniﬁcantly for both groups of participants.
Gait improvement also varied greatly depending on the
different vibrotactile feedback conditions. We assessed the

Fig. 4: Participants used harness while performing the timed
walking task utilizing the GAITRite system in both the real
world (left) and virtual environment (right).

spatial, static, and rhythmic) and a no-vibrotactile in VR
condition. A counterbalanced order of the four conditions
was applied to all participants in the study. Fig. 4 shows the
comparison of real and virtual environment walking for the
participants.

4.4.4 Post-Study Questionnaires

A post-study SSQ questionnaire and a demographic form
were completed by the participants at the end of the study.
Finally, each participant received $30/hour compensation
and a parking validation ticket.

5 METRICS

5.1 Gait Metrics

We examined the following gait metrics relative to each
vibrotactile feedback condition in this study.
- Walking Velocity: The distance traveled (cm) divided by
ambulation time (sec).
- Cadence: The number of steps taken per minute.
- Step Time (Left/Right): The amount of time (sec) between
the initial contact points of the opposite foot.
- Step Length (Left/Right): The distance (cm) between the cen-
ters of the heels of two successive steps taken by opposing
feet.
- Cycle Time (Left/Right): The time (sec) between the initial
contact points of the same foot’s two successive steps.
- Stride Length (Left/Right): The distance (cm) between the
steps of the same foot.
- Swing Time (Left/Right): The time (sec) between a foot’s
ultimate contact point and its starting contact point.
- Stance Time (Left/Right): The time (sec) between the start
and ﬁnal contact points of a single footstep.
- Single Support Time (Left/Right): This is the time (sec)
between the ﬁnal contact of the current footfall and the ﬁrst
contact of the following footfall of the same foot.
- Double Support Time (Left/Right): The time (sec) when both
feet are on the ground.
- Base of Support (Left/Right): The width between one foot
and the progression line of the opposing footstep.

gait characteristics from the start to ﬁnish of the trials (not
any speciﬁc portion of the trials). Additionally, both left
and right leg data were evaluated. There was no signiﬁcant
difference in the results for the left and right legs data. For
simplicity, we presented the average data for the left and
right leg for all gait metrics.

The mixed-model ANOVA test for all individuals re-
vealed a signiﬁcant difference in walking velocity, F(1,123)
= 69.8, p < .001; and effect size, η2 = 0.08. In addition, we
discovered a statistically signiﬁcant difference (p < .001) in
cadence, step length, stride length, step time, cycle time, and
swing time. Then we did post-hoc paired t-tests for within-
group and two-tailed t-tests for between-group comparisons
to identify differences between speciﬁc research conditions.

7.1 Participants With MI: Within-Group Comparisons

7.1.1 Non-VR Baseline vs. VR Baseline
Walking velocity was signiﬁcantly lower in the VR baseline
without vibrotactile feedback condition (Mean, M = 96.69,
Standard Deviation, SD = 13) compared to non-VR baseline
without vibrotactile feedback condition (M = 128.25, SD =
10.84); t(17) = 8.19, p < .001; and effect size, Cohen’s d = 0.11.
We also found a signiﬁcant reduction (p < .001) in cadence,
step length, and stride length for the VR baseline without
vibrotactile feedback condition. Step time, cycle time, and
swing time were signiﬁcantly enhanced (p < .001) in VR
baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition than non-
VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition. These
ﬁndings suggested that participants with MI experienced
gait disturbances in VR environments.

7.1.2 Spatial Vibrotactiile vs. VR Baseline
Walking velocity enhanced signiﬁcantly in the spatial vi-
brotactile feedback condition (M = 127.35, SD = 15.03)
compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback con-
dition (M = 96.69, SD = 13); t(17) = 5.74, p < .001, d = 0.76.
We found a signiﬁcant increase (p < .001) in cadence, step
length, and stride length for spatial vibrotactile feedback
condition compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback condition. Results also demonstrated a signiﬁcant
reduction in step time, cycle time, and swing time (p <
.001) in spatial vibrotactile feedback condition compared
to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition. The
ﬁndings demonstrated that spatial vibrotactile feedback en-
hanced gait metrics compared to the VR baseline without
vibrotactile feedback condition.

7.1.3 Spatial Vibrotactile vs. Static Vibrotactile
Experimental results revealed that walking velocity was
increased in spatial vibrotactile feedback condition (M =
127.35, SD = 15.03) relative to static vibrotactile feedback
condition (M = 114.4, SD = 12.6); t(17) = 4.71, p < .001,
d = 0.27. We discovered a statistically signiﬁcant increase
(p < .001) in cadence, step length, and stride length for
spatial vibrotactile feedback condition than static vibrotac-
tile feedback condition. Additionally, we noticed that step
time, cycle time, and swing time were signiﬁcantly reduced
(p < .001) in the spatial vibrotactile feedback condition
compared to the the static vibrotactile condition. Therefore,
spatial vibrotactile feedback condition exhibited greater gait
performance compared to the static vibrotactile condition.

7

Fig. 5: A comparison of walking velocity between study
conditions for participants with MI.

7.1.4 Spatial Vibrotactile vs. Rhythmic Vibrotactile

We noticed a signiﬁcant increase in walking velocity in
spatial (M = 127.35, SD = 15.03) compared to rhythmic
vibrotactile feedback (M = 113.45, SD = 13.68); t(17) = 4.1,
p < .001, d = 0.36. Also, cadence, step length, and stride
length for spatial vibrotactile feedback increased signiﬁ-
cantly (p < .001) than the rhythmic vibrotactile feedback.
However, we found a signiﬁcant reduction (p < .001) in
step time, cycle time, and swing time in spatial compared
to rhythmic vibrotactile feedback. The ﬁndings showed that
spatial vibrotactile feedback might be more beneﬁcial for
gait performance than rhythmic vibrotactile feedback.

7.1.5 Static Vibrotactile vs. VR Baseline

Our results indicated that walking velocity was signiﬁcantly
increased in static vibrotactile (M = 114.4, SD = 12.6) com-
pared to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback (M =
96.69, SD = 13); t(17) = 4.84, p < .001, d = 0.58. We also
found a signiﬁcant increase (p < .001) in cadence, step
length, and stride length in static than VR baseline without
vibrotactile feedback. However, we also noticed a signiﬁcant
reduction (p < .001) in step time, cycle time, and swing
time in static than VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback.
Thus, static vibrotactile feedback outperformed VR baseline
without vibrotactile feedback.

7.1.6 Static Vibrotactile vs. Rhythmic Vibrotactile

We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference in walking velocity
between static (M = 114.4, SD = 12.6) and rhythmic vibro-
tactile feedback (M = 113.45, SD = 13.68); t(17) = 0.35, p =
.73, d = 0.12 after post-hoc two-tailed paired t-test. We also
noticed no signiﬁcant difference for other gait parameters
between static and rhythmic vibrotactile feedback condition.
Therefore, study was equivocal as to whether rhythmic or
static vibrotactile input is more efﬁcient for improving gait
performance.

7.1.7 Rhythmic Vibrotactile vs. VR Baseline
We obtained a signiﬁcant increase in rhythmic (M = 113.45,
SD = 13.68) compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback (M = 96.69, SD = 13); t(17) = 3.81, p < .001, d =

TABLE 2: Gait metrics in ﬁve conditions for participants
with MI

TABLE 3: Gait metrics in ﬁve conditions for participants
without MI

8

Gait
Metrics

Cadence

Step
Length
Stride
Length
Step
Time
Cycle
Time
Swing
Time

Non-VR
baseline

VR
baseline

Spatial

Rhythmic

Static

Mean
(SD)
113.67
(9.84)
69.46
(8.01)
78.93
(11.19)
1.03
(0.56)
1.87
(0.94)
0.39
(0.07)

Mean
(SD)
92.14
(8.56)
48.11
(6.62)
69.38
(8.04)
1.07
(0.42)
1.99
(0.91)
0.48
(0.09)

Mean
(SD)

111.33
(6.17)
66.02
(7.23)
78.11
(9.75)
0.91
(0.51)
1.81
(0.77)
0.36
(0.05)

Mean
(SD)

103.65
(5.03)
55.19
(9.04)
68.77
(9.06)
0.99
(0.37)
1.91
(0.65)
0.42
(0.06)

Mean
(SD)

102.36
(7.89)
53.86
(5.94)
70.01
(11.23)
0.98
(0.29)
1.89
(0.82)
0.41
(0.05)

Gait
Metrics

Cadence

Step
Length
Stride
Length
Step
Time
Cycle
Time
Swing
Time

Non-VR
baseline

VR
baseline

Spatial

Rhythmic

Static

Mean
(SD)
128.37
(7.18)
77.28
(7.19)
90.78
(8.11)
1.14
(0.09)
1.68
(0.31)
0.34
(0.09)

Mean
(SD)
106.63
(4.33)
54.34
(5.09)
71.46
(6.89)
1.31
(0.4)
1.99
(0.16)
0.41
(0.1)

Mean
(SD)

126.52
(9.47)
75.01
(7.1)
89.14
(7.45)
1.11
(0.1)
1.76
(0.19)
0.33
(0.06)

Mean
(SD)

117.89
(6.51)
66.87
(8.12)
81.57
(5.78)
1.19
(0.08)
1.88
(0.15)
0.37
(0.07)

Mean
(SD)

118.44
(12.35)
65.42
(6.88)
82.84
(6.87)
1.18
(0.05)
1.86
(0.27)
0.36
(0.04)

0.38. We also observed a signiﬁcant increase (p < .001) in
cadence, step length, and stride length in rhythmic than VR
baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition. However,
results indicated a signiﬁcant reduction (p < .001) in step
time, cycle time, and swing time in rhythmic compared to
VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition. Con-
sequently, rhythmic vibrotactile feedback exceeded the VR
baseline condition in terms of gait performance.

Fig. 5 depicts the comparisons of walking velocity across
ﬁve distinct study conditions for the MI group. Table 2
displays the relative mean and standard deviation (SD) for
the ﬁve research conditions for the remaining gait metrics
that showed a signiﬁcant improvement.

7.2 Participants Without MI: Within-Group Compar-
isons

7.2.1 Non-VR Baseline vs. VR Baseline
Walking velocity was signiﬁcantly lower in VR baseline
without vibrotactile feedback (M = 128.22, SD = 5.58) than
the non-VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition
(M = 144.2, SD = 8.25); t(20) = 10.08, p < .001, d = 0.14.
We also noticed that cadence, step length, and stride length
for non-VR baseline were signiﬁcantly increased (p < .001)
than VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition.
However, we observed a signiﬁcant reduction (p < .001) in
step time, cycle time, and swing time in non-VR baseline
compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback con-
dition. The ﬁndings demonstrated that participants without
MI experienced gait disturbances in VR.

7.2.2 Spatial Vibrotactile vs. VR Baseline
Experimental results indicated a signiﬁcant
increase in
walking velocity in the spatial (M = 142.89, SD = 11.39)
compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback con-
dition (M = 128.22, SD = 5.58); t(20) = 6.87, p < .001, d = 0.75.
Likewise, results also revealed that cadence, step length,
and stride length for spatial vibrotactile condition increased
signiﬁcantly (p < .001). However, we noticed that step time,
cycle time, and swing time were signiﬁcantly decreased (p <
.001) in spatial compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback condition. Therefore, spatial vibrotactile feedback
produced superior outcomes than the VR baseline condition
without vibrotactile feedback.

7.2.3 Spatial Vibrotactile vs. Static Vibrotactile

We observed that walking velocity was signiﬁcantly higher
in spatial (M = 142.89, SD = 11.39) compared to static
vibrotactile feedback condition (M = 134.62, SD = 7.65); t(20)
= 3.53, p < .001, d = 0.38. Additionally, we found a signiﬁ-
cant increase (p < .001) in cadence, step length, and stride
length for spatial compared to static vibrotactile feedback
condition. However, there was a signiﬁcant reduction (p <
.001) in step time, cycle time and swing time in the spatial
vibrotactile feedback condition. The results suggested that
spatial vibrotactile feedback may be more efﬁcacious than
static vibrotactile feedback for gait performance.

7.2.4 Spatial Vibrotactile vs. Rhythmic Vibrotactile

Experimental results showed a signiﬁcant increase in walk-
ing velocity in the spatial (M = 142.89, SD = 11.39) com-
pared to the rhythmic vibrotactile feedback condition (M =
134.57, SD = 7.19); t(20) = 3.36, p < .001, d = 0.6. Likewise,
cadence, step length, and stride length for spatial condition
signiﬁcantly incremented (p < .001) than rhythmic vibrotac-
tile feedback condition. However, we observed signiﬁcant
reduction (p < .001) in step time, cycle time, and swing
time in spatial compared to rhythmic vibrotactile feedback
condition. As a result, spatial vibrotactile feedback could be
favored more than the rhythmic vibrotactile feedback for
gait improvement in VR environments.

7.2.5 Static Vibrotactile vs. VR Baseline

Experimental results revealed that walking velocity in static
(M = 134.62, SD = 7.65) was signiﬁcantly higher compared
to VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition (M =
128.22, SD = 5.58); t(20) = 2.97, p < .001, d = 0.3. Likewise,
signiﬁcant increase (p < .001) were observed in cadence,
step length, and stride length for static vibrotactile feedback
than VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition.
However, we found a signiﬁcant decline in step time, cycle
time, and swing time in static vibrotactile feedback condi-
tion (p < .001) compared to VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback. Thus, static vibrotactile feedback surpassed the no
vibrotactile feedback in VR.

7.2.6 Static Vibrotactile vs. Rhythmic Vibrotactile

We found no signiﬁcant difference in walking velocity be-
tween static (M = 84.76, SD = 13.78) and rhythmic vibrotac-
tile feedback condition (M = 82.66, SD = 15.69); t(20) = 1.11, p
= .138, d = 0.14. Likewise, there was no signiﬁcant difference
for the other gait metrics between static and rhythmic vibro-
tactile feedback condition. Hence, it was uncertain whether
rhythmic or static vibrotactile input would be more effective
for gait improvement.

7.2.7 Rhythmic vibrotactile vs. VR Baseline

Walking velocity was signiﬁcantly increased in rhythmic (M
= 134.57, SD = 7.19) than VR baseline without vibrotactile
feedback condition (M = 128.22, SD = 5.58); t(20) = 3.63, p
< .001, d = 0.25. However, step time, cycle time, and swing
time signiﬁcantly decreased (p < .001) in rhythmic vibro-
tactile feedback compared to VR baseline. Also, signiﬁcant
increment (p < .001) in cadence, step length, and stride
length was observed for rhythmic condition compared to
VR baseline without vibrotactile feedback condition. This
analysis revealed that rhythmic vibrotactile feedback might
be more effective for improving gait in virtual reality envi-
ronments than the absence of vibrotactile feedback in VR.

Fig. 6: Walking velocity comparison between study condi-
tions for participants without MI.

Fig. 6 compares the walking velocity of participants
without MI in ﬁve different study conditions. Table 3 con-
tains the relative means and standard deviations (SD) for
the other six gait metrics that exhibited a statistically sig-
niﬁcant improvement. Fig. 7 shows comparisons of effect
sizes (Cohen’s d) for walking velocity across various study
conditions.

7.3 Between-Group Comparisons

The mixed-ANOVA and post-hoc two-tailed t-tests revealed
that the walking velocity for participants with MI was
signiﬁcantly lower than that of participants without MI for
non-VR baseline condition; t(38) = 4.59, p = .003; d = 1.06,
and for VR baseline condition; t(38) = 2.88, p = .002; d
= 1.15. Furthermore, we found that walking velocity was
signiﬁcantly lower for participants with MI than partici-
pants without MI for all VR-based vibrotactile feedback

9

Fig. 7: Comparisons of effect size for walking velocity be-
tween study conditions for participants with and without
MI.

conditions: spatial vibrotactile (t(38) = 1.21, p = .01; d =
0.92), static vibrotactile (t(38) = 1.93, p = .008; d = 0.8), and
for rhythmic vibrotactile feedback condition (t(38) = 1.14,
p = .02; d = 0.77). For all conditions (non-VR baseline, VR
baseline, spatial, static, and rhythmic vibrotactile), partic-
ipants with MI demonstrated a signiﬁcant decrease (p <
.05) in cadence, step length, and stride length compared to
participants without MI.

7.4 Activities-speciﬁc Balance Conﬁdence (ABC) Scale

Two-tailed t-test was performed on the response scores
from the Activities-speciﬁc Balance Conﬁdence (ABC) Scale
between participants with MI (M = 72.64, SD = 19.33) and
participants without MI (M = 93.35, SD = 8.06), t(38) =
6.19, p < .001, d = 1.01. The computed mean score on the
ABC Scale for participants with MI was 72.64%, indicating
a moderate degree of functioning. However, the computed
mean ABC score for those without MI was 91.76% which
demonstrated a high level of functioning. These ratings
indicated a signiﬁcant difference between those with and
without MI in terms of physical functioning.

7.5 Simulator Sickness Questionnaire

For all participants, we performed a two-tailed t-test be-
tween pre-study SSQ scores and post-study SSQ scores. We
did not notice a statistically signiﬁcant rise in SSQ scores
among participants with and without MI. We found t(17) =
1.71, p = .07, d = 0.2 for participants with MI, while t(20) =
1.58, p = .09, d = 0.1 for participants without MI.

8 DISCUSSION
8.1 Gait Disturbances in VR Without Vibrotactile Feed-
back

Mixed ANOVA and post-hoc t-tests for both participant
groups revealed that walking velocity, step length, stride
length, cadence, step time, cycle time, and swing time were

signiﬁcantly changed (p < .001) in the VR baseline without
vibrotactile condition relative to the non-VR baseline with-
out vibrotactile condition. Therefore, we observed that gait
disturbances occurred for all individuals in the absence of
vibrotactile feedback, supporting our hypothesis H1. Pre-
vious research has shown that VR may produce postural
instability, which may result in gait disturbances [17], [18],
[19].

8.2 Gait Improvement in VR-based Vibrotactile Feed-
back Conditions

For both participants with and without MI, results revealed
that all VR-based vibrotactile conditions increased gait per-
formance signiﬁcantly (p < .001) compared to VR baseline
condition, which supported our hypothesis H2. In addition,
effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.5) demonstrated that Spatial vibro-
tactile feedback had a medium effect on both participants
with and without MI. The static vibrotactile had a medium
effect (Cohen’s d = 0.5) on participants with MI but a small
effect (Cohen’s d = 0.2) on those without MI. Rhythmic audio
had a small effect (Cohen’s d = 0.2) on both participant
groups.

Spatial vibrotactile feedback performed signiﬁcantly bet-
ter (p < .001) than other VR-based vibrotactile feedback
conditions, supporting our hypothesis H3. Additionally,
spatial vibrotactile feedback exhibited a larger effect size
than other conditions (Fig. 7). In prior research, simulated
spatial vibrotactile feedback was shown to be useful in the
real world for improving gait and postural stability due
to its superior quality [48]. However, the majority of prior
research was conducted in non-VR environments, while we
evaluated the inﬂuence of vibrotactile feedback in VR. Also,
earlier studies only examined spatial vibrotactile or only a
speciﬁc form of vibrotactile feedback, while this research
compared three distinct types of vibrotactile feedback in VR.

8.3 Gait Similarities and Dissimilarities Between Partic-
ipants With and Without MI

All ﬁve research conditions revealed signiﬁcant variations
in walking velocity, cadence, step length, and stride length
between people with and without MI. Other gait metrics,
however, did not change signiﬁcantly between people with
and without MI. Thus, our hypothesis H4 was supported
by the fact that some gait metrics (e.g., velocity, cadence,
step length, stride length) were altered differently between
individuals with and without MI, while some other gait
metrics were inﬂuenced similarly for both groups of par-
ticipants. These results were somewhat consistent with a
prior study by Guo et al. [33] where they also compared
the gait metrics of people with and without MI in a VE.
They reported walking velocity, step length, and stride
length were signiﬁcantly different between people with and
without MI, although there were no signiﬁcant variations in
other gait metrics between the two groups. However, they
did not investigate the effect of vibrotactile feedback.

To determine which group had greater gait improve-
ment in response to the vibrotactile feedback conditions,
we ﬁrst subtracted baseline data from each condition. Then,
ANOVA and post hoc two-tailed t-tests indicated that the
gait improvement of individuals with MI was substantially

greater (p < .001) than that of those without MI. Impact
size, as measured by Cohen’s d = 0.9, also revealed that
people with MI had a greater effect. We anticipated that
since people with MI had less gait functioning than those
without MI, they could be more amenable to improvement.

10

8.4 Cybersickness

Previous studies found that VR users exposed to virtual
worlds for more than 10 minutes might suffer the develop-
ment of cybersickness [65], [66]. Participants in our research
wore the HMD for around 45 minutes under four condi-
tions, which raised their likelihood of getting cybersickness
symptoms. However, we built the virtual environment with-
out the illusion of self-motion to reduce the likelihood of
participants experiencing cybersickness [67], and there were
resting periods between conditions. Therefore, there was no
statistically signiﬁcant difference between pre-SSQ and post-
SSQ ratings. Although we observed that many individuals
suffered minor cybersickness after the trials, this did not
seem to signiﬁcantly affect gait.

9 LIMITATIONS

The participants were informed of the whole research proto-
col at the outset of the trials. Then we conducted a few trials
with them until they were used to the experimental proce-
dure. Before beginning the vibrotactile feedback in VR, we
also conducted three baseline trials. However, the baseline
might be expanded to more trials. We did not do this since
the trials took around an hour to complete and included
individuals with MI due to MS who had reduced physical
functioning. However, we counterbalanced the feedback
conditions in VR to decrease the learning effects.

In our research, the feedback conditions were adminis-
tered in a counterbalanced sequence, which reduced carry-
over or practice effects (learning due to repetition) [68], [69],
[70]. Counterbalancing order was also found to be successful
in a number of previous studies [71], [72], [73]. Alternately,
we may have administered the vibrotactile feedback con-
ditions in a random sequence to minimize bias. Never-
theless, our research included MS patients who are very
prone to fatigue and cybersickness. Consequently, we were
particularly worried about the impact of carryover fatigue
and cybersickness on performance. Since counterbalancing
signiﬁcantly minimizes fatigue and cybersickness effects
[70], we preferred counterbalancing over randomization.

Participants wore harnesses throughout the research to
prevent falls, which may have improved their gait perfor-
mance somewhat. To ensure the consistency and safety of
the research protocol, we asked all participants to wear har-
nesses for all baseline and VR trials, regardless of whether
they had the risk of falling or not. Consequently, investiga-
tions examining gait without a harness may provide slightly
different ﬁndings.

The duration of the research was long, and each partic-
ipant had to complete 15 time-consuming GAITRite trials.
We discovered that the duration and physical demands of
the research might sometimes induce tiredness in partici-
pants. To reduce tiredness in our research, individuals were
permitted to remove their HMD and relax between trials

and conditions. This respite and removal of the HMD may
have enabled them to reestablish spatial orientation inside
the room, resulting in somewhat biased data.

The vibrating motors used for vibrotactile feedback
created noise. So it’s hard to say if the sounds it made
contributed to the gait improvement, if it was the actual
vibration, or both. More research will be needed to verify
this.

The ”rhythmic” vibrotactile feedback was provided at
one-second intervals. We did not examine this feedback con-
dition for different time periods (e.g., two-second). There-
fore, studies that provide ”rhythmic” vibrotactile input with
varying time intervals may produce slightly different ﬁnd-
ings for this particular circumstance.

For the static vibrotactile feedback, participants may
have experienced fatigue as the vibration was continually
played. However, the fatigue impact for this circumstance
was not measured.

In our research, the non-VR baseline was always per-
formed ﬁrst, which may have had an effect on the walking
speed for this condition. However, we wanted to limit
the learning impact of VR circumstances by introducing
sufﬁcient baseline tasks prior to VR conditions.

In our study, more females than males participated in
the MI group participants. This is due to the fact that we
recruited from the MS community, which is statistically
more prevalent in females [6]. Numerous prior studies have
shown no signiﬁcant gender impact on balance [74], [75],
[76]. In our future studies, we want to examine the gender
inﬂuence on gait metrics in VR.

During the VR intervention, we assessed gait perfor-
mance. We did not assess post-study gait effects. Our ob-
jective was accessibility rather than rehabilitation. Therefore
we only examined gait outside of VR as a baseline and
during VR immersion.

There were ﬁve distinct research conditions. We con-
ducted three trials for each research condition, resulting
in a total of 15 trials per participant, and we gathered
different data ﬁles for each trial. We conducted a total of
585 trials with our 39 participants. The HMD display failed
during three trials involving three individuals (MI group:2,
without MI group: 1). Restarting the ”Vive wireless app”
always resolved the problem. We repeated the three trials
and omitted the three ﬂawed data ﬁles.

Due to COVID-19 and our intended test group, which
included individuals with MI caused by MS, the recruit-
ing procedure was challenging. Because many prospective
volunteers had impaired immune systems, which placed
them at signiﬁcant risk for COVID-19. Consequently, they
excluded themselves from the research. We could have re-
cruited more participants if the research had been conducted
outside of COVID-19.

10 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this study, we assessed the effects of several vibrotactile
feedback modalities (spatial, static, and rhythmic) on gait in
VR. In our research, all vibrotactile feedback conditions sub-
stantially improved gait in VR. Spatial vibrotactile feedback
outperformed rhythmic and static vibrotactile signiﬁcantly.
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between

11

rhythmic and static vibrotactile feedback. Researchers will
be better able to comprehend the various types of vibro-
tactile input for improving gait in an HMD-based VE as a
consequence of these ﬁndings. In addition, this study may
assist developers in creating VR experiences that are more
accessible and useful for those with and without mobility
issues. Future research will include evaluating the efﬁcacy
of other feedback modalities to make real walking in VR
more accessible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to express their gratitude to ev-
eryone who participated in this study. This project was
funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation
(IIS 2007041).

REFERENCES

[2]

[1] Y. Agrawal, J. P. Carey, C. C. Della Santina, M. C. Schubert, and
L. B. Minor, “Disorders of balance and vestibular function in us
adults: data from the national health and nutrition examination
survey, 2001-2004,” Archives of internal medicine, vol. 169, no. 10,
pp. 938–944, 2009.
S. M. S. Ferdous, I. M. Arafat, and J. Quarles, “Visual feedback
to improve the accessibility of head-mounted displays for persons
with balance impairments,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI).
S. M. S. Ferdous, T. I. Chowdhury, I. M. Arafat, and J. Quarles, “In-
vestigating the reason for increased postural instability in virtual
reality for persons with balance impairments,” in Proceedings of
the 24th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology,
2018, pp. 1–7.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 121–128.

[3]

[4] R. Guo, G. Samaraweera, and J. Quarles, “The effects of ves on mo-
bility impaired users: Presence, gait, and physiological response,”
in Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software
and Technology, 2013, pp. 59–68.

[6]

IEEE, 2013, pp. 23–30.

[5] G. Samaraweera, R. Guo, and J. Quarles, “Latency and avatars in
virtual environments and the effects on gait for persons with mo-
bility impairments,” in 2013 IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces
(3DUI).
“[n. d.] people with disabilities
//www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/resources/
factsheet-on-persons-with-disabilities.html, accessed: 2021-08-30.
J. Demongeot,
and N. Vuillerme, “ibalance-abf: a smartphone-based audio-
biofeedback balance system,” IEEE transactions on biomedical en-
gineering, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 211–215, 2012.

[7] C. Franco, A. Fleury, P.-Y. Gum´ery, B. Diot,

in the world,” https:

[8] K. Sienko, S. Whitney, W. Carender, and C. Wall III, “The role of
sensory augmentation for people with vestibular deﬁcits: real-time
balance aid and/or rehabilitation device?” Journal of Vestibular
Research, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 63–76, 2017.

[9] R. Vel´azquez, “Wearable assistive devices for the blind,” in Wear-
able and autonomous biomedical devices and systems for smart environ-
ment. Springer, 2010, pp. 331–349.

[10] H. Thikey, F. van Wjick, M. Grealy, and P. Rowe, “A need for
meaningful visual feedback of lower extremity function after
stroke,” in 2011 5th International Conference on Pervasive Computing
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth) and Workshops.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 379–383.

[11] O. ˇCakrt, M. Chovanec, T. Funda, P. Kalitov´a, J. Betka, E. Zvˇeˇrina,
P. Kol´aˇr, and J. Jeˇr´abek, “Exercise with visual feedback improves
postural stability after vestibular schwannoma surgery,” European
archives of oto-rhino-laryngology, vol. 267, no. 9, pp. 1355–1360, 2010.
[12] S. S ¨utbeyaz, G. Yavuzer, N. Sezer, and B. F. Koseoglu, “Mirror
therapy enhances lower-extremity motor recovery and motor
functioning after stroke: a randomized controlled trial,” Archives of
physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 88, no. 5, pp. 555–559, 2007.
[13] J. K. Gibbs, M. Gillies, and X. Pan, “A comparison of the effects
of haptic and visual feedback on presence in virtual reality,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 157, p. 102717,
2022.

[14] P. Soltani and R. Andrade, “The inﬂuence of virtual reality head-
mounted displays on balance outcomes and training paradigms:
A systematic review.” Frontiers in sports and active living, vol. 2, p.
233, 2020.

[15] A. Martinez, A. I. Paganelli, and A. Raposo, “Analysing balance
loss in vr interaction with hmds,” Journal on Interactive Systems,
vol. 9, no. 2, 2018.

[16] A. Murata, “Effects of duration of immersion in a virtual reality
environment on postural stability,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 463–477, 2004.

[17] J. H. Hollman, R. H. Brey, T. J. Bang, and K. R. Kaufman, “Does
walking in a virtual environment induce unstable gait?: An exam-
ination of vertical ground reaction forces,” Gait & posture, vol. 26,
no. 2, pp. 289–294, 2007.

[18] L. I. Riem, B. D. Schmit, and S. A. Beardsley, “The effect of discrete
visual perturbations on balance control during gait,” in 2020 42nd
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
& Biology Society (EMBC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 3162–3165.

[19] B. Sondell, L. Nyberg, S. Eriksson, B. Engstr ¨om, A. Backman,
K. Holmlund, G. Bucht, and L. Lundin-Olsson, “Altered walking
pattern in a virtual environment,” Presence, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 191–
197, 2005.

[20] B. Horsak, M. Simonlehner, L. Sch ¨offer, B. Dumphart, A. Jalaeefar,
and M. Husinsky, “Overground walking in a fully immersive
virtual reality: A comprehensive study on the effects on full-body
walking biomechanics,” Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnol-
ogy, vol. 9, 2021.

[21] A. Canessa, P. Casu, F. Solari, and M. Chessa, “Comparing real
walking in immersive virtual reality and in physical world using
gait analysis.” in VISIGRAPP (2: HUCAPP), 2019, pp. 121–128.
[22] D. Martelli, B. Xia, A. Prado, and S. K. Agrawal, “Gait adaptations
during overground walking and multidirectional oscillations of
the visual ﬁeld in a virtual reality headset,” Gait & posture, vol. 67,
pp. 251–256, 2019.

[23] I. J. De Rooij, I. G. Van De Port, and J.-W. G. Meijer, “Effect of
virtual reality training on balance and gait ability in patients with
stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis,” Physical therapy,
vol. 96, no. 12, pp. 1905–1918, 2016.

[24] D. Meldrum, S. Herdman, R. Moloney, D. Murray, D. Duffy,
K. Malone, H. French, S. Hone, R. Conroy, and R. McConn-
Walsh, “Effectiveness of conventional versus virtual reality based
vestibular rehabilitation in the treatment of dizziness, gait and
balance impairment in adults with unilateral peripheral vestibular
loss: a randomised controlled trial,” BMC Ear, Nose and Throat
Disorders, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2012.

[25] E.-C. Park, S.-G. Kim, and C.-W. Lee, “The effects of virtual reality
game exercise on balance and gait of the elderly,” Journal of physical
therapy science, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1157–1159, 2015.

[26] C. Cho, W. Hwang, S. Hwang, and Y. Chung, “Treadmill training
with virtual reality improves gait, balance, and muscle strength
in children with cerebral palsy,” The Tohoku journal of experimental
medicine, vol. 238, no. 3, pp. 213–218, 2016.

[27] G. Duque, D. Boersma, G. Loza-Diaz, S. Hassan, H. Suarez,
D. Geisinger, P. Suriyaarachchi, A. Sharma, and O. Demontiero,
“Effects of balance training using a virtual-reality system in older
fallers,” Clinical interventions in aging, vol. 8, p. 257, 2013.

[28] M. Bergeron, C. L. Lortie, and M. J. Guitton, “Use of virtual real-
ity tools for vestibular disorders rehabilitation: a comprehensive
analysis,” Advances in medicine, vol. 2015, 2015.

[29] M. L. Walker, S. I. Ringleb, G. C. Maihafer, R. Walker, J. R. Crouch,
B. Van Lunen, and S. Morrison, “Virtual reality–enhanced partial
body weight–supported treadmill training poststroke: feasibility
and effectiveness in 6 subjects,” Archives of physical medicine and
rehabilitation, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 115–122, 2010.

[30] O. Janeh, O. Fr ¨undt, B. Sch ¨onwald, A. Gulberti, C. Buhmann,
C. Gerloff, F. Steinicke, and M. P ¨otter-Nerger, “Gait training in
virtual reality: short-term effects of different virtual manipulation
techniques in parkinson’s disease,” Cells, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 419, 2019.
[31] O. Janeh and F. Steinicke, “A review of the potential of virtual
walking techniques for gait rehabilitation,” Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, vol. 15, 2021.

[32] C. Winter, F. Kern, D. Gall, M. E. Latoschik, P. Pauli, and I. K¨athner,
“Immersive virtual reality during gait rehabilitation increases
walking speed and motivation: a usability evaluation with healthy
participants and patients with multiple sclerosis and stroke,”
Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–
14, 2021.

12

[33] R. Guo, G. Samaraweera, and J. Quarles, “Mobility impaired users
respond differently than healthy users in virtual environments,”
Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 509–526,
2015.

[34] A. Lott, E. Bisson, Y. Lajoie, J. McComas, and H. Sveistrup, “The
effect of two types of virtual reality on voluntary center of pressure
displacement,” Cyberpsychology & behavior, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 477–
485, 2003.

[35] P. Epure, C. Gheorghe, T. Nissen, L.-O. Toader, A. Nicolae, S. S.
Nielsen, D. J. R. Christensen, A. L. Brooks, and E. Petersson, “Ef-
fect of the oculus rift head mounted display on postural stability,”
in The 10th International Conference on Disability Virtual Reality &
Associated Technologies: Proceedings.
Reading University Press,
2014, pp. 119–127.

[36] M. T. Robert, L. Ballaz, and M. Lemay, “The effect of viewing a vir-
tual environment through a head-mounted display on balance,”
Gait & posture, vol. 48, pp. 261–266, 2016.

[37] C. G. Horlings, M. G. Carpenter, U. M. K ¨ung, F. Honegger,
B. Wiederhold, and J. H. Allum, “Inﬂuence of virtual reality on
postural stability during movements of quiet stance,” Neuroscience
letters, vol. 451, no. 3, pp. 227–231, 2009.

[38] G. Samaraweera, A. Perdomo, and J. Quarles, “Applying latency
to half of a self-avatar’s body to change real walking patterns,” in
2015 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 89–96.

[39] A. U. Alahakone and S. A. Senanayake, “A real-time system
with assistive feedback for postural control in rehabilitation,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 226–
233, 2010.

[40] L. Chiari, M. Dozza, A. Cappello, F. B. Horak, V. Macellari,
and D. Giansanti, “Audio-biofeedback for balance improvement:
an accelerometry-based system,” IEEE transactions on biomedical
engineering, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2108–2111, 2005.

[41] K. H. Sienko, M. D. Balkwill, and C. Wall, “Biofeedback improves
postural control recovery from multi-axis discrete perturbations,”
Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–11,
2012.

[42] M. Henry and S. Baudry, “Age-related changes in leg propriocep-
tion: implications for postural control,” Journal of neurophysiology,
vol. 122, no. 2, pp. 525–538, 2019.

[43] G. T. Wannstedt and R. M. Herman, “Use of augmented sen-
sory feedback to achieve symmetrical standing,” Physical Therapy,
vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 553–559, 1978.

[44] K. H. Sienko, R. D. Seidler, W. J. Carender, A. D. Goodworth,
S. L. Whitney, and R. J. Peterka, “Potential mechanisms of sensory
augmentation systems on human balance control,” Frontiers in
neurology, vol. 9, p. 944, 2018.

[45] A. D. Goodworth, C. Wall III, and R. J. Peterka, “Inﬂuence of
feedback parameters on performance of a vibrotactile balance
prosthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 397–408, 2009.

[46] C. Wall III, D. M. Wrisley, and K. D. Statler, “Vibrotactile tilt
feedback improves dynamic gait index: a fall risk indicator in
older adults,” Gait & posture, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 16–21, 2009.
[47] H. Rust, N. Lutz, V. Zumbrunnen, M. Imhof, ¨O. Yaldizli, V. Haller,
and J. H. Allum, “Beneﬁts of short-term training with vibrotactile
biofeedback of trunk sway on balance control in multiple sclero-
sis,” Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Research, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
1–10, 2020.

[48] G. Ballardini, V. Florio, A. Canessa, G. Carlini, P. Morasso, and
M. Casadio, “Vibrotactile feedback for improving standing bal-
ance,” Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology, vol. 8, p. 94,
2020.

[49] H. Kingma, L. Felipe, M.-C. Gerards, P. Gerits, N. Guinand,
A. Perez-Fornos, V. Demkin, and R. Van De Berg, “Vibrotactile
feedback improves balance and mobility in patients with severe
bilateral vestibular loss,” Journal of neurology, vol. 266, no. 1, pp.
19–26, 2019.

[50] M. R. Mahmud, M. Stewart, A. Cordova, and J. Quarles, “Auditory
feedback for standing balance improvement in virtual reality,” in
2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 782–791.

[51] M. N. Stevens, D. L. Barbour, M. P. Gronski, and T. E. Hullar, “Au-
ditory contributions to maintaining balance,” Journal of Vestibular
Research, vol. 26, no. 5-6, pp. 433–438, 2016.

[52] L. Gandemer, G. Parseihian, R. Kronland-Martinet, and C. Bour-
din, “Spatial cues provided by sound improve postural stabiliza-

13

[73] M. Sheskin and F. Keil, “Thechildlab. com a video chat platform

for developmental research,” 2018.

[74] B. O. Kahraman, T. Kahraman, O. Kalemci, and Y. S. Sengul,
“Gender differences in postural control in people with nonspeciﬁc
chronic low back pain,” Gait & Posture, vol. 64, pp. 147–151, 2018.
[75] A. Faraldo-Garc´ıa, S. Santos-P´erez, R. Crujeiras-Casais, T. Labella-
Caballero, and A. Soto-Varela, “Inﬂuence of age and gender in
the sensory analysis of balance control,” European Archives of Oto-
Rhino-Laryngology, vol. 269, no. 2, pp. 673–677, 2012.

[76] S. Schedler, R. Kiss, and T. Muehlbauer, “Age and sex differ-
ences in human balance performance from 6-18 years of age: a
systematic review and meta-analysis,” PLoS one, vol. 14, no. 4, p.
e0214434, 2019.

tion: evidence of a spatial auditory map?” Frontiers in neuroscience,
vol. 11, p. 357, 2017.

[53] J. Ross, O. Will, Z. McGann, and R. Balasubramaniam, “Auditory
white noise reduces age-related ﬂuctuations in balance,” Neuro-
science letters, vol. 630, pp. 216–221, 2016.

[54] T. Cornwell, J. Woodward, M. Wu, B. Jackson, P. Souza, J. Siegel,
S. Dhar, K. E. Gordon et al., “Walking with ears: altered auditory
feedback impacts gait step length in older adults,” Frontiers in
Sports and Active Living, vol. 2, p. 38, 2020.

[55] S. Ghai, I. Ghai, and A. O. Effenberg, “Effect of rhythmic auditory
cueing on aging gait: a systematic review and meta-analysis,”
Aging and disease, vol. 9, no. 5, p. 901, 2018.

[56] S. K. Helps, S. Bamford, E. J. Sonuga-Barke, and G. B. S ¨oderlund,
“Different effects of adding white noise on cognitive performance
of sub-, normal and super-attentive school children,” PloS one,
vol. 9, no. 11, p. e112768, 2014.

[57] U. Chong and S. Alimardanov, “Audio augmented reality using
unity for marine tourism,” in International Conference on Intelligent
Human Computer Interaction. Springer, 2020, pp. 303–311.

[58] J. Pinkl and M. Cohen, “Spatialized ar polyrhythmic metronome

using bose frames eyewear,” 2020.

[59] H. Kim, L. Remaggi, P. J. Jackson, and A. Hilton, “Immersive spa-
tial audio reproduction for vr/ar using room acoustic modelling
from 360 images,” in 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D
User Interfaces (VR).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 120–126.

[60] L. McCormack, A. Politis, R. Gonzalez, T. Lokki, and V. Pulkki,
“Parametric ambisonic encoding of arbitrary microphone arrays,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
2022.

[61] L. E. Powell and A. M. Myers, “The activities-speciﬁc balance con-
ﬁdence (abc) scale,” The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological
Sciences and Medical Sciences, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. M28–M34, 1995.
[62] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, K. S. Berbaum, and M. G. Lilien-
thal, “Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for
quantifying simulator sickness,” The international journal of aviation
psychology, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 203–220, 1993.

[63] T. M. Steffen, T. A. Hacker, and L. Mollinger, “Age-and gender-
related test performance in community-dwelling elderly people:
Six-minute walk test, berg balance scale, timed up & go test, and
gait speeds,” Physical therapy, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 128–137, 2002.
[64] “[GaitRite Manual] details gait parameters for gaitrite walk-
way system.” https://www.procarebv.nl/wp-content/uploads/
2017/01/Technische-aspecten-GAITrite-Walkway-System.pdf, ac-
cessed: 2021-08-30.

[65] E. Chang, H. T. Kim, and B. Yoo, “Virtual reality sickness: a review
of causes and measurements,” International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction, vol. 36, no. 17, pp. 1658–1682, 2020.

[66] H. Kim, D. J. Kim, W. H. Chung, K.-A. Park, J. D. Kim, D. Kim,
K. Kim, and H. J. Jeon, “Clinical predictors of cybersickness in
virtual reality (vr) among highly stressed people,” Scientiﬁc reports,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2021.

[67] M. E. McCauley and T. J. Sharkey, “Cybersickness: Perception
of self-motion in virtual environments,” Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 311–318, 1992.

[68] “[Counterbalancing] one of

the best ways to avoid pitfalls
https://explorable.com/

designs.”

repeated measure

of
counterbalanced-measures-design#:∼:text=Experiments%
20conducted%20with%20a%20counterbalanced%20measures%
20design%20are,subjects%20are%20exposed%20to%20all%20of%
20the%20treatments., accessed: 2021-08-30.

[69] “[Counterbalancing]

effect.”
experimental-design/, accessed: 2021-08-30.

counterbalancing to reduce

carryover
https://opentext.wsu.edu/carriecuttler/chapter/

[70] “[Counterbalancing]

counterbalancing

fatigue
https://psychology.illinoisstate.edu/

effect.”

practice

and
jccutti/psych231/SP01/week8.html#:∼:text=Advantages%3A%
20The%20biggest%20advantage%20is%20that%20exposure%20to,
levels%20of%20the%20IV%20Counterbalancing%20is%20not%
20required, accessed: 2021-08-30.

reduce

to

[71] A. J. Millner, M. D. Lee, K. Hoyt, J. W. Buckholtz, R. P. Auerbach,
and M. K. Nock, “Are suicide attempters more impulsive than
suicide ideators?” General hospital psychiatry, vol. 63, pp. 103–110,
2020.

[72] A. Plechat´a, V. Sahula, D. Fayette, and I. Fajnerov´a, “Age-related
differences with immersive and non-immersive virtual reality in
memory assessment,” Frontiers in psychology, p. 1330, 2019.

