LinkGlide-S: A Wearable Multi-Contact Tactile Display Aimed at 
Rendering Object Softness at the Palm with Impedance Control in VR 
and Telemanipulation

Miguel Altamirano Cabrera, Jonathan Tirado, Juan Heredia, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou

Abstract— LinkGlide-S is a novel wearable hand-worn tactile
display to deliver multi-contact and multi-modal stimuli at the
user’s palm. The array of inverted five-bar linkages generates
three independent contact points to cover the whole palm area.
The independent contact points generate various tactile patterns
at the user’s hand, providing multi-contact tactile feedback. An
impedance control delivers the stiffness of objects according
to different parameters. Three experiments were performed
to evaluate the perception of patterns, investigate the realistic
perception of object interaction in Virtual Reality, and assess
the users’ softness perception by the impedance control. The
experimental results revealed a high recognition rate for the
generated patterns. These results confirm that the performance
of LinkGlide-S is adequate to detect and manipulate virtual
objects with different stiffness. This novel haptic device can
potentially achieve a highly immersive VR experience and more
interactive applications during telemanipulation.

I. INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, teleoperation and telepresence represent one
of the most natural applications of haptics, while the most
effective combination of various haptic feedbacks remain to
be the subject of active research. Many Virtual Reality (VR)
applications have been introduced, such as simulators and
games, and are becoming part of our daily life.

The palm of the users plays an important role in the
manipulation and detection of objects [1]. The interaction
force between the objects and the palms determines the
perception of contact, weight, shape, and orientation. At
the same time, the friction forces produced by the object
displacement can be perceived as friction forces produced
by the slippage of the grasped objects.

Choi et al. [2], [3] introduced devices that deliver the
sensation of weight and grasping of objects in VR success-
fully. These devices are located on the fingers, where unidi-
rectional brakes create rigid grasping kinesthetic feedback.
Tirado et al. [4] presented a device that delivers softness-
hardness and stickiness feedback using electrical stimulation,
touching a virtual object. Also, other devices were used to
provide stimuli at the fingertips and potentially increase the
immersion experience on VR [5]–[10]. Nevertheless, these
devices deliver stimuli on the fingers, not on the palm.

The total number of tactile sensory units innervating the
whole glabrous skin area of the human hand is around
17,023 units [11]. The density of the receptors located in

The

authors

are with

Space

Science

of
Russia
juan.heredia, D.Tsetserukou} @skoltech.ru

{miguel.altamirano, jonathan.tirado,

Technology

and

Center,
(Skoltech),

Skolkovo
Institute
121205 Moscow,  

Fig. 1. A novel wearable haptic display L i n k G l i d e − S .

Kuchenbecker

the fingertips is five times bigger than the density in the
palm. However, the overall receptor number on the palm
is compensated by its largest area, having the 30% of all
the SA-I receptors located at the hand glabrous skin. For
this reason, it is essential to take advantage of the palm and
develop devices that stimulate the most significant area by
multi-contact points [12].
et al.

introduced a mechanical
[13]
impedance control to render the forces of the wrist in a
haptic device. Tsetserukou et al. [14] implemented a robust
impedance control to realize safe and smooth human-robot
interaction and to provide the effectiveness of the contact
task performance. These papers show that impedance control
can effectively modulate the sensation of stiffness. Tsykunov
et al. [15] proposed a novel interaction strategy to guide
the formation of quadrotors based on impedance control and
vibrotactile feedback.

In the present work, we are introducing a novel wearable
haptic interface Lin kGlid e −S and an extended perception
study of the multi-contact stimuli on the users’ palm. A brief
description of the preliminary design was presented in [16],
and its integration with the VR systems [17]. The wearable
tactile display Lin kGlid e −S is designed to provide multi-
contact and stimuli on the user’s palm with two purposes: the 
realistic rendering of object perception during the detection

and manipulation in VR environments and transferring the
information during telemanipulation. This paper presents a
novel wearable design for a hand-worn haptic display and
introduces a multi-contact perception study on the palm.

We have integrated force sensors in each of the three
contact points, allowing a force input in the system for the
impedance control implementation. Additionally, the device
was redesigned to improve its wearability and adapt
to
different hand shapes.

The first part of this work presents the Lin kGlid e −S
illustrates the impedance
configuration. The second part
control used to deliver the stiffness stimuli. In the last part,
three experiments are carried out
to evaluate the users’
perception.

II. LINKGLIDE-S WEARABLE HAPTIC DEVICE

Lin kGlid e −S provides the sense of touch at three
different points on the palm of the user, where multi-modal
stimuli can potentially be delivered. The proposed device
is based on the inverted five-bar linkages mechanism of M-
shape introduced in [18]. The array of mechanisms generates
the independent contact points covering the palm area. Each
one of the contact points can be supplied by a vibration
motor, and, potentially, by other stimulus generators, such
as electro-stimulation. The force sensors at the end-effectors
and the implementation of an impedance control provide the
object softness sensation.

The Lin kGlid e −S device was designed  to  adapt  to
the user’s hand ergonomically, improving the operability of
the fingers in comparison with the previous version. It has a
total weight of 270 g (89 g for the VR tracker, and 181 g
for the device). These interface characteristics define a good
wearability level according to [8].

Three 2-DoF inverted five-bar mechanisms, distributed in
parallel planes, produce sliding force and multi-contact state
at the palm by three contact points. Each of the systems has
two PowerHD DSM44 servo motors, their angles of rotation
are controlled to locate the single end-effector in the 2D
coordinate system, as shown in Fig. 2b. Each end-effector

(a) Isometric view of the 3D model.

Fig. 3. Bending of the device using modular base. Lateral view of the 
device with a positive angle rotation.

creates a contact point at user’s palm with different forces
and glides on the palm shape applying an adaptive force.

The base of the device consists on three modules con-
nected by metal pins, which allow the rotation of 15 deg. in
both directions, to adapt to the position of the user’s hand
while opening and closing. The rotation of the device’s base
is shown in Fig. 3.

A. Force Sensing

In each of the three contact points, one Force Sensitive
Resistor (FSR) was installed, as shown in Fig. 4. The
principal goal of the FSR is to measure the normal force
generated in each contact point. The sensed force is an input
for the impedance control, which is proposed to provide
the sensation of the object stiffness. The different shapes
and sizes of the user’s palms are a challenge to overcome
to deliver force and to ensure a contact point between the
points C n ( x n , y n) and the user’s palm. The FSR data is
used to solve this issue, monitoring if the contact is created
at the right point, and if the correct force is delivered. The
sensor is held by a component that was designed and 3D-
printed. A semi-flexible material (TPU 95A, thermoplastic
polyurethane) was used to print the FSR holder, which allows
reducing the signal noise from the deformation of the sensor
and creates a comfortable surface at the contact point. The
holder is located on each end-effector with a groove where
the FSR is inserted. Calibration is performed every time the
device is active in a non-touch position.

(b) Front view of the 3D model.

Fig. 2.

3D CAD model of wearable tactile display L i n k G l i d e − S .

Fig. 4. L i n k G l i d e − S worn on the palm.

B. Electronics and Software Design

The device is controlled using a Wi-Fi ESP8266 low-cost
microchip. One Multiplexer is implemented to read the data
from the three force sensors. A PWM Driver PCA9685 was
used to control the 6 servo motors, it is connected to the
microcontroller via I2C communication. One Li-Po 7.4 V
battery is connected through a DC/DC converter to power
the microcontroller and the servo driver.

A custom Python library was created to control the device.
The device is connected to a server via Wi-Fi, from which it
receives the coordinate of points C n ( x n , y n) to reach in each
interaction. The servomotors Power HD DSM44 allow a high
speed of 0.07s/60◦. Therefore, the maximum reaction time,
from when the command is called until the device reaches
the further desired position, is of 0.15 s. There are, however,
positions that can be reached on a lower time. The refresh
frequency to the server is 100 [Hz].

III. IMPEDANCE CONTROL CONFIGURATION

We propose an impedance control to implement rendering
of softness by the Lin kGlid e − S display between the
virtual object and the hand. The stiffness on the contact point
depends on the force delivered to the palm. A virtual mass-
spring-damper link is introduced for the impedance model
between each contact point and the palm of the user.

The impedance link is located in the axis normal to the
palm surface (y −axis) of each contact point. The force
delivered to the palm from the haptic device is generated in
the virtual environment and represents the force with which
the virtual object touches the virtual hand. The force sensors
give feedback of the actual force applied to the hand, and the
impedance control regulates this force. Therefore, the actual
and virtual forces are the same.

When the virtual user approaches a virtual object, the
impedance model is used to control the force to be delivered
on the palm. The impedance control generates the end-
effector trajectory that goes through the hand. Therefore, the
device is in the same contact point but delivers more force to
the user hand. The factors of the mass-spring-damping link
can be modified to provide different stimuli.

In order to calculate the impedance correction term for the
end-effector positions, we solve the second-order differential
equation that represents the impedance model:

Mdi∆ÿ + D d i∆ẏ + K d i ∆ y = F e x t( t i) ,

(1)

where M d i is the desired mass of a virtual object in each
point, D d i is the desired damping, and K d i is the desired
stiffness. ∆ y is the difference between the current position
and the desired position of the contact point, and the F e x t ( t i )
is the sensed force. According to the selection of different
parameters, the performance of the impedance model can
render different stimuli on the user’s palm. State space
representation of (1) has the form:

∆ y
∆ ẏ

= A

∆ y
∆ ẏ

+ B F ,
e x t

(2)

Fig. 5. Contact point expected position in y − a x i s (blue line) and real
position (green line) while under-damping response of the impedance control
to simulate an object bouncing on the user’s palm. The red line represents
the user’s palm position.

where A =

, B
=
pace, after integration, we write the impedance equation as:

. In discrete times-

− d −

0
K
M d

1
D d
M d

0
1
M d

∆ yk +1
∆ ẏ
k +1

= A d

∆ y
k
∆ ẏ  
k

k
+ B F ,
d  e x t

(3)

is the identity matrix, and e A T

where  A d = eA T , B b = (eA T − I )A − 1B , T is the
sampling time, I
is the
state transition matrix. The matrix exponential is found from
Cayley-Hamilton theorem, according to which every matrix
satisfies its characteristic polynomial. Using these statements,
we can find:

A d = e λ T (1 −λ T
−bT

)            

T
(1 −λ T −aT )

c
B d = −
b

λ T

e

(1 −λ T −1)
−bTeλT

,

(4)

(5)

dD
M d

where λ is the eigenvalue variable of the matrix A, a  =
1
. A d and B d matrices can be
— , b = − d , and c =
M d c
used to calculate the current y i m p position of the impedance 
model using equation (5).

K
M d

The implementation of the impedance control is done in
one dimension, changing the position in the y −axis. The
force from each contact point is constantly used to calculate
the independent impedance of each contact point. In Fig.
5, the contact point expected position, real position, and
hand position are rendered while the impedance control is
activated using an under-damped response.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

Three different experiments were carried out:

i)
the user perception of patterns delivery at

evaluate
human palm,
ii) to assess how the device helps to improve the user experi-
ence in a Virtual Reality environment, and i i i ) to examine
the user perception of stiffness patterns using impedance
control.

to
the

A. Experiment 1: Static Pattern Recognition

The experiment focuses on the perception of patterns on

the palm using the Lin kGlid e −S interface.

Participants: Sixteen volunteers, six women and ten men
(23.56 ±2.22 years old) participated and completed the test.
The participants were informed about the experiment and

statistical significant difference in the pattern recognition of
the users, F (10, 165) = 2.6724, p = 0.0047, η2 = 0.1393,
90%, suggesting a large effect on the recognition due to the
different patterns rendered.

p

The paired t-tests with one-step Bonferroni correction
showed statistically significant differences between the
recognition of pattern 4 and pattern 11 with a chosen
significance level of α < 0.15 (p = 0.1324 < 0.1,
Hedgesg = −1.14), and between pattern 6 and pattern 11 
(p = 0.1220 < 0.1, Hedgesg = −1.15). The open-source
statistical package Pingouin for Python was used for the
statistical analysis.

The average recognition rate is 78.1%. Patterns 2 and 9
have lower recognition rates of 62.5% and 65%, respectively.
The two patterns with lower recognition have similar designs,
both diagonal, but in different directions. We can observe
that, in both cases, the patterns are confused with the patterns
11 and 10, respectively. Those patterns have the middle point
in a different position. This effect shows that the central part
of the palm has to be stimulated more accurately because of
its lower contact during manipulation.

B. Experiment 2: Interaction with Objects in VR

This experiment aims to investigate the realistic perception
of object interaction using the proposed device in VR. Three
patterns from experiment 1 were selected and used to render
the spherical object surface. The results will help to develop
the best strategy to create tactile sensation with the available
three contact points.

Participants: Seven participants, two women and five men
(23.86 ±2.73 years old), completed the experiment. None of
them reported any deficiencies in sensorimotor function, and
all of them were right-handed.

Experimental Setup: The users were asked to wear the
device on the palm and a head-mounted display (HMD) HTC
Vive Pro. A VR environment was designed in the game
engine Unity 3D. The 3D environment consists of three
spheres of 25 cm in diameter located at 1.2 m floating over
the virtual floor, as shown in Fig. 7.

Method: The users were asked to grade the similarity
of the haptic sensation rendered by the device patterns
to the real
interaction with the objects. In the virtual 3D
environment, the user was asked to interact for one minute
with each of three spherical objects. When the users’ virtual
hand contacts the surface of the spherical objects the specific
tactile pattern is activated by the haptic display. Two of the
patterns were selected according to the high recognition rate

Fig. 7. Virtual Reality environment for the experiment 2.

Fig. 6. The designed tactile patterns for the static position experiment.

TABLE I
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR ACTUAL AND PERCEIVED STATIC PATTERNS
ACROSS ALL SUBJECTS

%

Answers (predicted class)
7
8
6
4
3
1
2
1.3
0.0
5.0
1.3
0.0
1 86.3 5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
0.0 62.5 7.5
2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 88.8 0.0
0.0
3
0.0
0.0
3.8
0.0
1.3
4
0.0 80.0 15.0 0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
5
1.3 91.3 0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
6.3
6
1.3
1.3
1.3 71.3 0.0
5.0
0.0
7
2.5
6.3
0.0
8
2.5
1.3
2.5
0.0
2.5
9 10.0 0.0
0.0
1.3
10 1.3
7.5
1.3
0.0
0.0
11 0.0 25.0 10.0 0.0

5
1.3
0.0
0.0
1.3 88.8 0.0
0.0
0.0
8.8
0.0
1.3
0.0

11
10
9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 26.3
2.5
1.3 10.0
0.0
3.8
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0 11.3 0.0
2.5
0.0
5.0 65.0 10.0 1.3
0.0 16.3 71.3 1.3
0.0 65.0
0.0

1.3 83.8 0.0
2.5
0.0
0.0

0.0

)
s
s
a
l
c

l
a
u
t
c
a
(

s
n
r
e
t
t
a
P

filled out the consent form. This study was approved by
the local Institutional Review Board with reference number
“MoM Protocol No.5 dd. July 21, 2021”. None of them
reported any deficiencies in sensorimotor function, and all
of them were right-handed.

Experimental setup: The subject was asked to sit in
front of a desk and to wear the Lin kGlid e −S device
on the right hand, which was located palm up with the
back resting on the table. To reduce the external stimuli,
we asked the users to use headphones with white noise. A
physical barrier obscured the visibility of the hand. During
the experiment,
the patterns were displayed on a screen
visible to the participants.

Method: In this experiment, eleven tactile patterns have
been designed, as shown in Fig. 6, where the red circles
represent the contact points on the palm.

Each pattern was delivered for 2 seconds on the user’s
palm. Each pattern was displayed five times in random order.
Results and discussion: The experimental results are

summarized in a confusion matrix (see Table I).

To determine the statistical differences in pattern recog-
nition, we conducted one-factor ANOVA without replication
with a chosen significance level of α < 0.05. The sphericity
and normality assumptions were examined and no violations
were detected. According to the ANOVA results, there is a

TABLE II
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR IMPEDANCE PATTERNS

Answers (predicted class)

%

Patterns (actual class)

1
86.7
16.7
0.0
TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR FORCE CONTROL

2
13.3
76.7
10.0

1
2
3

3
0.0
6.7
90.0

Fig. 8. The similarity perception rate of the delivered patterns, where 1 is
the lowest and 5 is the highest similarity level during the interaction with
the three spherical object surfaces.

from the experiment 1, i.e. patterns 1 and 3. Additionally, 
we opted for one diagonal pattern 2 arguing that that there 
will be no ambiguity with the symmetrical one anymore. The 
selected tactile patterns are patterns 1, 2, and 3 from Fig. 6. 
The participants interacted with each virtual spherical 
object for one minute. The interaction can be done from any 
part of the sphere. The participants graded the similarity, 
from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest), to the real interaction with a
spherical object.

Results and discussion: The similarity perception rates
during the interaction with the spherical object surfaces are
presented in Fig. 8.

To determine the statistical difference between the users’
grades, Friedman test with a chosen significance level of α
< 0.05 was performed. Statistically significant difference was
found between the similarity patterns rates (p = 0.0067 <
0.05). Wilcoxon tests were done for pairwise comparison
for the three patterns’ similarity perception rates. According
to the statistical significance difference, it was found that
interaction with a 3D sphere with pattern 2 is more realistic
comparing with pattern 3 (p = 0.0235) and pattern 1 (p =
0.0455). Based on this evidence, the pattern with the lower
recognition rate in the first experiment obtained the highest
similarity perception during the interaction with the spherical
object surfaces in the VR environment.

C. Experiment 3: Stiffness Representation by Impedance
Control

This evaluation was performed to analyze the human
perception of the different stiffness of objects delivered on
the palm by the haptic interface. The information from the
force sensors in the contact points was used to deploy the
control techniques. We propose two control approaches to
tactile interaction:

• Force Control: the device end-effectors move to the
palm until one of it measures the limit force. Then, 
the device returns to a no-contact position.
Impedance Control: the device interacts with the user’s
palm using the impedance control equations described 
in section III.

•

For both cases, the three contact points are located using 
pattern 2 of the previous experiments. Since pattern 2 of

%

Patterns (actual class)

Answers (predicted class)

4
86.7
10.0
0.0

5
13.3
86.7
13.3

4
5
6

6
0.0
3.3
86.7

the previous experiment had the highest recognition rate, we
consider it as the best one to test the control techniques.

We tested three different stiffness values in this experi-
ment: strong, medium, and low, for each control technique.
The parameters for the tactile patterns are as follows: Pattern
1 (strong stiffness, impedance control): inertial coefficient
of 1.2 kg, a stiffness coefficient of 20 N s / m , and a
damping coefficient of 1 N/m. Pattern 2 (medium stiffness,
impedance control): inertial coefficient of 0.6 kg, a stiffness
coefficient of 3 N s / m , and a damping coefficient of 1
N/m. Pattern 3 (low stiffness, impedance control): inertial
coefficient of 0.6kg, a stiffness coefficient of 1 Ns/m , and
a damping coefficient of 1 N/m. Pattern 4 (strong stiffness,
limit force of 4 N . Pattern 5 (medium
force control):
stiffness, force control): limit force 2.5 N . Pattern 6 (low
stiffness, force control): limit force 1 N .

Participants: Six participants completed the experiments,
two women and four men (24.7 ± 3.4 years old). None of
them reported any deficiencies in sensorimotor function, and 
all of them were right-handed.

Experimental Setup: The user was asked to sit in front of
a desk and to wear the Lin kGlid e −S device on the palm.
To reduce the external stimuli, the users wore headphones
with white noise. A physical barrier interrupted the vision of
the users to their hand. During the experiment, the patterns
were displayed on a screen.

Method: Before each section of the experiment, a training
session was conducted, where all the tactile patterns were
delivered two times to get acquainted with the stimuli. Each
pattern was delivered on their palm five times in a random
order. The user was asked to specify the force intensity that
corresponds to the delivered pattern.

This study was divided into two parts. During the first
part, the experimental procedure was implemented for the
tactile patterns using impedance control. In the second part,
the experimental procedure was implemented for the tactile
patterns using force control.

Results and discussion: The experimental results are
summarized in two confusion matrices for actual and per-
ceived patterns across all subjects. Table II contains the data
from the impedance control patterns and Table III shows the
data from the force control patterns.

The patterns perception was analyzed using Friedman test

with a chosen significance level of α < 0.05. Statistically
significant difference was found between the patterns de-
livered by the impedance control (p = 0.0421 < 0.05).
No statistically significant difference was found between the
patterns delivered by the force control (p = 0.6065 > 0.05).
Wilcoxon tests were performed for pairwise comparison of
the three patterns that implemented the impedance control.
According to the statistical significance difference, pattern 3
is more recognizable than pattern 2 (p = 0.034 < 0.05).

The difference in the results indicates that users can
perceive and distinguish different information by modifying
the impedance parameters. The impedance control delivers
a smooth force contact to the user’s hand. We can conclude
that the impedance control effectively presents the stiffness
of objects to the user’s palm.

V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this work, a novel wearable multi-contact tactile display
was presented. An extended perception study of the multi-
contact stimuli was performed. The implementation of the
impedance control for object stiffness rendering was intro-
duced and analyzed.

Three different experiments were carried out. The first ex-
periment evaluated the user perception of the tactile patterns
at the users’ palms. The second study analyzed the users’
sensations while interacting with spherical object surfaces
in VR environment, using selected tactile patterns from
the experiment 1. The last experiment examined the user
perception of stiffness patterns using impedance control.

In experiment 1, the average recognition rate was 78.1%.
Five patterns were perceived with a recognition rate of 80%
or over. Lin kGlid e −S can potentially be used in HRI
applications, in future work this application will be explored.
In experiment 2,
three patterns from experiment 1 were
selected to the perception of interaction with three spheres
in VR. The results showed that the tactile pattern 2 delivered
the most realistic sensation in comparison with the other
patterns. In experiment 3, a perception analysis between
force and impedance control for pattern recognition was
perfomed. The results indicate that users can perceive and
distinguish different patterns by modifying the impedance
parameters.

In future work, different impedance parameters and tactile
patterns will be explored in VR applications to enhance the
object perception for a variety of shapes. The collaborative
robot teleoperation will be implemented, and the users’ per-
ceptions will be explored, such as the force perception from
a remote robotic gripper during the grasping of deformable
objects.

Lin kGlid e −S can be used to represent the sensation of
virtual objects on the palm and, potentially, at other places 
of the body (the structure of the device can be adaptable
to any body surface). The proposed display can be used in
affective haptics (e.g. handshake presentation), robot bilateral
teleoperation, and teaching robotic systems using the human
skills, improving the user immersion.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The reported study was funded by CNRS and RFBR 

according to the research project No. 21-58-15006.

REFERENCES

3

4

2

1 B. Son and J. Park, “Haptic feedback to the palm and fingers
for improved tactile perception of large objects,” in Proceedings of
the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, ser. UIST ’18. New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 757–763.
I. Choi, S. Follmer, and H. Culbertson, “Grabity: A virtual reality
haptic controller for creating gravity and stiffness during grasping 
motions through asymmetric vibrations,” 2021, uS Patent 11,036,299.
E. W. Hawkes, I. Choi, and S. Follmer, “Wolverine: a wearable
haptic interface for grasping in virtual reality,” Apr. 2 2019, uS Patent
10,248,201.
J. Tirado, V. Panov, V. Yem, D. Tsetserukou, and H. Kajimoto,
“Electroar: Distributed electro-tactile stimulation for tactile transfer,”
in International Conference on Human Haptic Sensing and Touch
Enabled Computer Applications. Springer, 2020, pp. 442–450.
J.-J. Cabibihan, A. Y. Alhaddad, T. Gulrez, and W. J. Yoon, “Influence
of visual and haptic feedback on the detection of threshold forces in a
surgical grasping task,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 5525–5532, 2021.
E. M. Young, D. Gueorguiev, K. J. Kuchenbecker, and C. Pacchierotti,
“Compensating for fingertip size to render tactile cues more accu-
rately,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 144–151,
2020.
F. H. Giraud, S. Joshi, and J. Paik, “Haptigami: a fingertip haptic
interface with vibrotactile and 3-dof cutaneous force feedback,” IEEE
Transactions on Haptics, pp. 1–1, 2021.

7

6

5

8 C. Pacchierotti, S. Sinclair, M. Solazzi, A. Frisoli, V. Hayward, and
D. Prattichizzo, “Wearable Haptic Systems for the Fingertip and the
Hand : Taxonomy , Review , and Perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on
Haptics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 580–600, 2017.
F. Chinello, M. Malvezzi, C. Pacchierotti, and D. Prattichizzo, “Design
and development of a 3RRS wearable fingertip cutaneous device,”
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mecha-
tronics, AIM, vol. 2015-August, pp. 293–298, 2015.

9

10 D. Prattichizzo, F. Chinello, C. Pacchierotti, and M. Malvezzi, “To-
wards wearability in fingertip haptics: a 3-dof wearable device for
cutaneous force feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 506–516, 2013.

11 B. Y. R. S. Johansson and A. B. Vallbo, “Tactile Sensibility in the
Human Hand: Relative and Absolute Sensities of Four Types of
Mechanoreceptive Units in Glabrous Skin,” pp. 283–300, 1979.
12 M. Altamirano Cabrera, J. Heredia, and D. Tsetserukou, “Tactile
perception of objects by the user’s palm for the development of multi-
contact wearable tactile displays,” in Haptics: Science, Technology,
Applications, 2020, pp. 51–59.

13 K. J. Kuchenbecker, J. G. Park, and G. Niemeyer, “Characterizing
the Human Wrist for Improved Haptic Interaction,” in 2003 ASME
International Mechanical Engineering Congress, Washington, D.C,
2003, pp. 1–8.

15

14 D. Tsetserukou and N. Kawakami, “Design, control and evaluation
of a whole-sensitive robot arm for physical human-robot interaction,”
International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 17, pp. 699–725, 12
2009.
E. Tsykunov, L. Labazanova, A. Tleugazy, and D. Tsetserukou,
“Swarmtouch: Tactile interaction of human with impedance controlled
swarm of nano-quadrotors,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 4204–4209.
16 M. Altamirano Cabrera and D. Tsetserukou, “Linkglide: A wearable
haptic display with inverted five-bar linkages for delivering multi-
contact and multi-modal tactile stimuli,” in Haptic Interaction, Sin-
gapore, 2019, pp. 149–154.

17 ——, “Glidereality: A highly immersive vr system augmented by a
novel multi-modal and multi-contact cutaneous wearable display,” in
ACM SIGGRAPH 2019 Emerging Technologies, ser. SIGGRAPH ’19.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
18 D. Tsetserukou, S. Hosokawa, and K. Terashima, “Linktouch: A wear-
able haptic device with five-bar linkage mechanism for presentation
of two-dof force feedback at the fingerpad,” in 2014 IEEE Haptics
Symposium (HAPTICS), Feb 2014, pp. 307–312.

