International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

IMPACT OF 4IR TECHNOLOGY 
AND ITS IMPACT ON THE CURRENT DEPLOYMENT 

Bandar Alsulaimani1 and Amanul Islam2 

1Department of Electrical Engineering,  King Fahad University of Petroleum and 
Minerals (KFUPM), Saudi Arabia 
2Department of Computer Science and Information Technology,  
University of Malaya, Malaysia 

ABSTRACT 

The Fourth Industrial Revolution represents a fundamental change in how we live, work, and relate to one 
another.  It  is  a  new  chapter  in  human  development  with  remarkable  technological  advancements 
comparable to those of the first,  second, and third industrial revolutions. These developments are fusing 
the  physical,  digital,  and  biological  worlds  in  ways  that  hold  great  promise  as  well  as  the  possibility  of 
great danger. The way that modern people live and work is changing as a result of disruptive technologies 
and trends including the Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, virtual reality (VR), and artificial intelligence 
(AI).  This  is  known  as  the  fourth  industrial  revolution.  Industry  4.0  refers  to  the  incorporation  of  these 
technologies  into  production  processes.  In  this  article,  we  discussed  the  history  of  4IR  technology,  its 
impact of 4IR technology, and its impact on the current deployment. 

KEYWORDS 

4IR  technology,  new  computing  technology,  the  impact  of  4IR  technology,  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution, 
Industry 4.0 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Due  to  increased  interconnection  and  smart  automation,  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution,  also 
known as Industry 4.0, envisions fast change in technology, industries, and societal patterns and 
processes in the twenty-first century[1]. The word has been widely used in scientific literature, 
and Klaus Schwab, the World Economic Forum's Founder and Executive Chairman, popularized 
it  in  2015.  According  to  Schwab,  the  changes  are  more  than  merely  efficiency  gains;  they 
represent a significant transition in industrial capitalism[2].  

The  merging  of  technology  such  as  artificial  intelligence  and  gene  editing  with  advanced 
robotics, which blurs the borders between the physical, digital, and biological worlds, is a part of 
this phase of industrial development[3].  

Through  ongoing  automation  of  old  manufacturing  and  industrial  methods,  the  use  of  current 
smart technologies, large-scale machine-to-machine communication (M2M), and the internet of 
things(IoT), major alterations in how the global production and supply network runs are taking 
place[4]. Increased automation, improved communication and self-monitoring, and the usage of 
smart technologies that can evaluate and diagnose issues without the need for human interaction 
are all benefits of this integration[5].  

DOI: 10.5121/ijcsit.2022.14405                                                                                                                              53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

It  also  reflects  a  social,  political,  and  economic  transformation  from  the  digital  era  of  the  late 
1990s and early 2000s to an era of embedded connection marked by ubiquitous technological use 
(e.g., a metaverse) that alters how humans experience and understand the world around them. It 
asserts that, in comparison to humans' inherent senses and industrial abilities alone, we have built 
and are entering an enhanced social reality[6]. 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  discuss  4IR  technology  and  how  it  affects  current  deployment. 
Sections  2  and  3  covered  the  background  of  4IR  technology  as  well  as  its  effects  and  recent 
developments in computing technology. The effects of 4IR technology on business were briefly 
covered in Section 5, the effects of 4IR technology on the government were covered in Section 6, 
and the effects of 4IR technology on the people were covered in Section 7. The paper was ended 
in section 8. 

2.  HISTORY 

A group of experts working on a high-tech strategy for the German government coined the term 
fourth  industrial  revolution.  In  a  2015  article  published  by  Foreign  Affairs,  Klaus  Schwab, 
executive  chairman  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  (WEF),  popularized  the  phrase  to  a  wider 
audience[7].  At  the  2016  World  Economic  Forum  Annual  Meeting  in  Davos-Klosters, 
Switzerland, the topic, was "Mastering the Fourth Industrial Revolution." 

The  Forum  announced  the  opening  of  its  Centre  for  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  in  San 
Francisco  on  October  10,  2016.  Schwab's  2016  book  was  likewise  about  this,  with  the  same 
title.This fourth era, according to Schwab, involves technologies that merge hardware, software, 
and biology (cyber-physical systems), with an emphasis on communication and connectivity [8]. 
Breakthroughs in emerging technologies such as robotics, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology, 
quantum  computing,  biotechnology,  the  internet  of  things,  the  industrial  internet  of  things, 
decentralized  consensus,  fifth-generation  wireless 
technologies,  3D  printing,  and  fully 
autonomous vehicles, according to Schwab, will define this era[9]. 

First Industrial Revolution 

Through  the  utilization  of  steam  power  and  water  power,  manual  production  techniques  were 
replaced  by  machines  during  the  First  Industrial  Revolution.  This  refers  to  the  period  between 
1760 and 1820, or 1840 in Europe and the United States because the adoption of new technology 
took a long time. Although it also had societal implications, such as a growing middle class, it 
had an impact on the iron industry, agriculture, and mining, as well as textile production, which 
was  the  first  to  embrace  such  innovations.  At  the  time,  it  also  had  an  impact  on  British 
industry[39]. 

Second Industrial Revolution 

The period between 1871 and 1914, commonly referred to as the Technological Revolution, was 
marked  by  the  establishment  of  massive  railroad  and  telegraph  networks  that  facilitated  the 
speedier  exchange  of  people,  ideas,  and  electricity.  The  contemporary  production  line  was 
developed in factories thanks to increased electricity. It was a time of rapid economic expansion 
and productivity increases, together with a rise in unemployment as many factory workers were 
replaced by machines [40]. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

Third Industrial Revolution 

After  the  end  of  the  two  world  wars,  there  was  a  pause  in  industrialization  and  technological 
development compared to earlier eras, which led to the Third Industrial Revolution, also known 
as  the  Digital  Revolution.A  decade  later,  the  creation  of  the  Z1  computer,  which  made  use  of 
binary floating-point numbers and Boolean logic, marked the start of increasingly sophisticated 
digital  innovations.The  supercomputer  was  the  next  important  advancement  in  communication 
technologies, and with its widespread usage in the manufacturing process, equipment started to 
replace the need for human labor[41].  

3.  IMPACT OF 4IR TECHNOLOGY(NEW COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY) 

Because  of  growing  interconnectivity  and  smart  automation,  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution, 
4IR,  or  Industry  4.0,  intellectualizes  quick  modification  to  technology,  industries,  and  societal 
patterns  and  processes  in  the  21st  century.  Some  4IR  new  computing  technology  is  smart 
factories,3D  printing,  smart  sensors,  etc[10].  A  short  discussion  of  smart  factories,3D  printing, 
and smart sensors is given below. 

Fig-1. Components of 4IR technology 

3.1. Smart Factory 

Fig-2. Example of a smart factory 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

The Smart Factory is a vision of a manufacturing environment in which production and logistical 
systems are arranged without the need for human interaction[11]. The Smart Factory isn't just a 
concept anymore. While various model factories illustrate what is possible, numerous businesses 
have previously explained how the Smart Factory works with examples[12].  

Fig-3. Technology of smart factory 

Cyber-physical systems that connect with each Internet of Things and Services are the technical 
underpinnings  on  which  the  Smart  Factory  -  the  intelligent  factory  -  is  built.  The  data  transfer 
between  the  product  and  the  production  line  is  a  crucial  step  in  this  process.  This  makes  it 
possible for the Supply Chain to be connected much more effectively and for any manufacturing 
environment to be better organized [13].  

Fig-4. 4IR technology in smart factory 

The Fourth Industrial Revolution fosters what has been called  a "smart factory".Cyber-physical 
systems  control  physical  processes,  simulate  the  real  world,  and  make  decentralized  choices 
within modularly built smart factories. Cyber-physical systems communicate and work together 
with  humans  and  other  cyber-physical  systems  across  the  internet  of  things  in  real-time,  both 
within and between organizational services provided and used by value chain players [14].  

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

3.2. 3D Printing 

Fig-5. Example of 3d printing 

It  is  believed  that  3D  printing  technology  will  play  a  significant  role  in  the  Fourth  Industrial 
Revolution. The ability to manufacture numerous geometric forms and the simplification of the 
product  design  process  are  two  benefits  of  3D  printing  for  the  industry.  Additionally,  it  is 
comparatively  eco-friendly.  It  can  help  cut  down on lead times  and  overall  production costs in 
low-volume production[15]. Furthermore, it can improve flexibility, lower storage expenses, and 
aid  the  organization  in  adopting  a  mass  customization  business  plan.  Moreover,  printing  spare 
parts in 3D and installing them locally can reduce reliance on suppliers and shorten the lead time 
for supplies[16].  

Fig-6. Market trends of 3d printing 

There are several restrictions on the projected expansion of the 3D printing industry. First, even if 
the cost of equipment has decreased dramatically since the technology's inception, there are still 
other  considerations,  such  as  energy  expenditures.  A  global  survey  found  that  "there  are  many 
elements that contribute to the greater cost of the 3D  printing devices[17]. The energy required 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

by  3D  printing  to  create  products  is  significant,  to  name  a  few.  For  instance,  compared  to 
injection molding equipment, the energy released by various 3D printing methods might use up to 
50 to 100 times more electricity[18].  

The  rate  of  change  is  the  deciding  element.  One  can  identify  a  qualitative  shift  in  the  pace  of 
development  that  ushers  in  a  new  historical  period  by  relating  the  rate  of  technological 
advancement to socioeconomic and infrastructure changes that follow[19].  

3.3. Smart Sensors 

Fig-7. Example of a smart sensor 

For  Industry  4.0  and  other  "smart"  megatrends  including  smart  manufacturing,  smart  mobility, 
smart homes, smart cities, and smart factories, sensors and instrumentation are the driving forces 
of innovation[20].  

Smart  sensors  are  gadgets  that  provide  data  and  enable  additional  functionality,  such  as  self-
auditing  and  self-configuration  as  well  as  condition  monitoring  of  intricate  operations.  They 
greatly simplify installation work and aid in realizing a dense array of sensors because they have 
wireless communication capabilities[21].  

Fig-8. Technology of smart sensors 

Numerous experts have recognized and acknowledged the significance of sensors, measurement 
science,  and  smart  assessment  for  Industry  4.0,  which  has  already  resulted  in  the  declaration 
"Industry 4.0: nothing goes without sensor systems[22]."  

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

Fig-9. Application of smart sensors 

Some multi-sensing smart sensors can detect pressure, temperature, humidity, gas flow, and other 
things.  The  implementation  of  complete  systems  is,  however,  constrained  by  a  few  problems, 
including  time  synchronization  errors,  data  loss,  and  handling  huge  amounts  of  gathered  data. 
Additionally,  additional  restrictions  on  these  features  correspond  to  the  battery  power[23]. 
Smartwatches are one example of how smart sensors are being integrated into electronic devices. 
In  this  case,  sensors  collect  data  from  the  user's  movement,  process  it,  and  then  give  the  user 
information about how many steps they have taken throughout the day as well as convert the data 
into calories burned[24].  

3.4. Quantum Computing 

A  promising  new  technology  called  quantum  computing  has  the  potential  to  accelerate  the 
development  of  AI.  Unlike  binary  digital  electronic  computers,  which  are  built  on  transistors, 
quantum computers carry out a new kind of computation. Data is often encoded into binary digits 
(bits), each of which is always in one of two specified states during common digital computing (0 
or 1)[25].  

There  are  two  possible  measurements  of  a  qubit:  0  and  1.  Therefore,  the  qubit  is  a  two-
dimensional quantum system. Each dimension is denoted by a standard basis vector. In quantum 
computing,  we  use  the  Dirac  notation.  It  represents  a  column  vector  by  the  ket  that  looks  like 
“|ψ⟩”: 

The state of the qubit is represented by the superposition of both dimensions. This is the qubit 
state vector |ψ⟩ (“psi”). 

α  and  β  are  the  probability  amplitudes  of  the  states  |0⟩  and  |1⟩.  Their  squares  denote  the 
probabilities  of  measuring  the  qubit  as  0  (given  by  α^2)  or  1  (β^2)  respectively.|ψ⟩  must  be 
normalized by: 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

Let’s have a look at a graphical representation of the qubit state |ψ⟩ in the following figure. In this 
representation, both dimensions reside at the vertical axis but in opposite directions. The top and 
the bottom of the system correspond to the standard basis vectors |0⟩ and |1⟩, respectively. 

Fig-10. 2-dimensional qubit system 

Contrarily, quantum computation employs quantum bits, which are capable of existing in several 
superpositions of states. Because of their increased speed and ability to handle vast amounts of 
complex  data,  they  will  soon  be  able  to  run  large-scale  simulations  like  those  carried  out  by 
physicists at CERN's Hadron collider [26].  

Since  the  amount  of  data  we  produce  is  growing  at  an  exponential  rate,  it  is  projected  that 
quantum computing will advance much more shortly. This implies that to figure out what to do 
with such enormous amounts of data, we will likewise want much more powerful computers[27].  

The two most promising branches of AI promoting the 4IR, machine learning, and deep learning, 
are anticipated to be impacted to ever higher heights by quantum computing and neuromorphic 
devices.  

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

3.5. IoT(Internet of Things) 

Fig-11. Internet of Things(IoT) 

The term "Internet of things" (IoT) refers to physical objects (or groups of such objects) equipped 
with  sensors,  computing  power,  software,  and  other  technologies  that  communicate  with  one 
another  and  exchange  data  through  the  Internet  or  other  communications  networks.  The  term 
"internet of things" has been considered a misnomer because devices only need to be individually 
addressable and connected to a network, not the whole Internet[28]. 

Fig-12. The Internet of Things Market Size 

The  fusion  of  numerous  technologies,  such  as  ubiquitous  computing,  widely  available  sensors, 
sophisticated  embedded  systems,  and  machine  learning,  has  caused  the  sector  to  advance.  The 
Internet  of  things  is  enabled  by  the  traditional  fields  of  embedded  systems,  wireless  sensor 
networks,  control  systems,  and  automation  (including  home  and  building  automation)[29].  IoT 
products are most often associated with the "smart home" in the consumer market because they 
support  one  or  more  common  ecosystems  and  can  be  controlled  by  gadgets  related  to  those 
ecosystems,  like  smart  speakers  and  smartphones.  These  products  include  lighting  fixtures, 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

thermostats,  home  security  systems,  cameras,  and  other  appliances.  Systems  for  providing 
healthcare also leverage IoT [30]. 

Fig-13. Reference IoT Architecture for E-commerce 

Recent technological developments have had a significant impact on the e-commerce industry. It 
is  crucial  for  the  businesses  involved  to  use  the  appropriate  technology  to  satisfy  their  clients, 
especially  when  it  comes  to  IoT,  as  consumers'  unpredictable  lifestyles  transform  and  they 
quickly  get  fond  of  online  purchasing.  IoT-enabled  devices  exchange  data  with  one  another 
within an internet network, assisting both retail and e-commerce businesses in conducting their 
operations as easily and effectively as possible[31].  

The  way  that  customers  buy  has  drastically  changed  with  the  introduction  of  IoT  devices  like 
smart mirrors that allow users to easily try on garments virtually and are coupled with technology 
to help users re-purchase products of their choosing. The creation of IoT applications has become 
extremely popular over time. We'll talk about how the Internet of Things (IoT) is crucial to the e-
commerce sector in this blog[32]. 

3.6. AI (Artificial Intelligence) 

Fig-14. Artificial Intelligence 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

In  contrast  to  the  natural  intelligence  exhibited  by  animals,  including  humans,  artificial 
intelligence  (AI)  is intelligence  demonstrated  by  robots. The  study  of intelligent  agents,  or  any 
system  that  understands  its  environment  and  acts  in  a  way  that  maximizes  its  chances  of 
succeeding,  has  been  defined  as  the  focus  of  AI  research.  Previously,  robots  that  mimic  and 
exhibit  "human"  cognitive  abilities  associated  with  the  human  mind,  like  "learning"  and 
"problem-solving,"  were  referred  to  as  "artificial  intelligence."Major  AI  researchers  have  now 
rejected this notion and are now describing AI in terms of rationality and acting rationally, which 
does not constrain how intelligence can be expressed[33]. 

Fig-15: Subfields of artificial intelligence 

A  few  examples  of  AI  applications  are  cutting-edge  web  search  engines  like  Google, 
recommendation systems like YouTube, Amazon, and Netflix, speech recognition software like 
Siri and Alexa, self-driving cars like Tesla, automated decision-making, and dominating the best 
strategic  game  systems  (such  as  chess  and  Go).  The  AI  effect  is  a  phenomenon  where  actions 
once thought to require "intelligence" is frequently taken out of the definition of AI as machines 
grow  more  and  more  capable.  For  instance,  despite  being  a  commonplace  technique,  optical 
character recognition is typically left out of the list of items that are regarded to be AI[34]. 

4.  IMPACT OF 4 IR TECHNOLOGY ON THE BUSINESS 

improving  products, 

fostering  collaborative 

The  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  has  four  major  implications  for  business:  changing  customer 
expectations, 
innovation,  and  changing 
organizational structures. Customers,  whether they  are consumers or enterprises, are more and 
more at the center of the economy, which revolves around enhancing the customer experience. 
Additionally, it is now possible to add digital capabilities to physical goods and services to raise 
their value. While data and analytics are revolutionizing asset maintenance, new technologies are 
enhancing  asset  resilience  and  durability[35].  New  forms  of  collaboration  are  necessary  in  a 
world  of  customer  experiences,  data-based  services,  and  asset  performance  through  analytics. 
This  is  especially  true  given  how  quickly  innovation  and  disruption  are  occurring.  Finally,  the 
advent  of  global  platforms  and  other  new  business  models  calls  for  a  reevaluation  of  people, 
culture, and organizational structures. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

Overall,  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  is  driving  businesses  to  reevaluate  how  they  conduct 
business  due  to  the  inexorable  transition  from  basic  digitalization  (the  Third  Industrial 
Revolution)  to  innovation  based  on  a  combination  of  technologies.  The  fundamental  truth, 
however,  remains  the  same:  company  executives  and  senior  leaders  must  comprehend  their 
shifting  environment,  question  the  presumptions  of  their  operating  teams,  and  innovate 
ceaselessly and ruthlessly. 

5.  IMPACT OF 4IR TECHNOLOGY ON THE GOVERNMENT 

The nature of domestic and global security will be significantly altered by the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution, which will also have an impact on the likelihood and specifics of any conflict. Today 
is  no  exception  to the rule  that  the  history  of  conflict  and  global  security  is  also  the  history  of 
technological advancement. Modern state-on-state confrontations are becoming more "hybrid" in 
nature,  fusing  conventional  military  tactics  with  components  formerly  connected  to  non-state 
actors.  Uncomfortably,  lines  are  blurring  between  violence  and  nonviolence  (think  of 
cyberwarfare), combatant and noncombatant, and even war and peace [36]. 

Individuals and small groups will increasingly join states in being capable of wreaking havoc as 
this  process  progresses  and  new  technology  like  autonomous  or  biological  weapons  become 
simpler to utilize. Fears will arise as a result of this new vulnerability. However, at the same time, 
technological advancements offer the possibility of reducing the scope or impact of violence, for 
instance through the creation of novel forms of defense or improved targeting. 

6.  IMPACT OF 4IR TECHNOLOGY ON THE PEOPLE 

Finally, the Fourth Industrial Revolution will alter both what we do and who we are. Our feeling 
of  privacy,  our  concepts  of  ownership,  our  purchasing  habits,  the  amount  of  time  we  spend 
working  and  playing,  and  how  we  pursue  careers,  improve  our  talents,  meet  people,  and  foster 
relationships will all be impacted by this. Our health is already changing as a result of it, and it is 
creating  a  "quantified"  self.  Eventually,  it  might  even  lead  to  human  enhancement.  The 
possibilities are unlimited because they are only limited by our imagination[37]. 

Privacy  is  one  of  the  biggest  issues  that  new  information  technologies  bring  to  individuals. 
Although  we  intuitively  understand  why  it  is  so  important,  a  key  component  of  the  new 
connectivity  is  the  tracking  and  exchange  of  information  about  us.  In  the  coming  years, 
discussions regarding important topics like how losing control of our data will affect how we live 
our inner lives will get more heated. Similar to how biotechnology and artificial intelligence (AI) 
breakthroughs  are changing  what  it  means  to  be  human  by  advancing  the  present limits  of  life 
expectancy, health, intellect, and capabilities, these developments will force us to reevaluate our 
moral and ethical standards[38]. 

7.  CONCLUSION 

Finally, the Fourth Industrial Revolution will alter both what we do and who we are. Our feeling 
of  privacy,  our  concepts  of  ownership,  our  purchasing  habits,  the  amount  of  time  we  spend 
working  and  playing,  and  how  we  pursue  careers,  improve  our  talents,  meet  people,  and  foster 
relationships  will  all  be  impacted  by  this.  The  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution,  also  known  as 
Industry  4.0  or  Industrie  4.0,  is  a  technological  revolution  that  is  taking  place  in  the  modern 
developing  environment  where  novel  technologies  and  trends  like  virtual  reality  (VR),  the 
Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and robotics are fundamentally changing how 
people live, work, and interact with one another. Every aspect of human existence is changing as 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

a result of the Fourth Industrial  Revolution, from the government to business to healthcare. By 
altering  both  human  beings'  virtual  and  actual  physical  worlds,  it  is  even  having  an  impact  on 
their values, opportunities, relationships, and identities. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Benassi, M., Grinza, E., Rentocchini, F., & Rondi, L. (2020). Going revolutionary: The impact of 4IR 

technology development on firm performance. 

[2]  Agbehadji,  I.  E.,  Awuzie,  B.  O.,  &  Ngowi,  A.  B.  (2021).  COVID-19  pandemic  waves:  4IR 

technology utilisation in multi-sector economy. Sustainability, 13(18), 10168. 

[3]  Benassi, M., Grinza, E., Rentocchini, F., & Rondi, L. (2022). Patenting in 4IR technologies and firm 

performance. Industrial and Corporate Change, 31(1), 112-136. 

[4]  Diño,  M.  J.  S.,  &  Ong,  I.  L.  (2019).  Research,  technology,  education  &  scholarship  in  the  fourth 
industrial  revolution  [4IR]:  Influences  in  nursing  and  the  health  sciences.  The  Journal  of  Medical 
Investigation, 66(1.2), 3-7. 

[5]  Penprase, B. E. (2018). The fourth industrial revolution and higher education. Higher education in the 

era of the fourth industrial revolution, 10, 978-981. 

[6]  Ebekozien, A., & Aigbavboa, C. (2021). COVID-19 recovery for the Nigerian construction sites: The 
role of the fourth industrial revolution technologies. Sustainable Cities and Society, 69, 102803. 
[7]  Hoosain, M. S., Paul, B. S., & Ramakrishna, S. (2020). The impact of 4IR digital technologies and 
circular thinking on the United Nations sustainable development goals. Sustainability, 12(23), 10143. 
[8]  Mhlanga, D., & Moloi, T. (2020). COVID-19 and the digital transformation of education: What are 

we learning on 4IR in South Africa?. Education sciences, 10(7), 180. 

[9]  Malomane,  R.,  Musonda,  I.,  &  Okoro,  C.  S.  (2022).  The  Opportunities  and  Challenges  Associated 
with the Implementation of Fourth Industrial Revolution Technologies to Manage Health and Safety. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(2), 846. 

[10]  Yusuf, B., Walters, L. M., & Sailin, S. N. (2020). Restructuring Educational Institutions for Growth 
in  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  (4IR):  A  Systematic  Review.  Int.  J.  Emerg.  Technol.  Learn., 
15(3), 93-109. 

[11]  Viswanathan,  R.,  &  Telukdarie,  A.  (2022).  The  role  of  4IR  technologies  in  waste  management 

practices-a bibliographic analysis. Procedia Computer Science, 200, 247-256. 

[12]  Ndung’u,  N.,  &  Signe,  L.  (2020).  The  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  and  digitization  will  transform 

Africa into a global powerhouse. Foresight Africa, 2020, 61-73. 

[13]  David, L. O., Nwulu, N. I., Aigbavboa, C. O., & Adepoju, O. O. (2022). Integrating fourth industrial 
revolution  (4IR)  technologies  into  the  water,  energy  &  food  nexus  for  sustainable  security:  A 
bibliometric analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production, 363, 132522. 

[14]  Oke,  A.,  &  Fernandes,  F.  A.  P.  (2020).  Innovations  in  teaching  and  learning:  Exploring  the 
perceptions  of  the  education  sector  on  the  4th  industrial  revolution  (4IR).  Journal  of  Open 
Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 6(2), 31. 

[15]  Mayer,  C.  H.,  &  Oosthuizen,  R.  M.  (2020).  Positive  transformation  towards  the  fourth  industrial 
revolution: empirical evidence from a technology company. International Review of Psychiatry, 32(7-
8), 659-672. 

[16]  Lee,  J.,  &  Lee,  K.  (2021).  Is  the  fourth  industrial  revolution  a  continuation  of  the  third  industrial 
revolution or something new under the sun? Analyzing technological regimes using US patent data. 
Industrial and Corporate Change, 30(1), 137-159. 

[17]  Nyagadza,  B.,  Pashapa,  R.,  Chare,  A.,  Mazuruse,  G.,  &  Hove,  P.  K.  (2022).  Digital  technologies, 
Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) & Global Value Chains (GVCs) nexus with emerging economies’ 
future industrial innovation dynamics. Cogent Economics & Finance, 10(1), 2014654. 

[18]  Ibrahim,  F.  S.  B.,  Ebekozien,  A.,  Khan,  P.  A.  M.,  Aigbedion,  M.,  Ogbaini,  I.  F.,  &  Amadi,  G.  C. 
(2022).  Appraising  fourth  industrial  revolution  technologies  role  in  the  construction  sector:  how 
prepared is the construction consultants?. Facilities. 

[19]  Fanoro, M., Božanić, M., & Sinha, S. (2021). A Review of 4IR/5IR Enabling Technologies and Their 

Linkage to Manufacturing Supply Chain. Technologies, 9(4), 77. 

[20]  Cowie, P., Townsend, L., & Salemink, K. (2020). Smart rural futures: Will rural areas be left behind 

in the 4th industrial revolution?. Journal of rural studies, 79, 169-176. 

65 

 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

[21]  Xaba, S. A., Fang, X., & Mthembu, S. P. (2021). The Impact of the 4IR Technologies in the Works of 

Emerging South African Artists. Art and Design Review, 9(1), 58-73. 

[22]  Mtshali, T. I., & Ramaligela, S. M. (2020). Contemporary employability skills needed for learners to 
succeed  in  the  civil  technology  field  in  the  4IR  era.  Journal  of  Technical  Education  and  Training, 
12(3), 29-40. 

[23]  Ebekozien, A., Aigbedion, M., Duru, O. S. D., Udeagwu, O. H., & Aginah, I. L. (2021). Hazards of 
wood  sawmills  in  Nigeria’s  cities:  the  role  of  fourth  industrial  revolution  technologies.  Journal  of 
Facilities Management. 

[24]  Andreoni,  A.,  Chang,  H.  J.,  &  Labrunie,  M.  (2021).  Natura  non  facit  saltus:  Challenges  and 
opportunities  for  digital  industrialisation  across  developing  countries.  The  European  Journal  of 
Development Research, 33(2), 330-370. 

[25]  Mpofu,  R.,  & Nicolaides,  A.  (2019). Frankenstein and the  fourth industrial revolution (4IR): ethics 
and human rights considerations. African Journal of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure, 8(5), 1-25. 
[26]  Nobre, I., & Nobre, C. A. (2019). The Amazonia third way initiative: the role of technology to unveil 
the  potential  of  a  novel  tropical  biodiversity-based  economy.  Land  Use—Assessing  the  Past, 
Envisioning the Future, 1-32. 

[27]  Kruger,  S.,  &  Steyn,  A.  A.  (2020).  Enhancing  technology  transfer  through  entrepreneurial 
development:  practices  from  innovation  spaces.  The  Journal  of  Technology  Transfer,  45(6),  1655-
1689. 

[28]  Lee,  S.  W.,  Jo,  J.,  &  Kim,  S.  (2021).  Leveraging  the  4th  Industrial  Revolution  technology  for 
sustainable  development  of  the  Northern  Sea  Route  (NSR)—The  case  study  of  autonomous  vessel. 
Sustainability, 13(15), 8211. 

[29]  Herweijer, C., Combes, B., Johnson, L., McCargow, R., Bhardwaj, S., Jackson, B., &Ramchandani, 
P. (2018).  Enabling a sustainable Fourth Industrial Revolution: How G20 countries can create the 
conditions  for  emerging  technologies  to  benefit  people  and  the  planet  (No.  2018-32).  Economics 
Discussion Papers. 

[30]  Kim,  H.  S.,  &  Hwang,  W.  S.  (2022).  Absorption  trajectories  of  4IR  technologies:  evidence  from 

Korea. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 1-17. 

[31]  Bigerna, S., Micheli, S., & Polinori, P. (2021). New generation acceptability towards durability and 
repairability of products: Circular economy in the era of the 4th industrial revolution.  Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 165, 120558. 

[32]  Shilenge,  M.,  &  Telukdarie,  A.  (2021).  4IR  integration  of  information  technology  best  practice 
framework  in  operational  technology.  Journal  of  Industrial  Engineering  and  Management,  14(3), 
457-476. 

[33]  Jin, B. E., & Shin, D. C. (2021). The power of 4th industrial revolution in the fashion industry: what, 

why, and how has the industry changed?. Fashion and Textiles, 8(1), 1-25. 

[34]  Bhattacharya,  S.,  &  Chatterjee,  A.  (2021).  Digital  project  driven  supply  chains:  a  new  paradigm. 

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal. 

[35]  Olaitan, O. O., Issah, M., &  Wayi,  N. (2021). A framework to test South  Africa's readiness for the 

fourth industrial revolution. South African Journal of Information Management, 23(1), 1-10. 

[36]  Tugizimana, F., Engel, J., Salek, R., Dubery, I., Piater, L., & Burgess, K. (2020). The disruptive 4IR 
in  the  life  sciences:  Metabolomics.  In  The  Disruptive  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  (pp.  227-256). 
Springer, Cham. 

[37]  Tella,  A.,  Amuda,  H.  O.,  &  Ajani,  Y.  A.  (2022).  Relevance  of  blockchain  technology  and  the 

management of libraries and archives in the 4IR. Digital Library Perspectives. 

[38]  Evron,  Y.  (2021).  4IR  technologies  in  the  Israel  Defence  Forces:  blurring  traditional  boundaries. 

Journal of Strategic Studies, 44(4), 572-593. 

[39]  Berlanstein,  Lenard  R.,  ed.  The  industrial  revolution  and  work  in  nineteenth  century  Europe. 

Routledge, 2003. 

[40]  Forrester, Rochelle. "History of electricity." Available at SSRN 2876929 (2016). 
[41]  Janicke, Martin, and Klaus Jacob. "A third industrial revolution."  Long-term governance for social-

ecological change (2013): 47-71. 

66 

 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 14, No 4, August 2022 

AUTHORS 

Bandar    alsulaimani  is  currently  a  Ph.D.  researcher  from  the  Faculty  of  Electrical 
Engineering,  King  Fahad  University  of  Petroleum  and  Minerals  (KFUPM),  Saudi 
Arabia. Bandar is a  Saudi computer engineer. He  studied computer networks at King 
Fahad University of petroleum and minerals (KFUPM) and graduated with a master’s 
degree  as  well  from  the  same  University.  His  research  interests  include  computer 
networks, network security, network system,4IR technology, and wireless system. 

Amanul islam is currently a Research Assistant from the Faculty of Computer Science 
and  Information  Technology,  University  of  Malaya,  Malaysia.  He  received  a  BS 
degree  in  Information  and  Communication  Technology  from  The  Millennium 
University,  Bangladesh.  He  received  his  master’s  degree  in  Computer  Science  By 
Research  from  the  Faculty  of  Computer  Science  and  Information  Technology, 
University  of  Malaya,  Malaysia.  His  research  interests  include  computer  networks, 
network security, graphical authentication, and wireless system. 

67 

 
 
 
