2
2
0
2

p
e
S
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
3
4
0
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF

1

Leveraging Tendon Vibration to Extend
Pseudo-Haptic Sensations in VR

Yutaro Hirao, Tomohiro Amemiya, Takuji Narumi, Ferran Argelaguet, and Anatole L ´ecuyer

Abstract—The Pseudo-haptic technique is used to modify haptic perception by appropriately changing visual feedback to body
movements. Because tendon vibration can affect our somatosensory perception, we propose a method for leveraging tendon vibration
to extend pseudo-haptics. To evaluate the proposed method, we conducted three experiments that investigate the effect of tendon
vibration on the range and resolution of pseudo-haptic sensation. The ﬁrst experiment evaluated the effect of tendon vibration on the
detection threshold (DT) of visual/physical motion discrepancy. The results show that vibrations on the inner tendons of the wrist and
elbow increased the DT. This indicates that tendon vibration can increase applicable visual motion gain without being noticed by users.
The second experiment investigated the effect of tendon vibration on the resolution, that is, the just noticeable difference (JND) of
pseudo-weight sensation. The results indicate that both with- and without-vibration conditions had a similar JND of pseudo-weight
sensation and thus, both conditions can be considered to have a similar resolution of sense of weight. The third experiment
investigated the equivalence between the weight sensation induced by tendon vibration and visual motion gain, that is, the point of
subjective equality (PSE). The results show that vibration increases the sense of weight, and its effect was the same as that using a
gain of 0.64 without vibration. Taken together, our results suggest that using tendon vibration can enable a signiﬁcantly wider (nearly
double) range of pseudo-haptic sensation, without impairing its resolution.

Index Terms—Pseudo-Haptics, virtual reality, tendon vibration, cross-modal integration, maximum likelyhood estimation,

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

I N recent years, virtual reality (VR) technology has made

remarkable progress, enabling users to feel as if a virtual
object is actually present by providing visual and audio
information. However, haptic information still has a nar-
rower range of expression than audio-visual information,
and various approaches have been proposed to present
haptic information. Of these approaches, the pseudo-haptic
technique is an interesting alternative for generating haptics;
it is a method of modifying haptic perception by appropri-
ately changing the visual feedback to body movement [1],
[2]. Typical examples of pseudo-haptics techniques involve
modifying the force of a spring [3] or perceived weight
of an object [4]–[6] by changing the control-display gain
to the actual motion in a virtual environment. The main
advantage of the pseudo-haptics technique is that it can
present haptic sensations primarily through visual stimuli
and does not require bulky equipment. However, the per-
ceived force intensity presented by conventional techniques
of pesudo-haptics is severly limited because the pseudo-
haptic technique separates visual and haptic information,
and discrepancies that are too large induce discomfort or
break the haptic perception [1], [5], [7].

Some studies have attempted to improve the range of
acceptable motion alteration by increasing the contribution
of visual information to sensory integration by expanding
the ﬁeld of view of a head-mounted display (HMD) [8] or
using a more human-like avatar [9]. However, modifying

• Y. Hirao, T. Amemiya and T. Narumi are with the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-8654, Japan. E-mail: {hirao, amemiya, narumi}@cyber.t.u-
tokyo.ac.jp.

• A. L´ecuyer and F. Argelaguet work with Univ. Rennes, Inria, IRISA,

CNRS, Rennes, France.

the haptic sensation by directly increasing the contribution
of visual information is limited. In this study, considering
that tendon vibration affects somatosensory perception, we
investigate the potential of tendon vibration for expanding
the range of pseudo-haptic sensations.

Vibration has several possible effects on somatosensa-
tion. When a vibration is applied to a muscle or tendon,
the primary afferent of the muscle spindle is activated. This
can produce illusions of position, motion, and force [10]–
[12]. In addition to these illusions, the tonic vibration reﬂex
(TVR) occurs, which causes sustained contraction of the vi-
brated muscle and inhibition of the activity of the antagonist
muscle [13]. Based on these ﬁndings, we hypothesized that
the range of pseudo-haptics could be extended by precisely
controlling both tendon vibration stimuli and visual motion
gain.

In this study, we evaluate the effect of tendon vibra-
tion on pseudo-haptic weight sensation and discuss de-
sign guides for combining tendon vibration and pseudo-
haptics techniques. As a systematic investigation of the
effect, we conducted three experiments investigating the
potential effect of tendon vibration on the range and res-
olution of pseudo-weight sensation. Figure 1 provides a
brief summary of results. The ﬁrst experiment investigated
the effects of tendon vibration to the agonist muscle, an-
tagonist muscle, or both on the detection threshold (DT)
of the discrepancy between physical and virtual motion
with a motion gain. Because users begin to feel discom-
fort when they recognize the discrepancy, this DT can be
considered the strictest maximum applicable motion gain
for generating pseudo-weight sensation. Then, the second
experiment investigated the effect of tendon vibration to the
agonist muscle on the just noticeable difference (JND) in
pseudo-weight sensation induced by motion gain. This JND

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF

2

vision and haptics [21]. In particular, MLE well describes
spatial perception. In addition, considering the relationship
between motion and force, another explanation of the mech-
anism of pseudo-haptics is based on the indication that the
human central nervous system performs forward dynam-
ics calculations (FDC) [7], [23], [24] and inverse dynamics
calculations (IDC) [15], [25], [26]. In FDC, the motion of a
target object is estimated from the force applied to it. Honda
et al. adjusted the visual delay and mass of a manipulan-
dum in a system where the cursor on a monitor can be
manipulated by the manipulandum. They conﬁrmed that
the sensory-motor prediction error owing to the visual delay
was misattributed to the mass estimation [7]. Moreover, in
IDC, the force applied to a target object is inferred from
its motion. Takamuku and Gomi investigated the intensity
of motion resistance while varying the visual motion of a
cursor on a screen to the periodic motion of a stylus pen
[15]. They conﬁrmed that the intensity of motion resistance
associated with cursor delay correlates with the acceleration
of the cursor in the direction of movement. This suggests
that their subjects used IDC with visual motion information
as input to form an internal model of the dynamics for
the interaction (in this case, the spring-damper system).
By further developing these theories that can well explain
the primary bottom-up process of the sensory integra-
tion or relationship between motion and force estimation,
the Bayesian theory was proposed; it considers top-down
inﬂuences such as the intervention of predictions/prior-
knowledge, and complement/replacement of sensory input
by individual memory/experience [1], [22], [27]. Moreover,
a more uniﬁed explanation is obtained using the free energy
principle, which considers the loop between perception and
behavior change [28].

2.2 Limits of Pseudo-Haptics

As discussed, the manipulation of various haptic sensations
is possible by only adjusting visual feedback. However, the
pseudo-haptic technique is not omnipotent. Pseudo-haptics
technique separates visual and haptic information. Here,
larger gaps are necessary to induce more intensive sensa-
tion; however, gaps that are too large result in discomfort or

Fig. 2. Concept ﬁgure of the maximum likelyhood estimation of the
sensory integration process. It shows that the haptic estimation (ﬁnal
perception) is made by the integration of visual and haptic information
considering their reliability, i.e., the variance of the information. Note
that the distribution and mean of the visual and haptic info are only for
illustrative purposes.

Fig. 1. Summary of results: Tendon vibration was suggested to function
as noise on somatosensory information, making users rely more on
visual information and leading to a potentially wider range of applica-
ble visual motion gain (XP1). Moreover, the tendon vibration does not
change the resolution of pseudo-weight sensation (XP2). Furthermore,
tendon vibration increases weight sensation (XP3).

indicates the resolution of pseudo-weight sensation. We con-
sider that the DT and JND can be used to discuss whether
tendon vibration improves the range of presentable pseudo-
weight sensation. Finally, the third experiment investigated
the effect of tendon vibration on weight perception. This
concerns the point of subjective equality (PSE) of weight
perception induced by tendon vibration, compared with
pseudo-weight sensation induced by motion gain. These
three experiments cover the effects of combining tendon
vibration and motion gain on pseudo-weight sensation in
VR.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 introduces related work. We introduce the theoretical
background of pseudo-haptics and effects of tendon vibra-
tion on somatosensory sensation. Sections 3 to 5 describe
the three experiments. Then, Section 6 provides a general
discussion of all experimental results and comprehensive
discussion of the effect of tendon vibration on the pseudo-
haptic technique and design guide for application. Finally,
Section 7 concludes the paper.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Theoretical Background of Pseudo-Haptics

The pseudo-haptic technique is used to induce haptic illu-
sions by manipulating visual feedback to user movement
[1], [2]. It can be applied for many properties of haptic
sensations, such as compliance [3], [14], [15], weight [4]–
[7], and friction [16]–[20]. The mechanism of pseudo-haptics
has not yet been fully revealed. Still, several theories have
been proposed and discussed. One of the most conventional
explanation is that visual and haptic information are inte-
grated based on the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
[21], [22]. This theory explains that sensory information is
integrated based on its reliability (likelihood) for people to
estimate the properties of physical objects (Fig. 2). Ernst and
Banks conﬁrmed this in the estimation of the width of an
object when the information of width is different between

JOURNAL OF

3

a failure to integrate the information [1], [5], [7]. Based on
Pusch and L´ecuyer’s model [1], larger discrepancies could
result in larger complements and substitutions of sensory in-
formation from personal memories and experiences, which
would increase individual differences. Moreover, if the gap
is too large, the information is determined to be coming
from a different source and is not integrated [22]. While,
FDC and IDC theory can provide another explanation in
that the illusion would not arise when the brain no longer
has a model to which the large gap can be attributed [7].

Few studies have been conducted to solve the challenges
of pseudo-haptic techniques. Ban and Ujitoko proposed a
method for inducing pseudo-haptics more effectively by
connecting the discrepancy between a user’s ﬁnger and
the cursor on a touchscreen with a visual string [29]. An-
other possible approach involves increasing the reliability
of visual information in sensory integration, i.e., to decrease
the variance of visual
information in MLE so that the
ﬁnal perception is more dependent on visual information.
Williams and Peck conﬁrmed that wider ﬁelds of view in
VR could extend the applicable visual gain for redirected
walking techniques [8]. Furthermore, Ogawa et al. con-
cluded that more realistic avatars could make participants
notice the discrepancy between virtual and physical hand
movements less than the abstract avatar (a sphere object)
[9]. These studies did not mention pseudo-haptics, but
their aiming technique, retargeting, creates visual/physical
gaps and therefore, the results are applicable to pseudo-
haptics. However, these approaches do not affect haptic
information; therefore, their effectiveness is limited. Here,
we investigated the method that affects haptic information
with simple equipment to solve this problem using tendon
vibration stimulation.

2.3 Effect of tendon vibration on somatosensory infor-
mation and pseudo-haptic sensation

When vibration is applied to a tendon or muscle, the
primary afferents of the muscle spindle are activated. As
muscle spindles are sensors of position and motion [30],
the vibration can create the illusion of movement in the
direction of the muscle stretch (Fig. 3) [31]. This vibration
also induces a tonic vibration reﬂex (TVR) that contracts
muscles [13]. Here, if we resist the motion and attempt to
remain static, a motion illusion is produced in the opposite
direction of the TVR. In addition to the effect on position
and motion, tendon vibration can also affect force and
weight sensation (e.g. [32], [33]). The optimum vibration
parameters for generating the somatosensory illusion vary
within studies, but a vibration frequency of 70 to 100 Hz and
an amplitude of approximately 5 G is deemed sufﬁcient and
widely used for VR experiments [11], [34], [35]. The required
minimum duration of vibration to induce the illusion also
varies, but several studies have indicated that 6 s is the
minimum time required [36], [37].

Although many tendon vibration studies have been con-
ducted for static situations, several studies have conﬁrmed
that the tendon vibration illusion can be induced during
active motion [38], [39]. Sitting et al. observed that during
elbow ﬂexion-extension movements, applying a vibration
to the biceps likely affected position perception in slow

movements (approximately 6 deg/s) and velocity percep-
tion in fast movements (60 - 130 deg/s at maximum) [38].
Furthermore, Inglis and Frank determined that vibration
on the biceps (agonist muscle) does not affect positional
accuracy during arm ﬂexion-extension movements of 40-60
deg/s, whereas vibration on the triceps (antagonist muscle)
does, suggesting that muscle spindle afferents from the
extending antagonist muscle contribute to limb positional
accuracy during voluntary movements [39]. Although many
studies have investigated and conﬁrmed the effect of muscle
vibration on somatosensory sensation, the reproducibility
of the effect is difﬁcult and inconsistent across studies.
One reason is that vibrating one muscle may induce some
activity in neighboring or antagonistic muscles, which may
result in a change in the direction of the illusion or even
its disappearance [40]. In addition, individual differences
in anatomy increase the difﬁculty in selectively vibrating
the intended muscle in a practical set-up outside of the
experiment. Another reason is that the tendon vibration
illusion is strongly inﬂuenced by visual information (e.g.
[34], [41], [42]). It is also affected by cognitive factors such
as learning, attention, and even imagination [11]. Neu-
roimaging studies have shown that the same brain regions
are activated in both motor imagery [43] and illusory arm
movements [36]. Therefore, motor imagery could inﬂuence
motion illusions. Thyrion and Roll conﬁrmed that motor
imagery weaken/strengthen the illusory motion induced
by the vibration of biceps, and even modulate its perceived
direction [44]. In this manner, the motion illusion of tendon
vibration may not be always robust.

In addition to effect on position and motion, some
studies have investigated the effect on force and weight
estimation. Most studies have suggested that vibration on
the contracting muscle increases the sense of force or weight
(e.g. [33], [45], [46]). The mechanism of sense of force
and weight is not yet fully understood, but somatosensory
information is known to be a combined mechanism of
central and peripheral signals. These signals are the afferent
signal, which is generated by external stimuli, and efferent
copy, which is generated in corollary discharge with the
command to perform physical movements. The efferent

Fig. 3. Relationship between the position of tendon vibration feedback
and direction of motion illusion.

JOURNAL OF

4

copy is sometimes described as the sense of effort, and this
sense of effort, as well as peripheral signals, is known to
inﬂuence force and weight perception [10], [12]. The reason
for overestimating the exerted force by tendon vibration can
be explained in terms of two aspects: afferent and efferent
signals. Concerning afferent signals, vibrations to the tendon
and TVR cause neurons in the Golgi tendon organ, which
is a sensor for the degree of muscle contraction, to activate
and this additional afferent signals increase force and weight
perception [45]. This is also supported by the vibration effect
being reduced during muscle fatigue [47] and that the de-
sensitization of the Golgi tendon organ caused by relatively
long-term vibration [40], [48] reduces weight perception
[46]. Concerning efferent signals, vibration to the driving
muscle leads to the inhibition of the antagonist muscle, in-
creasing the effort required to overcome this inhibition and
exert the target force, resulting in increased force or weight
perception. [12], [33]. However, these effects are not always
consistent as noted by several studies reporting conﬂicting
results. McCloskey et al. observed that muscle exertion
perceived in vibrated muscles is underestimated [32]. They
mentioned that participants do not consider the force from
TVR induced by the tendon vibration as additional force
input; thus, TVR resulted in reducing the sense of effort.
Moreover, the effects vary depending on the context, such
as with tasks or questionnaires [49], [50]. Furthermore, as
motion and force sensation are closely related, the difﬁculty
involved in using tendon vibration to induce motion illusion
implies that to induce force perception.

By considering studies on the effect of tendon vibration
on somatosensory sensation, we hypothesized two possibil-
ities to solve the problem regarding the gap between visual
and physical information by leveraging tendon vibration.
One possible usage is to precisely control the somatosen-
sory sensation. This holds if the effect of tendon vibration
on somatosensory sensation is local, robust, and easy to
control. However, if the ﬁrst hypothesis does not work,
the other possible usage is to degrade the reliability of
somatosensory information using tendon vibration as noise
on the sensation, which makes the ﬁnal perception rely more
on visual information. This hypothesis is inspired by the
work of Ernst and Banks [21] that conﬁrmed that noise on
visual information increases variance and makes the width
estimation rely more on haptic information. In addition,
this hypothesis is supported by the simultaneous vibratory
stimulation of the agonist and antagonist muscles producing
high ﬁring rates of spindle endings in both sets of muscles,
masking (degrading) the spindle input that occurs during
actual movement, and reducing somatosensory accuracy
[51], [52]. This second hypothesis could be practical if the
effect of tendon vibration is broad and complex.

3 XP1: INFLUENCE OF TENDON VIBRATION ON
THE RANGE OF THE MAXIMUM APPLICABLE VI-
SUAL/PHYSICAL GAP
This experiment investigates the inﬂuence of tendon vibra-
tion on the applicable range of pseudo-weight sensation.
In this experiment, the DT of the discrepancy between
actual and VR motion with a motion gain was investigated
with the inner, outer, and both sides of vibration on the

wrist and elbow tendons, as well as a with no vibration
condition. As discussed, the effects of tendon vibration
on somatosensory perception are complex. In particular,
the experiments in previous studies were conducted in a
strict experimental environment with the subject’s body part
ﬁxed, as the purpose was to purely conﬁrm the effects of
tendon vibration on somatosensory perception. In contrast,
this experiment aims to clarify the effects in a more practical
situation, such as considering engineering applications. The
research question guiding this experiment was whether and
how tendon vibration affects the DT of the visual/physical
motion discrepancy in our setup.

3.1 Methods

3.1.1 Apparatus

Figure 4a shows the experimental apparatus. The experi-
ment was conducted with participants in a sitting position.
Participants wore wristbands with two vibrators (VIBRO
transducer VP210, Acouve Lab. Inc.), on the wrist and elbow
of the right arm. The vibrators were positioned to stimulate
the inner and outer tendons of the wrist and elbow, respec-
tively. The participants wore a VR headset (Oculus Quest 2)
and noise canceling headphones and held a VR controller
in each hand. The frequency of the vibration was 80 Hz and
the amplitude was 5 G except when vibrating both the inner
and outer tendons, for which it was 2.5 G. Subsection 3.1.3.
provides a detailed explanation.

3.1.2 Task
Calibration and measurement of motion illusion induced
by tendon vibration: The experiment involved two parts.
The objective of the ﬁrst part is to calibrate the vibrators’
position and measure the motion illusion induced by ten-
don vibration. First, participants were informed that the
vibration may induce a motion illusion, but its direction was
not indicated to avoid bias. Subsequently, participants were
asked to sit wearing equipment and with their right arm
extended straight down. They were then instructed to look
straight ahead with their eyes closed. Next, an experimenter
activated the vibration stimuli to the inner sides of the

Fig. 4. Apparatus (a), virtual environment (b), and wrist band with
vibrators (c). Participants wore noise-cancelling headphones during the
experiment. In addition, the two target bars were not presented simulta-
neously but one-by-one in each condition.

JOURNAL OF

5

participant’s right wrist and elbow. The vibration lasted for
6 s. Subsequently, the experimenter asked the participants if
they felt a motion illusion during the vibration. Six seconds
can be considered the minimum duration required to induce
motion illusion from previous studies [36], [37] and our in-
formal pilot test. If the motion illusion was not induced, the
experimenter slightly changed the position of the vibrators.
These steps were repeated ﬁve times or until the participants
experienced the motion illusion. Furthermore, when they
did not experience the motion illusion after repetitions two
and four, the experimenter activated a series of vibrations
in the order of the inner, outer, and inner tendon to increase
the probability that the participants would experience the
illusion [53]. The same calibration process was performed
for the vibration of the outer tendon.

After calibrating all vibrators positions, the participants
were asked to measure the vector of motion illusion they
experienced. First, the experimenter provided inner vibra-
tion stimuli to the participants for 6 s. Then, the participants
were asked to replicate the motion they experienced using
the right controller for this. In particular, participants pulled
the index trigger at the initial position. They replicated the
motion illusion by holding the trigger until the end of the
motion illusion. A ”beep” sound was provided when the
trigger was pulled or released. This replication task was
performed three times for each inner and outer tendon
vibration. Note the participants remained with their eyes
closed.

Investigation of DT of visual/physical discrepancy: The
second part is the main part of this experiment. The DT is
measured using the staircase method. In brief, participants
were asked to lift the virtual dumbbell with a motion gain
and answer if they noticed the difference between actual
and visual motions. A detailed explanation follows.

The participants performed the lifting task following the
staircase method. A visual gain was applied to the motion
in VR. There were two groups of gain: HIGH, in which
the visual gain was greater than 1.0, indicating that the
virtual motion was larger than the actual motion; and LOW,
in which the visual gain was less than 1.0, indicating that
the virtual motion was smaller. In the staircase method, the
initial motion gain was 1.0 or 2.0 for HIGH and 0.5 or 1.0
for LOW. The gain was increased or decreased by one step
from ten levels in the range of each group. Whether the
visual gain was increased or decreased depended on the
participants’ response to the questionnaire asking whether
they experienced the motions of virtual and physical hands
were the same or different. When participants answered
”the same,” the visual gain moved one step closer to 1.0, and
when they answered ”different,” it moved one step farther
from 1.0. The experiments ended after ﬁve turning points in
the direction change of visual gain. Furthermore, the visual
gain did not exceed the initial visual gain. If the answer
would make the visual gain exceed the initial gain, the
visual gain remained at the value, and the count of turning
points was increased.

A detailed explanation of the lifting task follows. Figure
4b shows the virtual environment. In the VR environment, a
virtual dumbbell was placed at the participant’s right hand
where their right arm naturally reached when extended
straight down in a seated position. In addition, participants

could see a virtual right hand at the position of their right
hand through the VR headset, and they could grab or release
by pulling or releasing the index trigger of the VR controller,
respectively. During the task, participants heard white noise.
First, participants grabbed a dumbbell and waited 6 s before
lifting it. Here, if the participants were being presented with
the vibration stimulus, the vibration presentation started,
and a 6 s countdown display and metronome sound at 120
bpm were simultaneously presented. This step induces the
motion illusion. After the 6 s, the participants lifted the
virtual dumbbell until it touched the blue bar in front of
them in 2 s. The two seconds was determined to be a sufﬁ-
cient duration to have some effect and let the participants
move with moderate speed by our pilot test, where we
compared 1, 2, and 3 s in the same setup as this experiment.
Participants were instructed to bend their elbow when they
lifted the dumbbell. A gain was applied to the rotation of the
elbow. The blue bar was placed at 60 degrees for LOW and
120 degrees for HIGH from the initial posture of the right
arm. The position of the blue bar was determined so that the
participants physically performed the same range of motion
for the HIGH and LOW conditions. Note that only one blue
bar was presented during the task, not simultaneously as
shown in the Fig. 4b. When the virtual dumbbell reached
the blue bar, all virtual objects and stimuli disappeared.
Then, a virtual panel with the written question ”I felt that
the motions of my virtual and physical hand were:” ”the
same” or ”different,” appeared in front of the participants.
The participants were asked to chose one of the two options
using the left controller.

3.1.3 Conditions

The experiment used a within-subjects design. The tested
condition related to the placement of the vibrations and
included three levels: the inner, outer, and all tendons vi-
brating, including the control condition without vibration.
The amplitude of the vibration was 5 G for the inner and
outer tendons, and 2.5 G for the all tendons condition.
Motion illusion is known to weaken when the amplitude of
tendon vibration is reduced [54]. However, we considered
that it was more important to maintain the total intensity of
vibration stimuli the same. This is because if the vibration
affects a motion illusion, the effect of inner and outer tendon
vibration should cancel each other.

3.1.4 Collected data

The vector of the motion illusion induced by the vibrations
were measured in the ﬁrst part. In addition, the values of
motion gain at the turning point of the staircase method
were measured in the second part. These values were av-
eraged to calculate the DT. In the end of the experiment,
participants were asked to ﬁll in a free structure interview.

3.1.5 Procedure

Twenty participants (twelve males and eight females in their
twenties) participated in the experiment. First, the objec-
tives, methods, and procedures were explained to them.
Next, the participants completed a consent form. Then,
the participants were asked to wear the equipment and
headphones (Fig.4a). After the ﬁrst part, the position of

JOURNAL OF

6

conditions than that without vibration condition for the
HIGH/LOW visual gain group.

3.2 Results

3.2.1 Direction and amount of motion illusion at rest

All participants successfully conﬁrmed to experience mo-
tion illusion in the ﬁrst part of the experiment. The data of
one participant was removed because of recording issues
and therefore the data of nineteen participants was used
to analyze the results of the ﬁrst part. Motion illusion was
measured as a vector from the initial position to the end
position of the illusion. Then, we ﬁrst assigned 1 or -1 for
all data of the motion illusion to observe the relationship
between the inner/outer tendon vibration and direction of
the motion illusion. In particular, 1 was assigned for the
results of motion illusion if the arm moved in a folding
direction (forward), and -1 was assigned for the opposite.
Here, the ratio of 1s to -1s were 13:6 for inner vibration and
16:3 for outer vibration. Then, the Spearman rank correlation
test was conducted for the direction results of the motion
illusion between inner and outer tendon vibration. Conse-
quently, we could not determine a signiﬁcant correlation.

In addition, we analyzed the effect of tendon vibration
on the amount of motion illusion. Here, we used the abso-
lute value of the results of the motion illusion. The average
of the absolute distance was 0.19 ± 0.23 (m) and 0.16 ± 0.25
(m) in the inner and outer tendon vibration, respectively.
We conducted the Pearson correlation test for the results of
the absolute distance of the motion illusion between inner
and outer tendon vibration. Here, we determined a sig-
niﬁcant positive correlation between the absolute distances
of motion illusion of the inner and outer tendon vibration
(r = 0.74, p < 0.001).

3.2.2 DT of the visual gain

Figure 6 shows the results of the DT. To obtain the DT
within a block of the staircase method, ten turning points
from both series of staircase methods were averaged. In the
statistical analysis, we used the inverse values of the LOW
group to enable a comparison of the effect of vibrations on
the DT between the HIGH and LOW groups. Two-way anal-
ysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the vibration
conditions vs. HIGH/LOW group, and when the sphericity
assumption was violated (Mauchly’s sphericity test), the
degrees of freedom were adjusted using the Greenhouse-
Geisser correction. A signiﬁcant main effect was observed
in the HIGH/LOW group factor (F (1, 19) = 4.56, p =
0.0460, η2 = 0.0324), and a trend of interaction effect was
also determined (F (2.54, 48.17) = 2.84, p = 0.0562, η2 =
0.0288). Then, Shaffer’s modiﬁed sequentially rejective Bon-
ferroni post-hoc tests were conducted for multiple compar-
isons. Consequently, a signiﬁcant difference between control
(mean = 1.41, σ = 0.17) and inner (mean = 1.53, σ = 0.21)
vibration condition (p = 0.0498, r = 0.56) in High visual
gain were found. Moreover, as a result of other post-hoc test
on the simple effect for the interaction, we determined a
signiﬁcant difference between the HIGH and inverse LOW
group for the inner vibration condition (p = 0.0165, η2 =
0.142).

Fig. 5. Concept ﬁgure of MLE with noise added on haptic information
([H1-2]). Noise on haptic information increases its variance and shifts
the perception to the value estimated by visual information.

the elbow was measured to co-localize the user with the
virtual content. The participants were instructed not to
move their elbow during the experiment. Before the second
part, participants conducted a training phase to understand
the staircase procedure without vibrations or gain. There
were eight blocks consisting of four vibration conditions
with the HIGH and LOW visual gain groups. Each block
had two series of visual gain: one began with the visual
gain of 1.0 and the other began with the visual gain farthest
from 1.0 within the range, i.e., 2.0 for HIGH and 0.5 for
LOW. Each series of the staircase method was presented
in turn and ended after ﬁve turning points of changing
the direction of the visual gain. The order of the vibration
conditions was counterbalanced between participants, and
the other orders on HIGH/LOW and the two series of visual
gain were randomly chosen. During the trials, participants
could take a break whenever and as often as they wanted.
After ﬁnishing all trials, the participants removed all their
equipment and completed the free-structured interview. The
participants were remunerated with an Amazon gift card of
20 euro for their participation.

3.1.6 Hypotheses

We had two hypotheses regarding the impact of tendon
vibration on the DT. These are as follows:

[H1-1] Muscle spindle input induces motion illusion.
[H1-2] Tendon vibration functions as noise on so-

matosensory sensation.

As the activation of muscle spindle induces the sensation
of the extension of muscle, [H1-1] implies that the DT of
the visual gain becomes higher/lower with the inner/outer
tendon vibration than that without vibration and both sides’
vibration. Whereas, the tendon vibration was conﬁrmed
to degrade proprioceptive responsiveness [51], [52]. Here,
noise on sensory information can increase its variances
it and thus increases the contribution ratio of the other
sensory information in the sensory integration process [21].
if the tendon vibration functions as noise
In this case,
on somatosensory sensation, the visual information should
be more dominant for position sensation, and users will
notice the discrepancy between visual and somatosensory
information less (Fig. 5). Therefore, [H1-2] means that the
visual gain of the DT becomes higher/lower with vibration

JOURNAL OF

7

3.3 Discussion

3.3.1 Effect of tendon vibration on motion illusion at rest

Unlike the previous report (e.g. [38], [39]), the results of
the direction of motion illusion in the ﬁrst part of the
experiment were inconsistent between the participants, and
the inner and outer tendon vibration did not always have
the opposite effect. We considered that this difference was
because our experiment setup had no restriction on user
movement, unlike in most existing studies. Because of the
freedom of the movement, some participants experienced
motion illusion in the direction of lengthening the muscle,
whereas others experienced TVR inducing the motion in the
direction of straining the muscle. Furthermore, the tendon
vibration illusion can be said to be strongly biased because
of top-down effects such as knowledge and expectations
[11], [44]; therefore, the motion illusion varies in a practical
setup where users can freely move their body. Nonetheless,
a correlation was found between the amount of motion illu-
sion caused by inner and outer tendon vibration, suggesting
that at least consistent individual differences exists in the
illusion of motion to tendon vibration.

3.3.2 How does tendon vibration affect the DT?

The results suggest that tendon vibration has an effect
on the DT of the discrepancy between actual and visual
motion, particularly with a high visual gain for which visual
motion was larger than actual motion. Participants had
a higher DT with tendon vibrations for the HIGH group
of visual gain. This indicates that tendon vibration could
extend the range of applicable visual gain without being
perceived by users. Regarding the effect of tendon vibration
on the DT, we had three different hypotheses. Of these
hypotheses, [H1-2] explained our results the best: tendon
vibration functions as noise on somatosensory sensation,
and participants noticed the discrepancy between visual and
somatosensory information less. If [H1-1] was true, the DT
should decrease for inner tendon vibration compared with
the control condition in the HIGH gain group. However,
the results indicated that the DT increased in both inner
and outer tendon vibration. Moreover, the results showed
that no positive correlation exists between the direction of
motion illusion induced by tendon vibration during rest and
whether DT increases compared with the control condition.
Therefore, [H1-2] seems to ﬁt these results the most.

The fact that the effect of all tendon vibration on DT
was weaker than that of inner and outer tendon vibration
suggests either that the effects of inner and outer tendon
vibrations cancel each other, or that what is important for
the effect on the DT is not the total amount of vibration
intensity, but the amplitude of each vibration. Although it
is unclear which of the two explanations is correct based
on the present experiment alone, the latter explanation is
more likely to be correct, given that there was no correlation
between whether the vibration is inner or outer and the
direction of motion illusion.

The effect of tendon vibration was larger with the HIGH
condition than LOW condition, and our results were consis-
tent with previous results reporting that people were more
sensitive to the visual/kinesthetic discrepancy in the LOW
visual gain than HIGH visual gain [55]. Another possible

Fig. 6. XP1 results: Average of the DT of the discrepancy between
physical and virtual motion with a visual gain. The top ﬁgure shows the
results of the HIGH group, and the bottom ﬁgure shows the LOW group.
The error bars indicate the standard error. ”*” indicates the statistical
difference with p < 0.05.

3.2.3 Relationship between motion illusion and DT

First, we analyzed the relationship between the DT results
and direction of motion illusion measured in the ﬁrst part
of the experiment. Because we focused on the direction and
its effect on the DT, we assigned 1 or -1 for all data of
the motion illusion and DT. In particular, 1 was assigned
to the DT results if it increased compared with the DT
without vibration, and -1 for the opposite results. Then,
the Spearman rank correlation test was conducted for the
pairs of the results of motion illusion and DT within the
same tendon vibration condition. Consequently, we found
a signiﬁcant negative correlation between the results of
motion illusion and the DT of the LOW group, with inner
tendon vibration (r = −0.46, p = 0.047).

In addition, we analysed the relationship between the
DT results and distance of motion illusion. To obtain the
effect the vibration had on the DT, we standardized the DT
data by the DT values without vibration. Then, the Pearson
correlation test was conducted for the pairs of the absolute
distance of motion illusion and DT results. Consequently,
we determined no signiﬁcant correlation.

JOURNAL OF

8

reason might be that, in our experiment, the amount of
visual motion was less with LOW visual gain (60 degrees)
than with HIGH visual gain (120 degrees). Therefore, al-
though the physical motion range was the same in the LOW
and HIGH condition (60 to 120 degrees), the visual informa-
tion in the LOW condition may affect the motion perception
less. Consequently, although the motion perception relied
more on the visual information owing to the noise effect of
the tendon vibration, its effect on the DT was small in LOW
visual gain.

4 XP2: INFLUENCE OF TENDON VIBRATION ON
RESOLUTION OF PSEUDO-WEIGHT SENSATION

In this experiment, the JND of pseudo-weight sensation
induced by motion gain with and without inner tendon vi-
bration was investigated. The ﬁrst experiment indicated that
the tendon vibration could extend the range of applicable vi-
sual gain. However, considering the possibility that tendon
vibration functions as noise on somatosensory information,
tendon vibration may degrade the sensitivity of pseudo-
weight sensation. Therefore, the research question of this
experiment was whether the tendon vibration affected the
sensitivity of pseudo-haptic weight sensation. Note that if
the tendon vibration improves or does not change the JND
compared with the no-vibration condition, we can conclude
that tendon vibration can effectively increase the range of
pseudo-haptic weight sensation.

Fig. 7. Concept ﬁgure of MLE with noise on haptic information and
increment of the reliability of visual information. The increment of the
reliability of visual information decreases its variances and makes the
ﬁnal perception have less variances ([H2-1]) and shift to the value
estimated by the visual information.

gains of 1.05, 1.28, 1.38, 1.62, 1.73, 1.95, respectively). These
values were determined through the pilot test. Note that
several motion gains exceeded the DT. Our pilot test con-
ﬁrmed that participants could experience a pseudo-weight
sensation for these gains while they noticed the motion
modiﬁcation. We considered only the inner tendon vibration
because it was expected to have the biggest effect on the
results, considering the results of the ﬁrst experiment.

4.1 Methods

4.1.3 Collected data

The equipment and virtual environment was the same as
the ﬁrst experiment.

4.1.1 Task

The experiment was conducted using the constant stimuli
method. The task involved comparing the weights of two
different virtual dumbbells: the reference and comparison
dumbbells. First, participants lifted the ﬁrst virtual dumb-
bell. The lifting task was the same as that in the ﬁrst
experiment for the HIGH gain group. When the virtual
dumbbell reached the blue bar, the dumbbell disappeared
and the other dumbbell appeared at the initial position.
Then, participants lifted the second dumbbell to the blue
bar. Subsequently, a question panel was presented in front
of them, and they had to answer the question ”Which
dumbbell did you feel heavier?” with ”the former” or ”the
latter.” They used the left VR controller to answer. Subsec-
tion 4.1.2. and 4.1.4 provides the detailed condition and ﬂow,
respectively.

4.1.2 Conditions

There were two conditions regarding the vibrations: with
and without inner tendon vibration. The vibration con-
ditions of the reference and comparison were the same.
This means that if the reference is without vibration, the
comparison is without vibration, and if the reference is with
vibration, the comparison is with vibration. In addition,
the reference dumbbell had a motion gain of 1.5, and the
comparison dumbbell had motion gains of -30%, -15%, -8%,
+8%, +15%, or +30% of the reference gain (that is, motion

Each participant answer was measured to calculate the
the JND of pseudo-weight sensation. Furthermore, ques-
tionnaires regarding tiredness, conﬁdence of the answer,
strategy to answer, and impression of vibration were asked.

4.1.4 Procedure

Ten participants (7 males and 3 females in their 20s) partic-
ipated. The ﬂow was almost the same with the ﬁrst exper-
iment until the ﬁrst part of the experiment. The difference
was that the calibration and measurement were conducted
only for the inner tendon vibration. Subsequently, partic-
ipants continued to the main part of the constant stimuli
method. There were 5 blocks in total. Within a block, all
combinations of the two vibration conditions and six motion
gains of the comparison condition were presented consider-
ing the presenting order of the reference and comparison
dumbbells. Therefore, each block included 24 trials, and
each comparison condition was compared to the reference
condition ten times. At the end of the experiment, par-
ticipants removed all of their equipment and ﬁlled in a
questionnaire. Subsequently, they were remunerated with
an Amazon gift card of 20 euro for their participation.

4.1.5 Hypotheses

The hypothesis of this experiment is as follows:

[H2-1] The JND does not increase because users rely

more on the visual information.

As depicted in Fig.5, the variance of the somatosen-
sory sensation increase if the tendon vibration functions

JOURNAL OF

9

as noise, increasing the variance of the ﬁnal perception:
pseudo-weight sensation. In this case, the JND increases.
However, we hypothesized that participants would rely
more on visual cues because of the noise on somatosensory
information and would then decrease the variance of the
visual sensation (Fig. 7). If this occurs, the JND would not
be necessarily increased.

4.2 Results: JND of pseudo-weight sensation

All participants successfully conﬁrmed to experience mo-
tion illusion in the ﬁrst part of the experiment. The Probit
analysis [56] was conducted for the results of each partic-
ipant, which calculated the parameters of the best-ﬁtting
cumulative normal function. Then, we computed the JND
for each vibration condition as a half of the distance between
the points of 25% and 75% on the psychometric curve for
each participant. These values were 0.20 ± 0.02 for the
condition without vibration (control) and 0.19 ± 0.01 for
the condition with the inner tendon vibration (vibration).
The JND of the vibration condition was approximately 5%
smaller than that of the control condition, but a t-test con-
ﬁrmed that this difference is insigniﬁcant. Figure 8 shows
the psychometric curves calculated with the averaged val-
ues of all participants’ results.

4.3 Discussion

The results of the JND suggests that the sensitivity of
pseudo-weight discrimination was the same or even better
with the inner tendon vibration than that without vibration.
These results support [H2-1]. Tendon vibration is known to
degrade proprioceptive responsiveness [51], [52] and this
should induce an increment of the variance of somatosen-
sory information and thus induce that of ﬁnal perception,
that is, pseudo-weight sensation. However, considering the
results obtained, the variance of visual information should
decrease. Regarding this, as mentioned above, we hypoth-
esize that this is because participants relied more on visual

Fig. 8. XP2 results: Psychometric curves of the averaged results. It plots
the average percentage of answers in which participants considered the
reference dumbbell to be heavier than the comparison dumbbell. The
error bar indicates the standard error (SE). Note that Control indicates
the condition without vibration.

information, and this decreases the variance of the informa-
tion [57].

5 XP3: INFLUENCE OF TENDON VIBRATION ON
PSEUDO-
SENSATION MEASURED BY
WEIGHT

WEIGHT INDUCED BY VISUAL MOTION GAIN

This experiment investigated the PSE between the pseudo-
weight sensation induced by the inner tendon vibration
and that by motion gain. Through the ﬁrst and second
experiment and our informal test, we observed that ten-
don vibration increased a sense of weight while lifting a
virtual object in VR. As mentioned in Section 2, the effect
of tendon vibration on force and weight sensation has
been investigated in previous studies. However, ﬁrst, as the
results regarding the motion illusion in the ﬁrst experiment
were different from those obtained in previous studies, we
considered that investigating the effect on weight was also
important using our practical setup. In addition, to the best
of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to measure the effect
of tendon vibration on the sense of weight by comparing
the pseudo-weight sensation induced by motion gain. The
objective of this study was to investigate the PSE between
the sense of weight induced by tendon vibration and that
by motion gain. The knowledge of the PSE leads the design
guide of the use of tendon vibration with pseudo-haptics
technique concerning the sense of weight.

5.1 Methods

The equipment and virtual environment was the same as
the ﬁrst and second experiments.

5.1.1 Task
The experiment was conducted following a staircase design.
The objective was to determine the PSE between the the
sense of weight induced by the inner tendon vibration and
that by a motion gain. The inner tendon vibration was
used considering the results of the ﬁrst experiment that
indicated that the inner tendon vibration was most effective
to the motion sensation for our lifting task. As a task of
the staircase method, participants lifted a reference and
comparison dumbbell independently, and then answered
the two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) question “Which is
heavier?” with ”the former,” or ”the latter.” The lifting task
was the same as that of the ﬁrst and second experiments.

5.1.2 Conditions
There were primarily 2 groups of staircase methods: vib-ref
and con-ref. In the vib-ref group, the reference condition was
a motion gain of 1.0 with inner tendon vibration. Here, the
comparison condition was without vibration and with a mo-
tion gain that was one of ten steps from 0.4 to 1.0. In the con-
ref group, the reference condition was without vibration and
with a motion gain of 1.0. Then, the comparison condition
was with inner tendon vibration and a motion gain that was
one of ten steps from 1.0 to 2.5. Our pilot test determined
these values. In the vib-ref group, the PSE indicates a motion
gain that induces the same weight sensation as the inner
tendon vibration. In the con-ref group, the PSE indicates the
motion gain required to cancel the sense of weight induced
by the inner tendon vibration.

0.000.250.500.751.001.001.251.501.752.00Visual GainProbability of estimating  the reference was heavierVibControlVibrationJOURNAL OF

5.1.3 Collected data

Each motion gain at a turning point was measured to
calculate the PSEs by averaging them.

5.1.4 Procedure

Twenty participants (12 males and 8 females in their 20s)
participated in the experiment. The procedure before the
main task was the same as that in the ﬁrst and second
experiments, including the calibration of the vibrator posi-
tions and measurement of motion illusion. The main part
was conducted with the staircase method, and the vib-
ref and con-ref groups were the two blocks. Both groups
had two series where one began with a minimum motion
gain of 0.4 for vib-ref and 1.0 for con-ref, and the other
with a maximum gain of 1.0 for vib-ref and 2.5 for con-
ref. The gain of the comparison dumbbell was increased or
decreased in an interval of 0.06 for vib-ref group or 0.15
for con-ref group following the participants’ answers. When
participants answered that the comparison dumbbell was
heavier, the motion gain increased by one step. When par-
ticipants answered that the reference dumbbell was heavier,
the motion gain decreased by one step. A block of stair case
methods ended when both series reached the 5th change
of the direction on increasing or decreasing the gain. In
addition, the motion gain did not exceed the minimum or
maximum gain. If the motion gain was to exceed the limit,
it remained at the same gain, and the count of turning
points increased. The presenting order of reference and
comparison conditions were randomized. In addition, the
order of blocks was counterbalanced.

5.2 Results: PSE of pseudo-weight sensation between
tendon vibration and motion gain

All participants successfully conﬁrmed experiencing motion
illusion in the ﬁrst part of the experiment. The 10 motion
gains at the turning points in a block were averaged for
each participant to compute the PSE. Table 1 indicates the
PSE results. The PSE was 0.64±0.22 in the vib-ref group and
1.62±0.76 in the con-ref group (each PSE was average±2σ).
Here, the results of the PSE had large variances beyond the
JNDs obtained in XP2. Then, we analyzed the correlation
between the two PSE results to determine if they were
consistent within each participant. Figure 9 shows the plots
of PSE results of each participant in the vib-ref and con-ref
groups. The Pearson correlation test was conducted for the
relationship between the results of the PSE in the vib-ref and
con-ref groups. Consequently, we determined a signiﬁcant
negative correlation (r = −0.61, p = 0.0042). In addition,
the same correlation test was conducted for the relationship
between the absolute value of the intensity of motion illu-
sion at rest and each PSE result. Then, a signiﬁcant positive
correlation was found between motion illusion and the PSE
of the con-ref group (r = 0.68, p = 0.00093).

5.3 Discussion

The PSE from the two groups were in a symmetrical re-
lationship. This suggests that the inner tendon vibration
increases the sense of weight and its effect is the same as
that using a motion gain of 0.64. That is, a motion gain

TABLE 1
PSE of pseudo-weight sensation between inner tendon vibration and
motion gain.

10

Condition
vib-ref
con-ref

PSE (average ± 2σ)
0.64 ± 0.22
1.62 ± 0.76

Fig. 9. Plots of the PSE results of each participant in the vib-ref and
con-ref groups.

of 1.62 cancels its effect. Studies mentioned in the related
work section have noted that tendon vibration increases
the signal from muscle spindle and/or tendon organ, and
this might lead to an increment of the sense of weight.
However, the results had large variances. As shown in
Fig. 9 and the results of the correlation test, participants
had consistent PSE results between the vib-ref and con-
ref groups. This indicates that the effect of the vibration
on pseudo-weight sensation has individual differences. The
results of the correlation test between the intensity of motion
illusion at rest and PSE of the con-ref group support this.

6 GENERAL DISCUSSION

This study investigated whether tendon vibration can ex-
tend the effect of the pseudo-haptic technique. Our results
suggest that the inner tendon vibration while lifting a vir-
tual object can extend an applicable motion gain without
being noticed by users (XP1) with the similar resolution of
pseudo-weight sensation as without vibration (XP2). Our
ﬁrst experiment suggested that an unnoticeable, strict appli-
cable gain was from 0.71 to 1.41 without tendon vibration
and 0.74 to 1.53 with inner tendon vibration. In addition,
the second experiment showed that the JND of pseudo-
weight sensation was 0.20 and 0.19 for each condition.
Here, we could roughly compute that visual motion gain
could present at least four levels of weight sensation (by
(1.41 − 0.71)/0.20) , and visual motion gain with inner
tendon vibration could present at least ﬁve levels of weight
sensation (by (1.53 − 0.74)/0.19). This effect indicates that
tendon vibration could increase the number of presentable
levels of pseudo-weight sensation. In addition, to the best of
our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to show the possibility

1.01.52.02.50.40.50.60.70.8PSE in Vib-RefPSE in Con-RefJOURNAL OF

11

Moreover, we consider that a visual gain with users feeling
uncomfortable or without sensory integration occurring be-
cause of a large visual/physical motion discrepancy is not
the same as the DT. Some studies have positively applied
visual gain above the DT and succeeded in presenting a
greater pseudo-weight sensation [5]. However, a method for
measuring the range of this practical visual gain has not yet
been established. Therefore, another study could propose an
experimental method for investigating this practical range
of pseudo-haptics with tendon vibration. Finally, the lim-
itation of our use of tendon vibration is that it emits noise
and may impair the VR experience. Although no participant
mentioned that they felt uncomfortable or annoyed by the
sound or vibration, using noise-cancelling headphone and
avoiding long-duration uses may create better experiences.

7 CONCLUSION

This study investigated the possibility of using tendon vi-
bration to extend pseudo-haptic sensations in VR. In par-
ticular, we evaluated the effect of tendon vibration on the
DT of visual/physical motion discrepancy (XP1), the JND of
pseudo-weight sensation induced by visual gain (XP2), and
the sense of weight by computing the PSE with the pseudo-
weight induced by visual gain (XP3). The results of the
ﬁrst and second experiments show the possibility of a new
approach that uses tendon vibration as noise on somatosen-
sory information to enable the pseudo-weight sensation to
rely more on visual information, and the PSE obtained in
the third experiment helps developers design a wider range
of pseudo-weight sensation. Our results suggest that tendon
vibration nearly doubles the capacity for simulating virtual
weights. In summary, our results show that tendon vibration
has a potential to extend pseudo-haptic techniques in VR.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the MEXT Grant-in-
Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (S) (19H05661), JSPS Grant-in-
Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (A) (21H04883), and Grant-in-
Aid for JSPS Fellows (21J12284).

REFERENCES

[1] A. Pusch and A. L´ecuyer, “Pseudo-haptics: from the theoretical
foundations to practical system design guidelines,” in Proceedings
of the 13th international conference on multimodal interfaces, 2011, pp.
57–64.

[2] Y. Ujitoko and Y. Ban, “Survey of pseudo-haptics: Haptic feedback
design and application proposals,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 699–711, 2021.

[3] A. L´ecuyer, S. Coquillart, A. Kheddar, P. Richard, and P. Coiffet,
“Pseudo-haptic feedback: can isometric input devices simulate
force feedback?” in Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No.
00CB37048).

IEEE, 2000, pp. 83–90.

[4] Y. Taima, Y. Ban, T. Narumi, T. Tanikawa, and M. Hirose, “Control-
ling fatigue while lifting objects using pseudo-haptics in a mixed
reality space,” in 2014 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS).
IEEE,
2014, pp. 175–180.

[5] M. Rietzler, F. Geiselhart, J. Gugenheimer, and E. Rukzio, “Break-
ing the tracking: Enabling weight perception using perceivable
tracking offsets,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2018, pp. 1–12.

Fig. 10. Summary of results: The pseudo-haptic technique can present
four steps of different weight sensation without the tendon vibration (the
range: 0.71 - 1.41; the resolution: 0.20) while it can present ﬁve steps
with the tendon vibration (the range: 0.74 - 1.53; the resolution: 0.19).
The most efﬁcient manner of combining visual motion gain and inner
tendon vibration is using a gain of 0.74 to 1.53 with the tendon vibration
and 0.98 to 1.41 without vibration. Then, the pseudo-haptic technique
can present 7 steps in total.

of using tendon vibration as noise on somatosensory infor-
mation to increase the contribution of visual information on
pseudo-haptics sensation.

Moreover, this study is the ﬁrst to compute the PSE of
pseudo-weight sensation between tendon vibration and mo-
tion gain (XP3). With the PSE obtained in our experiment,
developers can design a wider range of pseudo-weight
sensation by combining tendon vibration and motion gain.
Fig.10 summarizes our results. Practically, as the PSE was
0.64 and using the results of the ﬁrst experiment, we could
compute that the presentable range of weight sensation
with tendon vibration and gain is to be theoretically the
same as 0.45 (= 0.64 ∗ 0.74) to 0.98 (= 0.64 ∗ 1.53) with-
out tendon vibration. Therefore, considering the resolution
(results of XP2), the most efﬁcient manner of combining
techniques is to use 0.74 to 1.53 of gain with tendon vibra-
tion and 0.98 to 1.41 without tendon vibration. Then, we
can present at least seven levels of weight sensation (by
(1.53 − 0.74)/0.19 + (1.41 − 0.98)/0.20). We nearly dou-
ble the capacity for simulating virtual weights: four steps
only without vibration, and up to seven steps exploiting
vibrations. However, because the effect of tendon vibration
has individual differences, implementing a calibration step
to map the effects of tendon vibration and motion gain for
each user may be better in a practical application.

Future research may explore additional vibration param-
eters and interaction design that can further enhance the
effect. One possible method for enhancing the effect is to
utilize the aftereffect of tendon vibration [53]. For example,
to increase the effect of motion illusion, activate one side of
the tendon vibration until before lifting a virtual object and
then switch it to the other side of the tendon vibration im-
mediately after lifting. In addition, in the second and third
experiments, several visual gains were used above the DT.
The DT of the visual/physical motion discrepancy obtained
in the ﬁrst experiment is the strictest criterion for an appli-
cable visual gain. However, we believe that manipulating
the weight perception with gains above the DT is possible,
and that the practical range of the applicable visual gain is
greater than the DT obtained in the ﬁrst experiment. First, in
our experiment and in other psychological experiments that
investigate this type of DT, the threshold would be stricter
than in practical uses case because the tasks require partici-
pants to focus on the DT, thereby improving sensitivity to it.

JOURNAL OF

12

[6] M. Samad, E. Gatti, A. Hermes, H. Benko, and C. Parise, “Pseudo-
haptic weight: Changing the perceived weight of virtual objects
by manipulating control-display ratio,” in Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2019, pp.
1–13.

[7] T. Honda, N. Hagura, T. Yoshioka, and H. Imamizu, “Imposed
visual feedback delay of an action changes mass perception based
on the sensory prediction error,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 4, p.
760, 2013.

[8] N. L. Williams and T. C. Peck, “Estimation of rotation gain thresh-
olds considering fov, gender, and distractors,” IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3158–3168,
2019.

[9] N. Ogawa, T. Narumi, and M. Hirose, “Effect of avatar appearance
on detection thresholds for remapped hand movements,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 27, no. 7,
pp. 3182–3197, 2020.

[10] U. Proske and S. C. Gandevia, “The proprioceptive senses: their
roles in signaling body shape, body position and movement, and
muscle force,” Physiological reviews, 2012.

[11] M. W. Taylor, J. L. Taylor, and T. Seizova-Cajic, “Muscle vibration-
induced illusions: review of contributing factors, taxonomy of
illusions and user’s guide,” Multisensory Research, vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 25–63, 2017.

[12] U. Proske and T. Allen, “The neural basis of the senses of effort,
force and heaviness,” Experimental Brain Research, vol. 237, no. 3,
pp. 589–599, 2019.

[13] K. Hagbarth, “Motor effects of vibratory muscle stimuli

in
man,” in Noble Symposium I. Muscular afferents and motor control.
Almqvist & Wiksell, 1966, pp. 177–186.

[14] F. A. Sanz, D. A. G. J´auregui, M. Marchal, and A. L´ecuyer, “Elastic
images: Perceiving local elasticity of images through a novel
pseudo-haptic deformation effect,” ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 17–1, 2013.

[15] S. Takamuku and H. Gomi, “What you feel is what you see: inverse
dynamics estimation underlies the resistive sensation of a delayed
cursor,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, vol.
282, no. 1811, p. 20150864, 2015.

[16] T. Narumi, Y. Ujitoko, Y. Ban, T. Tanikawa, K. Hirota, and M. Hi-
rose, “Resistive swipe: Visuo-haptic interaction during swipe ges-
tures to scroll background images on touch interfaces,” in 2017
IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 334–339.

[17] Y. Ujitoko, Y. Ban, and K. Hirota, “Presenting static friction sen-
sation at stick-slip transition using pseudo-haptic effect,” in 2019
IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 181–186.

[18] ——, “Modulating ﬁne roughness perception of vibrotactile tex-
tured surface using pseudo-haptic effect,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1981–1990,
2019.

[19] A. L´ecuyer, J.-M. Burkhardt, and L. Etienne, “Feeling bumps and
holes without a haptic interface: the perception of pseudo-haptic
textures,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems, 2004, pp. 239–246.

[20] T. Hachisu, G. Cirio, M. Marchal, A. L´ecuyer, and H. Kajimoto,
“Virtual chromatic percussions simulated by pseudo-haptic and
vibrotactile feedback,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Con-
ference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology, 2011, pp.
1–5.

[21] M. O. Ernst and M. S. Banks, “Humans integrate visual and haptic
information in a statistically optimal fashion,” Nature, vol. 415, no.
6870, pp. 429–433, 2002.

[22] M. O. Ernst and H. H. B ¨ulthoff, “Merging the senses into a robust
percept,” Trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 162–169, 2004.
[23] D. M. Wolpert, Z. Ghahramani, and M. I. Jordan, “An internal
model for sensorimotor integration,” Science, vol. 269, no. 5232,
pp. 1880–1882, 1995.

[24] G. Ariff, O. Donchin, T. Nanayakkara, and R. Shadmehr, “A real-
time state predictor in motor control: study of saccadic eye move-
ments during unseen reaching movements,” Journal of neuroscience,
vol. 22, no. 17, pp. 7721–7729, 2002.

[25] R. Shadmehr and F. A. Mussa-Ivaldi, “Adaptive representation of
dynamics during learning of a motor task,” Journal of neuroscience,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 3208–3224, 1994.

[26] S. Runeson and G. Frykholm, “Kinematic speciﬁcation of dynam-
ics as an informational basis for person-and-action perception:
expectation, gender recognition, and deceptive intention.” Journal
of experimental psychology: general, vol. 112, no. 4, p. 585, 1983.

[27] D. C. Knill and A. Pouget, “The bayesian brain: the role of
uncertainty in neural coding and computation,” TRENDS in Neu-
rosciences, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 712–719, 2004.

[28] K. Friston, “The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain?”
Trends in cognitive sciences, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 293–301, 2009.
[29] Y. Ban and Y. Ujitoko, “Enhancing the pseudo-haptic effect on
the touch panel using the virtual string,” in 2018 IEEE Haptics
Symposium (HAPTICS).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 278–283.

[30] P. B. Matthews, “Mammalian muscle receptors and their central

actions,” 1972.

[31] G. M. Goodwin, D. McCloskey, and P. Matthews, “The contri-
bution of muscle afferents to keslesthesia shown by vibration
induced illusionsof movement and by the effects of paralysing
joint afferents,” Brain, vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 705–748, 1972.

[32] D. McCloskey, P. Ebeling, and G. Goodwin, “Estimation of weights
and tensions and apparent involvement of a “sense of effort”,”
Experimental neurology, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 220–232, 1974.

[33] L. Jones and I. Hunter, “Effect of muscle tendon vibration on the
perception of force,” Experimental neurology, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 35–
45, 1985.

[34] S. Le Franc, M. Fleury, M. Cogne, S. Butet, C. Barillot, A. Lecuyer,
and I. Bonan, “Inﬂuence of virtual reality visual feedback on the
illusion of movement induced by tendon vibration of wrist in
healthy participants,” Plos one, vol. 15, no. 11, p. e0242416, 2020.

[35] K. Ushiyama, A. Takahashi, and H. Kajimoto, “Modulation of a
hand-held object’s property through proprioceptive stimulation
during active arm movement: Proprioceptive modulation of a
hand-held object’s property,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[36] E. Naito, H. H. Ehrsson, S. Geyer, K. Zilles, and P. E. Roland,
“Illusory arm movements activate cortical motor areas: a positron
emission tomography study,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 19,
no. 14, pp. 6134–6144, 1999.

[37] R. Kitada, E. Naito, and M. Matsumura, “Perceptual changes in
illusory wrist ﬂexion angles resulting from motor imagery of the
same wrist movements,” Neuroscience, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 701–707,
2002.

[38] A. Sittig, J. van der Gon Denier, and C. Gielen, “The contribution of
afferent information on position and velocity to the control of slow
and fast human forearm movements,” Experimental Brain Research,
vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 33–40, 1987.

[39] J. Inglis and J. Frank, “The effect of agonist/antagonist muscle
vibration on human position sense,” Experimental Brain Research,
vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 573–580, 1990.

[40] D. Burke, K.-E. Hagbarth, L. L ¨ofstedt, and B. G. Wallin, “The
responses of human muscle spindle endings to vibration of non-
contracting muscles.” The Journal of physiology, vol. 261, no. 3, pp.
673–693, 1976.

[41] M. Tsuge, M. Izumizaki, K. Kigawa, T. Atsumi, and I. Homma,
“Interaction between vibration-evoked proprioceptive illusions
and mirror-evoked visual illusions in an arm-matching task,”
Experimental brain research, vol. 223, no. 4, pp. 541–551, 2012.
[42] G. Fusco, G. Tieri, and S. M. Aglioti, “Visual feedback from a vir-
tual body modulates motor illusion induced by tendon vibration,”
Psychological Research, vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 926–938, 2021.

[43] C. A. Porro, M. P. Francescato, V. Cettolo, M. E. Diamond,
P. Baraldi, C. Zuiani, M. Bazzocchi, and P. E. Di Prampero,
“Primary motor and sensory cortex activation during motor per-
formance and motor imagery: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 16, no. 23, pp. 7688–
7698, 1996.

[44] C. Thyrion and J.-P. Roll, “Perceptual integration of illusory and
imagined kinesthetic images,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 29,
no. 26, pp. 8483–8492, 2009.

[45] E. Cafarelli and C. E. Kostka, “Effect of vibration on static force
sensation in man,” Experimental neurology, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 331–
340, 1981.

[46] B. L. Luu, B. L. Day, J. D. Cole, and R. C. Fitzpatrick, “The
fusimotor and reafferent origin of the sense of force and weight,”
The Journal of physiology, vol. 589, no. 13, pp. 3135–3147, 2011.
[47] E. Cafarelli and J. Layton-Wood, “Effect of vibration on force
sensation in fatigued muscle.” Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 516–521, 1986.

[48] J. B. Fallon and V. G. Maceﬁeld, “Vibration sensitivity of human
muscle spindles and golgi tendon organs,” Muscle & Nerve: Ofﬁcial
Journal of the American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 21–29, 2007.

13

Anatole L ´ecuyer is director of research and
head of Hybrid team at Inria, Renne, France.
He is currently Associate Editor of IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics, Frontiers in Virtual Reality and Presence.
He was Program Chair of IEEE VR 2015-2016
and General Chair of IEEE ISMAR 2017. Ana-
tole L ´ecuyer obtained the IEEE VGTC Technical
Achievement Award in Virtual/Augmented Real-
ity in 2019.

JOURNAL OF

[49] D. McCloskey, “Differences between the senses of movement and
position shown by the effects of loading and vibration of muscles
in man,” Brain research, vol. 61, pp. 119–131, 1973.

[50] F. Monjo, J. Shemmell, and N. Forestier, “The sensory origin of the
sense of effort is context-dependent,” Experimental brain research,
vol. 236, no. 7, pp. 1997–2008, 2018.

[51] O. Bock, K. Pipereit, and A. Mierau, “A method to reversibly
degrade proprioceptive feedback in research on human motor
control,” Journal of neuroscience methods, vol. 160, no. 2, pp. 246–
250, 2007.

[52] C. Brun and M. Guerraz, “Anchoring the “ﬂoating arm”: Use of
proprioceptive and mirror visual feedback from one arm to control
involuntary displacement of the other arm,” Neuroscience, vol. 310,
pp. 268–278, 2015.

[53] T. Kito, T. Hashimoto, T. Yoneda, S. Katamoto, and E. Naito, “Sen-
sory processing during kinesthetic aftereffect following illusory
hand movement elicited by tendon vibration,” Brain research, vol.
1114, no. 1, pp. 75–84, 2006.

[54] J. S. Schoﬁeld, M. R. Dawson, J. P. Carey, and J. S. Hebert, “Charac-
terizing the effects of amplitude, frequency and limb position on
vibration induced movement illusions: Implications in sensory-
motor rehabilitation,” Technology and Health Care, vol. 23, no. 2, pp.
129–141, 2015.

[55] E. Burns and F. P. Brooks, “Perceptual sensitivity to vi-
sual/kinesthetic discrepancy in hand speed, and why we might
care,” in Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software
and technology, 2006, pp. 3–8.

[56] D. Finney, “Probit analysis (3rd edition),” 1971.
[57] W. A. Johnston and V. J. Dark, “Selective attention.” Annual review

of psychology, 1986.

Yutaro Hirao received his B.S. and M.S. in en-
gineering from Waseda University (2018 and
2020) in Japan. He is currently working toward
the PhD degree in engineering from the Uni-
versity of Tokyo. His research topics are mainly
virtual reality (VR) and cross-modal interaction.

Tomohiro Amemiya is an associate professor at
the Graduate School of Information Science and
Technology, the University of Tokyo. He received
BS and MS degrees in mechano-informatics
from the University of Tokyo in 2002 and 2004.
From 2004 to 2019, he was a research scientist
at NTT Communication Science Laboratories.
He received his Ph.D. from Osaka University in
2008. His research interests include somatosen-
sory perception and human-computer interac-
tion technologies.

Takuji Narumi is an associate professor at the
Graduate School of
Information Science and
the University of Tokyo. His re-
Technology,
search interests broadly include perceptual mod-
iﬁcation and human augmentation with virtual
reality and augmented reality technologies. He
received BE and ME degree from the University
of Tokyo in 2006 and 2008 respectively. He also
received his Ph.D. in Engineering from the Uni-
versity of Tokyo in 2011.

Ferran Argelaguet is an Inria research scien-
tist at the Hybrid team (Rennes, France) since
2016. He received his PhD degree from the
Universitat Polit `ecnica de Catalunya (UPC), in
Barcelona, Spain in 2011. His main research
interests include 3D user interfaces, virtual re-
ality and human-computer interaction. He was
program co-chair of the IEEE Virtual Reality and
3D User Interfaces conference track in 2019 and
2020, and the journal track in 2022.

