Quantifying Teaching Behaviour in
Robot Learning from Demonstration

Aran Sena1 and Matthew Howard1

Robotics

of

Journal

International
Research
XX(X):1–16
©The Author(s) 2019
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/

9
1
0
2

y
a
M
0
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
2
4
0
.
5
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
Learning from demonstration allows for rapid deployment of robot manipulators to a great many tasks, by relying
on a person showing the robot what
to do rather than programming it. While this approach provides many
opportunities, measuring, evaluating and improving the person’s teaching ability has remained largely unexplored in
robot manipulation research. To this end, a model for learning from demonstration is presented here which incorporates
the teacher’s understanding of, and inﬂuence on, the learner. The proposed model is used to clarify the teacher’s
objectives during learning from demonstration, providing new views on how teaching failures and efﬁciency can be
deﬁned. The beneﬁt of this approach is shown in two experiments (n = 30 and n = 36, respectively), which highlight
the difﬁculty teachers have in providing effective demonstrations, and show how ∼ 169 − 180% improvement in teaching
efﬁciency can be achieved through evaluation and feedback shaped by the proposed framework, relative to unguided
teaching.

Keywords
Learning from Demonstration, Machine Teaching, Human Robot Interaction

1 Introduction

The rise of collaborative robots—robots designed to work
safely in close proximity with people—is making it more
common for people interacting with robots to have little
or no technical background. These systems reduce the
requirement for conventional programming skills for robot
operation through the use of simpliﬁed programming
interfaces, making deployment faster and more ﬂexible. Of
particular interest for deploying such systems is Learning
from Demonstration (LfD) as a way to enable novice users
(i.e., people with no relevant technical background) to teach
robots to perform useful work, similarly to how they would
train an ordinary co-worker (Billard et al., 2008; Argall et al.,
2009; Calinon and Lee, 2017).

Key to making LfD practical in the real world, is ensuring
efﬁcient skill-learning by the robot. Efﬁcient skill-learning
in this context means the robot is able to not just learn
to perform the demonstrated task as it was shown by the
person, but to generalise beyond the speciﬁc demonstrations
provided, to new circumstances. This ability helps the robot
to adapt to uncertainty during operation and reduces the
teaching effort for the person doing the teaching.

into its learning process,

Deploying systems that can learn generalised tasks from
human teachers presents a number of challenges for both the
learner and the teacher. When a system incorporates human
input
the system performance
strongly depends on the quality of the data provided. As
noted by Argall et al. (2009), key issues that can arise as a
result of poor teaching in LfD include (i) undemonstrated
states, (ii) ambiguous demonstrations, and (iii) unsuccessful
demonstrations, all of which might confuse the robot learner,
resulting in poor performance during skill realisation. Poor
teaching is especially prevalent with novice teachers and

Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2015/06/09 v1.01]

Demonstrations
Generated
Target

Figure 1. Learning from Demonstration can be used to learn a
skill—here, disposal of unhealthy plants from a plant tray—from
a limited set of user-provided demonstrations. Key to this is the
ability to generalise from the demonstrated trajectories (cyan) to
determine the appropriate trajectory to pick plants from
previously unseen locations (red).

can be attributed to teachers lacking a shared mental model
with the robot, or a lack of understanding of how and what
the robot learns during the teaching process (Cakmak and
Thomaz, 2014; Hellstr¨om and Bensch, 2018).

The role of the teacher in LfD systems is an under-
explored area of research, with a lack of formal methods for
measuring, evaluating and modifying teaching behaviour.
To address this, a new theoretical
the
assessment and guidance of LfD is presented here. Built

framework for

1Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK

Corresponding author:
Aran Sena, King’s College London Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK.
Email: aran.sena@kcl.ac.uk

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. “Low-batch” manual tasks found in the ornamental horticulture industry. (a) Quality assessment automation is often
hampered due to companies growing a large variety of products, and (b) packaging often requires manual labour due to varying
retail packaging requirements that can change seasonally, thus creating a need for more ﬂexible automation systems.

on prior work in machine teaching, active learning, and
LfD, the proposed framework enables a formal analysis
of human-robot teaching during LfD to help people more
effectively teach robots new skills. It facilitates (i) the
deﬁnition of metrics to assess users’ quality of teaching,
(ii) the quantitative measurement of teaching failures, such
as undemonstrated states and ambiguous demonstrations,
and (iii) aids the development of tools (visualisations,
procedures, etc.) that can provide a clearer view of how to
guide the teaching process.

The effectiveness of this framework as a means of helping
novices during LfD is then shown in two experiments with
novice users, extending the work presented in (Sena et al.,
2018). It is shown in these validation experiments that the
evaluation and feedback tools derived from the proposed
framework allow for improving teaching performance, in
the order of a 180% improvement relative to unguided
the beneﬁt of measuring,
conditions. This highlights
evaluating, and modifying human teaching practice during
LfD, and provides insight into how LfD could be more
widely used as a practical
for deploying robotic
automation.

tool

2 Background and Related Work

Presented here is background on the ﬁeld of LfD, and the
current gap in considering the role of the teacher. Insights
from the related domain of algorithmic machine teaching
are then considered, to point to new directions for LfD
modelling.

Learning from demonstration in robotics

is often
described as a form of supervised learning, where a teacher
provides examples of a target
task they would like a
robot to perform, which the robot uses to learn a control
policy (Billard et al., 2008; Argall et al., 2009; Billing and
Hellstr¨om, 2010). LfD is a useful approach for robot task
learning as it reduces the complexity of search spaces for
learning real-world tasks, and reduces the amount of tedious
programming required which helps novice users use robot
systems (Billard et al., 2008; Chernova and Thomaz, 2014).
There is a large body of research available on the
policy learning aspect of LfD, including symbolic reasoning
methods (Billard et al., 2008; Ahmadzadeh et al., 2015),
reinforcement learning based methods (Schaal, 1996; Ng
and Russell, 2000; Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Kormushev et al.,
2013), dynamical system modelling methods (Schaal, 2006;
Pervez and Lee, 2017), probabilistic methods (Asfour et al.,

Prepared using sagej.cls

2006; Calinon and Billard, 2007b; Cederborg et al., 2010;
Calinon, 2015; Maeda et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018),
particle based approaches (Groth and Henrich, 2014; Orendt
et al., 2016), and geometric based methods (Ahmadzadeh
and Chernova, 2018). There is, however, less research found
in robot LfD on the teaching provided by people to robots,
particularly for learning grasping tasks.

While expert-level knowledge may not be required with
LfD, with many possible policy learning methods, there will
be many different requirements for the data provided to the
learning system. The optimal teaching strategy a user should
use may therefore be difﬁcult to identify for novice users.

2.1 Teaching Feedback and Evaluation

Feedback from robot learners to human teachers in LfD
is often considered in pragmatic terms, with solutions
determined based on the task at hand, or simply assuming
the teacher will be able to successfully interpret the learner’s
actions and adjust
their teaching behaviour accordingly.
Incremental methods in LfD are viewed as a way of gradually
learning a skill, and can be adapted to help improve and/or
overcome a users physical skill deﬁciencies (Calinon and
Billard, 2007a; Hoyos et al., 2016; Tykal et al., 2016).
However, even though the process is iterative, there has been
little research on how novice users interpret and adapt to the
learner over consecutive teaching steps.

Calinon and Billard (2007a) and Weiss et al. (2009)
both describe an incremental learning system where the
teachers can play during the learning
active role that
process is considered. In deciding where to provide a new
demonstration, the authors describe the teacher observing the
robot attempt the taught skill in new locations to determine
how to provide the next demonstration. This overlooks the
question of how the attempts should be selected to help
inform the teacher, whether the teacher will be able to
effectively test the learner’s knowledge, and whether the
teacher will be able to correctly interpret the attempts.

Effective feedback of what a robot has learned to do
can allow a teacher to provide more effective instruction
to the learner, without
the need for understanding how
learning is taking place. This is shown in Nicolescu and
Mataric (2003), where teachers observe robots executing
learned plans. Similarly, Argall et al. (2007) describe a
system for allowing a teacher to provide speciﬁc feedback
on trajectories generated by a learner after teaching. This
highlights the beneﬁt of informed teaching from a human

Sena and Howard

3

teacher, made possible through effective feedback of what
the robot has learned to do.

the robot

Toris et al. (2012) presents a user study comparing three
LfD policy learning methods on a sweeping task. A common
feedback point raised by participants was the need for
a better understanding of what
is “thinking”.
While direct comparison of learning methods for usability is
valuable, it is likely that speciﬁc methods will be of beneﬁt
to speciﬁc types of tasks.
An additional beneﬁt

to improving feedback in LfD
systems, for the beneﬁt of helping the teacher to understand
the learner’s capabilities, is this helps to facilitate trust
between the human teacher and robot learner (Yang et al.,
2017; Lewis et al., 2018), though this is not directly explored
in this work.

Other approaches

to achieving skill

learning and
generalisation with minimal teaching effort have considered
active learning based approaches, where the learner decides
when a new demonstration is required. This can be
achieved by either randomly sampling trajectories and
asking the teacher if they are acceptable, or requesting new
demonstration when entering regions of high uncertainty
(Argall et al., 2009; Cakmak and Thomaz, 2011; Maeda
et al., 2017). While this may be a complimentary approach
to improving teaching, this does not supersede the beneﬁt of
a good teacher, as discussed in §2.2, and thus the need to
understand how to measure and improve teaching remains
important.

Similar to issues found in LfD feedback, evaluation
of LfD systems has tended to focus on robot
learners.
Evaluation of teachers has more focused on their physical
skill when executing the task, such as in Ureche et al.
(2015) where metrics are proposed for determining quality
of bimanual demonstrations, and Cho and Jo (2013) where
an approach for identifying good teaching is determined by
identifying whether provided demonstrations are consistent
with previously provided demonstrations. While this could
help a learner avoid taking demonstrations from a bad
teacher, this does not directly evaluate the quality of teaching
and so does not necessarily help the teacher improve.

The proposed framework therefore intends to emphasise
the teacher’s contribution to learning, and provide new
approaches for designing feedback and evaluation tools in
LfD systems.

2.2 Insights from Machine Teaching

The ability to analyse teaching behaviour is critical
to
improving LfD performance. It can be shown that an optimal
teacher can theoretically provide the minimum number
of samples required to teach a learner a task, called the
teaching dimension (Goldman and Kearns, 1995; Balbach
and Zeugmann, 2009; Khan et al., 2011; Cakmak and
Thomaz, 2014; Zhu, 2015), by providing non-i.i.d. samples
to the learner which exploit the task structure and learning
method employed. In toy-problems, the learning method and
task structure can be clearly deﬁned for analysis, but when
using LfD for learning real-world tasks from novice users
this is rarely the case and so the analysis methods employed
in machine teaching are not directly applicable.
While identifying theoretically optimal
it

not be possible in general LfD tasks,

teachers may
is shown that

Prepared using sagej.cls

providing feedback and guidance to the teacher to help
them become informed about
the learning process can
change participants’ teaching strategy, resulting in improved
teaching performance (Zang et al., 2010; Cakmak and
Thomaz, 2014). It is this feedback mechanism for improving
the teacher that the here proposed framework aims to enable,
by providing a structure with which LfD problems can be
analysed, and with which support tools for teaching can be
designed.

2.3 Modelling Learning from Demonstration

There have been a number of efforts in the wider human
robot interaction (HRI) domain to model human behaviour
and cognition when interacting with robots. These have
typically focused on collaborative human-robot teams that
work together to complete a task, rather than the problem
faced in LfD of teaching new skills (Goodrich and Schultz,
2007; Nikolaidis et al., 2017; Hiatt et al., 2017).

Looking more speciﬁcally at HRI involving uncertain, or
noisy, communication, Hellstr¨om and Bensch (2018) present
a more general framework based on message compression.
Here they discuss the robot’s ability to inﬂuence the
person through communication, however, being a general
framework for HRI, it serves as a complementary resource
to the more focused LfD-speciﬁc framework presented here.

While there have been several works highlighting the
beneﬁts of considering the teacher as an active contributor
to the learning process in LfD, as discussed, there is a
lack of structure in considering their role. A signiﬁcant
previous effort to introduce a formal structure to LfD can be
found in (Billing and Hellstr¨om, 2010), where the authors
model the LfD process following a message compression
scheme. While this helps to provide a framework around the
learning process in LfD, there is no consideration for how
interaction with the system itself affects the teacher’s actions.
By not considering the inﬂuence of the teacher, the current
approaches of focusing on the learner neglects opportunities
for improving task learning performance in LfD.

An extension from Billing and Hellstr¨om (2010) is
considered in Cederborg and Oudeyer (2014), where the
authors present a generalised framework which considers
multiple modalities of teacher feedback to the robot, with
the view of using ambiguous teaching cues such as gaze to
infer the learner’s goal. Though the teacher is assumed to
be infallible, the learner is presented as a passive receiver
of information from the teacher in this case, missing the
opportunity to actively improve the teacher’s understanding
of the learning process beyond explicit training by an expert.

Given the lack of a distinct framework which captures
the teacher’s contribution to the LfD process explicitly,
and the beneﬁt of doing so as suggested in prior works,
there is a clear need to develop an improved formalism.
By considering the teacher explicitly, it would be possible
to deﬁne teaching objectives and quality measures in a
task-agnostic representation, and design tools that allow the
robot to more effectively guide the teacher toward better
demonstrations.

4

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

3 Learning and Teaching Framework

In this section, a new, formal framework for assessing the
role of the teacher in robot LfD is deﬁned, along with the
means by which it can be used to measure, evaluate, and
modify teacher behaviour. The proposed framework builds
on the prior work of Billing and Hellstr¨om (2010), but
diverges in that it places much greater emphasis on the role
of the teacher.

3.1 Framework Deﬁnition

The proposed framework describes the LfD process as a set
of mappings between an information history space, Ih, a
policy space, Π and a teacher belief space M. Ih represents
the space of all possible event histories, where each element
is a tuple containing initial conditions, observations, and
action sequences describing a full rollout of some behaviour
(i.e., task), . Π represents the space of all possible policies,
learnable by a selected learning function λ. M captures
the teacher’s belief about the extent to which the robot has
learnt the task, and the demonstrations necessary to improve
its performance. An overview of the framework is presented
in Figure 3, and the following highlights some of its salient
features.

3.1.1 Task Teaching — The
representing a
behaviour, or task, that the user would like to teach the robot
is denoted B, the task space (see Figure 3).

space

The elements of B represent all possible ways the robot
should be capable of performing the task. For instance, in the
plant grading task in Figure 1, B might represent the set of
all possible trajectories for picking and disposing of plants
from any location in a tray. The learner does not have access
directly to B, instead relying on a set of M demonstrations
provided by the teacher, b. In the plant grading task example,
b consists of the set of demonstrated trajectories for picking
plants from speciﬁc locations (cyan trajectories in Figure 1).
The goal of improving teaching efﬁciency is therefore
conceptually captured in this framework as that of providing
the best possible b to enable the robot to learn the target
behaviour B. A formal metric for this is discussed below
(refer to §3.2).

3.1.2 Task Learning — The framework assumes that the
robot is equipped with learning capability, such that it can
use demonstrations to form a task model. Speciﬁcally, there
exists a learning function, λ that uses b to derive a controller
π = λ(b) ∈ Π.

In real-world tasks, it is typically the case that* |b| (cid:28) |B|,
therefore the learning system must learn a model which can
generalise from the subset b provided. It is also typical that
learning occurs as an iterative operation, that is, the learnt
model is sequentially updated whenever new demonstrations
are provided. The framework captures this by assuming that
λ makes use of all past demonstrations provided, i.e., π =
λ(bm) ∈ Π, where bm contains the m demonstrations made
available.

3.1.3 Task Realisation — Once a controller has been
learnt, it can be executed by the learner to (try to) perform
the task. Execution of a task using a learnt model is denoted
as a mapping from Π to Ih through a “realisation function”
Λ, where each execution results in a task realisation, r =

Prepared using sagej.cls

Λ(π) ∈ Ih. Here, r represents the set of task realisations
which are actually observed by the teacher. In the plant
grading example task, these realisations, would represent the
robot using its learnt model to generate picking trajectories
(shown in red in Figure 1). The realisation space, R,
represents the set of all possible realisations of the learnt
model under different task conditions. It is desired that
the ﬁnal learnt model would result in B ⊆ R, which is
the case that the target task has been learnt completely.†
|r| (cid:28) |R|.
Note, however,
This means that R is not readily observable in practice,
hence measurement of learning performance may require
approximations.

is typically the case that

it

3.1.4 Generalisation — In order for the learner to learn
the target task effectively and efﬁciently, it is required for
the learner to generalise from the provided demonstrations.
Under the presented framework, generalisation is deﬁned as

(R \ b) ∩ B (cid:54)= ∅.

(1)

In other words, there exist task reproductions that do not
occur in the demonstrated data b, but do fall within the
deﬁnition of successful task performance B. This is captured
by the striped region in Figure 5.

3.1.5 Modelling the Teacher — To develop an intuition
for teaching behaviour and, importantly, why the teacher
can fail to provide adequate demonstrations, the framework
introduces a third space modelling the teacher’s beliefs about
the learning process. This is represented by a belief space,
M (see Figure 3).

As the teacher has no direct way of knowing the learner’s
state, R,
they must estimate it based on the available
information, i.e., the realisations that they observe, r. This
information is combined with the teacher’s prior knowledge
and biases, Q, to form an interpretation of the learner state
˜R. This is modelled as a mapping from Ih to an estimated
realisation space ˜R ⊂ M through an interpretation function
˜R = ω(r, Q).

iterative teaching,

In the context of

this estimated
realisation space is then used to guide the teacher’s next
demonstration, in conjunction with their internal idea of what
task the robot must learn ˜B, and their internal biases Q. This
is modelled as a mapping from M back into Ih through a
demonstration function

bm+1 = Ω( ˜R, ˜B, bm, Q).

(2)

With the addition of M, it is possible to close the loop on the
LfD process with a consideration for the teacher’s internal
belief processes and begin to reason about how teaching
failures occur in this iterative cycle, see Figure 4.

3.1.6 Objective Task Approximations If the task space
is very large or continuous, some form of approximation
ˆB ∼ B and ˆR ∼ R may be required for measurement of
teacher performance in practical situations. Note that the
approximations ˆB and ˆR are distinct from the teacher’s

∗Throughout this paper, |a| is used to denote the cardinality of the set a.
†Strict equality is not required, as R \ B represents event histories which
do not occur during the target task.

Sena and Howard

5

M

˜R

˜B

ω

Ω

R

Ih

r

b

B

Λ

λ

Π

π

Figure 3. Learning from Demonstration model incorporating imperfect teaching. The space introduced on the left, M, represents
the user’s understanding of what the robot has learned so far, and what they would like the robot to learn. The shaded regions
indicate parts of the process which are directly observable, i.e., the actual demonstrations provided b and the task realisations r.

Teacher

Learner

Data Set Update
bm+1 = Ω( ˜R, ˜B, bm, Q)

˜R

Interpretation
˜R = ω(r, Q)

b

r

Policy Derivation
π = λ(b) ∈ Π

π

Policy Execution
r = Λ(π) ∈ Ih

further measures which are useful for evaluating teacher
performance and identifying teaching failures.

3.2.1 Teaching Efﬁcacy — The primary objective of
teaching is to have the robot accurately learn the target skill,
such that it is able to perform the desired task. From the
perspective of learning, a necessary condition for this is that
Π contains a model sufﬁciently close to the target skill, and
that λ applied to the demonstrations bm correctly identiﬁes
this model.

Figure 4. LfD pipeline, accounting for teacher inﬂuence. The
teacher’s interpretation of the robot’s performance, ˜R is based
on the task realisations that they actually observe, r, and hidden
human factors (internal biases), Q. The way in which the
teacher provides new demonstrations then depends on this
interpretation, their interpretation of target behaviour ˜B, and Q.

internal evaluation of the task and learner performance ( ˜B
and ˜R, respectively) since they are objective, and therefore
independent of the individual teacher’s biases (i.e., are not
inﬂuenced by Q).

Such approximations may be formed through several
approaches, from state-space reduction via discretisation and
bounding, to statistical approximation with Monte Carlo
methods. For example, in the plant grading task (shown in
Figure 1), ˆR can be deﬁned as the trajectories generated
given a pre-deﬁned set of ‘test plant’ locations in the tray,
enabling a measure of the learnt policy’s performance to
be made, without having to exhaustively test every possible
plant location and every admissible approach trajectory for
any given plant.

The following sections describe measures of teaching
performance and teaching failure modes in the general case
of B and R, however, these are equally applicable in the
case that approximated spaces are used.

3.2 Evaluating Teaching by Demonstration

While evaluating the performance of the learner in LfD is
well established, relatively little attention has been given
to the performance of the teacher. The primary objective
of the teacher is to ensure the learnt model allows the
robot to execute the target skill. This primary objective is
formally deﬁned using the proposed feedback, along with

Prepared using sagej.cls

that

Billing and Hellstr¨om (2010) posit

the learning
objective can be described as the minimisation of B \ R
and R \ B. In other words B and R should overlap exactly,
meaning that the robot would reproduce the skill completely,
and exclusively to, the entire space of the target behaviour.
However, in practice, this objective is both (i) difﬁcult to
achieve (since in many cases, the spaces R and B are
too large to fully observe, refer to §3.1.3), and (ii) overly
prescriptive of the robot’s behaviour. Speciﬁcally, in terms
of the latter, it is often the case that learner behaviour in
conditions outside the desired task, i.e., R \ B, can simply
be ignored. For example, in the plant grading task in Figure 1,
the robot might learn how to pick plants in close proximity,
but external, to the tray as a consequence of learning to pick
those in the tray edge positions (a case of R \ B (cid:54)= ∅). This,
however, does not conﬂict with performing the target skill,
nor increase teaching effort.

Hence, the metric proposed here to evaluate teaching

efﬁcacy is

ε =

|R ∩ B|
|B|

,

ε ∈ [0, 1].

(3)

In other words, the goal is to achieve B ⊆ R, while ignoring
what the model has learned outside of the target space
(i.e., R \ B), normalised by the size of the task space B.
This measure can be treated as an objective measure of the
teacher’s ability in enabling the learner to acquire the skill
needed for the task.

The teacher’s performance can then be monitored during
interaction with the robot by considering the difference in
efﬁcacy with each additional demonstration.

3.2.2 Teaching Efﬁciency — Having deﬁned the measure
of teaching efﬁcacy,
is then possible to consider the
teaching efﬁciency. Efﬁciency in any given application is
often context-dependent, however, typically, it is desirable to

it

6

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

R

. . .

. . .

Ih

r

b

B

. . .

. . .

Figure 5. Focusing on the information history space, three
subsets of interest can be identiﬁed. The striped region in the
centre of the diagram represents parts of the task which have
been correctly learned through generalisation from the
demonstration set. The cross-hatched region then represents
undemonstrated regions of the task. Finally the shaded region
represents demonstrations that the teacher has performed
incorrectly. See §3.2.

minimise the total number of demonstrations required since
this is correlated with both the time spent teaching and the
space needed to store data.

in mind,

With this

teaching efﬁciency is deﬁned
here simply as efﬁcacy normalised by the number of
demonstrations provided

η =

ε
|b|

,

η ∈ [0, 1].

(4)

In other words, to be efﬁcient, the teacher must achieve the
maximum efﬁcacy with the fewest possible demonstrations.
Importantly, ambiguous demonstrations, undemonstrated
states, and incorrect demonstrations will all
in
reducing the teaching efﬁciency metric, as discussed below.

result

The deﬁnitions (3) and (4) provide a way to monitor a
user’s teaching performance. In the next section, commonly-
encountered teaching failures are analysed in light of the new
framework.

3.3 Understanding Teaching Failures

With the framework established, it is now possible to make
formal deﬁnitions of failure modes in LfD teaching, and
metrics for their quantitative evaluation. Speciﬁcally, the
below examines three common teaching failures, namely,
(i) incorrect demonstrations, (ii) ambiguous demonstrations,
and (iii) undemonstrated states. Each of these can be
attributed to poor teacher skill, Ω, affecting the quality of
data provided to the learner, or poor user judgement, ω,
affecting the accuracy of the teacher’s estimation ˜R (see
§3.1.5).

3.3.1 Incorrect Demonstrations — The most fundamental
teaching failure is that of providing incorrect, or unsuc-
cessful, demonstrations, i.e., demonstrations that are not
examples of the target skill. Formally, these can be deﬁned
as

b \ B (cid:54)= ∅

(5)

The effect of incorrect demonstrations can be observed
through a reduction in teaching efﬁcacy, as the learner’s
performance will degrade

εm − εm−1 ≤ 0.

(6)

Incorrect demonstrations can occur for a number of reasons.
For instance, the teacher may have poor skill in operating the
robot, possibly indicating they need more time interacting
with the robot to become accustomed to it. Alternatively,
the teacher may make errors, such as forgetting which
object
they had decided to demonstrate for the robot,
mid-demonstration. In both cases, incorrect demonstrations
represent a failure in the demonstration function, Ω, as a
result of human factors speciﬁc to the teacher, Q, in the
provision of demonstration data (see Figure 4). While it may
be difﬁcult to pinpoint a particular reason for an incorrect
demonstration, (6) provides a measure for identifying an
incorrect demonstration.

3.3.2 Undemonstrated States — As mentioned in §3.1.2,
usually |b| (cid:28) |B|, so it is inevitable that the learner must
generalise as much as possible from the demonstration set
to effectively perform the desired task. If there are relevant
states in which the robot cannot perform the task, after the
teacher has provided all of the demonstrations they think are
required for the robot to learn, these remaining states are
referred to as undemonstrated states.

Undemonstrated states occur as there is a limit to the
extent which generalisation is possible for a given b, and so
the teacher must form good estimations of the robot’s learned
ability to identify when enough data has been provided,
i.e., ideally ˜R ∼ R ∼ B.

The formalism deﬁnes undemonstrated states as the set

B \ (R ∪ b) (cid:54)= ∅

(7)

illustrated by the cross-hatched region in Figure 5.

From the perspective of the teacher, failure to adequately
demonstrate the task, such that
the learner is left with
undemonstrated states that prevent it performing the task is a
sign that the teacher does not understand the learner’s current
abilities, i.e., they have a poor estimate of ˜R where they
are overestimating the learner’s ability to perform the task.
Pathways to improving this estimate may include improving
the selection of task realisations r to give more useful
information to the teacher, or explicitly training the teacher
on how the robot learns in order to give them more accurate
expectations, Q, of the learner.

3.3.3 Ambiguous Demonstrations — The third teaching
failure that commonly occurs in LfD scenarios is the
issue of ambiguous demonstrations. These are deﬁned as
demonstrations which offer little or no new information
to the learner, such that performance on the target task
is not
improved. This can happen, for example, when
demonstrations provided by the teacher are very similar to
those already been seen by the learner.

With this in mind, an ambiguous demonstration is deﬁned
as one which is similar to demonstrations already provided,
within some threshold

illustrated by the solid-shaded region in Figure 5.

s(b, b) ≤ δa,

(8)

Prepared using sagej.cls

Sena and Howard

7

where b is the new demonstration, s(·, ·) is some measure of
similarity of b with respect to the existing demonstrations in
b, and δa is an ambiguity threshold level for s. For instance,
s could be the mean Euclidean distance difference between
a demonstrated trajectory and each of those in the data set b,
and δa set at some minimum threshold for this.

Note that, provision of ambiguous demonstrations results
in little or no improvement in the learner’s performance, but
should also not signiﬁcantly degrade it. Therefore, the effect
of ambiguous teaching is that the change (or lack thereof) in
learner efﬁcacy lies within an upper and lower bound

δl ≤ εm − εm−1 ≤ δu.

(9)

Similar to undemonstrated states, ambiguous demonstrations
can be attributed to the teacher forming a poor estimate of
the learner’s ability, ˜R, however, in this case, the teacher
is underestimating the impact individual demonstrations are
having on the learner’s ability.

To summarise, the proposed framework improves upon the
previous models of LfD by explicitly modelling what is
observed by the human teacher, and how this might be
interpreted by them. With this modiﬁcation, deﬁnitions
for measures of teacher performance and teaching failures
naturally follow. With these performance measures in place,
it is possible to design feedback tools with the speciﬁc
purpose of inﬂuencing the teacher’s belief space, M, which
can be used to guide teachers toward more effective teaching
practices. This is explored in the following two experiments,
demonstrating the beneﬁts of the proposed framework.

4 Evaluation

In this section, two experimental studies in LfD are presented
to explore how the proposed framework can be used
to measure, evaluate, and modify teacher behaviour to
improve the overall system performance. Speciﬁcally, the
experiments examine how it allows the design of effective
feedback approaches that help the teacher understand the
learner by improving interpretation, ω, to give the teacher
better estimations of the learner’s ability, ˜R. By closing
this loop between teacher and learner, it is hoped that the
teacher will be able to provide higher quality demonstrations,
b, during the data set update step, and thus increase the
performance of the robot compared to an unguided teacher.

4.1 Experiment 1: Point-to-Point Reaching

In the ﬁrst experiment, the teacher must teach a robot to
navigate a maze from a start region to a goal (see Figure 6a).
This task is chosen as it represents a relatively simple
challenge in terms of robot learning, but the performance
of the learner depends critically on the teacher’s skill in
understanding what the robot has learned from previous
demonstrations.
In particular,

the efﬁciency and efﬁcacy of teaching
depends on the teacher’s ability to ensure the robot
generalises from the teaching examples given, such that it is
able to generate a path from anywhere within the designated
start zone to the goal. In other words, B represents the
space of all such admissible trajectories , and the robot must
learn to approximate this from the subset b provided by the

Prepared using sagej.cls

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. Experimental set up. (a) Participants are asked to
guide a lightweight robot through the work space from the start
zone to the goal location, avoiding the maze boundaries and the
two obstacles (shaded zones). (b) End-effector of the robot
indicating the positioning of the TrakStar sensor used for
recording data.

teacher. To do this, the teacher must form a belief ˜R of the
robot’s actual ability R before selecting the demonstration
set b.

It is expected that the teaching quality can be modiﬁed
and improved by manipulating the teacher’s belief space M,
speciﬁcally, their prior beliefs about the learner, Q, and their
estimate of the robot’s actual ability ˜R. Due to the relatively
low-dimensional nature of the problem, it is hypothesised
that this can be achieved through appropriate design of
visual feedback. The following describes the experimental
procedure for evaluating this hypothesis and reports results
from a group of novice teachers‡.

4.1.1 Hypotheses — The experimental hypotheses are
chosen to test whether teacher skill, as measured by the
metrics (3) and (4), can be improved through appropriate
feedback to the teacher. They are formally deﬁned as:
H1: Visualisation of the robot’s learning progress results
in a signiﬁcant improvement in teaching efﬁciency,
compared to a no-guidance teaching process.

H2: A heuristically guided teaching process, which uses
visual feedback plus a rule set, results in signiﬁcantly
improved teaching efﬁciency, compared to a no-
guidance teaching process.

H3: A heuristically guided teaching process, which uses
visual feedback plus a rule set, results in signiﬁcantly
improved teaching efﬁciency, versus a solely visually
guided teaching process.

H1 tests whether knowledge of the learner’s actual ability
ˆR ∼ R,
improves teacher/learner performance beyond
the performance achieved when relying on the teacher’s
understanding ˜R alone.

H2 introduces a heuristic rule set for user guidance,
testing whether inﬂuencing the teacher’s biases, Q, along
with providing knowledge of ˆR improves teacher/learner
performance beyond relying on ˜R alone.

‡This experiment was approved by a KCL ethics committee, ref. LRS-
16/17-3800. Informed consent was obtained from all experimental partici-
pants. The data collected for this research is open access, with accreditation,
from http://doi.org/10.18742/RDM01-242.

8

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

1
3

2

1
3

2

4

5

4

1

3

2

m = 3
(a)

m = 4
(b)

m = 5
(c)

Figure 7. Example of a demonstration sequence for 3 ≤ m ≤ 5 demonstrations, and the visualisation shown to participants during
the visual feedback test conditions. Trajectories in ˆR are illustrated, with those that meet the criteria (10) coloured green and those
that do not coloured red. The teacher’s demonstrations (numbered in the order in which they are given) are overlaid in blue.

H3 considers whether modifying Q along with providing
ˆR improves teacher/learner performance beyond just the
feedback of ˆR alone.

teacher. Therefore the teacher must make good assessments
of the learner’s ability, ˜R, in order to provide suitable set of
demonstrations.

4.1.2 Materials and Methods — Participants in the
experiment are asked to teach a robot to navigate its end-
effector through a simple two-dimensional maze. To do this,
they must provide demonstrations to the robot by gripping
its end-effector and manually guiding it through the maze,
while avoiding the workspace boundaries and obstacles (see
Figure 6a).

More formally, the task skill to be taught to the robot is
deﬁned as generating a path which, beginning in a starting
area I, passes through an admissible space X to reach a
target β, see Figure 6a. X is deﬁned by a two dimensional
bounding rectangle (20 cm by 30 cm), containing the start
zone, I (a 20 cm by 6 cm rectangle) and the target, β
(a 0.5cm diameter circle). The two obstacles (shown in
the ﬁgure as shaded blocks) are not included in X . Any
trajectory Tm that links points in I to β, without leaving X ,
is a member of B

T ∈ B if






(i)

(ii)

(iii)

T ⊂ X

T (0) ⊂ I

(10)

T (T ) ⊂ β

where Tm(0) and T (T ) represent the ﬁrst and last sample in
the recorded trajectory respectively. Note that these criteria
apply to both demonstrations and task realisations.

The robot learner used in this experiment is a uFactory
(< 1 kg) with back-
uArm Metal, a lightweight
driveable motors. During teaching, the robot end effector
position is recorded using an NDI TrakStar sensor, (see
Figure 6b). This provides ±1.3 mm RMSE positioning
accuracy at a sampling rate of 80Hz.

robot

Using this setup, a data set consisting of M demon-
strations is collected during teaching. Each demonstration
consists of a trajectory containing Tm samples of the robot
state, ξj, (giving a total of J = Tm × M samples).

Using this data,

the robot uses a Task-Parameterised
Gaussian Mixture Model (TP-GMM) (Calinon, 2015) to
learn a model of the demonstrated task. While there are
many learning methods which are suitable for this step, TP-
GMM is chosen as it has been shown to be particularly
effective in generalising from a limited set of demonstrations
to unseen conditions. It is important to note that with TP-
GMM the robot learner cannot self-reﬁne the learned model,
i.e., the model is only as good as the data provided by the

Prepared using sagej.cls

In TP-GMM, the task is parameterised by a collection
of afﬁne transformations which, in this case, represent a
collection of reference frames marking robot end-effector
locations and object locations. A local mixture model is
learned for the demonstration data in each of these frames
of reference. The local models are then combined to the
global frame of reference through a product of Gaussians,
resulting in a trade-off between the local models which
optimises the consistencies observed in data in each frame
of reference. Continuous trajectories can then be generated
from the global model using Gaussian Mixture Regression
(the reader is referred to (Calinon, 2015) for full details of
the TP-GMM). In the implementation used here, the model
contains K = 11 Gaussian components, and the state ξj =
j ) ∈ R3×1 is represented with the time t and end-
(tj, x(cid:62)
effector position x for sample j. Four sets of task parameters
are used, deﬁning the start, end, and obstacle locations.

Teacher performance is measured according to the efﬁcacy
(3) and efﬁciency (4) of teaching. Here, as B and R
represent continuous spaces in this task, it is necessary to
deﬁne objective approximations for quantitative comparisons
(see §3.1.6). In this experiment, the goal region β is small, so
the primary task of teaching is to ensure the learner achieves
good generalisation over I. A simple way to approximate
B, therefore, is to discretise I into a ﬁnite set of points, and
consider any trajectory that links one of these points to the
target β, while meeting the criteria (10), as an element of ˆB.
In the results reported here, I is discretised into a grid of
20 × 7 points, so | ˆB| = 140. Similarly, R is approximated
by the set of trajectories generated by the TP-GMM from
each of these points, therefore maximum performance is
achieved when | ˆR ∩ ˆB| = 140 giving ε = 1, as shown in
Figure 7(c).

In two of the experimental conditions, visual feedback
is provided to experimental subjects (refer to §4.1.1 and
§4.1.3). As a simple means to generate such feedback, the
trajectories in ˆR are presented to the subjects, overlaid onto
an image of the maze. These are coloured green if they meet
the criteria (10) and red otherwise, as shown in the examples
in Figure 7.

4.1.3 Procedure — The following describes the protocol
for working with experimental participants.

The experiment is designed as a within-subjects study, so
a repeated-measures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) study is

Sena and Howard

9

used to determine if any signiﬁcant effects can be observed
in the data. The independent variable in each phase of
the experiment is the level of guidance provided to the
participant. In all stages of the experiment, the dependent
variable is the participant’s teaching efﬁciency, η.

A power analysis for a repeated measures ANOVA, with
one group and three measurement levels, indicates that, for a
medium effect size (Cohen’s f = 0.3) and a power of 0.95,
the required sample size is n = 30 (Faul et al., 2009). In
the results reported below, therefore, are for the experiment
conducted with 30 participants (17 male, 13 female; ages
µ = 35.1, σ = 9.7). All participants are pre-screened to
ensure that they have no background in robotics or machine
learning.

The experiment commences with the subject watching an
introductory video that (i) explains LfD using a real-world
task example, (ii) introduces the objective of teaching the
robot to generate trajectories from the start zone to the
goal through the maze. Videos are used for all instruction
to ensure consistency in the participants’ prior knowledge
and understanding of teaching phase§. After the introductory
video, they are given one minute to familiarise themselves
with the robot, where they are free to move it around. After
this, the main experiment begins. This is split into three
phases, one for each test condition. Each phase is introduced
by a video providing instructions, and the participant is given
one attempt to provide a set of demonstrations.

4.1.4 Conditions — The following are speciﬁc details on
each test condition used during the experiment.
Condition 1 - No Feedback (NF):

In this phase,
participants are tested to see if they are able to provide
demonstrations with no feedback, i.e., r = ∅, thus relying
only on their (uninformed) expectations of the system’s
behaviour, Q. The instruction video explains the different
areas of the task map, provides one basic example of how
the task is meant to be performed, and explains that they must
provide as many demonstrations as they feel are necessary to
enable the robot to perform the task from any point in the
start zone.

Condition 2 - Visual Feedback (VF): In this phase, the
effect of providing a transparent visualisation of the robot’s
learning progress is tested. In between each demonstration,
the user is provided with the visualisation of learning
progress, described in §4.1.2 and shown in Figure 7. The
instruction video explains the visualisation, and provides
a simple example of what demonstrations look like in the
visualisation.

Condition 3 - Visual Feedback, Rule Guidance (VR):
In this phase, the participant must additionally follow a
set of rules when providing their demonstrations. The rule
is designed to approximately guide users to avoid
set
undemonstrated states and ambiguous demonstrations. The
rules are (i) provide one demonstration, starting from
anywhere in the start zone, (ii) provide demonstrations
within 4 cm of the starting point of the ﬁrst demonstration,
test
until
trajectories, and (iii) continue providing demonstrations
within 4 cm of the starting point of successful trajectories,
in the area with the greatest number of failed (i.e., red)
trajectories. The instruction video explains the rules through

is surrounded by successful

(i.e., green)

it

Prepared using sagej.cls

*

**

)

%

(
η

25

20

15

10

5

0

NF

VF

VR

Figure 8. Box plot of results for each test condition. No
Feedback (NF), Visual Feedback(VF), Visual Feedback/Rule
Guidance (VR). The red lines indicate median values of the
teaching efﬁciency, η, in each case. The bottom and top of the
blue boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively.
The upper and lower of the dashed lines indicate maximum and
minimum values, respectively.

12

10

8

6

4

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
s
n
o
m
e
D

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

)

%

(
ε

NF

VF
(a)

VR

NF

VF
(b)

VR

Figure 9. Breakdown of (a) the number of demonstrations
provided in each phase, and (b) the percentage of successful
trajectories generated, i.e., the efﬁcacy, ε.

a single simple example, but avoids dictating exactly how the
participant should teach by only showing a small section of
the start zone when explaining the rule set.

4.1.5 Results — Prior to performing a repeated measures
ANOVA analysis, the model assumptions were all checked
and veriﬁed for the collected data; continuous dependent
variable, at
two groups of independent variables,
absenece of outliers, normally distributed dependent
variable, and sphericity of data.

least

The number of demonstrations used for evaluating user
performance was taken to be the number of demonstrations
required to achieve at least 90% coverage of the test grid,
or the maximum number of demonstrations if 90% coverage
was not achieved. Analysing the teaching efﬁciency score,
the data indicates a signiﬁcant effect of the feedback method
on the teaching efﬁciency, F (2, 58) = 7.952, p = 0.001. As
a signiﬁcant effect was observed, a multiple comparisons
of means was performed. A signiﬁcant difference was
found between the NF and VF conditions, p = 0.006,
as well as between the NF and VR conditions, p =
0.017. No signiﬁcant difference was observed between the
VF and VR conditions, p = 0.801. The median teaching
efﬁciencies, η, are shown in Figure 8. The difference
in teaching efﬁciency medians between the VF (13.4%)

§The introductory video used in the experiment
is provided as a
supplementary ﬁle to this paper, and is available to view online
https://youtu.be/eafZ1bRAGLM

10

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

4.2 Pick-and-Place Experiment

is to evaluate the
The aim of the second experiment
proposed framework in a real-world scenario, where there
are a large number of possible task conditions that may be
encountered (i.e., large B and R). Typically, this means
simple visualisation tools (such as that described in §4.1) are
no longer feasible, and alternative approaches must be used.
An alternative to visualising task execution in such situations
is to have the teacher watch the robot physically perform the
skill (i.e., using a task-realisation set r). For the teacher, this
presents an additional challenge as they must now rely on
a very small set of realisations r to form their estimates of
R. In such a scenario, it is unclear (i) how selection of r
affects novice teachers’ understanding of learner abilities ˜R,
and (ii) whether they may beneﬁt from system-selected (as
opposed to self-selected) r.

This experiment explores these questions through the task
of plant tray sorting (see Figure 1), whereby the robot must
be taught to reach from a start location to a target plant,
grasp it, and remove it to a bin (see Figure 10). Note that
the high number of degrees of freedom of the robot, and the
number of target plants involved make B and R non-trivial.
Additionally, as one realisation (i.e., the picking and removal
of a plant from a speciﬁc location) takes approximately 25
seconds in the system considered, and there are 100 plants in
the tray, feedback to the teacher can be extremely costly in
time. This makes the issue of teaching efﬁciency particularly
important for practical deployment of such systems.

4.2.1 Hypotheses — The experimental hypotheses are
chosen to test whether teacher skill, as measured by the
metrics (3) and (4), are inﬂuenced by the choice of feedback
in form of the task realisation set r, and whether the teachers
themselves are capable of selecting informative realisations.
In forming the set r, there is ﬂexibility in (i) the order
in which demonstrations and realisations are interleaved,
(ii) the speciﬁc choice of realisations in R selected to form
r, and (iii) the responsibility of the teacher to self-select r, or
otherwise.

To examine these issues, the following hypotheses are

deﬁned:
H4: Feedback through sampling the learnt model improves
teaching efﬁciency, compared to giving no feedback to
the teacher.

H5: Generalisation sampling (see below) of the learnt
model improves teaching efﬁciency, compared to task
realisations selected by the teacher.

H6: Generalisation sampling of the learnt model improves
teaching efﬁciency, compared to the learner simply
repeating what it was last shown.

for H5 and H6,

H7: Teaching efﬁciency improves between episodes as
the participant gains understanding of the learning
process.
In this experiment,
the so-called
generalisation sampling set consists of task realisations for
picking the plants located in the four corners of the tray,
and one plant located in its centre, see Figure 10. Sampling
the learner’s skill in these locations gives an estimate of the
generalisation capabilities of the robot, since they test its
behaviour across the whole space of possible target plants.

(cid:11)
(cid:10)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

(cid:11)
(cid:10)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

(cid:11)
(cid:10)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

(cid:11)
(cid:10)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

(a)

(cid:11)
(cid:10)

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

(b)

Figure 10. Experimental setup. (a) shows robot is shown in
starting position. (b) shows the ﬁducial markers used to localise
the plant tray and disposal bin (green bowl). Red circles in the
lower image indicate the generalisation sampling test set (see
main text).

condition and the NF (7.6%) condition shows a relative
improvement of approximately 180%. A similar teaching
efﬁciency improvement can be observed between the VR
(14%) condition and NF.

These results and the statistical analysis show support for
H1 and H2. This shows a clear beneﬁt in providing the
visual feedback to the teacher during LfD, i.e., by helping
the teacher to gain an accurate understanding of the learner’s
current ability, ˜R, teaching is improved. There is no support
found for H3. As seen in Figure 8, the teaching efﬁciency
of VF and VR are very similar, though it might be noted
that the standard deviation of VR is reduced compared to
VF, indicating the rule set did offer some assistance to the
teacher. This said, the effect of providing the ruleset for the
purpose of modfying the teacher’s prior beliefs of the learner,
Q, is not so apparent.

These ﬁndings show how the proposed framework can be
used to design an evaluation scheme for the teacher in a
given task, as well as tools which are designed to support
the teacher’s mental representations of the learner to improve
teaching performance. See §5 for further discussion.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Sena and Howard

11

Start
Position

(cid:121)

0.1

[m]

0

Release
Target

-0.5

-0.6

0.1

0

-0.5

Grab
Target

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-1

(a)

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-1

(b)

0

-0.1

‘

-0.2

-0.3

Figure 11. The user provides a set of demonstrations (a), which are used to build a model that is then used to generate trajectories
(b) for all of the targets (blue crosses). The colour of the trajectory indicates the status of the gripper, with red indicating open and
green indicating closed. A subset of the generated trajectories is shown in (b) for clarity.

H5, therefore, tests a teacher’s ability to interpret feedback
which has been designed to test the learner effectively,
i.e., r ∼ ˆR.

H6 considers the effect of

feedback which simply
executes the task in the same conditions as shown by the
teacher, i.e., r = b.

H4 considers whether the teacher can effectively teach the

learner with no feedback, r = ∅.

H7 considers whether the feedback acts as a training
mechanism in any of the conditions, i.e., whether it modiﬁes
Q in each interaction.

4.2.2 Materials and Methods — Participants in this
experiment are asked to teach a robot to grasp plants from
a plant tray and dispose of them in a disposal bin (see
Figure 10).

More speciﬁcally, the skill to be taught is to generate a
path which, beginning from a ﬁxed start position, must move
along an obstacle-free path toward a speciﬁc target plant,
into a suitable grasping position (identiﬁed by a grasping
action being within a threshold distance from the plant).
Once there, the robot must grab the plant and move along
an obstacle-free path to a bin by the tray. Once there, it must
release the plant into the bin (identiﬁed as release occurring
within a threshold distance from the bin). At all stages of
the movement, the gripper must remain in an admissable
space X , which excludes self-collisions and collisions with
the table. Examples of good demonstration trajectories are
shown in Figure 11 (a).

These requirements can be formally summarised as

T ∈ B if






(i)

T ⊂ X

(ii) d(T (ag), bg) ≤ δg

,

(11)

(iii) d(T (ar), br) ≤ δr

where d(·, ·) denotes the Euclidean distance between two
points, Tm(ag) (Tm(ar)) is taken as the location of robot
end-effector at the grabbing (releasing, respectively) action
step, bg (br) are the grabbing (releasing) target locations,
and δg (δr) is the grabbing (releasing) threshold. The latter
thresholds are deﬁned as the mean grab distance observed in

Prepared using sagej.cls

the demonstration set, ±2 standard deviations plus a 1mm
regularisation term.

In this experiment, the start and end points of the task are
ﬁxed positions, and so the teaching must focus on achieving
generalisation over the plant positions in the tray, which
shall form the test set. The test set is again constrained
to a ﬁnite size, naturally discretised into a set of 100 in
the tray grid. Therefore, for this experiment |B| = 100 and
max |R| = 100.

As the robot learner, a Rethink Robotics Sawyer robot
arm is used, equipped with an Active Robots AR10 hand.
The robot arm has 7 degrees of freedom and allows for
kinesthetic teaching through gravity-compensated control.
The hand has a further 10 degrees of freedom, however, only
four of these are used for the grab/release actions. The latter
are implemented as a pincer movement (either from the open
to closed position, or vice versa), triggered on-demand by
the user through press of a button. Detection of the location
the plant tray and disposal bin is achieved through ﬁducial
markers (Niekum, 2012), using the in-built cameras of the
robot.

During demonstrations,

the teacher guides the robot
through the required motions for the task using kinesthetic
teaching, and the end-effector positions and orientations
are recorded through the joint encoders using forward
kinematics, with a repeatability of ±1mm. The teacher issues
gripper control signals (open/close) using a button on the
robot’s end-effector cuff, and these are also recorded.

j , xh

j its orientation and xh

For learning, a TP-GMM model

is used to encode
the recorded task demonstrations (see §4.1). The state
representation consists of ξj = (tj, xp
j , xq
j )(cid:62), where tj
is the time stamp, xp
j is the position of the robot’s end-
effector, xq
j is the hand state (either
open or closed). The model
is parametrised with three
frames of reference: a start frame indicating the initial
position of the end-effector, a target frame indicating the
position of the target plant, and a goal frame indicating the
position of the disposal bin. It uses a mixture of K = 7
components, selected based on empirical testing. Examples
of task realisations generated by this model can be seen in
Figure 11 (b).

12

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

4.2.3 Procedure — The following describes the protocol
for working with the experimental participants.

some demonstrations of a task, and then observes the robot
performing the task.

Participants are screened to ensure they have no prior
background in robotics or machine learning. After giving
informed consent, they are assigned to one of the four
interaction conditions and shown video instructions on their
teaching task. Each group begins with the same introduction
video, explaining that
is to teach the robot
their goal
to perform a pick-and-place task, and provides a basic
explanation of LfD. Following this, to control for any effects
relating to the participant’s physical coordination skills when
interacting with the robot, the participants are allowed a 5
minute familiarisation period. During this time, they have
a print-out guidance sheet showing what the buttons on the
robot do¶, and are told to try pick-up as many plants from the
tray as they can in the time given.

After the familiarisation period, participants are shown a
video which explains the teaching procedure and that they
will be asked to teach the robot the same task three times. In
each teaching session, the participant may provide as many
demonstrations as they wish, but are limited to 15 minutes
per session. Participants are then shown condition-speciﬁc
instructions.

In all conditions, prior to providing a demonstration the
grab target must be set for the learner. The participant
ﬁrst points to the plant they wish to interact with and the
experimenter speciﬁes the target to the robot accordingly
on a privately viewed interface (this is done to remove
any possibility of the participant being affected by the
system software interface). The participant then provides a
demonstration of removal of the target plant into the disposal
bin. This continues until they decide they have provided
enough demonstrations, or the time limit for the session
expires. After this point, the robot resets for the next teaching
session.

The resultant data is analysed according to a mixed-factors
ANOVA. A power analysis indicates that, for a medium
effect size (Cohen’s f = 0.3) and a type I error rate α =
0.05, the required sample size is n = 36, or 9 per condition
(Faul et al., 2009). Accordingly, the results reported below
are for a population of 36 participants (18 male, 18 female;
ages µ = 36.7, σ = 10.2). The latter were recruited from a
horticultural production site (domain experts in the task of
plant sorting) with all experiments conducted on-site and in
a private area||.

4.2.4 Conditions — The following describes speciﬁc
details of each test condition used in the experiment.

Condition 1 - No Feedback (NF) In this condition,
participants are only able to observe the robot’s task
performance after they have provided a complete set of
demonstrations (i.e., at
the end of a teaching session).
No feedback is given during teaching (i.e., r = ∅),
representing a situation where the user must rely on their
own understanding of the learner’s ability, ˜R, developed
exclusively through their knowledge of the demonstrations
they provided, b, and their prior expectations, Q. After a
teaching session, they are permitted to view task realisations
for self-selected target plants. This condition represents a
typical na¨ıve approach to LfD, where a person provides

Prepared using sagej.cls

Condition 2 - Replay Feedback (RF) In this condition,
participants are shown a task realisation corresponding to the
last demonstration, immediately after it is shown (i.e., during
teaching, after each demonstration). Here, the participant
forms ˜R through observation of r and b, however, as r = b,
the feedback gives no indication of generalisation, which the
participant must estimate for themselves.

Condition 3 - Batch feedback (BF) In this condition, task
realisations for a set of pre-selected test points (i.e., the
generalisation sampling set) are shown to the participant
after every demonstration. As noted in §4.2.1, these points
are selected to give a good approximation of the robot’s
current ability ˆR ∼ R. If interpreted by the participant
correctly, this feedback gives information as to the extent to
which generalisation has occured when forming ˜R.

Condition 4 - Selected Feedback (SF) In this condition,
participants are free to choose when the robot should provide
a task realisation, and under what conﬁguration (i.e., which
plant location to test) during teaching. Here, the participant
forms ˜R through their own, self-selected r.

4.2.5 Results — The data were checked to be compatible
with model assumptions. Data in NF, RF, and BF was
found to be non-normal using an Anderson-Darling test.
ANOVA tests are noted as being robust to violations of
normality (Schmider et al., 2010), and considering the excess
Kurtosis for the four groups is 1.3695, 1.6042, −0.6387,
and 0.9762, respectively (where a normal distribution would
have an excess kurtosis value of zero), the violation is
considered minor and the data are assumed to follow a
normal distribution. Using Mauchly’s test for sphericity on
the repeated measures model gives χ2(2) = 1.2423, p =
0.5372, indicating the sphericity assumption is not violated
and no data correction is required.

Considering the teaching efﬁciency for the participant
groups, there was a signiﬁcant main effect observed for
the between-subjects factor,
indicating a difference was
observed between the test conditions (NF, RF, etc.),
F (3, 32) = 13.864, p = 5.797 × 10−6. As signiﬁcance was
found in the main effect, a multiple comparison of means
was performed. This shows that BF provides a 10.76%
improvement in efﬁciency compared to NF (p = 1.017 ×
10−5), 9.64% compared to RF (p = 6.2947 × 10−5), and
8.20% compared to SF (p = 5.8708 × 10−4), see Figure 13.
There was no signiﬁcance found in the within-subjects
factor analysis, i.e., there was no support for a learning
effect improving performance over each consecutive run over
all conditions. However, an interaction effect was observed
for the between and within factors, F (6, 64) = 2.7845, p =
0.01808). As an interaction effect was found, a multiple
comparison of means conditioned on the within factor is
used to consider the simple main effects. This multiple
comparison indicates that for the ﬁrst run, no signiﬁcance
in improvement is observed between BF and RF, and no
signiﬁcance is observed between BF and SF. On the third

¶See supplementary material “Robot Controls Guidance Sheet”.
(cid:107)This experiment was conducted with ethical approval granted by KCL
REC Committee under LRS-17/18-5549.

Sena and Howard

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

-0.2

-0.1

0

-0.2

-0.1

0

-0.2

-0.1

0

-0.2

-0.1

0 [m]

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

13

0.025

0.02

0.01

0 [m]

Figure 12. Example of a demonstration and reproduction sets for a case of (a) a poor demonstration set and the resulting
model-generated trajectories (b). (c) then shows a good demonstration set and the resulting model-generated trajectories (d). The
blue crosses indicate the tray targets, the red lines indicate the intended target for a grab action, and the shaded circles indicate the
location of the grab action for the given target, with the colour representing the distance of the robot grasp from the target at the
time of the grab action.

)

%
(
¯η

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
All

NF

RF

BF

SF

Figure 13. Teaching Efﬁciency means (¯η) for inidividual runs as
well as the overall mean for the four experimental conditions.

run, signiﬁcance is observed between BF (27.04%) and
each of the other conditions. In this third run, with NF
(11.35%), RF (11.94%), and SF (13.7%), the performance of
BF represents an average improvement of ∼ 220% relative
to each condition. On average, across all runs, the mean
teaching efﬁciency of BF represents a ∼ 169% relative
improvement over the other conditions.

the occurance of

To gain further insight into the participants’ teaching
behaviour,
(i) demonstration errors,
(ii) ambiguous demonstrations, and (iii) undemonstrated
states are recorded in Table 1. The demonstration error
values in Table 1 are gathered by visual inspection of the
demonstration sets (see Figure 14(c)), while the values for
undemonstrated states and ambiguous demonstrations are
generated by post-processing the data for each participant
iteratively to see the performance of the learnt model
after each demonstration is provided, and then applying
the deﬁnitions of ambiguous demonstrations
(9) and
undemonstrated states data sets (7). Typical examples of
these failures are shown in Figure 14.

Prepared using sagej.cls

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 14. Examples of failure modes observed in
demonstration sets. (a) undemonstrated states (demonstrations
do not cover the space), (b) ambiguous demonstrations
(multiple demonstrations co-located at top of grid), (c) errors
made during demonstration (demonstration given for wrong
target: the red line links the desired target with the
demonstration actually given).

Looking at the mean performance levels achieved across
all runs for each condition, it can be seen that BF achieved the
best overall performance, with 23.54% teaching efﬁciency.
This represents an average improvement of ∼ 169% relative
to NF (12.78%), NF (13.89%), and SF (15.34%). The
maximum average teaching performance can be found on
the third run, where BF achieved 27.04%, representing an
average improvement of ∼ 220%, relative to NF (11.35%),
RF (11.94%), and SF (13.7%).

From these results and the statistical analysis, there is
support for H5, H6, but not H4 or H7. See §5 for further
discussion.

14

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

Table 1. Total number of error occurrences observed in
participant data for each condition. In this experiment,
demonstration errors occur when participants provided an
example for a plant different to the one they selected.
Undemonstrated state counts are calculated using the
cardinality of the set deﬁned by (7), and ambiguous
demonstrations are found by considering the learner’s efﬁciacy
as deﬁned by (9).

NF

RF

BF

Demonstration Errors

4

0

3

SF

3

Undemonstrated States

499

619

827

485

Ambiguous Demonstrations

54

51

6

39

5 Discussion

The results from both experiments show strong evidence
that the feedback systems used could signiﬁcantly improve
participants’ teaching, resulting in improved learner perfor-
mance on the target tasks. By using the proposed frame-
work to design evaluation and feedback focused on their
needs (their interpretation of r, ˜R, etc.), they develop an
understanding of what demonstrations the learner requires
to learn, without necessarily understanding how learning is
taking place.

In addition to the basic result of improving teaching
performance, a number of insights can be gained from the
experimental results. In the ﬁrst experiment, it can be seen
that unguided participants (i.e., those in the NF condition)
tend to underestimate the number of demonstrations required
to teach effectively, compared to the other conditions (see
the participants’
Figure 9(a)). This is an indicator that
prior beliefs about the learner, Q, did not match reality,
resulting in a poor estimate of the learner’s ability ( ˜R (cid:54)=
ˆR). Looking at the efﬁcacy (see Figure 9(b)) it is seen
that feedback in the VF and VR cases not only improves
performance (higher mean efﬁcacy), but leads to greater
consistency (lower standard deviation) among participants,
compared to NF. This highlights the difﬁculty unguided
teachers had in providing adequate demonstrations. While
some (7 participants) did manage to achieve reasonably
good performance in the NF condition, there was wide
variation, and the majority performed badly. Conversely, in
VF and VR, all participants reached close to the maximum
efﬁcacy, indicating that the visualisation helped shape their
understanding of the teaching task ( ˜B and ˜R), and thereby
enabled them to provide better demonstrations.

The second experiment also supports these ﬁndings, and
gives further insight into (i) what kinds of feedback are
beneﬁcial, and (ii) the common pitfalls novice teachers
encounter. Looking at Figure 13, it can be seen that there
is a signiﬁcant boost to performance observed in the BF
condition, but feedback in the RF and SF conditions, offer
little improvement over the NF case. The results indicate
that for feedback to be of beneﬁt to the teacher, it must
offer insight on how well the learner generalises, i.e., simply
showing the teacher replays of demonstration conditions,
r = b as in the RF case, is not sufﬁcient guidance for
teaching. In addition, novice users cannot be expected to
know how to test for generalisation without appropriate
training, as indicated in the SF condition.

Prepared using sagej.cls

To gain insights into the reasons for this, it is useful to
look at participant teaching behaviours. Looking at Table 1,
BF featured the fewest ambiguous demonstrations, but also
the most undemonstrated states on average. This suggests
that the demonstrations provided by participants under the
BF condition are nearly always useful for the learning
system, however, the participants are not providing complete
demonstration sets. This may either be due to the participants
deciding the system has been shown enough information on
the task and stopping prematurely (poor ˜R), or they are
not able to provide enough demonstrations in the 15 minute
period permitted (feedback in this condition is the most
costly in time, with 5 task realisations shown to the teacher
after every demonstration). Nevertheless, performance is
highest in this condition, suggesting the teaching to be of
higher quality.

In addition to these observations, while RF did not provide
good overall performance, some beneﬁts to this condition
can be seen. Looking at Table 1, participants made no
demonstration errors in this condition. Having the robot
replay what the participants had just demonstrated appears
to help them spot errors as they happen (e.g., providing a
demonstration for the wrong target). This suggests that it
may be beneﬁcial to design elements of the RF and BF
strategies that combine feedback both on immediate errors
and learner generalisation.

6 Summary

This paper presents an extended model for LfD, which
incorporates the teacher’s understanding of, and inﬂuence
on, the learner. The proposed framework introduces a new
space—the teacher’s belief space—to the standard view on
LfD, highlighting the teacher’s understanding of the learner’s
ability, and how this forms the basis of their interaction. The
ability to formalise this relationship, and develop quantitative
metrics for its study, is crucial given that learner performance
strongly depends on the quality of data provided by the
teacher.

to be deﬁned. These,

The two experiments reported here show the beneﬁt of
approaching LfD problems using the proposed framework,
by enabling measures for assessing teaching quality, and
identifying teaching failures,
in
turn, can be used in creating feedback tools to directly
inﬂuence novice teacher behaviour and guide them toward
better teaching practice. Results from the experiments show
that, without
this guidance, novice teachers struggle to
efﬁciently provide demonstrations which avoid issues like
undemonstrated states and ambiguity, even for relatively
simple teaching tasks. In contrast, using feedback designed
from the perspective of improving teaching quality, as guided
by the proposed model, can result in a teaching efﬁciency
improvement of ∼ 169 − 180%. These results point to the
practical beneﬁts of the proposed model, and it is hoped that
this approach to incorporating teachers’ thought processes
more directly into LfD will help improve novice interactions
with LfD systems.

A limitation of the presented framework is the difﬁculty
in identifying the underlying objective task which the
user wishes to achieve. Future work on modelling LfD
with consideration of the teacher would therefore include

Sena and Howard

15

overcoming this to autonomously identify optimal test sets
for general LfD tasks which are economic with the teaching
effort required.

Overall, it is hoped that the presented framework and
supporting results highlight the beneﬁt of directly modelling
the teacher-robot interactions during LfD, and the resulting
new opportunities for evaluating and improving teaching and
learning of robotic grasping tasks. By providing a useful
structure to LfD problems, feedback tools can be designed
to enable novice users to better leverage sophisticated
policy learning methods to provide robots with advanced
manipulation skills that would be otherwise difﬁcult to train,
and difﬁcult to verify learning success.

7 Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the UK Agriculture and
Horticulture Development Board (AHDB), under project
HNS/PO 194 - GROWBOT: A Grower-Reprogrammable
for Ornamental Plant Production Tasks, and by
Robot
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC), under project EP/P010202/ - SoftSkills: Soft
Robotic Skill Learning from Human Demonstration.

References

Abbeel P and Ng AY (2004) Apprenticeship learning via
In: Twenty-ﬁrst international
inverse reinforcement learning.
conference on Machine learning (ICML) ’04. New York, New
York, USA: ACM Press, p. 1.

Ahmadzadeh SR and Chernova S (2018) Trajectory-Based Skill
Learning Using Generalized Cylinders. Frontiers in Robotics
and AI 5: 132.

Ahmadzadeh SR, Paikan A, Mastrogiovanni F, Natale L,
Kormushev P and Caldwell DG (2015) Learning symbolic
In:
representations of actions from human demonstrations.
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, pp. 3801–3808.

Argall B, Browning B and Veloso M (2007) Learning by
In:
demonstration with critique from a human teacher.
Proceeding of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). New York, New York, USA:
ACM Press, p. 57.

Argall BD, Chernova S, Veloso M and Browning B (2009) A
survey of robot learning from demonstration. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 57(5): 469–483.

Asfour T, Gyarfas F, Azad P and Dillmann R (2006) Imitation
Learning of Dual-Arm Manipulation Tasks in Humanoid
In: 6th IEEE-RAS International Conference on
Robots.
Humanoid Robots (Humanoids). IEEE, pp. 40–47.

Balbach FJ and Zeugmann T (2009) Recent Developments in
Algorithmic Teaching. In: Language and Automata Theory and
Applications (LATA). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1–18.
Billard A, Calinon S, Dillmann R and Schaal S (2008) Robot
In: Springer Handbook of

Programming by Demonstration.
Robotics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 1371–1394.

Billing EA and Hellstr¨om T (2010) A Formalism for Learning from
Demonstration. Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics 1(1):
1–13.

Cakmak M and Thomaz AL (2011) Active Learning with Mixed
Query Types in Learning from Demonstration. In: Proceedings

Prepared using sagej.cls

of the ICML Workshop on New Developments in Imitation
Learning.

Cakmak M and Thomaz AL (2014) Eliciting good teaching from
humans for machine learners. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 217: 198–
215.

Calinon S (2015) A tutorial on task-parameterized movement
learning and retrieval. Intelligent Service Robotics 9(1): 1–29.
Calinon S and Billard A (2007a) Incremental learning of gestures
In: Proceeding of
by imitation in a humanoid robot.
the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press,
p. 255.

Calinon S and Billard A (2007b) What is the Teacher’s Role in
Robot Programming by Demonstration? - Toward Benchmarks
for Improved Learning. Interaction Studies. Special Issue on
Psychological Benchmarks in Human-Robot Interaction 8(3).
In: Humanoid
Robotics: A Reference. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.
1–52.

Calinon S and Lee D (2017) Learning Control.

Cederborg T, Ming Li M, Baranes A and Oudeyer PY
(2010) Incremental local online Gaussian Mixture Regression
In: IEEE/RSJ
for imitation learning of multiple tasks.
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, pp. 267–274.

Cederborg T and Oudeyer PY (2014) A social learning formalism
for learners trying to ﬁgure out what a teacher wants them to
do. Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics 9.

Chernova S and Thomaz AL (2014) Robot Learning from Human

Teachers. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Cho S and Jo S (2013) Incremental Online Learning of Robot
Behaviors From Selected Multiple Kinesthetic Teaching Trials.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems
(SMC) 43(3): 730–740.

Faul F, Erdfelder E, Buchner A and Lang A (2009) Statistical
power analyses using G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and
regression analyses. Behavior Research Methods 41: 1149–
1160.

Goldman S and Kearns M (1995) On the Complexity of Teaching.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences 50(1): 20–31.
Goodrich MA and Schultz AC (2007) Human-Robot Interaction:
A Survey. Foundations and Trends® in Human-Computer
Interaction 1(3): 203–275.

Groth C and Henrich D (2014) One-shot robot programming by
demonstration using an online oriented particles simulation. In:
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics
(ROBIO). IEEE, pp. 154–160.

Hellstr¨om T and Bensch S (2018) Understandable robots - What,
Why, and How. Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics 9(1):
110–123.

Hiatt LM, Narber C, Bekele E, Khemlani SS and Trafton JG
(2017) Human modeling for humanrobot collaboration. The
International Journal of Robotics Research 36(5-7): 580–596.
Hoyos J, Prieto F, Aleny`a G, Torras C, Prieto F, Aleny`a G, Torras C
and Torras C (2016) Incremental Learning of Skills in a Task-
Parameterized Gaussian Mixture Model. Journal of Intelligent
Robot Systems 82: 81–99.

Huang Y, Silverio J, Rozo L and Caldwell DG (2018) Generalized
In: IEEE International

Task-Parameterized Skill Learning.

16

International Journal of Robotics Research XX(X)

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, pp. 1–
5.

Adaptive Motion of Animals and Machines. Tokyo: Springer-
Verlag, pp. 261–280.

Khan F, Mutlu B and Zhu X (2011) How Do Humans Teach: On
In: Neural
Curriculum Learning and Teaching Dimension.
Information Processing Systems 24 (NeurIPS). pp. 1449–1457.
Kormushev P, Calinon S and Caldwell D (2013) Reinforcement
Learning in Robotics: Applications and Real-World Chal-
lenges. Robotics 2(3): 122–148.

Lewis M, Sycara K and Walker P (2018) The Role of Trust in
Human-Robot Interaction. Springer, Cham, pp. 135–159.
Maeda G, Ewerton M, Osa T, Busch B and Peters J (2017) Active
Incremental Learning of Robot Movement Primitives.
In:
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). PMLR.

Ng AY and Russell SJ (2000) Algorithms for Inverse Reinforcement
In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth International
Learning.
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., pp. 663–670.

Nicolescu MN and Mataric MJ (2003) Natural methods for robot
In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint
task learning.
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, p. 241.
Niekum S (2012) ar track alvar. URL http://wiki.ros.

org/ar_track_alvar.

Nikolaidis S, Zhu YX, Hsu D and Srinivasa S (2017) Human-
Robot Mutual Adaptation in Shared Autonomy. In: ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction - (HRI).
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, pp. 294–302.

Orendt EM, Fichtner M and Henrich D (2016) Robot programming
by non-experts: Intuitiveness and robustness of One-Shot robot
In: 25th IEEE International Symposium on
programming.
Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN).
IEEE, pp. 192–199.

Pervez A and Lee D (2017) Learning task-parameterized dynamic
Intelligent

movement primitives using mixture of GMMs.
Service Robotics : 1–18.

Schaal S (1996) Learning From Demonstration.

In: Neural

Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). pp. 1040–1046.
Schaal S (2006) Dynamic Movement Primitives -A Framework
In:
for Motor Control in Humans and Humanoid Robotics.

Schmider E, Ziegler M, Danay E, Beyer L and B¨uhner M (2010) Is

It Really Robust? Methodology 6(4): 147–151.

Sena A, Zhao Y and Howard MJ (2018) Teaching Human Teachers
to Teach Robot Learners. In: IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, pp. 1–7.

three robot

Toris R, Suay HB and Chernova S (2012) A practical comparison
of
learning from demonstration algorithms.
In: ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). New York, USA: ACM Press, p. 261.
Tykal M, Montebelli A and Kyrki V (2016) Incrementally assisted
kinesthetic teaching for programming by demonstration.
In: ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). IEEE. ISBN 978-1-4673-8370-7, pp. 205–
212. DOI:10.1109/HRI.2016.7451753.

Ureche ALP, Umezawa K, Nakamura Y and Billard A (2015)
Task Parameterization Using Continuous Constraints Extracted
From Human Demonstrations. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
31(6): 1458–1471.

Weiss A, Igelsbock J, Calinon S, Billard A and Tscheligi M
(2009) Teaching a humanoid: A user study on learning by
demonstration with HOAP-3. In: The 18th IEEE International
Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
(RO-MAN). IEEE, pp. 147–152.

Yang XJ, Unhelkar VV, Li K and Shah JA (2017) Evaluating
Effects of User Experience and System Transparency on Trust
In: ACM/IEEE International Conference on
in Automation.
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). New York, New York, USA:
ACM Press, pp. 408–416.

Zang P, Tian R, Thomaz AL and Isbell CL (2010) Batch versus
interactive learning by demonstration. In: IEEE International
Conference on Development and Learning (ICDL). IEEE, pp.
219–224.

Zhu X (2015) Machine teaching: an inverse problem to machine
learning and an approach toward optimal education.
In:
Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press.

Prepared using sagej.cls

