9
1
0
2

n
u
J

4
1

]

G
D
.
h
t
a
m

[

1
v
6
0
4
6
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

SIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS: AN EFFICIENT APPROACH TO MOTION
IDENTIFICATION

ELENA CELLEDONI, PÅL ERIK LYSTAD, AND NIKOLAS TAPIA

Abstract. Signatures provide a succinct description of certain features of paths in a reparametrization
invariant way. We propose a method for classifying shapes based on signatures, and compare it to current
approaches based on the SRV transform and dynamic programming.
Key words and phrases. Shape analysis, Signature, Motion identiﬁcation

1. Introduction

Shape analysis is a broad and growing subject addressing the analysis of diﬀerent types of data
ranging from surfaces, landmarks, animation data etc. In this paper shapes are unparametrized curves.
Mathematically a shape is an equivalence class of curves under reparameterization, that is, two curves
c0, c1 : r0, 1s Ñ M are equivalent and determine the same shape if there exists a strictly increasing smooth
bijection ϕ : r0, 1s Ñ r0, 1s such that c1 “ c0 ˝ ϕ. For a given curve c we denote by rcs the corresponding
shape.

The similarity between two shapes rc0s, rc1s is then deﬁned by creating a distance function dS on the

space of shapes S,

dSprc0s, rc1sq :“ inf
ϕ

dPpc0, c1 ˝ ϕq

(1)

where dP is a suitable reparameterization invariant Riemannian distance on the manifold of parametrized
curves.

Finding the optimal reparameterization ϕ is however computationally demanding, and in many applica-
tions simply unnecessary. This is speciﬁcally the case of applications where the optimal parametrization
is not explicitly used for further calculations, e.g. problems of identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. Ways of
circumventing this step are therefore of great interest.

In recent years, after extensive work by Terry Lyons and collaborators, the theory of rough paths has
gained considerable importance as a toolbox for mathematical analysis and for mathematical modeling
in applications. In this context, the signature map provides a faithful representation of paths, captur-
ing their essential global properties. A fundamental property of the signature is its invariance under
reparameterization, surmising its importance for shapes.

In this paper, we deﬁne a measure of similarity between shapes in S by means of the signature. We
deﬁne a distance directly on S. We test the viability of this approach and use it to classify motion capture
animations from the CMU motion capture database [7]. Indeed, this leads to an eﬃcient technique that
delivers results comparable to what is obtainable with methodologies based on the SRV transform, but at a
much lower computational cost.

2. Shape analysis on Lie groups

In the following, G will denote a ﬁnite-dimensional Lie group under multiplication with identity element
denoted by e. We let g denote the corresponding right Lie algebra g :“ LRpGq. For a ﬁxed g P G, left and
right translation by g will be denoted Lgphq “ g ¨ h and Rgphq “ h ¨ g respectively.

2.1. Shape Space. We consider the space C 8pr0, 1s, Gq of parameterized smooth curves on G, i.e. smooth
maps c : r0, 1s Ñ G. To model the curves as unparameterized, or independent of parameterization, we
deﬁne the shape space S as the quotient space

S “ C 8pr0, 1s, Gq{Diﬀ`,
where Diﬀ` is the group of orientation preserving diﬀeomorphisms of the parameter space r0, 1s. The
elements of S are equivalence classes of curves. The elements of the same class are curves which can be
1

(2)

 
 
 
 
 
 
SIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

2

mapped to one another by changing their parameterization, that is, two curves c0, c1 P C 8pI, Gq are equal
in shape space if there exists ϕ P Diﬀ ` such that c1 “ c0 ˝ ϕ.

In the setting of our application, the search for optimal time parametrizations can be viewed as syncing
up the animations, removing disturbances due to small pauses, diﬀerent periodicity, or asynchronous
starting and stopping, by shifting the movement of one character to match the other as closely as possible.

2.2. Geodesic Distances on Shape Space. Our goal is to introduce a meaningful and computable
distance dS on S to estimate the similarity between two shapes. This area of research started with the
eﬀorts of Younes [16]. We will restrict the space of curves to the space of immersions, i.e. curves with
non-vanishing ﬁrst derivative, which we denote by

P “ Immpr0, 1s, Gq.

(3)

Let dP be a pseudo-metric on P. We deﬁne dS, for two elements rc0s, rc1s P S, by
dSprc0s, rc1sq :“ inf

dPpc0, c1 ˝ ϕq.

ϕPDiﬀ`
As shown in [3, Lemma 3.4], dS will be a pseudo-metric on S if dP is a reparameterization invariant or, in
other words, if for any two c0, c1 P P and any ϕ P Diﬀ ` we have that

(4)

dPpc0 ˝ ϕ, c1 ˝ ϕq “ dPpc0, c1q.
(5)
An obvious choice of metric on P is the familiar L2-metric. However, as shown by Michor and Mumford
[13], this metric leads to vanishing geodesic distance which renders it useless. They further show in [14]
that one solution to this problem is to consider metrics based on arc-length derivatives, creating a class of
Sobolev-type metrics.

There are multiple possible metrics in this class. One option is based on what is usually referred to as
the Square Root Velocity Transform (SRVT). This transform and accompanying metric was ﬁrst introduced,
in the context of shape analysis, by Srivastava et al.
[15], who used the transformation when working
with curves in Euclidian spaces. The transformation has later been adopted to more general shapes. Of
particular interest is the formulation for shapes that are represented as Lie-group valued curves [3].

We deﬁne the SRVT R : P Ñ C 8pr0, 1s, gzt0uq by

This transformation has the following useful properties [3, Lemma 3.6]:

Rpcqptq –

R´1
cptq˚p 9cptqq
a
k 9cptqk

.

(1) For every c P P and ϕ P Diﬀ `, the following equivariant property holds:

(2) It is translation invariant: for all c P P and g P G

Rpc ˝ ϕq “ Rpcq ˝ ϕ ¨

a

9ϕ.

(6)

(7)

RpRgpcqq “ Rpcq.

A similar result is true for shapes with values in Euclidean spaces [15].

Further, one can obtain a Riemannian metric dP˚ that coincides with the geodesic distance on a
submanifold P˚ Ă P by using the SRVT to pull back the L2-metric on C 8pI, gzt0uq [3]. Further restricting
the immersion space to P˚ “ tc P P : cp0q “ eu, where e is the identity element in G, the distance dP˚
turns out to be reparameterization invariant.

This invariance implies, in particular, that it will also yield a geodesic distance on S˚ :“ P˚{Diﬀ`
[2]. The restriction to P˚ isn’t very troublesome as any curve can be transferred to this space by right
translation by the inverse of its initial value, that is Rcp0q´1 [3].

Using the equivariant property for the SRVT from equation (7) and deﬁning qi “ Rpciq for i “ 0, 1, the

problem of calculating the metric for the shape space S˚ in equation (4) can be written as

dż

a

dS˚pc0, c1q “

inf
ϕPDiﬀ`pIq

I

}q0ptq ´ q1pϕptqq ¨

9ϕ}2dt.

(8)

Finding this inﬁmum will generally be very diﬃcult. The usual approach is therefore to discretize the
curves and solve instead a ﬁnite dimensional optimization problem. The most common methods used to
solve this problem in shape analysis [15] are based on either the gradient descent method or a dynamic
programming algorithm (DP). In our experiments we use the DP approach described in [1].

SIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

3

3. Signatures

Signatures, introduced by K.-T. Chen [4] for smooth paths and later generalized by Lyons [11] under the
name of geometric rough paths, are an important tool for the study of the solutions of controlled diﬀerential
equations, but have also proved useful for solving classiﬁcation problems of time series, Machine Learning
and Topological Data Analysis [6].

In the usual framework, signatures are deﬁned for paths taking values in a Banach space. From a
geometric point of view, and in light of our purposes, this setting has to be adapted. Luckily, Chen also
considered signatures for curves taking values on a smooth manifold [4]. This deﬁnition is quite general and
relies on the selection of a frame bundle. For Lie groups there is a canonical choice: the Maurer–Cartan
form. This is the unique right-invariant one form ω such that ωe “ idg, i.e. ωpvq “ pR´1
g q˚v for v P TgpGq
[8, p. 311].

Below we denote, for a ﬁnite-dimensional vector space V of dimension d “ dim V , the tensor algebra
à

over V ,

T pV q –

ně0

V bn.

We observe that T pV q is always inﬁnite-dimensional. Its dual space is denoted by T ppV qq – T pV q˚, and it
may be identiﬁed with the ring of formal power series in d noncommuting variables te1, . . . , edu.

Deﬁnition 3.1. Let G be a d-dimensional Lie group and α P C 8pr0, 1s, Gq be a smooth curve and ω the
Maurer-Cartan form on G. The signature Spαq of α is the family of linear maps on T p(cid:82)dq recursively
deﬁned by xSpαqs,t, 1y – 1 and

ż

t

xSpαqs,t, ei1¨¨¨ip y –

s

xSpαqs,u, ei1¨¨¨ip´1y ωip

αpuqp 9αpuqq du.

In this deﬁnition, the notation ωj

gpvq denotes the j-th component of the vector ωgpvq P g in a basis of

the Lie algebra g of G.

The signature provides a compact description of certain features of a path [5]. One of its main advantages
in our context is its reparameterization invariance: for any orientation-preserving diﬀeomorphism ϕ on
rs, ts we have that

Spα ˝ ϕqs,t “ Spαqs,t.

Other fundamental properties include:
(1) For each 0 ď s ă t ď 1, the signature Spxqs,t belongs to the set of group-like elements of T pp(cid:82)dqq,

and for any 0 ď s ď 1, Spxqs,s “ 1, the neutral element in the group.

(2) Chen’s rule: For any three 0 ď s ă u ă t ď 1 we have

Spxqs,u b Spxqu,t “ Spxqs,t.

Using these properties, signatures may be eﬃciently computed for some restricted classes of paths. For
example, if x is a straight line in (cid:82)d with base point a P (cid:82)d direction b P (cid:82)d, i.e. xt “ a ` tb for t P r0, 1s,
then

Spxqs,t “ expbppt ´ sqbq

“ 1 ` pt ´ sqb `

pt ´ sq2
2

b b b `

pt ´ sq3
6

b b b b b ` ¨ ¨ ¨ .

(9)

A similar statement is true for geodesic curves on a ﬁnite-dimensional compact Lie group.

We may think of signatures as an inﬁnite vector indexed by words over the alphabet t1, . . . , du. In
particular, for a piecewise linear path the above formula means that if we want to know the component in
(9) corresponding to the word w “ i1 ¨ ¨ ¨ ik then

xSpxqs,t, ewy “

pt ´ sqk
k!

kź

j“1

bij

For a general piecewise linear path x, we may use the above formula and Chen’s rule to deduce that

Spxqs,t “ expbp∆t1b1q b expbp∆t2b2q b ¨ ¨ ¨ b expbp∆tmbmq
where ∆tk “ tk ´ tk´1 are the length of the time intervals where the path is sampled and b1, . . . , bk are the
slopes of the path in each of these intervals. The entries of this expression may be computed by using a
Baker–Campbell–Hausdorﬀ-type formula, for example.

SIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

4

Finally, we remark that the signature possesses another interesting property, namely it is an homomor-
phism from path space with concatenation to the tensor algebra T pp(cid:82)dqq. This means that if we are given
two paths x : r0, 1s Ñ G and y : r0, 1s Ñ G, and we concatenate them to form a new path x ¨ y, then

Moreover, if we reverse the path x, i.e. we deﬁne ÐÝx ptq – xp1 ´ tq then

Spx ¨ yq0,1 “ Spxq0,1 b Spyq0,1.

SpÐÝx q0,1 “ Spxq´1
0,1

where the inverse is taken in the group-like elements of the tensor algebra.

It can be shown that actually, as a function of time the signature satisﬁes the diﬀerential equation

d
dt

Spxqs,t “ Spxqs,t b 9xt, Spxqs,s “ 1

in the tensor algebra. From this point of view, the signature map corresponds to the ﬂow map of the
vector ﬁeld given by the base path. Thus, the signature belongs to an inﬁnite-dimensional Lie group whose
Lie algebra is the free Lie algebra over (cid:82)d which we denote by Lp(cid:82)dq. It does not, however, constitute a
one-parameter subgroup. Therefore, for each ﬁxed time interval rs, ts we can map the signature to the free
Lie algebra via a logarithm map, and we deﬁne

Λpxqs,t “ logpSpxqs,tq P Lp(cid:82)dq.
This element, called the log-signature in the literature, provides a minimal description of the path, which is
equivalent to the full signature.

There are many ways in which signatures can be used to compare shapes, but the essential feature
is that since the map S is reparameterization invariant, one obtains a way of directly comparing shapes
instead of parameterized curves. For our experiments we chose a particular distance on T pp(cid:82)dqq (see next
section for the precise formula), but this is by no means the only possible choice.

In making this choice one has to truncate the signature to obtain a ﬁnite-dimensional object. Due to the
factorial decay of iterated integrals little information is lost in the process; still, some level has to be chosen
and usually this done by running experiments. Once the truncation level is chosen, several choices of metric
are available: the truncated tensor algebra becomes ﬁnite-dimensional so it has a nice linear structure and
we are free to choose norms on it subject to some compatibility restrictions. There is also the notion of
homogeneous norm on group-like elements, which takes into account the geometry of this group. Finally,
the logarithm in this group maps signatures into a linear space (the free Lie algebra) in a bijective way, so
no information is lost, but there is a substantial dimensional reduction.

According to our observations, is the last option which represents the most robust choice in terms of

noise sensitivity, while also providing an accurate way of comparing signatures.

4. Experiments

Motion capture animations are usually recorded as the angle of every joint in a skeleton for every frame
in an animation. A natural setting for the rotating joints is the Lie group of 3D rotations, SOp3q. Every
frame consists of d independently rotating joints so the frame can be modeled as an element in SOp3qd,
where SOp3qd is the Cartesian product of d copies of SOp3q. Interpolating between the frames will then
allow us to model the animation as a parameterized curve.

We use an interpolation scheme in which one uses the log map to linearly interpolate on the Lie algebra,
and then pull back to the Lie group with the exponential map. Let A, B P SOp3q, we deﬁne the interpolation
κ : r0, 1s Ñ SOp3q between A and B as

`
κpsq – exp

`

˘˘

s log

B ¨ AT

¨ A.

Notice that κp0q “ A and κp1q “ B. Applying this interpolation component-wise to the frames in SOp3qd
will enable us to construct a piece-wise interpolation between the frames of the animation. The Maurer–
Cartan form along the interpolation is piece-wise constant, making it easy to compute SRV representations,
dP˚-metrics, and signatures.

To test the eﬀectiveness of the proposed frameworks we check whether they are able to identify diﬀerent
types of character motion. We have selected animations from the CMU motion capture database with
descriptions "walk", "run/jog" and "forward jump". These are similar in length, and should produce results
that conform with human intuition.

The test will calculate a distance matrix using the proposed similarity measures. From the distance matrix
we produce a multidimensional scaling plot(MDS), depicting how similar, or dissimilar, the animations are.

SIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

5

MDS tries to place the data points in 2-dimensional scatter plot while preserving the distances given by
the distance matrix. See Kruskal [9] for more more information on this method.

In Figure 2 we calculate the distance matrix using the metric dP˚ on interpolation curves in P˚, and
in Figure 3 we use the metric dS˚, equation (8), on the shapes generated by the curves in S˚, where
the optimal reparameterization is calculated with a DP algorithm. There are little to no patterns when
projecting to the space pP˚, dP˚q, as seen in Figure 2. In Figure 3 however, we observe that modelling
the curves as being parameterization invariant yields three easily distinguishable clusters of animations.
Compared to Figure 2 we see a big beneﬁt from this model assumption.

In Figure 1 the animations are projected to the shape space S equipped with the distance function
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
dsigpc0, c1q “
(cid:13). While this ﬁgure does reveal the same structure as seen in ﬁgure 3,
the clusters exhibit both a higher internal and a lower external variability. An important take away from
this experiment is that this distance function in fact does preserve some of the structure of the shape space.

klog Spc0qk ´ log Spc1q

klog Spc1qk

log Spc0q

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

Figure 1. Multi dimensional scaling plot of distance matrix calculated from by projecting
animations to the space S˚ equipped with the distance function dsig. In this plot we have
taken animation with descriptions "run/jog", "forward jump" and "walk" from the CMU
Motion Capture Database [7].

runrunjumpjumprunrunwalkjumpjumpwalkwalkwalkwalkwalkrunrunwalkjumpjumpjumpjumprunwalkwalkrunrunwalkSIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

6

Figure 2. Animations projected to P˚ with distance matrix calculated with the metric dP˚.

Figure 3. Animations projected to S˚ with distance matrix calculated with metric dS˚
using a DP algorithm.

5. Concluding Remarks
Our preliminary experiments, show that classifying animations using a distance function on S˚ based on
signatures produces very encouraging results. The proposed method is computationally very eﬃcient, even
though somewhat less accurate than known methods in shape analysis.

The Riemannian metric (4) requires calculating the optimal reparameterizations between every pair of
animations. The proposed signature method instead only requires calculating the signature once for every

runrunjumpjumprunrunwalkjumpjumpwalkwalkwalkwalkwalkrunrunwalkjumpjumpjumpjumprunwalkwalkrunrunwalkrunrunjumpjumprunrunwalkjumpjumpwalkwalkwalkwalkwalkrunrunwalkjumpjumpjumpjumprunwalkwalkrunrunwalkSIGNATURES IN SHAPE ANALYSIS

7

animation, and then compares animations by computing inexpensive norms. The optimisation procedure is
no longer necessary. 1

In our experiments, the signature method outpreformed the optimal reparameterization metric by a
factor of „ 2000 when classifying animations. A more precise comparison with the SRVT approach and
other methods, see e.g. [10] goes beyond the scope of this work and will be considered in future work. Still
our preliminary experiments give an idea of the possible performance beneﬁts gained with the signature
approach.

Increasing the accuracy of the signature method might also be possible by deﬁning a more precise
similarity measure. Nonetheless, our results can be seen as proof of concept for using signatures as an
eﬃcient way of classifying shapes.

5.1. Acknowledgements. This paper contains work done as part of P.E.L.’s master thesis. The master
thesis will be published separately as part of NTNU’s Master of Science program in Applied Physics
and Mathematics [12]. N.T. acknowledges that part of this work was carried out during his tenure of an
ERCIM ‘Alain Bensoussan’ Fellowship Programme (contract number 2018-10) at NTNU. This work was
supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie, grant agreement No.691070.

The data used in this project was obtained from http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu. The database was created

with funding from NSF EIA-0196217.

References

[1] M. Bauer, M. Eslitzbichler, and M. Grasmair, “Landmark-Guided Elastic Shape Analysis of Human Character Motions,”

Inverse Problems and Imaging 11 (2015) 601–621.

[2] M. Bruveris, P. Michor, and D. Mumford, “Geodesic Completeness for Sobolev Metrics on the Space of Immersed Plane

Curves,” Forum of Mathematics, Sigma [electronic only] 2 (2013) .

[3] E. Celledoni, M. Eslitzbichler, and A. Schmeding, “Shape Analysis on Lie Groups with Applications in Computer

Animation,” Journal of Geometric Mechanics Vol. 8 No. 3 (2016), pp. 273-304 (2015) , arXiv:1506.00783 [math.DG].

[4] K.-T. Chen, “Iterated Integrals and Exponential Homomorphisms,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society

s3-4 no. 1, (1954) 502–512.

[5] K.-T. Chen, “Integration of Paths–A Faithful Representation of Paths by Noncommutative Formal Power Series,”

Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 89 no. 2, (1958) 395–407. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1993193.

[6] I. Chevyrev, V. Nanda, and H. Oberhauser, “Persistence paths and signature features in topological data analysis,”

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2018) . To appear.

[7] CMU Graphics Lab, “CMU Graphics Lab Motion Capture Database,” url visit date: 2018-12-10.

http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu/.

[8] J. Hilgert and K.-H. Neeb, Structure and Geometry of Lie Groups. Springer-Verlag New York, 2012.
[9] J. Kruskal and M. Wish, Multidimensional Scaling. Sage Publications, 1978.
[10] S. Lahiri, D. Robinson, and E. Klassen, “Precise Matching of PL Curves in (cid:82)N in the Square Root Velocity Framework,”

Geometry, Imaging and Computing 2 (01, 2015) .

[11] T. J. Lyons, “Diﬀerential equations diriven by rough signals,” Revista Matemática Iberoamericana 14 no. 2, (1998)

215–310.

[12] P. E. Lystad, “Signatures in Shape Analysis: an Eﬃcient Approach to Motion Identiﬁcation,” Master’s thesis,

Department of Mathematical Sciences, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway, 2019, Manuscript submitted for publication.
[13] P. Michor and D. Mumford, “Vanishing geodesic distance on spaces of submanifolds and diﬀeomorphisms,” Documenta

Mathematica 10 (2004) .

[14] P. Michor and D. Mumford, “D.: An overview of the Riemannian metrics on spaces of curves using the Hamiltonian

approach,” Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 23 (2006) 74–113.

[15] A. Srivastava, E. Klassen, S. H. Joshi, and I. H. Jermyn, “Shape Analysis of Elastic Curves in Euclidean Spaces.,” IEEE

Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 33 no. 7, (2011) 1415–1428.

[16] L. Younes, “Computable elastic distances between shapes,” SIAM J. of Applied Math (1998) 565–586.

E-mail address: elena.celledoni@ntnu.no
URL: https://www.ntnu.edu/employees/elena.celledoni

E-mail address: paalel@stud.ntnu.no

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim,

Norway.

E-mail address: tapia@wias-berlin.de
URL: https://www.wias-berlin.de/people/tapia

Weierstraß-Institut Berlin, Mohrenstr. 39, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

1A more thorough analysis of the run time complexities associated with these algorithms will be performed in future work.

