Using machine learning to understand physics graduate school admissions

Nicholas T. Young
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824 and
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science, and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824

Marcos D. Caballero
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824
Center for Computing in Science Education & Department of Physics, University of Oslo, N-0316 Oslo, Norway and
CREATE for STEM Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824

Among all of the ﬁrst-year graduate students enrolled in doctoral-granting physics departments, the percent-
age of female and racial minority students has remained unchanged for the past 20 years. The current graduate
program admissions process can create challenges for achieving diversity goals in physics. In this paper, we
will investigate how the various aspects of a prospective student’s application to a physics doctoral program
affect the likelihood the applicant will be admitted. Admissions data was collected from a large, Midwestern
public research university that has a decentralized admissions process and included applicants’ undergraduate
GPAs and institutions, research interests, and GRE scores. Because the collected data varied in scale, we used
supervised machine learning algorithms to create models that predict who was admitted into the PhD program.
We ﬁnd that using only the applicant’s undergraduate GPA and physics GRE score, we are able to predict with
75% accuracy who will be admitted to the program.

9
1
0
2

p
e
S
0
3

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
0
7
5
1
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
I.

INTRODUCTION

Despite other science, technology, engineering, and math-
ematics (STEM) ﬁelds becoming more diverse over the past
few decades, physics has lagged behind with only 20% of
bachelor’s degrees awarded to women and only 11% awarded
to racial minorities [1]. These numbers do not improve when
considering graduate degrees where 20% of doctoral degrees
are granted to women and 7% are granted to racial minorities
[1]. While this underrepresentation has both enrollment and
retention causes, this paper will focus on the factors that may
affect enrollment in physics graduate programs.

When considering enrollment in physics PhD programs,
prior work has found that minority students in physics are
less likely to apply to programs if they feel that they will not
be admitted based on low GPA or GRE scores, or lack of
research experience [2]. Further, given that many graduate
programs have application fees, ﬁnancial concerns may pre-
vent students from applying to graduate programs that they
believe they will not be admitted to. Therefore, it is important
to understand what matters when applying to physics gradu-
ate programs while acknowledging that many factors that are
not easily quantiﬁable matter.

Previous research into graduate admissions in physics has
tended to take a broad approach, characterizing the graduate
admissions process across the United States, both for master’s
and PhD programs [3, 4] or focusing on a speciﬁc subset of
universities such as elite universities [5]. These studies ﬁnd
that faculty consider numerical measures such as undergrad-
uate GPA and GRE scores most important in the admissions
process and have been conducted by either observing the ad-
missions process or by surveying faculty about what they be-
lieve to be most important in the admissions process. More
recent work in physics graduate admissions has explored ap-
plicant perceptions of the various components of the appli-
cation [6]. Missing in this analysis is an investigation of the
actual applications of prospective physics graduate students.
To our knowledge, there has only been one such study [7].

Given that applications to graduate programs consist of nu-
merical data such as GPA and GRE scores, categorical data
such as gender, race, and ethnicity, and open-ended data such
as letters of recommendation and personal statements, grad-
uate admissions is an ideal target for machine learning. In-
deed, machine learning approaches to understanding graduate
admissions have been employed in computer science to study
self-reported admissions data [8] and to streamline the review
process [9]. Machine learning methods have also been em-
ployed more broadly in higher education admissions to pre-
dict which admitted students will accept an offer to attend a
small liberal arts school [10, 11] and to predict which students
are likely to be admitted and to complete their MBA [12].

The goal of this work to further the study of graduate ad-
missions in physics by analyzing the applications using a ma-
chine learning approach.
In addition, unlike other studies
in physics graduate admissions, this work represents a case
study of a single institution rather than a broad look at the

graduate admissions landscape. However, since physics is re-
garded as a high consensus discipline, that is, there is large
agreement about what counts as legitimate admissions prac-
tices [13], we expect our results to generalize to similar doc-
toral programs. Future work will investigate the robustness of
the ﬁndings presented here.

II. METHODS

A. Data

The data used in this study comes from admissions data
recorded from 512 domestic applicants to a physics and as-
tronomy PhD program at a large, research-intensive, Mid-
western public university from 2014-2017. Domestic and in-
ternational applicants do not undergo the same review pro-
cess and hence we only analyze applications from domestic
students here. The admissions process is unique at this uni-
versity in that the applications are not reviewed by a central
committee but rather members of the subdiscipline in which
the student expresses interest. For example, if the student
intends to study high energy physics, only high energy physi-
cists would review the application and decide whether to ac-
cept the student. The data include the applicant’s undergrad-
uate institution and grade point average (GPA), their general
and physics GRE scores, and their physics subdiscipline of
interest. As laws of the state where this university is located
prohibit giving preferential treatment to applicants based on
gender, race, ethnicity, or national origin, demographics were
not recorded by the physics and astronomy department and
hence, are not available to us. Overall, 48% of the domestic
applicants were offered admission into the program.

B. Describing Undergraduate Institutions

Because the name of the undergraduate institution in itself
does not provide useful information to an algorithm, we cre-
ated new factors to describe characteristics of the institutions.
To describe the overall institution, we classiﬁed each institu-
tion as public or private, whether it is a minority serving in-
stitution (MSI), the region of the country it is located in (such
as Northeast, Southwest, etc.), and the Barron’s selectivity of
the institution, which describes how selective the undergrad-
uate program is and serves as a proxy for prestige. Classiﬁca-
tions for the ﬁrst three categories were taken from the most re-
cent Carnegie Rankings [14] while the Barron’s classiﬁcation
came from Barron’s Proﬁles of American Colleges. Because
the overall reputation of the applicant’s undergraduate univer-
sity may not describe the physics program at that university,
we also included factors related to the physics program such
as the highest physics degree offered at the university and the
size of the undergraduate program and PhD program if ap-
plicable. The size of the undergraduate and PhD programs
were determined by the number of graduates of the program

TABLE I. Variables used in our model and their scale of measure-
ment

department attracts more students and hence graduates more
students.

Measurement Scale
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Categorical
Categorical
Categorical

Factor
Undergraduate GPA
Verbal GRE score
Quantitative GRE score
Written GRE score
Physics GRE score
Proposed research area
Application year
Barron’s selectivity
Region of applicant’s
undergraduate institution
Type of physics program
at applicant’s undergraduate
institution
Size of undergraduate physics
program at applicant’s
undergraduate institution
Size of doctoral physics program
at applicant’s undergraduate
institution
Applicant attended a minority
serving institution
Binary
Public or Private
Output variable: admitted status Binary

Binary

Categorical

Categorical

Categorical

Categorical

in a typical year. The programs were then classiﬁed as small,
medium-small, medium-large, or large based on which quar-
tile they fell into. We used the Roster of Physics Departments
with Enrollment and Degree Data to collect this data [15].
All factors appearing in our model are shown in Table I and
include the scale of measurement.

C.

Justifying our choices of institutional factors

Prior work has documented university pedigree is often
considered in the application process because institutional
quality is assumed to be a proxy for student quality [5, 16].
Here, we measure institutional quality by Barron’s selectivity
and public or private status, with the assumption that physics
faculty view private universities as more prestigious than pub-
lic universities. We include region of the applicant’s under-
graduate university to account for the fact that the institution
being studied is a public university and may therefore show a
preference for students from the surrounding region.

Prior work has also found faculty exhibit a tendency to
admit students like themselves, though it is more common
among academics who graduated from elite institutions [5].
Therefore, it is not unreasonable to expect that faculty may
prefer to admit students who followed similar paths as they
did, meaning students from large, doctoral institutions may
be more likely to be admitted than students from smaller in-
stitutions. Additionally, we use the size of the undergraduate
and PhD programs as proxies for the perceived prestige of
the physics department, assuming a more prestigious physics

D. Random Forest Model

To analyze our data, we used the conditional inference for-
est algorithm, a variant of the random forest algorithm shown
to be less biased when the data includes both continuous and
categorical variables [17] such as those used in our model
(see table I). Random forest models in general are ensembles
of individual decision trees, which use binary splits of the in-
put features in order to make a prediction. The predictions
are then averaged over the individual trees to obtain the over-
all prediction of the random forest.

While there are multiple metrics used to assess random for-
est and other machine learning models, two of the most com-
mon are the accuracy and the area under the curve (AUC).
The accuracy is simply the proportion of correct predictions
made by the model. To ensure that the accuracy isn’t inﬂated
by overtraining, only a fraction of the available data is used to
construct the model while the rest is used to test the predictive
power. It is this remaining data that is used to calculate the ac-
curacy of the model. The AUC is deﬁned as the area beneath
the receiver operator curve of the model, which visualizes the
false positive rate against the true positive rate and varies be-
tween 0.5 and 1, with values greater than 0.7 signifying a
good model [18]. This area describes the proportion of posi-
tive cases that are ranked above negative cases in the data set.
For example, for our data, the AUC represents the proportion
of all random pairs of admitted and not-admitted applicants
in which the admitted applicant is classiﬁed as admitted and
the not-admitted applicant is classiﬁed as not-admitted.

In addition to making predictions, the random forest al-
gorithm can determine the importance of each feature to the
model, referred to as the feature importance. We use the AUC
feature importance [19] as it is less biased when input features
differ in scale (as do our factors listed in table I) and when
the predicted variable is not split evenly between the two out-
comes. As the feature importances are not assumed to follow
any statistical distribution, there is no simple way to apply
the idea of statistical signiﬁcance to feature importances. We
therefore apply the recursive backward elimination technique
described in [20] to determine which features are important
and which are not. We will refer to the features determined
to be important via this process as meaningful features. For
more information about random forest models, biases, and
feature importance measures, see Young et al. [21].

We chose to apply a random forest model instead of a more
traditional technique for classifying data such as logistic re-
gression (as used by Attiyeh and Attiyeh [22] and Posselt et
al [7] to study graduate admissions) due to these feature im-
portances. As feature importances measure all factors on the
same scale, that is how much they change the area under the
curve, factors of otherwise different scales can be compared.
This is in contrast to logistic regression where the odds ratio

for a continuous variable would measure the change in odds
for a unit increase in the variable while the odds ratio for a
categorical or binary variable measures the change in odds
relative to a reference group.

We used R [23] for our analysis and the party package
[17, 24, 25] to create a conditional inference forest model.
We used 500 trees to build our forest and 70% of our data to
train the model. We ran our model 30 times, randomly se-
lecting 70% of our data for training each time, and averaged
the feature importances over runs so that the resulting distri-
bution of individual feature importances would be approxi-
mately normal. As the conditional inference forest algorithm
has routines built in to handle missing data [26], applicants
with missing information were not removed from the data set.

III. RESULTS

Across the 30 runs, the average accuracy of our model pre-
dicting on the held-out data was 75.8% ± 0.6% and the aver-
age AUC was .821 ± .002. As our model’s accuracy is sig-
niﬁcantly higher than the null accuracy of 52.3%, the percent
of students who were not accepted, and our AUC is above
0.7, our model can be considered a reasonable model of the
data. The accuracy and AUC were also stable with regard to
how many trees we used to construct the model and the frac-
tion of the data we used to train the model, with the accuracy
changing by at most 1% and the AUC by 0.005.

The feature importances averaged over the 30 runs are
shown in Fig. 1. We ﬁnd numerical factors such as the appli-
cant’s score on the physics GRE, the applicant’s undergradu-

ate GPA, the applicant’s quantitative and verbal GRE scores,
and their proposed research area to be more important in the
application process than any factor describing the applicant’s
undergraduate institution. Using recursive backward elimi-
nation to determine the meaningful factors, we ﬁnd the appli-
cant’s physics GRE score and their undergraduate GPA to be
the only meaningful factors.

To verify that the applicant’s physics GRE score and their
undergraduate GPA were indeed the only meaningful factors,
we then reran our random forest model 30 times using only
these two factors as the predictors. Our average accuracy was
then 75.8% ± 0.6% and our average area under the curve
was .817 ± .003, which are not statistically different from
the values we found using all fourteen factors shown in table
I. Further, if these factors are truly meaningful, then plotting
an applicant’s physics GRE score against their undergraduate
GPA should show distinct groups. To test this idea, we gen-
erated all possible pairs of undergraduate GPA and physics
GRE scores and ran them through our model to ﬁnd the pre-
dicted admissions decision. The results are shown in Fig. 2
with the data from all of the applicants in our study overlaid.
While there does not appear to be a hard cutoff physics GRE
score, there appears to be a rough cutoff around 700. Inter-
estingly, the decision boundary has a negative slope between
GPA of 3.6 and 4.0, suggesting a high GPA can partially com-
pensate for a physics GRE score below the soft threshold.

FIG. 1. Averaged feature importances over 30 trials. Physics GRE
score and undergraduate GPA, appearing in orange, were the only
factors found to be meaningful.

FIG. 2. Plot of all applicant’s physics GRE scores vs their under-
graduate GPAs. The background coloring expresses the prediction
of the model had an applicant had that score.

IV. DISCUSSION

Perhaps unsurprisingly, we ﬁnd numerical measures are the
most important factors for determining whether a domestic
applicant will be accepted into this physics graduate program,
consistent with ﬁndings that graduate programs with a large
number of applicants use numerical measures as a ﬁrst pass
to evaluate applicants [3, 5]. While we ﬁnd no evidence of
a minimum physics GRE score, we do ﬁnd evidence of a
"rough cutoff" as described in Potvin et al. around 700. Nev-
ertheless, some students who scored signiﬁcantly above this
threshold were not admitted. While we do not know the rea-
sons why these students were not admitted, Posselt noted that
faculty may not admit superior applicants if they do not be-
lieve the applicant will actually enroll in their program [5].

Overall, our ﬁndings of the meaningful factors for admis-
sion to a physics graduate program are consistent with Potvin
et al.’s ﬁndings obtained by surveying physics graduate ad-
missions directors. Notably, we also ﬁnd that the physics
GRE score, undergraduate GPA, quantitative GRE score, and
proposed research area are more important than other factors
while the undergraduate institution, GRE written score, and
proximity/familiarity are less important factors.

Interestingly, the program studied here appears to place
more emphasis on the verbal GRE score than the average pro-
gram. This may be because our study only looked at domestic
students while Potvin et al.’s looked at all applicants. Because
international students also take the TOEFL while domestic
students do not and admissions directors ranked the TOEFL
as more important the verbal GRE, the TOEFL may take the
place of the verbal GRE and hence lower the perceived value
of the verbal GRE relative to other factors.

Despite prior work suggesting institutional characteristics
play an important role in graduate admissions, we did not ﬁnd
institutional or departmental characteristics to be meaning-
ful to our model. Our result could be due to differences in
methodology or due to institutional effects being inﬂuential
but not dominant factors [22]. Indeed, Posselt suggests insti-
tutional factors may be used to differentiate applicants with
similar GPAs and GRE scores [5]. Therefore, we may not
have found institutional factors to be meaningful since they
are used when primary factors such as GPA and physics GRE
scores do not sufﬁciently separate applicants.

While we did not have access to other criterion included
in the Potvin et al. such as application essays, research ex-
periences, and recommendation letters, we were still able to
create a model that correctly predicted whether an applicant
would be admitted with 75% accuracy based solely off the ap-
plicant’s undergraduate GPA and physics GRE score. While
undergraduate GPA is a signiﬁcant predictor of completing a
physics PhD, physics GRE is not, as those scoring near the
top of the physics GRE only have a 7% higher probability of
completing their PhD than those scoring near the bottom [27].
As the GRE is not associated with completing a doctoral de-
gree and is known to favor persons from majority groups in
science [28], the outsized role of the GRE in the admissions

process should be questioned. Indeed, the American Associa-
tion of Physics Teachers recently released a recommendation
against using the physics GRE in graduate admissions [29].

V. LIMITATIONS

As with any model, there are a few limitations to our
model. First, the data we used to make our model was not all
the data that would be available to a faculty member evaluat-
ing an application. Therefore, it is possible that meaningful
features other than GPA and physics GRE score could lie in
the data that was unavailable to us.

Second, feature importances can be inﬂated when features
used in the model are correlated, possibly causing some fac-
tors to be considered more important than they actually are.
There do exist methods for controlling for correlations in ran-
dom forest; however, unlike the conditional inference forest
algorithm used here, those methods can only be used with
data containing no missing values. Our initial analysis con-
trolling for correlations suggests that undergraduate GPA and
physics GRE scores are still the meaningful factors.

VI. FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION

Our work adds to the broader literature about graduate ad-
missions and the process by which applicants are judged. Be-
cause minority students may not apply to graduate programs
if they do not think they will be accepted, elucidating the fac-
tors that determine whether an applicant will be accepted is
crucial. Simply increasing the number of applicants from un-
derrepresented groups will not increase their representation
unless corresponding efforts are made to admit these students.
While our results align with prior work, these results repre-
sent only one institution and may not be representative of all
United States physics PhD programs. Our future work will
apply a similar analysis to other physics graduate programs
to test the generalizability of our results. Given the unique
structure of the admissions process at this university, gradu-
ate programs with a more traditional admissions process may
assign different weights to the various parts of an application.
Further, the university studied here has recently moved to a
rubric-based admissions format, designed to take into account
non-cognitive competencies and program ﬁt in addition to the
more traditional admissions criteria such as GPA and GRE
scores. Our future work will examine how including these
new criteria may change the factors that are most predictive
of an applicant being admitted to the program.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the graduate program directors at
the studied university for providing application data and for
providing insight into their admissions process.

[1] R. Ivie, Beyond Representation: Data to Improve the Situation
of Women and Minorities in Physics and Astronomy (2018).
[2] G. L. Cochran, T. Hodapp, and E. E. A. Brown, Identifying bar-
riers to ethnic/racial minority students’ participation in gradu-
ate physics, in Physics Education Research Conference Pro-
ceedings, PER Conference (Cincinnati, OH, 2018) pp. 92–95.
[3] G. Potvin, D. Chari, and T. Hodapp, Investigating approaches
to diversity in a national survey of physics doctoral degree pro-
grams: The graduate admissions landscape, Physical Review
Physics Education Research 13, 020142 (2017).

[4] D. Chari and G. Potvin, Admissions practices in terminal
master’s degree-granting physics departments: A compara-
tive analysis, Physical Review Physics Education Research 15,
010104 (2019).

[5] J. R. Posselt, Inside graduate admissions (Harvard University

Press, 2016).

[6] D. Chari and G. Potvin, Understanding the importance of
graduate admissions criteria according to prospective gradu-
ate students, Physical Review Physics Education Research 15,
023101 (2019).

[7] J. Posselt, T. Hernandez, G. Cochran, and C. Miller, Metrics
First, Diversity Later? Making the Shortlist and Getting Ad-
mitted to Physics PhD Programs, Journal of Women and Mi-
norities in Science and Engineering 10.1615/JWomenMinor-
ScienEng.2019027863.

[8] N. Gupta, A. Sawhney, and D. Roth, Will I Get in? Modeling
the Graduate Admission Process for American Universities,
in 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining
Workshops (ICDMW) (2016) pp. 631–638.

[9] A. Waters and R. Miikkulainen, GRADE: Machine Learning
Support for Graduate Admissions, AI Magazine 35, 64 (2014).
[10] T. Lux, R. Pittman, M. Shende, and A. Shende, Applications
of Supervised Learning Techniques on Undergraduate Admis-
sions Data, in Proceedings of the ACM International Confer-
ence on Computing Frontiers, CF ’16 (ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2016) pp. 412–417, event-place: Como, Italy.

[11] K. Basu, T. Basu, R. Buckmire, and N. Lal, Predictive Mod-
els of Student College Commitment Decisions Using Machine
Learning, Data 4, 65 (2019).

[12] J. Moore, An expert system approach to graduate school admis-
sion decisions and academic performance prediction, Omega
26, 659 (1998).

[13] J. R. Posselt, Disciplinary Logics in Doctoral Admissions:
Understanding Patterns of Faculty Evaluation, The Journal of
Higher Education 86, 807 (2015).

[14] I. U. C. for Postsecondary Research, The Carnegie Classiﬁca-
tion of Institutions of Higher Education, 2018 edition (Bloom-

ington, IN).

[15] S. Nicholson and P. J. Mulvey, Roster of Physics Departments
with Enrollment and Degree Data, 2015, Tech. Rep. (American
Institute of Physics, 2016).

[16] P. Paxton and K. A. Bollen, Perceived Quality and Methodol-
ogy in Graduate Department Ratings: Sociology, Political Sci-
ence, and Economics, Sociology of Education 76, 71 (2003).

[17] C. Strobl, A.-L. Boulesteix, A. Zeileis, and T. Hothorn, Bias
in random forest variable importance measures: Illustrations,
sources and a solution, BMC Bioinformatics 8, 25 (2007).
[18] M. B. Araújo, R. G. Pearson, W. Thuiller, and M. Erhard, Vali-
dation of species climate impact models under climate change,
Global Change Biology 11, 1504 (2005).

[19] S. Janitza, C. Strobl, and A.-L. Boulesteix, An AUC-based
permutation variable importance measure for random forests,
BMC Bioinformatics 14, 119 (2013).

[20] R. Díaz-Uriarte and S. Alvarez de Andrés, Gene selection and
classiﬁcation of microarray data using random forest, BMC
Bioinformatics 7, 3 (2006).

[21] N. T. Young, G. Allen, J. M. Aiken, R. Henderson, and M. D.
Caballero, Identifying features predictive of faculty integrat-
ing computation into physics courses, Physical Review Physics
Education Research 15, 010114 (2019).

[22] G. Attiyeh and R. Attiyeh, Testing for bias in graduate school
admissions, The Journal of Human Resources; Madison 32,
524 (1997).

[23] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria, 2018).

[24] T. Hothorn, P. Bühlmann, S. Dudoit, A. Molinaro, and M. J.
Van Der Laan, Survival ensembles, Biostatistics 7, 355 (2006).
[25] C. Strobl, A.-L. Boulesteix, T. Kneib, T. Augustin, and
A. Zeileis, Conditional variable importance for random forests,
BMC Bioinformatics 9, 307 (2008).

[26] A. Hapfelmeier, T. Hothorn, K. Ulm, and C. Strobl, A new vari-
able importance measure for random forests with missing data,
Statistics and Computing 24, 21 (2014).

[27] C. W. Miller, B. M. Zwickl, J. R. Posselt, R. T. Silvestrini,
and T. Hodapp, Typical physics Ph.D. admissions criteria limit
access to underrepresented groups but fail to predict doctoral
completion, Science Advances 5, eaat7550 (2019).

[28] C. Miller and K. Stassun, A test that fails, Nature 510, 303

(2014).

[29] Statement on the Use of the GRE in Admissions to Graduate
Physics Programs, American Association of Physics Teacher
(2019).

