9
1
0
2

g
u
A
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
9
1
5
5
0
.
7
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Astro2020 Activity, Project or State of the Profession (APC) White Paper

The Breakthrough Listen Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence

Thematic areas: technosignatures, radio astronomy, planetary systems, search for life beyond the
Solar System, activities, project

Primary Author:
Name: Dr. Vishal Gajjar
Institution: University of California, Berkeley
Email: vishalg@berkeley.edu

Co-authors:
Andrew Siemion (UC Berkeley, USA; SETI Institute USA; Radboud University, The
Netherlands; University of Malta, Malta), Steve Croft (UC Berkeley, USA; SETI Institute, USA),
Bryan Brzycki (UC Berkeley, USA), Marta Burgay (INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Tobia Carozzi
(Chalmers University, Sweden), Raimondo Concu (INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Daniel Czech (UC
Berkeley, USA), David DeBoer (UC Berkeley, USA), Julia DeMarines (UC Berkeley, USA),
Jamie Drew (Breakthrough Initiatives, USA), J. Emilio Enriquez (UC Berkeley, USA; Radboud
University, The Netherlands), James Fawcett (University of Manchester, UK), Peter Gallagher
(School of Cosmic Physics, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, Ireland), Michael Garrett
(University of Manchester, UK), Nectaria Gizani (Hellenic Open University, Greece), Greg
Hellbourg (Curtin University, Australia), Jamie Holder (University of Delaware, USA), Howard
Isaacson (UC Berkeley, USA; University of Southern Queensland, Australia), Sanjay Kudale
(Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope, National Center for Radio Astrophysics, Pune, India), Brian
Lacki (UC Berkeley, USA), Matthew Lebofsky (UC Berkeley, USA), Di Li (Key Laboratory of
FAST, NAOC, CAS, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China), David H. E.
MacMahon (UC Berkeley, USA), Joe McCauley (Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland), Andrea Melis
(INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Emilio Molinari (INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Pearse Murphy (Trinity College
Dublin, Ireland; School of Cosmic Physics, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, Ireland),
Delphine Perrodin (INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Maura Pilia (INAF, Cagliari, Italy), Danny C. Price
(UC Berkeley, USA; Swinburne University of Technology, Australia), Claire Webb (UC Berkeley,
USA; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA), Dan Werthimer (UC Berkeley, USA), David
Williams (UC Santa Cruz, USA), Pete Worden (Breakthrough Initiatives, USA), Philippe Zarka
(Observatoire de Paris, Paris), Yunfan Gerry Zhang (UC Berkeley, USA)

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract: The discovery of the ubiquity of habitable extrasolar planets, combined with
revolutionary advances in instrumentation and observational capabilities, have ushered in a
renaissance in the millenia-old quest to answer our most profound question about the universe and
our place within it − Are we alone? The Breakthrough Listen Initiative, announced in July 2015
as a 10-year 100M USD program, is the most comprehensive effort in history to quantify the
distribution of advanced, technologically capable life in the universe. In this white paper, we
outline the status of the on-going observing campaign with our primary observing facilities, as
well as planned activities with these instruments over the next few years. We also list
collaborative facilities which will conduct searches for technosignatures in either primary
observing mode, or commensally. We highlight some of the novel analysis techniques we are
bringing to bear on multi-petabyte data sets, including machine learning tools we are deploying to
search for a broader range of technosignatures than was previously possible.

1 Key Science Goals and Objectives

The search for life beyond Earth seeks to answer one of the most profound questions humans can
ask about our place in the universe − Are we alone? Recent discoveries of thousands of
exoplanets, including many Earth-like planets (Howell et al., 2014; Dressing & Charbonneau,
2015), point towards abundant targets of potential interest. Experiments to scan biospheres of
these exo-worlds are already in the design phase and will likely start operating in the next decade
(Schwieterman et al., 2018). It is possible that some fraction of these planets host life sufﬁciently
advanced to be capable of communicating using electromagnetic waves. The Breakthrough Listen
Initiative (hereafter, BL) is a US$100M 10-year effort to conduct the most sensitive,
comprehensive, and intensive search for such advanced life on other worlds (Worden et al., 2017;
Isaacson et al., 2017). BL currently has dedicated time on three telescopes: the Green Bank
Telescope (GBT; MacMahon et al., 2017) and the Parkes Observatory (Price et al., 2018) in the
radio, and Automated Planet Finder (APF; Lipman et al., 2018) in the optical. Additionally,
commensal observations will soon begin in the radio at the MeerKAT radio telescope in South
Africa.

Technosignature searches take place in a large, multidimensional parameter space. As the
luminosity function of the putative ETI transmitter is not known, deep, long observations from
single pixel receivers must be complemented by wide-ﬁeld surveys conducted across a signiﬁcant
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Other unknown signal characteristics include strength,
intermittency, polarization, and modulation types (Tarter, 2003; Wright et al., 2018).
Narrow-band (∼ Hz) radio signals are one of the most common signal types searched for in radio
SETI (Drake, 1961; Verschuur, 1973; Tarter et al., 1980; Horowitz et al., 1986;
Horowitz & Sagan, 1993; Oliver & Billingham, 1971; Siemion et al., 2013). Such signals are
ubiquitous features of early terrestrial communication systems, transit the interstellar medium
easily, are readily distinguished from natural astrophysical sources and can be produced with
relatively low energy (Cocconi & Morrison, 1959). The BL team has also developed a software
package to search for these narrow-band signals, turboSETI1(Enriquez et al., 2017). Broad-band

1turboSETI:https://github.com/UCBerkeleySETI/turbo_seti

1

radio emission exhibiting artiﬁcial dispersion and/or underlying modulation represents a different
class of radio emission indicative of an artiﬁcial origin. Due to the complexity of such signals,
very limited searches have been conducted (e.g. Harp et al., 2015). Recent advances in the
performance of Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) and availability of resources to store large
datasets are now allowing a more effective search for these wide variety of signals (§ 4.2).

The primary targets of the BL program include 1 million nearby stars, 100 nearby galaxies, and
deep observations of the Galactic center and plane (Isaacson et al., 2017). Enriquez et al. (2017)
reported observations at 1.4 GHz towards 692 stars using the GBT for narrowband signals. More
recently, Price et al. (2019) observed 1327 stars from 1.1 − 3.4 GHz using the GBT and Parkes
for similar narrowband signals. Over the next ﬁve years, MeerKAT will continue to perform a
survey of 1 million nearby stars (§ 2.5). Parkes has already completed a ﬁrst scan of the visible
part of the Galactic plane (Price et al., 2019b in prep.). It will continue to scan the Galactic plane
to investigate any intermittent ETI signals. The BL program is also planning to conduct deep
observations of the Galactic center across 0.7 − 100 GHz, utilizing both primary observing
facilities (Gajjar et al., 2019), and exploring partnerships with facilities operating at higher
frequencies such as the Sardinia Radio Telescope in Italy (§ 3.4).

BL also plans to examine Earth’s technosignature and how it changes over time (using GBT, with
plans to expand to Parkes and MeerKAT), by observing the Earth’s radio signature reﬂected from
the Moon (DeMarines et al., 2019), following a similar study by Sullivan et al. (1978). We will
also use APF to search for potential technosignatures in visible wavelengths, via Earthshine
measurements.

2 Current status of primary BL observing facilities

2.1 APF

The Automated Planet Finder is a 2.4-m telescope at Lick Observatory, Mt. Hamilton, California.
The high-resolution Levy Spectrometer is the lone instrument on the telescope and is capable of
producing optical spectra with a resolution of ∼ 100, 000, ideally suiting APF to search for
artiﬁcial optical lasers. Since 2015 BL has used APF to search a sample of nearby stars, plus a
representative sample of spectral types for stars within 50 pc. The narrow wavelength nature and
spatially-focused emission of optical lasers, allow detection against the broad band and isotropic
emission of stellar light.
In the next phase of BL observations on the APF, a select variety of planet candidates identiﬁed
by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) will be observed. We hope to develop the
ability to observe stars without the beneﬁt of standard on-slit guiding, using offset guiding
techniques. This new mode would allow for tessellated observations of galaxies, which are larger
than a single slit area covered by one pointing, and are too faint to use standard on-slit guiding.
Stars currently too faint to observe (V ∼ 14) could also be observed using off-slit guiding,
especially nearby M-dwarfs which are of special interest to the exoplanet community.

2

2.2 GBT

The Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope (GBT) is a 100-m single dish radio telescope located
in West Virginia, US. BL has contracted 20% of the observing time since the beginning of 2016.
It is the main telescope of the program in the Northern Hemisphere. Most observations to date
have been concentrated on a set of nearby stars north of −20◦; this list of targets is described in
(Isaacson et al., 2017). The four main receivers used thus far are L-band (1.1-1.9 GHz, 10 Jy
SEFD), S-band (1.68-2.65 GHz, 10 Jy SEFD), C-band (4-7.8 GHz, 10 Jy SEFD) and X-band
(7.8-12 GHz, 15 Jy SEFD). Commissioning of Ku-band (11.0-15.8 GHz, 15 Jy SEFD), KFPA
(18-27.5 GHz, 20 Jy SEFD) and other receivers is underway.
In order to maximize the data output for each receiver, we installed a data recorder composed of
hundreds of drives organized in 64 GPU-equipped compute nodes, and 7.8 PB of on-site storage
(MacMahon et al., 2017). This allows for up to 12 GHz instantaneous bandwidth to be recorded.
The overall level of completion for the nearby star part of the program is about 90%. We plan to
ﬁnish this part of the program in the next few months. Another major part of the program for
GBT is nearby galaxies, also described in (Isaacson et al., 2017). Some galaxies have already
been observed, although this part of the program will commence in full once the nearby star
program has been ﬁnalized.

2.3 Parkes

Approximately a quarter of the annual observing time (1500 h) on the CSIRO Parkes 64-m radio
telescope has been allocated to BL, to survey nearby stars (within 50 pc) and the Galactic plane
(covering ±6.5 degrees in Galactic latitude). The two main receivers in use are the 13-beam
20-cm receiver (MB, 1.2–1.6 GHz, 30 Jy SEFD), and the Ultra Wideband Low receiver (UWL,
0.7–4.0 GHz, 25 Jy SEFD). As at GBT, a wideband data recorder was installed by BL at the
telescope (Price et al., 2018). This recorder is capable of recording the voltage-level data products
across the full bandwidth afforded by the receivers (up to 5.0 Ghz). The recorder consists of 27
GPU-equipped compute nodes, and a total of 3.1 PB of on-site storage.

2.4 MWA

A pilot program is under development at the Murchison Wideﬁeld Array in Western Australia.
The current system consists of a single compute node and a head node, conﬁgured in a similar
manner to those at GBT and Parkes, but operating in a commensal mode. Voltage packets are sent
over ﬁber from the site to the Listen machines in Perth. First light on a pulsar was achieved in
early 2019 using playback of previously recorded data. Live commensal observing is anticipated
to be operational shortly, initially using incoherent beamforming but moving shortly afterward to
coherent beamforming and the generation of data products for input to the Listen SETI search
pipeline. Development of this system involves an engaged group of scientists and engineers at
Curtin University, who are also interested in the capabilities of the new hardware for fast transient
follow-up and other work. Once the system is fully commissioned we envisage adding additional
compute nodes to increase the available bandwidth and number of simultaneous beams.

3

2.5 MeerKAT

MeerKAT consists of 64 offset-gregorian antennas, each an effective 13.5m in diameter, with a
maximum baseline of 8 km. Each antenna has a carousel which can accommodate up to 4
different receivers. L-band receivers are currently installed on all antennas; UHF-band receivers
are also being installed (currently available on most antennas). S-band receivers are undergoing
testing prior to installation (two antennas are equipped with them) and there are plans to install
X-band receivers in future. Digital signal processing is handled by up to 288 SKARAB boards.
BL will conduct a commensal SETI program with MeerKAT to observe a million nearby stars and
other selected targets in partnership with the South African Radio Astronomy Observatory
(SARAO). Partnerships are also being formed with South African universities to engage students
and foster faculty interest in SETI science.
Space has been allocated for up to 144 BL computers in the Karoo Data Rack Area (KDRA) at
the MeerKAT site. The ﬁrst 1/8th of the BL equipment is currently undergoing commissioning (1
of 8 storage nodes, and 16 of 128 GPU nodes). The rest of the system will be installed in 2019Q4.
The GPU nodes will ingest channelized antenna voltages into large buffers, beamform on targets
in the ﬁeld of view and run detection pipelines to search for signals of interest. Raw voltage data
of selected signals of interest will be archived. The system also has access to a comprehensive
suite of sensors providing information on all aspects of the array’s operation, enabling the
automation of many observing processes. Desired targets have already been preselected and are
available in a database. While the primary objective is to survey one million nearby stars and
other objects, there exists a possibility to conduct searches using incoherent beamforming, where
signals would be localized after detection using voltage data in the buffer. In addition, proposals
for limited amounts of primary observing time will be submitted for consideration for MeerKAT’s
dedicated Open Time allocations.

2.6 VERITAS

VERITAS, the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System, is a set of four 12-m
diameter atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes built for studying very-high-energy γ-rays. The
telescopes’ large optical collection areas and fast cameras are suited as well to the search for the
technosignature of fast optical ﬂashes. VERITAS began operations with the complete array in
2007 and operations are currently supported through 2022. More than 10,000 hours of archival
data can be searched for ﬂashes within the 3.5◦-diameter ﬁeld of view, as was done for Boyajian’s
Star (Abeysekara et al., 2016). Dedicated 15-minute observations of targets from the BL list have
begun in 2019, with 30 h per year dedicated to the program.

3 Status of collaborative facilities and schedule

In this section we highlight some of the collaborative facilities where BL will either deploy or has
already deployed equipment to conduct dedicated SETI experiments. Observation time on these
facilities will either be obtained through submitting dedicated proposals to respective
time-allocation committees or through observing in commensal mode.

4

3.1 e-MERLIN and University of Manchester, UK

Radio SETI has mostly been conducted from array instruments in standard beamformed mode
due to the large volumes of interferometry data. However, recent development in computing and
storage capacity allowed us to explore narrow-band imaging using array telescopes
(Gray & Mooley, 2017; Garrett, 2018). We plan to initially use e-MERLIN and eventually
explore opportunities with Very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) to conduct such
observations commensally with other on-going observations. A memorandum-of-understanding
was signed in 2017 to collaborate with the 70-m Lovell Telescope and 6 of the 25-m e-MERLIN
antennas, providing excellent frequency coverage from 150 MHz to 24 GHz. BL is collaborating
with a team at the Jodrell Bank Observatory (JBO) which hosts the central correlator for the
e-MERLIN array. We have installed one head-node, one compute-node, and one storage-node,
connected to the e-MERLIN correlator. In early June 2019, ﬁrst-light observations with this
instrument were conducted with a 64 MHz spectral window centered at 5681 MHz towards
Kepler-111 (Fawcett et al. 2019 in prep.). In 2018, in collaboration with the Square Kilometer
Array and University of Manchester, BL organized a three-day workshop on the opportunities for
wide-ﬁeld radio SETI2 and discussed the merits and challenges of this endeavor (Croft, 2019).
Garrett (2018) have already demonstrated the importance of wide-ﬁeld radio SETI experiments
using archival VLBI data with limited overall bandwidth. Our plan for the next few years is to
deploy more equipment at JBO to build the necessary infrastructure to commensally observe for
SETI along with e-MERLIN and VLBI observations covering the entire observing band.

3.2 NenuFAR and Nanc¸ay

A Key Program of the NenuFAR commissioning process dedicated to SETI has been accepted by
the Nanc¸ay Observatory Scientiﬁc Committee in May 2019. This program exploits the multicast
capabilities of NenuFAR, a low frequency array in France, to commensally capture coherently
beamformed voltage data from primary Key Programs targeting exoplanet systems and the
Northern Celestial Pole. The voltage data will be locally stored and converted to the GUPPI RAW
ﬁles used by BL to compress the data sets and run SETI algorithms on them. When appropriate,
the SETI system will also be able to collect incoherently beamformed data commensally with
other Key Programs, trading off the sensitivity of the instrument for its large ﬁeld-of-view.
Observations will start in July 2019 and run until January 2020. By-products of the SETI survey
will allow for low-frequency Fast Radio Burst surveys using a detection pipeline developed at
Curtin University, and high-frequency-resolution Radio Frequency Interference surveys at the
Nanc¸ay Observatory. A primary observer program has also been mentioned in the Key Program
proposal, consisting of a high sensitivity survey of the Northern hemisphere. This survey uses 3
beams steered at the meridian, covering 1.5◦ every 24 h, resulting in a full survey in 60 days.
The 100m-class Nanc¸ay Radio Telescope (NRT) standard correlator capabilities have recently
been extended with the development of the dual-polarization ROACH-2-based “Wideband
Spectrometer for the NRT” (WIBAR), offering higher frequency resolution (∼ 16 Hz) and
bandwidth (550 MHz). We successfully proposed a SETI pilot program to run on the NRT over
the second semester of 2018, aimed at surveying 35 nearby stars (< 10 pc) extracted from the
GAIA DR2 catalogue and the 27 galaxies from Isaacson et al. (2017). Each astronomical target is

2http://www.jodrellbank.manchester.ac.uk/news-and-events/wide-ﬁeld-seti-workshop/

5

surveyed for 20 min, and a narrowband transmission search is conducted over the resulting
dynamic spectra (33 million frequency bins and 2 seconds integration per spectrum) to reach the
sensitivity to detect emissions as faint as 200 TW EIRP.

3.3 International LOFAR stations

The LOw Frequency ARray (LOFAR), is an aperture array radio telescope with antennas spread
across Europe, operating at 10−90 MHz and 110−250 MHz (van Haarlem et al., 2013). BL is
planning to use two of the international LOFAR stations: I-LOFAR located at Birr (Ireland) and
LOFAR-SE located at Onsala (Sweden). These observations provide complementary sky
coverage to MWA in the southern hemisphere. Moreover, due the large distance between the
LOFAR stations, they provide a unique opportunity to do multi-site SETI which is crucial to
discriminate sky-localized ETI signals from RFI. We are planning to do both targeted and
wide-ﬁeld commensal observations. We have already deployed head-nodes and planning to
deploy more compute-nodes with GPUs. We will use tools developed for operating an
international station in a stand-alone mode to record beamformed voltage stream data to disk3.
BL is working closely with the local teams at both facilities to develop tools to convert the voltage
stream data to GUPPI raw voltage format (Lebofsky et al., 2019) for easily adapting most of the
search algorithms developed for SETI within the BL team.

3.4 Sardinia Radio Telescope

The Sardinia Radio Telescope (SRT) is a 64-m antenna with a wide range of frequency coverage
from 300 MHz to 26 GHz. New receivers are also being planned (and have been funded), up to
115 GHz. As mentioned in § 1, one of the key science goals of the BL program is to conduct deep
observations of the Galactic center. We aim to conduct observations at higher frequencies beyond
4 GHz from the GBT. However, as the observing efﬁciency highly depends on the weather
conditions at K-band (18−26 GHz), having another facility observing the Galactic center along
with the GBT is essential. SRT is ideally placed to carry out these observations. BL team
members are in conversation with the local team to conduct feasibility studies to deploy the
necessary computing infrastructure to carryout these observations. Our current plan is to deploy
two compute-nodes before the end of 2019 and start observations in early 2020. We are also
collaborating with a local pulsar team to build a search pipeline for pulsars near the Galactic
center utilizing the same data.

3.5 FAST

FAST is the largest single-aperture radio telescope in the world and provides unprecedented
sensitivity with its enormous collecting area. Moreover, FAST is also equipped with a
cryogenically-cooled 19-beam receiver which provides fast survey speed and efﬁciency in
discriminating RFI for SETI. Over the next few years, FAST will commence surveys for HI,
pulsars, spectral lines, VLBI, and SETI (Li et al., 2018). In 2016 BL signed a Memorandum of
understanding with the National Astronomical Observatory of China for collaboration with

3https://github.com/2baOrNot2ba/iLiSA

6

FAST4. Li et al. (2019) discuss two unique SETI experiments FAST can conduct to push limits
placed by earlier studies and complement other on-going SETI activities in collaboration with
BL. These surveys include targeted observations of nearby stars with exoplanets discovered from
TESS. Li et al. (2019) also discussed a survey of nearby galaxies, with an example covering one
trillion stars in the Andromeda galaxy in just 6 h of observing with FAST’s 19-beam receiver. BL
is in conversation with a local team to conduct feasibility studies early next year for a dedicated
BL SETI backend.

3.6 GMRT

The upgraded Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope (uGMRT) is one of the most sensitive radio
telescopes currently operational at mid-radio frequencies (300 − 900 MHz). The long baseline
elements of the GMRT provide a unique opportunity to discriminate sources of potential
interference from any putative ETI signals. With the recent upgrade, GMRT has opened a new
radio window along with also providing excellent sensitivity (Gupta et al., 2017). It is likely that
only future telescopes such as SKA1 will be able to outperform the uGMRT at centimeter
wavelengths. We have proposed a pilot program to observe ten nearby stars, which host Earthlike
exoplanets. BL is in conversation with the local team for a feasibility study to deploy a dedicated
SETI backend. Our goal is to conduct a more ambitious program by mid-2020 involving both
commensal and primary-user observing.

3.7 The Cherenkov Telescope Array

The Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), a successor to VERITAS (§ 2.6), is a next generation
very-high-energy γ-ray observatory, planned to have an array of 99 telescopes in the south (ESO,
Paranal, Chile) and 19 in the north (ORM, La Palma, Spain). Three sizes of telescopes, from 4 m
to 23 m diameter, will be used to optimize γ-ray energy coverage of 20 GeV to 300 TeV. With the
implementation of suitable triggers, CTA has extraordinary potential for technosignature
searches. A single, point-like ﬂash illuminating a whole array with uniform intensity would be an
exceptional event. The 23-m telescopes, with ∼4 times the light collection capability of
VERITAS, would be sensitive to fainter ﬂashes. The large multiplicity of telescopes and long
baselines between them would improve noise rejection and parallax measurements, respectively,
compared to VERITAS. CTA construction is planned to begin at both sites in 2020. The
completion of the ﬁrst phase of construction, with partial arrays, is planned for the beginning of
2025. The CTA instrument, plans and timeline are described by Williams et al. (2019).

4 Technical Overview

4.1 Storage and Public Data

The large size of BL datasets means that network infrastructure poses a signiﬁcant challenge to
egress of data from the telescopes, long term archival, and public availability of data.

4https://breakthroughinitiatives.org/news/6

7

Nevertheless, BL has made available ∼ 1 PB of data in a public archive5, along with tools for data
analysis6,7. By engaging the academic and technical communities, we can bring a range of skills
to bear on our data analysis challenges, as well as helping to train the next generation of SETI
scientists. In-house solutions for public data availability are currently less expensive than
commercial cloud offerings, but we are piloting availability of small amounts of public data
through the Google Cloud Platform, which provides easier access to machine learning tools such
as TensorFlow.

4.2 Machine Learning

4.2.1 Supervised learning for signal detection

The ﬁrst goal in radio frequency SETI is the detection of signals. When the characteristics of a
target signal are known, a labeled training set can be created to instruct the model explicitly. In
the case of rare signals, such as fast radio bursts, where fewer detections have been made than are
necessary to construct a labeled training set from real data, simulation can be used instead. We
have already been successful at the application of classical, wide feature and deep neural network
ML methods to astronomical data in our detection and classiﬁcation of fast radio bursts
(Zhang et al., 2018). These methods are directly applicable to searching and classifying other
SETI signal models, and will be incorporated into our standard pipelines.

4.2.2 Self-supervised Learning for Anomaly Detection

In addition to detecting known signals, we are also interested in signals that appear anomalous
relative to the expected instrumental and astrophysical background. For narrowband signals, the
large variability in the signals and the abundance of interfering signals in the background data
make the simulation approach unsuitable. Instead, we deployed a predictive model of anomaly
detection that, when given an observation of a narrowband signal, predicts the next frame of
observations. If the prediction deviates signiﬁcantly from the observation, an anomaly alert is
triggered. Our model, based on a novel generative adversarial architecture, is proving to be more
robust than traditional methods in detecting discrepancies between an ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ frame
(Zhang et al., 2019).

4.2.3 Semi-supervised Learning for Signal Classiﬁcation

The most comprehensive searches for technosignatures should probe for all signal types that
deviate from the expected natural astrophysical and instrumental backgrounds. To address this,
we would like to build a universal signal classiﬁer that identiﬁes all signals, rather than just a few
types that are postulated to be more likely due to ETI. The sheer number of possibilities in
communication signals makes it difﬁcult to construct a completely labeled dataset for
classiﬁcation. In such cases a classiﬁer for a few signals can be built, and the other signals can be
observed to fall into clusters in the abstract representation of the model. We are experimenting
and reﬁning this approach using software deﬁned radios (SDR) and recorded baseband data.

5https://breakthroughinitiatives.org/news/25
6https://github.com/UCBerkeleySETI/turbo_seti
7https://github.com/UCBerkeleySETI/blimpy

8

5 Recommendations

5.1 Technosignatures are also biosignatures

Technosignature searches are an integral part of astrobiology, but in the past have not been funded
at the level they deserve. In recent years, Congress, and NASA, have shown renewed interest in
technosignature searches — language mandating funding for technosignature research was
included in draft versions of bills in the 2018 Congress. We are strongly supportive of public
funding for SETI (including public-private partnerships) which will enable SETI to become a
truly integral part of the academic enterprise and an interdisciplinary area of research, opening
opportunities for training and sustaining the next generation of SETI scientists and engineers. It is
apparent that there is a renewed interest in the community for technosignature searches, as
evident by more than half a dozen articles which were submitted for consideration for the science
decadal review (Haqq-Misra et al., 2019; Wright & Kipping, 2019; Wright et al., 2019;
DeMarines et al., 2019; Lesyna, 2019; Wright, 2019a; Berea et al., 2019; Margot et al., 2019). To
bolster the notion that biosignatures are inclusive of technosignatures, the early career community
has included technosignatures in their list of potential biosignatures in their publication of the
Astrobiology Primer V2.0 chapter 7 (Domagal-Goldman et al. (2016)). This is noteworthy as the
early career community are continuously being established in the ﬁeld of Astrobiology and are
emerging leaders.

5.2 Building an eco-system for the ﬁeld

Wright (2019b), a whitepaper being submitted in this cycle, very clearly highlights the
importance of funding to build the necessary environs for young researchers working in this area
to thrive. SETI has continuously generated interest in the public and provides a genuine, and
intrinsic, motivational spark for students to pursue STEM subjects in higher education. However,
there is a lack of opportunity for all of the many students who want to pursue SETI as an
academic career path to do so absent of federal support. As indicated by the the list of observation
programs outlined above, there are plentiful opportunities for young individuals to get involved
given the necessary support. In order to do that successfully, we recommend that funding should
be made available to universities for researchers interested in working on the datasets being
generated from various existing and upcoming facilities.

5.3 Interdisciplinary research for technosignature

BL’s search for technosignatures is a scientiﬁc venture whose possibility for success holds
profound consequences for all of humanity. There is much to be gained in the meantime to
promote interdisciplinary research that prepares for the moment of contact. How could BL
decode a message? What assumptions does BL make regarding technical processes that might,
inadvertently, underscore cultural biases? Such questions would beneﬁt from discussion among
and between SETI scientists and other scholars such as philosophers, futurists, and historians.
Engagement with such questions might shape how BL teaches AI technology to search for
patterns in the data, and, ethical methods on post-detection protocol. Denning & Dick (2019),
another whitepaper being submitted with this cycle, also highlights these points. In that vein, we

9

recommend to consider a sustained funding mechanism to promote interdisciplinary research that
would include BL and the broader SETI community. Efforts to do so have been intermittent and
decentralized—yet productive and provocative—calling attention to the need for a funded
structure for continuing conversations about ET. Last May, BL hosted the Making Contact
Workshop that invited historians, futurists, anthropologists, NASA policy makers, Indigenous
scholars, feminist theorists, storytellers, and AI/data experts to respond to these questions: “How
should SETI researchers prepare to potentially make contact with ET, and how should we respond
to a signal?” The Workshop’s goal was to collect diverse and unexpected responses with the hope
to make critical connections between largely siloed scholars, and, perhaps, nudge SETI science
toward greater inclusiveness. Social scientists and humanists raised topics with which SETI
astronomers loosely engage, but from perspectives that digressed from the day-to-day processes
of SETI science. A very brief sampling of topics raised were: the “discovery” of ET as an
extended process of detection, interpretation and understanding; using practices of “radical
otherness” to approach thinking through ET; the pitfalls of analogies of “contact,” and, the
continuing problems of speciesism, essentialism and anthropocentrism. These interventions are a
start on building bridges between scholars of disciplines beyond observational astronomy. The
question at the heart of SETI research—Are we alone?—is, ultimately, about a question about the
nature of humanity. This critical work sparked by BL is fundamental not only to the project’s
success, but about knowledge-making processes themselves.

10

References

Abeysekara, A. U., Archambault, S., Archer, A., et al. 2016, Astrophysical Journal Letters, 818,

L33

Berea, A., Croft, S., & Angerhausen, D. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 106

Cocconi, G., & Morrison, P. 1959, Nature, 184, 844.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=1959Natur.184..844C&link_type=EJOURNAL

Croft, S. 2019, Astronomy and Geophysics, 60, 2.22

DeMarines, J., Haqq-Misra, J., Isaacson, H., et al. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 558

Denning, K., & Dick, S. J. 2019, in BAAS

Domagal-Goldman, S. D., Wright, K. E., Adamala, K., et al. 2016, Astrobiology, 16, 561

Drake, F. D. 1961, Physics Today, 14, 40.

http://link.aip.org/link/PHTOAD/v14/i4/p40/s1&Agg=doi

Dressing, C. D., & Charbonneau, D. 2015, ApJ, 807, 45

Enriquez, J. E., Siemion, A., Foster, G., et al. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 849, 104

Gajjar, V., Siemion, A., Croft, S., et al. 2019, in American Astronomical Society Meeting

Abstracts, Vol. 51, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, 316.04

Garrett, M. A. 2018, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1810.07235

Gray, R. H., & Mooley, K. 2017, The Astronomical Journal, 153, 110

Gupta, Y., Ajithkumar, B., Kale, H., et al. 2017, Current Science, 113, 707

Haqq-Misra, J., Berea, A., Balbi, A., & Grimaldi, C. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 79

Harp, G. R., Ackermann, R. F., Astorga, A., et al. 2015, arXiv:1506.00055, 1506.00055.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=2015arXiv150600055H&link_type=ABSTRACT

Horowitz, P., Matthews, B. S., Forster, J., et al. 1986, Icarus, 67, 525.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=1986Icar...67..525H&link_type=ABSTRACT

Horowitz, P., & Sagan, C. 1993, The Astrophysical Journal, 415, 218.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1993ApJ...415..218H

Howell, S. B., Sobeck, C., Haas, M., et al. 2014, Publications of the Astronomical Society of the

Paciﬁc, 126, 398

Isaacson, H., Siemion, A. P. V., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2017, Publications of the Astronomical

Society of the Paciﬁc, 129, 054501

1

Lebofsky, M., Croft, S., Siemion, A. P. V., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.07391

Lesyna, L. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 164

Li, D., Wang, P., Qian, L., et al. 2018, IEEE Microwave Magazine, 19, 112

Li, D., Gajjar, V., Siemion, A., et al. 2019, RAA, Submitted

Lipman, D., Isaacson, H., Siemion, A. P. V., et al. 2018, arXiv.org, 1812.10161v1

MacMahon, D. H. E., Price, D. C., Lebofsky, M., et al. 2017, arXiv.org, 1707.06024v2

Margot, J.-L., Croft, S., Lazio, J., Tarter, J., & Korpela, E. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 298

Oliver, B. M., & Billingham, J., eds. 1971, Project Cyclops: A Design Study of a System for

Detecting Extraterrestrial Intelligent Life (NASA)

Price, D. C., MacMahon, D. H. E., Lebofsky, M., et al. 2018, Publications of the Astronomical

Society of Australia, 35, 213

Price, D. C., Enriquez, J. E., Brzycki, B., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.07750

Schwieterman, E. W., Kiang, N. Y., Parenteau, M. N., et al. 2018, Astrobiology, 18, 663

Siemion, A. P. V., Demorest, P., Korpela, E., et al. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 767, 94.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=2013ApJ...767...94S&link_type=ABSTRACT

Sullivan, W. T. I., Brown, S., & Wetherill, C. 1978, Science, 199, 377.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=1978Sci...199..377S&link_type=ABSTRACT

Tarter, J. 2003, Annual Reviews of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 39, 511.

http://arjournals.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.astro.39.1.511?prevSearch=%255Bauthor%253A%2Btarter%2Bjill%255D&searchHistoryKey=

Tarter, J., Cuzzi, J., Black, D., & Clark, T. 1980, Icarus, 42, 136.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1980Icar...42..136T

van Haarlem, M. P., Wise, M. W., Gunst, A. W., et al. 2013, arXiv.org, 3550.

http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-data_query?bibcode=2013arXiv1305.3550V&link_type=ABSTRACT

Verschuur, G. L. 1973, ICARUS, 19, 329

Williams, D. A., Balmaverde, B., Benbow, W., et al. 2019, The Cherenkov Telescope Array

(CTA), Astro2020 Project White Paper

Worden, S. P., Drew, J., Siemion, A., et al. 2017, Acta Astronautica, 139, 98

Wright, J. 2019a, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 389

Wright, J. 2019b, in BAAS

Wright, J., & Kipping, D. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 343

2

Wright, J., Zackrisson, E., & Lisse, C. 2019, in BAAS, Vol. 51, 366

Wright, J. T., Kanodia, S., & Lubar, E. 2018, AJ, 156, 260

Zhang, Y. G., Gajjar, V., Foster, G., et al. 2018, ApJ, 866, 149

Zhang, Y. G., Won, K. H., Son, S. W., Siemion, A., & Croft, S. 2019, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:1901.04636

3

