Fast Scenario Reduction for Power Systems by
Deep Learning

Qiao Li
dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Denver
Denver, USA
lq0607@gmail.com

David Wenzhong Gao
dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Denver
Denver, USA
wenzhong.gao@du.edu

9
1
0
2

g
u
A
0
3

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
6
8
4
1
1
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Scenario reduction is an important topic in stochas-
tic programming problems. Due to the random behavior of
load and renewable energy, stochastic programming becomes
a useful technique to optimize power systems. Thus, scenario
reduction gets more attentions in recent years. Many scenario
reduction methods have been proposed to reduce the scenario
set in a fast speed. However, the speed of scenario reduction
is still very slow, in which it takes at least several seconds to
several minutes to ﬁnish the reduction. This limitation of speed
prevents stochastic programming to be implemented in real-time
optimal control problems. In this paper, a fast scenario reduction
method based on deep learning is proposed to solve this problem.
Inspired by the deep learning based image process, recognition
and generation methods, the scenario data are transformed into
a 2D image-like data and then to be fed into a deep convolutional
neural network (DCNN). The output of the DCNN will be
an ”image” of the reduced scenario set. Since images can be
processed in a very high speed by neural networks, the scenario
reduction by neural network can also be very fast. The results of
the simulation show that the scenario reduction with the proposed
DCNN method can be completed in very high speed.

Index Terms—scenario reduction, deep learning, neural net-

work, stochastic programming, solar power

I. INTRODUCTION

With the rapid development of renewable energy in recent
years, the penetration of renewable energy in power systems
increases greatly. Also, the concept of microgrid is getting
popular in industrial. A typical microgrid contains a big
portion of renewable energy in its total generation. As a
result, the randomness introduced by the renewable sources
can inﬂuence the stability and efﬁciency of the power systems
and microgrids greatly. On the other hand, the load in most
power systems are also very random. Although many load
forecasting methods are proposed to study the behavior of the
load. It is still impossible to predict the load with no errors.
Therefore, the control and optimization based on the forecasted
data may not be the best way to operate the power system.

To solve this problem,

the stochastic programming is
adopted in many works to deal with the randomness and
stochastic phenomenon of renewable energy and load. Stochas-
tic programming can optimize the power systems according
to different possible scenarios. In comparison, the traditional
optimization methods only consider one scenario. By incor-
porating with stochastic programming, the better results of

unit commitment and model predictive control (MPC) can be
achieved [1–4]. In order to perform stochastic programming,
the scenario set for the power system is needed. The scenario
set contains many different scenarios and each scenario repre-
sents one possible trajectory of the states of the power system.
However, since a power system is a big system with a lot of
states and each state can have many different possible values,
the total number of scenarios in a scenario set is usually very
big. It needs massive computation resources to perform the
stochastic programming with the entire scenario set, which is
not efﬁcient. So, the scenario reduction method is invented to
reduce the number of scenarios in the scenario set, thus the
amount of data need to be processed is smaller. Several popular
scenario reduction approaches are proposed. Backward and
forward methods [5] are the most known scenario reduction
methods. These methods delete the redundant scenarios and
keep the space distance between the original scenario set
and the reduced scenario set small. However, backward and
forward methods are very slow compare to other methods. To
improve the speed of the forward method, the simultaneous
backward reduction (SBR) and fast forward selection (FFS)
methods is proposed in [6]. But it is still not fast enough
for big scenario set. In addition to backward and forward
methods, some papers use PSO (Particle swarm optimization)
to obtain the optimal reduced scenario set [7, 8]. PSO method
has similar performance as the FFS method according to [9].
Paper [10] introduces a heuristic search (HS) method to obtain
the optimal reduced scenario set by considering both the space
distance and moment distances to the original scenario set. In
[9], the authors introduce an improved initial-center reﬁned
and weighted K-means (ICRW K-means) method for scenario
reduction. This method improves the scenario reduction speed
compare to PSO and FFS methods. However, the speed is
still not enough for realtime control applications. According
literature review, there is no deep learning-based method being
used in scenario reduction. But
there some works which
implement the deep learning or neural network techniques in
scenario generation problems. Paper [11] uses ANN for one
step-ahead load forecasting and then generate the scenario
set of load by Gaussian white noise. A GAN (generative
adversarial networks) model is employed in [12] to learn the
scenario generation, and then the GAN model is used for

 
 
 
 
 
 
scenario generation for wind and solar power.

In this paper, a new scenario reduction method based on
deep learning is proposed. Inspired by the deep learning-based
image process, recognition and generation methods, which
are usually very fast. A deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN) model is developed for the fast scenario reduction of
renewable system. In order to achieve the scenario reduction
with the DCNN, the scenario set is transformed into a 2-D
image-like matrix. So the DCNN can process the scenario
set as the images. Then, the output of the DCNN will be an
smaller ”image” containing the data of the reduced scenario
set. It should be note that
this method does not actually
reduce the original scenario set, but instead generate a smaller
scenario set which is similar to the optimal reduced scenario
set.

The major contributions of this paper are summarized as

follows:

• To the best of our knowledge,

• A fast scenario reduction method is proposed. The pro-
posed scenario reduction method can be fast enough for
the realtime applications such as model predictive control.
this is the ﬁrst deep
learning-based method for scenario reduction problem.
The way to treat the scenario set as an image in this
method will be useful to implement other deep learning
mdoels in scenario reduction problems.

This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes
in detail the proposed scenario reduction methodology. The
method to pre-process the scenario set data and the structure of
the DCNN model will be introduced in different subsections.
Section III presents the simulation results of the proposed
method on solar power. Finally, conclusions are drawn in
Section IV.

II. PROPOSED APPROACH

The proposed DCNN for scenario reduction is shown in
Fig.1. The model reduces the scenario set P {ζs,1,...,T , ps} with
S scenarios into a reduced scenario set ˆP {ˆζs,1,...,T , ps} with
ˆS scenarios. In this model, the original scenario set should
be pre-processed into a 2-D data format at the ﬁrst. Then
the DCNN model will treat this 2-D data as an image and
output a smaller image according to the input. The small image
from the output of the DCNN is the reduced scenario set. In
order to get a good reduced scenario set, the DCNN model is
trained to generate the output similar to the reduced scenario
set from other convectional scenario reduction method. The
details about the DCNN model and data processing will be
introduced in the following subsections.

A. Data pre-process

The DCNN model in this paper contains a CNN layer, which
is usually used for image processing. In order to use the DCNN
model the process the scenario set, the data of scenario set
should be transformed into 2-D matrix format in which is same
as an image. Suppose there is a scenario set P {ζs,1,...,T , ps}
of the total solar generation of a solar array in T time steps.
The sth scenario ζs,1,...,T in the set has probability ps. There

are S scenarios in the set in total, so s = 1, 2, ..., S. For this
scenario set, the data pre-process module will transform the
data of the scenario set into the following matrix,










ζ1,1
ζ1,2
...
ζ1,T
p1

ζ2,1
ζ2,2
...
ζ2,T
p2

· · ·
· · ·
. . .
· · ·
· · ·










ζS,1
ζS,2
...
ζS,T
pS

(1)

where ζs,t for s = 1, 2, ..., S and t = 1, 2, ..., T are the
states (solar generation) of scenario s at time step t. In this
way, the scenario set is converted into a 2-D data format, i.e.,
an image with (T + 1) × S resolution.

Since the scenario reduction only reduce the number of
scenarios but not the length of each scenario, so the output
of the DCNN should be a vector of (T + 1) ˆS elements (the
output of a neural network is a vector), which represents a
(T + 1) × ˆS matrix. According to the Fig.1, the output data of
the DCNN should be post-processed back to the scenario set
data format. This conversion is same as the pre-process shown
above but in the opposite direction.

B. DCNN model

As shown in Fig.1, the DCNN model includes two major
parts: CNN layer and DNN (Deep Neural Network) layers. The
one CNN layer is used in the front of the model to extract the
patterns or features in the original data. One the other hand,
with the CNN layer, the data is compressed while the key
features in the original data can be retained. This compression
reduces the total amount of data the model need to deal
with, hence less computation resources is needed. Inside the
CNN layer, there is one convolutional layer and one pooling
layer. The convolution layer can ﬁlter out the key features
and patterns in the data. The ﬁlters in the convolutional layer
in this model is of (T + 1) × w size. The number w can
be chosen with a small integer. With this ﬁlter shape, the
ﬁlter can contain several complete scenarios. In this way, the
features of the scenarios along the entire time period can be
recognized. In the pooling layer, the pool size is 1×S/ ˆS. With
this pool size, the input data will be reduced into the desired
size by combining the nearby scenarios. Note that the size of
the reduced scenario set ˆS should be a factor of the size of the
original scenario set S. After the CNN layer, the data is input
into the DNN model. The DNN model is a series of ANNs
(Artiﬁcial Neural Network). In the DNN models, the number
of ﬁltered data generated by the CNN layer will decrease and
eventually reach 1, which is the desired output. The detailed
structure of each layer in the DCNN is presented in Table I.

C. Training

The objective of this model

is to generate the reduced
scenario data similar to the reduced set obtained from other
good scenario reduction method. In this paper, the heuristic
search (HS) method from [10] is used to train the DCNN
model. So, as shown in Fig.1, the HS method and the propsed

Fig. 1. The structure of the DCNN model.

TABLE I
THE DCNN MODEL STRUCTURE.

layer 1
layer 2
layer 3
layer 4
layer 5

layer type
Convolutional layer
Pooling layer
ANN
ANN
ANN

output size
(T + 1) × S × 64
(T + 1) × ˆS × 64
(T + 1) × ˆS × 32
(T + 1) × ˆS × 8
(T + 1) × ˆS

activation
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
ReLU
Sigmoid

DCNN model will be input with same scenario set, and then
the output of the DCNN model will be compared with the
output of the HS method to adjust the parameters of the
DCNN model. In this paper, the binary cross-entropy is used
to measure the difference between the DCNN output and the
result of HS method. The AdaDelta optimizer is used as the
training algorithm to update the parameters of the DCNN
model.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to test the proposed DCNN model, the simulation
of using the DCNN to reduce the scenario set of a 4kW
solar array is provided. The data is obtained from PVWatts
toolbox [13] developed by NREL (National Renewable Energy
Laboratory). The scenarios in the set represent the possible
solar generation in 24 hours (one data point for each hour). The
objective is to reduce the scenario set with 1000 scenarios into
the reduced scenario set with 200 sceneries. The simulation is
performed on a PC with Intel i7 2.8Ghz CPU, 24GB memory
and NVIDIA GTX 1050Ti graphic card with 4GB graphic
memory. The model is coded in Python with Tensorﬂow and
accelerated by the GPU. To train the DCNN model, 82% data
are used to train the model and the rest 18% data are used to
test the model. The model is trained by 10000 epoches. The
losses of the output during the training is shown in Fig.2.

Fig. 2. The losses of the DCNN model during training.

the DCNN can mimic the target data, which is the reduced
scenario set from HS method. While Fig.4 shows one result
of the reduced set compared with the original scenario set.
The result shows that the reduced scenario set can represent
the trend of the data in the original set.

Fig. 3. The results of DCNN model and the HS model in image format.

Fig.3 shows some results of the DCNN model and the HS
model (target) in image format. It shows that the output of

The performance and accuracy of the DCNN model
is
compared with the HS method in Table II. The results show

management problems,” in Power tech conference pro-
ceedings, 2003 IEEE Bologna, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2003, pp.
7–pp.

[6] H. Heitsch and W. R¨omisch, “Scenario reduction algo-
rithms in stochastic programming,” Computational opti-
mization and applications, vol. 24, no. 2-3, pp. 187–206,
2003.

[7] V. S. Pappala, I. Erlich, K. Rohrig, and J. Dobschinski,
“A stochastic model for the optimal operation of a wind-
thermal power system,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 940–950, 2009.

[8] G. Xiong, X. Liu, D. Chen, J. Zhang, and T. Hashiyama,
“Pso algorithm-based scenario reduction method for
stochastic unit commitment problem,” IEEJ Transactions
on Electrical and Electronic Engineering, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 206–213, 2017.

[9] C. Lin, C. Fang, Y. Chen, S. Liu, and Z. Bie, “Scenario
generation and reduction methods for power ﬂow exami-
nation of transmission expansion planning,” in Power and
Energy Systems (ICPES), 2017 IEEE 7th International
Conference on.

IEEE, 2017, pp. 90–95.

[10] J. Li, F. Lan, and H. Wei, “A scenario optimal reduction
method for wind power time series,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1657–1658, 2016.
[11] S. I. Vagropoulos, E. G. Kardakos, C. K. Simoglou, A. G.
Bakirtzis, and J. P. Catal˜ao, “Artiﬁcial neural network-
based methodology for short-term electric load scenario
generation,” in Intelligent System Application to Power
Systems (ISAP), 2015 18th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.

[12] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, D. Kirschen, and B. Zhang, “Model-
free renewable scenario generation using generative ad-
versarial networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 3265–3275, 2018.

[13] “Pvwatts calculator,” https://pvwatts.nrel.gov/index.php,

accessed: 2018-11-07.

Fig. 4. The original scenario set vs the reduced set by DCNN.

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE AND ACCURACY OF THE DCNN MODEL VS HS METHOD.

Time consumed (s)
Space distance
Moment distance

DCNN
0.0214
0.0056
1.43e-06

HS method
191.56
0.0228
2.29e-07

that the proposed DCNN method can obtain a very good result
as the HS method but with much fast speed.

IV. CONCLUSION

This paper proposed a DCNN-based scenario reduction
method. It is the ﬁrst work of using deep learning method to
deal with scenario reduction problem. The DCNN treats the
scenario set as image, and thus be able to process the reduction
in a very high speed. To evaluate the prosed method, the
DCNN model is simulated to reduce the scenario set of solar
generation data. The results are compared with HS method.
The results show that the proposed method can generate a good
reduced scenario set within a very short time. With the high
speed scenario reduction ability of this method, the stochastic
programming can be implemented in realtime application in
the future.

REFERENCES

[1] I. Necoara, D. N. Clipici, P. Patrinos, and A. Bemporad,
“Mpc for power systems dispatch based on stochastic
optimization.”

IFAC, 2014.

[2] A. Parisio and L. Glielmo, “Stochastic model predictive
control for economic/environmental operation manage-
ment of microgrids,” in Control Conference (ECC), 2013
European.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 2014–2019.
[3] S. Takriti, J. R. Birge, and E. Long, “A stochastic model
for the unit commitment problem,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1497–1508, 1996.
[4] U. A. Ozturk, M. Mazumdar, and B. A. Norman, “A
solution to the stochastic unit commitment problem using
chance constrained programming,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1589–1598, 2004.
[5] N. Growe-Kuska, H. Heitsch, and W. Romisch, “Sce-
nario reduction and scenario tree construction for power

