9
1
0
2

t
c
O
8
1

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
3
6
8
0
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The TCGA Meta-Dataset Clinical Benchmark

Mandana Samiei1 Tobias Würﬂ2 Tristan Deleu3 Martin Weiss 3
Francis Dutil5 Thomas Fevens1 Geneviève Boucher3, 4 Sebastien Lemieux3, 4
Joseph Paul Cohen3

Mila – Montreal, Canada

Abstract

Machine learning is bringing a paradigm shift to healthcare by changing the process
of disease diagnosis and prognosis in clinics and hospitals. This development
equips doctors and medical staff with tools to evaluate their hypotheses and hence
make more precise decisions. Although most current research in the literature seeks
to develop techniques and methods for predicting one particular clinical outcome,
this approach is far from the reality of clinical decision making in which you have
to consider several factors simultaneously. In addition, it is difﬁcult to follow the
recent progress concretely as there is a lack of consistency in benchmark datasets
and task deﬁnitions in the ﬁeld of Genomics. To address the aforementioned
issues, we provide a clinical Meta-Dataset derived from the publicly available
data hub called The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) that contains 174
tasks. We believe those tasks could be good proxy tasks to develop methods which
can work on a few samples of gene expression data. Also, learning to predict
multiple clinical variables using gene-expression data is an important task due to
the variety of phenotypes in clinical problems and lack of samples for some of the
rare variables. The deﬁned tasks cover a wide range of clinical problems including
predicting tumor tissue site, white cell count, histological type, family history of
cancer, gender, and many others which we explain later in the paper. Each task
represents an independent dataset. We use regression and neural network baselines
for all the tasks using only 150 samples and compare their performance.

1

Introduction

Most researchers develop new methods for one particular clinical task at a time, as an example, we
can name survival prediction (Wieringen et al., 2009) or tumor cell type classiﬁcation (Lyu and Haque,
2018). This approach is far from the reality of clinical decision making in which you have to consider
several clinical variables simultaneously which are often performed by doctors and clinical staff. In
some cases, those prediction tasks are correlated with each other. For instance, by knowing about
gender, alcohol history documents, and tumor tissue site, we can achieve a more reliable result of
cancer mortality. To tackle a precise outcome for many clinical tasks, it’s more practical to consider
inter-related tasks. In addition, there are some tasks that do not have enough number of samples.
By considering a few-shot learning regime, we leverage the samples from a collection of tasks and
construct a prior knowledge for a general prediction.

Additionally, while there has been an extreme growth in Machine Learning research for Genomics,
several barriers have slowed the progress. One particular barrier is the absence of global publicly
available benchmark datasets in the ﬁeld of gene expression works to evaluate the performance of
models, facilitate reproducibility and allow the community to focus on a set of challenges. There

1 Concordia University, 2 Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 3 Université de Montréal,

4 Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer. 5 Imagia. Correspondance: samiemandana@gmail.com.

Preprint. Under review.

 
 
 
 
 
 
are consistent public benchmarks in the ﬁeld of computer vision for image classiﬁcation tasks,
for example, ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015) and Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) (Russakovsky et al., 2015) which allowed a signiﬁcant improvement in the classiﬁcation
error from 25% in 2011 to 95% in 2017 for benchmark tasks. In contrast, practical progress in
genomics applications has been difﬁcult to measure due to variability and inconsistency in data sets
and task deﬁnitions. Although there is a fairly well-known challenge called DREAM that can be
found at http://dreamchallenges.org/, it has not imposed itself as a standard challenge such
as ImageNet.

In this paper, we propose a collection of 174 TCGA benchmark clinical tasks that can be used in
a multi-task learning framework. All the tasks are classiﬁcation problems and the input space is
gene-expression data with 20530 genes. We apply independent regression and neural models that
will predict across any general clinical tasks. The purpose of each dataset that can be inferred by its
name is predicting a clinical variable of a particular cancer type. For instance, one of the datasets is
named ’gender-LAML’ means we predict ’gender’ for ’Acute Myeloid Leukemia’ samples.

We evaluate the performance of each clinical task using logistic regression and a neural network
that will predict across corresponding cancer study. This framework is an initiative to develop
Meta-Learning techniques that make use of the interrelated clinical tasks of gene-expression data to
learn effective classiﬁcation models despite the small sample size of each individual task. The code is
accessible at: https://github.com/mandanasmi/TCGA_Benchmark.

1.1 Summary of Contributions

This paper proposes a public Meta-Dataset that provides 174 deﬁned clinical tasks. TCGA Meta-
Dataset also includes a meta-dataloader which is available on the Github repository. The organization
of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents related works to this paper, and Section 3 gives an
overview of the public TCGA dataset and the deﬁned tasks. Section 4 explains the data-loaders
available in the TCGA Meta-Dataset. Section 5 gives a detail of the experimental and training setup,
the baselines we used, the evaluation method, the architecture as well as a comparison of models’
performance on different tasks. In the end, Section 6 concludes the work and explains how we plan
to extend this in future work.

2 Related Works

A recent paper in Meta-Learning literature which is closely related to this work is Meta-Dataset by
(Triantaﬁllou et al., 2019) that offers an environment for training and evaluating meta-learners for
few-shot image classiﬁcation by evaluating various baselines and meta-learners on this Meta-Dataset.
This benchmark includes 10 datasets from various image classiﬁcation tasks including ILSVRC-2012
(ImageNet) (Russakovsky et al., 2015), Omniglot (Lake et al., 2019), Aircraft (Maji et al., 2013),
MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014), CUB-200-2011 (Birds) (Wah et al., 2011), Describable Textures (Cimpoi
et al., 2016), Quick Draw (Jongejan et al.,2016), Fungi (Schroeder and Cui, 2018), VGG Flower
(Nilsback and Zisserman, 2008) and Trafﬁc Signs (Houben et al., 2013). Despite having a small
number of tasks, developing this benchmark opens the door to the use of multiple datasets for few-shot
learning by leveraging the use of samples from different dataset to construct the prior knowledge from
multiple data sources and allows researchers to evaluate more challenging generalization problem.

In the literature of genomics applications, most of the works are developing algorithms and techniques
for only solving one particular clinical task at a time. To the best of our knowledge, there is no
particular work which is doing general clinical feature prediction using gene expression data, although
one of the works that has a similar initiative is "Multitask learning and benchmarking with clinical
time-series data" by (Harutyunyan et al., 2019), they are only considering 4 different tasks from
MIMIC-III database which is different from what we have done. This difference is coming from the
number of deﬁned tasks, the dataset that the tasks are originated from as well as deﬁning a few-shot
setting for each task in our Meta-Dataset.

3 Task Deﬁnition

The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) program collected clinicopathologic annotation data along with
multi-platform molecular proﬁles of more than 11,000 human tumors across 33 different cancer

2

types (Liu et al., 2018). We use the gene expression proﬁle (20530 genes) called IlluminaHiSeq
that is obtained from RNA-Seq using some alignment and quantiﬁcation algorithm. We consider
all cancer studies available in TCGA to predict the phenotypes corresponding to them. To perform
the prediction, we restrict ourselves to work only with samples for which TCGA has both RNA-Seq
and a given phenotype. There are 44 clinical variables (phenotypes) and 25 cancer studies. Tasks
are combinations of a phenotype to predict and a cancer study. The deﬁned tasks cover a range of
clinical problems including modeling tumor tissue site, white cell count, histological type, family
history of cancer, gender, pancan DNAMethyl which is the pan-cancer patterns of DNA methylation,
pancan miRNA which is the pan-cancer data analysis of microRNA, animal allergy history, asthema
history, mental status changes and a few others. You can ﬁnd the full list of tasks in ﬁgure 1 and the
Github Repo. There are 174 tasks in total in which 121 of them have enough number of samples by
considering the tasks that have at least 150 samples. We use gene expression data from tumor samples
of a particular cancer study to predict a phenotype. For example, a task called (’_EVENT’, ’KIRP’)
means we predict a phenotype called _EVENT which is an overall survival indicator (1=death,
0=censor) for TCGA Kidney Papillary Cell Carcinoma (KIRP) tumor samples. There are 174 tasks
in TCGA Meta-Dataset, a full list of tasks besides the baselines’ performance summary can be found
in Figure 1.

4 Data-loaders for TCGA Meta-Dataset

We offer a meta-dataloader for TCGA that allows loading a batch of tasks that can be iterated over
to generate datasets. We also provide the possibility of loading only one clinical task by specifying
the phenotype and the cancer study. The ﬁle TCGA.py includes the detail of meta-dataloader. You
can see an example below in which the variable ’datasets’ is the collection of all tasks and ’task’ is
one of these datasets named (’PAM50Call_RNAseq’, ’BRCA’). TCGA meta-dataloader is a part of
Torchmeta Library (Deleu et al., 2019) .

# Helper function, equivalent to Section 4
datasets = meta_dataloader.TCGA.TCGAMeta(download="True", min_samples_per_class=10)

task = meta_dataloader.TCGA.TCGATask((’PAM50Call_RNAseq’, ’BRCA’))

print(task.id)# output: (’PAM50Call_RNAseq’, ’BRCA’)
print(task._samples.shape)# output: (956, 20530)
print(collections.Counter(task._labels))# output: Counter(2: 434, 3: 194, 0: 142, 4:
119, 1: 67)

5 Experimental Results

We used three supervised models to evaluate the performance of each task using regression and neural
network baselines. For the majority class predictions, we use a dummy classiﬁer from Scikit-learn
(Pedregosa et al., 2011), for logistic regression we use a 1-layer neural network (zero-hidden layer
neural net with Softmax output) from PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017). As the third baseline, after a
hyperparameter search, we use a 3-layers network with 128 and 64 of hidden state size respectively,
a learning rate equal to 10−4, batch size of 32 and weight decay of 0.0 (no regularization effect).
We use Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) for optimization in the neural network and LBFGS (Liu and
Nocedal, 1989) for logistic regression. We run the network for 250 epochs for each task and over
10 different trials (by changing seed from 0 to 9). All tasks have 150 samples in total. We split 150
samples between train and test sets and valid set if needed. Train and test sets contain 50 and 100
samples respectively.

Results MLP has the highest overall performance compared to Logistic Regression and Majority.
The main limitation of logistic regression is that it cannot model the interactions between input
variables. While the MLP is dealing better with clinical classiﬁcation tasks, logistic regression has
higher performance on gender tasks. In table 1, you can see the average accuracy of each baseline
over all tasks as well as the standard deviation. This result has been concluded over 10 repeats.

3

Table 1: Accuracy and standard deviation of 3 baselines over all tasks

Model

Accuracy

Standard Deviation

Majority
Logistic Regression
Neural Network (MLP)

66.18
68.78
71.19

16.87
15.91
14.62

Figure 1: Model Performance over all datasets. Sub-ﬁgures show the performance of Majority
classiﬁer, Logistic Regression and MLP across all tasks.

6 Conclusion and Future works

We proposed a Meta-Dataset of tasks where each task is combinations of a clinical variable (pheno-
type) to predict and a cancer study. This dataset can be used as a testbed for developing algorithms for
genomics applications which can leverage a few-shot learning regime. We evaluated the performance
of clinical tasks using supervised models and compared their accuracy to provide a baseline of
what current techniques are able to achieve on the deﬁned tasks. For future work, we can apply
meta-learning methods to construct the shared structural information within interrelated clinical tasks
by using gene-expression data. As there is a lack of number of samples in the few-shot learning
regime, by using meta-learning methods we leverage the samples from a collection of tasks and
construct a prior knowledge for a general prediction. Also, studying the way that we can transfer
these features from one clinical task to another could be an interesting direction.

References

Cimpoi, M., Maji, S., Kokkinos, I., and Vedaldi, A. (2016). Deep ﬁlter banks for texture recognition,

description, and segmentation. International Journal of Computer Vision, 118(1):65–94.

Deleu, T., Würﬂ, T., Samiei, M., Cohen, J. P., and Bengio, Y. (2019). Torchmeta: A Meta-Learning

library for PyTorch. Available at: https://github.com/tristandeleu/pytorch-meta.

4

Harutyunyan, H., Khachatrian, H., Kale, D. C., Ver Steeg, G., and Galstyan, A. (2019). Multitask

learning and benchmarking with clinical time series data. volume 6.

Houben, S., Stallkamp, J., Salmen, J., Schlipsing, M., and Igel, C. (2013). Detection of trafﬁc signs

in real-world images: The german trafﬁc sign detection benchmark.

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.

cite
arxiv:1412.6980Comment: Published as a conference paper at the 3rd International Conference for
Learning Representations, San Diego, 2015.

Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2019). The Omniglot Challenge: A 3-Year

Progress Report.

Lin, T.-Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Dollár, P., and Zitnick,
C. L. (2014). Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In Fleet, D., Pajdla, T., Schiele,
B., and Tuytelaars, T., editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, pages 740–755, Cham. Springer
International Publishing.

Liu, D. C. and Nocedal, J. (1989). On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.

Math. Program., 45(1-3):503–528.

Liu, J., Lichtenberg, T., Hoadley, K. A., Poisson, L. M., Lazar, A. J., Cherniack, A. D., Kovatich,
A. J., Benz, C. C., Levine, D. A., Lee, A. V., Omberg, L., Wolf, D. M., Shriver, C. D., Thorsson,
V., Network, T. C. G. A. R., and Hu, H. (2018). Abstract 3287: An integrated tcga pan-cancer
clinical data resource to drive high quality survival outcome analytics. Cancer Research, 78(13
Supplement).

Lyu, B. and Haque, A. (2018). Deep learning based tumor type classiﬁcation using gene expression

data. ACM-BCB, pages 89–96.

Maji, S., Rahtu, E., Kannala, J., Blaschko, M. B., and Vedaldi, A. (2013). Fine-grained visual

classiﬁcation of aircraft. CoRR, abs/1306.5151.

Nilsback, M.-E. and Zisserman, A. (2008). Automated ﬂower classiﬁcation over a large number of

classes. pages 722–729.

Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A.,
Antiga, L., and Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in pytorch. 31st Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS).

Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M.,
Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M.,
Perrot, M., and Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. J. Mach. Learn.
Res., 12:2825–2830.

Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla,
A., Bernstein, M., Berg, A. C., and Fei-Fei, L. (2015). ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252.

Schroeder, B. and Cui, Y. (2018). Fgvcx fungi classiﬁcation challenge. github.com/visipedia/fgvcx_

fungi_comp.

Triantaﬁllou, E., Zhu, T., Dumoulin, V., Lamblin, P., Xu, K., Goroshin, R., Gelada, C., Swersky, K.,
Manzagol, P., and Larochelle, H. (2019). Meta-dataset: A dataset of datasets for learning to learn
from few examples. CoRR, abs/1903.03096.

Wah, C., Branson, S., Welinder, P., Perona, P., and Belongie, S. (2011). The caltech-ucsd birds-200-

2011 dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, California Institute of Technology.

Wieringen, W., Kun, D., Hampel, R., and Boulesteix, A.-L. (2009). Survival prediction using
gene expression data: A review and comparison. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis,
53:1590–1603.

5

