0
2
0
2

l
u
J

1

]
I
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
7
3
9
2
1
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Targeted sampling from massive block model graphs with
personalized PageRank∗

Fan Chen1, Yini Zhang2, and Karl Rohe1

1Department of Statistics
2School of Journalism and Mass Communication
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA

Abstract

This paper provides statistical theory and intuition for Personalized PageRank (PPR), a popular

technique that samples a small community from a massive network. We study a setting where the entire

network is expensive to thoroughly obtain or maintain, but we can start from a seed node of interest and

“crawl” the network to ﬁnd other nodes through their connections. By crawling the graph in a designed

way, the PPR vector can be approximated without querying the entire massive graph, making it an

alternative to snowball sampling. Using the degree-corrected stochastic block model, we study whether

the PPR vector can select nodes that belong to the same block as the seed node. We provide a simple and

interpretable form for the PPR vector, highlighting its biases towards high degree nodes outside of the

target block. We examine a simple adjustment based on node degrees and establish consistency results

for PPR clustering that allows for directed graphs. These results are enabled by recent technical advances

showing the element-wise convergence of eigenvectors. We illustrate the method with the massive Twitter

friendship graph, which we crawl using the Twitter API. We ﬁnd that (i) the adjusted and unadjusted

PPR techniques are complementary approaches, where the adjustment makes the results particularly

localized around the seed node and (ii) the bias adjustment greatly beneﬁts from degree regularization.

Keywords Community detection; Degree-corrected stochastic block model; Local clustering; Network

sampling; Personalized PageRank

1

Introduction

Much of the literature on graph sampling has treated the entire graph, or all of the people in it, as the

target population. However, in many settings, the target population is a small community in the massive

graph. For example, a key diﬃculty in studying social media is to gather data that is suﬃciently relevant

for the scientiﬁc objective. A motivating example for this paper is to sample the Twitter friendship graph
for accounts that report and discuss current political events.1 This corresponds to sampling and identifying
multiple diﬀerent communities, each a potentially small part of the massive network. In such an application,

the graph is useful for two primary reasons. First, via link tracing, we can ﬁnd potential members of the

∗This research is supported in part by NSF Grants DMS-1612456 and DMS-1916378 and ARO Grant W911NF-15-1-0423.
1See our website http://murmuration.wisc.edu which does this.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
target population. Second, the graph connections are informative for identifying community membership.

Throughout, we presume that the sampling is initiated around a “seed node” that belongs to the target

community of interest.

Personalized PageRank (PPR) can be thought of as an alternative to snowball sampling, a popular

technique for gathering individuals close to the seed node. For some d ≥ 0, snowball sampling gathers all
individuals who are d friends away from the seed. This process has two competing ﬂaws for our application

which are addressed by PPR. First, snowball sampling fails to account for the density of common friendships.

For example, perhaps i and j are both one friend removed from the seed, but i has 10 friends in common

with the seed, while j only has 1 friend in common. It seems natural to suppose that i is closer than j to the

seed. Hence, the metric for snowball sampling can be misleading. Second, the snowball sample size grows

very quickly with d. For example, under the “six degrees of separation” phenomenon [Watts and Strogatz,

1998, Newman et al., 2006], snowballing gathers the entire graph if d ≥ 6.

PPR gives a sample that is more localized around the seed node. The PPR vector is deﬁned as the

stationary distribution of what we call a personalized random walk [Page et al., 1998]. At each step of

the personalized random walk, the random walker returns to the seed node with probability α, called the

teleportation constant, and with probability 1−α, the random walker goes to an adjacent node that is chosen

uniformly at random. Consider the stationary distribution of this process as giving the inclusion probability

for a sample of size 1. This is the PPR vector. PPR naturally leads to a clustering algorithm, where the

cluster is made up of the nodes with a large inclusion probability. To quickly approximate the PPR vector,

Berkhin [2006] proposed an algorithm that only examines nodes with large inclusion probabilities (i.e. nodes

near the seed). As such, PPR is particularly useful for its computational eﬃciency – the running time and

the amount of data it requires is nearly linear in the size of the output cluster, which is typically much

smaller than that of the entire graph. Due to the local nature of the algorithm, it can be used to study

large graphs such as Twitter where the entire graph is not available, but where one can query to ﬁnd the

connections to any small set of nodes.

One way to conduct local clustering is by exploring and ranking the nearby nodes of a seed node.

[Andersen and Lang, 2006, Andersen and Peres, 2009, Alamgir and von Luxburg, 2010, Gharan and Trevisan,

2012]. Spielman and Teng [2004] pioneered local clustering by deﬁning nearness as the landing probability of

a random walk starting from the seed node. Their algorithm’s guarantee was improved in follow-up work by

Andersen et al. [2006] which proposed using an approximate PPR vector. Local algorithms can be applied

recursively to solving more complicated problems such as graph partitions (k-way partitions) [Spielman and

Teng, 1996, Karypis and Kumar, 1998], and has many fruitful applications [Jeh and Widom, 2003, Macropol

et al., 2009, Liao et al., 2009, Gupta et al., 2013, Gleich, 2015], particularly when it comes to sampling and
studying massive graphs.

Along with the widespread use of PPR, there has been recent work to study its statistical estimation

properties under a statistical model with latent community structure. Beyond the scope of local clustering,

Kloumann et al. [2017] showed that the PPR vector is asymptotically equivalent to optimal linear discrimi-

nant analysis under the stochastic block model (SBM) [Holland et al., 1983], assuming a symmetry condition

on the block structure. We add to this statistical understanding of PPR by providing a simple and more

general representation for PPR vectors that allows for diﬀerent block sizes, more than two blocks, degree

heterogeneity, and directed edges. In order to understand the eﬀects of heterogeneous node degrees, this

paper uses the degree-corrected stochastic block model (DC-SBM) [Karrer and Newman, 2011] and examines

when the PPR clustering recovers nodes within the same block as the seed node (local cluster). Breaking the

2

Table 1: Top 15 handles by PPR clustering. Column names represent seed nodes, and the sampled nodes
are ranked by PPR values, with teleportation constant α = 0.15 uniformly.

@CNN
CNN Breaking News
CNN International

1
2
3 Wolf Blitzer
Anderson Cooper
4
Christiane Amanpour
5
Pope Francis
6
Dr. Sanjay Gupta
7
CNNMoney
8
9
Jake Tapper
10 Brian Stelter
11 CNN Newsroom
12 Dana Bash
13 CNN Politics
14 BBC Breaking News
15 Brooke Baldwin

@BreitbartNews @dailykos
Alex Marlow
AndrewBreitbart
Big Hollywood
Big Government
James O’Keefe
Sean Hannity
Raheem
Joel B. Pollak
Ann Coulter
Allum Bokhari
Ben Kew
Brandon Darby
Noah Dulis
Michelle Malkin
Nate Church

Hillary Clinton
Stephen Colbert
Rachel Maddow MSNBC
Jake Tapper
Joy Reid
Chris Hayes
Emma Gonzlez
Markos Moulitsas
Maggie Haberman
Sarah Silverman
Lin-Manuel Miranda
Elizabeth Warren
Jon Favreau
Michelle Obama
Bill Clinton

Through the PPR vector, the top 15 handles returned to each of the three seed
nodes ﬁt well with the characteristics of the seed nodes. They are popular/high-
status handles either directly related to the seed nodes or align with their political
leanings. This shows the eﬀectiveness of clustering via the PPR vector. It also
shows the PPR vector’s preference for highly connected nodes.

symmetry that is imposed by Kloumann et al. [2017] reveals additional insight. In particular, given a seed

node in the ﬁrst block, we show that PPR is likely to contain high degree nodes outside of that block. We

study an adjustment that was previously proposed in Andersen et al. [2006]. We show how this adjustment

can correct for the bias. We illustrate these ideas with examples from the Twitter friendship graph.

1.1 An illustrative example in social media

Local clustering using PPR is particularly well suited to studying current political events on Twitter

because (i) the accounts that discuss politics or current events are a small part of the entire Twitter graph,

(ii) it is reasonable to believe that the accounts in our target population are well connected to one another

in the Twitter friendship graph, and (iii) while the entire Twitter graph is not publicly available, the way

that PPR (Algorithm 1 and 3) queries the graph matches the Twitter API protocol which is the primary
mode of access for researchers.

While we do not suppose that the Twitter friendship graph is sampled from a DC-SBM, Twitter does

have all of the heterogeneities that our results identify as important. The Twitter friendship graph is

composed of users who can freely follow others but will not necessarily be followed back, or friended. Such

asymmetry between following and friending forms a directed graph where follower count indicates status –

some popular/high-status nodes command millions of followers while the majority of nodes are followed by

far fewer.

The theoretical results in this paper suggest that such degree heterogeneities will make the PPR vector

biased for detecting block memberships (Theorem 1). We propose a way to adjust for this bias (Algorithm

2) and show that it is a consistent estimator (Corollary 1). Not surprisingly, this section demonstrates

that PPR with and without the bias adjustment give fundamentally diﬀerent results on the Twitter graph.

However, depending on the application, the biases in the PPR vector might be advantageous. In this way,

PPR with and without the bias adjustment are complementary, not competing, approaches.

To illustrate, Table 1 displays the top 15 handles ranked by the PPR vector (without adjustment) for

3

Table 2: Top 15 handles by adjusted PPR (with regularization) sampling. Column names represent seed
nodes, and the sampled nodes are ranked by adjusted PPR values, with teleportation constant α = 0.15
uniformly.

@CNN
PowerZ
1
Elissa Weldon
2
Tess Eastment
3
Chris Dawson
4
carol kinstle
5
erinmclaughlin
6
Taylor Ward
7
Jennifer Z. Deaton Nate Church
8
Pam Benson
9
10
amy entelis
11 Grace Bohnhoﬀ
12
kate lazarus
13 Newstron
14 Becky Brittain
15 CNN Ballot Bowl

@BreitbartNews @dailykos
Robert
Lee Peace
Wynn Marlow
Logan Churchwell
Peter Schweizer
Breitbart Sports
Jon Fleischman

Two Thanks
Catherine Daligga
exmearden
Faith Gardner
Andrew Thornton
UnreasonableFridays
DKos Top Comments
2016 relitigator
Daily Kos
Walter Einenkel
Candelaria Vargas

Daniel Nussbaum
Noah Dulis
Jon David Kahn
Breitbart California Mara Schechter
Ken Klukowski
pam key
Auntie Hollywood

Emi Feldman
The Soulful Negress
Kim Soﬀen

Instead of the
After adjustment, PPR returns a more localized cluster.
highly visible public faces of the three seed organizations, the individuals
in this table serve a central role to the internal organization (e.g. editors
and writers). Depending on the application, one might prefer the results in
Table 1 or Table 2.

three diﬀerent seed nodes: @CNN, @BreitbartNews, and @dailykos, the Twitter accounts of three diﬀerent

types of media outlets that exhibit distinct political leanings (legacy broadcast news, online right-wing and

online left-wing). For @CNN, all top 15 handles ranked by the PPR vector are its subsidiary accounts and

its celebrity reporters and anchors (like Wolf Blitzer and Anderson Cooper), except for one account, Pope

Francis, who enjoys an extremely larger following. The top 15 handles for @BreitbartNews are a mixed bag

of inﬂuential conservatives (like Sean Hannity and Ann Coulter) and Breitbart’s editors/writers. However,

the top 15 handles returned to @dailykos by the PPR vector are all famous liberal personalities not directly
aﬃliated with Daily Kos, but one, its founder Markos Moulitsas. Those people range from democratic

politicians to liberal media personalities and journalists, such as Hillary Clinton, Stephen Colbert, and

Rachel Maddow. All the handles align with the characteristics of their respective media outlets, attesting

to the clustering eﬀectiveness. However, it is worth noting that the top handles ranked by the PPR vector

tend to be popular handles with millions of followers. This shows that the PPR vector’s preference for high

in-degree nodes.

In contrast, for each of the three seeds, adjusted PPR ﬁnds accounts that are more central to the internal

functioning of these organizations. Table 2 lists those accounts. The bias adjustment also greatly beneﬁts

from a degree regularization [Qin and Rohe, 2013]. For @CNN, those handles include primarily its own

staﬀ/producers/journalists (like Elissa Weldon, Chris Dawson, and Grace Bohnhoﬀ), a freelance journalist

(Tess Eastment). The pattern is similar for @BreitbartNews and @dailykos, their top 15 handles including

their own journalists, editors as well as related writers/campaigners/activists. The general pattern is that the

adjustment returns editors, journalists and staﬀ working within each media outlet. As such, the adjustment

is useful for identifying a more localized cluster.

4

1.2 Main contributions

The main contributions of the paper are (a) a simple and interpretable form for the PPR vector and (b)

a statistical guarantee for clustering with the adjusted PPR vector.

(a) This paper reveals a simple two-stage form of the PPR vector under the population (expectation) DC-

SBM. Consider the v-th element of the PPR vector as the probability of sampling node v in a sample

of size 1 from the stationary distribution of the personalized random walk. This inclusion probability

is akin to stratiﬁed sampling:

The inclusion probability for node v is the product of two separate probabilities. First, the

probability that the personalized random walk samples any node in v’s block. Second, the

probability that the personalized random walk selects node v, conditional on sampling that

block.

Both of these probabilities have simple expressions. If there are K blocks in the graph, then the block-

wise probability comes from the PPR vector of a graph with K vertices, with edge weights speciﬁed by

the “block connection matrix” in the DC-SBM. The second probability is proportional to the degree of

node v. In addition to the population results, Theorem 2 demonstrates that when the graph is random,

the PPR vector concentrates around its population (expectation) under certain conditions.

(b) This paper identiﬁes two sources of bias of using a PPR vector for local clustering under the DC-SBM

– the ancillary eﬀects of heterogeneous node degrees and block degrees. With this ﬁnding, the paper

examines a simple bias adjustment that remedies the two biases simultaneously and suggests conditions

when the adjusted PPR can be used to return the correct local cluster. In other words,

PPR clustering with the adjustment achieves the precise identiﬁcation of the local cluster,

provided the graph is suﬃciently dense.

These results establish statistical performance (consistency) of PPR clustering under the DC-SBM, in

the sparse regime where the minimum expected degree grows logarithmically with the number of nodes

in the network. Our results provide an element-wise perturbation bound for PPR vectors, that allows

the number of clusters to grow with the size of graphs, and generalize to a directed graph setting as

PageRank does.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 formally introduces the PPR method and some
of the known results. Section 2 also introduces the degree-corrected stochastic block model. Section 3

gives a population analysis of the PPR clustering under directed block model graphs. Section 4 provides

concentration results for the PPR vector when the graph is random and provides a statistical guarantee on

the PPR local clustering method. Section 5 presents several numerical results showing the eﬀectiveness of

the PPR clustering. Section 6 illustrates the PPR clustering through the massive Twitter friendship graph

and demonstrates the beneﬁts of a smoothing step in the PPR adjustment.

2 Preliminaries

Throughout this paper, let G = (V, E) denotes an unweighted and connected graph, where E is the edge

set and V is the set of vertices indexed by 1, ..., N . When G is an undirected and unweighted graph, encode

5

E into a binary adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N with Auv = Avu = 1 if and only if edge (u, v) appears in
E. Deﬁne a diagonal matrix D = diag (d1, ..., dN ) and the graph transition matrix P as follows:

du =

(cid:88)

v∈V

Auv

and P = D−1A.

When G is a directed graph, the adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N accordingly becomes asymmetric with
Auv = 1 if and only if edge (u, v) ∈ E, and the graph transition matrix is deﬁned as

P = [Dout]−1A,

, ..., dout
where Dout = diag (dout
addition, deﬁne Din = diag (cid:0)din

1

N ) and dout
1 , ..., din
N

u = (cid:80)
(cid:1) where din

v∈V Auv is the number of edges leaving from node u. In
v = (cid:80)
u∈V Auv is the number of edges pointing to node v.

2.1 Personalized PageRank and the local clustering algorithm

The personalized PageRank (PPR) is an extension of Google’s PageRank [Brin and Page, 1998, Haveli-

wala, 2003]. To illustrate, consider a personalized random walk (or originally called “surﬁng”) on the graph
G = (V, E) with a seed node v0 ∈ V . At each step, the random walker either restarts from the seed node v0
with probability α (called the teleportation constant) or continues the random walk from the current node to
a neighbor uniformly at random. The personalized PageRank vector p ∈ [0, 1]N is the stationary distribution
of this process, thus the solution to the equation

p(cid:62) = απ(cid:62) + (1 − α)p(cid:62)P,

(1)

where P is the graph transition matrix, and π is the elementary unit vector in the direction of seed node v0.
Here p is a column vector normalized by a positive scalar such that its elements sum to 1, and without loss
of generality, we set v0 = 1 and thus π = (1, 0, ..., 0)(cid:62).

In general, the preference vector π does not have to be an elementary unit vector, but any probability
distribution on V . For example, when π = (1/N, ..., 1/N )(cid:62), PPR is equivalent to ordinary PageRank.
Moreover, the PPR vector is a linear function of the preference vector. That is, let p(π1) and p(π2) be two
PPR vectors corresponding to two preference vectors π1 and π2 respectively. Then, for a new preference
vector that is a convex combination of πi, the resulting PPR vector is constructive of p(πi),

p(w1π1 + w2π2) = w1p(π1) + w2p(π2),

where wi ≥ 0 and w1 + w2 = 1. Deﬁne Π to be an N × N matrix with repeating rows π(cid:62), and let
Q = αΠ + (1 − α)P , then Q is the Markov transition matrix for the stochastic process and Equation (1)
becomes p(cid:62) = p(cid:62)Q. Below are some useful properties of the PageRank vector (also see Haveliwala [2003],
Jeh and Widom [2003] and Appendix A).

Proposition 1. For any ﬁxed α ∈ (0, 1], the PPR vector p is

(a) the left leading eigenvector of Q, associated with the simple eigenvalue 1; and

6

(b) the inﬁnite sum of landing probability {(P s)(cid:62) π}∞

s=0 with weights φ = {α(1 − α)s}∞

s=0,

p(cid:62) = α

∞
(cid:88)

(1 − α)sπ(cid:62)P s.

s=0

(2)

Berkhin [2006] gives an iterative algorithm based on Proposition 1 to approximate the PPR vector (that

scales to large graphs); each update requires only neighborhood information of one visited vertex. A few

lines of linear algebra show that the PPR vector is equivalent to the solution to the linear system

p(cid:62) = α(cid:48)π(cid:62) + (1 − α(cid:48))p(cid:62)W,

where W = (I + P )/2 is the lazy graph transition matrix and α(cid:48) = α/(2 − α). Using this fact, Algorithm
1 approximates the PPR vector in running time of order (cid:79) (cid:0) 1
(cid:15)(1−α) vertices. The
following proposition gives a guarantee on the approximation error for this algorithm in terms of the tolerance

(cid:1), by reaching at most

(cid:15)α

2

parameter and the degrees of visited nodes.

Proposition 2 (Entrywise approximation error [Andersen et al., 2006]). Let p be a PPR vector, and let
p(cid:15) ∈ [0, 1]N be an approximate PPR vector computed by Algorithm 1 with a tolerance (cid:15) > 0. For any vertex
u that is sampled in Algorithm 1,

|pu − p(cid:15)

u| ≤ (cid:15)du.

Proposition 2 ensures that for any ﬁxed graph, the approximate PPR vector is arbitrarily close to the

exact PPR vector, as long as the tolerance (cid:15) > 0 is suﬃciently small. Appendix A contains a proof of

this proposition for completeness. Given a seed node in the graph, Algorithm 2 uses the approximate PPR

vector from Algorithm 1 and returns a set of nodes with the largest corresponding values in the adjusted
personalized PageRank (aPPR) vector, which is deﬁned as

p∗
v =

pv
dv

, for v = 1, 2, ..., N.

The aPPR vector was previously proposed in Andersen et al. [2006]. Algorithm 1 and 2 operate on undirected

graphs. We will generalize them to directed graphs in Section 3 thanks to a simpliﬁed and interpretable

form for the PPR vector.

Algorithm 1 Approximate PPR Vector (undirected) [Andersen et al., 2006]

Require: Undirected graph G, preference vector π, teleportation constant α, and tolerance (cid:15).

Initialize p ← 0, r ← π, α(cid:48) ← α/(2 − α).
while ∃u ∈ V such that ru ≥ (cid:15)du do

Uniformly sample a vertex u satisfying ru ≥ (cid:15)du.
pu ← pu + α(cid:48)ru.
for v : (u, v) ∈ E do

rv ← rv + (1 − α(cid:48))ru/(2du).

end for
ru ← (1 − α(cid:48))ru/2.

end while

Return: (cid:15)-approximate PPR vector p.

7

Algorithm 2 PPR Clustering (undirected)

Require: Undirected graph G, seed node v0, and the desired size of local cluster n.
1: Calculate the approximate PPR vector p (Algorithm 1).
2: Adjust the PPR vector p by node degrees, p∗
v ← pv/dv.
3: Rank all vertices according to the adjusted PPR vector p∗.
Return: local cluster – n top-ranking nodes.

2.2 Stochastic block model

In the stochastic block model (SBM), each node belongs to one of K blocks. The presence of each edge

corresponds to an independent Bernoulli random variable, where the probability of an edge between any two

nodes depends only on the block memberships of two nodes [Holland et al., 1983]. The formal deﬁnition is

as follows.

Deﬁnition 1. For a vertex set V = {1, 2, ..., N }, let z : {1, 2, ..., N } → {1, 2, ..., K} partition the N nodes

into K blocks, so z(v) is the block membership of vertex v. Let B be a K × K matrix with all entries range in
[0, 1]. Under the SBM, the probability of an edge between u and v is Bz(u)z(v). That is, Auv | z(u), z(v) ind.∼
Bernoulli (cid:0)Bz(u)z(v)

(cid:1), for any u, v ∈ {1, 2, ..., N }.

Under the ordinary SBM, nodes in the same block have the same expected degree. One extension is
the degree-corrected stochastic block model (DC-SBM), which adds a series of parameters (θv > 0 for every
vertex v) to create more heterogeneous node degrees [Karrer and Newman, 2011]. Let B be a K × K matrix
with Bij > 0 for any i and j. Then the probability of an edge between u and v is θuθvBz(u)z(v). That is,

Auv | z(u), z(v) ind.∼ Bernoulli (cid:0)θuθvBz(u)z(v)

(cid:1) ,

for u, v ∈ {1, 2, ..., N }. Since θv’s are arbitrary to a multiplicative constant which can be absorbed into
B, Karrer and Newman [2011] suggest imposing the constraint that the θv’s sum to 1 within each block.
That is, (cid:80)
v:z(v)=i θv = 1 for all i = 1, 2, .., K. With this constraint, Bij represents the expected number of
edges between block i and j if i (cid:54)= j, and twice of that if i = j. Throughout this paper, we presume B is
positive deﬁnite 2 and all blocks are connected (we ignore any blocks that are isolated from the seed). The
DC-SBM can be generalized to directed graphs by giving each node two parameters, θin
, controlling
its in-degree and out-degree respectively [Zhu et al., 2013]. Then, the presence of an directed edge from u

v and θout

v

to v, given the block memberships, corresponds to an independent Bernoulli random variable,

Auv | z(u), z(v) ind.∼ Bernoulli (cid:0)θout

u θin

v Bz(u)z(v)

(cid:1) .

In order to make the model identiﬁable, we need to impose a structural constraint on θin’s and θout’s, that
both of them sum up to 1 within each block,

(cid:88)

θin
v =

(cid:88)

v:z(v)=i

v:z(v)=i

θout
v = 1, for any i = 1, 2, ..., K.

Because the oﬀ-diagonal elements of B can be interpreted as the expected number of edges between blocks,

we deﬁne the block in-degree and block out-degree to be the total number of incoming edges and outgoing

2This prevents scenarios where edges are unlikely within blocks and more likely between blocks. In such scenarios, local

clustering needs to be reimagined cautiously. See Supplementary Materials S2 for additional details about generalizations.

8

edges respectively, that is, din

j = (cid:80)K

i=1 Bij, and dout

i = (cid:80)K

j=1 Bij.

3 Population Analysis of PageRank

In this section, we analyze the PPR vector of the expected adjacency matrix under the DC-SBM. This
provides a simple representation of the PPR vector that motivates (1) the bias adjustment and (2) the

generalization of Algorithm 1 and 2 to directed graphs.

We use three distinct typefaces to denote three classes of objects. Calligraphic typeface is given to the

population version of any observable quantities in random graphs, such as graph adjacency matrix and

node degrees (e.g. Equation (3)). Normal typeface is given to unobserved model parameters, such as block
membership and degree parameters θi. Bold face is given to all block-level quantities and parameters like B
and dout

.

i

Deﬁne the population graph adjacency matrix,

(cid:65) = E (A | z(1), z(2), ..., z(N )) ,

(3)

to be the expectation of random adjacency matrix A. Let Z ∈ {0, 1}N ×K be the block membership matrix
with Zvi = 1 if and only if vertex v belongs to block i, and deﬁne diagonal matrices Θin and Θout with
entries θin’s and θout’s respectively. Then, under the directed DC-SBM with K blocks and parameters
{B, Z, Θin, Θout}, (cid:65) ∈ RK×K can be compactly expressed as

(cid:65) = ΘoutZBZ (cid:62)Θin.

Accordingly, we deﬁne the population node degrees and the population transition matrix, (cid:100)in
v = (cid:80)

v∈V (cid:65)uv,
u∈V (cid:65)uv, and (cid:80) = [(cid:68)out]−1 (cid:65), where (cid:68)in and (cid:68)out are the diagonal matrices of the population
’s respectively. Let (cid:112) be the population PPR vector (i.e., the

(cid:100)out
node in-degrees (cid:100)in
solution to equation (cid:112)(cid:62) = απ(cid:62) + (1 − α)(cid:112)(cid:62)(cid:80)) and let (cid:112)∗ = (cid:2)(cid:68)in(cid:3)−1
In addition, deﬁne the block transition matrix P ∈ RK×K as

(cid:112) be the population aPPR vector.

u ’s and out-degrees (cid:100)out

v

u = (cid:80)

P = (cid:2)Dout(cid:3)−1

B,

(4)

where Din ∈ RK×K and Dout ∈ RK×K are diagonal matrices of the block in-degrees din
dout
i

’s.

i ’s and out-degrees

3.1 A representation of PPR vectors

This section provides a simple and interpretable form for PPR vectors under the population DC-SBM.

To this end, we deﬁne the “block-wise” PPR vector p ∈ RK to be the unique solution to linear system

p(cid:62) = απ(cid:62) + (1 − α)p(cid:62)P,

(5)

where π = Z (cid:62)π ∈ RK is the block-wise preference vector and P is the block transition matrix in Equation
(4). This treats the block connectivity matrix B as a weighted adjacency matrix of blocks and the block

of seed node as a seed block. To build up the relationship between PPR and the block-wise PPR, the next

theorem gives an explicit form for PPR vectors which also reveals the sources of bias for local clustering.

9

Theorem 1 (Explicit form of PPR vectors). Under the population directed DC-SBM with K blocks and
parameters (cid:8)B, Z, Θin, Θout(cid:9),

(a) the population PPR vector (cid:112) ∈ RN has elements

(cid:112)u = θin

u pz(u)

where p is the block-wise PPR vector in Equation (5),

(b) and the population aPPR vector (cid:112)∗ ∈ RN has elements

(cid:112)∗

u = p∗

z(u)

(6)

where p∗ = (cid:2)Din(cid:3)−1

p.

Theorem 1 demonstrates that the PPR vector (cid:112) decomposes into block-related information (p) and node
speciﬁc information (Θ). Within each block, the PPR values are proportional to the node degree parameters
θv’s and sum up to the block-wise PPR value of the block. The proof of Theorem 1 (Appendix A) relies on
a key observation (Appendix A.3) that the powers of population transition matrix, (cid:80)s for s = 1, 2, . . . , have
a similarly simple form and the node speciﬁc information components (i.e., z(v) and θv) are invariant in s.
In order to justify the adjustment (Step 2) in Algorithm 2, we observe that the seed always has the highest

population aPPR score. This turns out to be a key feature that facilitates the aPPR vector to recover a

local cluster correctly, so we state it in the following lemma.

Lemma 1 (The largest entry of aPPR vector). Under the population DC-SBM, assume that the minimum
expected degree is positive, that is, minv∈V (cid:100)v > 0. Then, for any ﬁxed α > 0, the population aPPR vector
(cid:112)∗ has the strictly largest entry corresponding to the seed node,

On the other hand, this is not generally true for a PPR vector.

(cid:112)∗
v0

> (cid:112)∗

v , for any v (cid:54)= v0.

When α = 0 (i.e., no teleportation), the PPR vector becomes the limiting distribution of a standard

random walk and all entries of the aPPR vector are equal (Appendix A). Lemma 1 (applied to block-wise

PPR vectors) and Theorem 1 together identify two sources of bias for PPR vectors and suggest a justiﬁcation

for the degree adjustment, which we discuss in order:

(i) Both node degree heterogeneity (Θ) and block size imbalance (D) confound the identiﬁcation of local

cluster by the PPR vector. In particular, suppose vertex v belongs to a block z(v) = i other than 1.
PPR vector assigns it a score θvpi, where pi is the block-wise PPR of block i, and θv is the parameter
speciﬁcally controlling the degree of v. Then, node v may rank at the top, if θv is large enough.
Furthermore, Lemma 1 implies that p1 is not necessarily the largest due to block degree heterogeneity.
Speciﬁcally, if block i has an exceedingly high block degree, it is likely that (cid:112) fails to down-rank node
v vis-a-vis those nodes of block 1.

(ii) Adjusted personalized PageRank removes the node and the block degree heterogeneity simultaneously,
and perfectly recovers the local cluster. To see this, note that p∗ is the adjusted version of block-wise
1 is the largest entry of p∗. From Equation 6, the aPPR vector assigns
PPR vector. From Lemma 1, p∗

10

any vertex v a score p∗
precisely the desired local cluster.

z(v). Hence, nodes with the highest value of (cid:112)∗ belong to block 1, which is

Note that the PPR vector can still be biased for local clustering even under the classic SBM. To see this,

set the matrix Θ to the identity matrix in Theorem 1. In this case, the heterogeneous block degrees still
confound the PPR vector (Section 5.2); there is generally no guarantee for p1 to appear on the top (due to
Lemma 1), unless there are further symmetry conditions. Kloumann et al. [2017] uses such one scenario. As

a byproduct of our analysis, we extend their results under the DC-SBM with the symmetric conditions (see

Supplementary Materials S3 to the paper).

3.2 Local clustering on directed graphs

In light of the clean form of PPR vectors under the DC-SBM, one can modify Algorithm 1 and 2 to

operate on a directed graph accordingly. To this end, note that the transition matrix of a directed graph

requires node out-degrees, hence Algorithm 1 examines only the edges leaving visited nodes. Consequently
it suﬃces to replace du’s in Algorithm 1 by dout
u ’s (Algorithm 3). Proposition 2 applies to Algorithm 3 as
well, and one can approximate the PPR vector provided the out-degrees of visited nodes can be observed

and the tolerance parameter (cid:15) > 0 is suﬃciently small.

To perform local clustering on a directed graph, Algorithm 4 adjusts the approximate PPR vectors from

Algorithm 3 by node in-degrees, that is,

p∗
v =

pv
din
v

, for v = 1, 2, ..., N.

Another option is regularized adjustment, which produces the regularized PPR (rPPR) vector,

pτ
v =

pv
din
v + τ

, for v = 1, 2, ..., N,

where τ > 0 is the regularization parameter. The regularized adjustment greatly stabilize the PPR clustering

in practice, by removing nodes with extremely low in-degrees (see Section 6 for more details). Adjusted PPR
for directed graphs is a local algorithm so long as din is available with a local query, for example, the Twitter
friendship graph.

Algorithm 3 Approximate PPR Vector (directed)

Require: Directed graph G, preference vector π, teleportation constant α, and tolerance (cid:15).

Initialize p ← 0, r ← π, α(cid:48) ← α/(2 − α).
while ∃u ∈ V such that ru ≥ (cid:15)dout

u do

Sample a vertex u uniformly at random, satisfying ru ≥ (cid:15)dout
u .
pu ← pu + α(cid:48)ru.
for v : (u, v) ∈ E do

rv ← rv + (1 − α(cid:48))ru/(2dout

u ).

end for
ru ← (1 − α(cid:48))ru/2.

end while

Return: (cid:15)-approximate PPR vector p.

11

Algorithm 4 PPR Clustering (directed)

Require: Directed graph G, seed node v0, the desired size of local cluster n, and an optional regularization

parameter τ .

1: Calculate the approximate PPR vector p (Algorithm 3).
2: Adjust the PPR vector p with:
Option (a): node in-degrees, p∗
v ← pv/din
v ,
Option (b): regularized node in-degrees, pτ

v ← pv/(din

3: Rank all vertices according to the aPPR vector p∗ or pτ .
Return: local cluster – n top-ranking nodes.

v + τ ).

4 Personalized PageRank in Random Graphs

This section establishes several concentration results for the local clustering algorithm using the adjusted

PPR vector (Algorithm 2 and 4) under the DC-SBM. The results show that if the graph is generated from

the DC-SBM, then PPR clustering returns the desired local cluster with high probability. Since in Algorithm

4, the calculation for PPR vectors only relies on node out-degrees and the adjustment step solely utilizes
node in-degrees, it is not diﬃcult to distinguish din and dout. Thus, we state the results in undirected graphs
for simplicity. One can draw the analogous conclusions for directed graphs by tracing the proof step by step.

We ﬁrst present a useful tool that controls the entrywise errors of a PPR vector in random graphs. Recall
that (cid:112) is the stationary distribution of probability transition matrix (cid:81) = αΠ + (1 − α)(cid:80). For any vector
x ∈ Rn, deﬁne the vector inﬁnity norm as (cid:107)x(cid:107)∞ = maxi |xi|. The following theorem bounds the entrywise
error of the stationary distribution of (cid:81).

Theorem 2 (Concentration of the PPR vectors). Let G = (V, E) be a graph of N vertices generated from
the DC-SBM with K blocks and parameters {B, Z, Θ}. Let p and (cid:112) be the PPR vector corresponding to
random transition matrix P and its population version (cid:80) respectively, with the same teleportation constant
α. Let p∗, (cid:112)∗ ∈ [0, 1]N be the adjusted PPR vector of p and (cid:112). Let δ be the average expected node degrees,
that is, δ = 1
N

v∈V (cid:100)v. Assume that ρ = maxv∈V (cid:100)v
minv∈V (cid:100)v

is bounded by some ﬁnite constant and that

(cid:80)

δ > c0(1 − α)2 log N,

(7)

for some suﬃciently large constant c0 > 0. Then, with probability at least 1 − (cid:79)(N −5),

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(cid:114)

≤ c1(1 − α)

log N
δ

, and

(cid:107)p∗ − (cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

(cid:114)

≤ c2(1 − α)

log N
δ

,

for some suﬃciently large constant c1, c2 > 0.

The proof of Theorem 2 invokes the elementary eigenvector perturbation bound for asymmetric matrices,

an analog to the celebrated Davis-Kahan sin Θ theorem [Davis and Kahan, 1970], and the novel leave-one-out

technique due to Chen et al. [2019]. The detailed proof is given in the Supplementary Materials S1 to the

paper.

Theorem 2 demonstrates that if the expected average degree δ exceeds (1 − α)2 log N to some suﬃciently
large extent, then with high probability, the random aPPR vector concentrates around the population aPPR

vector in terms of all entries. In fact, the concentration statement holds for any valid preference vector π.

Hence, the classic PageRank vector and some other variants also enjoy the entrywise error bounds, so long

as they can be written as the solution to the linear system (1).

12

Next, we introduce a separation measure of the DC-SBM. Recall that one can conduct a local clustering
task by selecting nodes ranked by the adjusted PPR vector p∗. In the population version, it is equivalent
to distinguishing between p∗
k, for all k = 2, 3, ..., K, which also characterizes the distance from the
desired local cluster (block 1) to its complement set (the other blocks). Only if they are suﬃciently separated,
can the local cluster be identiﬁable in the sample. Due to Lemma 1, we assume without loss of generality
that the second block has the second highest value in the “block-wise” aPPR vector, that is, p∗
2 ≥ p∗
k
for k = 3, 4, ..., K. Then, we deﬁne the separation measure ∆α ∈ (0, 1],

1 and p∗

1 > p∗

∆α =

p∗
1 − p∗
2
p∗
1

,

which turns out to be crucial in determining the sample complexity required to guarantee the exact recovery.
We remark that ∆α is an increasing function of the teleportation constant, hence the subscript α.

With Theorem 2 and the separation measure, we then give following corollary that bounds the accuracy

of Algorithm 2, in terms of graph edge density.

Corollary 1 (Exact recovery by adjusted PPR vector). For any seed nodes, let C ⊂ V be the local cluster
of n nodes returned by Algorithm 2 with teleportation constant α and tolerance (cid:15), and (cid:67) ⊂ V be the nodes
in the seed node’s block. Assume that ρ < c0, (cid:15) ≤ c1(1 − α)p∗
1

(cid:112)log N/δ, and that

δ > 16c2

(cid:19)2

(cid:18) 1 − α
∆α

log N,

(8)

for some suﬃciently large constants c0, c1, c2 > 0. If the desired size of the local cluster n = |(cid:67)|, then with
probability at least 1 − (cid:79)(N −5), we have C = (cid:67).

The proof of Corollary 1 is presented in Appendix A. We make a few remarks:

(i) Corollary 1 demonstrates that Algorithm 2 works under a sparse scenario, where the number of edges is

exceedingly small in proportion to the number of possible edges in the network. To reach the entrywise

control of the aPPR vector and the suﬃcient separation of local cluster from others, the theorem calls

for the expected node degree δ to grow with only a fraction (for any ﬁxed teleportation constant α)

of the logarithm of the size of the network, log N .

In other words, Algorithm 2 requires a sample

complexity (the number of edges) of order

(cid:19)2

(cid:18) 1 − α
∆α

N log N.

(ii) The results show that α leverages between the sampling complexity and statistical performance of PPR

clustering. To see this, rearrange condition (8),

(cid:19)2

(cid:18) 1 − α
∆α

<

c(cid:48)δ
log N

,

for some small enough constant c(cid:48) > 0. As α increases, the left hand side is decreasing to zero thus
making the condition more likely to hold. On the other hand, as α increases, the tolerance (cid:15) must
decrease at rate (cid:79)(1 − α) in order to guarantee an entrywise control of p(cid:15) analogous to the form in
Theorem 2 (Appendix A). More intuitively, if (cid:15) does not decrease, then as α goes to one, Algorithm

13

1 may terminate early without reaching all vertices in the desired local cluster. In sum, Algorithm 1
and 3 need at least (cid:79)
that one can approach the conditions in Corollary 1 by setting the teleportation constant suﬃciently

queries (see Supplementary Materials S2 for an example). This implies

1
α(1−α)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

large, while the computational burden can increase as α → 1.

5 Simulation Studies

This section compares the PPR vector and the aPPR vector. The results show the eﬀectiveness and

robustness of aPPR vector in detecting a local cluster. Experiment 1 utilizes the DC-SBM with a power-law

degree distribution and investigates the eﬀects of heterogeneous node degrees. Experiment 2 uses the SBM

with unequal block sizes to study the inﬂuences of heterogeneous block degrees. Experiment 3 generates

networks from the SBM with equal block sizes and varying edge density to examine the eﬃcacy of PPR

methods in sparse graphs.

In all simulations, we employee the block connectivity matrix B with homogeneous diagonal elements,
Bii = b1, and homogeneous oﬀ-diagonal elements, Bij = b2 for any i (cid:54)= j. Deﬁne the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) to be the expected number of in-block edges divided by the expected number of out-block edges, that
is, b1/(b2(K − 1)), where K is the number of blocks. In particular, we set the SNR to 1.5 and choose the
teleportation constant of α = 0.15 throughout the section. Additional simulation results (illustrating the

Theorem 2) are available from Supplementary Materials S2.

5.1 Experiment 1

This experiment illustrates how node degree heterogeneity aﬀects the discriminant power in identifying

local cluster using a PPR vector or an aPPR vector. The results also illustrate the advantages of having

multiple seed nodes. The Θ parameters from the DC-SBM are drawn from the power law distribution with
lower bound xmin = 1 and shape parameter β = 2.5. A random networks were sampled from the DC-SBM
with K = 3, N = 1500 and equal block sampling proportions,

z(v) i.i.d.∼ Multinomial

(cid:18) 1
3

,

1
3

,

1
3

(cid:19)

,

for vertex v = 1, 2, ..., N , whose expected average degree (δ) is set to 105. The PPR vector is calculated with
one or ten seeds randomly chosen from block one.

Figure 1 plots PPR values (left two panels) and aPPR values (right two panels) of a random graph

generated from the DC-SBM, excluding seed node(s). The upper two panels in Figure 1 contrast PPR and

aPPR when there is only one seed node and the bottom two panels compare two vectors when ten seed nodes

are used. The vertices from the local block in the SBM are colored in blue and the others are in yellow.

The nodes are ordered ﬁrst by block, then by node degree parameters θ (left is larger). A horizontal line is

drawn for each block indicating the median of the aPPR values within that block.

With one seed node (upper two panels), the scatter plots has two clouds within each block. The upper

cloud contains the immediate neighbors of the seed node. This separation disappears when multiple seed

nodes are used (bottom two panels). To see the eﬀect of node heterogeneity, the skewed distribution of PPR

values in each block demonstrates its bias towards high degree node inside and outside of the seed nodes

block in the SBM. In contrast, aPPR values are evenly distributed within blocks, verifying that aPPR vector

removes the eﬀects of node degree heterogeneity.

14

Figure 1: Comparison of PPR (left two panels) and aPPR (right two panels) under the DC-SBM with one
seed node (upper two panels) and ten seed nodes (bottom two panels). Local cluster is in blue and other
clusters are colored in yellow. Solid horizontal lines on right panels indicate the median of aPPR values
within each cluster.

5.2 Experiment 2

This experiment compares PPR and aPPR under the SBM with block degree heterogeneity. A number

of random networks were sampled from the SBM with K = 3, N = 900, and geometric block sampling

proportions,

z(v) i.i.d.∼ Multinomial (cid:0)1, b, b2(cid:1) ,

(9)

where b ∈ {1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0}. When b is larger, the population of nodes in each block becomes

more unbalanced and thus inducing greater block degree heterogeneity. The block connectivity matrix B

is conﬁgured as described in the beginning of this section. The expected average degree (δ) is set to 70.

For each sampled network, the size of the ﬁrst block is assumed known to Algorithm 2. The PPR vector is

calculated exactly in place of the approximation PPR vector (Step 1), with one seed randomly chosen from

the ﬁrst block.

The top panels of Figure 2 displays the PPR vector on an example network with b = 1.4, demonstrating

15

0500100015000.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.005IndexPPR050010001500IndexaPPR2x10-54x10-50500100015000.0000.0010.0020.0030.0040.005IndexPPR050010001500IndexaPPR10-52x10-53x10-5Figure 2: (Top) Simulated network generated from the classic SBM of 3 blocks with block degree heterogene-
ity. Three horizontal lines indicate the median of PPR and aPPR values within each cluster. (Bottom Left)
Comparison of performance for PPR (triangles with solid line) and aPPR (circles with dashed line) under
the SBM with diﬀerent levels of block degree heterogeneity. (Bottom Right) Comparison of performance for
PPR and aPPR under the four-parameters SBM with diﬀerent sparsity. Error bars are drawn using standard
deviation.

its preference toward the high degree block (the third block) over local cluster. Given the size of the ﬁrst

block, we measure the accuracy by the proportion of vertices belonging to the ﬁrst block in the returned

cluster. The bottom left panel of Figure 2 shows the accuracy of PPR and aPPR for six diﬀerent values

of b (i.e., the geometric ratio in distribution (9)) where each point is the average of 100 sampled network.

The comparison demonstrates that the adjusted PPR vector corrects the bias of PPR caused by block

heterogeneity. Moreover, block degree heterogeneity degrades the performance of both PPR and aPPR.

Note that aPPR outperforms PPR even when b = 1; this is likely due to the fact that even when nodes have

equal expected degrees in the SBM, the actual node degrees will be heterogeneous due to the randomness

in the sampled graph. In a ﬁnite graph, this variability is enough to give aPPR an advantage over PPR.

Asymptotically, this advantage should fade away [Kloumann et al., 2017].

16

0200400600800IndexPPR5x10-410-32x10-35x10-30200400600800IndexAPPR2x10-55x10-510-4llllll1.01.21.41.61.82.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Geometric RatioAccuracylPPRaPPRllllll204060800.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Expected Average DegreeAccuracylPPRaPPR5.3 Experiment 3

This experiment investigates the performance of PPR and aPPR under the SBM where there is no

heterogeneity in the expected node degrees or block degrees. A number of random networks were sampled
from the four-parameter stochastic block model, SBM(K = 3, N = 900, b1 = 0.6, b2 = 0.2) [Rohe et al., 2011].
Under the four-parameter SBM, each of K blocks has equal size in expectation, N/K, and the probability of
a connection between two nodes is b2 if they are in two separate blocks, or b1 if in the same one. In addition,
the expected average degree varies, δ ∈ {15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90}. For every setting, the results are averaged

over 100 samples of the network. The PPR vector is calculated with one seeds randomly chosen from block

one. The bottom right panel of Figure 2 contrasts the accuracy of PPR and aPPR against six diﬀerent

values of expected average degree, showing that when the sampled graph has minimal degree heterogeneity,

the adjusted PPR vector has only slightly higher accuracy than the PPR vector.

6 A Sample of Twitter

In this section, we provide a more detailed case study to illustrate the properties of diﬀerent PPR vectors.

We obtain a local cluster of nodes around the seed node @NBCPolitics (NBC Politics) in the Twitter

friendship graph. In the Twitter graph, the nodes are called handles or accounts (e.g. @NBCPolitics) and

if Twitter handle i follows Twitter handle j, then we deﬁne this as a directed edge (i, j) pointing from i to

j. Aﬃliated with NBC news, NBC Politics specializes in political news coverage and has over 470k followers

on Twitter (in-degree) and follows 145 handles (out-degree) as of December 2018. A brief look through

@NBCPolitics’ following list reveals that it follows a wide range of accounts, from TV programs, reporters

and editors aﬃliated with NBC, to media accounts and journalists of other news outlets as well as politicians.

Data on following and handle proﬁle information were collected through the Standard Twitter Search

API. We queried the Twitter friendship graph starting from the seed node @NBCPolitics, using Algorithm 3
with teleportation constant α = 0.15 and termination parameter (cid:15) = 10−7, ending up with 5840 surrounding
handles. Through this exercise, we intend to illustrate the properties and applications of local clustering

using PPR, aPPR and rPPR vectors, where we set the regularization parameter τ to 100.

We ﬁrst present the results of PPR. As Table 3 shows, the top 30 handles (except @NBCPolitics) with the

highest PPR values are a combination of (i) NBC’s news related programs such as NBC News, TODAY and

Meet the Press; (ii) NBC’s political reporters, anchors and editors, from well-known ﬁgures like Chuck Todd

and Andrea Mitchell to less-known ones like Pete Williams (justice correspondent) and Mark Murray (senior

political editor); (iii) other mainstream news outlets such as The Wall Street Journal, POLITICO, and

TIME; and (iv) prominent public ﬁgures and politicians like Melania Trump, Bill Clinton and John McCain.

In light of NBC’s status as a mainstream news outlet and the political focus of @NBCPolitics, such results

make sound sense. It must also be noted that all the top 30 handles are direct friends of @NBCPolitics’s

and have at least tens of thousands of followers. The median follower count is 1.4 million, suggesting high

in-degrees. In fact, the pattern observed in the top 30 extends to the top 200 handles with the highest PPR

values, which include NBC’s own programs, journalists, editors and staﬀ; fellow mainstream media outlets
and their staﬀ; and prominent public ﬁgures, politicians and government institutions (see Supplementary

Materials S4). The median in-degree of top 200 handles is around 184k, though there are four handles with

less than one thousand followers. One important thing to notice is that among the top 200 handles, the

ﬁrst 139 are all directly followed by @NBCPolitics, with handles having high in-degrees generally ranked

higher than those having low in-degrees (although @NBCPolitics follows 145 handles, 6 of them might have

17

Table 3: Top 30 handles of PPR with seed node @NBCPolitics and the teleportation constant α = 0.15 in
December 2018.

Name

Followers Description

1 Melania Trump
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 MSNBC

The White House
Chuck Todd
NBC News
NBC Nightly News
Andrea Mitchell
Savannah Guthrie
Joe Scarborough

POLITICO

Rachel Maddow MSNBC
10
Breaking News
11
NBC News First Read
12
13
TODAY
14 Meet the Press
The Wall Street Journal
15
16
Pete Williams
17 Mark Murray
18
19 Katy Tur
20
Bill Clinton
21 Kasie Hunt
22
TIME
23 Kelly O’Donnell
John McCain
24
Peter Alexander
25
26
Hallie Jackson
27 Kristen Welker
28
Carrie Dann
29 Willie Geist
30 Morning Joe

11242283
This account is run by the Oﬃce of First Lady Melania Trump...
17625630 Welcome to @WhiteHouse! Follow for the latest from President...
2032038 Moderator of @meetthepress and @nbcnews political director; ...
6280551
962290
1737764

The leading source of global news and info for more than 75 ...
Breaking news, in-depth reporting, context on news from ...
NBC News Chief Foreign Aﬀairs Correspondent/anchor, Andrea ...
881669 Mom to Vale & Charley, TODAY Co-Anchor, Georgetown Law. ...

The place for in-depth analysis, political commentary and ...
I see political people...

2521215 With Malice Toward None
2261911
9498076
9223158
53847
4276453

The ﬁrst place for news and analysis from the @NBCNews Poli...
America’s favorite morning show | Snapchat: todayshow
566713 Meet the Press is the longest-running television show in history ...

16188842
70062
97571 Mark Murray is the senior political editor for NBC News, ...

Breaking news and features from the WSJ.
NBC News Justice Correspondent. Covers US Supreme Court, ...

3695835

Nobody knows politics like POLITICO. Got a news tip for us? ...

587474 MSNBC anchor @2pm, NBC News correspondent, author of NYT ...

10697521

Founder, Clinton Foundation and 42nd President of the United...

381704 @NBCNews Capitol Hill Correspondent. Host, @KasieDC, Sundays...

15584815

Breaking news and current events from around the globe. Host...

195765 White House Correspondent @NBCNews Veteran of Cap Hill & ...
3181773 Memorial account for U.S. Senator John McCain, 1936-2018. To...

Chief White House Correspondent / @NBCNews / @MSNBC Anchor ...

283522 @NBCNews White House Correspondent / Weekend @TODAYshow ...
359099
182244 @NBCNews White House Correspondent. Links and retweets ...
.@NBCNews / @NBCPolitics. RTs not endorsements.
Host @NBC #SundayTODAY, Co-Host @Morning Joe, Sunday ...
Live tweet during the show! Links to must-read op-eds ...

37119
807536
563650

Through the PPR vector, the top 30 handles returned to @NBCPolitics include NBC’s news related programs and
celebrity reporters, comparable mainstream media outlets, as well as prominent political and public ﬁgures and
institutions. Such results line up with its status as a mainstream political news source, demonstrating clustering
eﬀectiveness. Those Twitter handles tend to have millions of followers, showing the PPR vector’s bias toward high
in-degree.

privacy protection that has prevented us from accessing their information). The remaining handles on the

list, although not directly followed by @NBCPolitics, include ﬁve handles associated with NBC, from its news

anchor Lester Holt to its News International President. However, the majority of those indirectly followed

by @NBCPolitics are mainly high proﬁle political and public ﬁgures (like President Trump, Vice President

Pence, Hillary Clinton, and Stephen Colbert), government organizations (like WhiteHouse Oﬃce of Cabinet

Aﬀairs and National Security Council), and mainstream news outlets (like New York Times, CNN and AP)

and well-known journalists (like John Dickerson and Anderson Cooper). We can thus conclude that the

PPR vector is biased toward popular accounts followed directly by the seed node or indirectly by its friends,

reﬂecting the popular Twitter handles followed by them. This property of the PPR vector can be harnessed

by researchers interested in identifying the upstream of a handle, i.e., those Twitter elites who are followed

by and might inﬂuence the seed node and by extension its followers.

In contrast, the aPPR vector up-weights handles that are much less popular (i.e., those with low in-

degrees). As shown in Table 2, the 30 handles with the highest aPPR values include NBC’s reporters,
writers, editors, producers, and programs, all of whom have a few hundred to a few thousand followers. The

30 handles also include those unaﬃliated with NBC, such as director of a non-proﬁt (Enroll America), director

of digital programming at National Geographic, and @CNNPolitics’ editor. All of them are professionally

related to the seed node. This testiﬁes to the applicability of aPPR for locating an idiosyncratic local cluster

around a seed node. However, more than half (17) of the 30 handles are obscure and not directly followed by

@NBCPolitics. The reason they appear on the list is probably that they have just one and at most a dozen

18

Table 4: Top 30 handles of aPPR with seed node @NBCPolitics and the teleportation constant α = 0.15 in
December 2018.

Area Man
CELESTIA ROBINSON
NBC Field Notes
rob adams
JL

Name
Stephanie Palla
1
Jennifer Sizemore
2
3
Alissa Swango
4 Making a Diﬀerence
Ron Whittemore
5
6
Svante Stockselius
7 Greg Martin
8
9
10
11
12
13 David Kelsey
Hank Morris
14
Jesse Marks
15
Brayden Rainey
16
child of the tiger
17
Julie Swango
18
Author Dianne Kube
19
Consider the Source
20
Adam Edelman
21
Phil McCausland
22
Corky Siemaszko
23
24
Sam Petulla
25 Ken Strickland
26 Mike Mullen
Elyse PG
27
A. Johnson
28
29
Steve Fenton
30 Dobe Pitty Mami

Followers Description

Enroll America National Regional Director...

198
386
441 Director of Digital Programming at @natgeo. All things ...
670 @NBCNightlyNews’ popular feature proﬁles ordinary ...

NBC News correspondents and http://t.co/1eSopOQt8s ...

Political Booking Producer at @nbcnews @todayshow
I am Area Man. I pwn your news feed.

1
3
1161
1
2
1390
2
2
1
1
1
1
3
4
7 Dianne Kube is an Author with a passion, for family,...
7
Political reporter @nbcnews. Wisconsin native, ...
2341
2519 @NBCNews Digital reporter focused on the rural-urban...
2538
2588
2693
7

Senior Writer at NBC News Digital (former NY Daily ...
Editor @cnnpolitics Usually looking for datasets. ...
NBC News Washington Bureau Chief

yet another activist twitter, ﬁghting all those fun...

2697 White House producer @nbcnews |@USCAnnenberg alum ...
Change your thoughts & you change your world. -Normal...

2
4
13

Through the aPPR vector, the top 30 handles returned to @NBCPolitics include some relevant handles
(NBC’s news team and their counterparts in other mainstream news organizations) and many obscure
ones (handles with few followers and no proﬁle descriptions). This results from the aPPR vector’s bias
toward extreme low degree and introduces noise to the clustering results.

followers (recall that aPPR divides by in-degree). In fact, 160 of the top 200 handles are not direct friends

of @NBCPolitics; the median in-degree of the top 200 handles is merely 8 (Supplementary Materials S4).

Those handles might have ended up on the list due to a combination of luck and, more importantly, their

extremely low in-degrees. In this regard, noise can be introduced by the aPPR vector because it prioritizes

handles with extremely low in-degrees that are possibly several degrees separated from the seed node.

To reduce noise, we applied a regularization step to the aPPR vector to remove those “distant” and small

nodes while preserving the close and relevant ones. In Table 3, the majority of the top 30 handles with the

highest regularized aPPR (i.e., rPPR) values have three- or four-digit numbers of followers. Similar to the

aPPR results, they include NBC’s news crew. But the diﬀerence is that the overwhelming majority (18) of

the top 30 handles work at NBC. Some handles who work for other news organizations (e.g., Sam Petulla

at @cnnpolitics and Emmanuelle Saliba at @Euronews) might have previously worked at NBC or have close

connection with its news team. Even the four handles that are not directly followed by @NBCPolitics are

interesting – they are non-proﬁt organizations (NYC Clothing Bank and Voices United) and news-related

individual or organization (James Miklaszewski and Social Headlines). This pattern can also be observed

in the top 200 handles, 72 of whom are directly followed by @NBCPolitics. The overwhelming majority

of those directly followed by it are aﬃliated with NBC, comprising its day-to-day news team, who enjoy

much less publicity than the celebrity reporters. The remaining 128 of them, who are not directly followed

by @NBCPolitics, actually also include 20 NBC’s journalists and staﬀ, such as Ray Farmer (NBC News

photographer) and Jim Miklaszewski (chief Pentagon correspondent for NBC News). Others are non-proﬁts

like Vets Helping Heroes and professionals from other news organizations or companies such as WSJ, NFL

19

Table 5: Top 30 handles of rPPR with seed node @NBCPolitics and the teleportation constant α = 0.15 in
December 2018.

NBC Field Notes
Adam Edelman
Phil McCausland
Corky Siemaszko
Sam Petulla

Name
Stephanie Palla
1
Jennifer Sizemore
2
3
Alissa Swango
4 Making a Diﬀerence
5 Greg Martin
6
7
8
9
10
11 Ken Strickland
Elyse PG
12
Hasani Gittens
13
Scott Foster
14
Zach Haberman
15
Emmanuelle Saliba
16
Alex Johnson
17
Savannah Sellers
18
NYC Clothing Bank
19
Shaquille Brewster
20
Joey Scarborough
21
Jane C. Timm
22
Anthony Terrell
23
NBC News Videos
24
Libby Leist
25
Voices United
26
Social Headlines
27
James Miklaszewski
28
Courtney Kube
29
Bob Corker
30

Followers Description

Enroll America National Regional Director http://t.co/X6jJIE...

198
386
441 Director of Digital Programming at @natgeo. All things food....
670 @NBCNightlyNews’ popular feature proﬁles ordinary people do...

Senior Writer at NBC News Digital (former NY Daily News ...
Editor @cnnpolitics Usually looking for datasets. You can ...
NBC News Washington Bureau Chief

Political Booking Producer at @nbcnews @todayshow
NBC News correspondents and http://t.co/1eSopOQt8s reporters...
Political reporter @nbcnews. Wisconsin native, Bestchester ...

1161
1390
2341
2519 @NBCNews Digital reporter focused on the rural-urban divide....
2538
2588
2693
2697 White House producer @nbcnews |@USCAnnenberg alum | LA kid ...
3002
3464
3693
4004
4371
4637

Level 29 Mage. Senior News Ed. @NBCNews. Sheriﬀ of Nattahna...
Senior Producer, Washington @NBCNEWS @TODAYshow
Lead Breaking News Editor, @NBCNews. Previously had other jobs...
Head of Social Media Strategy @Euronews | Launched #THECUBE ...
News, data and analysis for @NBCNews; data geek; ...
News junkie. Host of NBC’s ”Stay Tuned” on Snapchat. Storyte...

154 We distribute new, never-worn clothing and merchandise...

NBC News Social Media Editor. New York Daily News Alum. RTs ...

5362 @NBCNews Producer/Politics | @HowardU Alum| Journalist | Pol...
6277
6478 @nbcnews political reporter and fact checker. More fun than ...
Emmy Award winning journalist. Political observer. Covered ...
6827
The latest video from http://t.co/xPyvMOTEF6
7838
Executive Producer @todayshow
7946
310
Voices United is a non proﬁt educational organization ...
344 Daily roundup of top social media and networking stories.
337 Writer, Photographer, Editor, Director, Producer, Newshound ...

9494
10042

NBC News National Security & Military Reporter...
Serving Tennesseans in the U.S. Senate

Through the rPPR vector, the top 30 handles returned to @NBCPolitics include much fewer low in-degree
and obscure ones and many more moderately connected nodes that are relevant to @NBCPolitics, including its
reporters and editors and media professionals from other organizations.

Network, and Microsoft, who might have worked for NBC or have close connection with it. Although there

still appear to be obscure handles with few followers, they decrease signiﬁcantly in number – the median

in-degree of the top 200 handles is 340 (Supplementary Materials S4), a precipitous drop from that of the

top PPR handles yet not too small as compared to that of the top aPPR handles. We thus conclude that

the regularized aPPR vector returns a local cluster with little noise, reﬂecting a seed node’s close circles,

either directly or indirectly related.

In order to evaluate the inﬂuence of the desired cluster size n on the results based on diﬀerent PPR

vectors, we compare the local clusters of PPR, aPPR, and rPPR by varying sample size. Deﬁne the in-

and-out ratio of local cluster C ⊂ V as the proportion of edges inside C among all edges connected to

C,

2 × (cid:80)
(cid:80)

u,v∈C Auv
u + dout

u

.

u∈C din

A higher in-and-out ratio indicates a more internally connected sample. Figure 3 (Right) shows the eﬀec-

tiveness of aPPR and rPPR in producing a compact local cluster. When the sample size is bigger than 100,

the connectedness of the local cluster produced by rPPR stabilizes; the greater the sample size, the more

densely connected a cluster aPPR would produce. However, PPR is easily susceptible to the inclusion of

popular nodes. In this case, a sharp drop of in-and-out ratio for PPR when the sample size reaches around

140 is caused by inclusions of highly popular accounts @POTUS (President Trump) and @realDonaldTrump

(Donald J. Trump).

The PPR clustering is fairly robust to the choice of teleportation constant, despite the size of local

20

Figure 3: Left: an illustration of 5840 Twitter handles examined by Algorithm 3 and three samples of size
200 by PPR, aPPR, and rPPR. Each dot represents a user in Twitter. The blue dashed line delimits the
top 200 handles by PPR vector; vertices above the line are PPR’s sample. Similarly, the yellow dotdash line
determines the sample returned by Algorithm 4 given n = 200; vertices above this boundary correspond to
aPPR’s sample. In particular, dots in purple stand for the sample of rPPR; the purple solid line shows the
boundary of this sample. Right: The in-and-out ratio of local clusters identiﬁed by PPR, aPPR, and rPPR,
as the sample sizes vary. A higher in-and-out ratio indicates a more internally connected cluster.

cluster. To illustrate this, we also performed the same pipeline of analysis with the seed @NBCPolitics while

varying the value of α (e.g., 0.05, 0.25, and 1/3) in parallel. We observed that those local clusters returned by

Algorithm 4 all share a great portion of members in common. For example, there are 280 (93.3%) overlapping

members between two targeted samples of size n = 300, using α = 0.15 and 0.25 respectively. These suggest

a low sensitivity to the teleportation constant (see Supplementary Materials S2).

The left panel of Figure 3 depicts the behaviors of PPR, aPPR and rPPR. Each handle queried in this

sampling is displayed as a dot, with y-axis representing the PPR value and x-axis the number of followers (i.e.,

in-degree). Top handles with the highest PPR values are above blue dashed line, which tend to concentrate

on the right end of the x-axis and thus are biased toward high in-degrees. Top handles with highest aPPR

values are dots to the left of the yellow dotdash line, which gather on the left end of the x-axis and thus in

favor of low in-degrees. Regularized aPPR, by purple dots, excludes the very low degree nodes and very high
degree nodes. As the empirical results show, these three vectors can be thought of as lenses through which

we view the local structure of a given Twitter handle with varying foci, rendering high, moderate, and low

in-degree blocks and serving diﬀerent needs and purposes.

7 Discussion

This paper studies the PPR vector under the degree-corrected stochastic block model and PPR clustering

in massive block model graphs. We establish some consistency results for this method, and examine its

performance through analysis of Twitter friendship graph. As shown in the results, the PPR vectors with

21

Number of followersPPR10010110210310410510610710810−810−710−610−510−410−3Top 200 PPR boundaryTop 200 aPPR boundaryTop 200 rPPR boundaryllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll0100200300400500Sample SizeIn−and−out Ratio10−510−410−3lPPRaPPRrPPRand without adjustment have distinct properties and can be used to eﬀectively sample a massive graph for

various purposes. However, there are limitations worthy of future investigations.

In Section 3, we provide a representation of the PPR vector under the DC-SBM and its extension into

directed graphs. The result does not impose extra structural restrictions on the model parameters, except

that B corresponds to a strongly connected “block-wise” graph. We consider a positive deﬁnite connectivity
In practice (and many
matrix particularly so that it is intuitive to conceive the notion of local cluster.

of our experiments, see Supplementary Materials S2), however, a PPR-type algorithm appears to continue

working for a broader range of B (e.g., singular or indeﬁnite), provided that the teleportation constant is

suﬃciently large (e.g. α > 0.1). It is unclear yet what is the minimum constraint needed on B in order for

the PPR clustering to function. In addition, DC-SBM does have its limits. For example, the model fails

to capture either mixed block membership or popularity features which are potentially informative in real

world networks. The behavior of a PPR vector under other extensions of stochastic block model, such as

mixed membership stochastic block model and popularity-adjusted block model, remains unknown [Airoldi

et al., 2008, Sengupta and Chen, 2018]. Future studies on the PPR vector under these models could shed

further light on the PPR clustering and oﬀer more practical guidelines on their application.

In Section 4, we proved the consistency of the PPR clustering, requiring the average expected node

degree to grow in order of log N , which hits the boundary between the theoretical guarantees and the

realistic observation. In contrast, scale-free networks such as the preferential attachment model [Barab´asi

and Albert, 1999] have ﬁnite expected node degrees. Future investigations into variants of PPR that could

possibly overcome this limitation yet ensure a ﬁne local cluster discovery would be particularly interesting

and useful.

In Section 6, we introduce the regularized version of adjusted PPR (rPPR) vector, with a series of

empirical evidence showing its eﬃcacy in targeted sampling. While the results appear promising, theoretical

guarantees for this technique remain unexplored. In order for some mathematical analyses, one may resort

to the techniques used in Le et al. [2016]. It is previously shown that the regularized graph Laplacian (or

transition matrix) enjoys “nice” ﬁnite sample properties, which facilitate the consistency of many regularized

spectral methods. It thus is reasonable conjecture that rPPR vectors are also suitable for local clustering.

An R implementation of the PPR clustering is available at author’s GitHub (https://github.com/

RoheLab/aPPR).

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by NSF Grants DMS-1612456 and DMS-1916378 and ARO Grant W911NF-

15-1-0423. Thank you to Yuling Yan and E. Auden Krauska for the helpful comments. Thank you to Alex

Hayes for kindly advising on the software development.

A Technical Proofs

A.1 Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. We apply Perron-Frobenius theorem for the ﬁrst part [Perron, 1907, Frobenius et al., 1912], and

complete the proof by construction.

(a) First, notice that Q is a Markov transition matrix by modifying G = (V, E) a little. To this end, (i)

22

shrink the weights of every existing edge by factor 1 − α, and (ii) add an edge weighted α between
seed node v0 and all nodes in the graph. Then Q represents the new graph G(cid:48)(V, E(cid:48)), which is strongly
connected by construction. Hence Q is irreducible.

The PPR vector p is all-positive. To see this, note that the equation p(cid:62) = p(cid:62)Q implies that p is a
stationary distribution for the standard random walk on G(cid:48). Since G(cid:48) is strongly connected, it follows
that the stationary distribution must be all-positive.

From the Perron-Frobenius theorem, the only all-positive eigenvector of a non-negative irreducible

matrix is associated with the leading eigenvalue, which is 1 in our case. Since the leading eigenvalue

of non-negative irreducible matrix is simple, we conclude that p is unique.

(b) We ﬁnish the proof by constructing an explicit form of the PPR vector. Let Rα = α (cid:80)∞

s=0(1 − α)sP s.
α π satisﬁes the deﬁnition of personalized

The inﬁnite sum converges for α ∈ (0, 1]. Then, p = R(cid:62)
PageRank vector,

απ(cid:62) + (1 − α)π(cid:62)RαP = απ(cid:62) + (1 − α)π(cid:62)

α

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(1 − α)sP s

P

∞
(cid:88)

s=0

= απ(cid:62) + α

∞
(cid:88)

(1 − α)sπ(cid:62)P s

s=1

= π(cid:62)Rα.

Since the solution is unique, we have p = R(cid:62)

α π.

A.2 Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. Algorithm 1 maintains two vectors, p(cid:15) and r, by transporting probability mass from r to p(cid:15) at each
updating step. Note that the termination criterion implies that ru < (cid:15)du for any u sampled, thus it suﬃces
to prove that

|pu − p(cid:15)

u| ≤ ru.

For a ﬁxed α, let p(x) be the PPR vector with preference vector x ∈ RN satisfying xi ≥ 0 and (cid:107)x(cid:107)1 ≤ 1.
Then p(π) is the exact PPR vector as in Equation (2). Since p(x)(cid:62)P = p(x(cid:62)P ), we have [Jeh and Widom,
2003]

p(x) = αx + (1 − α)p(P (cid:62)x).

(10)

We argue that p(cid:15) + p(r) is invariant in updating steps. To see this, suppose (p(cid:15))(cid:48) and r(cid:48) are the results

of performing one update on p(cid:15) and r after sampling node u. We have

(p(cid:15))(cid:48) = p(cid:15) + αrueu,

r(cid:48) = r − rueu + (1 − α)ruP (cid:62)eu.

23

where eu is the unit vector on the direction of u. Then,

p(r) = p(r − rueu) + p(rueu)

(ii)

(i)

= p(r − rueu) + αrueu + (1 − α)p (cid:0)ruP (cid:62)eu
= p (cid:0)r − rueu + (1 − α)ruP (cid:62)eu
= p(r(cid:48)) + (p(cid:15))(cid:48) − p(cid:15),

(cid:1) + αrueu

(cid:1)

where (i) is applying Equation (10) at x = rueu and (ii) comes from the linearity of PPR vector in the
preference vector.

The desired result follows from recognizing that p(cid:15) + p(r) is initially (cid:126)0 + p(π) and that when the algorithm

terminates, [p(r)]u ≤ ru for any sampled u.

Remark. If (cid:15)d1 > 1, Algorithm 1 terminates after the ﬁrst round and simply output p = (cid:126)0. Under this

circumstance, Proposition 2 still holds, because |pu − p(cid:15)

u| ≤ |pu| + |p(cid:15)

u| ≤ 1.

A.3 Lemmas for the DC-SBM

Lemma 2 (Properties of the DC-SBM). Under the population directed DC-SBM with K blocks and param-
eters (cid:8)B, Z, Θin, Θout(cid:9),

(a) Din = Z (cid:62)(cid:68)inZ, and Dout = Z (cid:62)(cid:68)outZ , and

(b) (cid:100)in

v = θin

v din

z(v), and (cid:100)out

v = θout

v dout
z(v).

Proof. (a) is an alternative way of writing the deﬁnition. For (b), we prove the ﬁrst equation. Recall that
for any i, (cid:80)

u = 1, then by deﬁnition,

u:z(u)=i θout

(cid:100)in

v =

(cid:88)

u

u θin
θout

v Bz(u)z(v) = θin
v

K
(cid:88)

j=1



Bjz(v)

(cid:88)

θout
u

u:z(u)=j


 = θin

v din

z(v).

Remark. Since Z (cid:62)ΘinZ = IK, (a) implies (cid:2)(cid:68)in(cid:3)−1

ΘinZ = Z (cid:2)Din(cid:3)−1

.

Lemma 3 (Explicit form of (cid:80) and its powers). Under the population directed DC-SBM with K blocks and
parameters (cid:8)B, Z, Θin, Θout(cid:9), the population graph transition is the product

and its matrix powers are

(cid:80) = ZPZ (cid:62)Θin.

(cid:80)k = ZPkZ (cid:62)Θin.

Proof. By deﬁnition and Lemma 2(b), for any u, v ∈ V ,

(cid:80)uv =

(cid:16)

u dout
θout
z(u)

(cid:17)−1

u θin
θout

v Bz(u)z(v) = θin

v Bz(u)z(v)/dout

z(u) = θin

v Pz(u)z(v).

24

For the powers of (cid:80), noticing that Z (cid:62)ΘinZ = IK,

(cid:80)2 = ZPZ (cid:62)ΘinZPZ (cid:62)Θin = ZP2Z (cid:62)Θin.

The desired result follows from the principle of induction on k-th power.

A.4 Proof of Theorem 1

Proof. By Proposition 1 and Lemma 3, we have

(cid:112) = α

∞
(cid:88)

(1 − α)s ((cid:80)s)(cid:62) π

s=0
∞
(cid:88)

(1 − α)sΘinZ (Ps)(cid:62) Z (cid:62)π

= α

s=0

(cid:32)

= ΘinZ

α

∞
(cid:88)

s=0

= ΘinZp,

(1 − α)s (Ps)(cid:62) π

(cid:33)

In addition, it follows from Lemma 2(a) that

(cid:112)∗ = (cid:2)(cid:68)in(cid:3)−1

(cid:112) = (cid:2)(cid:68)in(cid:3)−1

ΘinZp = Z (cid:2)Din(cid:3)−1

p = Zp∗.

This completes the proof.

A.5 Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. For any α > 0, the PPR vector with seed node v0 = 1 is the solution to the equation (cid:112)(cid:62) = (cid:112)(cid:62)(cid:81),
where (cid:81) = αΠ + (1 − α)(cid:80). Deﬁne a sequence of probability distribution (cid:112)s ∈ RN such that (cid:112)s = ((cid:81)s)(cid:62) (cid:112)0,
where (cid:112)0 is an arbitrary initial probability distribution. Then, lims→∞ (cid:112)s = (cid:112). For simplicity, we assume
(cid:112)0 is close to (cid:112), that is, for any ε > 0 and s ≥ 0,

(cid:107)(cid:112)s − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞ < ε/2.

This can be achieved by ﬁnding an integer S(ε) large enough and setting (cid:112)0 = (cid:112)S.

We ﬁrst claim that

In fact, for any u (cid:54)= 1,

max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s+1
u
(cid:100)u

≤ (1 − α) max
u∈V

(cid:112)s
u
(cid:100)u

.

(11)

(12)

(cid:112)s+1
u

= α1{u=1} + (1 − α)

(cid:88)

(cid:65)vu
(cid:100)v

(cid:112)s
v

≤ (1 − α)

(cid:32)

(cid:88)

v∈V

v∈V

(cid:33)

(cid:65)vu

max
v∈V

(cid:112)s
v
(cid:100)v

= (1 − α)(cid:100)u max
v∈V

(cid:112)s
v
(cid:100)v

.

25

We then show (cid:112)s
1
(cid:100)1

> (cid:112)s
v
(cid:100)v

for any v (cid:54)= 1 by contradiction. Suppose otherwise that (cid:112)s
1
(cid:100)1

≤ maxu(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s
u
(cid:100)u

, then

Equation (11) implies for any s(cid:48),

(cid:112)s(cid:48)
1
(cid:100)1

≤

(cid:112)s

1 + ε
(cid:100)1

≤ max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s
u
(cid:100)u

+

ε
(cid:100)1

≤ max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s(cid:48)

u + ε
(cid:100)u

+

ε
(cid:100)1

≤ max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s(cid:48)
u
(cid:100)u

+

2ε
(cid:100)min

,

where (cid:100)min = minv∈V (cid:100)v. Hence, maxu∈V
recursively we have

(cid:112)s(cid:48)
u
(cid:100)u

≤ maxu(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s(cid:48)
u
(cid:100)u

+ 2ε
(cid:100)min

. In addition, applying Equation (12)

max
u∈V

(cid:112)s
u
(cid:100)u

= max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s
u
(cid:100)u

≤ (1 − α) max
u∈V
(cid:18)

≤ (1 − α)

max
u(cid:54)=1

(cid:112)s−1
u
(cid:100)u
(cid:112)s−1
u
(cid:100)u

(cid:19)

+

2ε
(cid:100)min

≤ (1 − α)s max
u∈V

(cid:112)0
u
(cid:100)u

+

2ε
(cid:100)min

s−1
(cid:88)

t=1

(1 − α)t.

The inequality means that if (cid:100)min > 0 is ﬁxed, (cid:112)s
the fact that (cid:112) is a probability distribution. This completes the proof.

u can be arbitrarily small when s → ∞, which contradicts

Remark. When the teleportation constant is zero, the PPR vector becomes the stationary probability

distribution of a standard random walk,

(cid:18) (cid:100)1
(cid:80)

i (cid:100)i

,

(cid:100)2
i (cid:100)i

(cid:80)

, ...,

(cid:19)

.

(cid:100)N
i (cid:100)i

(cid:80)

After adjusting by node degrees, every entry becomes identical (1/ (cid:80)
nizing that the teleportation introduces a particular favor of the seed node.

i (cid:100)i). The lemma is intuitive, recog-

Remark. When the edges are weighted (non-negative), the stationary distribution of a random walk is
still proportional to node degrees, if one deﬁnes the degree as sum of edge weights incident to the node [Lov´asz,

1996]. Note also that the stationary distribution of a random walk in a directed graph is characterized by

the in-degree of nodes [Ghoshal and Barab´asi, 2011, Lu et al., 2013]. The conclusion and a modiﬁed proof

apply to directed or weighted graphs.

A.6 Proof of Corollary 1

Proof. The algorithm ranks all vertices according to p(cid:15)∗, and the population local cluster can be explicitly
written as

(cid:67) = {v ∈ V : (cid:112)∗

v = p∗

1}.

It suﬃces to show that

p(cid:15)
v

∗ > p(cid:15)
u

∗, for ∀v ∈ (cid:67), u ∈ V \(cid:67),

26

where p(cid:15)∗

v = p(cid:15)

v/dv. To this end, we apply triangle inequality and get

∗

∗ − p(cid:15)
p(cid:15)
u
v
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

≥

(cid:112)∗
v − (cid:112)∗
u
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

−

|p∗
v − (cid:112)∗
v |
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

≥ ∆ −

2(cid:107)p∗ − (cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

−

−

|p∗
u − (cid:112)∗
u|
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
2(cid:107)p(cid:15)∗ − p∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

−

.

∗ − p∗
|p(cid:15)
u|
u
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

−

∗ − p∗
|p(cid:15)
v|
v
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

Since ∆α ≤ 1, assumption (8) contains condition (7) in Theorem 2, which together with Proposition 2 implies
that

(cid:107)p∗ − (cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

<

1
4

∆,

(cid:107)p(cid:15)∗ − p∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

<

1
4

∆,

if ∆2δ/ log N is large enough. These collectively imply p∗

v > p∗

u as desired.

27

Supplementary Materials

Abstract

This document provides several supplementary materials to “Targeted sampling from massive block

model graphs with personalized PageRank”. Section S1 contains a proof for the entrywise error control

(Theorem 2). Section S2 gives additional information about some model parameters, including B, (cid:80),
α, and N . Section S3 extends the results in Kloumann et al. [2017] to the DC-SBM from a linear

discriminant analysis perspective. Section S4 supplies three targeted Twitter samples about the seed

@NBCPolitics described in the paper. The PPR clustering is implemented in R and all source codes are

available at author’s GitHub (https://github.com/RoheLab/aPPR).

S1 A proof for the entrywise error control

We start with a few lemmas to prepare for the proof of Theorem 2. For completeness, Section S1.3 lists

a few inequalities that are used throughout the proofs.

S1.1 Some deﬁnitions and lemmas

In this section, we introduce a few notations used in Lemma S3 and list a few properties of vector norm

and matrix norm [Br´emaud, 2013].

For any strictly positive probability distribution vector p ∈ RN , the inner product space indexed by p is

a real vector space RN endowed with the inner product

(cid:104)x, y(cid:105)p =

N
(cid:88)

v=1

pvxvyv.

The corresponding vector norm and the induced matrix norm are deﬁned respectively as

(cid:107)x(cid:107)p =

(cid:113)

(cid:104)x, x(cid:105)p and (cid:107)A(cid:107)p = sup

(cid:107)A(cid:62)x(cid:107)p.

(cid:107)x(cid:107)p=1

Lemma S1. If 0 ≤ pmin ≤ pv ≤ pmax for all v = 1, 2, ..., N , then the following inequalities hold

√

pmin(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)x(cid:107)p ≤

√

pmax(cid:107)x(cid:107)2 and

(cid:114) pmin
pmax

(cid:107)A(cid:107)2 ≤ (cid:107)A(cid:107)p ≤

(cid:114) pmax
pmin

(cid:107)A(cid:107)2.

The following lemma provides concentration of the node degrees in a graph generated from the DC-SBM.

Lemma S2 (Degree concentration). Let G = (V, E) be a graph of N vertices generated from the DC-SBM
with K blocks and parameters {B, Z, Θ}. Let dmin and dmax be the smallest and the largest node degree
observed. Let δ be the average expected node degree, and deﬁne ρ = (cid:100)max/(cid:100)min. If δ ≥ c0(1 − α) log N for
some suﬃciently large constant c0 > 0, then with probability at least 1 − (cid:79)(N −10), it holds that

δ
2ρ

≤ dmin ≤ dmax ≤

3ρδ
2

.

(13)

Proof. Note that the deﬁnition of ρ immediately implies that

δ
ρ

≤ (cid:100)min ≤ (cid:100)max ≤ δρ.

28

The lemma follows from the standard Chernoﬀ’s bound, hence is omitted.

The following useful lemma concerns the eigenvector perturbation for probability transition matrices,

promoted from the celebrated Davis-Kahan sin Θ Theorem [Davis and Kahan, 1970].

Lemma S3 (Eigenvector perturbation). Suppose that Q, ˆQ, and (cid:81) are probability transition matrices with
stationary distributions p, ˆp, and (cid:112) respectively. Assume that (cid:81) represents a reversible Markov chain. Then,

(cid:107)p − ˆp(cid:107)(cid:112) ≤

(cid:107)(Q − ˆQ)(cid:62)p(cid:107)(cid:112)
1 − max{λ2((cid:81)), −λN ((cid:81))} − (cid:107) ˆQ − (cid:81)(cid:107)(cid:112)

.

The proof the Lemma S3 can be found in Chen et al. [2019] Section 3, thus omitted.

S1.2 Proof of Theorem 2

Proof. The proof processes as follows. We ﬁrst bound the entrywise error rate of p,

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(cid:114)

≤ c0

log N
δ

,

by invoking the novel leave-one-out techniques [Chen et al., 2019], The entrywise error bounds of p∗ follows
immediately.

Recall that both p and (cid:112) are stationary distribution, which means

Due to this, for any w = 1, 2, ..., N , we can decompose

p = Q(cid:62)p and (cid:112) = (cid:81)(cid:62)(cid:112).

pw − (cid:112)w = Q(cid:62)

·w(cid:112)

·wp − (cid:81)(cid:62)
= (Q·w − (cid:81)·w)(cid:62)(cid:112)
(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w
1

+ Q(cid:62)
(cid:124)

·w(p − (cid:112))
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:125)
:=I w
2

,

where Q·w denotes the w-th column of Q.

(a) We start with the ﬁrst term I w

1 . Note that

I w
1 = (1 − α)

= (1 − α)

(cid:124)

N
(cid:88)

v=1

N
(cid:88)

v=1

(cid:20) Avw
dv

−

(cid:65)vw
(cid:100)v

(cid:21)

(cid:112)v

(cid:20)
(Avw − (cid:65)vw)

(cid:21)

1
(cid:100)v

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w
11

N
(cid:88)

v=1

(cid:112)v

+ (1 − α)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

Avw

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
dv

−

1
(cid:100)v

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w
12

(cid:112)v

.

(cid:125)

Recall that Avw’s correspond to independent Bernoulli random variables, we can easily bound the ﬁrst

29

term using Bernstein’s inequality (Lemma S6), with probability at least 1 − (cid:79)(N −8),

|I w

11| ≤ (1 − α)

≤ (1 − α)

(cid:107)p(cid:107)∞
δ

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(Avw − (cid:65)vw)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
N
(cid:12)
(cid:88)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
v=1
(cid:118)

(cid:117)
(cid:117)
(cid:116)16 log N



N
(cid:88)

v=1

(cid:65)vw +

16 log N
3





(cid:107)p(cid:107)∞
δ

(i)
≤ (1 − α)

(cid:32)
(cid:114)
4

ρ log N
δ

+

16 log N
3δ

(cid:33)

(cid:107)p(cid:107)∞,

where (i) follows from the fact that ρδ ≤ (cid:100)max.

Note that the second term is

I w
12 = (1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

v=1

1(v,w)∈E

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 1
dv

−

1
(cid:100)v

(cid:112)v,

to which we can apply the Hoeﬀding’s inequality (Lemma S4) and obtain

(cid:32)

(cid:114)

|I w

12| ≤ ρ(1 − α)

P

ρ log N
δ

(cid:33)

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

≥ 1 − 2N −8.

In sums, we have high probability event

(cid:32)

|I w

1 | ≤ (1 − α)

(4 + ρ)

√

(cid:33) (cid:114)

ρ + 3

(cid:114)

log N
δ

log N
δ

(cid:107)p(cid:107)∞.

(14)

(b) The statistical dependency between p and Q introduces diﬃculty in sharply bounding I w

2 . Nevertheless,
we can invoke the leave-one-out techniques to decouple the dependency. To this end, we deﬁne, for
each w = 1, 2, ..., N , a new transition matrix Q(w) = αΠ + (1 − α)P (w) that bridges between Q and
(cid:81). P (w) has almost the same entries as P except for replacing those in w-th row or column by their
expectations; that is, for any u (cid:54)= v,

and for any u = 1, 2, ..., N ,

(cid:40)

P (w)

uv =

u (cid:54)= w and v (cid:54)= w,

Puv,
(cid:80)uv, u = w or v = w,

P (w)

uu = 1 −

(cid:88)

P (w)
uv ,

v:v(cid:54)=u

in order to ensure that P (w) and Q(w) are transition matrices.
In addition, deﬁne p(w) to be the
stationary distribution corresponding to Q(w). As demonstrated in Chen et al. [2019], p(w) helps us
well approximate p, yet it is statistically independent of Q·w.

30

Now we decompose I w

2 as follows:

I w
2 =

=

N
(cid:88)

v=1

N
(cid:88)

v=1
(cid:124)

Qvw(pv − (cid:112)v)

Qvw

(cid:16)
pv − p(w)

v

(cid:17)

+

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w
21

(cid:125)

N
(cid:88)

v=1
(cid:124)

(cid:16)

Qvw

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w
22

(cid:17)

.

(cid:125)

(c) In this part, we focus on the ﬁrst term I w

21, where we would need another intermediate quantity to
facilitate our estimation. To be speciﬁc, consider the leave-one-out version of Q conditioning on the
graph G = (V, E), Q(w,G) = αΠ + (1 − α)P (w,G), which is almost the same as Q except for replacing
the non-zero entries in w-th row or column by their expectations. Concretely, for and u (cid:54)= v,

(cid:40)

P (w,G)
uv

=

Puv,
1(u,v)∈E(cid:80)uv, u = w or v = w,

u (cid:54)= w and v (cid:54)= w,

and for any u = 1, 2, ..., N , deﬁne

P (w,G)
uu

= 1 −

(cid:88)

v:v(cid:54)=u

P (w,G)
uv

,

so that P (w,G) is a probability transition matrix.

With Q(w,G) in mind, we now apply Cauchy-Schwarz inequality on I w

21 to reach

|I w
21|

=

≤

(i)
≤

(ii)
≤

Qvw

(cid:16)

pv − p(w)

v

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:17)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

N
(cid:88)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
v=1
(cid:32) N
(cid:88)

(cid:33) 1

Q2

vw

v=1

(cid:114)

α +

(cid:114)

α +

1
dmin
1
dmin

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

2 (cid:13)
(cid:13)p − p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2
(cid:114) (cid:112)max
(cid:13)p − p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)(cid:112)
(cid:112)min
(cid:114) (cid:112)max
Q − Q(w)(cid:17)(cid:62)
(cid:112)min


(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

1
γ

(cid:16)

p(w)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2



(iii)
w.h.p.
≤

(cid:114)

α +

2ρ
δ

√

κ
γ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)(Q − Q(w,G))(cid:62)p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2
(cid:125)




(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w

211

+

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)(Q(w,G) − Q(w))(cid:62)p(w)(cid:13)

(cid:13)

(cid:13)2

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w

212

.

where (i) follows from Lemma S1 and the fact that Pvw ≤ 1
, (ii) comes from Lemma S3, and (iii)
dmin
results from Lemma S2 and the triangle inequality, and recognizing κ = (cid:112)max/(cid:112)min (from the proof
of Proposition 1, it is bounded), and “w.h.p.” is short for “with high probability”. Note that Π adds
at most 1 to the rank of (cid:81), and because we presume B is positive deﬁnite (cid:80) has exactly K positive
eigenvalues among other zeros (Section S2.2). Here, γ = 1 − max{λ2((cid:81)), −λN ((cid:81))} − (cid:107)Q(w,G) − (cid:81)(cid:107)(cid:112) is
the spectral gap and is lower bounded by some positive constant (due to Khanna et al. [2017]). Then,
it boils down to controlling I w

211 and I w

212.

31

For I w

211, the w-th entry inside the vector norm is

(cid:20)(cid:16)

Q − Q(w,G)(cid:17)(cid:62)

p(w)

(cid:21)

w

(cid:104)

=

(Q − (cid:81))(cid:62) p(w)(cid:105)

w

= (1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

(Pvw − (cid:80)vw)p(w)

.

v

v=1

Note that p(w)
Lemma S2, we have with probability at least 1 − 2N −8,

v

is statistically independent of P·w. Then, by Hoeﬀding’s inequality (Lemma S4) and

(cid:20)(cid:16)

Q − Q(w,G)(cid:17)(cid:62)

p(w)

(cid:114)

≤ 4ρ(1 − α)

(cid:21)

w

ρ log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

.

(15)

As for any u (cid:54)= w, applying Hoeﬀding’s inequality again yields

(cid:104)(cid:16)

Q − Q(w,G)(cid:17)

p(w)(cid:105)

u

= (1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

(Pvu − (cid:80)vu) p(w)

v

= (1 − α)

v=1
(cid:16)
Puu − P (w,G)
(cid:16)

uu

(cid:17)

p(w)
u
(cid:17)

+(1 − α)

Puw − P (w,G)

uw

p(w)
w

= −(1 − α)

+(1 − α)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

Puw − P (w,G)

uw

Puw − P (w,G)

uw

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

p(w)
u

p(w)
w .

Recognizing that

(cid:12)
(cid:12)Puw − P (w,G)
(cid:12)

uw

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12) =

(cid:40)

uu − (cid:65)uw(cid:100)−1
uu ,

Auwd−1
0,

(u, w) ∈ E,

(u, w) /∈ E,

we apply again the Hoeﬀding’s inequality (Lemma S4) together with (13), and obtain with probability
at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −8(cid:1),

(cid:20)(cid:16)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Q − Q(w,G)(cid:17)(cid:62)

p(w)

(cid:40)

(cid:21)

u

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≤

4ρ(1 − α)

√

log N
δ

(cid:13)p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)∞ ,

0,

(u, w) ∈ E,

(u, w) /∈ E.

(16)

Combining (15) and (16) yields

I w
211

≤

4ρ(1 − α)

1 +



(cid:114)





1(u,w)∈E

(cid:115) (cid:88)

u:u(cid:54)=w

ρ log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

(i)
w.h.p.
≤

8ρ2√

ρ(1 − α)

(cid:114)

log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

,

where (i) follows from the high probability event that dmax ≤ 3ρδ/2.

32

Regarding I w

212, since (Q(w,G) − Q(w))(cid:112) = (cid:126)0, we can rewrite this as

I w
212 =

(cid:16)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

Q(w,G) − Q(w)(cid:17)(cid:62) (cid:16)

p(w) − (cid:112)

(cid:17)(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)2

.

Similarly, note that P (w)
vw = (cid:65)vw
(cid:100)v
the vector norm to obtain that with probability at least 1 − 2N −8,

vw − P (w,G)

1(w,v) /∈E, we apply Bernstein’s inequality on w-th term inside

(cid:104)(cid:16)

Q(w,G) − Q(w)(cid:17) (cid:16)

p(w) − (cid:112)

(cid:17)(cid:105)

=

(1 − α)

w

=

(1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

(cid:16)

vw − P (w)
P (w,G)
vw

(cid:17) (cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

v=1

N
(cid:88)

v=1
(cid:32)

1
(cid:100)v
(cid:114)

(cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

1(w,v) /∈E

w.h.p.
≤

(1 − α)

4ρ

ρ log N
δ

(cid:33)

+

16
3

log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

.

For any u (cid:54)= w, the u-th term inside vector norm is

(cid:104)(cid:16)

Q(w,G) − Q(w)(cid:17) (cid:16)

p(w) − (cid:112)

(cid:17)(cid:105)

u

= (1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

(cid:16)

P (w,G)
vu

− P (w)
vu

(cid:17) (cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

= (1 − α)

v=1
(cid:16)

P (w,G)
vv
(cid:16)

(cid:17) (cid:16)

− P (w)
uu

+(1 − α)

vw − P (w)
P (w,G)
uw

(cid:17)

p(w)
u − (cid:112)u
(cid:17) (cid:16)

(cid:17)

p(w)
w − (cid:112)w
(cid:17)

p(w)
u − (cid:112)u

(cid:17) (cid:16)

= −(1 − α)

+(1 − α)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

vw − P (w)
P (w,G)
uw

vw − P (w)
P (w,G)
uw

(cid:17) (cid:16)

p(w)
w − (cid:112)w

(cid:17)

.

Recognizing that

we have from (13) that

uw − P (w,G)
P (w)

uw = (cid:65)uw(cid:100)−1
u

1(u,w) /∈E,

(cid:20)(cid:16)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Q(w,G) − Q(w)(cid:17)(cid:62) (cid:16)

(cid:17)(cid:21)

p(w) − (cid:112)

u

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≤ 2(cid:65)uw(cid:100)−1
u

1(u,w) /∈E(1 − α)

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

.

Hence, we have with probability at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −8(cid:1),



I w
212 ≤ (1 − α)

4ρ

(cid:114)

√

ρ

log N
δ

+

16
3

log N
δ

(i)
≤ (1 − α)

(cid:32)

4ρ

(cid:114)

√

ρ

log N
δ

+

16
3

log N
δ

+ 2ρ

(cid:118)
(cid:117)
(cid:117)
(cid:116)

+ 2

(cid:88)





1(u,w) /∈E
(cid:68)2
uu

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

u:u(cid:54)=w
(cid:33)
(cid:114) ρ
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

,

where (i) follows from the high probability event that dmax ≤ 3ρδ/2. Combining the above two bounds,

33

we have with probability at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −8(cid:1) that

I w
21 ≤

(cid:114)

α +

√

κ
γ

2ρ
δ

(I w

211 + I w

212)

(cid:32)

(cid:114)

≤ c(1 − α)

8ρ2

ρ log N
δ

(cid:32)

(cid:107)p(w)(cid:107)∞ +

2ρ

(cid:114)

+ 4ρ

(cid:114) ρ
δ

ρ log N
δ

+

16
3

log N
δ

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:107)p(w) − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(i)
≤ 8cρ2(1 − α)

(cid:114)

(cid:32)

ρ log N
δ
(cid:114)

+c(1 − α)

8ρ2

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

ρ log N
δ

+ 2ρ

(cid:114)

+ 4

(cid:114) ρ
δ

ρ log N
δ

+

16
3

log N
δ

(cid:33)

(cid:107)p(w) − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(ii)
≤ 8cρ2(1 − α)

(cid:114)

(iii)
≤ 16cρ2(1 − α)

ρ log N
δ
ρ log N
δ

(cid:114)

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞ +

c
2

(cid:107)p(w) − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞ + c(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞.

(cid:113)

√

κ

α + 2ρ
δ

γ , and (i) follows from the triangle inequality (cid:13)

where c =
(cid:13)∞ + (cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞,
and (ii) holds as long as δ > c0(1 − α)2 log N for some c0 > 0 suﬃciently large, and (iii) comes from
the triangle inequality (cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)(cid:13)

(cid:13)∞ ≤ (cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w)(cid:13)

(cid:13)p(w) − p(cid:13)

(cid:13)2 + (cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞.

(cid:13)∞ ≤ (cid:13)
(d) Now it is left to estimate the last item I w

(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)(cid:13)

22. Note that

I w
22 =

=

N
(cid:88)

v=1

N
(cid:88)

v=1

1(v,w)∈EQvw

(cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

(cid:20)
α1{w=1} + (1 − α)

1
dv

1(v,w)∈E

(cid:21) (cid:16)

(cid:17)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:16)

1{w=1}

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

+ (1 − α)

N
(cid:88)

v=1

= α

(cid:124)

N
(cid:88)

v=1

1(v,w)∈E
(cid:100)v
(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w

222

(cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w

221

N
(cid:88)

v=1

(cid:18) 1
dv

(cid:125)

(cid:19)

−

1
(cid:100)v

(cid:123)(cid:122)
:=I w

223

+ (1 − α)

(cid:124)

1(v,w)∈E

(cid:16)

p(w)
v − (cid:112)v

(cid:17)

.

(cid:125)

Since both p(w) and (cid:112) are distribution vector, I w
S4),

221 = 0. Then, due to Hoeﬀding’s inequality (Lemma

(cid:114)

|I w

222| ≤ 4ρ(1 − α)

|I w

223| ≤ 2ρ(1 − α)

(cid:114)

ρ log N
δ
ρ log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

,

,

34

with probability at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −8(cid:1). Thus, we reach the high probability event

|I w

22| ≤ 6ρ(1 − α)

(cid:114)

ρ log N
δ

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)p(w) − (cid:112)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)∞

.

In sums, we reach with probability at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −8(cid:1),

|I w

2 | ≤ 16ρ2(1 − α)

√

κρ
γ

(cid:114)

α +

(cid:114)

2ρ
δ

(cid:32) √

κ
γ

+

(cid:114)

α +

2ρ
δ

+ 6ρ(1 − α)

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

log N
δ
(cid:114)

ρ log N
δ

(cid:33)

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞.

(17)

(e) Collecting the preceding bounds (14) and (17) together, we conclude that with high probability

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞ = max

w

|pw − (cid:112)w|
(cid:114)

log N
δ

≤ c2(1 − α)

(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞ + c3(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞,

as long as δ/[(1 − α) log N ] is suﬃciently large, which controls the entrywise error of p,

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

(cid:114)

≤ c1(1 − α)

log N
δ

,

(18)

for some suﬃciently large constant c1, c2, c3 > 0.
Remark. c2 and c3 are controlled by constants ρ, κ, γ, which are thereby driven from the model
parameters B, Θ, K, and Z.

(f) Finally, we accomplish the proof by observing that

(cid:107)p∗ − (cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

≤

≤

min

2 max (cid:0)d−1
min, (cid:100)−1
(cid:100)−1
min
4(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

.

(cid:1)

(cid:107)p − (cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞

Above observation together with the inequality (18) allow us to control the entrywise error of p∗ as claimed,
with probability at least 1 − (cid:79) (cid:0)N −5(cid:1),

(cid:107)p∗ − (cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)∗(cid:107)∞

(cid:114)

≤ c2(1 − α)

log N
δ

,

for some suﬃciently large constant c2 > 0.

S1.3 Concentration inequalities

The following is a standard concentration inequality used throughout the paper.

Lemma S4 (Hoeﬀding’s inequality). Let {Xi}1≤i≤n be a sequence of independent random variables where

35

Xi ∈ [ai, bi] for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and Sn = (cid:80)n

i=1 Xi. Then,

P(|Sn − ESn| ≥ t) ≤ 2 exp

(cid:26)

−

t2
i=1(bi − ai)2

(cid:80)n

(cid:27)

.

The next lemma is a special case of Chernoﬀ’s bound.

Lemma S5 (Chernoﬀ’s bounds). Let {Xi}1≤i≤n be a sequence of independent random variables, whose sum
is Sn, each having probability pi of being equal to ai, otherwise 0. Deﬁne µ = (cid:80)
i piai. Then, for any (cid:15) > 0,

P (Xi ≥ (1 + (cid:15))µ) ≤ (1 + (cid:15))−(cid:15)µ,

P (Xi ≤ (1 − (cid:15))µ) ≤ (1 − (cid:15))(cid:15)µ.

For the use of this paper, we only invoke a simpler version of Bernstein inequality.

Lemma S6 (Bernstein’s inequality). Let {Xi}1≤i≤n be a sequence of independent random variables with
|Xi| ≤ B for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and Sn = (cid:80)n
i . Then, with probability at least
1 − 2n−a,

i=1 Xi and Tn = (cid:80)n

i=1 X 2

|Sn − E[Sn]| ≤ (cid:112)2a log nE[Tn] +

for any a ≥ 2.

2a
3

B log n

The proofs of Lemma S4, S5, and S6 can be found in Boucheron et al. [2013], hence are omitted.

S2 Additional information on model parameters

S2.1 Block connectivity matrix B

In the paper, we assume that the block connectivity matrix B corresponds to a strongly connected graph

at block level and is positive deﬁnite. These assumptions asserts the eﬃcacy of PPR clustering and is

primarily a technical assumption suﬃcient for our theoretical results. In fact, we require B to represent

to a strongly connected graph because this enables the block-wise PPR vector to have the largest value

corresponding to the block of seed(s) (Lemma 1 in the paper). On the other hand, we impose the positive

deﬁniteness on B because this allows us to intuitively deﬁne the notion of local cluster, yet our statistical

theory (i.e., the entrywise control of sample PPR vector) does not explicitly rely on such positive-deﬁniteness

per se. It is not clear yet whether these constraints are necessary in order for PPR clustering to function;

possible generalizations of them are of research interest.

We list a few concrete examples showing that (i) if we break the strongly-connectivity assumption, the

PPR clustering can fail, despite a reasonable teleportation constant, α = 0.15, but (ii) PPR clustering

often works as hoped even when B is not positive-deﬁnite. Throughout, we assume that the ﬁrst block is

targeted and consider directed graphs with three underlying blocks (K = 3). The ﬁrst two instances of
B demonstrates the necessity of the strongly-connectivity constraint, which ensures the block-wise aPPR

vector to possess the largest ﬁrst element. The third and forth instances, on the other hand, indicate that

B need not to be positive deﬁnite.

36

S2.1.1 Violating the strongly-connective assumption

Hierarchy case. Let the block connectivity matrix



p p p

B =




0 p p






0

0 p

for some constant p > 0. Bij is the number (or the probability) of edges from the i-th block to the j-th
block in population. Then, the directed graph represented by B is not strongly connected, as block 3 has

no path to the ﬁrst block. In fact, this graph (speciﬁed by upper triangular B) has a hierarchical structure,

where the third block is in the center (or the highest hierarchy) of the graph, and the member of ﬁrst block

are essentially satellite from outside. Particularly, edges only come from outsiders to insiders.

We now perform the PPR clustering on the ﬁrst cluster. The block-wise transition matrix is



1/3

P =




0

0

1/3

1/2

0



1/3

1/2


 .

1

Then, both B and P are positive deﬁnite, with eigenvalues of (p, p, p) and (1, 1/2, 1/3) respectively. To ease

the calculation, we set p = 3. Then the block-wise PPR vector is approximately

p = (0.209, 0.103, 0.688),

and the block-wise aPPR vector is approximately (after adjusting by column sums of B)

p∗ = (0.0698, 0.0172, 0.0764).

As shown, neither block-wise PPR vector nor aPPR vector properly recognize the local cluster 1.

Adding a small amount of circulation.

If we add a small quantity to the left bottom element of above

B matrix, then the block connectivity matrix corresponds to a connected graph. To illustrate, we assign a
small value to it, B31 = 0.1, then the new block connectivity matrix becomes

B(cid:48) =






p

0

p p

p p




 .

0.1

0 p

To explore the PPR vector, we set p = 3 once again. In this case, B(cid:48) has one real eigenvalue (≈ 4.069) and
two imaginary eigenvalues. The block-wise PPR vector is approximately

and the block-wise aPPR vector is approximately (after adjusting by column sums of B(cid:48))

p = (0.235, 0.115, 0.650),

p∗ = (0.0755, 0.0192, 0.0723).

37

In this case, the PPR clustering works like a charm.

S2.1.2 Violating the positive-deﬁnite assumption

Consider again the K = 3 design with equally distributed block size. We present two examples breaking

the positive-deﬁnite assumption on B, where the PPR cluster still operates properly.

Indeﬁnite case. Given some constants r > p > 0, deﬁne

B =



p




r

r

r

p

r



r

r


 .
p

In this case, the random graphs generated from such conﬁguration of B have a unique characteristic: two

vertices with diﬀerent block memberships are more likely to connect than those pairs belonging to the same

block. Note that the three eigenvalues of B are p + 2r, p − r, and p − r. Hence, B is an indeﬁnite matrix (so

does the block-wise transition matrix P).

Interestingly, the PPR clustering continues working under this circumstance. For simplicity, setting p = 3

and r = 9, and we articulate the block-wise PPR vector and aPPR vector. In fact, the block-wise PPR

vector is approximately

p = (0.386, 0.306, 0.306).

Since B has homogeneous column sums, it follows that the ﬁrst element in the block-wise aPPR vector is

also the largest, suggesting the eﬀectiveness of PPR clustering. The same conclusion hold when we set p = 3
and r = 99 (or 999).

Singular case. Suppose p > 0 and let



0 p 0



B =

p 0 p





 .

0 p 0

In this case, nodes in block 1 only connect with those nodes in block 2, and the nodes in block 3 only

have edges with block 2’s members. Note that B is singular because three of its eigenvalues are 1, -1, and

0. So does the block-wise transition matrix. However, the PPR clustering remain eﬀective. In fact, the

block-wise PPR vector and aPPR vector are

p = (0.345, 0.459, 0.195)

and p∗ =

1
p

(0.345, 0.230, 0.195).

In both cases (when B is not positive-deﬁnite), the block-wise aPPR vector correctly assigns the largest

value to the ﬁrst element and thus is still eﬀective for targeted sampling. These examples suggest a potentially

greater applicability of the PPR clustering under the block model graph.

S2.1.3 Comments

Putting together above demonstrations, we brieﬂy comment on B and the PPR clustering.

(i) The

strongly-connectivity assumption is essential for the PPR clustering to be consistent. (ii) The eﬃcacy of

PPR clustering is conditioning on the fact that teleportation constant is suﬃciently large. If we assign an

38

extremely small to it, e.g. α = 0.001, the PPR clustering collapses. (iii) Beyond community-like graphs

(where B is positive-deﬁnite), the PPR clustering has potential for working on a more general block model

graphs.

S2.2 Spectral analysis on graph transition (cid:80)

In this section, we present a spectral analysis of graph transition matrix, which demonstrates that (1)
under the population DC-SBM, a graph transition matrix (cid:80) has exactly K positive eigenvalues, and N − K
zero eigenvalues, and (2) in a random graph generated from the DC-SBM, the graph transition matrix P is

close to its population, with respect to spectral norm.

Lemma S7 (Eigen-decomposition for (cid:80) and P). Under the population DC-SBM with K blocks and param-
eters {B, Z, Θ}, let (cid:80) ∈ RN ×N be the population graph transition matrix and P ∈ RK×K be the block-wise
transition matrix. Then, (cid:80) and P have the same K positive eigenvalues. The remaining N − K eigenvalues
of (cid:80) are all zeros. Denote the K positive eigenvalues of both matrices as λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · ...λK ≥ 0, and let
(cid:88) ∈ RN ×K and (cid:89) ∈ RK×K contain the left eigenvector of (cid:80) and P respectively, corresponding to λi in
their i-th column. Then, there exists a orthogonal matrix U ∈ RK×K, such that

(a) (cid:88)(cid:62) = (cid:68)−1/2Θ1/2ZU ; and

(b) (cid:89)(cid:62) = D−1/2U.

Proof. We follow the proof of Lemma 3.3 in Qin and Rohe [2013]. Deﬁne L = D−1/2BD−1/2, then P =
D−1/2LD1/2. By model assumption, P (cid:31) 0.

Deﬁne the graph Laplacian (cid:76) = (cid:68)−1/2(cid:65)(cid:68)−1/2, then by Lemma 2(b),

(cid:76)uv =

(cid:65)uv√

(cid:100)u(cid:100)v

=

θuθvBz(u)z(v)
(cid:100)u(cid:100)v

√

=

√

θuθv
Bz(u)z(v)
(cid:112)dz(u)dz(v)

= [L]z(u)z(v)

(cid:112)

θuθv,

or equivalently,

Then

and

(cid:76) = Θ1/2ZLZ (cid:62)Θ1/2.

(cid:88)(cid:62)Λ(cid:88)(cid:48) = (cid:68)−1/2Θ1/2ZU ΛU (cid:62)Z (cid:62)Θ1/2(cid:68)1/2 = (cid:68)−1/2(cid:76)(cid:68)1/2 = (cid:68)−1(cid:65) = (cid:80),

(cid:89)(cid:62)Λ(cid:89)(cid:48) = D−1/2U ΛU (cid:62)D1/2 = D−1/2LD1/2 = P,

where (cid:88)(cid:48) = U (cid:62)Z (cid:62)Θ1/2(cid:68)1/2 and (cid:89)(cid:48) = U (cid:62)D1/2 are right eigenvectors if (cid:80) and P respectively. Recognizing
that (cid:88)(cid:62)(cid:88)(cid:48) = (cid:89)(cid:62)(cid:89)(cid:48) = IK completes the proof.

Lemma S8. Let L be a symmetric matrix, let D be a diagonal matrix, and let P = D−1/2LD1/2. If x is an
eigenvector of L corresponding to eigenvalue λ, then

(a) D−1/2x is a right eigenvector of P with eigenvalue λ,

(b) (cid:107)P (cid:62)P (cid:107) = (cid:107)L(cid:107)2.

Proof. Let y = D−1/2x, then

P y = D−1/2LD1/2y = D−1/2Lx = λD−1/2x = λy.

39

Supplementary Table S1: Number of nodes examined/reached by Algorithm 3 with seed node @NBCPolitics
and diﬀerent teleportation constants, and a ﬁxed tolerance parameter (cid:15) = 10−7, as in August 2019.

α
0.1
0.15
0.25
1/3

Examined Reached
342,454
272,985
228,561
193,848

7,445
5,919
4,860
3,984

Part (a) of the lemma follows. To see (b), observe that y is also an eigenvector of P (cid:62)P with eigenvalue
λ2.

Lemma S8 implies that P has the same spectral norm of graph Laplacian L. Since L concentrates to
(cid:76) (see for example Qin and Rohe [2013] for a proof), we have under a random graph generated from the
DC-SBM, the graph transition matrix P concentrates to its population (cid:80) with respect to spectral norm.

S2.3 Teleportation constant α

In the paper, we state that a suﬃciently large teleportation constant α enables the entrywise control of

sample PPR vector, thus facilitating the PPR clustering in a random graph. Here, from a practical perspec-

tive, we further illustrate the sensitivity of PPR clustering to α, with the Twitter friendship network. To

this end, we investigate the targeted sampling returned by four conﬁgurations of the teleportation constant,

α ∈ {0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 1/3}, where NBC Politics (@NBCPolitics) is the seed. The tolerance parameter is ﬁxed,
(cid:15) = 10−7, in four targeted sampling.

Table S1 lists the number of Twitter users we examined and the total number of users we “reached” (as

of August 2019) in four attempts. Here, we examine a user by retrieving its friend list (after which it gets a
positive pu value in Algorithm 3), and reach a user once it appears in a user’s friend list (at which point, it
possesses a positive rv value in Algorithm 3). Given the same tolerance parameter, varying the teleportation
constant largely aﬀects the number of nodes examined/reached. This demonstrates the role of teleportation

constant in leveraging between the seed preference and the standard random walk.

Despite the fact that diﬀerent α’s result in substantial diﬀerence in network coverage, when the algorithm

stops, the estimated local clusters appear to share a vast majority in common. To demonstrate this imme-

diately, we inspect the local clusters of size n = 300 returned by Algorithm 4 with four α’s and quantify to

what degree do they overlap each other. Table S2 shows the percentage of common members between each

pair of four returned local clusters. As shown, most pairs have about 90% overlapping members, indicating

that PPR clustering is fairly robust against the teleportation constant.

The stability of PPR clustering continues to show when we vary the cluster size, n = 100, 150, ..., 700.

Figure S1 shows the proportion of common members across all four local clusters, returned by PPR, aPPR,

and rPPR (with the regularizer τ = 10). Overall, the PPR clustering produces a fairly consistent local cluster,

with around 80% of members overlapping across four diﬀerent strengths of teleportation (see Supplementary

Materials).

We conclude that in practice, PPR clustering (i) is mainly inﬂuential to the number of nodes examined
in the targeted sampling and (ii) has fairly robust performance with respect to the choice of teleportation

constant.

40

Supplementary Table S2: Percentage of pairwise overlapping among three local clusters around @NBCPolitics
with diﬀerent teleportation constants, α ∈ {0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 1/3}, as in August 2019.

α
0.1
0.15
0.25
1/3

0.1

0.15

0.25

1/3

100% 92.7% 89.3% 87.7%
100% 93.3% 90%
92%
100%
100%

Supplementary Figure S1: Sensitivity to the teleportation constant, α = {0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 1/3}. Shown are
the percentage (left) and number (right) of common members across all four local clusters returned by three
PPR clustering methods. The targeted sample size increases from 100 to 700 with the increment of 50.

41

708090100200400600sample size% of overlaps (across all clusters)200400600200400600sample size# of overlaps (across all clusters)methodpprapprrpprSupplementary Figure S2: Entrywise error rate versus the graph sizes. Shown are relative entrywise error
(REE) corresponding to diﬀerent underlying graph sizes, averaged over 30 replicates. For each dot, an error
bar indicates the standard error. The RER for aPPR vector is scaled down by a factor of 240 to improve
visualization. The ticks in x-axis are transformed through logarithm with the natural base.

S2.4 The graph size N

In the paper, we provide an entrywise error control for the PPR vector and the aPPR vector (Theorem 2),

assuming the edge density is suﬃciently large (i.e., inequality (7) in the main paper). Simulation 3 in Section

5 demonstrates the relationship between the expected degree (δ) and the error rate of PPR clustering, as

promised by the theorem. Here, we provide another simulation to illustrate Theorem 2. Speciﬁcally, we

), given some edge density (δ).

further investigate the aﬀect of graph size (N ) on the relative entrywise error (REE) of the PPR vector
( (cid:107)p−(cid:112)(cid:107)∞
(cid:107)(cid:112)(cid:107)∞
We generate 30 replicates of networks of size N = ex, where x ∈ {6.5, 7, 7.5, 8, 8.5, 9}, from the four-
parameter stochastic block model, SBM(K = 3, N, b1 = 9, b2 = 3). The average expect degree is set to
δ = 125. Both PPR vectors and aPPR vectors are calculated for every network, with teleportation constant

α = 0.15 and 10 seeds randomly selected from the ﬁrst block. Figure S2 depict the REE with respect to

diﬀerent graph sizes (scaled by a logarithm transformation with the natural base). As shown, with δ ﬁxed

(not growing at the rate of log N ), the REE increases as the graph expands, so does the variance of REE for

both PPR and aPPR vectors, matching the results in Theorem 2.

S3 Connection to linear discriminant analysis

In this section, we give another representation of PPR vectors in the landing probability space, which

builds upon Kloumann et al. [2017]. This assorts PPR to a greater functional regime. Then, we extend

the previous result that links the PPR vectors with linear discriminant functions under the DC-SBM. In

particular, when every block has the same degree (volume), where D becomes a scalar matrix, the PPR

vector is asymptotically equivalent to the optimal linear discriminant function.

First, we brieﬂy introduce linear discriminant analysis in landing probability space, which the PPR vector

also lives in. Consider a random walk on the graph starting from a seed node. Deﬁne the landing probability
rv
s to be the probability that the random walk ends up at v ∈ V after exactly s steps. The landing probability

42

03691096.6332980.9588103.084Size of graphsRelative entrywise errorvectorPPRaPPRspace is the space of landing probability of any nodes.

A linear discriminant (LD) analysis keeps the ﬁrst S landing probability on each node, rv = (rv

0 , rv

1 , ..., rv

S) ∈

RS, and divides vertices into two sets by thresholding on the linear discriminant score vector l ∈ RN , whose
v-th entry is deﬁned to be inner product

lv = (cid:104)ω, rv(cid:105)

with some weights ω ∈ RS. For example, let ω = rv1 − rv2 , where v1, v2 are empirical centroids of two node
sets. Then lv increases as v slides from v1 to v2, and thresholding ((cid:107)v1(cid:107)2 − (cid:107)v2(cid:107)2)/2 allocates vertices to
nearest centroid.

Remark. The landing probability of the s-th step, rs = (cid:0)r1

follows from proposition 1 that PPR vector p = (cid:80)∞
yields an LD score vector with the weights ωP P R = (φ0, φ1, ..., φS−1).

(cid:1) ∈ RN , is deﬁned as (P s)(cid:62) π. It
s=0 φsrs with φs = α(1 − α)s. Keeping the ﬁrst S terms

s, ..., rN
s

s, r2

We then perform population (expectation) analysis for PPR in the landing probability space. Deﬁne
the population block landing probability Wk
s to be the probability that a random walk from v0 ends up in
block k after exactly s steps, where k = 1, 2, ..., K and s = 0, 1, ..., S − 1. Given that v0 is in block 1,
W·
0 = (1, 0, ..., 0)(cid:62). Using the ﬁrst S steps block landing probabilities, the next lemma gives an explicit form
of LD vectors.

Lemma S9 (Explicit form of LD vectors). Under the population DC-SBM with K blocks and parameters
{B, Z, Θ}, assume all blocks have the same degrees. Let (cid:108)(k) be the linear discriminant score vector between
block 1 and block k. Then,

(a) W·

s = P(cid:62)W·

s−1, s = 1, 2, ..., S − 1; and

(b) (cid:108)(k) = ΘZl(k), k = 2, ..., K, where l(k) = WW(cid:62)(e1 − ek).

Here, ek is the elementary unit vector on the direction of k-th block.

Proof. We prove (a) using following quantities. Let Ek
s be the number of paths from v0 to block k with exact
length s, and let (cid:69)k
s be the expected number of paths from v0 to block k with exact length s. Recall from
3 that Bij represents the expected number of edges between block i and j if i (cid:54)= j, or twice of that if i = j.
Then,

(cid:69)k

s =

K
(cid:88)

j=1

Bkj(cid:69)j

s−1.

To see W·

s = P(cid:62)W·

s−1, observe that

Wk

s =

(cid:69)k
s
i=1 (cid:69)i
s

(cid:80)K

=

(cid:80)K

j=1 Bkj(cid:69)j
(cid:80)K

j=1 Bij(cid:69)j

s−1

s−1

=

(cid:80)K

j=1 Bkj(cid:69)j
j=1 dj(cid:69)j

(cid:80)K

s−1

s−1

=

K
(cid:88)

j=1

PkjWk

s−1.

(cid:80)K

i=1

The last equality comes from the assumption that all blocks have the same degrees, which means di is
constant.

Now, we prove part (b) of the lemma. Let R ∈ RN ×S collect all landing probabilities rv

s of the ﬁrst
S steps, where v = 1, 2, ..., N and s = 0, 1, ..., S − 1. Without loss of generality, assume the seed node
corresponds to the ﬁrst row. Deﬁne (cid:82) = E(R) ∈ [0, 1]N ×S to be the population version of R. Then the
population landing probability is explicitly

(cid:82)v

s =

(cid:100)v
dz(v)

Wz(v)

s = θvWz(v)

s

,

43

or compactly,

(cid:82) = ΘZW.

In linear discriminant, the weights vector ω is the geometric diﬀerence between centroid of block 1 and

k, which can be written as

(cid:88)

(cid:82)v

1 −

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:82)v
1 ,

(cid:82)v

2 −

(cid:88)

(cid:82)v

2 , ...,

(cid:88)

(cid:82)v

S −

(cid:88)

v:z(v)=1

v:z(v)=k

v:z(v)=1

v:z(v)=k

v:z(v)=1

v:z(v)=k



(cid:82)v
S

 ,





or compactly

By Lemma 2, the linear discriminant score vector reads

ω = (cid:82)(cid:62)Z(e1 − ek).

(cid:104)(cid:82) · ω(cid:105) = (cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:62)Z(e1 − ek)

= ΘZWW(cid:62)(e1 − ek),

for k = 2, ..., K. Setting l(k) = WW(cid:62)(e1 − ek) completes the proof.

Recall from Theorem 1 that (cid:112) = ΘZp. The LD score vector (cid:108) has a similarly simple form that separates
the block-related information (W) and the node speciﬁc information (Θ and Z). Lemma S9 provides a

population (expectation) representation of PPR in the landing probability space. To facilitate its application

in random graphs, the next lemma provides a control of the landing probabilities on a random block model

graph.

Lemma S10 (Concentration of landing probabilities). Let G = (V, E) be a graph of N vertices generated
s ∈ [0, 1]N be the landing probabilities of
from the DC-SBM with K blocks and parameters {B, Z, Θ}. Let R·
the k-th step, and (cid:82)·

s = E(R) be its expectation. Then, for any (cid:15) > 0 and any vertex u = 1, 2, ..., N ,

P (Ru

s ≥ (1 + (cid:15))(cid:82)u

s ) ≤ (1 + (cid:15))−(cid:15)N r,

where r = minv∈V θuθvPz(u)z(v)Wz(v)
s−1 .

P (Ru

s ≥ (1 − (cid:15))(cid:82)u

s ) ≤ (1 − (cid:15))(cid:15)N r,

Proof. Note that Ru

s = (cid:80)

v∈V Xuv, where

Xuv =

Wz(v)
s−1
dz(v)

1{Auv=1}

are independent random variables having probability θuθvBz(u)z(v) of being equal to Wz(v)

s−1 /Dz(v)z(v). Then,

E [Ru

s ] =

Wz(v)
s−1
dz(v)

(cid:88)

v∈V

θuθvBz(u)z(v) = θu

K
(cid:88)

k=1

Pz(u)kWk

s−1 = (cid:82)u
s .

We can apply Chernoﬀ’s bounds (Lemma S5) on Ru

s and obtain bounds for any ﬁxed u,

P (Ru

s ≥ (1 + (cid:15))(cid:82)u

s ) ≤ (1 + (cid:15))−(cid:15)(cid:82)u
s ,

44

and

P (Ru

s ≤ (1 − (cid:15))(cid:82)u

s ) ≤ (1 − (cid:15))(cid:15)(cid:82)u
s .

Recognizing that (cid:82)u

s ≥ N r completes the proof.

Lemma S10 provides an entrywise concentration bound for landing probabilities. The next theorem

equates PPR and LD vectors when blocks are equally distributed. Together, they asserts the asymptotically

equivalence between PPR and LD vectors, in symmetric block model graphs.

Theorem S1 (Equivalence between PPR and LD vectors). Under the population DC-SBM with K blocks
and parameters {B, Z, Θ}, assume Bii = b1 for all i, and Bij = b2 for i (cid:54)= j (b1 > b2 > 0). Let λ2 the second
largest eigenvalue of (cid:80). Let (cid:112) be the personalized PageRank vector, and let (cid:108)(k) be the linear discriminant
score vector between block 1 and block k, k = 2, ..., K. If the teleportation constant α = 1 − λ2, then

Proof. From Section S2.2 and Lemma S9(a), the block landing probability is precisely

(cid:112) ∝ (cid:108)(k).

Wk

s =

K
(cid:88)

j=1

λs
jUkjU1j,

where λk is the k-th eigenvalues of (cid:80) and U is the orthogonal matrix used in Lemma S2.2.

Note that B has eigenvalues λ1 = 1 and λ2 = b1−b2
b1+b2

, with complexity indices 1 and k − 1 respectively. In

addition, we know the orthogonal matrix above precisely as well,

U =













1√
N
1√
N
1√
N
...
1√
N

1√
2
− 1√
2

0
...
0

1√
2
0
− 1√
2
...
0













.

· · ·

· · ·

1√
2
0

· · ·

0
...
· · · − 1√
2

Then it follows from Lemma S9(b) that the LD weight vector is

ωLD = (cid:82)(cid:62)Z(e1 − ek)
= W(cid:62)(e1 − ek)
= W1
K
(cid:88)

· − Wk
·

=

λs
j(U1j − Ukj)U1j

j=1

=

K
2












.












1
λ2
λ2
2
...
λS−1
2

On the other hand, the weight vector of PPR on landing probability space is ωP P R = (φ0, φ1, ...), where

45

φs = α(1 − α)s. Hence, setting the teleportation constant α = 1 − λ2 asymptotically equates approximate
PPR and LD vectors, up to a scalar factor.

Remark. First, a positive factor that diﬀerentiates PPR and LD vectors does not change the relative
ranking of the nodes, because the ranking via (cid:112) or c(cid:112) is equivalent. Hence, Theorem S1 shows that the PPR
vector is equivalent to an optimal LD score vector under described population DC-SBM. Second, Theorem

S1 is an extension of Kloumann et al. [2017]. Combining Theorem S1 and Lemma S10 gives the asymptotic

equivalence between PPR and LD vectors under the particular DC-SBM stated.

S4 Lists of top 200 handles

In this section, we supply three lists of handles resulting from sampling using PPR, aPPR, and rPPR

vectors with @NBCPolitics as the seed, as of December 2018. We conceal handles with followers count fewer

than 200 for privacy considerations. The biographical descriptions are trimmed for unifying displays. In

addition, we annotate handles with whether or not they are followed (“Followed”) by the seed node.

46

S4.1 A PPR’s sample of 200

Supplementary Table S3: Top (selected) handles returned by PPR.

Name

Followed

Followers Description

1 Melania Trump
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 MSNBC

The White House
Chuck Todd
NBC News
NBC Nightly News
Andrea Mitchell
Savannah Guthrie
Joe Scarborough

POLITICO

Frank Thorp V

Rachel Maddow MSNBC
10
Breaking News
11
NBC News First Read
12
13
TODAY
14 Meet the Press
The Wall Street Journal
15
16
Pete Williams
17 Mark Murray
18
19 Katy Tur
Bill Clinton
20
21 Kasie Hunt
22
TIME
23 Kelly O’Donnell
John McCain
24
Peter Alexander
25
26
Hallie Jackson
27 Kristen Welker
28
Carrie Dann
29 Willie Geist
30 Morning Joe
31
32 Mark Knoller
33
Tom Brokaw
34 Mika Brzezinski
Chris Jansing
35
John Harwood
36
Nicolle Wallace
37
NBC News Signal
38
Sam Stein
39
Chris Matthews
40
Carol Lee
41
42
Ali Vitali
43 Ken Dilanian
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54 Matthew Miller
55
56 Ken Strickland
57
Ron Fournier
58 Mike Memoli
59 Miguel Almaguer

Jim Miklaszewski
John Heilemann
Stephanie Ruhle
Nick Confessore
Talking Points Memo
Tom Costello
Post Politics
Alex Moe
Benjy Sarlin
Preet Bharara

Leigh Ann Caldwell

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

This account is run by the Oﬃce of First Lady Melania Trum...

11242283
17625630 Welcome to @WhiteHouse! Follow for the latest from President...
2032038 Moderator of @meetthepress and @nbcnews political director; ...
6280551
962290
1737764

The leading source of global news and info for more than 75 ...
Breaking news, in-depth reporting, context on news from arou...
NBC News Chief Foreign Aﬀairs Correspondent/anchor, Andrea ...

881669 Mom to Vale & Charley, TODAY Co-Anchor, Georgetown Law...

The place for in-depth analysis, political commentary and in...
I see political people... (Retweets do not imply endorsement...

2521215 With Malice Toward None
2261911
9498076
9223158
53847
4276453

The ﬁrst place for news and analysis from the @NBCNews Poli...
America’s favorite morning show | Snapchat: todayshow

566713 Meet the Press is the longest-running television show in his...

16188842
70062
97571 Mark Murray is the senior political editor for NBC News, as ...

Breaking news and features from the WSJ.
NBC News Justice Correspondent. Covers US Supreme Court, ...

3695835

Nobody knows politics like POLITICO. Got a news tip for us? ...

587474 MSNBC anchor @2pm, NBC News correspondent, author of NYT ...

10697521

Founder, Clinton Foundation and 42nd President of the United ...

381704 @NBCNews Capitol Hill Correspondent. Host, @KasieDC, Sundays...

15584815

Breaking news and current events from around the globe. Host...

195765 White House Correspondent @NBCNews Veteran of Cap Hill ...
3181773 Memorial account for U.S. Senator John McCain, 1936-2018. To...

283522 @NBCNews White House Correspondent / Weekend @TODAYshow ...
359099
Chief White House Correspondent / @NBCNews / @MSNBC ...
182244 @NBCNews White House Correspondent. Links and retweets ...
.@NBCNews / @NBCPolitics. RTs not endorsements.
Host @NBC #SundayTODAY, Co-Host @Morning Joe, Sunday ...
Live tweet during the show! Links to must-read op-eds and ...
Producer & Oﬀ-Air Reporter covering Congress at @NBCNews ...
CBS News White House Correspondent
Special correspondent, @NBCNews
”Bipartisanship helps to avoid extremes and imbalances. It ...

37119
807536
563650
58152
318923
308276
868124

72375 @msnbc Senior National Correspondent, intrepid traveler and ...

251246
413153
83715

a Dad who covers Washington, the economy and national politi...
Author of 18 Acres series, mom, dog walker, wife, gardener. ...
A new streaming news channel from @NBCNews. Catch us Thursda...
392003 Daily Beast/MSNBC newsletter: https://t.co/DVURxntWdL Emai...
882434
51240
78839 @NBCnews Political Reporter. Covered Trump campaign, WH + ...

Host of @hardball M-F at 7PM ET on @MSNBC and author of ”Bob...
Reporter for NBC News, former WSJ & POLITICO, Hudson’s mom, ...

124635
14196

Intelligence and national security reporter for the NBC News...
Jim Miklaszewski is Chief Pentagon Correspondent for NBC New...

247616 @SHO TheCircus host/ep; NBCNews/@MSNBC natl aﬀairs analyst;...
352895 Mom, MSNBC LIVE Anchor 9AM M-F, VELSHI & RUHLE 1 PM ...
172359
275692
17268
384611

Reporter for @NYTimes, writer-at-large for @NYTmag, MSNBC ...
Breaking news and analysis from the TPM team. Ill leave ...
NBC News Correspondent covering Aviation, Transportation, Ec...
The latest political news and analysis from The Washington P...

28245 @NBCNews Capitol Hill Producer + Oﬀ-Air Reporter; ’12 & ’16...

100896
945030
229867
20714
2693
64356
39693
14082

Political reporter for @NBCNews. I cover elections and their...
Patriotic American & proud immigrant. Movie buﬀ. @Springste...
Partner at Vianovo. MSNBC Justice & Security Analyst. Recove...
NBC Capitol Hill reporter. Formerly at CNN and public radio....
NBC News Washington Bureau Chief
President: Truscott Rossman. Best-seller https://t.co/09CdTN...
National Political Reporter @nbcnews; @latimes alum mike dot...
Proliﬁc coﬀee drinker. Chronic under sleeper. Raging road ...

47

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Tom Winter

Courtney Kube
NBC News World
Jonathan Martin
Steve Schmidt
Jenna Bush Hager
Sean Spicer
Roll Call
POLITICO 45
Scott Foster

60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69 Domenico Montanaro
70
71 Kailani Koenig
Capital Journal
72
NBC News Videos
73
74 Diane Sawyer
Jane C. Timm
75
Elyse PG
76
77
Libby Leist
78 Mike Barnicle
79
80
81
82
83 Marianna Sotomayor
84
85
86 Garrett Haake
Andrew Raﬀerty
87
Jacob Soboroﬀ
88
Perry Bacon Jr.
89
90
Alex Witt
91 Mark Halperin
92
Heidi Przybyla
93 Morgan Radford
94
Savannah Sellers
95 Marist Poll
96
97
98 Olivia Nuzzi
99

Reuters Politics
Beth Fouhy
HuﬀPost
Joey Scarborough

Shaquille Brewster
Joyce Alene

Jill Wine-Banks
NBC Field Notes

adam nagourney
Phil McCausland

Vicente Fox Quesada
Alex Johnson
Alex Seitz-Wald
Anthony Terrell
Sam Petulla

NBC News THINK
100 Making a Diﬀerence
101
102
103 Katie Couric
104 Monica Alba
105
106
108
109
110
111 Debra Messing
112
114
115
116
117
118
119
121
122
123
124

Corky Siemaszko
Zach Haberman
NBC Latino
Vivian Salama
Zeke Miller
Vaughn Hillyard
Jonathan Allen
HuﬀPost Politics
Nick Akerman
CSPAN
John McCormack

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

NBC News National Security & Military Reporter. Links and ...
9494
A dynamic look at world events from @NBCNews.
279165
Nat’l Political Correspondent, NY Times. Husband of the ...
241690
”Patriotism means to stand by the country. It does not mean ...
498812
207106 Mama to M and P, NBC News correspondent, Editor-at-Large ...
President of RigWil, Sr Advisor @AmericaFirstPAC check out ...
406957
Breaking news, reporter tweets and analysis from the Source ...
356374
A daily diary of the 45th president of the United States.
88470
Senior Producer, Washington @NBCNEWS @TODAYshow
3464
”Congress shall make no law respecting an est. of religion, ...
83999
NBC News Investigations reporter based in New York focusing ...
40777
Producer with @MSNBC & @NBCNews. Team @MeetThePress ...
11416

131212 WSJs home for politics, policy and national security news. ...

7838
876906

The latest video from http://t.co/xPyvMOTEF6
I like my news 24/7, my food spicy, my drinks caﬀeinated, ...

6478 @nbcnews political reporter and fact checker. More fun than ...
2697 White House producer @nbcnews |@USCAnnenberg alum | LA kid ...
7946

Executive Producer @todayshow

116588 Mike Barnicle is an award-winning print and broadcast journa...
259106
13684

U.S. political coverage, breaking news and special investiga...
Senior editor, politics, NBC News and MSNBC

11401771 Know what’s real.

6277
11965

NBC News Social Media Editor. New York Daily News Alum. RTs ...
Running around Capitol Hill for @NBCNews. Covers politics ...
5362 @NBCNews Producer/Politics | @HowardU Alum| Journalist ...

185116
40714
16567

U of Alabama Law Professor|@MSNBC Contributor|Obama US ...
Correspondent @msnbc Taller than I look on TV Long-suﬀe...
Senior political editor for @newsy Before that @NBCNews ...

144153 @MSNBC correspondent. Instagram & Snapchat: jacobsoboroﬀ

26853
I write about government (mostly federal, often state, ...
28126 Weekend host on @MSNBC (9am, noon & 1pm). Tiggers mom ...

332564
66489
20967 @NBCnews Correspondent: @TODAYShow/@NBCNightlyNews .

New York, New York
NBC News, n’tl political reporter ”Prezbella” Heidi.Przyb...

4637
16030

News junkie. Host of NBC’s ”Stay Tuned” on Snapchat. Storyte...
Founded in 1978, MIPO is home to the Marist Poll and regular...

158753 @NBCNews & @MSNBC Contributor. Speaker. Watergate prosecutor...

1390

NBC News correspondents and http://t.co/1eSopOQt8s reporters...

190919 Washington Correspondent, New York Magazine

12017

THINK is NBC News’ home for fresh opinion, sharp analysis ...

670 @NBCNightlyNews’ popular feature proﬁles ordinary people do...

25307

LA Bureau Chief for The New York Times. Story ideas welcome ...

1746116

2519 @NBCNews Digital reporter focused on the rural-urban divide....
Journalist, podcaster, @SU2C founder, doc ﬁlmmaker of @FedU...
30034 @NBCNews White House team. Covered Hillary Clinton on the ...

Presidente de Mxico de 2000 a 2006 y ahora trabajando po...
News, data and analysis for @NBCNews; data geek; non-celebri...
Political reporter for @NBCNews covering Democrats | Tips, ...
Emmy Award winning journalist. Political observer. Covered ...
Editor @cnnpolitics Usually looking for datasets. You can ...
Actor. Mama. Global Ambassador for HIV/AIDS for PSI. Activis...
Senior Writer at NBC News Digital (former NY Daily News rewr...
Lead Breaking News Editor, @NBCNews. Previously had other jobs ...
Elevating the conversation around Latino news in the United ...

1244017
4371
50168
6827
2588
532941
2538
3693
67920
16020 White House reporter for @WSJ. Formerly AP Baghdad bureau ...
215054 White House Reporter @AP. Email: zekejmiller@gmail.com Links...
31464 On the Road, Meeting Good Folk | NBC News | Arizonan | IG: @...
44477
1428870
14949
1915821
30688

political reporter, @NBCNews Digital | co-author, NYT bestse...
The latest political news from HuﬀPost’s politics team.
Partner in the AmLaw 100 law ﬁrm of Dorsey & Whitney, Water...
Capitol Hill. The White House. National Politics.
Senior writer at The Weekly Standard.

48

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Sarah Sanders

Education Nation

Emmanuelle Saliba
Hasani Gittens
Rebecca Sinderbrand
BuzzFeed Politics
Adam Edelman
Ethan Klapper
President Trump
Vice President Mike ...

Jo Ling Kent
125
PolitiFact
126
Bob Corker
127
Elise Jordan
128
129 Greg Martin
130
131 Micah Grimes
132
Jill Lawrence
133 McKay Coppins
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142 Donald J. Trump
143 Karen Pence
144
145 Kellyanne Conway
146 DRUDGE REPORT
147 White House History
The New York Times
148
149 White House Archived
150 Dan Scavino Jr.
151 Drudge Buzz
152 David Gregory
Hillary Clinton
153
CNN Breaking News
154
The Cabinet
155
Lester Holt
156
John Dickerson
157
CNN
158
J Earnest (Archived)
159
The Washington Post
160
Adam Liptak
161
162
NSC
163 MSNBC video
164 Gorsuch Facts
165 Greg Stohr
166 OMB Press
167
168
169
170
171
172 Mark Sherman
173
174
175
176
177
178
179 Keith Olbermann
180
181
182
183
184
185
186

Brian Williams
Pope Francis
Ezra Klein
Anderson Cooper
BBC News (World)
Reince Priebus
Joe Biden

U.S. Attorney EDVA
The Associated Press
Joe Palazzolo
Natalie Morales
Brent Kendall
Joan Biskupic

Richard Engel
Norah O’Donnell
Robert Barnes
Luke Russert
Stephen Colbert

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

32957
628659
10042
58884
1161
276468
25948
17282
131623
4004
3002
18691
121646
2341
18292
24593638
6795022
56050499
403315

NBC News Correspondent @NBCNightlyNews, @TODAYshow ...
Home of the Truth-O-Meter and independent fact-checking ...
Serving Tennesseans in the U.S. Senate
Co-host of @WMM podcast podcast. @MSNBC/@NBCNews political...
Political Booking Producer at @nbcnews @todayshow
Hosted by @NBCNews. Creator of Parent Toolkit & moderator of...
Head of Social, @NBCNews & @MSNBC – Foreign and domestic ...
Commentary editor and columnist @USATODAY. Author of The Art...
Staﬀ writer at @TheAtlantic. Author of THE WILDERNESS. ’Sor...
Head of Social Media Strategy @Euronews | Launched #THECUBE ...
Level 29 Mage. Senior News Ed. @NBCNews. Sheriﬀ of Nattahna...
Now: @NBCNews Senior Washington Editor, visiting lecturer @Y...
News and updates from the politics team @BuzzFeedNews.
Political reporter @nbcnews. Wisconsin native, Bestchester r...
Journalist (@YahooNews) and #avgeek.
45th President of the United States of America, @realDonaldT...
Vice President Mike Pence. Husband, father, & honored to ...
45th President of the United States of America
Educator, mom, wife of @VP Pence. Passionate about art thera...
3522219 @WhiteHouse Press Secretary. Proudly representing @POTUS ...
2506546 Mom. Patriot. Catholic. Counselor.
1408129
104010

The DRUDGE REPORT is a U.S. based news aggregation website ...
The White House Historical Association is a non-proﬁt organ...

42412491 Where the conversation begins. Follow for breaking news, ...
13379715
324561
104111
1749373
23643522
54476034
123597
501427
48122
40854429

This is an archive of an Obama Administration account mainta...
Assistant to President @realDonaldTrump, Director of Social ...
Tracking the buzz made by Americas #1 newsmaker Matt Drudge....
CNN, Georgetown U
2016 Democratic Nominee, SecState, Senator, hair icon. Mom, ...
Breaking news from CNN Digital. Now 54M strong. Check @cnn ...
The @WhiteHouse Oﬃce of Cabinet Aﬀairs. Tweets may be arc...
Anchor @NBCNightlyNews and @datelinenbc, reporting on the to...
Co-host CBS This Morning. This account @johndickerson is mos...
Its our job to #GoThere & tell the most diﬃcult stories. ...

1182091 WH Press Secretary. This is an archive of an Obama Administr...

13117609
61589
35905
40669
39143
11651
11182 Oﬃce of Management and Budget | Tweets may be archived: ...

Breaking news, analysis, and opinion. Founded in 1877. Our ...
Supreme Court reporter for The New York Times
National Security Council | Tweets may be archived ...
Favorite video highlights from @msnbc.
Judge Gorsuch will be fair to all regardless of their backgr...
Supreme Court reporter for Bloomberg News. Baseball dad ...

288066 @NBCNews Chief Foreign Correspondent
195549 Wife, mother of 3, Co-Host @cbsthismorning, #1 fan of @chefg...

37361
253495
18269222
6336
5709
13051963

Robert Barnes covers the Supreme Court for The Washington Po...
Sometimes nothing can be a real cool hand. STA’04/BC’08
the guy on CBS

Led by U.S. Attorney G. Zachary Terwilliger. 130+ attorneys ...
News from The Associated Press, and a taste of the great jou...

10938 WSJ reporter covering legal issues. joe.palazzolo@wsj.com. ...

443991 @TODAYshow Anchor and @AccessOnline Anchor, Author, mom ...

5451 WSJ legal aﬀairs reporter in Washington. Native Tar Heel, ...

11021

CNN legal analyst & Supreme Court biographer; Chicago native...
1097676 Dogs. And sports. And whales (Tom Jumbo-Grumbo on BoJack ...

230947

17791867 Welcome to the oﬃcial Twitter page of His Holiness Pope Fr...
Founder and editor-at-large, https://t.co/5gESirESRH. Why ...
tweets by Anderson Cooper. Anchor @AC360 and correspondent...
News, features and analysis from the World’s newsroom. Break...
President @MichaelBestLaw; Exclusive Speaker @WashSpeakers; ...
Represented Delaware in the Senate for 36 years, 47th Vice P...

2500383
9967099
24153838
935431
3111675

49

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Nate Silver

Jim Miklaszewski
Tony Mauro

187 Department of State
188
189
190 David Axelrod
191
192 George Bush
193
194
195
196 Mitt Romney
197
ABC News
198 Deborah Turness
The Hill
199
Ann Curry
200

CBS News
Jonathan Karl
BBC Breaking News

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

5149607 Welcome to the oﬃcial U.S. Department of State Twitter acc...

1956
20310

Chief Pentagon Correspondent for NBC News
Supreme Court correspondent, https://t.co/571ZdQnzo2 and The...

1113850 Director, UChicago Institute of Politics. Senior Political ...
3176243
356042
6537991
206986
38539186
1977201
13985606
10389
3162118
1536122

Editor-in-Chief, @FiveThirtyEight. Author, The Signal and ...
A tribute site to the 41st President of the United States of...
Your source for original reporting and trusted news.
ABC News Chief White House Correspondent. insta @jonkarl ...
Breaking news alerts and updates from the BBC. For news, ...
Senator-elect from Utah.
All the news and information you need to see, curated by the...
President of NBC News International
The Hill is the premier source for policy and political news...
Journalism is an act of faith in the future.

50

S4.2 An aPPR’s sample of 200

Supplementary Table S4: Top (selected) handles returned by aPPR. The handles with fewer than
200 followers are hidden for privacy considerations.

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Elyse PG

NBC Field Notes

Adam Edelman
Phil McCausland
Corky Siemaszko
Sam Petulla

1
Jennifer Sizemore
2
3
Alissa Swango
4 Making a Diﬀerence
5
6
7 Greg Martin
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25 Ken Strickland
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Emmanuelle Saliba

Shaquille Brewster

Savannah Sellers

Zach Haberman

Hasani Gittens

Alex Johnson

Scott Foster

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No

Enroll America National Regional Director http://t.co/X6jJIE...

198
386
441 Director of Digital Programming at @natgeo. All things food....
670 @NBCNightlyNews’ popular feature proﬁles ordinary people do...

NBC News correspondents and http://t.co/1eSopOQt8s reporters...

Political Booking Producer at @nbcnews @todayshow
I am Area Man. I pwn your news feed.

1
3
1161
1
2
1390
2
2
1
1
1
1
3
4
7 Dianne Kube is an Author with a passion, for family, holiday...
7
2341
2519 @NBCNews Digital reporter focused on the rural-urban divide....
2538
2588
2693
7

Senior Writer at NBC News Digital (former NY Daily News rewr...
Editor @cnnpolitics Usually looking for datasets. You can ...
NBC News Washington Bureau Chief

Political reporter @nbcnews. Wisconsin native, Bestchester ...

yet another activist twitter, ﬁghting all those fun -isms ...

2697 White House producer @nbcnews |@USCAnnenberg alum | LA kid ...

Change your thoughts & you change your world. -Norman Vincen...

2
4
13
6

154 We distribute new, never-worn clothing and merchandise to ...

10
3002
1
3464
2
13
5
3693
3
2
5
7
1
4004
2
4371
8
4637
21
6
15

Level 29 Mage. Senior News Ed. @NBCNews. Sheriﬀ of Nattahna...

Senior Producer, Washington @NBCNEWS @TODAYshow

Lead Breaking News Editor, @NBCNews. Previously had other jobs...
just like to stay in the know :) just like to stay in the ...

Head of Social Media Strategy @Euronews | Launched #THECUBE ...

News, data and analysis for @NBCNews; data geek; non-celebri...

News junkie. Host of NBC’s ”Stay Tuned” on Snapchat. Storyte...

Anti-money laundering professional with federal law enforcem...

5362 @NBCNews Producer/Politics | @HowardU Alum| Journalist | Pol...

Just another DIY, punk kid from the black land dirt of NEPA’...
Cdr Bob Mehal, Public Aﬀairs Oﬃce, Oﬃce of the Secretar...

2
18
5

51

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

NBC News Videos

Joey Scarborough

Voices United
Jane C. Timm
Social Headlines
James Miklaszewski

Anthony Terrell

Libby Leist

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112 Kailani Koenig
113
114
115 Gloria Turkin
116
117
118
119

Bob Corker

Courtney Kube

Vets Helping Heroes

No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

4
8
10
2
6277
5
1
310

NBC News Social Media Editor. New York Daily News Alum. RTs ...

Voices United is a non proﬁt educational organization for ...

6478 @nbcnews political reporter and fact checker. More fun than ...

344 Daily roundup of top social media and networking stories.
337 Writer, Photographer, Editor, Director, Producer, Newshound ...

Happy princess

Executive Producer @todayshow

I’m running for President of the United States of America.

Emmy Award winning journalist. Political observer. Covered ...

NBC News National Security & Military Reporter. Links and ...

”Rawr!”
The latest video from http://t.co/xPyvMOTEF6

12
6827
10
8
8
I’m the real Charlie Sheen. If you are a Winner, stick aroun...
9 Quotes from a nice jewish mom who’s just tryna get some nice...
2
4
6
7838
9
4
7946
8
2
35
8
2
2
16
4
5
1
4
9494
5
5
169
5
2
449
12
4
8
10042
4
2
11
4
8
29
2
6
11416
13
14
204
7
28
6
10

I am honest and straight to the point. Retired Civilian Fed...

Spcialiste dveloppement produit et marketing des produits ...

Raising funds to sponsor the training of assistance dogs for...

Serving Tennesseans in the U.S. Senate

Not your average Grandma

Live like Bones

An unconventional appreciation account for @DeadlineWH host,...

Producer with @MSNBC & @NBCNews. Team @MeetThePress alum. 20...

52

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Nick Akerman

NBC News THINK

120
121 Marianna Sotomayor
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
Beth Fouhy
138
139
Jim Miklaszewski
140 Miguel Almaguer
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155 Marist Poll
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181

Andrew Raﬀerty

Vivian Salama

Tom Costello

Jill Lawrence

No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

Running around Capitol Hill for @NBCNews. Covers politics ...
THINK is NBC News’ home for fresh opinion, sharp analysis ...

Photographer, artist, newsletter editor, designer, writer...

The Quest for the Denim Jacket

Author of A Traumatic History: A Unique Look at PTSD and ...

Senior editor, politics, NBC News and MSNBC
Jim Miklaszewski is Chief Pentagon Correspondent for NBC New...
Proliﬁc coﬀee drinker. Chronic under sleeper. Raging road ...

The Northeast Tennessee Victory program will create a grassr...

Just a dude with a crappy job.

Partner in the AmLaw 100 law ﬁrm of Dorsey & Whitney, Water...

2
11965
12017
1
15
2
3
18
5
5
9
15
16
5
7
5
7
7
13684
14196
14082
16
4
3
19
17
14
5
14949
5
59
8
8
4 Grad student at JHU
6
16030
10
7
4

Founded in 1978, MIPO is home to the Marist Poll and regular...
Sharing the best news from the e-Discovery world. Tweets by ...

11 Workforce and Economic Development Consultant; Employment ...

7 We’re the workers of the @villagevoice, trying to get a fair...
16020 White House reporter for @WSJ. Formerly AP Baghdad bureau ...

8
24
19
4
24
16567
5
36
17268

I should be the real trix rabbit

Curious food lover always looking for the best food everywhe...
Senior political editor for @newsy Before that @NBCNews. And...

NBC News Correspondent covering Aviation, Transportation, ...

68 Wanderlust journalist ... A man is but the product of ...

Bibliophile, Animal lover, Realtor, Volunteer,

6
25
70 Director or Product Marketing @ Microsoft. My tweets. My li...

Experienced (and successful) grantwriter, author, wife, moth...

Commentary editor and columnist @USATODAY. Author of The Art...
Howard McKinnon is Town Manager of Havana, Florida.

3
5
17282
8
136
59
8

53

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

12
7
8
8

15 Old and getting older.
15
15 Married

4
2 Director of the Essex, Connecticut Public Library aka ”Your ...

Journalist (@YahooNews) and #avgeek.

Now: @NBCNews Senior Washington Editor, visiting lecturer ...

Tireless trend researcher.

18292
38
5
18691
3
11
5
5
11
3

Ethan Klapper

Rebecca Sinderbrand

54

S4.3 An rPPR’s sample of 200

Supplementary Table S5: Top (selected) handles returned by rPPR. The handles with fewer than
200 followers are hidden for privacy considerations.

Name

Followed

Followers Description

NBC Field Notes
Adam Edelman
Phil McCausland
Corky Siemaszko
Sam Petulla

Shaquille Brewster
Joey Scarborough
Jane C. Timm
Anthony Terrell
NBC News Videos
Libby Leist
Voices United
Social Headlines
James Miklaszewski
Courtney Kube
Bob Corker

1
Jennifer Sizemore
2
3
Alissa Swango
4 Making a Diﬀerence
5 Greg Martin
6
7
8
9
10
11 Ken Strickland
Elyse PG
12
Hasani Gittens
13
Scott Foster
14
Zach Haberman
15
Emmanuelle Saliba
16
Alex Johnson
17
18
Savannah Sellers
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31 Kailani Koenig
32
Vets Helping Heroes
33 Marianna Sotomayor
NBC News THINK
34
Beth Fouhy
35
36
Jim Miklaszewski
37 Miguel Almaguer
38
39
40 Marist Poll
Vivian Salama
41
Andrew Raﬀerty
42
43
Tom Costello
44 Gloria Turkin
Jill Lawrence
45
Ethan Klapper
46
Rebecca Sinderbrand
47
48
Leigh Ann Caldwell
49 Morgan Radford
50 GuardAnglSolPet
51
adam nagourney
52
53 Micah Grimes
54
55
56
57

Alex Moe
Ray Farmer

Perry Bacon Jr.

Nick Akerman

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No

Enroll America National Regional Director http://t.co/X6jJIE...

198
386
441 Director of Digital Programming at @natgeo. All things food....
670 @NBCNightlyNews’ popular feature proﬁles ordinary people do...

Senior Writer at NBC News Digital (former NY Daily News ...
Editor @cnnpolitics Usually looking for datasets. You can ...
NBC News Washington Bureau Chief

Political Booking Producer at @nbcnews @todayshow
NBC News correspondents and http://t.co/1eSopOQt8s reporters...
Political reporter @nbcnews. Wisconsin native, Bestchester ...

1161
1390
2341
2519 @NBCNews Digital reporter focused on the rural-urban divide....
2538
2588
2693
2697 White House producer @nbcnews |@USCAnnenberg alum | LA kid ...
3002
3464
3693
4004
4371
4637

Level 29 Mage. Senior News Ed. @NBCNews. Sheriﬀ of Nattahna...
Senior Producer, Washington @NBCNEWS @TODAYshow
Lead Breaking News Editor, @NBCNews. Previously had other jobs ...
Head of Social Media Strategy @Euronews | Launched #THECUBE ...
News, data and analysis for @NBCNews; data geek; non-celebri...
News junkie. Host of NBC’s ”Stay Tuned” on Snapchat. Storyte...

154 We distribute new, never-worn clothing and merchandise to ...

NBC News Social Media Editor. New York Daily News Alum. RTs ...

5362 @NBCNews Producer/Politics | @HowardU Alum| Journalist | Pol...
6277
6478 @nbcnews political reporter and fact checker. More fun than ...
Emmy Award winning journalist. Political observer. Covered ...
6827
The latest video from http://t.co/xPyvMOTEF6
7838
Executive Producer @todayshow
7946
310
Voices United is a non proﬁt educational organization for ...
344 Daily roundup of top social media and networking stories.
337 Writer, Photographer, Editor, Director, Producer, Newshound ...
NBC News National Security & Military Reporter. Links and ...
Serving Tennesseans in the U.S. Senate
Producer with @MSNBC & @NBCNews. Team @MeetThePress alum...
Raising funds to sponsor the training of assistance dogs for...
Running around Capitol Hill for @NBCNews. Covers politics ...
THINK is NBC News’ home for fresh opinion, sharp analysis ...
Senior editor, politics, NBC News and MSNBC
Jim Miklaszewski is Chief Pentagon Correspondent for NBC New...
Proliﬁc coﬀee drinker. Chronic under sleeper. Raging road ...

9494
10042
11416
449
11965
12017
13684
14196
14082
169
14949
16030
16020 White House reporter for @WSJ. Formerly AP Baghdad bureau ...
Senior political editor for @newsy Before that @NBCNews. And...
16567
NBC News Correspondent covering Aviation, Transportation, ...
17268
I am honest and straight to the point. Retired Civilian Fed...
204
Commentary editor and columnist @USATODAY. Author of The Art...
17282
Journalist (@YahooNews) and #avgeek.
18292
Now: @NBCNews Senior Washington Editor, visiting lecturer ...
18691
20714
NBC Capitol Hill reporter. Formerly at CNN and public radio....
20967 @NBCnews Correspondent: @TODAYShow/@NBCNightlyNews/...

Partner in the AmLaw 100 law ﬁrm of Dorsey & Whitney, Water...
Founded in 1978, MIPO is home to the Marist Poll and regular...

927
25307
13
25948
26853
21

Supporting the Military, our Veterans and their Beloved Pets...
LA Bureau Chief for The New York Times. Story ideas welcome ...

Head of Social, @NBCNews & @MSNBC – Foreign and domestic ...
I write about government (mostly federal, often state, occas...

28245 @NBCNews Capitol Hill Producer + Oﬀ-Air Reporter; ’12 & ’16...

603

NBC News staﬀ photographer. Colorado based

55

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Alex Witt

Tom Winter

Carrie Dann

Vaughn Hillyard

Jim Miklaszewski

John McCormack

Thomas DeFrank
Jo Ling Kent

58
59 Monica Alba
60
61
62
63
64
65
66 Madelyn Monteath
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75 Mike Memoli
John Boxley
76
77
78
79
80 Garrett Haake
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99

Carol Lee
Alex Seitz-Wald

Chi Omega
Aarne Heikkila

HailYeah63
Eva’s Heroes

Sam Singal

Jonathan Allen
NBC News First Read

100 Dani
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119

Frank Thorp V
Youcef

project c.u.r.e.

Elise Jordan
Patrick Burkey
bill hartnett

Ron Fournier

Pete Williams

Heidi Przybyla

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes

28126 Weekend host on @MSNBC (9am, noon & 1pm). Tiggers mom + ...
30034 @NBCNews White House team. Covered Hillary Clinton on the ...

1956
13
30688
136

Chief Pentagon Correspondent for NBC News

Senior writer at The Weekly Standard.

31464 On the Road, Meeting Good Folk | NBC News | Arizonan | IG...

NFL Network, wife, mother.. not necessarily in that order.
Veteran White House correspondent (every prez since LBJ) and...
NBC News Correspondent @NBCNightlyNews, @TODAYshow...

35
257
593
32957
10
37119
3
7 Dianne Kube is an Author with a passion, for family, holiday...

.@NBCNews / @NBCPolitics. RTs not endorsements.

Cdr Bob Mehal, Public Aﬀairs Oﬃce, Oﬃce of the Secretar...

National Political Reporter @nbcnews; @latimes alum mike dot...
NBC News Producer...Living life one day at a time.

18
7
39693
1201
15
40777
7
40714
59
70 Director or Product Marketing @ Microsoft. My tweets. My li...
68 Wanderlust journalist ... A man is but the product of ...

NBC News Investigations reporter based in New York focusing ...

Correspondent @msnbc Taller than I look on TV Long-suﬀe...

158 Marketing nerd at Cornerstone OnDemand.

political reporter, @NBCNews Digital | co-author, NYT bestse...
The ﬁrst place for news and analysis from the @NBCNews Poli...
Smokin Meat & Raising Kids That Raise Hell. Live Every Day ...
Executive Producer, @nbcnightlynews

44477
53847
92
1016
29
59
51240
50168
28
188
483 #RedskinsTweetTeam #HTTR

Reporter for NBC News, former WSJ & POLITICO, Hudson’s mom, ...
Political reporter for @NBCNews covering Democrats | Tips, ...
An unconventional appreciation account for @DeadlineWH host,...
I am a Senior Video Producer at NBCNews.com, as well a few ...

2067
6
278
1210
447
58152
228
76
2260
117
4
58884
2313
2500
7
8
16
36
64356
12
70062

To enrich the lives of individuals with intellectual special...

Chi Omega Chapter at CU Boulder
Coordinating Producer for @JacobSoboroﬀ @MSNBC & @NBCNews, ...
only here to talk shit & complain
Producer & Oﬀ-Air Reporter covering Congress at @NBCNews. ...

Pentagon correspondent http://t.co/Qo0w3AnYOb
delivering donated medical supplies and equipment to develop...

Co-host of @WMM podcast podcast. @MSNBC/@NBCNews political ...
Executive Producer, @NBCNews, @MSNBC. Former EP, @NBCNightly...
Stripmining the internets for remarkable ephemera Social Mus...

President: Truscott Rossman. Best-seller https://t.co/09CdTN...

NBC News Justice Correspondent. Covers US Supreme Court, ...

65 Wife, Mother. Litigation Specialist. Designer. Activist for ...
10
66489

NBC News, n’tl political reporter ”Prezbella” Heidi.Przyb...

56

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

prodjay

Ali Vitali

NBC Latino

Chris Jansing

Brent Kendall

Amy Lynn-Cramer

U.S. Attorney EDVA

Tammy Fine
Bonnie Optekman

120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141 Meghann Ludemann
142
143
144 Doug Adams
145
146 Mark Sherman
Robin Gradison
147
NBC News Signal
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155 Domenico Montanaro
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
samgo
168
169 Megan Stark
170
171 Katie Yu
172 Mark Murray
173 Kevin Thurm
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181

Anna Matthews

POLITICO 45

Stacey Klein

Rich Latour

Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

Elevating the conversation around Latino news in the United ...

67920
189
38

72375 @msnbc Senior National Correspondent, intrepid traveler and ...

1

5451 WSJ legal aﬀairs reporter in Washington. Native Tar Heel, ...

Led by U.S. Attorney G. Zachary Terwilliger. 130+ attorneys ...
Life long learner Paralegal Arts & Culture Black Community ...

2
5709
74
2
2
1584
2242 Digital media strategist. Voice over artist. News junkie, ...
yet another activist twitter, ﬁghting all those fun -isms ...
Communicator through an eclectic lens of #healthcare #hospit...
Earth and Physical Science Teacher, Mom of 2, Self-declared ...

Corporate Communications by day. Teen Negotiator by night...

3
109
88

1590 Mommy to 2 amazing kiddos, Wife to @tecramer AND Corporate ...

5
304
109
10
216
4

NBC News producer

Stay Tuned Associate Producer @NBCNews on @Snapchat

78839 @NBCnews Political Reporter. Covered Trump campaign, WH + ...
NBC Sr. Political desk editor; Father; Baseball fan; Lover ...

1902
99
6336
272
83715
45
8
18

NBC News DC Deputy Bureau Chief, politics junkie, road run...
A new streaming news channel from @NBCNews. Catch us Thursda...
Professor at Columbia Journaism School.

914 @NBCNews White House Producer, Born and raised in BalDimore ...

97
1883
83999
5
6
24
24
25
161
230
46
88470

From Broadcast News to Digital Storytelling. Dad of 3 Boys ...
”Congress shall make no law respecting an est. of religion, ...

Anti-money laundering professional with federal law enforcem...

Curious food lover always looking for the best food everywhe...

1 of 12 U.S.-led PRTs. Improving Panjshir’s stability, incre...

A daily diary of the 45th president of the United States.

9 Quotes from a nice jewish mom who’s just tryna get some nice...
The Northeast Tennessee Victory program will create a grassr...

19

130 @NBCNews Producer in London, Links & retweets aren’t endorse...

1161
263
70
484

Executive Producer, @MSNBC Digital
over served Coloradan

NBC News Senior Producer / formerly @Nightline, @NBCNightlyN...

97571 Mark Murray is the senior political editor for NBC News, as ...
Chief Executive Oﬃcer @ClintonFdn. Dad, sports fan & trivi...

1946

Providing conservatives with breaking news, opinion, blogs ...

122 Mom, wife, grandma, Airedale Terrier lover
173
14
12
137
15
8
16

Celebrate the simple loveliness of every day things, scarves...

Author of A Traumatic History: A Unique Look at PTSD and ...

57

. . . continued

Name

Followed

Followers Description

Benjy Sarlin

182
183
184 David Espo
185
186 matt toder
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196 Daniella Mayer
197
198
199
200

Bill Hatﬁeld

Phil Griﬃn

No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

9
8

I’m the real Charlie Sheen. If you are a Winner, stick aroun...

1308 Dad, AP Special Correspondent, Dad, Red Sox fan, Dad.

Political reporter for @NBCNews. I cover elections and their...

supervising producer, documentaries/verticals at NBC News ...

40
253
13
100896
15
29
17
28 Director of the Marist Poll, poll obsessed, epistemophilic,...
16
144
108
314 DON’T forget the A. I think everything about North Korea is ...
635 Washington news producer for NBC News TODAY; politics/histor...

Vice President, Standards @NBCNews
trey.daly@gmail.com

I should be the real trix rabbit

19
50
231

58

References

Edoardo M Airoldi, David M Blei, Stephen E Fienberg, and Eric P Xing. Mixed membership stochastic

blockmodels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(Sep):1981–2014, 2008.

M. Alamgir and U. von Luxburg. Multi-agent random walks for local clustering. pages 18–27, Piscataway,

NJ, USA, December 2010. Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, IEEE.

Reid Andersen and Kevin J. Lang. Communities from seed sets. In Proceedings of the 15th International

Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’06, pages 223–232, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM. ISBN
1-59593-323-9. doi: 10.1145/1135777.1135814. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1135777.1135814.

Reid Andersen and Yuval Peres. Finding sparse cuts locally using evolving sets. In Proceedings of the Forty-

ﬁrst Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’09, pages 235–244, New York, NY, USA,
2009. ACM. ISBN 978-1-60558-506-2. doi: 10.1145/1536414.1536449. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1536414.1536449.

Reid Andersen, Fan Chung, and Kevin Lang. Local graph partitioning using pagerank vectors. In Proceedings

of the 47th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’06, pages 475–486,

Washington, DC, USA, 2006. IEEE Computer Society. ISBN 0-7695-2720-5. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2006.44.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2006.44.

Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi and R´eka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. science, 286(5439):

509–512, 1999.

Pavel Berkhin. Bookmark-coloring algorithm for personalized pagerank computing. Internet Mathematics,

3(1):41–62, 2006.

St´ephane Boucheron, G´abor Lugosi, and Pascal Massart. Concentration inequalities: A nonasymptotic theory

of independence. Oxford university press, 2013.

Pierre Br´emaud. Markov chains: Gibbs ﬁelds, Monte Carlo simulation, and queues, volume 31. Springer

Science & Business Media, 2013.

Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine. Comput.

Netw. ISDN Syst., 30(1-7):107–117, April 1998. ISSN 0169-7552. doi: 10.1016/S0169-7552(98)00110-X.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-7552(98)00110-X.

Yuxin Chen, Jianqing Fan, Cong Ma, and Kaizheng Wang. Spectral method and regularized mle are both

optimal for top-k ranking. Ann. Statist., 47(4):2204–2235, 08 2019. doi: 10.1214/18-AOS1745. URL
https://doi.org/10.1214/18-AOS1745.

Chandler Davis and William Morton Kahan. The rotation of eigenvectors by a perturbation. iii. SIAM

Journal on Numerical Analysis, 7(1):1–46, 1970.

Georg Ferdinand Frobenius, Ferdinand Georg Frobenius, Ferdinand Georg Frobenius, Ferdinand Georg
¨Uber Matrizen aus nicht negativen Elementen. K¨onigliche

Frobenius, and Germany Mathematician.

Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1912.

59

Shayan Oveis Gharan and Luca Trevisan. Approximating the expansion proﬁle and almost optimal local

graph clustering. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 53rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer

Science, FOCS ’12, pages 187–196, Washington, DC, USA, 2012. IEEE Computer Society. ISBN 978-0-
7695-4874-6. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2012.85. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2012.85.

Gourab Ghoshal and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi. Ranking stability and super-stable nodes in complex networks.

Nature communications, 2:394, 2011.

David F Gleich. Pagerank beyond the web. SIAM Review, 57(3):321–363, 2015.

Pankaj Gupta, Ashish Goel, Jimmy Lin, Aneesh Sharma, Dong Wang, and Reza Zadeh. Wtf: The who to

follow service at twitter. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web, pages

505–514. ACM, 2013.

Taher H Haveliwala. Topic-sensitive pagerank: A context-sensitive ranking algorithm for web search. IEEE

transactions on knowledge and data engineering, 15(4):784–796, 2003.

Paul W Holland, Kathryn Blackmond Laskey, and Samuel Leinhardt. Stochastic blockmodels: First steps.

Social networks, 5(2):109–137, 1983.

Glen Jeh and Jennifer Widom. Scaling personalized web search. In Proceedings of the 12th International

Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’03, pages 271–279, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM. ISBN
1-58113-680-3. doi: 10.1145/775152.775191. URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/775152.775191.

Brian Karrer and Mark EJ Newman. Stochastic blockmodels and community structure in networks. Physical

Review E, 83(1):016107, 2011.

George Karypis and Vipin Kumar. Multilevelk-way partitioning scheme for irregular graphs. Journal of

Parallel and Distributed computing, 48(1):96–129, 1998.

Rajiv Khanna, Ethan Elenberg, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sahand Negahban. On approximation guaran-

tees for greedy low rank optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.02721, 2017.

Isabel M. Kloumann, Johan Ugander, and Jon Kleinberg. Block models and personalized pagerank. Pro-

ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1):33–38, 2017. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1611275114. URL https://www.pnas.org/content/114/1/33.

Can M Le, Elizaveta Levina, Roman Vershynin, et al. Optimization via low-rank approximation for com-

munity detection in networks. The Annals of Statistics, 44(1):373–400, 2016.

Chung-Shou Liao, Kanghao Lu, Michael Baym, Rohit Singh, and Bonnie Berger. IsoRankN: spectral methods

for global alignment of multiple protein networks. Bioinformatics, 25(12):i253–i258, 05 2009. ISSN 1367-
4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp203. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp203.

L´aszl´o Lov´asz. Random walks on graphs: A survey. In D. Mikl´os, V. T. S´os, and T. Sz˝onyi, editors, Combi-

natorics, Paul Erd˝os is Eighty, volume 2, pages 353–398. J´anos Bolyai Mathematical Society, Budapest,

1996.

Xin Lu, Jens Malmros, Fredrik Liljeros, Tom Britton, et al. Respondent-driven sampling on directed net-

works. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 7:292–322, 2013.

60

Kathy Macropol, Tolga Can, and Ambuj K. Singh. Rrw: repeated random walks on genome-scale protein

networks for local cluster discovery. BMC Bioinformatics, 10(1):283, Sep 2009.
10.1186/1471-2105-10-283. URL https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-283.

ISSN 1471-2105. doi:

Mark Newman, Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, and Duncan J. Watts, editors. The Structure and Dynamics of

Networks. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 2006.

L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.

In Proceedings of the 7th International World Wide Web Conference, pages 161–172, Brisbane, Australia,
1998. URL citeseer.nj.nec.com/page98pagerank.html.

Oskar Perron. Zur theorie der matrices. Mathematische Annalen, 64(2):248–263, 1907.

Tai Qin and Karl Rohe. Regularized spectral clustering under the degree-corrected stochastic blockmodel.

In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume
2, NIPS’13, pages 3120–3128, USA, 2013. Curran Associates Inc. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=2999792.2999960.

Karl Rohe, Sourav Chatterjee, and Bin Yu. Spectral clustering and the high-dimensional stochastic block-

model. The Annals of Statistics, 39(4):1878–1915, 2011.

Srijan Sengupta and Yuguo Chen. A block model for node popularity in networks with community structure.

Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 80(2):365–386, 2018.

Daniel A Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng. Spectral partitioning works: Planar graphs and ﬁnite element

meshes.

In Foundations of Computer Science, 1996. Proceedings., 37th Annual Symposium on, pages

96–105. IEEE, 1996.

Daniel A Spielman and Shang Hua Teng. Nearly-linear time algorithms for graph partitioning, graph sparsi-

ﬁcation, and solving linear systems. In Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory

of computing, pages 81–90. ACM, 2004.

Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. Collective dynamics of small-worldnetworks. nature, 393(6684):

440, 1998.

Yaojia Zhu, Xiaoran Yan, and Cristopher Moore. Oriented and degree-generated block models: generating

and inferring communities with inhomogeneous degree distributions. Journal of Complex Networks, 2(1):

1–18, 2013.

61

