9
1
0
2

v
o
N
3
1

]

V

I
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
2
4
2
5
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fast Approximate Time-Delay Estimation in Ultrasound Elastography
Using Principal Component Analysis

Abdelrahman Zayed1 and Hassan Rivaz2

Abstract— Time delay estimation (TDE) is a critical and
challenging step in all ultrasound elastography methods. A
growing number of TDE techniques require an approximate but
robust and fast method to initialize solving for TDE. Herein, we
present a fast method for calculating an approximate TDE be-
tween two radio frequency (RF) frames of ultrasound. Although
this approximate TDE can be useful for several algorithms,
we focus on GLobal Ultrasound Elastography (GLUE), which
currently relies on Dynamic Programming (DP) to provide this
approximate TDE. We exploit Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) to ﬁnd the general modes of deformation in quasi-
static elastography, and therefore call our method PCA-GLUE.
PCA-GLUE is a data-driven approach that learns a set of
TDE principal components from a training database in real
experiments. In the test phase, TDE is approximated as a
weighted sum of these principal components. Our algorithm
robustly estimates the weights from sparse feature matches,
then passes the resulting displacement ﬁeld to GLUE as initial
estimates to perform a more accurate displacement estimation.
PCA-GLUE is more than ten times faster than DP in estimation
of the initial displacement ﬁeld and yields similar results.

I. INTRODUCTION

Ultrasound elastography is an emerging imaging modality
that can estimate the mechanical properties of the tissue
using Radio Frequency (RF) data. This is of great importance
in the diagnosis of many diseases and has many clinical
applications [1]. Elastography can be broadly classiﬁed into
dynamic and quasi-static elastography [2]. Dynamic elastog-
raphy often provides quantitative mechanical properties of
the tissue. Quasi-static elastography, which is our concern in
this paper, estimates the tissue deformation that occur due to
applying a slowly varying external force [3].

Regardless of the elastography technique used, estima-
tion of tissue displacement, also known as Time-Delay-
Estimation (TDE),
is a critical and challenging step. A
growing interest is dedicated to developing robust and ac-
curate TDE methods either using window-based [4], [5] or
optimization-based [6], [7] methods. Window-based tech-
niques calculate the TDE for small windows of the RF
data either by maximizing a similarity metric such as nor-
malized cross correlation (NCC) or by ﬁnding the zero
crossing of the phase of cross correlation [5]. Optimization-
based techniques, such as Global Ultrasound Elastography

*This research was funded by Richard and Edith Strauss Foundation.
1Abdelrahman Zayed is with Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering and PERFORM Centre, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada a zayed@encs.concordia.ca

2Hassan Rivaz is with Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering and PERFORM Centre, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada hrivaz@ece.concordia.ca

(GLUE), calculate the TDE by minimizing a regularized cost
function [6].

An approximate estimation of the displacement map is
mandatory in some methods (such as GLUE) or can help
speed the search (such as in window-based methods). Dy-
namic Programming (DP) [8] has been often used to pro-
vide this initial estimate. However, GLUE requires initial
estimates for all samples of the image and running DP for
the entire image is computationally expensive. In this paper,
we present a method that only needs DP initial estimates for
few RF lines, and as such, is very computationally efﬁcient.
Inspired by the success of [9], we ﬁrst compute the
principal components of deformation ﬁelds in quasi-static
elastography by collecting many frames of ultrasound data
during free-hand palpation from different phantoms and at
different locations, in addition to in-vivo data collected from
the liver. An ultrasound probe can move in 6 degrees of
freedom (DOF), and we collect this data by allowing all
kinds of motion. Although purely axial displacements of
the probe are ideal for quasi-static elastography, we do
not restrict our training database to this kind of motion to
allow our model to better generalize to different users with
different styles of compression. We then estimate any kind of
compression as some weighted summation of these principal
components. A recent work shows promising results of
displacement estimation by learning a global dictionary of
deformations in electrode displacement elastography [10].

II. METHOD

DP is a global optimization method that can provide
discrete displacement estimates [8]. Although substantially
more efﬁcient than a brute force algorithm, DP is com-
putationally expensive. Herein, we propose a data-driven
technique that learns the deformation modes (i.e. principal
components) of quasi-static elastography, and then approxi-
mates any deformation as a weighted sum of these modes.
During training, we calculate N principal components
that describe the axial displacement as the tissue deforms.
These principal components are represented by b1 to bN.
Fig. 1 shows a schematic of probe motion and some of
these principal components learned from real experiments.
It is clear that applying an axial force produces an axial
displacement that increases linearly with the depth, starting
from zero at the probe level, while the opposite happens
after the removal of the force. As for rotation, it produces
an axial displacement in two opposite directions (upwards
and downwards) on both sides.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Let I1 and I2 be RF frames of size m × l, where m is the
number of samples in an RF line and l is the number of RF
lines. Our goal is to calculate an approximate deformation
ﬁeld between these two frames. Algorithm 1 shows the steps
of our method, which is also outlined below.

A. Calculating the displacement of the sparse features

We ﬁrst choose p << l equidistant RF lines and run DP
to calculate an integer axial displacement ﬁeld. DP produces
K = m × p displacements between I1 and I2. Compared to
the image size m × l, K represents a sparse set of correspon-
dences. We perform a simple linear interpolation to convert
these integer deformation estimates to real numbers. We then
form vector c of length K that corresponds to the interpolated
axial displacements.

(a) Directions of applied force

(b) Axial deformation (z)

Algorithm 1 PCA-GLUE. Disp. refers to displacement.

1: procedure PCA-GLUE
2:
3:
4:

Choose p equidistant RF lines
Run DP to get the integer axial disp. of the p RF lines
Solve Eq. 2 to get the vector w
Compute the initial axial disp. of all RF lines by Eq. 3
Use GLUE to calculate the exact axial disp.
Strain is obtained by spatial differentiation of the disp.

5:
6:
7:
8: end procedure

B. Estimating the displacement in the whole image using the
principal components

We form the matrix A such that







A =

b2(q1)
b2(q2)

bN(q1)
b1(q1)
bN(q2)
b1(q2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
bN(qK)
b1(qK)

b3(q1)
b3(q2)

b2(qK)

b3(qK)

. . .
. . .

. . .







(1)

where q1 to qK correspond to our 2D sparse features chosen
along the p RF lines before deformation. N is the number of
principal components used. We then solve the optimization
equation below:

ˆw = arg min
w

||Aw–c||

(2)

The intuition behind this equation is that we ﬁnd the weight
vector w = (w1, ..., wN)T that best describes the displacement
of the p RF lines as a linear combination of the principal
components that we computed ofﬂine. Hence, the displace-
ment of the rest of the RF lines is assumed to be also a linear
combination of the same principal components weighted by
the same weight vector.

Consequently, the initial estimate of the axial displacement

ˆd is calculated as:

ˆd =

N
∑
n=1
where ˆd is passed to GLUE to calculate the ﬁne-tuned d.
Finally, spatial differentiation is performed on d to obtain
the strain image.

ˆwnbn

(3)

C. Data Collection and Principal Components

1) Training the Model: For our training data, we collected
approximately 4000 frames from both in-vivo liver data and
3 different CIRS phantoms (Norfolk, VA), namely Models
040GSE, 039 and 059 at different locations. RF phantom data
were collected using a 12R Alpinion Ultrasound machine
(Bothell, WA) with an L3-12H high density linear array
probe at a center frequency of 8.5 MHz and sampling
frequency of 40 MHz. The probe can move in 6 degrees
of freedom (DOF) in total, wherein 3 result
in out-of-
plane motion and 3 lead to in-plane motion. Hence, we
performed 3 types of probe motion that lead to in-plane
motion, namely purely axial, purely in-plane rotation and
purely lateral displacement (two of these DOFs are shown
in Fig. 1). We used GLUE [6] to calculate the displacement

(c) In-plane rotation (θ )

Fig. 1. Principal components of in-plane axial displacement learned from
both in-vivo and phantom experiments. In (a), translation of the probe along
z and its rotation by θ generates axial deformation in the phantom. In (b),
extension and compression principal components along z are shown. In (c),
displacement arising from rotation by θ is shown.

images for training. It took around 5 hours to extract the
principal components, but this step is performed only once
ofﬂine and does not need to be performed at test time.

2) Principal Components: More principal components
better capture the space of different deformations. However,
this will render the algorithm more computationally expen-
sive and also less robust to noise. To specify the number
of principal components, we choose N principal components
and calculate the variance in our data after being projected to
a lower dimensional space. In our case, taking just N = 12
principal components was enough to preserve 95% of the
variance in the high-dimensional data.

As for the lateral displacement, we tried to calculate
their own principal components, but that was not possible.
The variance was almost equally distributed over all the
eigenvalues (resembling white noise). Therefore, to preserve
up to 95% of the variance, we had to take hundreds of
principal components. That is because GLUE is not very
accurate in calculating lateral displacements, mainly because
of the poor resolution of ultrasound in this direction. As
a result, instead of calculating principal components in the
lateral direction, we simply perform a bi-linear interpolation
of the K = m × p lateral displacement estimates. Our results
this bi-linear interpolation provides acceptable
show that
lateral displacement estimates.

III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

We chose N=12 and p=5 for the number of principal
components and RF lines respectively, which corresponds
to the best trade-off between running time and accuracy.
In order to quantitatively measure the performance of our
method, we used two unitless metrics which are signal to
noise ratio (SNR) and contrast to noise ratio (CNR) [11]:

CNR =

(cid:115)

C
N

=

2( ¯sb − ¯st )2
b + σ 2
σ 2
t

, SNR =

¯s
σ

(4)

where ¯st and σ 2
t are the strain average and variance of the
target window, ¯sb and σ 2
b are the strain average and variance
of the background window respectively. To calculate the
SNR, we used the same background window, which means
that ¯s= ¯sb and σ =σb.

Our unoptimized implementation of the proposed method
in MATLAB takes approximately 258 ms on an 8th genera-
tion 3.2 GHz Intel core i7 to estimate the 2D displacement
ﬁelds between two very large images of size 2304 × 384.
In comparison, DP takes approximately 2.6 seconds on the
same system to estimate the 2D displacement ﬁelds of two
images of the same size, more than ten times longer than
the proposed method. Further speed-up can be achieved by
optimizing our code and implementing it in C.

A. Phantom Results

For our experiments, we used data acquired from the same
three CIRS elastography phantoms using the 12R Alpinion
E-Cube ultrasound machine at a sampling rate of 40 MHz.
Fig. 2 shows the results of both GLUE and PCA-GLUE, as

(a) PCA-GLUE

(b) GLUE

Fig. 2. Results of the axial strain images for the real phantom experiment.
The target and background windows are used for calculating SNR and CNR.

(a) PCA-GLUE

(b) GLUE

Fig. 3. Results of the axial strain images for in-vivo data. The target and
background windows are used for calculating SNR and CNR.

well as the windows used as target and background. Table I
summarizes the results, where the values of SNR and CNR
for both GLUE and PCA-GLUE are almost the same. It is
important to note that the reported results are on new test
data which our model has not seen before during the training
phase.

B. In-vivo Results

Our in-vivo results were collected from one patient un-
dergoing open surgical radiofrequency thermal ablation for
primary or secondary liver cancers. The data was acquired
from Johns Hopkins Hospital. Fig. 3 shows the results of
both GLUE and PCA-GLUE, as well as the windows used
as target and background. Table II summarizes the results,
where the values of SNR and CNR for both GLUE and PCA-
GLUE are very close.

C. Varying the number of sparse features K

Increasing p means that there are more correspondences
available for Eq. 2, leading to more accurate weights. How-
ever, DP should be run on more RF lines which increases
the computational complexity. Fig. 4 shows that increasing
the number of RF lines above 5 will not change the results,
and therefore, we set p = 5 RF lines.

(a) PCA-GLUE using 5 RF lines

(b) PCA-GLUE using 15 RF lines

(c) PCA-GLUE using 30 RF lines

(d) GLUE

Fig. 4. Results of the axial strain images for the phantom experiment as we increase the number of RF lines p from 5 to 30.

TABLE I
THE SNR AND CNR VALUES OF THE AXIAL STRAIN IMAGES FOR THE

PHANTOM EXPERIMENT. TARGET WINDOWS AND BACKGROUND
WINDOWS ARE OF SIZE 3 mm × 3 mm AND 5 mm × 5 mm RESPECTIVELY
AS SHOWN IN FIG. 2. SNR IS CALCULATED FOR THE BACKGROUND
WINDOW.

Method used

SNR

CNR

GLUE
PCA-GLUE

22.51
22.50

20.74
20.75

TABLE II
THE SNR AND CNR VALUES OF THE AXIAL STRAIN IMAGES FOR THE
in-vivo DATA. TARGET WINDOWS AND BACKGROUND WINDOWS ARE OF
SIZE 3 mm × 3 mm AND 5 mm × 5 mm RESPECTIVELY AS SHOWN IN FIG.
3. SNR IS CALCULATED FOR THE BACKGROUND WINDOW.

Method used

SNR

CNR

GLUE
PCA-GLUE

20.26
20.49

17.18
18.09

IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

PCA-GLUE provides an initial displacement map substan-
tially faster than DP. A second important application of our
proposed framework is that the weights of the principal com-
ponents determine the magnitude of different types of probe
motion (e.g. purely axial, in-plane rotation, etc.). For quasi-
static elastography, purely axial displacements usually lead
to strain images of higher quality. Therefore, our proposed
method can be used as a very fast technique for selecting
good frames for further processing.

In this paper, we introduced a novel data-driven method for
efﬁciently calculating an initial axial displacement between
two frames of RF data. In quasi-static elastography, there is
a large variability in the types of probe motion as well as in
tissue inhomogeneities. This leads to a large variability in the
underlying displacement ﬁeld. However, this displacement
ﬁeld can be approximated with a weighted summation of
few principal components of tissue deformation that capture
most of displacement variability. Our proposed method is

more than 10 times faster than DP and generates similar
displacement estimates.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The in-vivo data were collected at Johns Hopkins Hospital.
The authors would like to thank the principal investigators
Drs. E. Boctor, M. Choti and G. Hager who provided us with
the data.

REFERENCES

[1] J.-L. Gennisson, T. Defﬁeux, M. Fink, and M. Tanter, “Ultrasound
elastography: principles and techniques,” Diagnostic and interven-
tional imaging, vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 487–495, 2013.

[2] T. J Hall, P. E Barboneg, A. A Oberai, J. Jiang, J.-F. Dord,
S. Goenezen, and T. G Fisher, “Recent results in nonlinear strain and
modulus imaging,” Current medical imaging reviews, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
313–327, 2011.

[3] K. Parker, M. Doyley, and D. Rubens, “Imaging the elastic properties
of tissue: the 20 year perspective,” Physics in medicine & biology,
vol. 56, no. 1, p. R1, 2010.

[4] J.

Jiang and T.

J. Hall, “A coupled subsample displacement
estimation method for ultrasound-based strain elastography,” Physics
in Medicine and Biology, vol. 60, no. 21, pp. 8347–8364, oct
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1088%2F0031-9155%
2015.
2F60%2F21%2F8347

[5] L. Yuan and P. C. Pedersen, “Analytical phase-tracking-based strain
estimation for ultrasound elasticity,” IEEE transactions on ultrasonics,
ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 185–207, 2015.
[6] H. S. Hashemi and H. Rivaz, “Global time-delay estimation in ultra-
sound elastography,” IEEE transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics,
and frequency control, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 1625–1636, 2017.

[7] H. Rivaz, E. M. Boctor, M. A. Choti, and G. D. Hager, “Real-time
regularized ultrasound elastography,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 928–945, 2011.

[8] H. Rivaz, E. Boctor, P. Foroughi, R. Zellars, G. Fichtinger, and
G. Hager, “Ultrasound elastography: a dynamic programming ap-
proach,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 27, no. 10, pp.
1373–1377, 2008.

[9] J. Wulff and M. J. Black, “Efﬁcient sparse-to-dense optical ﬂow
estimation using a learned basis and layers,” in IEEE Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2015, June 2015.
[10] R. M. Pohlman and T. Varghese, “Dictionary representations for elec-
trode displacement elastography,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics,
Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, (in press).

[11] J. Ophir, S. K. Alam, B. Garra, F. Kallel, E. Konofagou, T. Krouskop,
and T. Varghese, “Elastography: ultrasonic estimation and imaging of
the elastic properties of tissues,” Proceedings Inst. Mech. Eng., Part
H: J. Eng. in Med., vol. 213, no. 3, pp. 203–233, 1999.

