Customers Churn Prediction in Financial Institution Using                          

Artificial Neural Network. 

Kamorudeen A. AMUDA*1, Adesesan B. ADEYEMO2 

Department of Computer Science, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.  

*Email of Corresponding Author: akindeleamuda@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT 
In this study a predictive model using Multi-layer Perceptron of Artificial Neural Network architecture was developed 
to  predict  customer  churn  in  financial  institution.  Previous  researches  have  used  supervised  machine  learning 
classifiers such as Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Support Vector Machine, K-Nearest Neighbors, and Random 
Forest.  These  classifiers  require  human  effort  to  perform  feature  engineering  which  lead  to  over-specified  and 
incomplete feature selection. Therefore, this research developed a model to eliminate manual feature engineering  in 
data  preprocessing  stage.  Fifty  thousand  customers’  data  were  extracted  from  the  database  of  one  of  the  leading 
financial institution in Nigeria for the study.  The multi-layer perceptron model was built with python programming 
language and used two overfitting techniques (Dropout and L2 regularization).  
The implementation done in python was compared with another model in Neuro solution infinity software. The results 
showed  that  the  Artificial  Neural  Network  software  development  (Python)  had  comparable  performance  with  that 
obtained from the Neuro Solution Infinity software. The accuracy rates are 97.53% and 97.4% while ROC (Receiver 
Operating Characteristic) curve graphs are 0.89 and 0.85 respectively.  

Keywords: Multi-layer Perceptron, Artificial Neural Network, Customer Churns, Classifiers, Feature engineering,  
L2 regularization and Dropout.  

1.0 Introduction  
The volume of data has been growing at a fast rate due 
to technological advancement which makes data as the 
oil  of  the  21st  century  but  oil  is  just  useless  until  it 
refines into fuel. Many new methods and techniques 
have  been  introduced  to  extract  the  meaningful  and 
salient information hidden in the data and the process 
is  called  Data  Mining  Techniques.  The  technique 
included  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM),  Linear 
Regression,  Genetic  algorithm,  Decision  Tree  and 
Neural Network (Taiwo & Adeyemo 2012).  
Customer  churn 
is  a  fundamental  problem  for 
companies  and it is defined as the loss of customers 
because they move out to competitors.  Being able to 
predict customer churning behavior in advance, gives 
an institution a high valuable insight in order to retain 
and increase their customer base.  
A  wide  range  of  customer  churn  predictive  models 
have  been  developed  in  the  last  decades.  Most 
advanced models make use of state-of-the-art machine 
learning classifiers such as random forest, linear and 
logistic regression (Castanedo, 2014).  
One  of  the  most  direct  and  effective  approaches  to 
keep the current customers is that the company should 
be able to foresee potential churners in time and react 
to it quickly. Recognizing the indications of potential 
churn;  satisfying  customer  needs,  restoring  and  re-
establishing loyalty are actions supposed to help the s 
organization  minimize  the  cost  of  gaining  new 
customers (Mitkees et al, 2017).  

Financial institutions are the organization that process 
monetary  transaction  including  business  and  private 
loans,  customer  deposits  and 
investments.  As 
customers  are  directly  related  to  profits,  financial 
institutions  must  avoid  the  loss  of  customers  while 
acquiring  new  customers.  Harvard  Business  Review 
believes that by reducing the customer defection rate 
by 5%, companies can increase profits by 25% to 85%, 
while Business Week thought the profits will increase 
by 140%.   
Bhattacharya (1994) that the cost of developing a new 
customer is 5 to 6 times than retaining an old customer. 
As  can  be  seen,  reducing  customer  attrition  has  a 
significant  impact  not  only  on  increasing  profits  for 
financial institutions, but also on enhancing their core 
competitiveness.  Therefore,  it  is  urgent  for  financial 
institutions  to  improve  the  capabilities  to  predict 
customer  churn,  thereby  taking  timely  measures  to 
retain  customers  and  preventing  other  clients  from 
churning. 

Artificial Neural Network also called Neural Network 
(NN) is a complex network that comprises a large set 
of  simple  nodes  known  as  neural  cells.  Artificial 
Neural  Network  was  proposed  based  on  advanced 
biology  research  concerning  human  brain  tissue  and 
neural  system,  and  can  be  used  to  simulate  neural 
activities of information processing in the human brain 
(Vaxevanidis,2008).  

 
 
Artificial Neural Network have  been used in finance 
for portfolio management, credit rating and predicting 
bankruptcy,  forecasting  exchange  rates,  predicting 
stock values, inflation and cash forecasting.   
In  this  paper,  we  work  on  predictive  analysis  of 
churning behavior in financial institution base on the 
dataset extracted from the bank database.  The model 
developed  with  MLP  of  Artificial  Neural  Network 
architecture, potential churners and non-churners were 
predicts  and  different  performance  metrics  such  as 
precision,  accuracy,  recall  and  f-score  were  used  to 
evaluate  the  robustness  of  the  model  and  compared 
with Neuro Solution Infinity analytical tool. The paper 
is structured as follows. Section 2 explores the various 
literature reviews on the related work. Section 3 gives 
the 
the 
methodological  approach.  Section  4  illustrates  the 
results  of  the  proposed  work and  Section  5  explores 
the conclusion and future work. 

objectives 

illustrates 

research 

and 

2.0 LITERATURE REVIEWS 
He  et  al,  (2014)  carried  out  a  research  on  customer 
attrition  analysis  of  commercial  bank  using  Support 
Vector  Machine.  The  dataset  contains  50000 
customers  records  were  extracted  from  Chinese 
commercial  bank data  warehouse.  After  the  removal 
of missing values and outliers, 46,406 records used to 
model.  SVM  algorithm  was  applied  but  due  to  the 
imbalanced  characteristics  of  the  dataset,  Random 
sampling  method  was  introduced  to  improve  SVM 
since it has a higher degree of recognition. The results 
shown that the combination of random sampling and 
support  vector  machine  algorithm  significantly 
improved the predictive power and accurately predict 
churning rate.  
In  the  telecommunication  industry,  cellular  network 
providers  are  becoming  more  competitive  and  churn 
management 
task 
become 
telecommunication industry. Sharma, (2011) applied a 
neural  network  to  predict  customer  churn  in  cellular 
network  service.  The  dataset  contains  20  variables 
worth  of  information  about  2,427  customers  were 
collected from UCI Machine Learning Database at the 
University of California, Irvine.  Neural Network was 
implemented  on  Clementine  data  mining  software 
package  from  SPSS  Inc.,  Clementine  provided  two 
different classes of supervised neural networks namely 
Multilayer  Perceptron  (MLP)  and  Radial  Base 
Function Network (RBFN). The result shows that the 
model predicts customers churn with an accuracy rate 
of more than 92%.  

crucial 

has 

a 

Oyeniyi  &  Adeyemo,  (2015)  customer  churn  has 
become a major problem within a customer-centered 
banking  industry  and  banks  have  tried  to  track 
Customer Interaction in order to detect early warning 

signs in customer’s behaviour such as a reduction in 
transaction and account dormancy. They also worked 
on customer churn analysis in the banking sector, the 
model  used  K-Means  and  Repeated  Incremental 
Pruning to Produce Error Reduction (JRip algorithm) 
which  was  implemented  on  Weka.  The  dataset  was 
extracted  from  the  bank's  customer  relationship 
management database and transaction warehouse from 
a  major  Nigeria  bank.  The  results  determine  the 
pattern  in  customer  behavior  and  help  banks  to 
identify customers that are likely to churn. 

To  improve  the  prediction  abilities  of  machine 
learning method, Guo-en et al (2008) applied support 
vector  machine  on  structure  risk  minimization  to 
customer  churn  analysis.  The  dataset  was  collected 
from machine learning UCI database of the University 
of  California.  The  results  shown  that  the  support 
vector machine method enjoys the best accuracy rate, 
hit  rate,  covering  rate  and  lift  coefficient  when 
compared  with  Artificial  Neural  Network,  Decision 
Tree,  Logistic  Regression  and  Naïve  Bayesian 
classifier.  Support  vector  machine  provides  an 
effective measurement for customer churn prediction.  

Taiwo  &  Adeyemo  (2012),  used  descriptive  and 
predictive  data  mining  techniques  to  determine  the 
calling  behaviour  of  subscribers  and  recognize 
subscribers  with  a  high  probability  of  churn  in  a 
telecommunication company. In the descriptive stage, 
the  customers  were  clustered  based  on  their  usage 
for 
behavioural 
clustering  methods  were  K-Means  and  Expected 
Maximization 
stage, 
In 
DecisionStump,  M5P  and  RepTree  classifiers 
algorithms  were  implemented  in  Weka.  The  results 
show  that  EM  performs  better  than  K-mean  in  the 
descriptive stage while M5P perform better than both 
DecisionStump, and RepTree in the predictive stage. 

features  and  algorithms  used 

the  predictive 

(EM). 

in 

Lu et al, (2011) proposed the use of boosting algorithm 
customer 
to 
the 
churn 
the 
predict 
telecommunication 
industry.  Customers  were 
separated  into  two  clusters  based  on  the  weight 
assigned by boosting algorithm, the data set used was 
extracted  from  a  telecommunication  company  which 
included  a  segment  of  mobile  customers  who  are 
active  and  contains  about  700  variables.  Boosting 
algorithm performs better than logistic regression and 
it provides a good separation of churn data.  

Sandeepkumar  &  Monica  (2019),  considered  multi-
layered  neural  network  which  also  known  as  Deep 
Feed  Forward  Neural  Network  (DFNN)  to  perform 
predictive  analytics  on  customer  attrition  in  the 
banking  sector.  The  dataset  was  collected  from  the 

 
UCI machine learning archive which has total 10,000 
customer  data  with  14  dimensions  of  features.    The 
model  use  optimized  one  hot  encoding  and  Tukey 
outliers’  algorithms  to  perform  data  cleaning  and 
preprocessing.  The  model  was  compared  with  the 
learning  algorithms  such  as  Logistic 
machine 
regression,  Decision  tree  and  Gaussian  Naïve  Bayes 
algorithm.  The  results  shown  that  Enhanced  Deep 
Feed  Forward  Neural  Network  (DFNN)  model 
performs best in accuracy when compared with others 
machine learning algorithms. 

Wang  et  al  (2018),  worked  on  large-scale  ensemble 
model  for  customer  churn  prediction  in  search  Ads. 
The  aimed  of  the  research  was  to  detect  customers 
with a high propensity to leave the ads platform. the 
ensemble  model  of  gradient  boosting  decision  tree 
(GBDT) was used to predict customer that will be  a 
churner in the foreseeable future based on its activities 
in the search ads. two different features for the GBDT 
were  dynamic  features  and  static  features.  dynamic 
features considered a sequence of customers’ activities 
such as impressions, clicks during a long period. while 
static features considered the information of customers 
setting  such  as  creation  time,  customer  type.  the 
dataset was collected from Bing Ads platform and the 
result shown that the static and dynamic features are 
complementary  with  AUC  (area  under  the  curve  of 
ROC) value 0.8410.  

Rosa  (2019),  proposed  a  new  framework  that  used 
Artificial Neural Network for assessing and predicting 
customer attrition in the banking industry. About 1588 
customers  data  from  the  period  of  January  2017  to 
December  2017  was  extracted  from  the  bank´s  Data 
Warehouse  with  the  use  of  SAS  Base.  The  research 
solely  focused  on  developing  neural  network  and 
overlooked other machine learning algorithms such as 
Decision  Trees,  Logistic  Regression,  or  Support 
Vector Machines. 

3.0 MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Customer churn prediction has a great impact on 
financial institutions since they are mainly depending 
on  customer  satisfaction  for  their  operations.  These 
institutions  are  highly  competitive  environment  and 
retain  customers  by  satisfying  their  needs  under  the 
resource’s constraint. The data mining techniques used 
to discover interesting patterns and relationships that 
exist in the data and predict the customers’  behavior 
either churning or non-churning by fitting the model 
on the available historical data.  

Researches  on  churn  prediction  have  used 
machine 
learning  classifiers  such  as  Logistic 
Regression, Decision Tree, Support Vector Machine, 

lead 

K-Nearest  Neighbors,  and  Random  Forest.  These 
classifiers  require  human  effort  to  perform  feature 
engineering  which 
to  over-specified  and 
incomplete feature selection. 
Hence,  this  research  developed  a  predictive  model 
using  Multilayer  Perceptron  of  Artificial  Neural 
Network architecture to predict customer churn as well 
as to eliminate the manual feature engineering process 
in data preprocessing stage.  
The  main  objectives  of  this  research  paper  are:  To 
develop  customer  churn  predictive  model  using 
Multilayer  Perceptron  of  Artificial  Neural  Network 
Architecture; To use the model to predict the potential 
churners and non-churners; To evaluate and compare 
the  performance  of  the  model  with  analytical  tool 
result.  

Data Collection 

The dataset was extracted from the database of one of 
the  leading  financial  institution  in  Nigeria.    The 
contained  about  50000  customers’  data  with  42 
attributes. Some of these are: 

Features 
Gender 

Cust_txn_status 
Marital_status 

Occupation 
Lga 
State 
Religion 

current_account 

xclusive_subscript 

current_account_cor
p 

savings_deposit_yo
uth 
Community_savings
_account 
Hida 

Divorced;  M= 
S=Single, 

Description  
M for Male; F for Female 
and  NULL  was  used  for 
customers  we  couldn’t 
get their gender type 
Active and Inactive 
D= 
Married; 
NULL=NULL 
Customer Job description 
Local Government Area 
State in Nigeria  
Christian;  Islam;  Other 
Religion 
Current  Accounts 
individuals 
for 
Current  Account 
High 
worth 
Net 
Individuals with monthly 
income above N1m 
Current  account  for  big 
companies 
shell, 
chevron, 
coca-cola, 
nestle. 
accounts 
Savings 
teenagers and babies 
Savings 
for 
estates and communities 
interest  deposit 
High 
account 

account 

like 

for 

for 

 
 
 
Mobapp_Fund_Trsf
_LCY_Revenue 

Mobapp_Fund_Trsf
_FCY_Count 

Mobapp_Fund_Trsf
_FCY_Vol 

Mobapp_Fund_Trsf
_FCY_Revenue 

Mobapp_Lifestyle_
Count 

Mobapp_Lifestyle_
Vol 

mobapp_Lifestyle_
Revenue 

Cust_id 

the 

Sept 

total  amount  of 
customer 
or 

Profit  accruable  to  the 
Bank  based  on  currency 
transfers by the customer 
between 
to 
November 
The total number of times 
the  customer  transferred 
money  (USD  or  EURO 
or GBP only). 
The 
money 
transferred 
(USD 
EURO or GBP only) 
Profit  accruable  to  the 
Bank  based  on  foreign 
currency  transfers  made 
by the customer between 
Sept to November 
The total number of times 
the  customer  paid  for 
travel  tickets  or  movie 
tickets  or  other  event 
ticket 
Amount  in  naira  times 
paid  by  customer  for 
travel  tickets  or  movie 
tickets  or  other  event 
ticket.  
Profit  accruable  to  the 
bank 
on 
based 
transactions  made  by 
customers 
travel 
tickets or movie tickets or 
other event. 
Unique 
number for customers. 

identification 

for 

Data Preparation 

The missing values with 30% null were removed from 
the  dataset  with  the  aid  of  Python  programming 
language libraries. Numerical data was replaced with 
the ‘mean’ of the variables while the ‘mode’ was used 
for 
the  categorical  data.  To  achieve  better 
performance, the categorical data was transformed to 
numerical format using the Label Encoder function in 
Python. Feature scaling was applied to normalize the 
data and improved the computational time.  

Tools and Libraries 

Anaconda: is an open source software distribution of 
R  and  Python  programming  languages  that  are  used 
for  scientific  computing  such  as  data  science, 

predictive  analytics,  machine  learning,  and  deep 
learning  applications  purposely  to  simplify  package 
management and deployment. 
Jupyter  Notebook:  is  an  open  free  source  web 
application  that  is  used  for  data  cleaning  and 
transformation,  numerical,  simulation,  statistical 
modelling, data visualization and so on. 
Matplotlib:  is  an  amazing  visualization  library  in 
Python  programming  language  for  two-dimensional 
plots  of  arrays.  One  of  the  greatest  benefits  of 
visualization is that it allows high dimensionality data 
to visualize and easily understandable and it consists 
of several plots like line, bar, scatter, histogram and so 
on.  
Pandas:  is  the  most  popular  Python  programming 
language package that offers powerful, expensive and 
flexible  data  structures  that  make  data  manipulation 
and analysis easy.  
Numpy:  is  the  fundamental  package  for  scientific 
computing  in  Python  programming  language  that 
contains  a  powerful  N-dimensional  array  object  and 
also useful in linear algebra. 
Label  Encoder:  is  a  Python  programming  language 
package that is used to transform non-numerical labels 
(or nominal categorical variables) to numerical labels.  
ANN  visualizer: is a Python programming language 
library that enables visualization of an artificial neural 
network.                                                                                                       
Seaborn: is a Python data visualization library based 
on  matplotlib  that  provides  high-level  interface  for 
drawing attractive and informative statistical graphics. 
Sci-kit Learn: it is a free machine learning library for 
Python  programming  language  that  designed  to 
interoperate  with  Python  numerical  Numpy  and 
scientific  libraries  SciPy.  Also,  it  can  be  used  for 
classification,  regression  and  clustering  algorithms 
including support vector machine, linear and logistic 
regression, random forests, gradient boosting, decision 
tree, K-means and so on. 

TensorFlow: is an open source Python library used for 
machine learning applications such as neural network 
and used Keras as a backend.  

Keras:  is  a  neural  network  framework  for  Python 
programming  language  that  provides  a  convenient 
way  to  define  and  train  almost  any  kind  of  deep 
learning model.  

Neuro Solutions Infinity: is one of the most powerful 
neural network software of the Neuro Solutions family 
that  streamlines 
the  data  mining  process  by 
automatically cleaning and preprocessing data. It uses 
distributed computing, advanced neural networks and 
artificial  intelligence  (AI)  to  model  data;  creates 
highly accurate predictive models with an easy-to-use 

 
and intuitive interface that provides valuable insights 
that can be used to drive better decisions. 

In  multilayer  perceptron  architecture,  each  hidden 
layer node consists of two parts; 

Microsoft  SQL  Server:  is  a  relational  database 
management 
system  developed  by  Microsoft 
Incorporation  which  primarily  used  for  storing  and 
retrieving  data 
software 
applications  that  run  on  the  same  computer  or  on 
another computer across a network. 

requested  by  other 

Flowchart:  illustrate  the  step  by  step  procedure  on 
how  to  predict  customers  churn  with  the  multilayer 
perceptron of artificial neural network architecture.  

•  Summation 

summation 
function:  The 
function  calculates  the  sum  of  each  input 
the  corresponding 
value  multiplied  by 
weights.  Mathematically, 
be 
represented as  

can 

it 

Where n is the numbers of neuron in the network  

•  Activation function: The activation is applied 
by each neuron to sum of weight input signals 
in  order  to  determine  its  output  signal.  
Sigmoid function such as the S-shaped curve 
is one of the most commonly used activation 
functions for binary classification problems.  

Steps for MLP Model 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

viii. 

Figure 1: Flow Diagram for proposed model. 

Implementation 

Infinity 

The  implementation  was  carried  out  in  two  phases; 
MLP software development on Python and then using 
Neuro  Solution 
software.  Multilayer 
Perceptron:  MLP  is  an  architecture  of  the  artificial 
neural network that consists of multiple layers where 
each layer is fully connected with the next layer in a 
feed-forward  direction.  The  first  layer  and  the  last 
layers represent the inputs (independent variables) and 
outputs  (target  variables)  of  the  system  respectively. 
the  nodes  represented  as 
Connections  between 
weights. The more the numbers of hidden layers in the 
network, the more the complexity of the network.  

from 

Extraction  of  customer  data  including 
transactional 
bank 
history 
database.  
Data pre-processing for removal of noise 
and  transformation  of  categorical  data 
into numerical data. 
Data  splitting  (train  and  test  set)  and 
feature scaling 
Start  at  the  input  layer  by  forwarding 
propagates  patterns  of  the  train  data 
through the network to generate output.  
Using  cost  function  to  calculate  the 
network  output  to  minimize  the  error 
rate. 
Find the derivative with respect to each 
weight in the network and updating the 
model,  
Calculate the network output and apply 
the 
function 
threshold 
predicted class label. 
Evaluate the model. 

to  obtain 

 
 
 
4.0 RESULTS AND DISCUSION 

The  result  of  the  implementation  in  Python  was 
presented in figure 4, figure 5 and figure 6. It can be 
seen  that  training  loss  was  decreasing  while  training 
accuracy  was  increasing  and  also  the  validation  loss 
was  decreasing  while  validation  accuracy  was 
increasing.  These  shown  that  the  model  was  neither 
overfitting nor underfitting. 

Figure 4: Learning Process 

Figure 5: Training Loss and Validation Loss 

Figure 2: Proposed Model of Multilayer 
Perceptron of Artificial Neural Network.  

Neuro Solution Infinity Software: The implementation 
was  done  by  launching  the  software  followed  by 
uploading the data from the Personal Computer (PC) 
into the  software platform.  The  dataset divided into 
three parts; training set, test set, and validation set and 
the  threshold  for  the  missing  values  was  set.  The 
Neuro  Solution  Software  comprises  of  different 
algorithms  such  as  Multilayer  Perceptron  (MLP), 
Probabilistic  Neural  Network  (PNN),  and  Support 
Vector Machine (SVM). In figure 3 about 50 different 
models  ran  on  the  software  and  the  best  model  was 
selected for the churn analysis. 

Figure 3: Screenshot of Neuro Solution Infinity 
Interface. 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Training Accuracy and Validation 
Accuracy 

 Performance  Evaluation:  Confusion  matrix  was 
used  to  describe  the  performance  of  the  Multilayer 
perceptron classifier on a set of test data for which the 
true values are known. It aids the visualization of the 
performance of the model. The confusion matrix table 
summarized  the  prediction  results  of  the  model.  The 
numbers  of  correctly  classified  and 
incorrectly 
classified  (misclassified)  are  summarized  with  count 
values and broken down by each class (churners and 
non-churners). The essence of performance evaluation 
is to gives insight not only into the errors being made 
by the model but more importantly the types of errors 
that are being made. 

ROC  curve  was  used  to  know  the  capability  of  the 
models  to  distinguish  between  classes  (churners  and 
non-churners).  ROC  values  range  between  0  and  1, 
that is, if the value close to 1, it means the model has 
good measure of separability while near 0 means it has 
worst  measure  of  separability  (i.e.  it  is  reciprocating 
the  result).  Figure  7  it  can  be  seen  that  the  model 
correctly classified 38 customers as churners, 4841 as 
non-churners 
incorrectly  misclassified  9 
customers as churners and 112 as non-churners. 

and 

Figure 7 Confusion Matrix on Python 

From figure 8 the value for ROC curve graph was 
0.89 which mean the model was working perfectly. 
Dropout was introduced in the network to reduce 
overfitting and the complexity of the network to the 
minimal level.  

Figure 8: ROC Curve on Python 

Figure 9: Neuro Solution Infinity ROC Curve 

Figure 9 shows the ROC curve for the best model in 
the  Neuro  Solution  Infinity  software,  Multilayer 
Perceptron (MLP) model gave the best result with 0.85 
followed  by  Probabilistic  Neural  Network  (PNN), 
0.84 and Support Vector Machine (SVM), 0.842. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparative Analysis of Implementations  

the 

results  of 

Table  1  presents 
two 
implementations;  it  can  be  seen  that  the  Multilayer 
Perceptron  implemented  on  Python’s  result  was 
comparable  to  that  of  the  Neuro  Solution  Infinity 
software.  

the 

Python  

Neuro Solution 
Infinity Software 

Accuracy 
Rate 

97.53 

97.36 

ROC  curve 
Value 

0.89 

0.85 

Precision  

97.7 

97.6 

Recall  

99.8 

99.9 

F – Measure 

98.8 

98.7 

Table 1: Implementation Results 

Figure 11: Schematic Diagram of the Proposed 
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) model 

Figure 10: Pictorial view of the two implementations 
performance. 

In figure 11 Dropout was introduced in the network to 
reduce the degree overfitting and the complexity of the 
network to the minimal level. 

5.0  CONCLUSION 

This  research  was  designed  for  the  prediction  of 
customers  churn  using  the  data  from  a  financial 
institution in Nigeria. The data was extracted from the 
bank database and divided into three sets: training set, 
test set, and validation set.  Eighty percent (80%)  of 
the  dataset  was  used  for  training,  ten  percent  (10%) 
was  used  for  testing  and  the  remaining  ten  percent 
(10%)  was  used  for  validating  the  model.  Data  pre-
processing was carried out by removing thirty percent 
(30%) of missing values and the text (categorical) data 
were  converted  into  numerical  data.    Also,  feature 
scaling  was  employed  to  increase  the  computation 
time of the algorithm.  

implemented  on 

Multilayer  Perceptron  Artificial  Neural  Network 
architecture  was 
two  different 
platforms;  Python  and  Neuro  Solution  Infinity 
Software. The results obtained using the two software 
were  comparable  with  the  Python  implementation 
given  a  97.53  %  accuracy  while  the  Neuro  Solution 
Infinity  software  gave  97.36%  accuracy.  The 
performance of the models was evaluated on the test 
dataset  (unseen  data)  using  the  following  metrics: 
Accuracy,  Precision,  Recall,  F-measure.  In  recent 
surveys  Python  programming  language  has  been 
gaining  in  popularity  as  the  tool  of  choice  amongst 
Data  Scientists  and  Data  Mining  and  Natural 
Language  researchers.  This  is  due  to  its  being 
relatively  easy  to  learn  and  its  very  rich  library  of 

 
 
 
functions and utilities. The information obtained from 
the predictive model can be used for decision making 
in customer retention management system. For future 
work  other  ANN  architectures  such  as  Convolution 
Neural  Network  (CNN),  Recurrent  Neural  Network 
(RNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM).  

Churn  Using  both  Descriptive  and  Predictive 
Algorithms, 3(2), 27–34. 

Wang, Q., Xu, M., & Hussain, A. (2018). Large-scale 
Ensemble  Model  for  Customer  Churn  Prediction  in 
Search Ads. 

Vaxevanidis, N. M. (2008). Artificial neural network 
models  for  the  prediction  of  surface  roughness  in 
283–292. 
electrical 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-008-0081-9 

machining, 

discharge 

REFRENCES 

Bhattacharya,  C.  B.  (1994).  When  Customers  Are 
Members:  Customer  Retention  in  Paid  Membership 
Contexts? 

Castanedo, F. (2014). Using Deep Learning to Predict 
Customer  Churn  in  a  Mobile  Telecommunication 
Network, 1–8.  

Guo-en, X. I. A., & Wei-dong, J. I. N. (2008). Model 
of  Customer  Churn  Prediction  on  Support  Vector 
Machine.  Systems  Engineering  -  Theory  &  Practice, 
28(1),71–77. 
  https://doi.org/10.1016/S1874-
8651(09)60003-X 

He,  B.,  Shi,  Y.,  Wan,  Q.,  &  Zhao,  X.  (2014). 
Prediction of customer attrition of commercial banks 
based on SVM model. Procedia - Procedia Computer 
Science,31,423–430. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2014.05.286 

Lu,  N.,  Lin,  H.,  Lu,  J.,  &  Zhang,  G.  (2011).  A 
Customer  Churn  Prediction  Model 
in  Telecom 
Industry Using Boosting, (c), 1–7. 

Mitkees, I. M. M., Ibrahim, A., & Elseddawy, B. 
(2017). Customer Churn Prediction Model using Data 
Mining techniques, 262–268.  

Oyeniyi, A. O., & Adeyemo, A. B. (2015). Customer 
Churn Analysis in Banking Sector Using Data Mining 
Techniques, 8(3), 165–174. 

Rosa,  Nelson  Belém  da  Costa.  Gauging  and 
foreseeing customer churn in the banking industry: a 
neural network approach. Diss. 2019 

Sandeepkumar  hegde,  &  Mundada,  M.  R.(2019). 
Enhanced Deep Feed Forward Neural Network Model 
for the Customer Attrition Analysis in Banking Sector. 
(July), 10–19. https://doi.org/10.5815/ijisa.2019.07.02 

Sharma,  A.  (2011).  A  Neural  Network  based 
Approach for Predicting Customer Churn in Cellular 
Network Services, 27(11), 26–31. 

Taiwo,  Adeyemo.  (2012).  Computing,  Information 
Systems  Data  Mining  Technique  for  Predicting 
Telecommunications Industry Customer Churn Using 
both Descriptive and Predictive Algorithms Customer 

 
 
 
 
 
