0
2
0
2

r
a

M
0
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
1
7
5
0
.
3
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Undergraduate Student Research With Low Faculty
Cost

Sindhu Kutty
Division of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, USA
skutty@umich.edu

Mark Guzdial
Division of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, USA
mjguz@umich.edu

Abstract—Undergraduates are unlikely to even consider gradu-
ate research in Computer Science if they do not know what Com-
puter Science research is. Many programs aimed at introducing
undergraduate to research are structured like graduate research
programs, with a small number of undergraduates working with
a faculty advisor. Further, females, under-represented minorities,
and ﬁrst generation students may be too intimidated or the idea
of research may be too amorphous, so that they miss out on
these programs. As a consequence, we lose out on opportunities
for greater diversity in CS research.

We have started a pilot program in our department where
a larger number of students (close to two dozen) work with a
single faculty member as part of a research group focused on
Machine Learning and related areas. The goal of this program is
not to convince students to pursue a research career but rather
to enable them to make a more informed decision about what
role they would like research to play in their future.

In order to evaluate our approach, we elicited student experi-
ence via two anonymized exit surveys. Students report that they
develop a better understanding of what research in Computer
Science is. Their interest in research was increased as was their
reported conﬁdence in their ability to do research, although not
all students wanted to further pursue computer science research
opportunities. Given the reported experience of female students,
this program can offer a starting point for greater diversity in
CS research.

Index Terms—undergraduate research, research pedagogy,

social computing, machine learning

I. INTRODUCTION

Students who have only a second-hand or vague understand-
ing of the Computer Science research process may never seri-
ously consider research as a possible career path. This can hin-
der engagement from students who are in demographic groups
that are under-represented in the ﬁeld, including women, racial
minorities and ﬁrst generation students.

In this project, we are interested in providing a safe space
for students to ‘try research on for size’. We aim to provide
enough structure to the process so that it is scalable. We
hypothesize that we can use this model to target students who
may not have had exposure to the idea of research or might
have been intimidated by the idea.

978-1-7281-7172-2/20$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

This project is an educational initiative to introduce under-
graduates to research in an environment that is both more
scalable and less intimidating than common models of under-
graduate research opportunities. Lack of awareness or a self-
perceived lack of preparedness may mean that some students
miss out on these programs [2]. This program deconstructs
the research process via twice-weekly meetings, a guided
literature survey and a replication project. Unlike UROP and
similar programs, the faculty to student ratio is low (one
faculty to 22 students in this offering). Given concerns of
high enrollment, this program provides a scalable approach
to introduce undergraduates to CS research.

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we
elicited student experience via two anonymized exit surveys.
Students report having a better sense of what is involved in
doing CS research despite not having a clear idea previously.
They found the level of detail involved in the process chal-
lenging but enjoyable.

III. ELEMENTS OF THE PROGRAM

This program was advertised to students towards the end
of a high enrollment upper-level undergraduate course on
Machine Learning taught by one of the authors. The course
was run for a duration of 7 weeks with twice-weekly meetings
for the ﬁrst six weeks and a ﬁnal presentation in the last week.
Optionally, students were encouraged to submit a written
report of their work. This was an informal course offering:
in particular, students received no academic credit or grade
for participation in this course.

Elements of this methodology have been used previously in
other institutions to engage students with research. Replication
projects have been used to teach research in STEM ﬁelds,
including mathematics, psychology and even computer science
(see, for instance, [1]). Reading groups and seminar-style
courses typically have assigned readings and presentations.
However, we have provided a framework that uses these
elements to introduce students to CS research with low per-
student faculty cost.

The course focused on recent research results in Machine
Learning and Social Computing. A sampling of subtopics
were presented in the kick-off meeting. Students then divided

 
 
 
 
 
 
into self-selected groups of about 3 each based on topic
preferences. If larger groups formed around topics, students
were divided into smaller subgroups.

A. Literature Survey Component

To fully immerse students in the ﬁeld, students do a
literature survey of different subareas. The faculty mentor
works with each group to pick representative papers for each
subtopic, by pointing out some sample results and relevant and
reputable conferences. The group that selected the subtopic
was responsible for presenting the main results in these papers
to the entire cohort. All groups read papers from every
subtopic. A template is provided to students to guide them
in reading and analyzing the paper, and all groups produce a
written summary of papers that they have read that week.

B. Replication Project Component

To engage students in thinking about research contribu-
tions, we have students design a replication study. The fac-
ulty mentor works with each group to pick an appropriate
(set of) result(s) for replication. For instance, students may
choose a highly theoretical result and design an experiment
to understand the result and test the impact of relaxing the
assumptions in the results. The faculty mentor meets with
each small group on a weekly basis to discuss their progress
and provide feedback on their work. In order to approach this
systematically, the tasks are structured so that each week’s
assignment is of increasing speciﬁcity. For instance, one of
the ﬁrst steps may be to delineate the results for replication.
In a later week, the task may involve specifying pseudocode
to test their hypotheses.

IV. HIGHLIGHTS OF SURVEY RESULTS

There were 22 members of

the research group. Two
anonymized exit surveys were administered approximately a
month and 3 months after the ﬁnal presentation. We received
19 responses to the ﬁrst survey and 10 to the second. 3 out
of 10 respondents in the second survey were female. As a
point of comparison, the general population of female CS
undergraduate students at our institution is 22%. We do not
have gender data for the ﬁrst survey.

We elicited students’ interest and conﬁdence in doing
research via a 5-point Likert scale. Students reported an
increased interest and conﬁdence in research. Most students
had some exposure to reading research papers but their under-
standing of what the research process entailed in Computer
Science was vague: “I thought it is involved a lot coding
at least and a lot about implementation in real life.”. They
were surprised the amount of detail and depth involved in
the process: “The research process focuses a lot more on the
thought experiment and ideas behind. The ability of asking
interesting question is crucial in research.”. They noted that
they had a better understanding of the breadth of applications,
likely as a consequence of exposure to interdisciplinary work.
They also report having formed a better understanding of the
research process: “Yes, I have a much better idea. Especially

after working on a replication project I got a reasonable idea
of what CS research looks like.” and indicate that the course
can help other students evaluate whether CS research is right
for them: “Yes I strongly agree that it is helpful regardless of
students research status. In previous courses, I feel majority of
the time was spent on how to implement the code and following
the task instructions. But this reading group really engages
me to think about the reasons and broader picture behind it.
I enjoy this challenging process.”

In particular, 2 out of 3 female respondents reported that
they deﬁnitely saw CS research as part of their future plans. All
female respondents also reported having a better sense of what
CS research is about due to the program. They reported that
the program had helped them decide their plans. All female
respondents also report that a student who is not currently
interested in research might beneﬁt from such a program:
“If they haven’t had that kind of exposure being exposed to
research papers and doing these sorts of projects may turn
them around if they discover that they enjoy it”

V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

After engaging in this program students report that they
developed a better understanding of what research in Computer
Science is. They reported enjoying the course, indicating a
more welcoming environment. Their reported conﬁdence in
their ability to do research was increased. Overall, partici-
pants also reported having an increased interest in research.
All respondents reported that, to varying degrees, it helped
inform their post graduation plans. Not all female respondents
reported that they necessarily saw CS research as part of their
future plans; however, they all reported that the program had
helped them decide their plans. All female respondents also
reported having a better sense of what CS research is about
due to the program and would recommend it to a student who
is unsure about CS research. Given the reported experience
of female students, this program can offer a starting point
for greater diversity in CS research. Ours is an R1 institute
with high enrollments in CS. We would like to evaluate the
suitability of this approach to different departments with po-
tentially different demographics and cultures. It would also be
interesting to explore whether this program can be effectively
adapted to other areas of CS than Machine Learning and
related subﬁelds.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Kathryn Cunningham for
help with processes related to IRB and the students who
participated in the course and provided feedback. The ﬁrst
author gratefully acknowledges the 2019 Course Development
Fund, CSE department, University of Michigan.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Ramanujan. “A.I. as an introduction to research methods in computer
science,” AAAI ’16: Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. AAAI Press 4128-4129.

[2] M. C. Linn, E. Palmer, A. Baranger, E. Gerard, and E. Stone. “Under-
graduate research experiences: Impacts and opportunities,” Science. Vol.
347, Issue 6222, 2015.

