Deep generative models in DataSHIELD 

S Lenz1*, H Binder1 

1Institute  of  Medical  Biometry  and  Statistics,  Faculty  of  Medicine  and  Medical  Center  – 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg 

*Corresponding author (E-mail: lenz@imbi.uni-freiburg.de) 

Abstract 
The  best  way  to  calculate  statistics  from  medical  data  is  to  use  the  data  of  individual 
patients.  In  some  settings,  this  data  is  difficult  to  obtain  due  to  privacy  restrictions.  In 
Germany,  for  example,  it  is  not  possible  to  pool  routine  data  from  different  hospitals  for 
research  purposes  without  the  consent  of  the patients.  The  DataSHIELD  software provides 
an infrastructure and a set of statistical methods for joint analyses of distributed data. The 
contained algorithms are reformulated to work with aggregated data from the participating 
sites instead of the individual data. If a desired algorithm is not implemented in DataSHIELD 
or cannot be reformulated in such a way, using artificial data is an alternative. We present a 
methodology together with a software implementation that builds on DataSHIELD to create 
artificial data that preserve complex patterns from distributed individual patient data. Such 
data  sets  of  artificial  patients,  which  are  not  linked  to  real  patients,  can  then  be  used  for 
joint  analyses.  Models  that  are  able  to  capture  a  joint  distribution  of  variables  and  can 
generate new data according to this distribution are called generative models. Here we focus 
on  deep  Boltzmann  machines  (DBMs),  a  generative  model  trained  with unsupervised  deep 
learning.  Algorithms  for  training  and  evaluating  DBMs  are  implemented  in  the  package 
“BoltzmannMachines” for the Julia programming language. We wrap its functionality for use 
with  DataSHIELD,  which  is  based  on  the  R  programming  language.  Like  DataSHIELD,  our 
software  is  freely  available  as  open  source  software.  As  an  exemplary  application,  we 
conduct  a  distributed  analysis  with  DBMs  on  a  synthetic  data  set.  The  data  set  simulates 
genetic  variant  data.  Hidden  in  noise,  it  contains  patterns  of  groups  of  specific  mutations 
that  could  be  linked  to  some  hypothetical  pathological  outcome.  The  data  is  distributed 
among different sites and a joint artificial data set is generated by DBMs that are trained on 
each share of the data. The patterns can be recovered in the artificial data using hierarchical 
clustering  of  the  virtual  patients,  which  demonstrates  the  feasibility  of  the  approach.  Our 
implementation adds to DataSHIELD  the ability to generate artificial data that can be used 
for various analyses, e. g. for pattern recognition with deep learning. This also demonstrates 
more  generally  how  DataSHIELD  can  be  flexibly  extended  with  advanced  algorithms  from 
languages other than R. 

- 1 - 

 
Introduction 
In large consortia, pooling of individual level data is often not possible due to data security 
and  data  protection  concerns.  Thus,  techniques  for  distributed  privacy-preserving  analysis 
are  needed.  For  example  the  MIRACUM  consortium  [1],  a  joint  project  of  ten  university 
hospitals in Germany, aims to show how patient data that are distributed across sites can be 
jointly analysed. In this consortium, a particular goal is to apply advanced machine learning 
techniques that can find complex interaction patterns in medical data.  

One general way to enable such analysis techniques on distributed data is to use a synthetic 
data approach. Synthetic datasets mimic statistical features of the original data without any 
linkage to individuals in the original data. These synthetic data can then be shared across the 
sites for joint analyses. For simple statistical analyses, this approach has been found to work 
well  [2–4],  and  there  are  even  commercial  offerings  for  business  data  [5].  Multivariable 
statistical  analyses  are  also  feasible.  For  example,  an  approach  using  bivariate  copulas  can 
recreate complex marginal distributions and provide results similar to the original data when 
using multivariable linear mixed regression for analysis [6].  

However,  it  is  still  unclear  how  best  to  create  synthetic  data  that  also  reflect  complex 
patterns, which might, e.g., be analysed using machine learning tools. This may require more 
complex approaches to generate the synthetic data. In particular, generative deep learning 
approaches  might  be  useful,  as  they  can  represent  complex  patterns  [7]  and  have  been 
shown to be feasible for small sample sizes [8]. Correspondingly, we decided to develop an 
implementation for artificial data based on deep learning within the DataSHIELD framework 
for distributed analysis. DataSHIELD [9] is a software tool used in many multicentre studies 
for  distributed  privacy-preserving  analysis,  and  which  offers  many  statistical  tools  for 
researchers.  Its  implementation  is  based  on  meta-analysis  techniques  or  parameter 
estimation  via  distributed  calculation.  A  synthetic  data  approach  in  DataSHIELD  will  thus 
provide even more flexible data analysis tools to an already very active use community. 

In  the  following,  we  present  the  implementation  of  our  approach  using  deep  Boltzmann 
machines  as  generative  models  in  DataSHIELD.  We  used  the  Julia  programming  language 
[10], which is better suited for implementing deep learning algorithms, and integrated it in 
the statistical analysis environment R [11], which is the basis for DataSHIELD, via a package 
for interfacing Julia and R. Deep Boltzmann machines were chosen as generative models for 
synthetic data on the basis of their good performance on data sets with small sample sizes 
[8].  This  is  of  particular  importance,  e.g.,  when  the  overall  sample  size  is  moderate,  but 
sample  size  per  site  is  small.  We  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  the  approach  with  an 
empirical  study  investigating  different  numbers  of  sites  and  sample  sizes  per  site  in  a 
distributed analysis.  

- 2 - 

Methods 

DataSHIELD 
DataSHIELD is open-source software that is already used in the field of epidemiology for the 
analysis  of  multi-centre  cohort  studies.  Analyses  in  DataSHIELD  are  performed  without 
individual data leaving the sites. This is possible by using reformulated algorithms that solely 
rely on aggregated statistics. Only those aggregated statistics leave the sites and are used to 
calculate  the  final  result.  In  this  way,  the  DataSHIELD  software  allows  users  to  perform 
several  types  of  descriptive  statistics  and  standard  statistical  models.  For  example,  it  is 
possible  to  compute  linear  regression  models  via  DataSHIELD  on  data  sets  that  are 
distributed among several sites, and get the same results as with pooled data. The user can 
access  the  DataSHIELD  functionality  by  using  functions  of  specific  packages  in  the  R 
programming language [11]. 

The  Opal  web  server  software  [12],  running  in  separate  instances  at  each  of  the  sites 
participating in a federated analysis, provides the decentralised data. Its interface is secured 
by  authentication  and  authorization.  Some  users  may  have  the  right  to  view  data,  while 
others may only access aggregated data by calling specific R functions that are approved by 
the organization operating the Opal instance. These R functions, most of which are collected 
in packages specifically for use in DataSHIELD, must only return data that does not disclose 
information about individuals. The official DataSHIELD packages are designed and reviewed 
specifically to minimise the disclosure risk. In addition to the existing package ecosystem, the 
infrastructure is extensible and allows developers to write their own R packages, which then 
can be installed by administrators of Opal instances. 

Deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs) as generative models 
The goal of generative models is to capture the probability distribution of multiple variables 
in a model, allowing new samples to be drawn from the model according to this distribution. 
Generative  models  are  trained  in  an  unsupervised  manner  with  data  from  the  original 
distribution  as 
input.  In  many  cases,  they  can  also  be  used  to  find  higher-level 
representations of the data [7] by analysing the model parameters. 

Here we will focus on deep Boltzmann machines as generative models. General Boltzmann 
machines are stochastic neural networks whose nodes have an activation probability 𝑝(𝑣, ℎ) 
that is determined by the energy function 𝐸 of the network.  

𝑝(𝑣, ℎ) =  

𝑒−𝐸(𝑣,ℎ)
𝑍

    with   𝑍 =   ∑ 𝑒−𝐸(𝑣,ℎ)

𝑣,ℎ

Thus, Boltzmann machines are so-called “energy-based” models. The nodes are divided into 
two groups. The visible nodes (𝑣) receive the data input, while the hidden nodes (ℎ) encode 
latent  variables  of  the  data.  The  normalization  constant  𝑍  is  also  called  the  partition 
function.  Due  to  the  large  number  of  terms  in  the  sum  for  𝑍,  which  runs  over  all  possible 

- 3 - 

 
configurations  of  activations  of  nodes,  computing  the  real  value  of  the  probability  is  too 
complex for most use cases. In practice, Gibbs sampling is used instead to sample from the 
model.  With  Gibbs  sampling,  it  is  also  easy  to  sample  conditionally  on  specific  variables, 
which  makes  it  possible  to  use  Boltzmann  machines  as  generative  models  in  “what-if” 
scenarios.  For  example,  in  a  medical  setting,  a  Boltzmann  machine  trained  on  patients’ 
diagnoses  can  be  used  to  generate  synthetic  patient  data  with  specific  disease  patterns, 
even if these patterns are relatively rare in the original data. A use case for this may be to 
simulate a population of patients in planning a new study. 

The  network  of  general  Boltzmann  machines  is  a  complete  undirected  graph,  where  all 
nodes  are  connected  to  each  other.  A  first  step  in  making  Boltzmann  machines  practically 
usable was to use restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs). These restrict the connections in 
the  graph,  disallowing  connections  between  visible  nodes  as  well  as  connections  between 
hidden  nodes.  Thereby,  the  graph  of  the  network  forms  a  complete  bipartite  graph  that 
partitions  the  set  of  vertices  into  the  set  of  visible  nodes,  the  visible  layer,  and  the  set  of 
hidden  nodes,  the  hidden  layer.  This  allows  for  the  rapid  calculation  of  the  conditional 
probabilities because in this case it is possible to derive simple formulas for the conditional 
probabilities, which can be calculated for all nodes in a layer in a vectorised way. This is the 
basis  for  an  effective  training  algorithm  for  RBMs  called  contrastive  divergence[13].    RBMs 
can also be used as generative models but the restrictions on the connections in the network 
also limit their power to model distributions. 

Subsequently, it was discovered that stacking restricted Boltzmann machines on top of each 
other by training the next restricted Boltzmann machines with the hidden activations of the 
previous one enabled the networks to learn features of increasing abstraction. The resulting 
model is a deep belief network (DBN), and the training procedure is called greedy layer-wise 
training  [14].  Although  this  architecture  is  well  suited  for  dimension  reduction,  it  is  less 
powerful than the next stage of development, the deep Boltzmann machines (DBMs). Deep 
belief  networks  can  be  used  as  generative  models  by  sampling  in  the  last  restricted 
Boltzmann machine and then using the conditional probabilities to propagate the activation 
to the visible nodes. This way, the full information of the network is not harnessed equally to 
generate  new  samples.  Deep  Boltzmann  machines,  on  the  other  hand,  have  the  same 
network layout as deep belief networks, but generate samples employing  the full network. 
This  is  similar  to  a  general  Boltzmann  machine,  albeit  restricted  to  a  layered  layout.  For 
training, DBMs are optimized with an algorithm for maximizing the variational lower bound 
of the likelihood in the Boltzmann machine model. This algorithm is also referred to as fine-
tuning because greedy layer-wise pre-training is carried out to provide a good starting point 
for the variational likelihood algorithm, which would otherwise not succeed in finding a good 
local optimum. 

Due to the intractable nature of the partition function, monitoring the optimisation process 
and  evaluating  the  resulting  model  is  difficult.  For  restricted  Boltzmann  machines,  the 
reconstruction error is a proxy measure that follows the likelihood of the model very well. It 

- 4 - 

is calculated by taking the data as activation of the visible nodes, calculating the probabilities 
for  the  activations  in  the  hidden  layer  conditioned  on  the  data  input  and  then  again 
calculating the probabilities of the visible layer conditioned on the hidden probabilities. This 
last  result  is  called  the  reconstruction  of  the  data  input.  The  reconstruction  error  is  the 
distance to the original data. It can also be used to monitor the greedy layer-wise training of 
deep belief networks and for the pre-training of deep Boltzmann machines. 

With  a  stochastic  algorithm  called  annealed  importance  sampling  (AIS),  it  is  possible  to 
estimate  the  likelihood  of  restricted  and  deep  Boltzmann  machines  [15].  It  is  needed  in 
particular  to  measure  the  training  objective  of  DBMs,  the  variational  lower  bound  of  the 
likelihood. 

We  employ  a  package  for  the  Julia  programming  language  [10]  that  implements  these 
algorithms and provides a user-friendly interface for training and evaluating deep Boltzmann 
machines  (https://github.com/stefan-m-lenz/BoltzmannMachines.jl).  Further  on,  we  show 
how we integrate this with the DataSHIELD software and concept. 

Implementation of deep Boltzmann machines in DataSHIELD 
The  developed  software  allows  users  to  remotely  train  deep  Boltzmann  machines  without 
access to the individual-level data. Trained models can be used, e.g., to generate synthetic 
data as depicted in Fig 1.  

Fig  1.  Applying  the  DataSHIELD  principle  in  working  with  synthetic  data  from  generative  models.  The  standard 
DataSHIELD approach is depicted in panel A: The researcher sends a request via the DataSHIELD infrastructure (1). The sites 
then  calculate  aggregated  statistics  (2)  and  return  them  to  the  researcher  (3).  These  statistics  do  not  allow  conclusions 
about  individual  patients,  but  can  be  used  to  derive  useful  information  about  the  population  (4).  When  working  with 
generated models and synthetic data (panel B), the workflow is similar. The researcher requests the training of a generative 
model  (1).  Once  the  model  has  been  trained  (2),  synthetic  samples  can  be  generated  (3).  The  researcher  can  use  the 
synthetic data to conduct further analyses (4). 

We provide our implementation of DBMs in DataSHIELD as open-source software. It consists 
of  a  client-side  R  package  (https://github.com/stefan-m-lenz/dsBoltzmannMachines)  and  a 
server-side R package that can be installed in an Opal server and called from the client-side 
(https://github.com/stefan-m-lenz/dsBoltzmannMachinesClient). The server-side needs Julia 
with  the  package  “BoltzmannMachines”  installed  in  addition.  The  functionality  of  the 

- 5 - 

 
“BoltzmannMachines” Julia package is imported into R via the “JuliaConnectoR” R package 
(https://github.com/stefan-m-lenz/JuliaConnectoR).  This  provides  a  generic  interface  that 
allows  the  use  of  Julia  functions  in  R  and  thereby  makes  it  possible  to  obtain  the  speed 
advantages of the Julia code while using the DataSHIELD R interface. 

From  a  technical  perspective,  it  is  straightforward  to  transfer  the  models  outside  via 
DataSHIELD,  because  the  DataSHIELD  infrastructure  can  transfer  arbitrary  R  objects  to  the 
client. It is the responsibility of the developers of DataSHIELD functionality to ensure that the 
returned values do not disclose sensitive information about individuals. For basic aggregated 
statistics  it  is  possible  to  prove  mathematically  how  much  information  about  individuals  is 
contained.  For neural  networks,  this  is  very hard  because they are  so  complex  and usually 
consist  of  a  very  high number of  parameters.  In  many cases,  the  number  of parameters  is 
even higher than the number of data points in the training data itself. Thus, it is very hard to 
prove  that  a  neural  network  cannot  be  hacked.  Model  inversion  attacks,  which  aim  to 
extract  information  about  individual  data  sets  from  trained  models,  are  being  researched 
and developed  [16]. Therefore, we do not allow the transfer of the models by default, but 
give  data  custodians  the  option  to  explicitly  allow  this  in  the  Opal  server  environment  if 
there is enough trust in the given setting.  

An  additional  challenge,  common  to  all  neural  networks,  is  the  extensive  hyperparameter 
tuning that the training requires. As shown in Fig 2, the number of epochs and the learning 
rate,  together  with  the  model  architecture,  are  parameters  that  are  highly  important  for 
successful training. These parameters must be tuned individually for different data sets, as 
the learning rate depends on how informative the different samples are, and the number of 
epochs must be adjusted accordingly. The architecture must be deep enough to be able to 
capture  the  important  structure.  At  the  same  time  the  model  should  not  have  too  many 
parameters  to  avoid  overfitting  and  computational  cost.  To  choose  these  parameters,  our 
software provides different metrics to assess the model quality during and after the training. 
It offers functions to estimate the likelihood (for RBMs and DBMs) and the lower bound of 
the  likelihood  (for  DBMs)  via  AIS.  For  smaller  models,  it  is  also  possible  to  calculate  the 
likelihood exactly. These evaluations can be collected during training to monitor its success. 
The  monitoring  output  can  be  transferred  and  displayed  to  the  DataSHIELD  client  without 
privacy issues, even if the number of training attempts is high, because it does not contain 
information about individual patient data. In this way, the user can see the performance and 
select good hyperparameters without having direct access to the models. After a successful 
training, the final model can then be used to generate synthetic data that is handed to the 
researcher. 

- 6 - 

 
 
 
 
Table 1 Overview of client-side functions for training and using DBM models 

Function name 
ds.monitored_fitrbm 
ds.monitored_stackrbms 

ds.monitored_fitdbm 

ds.setJuliaSeed 
ds.dbm.samples/ 
ds.rbm.samples  
ds.bm.defineLayer 

ds.bm.definePartitionedLayer 
ds.dbm.top2LatentDims 

ds.rbm.loglikelihood 

ds.dbm.loglikelihood 

ds.dbm.logproblowerbound 

ds.rbm.exactloglikelihood/ 
ds.dbm.exactloglikelihood 

Short description 
Monitored training of an RBM model 
Monitored training of a stack of RBMs. Can be used for 
pre-training a DBM or for training a DBN  
Monitored  training  of  a  DBM,  including  pre-training 
and fine-tuning 
Set a seed for the random number generator 
Generate samples from a DBM/RBM.  
This also allows conditional sampling. 
Define training parameters individually for a RBM layer 
in a DBM or DBN 
Define a partitioned layer using other layers as parts 
Get  a 
features 
Estimates  the  partition  function  of  an  RBM  with  AIS 
and then calculates the log-likelihood 
Performs a separate AIS run for each of the samples to 
estimate the log-likelihood of a DBM 
Estimates the variational lower bound of the likelihood 
of a DBM with AIS 
Calculates 
(exponential complexity) 

two-dimensional  representation  of 

for  a  RBM/DBM 

log-likelihood 

latent 

the 

- 7 - 

 
Fig 2 Example code for training a deep Boltzmann machine and using it as a generative model. First, the user needs to log 
in  to  the  Opal  server,  where  the  data  is  stored.  If  the  specified  data  set  is  available,  and  the  user  has  the  correct  access 
rights, the data set is loaded into the R session. The loaded data can be split into training and test data before the training. 
In  the  subsequent  call  to  the  fitting  function,  which  by  default  also  collects  monitoring  data  from  the  training,  the  most 
important  parameters  for  training  a  DBM  are  included.  The  numbers  of  hidden  nodes  for  each  of  the  hidden  layers 
(“nhiddens”)  determine  the  model  architecture.  The  learning  rate  and  the  number  of  epochs  for  pre-training  and  fine-
tuning of the DBM are the most important parameters for the optimization procedure. If a good solution has been found, 
the model can be used to generate synthetic data and return it to the client.   

To provide a rough idea of the time needed to train DBMs with our software, we measured 
the  execution  time  of the  code in  Fig 2, using the example data set described above, on a 
desktop computer with an Intel Core i5-4570 processor with 3.2 GHz, and running Opal in a 
virtual machine with only 1 CPU. The fitting of the DBM with monitoring  took less than 1.5 
minutes,  and  without  monitoring  less  than  15  seconds.  (On  the  first  training  run  in  the 
session, the elapsed times were a little longer due to compilation in Julia.) 

Results 
We  consider  an  example  that  is  motivated  by  genetic  variant  data,  so-called  SNPs  (single 
nucleotide  polymorphisms).  One  main  goal  of  deep  learning  on  genetic  data  is  to  uncover 
interactions  between  genetic  mutations  that  lead  to  certain  (pathological)  phenotypes. 
jointly 
Particularly 

interesting  are  cases  with  many 

interacting  mutations  that  are 

- 8 - 

library(dsBoltzmannMachinesClient) logindata <- data.frame(server = "server",                         url = "https://datashield.example.com",                         user = "user", password = "password",                         table = "MyTable")  o <- datashield.login(logins = logindata, assign = TRUE) # ==> data in D  ds.setJuliaSeed(o, 1) # for reproducibility  ds.splitdata(o, "D", 0.2, "D.Train", "D.Test")  # Training result <- ds.monitored_fitdbm(o, data = "D.Train", nhiddens = c(50, 25, 15),                               epochspretraining = 30,                               learningratepretraining = 0.005,                               epochs = 100,                               learningrate = 0.05,                               monitoringdata = c("D.Train", "D.Test")) plotMonitoring(result)  # Generating data generated <- ds.dbm.samples(o)  datashield.logout(o)  
responsible for a resulting phenotype. These cases are hard to detect with univariate testing 
of SNPs, which is used in genome-wide association studies (GWAS).  

We conducted an experiment to show that is it possible to learn and reproduce higher-level 
patterns  employing  DBMs  in  SNP-like  data  sets  and  evaluated  their  performance  as 
generative models in this setting, showing the effect of the available sample size in particular 
(see  Fig  3).  The  artificial  data  set  for  our  experiment  consisted  of  binary  data  mostly 
consisting of zeros with some noise added from a Bernoulli distribution with a probability of 
0.1. The 500 samples are split equally into “cases” and “controls”. The “cases” have groups 
of five ones at five possible “SNP sets” among the 50 SNP variables. This could correspond to 
mutations that may deactivate a certain pathway, when they occur together. 

In  this  experiment  the  data  set  is  split  onto  a  number  of  virtual  sites,  where  models  are 
trained and then used to generate new data. This new data can then be visually compared 
with the original data (see Fig 3). 

Fig 3. Sketch of the experimental setup for the comparison of original and generated data. In the first step, the original 
data  is  split  into  a  number  of  smaller  data  sets,  which  are  distributed  to  the  virtual  sites.  (For  simplicity,  only  two 
sites/clinics are shown.) In Step 2, separate generative models are trained at each site on their share of the data. In step 3, 
synthetic data are generated by each of the models and compiled to again form one overall data set. This synthetic data set 
will be visually compared to the original data set. For the results, see Fig 4 below. 

The results of the experiment are shown in Fig 4. The higher-level patterns, which here are 
the arrays of co-occurring SNPs, are preserved in the synthetic data, even in the case of 20 

- 9 - 

 
 
sites  having  only  25  patients.  However,  one  can  observe  that  the  noise  in  the  sampling 
output increases as the same amount of samples is distributed among a growing number of 
sites. Further, it is notable that there is some price to pay for using synthetic data since the 
output is not exactly the same as the input (see Fig 4, e.g. comparing panels A and B). 

Fig  4.  Hierarchical  clustering  view  of  a  data  set  and  associated  synthetic  data  sets.  The  rows  are  the  patients  and  the 
columns are the variables. The rows are clustered  hierarchically  [17]. Panel A  shows the original  data set,  panel B  shows 
data generated from one DBM that has been trained on the original data. Panels C and D show outputs of the experiment 
conducted with 2 and 20 sites, respectively. 

Discussion 
While synthetic data are a promising option for enabling a broad set of statistical analyses in 
a  distributed  setting,  an  accessible  implementation  is  currently  lacking.  We  described  an 
extension  of  the  popular  DataSHIELD  framework  for  distributed  analysis  under  data 

- 10 - 

ABCD 
protection  constraints.  In  particular,  we  leveraged  generative  deep  learning  for  obtaining 
synthetic  data,  connecting  the  R  language,  which  is  the  basis  for  DataSHIELD,  to  the  Julia 
language. To the user, this complexity is masked via a convenient R package. 

We  chose  deep  Boltzmann  machines  (DBMs)  as  generative  models  to  be  implemented  in 
DataSHIELD  because  of  their  advantages  in  certain  use  cases.  As  shown  in  our  feasibility 
study,  DBMs  can deal  with  a  low  number  of  training  samples  and  are hard  to  overfit.  This 
makes  them  especially  suitable  for  distributed  settings  with  small  data  sets  at  each  of  the 
sites.  In  recent  years,  other  generative  models,  most  importantly  generative  adversarial 
networks (GANs) [18] and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [19,20], have become popular. In 
contrast to deep Boltzmann machines, which rely on Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to 
be trained, these models are trained  using backpropagation of errors, requiring a different 
implementation approach for the training. As a next step, we plan to implement VAEs as a 
generative  model  in  DataSHIELD,  and  to  combine  the  different  models  to  minimize  bias  in 
generated data. 

Another  area  in  which  DBMs  excel  is  conditional  sampling.  A  possible  application  of 
conditional  sampling  is  a  DBM  trained  on  gene  expression  data,  to  simulate  the  up-
regulation of one pathway  and observe changes in the expression of other genes. Another 
example  could  be  to  generate  data  for  medication  or  comorbidities  conditioned  on 
diagnoses  in  data  from  electronic  health  records.  In  DBMs,  conditional  sampling  is 
straightforward using Gibbs sampling. 

The  results  of  our  empirical  investigation  showed  that  some  structure  is  maintained  even 
with  very  small  sample  sizes,  but  performance  could  potentially  still  be  improved.  For 
example,  partitioning  of  layers  can  be  used  to  further  decrease  the  number  of  samples 
needed to find informative structure in the data [8]. 

Conclusions 
With  the  presented  extension  to  the  DataSHIELD  software,  we  add  the  possibility  of 
generating artificial data sets that preserve the higher level patterns from individual patient 
data that may be distributed among different sites. These generated data sets can then be 
analysed to extract patterns from the original data without access to individual patient data. 
The  results  presented  here  indicate  that  our  proposed  approach  is  ready  for  use  in  real 
world  applications.  This  is  facilitated  by  the  user-friendly  design  of  our  implementation 
complemented by extensive documentation. More generally, the proposed implementation 
provides  a  sound  basis  for  subsequent  extensions  to  other  generative  approaches  for 
synthetic data in distributed analysis. 

- 11 - 

 
Conflicts of Interest 
None declared. 

Acknowledgements 
This work has been supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in 
Germany in the MIRACUM project (FKZ 01ZZ1801B). 

References 
1.   Prokosch H-U, Acker T, Bernarding J, Binder H, Boeker M, Boerries M, et al. MIRACUM: 
Medical  Informatics  in  Research  and  Care  in  University  Medicine.  Methods  Inf  Med. 
2018;57: e82–e91. doi:10.3414/ME17-02-0025 

2.   Nowok B, Raab GM, Dibben C. synthpop: Bespoke Creation of Synthetic Data in R. J Stat 

Softw. 2016;74: 1–26. doi:10.18637/jss.v074.i11 

3.   Manrique‐Vallier  D,  Hu  J.  Bayesian  non-parametric  generation  of  fully  synthetic 
multivariate categorical data in the presence of structural zeros. J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat 
Soc. 2018;181: 635–647. doi:10.1111/rssa.12352 

4.   Quick  H,  Holan  SH,  Wikle  CK.  Generating  partially  synthetic  geocoded  public  use  data 
with  decreased disclosure  risk  by  using differential  smoothing. J  R Stat Soc  Ser  A  Stat 
Soc. 2018;181: 649–661. doi:10.1111/rssa.12360 

5.   Web 

site  of  company  “Statice.” 

[cited  27  Aug  2019].  Available 

from: 

https://www.statice.ai/ 

6.   Bonofiglio F, Schumacher M, Binder H. Recovery of original individual person data (IPD) 
inferences  from  empirical  IPD  summaries  only:  Applications  to  distributed  computing 
under disclosure constraints. Stat Med. 2020;39: 1183–1198. doi:10.1002/sim.8470 

7.   Salakhutdinov  R.  Learning  Deep  Generative  Models.  Annu  Rev  Stat  Its  Appl.  2015;2: 

361–385. doi:10.1146/annurev-statistics-010814-020120 

8.   Hess M, Lenz S, Blätte TJ, Bullinger L, Binder H. Partitioned learning of deep Boltzmann 
3173–3180. 

Bioinformatics. 

2017;33: 

data. 

SNP 

for 

machines 
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx408 

9.   Budin-Ljøsne I, Burton P, Isaeva J, Gaye A, Turner A, Murtagh MJ, et al. DataSHIELD: An 
Ethically  Robust  Solution  to  Multiple-Site  Individual-Level  Data  Analysis.  Public  Health 
Genomics. 2015;18: 87–96. doi:10.1159/000368959 

10.   Bezanson  J,  Edelman  A,  Karpinski  S,  Shah  V.  Julia:  A  Fresh  Approach  to  Numerical 

Computing. SIAM Rev. 2017;59: 65–98. doi:10.1137/141000671 

- 12 - 

11.   R  Core  Team.  R:  A  Language  and  Environment  for  Statistical  Computing.  Vienna, 
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2019. Available from: https://www.R-
project.org/ 

12.   Doiron  D,  Marcon  Y,  Fortier  I,  Burton  P,  Ferretti  V.  Software  Application  Profile:  Opal 
and  Mica:  open-source  software  solutions  for  epidemiological  data  management, 
harmonization  and  dissemination. 
J  Epidemiol.  2017;46:  1372–1378. 
Int 
doi:10.1093/ije/dyx180 

13.   Hinton GE. A Practical Guide to Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines. In: Montavon 
G,  Orr  GB,  Müller  K-R,  editors.  Neural  Networks:  Tricks  of  the  Trade:  Second  Edition. 
2012. pp. 599–619. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_32 

14.   Hinton  GE,  Salakhutdinov  RR.  Reducing  the  Dimensionality  of  Data  with  Neural 

Networks. Science. 2006;313: 504–507. doi:10.1126/science.1127647 

15.   Salakhutdinov  R,  Hinton  G.  An  Efficient  Learning  Procedure  for  Deep  Boltzmann 

Machines. Neural Comput. 2012;24: 1967–2006. doi:10.1162/NECO_a_00311 

16.   Fredrikson  M,  Jha  S,  Ristenpart  T.  Model  Inversion  Attacks  that  Exploit  Confidence 
Information  and  Basic  Countermeasures.  Proceedings  of  the  22nd  ACM  SIGSAC 
Conference  on  Computer  and  Communications  Security  -  CCS  ’15.  Denver,  Colorado, 
USA: ACM Press; 2015. pp. 1322–1333. doi:10.1145/2810103.2813677 

17.   Murtagh  F,  Contreras  P.  Algorithms  for  hierarchical  clustering:  an  overview.  Wiley 

Interdiscip Rev Data Min Knowl Discov. 2012;2: 86–97. doi:10.1002/widm.53 

18.   Goodfellow  I,  Pouget-Abadie  J,  Mirza  M,  Xu  B,  Warde-Farley  D,  Ozair  S,  et  al. 
Generative  Adversarial  Nets.  In:  Ghahramani  Z,  Welling  M,  Cortes  C,  Lawrence  ND, 
Weinberger KQ, editors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27. Curran 
Associates, Inc.; 2014. pp. 2672–2680.  

19.   Kingma  DP,  Welling  M.  Auto-Encoding  Variational  Bayes.  arXiv:13126114  [Preprint]. 

2013 [cited 19 Feb 2019]. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 

20.   Rezende  DJ,  Mohamed  S,  Wierstra  D.  Stochastic  Backpropagation  and  Approximate 
Inference  in  Deep  Generative  Models.  arXiv:14014082  [Preprint].  2014  [cited  19  Feb 
2019]. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1401.4082 

- 13 - 

 
