0
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
1

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
7
0
6
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Automated Extraction of Socio-political Events from News (AESPEN):
Workshop and Shared Task Report

Ali H ¨urriyeto˘glu∗, Vanni Zavarella†, Hristo Tanev†, Erdem Y¨or ¨uk∗, Ali Safaya∗, Osman Mutlu∗
∗Koc¸ University,
Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450, Sarıyer, ˙Istanbul/Turkey
{ahurriyetoglu, eryoruk, asafaya19, omutlu}@ku.edu.tr

†European Commission Joint Research Centre
Via E. Fermi, 2749, 21027 Ispra VA, Italy
{vanni.zavarella, hristo.tanev}@ec.europa.eu

Abstract
We describe our effort on automated extraction of socio-political events from news in the scope of a workshop and a shared task we
organized at Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2020). We believe the event extraction studies in computational
linguistics and social and political sciences should further support each other in order to enable large scale socio-political event
information collection across sources, countries, and languages. The event consists of regular research papers and a shared task, which
is about event sentence coreference identiﬁcation (ESCI), tracks. All submissions were reviewed by ﬁve members of the program
committee. The workshop attracted research papers related to evaluation of machine learning methodologies, language resources,
material conﬂict forecasting, and a shared task participation report in the scope of socio-political event information collection. It has
shown us the volume and variety of both the data sources and event information collection approaches related to socio-political events
and the need to ﬁll the gap between automated text processing techniques and requirements of social and political sciences.

Keywords: socio-political events,
putational linguistics, social sciences, political sciences

information extraction, event extraction, machine learning, natural language processing, com-

1.

Introduction

of

tools

automated

construction

socio-political

(Yoruk, 2012),

S¨onmez et al., 2016).

event
Automatic
the natu-
databases has long been a challenge for
language processing (NLP) and social and po-
ral
science communities in terms of algorithmic
litical
required to de-
approaches and language resources
(Chenoweth and Lewis, 2013;
velop
Weidmann and Rød, 2019; Raleigh et al., 2010).
At
the same time, social and political scientists have been
working on creating socio-political event databases
for decades using manual
semi-
automatic (Nardulli et al., 2015), and automatic approaches
Boschee et al., 2013;
(Leetaru and Schrodt, 2013;
However,
Schrodt et al., 2014;
the results yielded by these approaches to date are
either not of sufﬁcient quality or require tremendous
effort to be replicated on new data (Wang et al., 2016;
Ward et al., 2013; Ettinger et al., 2017). On the one hand,
manual or semi-automatic methods require high-quality
human effort; on the other hand, state-of-the-art automated
event detection systems are not accurate enough for their
output to be used directly without human moderation.
The NLP community has achieved some consensus
on the treatment of events both in terms of
task
deﬁnition and appropriate techniques
their de-
tection (Pustejovsky et al., 2005; Doddington et al., 2004;
Song et al., 2015; Getman et al., 2018). However, in order
to be useful, these formalisms and related systems need
to be adjusted or extended for each type of event in rela-
tion to certain use cases. The social and political scientists
spend a similar effort for formalising event types such as

for

(CAMEO) (Gerner et al., 2002) and implement the afore-
mentioned systems that vary from rule-based to fully auto-
matic approaches. Unfortunately, any new project in this
line still ﬁnds itself making design decisions such as using
only the heading sentences in a news article or not consid-
ering coreference information (Boschee et al., 2013) with-
out being able to quantify their effect. Therefore, we think
these communities should investigate ways of supporting
each other in order to reach a consensus and enable any
prospective event information collection project as robustly
and predictably as possible.
Given the aforementioned limitations, there is an increas-
ing tendency to rely on machine learning (ML) and NLP
methods to deal better with the vast amount and variety
of data to be processed. Consequently, we thought it was
time to held a workshop on Automated Extraction of Socio-
political Events from News (AESPEN)1 at Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2020).2 The
purpose of this workshop was to inspire the emergence
of innovative technological and scientiﬁc solutions in the
ﬁeld of event detection and event metadata extraction from
news, as well as the development of evaluation metrics for
socio-political event recognition. Moreover, the workshop
aimed at triggering a deeper understanding of the usability
of socio-political event datasets.
We organized a shared task as a continuation of
the Evaluation Forum
the Conference and Labs of

1https://emw.ku.edu.tr/aespen-2020/,

ac-

cessed on April 18, 2020.

2https://lrec2020.lrec-conf.org/, accessed on

April 18, 2020.

 
 
 
 
 
 
(CLEF 2019) task ProtestNews (H¨urriyeto˘glu et al., 2019a;
H¨urriyeto˘glu et al., 2019b), which was on cross-context
document classiﬁcation, event sentence detection, and
event extraction pertaining to protest events. We aimed
at establishing a benchmark for the event sentence corefer-
ence identiﬁcation (ESCI) sub-task within the scope of the
AESPEN workshop. The scope of this shared task was on
clustering given event related sentences so that each cluster
consists of sentences about the same event.
We provide details of our motivation in Section 2. Then,
we introduce the ESCI shared task in Section 3. Finally,
we brieﬂy describe the accepted papers and the shared task
results in Section 4. We conclude this report in section 5.

2. Motivation

on

that

such

event

(GDELT)

Autocracies

collection requires

the
Automating political
availability of gold-standard corpora
can be
used for system development and evaluation. More-
automated tool performances need to be re-
over,
producible and comparable.
Although a tremendous
is being spent on creating socio-political event
effort
as ACLED (Raleigh et al., 2010),
databases
and
the Global Database
of Events, Language,
the
Tone
(Leetaru and Schrodt, 2013),
Mass Mobilization
Database
(MMAD) (Weidmann and Rød, 2019), the Integrated Cri-
sis Early Warning System (ICEWS) (Boschee et al., 2013),
and the Protest Dataset 30 European countries (Pol-
Dem) (Kriesi et al., 2019) we believe there is still a lot
of room for improvement and harmonisation of the event
schemas and tasks. This limitation causes the deﬁnition
of the events and automated event information collection
tool performances to be restricted to single projects.
Consequently, the lack of comparable and reproducible
settings hinders progress on this task.
We invited contributions from researchers in NLP, ML and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) involved in automated event data
collection, as well as researchers in social and political sci-
ences, conﬂict analysis and peace studies, who make use of
this kind of data for their analytical work. Our goal was
to enable the emergence of innovative NLP and informa-
tion extraction (IE) solutions that can deal with the cur-
rent stream of information, manage the risks of informa-
tion overload, identify different sources and perspectives,
and provide unitary and intelligible representations of the
larger and long-term storylines behind news articles.
Our workshop provided a venue for discussing the cre-
ation and facilitation of language resources in the social
and political sciences domain. Social and political scien-
tists were interested in reporting and discussing the auto-
mated tools and comparing traditional coding approaches
with automated tools. Computational linguistics and ma-
chine learning practitioners and researchers beneﬁted from
being challenged by real-world use cases, in terms of event
data extraction, representation and aggregation.
We invited work on all aspects of automated coding of
socio-political events from monolingual or multilingual
news sources. This includes (but is not limited to) the fol-
lowing topics: event metadata extraction, source bias mit-
igation, event data schema and representation, event infor-

mation duplication detection, extracting events beyond a
sentence in a document, training data collection and annota-
tion processes, event coreference (in- and cross-document),
sub-event and event subset relations, event dataset evalu-
ation and validity metrics, event datasets quality assess-
ments, deﬁning, populating and facilitating event ontolo-
gies, automated tools for relevant subtasks, understanding
the limits that are introduced by copyright rules and ethical
concerns and ethical design.

their event

3. Shared Task
A news article may contain one or more events that are ex-
pressed with one or more sentences. Identifying event sen-
tences that are about the same event is necessary in order
to collect event information robustly. Therefore, we should
develop methods that are able to identify whether a group
of sentences are about the same event. Reliable identiﬁca-
tion of this relation will enable us to determine how many
events are reported in a news article as well. Moreover,
solving this problem has the potential to facilitate cross-
document event sentence relation identiﬁcation in the long
term. Therefore, we should develop methods that are able
to identify whether a group of event sentences are about the
same event. Consequently, we organized the ESCI shared
task in the hopes of attracting attention to this problem and
possibly provide a benchmark for it.
We examined our gold standard corpus that contains
1,290 events in 712 documents annotated at token level
information (H¨urriyeto˘glu et al., 2019a;
for
H¨urriyeto˘glu et al., 2020).
H¨urriyeto˘glu et al., 2019b;
These documents are the positively labelled instances of
random samples and active learning based samples based
on these random samples. We have observed that 60%
of the news articles contain information about a single
event.
The remaining documents contain information
about multiple events, which sums up to 45% of the total
event count. Only 45% of the events are expressed with
only a single sentence.
Consequently, we think protest event collection systems
should take these phenomena into account and introduce
the ESCI shared task. As training data participants of the
data challenge received event related sentences and their
true clustering in a news article, in which a cluster repre-
sents all sentences about an event. This data was extracted
from 404 documents. The documents that contain a sin-
gle event sentence were excluded from this exercise, since
there is only one possible clustering in that case. The num-
ber of events per document in the training data is 1 for
207 and 2 for 132 documents. The remaining 65 docu-
ments contain 3 or more events. The task of the partici-
pants was to develop systems that can predict grouping of
the given sentences that consists of events on test data, ex-
tracted from 100 documents, and that was delivered to them
one week before the deadline. The correct grouping of the
test set was not shared with the participants. The evalua-
tion metric is Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) as implemented
by Scikit-learn (Hubert and Arabie, 1985).3 We calculated

3https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.adjusted_rand_score.html,

accessed on April 19, 2020.

macro and micro versions of this score. The macro ver-
sion calculates average of the per document scores from
all of the documents independent of how many event sen-
tences are there in each document. However, the micro
score weights the per document score with the number of
the event sentences in a document. We report the F1 score
that is calculated similarly as well.
The event type is a protest in the scope of this task. The
event we simply refer to as protest events are comprised
within the scope of contentious politics. Contentious pol-
itics events refers to politically motivated collective action
events which lay outside the ofﬁcial mechanisms of polit-
ical participation associated with formal government insti-
tutions of the country in which the said action takes place.4
The data is shared with the researchers, who signed an ap-
plication form that limits the use of the data only for re-
search purposes, as a ﬁle that contains lines of JSON ob-
jects. Each JSON object contain all event sentences that
are identiﬁed in a news article and their clustering, which is
found in the event clusters ﬁeld.
A sample JSON object is presented below. The url ﬁeld
is provided only as an ID. The numbers in the sentence no
correspond to sentences in the sentences ﬁeld in the same
order. The event clusters ﬁeld provides the correct cluster-
ing of the event sentences. For instance, below in Listing 1,
the ﬁrst and third sentences are about the same event. But,
the second sentence is about a separate event.

Listing 1: Event sentences that are extracted from a docu-
ment in the order they occur in a sentence.

1 {
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10 }

"url": "http://www.newindianexpress.
com/nation/2009/aug/25/congress-
demands-advanis-apology-80257",

"sentences": [

"Singh had recently blamed Advani
for coming to Gujarat Chief
Minister Narendra Modi ’ s
rescue and ensured that he was
not sacked , in the wake of the

riots .",

"On Kandahar plane hijack issue ,
Singh said Advani was not
speaking the truth .",

"Elaborating on the three issues ,
Singhvi said , The BJP gave
sermons on Raj Dharma and
turned a Nelson ’ s eye to the
communal carnage , which became
a big blot on the fair name of
the country ."

],
"sentence_no": [4, 6, 14],
"event_clusters": [[4, 14], [6]]

We have calculated three baseline scores on the test data.
First, we checked score of a dummy predictor that as-
signs all event sentences to a single cluster all the time,
i.e., minimum cluster prediction (MinC). Second, another
dummy baseline predicts as each event sentence as being
in a separate cluster in a document, i.e., maximum cluster
prediction (MaxC). Finally, we used BERT sentence rep-
resentations (Devlin et al., 2019) to train a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) model that i) ﬁrst evaluates each possible
sentence pair in the document, ii) then assign a positive or
negative label indicating that this pair of sentences is co-
referent, iii) ﬁnally using the correlation clustering algo-
rithm (Bansal et al., 2004) we take those labeled pairs and
cluster them. 5 The scores of these methods are provided in
Table 1 as MinC, MaxC, and MLP. The slightly low scores
obtained from the dummy systems direct us to use the MLP
system as the baseline we share with the participants. Note
that the strength of the dummy baselines changes according
to data distribution in test data.

ARI

F1

MinC
MaxC
MLP

Macro Micro Macro Micro
.4040
.5000
.3722
.1071
.4840
.5077

.5000
.3476
.5560

.4040
.0628
.4064

Table 1: Adjusted Random Index (ARI) and F1 for each
baseline system.

4. Submissions
The workshop has attracted nine papers as regular paper
submissions and one as a shared task participation report.
The shared task report and seven of the regular papers were
accepted on the basis of the reviews, which were ﬁve per
paper, performed by the program committee members.
The accepted regular papers can be grouped as i)
evaluation of
learning ap-
state-of-the-art machine
proaches by B¨uy¨uk¨oz et al. (2020), Olsson et al. (2020),
introduction of
and Piskorski and Jacquet (2020),
ii)
a new data set by Radford (2020),
iii) projects of
information collection by Osorio et al. (2020)
event
and iv)
and Papanikolaou and Papageorgiou1 (2020),
forecasting of political conﬂict by Halkia et al. (2020).
The
and
Olsson et al. (2020) show that state-of-the-art deep learn-
ing models such as BERT and ELMo (Peters et al., 2018)
yield
tradi-
tional ML methods such as support vector machines
(SVM) on conﬂict and protest event data respectively.
Piskorski and Jacquet (2020) have found that TF-IDF
weighted character n-gram based SVM model performs
better than an SVM model that uses pre-trained embed-
dings such as GLOVE (Pennington et al., 2014), BERT,
and FASTTEXT (Mikolov et al., 2018) in most of the
experiments on conﬂict data.

B¨uy¨uk¨oz et al. (2020)

performance

consistently

evaluation

higher

than

of

4You
protest

can
is

ﬁnd
deﬁned

about
sentences
a
labelled
is
which
https://github.com/emerging-welfare/general_info/tree/master/annotation-manuals.

https://github.com/alisafaya/event-coreference,
accessed on April 21, 2020.

annotation manual,

detailed
and

available

on

how
are
on

how event

system is

information

5The

code

this

our

for

on

Halkia et al. (2020)

Radford (2020) introduces the dataset Headlines of War for
cross-document coreference resolution for the news head-
lines. The dataset consists of positive samples from Mil-
itarized Interstate Disputes dataset and negative samples
from New York Times.6 The description of this invaluable
resource is accompanied with a detailed discussion of its
utility and caveats.
Osorio et al. (2020) introduce Hadath that
is a super-
vised protocol for event information collection from Ara-
bic sources. The utility of Hadath was demonstrated
in processing news reported between 2012 and 2012 in
Afghanistan. In the scope of the other event information
collection study, Papanikolaou and Papageorgiou1 (2020)
processed two news sources in Greek from Greece to cre-
ate a database of protest events for the period between 1996
and 2014. Osorio et al and Papanikolaou and Papageor-
giou utilized fully automatic tools that integrate supervised
machine learning and rule based methodologies at various
degrees.
a material
Finally,
available
conﬂict
results
event databases GDELT and ICEWS. Their
to correctly pre-
demonstrate
dict
social upheaval using the methodology they
propose, which utilizes Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997).
We have received expression of interest from 12 research
teams, of which 6 teams signed the application form and
received the data. Two of these teams sent their predic-
tions on the test data. The scores of these methods are il-
lustrated in Table 2. Finally, only ¨Ors et al. (2020) submit-
ted a paper about their work. This team reported their work
as consisting of three steps. First, they use a transformer
based model, which is ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020), to pre-
dict whether a pair of sentences refer to the same event or
not. Later, they use these predictions as the initial scores
and recalculate the pair scores by considering the relation
of sentences in a pair with respect to other sentences. As the
last step, ﬁnal scores between these sentences are used to
construct the clusters, starting with the pairs with the high-
est scores.

is possible

forecasting

presents

exploits

study

that

that

it

¨Ors et al.
UNC Charlotte

ARI

F1

Macro Micro Macro Micro
.5898
.6006
.3284
.3388

.4644
.3253

.6736
.4352

Table 2: Adjusted Random Index (ARI) and F1 for each
baseline system.

5. Concluding Remarks
We have provided a brief summary of the workshop Au-
tomated Extraction of Socio-political Events from News
(AESPEN) and the shared task Event Sentence Coreference
Identiﬁcation (ESCI) we organized in the scope of Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2020).
The variety of the submitted papers show that we could

6https://spiderbites.nytimes.com, accessed on

April 21, 2020.

bring the ML, NLP, and social and political science com-
munities together. Although the breadth of the topics were
limited, the technical depth and timeliness of the contribu-
tions show that the workshop contribute to the discipline
of automatic extraction of socio-political events. The pa-
pers about processing Arabic and Greek sources are signif-
icant contributions to the understanding of how should we
handle languages other than English. Finally, the shared
task ESCI demonstrated the prevalence of the event coref-
erences, some baselines for handling them, and a state-of-
the-art system that is able to tackle this task.
We consider this workshop as a beginning. We expect this
effort to be extended both in depth and in breadth since we
think the work presented is only the tip of the iceberg con-
sidering the recent projects and technical potential intro-
duced by deep learning technologies.

6. Acknowledgements
The authors from Koc¸ University are funded by the Eu-
ropean Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant 714868
awarded to Dr. Erdem Y¨or¨uk for his project Emerging Wel-
fare. We appreciate contributions of the program committee
members, who are in alphabetical order Svetla Boycheva,
Fırat Durus¸an, Theresa Gessler, Christian G¨obel, Burak
G¨urel, Matina Halkia, Sophia Hunger, J. Craig Jenkins,
Liron Lavi, Jasmine Lorenzini, Bernardo Magnini, Osman
Mutlu, Nelleke Oostdijk, Arzucan ¨Ozg¨ur, Jakub Piskorski,
Lidia Pivovarova, Benjamin J. Radford, Clionadh Raleigh,
Ali Safaya, Parang Saraf, Philip Schrodt, Manuela Sper-
anza, Aline Villavicencio, C¸ a˘grı Yoltar, Kalliopi Zervanou
and of the keynote speaker Clionadh Raleigh. We are grate-
ful to the management of the Competence Centre on Text
Mining and Analysis (CC-TMA) at European Commission
Joint Research Center (JRC) for the support. Any opin-
ions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or suggestions expressed here
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the
view of the sponsor(s) or authors’ employer(s).

7. Bibliographical References
Bansal, N., Blum, A., and Chawla, S. (2004). Correlation

clustering. Mach. Learn., 56(1–3):89–113, June.

Boschee, E., Natarajan, P., and Weischedel, R.

(2013).
Automatic Extraction of Events from Open Source Text
for Predictive Forecasting. In V.S. Subrahmanian, editor,
Handbook of Computational Approaches to Counterter-
rorism, pages 51–67. Springer New York, New York,
NY.

B¨uy¨uk¨oz, B., H¨urriyeto˘glu, A., and ¨Ozg¨ur, A. (2020). An-
alyzing ELMo and DistilBERT on Socio-political News
In Proceedings of the Workshop Auto-
Classiﬁcation.
mated Extraction of Socio-political Events from News
(AESPEN).

Chenoweth, E. and Lewis, O. A. (2013). Unpacking non-
violent campaigns: Introducing the NAVCO 2.0 dataset.
Journal of Peace Research, 50(3):415–423.

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human

Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Doddington, G., Mitchell, A., Przybocki, M., Ramshaw,
L., Strassel, S., and Weischedel, R. (2004). The auto-
matic content extraction (ACE) program – tasks, data,
and evaluation. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC’04), Lisbon, Portugal, May. European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA).

Ettinger, A., Rao, S., Daum´e III, H., and Bender, E. M.
(2017). Towards Linguistically Generalizable NLP Sys-
tems: A Workshop and Shared Task. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Building Linguistically Generaliz-
able NLP Systems, pages 1–10. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

Gerner, D. J., Schrodt, P. A., Yilmaz, O., and Abu-Jabr,
R. (2002). Conﬂict and mediation event observations
(cameo): A new event data framework for the analysis
of foreign policy interactions. International Studies As-
sociation, New Orleans.

Getman, J., Ellis, J., Strassel, S., Song, Z., and Tracey, J.
(2018). Laying the groundwork for knowledge base pop-
ulation: Nine years of linguistic resources for TAC KBP.
In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018),
Miyazaki, Japan, May. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).

Halkia, M., Ferri, S., Papazoglou, M., van Damme, M.-S.,
and Thomakos, D. (2020). Conﬂict Event Modelling:
Research Experiment and Event Data Limitations.
In
Proceedings of the Workshop Automated Extraction of
Socio-political Events from News (AESPEN).

Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-
term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780.
Hubert, L. and Arabie, P. (1985). Comparing partitions.

Journal of classiﬁcation, 2(1):193–218.

H¨urriyeto˘glu, A., Y¨or¨uk, E., Y¨uret, D., Yoltar, C¸ ., G¨urel,
B., Durus¸an, F., and Mutlu, O. (2019a). A task set pro-
posal for automatic protest information collection across
multiple countries. In Leif Azzopardi, et al., editors, Ad-
vances in Information Retrieval, pages 316–323, Cham.
Springer International Publishing.

H¨urriyeto˘glu, A., Y¨or¨uk, E., Y¨uret, D., Yoltar, C¸ ., G¨urel,
B., Durus¸an, F., Mutlu, O., and Akdemir, A. (2019b).
Overview of clef 2019 lab protestnews: Extracting
protests from news in a cross-context setting. In Fabio
Crestani, et al., editors, Experimental IR Meets Multilin-
guality, Multimodality, and Interaction, pages 425–432,
Cham. Springer International Publishing.

H¨urriyeto˘glu, A., Y¨or¨uk, E., Y¨uret, D., Mutlu, O., Yoltar,
C¸ ., G¨urel, B., and Durus¸an, F. (2020). Cross-context
news corpus for protest events related knowledge base
construction. In Automated Knowledge Base Construc-
tion (AKBC), June.

Kriesi, H., W¨uest, B., Lorenzini, J., Makarov, P., Enggist,
M., Rothenh¨ausler, K., Kurer, T., H¨ausermann, Silja,
P. W., Altiparmakis, A., Borb´ath, E., Bremer, B., Gessler,
T., Hunger, S., Hutter, S., Schulte-Cloos, J., and Wang,

C. (2019). PolDem – Protest Event Dataset 30.

Lan, Z., Chen, M., Goodman, S., Gimpel, K., Sharma,
P., and Soricut, R. (2020). Albert: A lite bert for self-
supervised learning of language representations. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations.
Leetaru, K. and Schrodt, P. A. (2013). GDELT: Global data
on events, location, and tone, 1979–2012. In ISA annual
convention, volume 2, pages 1–49. Citeseer.

Mikolov, T., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., Puhrsch, C., and
Joulin, A. (2018). Advances in pre-training distributed
In Proceedings of the Eleventh
word representations.
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan, May. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association (ELRA).

Nardulli, P. F., Althaus, S. L., and Hayes, M. (2015). A
Progressive Supervised-learning Approach to Generat-
ing Rich Civil Strife Data. Sociological Methodology,
45(1):148–183.

Olsson, F., Sahlgren, M., Abdesslem, F. B., Ekgren, A.,
and Eck, K. (2020). Text Categorization for Conﬂict
Event Annotation. In Proceedings of the Workshop Au-
tomated Extraction of Socio-political Events from News
(AESPEN).

¨Ors, K. F., Yeniterzi, S., and Yeniterzi, R. (2020). Event
In Proceedings of
Clustering within News Articles.
the Workshop Automated Extraction of Socio-political
Events from News (AESPEN).

Osorio, J., Reyes, A., Beltran, A., and Ahmadzai, A.
(2020). Supervised Event Coding from Text Written
In Proceedings of
in Arabic:
the Workshop Automated Extraction of Socio-political
Events from News (AESPEN).

Introducing Hadath.

Papanikolaou, K. and Papageorgiou1, H. (2020). Protest
Event Analysis: A Longitudinal Analysis for Greece. In
Proceedings of the Workshop Automated Extraction of
Socio-political Events from News (AESPEN).
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C.

(2014).
Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–
1543, Doha, Qatar, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Peters, M., Neumann, M., Iyyer, M., Gardner, M., Clark,
C., Lee, K., and Zettlemoyer, L. (2018). Deep contextu-
alized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 2227–
2237, New Orleans, Louisiana, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Piskorski, J. and Jacquet, G. (2020). TF-IDF Character N-
grams versusWord Embedding-based Models for Fine-
grained Event Classiﬁcation: A Preliminary study. In
Proceedings of the Workshop Automated Extraction of
Socio-political Events from News (AESPEN).

Pustejovsky, J., Knippen, R., Littman, J., and Saur´ı, R.
(2005). Temporal and event information in natural lan-
guage text. Language resources and evaluation, 39(2-
3):123–164.

Radford, B.

(2020). Seeing the Forest and the Trees:
Detection and Cross-Document Coreference Resolution
In Proceedings of
of Militarized Interstate Disputes.
the Workshop Automated Extraction of Socio-political
Events from News (AESPEN).

Raleigh, C., Linke, A., Hegre, H., and Karlsen, J. (2010).
Introducing acled: an armed conﬂict location and event
dataset: special data feature. Journal of peace research,
47(5):651–660.

Schrodt, P. A., Beieler, J., and Idris, M. (2014). Three’sa
charm?: Open event data coding with el: Diablo, Pe-
trarch, and the open event data alliance. In ISA Annual
Convention.

Song, Z., Bies, A., Strassel, S., Riese, T., Mott, J., Ellis,
J., Wright, J., Kulick, S., Ryant, N., and Ma, X. (2015).
From light to rich ERE: Annotation of entities, relations,
and events. In Proceedings of the The 3rd Workshop on
EVENTS: Deﬁnition, Detection, Coreference, and Rep-
resentation, pages 89–98, Denver, Colorado, June. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.

S¨onmez, C¸ ., ¨Ozg¨ur, A., and Y¨or¨uk, E. (2016). Towards
building a political protest database to explain changes
in the welfare state. In Proceedings of the 10th SIGHUM
Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Her-
itage, Social Sciences, and Humanities, pages 106–110.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Wang, W., Kennedy, R., Lazer, D., and Ramakrishnan, N.
(2016). Growing pains for global monitoring of societal
events. Science, 353(6307):1502–1503.

Ward, M. D., Beger, A., Cutler, J., Dickenson, M., Dorff,
C., and Radford, B. (2013). Comparing gdelt and icews
event data. Event Data Analysis, 21(1):267–297.

Weidmann, N. B. and Rød, E. G., (2019). The Internet and
Political Protest in Autocracies, chapter Coding Protest
Events in Autocracies. Oxford Studies in Digital Poli-
tics, Oxford.

Yoruk, E. (2012). The politics of the Turkish welfare sys-
tem transformation in the neoliberal era: Welfare as mo-
bilization and containment. The Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity.

