0
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
1

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
0
1
5
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Predicting time to graduation at a large enrollment
American university

John M. Aiken1,3 Riccardo De Bin2 Morten Hjorth-Jensen1, 3, 4 Marcos D.
Caballero1, 3, 5

1 University of Oslo Department of Physics, Centre for Computing in Science
Education, Blindern, Oslo, Norway
2 University of Oslo Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Blindern, Oslo, Norway
3 Michigan State University Department of Physics and Astronomy, East Lansing,
Michigan, USA
4 Michigan State University, National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory and
Facility for Rare Ion Beams, East Lansing, Michigan, USA
5 CREATE for STEM Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824

* j.m.aiken@fys.uio.no

Abstract

The time it takes a student to graduate with a university degree is mitigated by a
variety of factors such as their background, the academic performance at university, and
their integration into the social communities of the university they attend. Different
universities have different populations, student services, instruction styles, and degree
programs, however, they all collect institutional data. This study presents data for
160,933 students attending a large American research university. The data includes
performance, enrollment, demographics, and preparation features. Discrete time hazard
models for the time-to-graduation are presented in the context of Tinto’s Theory of
Drop Out. Additionally, a novel machine learning method: gradient boosted trees, is
applied and compared to the typical maximum likelihood method. We demonstrate that
enrollment factors (such as changing a major) lead to greater increases in model
predictive performance of when a student graduates than performance factors (such as
grades) or preparation (such as high school GPA).

1

Introduction

University students must meet a number of objectives to obtain degrees and in many
cases this can prolong their time at the university [1] or they drop out altogether [2].
During their studies, American students may take on substantial financial obligations
when choosing to pursue degrees and extending beyond the “four-year degree” can
greatly increase the cost of obtaining that degree [3]. Thus understanding the paths
that students take towards degree completion can help faculty and administrators better
serve student populations to meet their educational goals. Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out
[4] has seen large acceptance in its ability to describe the factors that influence a
student’s path towards degree completion [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Tinto theorized that a student’s
college drop out decision is mediated by two conglomerate features: 1) educational goal
commitment, and 2) institutional commitment. He further theorized that these

November 17, 2021

1/28

 
 
 
 
 
 
commitments are dynamic. Students begin their university studies with initial
commitments that are then mediated by how students participate in the academic and
social systems of the university. Tinto suggested that using institutional data such as
that collected by university registrars, could quantify these relationships and provide
predictive models for determining student’s at-risk to drop out or alternatively,
graduate.

This paper examines student ultimate success at university. We define this success

as obtaining a bachelor’s degree. It uses 20 years of institutional data for
160,933 students attending a large enrollment American research university. This paper
examines two specific research questions:

1. In the context of Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out [4], what factors (such as grades,

participation in a major, student background, etc.) contribute to the time it takes
to obtain a degree at a large enrollment research university in the United States?
How does the contribution of these factors change for longer durations until
graduation?

2. How can recent innovations in statistics and machine learning, such as gradient

boosting and xgboost, improve educational model performance?

We focus on a comparison of student participation in an academic system, their
involvement in the social system, and their initial conditions due to high school training.
We demonstrate that enrollment factors (e.g., changing a major) and academic
performance are more important to predicting when a student graduates than
pre-college experiences (e.g., high school GPA). Additionally, we compare traditional
statistical modeling (maximum likelihood estimation) to new techniques from machine
learning (gradient boosting [10]) and demonstrate that the machine learning methods
are more effective at estimating the function predicting time-to-graduation.

It is important to use an analysis technique that respects the dynamics assumptions

of Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out. In this paper we use a Discrete Time Hazard Model
framework [11]. Discrete time hazard model is useful when the classic Cox regression
model assumption that events happen on a continuous interval no longer hold valid [11].
This is true when data has highly discretized time intervals such as semesters enrolled.
Traditionally this modeling is done with logistic regression via maximum likelihood
estimation [11]. In this paper we compare two models that fit the logistic model
including logistic regression (maximum likelihood estimation) and a gradient boosted
tree model (xgboost, [10]).

2 Background

In this section Tinto’s theory[4] and the use of that theory will be described, the use of
discrete time hazard model [11] to predict when students graduate and/or drop out will
be described, and the value of a new machine learning method known as gradient
boosting will be described [10]. The functional descriptions of the discrete time hazard
model and gradient boosting are described in Section 4.

2.1 Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out

Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out describes a students intent to drop out based on the
interplay of two quantities: 1) a student’s commitment to education, and 2) a student’s
commitment to a specific institution. A student’s commitment to education is mediated
by the initial state of a student entering the university and the dynamics that occur
while the student attends university. These dynamics are dictated by a student’s

November 17, 2021

2/28

participation and acceptance into the social and academic communities that are at a
university. A student’s commitment to an institution is tempered by many factors such
as the educational goals available at an institution (e.g., a technical university degree
offerings versus a liberal arts university), family commitment to a university, and social
acceptance at the university. While Tinto’s theory explicitly attempts to describe why
students drop out from college, it is not uncommon that this theory is used to study
student graduation from college given that graduation is an alternative outcome to
dropping out [9, 12, 1]. In this paper we focus on a student’s commitment to education
as the framing for features that predict when a student will graduate if they do so.
It is common to characterize Tinto’s theory of dropout as a discrete time hazard
problem [8, 9, 12, 13, 1]. Tinto’s theory posits that a student’s educational commitment
changes over time as they work toward’s a degree and that effects, such as high school
GPA, that may be strong in the beginning of a degree program are weak toward’s the
end of a degree program. Discrete time hazard modeling provides a systematic method
for examining the various effects on the probability to graduate over time [11]. To that
end, discrete time hazard modeling has been used to examine the dynamic impact of
various effects that Tinto predicts effect a student’s educational commitment. College
GPA has been demonstrated to have a profound but diminishing time varying effect on
graduation [8, 14, 1]. Financial aid and money spent on student services has also
demonstrated a time varying (diminishing) effect on the probability to graduate [14, 1].
First generation student’s are considered high risk for drop out but this effect diminishes
over time indicating that first generation students need specific resources other students
may not [9]. Non-traditional enrollment factors such as delaying enrollment, working
while enrolled, and stopping education for some period of time can all have a negative
time varying effect on graduation [12]. In each case these studies showed a statistically
significant time varying impact that supports the dynamic claims of Tinto’s theory.
A student’s preparation has long been known to impact a student’s ability to

graduate. Preparation is assessed in many ways and can be represented as the
experiences a student has in school and also their present innate ability to perform a
specific function. Math preparation correlates with both performance in university and
graduating [15, 16]. The same is true for physics and english preparation [17, 18, 19].
High school GPA and SAT scores typically account for some but not all of student
success at university (GPA, etc.) [20, 21, 22]. Preparation for university often can be
experienced differentially as well. Women in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics) degree programs report having less access to laboratory experiences
in high school, are encouraged towards science by their father’s differently, and overall
have a different preparation than their male counterparts [23, 19].

A student’s demographics can include the student’s gender, race, the financial
support they can expect from their family, and if a student is the first in their family to
attend college. Race has long been shown to be a factor in whether a student graduates
or not. Black students are less likely to graduate than fellow white students when
adjusted for socio-economic status and academic ability and they are more likely to
have unwelcoming experiences in STEM programs while at university [24, 23, 1]. Female
students are also likely to have unwelcoming experiences that cause them to switch from
STEM programs [23]. However they have been show to be equally likely to graduate or
more likely to graduation in comparison to their male counterparts [24, 23]. The
financial support both in terms of loans and scholarships and the socio-economic status
of a student’s family have long been known to be a factor in university graduation with
students who have more financial support typically being more likely to graduate [24,
25, 26, 27, 1]. First generation students are less likely to participate in extra-curricular
activities at university [28, 29] and are more likely to dropout even when adjusting for
race, family income, gender, and preparation [9]. Ultimately, American students from

November 17, 2021

3/28

different backgrounds often see different success rates at university due to the different
experience they have at the university due to their race, gender, or socio-economic
status.

2.2 Gradient boosting

In this paper we use a novel method known as ”gradient boosting”. Gradient boosting
can solve a large number of statistical modeling problems including logistic problems as
found in this paper. Logistic problems are a group of statistical problems that assume
that a sigmoidal function made from parameters θ and data x (i.e., [1 + e−θT x]−1)
approximates the probability P (Y |X). In plain language, the model uses input data X
to determine how likely the outcome, Y , is to be true. In the context of this paper that
would mean the input data X is used to predict whether a student will graduate in the
following semester. In education research, the maximum likelihood method has
commonly been used to find the solutions to logistic problems. Maximum likelihood
solves the logistic regression problem by picking parameters θ that maximize the log
likelihood function [30].

Since there is no closed form solution to this likelihood equation the solution is
found iteratively via some optimization algorithm [30]. Maximum likelihood is the
typical default solution for logistic problems in most statistical packages such as
statsmodels [31] in python and glm in R [32].

Gradient boosting produces the solution to the logistic problem in a different way.

The log-likelihood is maximized (or, in machine learning terms, the negative
log-likelihood is minimized) in small steps: at each step, called boosting iteration, the
gradient of the log-likelihood is computed to identify the best direction for the
maximization, and it is then fed to a base learner, through which the model is updated.
Different choices of base learners (in this paper we will use trees) provide different
solutions, guaranteeing maximum flexibility [33]. An early stop, through a tuning
parameter which controls the number of iterations, prevents overfitting and provide a
better bias-variance trade-off [34]. If the base learner is weak enough in comparison to
the signal-to-noise, it can be shown that, at least for a continuous response, boosted
models outperform their unboosted versions in term of MSE [35]. Several modifications
of the boosting algorithm have been proposed, including stochastic gradient boosting,
that uses column and row subsampling to further avoid overfitting and even better deal
with the bias-variance trade-off issue [36].

Gradient boosting has been demonstrated to produce better fit models in comparison
to traditional methods across a number of domains both in binary classification and in
hazard modeling [37, 38, 39]. Boosted logistic models have been demonstrated to be
more effective at fitting data than models that use maximum likelihood estimation [40].
The structure of educational data can be highly complex often containing many sub
groups that have different effects [41]. It is likely that gradient boosting can provide
better parameter estimation for education research questions as well.

In this paper we use the Extreme Gradient Boosting (xgboost) algorithm [10].
Xgboost implements stochastic gradient boosting [42] with column and row-wise
subsampling, regularization, decision tree base learners with a custom tree split finding
algorithm, and an in-model data imputation system for missing data. The specifics of
xgboost are explained in Section 4.

3 Data Set

The data in this study comes from registrar information from a large enrollment
American research university [21]. It includes timestamped course grades, demographics,

November 17, 2021

4/28

majors declared, degrees awarded, and preparation information for 160,933 students for
the years 1992 to 2012. Student’s are included in the study if they remain enrolled for
at least 5 semesters. The 5 semester mark is chosen because a large number of
students(18.3%) remain enrolled for only four or less semesters taking core courses [1].
These students do not graduate the university and likely transfer elsewhere as their
institutional commitment may be low [4]. 88.02% students who remain enrolled for at
least 5 semesters graduate from this university.

In this study, data is organized by semester into of four categories: demographics,
preparation, enrollment, and performance (Fig. 1). Demographics and preparation are
considered ”static” features. That is, they are not changing over the course of the study.
The enrollment and performance features are considered ”dynamic”. That is, they are
cumulative and values can change as students progress in their studies.

The demographics data includes gender, race, cohort year, and the median family
income for the zipcode the high school the student attended. The gender category is
binary: male or female. The race category uses the IPEDs definitions [43] which is then
reduced to a binary category of white/asian or other. This is due to two reasons: 1) the
university has a primarily white/asian population, and 2) in this paper we establish
model comparison’s via out-of-sample prediction accuracy. Thus due to the small
minority population, out-of-sample, per semester data may not include all racial groups
with sufficient numbers (>100, [44]). The cohort year is the year the student begins
their first courses. The median income comes from the 2011 American Community
Survey 5-Year Estimate [45]. If the student has a reported high school GPA, then we
also know the zip code of the high school the student attended. This zipcode is matched
to the 2011 census data zip codes. The census data includes the median incomes for
families living in that zipcode. The log of the median income is then recorded per
student. If the zip code data is missing the median income is imputed as described in
Section 4. This method is not an attempt to provide a course grained estimate of the
socio-economic status of the student. Instead, it is a method to obtain a measure of the
socio-economic status of the high school the student attended. Student learning can be
impacted not only by a student’s personal socio-economic status, but also the
socio-economic status of the learning community they belong to [46]. We do not have
individual level socio-economic data such as parental income. Nor do we have data on
financial aid status.

The preparation data includes the per student reported high school GPA, a math

placement score, and if amount of Advanced Placement credits if any. The math
placement score comes from a 30 item test that the university requires students to take
upon admission. This test has been used for the entirety of the study. A higher score
will place the student in a higher math course up to calculus 1. High school GPA is also
reported for each student. In both the cases of high school GPA and math placement
score the data can be missing for several reasons. High school GPA is not required to be
reported by applicants to this university, thus high school GPA is not always recorded
for each student. If students have transfer courses for higher math courses (e.g., calculus
1) then the student does not need to take a placement test to determine if they can
begin in calculus 1. In the case of missing data the math placement score and the high
school GPA are imputed as described in Section 4.

The enrollment features are organized per semester. They include whether a student
changed their major in that semester, the number of currently enrolled majors, the ratio
of credit hours to a full time load (12 credit hours), the total registered semester credit
hours, the total cumulative credit hours accrued, the non-major credits the student has
registered for in this semester, the major credits hours enrolled per semester, whether
the student was enrolled in the previous semester, and the cumulative number of
skipped semesters.

November 17, 2021

5/28

Fig 1. Data model for all models presented in this paper.

The performance features are organized per semester. They include the current
semester GPA, the cumulative GPA, the current semester’s GPA for courses outside of
the student’s current major, and the current semester’s GPA for courses within the
student’s current major.

4 Methods

In this paper we have used a discrete time hazard modeling framework for all models
that are presented. We begin by comparing the logistic regression model to a gradient
boosted (xgboost) [10] model to produce the most predictive model. In this section we
will describe the discrete time hazard modeling framework, the logistic regression
equation, the xgboost model equation, and the statistics and evaluation methods that
we have used to determine the xgboost model is the best predictive model. We will then
describe the methods we used to evaluate what features the model uses to produce
predictions. The superior xgboost model is then used to describe what factors are most
predictive of students graduating in a particular semester.

4.1 Discrete Time Hazard Models

Discrete time hazard models are, essentially, logistic regression (or other classification)
models calculated per time step for time changing data. They control for time to event
predictions when the times to events are simultaneous or explicitly discrete and there is
new data being collected over the course of the study period [11]. Traditional hazard
analysis such as Cox regression is not capable of doing this type of analysis due to the
duration being measured being a common value amongst many students [11]. This is
due to the likelihood function of a continuous event duration model assumes
independent and unique durations (i.e., the time it takes to graduate). When these
durations are not unique, they can lead to overfitting. In this study the time unit used
is a semester [1]. Thus the models attempt to predict whether a student will graduate
in the immediate following semester. If a student drops out from the university, they

November 17, 2021

6/28

Static FeaturesDemographicsGenderRaceCohort yearHigh school median family incomePreparationHigh school GPAMath placement scoreAP creditsDynamic FeaturesEnrollmentChanged majorNumber of enrolled majorsFraction above/below full-time credit hoursTotal semester credit hoursCumulative credit hoursMajor credit hoursNon-major credit hoursEnrolled in previous semesterCumulative skipped semestersPerformanceCurrent GPACumulative GPANon-major GPAMajor GPAFig 2. A comparison of a subset of features for students who graduate versus those
who do not based on first year enrolled. Since 1992 the student population has become
more diverse racially, students have had increasing high school GPAs and math
placement scores, and the time it takes students who graduate to graduate has been
decreasing. Students who graduate typically take more credit hours than those who
don’t, typically are better prepared as measured by high school GPA and math
placement score, and are less diverse than the total university population.

November 17, 2021

7/28

3.03.23.43.63.84.0Mean High School GPAgraduateddid not graduate0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Mean Math Placement Score199219962000200420082012012345Mean AP credit hours1992199620002004200820120.50.60.70.80.91.0Fraction of White/Asians0.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Fraction of Women10.0010.2510.5010.7511.0011.2511.5011.7512.00Mean Enrolled Credit HoursFirst Year EnrolledFig 3. Students typically graduate within the window of 8 to 12 semesters. The bars
represent the number of students across all cohort years who graduate in the following
semester. The green line represents the cumulative fraction of students who have
graduated.

are not included in following semester data set.

4.2 Logistic Regression

The logistic regression equation used in this paper is as follows:

log

y(t)
1 − y(t)

= β0(t) + βT

S X S + βD(t)T X D(t)

(1)

Where y(t) is the likelihood to graduate in the following semester and βS and X S
are static features indicated by subtext S (Fig. 1). The dynamic terms (indicated by
subtext D) are calculated per semester t from semester 5 until semester 16 [1]. (cid:15) is then
the irreducible random error. This is effectively an iteratively calculated multinomial
logistic regression model [1]. The model is fit using the maximum likelihood estimation
method. No regularization is used.

The logistic regression model is built using the statsmodels library in python [31].

4.3 Gradient Boosted Trees

Xgboost is an implementation of a stochastic gradient boosting machine [47, 42, 10]
that can also be used to attempt to solve the logistic equation. Gradient boosted
machines can be seen as models that are iteratively fit on the current residuals starting
from the null model. The additive collection of these models produce the output.
Xgboost uses decision trees as its base learners.

The gradient boosted model is thus:

log

y(t)
1 − y(t)

= F0 +

M
(cid:88)

m

hm(X(t))Fm(X(t))

(2)

Where m is the iteration index, hm(X) is the previous iterations residual model and

Fm(X) is the current iteration’s model fit to previous iteration’s residuals. The total
number of iterations is set by M .

A gradient boosted machine can use any learner for the iterative procedure. In this
paper we use the decision tree learner as implemented in Xgboost [10]. Decision trees
are models that use a tree like structure to fit data and produce regressions and

November 17, 2021

8/28

5678910111213141516Graduating Semester0500010000150002000025000N Students0.00.20.40.60.81.0% Studentsclassifications. For each ”leaf” node in a tree, a specific decision is made that separates
data into two diverging paths. Each node represents a single variable. Categorical
variables (e.g., gender) are simply split by the category. Continuous variables (e.g.,
semester GPA) are split by a decision boundary (e.g., GPA > 3.0). This boundary is
typically determined through iteratively fitting the model to find the best boundary.

In Xgboost, each decision tree is trained from a randomly sampled set of rows and
columns. Each tree is grown up to a maximum depth using a leaf growing algorithm that
estimates whether an additional leaf will produce a better or worse tree [10]. Thus there
is no separation between static and dynamic features as in the logistic regression model
for each semester. All xgboost models are built using the xgboost library in python [10].
Xgboost has a built in algorithm to deal with missing data [10]. When missing, data

is imputed for each tree by selecting the most common decision path for a node.
Because a feature may appear in many trees in the model, the decision boundary can be
very different per tree in comparison to an mean imputation scheme.

Xgboost models have hyperparameters that define how the model is to be

constructed prior to the model being trained. These hyperparameters govern two classes
of model design: 1) how the boosting functions, and 2) how the trees are grown and
structured. In the case of boosting, the most common hyperparameter used is the
number of total boosting learners. For the tree structure this includes the maximum
depth a tree can grow to and the fraction of variable and row sub-selection. Typically
these hyperparameters are determined by grid search when the total combination of
hyperparameters is below 1000 combinations [48, 49].

Because the learners in the xgboost model are decision trees and not linear models,
the xgboost model does not report typical coefficient values like in a traditional logistic
regression. Instead they report feature ”importances” known as ”gain”. Each time a
variable is used in a tree, the tree is built optimally by splitting in the optimum
location. The increase in accuracy due to this split is the gain. The feature importance
for a specific variable reported then is the average gain across all the instances that the
variable is used in in the model. Xgboost uses a custom split finding algorithm that
compares the utility of growing a tree to its maximum depth based on increase in
accuracy [10].

4.4 Model Evaluation

The goal of this study is to produce a predictive model of when student’s graduate. We
use a number of techniques to verify the veracity of the model and increase its accuracy
(Fig. 4). These include: splitting the data into a training/testing sets, imputing missing
data, and picking custom thresholds for the predicted probability of graduation. We
also limit the over-estimation of a variable’s impact on when a student graduates by
weighting explanation methods with the F1-score [30]. The following section will explain
these techniques in detail.

The data processing and model evaluation follows the procedure shown in the

flowchart in Fig. 4. Data for the discrete time hazard model models are:

1. queried from the pathways database [21]

2. Continuous values such as high school GPA and semester GPA are rescaled using
the z-score. The means and standard deviations are determined by either the
starting year cohort (high school GPA) or the timestamp for the enrolled semester
(semester GPA). The median income is scaled using the logarithm.

3. Data is split into training (50%) and testing (50%) sets. Since the discrete time
hazard models are evaluated per semester data is split by student and not by

November 17, 2021

9/28

Fig 4. Model evaluation flowchart. Data is split into testing and training sets and is
evaluated for two separate models: logistic regression solved by maximum likelihood and
gradient boosted trees (xgboost). Missing data for the xgboost model is not imputed
from the mean and instead uses the built in imputation engine within xgboost [10].

semester. Thus a student in training data in semester 5 is also in training data for
subsequent semesters.

4. Missing data that is input into the logistic regression model is imputed from the
means calculated during the rescaling step. Missing data for the xgboost model is
not imputed prior to fitting the model since the xgboost algorithm has an
imputation engine built in.

5. Each model is trained and evaluated using the F1 score. In-sample F1 scores are

used to determine the best threshold for splitting the predicted probability
distributions for classification (i.e., does the student gradute in the next semester).

6. Models using the selected threshold are then evaluated using out-of-sample test

data to compute the F1 score.

Several data handling procedures were used to prevent model overfitting, data
leakage, and poor predictive performance due to unbalanced class issues. To evaluate
the predictive capability of each model, data in this paper is separated into training and
test sets for each semester that the discrete time hazard model model is applied.
Separating data into partitioned training and testing sets is important to prevent a too
optimistic evaluation of the model error[30]. Without having hold out data to evaluate
the model performance, we have no way of knowing how a model will predict the
outcome of data it has not seen before [30, 50, 44]. Using hold-out data is atypical in
recommendations within education research for assessing predictive ability [51, 52] and
is not used typically in modern papers using discrete time hazard analysis (e.g., [1]).
Data leakage could occur between two semesters if, for example, a student in
semester 6 is in a training set and the same student is in a test set in semester 7 [44].

November 17, 2021

10/28

Pathways dbtrain/ test splitImpute missing data with meanTesting dataLogistic Regression(MLE)Gradient Boosted TreesEvaluationF1-ScoreBest modelPartial dependenceTraining dataFeature importanceRescale dataRescale dataTraining mean, stdevThis is due to some of the features being cumulative thus they would carry forward
information from the previous training period into the next test period. Thus, students
are identified prior to model training as belonging to the training or testing data set.
Students in the test data set are only given to the model to evaluate model predictive
performance.

Students do not always have an entry in the database for their high school GPA or

their math placement score. This can be due to a variety of reasons such as the high
school GPA was not reported, the reported high school GPA was self reported and
potentially untrustworthy, and the math placement score was not given to the student
because they transferred math credits from another institution. To prevent errors
associated with removing data [53], this data is imputed in one of two ways. For the
logistic model data is imputed from the mean for the student’s cohort year. For the
xgboost model data is imputed within the model. Xgboost will actively impute missing
data within each tree learner based on the most likely branch for each decision node
(see Section 4 and [10] for more details).

The predictive ability of models in this paper is estimated using the F1-score and the

recall [54]. The F1-score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall and is
calculated with the following equation:

F1-score = 2

Pr · Re
Pr + Re

P r =

Re =

true positive
true positive + false positive
true positive
true positive + false negative

(3)

(4)

(5)

The F1 score is over the range 0 to 1 with 1 being perfect performance and 0 being

random performance. Precision is defined as the ratio of true positives to the sum of
true positives and false positives. That is, it is the ratio of true predicted graduations
per semester to the sum of the true predicted graduations and those predicted to
graduate but actually do not. Precision is over the range 0 to 1 with 1 being perfect
performance and 0 being random performance. Recall is defined as the ratio of true
positives to the sum of true positives and false negatives. That is, it is the ration of the
number of students predicted to graduate to the total number of people who actually
graduated per semester. Recall is over the range 0 to 1 with 1 being perfect
performance and 0 being random performance.

We use the F1-score over other statistics (such as the area under the reciever
operating curve (AUC), [30]) because it balances the trade off between high precision
(which includes falsely labeling students as graduated) and high recall (which includes
falsely labeling students as not graduating). We use the Recall score in the cases of
understanding model performance for sub-groups (such as under-represented minorities)
because it gives a more direct interpretation of how accurately the model selects the
graduating case.

Students are enrolled for many semesters however they only graduate in a single
semester. Thus the majority class in each semester is that a student will not graduate
in the following semester. This unbalanced class issue can lead to under-fitting of the
model specifically such that models simply predict the majority class (in this case not
graduating) far too often [55]. We attempted to use an over-sampling technique [56] to
address this issue however this did not increase model performance. Instead we choose
custom thresholds for the model probability distributions for predicting when a student
graduated. The custom thresholds are picked using the F1 scores calculated from the
training data [57]. The best threshold is calculated via a grid-search between a threshold
of 0 to 1 using increments of 0.01. This still, typically, does not increase F1 scores.

November 17, 2021

11/28

Beyond predicting when a student will graduate we are interested in the factors that
explain why a student was predicted to graduate (or not graduate). A typical logistic
regression model using maximum likelihood produces coefficients that represent the
magnitude and direction a particular feature given the other variables. For gradient
boosted trees these values are calculated differently. Xgboost uses instead the average
gain in prediction accuracy across all instances a feature is used in each tree learner.
This is commonly called the ”feature importance”. Additionally we can estimate how
much a feature, depending on individual values, contributes to the predicted probability
of graduating. In this case we use a method called ”partial dependence” that was
originally developed to use with gradient boosted models [47]. Both the xgboost model
and the logistic regression model have a different level of confidence in the prediction
per semester (Fig. 5). Due to this variable confidence our confidence in feature
importances and partial dependences varies as well. In order to account for this
confidence we have weighted the feature importances and partial dependences with the
out-of-sample F1 score. This is explained below.

We estimate the effects of model features on prediction using the using the weighted

mean of the feature importances. For all 11 semesters the feature importance is
weighted by the overall F1-score for the semester following this equation:

βweighted =

N =11
(cid:88)

i=0

F T

1 βi

(6)

This then allows for the cumulative weighted features in Fig. 7 and the weighted

features in Fig. 8.

We also estimate the effects of model features on prediction using the partial

dependence [47]. A partial dependence plot represents the average model output for a
single variable (S) across the entire feature space (C) in the context of all other features
[47]. This means that for a specific feature S, the exact values of S are first, fixed for all
rows in the data set for each unique value of S. Then the model is calculated per value.
The average contribution of a specific unique value to the overall predicted probability
of graduation is then considered the partial dependence. Partial dependence is then
assumed to be a continuous function over the entire feature space of S. Partial
dependence is estimated using the following equation as:

ˆfxS (xs) =

1
n

n
(cid:88)

i=1

ˆf (xS, xi

C)

(7)

The partial dependence is calculated for each semester and is weighted by the

F1-score for that semester (Fig. 9, 10) in a similar fashion to equation 6.

Partial dependence allows the researcher to see the direct contribution to the
predicted probability of a given variable value. Because variables often have many
values, they can give fluctuating contributions to the predicted probability. In linear
models, it is assumed that variables produce linear contributions to the partial
dependence [47, 30] and thus coefficients of a linear model represent unit increases [30,
58]. For nonlinear models such as gradient boosted trees, this assumption is relaxed and
variables can produce nonlinear contributions to the predicted probability.

5 Results

In this study we have two broad research questions: 1) exploring the effectiveness of a
gradient boosted logistic model in comparison to traditionally solved logistic models,
and 2) quantifying the components of Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out in the context of who

November 17, 2021

12/28

does or does not graduate at this university during the study period. In this section we
will first describe the effectiveness of the gradient boosted model in comparison to the
traditional maximum likelihood model. Then we will describe the results that are drawn
from the gradient boosted model in the context of Tinto’s theory.

5.1 Gradient boosting

The models in this study attempt to predict whether a student will graduate or not
during the observation period of being enrolled for 5-16 semesters. The xgboost model
is generally more effective than the logistic regression model except in the last semesters
(15-16) studied as assessed by the out-of-sample F1-score (Fig. 5). Xgboost is
particularly more effective in highly imbalanced case of students graduating
(approximately 5% per semester (Fig. 3)) within ≤8 semesters (Fig. 5). In the more
balanced case (semesters 8-14 have approximately 20% of the students eligible to
graduate do so (Fig. 3)), Xgboost still performs better than the logistic regression
model (Fig. 5). In the final semesters (semesters 15-16) logistic regression outperforms
xgboost slightly.

Xgboost is more effective at correctly predicting the graduating semester of female
students as assessed by the out-of-sample recall for all semesters except for semester 16
(Fig. 6). Xgboost is also more effective at correctly predicting the graduating semester
of under represented minority students for all semesters (Fig. 6). Additionally, Xgboost
is able to handle missing data cases better than the logistic regression model for all
semesters (Fig. 6). Due to the effectiveness of xgboost over logistic regression, the
remaining results will focus on the xgboost model.

5.2 Effects on Time-to-Graduation

Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out posits two overarching quantities as governing student
choice to drop out or continue to graduation: 1) educational goal commitment, and 2)
institutional commitment. Students initially start university with these commitments.
These commitments are then mediated by a student’s participating and integration into
the academic system and the social system of a given institution. Generally speaking
(Fig. 2), graduating students take more credit hours per semester
(N (grad) = 15.1 ± 0.01, N (no − grad) = 13.17 ± 0.05), enroll for more semesters
(N (grad) = 10.57 ± 0.01, N (no − grad) = 8.79 ± 0.05), are more likely to be white or
asian (N (grad) = 86.7%, N (no − grad) = 75.3%), and more likely to be female
(N (grad) = 54.2%, N (no − grad) = 48.9%).

In this study, we characterize student’s initial commitments as being mediated via
the following quantities: high school GPA, math placement score, the number of AP
credit hours the student possesses, the median income of the high school the student
attended, gender, and race. Preparation is about half as important in predicting when a
student graduates in comparison to enrollment factors (Fig. 7). For early graduating
students (≤8 semesters), both math placement scores and high school GPAs were
important in predicting that a student will graduate (Fig. 8). While students are likely
to have more AP credits on average if they graduate in 8-10 semesters
(AP8−10 = 4.06 ± 0.03, APother = 2.26 ± 0.01), having AP credits was not an important
indicator for predicting graduation during any semester in comparison to other features
(Fig. 7, 8). While white and asian students and female students are more likely to
graduate (Fig., 2), demographics are not major indicators for predicting when a student
graduates for any semester (Fig. 7, 8). This is also true for the median incomes of the
zipcode the students went to high school.

In this study academic integration is represented by a combination of features
including the cumulative credit hours, cumulative mean grade; and the per-semester

November 17, 2021

13/28

Fig 5. Out-of-sample F1 scores for all models per semester. Xgboost clearly increases
the precision and recall tradeoff for the bulk of semesters. Error bars are the
bootstrapped standard deviation of the F1 score.

fraction above or below full-time credit hour, mean grade, non-major GPA. A student’s
enrollment and performance are the most predictive features when predicting the
semester when a student graduates (Fig. 7, 8). A student’s cumulative credit hours is
most important to predicting whether a student graduates ”on-time” (after 8 semesters)
or not and is overall important for prediction. The cumulative credit hours is less
important for prediction the further a student’s credits are away from 120 total credit
hours (Fig. 9). A student’s average grade is most important for predicting that students
will graduate within 10 semesters and is overall important for predicting when a student
will graduate (Fig. 7, 8). Having above average grades is important for predicting
students who graduate in 9-10 semesters however this is less important for other
semesters (Fig. 10).

In this study we use per semester major GPA, major credit hours, cumulative
number of majors, and whether a student changed major in that semester or not to
represent their social integration into the departments and learning communities
associated with their chosen degree program. Student’s performance within their major
was not as an important indicator for predicting graduation in comparison to overall
grade and cumulative credit hours (Fig. 7). Changing a major has increased importance
for predicting students who graduate later (Fig. 8).

6 Discussion

This paper presents two complimentary results: 1) gradient boosting is a useful tool for
predicting when students graduate in comparison to traditional statistical algorithms, 2)
students who actively integrate into their academic and social communities is the
primary effect that predicts when a student graduates thus following Tinto’s Theory.
This section will discuss why the xgboost model outperforms logistic regression, the
implications that come with the results of the model, and compare it to other studies
that have predicted time-to-graduation using Tinto’s Theory of Drop Out and hazard
modeling more broadly.

November 17, 2021

14/28

5678910111213141516Semester graduated0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6F1 scorelogistic regressionxgboostFig 6. Recall scores for sub-populations within the data. The Xgboost model
consistently labels women, under represented minorities, and students with missing data
better than logistic regression. In Fig. 5, there is a large disparity between the logistic
regression model and the xgboost model for semesters 5-7. This may be due to the
imputation method used with the logistic regression model and the correlation between
graduating and missing data during those semesters. However, the gaps in model
performance for women, minorities, and missing data in later semesters with no
correlation are likely not due to imputation and demonstrate a strong preference for
using the xgboost model over the logistic regression model.

6.1 Why does gradient boosting produce better fitted models

than maximum likelihood estimation?

In almost every case, the xgboost model predicts graduation better than the logistic
regression model. This can be for several reasons. First, the xgboost model fitting
procedure is a slower iterative procedure (1000 iterations) than the maximum likelihood
estimation (typically 5-6 iterations) that the logistic regression model uses. Thus, in
each iteration the xgboost model can focus on the local neighborhood of feature details
within the training data that the logistic regression model may miss [59].

Second, the xgboost model uses a custom imputation engine [10]. Whenever data is
missing and an learner is using a feature with missing data, the missing data is imputed
to be the most likely choice in the decision tree. Because there are many learners, they
can account for different local patterns in the data. The data for the logistic regression
model is imputed from the mean of the student’s starting year cohort. This mean
imputation likely loses information that the xgboost model is able to attend to. It could
be that a more sophisticated imputation model will increase the logistic regression
model performance. Typically if data missingness correlates with the outcome variable,
then data should be imputed to prevent bias due to the missing data [60]. In our case,
data missingness for both high school GPA and math placement score correlates with
early graduation rates (see supplemental Fig. 11). Thus the logistic regression model
performance would likely increase for semester’s 5-7 with a more sophisticated
imputation model. However this would not explain the substantial improvements
xgboost makes over the logistic model for women and under represented minorities in
later semesters.

Third, xgboost penalizes leafs within the tree learners that are fit on few examples
from the training data [10]. Additionally, xgboost weights on class labels as well. This is
especially useful in the highly unbalanced case of predicting when a student graduates.
Because the weight of training data from students who do not graduate is tuned via a
grid search, this prevents the xgboost model from overfitting on the majority class
simply due to having more representative samples.

November 17, 2021

15/28

56789101112131415160.00.10.20.30.40.5RecallFemale5678910111213141516Semester GraduatedUnder-Represented Minority5678910111213141516Missing HSGPAXgboostLogistic RegressionFig 7. Average feature importance for all graduating semesters for the xgboost model.
Feature importances are weighted by the F1 scores per semester. Enrollment factors
and the cumulative average grade are more likely to predict when a student graduates
than other factors.

November 17, 2021

16/28

0.00.10.20.30.40.5Cumulative WeightedFeature ImportanceMedian Income (log)FemaleNon-Major GPANon-Major Credit HoursFirst Course YearWhite/AsianN-MajorsTotal semestercredit hoursAP Credit HoursMajor Credit HoursMean GradeHS GPAMath Placement ScoreMajor GPAFraction above orbelow full-time credit hoursChanged MajorCumulative Mean GradeCumulative Credit HoursdemographicspreparationperformanceenrollmentFig 8. Xgboost feature importances for predicting if a student will graduate in the next
semester. Feature importances are weighted by the F1 score calculated from test data.
The row-wise sum of these features would produce Fig. 7. By far the most important
feature for graduating ”on time” (within 8 semesters) is having enough credit hours.
Student preparation is important for graduating ”early” (<8 semesters). Students who
change majors are more likely to graduate later and thus this feature becomes more
important in later graduating semesters.

November 17, 2021

17/28

5678910111213141516Graduating SemesterFemaleWhite/AsianMedian Income (log)First Course YearHS GPAMath Placement ScoreChanged MajorN-MajorsMean GradeCumulative Mean GradeFraction above orbelow full-time credit hoursTotal semestercredit hoursCumulative Credit HoursAP Credit HoursMajor Credit HoursNon-Major Credit HoursMajor GPANon-Major GPA0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.14Weighted Feature ImportanceFig 9. The partial dependence per semester for the cumulative credit hours a student
has obtained. The stronger the partial dependence, the more contribution that value of
cumulative credit hours has on the predicted probability that a student will graduate in
the given semester. The partial dependence has been weighted by the per semester F1
score. Having a total number of credit hours close to 120 is highly predictive of
graduating if students graduate between 8 and 10 semesters of enrollment. Outside of
this window the impact of the total number of credit hours diminishes. This is likely
due to students having additional credit hours that do not count towards a degree such
as when they change their major.

November 17, 2021

18/28

5678910111213141516Semester Graduated0255075100125150175200Cumulative Credit Hours120 credit hours0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.140.160.18Weighted Partial DependenceFig 10. The partial dependence per semester for the cumulative average GPA a student
has obtained. The stronger the partial dependence, the more contribution that the
cumulative average GPA has on the predicted probability that a student will graduate
in the given semester. The partial dependence has been weighted by the per semester F1
score. Having a far above average GPA is a major contribution to graduating if a
student graduates between semesters 9 and 10. This is likely due to these students never
failing a course and having a high commitment to their chosen major.

6.2 Effects on Time-to-Graduation

Tinto’s theory suggests that students have an initial level of intent to graduate from an
institution upon entry [4, 2]. This intent is the combination of a students family
background (e.g., socio-economic status), individual attributes (e.g., academic ability,
race), and pre-college experiences (e.g., high school GPA). This intent is then tempered
by the student’s at-college experience such as social integration [61], financial support
[9], and academic performance.

6.2.1 Effects on the initial conditions of educational commitment

Student’s backgrounds can set up a wide variety of contributions to their initial
educational and institutional commitments. In this study we assess these initial
conditions using a student’s high school GPA, math placement score, the number of AP
credit hours the student possesses, the median income of the high school the student
attended, gender, and race. This university uses a math placement test to determine a
student’s incoming math ability to place them in the appropriate math course. This test
was designed at the university and has been used for the entire study period. This test
was not designed with psychometrics in mind. Thus, while the test is representative of
some measurement of math ability, it is unclear how much the test is representative of
math ability. However, we see that a student’s math placement score is the most
important attribute that predicts when a student will graduate that is not a
performance or enrollment variable 8). This could be similar to [13] evidence that the
starting math course is very important to staying in STEM. In [13], students taking
lower level math courses at college had increased likelihood of leaving the STEM major
they were enrolled in for a different major. In our case, students who take remedial

November 17, 2021

19/28

5678910111213141516Semester Graduated2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0Cumulative Average GPA (Z-score)0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.140.16Weighted Partial Dependencemath courses simply have more courses to take and thus must remain at the university
longer. Given that students in our study who come from higher income communities are
able to remain at university longer before graduating, this indicates that remedial
mathematics should be examined more in terms of the cost for a student. It should also
be noted that in this study we are predicting all students time to graduation even those
who are not pursuing quantitative degrees. The result that math ability has a dominant
effect in the context of other demographic and preparation variables is consistent with
the literature which claims that math ability has an sizeable effect on student
performance at university [16].

A student’s high school GPA is similarly important to a student’s math ability in
predicting when they graduate (Fig. 8,7). This is consistent with some literature that
finds that students with higher high school GPAs are more likely to graduate within 4
years [9]. [8] found in a similar study that high school GPA had little to no effect on
predicting when a student drops out from university. In both this paper and [8] the
study uses data from university’s that serve primarily students who come from the state
the university resides in. Thus this may indicate that the effect of high school GPA on
college success is geographically dependent on the quality of high school preparation for
university.

Perhaps counter-intuitively having AP credits is not as important as a student’s high

school GPA or math ability (Fig. 7). AP credits directly count for college credits.
Students with more AP credit have fewer credit hours necessary to graduate. In this
study, having AP credits is an indicator that a student will graduate in four years (8-9
semesters). However it is not a strong indicator that a student will graduate early in
comparison to a student’s math placement score and high school GPA. [8] found that
having transfer credits had no effect on on students dropping out. This was also true in
a study of physics students who change their majors [21]. It could be that AP credits
are too random in whether they count for credit or not. A student may choose to take a
course anyways they have AP credit for if its in a sequence (e.g., introductory physics)
because they may feel ill prepared for the second semester course. It could also be that
some students who take AP courses do so with the intent to take a minor or dual major.
In this case, the AP courses ”free” up more time at university to be able to graduate in
four years.

Financial aid is one of the top reasons students leave the university without a degree

[9]. In this study we do not know if a student has access to financial aid or not.
However, we do include the median income for families that live in the zip code of the
high school the student attended according to the 2011 census American Community
Survey 5- year estimate [45]. This is a rough estimate of the socio-economic status of
the high school that the student attends. A course grained measurement like this does
not capture all of the nuances of individual students financial support and in our case,
we see that this feature was less important in comparison to performance and
enrollment features. In our study, we find that coming from higher income high school’s
is an indicator that a student will take longer to graduate. [46] found that the
socio-economic status of a student’s peers had an approximately equal effect as a
student’s individual socio-economic status on high school student exit examination
scores. While this effect is small, it may indicate that students from higher income
regions have access to more resources and thus can spend more time in college before
entering the work force. This is a similar result to [9] which found that students who
come from low income households are likely to graduate within 4 years in comparison to
students from higher income households.

November 17, 2021

20/28

6.2.2 Dynamic contributions to a student’s academic integration

A student’s academic integration is defined by Tinto [4] as being a combination of
performance in university and their intellectual development. In this study we
characterize performance through both cumulative GPA measurements and per
semester GPA measurements. Further, we split this into major and non-major GPAs.
Performance as measured by GPA has had a demonstrated primary effect on
graduating [8, 14, 1]. [8] found that there was a decaying impact on drop out due to
GPA. The longer a student was enrolled, the less their GPA was likely to be a strongly
influencing factor on dropping out. In our study we find somewhat different results,
namely students with above average cumulative GPAs are more likely to graduate on
time (Fig. 10). However this effect diminishes with time. It could be that this peak
effect is due to two reasons: 1) high performing students are more likely to graduate on
time [1], and 2) failing a single course significantly sets back both the time to graduate
and a student’s cumulative GPA.

There is an interplay between the cumulative credit hours and the cumulative mean
grade. In semester 8, the single most predictive feature is cumulative credit hours (Fig.
8). However by semester 10, cumulative credit hours has exchanged the highest rank
with the cumulative mean grade. This has a couple implications. First, the decaying
impact of grades as noted by [8] in this case begins later at semester 10. Second, it may
be that to graduate within 8 semesters (4 years), there are very few paths other than a
strictly laid out course schedule with no deviations and no failing grades. Whereas
graduating within 5 years allows more leeway for students to take additional courses
that could be due to, for example, receiving a minor.

Second, there is a transition across graduating semesters of what is important (Fig.
8). Early graduation is predicated more by a student’s initial conditions than anything
else. By semester 8, the overwhelming effect on successfully predicting students
graduating in this semester is their cumulative credit hours. Past semester 8, there is a
strong combination of features that are predictive of graduating. This suggests that
while Tinto’s theory indicates that there is a dynamic contribution of on-campus
interactions to student educational and institutional commitments, these dynamic
contributions may not matter that much for students with very strong backgrounds who
wish to graduate early.

6.2.3 Dynamic contributions to a student’s social integration

A student’s social integration is defined by Tinto [4] as being a combination of peer
group interactions and faculty interactions. In this study we use a course grained
measurement of peer group and faculty interactions by measuring the total per semester
credit hours a student registers for in their major. Additionally, we note when a student
changes their major. Changing a major is a distinct situation where a student will leave
their peer and faculty group for a new group and thus may indicate low social
integration.

In this study students who attend the university and take a recommended load of
courses and pass each course were likely to graduate in 8-10 semesters. When students
altered from this path (e.g., a student changes their major) they increased the amount
of time it took to graduate or did not graduate during the study period. [13] provides,
at least for STEM students, a complementary explanation as to why a student may
graduate later. This university has a very large enrollment (typically >50000 students),
a strong research program, and a strong greek life. In each case these may contribute to
social integrations given there is more opportunity at this university than some others
for meeting new people, participating in research, or participating in social events.

While not being the largest effect, students who take higher amounts of major credit

November 17, 2021

21/28

hours were more likely to graduate in semesters 8 and 9 (Fig. 8). This is sensible given’s
Tinto’s theory since taking more major credit hours both works toward’s graduation
and is an indication of a strong integration into a peer and faculty group. Within the
literature, STEM students who took fewer STEM courses in the first year, were enrolled
in less challenging math courses in the first year, and performed poorly in their STEM
courses in comparison to non-STEM courses were highly likely to switch majors. Tinto
would describe these students as having a reduced educational commitment due to not
integrating into the social community and/or lack in the academic engagement of their
chosen degree program. In our study we find similar conclusions, higher performance
and the number of major credit hours is a more likely indicator of graduating in four
years and this effect diminishes over time after the 4 year (8-9 semesters) mark (Fig. 8).
Thus, it may be likely that performance in a major and the frequency of major courses
taken may be an indicator of lower social and academic engagement described by Tinto
[4].

In this study we have highlighted that changing a major can have a profound effect

on the time it takes to graduate. Changing a major impacts a student’s
time-to-graduation and is predictive of students who graduate later (Fig. 8). A student
who changes their major could do so due to low academic integration [13]. However this
low academic integration could represent low social integration as well [23]. Student’s
who perform poorly may ask themselves if they ”belong” in a major. In many cases
STEM students who demonstrate high academic performance change their major due to
reasons associated with social and personal interactions at university [23, 13]. This
especially affects women and under represented minorities [23]. In this study changing a
major does not show a strong correlation with a student’s race or gender
(ρrace = −0.07, ρgender = −0.03). In many cases, the experiences that lead to changing
a major are more nuanced than a single variable can contain thus while race and gender
are a strong component to major change as reported in qualitative interviews [23], this
may not be captured in binary variables. Ultimately, changing majors has been a poorly
investigated and deserves more investigation. Future work will look at using Tinto’s
theory as a framework for investigating student’s changing their major.

6.2.4 Limitations on this Study

Given that a perfect F1-score is 1 and in this paper we report F1-scores around 0.5 at
the maximum, it is likely that some of these effects such as financial aid or social
integration have large effects on when a student graduates. It is common in some
studies, (e.g., [1]) to use individual heterogeneity models or ”frailty” models to assess
unmeasured contributions to graduation [62]. In our case, we attempted initially to use
gamma distributed frailty terms [11, 63]. These proved to provide no increase in model
performance thus were removed from subsequent analysis. Future work will consider
what contributes to the unobserved heterogeneity (e.g., direct measurements of peer
social engagement such as social network centrality).

Additionally, this paper has focused on a student’s educational commitment (per [4])
as opposed to their institutional commitment. Much of this is mediated by the fact that
88% of students in the study do in fact graduate, there may be a subset of students who
leave simply due to the fact they become disillusioned with the institution and want to
pursue a degree elsewhere. Thus there is likely other factors that are not observed that
effects when a student a graduates. Many of these factors, such as life events such as
family hardship, are necessarily hard to observe for an entire university population.
There are also likely factors that are particular to this university that are not common
or not impacting at other institutions. Future work will investigate the effect of student
social network belonging and the amount of financial aid available to the students.

November 17, 2021

22/28

7 Conclusion

This paper has presented a discrete time hazard model predicting when a student will
graduate. It uses a novel method to calculate the logistic regression called gradient
boosting which has been shown to provide better fits than traditional maximum
likelihood. While using more sophisticated imputation with the logistic regression model
might have increased performance, the ease of use of xgboosts built-in imputation
engine provides a strong advantage in it’s use to researchers. Given the utility of
gradient boosting in this setting, especially in providing better predictions for
under-served populations, this paper recommends that this method be more prevalent
in the education research community. Additionally, other methods should be examined
such as artificial neural networks [64].

Additionally, this paper used the partial dependence method to examine two of the

model variables. Partial dependence tells us the contributions to the predicted
probability of the model for the entire feature space. This method allows us to examine
the entirety of continuous variables such as GPA instead of reducing them to a single
value associated with a model coefficient. This method too should see much broader use
in the education research community.

This paper follows Tinto’s theory of drop out that predicts social integration and
college participation are more likely to impact a student’s commitment to graduation
than second order effects such as preparation. Future work will connect student
academic performance, participation in course work, with social network metrics and
financial aid information. Future work will also examine the specific effects that
remedial math have on student retention in a major, their time to graduation, and if
participating in remedial math courses lowers the likelihood to graduate.

8 Acknowledgements

This project was supported by the Michigan State University College of Natural
Sciences including the STEM Gateway Fellowship and the Lappan-Phillips Foundation,
the Association of American Universities, and the Norwegian Agency for Quality
Assurance in Education (NOKUT), which supports the Center for Computing in
Science Education. This project has also received support from the INTPART project
of the Research Council of Norway (Grant No. 288125). Morten Hjorth-Jensen is
supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (Grant No. PHY-1404159).

November 17, 2021

23/28

9 Supplemental

Fig 11. The fraction of missing data and the Spearman rank correlation between
whether data is missing and the outcome variable of graduating the following semester.
There is a small correlation in the early semesters (5-7) between whether students are
graduating and if they have missing data or not.

References

[1] Hongtao Yue and Xuanning Fu. “Rethinking graduation and time to degree: A
fresh perspective”. In: Research in Higher Education 58.2 (2017), pp. 184–213.

[2] John M Braxton, Jeffrey F Milem, and Anna Shaw Sullivan. “The influence of

active learning on the college student departure process: Toward a revision of
Tinto’s theory”. In: The journal of higher education 71.5 (2000), pp. 569–590.

[3] Jaison R Abel, Richard Deitz, and Yaqin Su. “Are recent college graduates finding

good jobs?” In: Current issues in economics and finance 20.1 (2014).

[4] Vincent Tinto. “Dropout from higher education: A theoretical synthesis of recent

research”. In: Review of educational research 45.1 (1975), pp. 89–125.

November 17, 2021

24/28

0.000.050.100.150.200.25Fraction missing dataHigh school GPAMath Placement Score5678910111213141516Semester Graduates0.000.050.100.150.20Spearman Correlation[5] Ernest T Pascarella and Patrick T Terenzini. “Predicting voluntary freshman year
persistence/withdrawal behavior in a residential university: A path analytic
validation of Tinto’s model.” In: Journal of educational psychology 75.2 (1983),
p. 215.

[6] Amaury Nora, LC Attinasi Jr, and Andrew Matonak. “Testing qualitative

indicators of precollege factors in Tinto’s attrition model: A community college
student population”. In: The Review of Higher Education 13.3 (1990),
pp. 337–355.

[7] Alberto F Cabrera, Amaury Nora, and Maria B Castaneda. “College persistence:
Structural equations modeling test of an integrated model of student retention”.
In: The journal of higher education 64.2 (1993), pp. 123–139.

[8] Stephen L DesJardins, Dennis A Ahlburg, and Brian P McCall. “An event history
model of student departure”. In: Economics of education review 18.3 (1999),
pp. 375–390.

[9] Terry T Ishitani. “A longitudinal approach to assessing attrition behavior among
first-generation students: Time-varying effects of pre-college characteristics”. In:
Research in higher education 44.4 (2003), pp. 433–449.

[10] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining. ACM. 2016, pp. 785–794.

[11] Kazuo Yamaguchi. Event history analysis. Vol. 28. Sage, 1991.

[12] Marc A Scott and Benjamin B Kennedy. “Pitfalls in pathways: Some perspectives

on competing risks event history analysis in education research”. In: Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics 30.4 (2005), pp. 413–442.

[13] Xianglei Chen. STEM Attrition: College Students’ Paths into and out of STEM
Fields. Statistical Analysis Report. NCES 2014-001. Tech. rep. 2013. url:
https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2014/2014001rev.pdf.

[14] Rong Chen. “Institutional characteristics and college student dropout risks: A

multilevel event history analysis”. In: Research in Higher education 53.5 (2012),
pp. 487–505.

[15] Jerry Trusty and Spencer G Niles. “High-school math courses and completion of

the bachelor’s degree”. In: Professional School Counseling (2003), pp. 99–107.

[16] Matthew N Gaertner et al. “Preparing students for college and careers: The causal

role of algebra II”. In: Research in Higher Education 55.2 (2014), pp. 143–165.

[17] Betty Bamberg. “Composition instruction does make a difference: A comparison
of the high school preparation of college freshmen in regular and remedial English
classes”. In: Research in the Teaching of English 12.1 (1978), pp. 47–59.

[18] Philip M Sadler and Robert H Tai. “Success in introductory college physics: The
role of high school preparation”. In: Sci. Educ. 85.2 (2001), pp. 111–136. doi:
10.1002/1098-237X(200103)85:2<111::AID-SCE20>3.0.CO;2-O.

[19] Zahra Hazari, Robert H Tai, and Philip M Sadler. “Gender differences in

introductory university physics performance: The influence of high school physics
preparation and affective factors”. In: Science Education 91.6 (2007), pp. 847–876.

[20] Rebecca Zwick and Jeffrey C Sklar. “Predicting college grades and degree

completion using high school grades and SAT scores: The role of student ethnicity
and first language”. In: American Educational Research Journal 42.3 (2005),
pp. 439–464.

November 17, 2021

25/28

[21] John M Aiken, Rachel Henderson, and Marcos D Caballero. “Modeling student
pathways in a physics bachelor’s degree program”. In: Physical Review Physics
Education Research 15.1 (2019), p. 010128.

[22] Cabot Zabriskie et al. “Using machine learning to predict physics course
outcomes”. In: Physical Review Physics Education Research 15.2 (2019),
p. 020120.

[23] Elaine Seymour. Talking about leaving: Why undergraduates leave the sciences.

Westview Press, 2000. doi: 10.1086/495437.

[24] Karl L Alexander et al. “Social background, academic resources, and college

graduation: Recent evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey”. In:
American Journal of Education 90.4 (1982), pp. 315–333.

[25] William H Sewell and Vimal P Shah. “Socioeconomic status, intelligence, and the
attainment of higher education”. In: Sociology of education (1967), pp. 1–23.

[26] William Richard Smith, Julie Edmister, and Kathleen Sullivan. “Factors

influencing graduation rates at Mississippi’s public universities”. In: College and
University 76.3 (2001), p. 11.

[27] Heather T Rowan-Kenyon. “Predictors of delayed college enrollment and the

impact of socioeconomic status”. In: The Journal of Higher Education 78.2 (2007),
pp. 188–214.

[28] Susan P Choy. Students whose parents did not go to college: Postsecondary access,

persistence, and attainment. 2001.

[29] Ernest T Pascarella et al. “First-generation college students: Additional evidence
on college experiences and outcomes”. In: The Journal of Higher Education 75.3
(2004), pp. 249–284.

[30] Trevor Hastie et al. The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference

and prediction. Vol. 27. 2. Springer, 2005, pp. 83–85.

[31] Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. “statsmodels: Econometric and statistical

modeling with python”. In: 9th Python in Science Conference. 2010.

[32] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. ISBN

3-900051-07-0. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2020.
url: http://www.R-project.org/.

[33] Peter B¨uhlmann, Torsten Hothorn, et al. “Boosting algorithms: Regularization,

prediction and model fitting”. In: Statistical Science 22.4 (2007), pp. 477–505.

[34] Andreas Mayr et al. “Extending statistical boosting”. In: Methods of information

in medicine 53.06 (2014), pp. 428–435.

[35] Peter B¨uhlmann and Bin Yu. “Boosting with the L 2 loss: regression and

classification”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 98.462 (2003),
pp. 324–339.

[36] Yuk Lai Suen, Prem Melville, and Raymond J Mooney. “Combining bias and

variance reduction techniques for regression trees”. In: European Conference on
Machine Learning. Springer. 2005, pp. 741–749.

[37] L Lombardo et al. “Binary logistic regression versus stochastic gradient boosted
decision trees in assessing landslide susceptibility for multiple-occurring landslide
events: application to the 2009 storm event in Messina (Sicily, southern Italy)”. In:
Natural Hazards 79.3 (2015), pp. 1621–1648.

[38] Qian Xu et al. “PDC-SGB: Prediction of effective drug combinations using a
stochastic gradient boosting algorithm”. In: Journal of theoretical biology 417
(2017), pp. 1–7.

November 17, 2021

26/28

[39] Xiaolei Ma et al. “Prioritizing influential factors for freeway incident clearance

time prediction using the gradient boosting decision trees method”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 18.9 (2017), pp. 2303–2310.

[40] Fortunato S De Menezes et al. “Data classification with binary response through

the Boosting algorithm and logistic regression”. In: Expert Systems with
Applications 69 (2017), pp. 62–73.

[41] Anthony S Bryk and Stephen W Raudenbush. “Toward a more appropriate

conceptualization of research on school effects: A three-level hierarchical linear
model”. In: Multilevel analysis of educational data. Elsevier, 1989, pp. 159–204.

[42] Jerome H Friedman. “Stochastic gradient boosting”. In: Computational statistics

& data analysis 38.4 (2002), pp. 367–378.

[43]

IPEDs definitions. https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/report-your-data/race-
ethnicity-reporting-changes. Accessed: 10-23-2018.

[44] Russell A Poldrack, Grace Huckins, and Gael Varoquaux. “Establishment of Best

Practices for Evidence for Prediction: A Review”. In: JAMA psychiatry (2019).

[45] American Community Survey Tables: 2007 – 2011 B19013A. url:

https://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/en/ACS/11_5YR/S1903/
0100000US.86000.

[46] Stephen J Caldas and Carl Bankston. “Effect of school population socioeconomic
status on individual academic achievement”. In: The Journal of Educational
Research 90.5 (1997), pp. 269–277.

[47] Jerome H Friedman. “Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting

machine”. In: Annals of statistics (2001), pp. 1189–1232.

[48] Aur´elien G´eron. Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow:

concepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems. “O’Reilly Media, Inc.”,
2017. url: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3153997.

[49] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. “Random search for hyper-parameter

optimization”. In: Journal of machine learning research 13.Feb (2012),
pp. 281–305.

[50] Jake M. Hofman, Amit Sharma, and Duncan J. Watts. “Prediction and

explanation in social systems”. In: Science 355.6324 (2017), pp. 486–488. issn:
0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.aal3856. eprint:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/355/6324/486.full.pdf. url:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/355/6324/486.

[51] Stephen W Raudenbush and Anthony S Bryk. Hierarchical linear models:

Applications and data analysis methods. Vol. 1. Sage, 2002.

[52] Ben Van Dusen and Jayson Nissen. “Modernizing use of regression models in

physics education research: A review of hierarchical linear modeling”. In: Physical
Review Physics Education Research 15.2 (2019), p. 020108. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevPhysEducRes.15.020108.

[53] Donald B Rubin. “Inference and missing data”. In: Biometrika 63.3 (1976),

pp. 581–592.

[54] Cyril Goutte and Eric Gaussier. “A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall
and F-score, with implication for evaluation”. In: European Conference on
Information Retrieval. Springer. 2005, pp. 345–359.

[55] Gary M Weiss, Kate McCarthy, and Bibi Zabar. “Cost-sensitive learning vs.

sampling: Which is best for handling unbalanced classes with unequal error costs?”
In: Dmin 7.35-41 (2007), p. 24.

November 17, 2021

27/28

[56] Nitesh V Chawla et al. “SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique”. In:

Journal of artificial intelligence research 16 (2002), pp. 321–357.

[57]

Isabelle Guyon and Andr´e Elisseeff. “An introduction to feature extraction”. In:
Feature extraction. Springer, 2006, pp. 1–25. doi:
10.1007/978-3-540-35488-8_1.

[58] David W Hosmer Jr, Stanley Lemeshow, and Rodney X Sturdivant. Applied

logistic regression. Vol. 398. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.

[59] Didrik Nielsen. “Tree boosting with xgboost-why does xgboost win” every”

machine learning competition?” MA thesis. NTNU, 2016.

[60] Jonathan AC Sterne et al. “Multiple imputation for missing data in

epidemiological and clinical research: potential and pitfalls”. In: Bmj 338 (2009),
b2393.

[61] Adrianna Kezar. “Higher education change and social networks: A review of
research”. In: The Journal of Higher Education 85.1 (2014), pp. 91–125.

[62] James W Vaupel, Kenneth G Manton, and Eric Stallard. “The impact of

heterogeneity in individual frailty on the dynamics of mortality”. In: Demography
16.3 (1979), pp. 439–454.

[63] Philip Hougaard. “Frailty models for survival data”. In: Lifetime data analysis 1.3

(1995), pp. 255–273.

[64] Julie M Byers Gonz´alez and Stephen L DesJardins. “Artificial neural networks: A
new approach to predicting application behavior”. In: Research in Higher
Education 43.2 (2002), pp. 235–258.

November 17, 2021

28/28

