Price Optimization in Fashion E-commerce

Sajan Kedia
sajan.kedia@myntra.com
Myntra Designs
India

Samyak Jain
jainsamyak2512@gmail.com
Myntra Designs
India

Abhishek Sharma
abhishek.sharma4@myntra.com
Myntra Designs
India

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
4
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
1
2
5
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
With the rapid growth in the fashion e-commerce industry,
it is becoming extremely challenging for the E-tailers to set
an optimal price point for all the products on the platform.
By establishing an optimal price point, they can maximize
the platform’s overall revenue and profit. In this paper, we
propose a novel machine learning and optimization tech-
nique to find the optimal price point at an individual product
level. It comprises three major components. Firstly, we use a
demand prediction model to predict the next day's demand
for each product at a certain discount percentage. Next step,
we use the concept of price elasticity of demand to get the
multiple demand values by varying the discount percentage.
Thus we obtain multiple price demand pairs for each product
and we've to choose one of them for the live platform. Typi-
cally fashion e-commerce has millions of products, so there
can be many permutations. Each permutation will assign a
unique price point for all the products, which will sum up
to a unique revenue number. To choose the best permuta-
tion which gives maximum revenue, a linear programming
optimization technique is used. We've deployed the above
methods in the live production environment and conducted
several A/B tests. According to the A/B test result, our model
is improving the revenue by 1% and gross margin by 0.81%.

Keywords Pricing, Demand Prediction, Price Elasticity of
Demand, Linear Programming, Optimization, Regression

1 Introduction
The E-commerce industry is growing at a very rapid rate.
According to Statista report1, it is expected to become $4.88
trillion markets by 2021. One of the biggest challenges to
the e-commerce companies is to set an optimal price for
all the products on the platform daily, which can overall
maximize the revenue & the profitability. Specifically fash-
ion e-commerce is very price sensitive and shopping be-
haviour heavily relies on discounting. Typically in a fashion
e-commerce platform, starting from the product discovery
to the final order, discount and the price point is the main
conversion driving factor. As shown in Figure 1, the List Page
& product display page (PDP) displays the product(s) with
it's MRP and the discounted price. Product 1,4 is discounted,
whereas product 2,3 is selling on MRP. This impacts the click-
through rate (CTR) & conversion. Hence, finding an optimal

1https://www.statista.com/statistics/379046/worldwide-retail-e-
commerce-sales/

price point for all the products is a critical business need
which maximizes the overall revenue.

To maximize revenue, we need to predict the quantity sold
of all products at any given price. To get the quantity sold for
all the products, a Demand Prediction Model has been used.
The model is trained on all the products based on their his-
torical sales & browsing clickstream data. The output label is
the quantity sold value, which is continuous. Hence it's a re-
gression problem. Demand prediction has a direct impact on
the overall revenue. Small changes in it can vary the overall
revenue number drastically. For demand prediction, several
regression models like Linear Regression, Random Forest
Regressor, XGBoost [2], MultiLayer Perceptron have been
applied. An ensemble [11] of the models mentioned above is
used since each base model was not able to learn all aspects
about the nature of demand of the product and wasn't giving
adequate results. Usually, the demand for a product is tem-
poral, as it depends on historical sales. To leverage this fact,
Time Series techniques like the autoregressive integrated
moving model (ARIMA) [9] [3] is used. An RNN architecture
based LSTM(Long Short-Term Memory) model [6] is also
used to capture the sequence of the sales to get the next day's
demand. In the result section, a very detailed comparative
study of these models is explained.

Another significant challenge is cannibalization among
products, i.e., if we decrease the discount of a product, it can
lead to an increase in sales for other products competing with
it. For example, if the discount is decreased for Nike shoes,
it can lead to a rise in sales for Adidas or Puma shoes since
they are competing brands & the price affinity is also very
similar. We overcame this problem by running the model
at a category level and creating features at a brand level,
which can take into account cannibalization. The second
major challenge is to predict demand for new products, it's
a cold start problem since we don't have any historical data
for these products. To overcome this problem, we've used a
Deep Learning-based model to learn the Product embedding.
These embeddings are used as features in the Demand Model.
The demand prediction model generates demand for all
the products for tomorrow at the base discount value. To get
demand at different discount values economics concept of
"Price Elasticity of Demand" (PED) is used. Price elasticity
represents how the demand for a product varies as the price
changes. After applying this, we get multiple price-demand
pairs for each product. We have to select a single price point

 
 
 
 
 
 
AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Kedia, et al.

for every product such that the chosen configuration maxi-
mizes the overall revenue. To solve it, the Linear Program-
ming optimization technique [15] is used. Linear Program-
ming Problem formulation, along with the constraints, is
described in detail in section 3.4.

The solution was deployed in a live production environ-
ment, and several A/B Tests were conducted. During the A/B
test, A set was shown the same default price, whereas the
B set was shown the optimal price suggested by the model.
As explained in the Result section we're getting a revenue
improvement by approx 1% and gross margin improvement
by 0.81%.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we briefly discuss the related work. We introduce the
Methodology in Section 3 that comprises feature engineering,
demand prediction model, price elasticity of demand, and
linear programming optimization. In Section 4, Results and
Analysis are discussed, and we conclude the paper in Section
5.

Figure 1. List Page and PDP page

2 Related Work
In this section, we've briefly reviewed the current literature
work on Price Optimization in E-commerce. In [7], authors
are first creating customer segments using K-means cluster-
ing; then, a price range is assigned to each cluster using a
regression model. Post that authors are trying to find out the
customer's likelihood of buying a product using the previous
outcome of user cluster & price range. The customer's like-
lihood is calculated by using the logistic regression model.
This model gives price range at a user cluster level, whereas
in typical fashion e-commerce exact price point of each prod-
uct is desired.

Paper [14] describes the price prediction methodology
for AWS spot instances. To predict the price for next hour,
they've trained a linear model by taking the last three months
& previous 24 hours of historical price points to capture the
temporal effect. The weights of the linear model is learned
by applying a Gradient descent based approach. This price
prediction model works well in this particular case since the
number of instances in AWS is very limited. In contrast, in
fashion e-commerce, there can be millions of products, so
the methodology mentioned above was not working well in
our case.

In paper[13], authors studied how the sales probability of
the products are affected by customer behaviors and different
pricing strategies by simulating a Test Market Environment.
They used different learning techniques to estimate the sales
probability from observable market data. In the second step,
they used data-driven dynamic pricing strategies that also
took care of the market competition. They compute the prices
based on the current state as well as taking future states into
account. They claim that their approach works even if the
number of competitors is significant.

Paper [16] authors have explained the optimal price rec-
ommendation model for the hosts at the Airbnb platform.
Firstly they've applied a binary classification model to pre-
dict booking probability of each listing in the platform; after
that, a regression model predicts the optimal price for each
listing for a night. At last, they apply a personalization layer
to generate the final price suggestion to the hosts for their
property. This setup is very different from a conventional
fashion e-commerce setup where we need to decide an exact
price point for all the products, whereas in the former case,
it's a range of price.

To address the above issues, we've proposed a novel ma-
chine learning mechanism to predict the exact price point
for all the products on a fashion e-commerce platform at a
daily level.

3 Methodology
In this section, we have explained the methodology of deriv-
ing the optimal price point for all the products in the fashion
e-commerce platform.

Figure 2 shows the architecture diagram to optimize the

price for all the products.

n
(cid:213)

R =

piqi

(1)

i=1
Here R is the revenue of the whole platform, pi is the price
assigned to ith product, and qi is the quantity sold at that
price.

According to Equation 1, revenue is highly dependent on
the quantity sold. Quantity sold is, in turn, dependent on
the price of the product. Typically, as the price increases, the
demand goes down and vice-versa. So there is a trade-off

Price Optimization in Fashion E-commerce

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

The ratio of quantity sold at BAG level (brand, arti-
cle, gender) to the total quantity sold of a product is
calculated to take care of the competitiveness among
substitutable products.

• Sort rank: Search ranking of a product is very highly
correlated with the quantity sold. Products listed in
the top search result generally have higher amounts
sold. The search ranking score has been used for all
the live products to capture this effect in our model.
• Product Embedding: From the clickstream data, the
user-product interaction matrix is generated. The value
of an element in this matrix signifies the implicit score
(click, order count, etc.) of a user's interaction with
the product. Skip-gram based model[8] is applied to
the interaction matrix, which captures the hidden at-
tributes of the products in the lower dimension latent
space. Word2Vec [12] is used for the implementation
purpose.

3.2 Demand Prediction Model

Demand for a product is a continuous variable, hence regres-
sion based models, sequence model LSTM, and time series
model ARIMA were used to predict future demand for all
the products. Since the data obeyed most of the assumptions
of linear regression (the linear relationship between input
and output variables, feature independence, each feature
following normal distribution and homoscedasticity), linear
regression became an optimal choice. Hyperparameters like
learning rate (alpha) and max no. of iterations were tuned
using GridSearchCV and by applying 5 fold cross-validation.
The learning rate of 0.01 and the max iteration of 1000 was
chosen as a result of it. Overfitting was taken care of by
using a combination of L1 and L2 regularization (Elastic Net
Regularization). Tree-based models were also used. They
do not need to establish a functional relationship between
input features and output labels, so they are useful when it
comes to demand prediction. Also, trees are much better to
interpret and can be used to explain the outcome to business
users adequately. Various types of tree-based models like
Random Forest and XGBoost were used. Hyperparameters
like depth of the tree and the number of trees were tuned
using the technique mentioned above. Overfitting was taken
care of by post-pruning the trees. Lastly, a MLP regressor
with a single hidden layer of 100 neurons, relu activation,
and Adam optimizer was used. Finally, an ensemble of all
the regressors was adopted. The median of the output of
all the regressors was chosen as the final prediction. It was
chosen because each of the individual regressors was not
able to learn all aspects of the nature of the demand for the
product and wasn't giving adequate results. Thus, the ensem-
ble approach was able to capture all aspects of the data and
delivered positive results. LSTM with a hidden layer was also
used to capture the temporal effects of the sale. Batch-size for
each epoch was chosen in such a way that it comprised of all

Figure 2. Architecture Diagram

between cost and demand. To maximize revenue, we need
demand for all the products at a given price. Therefore, a
demand prediction model is required. Predicting demand for
tomorrow at an individual product level is a very challenging
task. For new products, there is a cold start problem which we
address by using product embeddings. Another challenging
task is how to capture the cannibalization of product.

3.1 Feature Engineering

To estimate the demand for all products in the platform ex-
tensive feature engineering is done. The features are broadly
categorized into four categories :

Figure 3. Feature Engineering for Demand Prediction

• Observed features: These features showcase the brows-
ing behavior of people. They include quantity sold, list
count, product display count, cart count, total inven-
tory, etc. From these features, the model can learn
about the visibility aspects of the products. These di-
rectly correlate with the demand for the product.
• Engineered features: To capture the historical trend
of the products, we've handcrafted multiple features.
For example, the last seven days of sales, previous 7
days visibility, etc. They also capture the seasonality
effects and its correlation to the demand of the product.

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Kedia, et al.

the items of a particular day. Hyperparameters like loss func-
tion, number of neurons, type of optimization algorithm, and
the number of epochs were tuned by observing the training
and validation loss convergence. Mean-squared error loss,
50 neurons, Adam optimizer, and 1000 epochs were used to
perform the task. Arima was also used to capture the trends
and seasonality of the demand for the product. The three
parameters of ARIMA : p (number of lags of quantity sold to
be used as predictors), q (lagged forecast errors), and d (min-
imum amount of difference to make series stationery) were
set using the ACF and PACF plots. The order of difference (d)
= 2 was chosen by observing when the ACF plot approaches
0. The number of lags (p) = 1 was selected by observing the
PACF plot and when it exceeds the PACF's plot significance
limit. Lagged forecast errors (q) = 1 was chosen the same
way as p was chosen but by looking at the ACF plot instead
of PACF.

3.3 Price Elasticity of Demand

From the demand model, we get the demand for a particular
product for the next day based on its base discount. To get
the demand for a product at a different price point, we use
the concept of price elasticity of demand [1][10].

Figure 4. Variation of Price and Demand of a Product

Figure 4 illustrates the effects of change in price on the
quantity demanded of a product. When the price drops from
INR 1400 to 1200, the quantity demanded of the product
increases from 7 to 11. The price elasticity of demand is used
to capture this phenomenon.

The formula for price elasticity of demand is :

.

P
∆P

Ed = ∆Q
Q
where Q, P are the original demand and price for the
product, respectively. ∆Q represents the change in demand as
the price changes, and ∆P depicts the change in the product’s
price.

(2)

A product is said to be highly elastic if for a small change
in price there is a huge change in demand, unitary elastic
if the change in price is directly proportional to change in
demand and is called inelastic if there is a significant change
in price but not much change in demand.

Since we are operating in a fashion e-commerce envi-
ronment determination of price elasticity of demand is a
challenging task. There is a wide range of products that are
sold, so we experience all types of elasticity. Usually price
and demand share an inverse relationship i.e., when the price
decreases, the demand for that product increases and vice-
versa.

But this relationship is not followed in the case of Gif-
fen/Veblen goods. Giffen/Veblen goods are a type of product,
for which the demand increases when there is an increase
in the price. In our environment, we not only experience
different types of elasticity, but we also have to deal with Gif-
fen/Veblen goods. E.g., Rolex watch is a type of Veblen good
as its demand increases with an increase in price because it
is used more as a status symbol.

Due to these reasons calculating the price elasticity of
demand at a brand, category, or any other global level is not
possible. So we have computed it for each product based on
the historical price-demand pairs for that product. For new
products, the elasticity of similar products determined by
product embeddings were used.

Price elasticity is used to calculate the product demand at
different price points. From the business side, there is a strict
guardrail of max ±δ % change in the base discount, where δ
is a user defined threshold. The value of δ is kept as a small
positive integer since a drastic change in the discounts of the
products is not desired. We have the demand value for all
the products for tomorrow at the base discount by using the
aforementioned demand prediction model. We also calculate
two more demand values by increasing the base discount by
δ % and decreasing by δ % by using the price elasticity. Thus
the output after applying the elasticity concept is that we get
three different price points and the corresponding demand
value for all products. The price elasticity changes with time,
so its value is updated daily.

3.4 Linear Programming

After applying the price elasticity of demand, we get three
different price points for a product and the corresponding
demand at those price points.

Now we need to choose one of these three prices such that
the net revenue is maximized. Given 3 different price points
and N products, there will be 3N permutations in total. Thus,
the problem boils down to an optimization problem, and we
formulate the following integer problem formulation: [5].

max

3
(cid:213)

n
(cid:213)

k=1

i=1

pikxikdik

Price Optimization in Fashion E-commerce

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Figure 5. Linear Programming Vector Computations

Subject To the constraints

chosen as the optimal price point. The linear programming
problem [4] thus obtained is :

3
(cid:213)

k =1

xik = 1 ∀ i ∈ n

3
(cid:213)

n
(cid:213)

k =1

i=1

pikxik = c

xik ∈ {0, 1}

In the above equations pik denotes the price and dik denotes
the demand for ith product if kth price-demand pair is chosen.
Here, xik acts like a mask that is used to select a particular
price for a product. xik is a boolean variable (0 or 1) where 1
denotes that we select the price and 0 that we do not select it.
The constraint (cid:205)3
k =1 xik = 1 makes sure that we select only 1
price for a product and (cid:205)3
i=1 pikxik = c makes sure that
sum of all the selected prices is equal to c, where c is user-
defined variable. C can be varied from its minimum value that
is obtained when the least price for each product is chosen to
its maximum value that is obtained when the highest price
for each product is chosen. Somewhere in between, we get
the optimal solution.

(cid:205)n

k =1

The above formulation is computationally intractable since
there can be millions of permutations of price-demand pairs.
Thus we convert the above integer programming problem
to a linear programming problem by treating xik as a con-
tinuous variable. This technique is called linear relaxation.
The solution obtained from this problem acts like a linear
bound for the integer formulation problem. Here, for the ith
product the price corresponding to maximum value of xik is

max

3
(cid:213)

n
(cid:213)

k=1

i=1

pikxikdik

Subject To the constraints

3
(cid:213)

xik = 1 ∀ i ∈ n

k=1
3
(cid:213)

n
(cid:213)

k =1

i=1

pikxik = c

0 ≤ xik ≤ 1

We implement the above linear programming problem
using Scipy linear programming library routine linprog. The
input is given in the vector form as follows:

max r.x
Subject To A.x = b
Where r is a vector that contains the revenue contributed
by a product at each price point, A is a matrix that contains
information about the products and their prices.

As shown in Figure 5, a set of 3 columns represents a
product. In this set of 3 columns, the first column represents
value corresponding to (discount-δ %), middle column to base
discount, last column to (discount+δ %). The last row of A
contains different price points according to their updated
discount value & product. b vector contains the upper bound

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Kedia, et al.

of the constraints. All entries in b are 1 except the last one,
which is equal to c. Here 1 represents that only one price can
be selected for each product, and c indicates the summation
corresponding to the chosen prices.

4 Results & Analysis
In this section, we have discussed the data sources used to
collect the data, followed by an analysis of the data and the
insights derived from it. Different kinds of evaluation metrics
used to check the accuracy are also discussed along with the
comparative study of different models used.

hence elasticity is calculated at a product level. It is evident
from the figure that the range of elasticity is from -5 to +5. -5
indicates that if the price is dropped, then demand increases
drastically, and +5 suggests that if the price is increased, then
demand also increases by a large margin. It can be observed
that most of the time, elasticity value is 0; this is so because
80% of the quantity of the product sold is 0. Lastly, it can be
concluded that most of the product’s elasticity lies between
-1 to +1. Hence, most of the products are relatively inelastic,
but there are few products whose elasticity is very high and
are at extreme ends, so it has to be calculated accurately.

4.1 Data Sources

Data was collected from the following sources :

• Clickstream data: this contained all user activity

such as clicks, carts, orders, etc.

• Product Catalog: this contained details of a product
like brand, color, price, and other attributes related to
the product.

• Price data: this contained the price and the quantity

sold of a product at hour level granularity.

• Sort Rank: this contained search rank and the corre-
sponding scores for all the live products on the plat-
form.

4.2 Analysis of Data

According to the analysis, 20% of the products generate 80%
of the revenue. Hence, it is required to price these products
precisely. This is the biggest challenge when it comes to de-
mand prediction. Figure 6 shows the distribution of quantity

Figure 6. Distribution of Quantity Sold

sold for all the products on the platform. It is evident that a
minority of products contribute towards the total revenue.
Figure 7 shows the elasticity distribution of the products
on the platform. The y-axis of the graph depicts the density
rather than the actual count frequency of the elasticity value.
As discussed in Section 3.3, the determination of elasticity is
a difficult task. All kinds of elasticity are experienced, and

Figure 7. Distribution of Elasticity

4.3 Evaluation Metric

To evaluate the demand prediction models, mean absolute
error & root mean squared error is used as a metric. They
both tell us the idea of how much the predicted output is
deviating from the actual label. For this scenario, coefficient
of determination i.e., R2 or adjusted R2, is not a good measure
as it involves the mean of the actual label. Since 80% of the
time actual label is 0 mean cannot accommodate it, and hence
R2 cannot judge the demand model's performance.

4.4 Results

In this section results of different models are discussed in ta-
ble 1. Majorly three different classes of the model were tested
and compared. They include regressors, LSTM, and ARIMA.
mae and rmse were chosen as the evaluation metric to com-
pare these models. The reason for this choice is discussed in
section 4.3. All the models were trained on historical data of
the past three months, comprising of over a million records.
For the test data, the recent single day records were used.
First, different kinds of regressors were used; out of all the
regressors, XGBoost gave the best result. It is so because it’s
tough to establish a functional relationship between input
features and output demand. As XGBoost does not need to
establish any functional relationship, it performed better.

Price Optimization in Fashion E-commerce

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Model
Linear Regression
Random Forest Regressor
XG Boost
MLP Regressor
Ensemble
LSTM
ARIMA

mae
0.207
0.219
0.195
0.254
0.192
0.221
0.258

rmse
0.732
0.854
0.847
1.471
0.774
0.912
1.497

Table 1. Comparative performance of various models

However, all individual regressors were not able to capture
all aspects of the data, so an ensemble of all the regressors
gave the ideal result. The ensemble takes advantage of all
regressors and hence is chosen. Then, after regressors, LSTM
& ARIMA were also tried, but it failed to give the desired
result as due to multiple external factors in the business, the
demand data for the products did not exhibit sequential &
temporal characteristics.

4.5 Experimental Design

In this section, we describe live experiments that were per-
formed on one of the largest fashion e-commerce platforms.
The experiments were run on around two hundred thousand
styles spread across five days. To test the hypothesis that
model recommended prices are better than baseline prices,
two user groups were created:

• Set-A (Control group) was shown the baseline prices
• Set-B (Treatment group) was shown model recom-

mended prices.

These sets were created using a random assignment from
the set of live users. 50% of the total live users were assigned
to Set A and the rest to Set B.

Users in Control and Treatment groups were exposed to
the same product. But the products were priced differently
according to the group they belong to. Both groups were
compared with respect to the overall platform revenue and
gross margin. Revenue is already defined and explained in
section 3, whereas gross margin can be defined as follows :

GrossMarдin = (Revenue − (buyinд cost))/Revenue

In general, the gross margin in our scenario is pure profit

bottom line.

In table 2, the first three instances correspond to the busi-
ness unit - Men's Jeans and Streetwear, while the last 2 are
of Women's Western wear and Eyewear respectively.

In the case of Men's Jeans and Streetwear, there is a steady
increase in both revenue and gross margin of the whole
platform. From this, it can be concluded that the model rec-
ommended price gave positive results for this business unit.

Percentage increment in Revenue GM % Uplift

Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5

0.96%
1.96%
0.09%
3.27%
7.05%

Table 2. A/B test results

0.99%
0.95%
0.49%
-0.41%
0.15%

In the case of Women's Western wear, there was a massive
lift in revenue, but the gross margin fell. The reason for this
is that women's products were highly elastic. Small changes
in price had a significant impact on demand. So due to the
model’s recommended price, there was a vast fluctuation in
demand (i.e., demand for products increased), and the rev-
enue thus increased. However, the gross margin was slightly
impacted, and it decreased.

Eyewear is a small business unit, so the impact of discount
change is enormous, i.e., 7.05% increment in the revenue,
whereas the GM increased by 0.15%.

Overall there was an approximately 1% increase in revenue
of the platform and 0.81% uplift in gross margin due to model
recommended prices. These are computed by taking the
average of the first three instances since they belong to the
same business unit.

5 Conclusion
Fashion e-tailers currently find it extremely hard to decide
an optimal price & discounting for all the products on a daily
basis, which can maximize the overall net revenue & the
profitability. To solve this, we have proposed a novel method
comprising three major components. First, a demand predic-
tion model is used to get an accurate estimate of tomorrow's
demand. Then, the concept of price elasticity of demand is
used to get the demand for a product at multiple price points.
Finally, a linear programming optimization technique is used
to select one price point for each product, which maximizes
the overall revenue. Online A/B test experiments show that
by deploying the model revenue and gross margin increases.
Right now, the prices are decided and updated daily, but in
the future, we would like to extend our work so that we can
also capture the intra-day signals in our model & accordingly
do the intra-day dynamic pricing.

References
[1] M Babar, PH Nguyen, V Cuk, and IG Kamphuis. 2015. The development
of demand elasticity model for demand response in the retail market
environment. In 2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech. IEEE, 1–6.

[2] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree
boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 785–794.
[3] Javier Contreras, Rosario Espinola, Francisco J Nogales, and Antonio J
Conejo. 2003. ARIMA models to predict next-day electricity prices.
IEEE transactions on power systems 18, 3 (2003), 1014–1020.

AI4FashionSC KDD, August 23, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA

Kedia, et al.

[4] MAH Dempster and JP Hutton. 1999. Pricing American stock options
by linear programming. Mathematical Finance 9, 3 (1999), 229–254.
[5] Ralph E Gomory and William J Baumol. 1960. Integer programming
and pricing. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society (1960),
521–550.

[6] Klaus Greff, Rupesh K Srivastava, Jan Koutník, Bas R Steunebrink,
and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2016. LSTM: A search space odyssey. IEEE
transactions on neural networks and learning systems 28, 10 (2016),
2222–2232.

[7] Rajan Gupta and Chaitanya Pathak. 2014. A Machine Learning Frame-
work for Predicting Purchase by Online Customers based on Dynamic
Pricing. In Complex Adaptive Systems.

[8] David Guthrie, Ben Allison, Wei Liu, Louise Guthrie, and Yorick Wilks.
2006. A closer look at skip-gram modelling.. In LREC. 1222–1225.
[9] Maobin Li, Shouwen Ji, and Gang Liu. 2018. Forecasting of Chinese
E-Commerce Sales: An Empirical Comparison of ARIMA, Nonlinear
Autoregressive Neural Network, and a Combined ARIMA-NARNN
Model. Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2018 (2018).

[10] Lusajo M Minga, Yu-Qiang Feng, and Yi-Jun Li. 2003. Dynamic pricing:
ecommerce-oriented price setting algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2003
International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (IEEE

Cat. No. 03EX693), Vol. 2. IEEE, 893–898.

[11] Xueheng Qiu, Le Zhang, Ye Ren, Ponnuthurai N Suganthan, and Gehan
Amaratunga. 2014. Ensemble deep learning for regression and time se-
ries forecasting. In 2014 IEEE symposium on computational intelligence
in ensemble learning (CIEL). IEEE, 1–6.

[12] Xin Rong. 2014. word2vec parameter learning explained. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1411.2738 (2014).

[13] Rainer Schlosser and Martin Boissier. 2018. Dynamic pricing under
competition on online marketplaces: A data-driven approach. In Pro-
ceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery & Data Mining. ACM, 705–714.

[14] Vivek Kumar Singh and Kaushik Dutta. 2015. Dynamic Price Prediction
for Amazon Spot Instances. 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences (2015), 1513–1520.

[15] Daniel Solow. 2007. Linear and nonlinear programming. Wiley Ency-

clopedia of Computer Science and Engineering (2007).

[16] Peng Ye, Julian Qian, Jieying Chen, Chen-hung Wu, Yitong Zhou,
Spencer De Mars, Frank Yang, and Li Zhang. 2018. Customized Re-
gression Model for Airbnb Dynamic Pricing. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining. ACM, 932–940.

