0
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
0
9
3
1
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Working Paper SeriesIPL working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been formally peer reviewed.  © 2020 by Jeremy Ferwerda, Nicholas Adams-Cohen, Kirk Bansak, Jennifer Fei, Duncan Lawrence, Jeremy M.  Weinstein, and Jens Hainmueller. All rights reserved.Working Paper No. 20-06 Jeremy Ferwerda, Nicholas Adams-Cohen, Kirk Bansak, Jennifer Fei, Duncan Lawrence, Jeremy M. Weinstein, and Jens Hainmueller Leveraging the Power of Place:  A Data-Driven Decision Helper to Improve the Location Decisions of Economic Immigrants 
 
 
 
 
 
Leveraging the Power of Place: A Data-Driven Decision Helper to Improve the
Location Decisions of Economic Immigrants

Jeremy Ferwerda1,2,∗, Nicholas Adams-Cohen1,∗, Kirk Bansak1,3,∗, Jennifer Fei1, Duncan
Lawrence1, Jeremy Weinstein1,4, and Jens Hainmueller 1,4,5,†
1Immigration Policy Lab, Stanford University
2Department of Government, Dartmouth College
3Department of Political Science, University of California San Diego
4Department of Political Science, Stanford University
5Graduate School of Business, Stanford University
∗Equal contributor
†Project director and corresponding author. Contact: jhain@stanford.edu.

July 2020

A growing number of countries have established programs to attract immigrants
who can contribute to their economy. Research suggests that an immigrant’s initial
arrival location plays a key role in shaping their economic success. Yet immigrants
currently lack access to personalized information that would help them identify op-
timal destinations. Instead, they often rely on availability heuristics, which can lead
to the selection of sub-optimal landing locations, lower earnings, elevated outmigra-
tion rates, and concentration in the most well-known locations. To address this issue
and counteract the effects of cognitive biases and limited information, we propose a
data-driven decision helper that draws on behavioral insights, administrative data,
and machine learning methods to inform immigrants’ location decisions. The deci-
sion helper provides personalized location recommendations that reﬂect immigrants’
preferences as well as data-driven predictions of the locations where they maximize
their expected earnings given their proﬁle. We illustrate the potential impact of our
approach using backtests conducted with administrative data that links landing data
of recent economic immigrants from Canada’s Express Entry system with their earn-
ings retrieved from tax records. Simulations across various scenarios suggest that
providing location recommendations to incoming economic immigrants can increase
their initial earnings and lead to a mild shift away from the most populous land-
ing destinations. Our approach can be implemented within existing institutional
structures at minimal cost, and offers governments an opportunity to harness their
administrative data to improve outcomes for economic immigrants.

1 Introduction

Immigration has long been recognized as a driver of economic growth (Peri, Shih and
Sparber 2015; Kerr et al. 2016). Immigrants increase the size and diversity of the work-
force, ﬁll skill shortages, start businesses, and contribute to innovation (Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle 2010; Borjas 1995; Burchardi et al. 2020). To encourage these positive effects,
many countries have complemented family-based and humanitarian admission streams
with economic immigration programs, which prioritize the admission of skilled profes-
sionals. A prominent example is Canada’s Express Entry system, through which approx-
imately 100,000 immigrants are admitted each year. Applicants earn points for qualiﬁca-
tions, such as language ability, educational degrees, and occupational experience, as well
as other factors that have been shown to be associated with long-term economic success
in Canada. Applicants who are above a certain threshold for that particular application
round receive invitations to apply for permanent residence (Desiderio and Hooper 2016).
Several other countries, such as Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, have
implemented similar policies (Kerr et al. 2017).

The goal of these programs is to admit immigrants who are likely to succeed econom-
ically and contribute to the destination country. Yet despite these programs’ intentions,
immigrants nevertheless face a number of barriers to economic success. For instance,
while a subset of individuals will have a preexisting job offer, the majority must select
an initial location within the destination country in which to settle and begin their job
search. However, immigrants generally lack access to personalized information on the
locations that are aligned with their preferences and skill sets. As a result, the initial lo-
cation decision can be affected by a variety of decision-making biases, such as availability
heuristics. When economic immigrants choose suboptimal landing locations, economic
admission programs cannot realize their full potential. Indeed, previous studies have
demonstrated that the initial location of immigrants has a sizable impact on their short-
as well as long-term economic outcomes (Åslund and Rooth 2007; Damm 2014; Bansak
et al. 2018).

In this study, we propose a data-driven decision helper that leverages administrative
data and machine learning methods to improve the initial location decisions of economic
immigrants. Drawing on behavioral insights that have been used to improve decisions in
other policy domains (Thaler and Sunstein 2009; OECD 2017), our approach seeks to en-
hance the choice architecture that shapes immigrants’ decisions by providing them with
systematic personalized information, delivered in the form of informational nudges,
about which locations in the destination country would likely be beneﬁcial to them.
Building upon the outcome-based matching algorithm developed in Bansak et al. (2018),
the decision helper provides newly invited immigrants with location recommendations
that align with their preferences and maximize their expected economic outcomes. These
recommendations draw on machine learning models applied to administrative data,
which predict how immigrants with similar proﬁles have fared across possible land-
ing locations, in combination with elicited preferences. The recommendations from the
decision helper are not meant to be binding, but provide additional information that

1

assists newly invited economic immigrants to make more informed location decisions.

To illustrate the potential of our approach, we evaluate administrative tax and land-
ing data on recent cohorts from the economic immigration programs within Canada’s
Express Entry system. We ﬁnd that landing locations are highly concentrated, and many
economic immigrants settle in destinations that are sub-optimal from the perspective of
predicted earnings. Using backtests and simulations, we ﬁnd that providing data-driven
location recommendations could signiﬁcantly increase the annual income of economic
immigrants and more widely disperse the beneﬁts of economic migration across Canada.
These gains would be realized at limited marginal cost, since the Canadian government
already collects the administrative data used to train the models and communicates
regularly with economic immigrants throughout the application process. Although the
decision helper should be tested prospectively via a randomized controlled trial to eval-
uate its full impact on a variety of outcomes, our results suggest that nudging incoming
economic immigrants with personalized information could improve their outcomes and
create an opportunity for governments to leverage their existing data to offer an innova-
tive resource at scale.

2 A Data-Driven Decision Helper

2.1 Motivation

Our approach is motivated by a growing body of research that demonstrates the im-
portance of the initial landing location in shaping immigrants’ outcomes. For example,
studies have used quasi-experimental designs to demonstrate that an immigrant’s ini-
tial landing location has an impact on short- as well as long-term economic success
(Åslund and Rooth 2007; Damm 2014; Bansak et al. 2018). Similarly, when examining
outcomes among non-immigrants, experiments have shown that families who were ran-
domly offered housing vouchers to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods had improved
long-term outcomes in terms of earnings and educational attainment for their children
(Chetty, Hendren and Katz 2016; Ludwig et al. 2013).

The initial destination choice is also consequential given that many immigrants tend
to remain in their landing location (Kaida, Hou and Stick 2020; Mossad et al. 2020). For
example, in Canada, more than 80% of recent economic class immigrants remained in
their arrival cities ten years later (Kaida, Hou and Stick 2020). In addition, landing lo-
cations are often highly concentrated. For example, in Australia, more than half of all
recent immigrants settled in Greater Sydney and Greater Melbourne, and only 14% set-
tled outside the major capital cities (Tuli 2019). If initial settlement patterns concentrate
immigrants in a few prominent landing regions, many areas of the country may not
experience the economic growth associated with immigration. Moreover, undue con-
centration may impose costs in the form of congestion in local services, housing, and
labor markets. To address the uneven distribution of immigrants, governments includ-
ing Canada and Australia have implemented policy reforms to regionalize immigration

2

and encourage settlement outside of well-known major cities (Taylor et al. 2014; Fotros
2018; Hugo 2008; Brezzi et al. 2010).

Although the evidence suggests that the initial landing location shapes immigrants’
outcomes, choosing an optimal destination from the large set of potential options is a
formidable task. Research suggests that immigrants consider the location of family or
friends, the perceived availability of employment opportunities, or preferences regarding
climate, city size, and cultural diversity (Chiswick and Miller 2004; Hyndman, Schuur-
man and Fiedler 2006; Akbari and Harrington 2007; Massey 2008; Brezzi et al. 2010;
Tonkin and Tonkin 1993; Damm 2009; Mossad et al. 2020). While some of these consid-
erations may lead immigrants to correctly identify an optimal location, research also sug-
gests that location decisions are impaired by common cognitive biases. One such bias,
which has been well documented as a powerful inﬂuence across many choice settings
with incomplete information (Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Thaler and Sunstein 2009),
is an availability heuristic. This heuristic suggests that immigrants prioritize places they
have heard about, and that they overlook less prominent locations even though these
locations may actually align with their preferences and skills.

For example, in the Canadian context, studies indicate that many location decisions
are linked to the international prominence of destinations (Di Biase and Bauder 2005). As
Bégin-Gillis (2010) argues, “many immigrants choose Toronto simply because that is all
they know of Canada” (also see McDonald (2004)). Similarly, Teo (2003) concludes that
“unfamiliarity means that decisions regarding their initial destination are often reliant
on secondary information sourced from earlier migrants, immigration companies, the
Internet or other sources” (also see Fotros (2018)). Recognizing that perceptions of places
can skew location decisions toward prominent cities, some provinces have attempted to
inﬂuence perceptions by providing prospective immigrants with information about less
prominent locations. Evaluating these programs, Bégin-Gillis (2010) notes that when
“prospective immigrants are provided with more information and provided with more
choices, they often choose differently.”

Interventions that use behavioral insights to counteract the effects of cognitive biases
have been used in a wide variety of policy domains (Thaler and Sunstein 2009; OECD
2017). Our approach builds on these behavioral insights, and seeks to enhance the choice
architecture for newly invited economic immigrants by systematically providing person-
alized recommendations as they make a decision about where to settle in the destination
country. The recommendations from our decision helper reﬂect individuals’ location
preferences as well as data-driven predictions about the locations where they are likely
to attain the highest earnings given their proﬁle. The recommendations thus act as infor-
mational nudges that counteract the effects of limited information and cognitive biases,
assisting immigrants in making more informed location decisions.

The primary anticipated users of the tool are economic immigrants who have been
invited to apply for permanent residence via an economic admissions stream and are in
the process of selecting a landing location within the destination country. Since govern-
ments communicate regularly with immigrants during this transition period to provide

3

information about the immigration process, the decision helper could be offered online
via a user interface at minimal cost. We expect that immigrants’ likelihood of using
the decision helper tool will depend on their prior level of certainty in their destination
decision. As a result, the decision helper provides a complementary source of informa-
tion with minimal disruption to existing sets of resources that guide decision making.
Our decision helper could—with appropriate adjustments—also be useful for other im-
migrants or even Canadian-born residents as an informational tool in deciding if and
where to move. Note that even Canadian-born residents typically do not have access
to granular administrative data which would allow them to discern how workers with
similar skill-sets and backgrounds fare in various locations.

2.2 Design

The decision helper approach combines three main stages: modeling and prediction,
preference constraints, and recommendations. Figure 1 is a ﬂowchart of these different
steps.

2.2.1 Modeling/Prediction

Our approach leverages individual-level administrative data from prior immigrant ar-
rivals. Governments routinely gather information on applicants to economic immigra-
tion programs, ranging from individuals’ skills, education, and prior job experience
to their age, gender, and national origin. Using unique identiﬁers, these background
characteristics can be merged with applicants’ initial landing locations and economic
outcomes, such as earnings or employment. Although governments with economic ad-
mission streams collect these data as part of normal program administration, to our
knowledge they have not been systematically leveraged to predict how immigrants with
different proﬁles fare across various landing locations.

Our approach leverages these historical data to ﬁt a set of location-speciﬁc, super-
vised machine learning models that serve as the basis for recommended landing loca-
tions for future immigrants. These models learn how immigrants’ background character-
istics and skill sets are related to taxable earnings within each potential landing location,
while also accounting for local trends over time. The models can then be used to predict
an economic immigrant’s expected earnings at any of the possible landing locations. To
minimize bias in the models’ earnings predictions, a broad set of characteristics related
to immigrants’ backgrounds, qualiﬁcations, and skills are included as predictors. Fur-
thermore, to reduce the possibility that observed patterns are driven by location-speciﬁc
self-selection bias, the data used to train the model could exclude prior immigrants with
standing job offers, family ties to speciﬁc locations, or other special situations. See the
Supplementary Material (SM) appendix for a formalization and decomposition of the
possible selection bias in the models, along with discussion on how such bias can be
limited.

4

Figure 1: Decision Helper

5

Models For each of the K total locations, weestimate a function beta using as inputs allj living in k.We use these betas to predict expectedoutcomes in k.Predicted OutcomeFor all individuals i in the client data, inputcovariates x to all K functions and obtain a vector ofpredicted outcomes in each location.Underlying PreferencesWe assume every person has a utility for each locationk. Client DataIn the client data, for eachindividual i, we have anequivalent vector of covariatesx as used in the modeling step.Restricted Set of LocationsWe further assume every person has a utility threshold,below which they will not live in a location. Deﬁne S as the subset of locations for person i whereutilities are above this utility threshold.Deﬁne t as the cardinality of set S for individual i.For each i, we ﬁnd all locations in S with a surveymethod.Recommend LocationsThe ﬁnal recommendation function takes as input the predicted outcomes and set ofrestricted locations S and outputs ranked t predicted outcomes for each location k in S.Our interface then recommends locations top z locations in order.Modeling/PredictionsPreference ConstraintsRecommendationsAdministrative DataIn the administrative data, for eachindividual j, we have a vector ofcovariates x and outcome y. In addition,we have their landing location choice k.2.2.2 Preference Constraints

Next, the decision helper elicits and incorporates individuals’ location preferences. Even
if a particular location is predicted to be the best for an immigrant in terms of expected
earnings, if the immigrant strongly prefers not to live there, then recommending such a
location will result in limited uptake and downstream dissatisfaction. To accommodate
individual preferences, we identify the list of locations each user would consider unac-
ceptable, and then limit the choice set to the remaining locations prior to optimizing on
expected earnings.

Our approach is agnostic to the speciﬁc method used to rule out unacceptable lo-
cations prior to making recommendations. For instance, users can be directly queried
to indicate regions of the country where they are unwilling to settle. Alternately, users
can be asked to provide preferences regarding speciﬁc location characteristics via di-
rect questioning or conjoint survey tasks, spanning identiﬁable features such as urban
density, climate, and the relative availability of amenities. These can be mapped onto ob-
servable characteristics of each landing location in order to identify acceptable locations
according to the expressed preferences.

2.2.3 Recommendations

After taking individual preferences into account to constrain the choice set, the remain-
ing locations are then ranked with respect to the individual’s predicted earnings in each
location. The decision helper delivers these recommendations to the user in the form
of an informational nudge via an online interface. Users can be given either a reduced
the top 3 locations) or a full ranked list of
number of the top ranked locations (e.g.
the locations, along with accompanying information. Users choose whether to use the
tool and follow the recommendations. This approach is non-coercive, seeking only to
inform those who can beneﬁt while not interfering with immigrants who may already
have solid plans or private information guiding their selection of a particular location.

3 Empirical Analysis

We illustrate the potential of a decision helper to recommend initial landing locations
for newly invited immigrants by evaluating data from Canada’s ﬂagship Express Entry
system. Express Entry is a system that manages applications to Canada’s high skilled
economic immigration programs, which select skilled workers for admission through a
points-based system.1 The Express Entry application process involves several stages and
is designed to select applicants who are most likely to succeed in Canada (Immigration,
Refugees and Citizenship Canada 2019). First, eligible candidates create and submit a

1 These economic immigration programs are the Federal Skilled Worker Program, the
Federal Skilled Trades Program, the Canadian Experience Class, and a portion of the
Provincial Nominee Program.

6

proﬁle to indicate their interest in moving to Canada. If candidates meet the minimum
requirements for one of the programs managed by Express Entry, they are entered into
the Express Entry pool, awarded points based on information in their proﬁle and ranked
according to the Comprehensive Ranking System (CRS). The CRS awards points based
on human capital characteristics including language skills, education, work experience,
age, employment and other aspects that previously have been shown to be associated
with long-term economic success in Canada. Factors in the CRS are generally grouped
under two categories: core points and additional/bonus points. Candidates with the
highest rankings in the pool are invited to apply online for permanent residence follow-
ing regular invitation rounds. If candidates’ CRS scores are above a speciﬁed threshold
for an invitation round, they receive an invitation to apply for permanent residence,
to be submitted within 90 days of receiving an invitation (Immigration, Refugees and
Citizenship Canada 2019).
If an application is approved by an IRCC ofﬁcer, perma-
nent resident visas are issued so that the applicant and his or her accompanying family
members can be admitted to Canada. Processing times for Express Entry proﬁles vary
depending on the program of admission, but the majority of applications are processed
within six months.

Since the system initially launched in 2015, it has steadily expanded. In 2018, 280,000
Express Entry proﬁles were submitted, and 92,331 people were admitted to Canada
through the Express Entry system (Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada 2019).
The growing importance of this system is mirrored by similar developments within other
advanced economies. For instance, Australia and New Zealand also use a similar expres-
sion of interest process to determine applicants’ eligibility and offer invitations to apply
for permanent residence. Countries such as Austria, Japan, South Korea, and the United
Kingdom also have aspects of points-based admissions systems built into their economic
immigration programs.

3.1 Data

We draw on data from the Longitudinal Immigration Database (IMDB)—the integrated
administrative database that Immigration Refugees and Citizenship Canada reports on
the outcomes of immigrants. IMDB was initially a basic linkage between tax ﬁles and the
Permanent Residents Database. The IMDB (2019 release) includes more than 12 million
immigrants who landed in Canada between 1952 and 2018 and income tax records from
1982 to 2017, as well as all temporary residents, Express Entry Comprehensive Ranking
System scores, citizenship uptake, and service usage for settlement programs. We sub-
set the data to include principal applicants who arrived between 2012 and 2017 under
the following programs: the Federal Skilled Worker program, the Federal Skilled Trades
program, and the Canadian Experience Class. Applications for these admission streams
are managed by the Express Entry system. We further subset the data to exclude indi-
viduals who were minors at the time of arrival (≤18), as well as individuals who did not
ﬁle a tax return while living in Canada. Given that the Express Entry system does not
apply to Quebec, we also exclude all immigrants who ﬁrst landed in Quebec or entered

7

on an immigration program run by Quebec. The ﬁnal sample size consists of 203,290
unique principal applicants.

3.2 Measures

The outcome measure is immigrants’ individual annual employment income, measured
at the close of the ﬁrst full calendar year after arrival. We model this outcome as a
function of a variety of predictors that are either prior to or contemporaneous with
an immigrant’s arrival. Predictors used in the modeling stage include age at arrival,
citizenship, continent of birth, education, family status, gender, intended occupation,
skill level, English ability, French ability, having a prior temporary residence permit for
study in Canada, having a prior temporary residence permit for work in Canada, having
previously ﬁled taxes in Canada, arrival month, arrival year, immigration category, and
Express Entry indicator. See Table S2 in the SM appendix for more information and
summary statistics on these measures.

We map immigrants’ landing locations to a speciﬁc Economic Region (ER) within
Canada, using census subdivision codes. As regional predictors, we also include the
population and the unemployment rate within the ER in the quarter of immigrants’ ar-
rival. An ER is a Canadian census designation that groups neighboring census divisions
to proxy regional economies. We use the ER as the primary unit throughout the analysis.
There are 76 ERs in total, but in our analysis there are 52 after excluding Quebec and
merging the smallest ERs using standard census practices.

3.3 Models

The modeling approach is based on the methodology developed in Bansak et al. (2018).
We ﬁrst merge historical data on immigrants’ background characteristics, economic out-
comes, and geographic locations. Using supervised machine learning methods, we ﬁt
separate models across each ER estimating an immigrant’s annual employment income
as a function of the predictors described above. These models serve as the basis for the
decision helper tool’s recommendations, as they allow for the generation of annual em-
ployment income predictions across each ER that are personalized to each immigrant’s
background characteristics.

As our modeling technique, we use stochastic gradient boosted trees. We use 10-fold
cross-validation within the training data to select tuning parameter values, including the
interaction depth, bag fraction, learning rate, and number of boosting iterations.2 More

2 The cross-validated R2 for our primary set of models (where the units of analysis
are principal applicants) is 0.54. Within the context of incomes – which are highly
skewed and difﬁcult to predict – this is relatively high. This represents a substan-
tial improvement over the R2 for an analogous linear regression model using cross-
validation (0.34). See the SM appendix for more details, including a breakdown of the
relative importance of the predictors in the boosted trees models.

8

details are provided in the SM appendix.

3.4 Simulations

To estimate how our proposed decision helper would affect income and inﬂuence lo-
cation decisions, we perform a series of backtests using historic Express Entry cohorts.
Speciﬁcally, we implement a series of simulations in which the decision helper pro-
vides recommendations to individual immigrants. We then simulate uptake of these
recommendations, and for individuals who follow the recommendation, we compare
the expected income at that location and at the location where they actually landed.

After training the models, we input the background characteristics of 2015 and 2016
Express Entry principal applicants (n = 17, 640) to obtain predicted income across ERs.
These predictions serve as the basis for the simulated recommendations. The degree to
which immigrants would follow such recommendations is unknown. To model these
dynamics, the simulations vary two parameters that reﬂect different assumptions con-
cerning the inﬂuence of the recommendation on immigrants’ location decisions.

The ﬁrst parameter is the compliance rate, denoted by π, which is deﬁned as the
probability that individuals will follow the recommendations. We assume that the prob-
ability of following a recommendation decreases linearly across income quantiles. We
apply an upper bound πmax to the individuals with the lowest actual income. We then
linearly interpolate to a value of π = 0 across the income distribution. Each individual
within the prediction set thus receives an individual compliance parameter, πi. Function-
ally, the average compliance rate across the distribution is πmax/2. For example, in the
simulations with πmax = .30, on average 15 percent of immigrants are expected to follow
the recommendation, and the probability varies from a high of 30 percent for the lowest-
income immigrants to close to zero percent for the highest-income immigrants. We chose
to vary πi as a function of income under the assumption that wealthier individuals are
more likely to have self-selected into location-speciﬁc employment opportunities. Sim-
ulations that impose a uniform compliance parameter instead also suggest substantial
gains (see SM appendix).

The second parameter is the number of acceptable locations, denoted by φ. Each
applicant is assumed to have a set of idiosyncratic preferences regarding locations, which
results in a ranked preference order of ERs, ranging from the most attractive (1) to the
least attractive (52). The φ parameter determines how many top-preference-ranked ERs
are included within the optimization. Location preferences are unmeasured within the
administrative data, and must be inferred. Using the landing ER as the dependent
variable, we ﬁt a multinomial logit model and proxy immigrants’ preferences using
their predicted probability of landing in each ER. After obtaining predictions for each
Express Entry case, we rank order locations by each individual’s predicted probability of
landing, randomly breaking ties. For each individual, the resulting preference ranks are
then used in conjunction with the parameter φ to deﬁne their set of acceptable locations,
which serves as the initial set of locations considered when selecting the locations with
the highest expected incomes. To guarantee that gains are not entirely driven by subsets

9

of locations with certain characteristics, we run simulations entirely removing certain
ERs from consideration, and ﬁnd no major deviation from our core results (see SM
appendix).

We conduct a simulation for various combinations of parameters. For each immi-
grant we consider only the top φ preference-ranked locations, and return the three loca-
tions within this subset that are expected to yield the highest employment income for the
immigrant. We assume that individuals who follow the recommendations have an equal
probability of selecting each of these three locations. However, with probability (1-πi),
individuals will select their original location rather than any of the recommendations.
For each case, we draw from a uniform distribution bounded by 0 and 1 to determine
whether the case will take the recommendation or not. If (draw) > π, cases are assumed
not to have followed the recommendation, and their location is recorded as their actual
location. Their income is recorded as their predicted income within their actual location;
for these immigrants there is no gain in income from using the tool. For immigrants
where (draw) < π, we perform a second draw to determine which of the three loca-
tions they will select. For these immigrants, the expected gain in income is computed
as the difference between the expected income they would earn in the recommended
location and the location they would have chosen without the tool. After performing
these random draws for each of the 2015 and 2016 Express Entry users, we obtain the
total expected difference in location counts and income.

4 Results from Empirical Analysis

4.1 Current Settlement Patterns

As shown in Figure 2, economic immigrants who arrived in the 2015 and 2016 arrival
cohorts through the Express Entry system are highly concentrated within a few regions
of Canada. About 78% settled in one of the four largest ERs as their initial destination,
and 31% of immigrants selected Toronto. In stark contrast, only about 44% of the overall
population is concentrated in those four ERs.3

To what extent do these concentrated settlement patterns support the goal of max-
imizing incomes? We evaluate this by estimating each economic immigrant’s expected
income in every potential landing region as a function of their background characteris-
tics and qualiﬁcations (see SM for details). Among economic immigrants who selected
one of the four most selected locations, Figure 3 displays how the selected ER would
rank in terms of expected earnings relative to all other potential ERs. For example, a
rank of 1 for a given immigrant in the top left panel indicates that, at the time of ar-
rival, the models estimate that Toronto ranked ﬁrst (i.e. best) out of 52 possible landing
locations in terms of the expected employment income for that immigrant.

Although the models suggest that a small subset of individuals selected an initial

3 We exclude Quebec from this computation to have an accurate comparison.

10

Figure 2: Landing Economic Regions for Express Entry Cohorts Arriving 2015-2016.
N=17,640.

11

S. Cst., Nt. Dame (NL)W. Coast (NL)P. Edward Isl. (PE)Cape Breton (NS)N. Shore (NS)Annap. Valley (NS)Campbellton (NB)Edmundston (NB)Southeast (MB)S. Cen., N. Cen. (MB)Southwest (MB)Interlake (MB)Yukon (YT)Southern (NS)Moncton (NB)Saint John (NB)Fredericton (NB)Stratford (ON)Northwest (ON)Parklands, N. (MB)Swift Current (SK)Yorkton (SK)P. Alb., Northern (SK)N.W. Territories (NT)Avalon Pen. (NL)Kingston (ON)Muskoka (ON)Northeast (ON)Kootenay (BC)Cariboo (BC)N. Coast, Nech. (BC)Windsor (ON)Northeast (BC)Regina (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Saskatoon (SK)Halifax (NS)Thompson (BC)London (ON)Hamilton (ON)Camrose (AB)Vancouver Isl. (BC)Red Deer (AB)Lethbridge (AB)Kitchener (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Ottawa (ON)Banff, Athab. (AB)Calgary (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Edmonton (AB)Toronto (ON)020004000Number of EE CasesFigure 3: Estimated Annual Income: Rank of Landing Economic Region vs. All Eco-
nomic Regions. N=17,640

12

Figure2:EstimatedAnnualIncome:RankofLandingERvs.AllERs010020002040RankCountToronto 030609012002040RankCountEdmonton05010002040RankCountLower Mainland025507502040RankCountCalgary5location that maximizes their expected income, we ﬁnd that for many economic immi-
grants the chosen location is far from optimal in terms of expected income. For instance,
among economic immigrants who chose to settle in Toronto, that landing location only
ranked approximately 20th on average out of the 52 ERs in terms of maximizing ex-
pected income in the year after arrival.
In other words, the data suggest that for the
average economic immigrant who settled in Toronto, there were 19 other ERs where that
immigrant had a higher expected income than in Toronto. The situation is similar for
other prominent locations, including Edmonton, Lower Mainland, and Calgary, where
the average ranks are 28, 24, and 26, respectively. Across Canada as a whole, the average
rank is a mere 26.5. This suggests that many immigrants do not select locations where
individuals with similar background characteristics tend to achieve the best economic
outcomes, and there is potential to improve immigrants’ landing choices.

4.2 Changes in Expected Income and Arrival Locations

Figure 4 displays the results from backtests that examine how a data-driven decision
helper tool may inﬂuence the expected incomes and location decisions of economic im-
migrants who enter through the Express Entry system (see SM for details). The top
panel shows the estimated effects on the average expected income one year after arrival
for economic immigrants across the entire backtest cohort of 2015 and 2016 arrivals. We
simulate effects using a varying set of parameters, including the share of immigrants
who are assumed to follow the recommendations (horizontal axis) and the number of
locations that are considered for each recommendation, based on the immigrants’ mod-
eled location preferences (colors and symbols). These results report the average gain
from 100 simulation runs.

The simulations suggest gains in expected annual incomes, even under scenarios in
which compliance is low and/or location preferences are highly restrictive. For exam-
ple, using the assumption that on average only 10% of immigrants settle in one of the
recommended locations, and that individuals’ location preferences will rule out 42 of
the 52 possible locations as unacceptable (the scenario labeled “Top 10”), the simulation
yields an average gain in expected annual employment income one year after arrival
of $1,100, averaged across the full cohort. This amounts to a cumulative gain of $55
million in total income for every 50,000 cases that enter Canada via the Express Entry
system. Note that these gains are entirely driven by the 10% of immigrants who follow
the recommendations, since we assume zero gains for the rest of the cohort. Immigrants
who do follow the recommendation increase their expected annual employment income
one year after arrival by $10,600 on average, relative to the estimated income at the loca-
tion they would have selected without using the decision helper. These gains are large
relative to the observed average ﬁrst-year income within the prediction sample ($49,900).
Across the full cohort, the total expected gains from implementing the decision
helper would be larger if immigrants had less restrictive location preferences and/or
more immigrants followed the recommendations. For example, under the assumption
that 15% of immigrants follow the recommendations, and the recommended locations

13

are chosen from a set of 25 acceptable locations, the average expected annual income one
year after arrival across the cohort increases by $3,400. The SM demonstrates that these
results are similar across various robustness checks, including replicating the analysis
with cost of living adjusted income (Figure S3), recommending locations to maximize the
joint income of principal applicants and their spouses (Figure S4), or removing smaller,
larger, or growing ERs from consideration (Figure S7).

The lower panel in Figure 4 displays the anticipated impact on the distribution of
economic immigrants across initial landing regions under the 15% compliance and Top
25 location simulation scenario. The results suggests that we would see a mild shift from
the most populous destinations toward mid-sized landing regions. For instance, about
15% of immigrants who chose one of the four largest locations would have chosen an
alternate location in Canada if they had followed the recommendation. Although there
is not a marked redistribution of arrivals toward the smallest locations, the estimates
for smaller locations are likely conservative given that the preferences for our simulation
were derived from data on the existing residential patterns of immigrants across Canada.
Figure S5 in the SM shows the expected distribution if no location preferences were
taken into account. While these scenarios ﬁnd that the majority of outﬂows continue
to be associated with the four largest ERs, we ﬁnd more movement into a subset of the
smaller locations when we do not restrict locations based on the inferred preferences.

4.3 Changes in Expected Income for Subgroups

We also assess the distribution of potential gains across subgroups to understand the
differential effects our approach could have for economic immigrants of various back-
grounds. Figure 5 shows the estimates of the change in average expected incomes one
year after arrival across a variety of different subgroups, again using the assumption that
15% of immigrants would follow the recommendations and that recommended locations
are chosen from a set of 25 acceptable locations. While expected gains vary as a function
of individuals’ characteristics, the overall increase in income does not appear to be the
result of disproportionate beneﬁt on the part of any particular demographic or socioeco-
nomic groups. Instead, we ﬁnd comparable average gains across a range of subgroups of
economic immigrants, including groups stratiﬁed by gender, education level, case size,
landing year, and immigration category.4

5 Potential Limitations

The impact assessment is limited to backtests applied to historical data. Such backtests
are commonly used to examine the potential impact of new approaches, but they cannot

4 Results for case size subgroups are only shown for case sizes of 1 and 2 due to an

insufﬁcient number of cases of size greater than 2.

14

Figure 4: Estimated Average Income Gains and Shifts in Arrival Locations. N=17,640

15

lllllll100020003000400051015Percent of Express Entry cases who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD):One Year After ArrivalEconomic Regions Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10S. Cst., Nt. Dame (NL)W. Coast (NL)P. Edward Isl. (PE)Cape Breton (NS)N. Shore (NS)Annap. Valley (NS)Campbellton (NB)Edmundston (NB)Southeast (MB)S. Cen., N. Cen. (MB)Southwest (MB)Interlake (MB)Yukon (YT)Southern (NS)Moncton (NB)Saint John (NB)Fredericton (NB)Stratford (ON)Northwest (ON)Parklands, N. (MB)Swift Current (SK)Yorkton (SK)P. Alb., Northern (SK)N.W. Territories (NT)Avalon Pen. (NL)Kingston (ON)Muskoka (ON)Northeast (ON)Kootenay (BC)Cariboo (BC)N. Coast, Nech. (BC)Windsor (ON)Northeast (BC)Regina (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Saskatoon (SK)Halifax (NS)Thompson (BC)London (ON)Hamilton (ON)Camrose (AB)Vancouver Isl. (BC)Red Deer (AB)Lethbridge (AB)Kitchener (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Ottawa (ON)Banff, Athab. (AB)Calgary (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Edmonton (AB)Toronto (ON)020004000Number of Express Entry CasesActualCounterfactualFigure 5: Estimated Average Income Gains for Subgroups. N=17,640

16

Immigration CategoryLanding YearCase SizeAgeEducationGenderSkilled  WorkerSkilled  TradesCanadian  Experience201520161220−2930−3940+< BABAMAPhDMaleFemale020004000020004000Average Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD):One Year After Arrivalfully capture all the factors that may affect the potential impact of our decision helper in
a prospective implementation.

For instance, economic outcomes could be inﬂuenced by compositional effects if
many immigrants with a similar proﬁle receive the same location recommendation.
Modeling such effects in a backtest is challenging because their direction and magni-
tude is theoretically ambiguous. An increased concentration could lower expected in-
comes due to saturation, or alternatively, increase incomes due to local agglomeration
economies, which are common for high-skilled migration (Kerr et al. 2017). Similarly,
economic immigrants account for a relatively small fraction of the local labor market,
implying that the direct impact of the tool on labor market saturation is difﬁcult to
determine a priori.

Although we do not model compositional effects directly in the backtests, in a
prospective application the decision helper can learn potential compositional effects over
time as the models are continually updated based on observed data from new arrivals,
as well as local economic conditions at the time of arrival. Therefore, should a particular
location cease to be a good match for a particular immigrant proﬁle due to increased con-
centration, the models would adjust to this pattern over time and no longer recommend
that location. In addition, the approach can be adjusted to incorporate location-speciﬁc
quotas if desired by governments.

The results in a prospective implementation could also differ from the backtests if
the expected incomes predicted by the machine learning models over- or under- esti-
mate the actual incomes that newly invited immigrants attain if they were to follow
the recommendations. Such prediction errors could occur for a variety of reasons, in-
cluding immigrants selecting into locations based on unobserved characteristics. Such
unobserved characteristics can be separated into two broad categories. The ﬁrst cate-
gory includes unobserved characteristics that are unrelated to any particular location,
and hence could be associated with higher (or lower) earnings potential in all possible
locations. Examples would include an individual’s unmeasured abilities or motivation.
The second category includes unobserved characteristics that are unique to speciﬁc lo-
cations, and hence represent an earnings advantage for a particular individual only in
a select location (or select locations). Examples would include an individual’s unknown
job offer or social network (e.g. family members) in a speciﬁc location. See the SM ap-
pendix for a more comprehensive discussion, formalization, and decomposition of the
possible selection bias.

These concerns about selection bias driving the results in our backtests are partially
addressed by the fact that we train ﬂexible models on a rich set of covariates derived
from application data to economic admissions programs. That is, conditional on the
broad set of background and skills-based characteristics we observe, it is not likely that
individuals have self-selected into locations as a function of unobserved non-location-
speciﬁc characteristics that account for the full magnitude of the estimated gains we
observe in the backtests. For instance, for individuals who are identical on the observed
characteristics (e.g. same age, education, profession, skills, etc.), their variation in un-

17

measured variables such as motivation would need to both be integral in their location
choices and signiﬁcantly affect their earnings potential (see SM for details).

Finally, while the backtest results suggest the possibility of gains if the decision
helper were implemented, it is important to obtain reliable estimates of impact through
a prospective randomized-controlled trial (RCT). An RCT would randomly assign new
arrivals to receive recommendations from the decision helper, allowing for a rigorous
evaluation of the tool’s impact on a variety of outcomes, including incomes, satisfaction,
and location patterns.

6 Potential Risks

To examine potential risks, it is important to consider how introducing a decision-helper
tool would inﬂuence the status quo. The decision-helper provides additional informa-
tion to incoming economic immigrants so that they can make more informed location
decisions, from among the set of possible locations that match their preferences. In doing
so, it does not limit immigrants’ agency to choose their ﬁnal settlement location. Given
that the recommendations are based on historical data, the predictions may be subject to
error. As a result, the decision helper should be viewed as a complement, rather than a
replacement, of the existing information streams and processes that governments use to
inform immigrants about potential destinations.

Care needs to be taken to transparently communicate the locational recommenda-
tions to users.
In particular, users should be made aware that the recommendations
are based upon the goal of maximizing the particular metric of near-term income (or
whichever speciﬁc metric has been applied) and that the predictions reﬂect the out-
comes that recent immigrants with similar proﬁles have attained in the past. This does
not guarantee that the user’s realized income will be optimal at the recommended lo-
cation, as expected income cannot take into account all possible factors that are unique
to an individual. Nor does it imply that the recommended location would necessarily
be optimal in terms of other possible life goals or long-term earnings. While we do not
have evidence that selecting locations based on near-term earnings will have a negative
impact on these longer-term outcomes, this is a theoretically possible risk that would
need to be monitored over the course of a prospective implementation.

7 Discussion

A growing number of countries have implemented economic immigration programs to
attract global talent and generate growth. However, economic immigrants lack access to
personalized information that would help them identify their most beneﬁcial initial set-
tlement locations. In this study, we propose a data-driven decision helper that delivers
informational nudges to counteract the effects of limited information and cognitive bi-
ases. The decision helper harnesses insights from administrative data to recommend the

18

locations that would maximize their expected incomes and align with their preferences.
We illustrate its potential by conducting backtests on historical data from the Canadian
Express Entry system. The results suggest that economic immigrants currently select
sub-optimal locations, and that there could be gains in expected incomes from provid-
ing data-driven, personalized location recommendations. While the results from our
backtests suggest potential gains in the Canadian context, it is important to assess the
impact in the context of a pilot initiative with a randomized controlled trial.

The decision helper outlined in this study is adaptable and could be rapidly im-
plemented within existing institutional structures in various countries. First, as we
demonstrate via application to Canadian data, many governments are already collecting
administrative data that can be used to generate recommendations. Moreover, govern-
ments administering economic admission programs engage in regular communication
with applicants, implying that the decision helper can easily be made accessible to a
large group of users. In light of the gains observed in the backtests, these limited costs
suggest a positive return on investment, even in scenarios where only a small share
of immigrants follow the recommendations. Second, the approach is ﬂexible in terms
of implementation and can be adjusted to the speciﬁc priorities identiﬁed by the desti-
nation government. For example, the decision helper could be used to improve other
measurable integration outcomes (for example, longer-term measures of income), in-
corporate location-speciﬁc quotas, and allow for a wide variety of approaches to elicit
preferences and display recommendations. Third, the approach is designed as a learning
system such that the models for the predictions are continually updated using observed
data from new arrivals and changing local economic conditions. The decision helper
therefore learns synergies between personal characteristics and landing locations as they
evolve over time and adjusts the recommendations accordingly. Finally, the approach
supports individual agency. The decision helper provides immigrants with personalized
recommendations that help them make a more informed decision, but immigrants de-
cide whether to use it, and they can decline the recommendations. The decision helper
thus complements rather than replaces existing information streams and processes.

In sum, a data-driven decision helper holds the potential to assist incoming economic
immigrants in overcoming informational barriers and choosing better landing locations.
In addition, the approach we outline offers governments the ability to leverage adminis-
trative data to increase economic returns within the structures of their existing admission
process. Together, we expect these factors to improve the well-being of economic immi-
grants and the communities in which they settle.

8 Acknowledgments

This study was completed as part of a Data Partnership Arrangement between Immi-
gration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) and the Immigration Policy Lab. The
analysis, conclusions, opinions, and statements expressed in the material are those of
the authors, and not necessarily those of the IRCC. This research received generous sup-

19

port from Eric and Wendy Schmidt by recommendation of Schmidt Futures. We also
acknowledge funding from the Charles Koch Foundation. These funders had no role in
the data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

References

Akbari, Ather H and Jennifer S Harrington. 2007.

Initial location choice of new im-
migrants to Canada. Technical report. Working Paper 05-2007, Atlantic Metropolis
Centre.

Åslund, Olof and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2007. “Do when and where matter? Initial labour
market conditions and immigrant earnings.” The Economic Journal 117(518):422–448.

Bansak, Kirk, Jeremy Ferwerda, Jens Hainmueller, Andrea Dillon, Dominik Hangart-
ner, Duncan Lawrence and Jeremy Weinstein. 2018. “Improving refugee integration
through data-driven algorithmic assignment.” Science 359(6373):325–329.

Bégin-Gillis, Margot. 2010. “Immigrant settlement in rural Nova Scotia: Impacting the
location decisions of newcomers.” Papers in Canadian Economic Development 12:1–18.

Borjas, George J. 1995. “The economic beneﬁts from immigration.” Journal of Economic

Perspectives 9(2):3–22.

Brezzi, Monica, Jean-Christophe Dumont, Mario Piacentini and Cécile Thoreau. 2010.
Determinants of localization of recent immigrants across OECD regions. Technical
report. Paper for OECD Workshop “Migration and Regional Development”, June 7,
2010, Paris.

Burchardi, Konrad, Thomas Chaney, Tarek Alexander Hassan, Stephen Terry and Lisa
Tarquinio. 2020. Immigration, Innovation, and Growth. Technical report. NBER Work-
ing Paper No. 27075.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren and Lawrence F Katz. 2016. “The effects of exposure
to better neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
experiment.” American Economic Review 106(4):855–902.

Chiswick, Barry R and Paul W Miller. 2004. “Where immigrants settle in the United

States.” Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and Practice 6(2):185–197.

Damm, Anna Piil. 2009. “Determinants of recent immigrants’ location choices: Quasi-

experimental evidence.” Journal of Population Economics 22(1):145–174.

Damm, Anna Piil. 2014. “Neighborhood quality and labor market outcomes: Evidence
from quasi-random neighborhood assignment of immigrants.” Journal of Urban Eco-
nomics 79:139–166.

20

Desiderio, Maria Vincenza and Kate Hooper. 2016. The Canadian expression of interest
system: A model to manage skilled migration to the European Union? Technical
report. Migration Policy Institute Europe.

Di Biase, Sonia and Harald Bauder. 2005. “Immigrant settlement in Ontario: Location

and local labour markets.” Canadian Ethnic Studies 37(3):114.

Fotros, Homayoon. 2018. Destination matters: Policy options to balance the distribu-
tion of Iranian immigrants in Canada. Technical report. PhD Thesis, Simon Frazer
University.

Hugo, Graeme. 2008. “Immigrant settlement outside of Australia’s capital cities.” Popu-

lation, Space and Place 14(6):553–571.

Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. “How much does immigration

boost innovation?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2):31–56.

Hyndman, Jennifer, Nadine Schuurman and Rob Fiedler. 2006. “Size matters: Attracting
new immigrants to Canadian cities.” Journal of International Migration and Integration
7(1):1.

Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada. 2019. Express Entry year-end report

2018. Technical report.

Kaida, Lisa, Feng Hou and Max Stick. 2020. “Are refugees more likely to leave initial
destinations than economic immigrants? Recent evidence from Canadian longitudinal
administrative data.” Population, Space and Place p. e2316.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, Ça ˘glar Özden and Christopher Parsons. 2016. “Global

talent ﬂows.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(4):83–106.

Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William Kerr, Ça ˘glar Özden and Christopher Parsons. 2017. “High-

skilled migration and agglomeration.” Annual Review of Economics 9:201–234.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J Duncan, Lisa A Gennetian, Lawrence F Katz, Ronald C Kessler,
Jeffrey R Kling and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2013. “Long-term neighborhood effects on low-
income families: Evidence from moving to opportunity.” American Economic Review
103(3):226–31.

Massey, Douglas S. 2008. New Faces in New Places: The Changing Geography of American

Immigration. Russell Sage Foundation.

McDonald, James Ted. 2004. “Toronto and Vancouver bound: The location choice of new

Canadian immigrants.” Canadian Journal of Urban Research pp. 85–101.

Mossad, Nadwa, Jeremy Ferwerda, Duncan Lawrence, Jeremy M Weinstein and Jens
Hainmueller. 2020. “In search of opportunity and community: Internal migration of
refugees in the United States.” Science Advances (Forthcoming).

21

OECD. 2017. Behavioural insights and public policy: Lessons from around the world.

Technical report.

Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih and Chad Sparber. 2015. “STEM workers, H-1B visas, and

productivity in US cities.” Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1):S225–S255.

Taylor, Andrew J, Lauren Bell, Rolf Gerritsen et al. 2014. “Beneﬁts of skilled migration
programs for regional Australia: Perspectives from the Northern Territory.” Journal of
Economic & Social Policy 16(1):35.

Teo, Sin Yih. 2003. Imagining Canada: Tracing the cultural logics of migration amongst
PRC immigrants in Vancouver. Technical report. PhD Thesis, University of British
Columbia.

Thaler, Richard H and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,

Wealth, and Happiness. Penguin.

Tonkin, Sue and Sue Tonkin. 1993.

Initial location decisions of immigrants: Results
from the longitudinal survey of immigrants to Australia (LSIA) pilot. Technical report.
Australian Government Pub. Service.

Tuli, Sajeda. 2019. “Migrants want to live in the big cities, just like the rest of us.” The

Conversation March 31, 2019.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics

and biases.” Science 185(4157):1124–1131.

22

Supplementary Material

S1 Decision Helper Workﬂow

In this section, we provide additional details and formalize our decision helper approach.
This workﬂow consists of three stages, modeling/prediction, preference constraints, and
recommendations. We repeat the visualization of the workﬂow with additional formal
notation in Figure 1, and describe each step of the process in detail.

S1.1 Modeling/prediction

In the ﬁrst stage, we use training data to build a series of models that predict expected
outcomes in a particular location. This process begins by gathering a set of Admin-
strative Data, an individual-level dataset containing information about prior immigrant
arrivals. This dataset must consist of individuals that are similar to the eventual users of
the decision helper tool.

For each individual in the administrative data, we need three pieces of information:
a collection of covariates, a measurable outcome, and a choice of landing location. Be-
cause our goal is to determine unique synergies between individual-level proﬁles and
outcomes in a particular landing spot, we estimate models for each location separately.

For each individual in the administrative data j = 1, . . . , m, let the outcome of inter-
est be denoted yj and the landing decision denoted wj ∈ {1, . . . , K}. Let (cid:126)xj represent a
p-dimensional vector of relevant covariates for individual j, and xir represent the r-th fea-
ture in the p-dimensional vector. Our goal in the model training portion of the workﬂow
is to predict the outcome based on the relevant covariates and speciﬁed landing location;
that is, to estimate function β mapping (cid:126)xj to yj. As we want to ﬁnd separate functional
forms for each location k = 1, . . . , K, we estimate K total functions βk((cid:126)xj|wj = k). We ﬁnd
an approximation ˆβk to βk by minimizing the expected value of a speciﬁed loss function
L(yj, βk((cid:126)xj) over the joint distribution of (y,(cid:126)x):

ˆβk = argmin

E

βk

(y,(cid:126)x) L(y, βk((cid:126)x))

After estimating ˆβk for all K landing locations in the administrative data, we then
apply these models to the Client Data, the potential users of the decision helper tool.
For each client i = 1, . . . , n, we have the same set of covariates used to train the models
(cid:126)xi. By inputting (cid:126)xi to each of the ˆβk location functions, we obtain individual predicted
outcomes in each possible location. The following delineates each step in this process:

23

1. Denote the administrative data by matrix A

A =











x11
y1 w1
...
...
...
xj1
yj wj
...
...
...
ym wm xm1

x1r
. . .
...
. . .
xjr
. . .
...
. . .
. . . xmr











x1p
. . .
...
. . .
xjp
. . .
...
. . .
. . . xmp

2. Train a set of K models,

as follows.

For k = 1, . . . , K:

L = { ˆβ1((cid:126)xj), . . . , ˆβk((cid:126)xj), . . . , ˆβK((cid:126)xj)}

a) Subset A to individuals for whom wj = k and call this Ak

Ak =











x11
y1
...
...
xj1
yj
...
...
yml xmk1

x1r
. . .
...
. . .
xjr
. . .
...
. . .
. . . xmkr











x1p
. . .
...
. . .
xjp
. . .
...
. . .
. . . xmk p

w=k

=











(cid:126)x1
y1
...
...
(cid:126)xj
yj
...
...
ym (cid:126)xmk











w=k

Where mk denotes the number of individuals in the administrative data for
whom wj = k.

b) Using the data in Ak, model and estimate ˆβk.

Note that while there are many ways to potentially model ˆβk, we have found
that using supervised machine learning methods provides the best ﬂexible
solution to capture complex non-linearities, interactions between covariates,
and automatically engage in feature selection. To avoid overﬁtting on the
training set, wherin ˆβk has very high predictive power in the training set but
low out-of-sample predictive power, it is necessary to use cross-validation in
the training process.

3. Denote the client data by matrix C.

C =











x11
...
xj1
...
xn1

. . . x1r
...
. . .
. . . xjr
...
. . .
. . . xnr











. . . x1p
...
. . .
. . . xjp
...
. . .
. . . xnp

=

24





















(cid:126)x1
...
(cid:126)xj
...
(cid:126)xn

4. For all clients in C and all k locations, estimate βk : (cid:126)xi → ˆyi as follows:

For i = 1, . . . , n

For d = 1, . . . , k

Estimate βk((cid:126)xi) by applying the k-th model in L to (cid:126)xi, where ˆβk((cid:126)xi) = ˆyik

Arrange ˆyik into a vector (cid:126)ˆyi = [ ˆyi1, ˆyi2, . . . , ˆyiK]

5. Produce a matrix of predicted outcomes M, with rows corresponding to clients and

columns responding to potential landing locations as follows.

M =












(cid:126)ˆy1
...



(cid:126)ˆyi


...


(cid:126)ˆyn

=











ˆy11
...
ˆyi1
...
ˆyn1

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

ˆy1k
...
ˆyik
...
ˆynk

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .











ˆy1K
...
ˆyiK
...
ˆynK

This represents the ﬁnal ouptut of the modeling/prediction phase of the workﬂow

S1.2 Preference Constraint

The next stage of our approach involves eliciting clients’ underlying preferences and
ruling out locations that are inconsistent with these preferences. Speciﬁcally, we as-
sume that for every client i = 1, . . . , n, preferences for each location k ∈ {1, . . . , K} can be
expressed by a utility value uik ∈ R. The set of utility values over each K location is
arranged in a vector (cid:126)ui = [ui1, ui2, . . . , uiK].

We further assume that every individual has a utility threshold below which they
will ﬁnd a location unacceptable to live in. We denote this utility threshold ψi. We
denote the subset of acceptable locations for each individual i as Si = {k(cid:48)} ⊂ K, and
deﬁne acceptable locations in {k(cid:48)} ⊂ K as those locations where an individual’s utility
value is above their utility threshold value ψi.

Si = {k(cid:48)} ⊂ K|uik(cid:48) > ψi∀k(cid:48)

Given every individual has their own utility vectors (cid:126)ui and utility threshold value ψi,
the cardinality of set Si is different for each i. Deﬁne ti = |Si|, the number of acceptable
locations for person i. We assume ti ≥ 1; that is that Si is non-empty and at least one
location is above the utility threshold.

We ﬁnd set Si acceptable locations for each i with a survey method. As expressed
in the main paper, we are agnostic as to which survey device is used, as long as the
method allows us to restrict the set of locations to those consistent with i’s underlying
preferences.

25

S1.3 Recommendations
The ﬁnal stage of our workﬂow uses as input the predicted outcome vector (cid:126)ˆyi and set
of feasible locations Si to produce a ﬁnal set of recommendations for individual i. This
process is formalized as follows:

Deﬁne µ as a function with predicted outcome vector (cid:126)ˆyi and set of feasible locations
Si as inputs. The function µ then outputs vector ˆyiR which ranks expected outcomes for
all ti locations within feasible set Si.

µ : ((cid:126)ˆyi, Si) −→ (cid:126)ˆyiR = [ ˆyik(cid:48)

1

, ˆyik(cid:48)

2

... ˆyik(cid:48)
ti

]

s.t. ˆyik(cid:48)

1

≥ ˆyik(cid:48)

2

≥ ... ≥ ˆyik(cid:48)
ti

and k(cid:48) ∈ Si

Deﬁne z as the maximum number of recommendations to present to the user, and z(cid:48)
i

as the minimum between z and ti.

z(cid:48)
i = min(z, ti)

The ﬁnal interface will recommend the top z(cid:48)
formats could be used to present the recommendations.

i locations to user i order. Various

(k(cid:48)

1, k(cid:48)

2, ..., k(cid:48)
z(cid:48)
i

)

S2 Properties of the Modeling/Prediction Stage

For individuals denoted by i, let Yi denote observed outcomes, Ai denote their chosen
locations, and Xi denote their observed characteristics (which can denote a vector of
covariates or a single fully stratifying variable). Further, let Yi(a) denote the potential
outcome for individual i in any location a ∈ SA, where SA denotes the set of possible
locations. In other words, Yi(a) represents the outcome that individual i would achieve if
that individual had chosen location a, and Yi = Yi(Ai).5 In the modeling/prediction stage
of the decision helper, the goal is to determine the optimal location for each individual
as a function of their observed characteristics. In other words, for each stratum Xi = x
and at each location a ∈ SA, the goal is to determine the following quantity of interest:

θa(x) ≡ E[Yi(a)|Xi = x]

where the expectation (and all expectations presented hereafter) is deﬁned over the dis-
tribution of the population of interest (i.e. the population for whom the decision helper

5 Note that the deﬁnition of the potential outcomes implies the stable unit treatment

value assumption (SUTVA).

26

is targeted).

The goal is then to use this quantity for all a ∈ SA to determine each individual’s
optimal location(s)—that is, the location(s) for which the quantity is highest, perhaps
subject to additional constraints—and then deliver informational nudges to encourage
individuals to land in these locations.

However, a key impediment to using θa(x) in this ideal manner is that θa(x) is not
necessarily identiﬁable with observed data. Instead, what is identiﬁed is the following:

θ(cid:48)
a(x) ≡ E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai = a] = E[Yi|Xi = x, Ai = a]

That is, it is based upon θ(cid:48)
a(x) (or estimates thereof) that optimal locations will be in-
ferred for each individual, and these inferences may not perfectly match the true optimal
locations as deﬁned by θa(x).

Therefore, it is useful to characterize the potential bias of θ(cid:48)

a(x) with respect to θa(x)
in order to (a) understand the extent to which that bias may result in suboptimal infor-
mational nudges and (b) identify concrete actions that can be taken to limit or eliminate
the bias. To do so, the following additional quantities are ﬁrst deﬁned:

θ(cid:48)(cid:48)
a (x) ≡ E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai (cid:54)= a]

pa(x) ≡ P(Ai = a|Xi = x)

In addition, assume that 0 < pa(x) for all a and x, and note that θa(x) = θ(cid:48)
θ(cid:48)(cid:48)
a (x)(1 − pa(x)). Hence, the bias of θ(cid:48)
following:

a(x)pa(x) +
a(x) with respect to θa(x) is bounded by the

Ba(x) ≡ lim

pa(x)→0

(cid:0)θ(cid:48)

a(x) − θa(x)(cid:1) = θ(cid:48)

a(x) − θ(cid:48)(cid:48)

a (x)

= E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai = a] − E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai (cid:54)= a]

This term is a form of selection bias that represents, within a stratum of x, the extent to
which the mean potential outcome in location a is higher for individuals who actually
choose a versus individuals who do not choose a.

If it can be assumed that Yi(a)|= Ai|Xi, then the selection bias is eliminated (i.e. se-
lection on observables). However, it could be that the potential outcomes are also related
to unobserved characteristics of an individual that may also be correlated with location
choices. Such unobserved characteristics can be separated into two broad categories. The
ﬁrst, denoted by Ui, are unobserved characteristics that are unrelated to any particular
location. Examples would include an individual’s unmeasured abilities or motivation.
The second, denoted by Vai, are unobserved characteristics that are unique to a particu-
lar location a in question. Examples would include an individual’s unknown job offer or
social network (e.g. family members) in location a.

Taking these unobserved characteristics into account, for any location a let the po-
tential outcome Yi(a) be modeled as an arbitrary (and arbitrarily complex) function of

27

Xi, Ui, and Vai as well as an exogenous error term:

Yi(a) = ga(Xi, Ui, Vai) + (cid:101)i

where E[(cid:101)i|Xi, Ai] = 0. By extension, we have the following:

Ba(x) = E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai = a] − E[Yi(a)|Xi = x, Ai (cid:54)= a]

= E[ga(Xi, Ui, Vai) + (cid:101)i|Xi = x, Ai = a] − E[ga(Xi, Ui, Vai) + (cid:101)i|Xi = x, Ai (cid:54)= a]

(cid:90)

=

ga(x, u, va)dFUi,Vai|Xi=x,Ai=a(u, va) −

(cid:90)

ga(x, u, va)dFUi,Vai|Xi=x,Ai(cid:54)=a(u, va)

(cid:90) (cid:90)

(cid:90) (cid:90)

=

−

ga(x, u, va)dFVai|Ui=u,Xi=x,Ai=a(va)dFUi|Xi=x,Ai=a(u)

ga(x, u, va)dFVai|Ui=u,Xi=x,Ai(cid:54)=a(va)dFUi|Xi=x,Ai(cid:54)=a(u)

where FU,Va|X,A denotes the joint conditional distribution function of U and Va given
X and A; FVa|U,X,A denotes the conditional distribution function of Va given U, X, A;
and FU|X,A denotes the conditional distribution function of U given X and A, all in the
population of interest.

These results help to highlight what assumptions are required, and what correspond-
ing design decisions could be made, to limit or eliminate this bias. For instance, pro-
vided a sufﬁciently rich set of covariates are observed in Xi, the following assumption
may hold:

Ui|= Ai|Xi

In words, this assumption states that within strata of X, individuals are not self-selecting
into locations as a function of unobserved non-location-speciﬁc characteristics. For in-
stance, for individuals who are identical on Xi (e.g. same age, education, profession,
skills, etc.), their variation in unmeasured variables Ui such as motivation is unrelated to
their location choices Ai. Under the assumption that Ui|= Ai|Xi, FU|X,A = FU|X and hence
the bias term simpliﬁes to:

(cid:90) (cid:90)

Ba(x) =

ga(x, u, va){dFVai|Ui=u,Xi=x,Ai=a(va) − dFVai|Ui=u,Xi=x,Ai(cid:54)=a(va)}dFUi|Xi=x(u)

In other words, under this assumption, the bias is driven by the difference in the distri-
bution of Vai for individuals who choose a versus do not choose a, by joint strata of X
and U. If we make this assumption in the context of the simulated backtests applied to
the Canada Express Entry applicants, then for the resulting estimated gains to be driven
purely by bias, this would mean that the average estimated gains among compliers can
be accounted for by bias attributed solely to location-speciﬁc links or advantages that
the individuals who chose any particular Economic Region had over otherwise identical
individuals who did not choose that Economic Region. In other words, the individuals
who select into a particular location have an average annual employment income ad-

28

vantage at that location of between $11,000 and $22,700 (depending on the simulation
scenario) due to pre-determined job offers or family/social network ties compared to
otherwise identical individuals who chose different locations.

Another assumption that could be made is that Vai is constant in the population
of interest, which could be ensured by design by redeﬁning the population of interest
and excluding individuals accordingly, e.g. excluding all individuals likely to have pre-
determined job offers.6 Under the assumption that Vai = ˜va for all individuals in the
population of interest, the bias term simpliﬁes to the following:

(cid:90)

Ba(x) =

ga(x, u, ˜va)dFUi|Xi=x,Ai=a(u) −

(cid:90)

ga(x, u, ˜va)dFUi|Xi=x,Ai(cid:54)=a(u)

If the previous assumption that Ui|= Ai|Xi is added back in, the bias is completely elim-
inated:

(cid:90)

Ba(x) =

ga(x, u, ˜va){dFUi|Xi=x(u) − dFUi|Xi=x(u)} = 0

S3 Application of Decision Helper Workﬂow: Canada

Express Entry

The empirical application of our proposed decision helper workﬂow analyzed data from
Canada’s Express Entry system. While we provide an overview of this method in the
body of our paper, here we provide additional methodological details on how we imple-
ment the Model/Predictions and Preference Constraint portion of our workﬂow.

S3.1 Data Sources

We merged three datasets at the Federal Research Data Center in Ottawa to conduct our
analysis:

• IMDB Integrated Permanent and Non-permanent Resident File (PNRF) 1980-2018

(2019 release)

• IMDB Tax Year Files (t1ff) 2013-2017 (2019 release)

• Express Entry File (2018 release, case level data)

6 Note that excluding those with job offers from the training data set would have meant
excluding a signiﬁcant proportion of immigrants who came through Express Entry
in the ﬁrst 2 years (2015-2016). However, this limitation becomes less salient as the
share of admissions with job offers has declined considerably in recent years with the
reduction in number of points for arranged employment in the CRS. For example, in
2017-2019 only about 10% of invited candidates had a job offer or arranged employ-
ment.

29

In addition, we leveraged several additional datasets to provide supplementary in-
formation on population levels, unemployment rates, and price indices by geographic
region:

• Canada Labour Force Survey (LFS): A monthly survey providing data on the labour
market, including estimates of employment and demographics of the working pop-
ulation. Estimates are available at different levels of geographic aggregation, in-
cluding Economic Region.

• Canadian Rental Housing Index: Public index compiled by the BC Non-Proﬁt
Housing Association, based on the 2016 Census. The index reports the average
rental price for a single-family apartment, by Census Subdivision (CSD).

A full list of considered variables is found in Table S1. Note that all analyses was
conducted in the Federal Research Data Centre in Ottawa and all data output presented
here was approved for release.

S3.1.1 Administrative Data

Although the population of interest consists of immigrants entering through Canada’s
Express Entry system, limited data on this relatively new initiative required us to ex-
pand our training data to similar economic immigrants entering Canada. Speciﬁcally,
in addition to including all Express Entry clients entering between 2015 and 2016 who
ﬁled a tax return, we expand our training set to include Non-Express Entry clients who
entered between 2012 and 2016 and ﬁled a tax return under four admission categories
that would be managed by the Express Entry system: Federal Skilled Workers (A1111),
Skilled Trades (A1120), Canadian Experience (A1130), and Provincial Nominees (A1300).

We restrict our training set by removing:

• Individuals who were selected by Quebec or landed in Quebec, given that Express

Entry does not apply to this province.

• Individuals whose yearly income in the year after arrival exceeded the 99th per-

centile, to avoid overﬁtting to outliers.

• Accompanying children (LANDING_AGE > 18)

• Individuals who died in the year of arrival or in the following year

This set of training data corresponds to matrix A in the decision helper helper work-

ﬂow.

30

S3.1.2 Client Data

The client dataset consists of the Express Entry cohort who entered prior to 2017 (the
ﬁnal year available in the outcome data), along with their associated characteristics from
the PNRF ﬁle. This represents the group of economic immigrants we consider in all our
simulation results. A set of descriptive statistics for this subgroup is found in Table S2.
This set of prediction data corresponds to C in the general decision helper helper

workﬂow.

S3.2 Modeling Decisions

Our workﬂow allows for a wide variety of potential models to be used in predicting
outcomes. In this section, we describe the particular modeling decisions we made in the
context of analyzing Canadian immigration data.

S3.2.1 Models

We used a supervised machine learning framework to ﬁt and train our models. We
use this class of models due to their ability to both ﬂexibly ﬁt the training data while
retaining high out-of-sample accuracy with proper model tuning. While any number
of supervised machine learning methods might be applicable, we chose to use gradient
boosting machines due to their ability to automatically engage in feature selection and
discover complex interactions between covariates.

We implement the modeling stage on a location-by-location basis. Speciﬁcally, for
each economic region, we ﬁrst subset the training data to those individuals who origi-
nally landed in that location, and ﬁt the supervised learning model using individuals’
background characteristics to predict their employment earnings. We model synergies
using stochastic gradient boosted trees, which we run with a customized script using
the gradient boosting machine (gbm) package within R.

In our implementation of gradient boosted trees, we used 10-fold cross-validation
within the training data to select tuning parameter values, including the interaction
depth (the maximum nodes per tree), bag fraction (the proportion of the training set
considered at each tree expansion), learning rate (the size of each incremental step in the
algorithm), and number of boosting iterations (number of trees considered).

To determine the best model, we ﬁrst ﬁx an interaction depth, bag fraction, and learn-
ing rate. For this ﬁxed set of parameters, we then ﬁt models over a sequence of boosting
iterations (normally, 1 to 1,000 trees). For each model, we calculate the cross-validation
root mean square error (RMSE), and choose the model which minimizes this error. To
avoid potentially choosing a local minimum, if the best model is within 100 trees of the
maximum number of trees we consider, we re-run this process by increasing the maxi-

31

mum considered trees by 500. We repeat this process as many times as necessary, and
record the ﬁnal tree count and RMSE for the ﬁxed interaction depth, bag fraction, and
learning rate.

We repeat the above process tuning over different values of interaction depth, bag
fraction, and learning rate. Finally, we pick the model with the set of parameters with the
lowest cross-validation RMSE for each separate location model. The set of parameters
we consider are:

• Interaction Depth: 5-7

• Learning Rate: .1 and .01

• Bag Fraction: .5-.8 by .15

The set of ﬁnal models, one for each location, correspond to the set of L models in

the general workﬂow.

In order to investigate which covariates are the most predictive of income, we calcu-
late a variable importance measure for each predictor in every separate tuned location
model (see summary.gbm in the gbm package for details on how this statistic is calcu-
lated). We present these variable importance measures in Figure S1.

This ﬁgure demonstrates one of the advantages of ﬁtting each location model sepa-
rately – in each model, the importance measures of each covariate differs, demonstrating
how the set of characteristics that lead to better or worse economic outcomes vary be-
tween ERs. Some overall trends emerge, with occupation and citizenship in the top most
inﬂuential covariates in every model. Whether or not a client had a previous temporary
residence permit is also a highly inﬂuential predictor in certain Economic regions, es-
pecially in Toronto. We further note certain variables have little inﬂuence on predicted
income across each model, such as the language (French and English) indicators and
landing year.

S3.2.2 Predicted Outcomes

We then apply each ﬁtted model to the prediction set to estimate the income for new
Express Entry clients should they select the economic region in question. For the pre-
diction set, we remove any Express Entry client with the provincial nomination (A1300)
category, as these clients do not have ﬂexibility in choosing the initial landing location.
This process is performed separately and independently for each location, which yields
a vector of predicted income across possible economic regions for each individual within
the prediction set. The ﬁnal result is a matrix of predicted annual income with rows rep-
resenting individual Express Entry clients and columns representing economic regions,

32

corresponding to M in the general workﬂow.

In order to asses model ﬁt, we compare predicted income within the principal appli-
cants’ actual location to their observed income in that location in the top panel of Figure
S2. The bottom two panels show the histogram of predicted incomes and actual incomes
respectively. Overall, predictions are well calibrated, albeit slightly more conservative
than observed income at the tails of the distribution.

In our implementation, the cross-validated R2 for the tuned PA model is 0.54. Within
the context of incomes – which are highly skewed and difﬁcult to predict – this is rel-
atively high. This represents a substantial improvement over the R2 for an analogous
linear regression model using cross-validation (0.34). The RMSE for the tuned model is
29,486, as compared to an observed mean income of 58,000 and a standard deviation of
41,600.

S3.3 Approximating Locational Preferences

While a prospective use case would use a survey restrict locations to a set that align with
an individual’s underlying preferences, we were unable to engage in this exercise in our
backtests. Therefore, we use the administrative data and existing migration patterns to
estimate preferences. We explain the details of this methodology in this section.

S3.3.1 Underlying Preferences

Upon entering Canada, clients plausibly have a series of idiosyncratic locational pref-
erences related to geographic location, climate, local demographics, labor markets, and
other potential factors. We approximated individual locational preferences by examin-
ing how Express Entry clients with different background characteristics varied in terms
of their original landing locations. Using the landing Economic Region as the dependent
variable, we ﬁt a multinomial logit model on Express Entry clients and a random subset
of 20% of the non-Express Entry economic immigrants. Given that these preferences are
proxies, we use a coarse set of covariates including education, birth region, age, immi-
gration category, case size, and indicators for work and study permits. These predictions
approximate the vector of utilities u in the workﬂow.

S3.3.2 Restricted Set of Locations

After obtaining predictions for each Express Entry case, we rank order locations by pre-
dicted preferences, randomly breaking ties. The resulting ranks are used in conjunction
with the parameter φ (the number of acceptable locations we consider) to determine
the initial set of locations considered when selecting the locations with the top optimal
income. This set of φ acceptable locations represents subset Si in the workﬂow.

33

S4 Robustness Checks

Below we discuss several robustness checks to our study. In particular, we outline the
impact of our backtest when considering 1) cost-of-living adjustments, 2) maximizing
principal applicant plus spouse income, and 3) alternative simulation speciﬁcations.

S4.1 Cost-of-living Adjustments

An important consideration inﬂuencing relative quality of life across landing locations
relates to living costs. To take this factor into account during the recommendation pro-
cess, we ran alternate simulations where we deﬁne outcomes as total income less esti-
mated yearly rental costs of a two bedroom apartment. To our knowledge, rental prices
are the most granular cost index currently available across small geographic regions. The
estimates we pull are from the Canadian Rental Housing Index, a public index compiled
by the BC Non-Proﬁt Housing Association and based on the 2016 Census. The index
reports the average rental price for a single-family apartment, by Census Subdivision
(CSD).

In Figure S3, we replicate the results in our main paper, demonstrating average gains
in employment under various simulation parameters in the top panel and visualizing
expected movement patterns in the bottom panel.

S4.2 Principal Applicant and Spouse Model

While our main paper reports our ﬁndings for principal applicants only, we addition-
ally ﬁt a set of models that consider both principal applicants and their accompanying
partners. As a simplifying assumption, we assume that both individuals in a case have
similar (joint) locational preferences, and derive these preferences from a PA-only model.
The income predictions, however, take into account the joint income of the PA and part-
ner divided by the number of adults in the family unit (average family income). We then
estimate the models assuming a family unit will move jointly. In Figure S4, we replicate
the results in the main paper using this approach, with similar results.

S4.3 Alternative Simulation Speciﬁcations

Our simulations vary two parameters: the number of acceptable locations considered (φ)
and the compliance rate (π). In this section, we consider the impact of further varying
these parameters on our core results.

S4.3.1 No Locational Preferences

In our main analysis, we infer regional preferences by analyzing existing residential pat-
terns and then using these estimated preferences to restrict the choice set in our simu-

34

lations. However, expected income gains are maximized when no locational preferences
are taken into account. In Figure S5, we show simulated movement patterns with no
locational preferences under different compliance rates. Relative to the case presented
in the main paper, the results similarly suggest that the majority of outﬂow is from the
four largest locations, but display increased recommendations to smaller locations.

S4.3.2 Constant Compliance Rate

In the body of the paper, we present results where we vary the compliance rate π as
a function of income. Speciﬁcally, we specify an upper bound πmax to the individuals
with the lowest actual income before linearly interpolating to the value π = 0 across the
entire income distribution. Thus, each individual receives a heterogeneous compliance
parameter πi, and the average compliance rate in a particular simulation run is reported
as πmax/2.

To ensure that results are not driven by this modeling decision, we repeat our sim-
ulations with a constant compliance rate in an individual simulation run.
In each of
these tests, we set a single π that represents each individuals’ likelihood of complying,
which is constant across income. We present these results in Figure S6, which reveals
very similar potential average gains in income across each simulation.

S4.3.3 Removing Economic Regions

In order to evaluate whether the gains we report in the main analysis of our paper are
being driven by a speciﬁc subset of ERs, we rerun the simulations exactly as described in
the body of the paper but remove from consideration certain subsets of landing locations.
That is, if an individual ‘complies’ with probability πi, we limit the set of locations they
can potentially move to in the simulation.

We begin by specifying three alternative models, in each case excluding a subset
of ERs that could potentially drive our results.
In the ﬁrst alternative model, we do
not allow individuals to move to the largest ERs, those with a population greater than
1,500,000 according to the 2016 census. In the second, we extend this to include large and
growing ERs, deﬁned as all ERs with a population greater than 1,000,000 and a growth
rate in population from the 2011 to 2016 census above 5%. In the third, we remove the
smallest ERs – those with a population less than 100,000 in the 2016 census. A full list of
removed ERs in each speciﬁcation is listed in the Table S3 below.

The results of these alternative model runs are found in Figure S7. Overall, these
plots demonstrate the gains we ﬁnd in our main analysis are not driven by one of the
ER subsets we deﬁne above. In the top-left panel, we presents results from a simulation
considering “All ERs,” effectively replicating our main results in the body of our paper.
In each of the three alternative speciﬁcations, we see that average gains across each
compliance and preference parameter do not substantially differ from this baseline.

35

Another way we check against the impact of a single ER on our core results is by run-
ning a “leave-one-out” robustness check. In this test, we run a series of 52 simulations, in
each case dropping one of the 52 total ERs from consideration. Other than removing this
single ER from the choice set, the simulations are run exactly as described in the body
of the paper. For simulation, we calculate the mean gain in annual income. We present
the average of these gains and the 95% conﬁdence interval across the 52 simulations in
Figure S8. We again see little change to our core results, demonstrating no single ER
drives the average gain in income in our simulations.

36

S5 Figures

37

Figure S1: Variable Importance Statistics for Tuned Location Models (Principal Appli-
cants)

38

Cape Breton (NS)P. Edward Isl. (PE)W. Coast (NL)S. Cst., Nt. Dame (NL)Interlake (MB)Southwest (MB)S. Cen., N. Cen. (MB)Southeast (MB)Edmundston (NB)Campbellton (NB)Annap. Valley (NS)N. Shore (NS)Parklands, N. (MB)Northwest (ON)Stratford (ON)Fredericton (NB)Saint John (NB)Moncton (NB)Southern (NS)Yukon (YT)Northeast (ON)Muskoka (ON)Kingston (ON)Avalon Pen. (NL)N.W. Territories (NT)P. Alb., Northern (SK)Yorkton (SK)Swift Current (SK)Saskatoon (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Regina (SK)Northeast (BC)Windsor (ON)N. Coast, Nech. (BC)Cariboo (BC)Kootenay (BC)Lethbridge (AB)Red Deer (AB)Vancouver Isl. (BC)Camrose (AB)Hamilton (ON)London (ON)Thompson (BC)Halifax (NS)Toronto (ON)Edmonton (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Calgary (AB)Banff, Athab. (AB)Ottawa (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Kitchener (ON)010203040010203040010203040010203040010203040010203040010203040010203040Speaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitSpeaks EnglishLanding YearSpeaks FrenchPrefilerExpress EntryLanding MonthFamily SizeER UnemploymentImmig. CategoryEducationBirth RegionER PopulationGenderAgeSkill LevelCitizenshipOccupationTemp. Resid. PermitRelative Variable ImportanceFigure S2: Calibration Plot: Model Fit for Express Entry Clients

39

050000100000150000200000050000100000150000200000Prediction (CAD)Outcome (CAD)0100020003000050000100000150000200000Prediction (CAD)Freq.050010001500050000100000150000200000Actual (CAD)Freq.Figure S3: Estimated Average Income Gains and Shifts in Arrival Locations with CPI
Adjustments

40

lllllll100020003000400051015Percent of EE cases who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10Follow Recommendation: 15%  ERs Considered: AllFollow Recommendation: 10%  ERs Considered: Top 25Follow Recommendation: 5%  ERs Considered: Top 15020004000020004000020004000S. Coast and Notre Dame (NL)W. Coast (NL)Prince Edward Island (PE)Cape Breton (NS)N. Shore (NS)Annapolis Valley (NS)Campbellton (NB)Edmundston (NB)Southeast (MB)S. Central and N. Central (MB)Southwest (MB)Interlake (MB)Yukon (YT)Southern (NS)Moncton (NB)Saint John (NB)Fredericton (NB)Stratford (ON)Northwest (ON)Parklands and North (MB)Swift Current (SK)Yorkton (SK)Prince Albert and Northern (SK)N.W. Territories (NT)Avalon Peninsula (NL)Kingston (ON)Muskoka (ON)Northeast (ON)Kootenay (BC)Cariboo (BC)North Coast and Nechako (BC)Windsor (ON)Northeast (BC)Regina (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Saskatoon (SK)Halifax (NS)Thompson (BC)London (ON)Hamilton (ON)Camrose (AB)Vancouver Island (BC)Red Deer (AB)Lethbridge (AB)Kitchener (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Ottawa (ON)Banff and Athabasca (AB)Calgary (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Edmonton (AB)Toronto (ON)Number of EE CasesActualCounterfactualFigure S4: Estimated Average Income Gains and Shifts in Arrival Locations for Principal
Applicant and Spouse Model

41

lllllll1000200051015Percent of EE cases who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10Follow Recommendation: 15%  ERs Considered: AllFollow Recommendation: 10%  ERs Considered: Top 25Follow Recommendation: 5%  ERs Considered: Top 15020004000020004000020004000S. Coast and Notre Dame (NL)W. Coast (NL)Prince Edward Island (PE)Cape Breton (NS)N. Shore (NS)Annapolis Valley (NS)Campbellton (NB)Edmundston (NB)Southeast (MB)S. Central and N. Central (MB)Southwest (MB)Interlake (MB)Yukon (YT)Southern (NS)Moncton (NB)Saint John (NB)Fredericton (NB)Stratford (ON)Northwest (ON)Parklands and North (MB)Swift Current (SK)Yorkton (SK)Prince Albert and Northern (SK)N.W. Territories (NT)Avalon Peninsula (NL)Kingston (ON)Muskoka (ON)Northeast (ON)Kootenay (BC)Cariboo (BC)North Coast and Nechako (BC)Windsor (ON)Northeast (BC)Regina (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Saskatoon (SK)Halifax (NS)Thompson (BC)London (ON)Hamilton (ON)Camrose (AB)Vancouver Island (BC)Red Deer (AB)Lethbridge (AB)Kitchener (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Ottawa (ON)Banff and Athabasca (AB)Calgary (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Edmonton (AB)Toronto (ON)Number of EE CasesActualCounterfactualFigure S5: Movement Under Various Simulation Parameters

42

Follow Recommendation: 15%  ERs Considered: AllFollow Recommendation: 10%  ERs Considered: AllFollow Recommendation: 5%  ERs Considered: All020004000020004000020004000S. Coast and Notre Dame (NL)W. Coast (NL)Prince Edward Island (PE)Cape Breton (NS)N. Shore (NS)Annapolis Valley (NS)Campbellton (NB)Edmundston (NB)Southeast (MB)S. Central and N. Central (MB)Southwest (MB)Interlake (MB)Yukon (YT)Southern (NS)Moncton (NB)Saint John (NB)Fredericton (NB)Stratford (ON)Northwest (ON)Parklands and North (MB)Swift Current (SK)Yorkton (SK)Prince Albert and Northern (SK)N.W. Territories (NT)Avalon Peninsula (NL)Kingston (ON)Muskoka (ON)Northeast (ON)Kootenay (BC)Cariboo (BC)North Coast and Nechako (BC)Windsor (ON)Northeast (BC)Regina (SK)Winnipeg (MB)Saskatoon (SK)Halifax (NS)Thompson (BC)London (ON)Hamilton (ON)Camrose (AB)Vancouver Island (BC)Red Deer (AB)Lethbridge (AB)Kitchener (ON)Wood Buffalo (AB)Ottawa (ON)Banff and Athabasca (AB)Calgary (AB)Lower Mainland (BC)Edmonton (AB)Toronto (ON)Number of EE CasesActualCounterfactualFigure S6: Constant Compliance Rate: Estimated Average Income Gains. N=17,640

43

lllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:l251510Figure S7: Removing Subsets of ERs. N=17,640

44

lllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10All ERs Consideredlllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10No Movement to Smaller ERslllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10No Movement to Largest ERslllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10No Movement to Large and Growing ERsFigure S8: Average Gains Across 52 Leave-One-Out Simulations. N=17,640

45

lllllll0100020003000400051015Percent of Economic Migrants who follow recommendationAverage Gain in Annual Adjusted Income (CAD)ERs Considered:lTop 25Top 15Top 10Range of Mean Gains: Leave−One−OutS6 Tables

46

Source
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF

PNRF
PNRF

PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF

Description

Quebec program in-
dicator

Intended
Economic
Region (ER) of land-
ing

Express Entry ﬂag

Admission category

3-digit expected occu-
pation code

PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
PNRF
Tax

Tax

Individual
employ-
ment income (exclud-
ing self-employment)
Whether an individ-
ual ﬁled a return on a
TR permit
LFS
Quarterly population
External Average yearly rental

LFS

price
Quarterly unemploy-
ment

Original Variable Name
COUNTRY_BIRTH1,4
COUNTRY_CITIZENSHIP1,4
CSQ_IND2

DEATH_INDICATOR2
DESTINATION_ER1,2,3

EDUCATION_QUALIFICATION1
EXPRESS_ENTRY_IND1,2
FAMILY_STATUS1,2
GENDER1
IMMIGRATION_CATEGORY_CENSUS1,2
LANDING_AGE1
LANDING_MONTH1
LANDING_YEAR1,2
LEVEL_OF_EDUCATION1
NOC3_CD111

NUMBER_STUDY_PERMITS1
NUMBER_WORK_PERMITS1
OFFICIAL_LANGUAGE1
SKILL_LEVEL_CD111
EI___I1

PREFILER_IND1

POPULATION_ER1
PRICE_INDEX3

UNEMPLOYMENT_ER1

1 = Variable used to train machine learning models
2 = Variable used to subset the data
3 = Variable used to adjust ﬁnal predictions

4 = Variable aggregated to the continent level for modeling

Table S1: Variable Names

47

mean

sd

min

max

mean

sd

min

max

English: No
English: Yes
French: No
French: Yes
Preﬁler: No
Preﬁler: Yes
TR: No TR
TR: Study
TR: Study+Work
TR: Work

0.02
0.98
0.97
0.03
0.13
0.87
0.12
0.01
0.31
0.57

0.14
0.14
0.16
0.16
0.34
0.34
0.32
0.09
0.46
0.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Annual Income per Head (CAD)
Age
Birth Region: The Americas
Birth Region: Europe
Birth Region: Africa
Birth Region: Asia
Birth Region: Oceania
Citizenship: United States
Citizenship: Mexico
Citizenship: Jamaica
Citizenship: Brazil
Citizenship: France
Citizenship: Germany
Citizenship: Poland
Citizenship: Russia
Citizenship: Ukraine
Citizenship: Ireland
Citizenship: United Kingdom
Citizenship: Nigeria
Citizenship: South Africa
Citizenship: Iran
Citizenship: China
Citizenship: South Korea
Citizenship: Philippines
Citizenship: India
Citizenship: Pakistan
Citizenship: Australia
Citizenship: Other
Education: Less than BA
Education: BA
Education: MA
Education: PhD
Male
Female
Unit Size
Landing Year: 2015
Landing Year: 2016
Landing Month (1-12)
Category: Skilled Worker program
Category: Skilled Trades program
Category: Canadian Experience Class
Industry: ArtCultureSport
Industry: Computer
Industry: Education_Law_Govt
Industry: Extraction
Industry: Finance
Industry: FoodTourism
Industry: Health
Industry: Management_Misc
Industry: ManualTrades
Industry: Manufacturing
Industry: NatResources_9980
Industry: No_Info
Industry: Sales
Industry: Services
Industry: SocialServices
Industry: Technical
Skill Level: Managerial
Skill Level: Professionals
Skill Level: Skilled and Technical

49900.00
33.15
0.09
0.24
0.06
0.59
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.06
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.03
0.14
0.28
0.02
0.02
0.18
0.41
0.27
0.28
0.03
0.67
0.33
1.43
0.29
0.71
7.40
0.46
0.09
0.45
0.04
0.20
0.07
0.00
0.09
0.12
0.04
0.03
0.10
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.18
0.01
0.03
0.10
0.35
0.55

33600.00
5.99
0.29
0.43
0.23
0.49
0.14
0.17
0.13
0.11
0.11
0.16
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.12
0.21
0.24
0.15
0.10
0.09
0.20
0.16
0.35
0.45
0.12
0.14
0.38
0.49
0.44
0.45
0.18
0.47
0.47
0.50
0.45
0.45
3.40
0.50
0.29
0.50
0.20
0.40
0.25
0.03
0.29
0.33
0.21
0.16
0.31
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.22
0.38
0.12
0.18
0.30
0.48
0.50

0
22
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

246600
65
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
12
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Table S2: Descriptive Statistics: Express Entry Principal Applicants

48

Name Large Rapidly Growing Small

Toronto X
Lower Mainland X

ER_CODE
3530
5920
Calgary
4830
Edmonton
4860
Kitchener
3540
Interlake
4660
Parklands and North
4680
Banff and Athabasca
4840
Yorkton
4740
Edmundston
1350
N.E. (B.C.)
5980
4620
S. Central and N. Central
5960 North Coast and Nechako
S. Central and N. Central
4640
N.W. Territories
6110
4670
Parklands and North
5970 North Coast and Nechako
4760 Prince Albert and Northern
S. Coast and Notre Dame
1020
Yukon
6010

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Table S3: Removing Economic Regions Robustness Check

49

