Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

An Economic Perspective on Predictive Maintenance of 
Filtration Units 

Tan Jing Yu, Denis 
Nanyang Business School 

Assoc Prof Law Wing-Keung, Adrian 
School of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering

rate 

the  availability  of 
the  adoption 

Abstract  -  This  paper  provides  an  economic 
perspective  on  the  predictive  maintenance  of 
filtration units. The rise of predictive maintenance is 
possible  due  to  the  growing  trend  of  industry  4.0 
inexpensive  sensors. 
and 
However, 
for  predictive 
maintenance  by  companies  remains  low.  The 
majority of companies are sticking to corrective and 
preventive maintenance. This is not due to a lack of 
information  on  the  technical  implementation  of 
predictive  maintenance,  with  an  abundance  of 
research  papers  on  state-of-the-art  machine 
learning  algorithms  that  can  be  used  effectively. 
The main issue is that most upper management has 
not yet been fully convinced of the idea of predictive 
maintenance.  The  economic  value  of 
the 
implementation  has  to  be  linked  to  the  predictive 
maintenance program for better justification by the 
management.  

In this study, three machine learning models were 
trained  to  demonstrate  the  economic  value  of 
predictive maintenance. Data was collected from a 
testbed  located  at  the  Singapore  University  of 
Technology  and  Design.  The 
testbed  closely 
resembles  a  real-world  water  treatment  plant.  A 
cost-benefit  analysis  coupled  with  Monte  Carlo 
simulation  was  proposed.  It  provided  a  structured 
approach to document potential costs and savings 
by 
implementing  a  predictive  maintenance 
program.  The  simulation  incorporated  real-world 
risk  into  a  financial  model.  Financial  figures  were 
adapted  from  CITIC  Envirotech  Ltd,  a  leading 
membrane-based 
environmental 
solutions  provider.  Two  scenarios  were  used  to 
elaborate  on  the  economic  values  of  predictive 
maintenance. Overall, this study seeks to bridge the 
gap  between  technical  and  business  domains  of 
predictive maintenance.  

integrated 

Keywords 

– 

industry 

maintenance,  machine 
business, proof of concept, cost-benefit analysis 

learning, 

4.0, 

predictive 
filtration  unit, 

1 INTRODUCTION 

the  advancement  of 

With 
industry  4.0  and 
inexpensive  sensors,  predictive  maintenance  has 
become  more  than  ever  possible.  Industry  4.0 
seeks  to  fusion  machines  with  data  to  improve 
overall 
maintenance 
management [1].  This movement serves to enable 

performance 

and 

real-time remote monitoring of physical assets, live 
tracking  of  products,  and  streamlining  the  entire 
production process [2]. Companies are increasingly 
aware  of  the  benefits  of  predictive  maintenance. 
Yet,  the  adoption  rate  remains  low.  According  to 
Emory  University  Future  of  IIoT  Research  Study 
and Presenso, only 35% of industry players deploy 
advanced statistical modeling or machine learning 
for predictive analytics [3]. 

There  exists  an  abundance  of  research  papers 
purely focusing on the technical implementation of 
predictive maintenance [4, 5]. They provide detailed 
methods describing the use of statistical modeling, 
time  series  forecasting,  or  machine  learning  to 
predict faults. These are useful for companies that 
have already implemented predictive maintenance 
and  are  looking  to  advance  further.  However,  as 
mentioned earlier, most companies have not even 
begun 
implementing  predictive  maintenance. 
Technical details are of lower importance to these 
companies. The more pressing issue at hand is to 
the  economic  value  of  a  predictive 
justify 
maintenance  program.  Upgrading  to  a  predictive 
maintenance  program  is  a  long-term  plan  and 
requires substantial costs. If the management does 
lack  of  cost 
idea  due 
not  buy 
justifications,  no  amount  of  state-of-the-art 
predictive maintenance models will suffice. 

into 

the 

to 

to 

treatment 

the  water 

The scope of this study encompasses the technical 
and  business  aspects  of  predictive  maintenance 
implementation.  The  focus  is  on  bridging  the  gap 
between  the  two  aspects.  The  study  assumes 
reference 
industry, 
specifically  the  ultra-filtration  stage.  The  model 
development  stage  simply  serves  to  illustrate  the 
proof of concept and is not the main focus. There is 
no intention to promote any technical models here 
as there are plenty of such resources out there. A 
financial  model  is  also  provided  to  analyze  the 
implementing  a  predictive 
economic  side  of 
maintenance  program.  A  discussion  will  be  made 
linking the technical and financial models. 

The  remaining  of  this  paper  is  structured  in  the 
following manner. Section 2 discusses the literature 
review of common maintenance strategies and the 
prospects  of  predictive  maintenance.  Section  3 
describes  and  explains  the  methods  used  in  this 
study to bridge the gap between the technical and 
business  aspects  of  predictive  maintenance. 
Section  4  shows  the  results  obtained.  Section  5 
discusses  the  implications  of  the  results  and  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

limitations of the study. Lastly, Section 6 concludes 
the study done and outlines possible future related 
work. 

2 LITERATURE REVIEW 

in 

the  engineering 

the  operation  cost. 

Maintenance  of  plant  and  equipment  frequently 
occurs 
industries.  These 
maintenance  operations  usually  take  up  around 
15% to 70% of the companies’ overall expenses [6]. 
In  other  words,  the  maintenance  cost  can  be  a 
significant  part  of 
In  an 
increasingly  competitive 
landscape,  companies 
need  to  constantly  find  ways  to  cut  costs  or  risk 
losing  to  their  competitors.  Currently,  corrective 
maintenance  and  preventive  maintenance  are  the 
dominant maintenance strategies adopted by most 
companies. However, these two techniques suffer 
from  a  lack  of  foresight  [7].  When  the  equipment 
suffers  from  an  unanticipated  breakdown,  the 
factory or plant has to halt the production process 
until the equipment is fixed. This negatively impacts 
the  revenue  of  the  company  or  even  the  risk  of 
losing its client due to late deliveries. 
Due to the weaknesses of corrective maintenance 
and preventive  maintenance, they have  given rise 
to  predictive  maintenance.  Unlike  the  other  two, 
follows  a  proactive 
predictive  maintenance 
approach.  Sensors  are  utilized  to  monitor  the 
values of the physical assets and they are crucial to 
the  implementation  of  predictive  maintenance  [8]. 
They  detect  and  provide  various  information  such 
as  time,  temperature,  pressure,  length,  mass, 
angle, length. The values can be displayed locally 
at  the  sensors  displays  or  sent  to  an  external 
network for further analysis [9].  

There are two well-known concepts regarding how 
sensors  provide  signals  on  faults  [10].  The  first 
concept  involves  looking  at  faults  from  a  data-
centric  view.  Essentially,  the  values  from  the 
sensors are used to provide signals on impending 
faults. There are 4 main faults. Outlier refers to an 
isolated  data  point  based  on  other  data  points. 
Gradient [11] and distance from other readings [12] 
are  popular  measures  to  detect  outliers.  Spike 
refers to multiple data points forming an unexpected 
uptrend,  usually  within  a  short  period.  “Stuck-at” 
refers to data points with little to no variation for an 
extended  period.  This  phenomenon  can  happen 
after a spike. High noise or variance refers to data 
points that vary wildly. The underlying trend of the 
data  might  not  be  discovered.  This  should  be 
differentiated  from  the  usual  noise  effect  that  is 
common to most sensor data. The second concept 
involves  looking  at  faults  from  a  system-centric 
view. Instead of focusing on the data, it examines 
the  sensor  and  attempts  to  discover  any  physical 
malfunctions.  The  malfunctions  are  linked  back  to 
the  data.  Both  the  data-centric  view  and  system-
centric view are closely interlinked with each other. 
The  4  faults  mentioned  above  can  be  detected 
through  either  concept  or  a  combination  of  both. 

Given that it is the era of big data and industry 4.0, 
the data-centric view has risen in popularity rapidly. 
Therefore,  most 
predictive  maintenance 
implementations are headed towards this path. 

There  are  4  distinct  methods  for  fault  detection 
which  enable 
the  data-centric  approach.  As 
discussed  in  [13],  they  are  rule-based  methods, 
estimation-based  methods, 
time-series-based 
methods, and learning-based methods. Rule-based 
methods  require  extensive  use  of  domain-specific 
knowledge  to  set  constraints.  For  example,  if  the 
sensor  reading  rises  above  or  below  a  specific 
threshold,  a  fault  signal  is  produced.  Estimation-
based  methods  make  use  of  multiple  similar 
sensors  that  are  correlated.  As  a  result,  any 
individual sensor measurements can be estimated 
using the other sensor measurements. Time-series-
based  methods  assume 
inherent  non-
randomness  of  data.  It  utilizes  concepts  such  as 
stationarity and autocorrelation to model the sensor 
measurements.  A  comparison  can  be  made 
between the actual values and the predicted values 
to  detect  any  possible  faults  with  the  system. 
Learning-based  methods  use  machine  learning  to 
predict  continuous  values  or  classify  faults.  The 
data is usually split into training data and validation 
data. With a sufficient amount of data to represent 
normal  and  abnormal  behaviors,  learning-based 
methods can provide promising results. 

the 

3 METHODS 

This  study  is  conducted  using  a  proof  of  concept 
approach. There are 4 main steps involved in this 
study.  The  first  step  involves  collecting  data  to 
facilitate  the  process  of  building  a  predictive 
maintenance model. The second step involves the 
machine learning model development process after 
data collection. The third step involves the creation 
of  a  financial  model  to  perform  financial  analysis 
and simulations. The fourth step attempts to link the 
predictive  maintenance  model  to  the  financial 
model.  Details  of  each  step  are  further  outlined 
below. 

3.1 EXPERIMENTS AND DATA 
COLLECTION 

Experiments and collection of data were performed 
at  the  Secure  Water  Treatment  (SWaT)  testbed 
located at the Singapore University of Technology 
and  Design  (SUTD).  The  testbed  provides  a  
platform that simulates a real-world water treatment 
plant.  It  has  a  physical  and  cyber  portion.  In  this 
study, the focus is on the physical portion. There are 
6 stages in the physical process: raw water intake; 
chemical  dosing  pre-treatment;  ultra-filtration; 
dechlorination  using  ultraviolet 
lamps;  reverse 
osmosis;  backwash  process.  The  experiments 
mainly 
the  ultra-filtration  stage  and 
simulations of sensor values.  

involved 

 
 
Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

In  addition  to  the  6  stages  of  the  physical  water 
treatment plant, the experiment setup also involved 
the  usage  of  Allen-Bradley  Programmable  Logic 
Controllers  (PLCs),  Human  Machine  Interfaces 
(HMIs),  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition 
(SCADA) workstation and a  Historian. The SCADA 
system makes available the sensor data during the 
operation of the testbed. The Historian records the 
sensor  data  which  can  be  retrieved  by 
the 
researchers after the experiment.  

An experiment started by switching on the testbed 
system. This initiated stage 1 of the water treatment 
process, i.e. the raw water intake stage. Under no 
interference  from  researchers,  the  entire  system 
goes  through  normal  operation.  However,  most 
researchers are not interested in normal operations. 
In  this  case,  various  attack  scenarios  can  be 
performed  using  the  HMI.  Changes  can  also  be 
made to the entire physical process by changing the 
PLC  code.  However,  this  is  not  done  here.  The 
focus of the experiments for this study was on the 
predictive  maintenance 
through 
simulation of values. The system takes around 20 
minutes to stabilize after switching on. The values 
should  preferably  be  changed  after  the  system 
stabilized  to  avoid  excessive  noise  factor.  For  the 
present experiments, the value was changed for the 
differential  pressure  indicator  transmitter  (DPIT) 
sensor in the ultra-filtration stage. The alteration of 
the  value  was  performed  5  times  throughout  the 
entire duration of the experiment. The sequence of 
value simulation is presented in Table 1. 

scenarios 

Table 1 Sequence of value simulation 

The experiment lasted approximately 145 minutes. 
The  final  dataset  was  exported  as  a  comma-
separated values (CSV) file. The dataset consisted 
of  8701  rows  and  82  columns  excluding  the 
headings. 

3.2 PREDICTIVE MAINTENANCE 
MODELS DEVELOPMENT 

With the comma-separated values file obtained, 
a 
few  predictive  maintenance  models  were 
developed  thereafter.  The  key  steps  taken  in  the 
model  development  process  are  described  here. 
Python (programming  language) was used for the 
entire process. The initial step consisted of loading 

the CSV file as a DataFrame object for easier data 
manipulation. Data cleaning was then performed by 
checking  and  removing  any  null  values.  The  CSV 
file contained some “Bad Input” values which were 
removed.  The  data  types  of  columns  were  mostly 
changed  to  floating-point  numbers  except  for  the 
timestamp  column.  Exploratory  data  analysis 
followed 
thereafter.  Time  series  plots  were 
visualized  for  columns  belonging  to  the  ultra-
filtration  stage.  The  next  step  would  be  feature 
extraction.  The  differential  pressure 
indicating 
transmitter  (DPIT301)  was  chosen  as  the  primary 
feature  as 
the  key  parameter 
changed  during  the  experiments.  Lag  features 
would be extracted from this primary feature. Lag 5 
to lag 30 were chosen (lag n  meant an  offset of n-
seconds). Next, a time series split was performed to 
obtain  multiple  training  and  test  sets.  Figure  1 
shows a visual representation. A total of 5 splits was 
used. 

it  represented 

Figure 1 Time series split 

Source: [14] 

For  the  model  building  stage,  3  different  types  of 
models  were  used.  They  were  linear  regression, 
random  forest  regressor,  and  gradient  boosting 
regressor.  A  model  was  trained  once  per  time 
series split. This was repeated for all 3 regressors. 
3.3 FINANCIAL MODELING 
The financial modeling process seeks to create an 
abstract  representation  of  an  actual  company’s 
financial statement [15]. A cost-benefit analysis was 
chosen as the financial model to illustrate the proof 
of  concept.  The  financial  template  used  for  the 
analysis  mainly  took  reference  from  [16].  As 
mentioned earlier, the experiments were conducted 
in a testbed. Therefore, no financial figures could be 
obtained from the testbed itself. A possible solution 
was  to  come  up  with  representative  figures. 
However, it would be better to use figures from an 
actual company. This would help to achieve a more 
robust  financial  analysis  and  simulation.  For  this 
study,  CITIC  Envirotech  Ltd  was  chosen  as  the 
company  to  be  modeled  after.  It  is  a  leading 
membrane-based 
environmental 
solutions provider mainly engaged in environmental 
services. Most of the financial figures were adopted 
from its 2018 annual report [17]. Other figures were 

integrated 

 
 
 
 
 
However, this study is interested in bridging the gap 
between  the  technical  and  business  aspects.  To 
to 
achieve 
this, 
elaborate  on 
the 
preventive 
predictive 
maintenance.  

two  scenarios  are  designed 
the  differences  between 

maintenance 

and 

The  first  scenario  illustrates  the  avoidance  of 
maintenance  due  to  the  predictive  maintenance 
model signaling that no fault is likely to occur in the 
next  X  period.  In  contrast  to  the  preventive 
maintenance  cycle  which  initiates  maintenance 
based on a fixed schedule, predictive maintenance 
can delay unnecessary maintenance which results 
in  a  sub-optimal  operational  time  of  the  water 
treatment plant.  

The  second  scenario  illustrates  the  avoidance  of 
unanticipated  breakdown.  The  usual  30  minutes 
preventive maintenance cycle has the possibility of 
missing out on within-cycle failures. An unexpected 
event can cause the pressure of the filtration unit to 
spike  up  to  an  unacceptable  range  within  a  short 
period.  If  the  predictive  maintenance  model  can 
forecast  this  spike  in  pressure  fast  enough,  the 
system  can  be  halted  swiftly.  Thereafter, 
maintenance  can  be  carried  out.  Catastrophic 
failure of the filtration unit is avoided as a result. By 
avoiding  an  extended  period  of  downtime  for  the 
water  treatment  plant,  significant  loss  of  revenue 
can be prevented. 

4 

 RESULTS 

trained  machine 

The 
learning  models  were 
evaluated  using  root  mean  square  error  (RMSE). 
RMSE  is  a  standard  statistical  metric  used  to 
measure  the  standard  deviation  of  the  prediction 
errors. The formula for RMSE is defined as follow: 

RMSE = √1
n

 ∑ (yi - ŷ)2

n
i=1

(2)            

where n is the number of data points, i is the index, 
yi is the actual value, and ŷ is the predicted value. 
The evaluation results of  the models on each test 
set are summarized in Table 2. The average RMSE 
of each model is also presented. 

Table 2 Root mean square error results for all 3 models 

Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

either  obtained  online  or  derived  from  existing 
figures in the annual report. 

of 

for 

technique 

assessment 

The  cost-benefit  analysis  aims  to  serve  as  a  non-
biased 
the 
predictive  maintenance 
implementation 
programs. Ideally, the program manager can make 
decisions  based  on  quantitative  evidence  backed 
by sound financial models. The template allows the 
manager  to  input  any  known  potential  costs  and 
savings.  Unquantifiable  costs  and  savings  should 
be clearly stated in the assumptions or notes. The 
core  concept  of  the  financial  model  is  to  present 
numbers  accurately  and 
transparently  with 
reasonable assumptions.  

Microsoft Excel was used to create the cost-benefit 
analysis  template.  The  template  utilized  three 
spreadsheets.  The  first  spreadsheet  detailed  the 
cost  of  implementing  the  predictive  maintenance 
program.  The  second  spreadsheet  detailed  the 
direct  cost  savings  of  the  program.  The  third 
spreadsheet detailed the indirect cost savings of the 
program.  All  costs  and  savings  are  calculated 
based on an annual basis. The salient features of 
each spreadsheet are outlined below. 

The first spreadsheet consists of 3 main categories: 
equipment,  supplies/inventories,  labor.  The  costs 
can be either variable only, fixed only, or both. The 
second  spreadsheet  details  the  reduction  in  costs 
attributed  to  operating  activities  and  financing 
activities.  A  one-off  gain  due  to  disposal  of 
equipment  and  supplies  specific  to  preventive 
third 
maintenance  was  also  assumed.  The 
spreadsheet  details  the  cost  savings  due  to  the 
avoidance  of 
lost  productivity  and  delay  of 
maintenance  cycles.  Monte  Carlo  simulation  was 
also  utilized  for  values  that  are  difficult  to  predict 
such  as 
indirect  cost  savings  and  certain 
subcategories of direct cost savings. The simulation 
helped  provide  a  probability  distribution  of 
outcomes  and  incorporated  risk  into  the  financial 
model. Refer to [18] for more details on the Monte 
Carlo simulation. The 3 spreadsheets are linked to 
model the net benefit or cost through the following 
equation: 

Net benefit (cost) = Total direct cost savings + Total 
indirect cost savings − Total cost of implementation  (1) 

It should be noted that the template is not meant to 
be  a  “once  and  for  all”  analysis.  When  hidden  or 
latent  costs  surface  throughout  the  predictive 
maintenance program, they should be reflected by 
updating the template. Companies can also expand 
upon  this  template  to  perform  more  complicated 
analyses  such  as  return  on  investment  or  internal 
rate of return calculations. 

3.4 LINKING PREDICTIVE 
MAINTENANCE MODEL TO FINANCIAL 
MODEL 

Individually, the predictive maintenance model and 
the  financial  model  are  powerful  tools  already. 

 
 
 
            
 
Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

the  cost-benefit  analysis,  Monte  Carlo 
For 
simulation  was  evaluated  to  be  suitable  for  4 
subcategories  of  both  direct  cost  categories  and 
indirect  cost  categories.  The  4  subcategories  are 
inspection cost savings, maintenance cost savings, 
avoidance  of  lost  revenue,  and  materials  cost 
savings. The results of the Monte Carlo simulation 
are  presented  in  Table  3.  The  summary  statistics 
shown 
include  average,  standard  deviation, 
maximum, and minimum. 

Table 3 Monte Carlo simulation for selected cost 
savings categories 

5 DISCUSSION 

differ 

might 

results 

technical 

less  on 

From the results of the 3 machine learning models, 
linear regression performed the best based on the 
evaluation metric root mean square error. Random 
forest  regressor  was  ranked  second  while  the 
gradient  boosting  regressor  ranked  last.  This  was 
not  unexpected  as  tree-based  models  are  well-
known  for  overfitting.  Moreover,  the  data  set  was 
not that large with around 8700 rows. As this study 
focuses 
implementation, 
hyperparameter  tuning  was  not  performed.  The 
comparison 
after 
hyperparameter tuning. A simple linear regression 
model has shown to be effective with the given data 
set.  The  advantages  of  these  machine  learning 
models  can  be  linked  back  to  the  2  scenarios 
mentioned in the methods section previously. With 
a reasonably low RMSE, the model can forecast the 
pressure values accurately. The manager can set a 
limit  value  for  the  sensor  based  on  domain 
knowledge.  For  example,  if  the  pressure  value  of 
transmitter 
the  differential  pressure 
exceeds  40  kPa,  maintenance  actions  have  to  be 
performed within the next 5 minutes. Otherwise, the 
water  treatment  plant  can  continue  running.  The 
delay of unnecessary maintenance would not only 
save costs but allow the plant to continue operating 
and  generate  additional 
revenue.  The  other 
scenario assumed the fact that equipment can fail 
rapidly  due  to  unexpected  events.  The  reactive 
nature  of  corrective  maintenance  and  preventive 
maintenance  would  not  be  ideal  here.  Predictive 
maintenance  would  allow  the  timely  detection  of 

indicating 

the  system 

pressure value exceeding its limit and immediately 
halt 
further  damage. 
to  prevent 
Maintenance  can  be  performed  and  the  system 
continues operating thereafter. A significant loss of 
revenue can also be avoided. Generally, the model 
development process was satisfactory and served 
its purpose in illustrating the proof of concept. 

to 

for 

from 

template  pushed 

financial 
for  managers 

template 
The  cost-benefit  analysis 
provided  a  structured  way 
to 
document all the potential costs and savings of the 
predictive  maintenance  program.  Although  it  was 
specific  to  the  water  treatment  industry,  it  can  be 
easily  generalized  to  any  other  similar  industries. 
transparency.  All 
The 
factors  could  be 
assumptions  or  unknown 
documented  down  and  made  known 
the 
management  or  potential  investors.  The  nature  of 
cost-benefit  analysis  was  such  that  only  relevant 
costs were included in the calculations. This meant 
sunk  costs  or  any  other  unavoidable  costs  were 
excluded 
if 
depreciation  or  research  and  development  costs 
were included in the financial analysis, a profitable 
project  might  turn  unprofitable.  This  would  cause 
the predictive maintenance program to be rejected 
by  the  management  without  a  doubt.  Thus,  cost-
benefit  analysis  seeks  to  avoid  such  situations.  It 
should be clear that performing this analysis does 
not  guarantee  that  the  predictive  maintenance 
project would be justifiable based on cost savings. 
Assumptions  are  inherent  to  all  financial  models. 
The  model  is  as  good  as  the  assumptions  made. 
However, the structured approach allows managers 
to quickly decide on whether to accept or reject the 
project.  Opportunity  costs  can  be  minimized  as  a 
result. 

the  analysis.  For  example, 

The  Monte  Carlo  simulation  was  proposed  as  an 
added function to the cost-benefit analysis financial 
template. The probabilistic distribution generated by 
the  simulation  served  various  purposes.  Firstly,  it 
models the inherent risk that most or all real-world 
companies  face.  Few  companies  can  judge  from 
the  onset  whether  a  new  project  would  be 
successful or not. The lack of certainty resulted in 
many prospective projects being rejected by upper 
management.  With  a  structured  financial  template 
that  outlines  in  detail  the  potential  costs  and 
savings, companies can gain better insights into the 
future  profitability  of  a  predictive  maintenance 
program.  Secondly,  the  simulation  encapsulates 
the  risk  of  machine  learning  models.  No  model  is 
completely  perfect  and  can  predict  all 
faults 
correctly. There are events where the filtration unit 
experiences a rapid rise in pressure but the model 
failed  to  detect  the  fault.  As  a  result,  the  water 
treatment  plant  has  to  halt  all  current  operations 
and  fix  the  issue.  The  downtime  experienced 
means  a  loss  of  revenue  for  the  company.  The 
expectation  that  any  machine  learning  model  can 
perform sub-optimally is incorporated into the cost-
benefit  analysis.  Lastly, 
the  presence  of  a 
probability  distribution  improves  cost  and  savings 

 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

transparency. A point estimate can be biased due 
to several reasons such as sampling bias or lack of 
detailed  information.  For  this  study,  the  lack  of 
opportunity  to  obtain  data  from  a  real  company 
resulted in greater uncertainty. Modeling a range of 
values  would  help  avoid  overly  optimistic  or 
pessimistic results. 

There are a few limitations to this study. As it was 
conducted using a proof of concept approach, the 
findings  are  mostly  theoretical.  Therefore,  reality 
could pan out very differently for some companies. 
Given  that  predictive  maintenance  programs  are 
long-term  in  nature,  a  cost-benefit  analysis  might 
not be sufficient for large publicly listed companies. 
This  is  because  these  companies  have  high 
opportunity costs for funds. The implementation of 
a predictive maintenance program requires a huge 
outlay of funds in the first few years. These funds 
investment 
could  have  been  used 
purposes.  As such, a  discounted cash flow (DCF) 
analysis  would  be  more  suitable 
these 
companies. DCF analysis evaluates an investment 
today  based  on  future  cash  flows.  However,  it  is 
difficult  for  an  outsider  to  obtain  a  company’s 
required  rate  of  return  on  investment.  Complex 
financial  analyses  could  not  be  made  as  a  result. 
The  data  obtained  from  the  testbed  was  not 
representative  of  an  actual  water  treatment  plant 
either. The physical process was extremely stable 
as it  was not treating water for public or  industrial 
use.  The  machine  learning  models  could  have 
presented  overly  optimistic  results  not  easily 
achievable in an actual water treatment plant. 

for  other 

for 

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

the 

The  proof  of  concept  approach  deployed  in  this 
study  has  shown 
immense  potential  of 
predictive  maintenance  in  the  water  treatment 
industry.  The  wider  industry  outlook  for  predictive 
maintenance is also very optimistic with the rise of 
industry  4.0  and  the  availability  of  inexpensive 
sensors.  This  study  has  successfully  bridged  the 
gap between the technical and business domains of 
predictive  maintenance.  A  few  machine  learning 
models  were  deployed  to  illustrate  the  proof  of 
concept.  A  cost-benefit  analysis  combined  with 
Monte  Carlo  analysis  has  provided  a  structured 
approach 
that 
incorporates  real-world  risk.  Possible  future  work 
includes  collaborating  with  an  actual  water 
treatment  company  to  obtain  more  realistic  data 
and  start  a  pilot  program  over  there.  A  deep 
understanding of a business could lead to a more 
predictive 
successful 
maintenance.  Overall,  this  study  has  provided  an 
economic perspective on predictive maintenance of 
filtration units. The limits of predictive maintenance 
know no bounds and the concepts employed in this 
study  can  hopefully  be  extended  to  future  studies 
as well. 

financial  model 

implementation 

to  build  a 

of 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  funding  support 
from  Nanyang  Technological  University  –  URECA 
Undergraduate  Research  Programme 
this 
research project. 

for 

I would like to thank my supervisor, Assoc Prof Law 
for  providing  valuable 
Wing-Keung,  Adrian 
guidance  and 
the  research  direction 
throughout  this  project.  I  would  also  like  to  thank 
Liuyang,  Yuying,  and  Giorgio  for  assisting  in  the 
data collection process and providing their insights 
on the project.  

framing 

REFERENCES 

[1] J. Lee, H. Kao and S. Yang, "Service Innovation 
and Smart Analytics for Industry 4.0 and Big Data 
Environment", Procedia  CIRP,  vol.  16,  pp.  3-8, 
2014. 10.1016/j.procir.2014.02.001  

[2]  F.  Almada-Lobo,  "The  Industry  4.0  revolution 
and the future of Manufacturing Execution Systems 
(MES)", Journal of Innovation Management, vol. 3, 
no.  4,  pp.  16-21,  2016.  10.24840/2183-
0606_003.004_0003 

[3] A. Jalan, "Future of IIOT Predictive Maintenance 
Research 
2018, 
https://www.presenso.com/blog/emory-research.  

Study", May 

[4]  C.  Okoh,  R.  Roy  and  J.  Mehnen,  "Predictive 
Through-Life 
Maintenance  Modelling 
Engineering Services", Procedia CIRP, vol. 59, pp. 
196-201, 2017. 10.1016/j.procir.2016.09.033 

for 

[5]  G.  Susto,  A.  Schirru,  S.  Pampuri,  S.  McLoone 
and  A.  Beghi,  "Machine  Learning  for  Predictive 
Maintenance: A Multiple Classifier Approach", IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 11, no. 
3, pp. 812-820, 2015. 10.1109/tii.2014.2349359  

[6]  M.  Bevilacqua  and  M.  Braglia,  "The  analytic 
hierarchy process applied to maintenance strategy 
selection", Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 
vol.  70,  no.  1,  pp.  71-83,  2000.10.1016/s0951-
8320(00)00047-8  

[7] A. Pektas and E. Pektas, "A Novel Scheme for 
Accurate  Remaining  Useful  Life  Prediction  for 
by  Using  Deep  Neural 
Industrial 
Network", International 
Artificial 
Intelligence & Applications, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 17-25, 
2018. 10.5121/ijaia.2018.9502  

Journal 

IoTs 

of 

[8] S. Kennedy, "New tools for PdM", March 2006, 
https://www.plantservices.com/articles/2006/072/.  

[9]  M.  Rouse,  "What  is  sensor?  -  Definition  from 
2012, 
WhatIs.com", July 
https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/sensor.  

[10]  K.  Ni  et  al.,  "Sensor  Network  Data  Fault 
Types", ACM  Transactions  on  Sensor  Networks, 
vol. 
2009. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.183.3720&rep=rep1&type=pdf 

11-27, 

no. 

pp. 

5, 

3, 

 
 
Proceedings of the URECA@NTU 2019-20 

[11] N. Ramanathan et al., “Rapid Deployment with 
Confidence:  Calibration  and  Fault  Detection  in 
Environmental  Sensor  Networks,”  Tech.  Rep., 
2006. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8v26b5qh 

[12]  B.  Sheng, Q. Li,  W. Mao and  W. Jin, "Outlier 
detection  in  sensor  networks", Proceedings  of  the 
8th ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc 
networking 
2007. 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1288107.1288137 

computing, 

and 

[13]  K.  Tomás  and  B.  Tomáš,  "Early  Failure 
Detection  for  Predictive  Maintenance  of  Sensor 
Parts", ITAT,  vol.  1649,  pp.  123-130,  2016. 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1649/123.pdf 

[14]  C.  Gray,  "Stock  Prediction  with  ML:  Walk-
forward  Modeling  —  The  Alpha  Scientist", July 
2018, 
https://alphascientist.com/walk_forward_model_bu
ilding.html. 

"How  Financial  Modeling 
[15]  C.  Kopp, 
Works", June 
2019, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/financialmod
eling.asp. 

method 

[16]  R.  Wurzbach,  "A  web-based  cost  benefit 
predictive 
analysis 
the 
maintenance", Inframation 
Thermographer’s 
2000.  
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.121.3672&rep=rep1&type=pdf 

Conference, 

2000, 

for 

[17] CITIC Envirotech Ltd, "New breakthrough New 
Possibilities Annual Report 2018", 2018. 

[18]  W.  Kenton,  "Monte  Carlo  Simulation", June 
2019, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/montecarlo
simulation.asp. 

 
 
 
 
