Large-scale neuromorphic optoelectronic computing 

with a reconfigurable diffractive processing unit 

Tiankuang  Zhou1,2,5,  Xing  Lin1,2,4,#,  Jiamin  Wu1,2,  Yitong  Chen1,2,  Hao  Xie1,2,  Yipeng  Li1,2, 
Jintao Fan1,2, Huaqiang Wu3,4,7, Lu Fang2,3,6,# and Qionghai Dai1,2,3,# 

1Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 
2Institute for Brain and Cognitive Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 
3Beijing  National  Research  Center  for  Information  Science  and  Technology,  Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China 
4Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chips, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 
5Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China 
6Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 
7Institute of Microelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 

# Correspondence: lin-x@tsinghua.edu.cn, fanglu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, qhdai@tsinghua.edu.cn 

Application-specific optical processors have been considered disruptive technologies for 
modern  computing  that  can  fundamentally  accelerate  the  development  of  artificial 
intelligence  (AI)  by  offering  substantially  improved  computing  performance.  Recent 
advancements in optical neural network architectures for neural information processing 
have  been  applied  to  perform  various  machine  learning  tasks.  However,  the  existing 
architectures  have  limited  complexity  and  performance;  and  each  of  them  requires  its 
own  dedicated  design  that  cannot  be  reconfigured  to  switch  between  different  neural 
network  models  for  different  applications  after  deployment.  Here,  we  propose  an 
optoelectronic  reconfigurable  computing  paradigm  by  constructing  a  diffractive 
processing unit (DPU) that can efficiently support different neural networks and achieve 
a  high  model  complexity  with  millions  of  neurons.  It  allocates  almost  all  of  its 
computational operations optically and achieves extremely high speed of data modulation 
and  large-scale  network  parameter  updating  by  dynamically  programming  optical 
modulators  and  photodetectors.  We  demonstrated  the  reconfiguration  of  the  DPU  to 
implement various diffractive feedforward and recurrent neural networks and developed 
a novel adaptive training approach to circumvent the system imperfections. We applied 
the trained networks for high-speed classifying of handwritten digit images and human 
action  videos  over  benchmark  datasets,  and  the  experimental  results  revealed  a 
comparable classification accuracy to the electronic computing approaches. Furthermore, 
our  prototype  system  built  with  off-the-shelf  optoelectronic  components  surpasses  the 
performance  of  state-of-the-art  graphics  processing  units  (GPUs)  by  several  times  on 
computing speed and more than an order of magnitude on system energy efficiency. We 
believe the proposed reconfigurable DPU is a remarkable step towards high-performance 
neuromorphic optoelectronic computing processors that can achieve real-time dynamic 
architecture configurations according to software and will facilitate a broad range of AI 
applications, e.g., autonomous driving, robotics, and edge computing. 

 
Computing processors driven by electronics have evolved dramatically over the past decade, 
from  general-purpose  central  processing  units  (CPUs)1 to  custom  computing  platforms,  e.g., 
GPUs2,  FPGAs3,  and  ASICs4,5,  to  meet  the  ubiquitously  increasing  demand  of  computing 
resources. The progress of these silicon computing hardware platforms has greatly contributed 
to the resurgence of artificial intelligence (AI) by allowing the training of larger-scale and more 
complicated  models6,7.  We  have  witnessed  the  extensive  applications  of  various  neural 
computing  architectures,  e.g.,  convolutional  neural  networks  (CNNs)2,7,  recurrent  neural 
networks  (RNNs)8,  spiking  neural  networks  (SNNs)9,  and  reservoir  computing  (RC)10,  in  a 
broad  range  of  fields.  However,  electronic  hardware  implementations  have  reached 
unsustainable performance growth as the exponential scaling of electronic transistors embodied 
by Moore’s law approaches its physical limit, where the speed and energy are fundamentally 
limited by parasitic capacitance, the tunnelling effect, and crosstalk11,12. Therefore, despite the 
current dominance of electronic processors, the development of the next-generation computing 
modality is particularly imminent. 

Optical computing uses photons instead of electrons for computation, and this process can 
overcome the inherent limitations of electronics and improve the energy efficiency, processing 
speed, and computational throughput by orders of magnitude13,14. Such extraordinary properties 
have  been  exploited  to  build  application-specific  optical  processors  for  solving  fundamental 
mathematical15-21  and  signal  processing22-25  problems  with  performances  far  beyond  that  of 
existing electronic processors. In particular, the artificial neural networks (ANNs) are one of 
the most promising optical computing paradigms, where the neuron functionality and its dense 
interconnectivity can be effectively implemented with optoelectronic devices and the nature of 
light propagation26-29. Substantial recent progress has been made in optically accelerated neural 
information  processing  to  accomplish  some  advanced  AI  tasks30-43.  Nevertheless,  existing 
optical AI accelerators can only support a single functionality customized for the specific neural 
network architecture or task and cannot be adapted to diverse AI algorithms for different tasks. 
In addition, the model complexity of current optical neural networks (ONNs) is much lower, 
resulting in a large gap in model accuracy (e.g., classification accuracy) compared with that of 
state-of-the-art electronic ANNs. The reasons are mainly due to (1) the limited flexibility of the 
network design space in optics, e.g., the difficulty of integrating ideal nonlinear operations and 
flexibly controlling the complex data flow, and (2) the imperfections of optical systems, which 
cause the deviation of a model and the accumulation of computing errors in practice. 

Here,  we  propose  a  reconfigurable  diffractive  processing  unit  (DPU)  for  large-scale 
neuromorphic  optoelectronic  computing  that  can  be  programmed  to  change  its  functionality 
and  adapt  to  different  types  of  neural  network  architectures.  The  proposed  optoelectronic 
processor combines the advantages of optics and electronics with the availability of extremely 
high-bandwidth  optical  modulators  and  photodetectors;  almost  all  of  its  computational 
operations (OPs) are effectively implemented with optical diffraction, and its programmability 
is controlled electronically. We demonstrate the flexible design of complex diffractive neural 
networks with a DPU that can support millions of neurons. The superior inference capabilities 
of these networks were validated by applying them for video-rate image recognition tasks with 
a computing speed of 270.5 TOPs/s and a system energy efficiency of 5.9 TOPs/J, which are 
over 9 times and an order of magnitude improvement over those of state-of-the-art GPUs44, 
respectively.  To  effectively  design  and  train  the  networks  for  the  tasks,  an  in  silico  training 

solution34,35 is first adopted for learning the neural network parameters and evaluating the model 
accuracy. Our diffractive feedforward neural networks surpass the classification accuracy of 
LeNet-4 (an error rate of 1.1%) on the MNIST handwritten digit database45, and the constructed 
diffractive  RNNs  reach  or  even  outperform  the  classification  accuracy  of  state-of-the-art 
electronic  computing  approaches38  on  the  Weizmann46  and  KTH47  human  action  datasets. 
During the practical implementation of in silico-trained models with optoelectronic devices, we 
develop an adaptive training method to address the deviations of models caused by different 
error sources, such as alignment errors and non-ideal device characteristics. By adaptively fine-
tuning the network parameters layer by layer to compensate for the system imperfections, the 
model deviations were successfully circumvented, and our experimental results achieved highly 
accurate inference performance, i.e., 96.8%, 100.0%, and 96.3% blind testing accuracies for the 
entire MNIST, Weizmann and KTH test datasets, respectively (see Extended Data Table 1). 

Optoelectronic implementation of the reconfigurable diffractive processing unit 

The  principle  of  the  proposed  DPU  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  1a.  The  DPU  is  an  optoelectronic 
neuromorphic  processor  comprising  large-scale  diffractive  perceptron  neurons  and  weighted 
optical interconnections. It represents a fundamental building block that can be programmed 
for establishing various types of diffractive neural networks with high model complexity and 
accuracy.  To  achieve  optical  information  processing  with  diffractive  neurons,  the  unit  input 
data are quantized and electro-optically converted to a complex-valued optical field with an 
information coding (IC) module. Different input nodes are physically connected to individual 
neurons with the light diffractive connections (DCs), where the synaptic weights that control 
the strength of connections are determined by the diffractive modulation (DM) of the wavefront. 
Each  diffractive  optoelectronic  neuron  performs  the  optical  field  summation  (OS)  of  its 
weighted inputs and generates the unit output by applying the complex activation (CA) function 
on the calculated optical field that naturally occurs during the photoelectric conversion. 

We adopt programmable optoelectronic devices with an extremely high data throughput, 
i.e., on the order of gigabytes per second (GB/s), to implement the DPU that allows for high-
speed neural network configurations and achieves video-rate inference capabilities (Fig. 1b). 
Our system in this work is designed to process large-scale visual signals that feed in images and 
videos;  thus,  a  digital  micromirror  device  (DMD)  and  spatial  light  modulator  (SLM)  are 
selected  as  optical  modulators,  and  a  scientific  complementary  metal-oxide-semiconductor 
(sCMOS) sensor is used as the photodetector. The DMD provides a high optical contrast to 
perform  IC  that  facilitates  system  calibration  and  optical  signal  processing.  It  encodes  the 
binarized unit inputs into the amplitude of coherent optical fields, and their phase distribution 
is  subsequently  modulated  by  a  phase  SLM  in  this  example  for  implementing  DM.  The 
weighted DCs between input nodes and artificial neurons are enabled through free-space optical 
diffraction, where the receptive field of each neuron is determined by the amount of diffraction 
from  the  SLM  plane  to  the  sensor  plane.  We  take  advantage  of  the  photoelectric  effect 
characteristic of sCMOS pixels to achieve the functionality of artificial neurons, i.e., OS and 
CA, and generate unit outputs with high efficiency. We exploit the photoelectric effect, which 
measures the intensity of incident optical fields, as the CA function avoids the preparation of 
nonlinear  optical  materials  and  reduces  the  system  complexity.  Our  system  schematic  and 

experimental  setup  are  shown  in  Extended  Data  Fig.  1.  By  controlling  and  buffering  the 
massively  parallel  optoelectronic  dataflow  of  the  unit,  the  DPU  is  allowed  to  be  temporally 
multiplexed and programmed for customizing different types of ONN architectures (Fig. 1c,d,e). 
Since  almost  all  of  the  computational  operations  are  accomplished  optically,  the  proposed 
optoelectronic AI architecture dramatically improves the computating speed and system energy 
efficiency  compared  with  existing  electronic  neuromorphic  processors  (see  Supplementary 
Table S1). 

Analysing light diffraction to construct ONNs with diverse diffractive optical elements has 
been proven to be an effective method for integrating more optical neurons34-37,40-43. The DPU 
benefits  from  this  capability  and  enables  us  to  develop  different  diffractive  neural  networks 
with the following unique features: (1) programmable neural network parameters for adapting 
the optical system imperfections; (2) high-throughput optoelectronic devices to support massive 
numbers of neurons and their interconnectivity; (3) high-speed dataflow control and buffer for 
flexibly  reconfiguring  complex  networks;  and  (4)  a  vast  majority  percentage  of  optical 
computing to empower the processor with high energy efficiency. Specifically, we demonstrate 
that  the  sequential  cascading  of  DPU  layers  successfully  achieves  a  diffractive  deep  neural 
network  (DNN),  i.e.,  D2NN34-37,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1c,  where  the  experimental  results  and 
numerical designs for classifying the MNIST handwritten digit database were highly matched 
after the adaptive training. To further improve the inference capability for higher classification 
accuracy, we increase the model complexity of the constructed feedforward neural network by 
generating multiple diffractive feature maps at each hidden layer and constructing a diffractive 
network in network (D-NIN) architecture (Fig. 1d). In addition to the feedforward architectures, 
the DPU can be recurrently connected as diffractive RNNs, i.e., D-RNNs (Fig. 1e), for feeding 
in the temporal sequential data, and these networks are applied for high-accuracy human action 
video recognition on the Weizmann and KTH databases. 

Adaptive training of optoelectronic diffractive deep neural network (D2NN) 

We  validate  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposed  adaptive  training  approach  as  well  as  the 
functionality of the DPU by configuring an optoelectronic D2NN for classifying the MNIST 
handwritten digits (Fig. 2). It has been demonstrated that the all-optical D2NN34-37 model can 
classify the MNIST database with a very promising model accuracy compared with electronic 
computing. However, the difficulty arises from the imperfections of the physical system, e.g., 
layer misalignment, optical aberration, fabrication error, etc., which inevitably deteriorate the 
performance  of  an  in  silico-designed  network  model  and  cause  discrepancies  between 
numerical  simulations  and  practical  experiments.  We  show  that  such  system  error-induced 
model degeneration can be effectively compensated in the optoelectronic D2NN by applying 
the measured intermediate optical fields of DPU outputs for adaptively adjusting the network 
parameters (see Extended Data Fig. 2). In contrast to in situ training solutions32,33 that seek to 
update the gradient directly in the system, our adaptive training approach sequentially corrects 
the  in  silico-trained  model  layer  by  layer  for  higher  training  robustness  and  efficiency.  To 
implement, we first adopt an in silico electronic pre-training process34 to simulate the network 
model  and  learn  its  parameters.  In  silico  training  has  lower  training  complexity  than  in  situ 
training  by  taking  advantage  of  existing  high-performance  physical  models  and  system 

parameters. The pre-trained model is then transferred to the optoelectronic D2NN system by 
deploying the network structure and programming the SLM for individual DPU layers to write 
the  network  parameters.  As  the  model  transfer  errors  distort  the  wavefront  connections  of 
neurons  in  each  layer,  we  derive  the  fundamental  principle  from  adaptive  optics48,49  to 
sequentially  compensate  for  the  wavefront  distortion  in  each  layer  and  alleviate  the  error 
accumulation. For the correction of the current layer, we experimentally record its DPU outputs 
in situ by using the samples from the training set and adopt them as the inputs of the next layer 
for in silico re-training of the following diffractive layers. The error of the last layer is corrected 
by simply multiplying the energy distribution of output categories by the decision coefficients, 
e.g., 10 coefficients for 10 categories, and the optimization uses the same training schematic. 
The  adaptive  training  process  fine-tunes  the  parameters  of  each  diffractive  layer  to 
accommodate the model transfer errors and effectively recovers the high inference accuracy. 

The MNIST classification was performed by using a three-layer optoelectronic D2NN that 
experimentally operated at an inference speed of 56 fps (see Methods). The model was in silico 
trained  with  an  MNIST  training  set  containing  55,000  images  and  achieved  a  blind  testing 
accuracy of 97.6% on 10,000 digit images in a test set (see Methods and Extended Data Table 
1). The training target was set to individually map input handwritten digits, i.e., from “0” to “9”, 
into ten predefined regions on the output layer (i.e., layer 3), where a classification result was 
determined by finding the target region with the maximum optical signal (Fig. 2a). Without 
adaptive  training,  the  direct  transfer  of  the  pre-trained  model  to  our  optoelectronic  system 
dramatically decreased the recognition accuracy to 63.9% due to the accumulation of system 
errors layer by layer. As illustrated with the exemple digits “2” and “0” from a test set (Fig. 2a, 
left  and  middle),  the  layer  error  accumulation  causes  the  intensity  distribution  of  the  DPU 
output at each layer to gradually deviate from that of the pre-trained model, and this deviation 
reduces  the  percentage  of  energy  focusing  on  the  target  region  and  thus  may  result  in  an 
incorrect recognition category. For example, the simulation output of a digit “0” has 90.8% of 
its  energy  distribution  percentage  correctly  focused  on  the  zeroth  region;  however,  this 
percentage decreases to 5.5% during the experiment and is lower than the value of 25.2% for 
the sixth output region, i.e., misclassified as a digit “6”. The confusion matrix (Fig. 2c, left) 
summarizes the classification results of all instances in the MNIST test set, where the diagonal 
and non-diagonal values represent the percentages of correct and incorrect predictions for each 
category,  respectively.  The  results  show  that  transferring  a  direct  model  causes  a  large 
percentage of incorrect predictions and is especially biased for those digits such as “0”, “3”, 
“8”, and “9” that achieve correct prediction percentages of less than 60%. 

To circumvent the system error and improve the recognition performance, adaptive training 
of  the  constructed  three-layer  optoelectronic  D2NN  was  implemented  with  two-stage  fine-
tuning  of  the  pre-trained  model.  Specifically,  we  had  the  option  to  trade-off  between  the 
experimental accuracy and training efficiency by using a full training set or a mini-training set 
(2% in this example), where the DPU outputs of the first and second layers were experimentally 
recorded during the first and second adaptive training stages, respectively. The first adaptive 
training stage used the experimentally measured outputs of the first layer as the inputs of the 
second layer and re-trained the parameters of the second and third diffractive layers in silico. 
Similarly, the second layer’s experimental outputs were used for in silico re-training of the third 
diffractive  layer  during  the  second  adaptive  training  stage.  Each  adaptive  training  stage 

performed in silico fine-tuning of the network parameters by initializing this process with the 
pre-trained  model  and  keeping  the  same  training  settings.  After  each  stage,  the  SLM  phase 
patterns  were  updated  accordingly  with  the  refined  parameters  for  adapting  the  system 
imperfections  and  alleviating  the  accumulation  of  system  errors.  With  adaptive  training,  the 
intensity distributions of DPU outputs between simulations and experiments are more matched, 
especially  at  the  last  layer,  and  both  of  the  exemple  testing  digits  “2”  and  “0”  are  correctly 
categorized  during  the  experiments  (Fig.  2a,  right).  More  exemple  of  correct  D2NN  testing 
results can be founded in Supplementary Video 1. The convergence plot in Fig. 2b shows that 
by refining the parameters of the pre-trained model with experimentally measured layer outputs, 
the  first  and  second  stages  of  adaptive  training  improve  the  system  error-induced  testing 
accuracy decrement from 82.1% to 97.4% and 84.9% to 96.3%, respectively, with a full training 
set (orange plots) and from 82.1% to 95.9% and 75.4% to 93.6%, respectively, with a mini-
training set (yellow plots). Despite the lower accuracy, the mini-training set is more efficient, 
i.e., ~3 min for 20 epochs with the mini-training set compared with ~3.8 h of pre-training (blue 
plot) for 15 epochs with the full training set. After the adaptive training with multiplying of 
decision coefficients, the large model discrepancies between the simulations and experiments 
are overcome, and the experimental testing accuracy improves from 63.9% (green star) to 96.0% 
(orange star) with the full training set and to 93.9% (yellow star) with the mini-training set. As 
shown by the confusion matrix in Fig. 2c, right, the correct prediction rates of the categories 
are improved and are all larger than 93%. A histogram of the phase differences (Fig. 2d, bottom 
left)  between  the  diffractive  layers  before  (Fig.  2d,  top)  and  after  (Fig.  2d,  bottom  right) 
adaptive training reflects the fine-tuning process of the second and third diffractive layers for 
adapting the system error, where a large percentage of diffractive neurons have a small change 
in the phase modulation value. 

High-accuracy object classification with a diffractive network in networks (D-NIN-1) 

In a CNN architecture (e.g., LeNet45), segmenting the hidden layer into a set of feature maps 
with  weight  sharing  is  the  critical  mechanism  that  leads  to  high  model  performance.  We 
demonstrate that the inference capability and model robustness of the optoelectronic D2NN can 
be further enhanced by designing a multi-channel diffractive hidden layer as well as its external 
and internal interconnectivity structure (Figs. 1d and 3a). Since the phase modulation of unit 
inputs  in  the  DPU  is  inherently  equivalent  to  the  complex  convolution  operation  in  the 
frequency  domain,  we  implement  multiple  diffractive  feature  maps  at  each  hidden  layer  by 
stacking multiple DPU layers. Each feature map is generated with high-speed buffering and the 
weighted summation of DPU outputs and is set to share the same DPU layer for reducing the 
network  parameters  and  achieving  high-efficiency  training.  We  term  the  constructed 
architecture a diffractive network in network, i.e., D-NIN-1, as each of the diffractive feature 
maps is externally weighted and connected to all feature maps of the previous layer through the 
shared internal connectivities of the DPU layer. In contrast to the deep electronic network in 
network (NIN) architecture50 that builds micro neural networks within the receptive field of 
successive layers, the internal neural networks in D-NIN-1 are implemented with DPU layers 
that fully connect the input and output feature maps through optical diffractions. To fuse the 
multi-channel diffractive feature maps, a schematic of the external connections of feature maps 
is adopted to perform the weighted summation of DPU outputs for the input feature maps of 

previous layers. Given the complex internal and external neuron connectivity structure used to 
compute  more  abstract  features  of  each  hidden  layer,  the  network  outputs  of  D-NIN-1  are 
obtained after a DPU read-out layer for the final decision making. 

We  evaluate  the  performance  of  D-NIN-1  by  constructing  a  three-layer  architecture,  as 
shown in Fig. 3a, and demonstrate its superior model accuracy and robustness over the three-
layer D2NN (Fig. 2) on the task of MNIST classification. Instead of having a single diffractive 
feature map at each layer, the hidden layers of D-NIN-1 are configured with three diffractive 
feature maps corresponding to three DPU layers in this example (see Methods). With the same 
DPU settings and in silico training procedures as D2NN, the D-NIN-1 model improves the blind 
testing accuracy from 97.6% to 98.8%, surpassing the model accuracy of the electronic CNN 
architecture  LeNet-1.  A  comparisons  of  convergence  plots  between  D-NIN-1  and  LeNets, 
including the LeNet-1, LeNet-4, and LeNet-5, in Fig. 3b shows that D-NIN-1 has the highest 
convergence  speed  with  respect  to  the  training  epochs  (see  arrow).  In  addition,  the  model 
performance of D-NIN-1 can be further boosted as the D-NIN-1++, which achieves an accuracy 
of 99.0% that surpasses the LeNet-4 by integrating a low-complexity electronic fully connected 
layer at the end of D-NIN-1 (see Methods). Despite the integration of electronic computational 
operations,  optical  computing  is  still  dominant,  and  the  ratio  between  optical  and  electronic 
computational  operations  is  1.16 × 106,  which  guarantees  high  performance  in  terms  of 
computing speed and energy efficiency (see Supplementary Information). 

Compared  with  the  optoelectronic  D2NNs,  the  stacking  of  multiple  DPU  layers  at  each 
hidden layer provides higher degrees-of-freedom and robustness for fine-tuning the pre-trained 
model of D-NIN-1 to accommodate the system imperfections. With the programming of the 
optoelectronic  DPU  system  to  deploy  the  D-NIN-1  model,  the  experimental  classification 
accuracy over the whole test dataset reaches a blind testing accuracy of 96.8% after adaptive 
training. The confusion matrix (Fig. 3c, left) summarizing the inference results of 10,000 testing 
digits  shows  that  D-NIN-1  improves  the  percentage  of  correct  predictions  for  all  of  the 
categories (except digits “1” and “9”) compared with the D2NN and achieves values larger than 
94%. We also analysed the energy distribution of ten predefined detection regions on the output 
layer of the inference results (Fig. 3c, right). D-NIN-1 achieves an average energy percentage 
of more than ~50.0% on the target region for each category, as shown in the diagonal values of 
the  energy  matrix,  which  demonstrates  that  the  network  successfully  learns  to  generate  the 
maximum energy on the correct target regions for input digits. Fig. 3d (top row) visualizes the 
phase modulation coefficients of each DPU after the adaptive training of the constructed three-
layer D-NIN-1. The corresponding feature maps at each layer and the classification results of 
two  exemple  digits  “3”  and  “5”  are  shown  in  the  middle  and  bottom  rows  of  Fig.  3d, 
respectively. Both of the exemple digits were misclassified in the D2NN, i.e., misclassifying 
the digit “3” as “8” and the digit “5” as “3” due to the similarity of the digit profiles on the right 
and bottom parts, respectively. D-NIN-1, by contrast, can correctly categorize the two digits by 
gradually abstracting more feature representations of input digits for making the classification 
decisions. The experimental results show maximum energy distribution percentages of 32.3% 
and 53.2%, correctly focusing on the third and fifth target regions, respectively (Fig. 3d, last 
column). More exemple of correct D-NIN-1 testing results can be founded in the Supplementary 
Video 2. 

Configuring a diffractive RNNs (D-RNN) for human action recognition 

In addition to still images, the reconfigurability of the DPU allows us to construct a large-scale 
diffractive recurrent neural network (D-RNN) to perform high-accuracy recognition tasks for 
video sequences. To demonstrate its functionality, we configure a standard RNN architecture 
based on the recurrent connections of DPU layers and apply it for the important task of video-
based human action recognition38. The folded and unfolded representations of the proposed D-
RNN  are  shown  in  Figs.  1e  and  4a,  respectively,  and  comprise  the  temporal  sequential 
connections of the input, hidden, and output layers with the shared diffractive parameters in 
time. The memory of input sequences is formed by generating the diffractive hidden states at 
different time steps. For the D-RNN hidden layer at the time step of  𝑡, the hidden state  ℎ!  is 
a function of the hidden state  ℎ!"#  at the time step of  𝑡 − 1  and the input sequence  𝑥!  at the 
time step of  𝑡. We adopt an affine combination to fuse the states from these two sources, i.e., 
ℎ! = 𝜆𝑓#(ℎ!"#) + (1 − 𝜆)𝑓$(𝑥!),  where  𝑚! = 𝑓#(ℎ!"#)  denotes  the  memory  state  mapping 
from  ℎ!"#;  𝑖! = 𝑓$(𝑥!)  denotes the input state mapping from  𝑥!; and  𝜆 ∈ (0, 1)  is the fusing 
coefficient that controls the strength of the memory state with respect to the input state. The 
complexity  of  mapping  functions  𝑓#(∙)  and  𝑓$(∙)  can  be  increased  by  using  multiple  DPU 
layers,  forming  a  spatial  deep  hidden  layer  structure  in  addition  to  the  temporal  deep 
architecture of the D-RNN, e.g., shown in Fig. 1e. Considering the recognition speed of our 
system and the complexity of our tasks, both of the functions are implemented with a single 
DPU layer (Fig. 4a) that operates the system at a read-in speed of ~70 fps (see Methods). The 
last hidden state of the D-RNN, summarizing the memory of input sequences, is extracted and 
read out with the DPU or electronic output layer to generate the categorical output distribution 
for determining the action categories. 

The constructed D-RNN for the task of human action recognition was evaluated on two 
standard benchmark databases, i.e., the Weizmann46 and KTH47 databases, with preprocessing 
(see Methods) to adapt to the network input. The Weizmann dataset, including ten categories 
of natural human actions (bend, jack, jump, pjump, run, side, skip, walk, wave1, and wave2), 
was split into 60 and 30 videos (actions) as the training and test sets, respectively, with 30~100 
frames for each video sequence. For the KTH dataset, we used the first scene (150 videos) with 
a 16:9 database split for training and testing the system38, where each of the video sequences 
had 350~600 frames belonging to one of six human action categories: boxing, handclapping, 
handwaving, jogging, running, and walking. The recurrent connection of the hidden layer at 
different time steps allows the D-RNN to process a variable sequence length of inputs. Although 
a longer network sequence length (larger  𝑁) can incorporate more frames for the recognition 
decision, this causes difficulties for the network in training as well as forgetting of long-term 
memory, i.e., the vanishing of frame information at a time step that is far from the current time 
step. Therefore, for each of the video sequences in the database with a length of  𝑀, we set 
𝑁 ≪ 𝑀  and divided the sequence into numbers of sub-sequences with the same length as  𝑁, 
with which the D-RNN was trained and tested. We quantitatively evaluated the model accuracy 
with two metrics, i.e., the frame accuracy and video accuracy. The frame accuracy was obtained 
by statistically summarizing the inference results of all sub-sequences in the test set. The video 
accuracy was calculated based on the predicted category of each video sequence in the test set 
and was derived by applying the winner-takes-all strategy38 (action category with the most votes) 
on the testing results of all sub-sequences in the video sequence. 

After the ablation and performance analyses, the network sequence lengths were set to 3 
and  5  for  the  Weizmann  and  KTH  databases,  respectively  (see  Methods).  The  D-RNN 
architecture was first evaluated by configuring the DPU read-out layer and was then in silico 
pre-trained with the optimal fusing coefficient of 0.2 for both the Weizmann and KTH databases; 
it achieved a blind testing frame accuracy of 88.9% for both databases, corresponding to a video 
accuracy  of  100%  and  94.4%  for  the  two  models,  respectively.  To  implement  the  model 
experimentally, we performed adaptive training by fine-tuning the modulation coefficients of 
only the read-out layer due to the recurrent connection inherence of the D-RNN. The designed 
modulation coefficients of the memory, read-in, and read-out DPU layers after adaptive training 
are shown in Fig. 4b, where the top and bottom rows correspond to the models of the Weizmann 
and  KTH  databases,  respectively.  Compared  with  the  experimental  results  without  adaptive 
training, the adaptive training improved the experimental frame accuracy from 51.0% to 82.9% 
and  the  experimental  video  accuracy  from  56.7%  to  96.7%  for  the  Weizmann  database. 
Similarly, after the adaptive training, the experimental frame and video accuracies improved 
from 53.8% to 85.1% and from 55.6% to 94.4% for the KTH database, respectively. Without 
adaptive training, the hidden layer of the D-RNN accumulates system imperfections at different 
time  instances,  resulting  in  a  dramatic  reduction  in  the  experimental  recognition  accuracy. 
However, the adaptive-trained DPU read-out layer was able to extract the preserved temporal 
information of the sub-sequences and recover the model accuracy. 

We  visualize  the  experimental  testing  results  of  all  sub-sequences  with  the  categorical 
voting matrix in Fig. 4c by calculating the percentage of votes for all categories in each testing 
video sequence, where the category with the maximum percentage of the vote represents the 
predicted category of a video sequence. The target testing video sequences were ranked in order 
with  respect  to  the  video  categories  so  that  the  diagonal  positions  of  two  categorical  voting 
matrices represent the correct predictions. The experimental results show the miscategorization 
of one video sequence (i.e., 25th) and three video sequences (i.e., 6th, 11th, and 15th), marked 
with  white  arrows,  for  the  Weizmann  (Fig.  4c,  left)  and  KTH  (Fig.  4c,  right)  databases, 
respectively.  In  addition,  there  are  more  incorrect  predictions  of  sub-sequences  among  the 
actions with higher similarities, such as between the actions of handclapping and handwaving 
(category labels of 1 and 2, respectively) for the KTH database (Fig. 4c, right). Four exemple 
testing results are shown in Fig. 4e, including the action categories of side and jack from the 
Weizmann database (Fig. 4e, left) as well as handwaving and walking from the KTH database 
(Fig. 4e, right). At the different time steps of  𝑡, the D-RNN hidden layer gradually updates its 
output states  ℎ!  by sequentially reading in the input frames  𝑥!  that generate the memory of 
input sub-sequences (first to second-last columns of Fig. 4e, left and right). The output regions 
predefined during the training, i.e., ten and six regions for the Weizmann and KTH databases, 
respectively, each corresponds to one category, and the DPU output layer reads out the memory 
of input sub-sequences and correctly categorizes the four exemple sub-sequences by producing 
the  maximum  energy  on  the  target  regions  (last  columns  of  Fig.  4e,  left  and  right).  More 
exemple of correct sub-sequence testing results from all actions of the Weizmann and KTH 
databases can be founded in Supplementary Video 3 and 4, respectively. 

The recognition accuracy and robustness of the D-RNN can be further enhanced, forming 
the  D-RNN++  architecture,  by  transferring  the  trained  D-RNN  hidden  layer  and  using  an 
electronic  read-out  layer  to  replace  the  DPU  read-out  layer  (Fig.  4a,  right).  Inspired  by  the 

memory  read-out  modality  of  reservoir  computing10,38,51,  we  adopt  an  electronic  linear  fully 
connected  layer  that  takes  the  last  hidden  state  as  the  input  nodes  and  fully-connects  to  the 
output  action  category  nodes,  where  the  weights  are  effectively  learned  with  a  fast  ridge 
regression  algorithm38,51  (see  Methods).  The  redundancy  of  memories  in  the  hidden  state 
enables us to reduce the complexity of the electronic read-out layer, i.e., reducing the number 
of read-out nodes, by average pooling the last hidden state. We evaluate the experimental frame 
and video accuracies of D-RNN++ with respect to the number of read-out nodes, as shown in 
Fig. 4d. The results demonstrate that D-RNN++ achieves an experimental video accuracy of 
100%  and  96.3%  under  the  optimized  number  of  electronic  read-out  nodes  of  2500  for  the 
Weizmann and KTH (first scene) databases, respectively. The low-complexity implementation 
of  the  electronic  read-out  layer  has  subtle  effects  on  the  proportion  of  optical  computing 
operations for the D-RNN (see Supplementary Information) and preserves its computational 
efficiency.  Furthermore,  the  experimental  video  accuracy  of  D-RNN++  for  categorizing  the 
Weizmann  and  KTH  (first  scene)  databases  achieves  comparable  performance  to  and  even 
outperforms  the  state-of-the-art  electronic  computing  approaches38,52,53  that  have  reported 
accuracies of 100% and 96.0%, respectively. 

Discussion 

The DPU system in this work was configured with and 8-bit phase modulation accuracy with a 
16-bit accuracy of optical field measurement. We adopt a DMD to provide the binary unit input 
and abstract the features for recognition tasks considering its properties of high optical contrast, 
high speed, and easy calibration property. A higher input bit depth can be achieved by using an 
amplitude-SLM  with  additional  calibrations  or  high-speed  changing  of  the  binary  pattern 
multiple times within a single cycle of the DPU working flow. The system can be made more 
compact  by  using  a  smaller  modulation  pixel  pitch  to  reduce  the  propagation  distance  for 
diffractive  connections.  Since  the  adopted  programmable  optoelectronic  devices  are  widely 
used in many areas, such as microscopic imaging49 and free-space optical communication54,55, 
the proposed architecture can easily be integrated into these applications with both real-space 
and Fourier-space implementations35. 

The  computing  speed  and  energy  efficiency  of  the  DPU  can  be  further  improved  by  using 
optoelectronic devices with higher data throughput and speed, such as detectors using single-
photon  avalanche  diode  (SPAD)  arrays56  and  SLMs  using  the  tuneable  meatasurface57,  and 
designing the ASICs for dataflow control and unit programmability. In addition, spatial and 
spectral  multiplexing  techniques  can  be  incorporated.  Since  phase  modulation  does  not 
consume much energy compared to amplitude modulation, the system can be scaled up with 
multiple  layers  of  phase  modulation  for  more  flexible  control  of  network  weights  while 
preserving its light efficiency. The DPU in this implementation was designed under a single 
visible  wavelength  of  698  nm  and  can  be  extended  to  multiple  wavelengths  by  using  the 
wavelength  division  multiplexing  (WDM)  technique.  Improved  processing  speed  and 
throughput will facilitate the DPU to configure feedforward and recurrent neural networks with 
higher model complexity and inference capability. For example, we can design more advanced 
internal and external connectivities for the D-NIN by encoding multiple diffractive feature maps 

with multiple wavelengths; a long short-term memory (LSTM) unit8 can be incorporated for 
the D-RNN to avoid the forgetting of long-term memory and read-in longer sequences. 

Conclusion 

We have experimentally demonstrated a reconfigurable optoelectronic computing processor, 
i.e., a DPU, that can be programmed to adapt to different types of ANN architectures for large-
scale  optical  neural  information  processing.  Benefitting  from  high-bandwidth  optoelectronic 
devices with the proposed novel adaptive training technique, our approach addressed the long-
standing issues of insufficient model complexity and experimental model deviations in building 
the neuromorphic photonic computing systems. The constructed optoelectronic neural networks 
were applied to video-rate recognition tasks for handwritten digits as well as human actions on 
benchmark databases, and the accuracy of these networks reached and even outperformed the 
model accuracy of advanced electronic computing methods. Our prototype system has achieved 
several  times  higher  computing  speeds  and  more  than  an  order  of  magnitude  better  system 
energy efficiency than the Tesla V100 GPU44, and the performance could be further enhanced 
by using on-chip programmable optoelectronic devices58 for system integration. In addition, the 
proposed adaptive training technique can serve as a universal training approach for constructing 
large-scale neuromorphic photonic and electronic analog44 computing systems with high model 
accuracy.  By  effectively  designing  an  optoelectronic  computing  system  to  fuse  the 
complementary advantages of optics and electronics, we anticipate that the proposed approach 
will enable the development of more powerful optical AI accelerators as critical support for 
modern computing and move towards opening a new era of artificial intelligence. 

References 

1.  Moore, G. E. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Proc. IEEE 86, 82-

2. 

3. 

4. 

85 (1998). 
Krizhevsky,  A.,  Sutskever,  I.  &  Hinton,  G.  E.  Imagenet  classification  with  deep 
convolutional  neural  networks.  In  Proc.  Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing 
systems 1097-1105 (2012). 
Zhang,  C.  et  al.  Optimizing  FPGA-based  accelerator  design  for  deep  convolutional 
neural networks. In 2015 International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays 
161-170 (ACM/SIGDA, 2015). 
Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550, 354-
359 (2017). 

5.  Merolla,  P.,  A.  et  al.  A  million  spiking-neuron  integrated  circuit  with  a  scalable 

6. 
7. 

8. 

communication network and interface. Science 345, 668-673 (2014). 
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436-444 (2015). 
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 
Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 770-778 (IEEE, 
2016). 
Graves, A., Mohamed, A. R. & Hinton, G. Speech recognition with deep recurrent neural 
networks.  In  2013  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Acoustics,  Speech  and  Signal 
Processing 6645-6649 (IEEE, 2013). 

9. 

Roy,  K.,  Jaiswal,  A.  &  Panda,  P.  Towards  spike-based  machine  intelligence  with 
neuromorphic computing. Nature 575, 607-617 (2019). 

10.  Lukoševičius,  M.  &  Jaeger,  H.  Reservoir  computing  approaches  to  recurrent  neural 

network training. Computer Science Review 3, 127-149 (2009). 

11.  Waldrop, M. M. The chips are down for Moore’s law. Nature News 530, 144 (2016). 
12.  Miller, D. A. B. Attojoule optoelectronics for low-energy information processing and 

communications. Journal of Lightwave Technology 35, 346-396 (2017). 
13. 
Prucnal, P. R., & Shastri, B. J. Neuromorphic Photonics (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2017). 
14.  Zhang, Q,. Yu, H., Barbiero, M., Wang, B. & Gu, M. Artificial neural networks enabled 

15. 

16. 

by nanophotonics. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 1-14 (2019). 
Ferrera, M. et al. On-chip CMOS-compatible all-optical integrator. Nat. Commun. 1, 1-
5 (2010). 
Silva,  A.  et  al.  Performing  mathematical  operations  with  metamaterials.  Science  343, 
160-163 (2014). 

17.  Zhu, T. et al. Plasmonic computing of spatial differentiation. Nat. Commun. 8, 1-6 (2017). 
18. 
Feldmann,  J.  et  al.  Calculating  with  light  using  a  chip-scale  all-optical  abacus.  Nat. 
Commun. 8, 1-8 (2017). 

19.  Estakhri, N. M., Edwards, B. & Engheta, N. Inverse-designed metastructures that solve 

equations. Science 363, 1333-1338 (2019). 

20.  McMahon, P. L. et al. A fully programmable 100-spin coherent Ising machine with all-

to-all connections. Science 354, 614-617 (2016). 

21.  Xu, X.-Y. et al. A scalable photonic computer solving the subset sum problem. Sci. Adv. 

6, eaay5853 (2020). 

22.  Liu, W. et al. A fully reconfigurable photonic integrated signal processor. Nat. Photonics 

23. 

10, 190-195 (2016). 
Pérez, D. et al. Multipurpose silicon photonics signal processor core. Nat. Commun. 8, 
1-9 (2017). 

24.  Kwon, H., Sounas, D., Cordaro, A., Polman, A. & Alù, A. Nonlocal metasurfaces for 

optical signal processing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 173004 (2018). 

25.  Babaeian, M. et al. Nonlinear optical components for all-optical probabilistic graphical 

26. 

model. Nat. Commun. 9, 1-8 (2018). 
Psaltis,  D.,  Brady,  D.,  Gu,  X.  G.  &  Lin,  S.  Holography  in  artificial  neural  networks. 
Nature 343, 325-330 (1990). 
Shainline,  J.  M.,  Buckley,  S.  M.,  Mirin,  R.  P.  &  Nam,  S.  W.  Superconducting 
optoelectronic circuits for neuromorphic computing. Phys. Rev. Appl. 7, 034013 (2016). 
28.  Van  der  Sande,  G.,  Brunner,  D.  &  Soriano,  M.  C.  Advances  in  photonic  reservoir 

27. 

computing. Nanophotonics 6, 561-576 (2017). 

29.  Hamerly, R., Bernstein, L., Sludds, A., Soljačić, M. & Englund, D. Large-scale optical 

30. 

neural networks based on photoelectric multiplication. Phys. Rev. X 9, 021032 (2019) 
Feldmann, J., Youngblood, N., Wright, C. D., Bhaskaran, H. & Pernice, W. H. P. All-
optical spiking neurosynaptic networks with self-learning capabilities. Nature 569, 208-
214 (2019). 

31.  Mennel, L. et al. Ultrafast machine vision with 2D material neural network image sensors. 

Nature 579, 62-66 (2020). 
Shen, Y. et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nat. Photonics 11, 

32. 

441-447 (2017). 

33.  Hughes, T. W., Minkov, M., Shi, Y. & Fan, S. Training of photonic neural networks 

through in situ backpropagation and gradient measurement. Optica 5, 864-871 (2018). 

34.  Lin,  X.  et  al.  All-optical  machine  learning  using  diffractive  deep  neural  networks. 

Science 361, 1004-1008 (2018). 

35.  Tao, Y. et al. Fourier-space diffractive deep neural network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 023901 

(2019). 

36.  Zhou,  T.  et  al.  In  situ  optical  backpropagation  training  of  diffractive  optical  neural 

networks. Photonics Res. 8, 940-953 (2020). 

37.  Dou, H. et al. Residual D2NN: training diffractive deep neural networks via learnable 

light shortcuts. Opt. Lett. 45, 2688-2691 (2020). 

38.  Antonik, P., Marsal, N., Brunner, D. & Rontani, D. Human action recognition with a 
large-scale brain-inspired photonic computer. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 530-537 (2019). 
39.  Hughes, T. W., Williamson, I. A. D., Minkov, M. & Fan, S. Wave physics as an analog 

recurrent neural network. Sci. Adv. 5, eaay6946 (2019). 

40.  Bueno, J. et al. Reinforcement learning in a large-scale photonic recurrent neural network. 

Optica 5, 756-760 (2018). 

41.  Chang,  J.,  Sitzmann,  V.,  Dun,  X.,  Heidrich,  W.,  &  Wetzstein,  G.  Hybrid  optical-
electronic  convolutional  neural  networks  with  optimized  diffractive  optics  for  image 
classification. Sci. Rep. 8, 1-10 (2018). 

42.  Luo, Y. et al. Design of task-specific optical systems using broadband diffractive neural 

networks. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 1-14 (2019). 

43.  Zuo, Y. et al. All-optical neural network with nonlinear activation functions. Optica 6, 

1132-1137 (2019). 

44.  Yao,  P.  et  al.  Fully  hardware-implemented  memristor  convolutional  neural  network. 

Nature 577, 641-646 (2020). 

45.  LeCun,  Y.,  Bottou,  L.,  Bengio,  Y.,  &  Haffner,  P.  Gradient-based  learning  applied  to 

document recognition. Proc. IEEE 86, 2278-2324 (1998). 

47. 

46.  Blank,  M.,  Gorelick,  L.,  Shechtman,  E.,  Irani,  M.  &  Basri,  R.  Actions  as  space-time 
shapes. In Proc. 10th IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV'05) 1, 
1395-1402 (IEEE, 2005). 
Schuldt, C., Laptev, I. & Caputo, B. Recognizing human actions: a local SVM approach. 
In Proc. 17th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (IEEE, 2004). 
Ji, N. Adaptive optical fluorescence microscopy. Nat. Methods 14, 374-380 (2017). 
Salter, P. S., & Booth, M. J. Adaptive optics in laser processing. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 1-16 
(2019). 

48. 
49. 

50.  Lin, M., Chen, Q. & Yan, S. Network in network. In Proc. 2nd International Conference 

on Learning Representations 14-16 (2013). 

51.  Larger,  L.  et  al.  High-speed  photonic  reservoir  computing  using  a  time-delay-based 

52. 

53. 

architecture: Million words per second classification. Phys. Rev. X 7, 011015 (2017). 
Jhuang, H., Serre, T., Wolf, L. & Poggio, T. A biologically inspired system for action 
recognition.  In  Proc.  11th  International  Conference  on  Computer  Vision  1-8  (IEEE, 
2007). 
Shu, N., Tang, Q. & Liu, H. A bio-inspired approach modeling spiking neural networks 
of visual cortex for human action recognition. In 2014 International Joint Conference 

on Neural Networks (IJCNN) (IEEE, 2014). 

54.  Wang,  J.  et  al.  Terabit  free-space  data  transmission  employing  orbital  angular 

momentum multiplexing. Nat. Photonics 6, 488-496 (2012). 

55.  Khalighi,  M.  A.  &  Uysal,  M.  Survey  on  free  space  optical  communication:  a 
communication  theory  perspective.  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  &  Tutorials  16, 
2231-2258 (2014). 

56.  Morimoto, K. et al. Megapixel time-gated SPAD image sensor for 2D and 3D imaging 

57. 

58. 

applications. Optica 7, 346-354 (2020) 
Forouzmand,  A.  et  al.  Tunable  all-dielectric  metasurface  for  phase  modulation  of  the 
tin 
light  via  permittivity 
reflected 
oxide. Nanophotonics 8, 415-427 (2019). 
Shirmanesh, G. K., Sokhoyan, R., Wu, P. C., & Atwater, H. A. Electro-optically tunable 
multifunctional metasurfaces. ACS Nano 14, 6912-6920 (2020). 

tuning  of 

transmitted 

indium 

and 

59.  Kingma,  D.  P.  &  Ba,  J.  Adam:  A  method  for  stochastic  optimization.  In  Proc.  3rd 

International Conference on Learning Representations (2014). 

60.  Chen, L.-C., Zhu, Y., Papandreou, G., Schroff, F. & Adam, H. Encoder-decoder with 
atrous  separable  convolution  for  semantic  image  segmentation.  In  Proc.  European 
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 801-818 (Springer, 2018). 

 
 
 
Fig. 1. Reconfigurable diffractive optoelectronic processor. a, A diffractive processing unit 
(DPU)  is  a  large-scale  perceptron-like  optoelectronic  computing  building  block  that  can  be 
programmed for constructing different diffractive neural networks. IC, information coding; DM, 
diffractive modulation; DC, diffractive connection; OS, optical field summation; CA, complex 
activation. b, High-speed programmable optoelectronic devices were adopted to implement the 
DPU,  i.e.,  a  digital  micromirror  device  (DMD)  for  IC  of  unit  inputs,  a  phase  spatial  light 
modulator (SLM) for DM of synaptic weights, and a scientific complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (sCMOS) sensor for OS and CA that performs the functionality of diffractive 
optoelectronic neurons, in this example. The artificial neurons achieve OS of weighted inputs 
through DCs, where the nonlinear CA function is achieved by taking advantage of the inherent 
photoelectric effect of sCMOS pixels that measures the intensity, i.e., square of the amplitude 
component, of the calculated complex optical field. Our system is able to be reconfigured to 
perform different machine learning tasks at video rates with extremely high energy efficiency 
by assigning almost all of its computations optically, while its programmability and dataflow 
are controlled electronically. c,d,e, Three different types of neural network architectures were 
constructed  with  temporal  multiplexing  and  stacking  of  DPU  layers  for  large-scale 
neuromorphic  computing  that  supports  millions  of  neurons.  The  high-bandwidth  optical 
modulators  (DMD  and  SLM)  and  photodetector  (sCMOS  sensor)  empower  the  high  data 
modulation  speed  of  our  system  to  perform  video-rate  recognition  tasks.  A  diffractive  deep 
neural network (DNN), i.e., D2NN34-37, is achieved with the sequential cascading of DPU layers 
(a),  and  its  inference  capability  can  be  substantially  strengthened  by  generating  multiple 
diffractive feature maps on each layer and constructing a diffractive network in network (D-
NIN) (b). The DPU layers can also be recurrently connected as a diffractive RNN (D-RNN) 
that can take temporal sequential data, e.g., videos, as the input and encode individual hidden 
states for making the final recognition decision (c). 

 
 
 
Fig. 2. Adaptive training of the optoelectronic D2NN for handwritten digit classification. 
a,  Experimental  DPU  outputs  of  a  three-layer  optoelectronic  D2NN.  The  handwritten  input 
digits (0~9) are classified by finding a maximum optical signal region among ten pre-defined 
regions  at  the  output  plane,  each  corresponding  to  one  digit  (from  left  to  right,  then  top  to 
bottom). With the exemple input digits “2” and “0” (left), the direct transfer of the pre-trained 
model to the system causes the DPU outputs of each layer to gradually deviate from those of 
the simulations and misclassification of the digit “0” (middle). Such an accumulation of system 
errors  is  alleviated  with  adaptive  training,  and  both  exemple  digits  “2”  and  “0”  (right)  are 
correctly  categorized.  b,  Convergence  plots  (at  a  step  size  of  100  iterations)  of  the 
optoelectronic  D2NN  evaluated  on  the  blind  test  dataset.  The  discrepancies  between  the 
simulations and experiments of the in silico pre-trained model dramatically decrease the blind 
testing  accuracy  to  63.9%,  which  is  improved  to  96.0%  after  adaptive  training  by  using  the 
experimentally  measured  DPU  outputs  to  efficiently  refine  the  network  parameters.  c, 
Confusion matrices summarizing the experimental classification results of all instances in the 
test set. The pre-trained model generates a high percentage of incorrect predictions for each 
category due to the system imperfections (left), but this limitation is effectively circumvented 
with adaptive training, which recovers the high prediction accuracy (right). d, Final designs of 
three diffractive layers for high-accuracy handwritten digit classification (top) and histograms 
of the phase differences before and after adaptive training for layer 2 and layer 3 (bottom). 

 
 
 
Fig.  3.  High-accuracy  MNIST  classification  with  a  diffractive  network  in  network  (D-
NIN).  a,  Configuring  a  three-layer  D-NIN-1  with  DPUs.  D-NIN-1  is  a  hierarchical 
interconnectivity architecture that comprises the internal and external connections of diffractive 
neurons. By stacking multiple DPUs at each hidden layer to generate multi-channel diffractive 
feature  maps,  the  model’s  accuracy  and  the  robustness  of  the  network  were  substantially 
improved  compared  with  those  of  the  D2NN.  b,  Convergence  plots  and  model  comparisons 
between  D-NIN-1  and  LeNet45.  D-NIN-1  and  its  enhanced  version  (D-NIN-1++)  achieve 
competitive classification accuracies, i.e., 98.8% and 99.0%, respectively, with respect to the 
electronic CNNs on the MNIST dataset. c, Experimental confusion and energy matrices after 
adaptive training. The optoelectronic system implemented with the D-NIN-1 model was blind 
tested with 10,000 input digits from the MNIST test set and achieved a recognition accuracy of 
96.8%, and this system improved both the correct prediction rate and average energy focused 
on the target region. d, The designed diffractive layers and the layer outputs of two exemple 
digits “3” and “5”. By learning to abstract more feature representations of input digits, D-NIN-
1 correctly categorized both of the exemple digits that were misclassified by the D2NN. 

 
Fig. 4. Human action recognition with a diffractive RNN (D-RNN). a, The architecture of 
the  unfolded  D-RNN.  The  D-RNN  uses  the  recurrent  connection  of  the  hidden  layer  for 
sequentially reading in the video frames at different time steps to generate the memory of inputs 
with the diffractive hidden states. Both the DPU and electronic output layers can be exploited 
to read out the memory and perform the categorization of human action videos. b, The designed 
modulation coefficients of the D-RNN after adaptive training. The performance of the D-RNN 
is  evaluated  on  the  Weizmann  (top)  and  KTH  (bottom)  human  action  databases,  and  the 
network coefficients, including the memory, read-in, and read-out DPU layers, are learned for 
the  inference  tasks.  c,  The  experimental  inference  results  of  all  sub-sequences  for  the  two 
databases. The results are visualized as a categorical voting matrix in which the category of a 
test video is determined by finding the maximum percentage of votes among all categories. For 
the Weizmann database (left), the category labels from 0 to 9 correspond to the action types of 
bend, jack, jump, pjump, run, side, skip, walk, wave1, and wave2, respectively. For the KTH 
database  (right),  the  category  labels  from  0  to  5  correspond  to  the  action  types  of  boxing, 
handclapping,  handwaving,  jogging,  running,  and  walking,  respectively.  d,  Enhancing  the 
performance  of  the  D-RNN  with  an  electronic  read-out  layer.  The  redundancy  of  memories 

 
enables us to dramatically reduce the complexity of the electronic read-out layer by average 
pooling  the  last  hidden  state  while  preserving  its  experimental  recognition  accuracy.  e,  The 
exemple input sub-sequences, hidden states, and recognition results. Four testing sub-sequences, 
two from the Weizmann database (left) and two from the KTH database (right), are successfully 
categorized during experiments by finding the region with the maximum energy among the pre-
defined regions at the output plane, with each corresponding to one category label (sequentially 
labelled from left to right, then top to bottom). 

 
 
Extended Data Table 1. Benchmark performance of DPU-constructed DNN architectures 

Network 
Architecture 
Types 

Model 
Accuracy 
(%) 

Experimental 
Accuracy   
(%) 

Computing 
Speeda 
(TOPs/s) 

Computing Energy 
Efficiencya 
(TOPs/J) 

System Energy 
Efficiencya 
(TOPs/J) 

D2NN 

97.6% 

96.0% 

133.4 

2446.1 

D-NIN-1(++) 

99.0% 

96.8% 

133.4 

~1514.0 

  Weizm. 
N
N
R
D

KTH 

-

100.0% 

96.7% 

270.5 

2548.0 

94.4% 

94.4% 

270.5 

2316.4 

+
+
N
N
R
D

-

Weizm. 

KTH 

− 

− 

100.0% 

270.5 

2522.3 

96.3% 

270.5 

2281.6 

(asee Supplementary Information for the detailed calculations) 

2.889 

2.887 

5.855 

5.854 

5.855 

5.853 

 
