1
2
0
2

t
c
O
8

]

B
C
.
o
i
b
-
q
[

2
v
4
5
0
2
1
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Morphodynamics Facilitate Cancer Cells to Navigate 3D Extracellular Matrix

Christopher Z. Eddy,1 Helena Raposo,2 Aayushi Manchanda,3 Ryan Wong,1 Fuxin Li,4 and Bo Sun1, ∗
1Department of Physics, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR, 97331
2Department of Chemical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR, 97331
3Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR, 97331
4School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis OR, 97331

Cell shape is linked to cell function. The signiﬁcance of cell morphodynamics, namely the tem-
poral ﬂuctuation of cell shape, is much less understood. Here we study the morphodynamics of
MDA-MB-231 cells in type I collagen extracellular matrix (ECM). We systematically vary ECM
physical properties by tuning collagen concentrations, alignment, and gelation temperatures. We
ﬁnd that morphodynamics of 3D migrating cells are externally controlled by ECM mechanics and
internally modulated by Rho/ROCK-signaling. We employ machine learning to classify cell shape
into four diﬀerent morphological phenotypes, each corresponding to a distinct migration mode. As a
result, we map cell morphodynamics at mesoscale into the temporal evolution of morphological phe-
notypes. We characterize the mesoscale dynamics including occurrence probability, dwell time and
transition matrix at varying ECM conditions, which demonstrate the complex phenotype landscape
and optimal pathways for phenotype transitions. In light of the mesoscale dynamics, we show that
3D cancer cell motility is a hidden Markov process whereby the step size distributions of cell mi-
gration are coupled with simultaneous cell morphodynamics. Morphological phenotype transitions
also facilitate cancer cells to navigate non-uniform ECM such as traversing the interface between
matrices of two distinct microstructures. In conclusion, we demonstrate that 3D migrating cancer
cells exhibit rich morphodynamics that is controlled by ECM mechanics, Rho/ROCK-signaling,
and regulate cell motility. Our results pave the way to the functional understanding and mechanical
programming of cell morphodynamics as a route to predict and control 3D cell motility.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Shape deﬁnes the cell. In the 1677 book Micrographia,
Robert Hooke showed sections within a herbaceous plant
under a microscope. The shape of those sections resem-
bles cells in a monastery, so he named the structures
cells [1]. Many breakthroughs followed Hooke’s discov-
ery, from the cell theory of Schwann and Schleiden, to the
theory of tissue formation by Remak, Virchow and Kol-
liker, and the theory of cellularpathologie by Virchow, all
of which are inspired by observations of cell shapes, or
morphology in general [2, 3].

In our modern view cell shape is determined by cell
function [4, 5]. A nerve cell has long branched protru-
sions for communication with other neurons; while the
cuboidal shape of epithelial cells allow them to tile the
surface of organs. Loss of characteristic shape, on the
other hand, is associated with functional abnormality.
Thus morphological characterization has been an impor-
tant tool for diagnosis such as in red blood cell disease [6],
neurological disease [7], and cancer [8, 9]. More recently,
cell shape analysis is boosted by techniques from com-
puter vision. As a result, it becomes possible to obtain
high content information of cellular states from morpho-
logical data alone [9–13].

While most research focuses on the static cell morphol-
ogy, the dynamic ﬂuctuation of cell shape is much less un-
derstood [14, 15]. However, shape ﬂuctuation – namely
morphodynamics, is of central importance for dynamic

∗ Correspondence to sunb@onid.orst.edu

cellular functions. The abnormal diﬀusion of small pro-
trusions - microvilli - on the surface of a T cell allows
the T cell to eﬃciently scan antigen-presenting surfaces
[16]. For a migrating cancer cell, morphodynamics drives
the motility of the cell in many ways similar to our body
frame movements that enable swimming.
In fact, just
as there are diﬀerent swimming styles, cancer cells have
been observed to execute multiple programs – migration
modes – during invasion in 3D tissue space [17]. Each
mode has distinct signatures of morphology and morpho-
dynamics, and are usually classiﬁed based on cell mor-
phology as ﬁlopodial, lamellipodial, lobopodial, blebbing,
and actin-enriched leading edge [18]. Cancer cell migra-
tion modes is controlled by intracellular signaling such as
the Rho-ROCK-myosin pathways [19, 20], and extracel-
lular factors such as the elasticity, and degradability of
the extracellular matrix (ECM) [18, 21]. The ability of a
cancer cell to switch between migration modes is impor-
tant for tumor prognosis. Many therapies, such as MMP
inhibitors that target a particular mode of cell motility,
fail to stop tumor metastasis largely because cells take
other available migration programs [22, 23].

In this paper, we study the morphodynamics of MDA-
MB-231 cells, a highly invasive human breast cancer cell
line, in 3D collagen matrices. We devise machine learn-
ing techniques to classify cell shapes into morphological
phenotypes that correspond to known migration modes.
This approach provides a mesoscale mapping of cell mor-
phodynamics into transitions among morphological phe-
notypes. We ﬁnd individual cells are capable of rapidly
sampling multiple morphological phenotypes, implying
spontaneous migration mode transitions. We ﬁnd ECM

 
 
 
 
 
 
mechanics coupled with cell mechanosensing pathways
regulate the stability and transition rates between mor-
phological phenotypes. We also ﬁnd that such transi-
tions facilitate cancer cells to navigate ECM with inher-
ent structural and mechanical heterogeneity. Our results
reveal 3D cancer cell migration as a hidden Markov pro-
cess and morphodynamics contribute to the changes of
motility by ECM physical cues.

FIG. 1. Three-dimensional migration of MDA-MB-231 cells
show signiﬁcant cell shape ﬂuctuation.
(A) A typical time
lapse recording of 25 hours is projected onto a single im-
age with colors representing time. (B) The real space (x-y
plane), and shape ﬂuctuations of 3 cells shown in (A). (C)
The mean square displacement (σ2) of selected cell geomet-
ric measures. Dots: experimental measurements. Solid lines:
linear ﬁt. Dashed lines: 95% prediction interval. Here the
form factor is deﬁned as perimeter2/area. Curl is deﬁned as
the ratio between the major axis length and skeletonized con-
tour length. This ﬁgure is prepared with Mathlab R2020a
(www.mathworks.com) and ImageJ (https://imagej.net).

II. RESULTS

We ﬁnd 3D migrating cancer cells demonstrate rapid
shape ﬂuctuations (Fig. 1(A-B)). In order to quantify
the cell morphodynamics, we take time-lapse ﬂuorescent
images of MDA-MB-231 cells migrating in collagen ma-
trices. The GFP-labeled cells typically stay within the
focal depth of the objective lens (20X, NA 0.7) for 10-20
hours, while we obtain 2D cell images at a rate of 4 frames
per hour (see SI Appendix section S1). After binarization
and segmentation, we compute a total of twenty-one geo-
metric measures which collectively quantify the shape of
a cell (see SI Appendix section S2). These geometric mea-
sures characterize cell size (such as area and perimeter),

2

deviation from circle (such as aspect ratio and form fac-
tor), surface topography (such as solidity), and backbone
curvature (such as curl – the ratio between the major axis
length and skeletonized contour length).

The morphodynamics of a cell manifests itself as a ran-
dom walk in the geometric shape space concurrent with
its motility in the 3D matrix (Fig. 1). However, un-
like the real space motility that is slightly superdiﬀusive
[24], we ﬁnd cell morphodynamics is subdiﬀusive in the
geometric shape space (Fig. 1C and SI Appendix sec-
tion S3). The subdiﬀusivity suggests physical barriers
that are present both intrinsic to the cells and from the
3D ECM. Indeed, we ﬁnd cells moving on 2D surface ex-
hibit faster shape ﬂuctuations than cells embedded in 3D
ECM. Still, on ﬂat surfaces cells show subdiﬀusive ran-
dom walks in the geometric shape space and superdiﬀu-
sive walks in real space (SI Appendix section S3).

After quantitatively demonstrating the shape ﬂuctua-
tions of migrating cancer cells, we next investigate cell
morphodynamics at a mesoscale that allows us to gain
insights on cell migration modes. This is possible be-
cause diﬀerent migration modes are associated with dis-
tinct characteristic cell morphologies (Fig. 2A) [17, 18].
Using 3800 manually labeled single cell images, we have
trained machine classiﬁers that classify cell morphology
into four morphological phenotypes based on and named
after their corresponding migration modes.

We consider four morphological phenotypes includ-
ing two amoeboidal ones: actin-enriched leading edge
(or AE in short) and small blebbing (BB); as well as
two mesenchymal ones: ﬁlopodial (FP) and lamellipo-
dial (LA). These morphological phenotypes are associ-
ated with known migration modes exhibiting character-
istic molecular ﬁngerprints. For instance AE and BB cells
do not rely on cell-ECM adhesions during migration. For
BB cells, their cortical stress continuously drives the for-
mation of rounded blebs at the cell membrane [25–27].
AE cells, on the other hand, demonstrate elevated actin
polymerization that drive sharp protrusions [28, 29]. Nei-
ther AE nor BB cells show clear polarization of cytoskele-
ton and cytoskeleton-associated proteins.
In contrast,
FP and LA cells exhibit strong cell-ECM adhesions. The
ﬁlopodial cells consist of distinguishable F-actin bundles
extending across the polarized cell body [30, 31], while
the lamellipodial cells feature fan-shaped leading edges of
migration [32, 33]. See also Fig. S19 for characteristic F-
actin subcellular structures. Of note, another migration
mode, namely lobopodial or nuclear piston mode, has
not been observed in our experiments which is consistent
with previous reports [34].

Once the classiﬁer is trained, morphological pheno-
types are determined automatically from a cell image if
a particular phenotype receives more than 60% proba-
bility score (Fig. 2B). For a small fraction of cells (≈
10%), none of the four phenotypes receive more than
60% probability score, we consider these cells to be in
an intermediate state.

We have trained two classiﬁers (see SI Appendix S4).

13perimeter2(104𝜇𝑚2)031aspect ratiotime (hour)025ABtime delay (hour)𝜎2𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎(𝜇𝑚4)103104110𝜎2𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟(×10−4)14𝜎2𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑙(×10−2)0.61.8110110𝑦~𝑥𝑛𝑛=0.6𝑦~𝑥𝑛𝑛=0.4𝑦~𝑥𝑛𝑛=0.25C3

ings of 3D migrating MDA-MB-231 cells we ﬁnd cells
spontaneously make transitions among diﬀerent morpho-
logical phenotypes. Fig. 3A shows snapshots of a typ-
ical cell. The cell switches directly from blebbing (B)
mode to lamellipodial (L) mode via intermediate state
(I). Therefore using machine learning technique we map
cell morphodynamics into transitions between morpho-
logical phenotypes, or their associated migration modes.

FIG. 2. Development of a supervised machine learning model
to classify cells into morphological phenotypes correspond-
ing to diﬀerent migration modes. (A) MDA-MB-231 cells in
3D collagen matrices exhibit multiple morphological pheno-
types that are characteristic of four distinct migration modes:
actin-enriched leading edge (AE), small blebbing (BB), ﬁlopo-
dial (FP), and lamellipodial (LA). Scale bars are 20 µm. (B)
The cell images are quantiﬁed using a total of 21 geometric
measures such as area, solidity, and aspect ratio. With 3800
manually labeled single cell images we have trained a sup-
ported vector machine (SVM) to calculate probability scores
(Val) for a cell to belong to each morphological phenotypes
(classes). We assign a cell to the class C with the maximum
score (M ax(C, val)), if this maximum score is greater than a
threshold of 60% (M ax(C, val) >0.6). We consider a cell to
be at an intermediate state if none of the four classes have
a score higher than 0.6. In (B) a sample cell image is clas-
siﬁed as a lamellipodial cell (LA), because LA class has a
score of greater than 0.6. (C) To better visualize the high
dimensional geometric measures, we apply t-SNE method to
generate a 3D projection of the geometric cell shape space.
15,000 unseen data set is presented here. Diﬀerent morpho-
logical phenotypes are well separated. AE (yellow): actin-
small blebbing. FP
enriched leading edge. BB (green):
(magenta): ﬁlopodial. LA (blue):
lamellipodial. This ﬁg-
ure is prepared with Matlab R2020a (www.mathworks.com)
and ImageJ (https://imagej.net).

The ﬁrst one is based on support vector machines (SVM
[35, 36]) involving 21 geometric measures of binarized
cell images. The second one is based on Random-Forest
model using the same geometric properties [37]. The two
classiﬁers agree with each other well on test data sets
(90% overlapping). The SVM classiﬁer particularly has
a higher success rate of classifying unseen data (88%). In
the following we mainly report the results from SVM al-
gorithm. We also employ the t-SNE algorithm to reduce
the dimension of the (21-dimensional) geometric shape
space to facilitate visualization of cellular morphodynam-
ics. As shown in Fig. 2C, unseen data (15,000 data
points) belonging to diﬀerent morphological phenotypes
form separable clusters in the embedding space.

By applying the SVM classiﬁer to time lapse record-

FIG. 3. Rho/ROCK-signaling internally controls mesoscale
morphodynamics of 3D cultured MDA-MB-231 cells. (A) A
sample time series of morphological phenotype. Insets: three
snapshots showing the GFP-labeled cell morphology. Abbre-
viations: B – blebbing, I – intermediate state, L – lamel-
(B) Representative morphological changes under
lipodial.
treatment of Y27632 and CN03, which downregulates and
upregulates Rho/ROCK signaling respectively. (C-D) Char-
acteristic morphodynamic trajectories of cells in the t-SNE
embedded shape space. The trajectories start immediately
after introducing Y27632 or CN03, and ends after 12 hours
of incubating with the drugs. The forward time directions
are shown as thick curves with arrows as guide to the eyes.
Two representative trajectories (one with circular symbols,
and another one with triangular symbols) per each treatment
are shown as colored symbols connected by black lines, where
color represents the instantaneous phenotype. Unconnected
light-colored dots show training sets which are the same as in
Fig. 2C. Note that to better visualize the 3D trajectories, co-
ordinates have been rotated with respect to Fig. 2C. This ﬁg-
ure is prepared with Matlab R2020a (www.mathworks.com)
and ImageJ (https://imagej.net).

In order to understand the mechanisms underlying cell
morphological phenotype transitions, we examine the ef-
fects of manipulating Rho/ROCK-signaling, which is a
master regulator that determines the mechanical state of
a cell. Rho/ROCK-signaling controls key aspects of cell
morphogenesis and migration, such as actomyosin con-
tractility, actin polymerization, cell-cell and cell-ECM
adhesion [38]. By regulating the cell mechanotrans-
duction pathways, Rho/ROCK-signaling has also been

V3V2Train DataV1geometric measurest-SNE embeddingArea = 693 µm2Solidity = 0.6Aspect Ratio = 1.1(18 other measures)SVM ClassifierCAEBBFPLAVal18.6%8.7%2.5%70.2%actin-enriched leading edge (AE)blebbing (BB)filopodia (FP)lamellipodia (LA)visualization of training setsABCAEBBFPLAROCK ↓Y27632Rho ↑CN03ROCK ↓Y27632Rho ↑CN03V1V2V3V1V2V3ACDAEBBFPLABtimeB→Lshown to control 3D cell migration phenotype plasticity
[20].

We apply Y27632 [39], a potent Rho kinase (ROCK)
inhibitor, and CN03 [40], a Rho-activator to MDA-MB-
231 cells cultured in collagen ECM (see SI appendix
S5). Y27632 reduces actomyosin contractility, promoting
transitions from blebbing to mesenchymal phenotypes
[41]. On the other hand, CN03 elevates myosin II ac-
tivity, leading to retraction of ﬁlopodia to rounded cell
shapes (Fig. 3B). These results are consistent with pre-
vious reports on the molecular control of cell migration
modes by Rho/ROCK-signaling [18].

While previous studies focus on the end points of ma-
nipulating Rho/ROCK-signaling, morphodynamic anal-
ysis oﬀers insights to the transition paths between mi-
In particular, we take advantage of a
gration modes.
modiﬁed t-SNE algorithm [42], which projects a cell im-
age in the embedding space deﬁned by the training sets
(Fig. 2C, SI appendix S4). This approach allows us to
map the continuous shape change of a cell as a trajectory
in the embedded shape space. Similar approaches have
also been employed previously in studying complex body
movements of other organisms such as fruit ﬂies, where
transition paths between diﬀerent ﬂy behaviors can be
visualized [43].

Tracking the mesoscale morphodynamics of MDA-MB-
231 cells under pharmacological perturbations, we ﬁnd
up and down regulation of Rho/ROCK-signaling do not
lead to a reversal of morphodynamic trajectories. In par-
ticular, when treated with Y27632 blebbing cells turn to
ﬁlopodial or lamellipodial via strongly converging trajec-
tories most of which ﬁrst visiting AE states (see also SI
appendix S5). Fig. 3C shows two representative tra-
jectories. AE state exhibits weak cell-ECM adhesions
and F-actin rich protrusions [44, 45]. Our results sug-
gest AE states mediate Rho/ROCK-signaling controlled
transition from amoeboidal to mesenchymal motility. On
the other hand, CN03 treatment causes the majority of
mesenchymal cells to switch to blebbing modes. How-
ever, without going through AE states, CN03 leads to
strongly ﬂuctuating and diverging trajectories observed
from multiple cells (Fig. 3D shows two representative
trajectories, see also SI appendix S5).

Since Rho/ROCK-signaling is employed by cells to
sense ECM physical properties, we next investigate the
In
external control of mesoscale cell morphodynamics.
particular, we focus on the role of ECM physical prop-
erties in regulating cell morphological phenotype tran-
sitions. In order to control the microstructure of colla-
gen matrices we apply three methods as shown in Fig.
4(A-D) (see also SI appendix S6). First, increasing gela-
tion temperature from room temperature (RT) to 37 ◦C,
while keeping collagen density at [col]= 1.5 mg/mL sig-
niﬁcantly reduces ﬁber length and pore size (Fig. 4B).
Second, increasing collagen density to [col]= 3.0 mg/mL
while keeping gelation temperature at room temperature
moderately reduces pore size, preserves a clear ﬁbrous
structure, and increases stiﬀness (Fig. 4C). Finally, keep-

4

ing gelation at room temperature and [col]=1.5 mg/mL,
while generating an unidirectional ﬂow ﬁeld during gela-
tion leads to aligned collagen ﬁbers in the ECM. This
method creates strong anisotropy in the ECM.

We ﬁnd the occurrence probability (population frac-
tion) of diﬀerent morphological phenotypes are remark-
ably diﬀerent at diﬀerent ECM conditions. As shown in
Fig. 4E, increasing gelation temperature does not aﬀect
the probability of AE and LA cells. However, the ho-
mogeneous matrix microstructure at 37 ◦C signiﬁcantly
reduces the fraction of FP cells from 43% to 25%, while
increases fraction of BB cells from 15% to 25%. Com-
pared with increasing gelation temperature, doubling col-
lagen concentration leads to less dramatic changes of
the ECM microstructure. Correspondingly, only mod-
erate changes of phenotype probabilities are observed.
On the other hand, when matrix anisotropy is increased
by aligning ECM ﬁbers, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant shift of cells
from amoeboid phenotypes to ﬁlopodial mode. Taken to-
gether, these results show that ECM heterogeneity and
anisotropy determine the probability of diﬀerent morpho-
logical phenotypes.

We have also examined the stability of each morpho-
logical phenotype by measuring the average dwell time –
duration of a cell to stay continuously in a morphologi-
cal phenotype before transition to another (SI appendix
S7). As shown in Fig. 4F, in all three cases manipu-
lating ECM physical properties moderately increase the
dwell time of all four morphological phenotypes. There-
fore the changes in the phenotype probability can not be
explained by the phenotype stability alone, and in some
cases move in opposite trend from the dwell times ob-
served. For instance, occurrence probability of ﬁlopodial
cells is lowest at 37 ◦C, which happens to be the condi-
tion where ﬁlopodial cells show longest dwell time. As
we will show later, such discrepancies can be attributed
to the detailed transition paths between the phenotypes.
To reveal further details of morphological phenotype
dynamics, we have computed the phenotype transition
matrix: rates r that characterize the probability of tran-
sitions per hour between any two phenotypes (Fig. 4G-J
(see also SI appendix S7). While the rates vary dra-
matically for diﬀerent ECM conditions (arrows in Fig.
4G-J), we notice several remarkable common features.
First, direct transitions along FP - BB path rarely hap-
pen (r <0.03 hr−1). Instead, amoeboidal - mesenchymal
transitions are primarily mediated by LA and AE states,
presumably by turning cell-ECM adhesion on and oﬀ.
On the other hand, transitions within the amoeboidal
(AE - BB) and mesenchymal (FP - LA) modes are fre-
quent, and the rates can go up to 1 per hour. Finally,
while the morphological phenotype transitions are intrin-
sically non-equilibrium processes, probability ﬂuxes be-
tween states are generally very small (SI appendix S7).
This means that an approximate detailed balance exists
among morphological phenotypes.
In comparison with
other nonequilibium stationary processes at mesoscale
[46], we speculate morphological phenotype transitions

5

FIG. 4. Physical properties of collagen ECM regulate the morphological phenotype homeostasis of 3D migrating MDA-MB-
231 cells. (A-D) Confocal reﬂection images and pseudo colored MDA-MB-231 cells for collagen matrices prepared at varying
conditions. Scale bars: 20 µm. A: collagen ECM prepared at room temperature (RT, or 25 ◦C) and collagen concentration of
[col] = 1.5 mg/mL. B: collagen ECM prepared at 37 ◦C and [col] = 1.5 mg/mL. C: collagen ECM prepared at RT and [col] =
3.0 mg/mL. D: collagen ECM prepared with ﬂow-aligned collagen ﬁbers. (E) Fraction of cells in each morphological phenotype.
8,000 single cell images are analyzed under each ECM condition. (F) Dwell time of cells in each morphological phenotype.
Errorbars in (E-F) represent 95% conﬁdence intervals calculated from 1000 bootstrap iterations. (G-J): The transition matrix
– morphological phenotype transition rates under varying ECM conditions. G: collagen ECM prepared at room temperature
and [col] = 1.5 mg/mL. H: collagen ECM prepared at 37 ◦C and [col] = 1.5 mg/mL. I: collagen ECM prepared at RT and [col]
= 3.0 mg/mL. J: collagen ECM prepared with ﬂow-aligned collagen ﬁbers. Under each ECM condition a total of more than
2,000 hours of single cell trajectories are analyzed. This ﬁgure is prepared with Matlab R2020a (www.mathworks.com) and
ImageJ (https://imagej.net).

are not gated by active processes such as ATP consump-
tion.

The transition rates also oﬀer insights to understand
the ECM-dependence of the fraction of cells in each mor-
phological phenotype (Fig. 4E). For instance, as gelation
temperature increases from RT to 37 ◦C, rates from AE
to FP decreases by 52 percent, and rates from BB to
AE decreases by 22 percent (Fig. 4G and Fig. 4H). As
a result, we observe more blebbing cells and less ﬁlopo-
dial cells in collagen matrices prepared at 37 ◦C. This
is consistent with the mechanical mechanism of blebbing
formation [47, 48]. Blebs form when actomyosin contrac-
tility exceeds the binding between cortical actin and cell
membrane. A blebbing cell turns to AE when actin poly-
merization causes sharp protrusion on the membrane.
Our results suggest that homogeneous collagen ECM fa-
vors BB phenotype to AE, likely due to the reduced pro-
trusive force associated with actin polymerization.

Conversely, as ECM becomes more anisotropic (Fig.
4G and Fig. 4J), the transition rate from LA to FP in-
creases as much as 27 percent, while rate from AE to BB
decrease by 44 percent. Together, these altered rates lead
to a signiﬁcant fraction of blebbing cells turning to ﬁlopo-
dial as shown in Fig. 4E. Filopodial protrusions consist
of elongated F-actin bundles supported by elevated actin
polymerization and cross-linking by Ena/VASP proteins
[49]. Our results suggest that the mechanical barrier sep-
arating ﬁlopodia and blebbing protrusions is too high for

actomyosin contractility to overcome directly.
Instead,
a blebbing cell turning into a ﬁlopodial one has to ﬁrst
transform into AE or LA states.

Because the morphological phenotype of a cell is linked
to its 3D migration mode, we next investigate if the in-
vasion potential of MDA-MB-231 cells depends on the
mesoscale morphodynamics. Due to the short dwell
times for each morphological phenotype, we only consider
two coarse-grained classes of morphologies: mesenchymal
(ME), which consists of FP and LA states; and amoe-
boidal (AM), which consists of AE and BB states.
In
particular, we measure for short time scales the step size
distributions and for longer time scales the mean square
displacement of the cells in randomly aligned collagen
matrices gelled at room temperature (Fig. 5).

Interestingly we ﬁnd the steps are better described by
a log-normal, rather than Gaussian distribution (SI ap-
pendix S8) due to frequent large steps. Fig. 5A shows
the mean and variance of the ﬁtting parameters.
It is
clear that the steps in physical space are coupled with the
corresponding mesoscale dynamics. For cells that dwell
in the amoeboidal class, both mean and variance of the
steps are the smallest. Correspondingly, the mean square
displacement of amoeboid cells have a small slope, cor-
responding to an eﬀective diﬀusivity of 6 µm2/hour (for
each spatial dimension, Fig. 5B). On the other hand,
cells make larger steps when dwelling in the mesenchy-
mal class, and the eﬀective diﬀusivity increases by three-

ABEGIHJrate (ℎ𝑟−1)10alignedAEFPBBLAprobability0.60Fdwell time (hr)3collagen densityx2RT to 37°CCD0AEFPBBLAAEFPBBLAAEFPBBLA00.20.40.6Observation ProbabilityAEFPBBLA00.20.40.6Observation ProbabilityAEFPBBLA00.20.40.6Observation ProbabilityAEFPBBLA00.20.40.6Observation Probabilityrandom, RT37°C3.0 mg/mLfold to 19 µm2/hour. The observed higher motility for
cells in the ME state than in AE state is consistent with
both migratory measurements in vitro [50] and metas-
tasis measurements in vivo [51]. For instance, using a
mouse breast cancer model, it is shown that inhibition
of mesenchymal phenotype by NEDD9-depletion signif-
icantly (by ≈ 50%) reduces the number of circulating
tumor cells.

Our analysis shows that not only it is important to
distinguish diﬀerent morphological phenotypes in study-
ing the motility of cancer cells, but also one may need to
take into account of phenotype transitions. We ﬁnd cell
migration steps associated with diﬀerent class-switching
events have distinct statistical distributions (Fig. 5A,
also see SI appendix S8 for the motility characteristics
of cells involving intermediate states). Without account-
ing for the class-switching events, the weighted average
of mean square displacements from mesenchymal, amoe-
boidal, and intermediate state cells underestimates the
observed cell motility by 20% (Fig. 5B, the weighted av-
erage MSD curve corresponds to a diﬀusivity of approxi-
mately 15 µm2/hour, as compared with 19 µm2/hour for
full cell trajectories). We also ﬁnd cell motility depend on
the direction of state transitions. For instance, the vari-
ance of steps coupled to ME-to-AM transition is almost
twice the value for AM-to-ME transition (Fig. 5A, lower
panel). Since morphological phenotype transitions occur
spontaneously at single cell level, our results show that
morphodynamics and cell motility are closely coupled to
determine the invasive potential of cancer cells.

During metastasis a migrating cancer cell must navi-
gate ECM of distinct mechanical properties. Therefore,
we next investigate how cell morphodynamics facilitate
cell traverse interfaces and adapt to ECM of distinct me-
chanics. To this end, we create collagen matrices consist
of two integrated layers (SI appendix S9). The RT layer
is prepared at room temperature that shows a porous
ﬁbrous network, and the 37 ◦C layer is prepared at 37
◦C showing a much more homogeneous structure (Fig.
6A). Without additional cues MDA-MB-231 cells ran-
domly navigate the ECM, occasionally traverse the in-
terface to experience a sudden change of ECM physical
properties. Over the course of 24 hours we do not observe
durotaxis.

Consistent with the corresponding results in uniform
ECM, we ﬁnd the likelihood of observing a ﬁlopodial cell
is signiﬁcantly higher in the ECM layer prepared at room
temperature, while for blebbing cells the probability is
higher in the gel layer prepared at 37 ◦C (Fig. 6B). The
dwell times of phenotypes, on the other hand, follow the
same trend of occurrence probabilities but change rather
moderately (Fig. 6C).

The shift of phenotype homeostasis once again can
be understood from the phenotype transition matrices.
To simplify the discussion in Fig. 6D we plot the top
four matrix elements of the transition matrices calcu-
lated from cells in each of the two layers. In the RT layer,
ﬁlopodial cell population is enriched by frequent LA-AE

6

FIG. 5. Cancer cell migration in 3D ECM is coupled with
morphological phenotype and phenotype transitions.
(A)
Means (m, upper panel) and variances (σ2, lower panel) of
the step size distributions by ﬁtting the experimental mea-
surements with log-normal distribution. The steps are cat-
egorized based on morphological phenotype (coarse-grained
as mesenchymal, amoeboidal and intermediate state) dynam-
ics. ME: abbreviation for mesenchymal, which includes FP
and LA states. AM: abbreviation for amoeboidal, which in-
cludes BB and AE states. If a cell makes a step by starting
from AM state to ME state, the step is categorized as an
AM-ME step. The starting and ending frames of steps are
In (A) errorbars show the 95%
separated by 15 minutes.
conﬁdence interval of ﬁtted parameters. (B) Real-space (2D
projection) mean square displacements (MSD) of cells. AM:
the MSD of cells dwelling in the AM state. ME: the MSD of
cells dwelling in the ME state. average: the weighted average
of mean square displacements of AM, ME, and intermediate
dwelling cells. The average is based on the occurrence frac-
tion of AM, ME and intermediate state of cells. Full trajec-
tory: the MSD obtained from entire cell trajectories regard-
less of the morphological phenotypes. Shaded areas in C show
SEM. In (A-B) a total of 1974 hours of single cell trajectories
are analyzed. The ECM are prepared at room-temperature
with a concentration [col] = 1.5 mg/mL. This ﬁgure is pre-
pared with Mathlab R2020a (www.mathworks.com) and Im-
ageJ (https://imagej.net).

exchange and LA to FP transition. As cells cross the
interface, LA to FP becomes less likely, and the AE-BB
pathway is steered to favor blebbing states.

To further quantify the eﬀect of the interface in modu-
lating cell morphodynamics, we calculate spatial frequen-
cies of dwell events (Fig. 6E) and AE-originating tran-
sition events (Fig. 6F). We deﬁne a coordinate system
where the y-axis is along the interface passing x=0 (Fig.
6A). This allows us to combine data from multiple repeat-
ing experiments where cell locations are seeded randomly.
After aligning the coordinates, we deﬁne the spatial fre-
quency of transition (or dwell) events from state i to state
j as R(i → j, x), which satisﬁes

P (i → j, x) = R(i → j, x)M (x)

(1)

Here P (i → j, x) is the probability density of observing
event i → j per unit time (1 hour), and M (x) is the cell
density (along x-axis). We use a 1-D Gaussian kernel to
estimate P (i → j, x) and M (x) (SI appendix S9). As a

AM-AMAM-MEME-MEME-AM0369122 (m2)AM-AMAM-MEME-MEME-AM01234m (m)AM-AMAM-MEME-AMME-ME𝑚	(µ𝑚)𝜎!	(µ𝑚!)40120lag time (hours)0.511.5𝜎"#!	(µ𝑚!)15000ABAMMEaveragefull trajectoryresult, the spatial frequency R(i → j, x) represents the
likelihood of a cell to undergo a speciﬁc type of transition
over unit time (1 hour) as a function of distance to the
interface.

The spatial frequency of dwell events clearly show that
while FP state is increasingly stable into the RT layer,
LA and BB states are more stable in the 37 ◦C layer.
AE state, on the other hand, is most stable at the in-
terface (Fig. 6E). Therefore AE state plays a special
role in mediating the cell adaptation across distinct ECM
layers. Indeed, we ﬁnd a gradual shift of favorable AE-
originating transitions as distance to the interface varies.
The frequency of AE to LA events, the main amoeboidal
to mesenchymal path, peaks in the RT layer. AE to
BB events, which is mainly responsible of enriching bleb-
bing cells, has peak frequency in the 37 ◦C layer. Taken
together, we ﬁnd morphological phenotype transitions
and the associated migration mode switching are integral
parts of cancer cell invasion and adaptation to complex
ECM.

III. DISCUSSION

In this paper, we report the morphodynamics of MDA-
MB-231 cells in type I collagen ECM as a model sys-
tem of metastatic cancer cells migrating in 3D tissue.
MDA-MB-231 cells rapidly change their geometry, ex-
hibiting a subdiﬀusive random walk in the geometric
shape space. This occurs simultaneously with their su-
perdiﬀusive walks in the real space (Fig. 1).

The biological signiﬁcance of the morphodynamics is
further demonstrated by classifying cell shapes into mor-
phological phenotypes corresponding to diﬀerent migra-
tion programs (Fig. 2). This allows us to study cell
morphodynamics at the mesoscale, in terms of morpho-
logical phenotype transitions. Utilizing machine learning
and visualization techniques, we show that cell morpho-
dynamics is regulated by Rho/ROCK-signaling (Fig. 3),
which is a molecular control hub of cell mechanosens-
ing and force generation. It has been shown previously
that Rho/Rac signaling regulates the shift between mes-
enchymal and amoeboidal motility [19, 21]. Our analy-
sis further reveals that instead of favoring a particular
mode of motility, perturbations of Rho/ROCK-signaling
In particu-
alter the migration mode transition rates.
lar, down regulating Rho leads to overall amoeboidal-to-
mesenchymal transition that routes through AE and LA
states. Activation of Rho, on the other hand, leads to
strongly ﬂuctuating morphodynamics that enriches bleb-
bing cells. The irreversibility of up and down regulating
Rho/ROCK-signaling results suggest a complex pheno-
type landscape that controls 3D cancer cell motility.

We study morphological phenotype transitions in ECM
of distinct physical properties and ﬁnd ECM microstruc-
ture modulates the probabilities, dwell times, and tran-
sition rates of morphological phenotypes. Collagen ma-
trices with homogeneous structure, as those prepared at

7

higher temperature, enrich the population of blebbing
cells. By comparing the transition matrices, we ﬁnd the
enrichment of blebbing cells is directly related with the
reduced transition rate from BB to AE state, and also in-
directly contributed by the mesenchymal-to-amoeboidal
transition through LA and AE states. Similarly, collagen
matrices with structural anisotropy enrich the population
of ﬁlopodial cells. The enrichment is directly attributed
to an increased LA to FP rate, and indirectly contributed
by the amoeboidal-to-mesenchymal transition mediated
by LA and AE states. These results show that it is pos-
sible to execute external control of cell morphodynam-
ics (and the corresponding 3D migration modes) through
ECM mechanics. Importantly, taking into account of the
phenotype transitions allows us to better predict the out-
come of manipulating cell migration mode through ECM
physical properties [17, 52].

In light of the rapid phenotype transitions exhibited by
individual cells, 3D cancer cell motility may be consid-
ered as a hidden Markov process where each phenotype is
associated with characteristic step size distributions (Fig.
5). Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd steps that occur simultaneously
with a phenotype transition have distinct sizes compared
with steps that occur while cells dwell in a particular
morphological phenotype. This makes morphodynamics
a crucial factor in determining the invasive potential of
cancer cells. To our knowledge, this aspect has been so
far largely overlooked in the literature.

In the lens of a hidden Markov process, morphody-
namics may facilitate cancer invasion because phenotype
transitions allow cancer cells to search for and commit to
a more eﬀective migration program [53]. Using a ECM
model consisting of two mechanically distinct layers, we
show the cells gradually adjust their morphodynamics
as they approach and cross the layer interface (Fig. 6).
Therefore morphological phenotype transitions may be
essential in cancer cell metastasis by enabling the cells to
navigate non-uniform ECM.

The connection between morphological phenotypes
and cell migration modes may be further strengthened
by incorporating key molecular ﬁngerprints. Using a
small data set, we ﬁnd the machine-classiﬁed morpholog-
ical phenotypes have F-actin structures that are expected
from the corresponding migration modes (Fig. S19, [31]).
We anticipate that training with a multichannel data set
which includes not only cell shape but also molecular
proﬁles such as actin, myosin, and integrin, will improve
accuracy in identifying cell migration modes. However,
doing so could reduce the throughput and limit the ap-
plicability in general imaging settings.

In summary, we demonstrate the morphodynamics of
3D migrating cancer cells as a powerful tool to inspect
the internal state and microenvironment of the cells. In-
vestigated at mesoscale, the morphodynamics imply that
3D cancer cell migration is inherently plastic [18]. The
plasticity is controlled by the mode transition matrices,
rather than a deterministic decision tree [17]. In order to
further exploit the information provided by the cell shape

8

FIG. 6. Morphological phenotype transition facilitates cell migration in heterogeneous ECM. (A) Time-lapse projection of
3D migrating MDA-MB-231 cells navigating engineered heterogeneous ECM. The ECM contains two adjacent layers that are
prepared at room temperature (RT) and 37 ◦C respectively. A confocal reﬂection image shows the ECM structure next to the
interface (dashed line, y-axis). Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) Fraction of cells of each morphological phenotype in both sides of the
interface. (C) Dwell time of cells of each morphological phenotype in both sides of the interface. (D) Phenotype transition
(F) Spatial frequency of AE to AE, AE to
rates in both sides of the interface.
LA and AE to BB events. See main text for the deﬁnition of spatial frequency R(i → j, x). In (E-F) dashed lines indicate
the interface (x=0) separating the 37 ◦C gel (left) and RT gel (right). A total of 3,800 hours of single cell recordings from
three independent experiments have been used to calculate the results in (B-F). This ﬁgure is prepared with Mathlab R2020a
(www.mathworks.com) and ImageJ (https://imagej.net).

(E) Spatial frequency of of dwell events.

ﬂuctuations, future research is needed to decode morpho-
dynamics as a rich body language of cells, and to control
morphodynamics as a route of mechanical programming
of cell phenotype.

IV. MATERIALS AND METHODS

GFP-labeled MDA-MB-231 cells are purchased from
GenTarget Inc and are handled following the vendor’s
recommendations. High concentration rat tail Type I
collagen solutions are purchased from Corning Inc, and
the collagen gels are prepared following standard pro-
tocol. Cells and collagen ﬁbers are imaged using Leica
SPE confocal microscope with ﬂuorescent and reﬂection
channels simultaneously. A streamline of utilizing Im-
ageJ , Matlab, and Python scripts are developed to an-
alyze raw images. See SI Appendix S1-S10 for details of
3D cell culture, microscopy, pharmacological treatments,
and data analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This is a preprint of an article published in Scientiﬁc
Reports. The ﬁnal authenticated version is available
online at: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-99902-9.
We thank Prof. Michelle Digman and Prof. Steve Press´e
for helpful discussions. We also thank Prof. Willie
Rochefort and Conor Harris for help with rheological
measurements. The funding for this research results from
a Scialog Program sponsored jointly by Research Cor-
poration for Science Advancement and the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation through a grant to Oregon State
University by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
(award 6790.11). Part of this research was conducted at
the Northwest Nanotechnology Infrastructure, a National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure site at Ore-
gon State University which is supported in part by the
National Science Foundation (grant NNCI-1542101) and
Oregon State University. C. Eddy and B. Sun are sup-
ported by DOD award W81XWH-20-1-0444 (BC190068).
B. Sun is also supported by the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences award 1R35GM138179 and Na-
tional Science Foundation award PHY-1844627.

[1] R. Hooke, Micrographia (The Royal Society, 1665).
[2] P. Mazzarello, “A unifying concept: the history of cell

theory,” Nat. cell biol. , E13–E15 (1999).

[3] E. Mayr, The Growth of the Biological Thought (Belknap,

Cambridge, MA, 1982).

[4] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, D. Morgan, M. Raﬀ,
K. Roberts, and P. Walter, Molecular biology of the cell
(Garland Science, 2014).

[5] R. Singhvi, A. Kumar, G. P. Lopez, G. N. Stephanopou-
los, D. I. Wang, G. M. Whitesides, and D. E. Ingber,

probability0.6LABBFPAE037°CRT100 𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚0.70AE→AEBB→BBLA→LAFP→FP𝑇𝑇𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑(hr)40rate (ℎ𝑟𝑟−1)0.8BCDEFLABBFPAE37°CRTAEAEBBBBFPFPLALA37°CRT0𝑅𝑅𝑖𝑖→𝑖𝑖(ℎ𝑟𝑟−1)37°CRT𝑅𝑅𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴→𝑋𝑋(ℎ𝑟𝑟−1)0.1037°CRT100 𝜇𝜇𝑚𝑚ABBLAAEAERT37°C𝑥𝑥𝑦𝑦𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥“Engineering cell shape and function,” Science 264, 696–
698 (1994).

[6] Monica Diez-Silva, Ming Dao, Jongyoon Han, Chwee-
Teck Lim, and Subra Suresh, “Shape and biomechanical
characteristics of human red blood cells in health and
disease,” MRS bulletin / Materials Research Society 35,
382–388 (2010).

[7] Alberto Serrano-Pozo, Matthew P Frosch, Eliezer
Masliah, and Bradley T Hyman, “Shape and biomechan-
ical characteristics of human red blood cells in health and
disease,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 1,
a006189 (2011).

[8] Z. Yin, A. Sadok, H. Sailem, A. McCarthy, X. Xia, F. Li,
M. A. Garcia, L. Evans, A. R. Barr, N. Perrimon, C. J.
Marshall, S. T. C. Wong, and C. Bakal, “A screen for
morphological complexity identiﬁes regulators of switch-
like transitions between discrete cell shapes,” Nat. Cell
Biol. 15, 860–871 (2013).

[9] Pei-Hsun Wu, Jude M. Phillip, Shyam B. Khatau, Wei-
Chiang Chen, Jeﬀrey Stirman, Sophie Rosseel, Kather-
ine Tschudi, Joshua Van Patten, Michael Wong, Sonal
Gupta, Alexander S. Baras, Jeﬀrey T. Leek, Anirban
Maitra, and Denis Wirtz, “Evolution of cellular morpho-
phenotypes in cancer metastasis,” Sci. Rep. 5 (2015),
10.1038/srep18437.

[10] C. Bakal, J. Aach, G. Church, and N. Perrimon, “Quan-
titative morphological signatures deﬁne local signaling
networks regulating cell morphology,” Science 316, 1753
(2007).

[11] Michael Held, Michael H A Schmitz, Bernd Fischer,
Thomas Walter, Beate Neumann, Michael H Olma,
and Daniel W Ger-
Matthias Peter, Jan Ellenberg,
lich, “CellCognition:
time-resolved phenotype annota-
tion in high-throughput live cell imaging,” Nat Methods
7, 747–754 (2010).

[12] Van K. Lam, Thanh C. Nguyen, Byung M. Chung,
George Nehmetallah, and Christopher B. Raub, “Quan-
titative assessment of cancer cell morphology and motil-
ity using telecentric digital holographic microscopy and
machine learning,” Cytometry Part A 93, 334–345
(2017).

[13] J. C. Caicedo1, S. Cooper, F. Heigwer, S. Warcha, P. Qiu,
C. Molnar, A. S. Vasilevich, J. D. Barry, H. S. Bansal,
O. Kraus, M. Wawer, L. Paavolainen, M. D. Herrmann,
M. Rohban, J. Hung, H. Hennig, J. Concannon, I. Smith,
P. A. Clemons, S. Singh, P. Rees, P. Horvath, R. G.
Linington, and A. E. Carpenter, “Data-analysis strate-
gies for image-based cell proﬁling,” Nat. Methods 14, 849
(2017).

[14] G. Pau, T. Walter, B. Neumann, J. H´erich´e, J. Ellenberg,
and W. Huber, “CellCognition: time-resolved phenotype
annotation in high-throughput live cell imaging,” BMC
Bioinformatics 14, 1–10 (2013).

[15] S. Gordonov, M. K. Hwang, A. Wells, F. B. Gertler, D. A.
Lauﬀenburger,
and M. Bathe, “Time series modeling
of live-cell shape dynamics for image-based phenotypic
proﬁling,” Integrative biology 8, 73–90 (2016).

[16] En Cai, Kyle Marchuk, Peter Beemiller, Casey Bep-
pler, Matthew G. Rubashkin, Valerie M. Weaver, Audrey
G´erard, Tsung-Li Liu, Bi-Chang Chen, Eric Betzig, Fred-
eric Bartumeus, and Matthew F. Krummel, “Visualizing
dynamic microvillar search and stabilization during lig-
and detection by t cells,” Science 356 (2017).

9

[17] C. D. Paul, P. Mistriotis,

and K. Konstantopoulos,
“Cancer cell motility: lessons from migration in conﬁned
spaces,” Nature Reviews Cancer 17, 131 (2017).

[18] R. J. Petrie and K. M. Yamada, “At the leading edge of
three-dimensional cell migration,” J. Cell Science 125,
5917–5926 (2012).

[19] V. Sanz-Moreno, G. Gadea, J. Ahn, H. Paterson,
P. Marra, S. Pinner, E. Sahai, and C. J. Marshall, “Rac
activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell
movement,” Cell 135, 510–523 (2008).

[20] S. Wilkinson, H. F. Paterson,

and C. J. Marshall,
“Cdc42-mrck and rho-rock signalling cooperate in myosin
phosphorylation and cell invasion,” Nat. Cell Biol. 7,
255–261 (2005).

[21] V. Sanz-Moreno and C. J. Marshall, “The plasticity of
cytoskeletal dynamics underlying neoplastic cell migra-
tion,” Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 690–696 (2010).

[22] M. Pavlaki and S. Zucker, “Matrix metalloproteinase in-
hibitors (mmpis): the beginning of phase i or the termi-
nation of phase iii clinical trials,” Cancer Metastasis Rev.
22, 177–203 (2003).

[23] K. Wolf, I. Mazo, H. Leung, K. Engelke, U. H. von An-
drian, E. I. Deryugina, A. Y. Strongin, E. Br¨ocker, and
P. Friedl, “Compensation mechanism in tumor cell mi-
gration,” J. Cell Biol. 160, 267 (2003).

[24] L Liu, G Doclos, B Sun, J Lee, A Wu, Y Kam, E Sontag,
H Stone, J C Sturm, R Gatenby, and R H Austin, “Mini-
mization of thermodynamic costs in cancer cell invasion,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 110, 1686–1691 (2013).

[25] Guillaume Charras and Ewa Paluch, “Blebs lead the way:
how to migrate without lamellipodia,” Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology 9, 730–736 (2008).

[26] Anna Lorentzen, Jeﬀrey Bamber, Amine Sadok, Ilan
Elson-Schwab, and Christopher J Marshall, “An ezrin-
rich, rigid uropod-like structure directs movement of
amoeboid blebbing cells,” Journal of cell science 124,
1256–1267 (2011).

[27] Daisuke Yamazaki, Shusaku Kurisu, and Tadaomi Tak-
enawa, “Regulation of cancer cell motility through actin
reorganization,” Cancer science 96, 379–386 (2005).
[28] Ryan J Petrie and Kenneth M Yamada, “At the leading
edge of three-dimensional cell migration,” Journal of cell
science 125, 5917–5926 (2012).

[29] Jeﬀrey B Wyckoﬀ, Sophie E Pinner, Steve Gschmeiss-
ner, John S Condeelis,
and Erik Sahai, “Rock-and
myosin-dependent matrix deformation enables protease-
independent tumor-cell invasion in vivo,” Current Biol-
ogy 16, 1515–1523 (2006).

[30] Perihan Nalbant, Louis Hodgson, Vadim Kraynov, Alexei
Toutchkine, and Klaus M Hahn, “Activation of endoge-
nous cdc42 visualized in living cells,” Science 305, 1615–
1619 (2004).

[31] John Philip Trinkaus, “Surface activity and locomotion of
fundulus deep cells during blastula and gastrula stages,”
Developmental biology 30, 68–103 (1973).
[32] Michael Abercrombie, Joan EM Heaysman,

and Su-
san M Pegrum, “The locomotion of ﬁbroblasts in culture
i. movements of the leading edge,” Experimental cell re-
search 59, 393–398 (1970).

[33] Ryan J Petrie, N´uria Gavara, Richard S Chadwick, and
Kenneth M Yamada, “Nonpolarized signaling reveals two
distinct modes of 3d cell migration,” Journal of Cell Bi-
ology 197, 439–455 (2012).

[34] R. J. Petrie, H. M. Harlin, L. T. Korsak, , and K. M.
Yamada, “Activating the nuclear piston mechanism of
3d migration in tumor cells,” J. Cell Biol. 216, 93–100
(2017).

[35] Corinna Cortes and Vladimir N. Vapnik, “Support-

Vector Networks,” Machine Learning 20, 1–10 (1995).

[36] Asa Ben-Hur, David Horn, Hava Siegelmann,

and
Vladimir N.; Vapnik, “Support vector clustering,” Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 2 (2001).

[37] Leo Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning 45,

5–32 (2001).

[38] Martin Schwartz, “Rho signalling at a glance,” Journal

of Cell Science 117, 5457–5458 (2004).

[39] Masahiro Matsubara and Mina J. Bissell, “Inhibitors of
Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling revert the malignant phe-
notype of breast cancer cells in 3D context,” Oncotarget
7, 31602–31622 (2016).

[40] Abdelkader Daoud, Udhayakumar Gopal, Jasmine Kaur,
and Jennifer S.
Isaacs, “Molecular and functional
crosstalk between extracellular Hsp90 and ephrin A1 sig-
naling,” Oncotarget 8, 106807–106819 (2017).

[41] T. Yeung, P. C. Georges, L. A. Flanagan, B. Marg,
M. Ortiz, M. Funaki, N. Zahir, W. Ming, V. Weaver,
and P. A. Janmey, “Eﬀects of substrate stiﬀness on cell
morphology, cytoskeletal structure, and adhesion,” Cell
Motil. Cytoskeleton 60, 24–34 (2005).

[42] L.J.P. van der Maaten, “Learning a parametric embed-
ding by preserving local structure,” Proceedings of the
Twelfth International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Statistics JMLR W&CP 5, 384–391 (2009).
[43] Gordon J. Berman, Daniel M. Choi, William Bialek,
and Joshua W. Shaevitz, “Mapping the stereotyped be-
haviour of freely moving fruit ﬂies,” Journal of The Royal
Society Interface 11, 20140672 (2014).

[44] K. Yoshlda and T. Soldatl, “Dissection of amoeboid
movement into two mechanically distinct modes,” J. Cell
Science 119, 3833–3844 (2006).

10

[45] J. B. Wyckoﬀ, S. E. Pinner, S. Gschmeissner, J. S.
Condeelis, and E. Sahai, “Rock- and myosin-dependent
matrix deformation enables protease-independent tumor-
cell invasion in vivo.” Curr. Biol. 16, 1515–1523 (2006).
[46] Christopher Battle, Chase P. Broedersz, Nikta Fakhri,
Veikko F. Geyer, Jonathon Howard, Christoph F.
Schmidt, and Fred C. MacKintosh, “Broken detailed bal-
ance at mesoscopic scales in active biological systems,”
Science 352, 604–607 (2016).

[47] Jean-Yves Tinevez, Ulrike Schulze, Guillaume Salbreux,
Julia Roensch, Jean-Fran¸cois Joanny, and Ewa Paluch,
“Role of cortical tension in bleb growth,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 106, 18581–18586
(2009).

[48] R. J. Petrie, N. Gavara, R. S. Chadwick, and K. M.
Yamada, “Nonpolarized signaling reveals two distinct
modes of 3d cell migration,” J. Cell Biol. 197, 439–455
(2012).

[49] M. R. Mejillano, S. Kojima, D. A. Applewhite, F. B.
Gertler, T. M. Svitkina, and G. G. Borisy, “Lamellipo-
dial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery:
pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end,” Cell 118, 363–
373 (2004).

[50] Alakesh Das, Melissa Monteiro, Amlan Barai, Sandeep
Kumar, and Shamik Sen, “Mmp proteolytic activity reg-
ulates cancer invasiveness by modulating integrins,” Sci-
entiﬁc Reports 7, 14219 (2017).

[51] B. C. Jones, L. C. Kelley, Y. V. Loskutov, K. M. Marinak,
V. K. Kozyreva, M. B. Smolkin, and E. N. Pugacheva,
“Dual targeting of mesenchymal and amoeboid motility
hinders metastatic behavior,” Molecular cancer research
15, 670–682 (2017).

[52] A. D. Doyle and K. M. Yamada, “Mechanosensing via
cell-matrix adhesions in 3d microenvironments,” Exp.
Cell Res. 343, 60–66 (2016).

[53] P. B. Gupta, C. M. Fillmore, G. Jiang, S. D. Shapira,
K. Tao, C. Kuperwasser, and E. S. Lander, “Stochastic
state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in
populations of cancer cells,” Cell 146, 633–644 (2011).

