International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 5 - May 2020 

Using a Binary Classification Model to Predict 
the Likelihood of Enrolment to the 
Undergraduate Program of a Philippine 
University 
Joseph A. Esquivel1, James A. Esquivel2 
1DIT Student, Graduate School, Angeles University Foundation 
McArthur Highway, Angeles City, Philippines 

Abstract —  With the recent implementation of the K 
to  12  Program,  academic  institutions,  specifically, 
Colleges  and  Universities  in  the  Philippines  have 
been  faced  with  difficulties  in  determining  projected 
freshmen  enrollees  vis-à-vis  decision-making  factors 
for  efficient  resource  management.  Enrollment 
targets  directly  impacts  success  factors  of  Higher 
Institutions.  This  study  covered  an 
Education 
analysis  of  various  characteristics  of 
freshmen 
applicants  affecting  their  admission  status  in  a 
Philippine  university. 
  A  predictive  model  was 
developed  using  Logistic  Regression  to  evaluate  the 
probability  that  an  admitted  student  will  pursue  to 
enroll in the Institution or not.  The dataset used was 
acquired from the University Admissions Office.  The 
office designed an online application form to capture 
applicants’  details.  The  online  form  was  distributed 
to  all  student  applicants,  and  most  often,  students, 
tend to provide incomplete information.  Despite this 
fact,  student  characteristics,  as  well  as  geographic 
and  demographic  data  based  on  the  student’s 
location  are  significant  predictors  of  enrollment 
decision.    The  results  of  the  study  show  that  given 
information  about  prospective  students, 
limited 
implement 
Institutions  can 
Higher  Education 
machine 
supplement 
techniques 
learning 
management decisions and provide estimates of class 
sizes,  in  this  way,  it  will  allow  the  institution  to 
optimize  the  allocation  of  resources  and  will  have 
better control over net tuition revenue. 

to 

Keywords — Data Mining, Education Data Mining, 
Predictive  Modeling,  Binary  Classification,  Logistic 
Regression. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Data  mining  is  defined  as  the  process  of 
uncovering  and  analysis  of  large  sum  of  data  that 
targets  to  reveal  hidden  patterns  and  rules.  Data 
mining supports in the extraction of knowledge from 
unprocessed  data  (Bra,  et.al.,  2012).    In  a  study 
conducted  by  Sabnani,  More,  Kudale  and  Janrao 
(2018), they stated that data mining is the uncovering 
of  hidden  predictive  information  from  database  that 
includes the process of analyzing data from different 

it 

perspectives  and 
into  useful 
summarizing 
information to increase revenue.  With the continuous 
growth  of  voluminous  data,  there  is  a  good  reason 
that  smart  data  analysis  will  be  more  pervasive  and 
will  be  a  necessary  component  for  technological 
advancement (Osisanwo et., al., 2017). 

In the  educational  setting,  Undaiva,  Patel,  Shah 
and Nikhil (2015), presented in their research that the 
main objective of Educational Data Mining (hereafter 
referred  to  as  EDM)  is  to  discover  hidden  patterns, 
association  and  relations  to  discover  the  hidden 
knowledge through different data mining techniques.  
The  knowledge  discovered  by  the  techniques  would 
enable  the  higher  learning  institutions  to  improve 
their  educational  processes  which  include  making 
better  decisions,  having  more  advanced  planning  in 
directing  students,  predicting  individual  behaviors 
with  higher  accuracy,  and  enabling  the  institution  to 
allocate resources and staff more effectively. 

Higher Education  Institutions  exert much  effort 
and  substantial  resources  to  influence,  predict  and 
recognize  the  decision-making  choices  of  student 
applicants  who  have  been  offered  admission  (Basu, 
et. al., 2019).  They are challenged by the uncertainty 
of human selection patterns, which greatly affects the 
target  number  of  incoming  students  (Abelt,  et.  al., 
2015).   

The birth of K to 12 in the Philippines added up 
to  the  increasing  pressure  of  the  HEIs,    college 
freshmen enrolment plunged to its lowest state in SY 
2016-2017 that stretches to SY 2017-2018.   Another 
growing  concern  is,  graduates  of  the  K  to  12  Senior 
High  School  program  (Grade  12),  may  or  may  not 
intend to enroll college since the SHS curriculum was 
designed to prepare students for one of the following: 
employment, entrepreneurship, Tech-Voc and Higher 
Education. 

Predicting 

students’  decision 

to  pursue 
admission  may  help  the  University  to  save  and 
properly  manage  resources  and  fairly  distribute 
scholarship 
to  underprivileged  but  deserving 
students. 

ISSN: 2231-2803                               http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 6 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 5 - May 2020 

breakdown  of  enrolment  based  on  the  location  of 
applicants’ residences,  whether  within  or  outside  the 
province where the University is located. 

TABLE III 
STUDENT APPLICANT ADMISSION VS ENROLMENT 

Applicants  Admit 
4,486 
7,879 

Enroll 
3,414 

% 
76.10% 

TABLE IIIII 
STUDENT APPLICANT RESIDENCE 

Residence 
In-Province 
Out-Province 

Admit 
6,489 
1,390 

Enroll 
3,199 
215 

% 
49.3% 
15.5% 

Table  IV  shows  the  gender  breakdown  of 
students,  the  percentage  of  those  who  applied  and 
pursued enrolment were also indicated on the table. 

TABLE IVV 
STUDENT APPLICANT GENDER 

Gender 
Male 
Female 

Admit 
3,635 
4,244 

Enroll  % 
51.4 
1,870 
39.9 
1,693 

Fig. 1  shows the breakdown of students who applied 
online and those who opted to apply on-site.  A total 
of  1,962  students  applied  on-line  in  which  892 
pursued their  enrolment and  1,070  did not.    Most  of 
the  applicants  preferred 
traditional  way  of 
applying, on-site application process.  

the 

The  graphs  illustrated  were  generated  using 
Google  Data  Studio.    These  figures  enable  the 
Institution’s  decision  makers  to  quickly  grasp  the 
trend  and  may  assist  in  making  informed  decisions 
for the school’s main source of funds, students.  

II. METHODOLOGY 

This  section  illustrates  the  research  design, 
procedures  and  planned  data  analysis  used  in  the 
study.  

A.  Freshmen Data Description 

This  section  of  the  paper  describes  freshmen 
information  which  generally  consists  of  information 
on their enrolment status, residency, gender, parent’s 
job, type of Senior High School where they graduated 
from, School Choice.    

Table  I  presents  some  of  the  demographic 
variables included in the study.  The variables found 
in  the  dataset  are  considered  as  potential  predictors  
of the dependent variable that is to enroll (Yes) or not 
enroll (No). 

A  total  of  nineteen  (19)  features  were  included 
in  the  Feature  Selection  process  utilizing  Weka 
Attribute Evaluator (supervised). 

TABLE I 
STUDENT APPLICANT ADMISSION DATA 

Feature 
OL Pursued 

Within_City 

Description 
A binary variable indicating 
the whether the applicant is 
enrolled or not. The label is 
1 if the applicant pursued 
enrolment and 0 otherwise. 
City or Municipality where 
the Applicant is residing 

Within_Province  A binary variable which tells 

Religion_Binary 

Type_of_School 

With_Honors 

School_choice 

whether applicant lives 
within the province of 
Pampanga or not. 
A binary variable which 
indicates the Religion of the 
applicant. Whether applicant 
is (0) Non-Catholic or (1) 
Catholic.  
A binary variable which 
indicates the type of SHS 
where the applicant 
graduated from.  Whether 
the school is (0) Public or 
(1) Private. 
A binary variable indicating 
whether the applicant 
received an honor or not. 
A binary variable which 
indicates whether the 
applicant’s first school 
choice is the local 
institution. 

Table II displays the details of enrolees in terms 
of  the number  of  applications, admitted  and  pursued 
enrolment  for  the  school  year  2018.   A total number 
of  7,879  applications  were  received  by  the  local 
university  of  which  4,486  were  admitted  and  3,414 
pursued  their  enrolment.  Table  III  presents  the 

ISSN: 2231-2803                               http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 5 - May 2020 

also combined in order to make meaningful insights, 
as  seen  in  the  tables  and  graphs.      The  combined 
dataset  was  processed  using  Weka  in  order  to  build 
the  Logistic  Regression  model.    The  result  of  the 
model  was  evaluated  based  on 
its  accuracy, 
sensitivity and specificity. 

D.  Statistical Analysis of Data 

The study evaluated the prediction performance 
of  the  features,  which  is  an  essential  part  of  the 
research  undertaking.    Classification  method  will 
allow  to  categorize  the  data  into  distinct  number  of 
classes.    The  classification  algorithm  used  in  the 
study  is  a  Binary  Classifier, also  known  as,  Logistic 
Regression,  with  only  two  (2)  possible  outcomes,  to 
enroll (Yes) or not enroll (No).  
Confusion  matrix 

to 
evaluate  the  accuracy  of  the  prediction.    Matrix  was 
applied on the Logistic Regression results. 

table  was  also  used 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The purpose of this study was to create and apply 
a  predictive  model  to  predict  college  admission  and 
enrollment  using  student  characteristics.  The  study 
examined  SY  2018  admission  and  actual  enrollment 
datasets in a local university. 

A.  Features Selection 

Features  were  selected  using  Classifier  Subset 
Evaluator  utilizing  Logistic  as  the  classifier  in  order 
to estimate the accuracy of the subsets and Best first 
as  the  search  method  utilizing  bi-directional  search 
direction.  

The results, selected features, were then identified 
and applied to create the predictive model, see Figure 
3.  The  dataset  contains  nineteen  (19)  features  and 
among  these  features,  twelve  (12)  features  were 
selected,  these  selected  attributes  were  then  applied 
to  the  model  in  order  to  achieve  the  best  accuracy 
percentage.  

Within_City, 

The following attributes with their corresponding 
rank,  as  shown  in  figure  3,  were  selected:  OL 
Pursued, 
Within_Province, 
College_Admitted_To_Binary, 
Religion_Binary, 
Total_Number_Siblings, 
Guardian_Parent_Bnary, 
Previous_School_Binary, 
With_Honors, 
School_Choice, Type_Of_School. 

Table  V  presents  the  details  of  the  performance 

metrics for evaluating the models.  

schools  where 

Fig. 2  indicates the breakdown of applicants courses 
and 
to.  
Accountancy  registered  the  highest,  followed  by 
Aeronautics Engineering  

they  were  admitted 

B.  Research Design 

The  regression  model  predicts  a  categorical 
from  a  selected  group  of 
dependent  variable 
predictors 
(Fidell  &  Tabachnick,  2019).  The 
predicted  variable  is  how  likely  a  student  applicant 
will  pursue  enrollment  in  the  institution.  The  study 
the 
provided  details  about 
preprocessing 
data 
the 
exploration,  and  summarized  the  methodology.    The 
researcher  employed  descriptive  research  design, 
since  the  study  mined  students’  and  University’s 
characteristics.    Distinguishing  these  attributes  will 
help  in  predicting  students’  decision  whether  to 
pursue enrollment or not. 

the  data,  discussed 
data, 

performed 

of 

research 

Prediction 

design  was 

also 
implemented  to  identify  relationships  of  the  features 
or variables with the dependent variable, to enroll or 
not  to  enroll.    Since  the  study  will  predict  the 
enrollment  decision  of  a 
is 
classification 
dichotomous 
algorithm, Logistic Regression, is implemented. 

student,  which 

in  nature, 

binary 

C.  Procedure 

Data mining process was applied to retrieve and 
transform  the  datasets  which  were  sourced  from  the 
Admissions  Office  of  the  University.    Initially,  the 
dataset  was  cleaned  using  basic  strategies  such  as 
implementing  imputation  and  /  or  discard  rows  or 
columns containing missing values. 

The data mining process involved the following 
steps: 1) enrollment data collection, 2) Data Cleaning 
and  Wrangling  3)  Feature  Selection  utilizing 
Correlation  Attribute  Evaluator  and  Ranker,  3) 
Splitting the records into Test and Train data, 4) train 
the    classifier  using  k-fold  cross  validation,  5) 
execute  model  using  test  data  set  and  evaluate  the 
results.  Dataset  was  prepared  using  MS  Excel, 
cleaning involves removal of duplicates in data entry, 
dataset  from  different  sources,  Marketing  Campaign 
and  Actual  Enrolment  Records  from  the  ITSS,  were 

ISSN: 2231-2803                               http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 8 

 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 5 - May 2020 

TABLE VI 
METRICS FOR EVALUATION 

TP Rate 
0.843 

Detailed Accuracy By Class 
FP Rate 
0.327 

Precision  Recall 
0.843 

0.757 

F-Measure 
0.798 

Fig.  3    Out  of  nineteen  (19)  features,  twelve  (12) 
were  selected  from  the  dataset  using  a  bi-directional 
search method. 

B.  Metrics for Evaluating the Model 

The  model  was  evaluated  based  on 

three 
performance  measures:  accuracy,  sensitivity  and 
specificity.    Table  III  shows  the  descriptions  of  the 
metrics.  

TABLE V 
METRICS FOR EVALUATION 
Regular 

Formula 

Description 

Metric 
Accuracy  Measures the ability of 
the model to correctly 
predict the class label of 
unseen data. 
Sensitivity  Measures the proportion 

of True Positives (or 
Yes’s) that are correctly 
identified as such. 

Specificity  Measures the proportion 

of True Negatives (or 
No’s) that are correctly 
identified as such. 

C.  Logistic Regression Model 

This  section  discusses  the  Logistic  Regression 
results  using  Weka.    In  building  the  model,  as 
prescribed by Weka Attribute selector and to achieve 
a  high  accuracy  rate,  twelve  (12)  features  were 
included.  Also,  all  records  in  the  dataset  were  used 
and  ten  (10)  fold  cross  validation  was  applied  in 
building  the  model.    Table  VI  below  shows  the 
Detailed Accuracy By Class. 

True Positive (TP) Rate result, as shown above, is 
a  fairly  good  indicator  which  means  the  model 
correctly  predicted  a  label  (predicted  yes  and  it  is  a 
yes), False Positive (FP) Rate  yield also have shown 
a  good  result,  this  is  incorrectly  predicting  the  label 
(predicted  yes  and it  was  actually  no),  the  lower  the 
value  the  better  the  interpretation.    Accuracy  (F-
Measure)  shows  an  average  of  79.8%  accuracy  rate 
with the selected features applied in the model. 

D.  Confusion Matrix 

This  section  shows  an  evaluation  of  the  result 

using a confusion matrix. 

TABLE VII 
CONFUSION MATRIX 

Positive (1)  Negative (0) 

Positive (1) 
Negative (0) 

3,637 
1,166 

679 
2,397 

In  order  to  test  the  performance  of  the  LR 
model, the  entire  dataset  was  utilized as  training  set.  
Results  from  Weka  showed  that  the model  predicted 
3,637  applicants  were  classified  to  enroll,  on  the 
other  hand,  2,397  were  predicted  otherwise,  not  to 
enroll,  in  the  Academic  Institution,  679  applicants 
were  incorrectly  identified  as  not  to  enroll  but  will 
enroll  and  lastly,  1,166  applicants  were  incorrectly 
labeled. 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

The  study  illustrated  the  factors that influenced 
the enrolment decision of prospective students based 
on  their  characteristics.  With  the  results  generated, 
Machine  Learning  techniques  may  be  used  as  a 
supplement  to  enrollment  decisions  and  to  measure 
the level of  correlation between enrollment and such 
factors.  From nineteen (19) variables, Weka reduced 
the  relevant  features  selected  to  twelve  (12)  which 
can yield a high accuracy performance.  

The model was able to predict the enrollment of 
an applicant based on a given set of features  with an 
accuracy rate of 80% using the selected attributes. 

The  accuracy  rate  percentage  can  be  improved 
by  adding  other  relevant  features  such  as  SHS  GPA 
of applicants, NSAT Grades and Scholarships. 

Future  direction  of  the  research  is  to  integrate 
datasets  from  the  Registrar,  Marketing,  Student 
Affairs  and  Testing  Offices,  comparison  of  multiple 
classification  techniques  other  than  LR  such  as 
Support  Vector  Machines  (SVMs)  and  Neural 
Networks.  Also,  the  implementation  of  Geocoding, 

ISSN: 2231-2803                               http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 5 - May 2020 

that  is  to  incorporate  geographic  locations  on  the 
model, 
location 
like  considering  an  applicant’s 
relative to that of the institution they are applying to.  
Lastly, the application of feature engineering, that is, 
designing  surveys  for  prospective  students  to  better 
their 
understand 
enrolment to the University. 

their  decisions 

for  pursuing 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  authors  wish  to  acknowledge  the  assistance 
extended  by  the  participating  institution  especially 
the  offices  of  the  Admissions,  University  Registrar 
and the ITSS.   

REFERENCES 

[1]  Abelt, J., Browning, D., Dyer, C., Haines, M., Ross, J., Still, 
P.,  and  Gerber,  M.,  “Predicting  likelihood  of  enrollment 
among  applicants  to  the  UVa  undergraduate  program” 
Available: 
(2015, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/sieds.2015.7116973. 

194–199. 

[Online]. 

June10). 

[2]  Basu,  K.,  Basu,  T.,  Buckmire,  R.,  and  Lal,  N.,  (2019). 
“Predictive  Models  of  Student  College  Commitment 
Decisions  Using  Machine  Learning”.  Data,  4(2),  65. 
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/data4020065.  

[3]  Bra, A., and Lungu, I. (2012) “Improving Decision Support 
Systems  with  Data  Mining  Techniques".  Advances  in  Data 
Mining  Knowledge  Discovery  and  Applications.  [Online]. 
Available: https://doi.org/10.5772/47788.  

[4]  H.  Sabnani,  M.  More,  P.  Kudale,  and  S.  Janrao,  (2018). 
“Prediction  of  Student  Enrolment  Using  Data  Mining 
Techniques”  International  Research  Journal  of  Engineering 
and Technology, 4–7. Retrieved from www.irjet.net 
[5]  B.  G.  Tabachnick,  &  L.  S.  Fidell,  (2019).  “Using 
Multivariate  Statistics  Title:  Using  multivariate  statistics” 
from 
(Vol. 
https://lccn.loc.gov/2017040173 

Retrieved 

1–14. 

7). 

[6]  Osisanwo, F.Y., Akinsola J.E.T., Awodele, O., Hinmikaiye, 
J.  O.,  Olakanmi,  O.,  and  Akinjobi,  J.  (2017).  “Supervised 
Machine  Learning  Algorithms:  Classification 
and 
Comparison” International Journal of Computer Trends and 
Technology (IJCTT) –  Volume 47 Number 3, 2017. ISSN: 
2231-2803,  10.14445/22312803/IJCTT-V48P126,  pp  128  – 
138. 
website: 
from 
https://www.ijcttjournal.org/2017/Volume48/number-
3/IJCTT-V48P126.pdf 
J.  N.  Undavia,  P.  M.  Dolia  and  N.  P.  Shah,  (2013). 
“Education  Data  Mining  in  Higher  Education  -  A  Primary 
Prediction  Model  and 
Its  Affecting  Parameters” 
International Journal of Current Research, 5(5), 1209–1213. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.4514.1840 

Available 

IJCTT 

[7] 

ISSN: 2231-2803                               http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 10 

 
