The  Influences  of  Pre-birth  Factors  in  Early  Assessment  of  Child 

Mortality using Machine Learning Techniques 

Asadullah Hill Galiba*, Nadia Nahara, and B M Mainul Hossaina 

aInstitute of Information Technology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh;  

*Email: bsse0712@iit.du.ac.bd; Address: Shopno Nir Tower, 52/3-C, Balughat, Dhaka 

Cantonment, Dhaka – 1206, Bangladesh. 

 
 
The  Influences  of  Pre-birth  Factors  in  Early  Assessment  of  Child 

Mortality using Machine Learning Techniques 

Analysis of child mortality is crucial as it pertains to the policy and programs of a 

country. The early assessment of patterns and trends in causes of child mortality 

help decision-makers assess needs, prioritize interventions, and monitor progress. 

Post-birth factors of the child, such as real-time clinical data, health data of the 

child,  etc.  are  frequently  used  in  child  mortality  study.  However,  in  the  early 

assessment  of  child  mortality,  pre-birth  factors  would  be  more  practical  and 

beneficial  than  the  post-birth  factors. This study  aims  at  incorporating  pre-birth 

factors,  such  as  birth  history,  maternal  history,  reproduction  history,  socio-

economic  condition,  etc.  for  classifying  child  mortality.  To  assess  the  relative 

importance of the features, Information Gain (IG) attribute evaluator is employed.  

For  classifying  child  mortality,  four  machine  learning  algorithms  are  evaluated. 

Results  show  that  the  proposed  approach  achieved  an  AUC  score  of  0.947  in 

classifying child mortality which outperformed the clinical standards. In terms of 

accuracy, precision, recall, and f-1 score, the results are also notable and uniform. 

In developing countries like Bangladesh, the early assessment of child mortality 

using pre-birth factors would be effective and feasible as it avoids the uncertainty 

of the post-birth factors. 

Keywords:  Child  Mortality,  Bangladesh,  Pre-birth  Factors,  Healthcare,  Feature 

Importance, Classification, Machine Learning 

1. Introduction 

Despite the child mortality rate is decreasing all over the world, it is still an alarming issue 

in the underdeveloped and developing countries. Child mortality is one of the most critical 

concerns of Bangladesh. Bangladesh's child mortality rate was 32.4 deaths per 1,000 live 

births in 2018 as reported by  UNICEF.1 According to the Central Intelligence Agency 

(CIA) of USA Bangladesh ranked 61th among 225 countries in infant mortality.2 In global 

context, 15,000 children under-5 die every day all over the world.3 That immense number 

of children die due to a lack of facilities and many other factors. 

 
 
Factors and trends associated with child mortality might also help in classifying 

child  mortality.  According  to  existing  works,  post-birth  factors,  such  as  clinical  and 

health-related  real-time  factors  are  crucial  in  child  mortality  analysis.4-8  However,  the 

incorporation of pre-birth factors, such as birth history, socio-economic attributes, family 

history,  maternal  history,  etc.  could  be  beneficial  in  the  early  classification  of  child 

mortality.  Moreover,  trends  in  the  causes  of  child  mortality  serve  as  important  global 

health information to guide efforts to improve child survival. Besides, trends and factors 

associated with  child mortality differ  from  country  to  country due to  living standards, 

socio-economic  conditions,  environmental  factors,  etc.  For  instance,  Hobcraft  et  al. 

suggests that mother education levels tend to be strongly correlated with child mortality 

in  Asian  countries.9  So,  identifying  those  trends  and  factors  associated  with  child 

mortality, utilizing those in classifying child mortality would be helpful to prevent child 

death. 

In developing countries like Bangladesh, there are several studies that try to sort 

out trends and factors associated with child mortality. With the child mortality declining 

in Bangladesh, the distribution of causes of death also changes. Liu et al. investigated the 

trends  in  causes  of  death  among  children  under  5  in  Bangladesh.10  Accordingly, 

Pneumonia remained the top killer of children under 5 in Bangladesh between 1993 and 

2004.  Many  other  factors  and  trends  regarding  child  mortality  in  Bangladesh  are 

discussed in the related literature, such as sex of the child, mother's and father's education, 

mother's age, preceding birth interval, place of residence , mother work status, place of 

delivery, multiple births, breastfeeding, birth age, period of birth, age-specific effects of 

previous child's death  etc.11-18 However, to the best of our knowledge, no study deals 

with child mortality classification or prediction in the context of Bangladesh. Apart from 

that,  most  of  the  relevant  studies  regarding  child  mortality  prediction  or  classification 

 
 
incorporated many post-birth features, such as clinical features, health features, and many 

other  real-time  data  of  the  child.4-8  Though  incorporating  pre-birth  features  might  be 

decisive in the early assessment of child mortality classification, those features are mostly 

ignored in the related works. 

This study aims to analyze the feature importance in classifying child mortality 

and incorporate pre-birth factors in classifying child mortality in Bangladesh. By doing 

so,  a  crucial  healthcare  issue  –  child  mortality  can  be  assessed  earlier.  Dataset  from 

Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS) is used to extract relevant features 

from birth history, maternity, reproduction, and socio-economic information. According 

to existing works, feature selection takes into account the trends and factors associated 

with child mortality in Bangladesh. With the selected features, the feature importance is 

analyzed by measuring the Information Gain of each feature. Here, the Information Gain 

Attribute Evaluator with Ranker Search Method are used for measuring relative feature 

importance. Consequently, a ranking of features is generated using the features according 

to relevant importance in classifying child mortality. Next, for the classification of child 

mortality, the selected features are used to model machine learning classifiers. The model 

is  trained  using  the  past  data  records  of  both  successful  survival  and  child  death  in 

Bangladesh.  Four  machine  learning  classifiers  are  used  for  model  training  -  Support 

Vector  Machine  (SVM),  Random  Forest,  Logistic  Regression,  and  Naive  Bayes.  The 

comparative performance of each model is evaluated by running each model through 10-

fold cross-validation. 

To evaluate the performance of child mortality classification, different metrics, 

such as AUC (Area Under the receiver operating characteristic Curve), precision, recall, 

f-1 scores, and accuracy is measured. According to existing works, AUC is mostly used 

and suitable metric for performance evaluation. The results show that the performance of 

 
 
the  child  mortality  classification  in  terms  of  AUC  scores  is  high  in  comparison  with 

relevant  studies  and  clinical  standards.4,20,21  The  results  of  other  metrics  are  also 

consistent and noteworthy. For Instance, Decision Tree classifier gives precision score of 

0.943, recall score of  0.971, f-1 score of 0.957, and accuracy of 0.921 respectively.  In 

classifying  child  mortality,  Decision  Tree  and  Random  Forest  outperformed  other 

classifiers. 

This  study  aims  to  answer  two  research  questions  (RQ)  concerning  feature 

importance and performance of the child mortality classification: 

  How do the pre-birth factors perform in classifying child mortality? 

  What is the relative feature importance in classifying child mortality? 

The  first  question  seeks  to  analyze  the  relevance  and  influence  of  pre-birth  factors  in 

classifying  child  mortality.  The  second  question  tries  to  figure  out  the  relative 

significance of the factors in child mortality classification. 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work on the classification of child 

mortality in Bangladesh using machine learning techniques. 

2. Related Work 

Researchers  investigated  many  factors  associated  with  child  and  infant  mortality  in 

Bangladesh. For instance, Kabir et al. analyzed several factors influencing child mortality 

in Bangladesh, such as mother's and father's education, type of place of residence (rural 

or urban), work status of mother, sex of the child, place of delivery (home or hospital), 

mother's age at the time of birth, etc.12 D'Souza et al. suggested that female mortality is 

almost 50 percent higher than male mortality in Bangladesh.11 Alam et al. suggested that 

maternal age is crucial for high neonatal mortality.14 According to their analysis, teenage 

motherhood  is  one  of  the  vital  factors  for  neonatal  mortality.  In  another  work,  they 

 
 
investigated the age-specific effects of previous child's mortality on the subsequent child's 

mortality.18 Majumdar et al. used multivariate analysis to demonstrate that preceding birth 

interval length, followed by the survival status of the immediately preceding child, are 

the most significant factors for child and infant mortality.13 Besides, they hinted that sex 

of the index child and mother's and father's education are also important regarding the 

mortality rate. According to Hong, multiple births in Bangladesh, regardless of other risk 

factors, are highly negatively associated with child mortality.16 Miller et al. suggests that 

children born within 15 months of a previous birth are 60 to 80% more prone to child 

death.15  According  to  Mondal  et  al.  the  most  important  predictors  of  neonatal,  post-

neonatal and infant  mortality  are immunization, breastfeeding, birth age and period of 

birth.17 

Rinta-Koski et al. used post-birth factors associated with the Bayesian Gaussian 

process classification for predicting preterm infant in-hospital-mortality.4 They collected 

sensory data from the first 24 hours at the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). They 

incorporated those sensor measurements with standard clinical features, such as oxygen 

saturation by pulse oximetry (SpO2), supplemental oxygen levels, etc. Their predictive 

model  gained  an  AUC  of  0.94.  Their  performance  exceeded  the  AUC  of  score  0.915 

reported by Saria et al., AUC score of 0.913 for CRIB-II (Clinical Risk Index for Babies) 

and  AUC  score  of  0.907  for  SNAPPE-II  (Score  for  Neonatal  Acute  Physiology  with 

Perinatal Extension) reported by Reid et al.20,21 

Zernikow  et  al.  outperformed  the  Rinta-Koski  et  al.  and  other  relevant  models 

with an AUC score of 0.95.22 They used an artificial neural network for the predictive 

model. However, their model trained on the older dataset - infants born between 1990 and 

1993. 

 
 
Wilson  et  al.  made  use  of  a  Bayesian  network  to  determine  complex  factors 

causing  neonatal  mortality.5  Their  network  considered  factors  that  cause  neonatal 

mortality, including maternal death, preterm birth, breathing at birth and movement. They 

used observational  data  from  the Child Health Registry and Global  Network Maternal 

and  used  logistic  regression  models  and  algorithms  that  estimated  the  average  causal 

effect and uncovered previously unknown factors and pathways.  

Ramos et al. used Data Mining techniques for analysing infant mortality over the 

integrated SIM and SINASC databases of the municipality of Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, 

between  the  years  2008  and  2012.6  This  research  used  13  features  from  the  dataset 

instances, such as gender of the new-born, 1-minute Apgar score (5 parameters that are 

evaluated during the first minute of the child’s life), heart rate, breathing, muscle tone, 

irritability,  and  the  color  of  the  skin.  Other  attributes  are  the  5-minutes  Apgar  score, 

weight, color, age of the child, the cause of the death, mother’s age, number of mother’s 

dead children, the number of mother’s living children, number of weeks of gestation, type 

of  pregnancy,  and  type  of  birth.  However,  in  their  work,  the  Naïve  Bayes  classifier 

presented  better  performance  than  the  other  Data  Mining  approaches.  Besides,  good 

results were obtained by the application of the non-supervised Apriori algorithm. As an 

important  achievement  of  this  work,  some  rules  were  found  that  could  help  health 

professionals  in  their  everyday  activities.  Though  it  used  many  post-birth  factors,  it 

utilized some pre-birth factors also. 

A  study  on  births  in  Bega  Obstetrics  and  Gynecology  Clinique,  in  Timisoara, 

Romania,  was  presented  by  Robu  and  Holban.7  It  analyzed  2325  births  based  on  15 

features such as mother’s age, the number of gestations, number of weeks of pregnancy, 

child’s  gender,  child’s  weight,  and  type  of  delivery.  They  looked  for  a  new  way  to 

estimate the child’s Apgar score at birth. To do so, they used 10 classification algorithms 

 
 
such as Na¨ıve Bayes, ID3, KNN, Random Forest, SMO, AdaBoost, LogitBoost, JRipp, 

REPTree,  and  SimpleCart.  After  several  experiments,  the  LogitBoost  algorithm  was 

selected  as  the  best  algorithm  as  it  achieved  an  accuracy  of  80.25%.  Besides,  they 

provided a Java application based on that.  

Zhou  et  al.  used  Artificial  neural  networks  to  predict  outcomes  in  a  neonatal 

intensive care unit (NICU).8 They used a gradient ascent method for the weight update of 

three-layer  feed-forward  neural  networks.  The  results  were  evaluated  by  performance 

measurement techniques, such as the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve and the 

Hosmer-Lemeshow test. The resulting models applied as mortality prognostic screening 

tools. 

Most works incorporated post-birth factors for child mortality analysis, prediction 

and  classification.  The  pre-birth  factors  are  mostly  ignored  in  the  existing  literature. 

Though several works dealt with individual pre-birth factors for analysing patterns and 

trends  in  Bangladesh,  no  work  incorporated  those  pre-birth  factors  for  child  mortality 

prediction or classification. 

3. Methodology 

3.1 Dataset 

This research derived relevant data from a nationally representative secondary data set - 

Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (BDHS), 2014, which was obtained through 

a  collaborative  effort  by  the  National  Institute  of  Population  Research  and  Training 

(Bangladesh),  ICF  International  (USA),  and  Mitra  and  Associates  (Bangladesh),  and 

United States Agency for International Development (USAID)/Bangladesh.19 The 2014 

BDHS collected data from  the ever-married women (age 15-49) regarding a complete 

history of their live births, including the socio-economic condition, reproduction history, 

 
 
maternity history, sex, survival status, age at the time of the survey or age at death, etc. It 

also contains data on neonatal, post neonatal, infant, child, and under-5 mortality. There 

are 43772 instances. 

3.2 Data Pre-processing 

Firstly,  features  relevant  to  reproduction,  birth  history,  and  maternity  history  are 

considered  for  this  research.  Also,  features  regarding  socioeconomic  status,  such  as 

education  years  of  mothers,  wealth  status,  etc.  are  considered.  Factors  and  trends 

associated with child death in Bangladesh as well as in Asian countries as mentioned in 

the related works are considered while selecting the features.9,11-18 As the data came from 

a  survey,  many  values  of  particular  attributes  left  blank/unanswered.  Those  attributes 

were dropped off from the dataset due to a lack of instances.  

According to the selection, the features are as follow: 

(1)  Interval  from  previous  birth:  The  previous  birth  interval  is  measured  as  the 

difference between the last birth and the previous birth in months. It ranges from 

9 to 267.  

(2)  Total sons died: It refers to the number of sons who have already died. It ranges 

from 0 to 10.   

(3)  Total daughters died: It refers to the number of daughters who have already died. 

It ranges from 0 to 5.  

(4)  Wealth status: It refers the wealth status of the mother. There are five categories 

- poorest, poorer, middle, richer, and richest.   

(5)  Total number of births in the last five years: It refers to all births in the last five 

years. It ranges from 0 to 5.  

 
 
(6)  Number of family members: It refers to the total number of family members. It 

ranges from 1 to 25.  

(7)  Eligible female members in the family: The number of eligible female members 

in the family. It ranges from 0 to 7.   

(8)  Total children born: It refers to the total number of children ever born. It ranges 

from 1 to 15.   

(9)  Education years of mother: It refers to the total number of education years of the 

mother. It ranges from 0 to 17.  

(10)  Are children twin: It refers to whether the last child is a twin or not. 

(11)  Age of mother at first birth: It refers to the age of the mother at the first birth of 

her. It ranges from 10 to 46.    

(12)  Birth Month: Month of birth of the last child. It ranges from 1 to 12. 

(13)  Number  of  breastfeeding  months  of  the  last  child:  It  refers  to  the  duration  of 

breastfeeding of the last child in months. It ranges from 0 to 35.  

(14)  Sex of child: It refers to whether the sex of the child is male or female. 

(15)  Is previous children cesarean: It refers to whether the previous child born in the 

last three/five years was born by cesarean or not.  

(16)  Size of child on birth: Children size at birth, five categories - very small, small, 

average, larger than average, and smaller than average.   

(17)  Is last children cesarean: It refers to whether the child was born by the cesarian 

section or not.     

Here, the target class is:   

Has died: It refers to whether the last child was alive or dead at the time of the 

interview. 

 
 
After  the  selection,  normalization  was  applied  to  the  numeric  attributes.  To  shift  the 

values  of  the  numeric  attributes  in  the  dataset  to  a  common  scale,  without  distorting 

differences in the ranges of values, normalization was applied here. 

3.3 Feature Selection Technique 

In this study, Information Gain Attribute Evaluator is used for feature selection 

and measuring relative importance of features.23,24 Information Gain (IG) is an entropy-

based feature evaluation method, which is defined as the amount of knowledge gained 

from the features. It evaluates the worth of an attribute by measuring the information gain 

with respect to the class. First, it calculates the Entropy. Entropy measures the degree of 

"impurity". Entropy should be reduced for better classification as higher Entropy induces 

uncertainity. The Entropy of a set T, E(T), is defined as follows: 

𝐶
𝐸(𝑇) = − ∑ (𝑃𝑖 ∗ log2 𝑃𝑖)
𝑖=1

(1) 

Where, C is the set of classes in T, and Pi is the proportion of the number of elements in 

class i to the number of elements in set T. 

According  to  the  Entropy,  the  Information  Gain  Attribute  Evaluator  calculates  the 

Information Gain (IG). The Information Gain of T for attribute a, IG (T, a) is defined as 

follows:  

𝐼𝐺(𝑇, 𝑎) = 𝐸(𝑇) − 𝐸(𝑇|𝑎) 

(2) 

Where, E(T|a) is the conditional entropy of T given the value of attribute a. 

Using 10-fold cross-validation on the Weka tool, Information Gain Attribute Evaluator is 

employed.24 It assesses the weight of an attribute by calculating the information gain with 

respect to the class. Afterwards, Ranker Search Method of Weka tool ranks attributes by 

 
 
 
 
 
their individual evaluations. Here, that evaluator finally provided a ranking of features 

based on their importance for classifying child mortality. 

3.4 Classification Approach 

According  to  the  features,  a  machine  learning  model  is  trained  for  classifying  child 

mortality. Four machine learning algorithms are evaluated here:  

Support Vector Machine (SVM): Support Vector Machine is a two-group classification 

problem  learning  technique.  Here,  the  input  vectors  are  translated  to  a  very  high 

dimensional feature space in a non-linear manner. A linear decision surface is built in this 

feature  space.  Different  characteristics  of  the  decision  surface  ensure  the  learning 

machine has a high generalization power.25 

Random Forest: Random forests are an ensemble learning method that works by building 

a  variety  of  decision  trees  during  training.  The  purpose  of  the  approach  is  to  create 

multiple  trees  in  the  feature  space  randomly  selected  subspaces.  Trees  in  various 

subspaces generalize their classification in complementary ways and can monotonically 

boost their combined classification.26  

Logistic Regression: Logistic regression is a statistical model which employs a logistic 

function  to  model  a  binary  dependent  variable  in  its  fundamental  form.  When  the 

dependent  variable  is  categorical,  logical  regression  is  used  mostly.  Several  medical 

scales were established using logistic regression to measure the severity of a patient. 

Naive Bayes: The classification of Naive Bayes is a set of classification algorithms based 

on the Bayes theorem.  Each pair of features to  be classified is  independent  from  each 

other. It is employed in automatic medical diagnosis. 

All these machine learning models are popular and well-suited for different cases. 

These models were fitted with the training data and cross-validated in 10 folds using the 

 
 
test data. The parameters of the different machine learning models are set to default in 

Weka tool as that configuration gives high performance values. 

By running each model through 10-fold cross-validation, the relative performance 

of each model is assessed. For each of the 10 repetitions of the analysis, the dataset is 

split into 10 equal partitions, commonly referred to as folds, assuring that instances, where 

Has  died  is  true,  are  distributed  equally  across  folds.  This  follows  generally  accepted 

benchmarks for accurate training and testing of model performance.27 

4. Findings and Result Analysis 

4.1 Feature Importance (Ranking) 

The ranked features set according to the Information Gain Attribute Evaluator and Ranker 

Search Method are given in Table 1. 

 According  to  the  feature  ranking,  total  sons  and  daughters  died  are  the  most 

important  features  for  classifying  child  mortality.  Apart  from  the  birth  and  maternity 

history-related features, particular socio-economic features, such as education years of 

mothers,  and  the  wealth  status  of  the  family  are  notable  features  in  classifying  child 

mortality. Also, features like the number of members and eligible female members in the 

family, age of the mother at first birth, the interval from previous birth play a decisive 

role in child mortality classification. These results suggest that pre-birth factors like birth 

history, maternity history, socio-economic condition, etc. have consequential impact on 

child mortality analysis. 

4.2 Classification Performance 

According to relevant literature, to measure whether the model gives higher probabilities 

to children with the event (e.g. children who die) as opposed to children without the event, 

 
 
the  AUC  (Area  Under  the  receiver  operating  characteristic  Curve)  is  most  commonly 

used. So, in evaluating the performance of the model, AUC is considered primarily. Also, 

other metrics for model evaluation, such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are 

calculated in this study. Four machine learning models (SVM, Random Forest, Logistic 

Regression, Naïve Bayes) are evaluated in this study. The results of the evaluation are 

depicted in Table 2. 

In terms of AUC, Decision Tree and Random Forest have high AUC scores of 

0.947 and 0.940 respectively. Though this study is in the context of Bangladesh only, it 

exceeds  the  performance  of  relevant  studies  and  clinical  standards,  such  as  the  AUC 

scores of 0.94 (Rinta-Koski  et  al.), 0.915 (Saria et  al.), 0.913 and 0.907 (CRIB-II  and 

SNAPPE-II, reported by Reid et al.) respectively.4,20,21 The high AUC score of this study 

suggests that the pre-birth factors are crucial for classifying child mortality.  

The classification problem in this study is life-critical as identifying a birth at high 

risk is more important than misclassification of a low-risk birth. So, in this case, the recall 

score is an important metric as the results should contain less False Negatives to give an 

effective classification. According to Table 2, all the models using different algorithms 

give high recall scores ranging from 0.951 to 0.981.   

In addition, the precision scores range from 0.924 to 0.943, F-1 scores range from 

0.943 to 0.953, and accuracy range from 0.895 to 0.921 for all the four machine learning 

algorithms. These scores help to solidify the base of pre-birth factors in classifying child 

mortality.  Moreover,  it  should  be  noted  that  all  of  these  performance  values  do  not 

fluctuate  notably  for  different  models,  which  might  suggest  that  the  features  are  well 

suited for child mortality classification.      

From Table 2, it is clear that Decision Tree dominates over the other algorithms 

in  terms  of  precision,  f-1  score,  and  accuracy.  Also,  Random  Forest  and  Logistic 

 
 
Regression  perform  comparatively  well  with  respect  to  Naive  Bayes.  It  might  be 

suggested  that  Decision  Tree  can  be  used  in  the  current  scenario  for  achieving  high 

performance. 

5. Limitation 

Regarding threats to internal validity, the results of this study are difficult to interpret due 

to  methodological  complexity.  The  feature  importance  from  certain  methods  does  not 

imply direction, making it more difficult to infer relationships. Besides, the 10-repetition, 

10-fold  cross-validation  framework  requires  variable  importance  and  inclusion  to  be 

aggregated  across  run  and  fold  combinations.  However,  this  complexity  allows  for  a 

much deeper  examination and cross-validation of the factors that influence in-hospital 

mortality in this case. Additionally, extended parameter tuning could not be performed 

on several methods due to computational limitations. Although tuning the parameters of 

each model could improve their performance, the baseline models performed relatively 

well, and tests of parameter tuning resulted in minimal performance gain and significant 

computational strain. 

In terms of threats to external validity, the generalizability of the results might be 

questionable as this study uses a national dataset in the context of Bangladesh only. So, 

its potential to be applied to other contexts should be reassessed. It might be possible that 

factors associated child mortality varies from region to region.  

Therefore, the proposed approach and features set have to be well-analyzed and 

should  not  be  used  in  performing  real-time  risk  prediction  before  further  analysis.  As 

child  mortality  is  a  life-critical  issue,  the  study  needs  more  reviews  and  analytical 

advancement to be a generalized solution in practice. 

 
 
6. Conclusion 

Identifying  significant  factors  associated  with  child  mortality  would  be  beneficial  for 

building  an  advanced  prevention  strategy.  This  research  seeks  to  sort  out  the  factors 

associated  with  child  mortality  and  their  relative  significance.  Also,  it  directs  at  the 

applicability  of  many  pre-birth  factors  in  classifying  child  mortality  in  developing 

countries  like  Bangladesh  which  might  be  beneficial  for  preventing  this  phenomenon. 

This is the first study in classifying child mortality in Bangladesh and considering pre-

birth factors for classification according to the best of our knowledge. 

While  existing  works  of  child  mortality  analysis  mostly  dealt  with  post-birth 

factors  in  classifying  child  mortality,  this  study  also  incorporated  pre-birth  factors  in 

classifying  child  mortality.  Results  show  that  incorporating  pre-birth  factors  (birth 

history, maternity, reproduction, and socio-economic information, etc.) performs better 

in  terms  of  AUC  scores  in  comparison  with  relevant  studies  and  clinical  standards  in 

classifying child mortality.4,20,21 

This  study  also  includes  the  identification  of  a  statistically  significant  pattern: 

feature importance and ranking in classifying child mortality in Bangladesh. That ranking 

could be used for targeted investment of resources to mitigate the risks. It also suggests 

that child mortality depends on these ranked features mentioned in  this study as these 

features give sound performance in child mortality classification. So, taking the necessary 

steps regarding these features may reduce child mortality. Besides, further surveys and 

finding  new  factors  should  be  maintained.  Finally,  this  work  can  be  helpful  for  the 

government and hospital to take an insight on this burning issue and prioritize activities 

regarding child mortality reduction.   

Future  works  will  involve  the  study  of  other  decisive  factors,  such  as 

psychological  factors,  social  factors,  demographic  factors,  etc.  for  child  mortality 

 
 
classification.  Also,  incorporating  physical  and  health  information  of  children  in 

classifying child mortality will be performed in the future. 

7. Disclosure of Interest 

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors. 

8. Ethical Consideration Statement 

Not  applicable.  As  part  of  this  work,  no  experiments  were  conducted  on  humans  or 

animals. 

References 

1.  United Nations Children’s Fund. Bangladesh (bgd) - demographics, health infant 

mortality.  New  York:  UNICEF;  2019  December.  [accessed  2019  Oct  19]. 

https://data.unicef.org/country/bgd/ 

2.  Central  Intelligent  Agency.  The  World  Factbook:  Country  comparison:  Infant 

mortality rate. [accessed 2019 Oct 21]. 

 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-

factbook/rankorder/2091rank.html 

3.  Roser M, Ritchie H, Dadonaite B. Child & Infant Mortality. Our World in Data. 

2013 May 10. 

4.  Rinta-Koski OP, Särkkä S, Hollmén J, Leskinen M, Andersson S. Prediction of 

preterm  infant  mortality  with  Gaussian process  classification.  In  ESANN  2017 

Apr 26. 

5.  Wilson  KA,  Wallace  DD,  Goudar  SS,  Theriaque  D,  McClure  EM.  Identifying 

Causes  of  Neonatal  Mortality  from  Observational  Data:  A  Bayesian  Network 

Approach.  InProceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Data  Mining 

(DMIN)  2015  (p.  132).  The  Steering  Committee  of  The  World  Congress  in 

Computer  Science,  Computer  Engineering 

and  Applied  Computing 

(WorldComp).  

6.  Ramos R, Silva C, Moreira MW, Rodrigues JJ, Oliveira M, Monteiro O. Using 

predictive classifiers to prevent infant mortality in the Brazilian northeast. In2017 

 
 
IEEE 19th  International  Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and 

Services (Healthcom) 2017 Oct 12 (pp. 1-6). IEEE.  

7.  Robu, R., & Holban, Ş. (2015). The analysis and classification of birth data. Acta 

Polytechnica Hungarica, 12(4). 

8.  Zhou D, Frize M. Predicting probability of mortality in the neonatal intensive care 

unit. In2006 International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 

Biology Society 2006 Sep (pp. 2308-2311). IEEE. 

9.  Hobcraft JN, McDonald JW, Rutstein SO. Socio-economic factors in infant and 

child  mortality:  a  cross-national  comparison.  Population  studies.  1984  Jul 

1;38(2):193-223. 

10. Liu L, Li Q, Lee RA, Friberg IK, Perin J, Walker N, Black RE. Trends in causes 

of death among children under 5 in Bangladesh, 1993-2004: an exercise applying 

a standardized computer algorithm to assign causes of death using verbal autopsy 

data. Population health metrics. 2011 Dec 1;9(1):43. 

11. D'Souza  S,  Chen  LC.  Sex  differentials  in  mortality  in  rural  Bangladesh. 

Population and development review. 1980 Jun 1:257-70. 

12. Kabir  A,  Islam  MS,  Ahmed  MS,  Barbhuiya  K.  Factors  influencing  infant  and 

child mortality in Bangladesh. J Med Sci. 2001 Sep; 5:292-5. 

13. Majumder  AK,  May  M,  Pant  PD.  Infant  and  child  mortality  determinants  in 

Bangladesh:  Are 

they  changing?.  Journal  of  Biosocial  Science.  1997 

Oct;29(4):385-99. 

14. Alam N. Teenage motherhood and infant mortality in Bangladesh: maternal age-

dependent effect of parity one. Journal of biosocial science. 2000 Apr;32(2):229-

36. 

15. Miller JE, Trussell J, Pebley AR, Vaughan B. Birth spacing and child mortality in 

Bangladesh and the Philippines. Demography. 1992 May 1;29(2):305-18. 

16. Hong  R.  Effect  of  multiple  birth  on  infant  mortality  in  Bangladesh.  Journal  of 

paediatrics and child health. 2006 Oct;42(10):630-5. 

17. Mondal  MN,  Hossain  MK,  Ali  MK.  Factors  influencing  infant  and  child 

mortality:  A  case  study  of  Rajshahi  District,  Bangladesh.  Journal  of  Human 

Ecology. 2009 Apr 1;26(1):31-9. 

18. Alam N, David PH. Infant and child mortality in Bangladesh: age-specific effects 

of previous child's death. Journal of Biosocial Science. 1998 Jul;30(3):333-48. 

 
 
19. National Institute of Population Research and Training, Mitra and Associates, ICF 

International. Bangladesh demographic and health survey 2014. 

20.  Saria  S,  Rajani  AK,  Gould  J,  Koller  D,  Penn  AA.  Integration  of  early 

physiological responses predicts later illness severity in preterm infants. Science 

translational medicine. 2010 Sep 8;2(48):48ra65-. 

21. Reid S, Bajuk B, Lui K, Sullivan EA, NSW and ACT Neonatal Intensive Care 

Units  Audit  Group,  PSN.  Comparing  CRIB‐II  and  SNAPPE‐II  as  mortality 

predictors for very preterm infants. Journal of paediatrics and child health. 2015 

May;51(5):524-8. 

22. Zernikow  B,  Holtmannspoetter  K,  Michel  E,  Pielemeier  W,  Hornschuh  F, 

Westermann A, Hennecke KH. Artificial neural  network for risk assessment in 

preterm neonates. Archives of Disease in Childhood-Fetal and Neonatal Edition. 

1998 Sep 1;79(2):F129-34. 

23. Kent JT. Information gain and a general measure of correlation. Biometrika. 1983 

Apr 1;70(1):163-73. 

24. Hall M, Frank E, Holmes G, Pfahringer B, Reutemann P, Witten IH. The WEKA 

data mining software: an update. ACM SIGKDD explorations newsletter. 2009 

Nov 16;11(1):10-8. 

25. Cortes  C,  Vapnik  V.  Support-vector  networks.  Machine  learning.  1995  Sep 

1;20(3):273-97. 

26. Ho TK. Random decision forests. InProceedings of 3rd international conference 

on document analysis and recognition 1995 Aug 14 (Vol. 1, pp. 278-282). IEEE. 

27. Kim JH. Estimating classification error rate: Repeated cross-validation, repeated 

hold-out  and  bootstrap.  Computational  statistics  &  data  analysis.  2009  Sep 

1;53(11):3735-45. 

 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Ranking of Features based on Information Gain. 

Features 

Total sons died 

Total daughters 

Total children born 

Education years of mother 

Are children twin 

Interval from previous birth 

Wealth status 

Total number of births in the last five years 

Number of family members 

Age of mother at first birth 

Eligible female members in family 

Birth Month 

Number of breastfeeding months of the last child 

Sex of child 

Is previous children caesarean 

Size of child on birth 

Is last children caesarean 

Ranking 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

 
 
 
Table 2. Classification Performance 

AUC 

Precision 

Recall 

F-1 Score 

Accuracy 

Decision Tree 

0.947 

0.943 

0.971 

0.957 

Random Forest 

0.940 

0.940 

0.956 

0.948 

Logistic Regression 

0.916 

0.924 

0.981 

0.953 

Naïve Bayes 

0.861 

0.935 

0.951 

0.943 

0.921 

0.905 

0.912 

0.895 

 
 
 
 
 
 
