Reducing Discrimination in Learning Algorithms for Social Good in
Sociotechnical Systems

Katelyn Morrison
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, United States
katelyn.morrison@pitt.edu

0
2
0
2

c
e
D
6

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
8
9
3
1
.
1
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Sociotechnical systems within cities are now
equipped with machine learning algorithms in
hopes to increase efﬁciency and functionality by
modeling and predicting trends. Machine learning
algorithms have been applied in these domains to
address challenges such as balancing the distribu-
tion of bikes throughout a city and identifying de-
mand hotspots for ride sharing drivers. However,
these algorithms applied to challenges in sociotech-
nical systems have exacerbated social inequalities
due to previous bias in data sets or the lack of data
from marginalized communities.
In this paper, I
will address how smart mobility initiatives in cities
use machine learning algorithms to address chal-
lenges.
I will also address how these algorithms
unintentionally discriminate against features such
as socioeconomic status to motivate the importance
of algorithmic fairness. Using the bike sharing pro-
gram in Pittsburgh, PA, I will present a position
on how discrimination can be eliminated from the
pipeline using Bayesian Optimization.

1 Introduction
As smart cities emerge, sociotechnical systems are starting
to eliminate traditional systems such as replacing transporta-
tion systems with advanced technologies [Levine, 2020] -
also known as smart mobility systems. These initiatives are
spreading from city to city, introducing dynamic, on-demand
bike sharing programs, ride hailing programs, and car sharing
programs [Yan and Howe, 2020]. Emerging smart mobility
systems are supported by a variety of Information and Com-
munication Technologies [Benevolo et al., 2016] which have
allowed for the possibility of collecting copious amounts of
data on citizens’ mobility patterns. Citizens can now interact
with these systems through hardware and software leaving
behind traces of their data and insights about their behaviors
in the future [Rangwala, 2018].

People interact with a variety of smart devices connected
to the internet that provide services such as navigation kiosks
or apps, bus routing apps, smart card readers, and ride sharing
apps numerous times throughout their day to navigate the city
generating a vast amount of valuable data. This data makes up

a large data set that is then used in learning algorithms to as-
sist urban planners, policy makers, and government ofﬁcials
in evaluating policies or making decisions. In terms of smart
mobility initiatives, the data helps decision makers evaluate
where to redistribute resources and when to eliminate re-
sources in an area with little demand [Yan and Howe, 2020;
Luo et al., 2020]. Nonetheless, these complex, dynamic sys-
tems collecting copious amounts of data, and the citizens pro-
viding the data, are increasingly important agents in the de-
cision making and policy making processes. Thus, citizens
play an important role within several systems in the city in-
cluding the transportation system and the future governance
related to it.

Smart mobility initiatives are motivated by providing a
cheap, yet dynamic, on-demand mode of transportation for
citizens [Yan and Howe, 2020]. Thus, the accessibility and
availability of smart mobility options are vital within a city.
Furthermore, the fairness of the algorithms used for these ini-
tiatives are equally important to avoid intensifying inequali-
ties already present in a given area. Initiatives such as bike
sharing programs have the potential to increase the overall
quality of life and health of citizens [Mooney et al., 2019].
Other initiatives such as car sharing or ride hailing have the
potential to reduce trafﬁc congestion which ultimately helps
reduce the CO2 emissions [Luo et al., 2020]. Furthermore,
these affordable, dynamic, on-demand modes of transporta-
tion help connect citizens to the job market and economy
within cities. These smart mobility initiatives can only ful-
ﬁll their mission if they are equally accessible to all social
classes and all neighborhoods within a city.

Learning algorithms have been used to complement smart
mobility initiatives, but the algorithms focus on past usage
data to predict future trends. However, it has been observed
that using past usage data tends to intensify any social in-
equalities that are present in the previous usage data [Chui et
al., 2019]. Repercussions of the current techniques will be re-
vealed through several related works that focus on smart mo-
bility systems and fairness in machine learning algorithms.

2 Related Work
The awareness of algorithmic bias and lack of fairness in
learning algorithms is not novel. Recently, the notion of fair-
ness in learning algorithms applied to urban systems has been
explored. However, research has highlighted the lack of pre-

 
 
 
 
 
 
viously acknowledging the impact these learning algorithms
have had on mobility systems [Yan and Howe, 2020]. There
are several works considering novel techniques to predict de-
mand of smart mobility systems or identify hotspots at a given
space and time, but as [Yan and Howe, 2020] mentioned, ”No
existing work in modeling urban resource demand considers
fairness in their solutions”. The following works that consider
or show a lack of considering fairness within their algorithm
provide a strong motivation that learning algorithms need to
be reevaluated in the context of urban and social systems.

2.1 Applications in Sociotechnical Systems
[Yan and Howe, 2020] develops a model that represents the
demand prediction of bikes in a bike sharing program or de-
mand hotspots of rides for a ride hailing driver. Speciﬁcally,
this model is based on three convolutional neural networks
(CNN) combined into one to model the demand of smart mo-
bility resources. They use regularizers in their loss function
to ensure fairness while training and testing the model.
In
their work, they deﬁne fairness, ”... as the requirement that
individuals of different demographic groups receives equal
amount of mobility resources”.

Another study looks at the expansion of electric vehicle
sharing systems and uses a data-driven approach to predict
the demand of the system currently, in the near future, and
in the long term [Luo et al., 2020]. They use features from a
station while considering the global spatial and local temporal
attributes to a given system’s station network. Their demand
prediction model is made up of Graph Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (GCN), but does not strongly consider fairness
of the prediction given that they are incorporating historical
knowledge.

Two recent studies evaluate fairness, but in a slightly dif-
ferent context. Switching from the customer’s perspective
to the provider’s, or driver’s, perspective, these two studies
focus on the fairness of the drivers’ income or opportunity
to pick up passengers [Rong et al., 2019; Lesmana et al.,
2019]. [Rong et al., 2019] speciﬁcally studies this problem in
the context of Changsha, China to optimize the dispatching
of taxis to predicted hotspots fairly. [Lesmana et al., 2019]
focuses more broadly on the ride hailing system instead of
speciﬁcally taxis and evaluate their contributions on data from
New York City. They both want to optimize the system’s ef-
ﬁciency while incorporating the fairness of revenue among
drivers and acknowledge its potential to be applied in other
domains relating to sociotechnical systems.

2.2 Fairness in Learning Algorithms
Learning algorithms used in the domain of smart mobility
have provided signiﬁcant assistance to decision makers and
urban planners, but they do not incorporate fairness. Creating
a classiﬁer that incorporates fairness effectively will not be
achieved by simply abstracting out features or ignoring sen-
sitive attributes [Barocas et al., 2019]. [Barocas et al., 2019]
presents a list of several proposed fairness criteria - the below
works propose classiﬁers that satisfy statistical parity.

[Zemel et al., 2013] creates a fair classiﬁer by generating a
probabilistic mapping where necessary information about in-
dividuals is mapped from the original distribution to another

distribution. Furthermore, information of a given protected
feature is dissociated from that individual in the new distri-
bution. They achieve this by having their classiﬁer learn a
set that satisﬁes group fairness (i.e. statistical parity or demo-
graphic parity).

Another approach creates a classiﬁer by adjusting how sim-
ilar individuals should be treated in the given classiﬁcation
task [Dwork et al., 2011]. Similar to [Zemel et al., 2013],
they investigate how their classiﬁer can satisfy statistical par-
ity. Their classiﬁer satisﬁes statistical parity under the Lips-
chitz condition.

2.3 Evaluating Accessibility in Systems
Some studies have evaluated and investigated the accessibil-
ity, fairness, and discrimination present within current smart
mobility systems. Two studies in Manizales, Colombia inves-
tigate the social accessibility of the public bike sharing sys-
tem, Manizales En Bici. An important characteristic of Man-
izales is that it is split into sectors, or neighborhoods, that are
grouped by socioeconomic status. One study investigates the
problem of unequal distribution of the bikes by calculating
the minimum travel time to get around the city in compari-
son to socioeconomic status and geography [Cardona et al.,
2017]. Another study uses ArcGIS software [Garcia et al.,
2017] to visualize this. Overall, both of these studies agree
that the locations of the Manizales En Bici stations are more
accessible or available to individuals of higher socioeconomic
status.

A separate study evaluated another bike sharing program in
Seattle, WA, where the bikes are not required to be returned
to a station [Mooney et al., 2019]. This study discovers that
while no neighborhood was being exclusively avoided, the
richer neighborhoods tended to have more bikes available.
Their conclusion from the studies pointed out that dock-less,
or station-less, smart mobility systems can potentially offer
more equity than other models.

3 Preliminary Work & Methods
I analyzed the Pittsburgh’s Healthy Ride bike sharing pro-
gram to identify the fairness, or accessibility, of the current
distribution of bike stations. Accessibility can be determined
by the relationship between the number of bike stations, the
moving average number of bikes at a given station, and re-
lated demographic and economic features in a given census
tract. The geospatial analysis in ﬁgure 1 reveals that 95%
of the bike stations were placed in neighborhoods that were
considered to have little to no evidence of poor housing con-
ditions. The geospatial analysis in ﬁgure 2 reveals the me-
dian household income in 2015 in relation to the bike sta-
tions. One cluster of bike stations circled in magenta iden-
tiﬁes outliers in the income data:
this region of Pittsburgh
is primarily student housing where students rent or sublease
houses. This area also broadly encompasses three universi-
ties in Pittsburgh. These two ﬁgures help set the stage for the
Bayesian Optimization approach that I propose.

In the context of smart mobility systems, it is common to
use supervised learning algorithms to predict demand, iden-
tify demand hotspots, and identify the best location to dis-
tribute resources to help decision makers and urban planners.

Figure 1: Mapping bike station locations to poor housing conditions
in Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Data from [Jones, 2020; Khalil, 2020]

Figure 2: Bike station locations and 2015 median household income
in Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Data from [FFIEC, 2020; Khalil, 2020]

These algorithms are applied to help mitigate the exploita-
tion vs. exploration problem that occurs in bike sharing pro-
grams. Considering the Pittsburgh Healthy Ride bike shar-
ing program, I propose a novel approach to identify demand
hotspots and prime locations while trying to incorporate fair-
ness similar to [Zemel et al., 2013] by dissociating informa-
tion of selected features from a neighborhood or census tract.
Pittsburgh’s bike sharing program has 100 bike stations
which have been placed based on 6 criteria deﬁned by the
Healthy Ride organization. They deﬁne a good location for
a station to be within 1/4 mile from another station, on pub-
lic land, not obstructing other public utilities, not hidden in
allies or side streets, has a certain amount of square footage
to build the station, and has access to sunlight [HealthyRide,
2020]. Their current plan for expansion is undetermined and
they are asking for users to ﬁll out a feedback form. Soliciting
feedback for this system can result in profound disparate im-
pact [Barocas et al., 2019]. With this is mind, I propose modi-
fying this current decision making process by using Bayesian
Optimization for model-based reinforcement learning to ex-
plore new areas for stations followed by Bayesian inference to
update the prior and posterior based on evidence that results
from the exploration. To satisfy statistical parity, the data can
be mapped to a new distribution [Zemel et al., 2013].

In the case of bike sharing programs, the agent is a plan-
ner and they are trying to optimize the location to put a bike
station or the location to reallocate current bikes to another
station. It is costly and takes time to build the bike stations,
thus the planners want to make sure that they will build the
station in a location that will have a high demand. The plan-
ner is faced with an exploration vs. exploitation trade off.
An agent (i.e. planner) would be rewarded every time it ex-
plores uncharted neighborhoods or neighborhoods with very
little historical user data. These rewards are to encourage the
planner to explore and identify regions that do not have any
source of historical data to contribute to evidence of demand.
The policies for the agent (i.e the planner) will represent the
probabilities for each action that can be taken (i.e. the next
neighborhoods a planner should construct a station at). These
probabilities would be calculated and updated by using an ac-
quisition function.

The value function can be deﬁned as the posterior using

past usage data (i.e. the evidence), the prior belief (i.e previ-
ous likelihood of demand), and the current likelihood given
the location the planner chooses. Currently, bike sharing pro-
grams tend to place bikes and stations in regions where there
is a high certainty that demand will be high. If they ignore this
high certainty, they will eventually place bikes or stations in
regions that could have otherwise been excluded or discrimi-
nated against. This approach allows planners to consider evi-
dence of past user demand for certain locations and times. It
also allows for the demand of station locations in previously
unexplored regions to be identiﬁed. This approach forces the
bike sharing programs to explore new regions and potentially
identify a new cohort of users for their system.

To execute this, several features need to be integrated into
the algorithm so that an unexplored area in the city that has
no points of interest is not chosen with a high conﬁdence.
For example, if an entire census tract consisted of forested
land, no housing, no businesses, and no points of interest,
it would not be beneﬁcial to have the algorithm suggest this
area. Thus, spatial features will be needed such as point of
interests (i.e. businesses, housing developments, and other
transit stations).

4 Conclusion & Discussion
When considering future work in fairness-aware learning
algorithms applied in sociotechnical systems, researchers
should avoid developing and deploying algorithms that ad-
here to ”fairness through unawareness” [Hardt et al., 2016].
Identifying alternatives to the current demand and hot spot
prediction algorithms are imperative to increasing the ac-
cessibility of smart mobility options to all citizens. There
are numerous contributions progressing fairness of machine
learning algorithms. There are also numerous contributions
integrating learning algorithms in sociotechnical systems to
achieve efﬁciency, but there is a lack of contributions pro-
gressing fairness of learning algorithms in urban systems.
Future work should consider novel approaches that combine
novel techniques from both domains to reduce discrimina-
tion. I identify an approach using Bayesian optimization for
model-based reinforcement learning to help planners identify
locations to offer smart mobility systems.

[Rangwala, 2018] Harsh Rangwala.

Socio-technical sys-

tems, Dec 2018.

[Rong et al., 2019] Huigui Rong, Qun Zhang, Xun Zhou,
Hongbo Jiang, Da Cao, and Keqin Li. Tesla: A central-
ized taxi dispatching approach to optimizing revenue efﬁ-
ciency with global fairness. In KDD Workshop on Urban
Computing (UrbComp ’20), 2019.

[Yan and Howe, 2020] An Yan and Bill Howe. Fairness-
In Proceed-
aware demand prediction for new mobility.
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol-
ume 34, pages 1079–1087, 2020.

[Zemel et al., 2013] Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky,
Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair representa-
tions. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 325–333, 2013.

References
[Barocas et al., 2019] Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and
Fairness and Machine Learning.

Arvind Narayanan.
fairmlbook.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.

[Benevolo et al., 2016] Clara Benevolo, Renata Paola
Dameri, and Beatrice D’auria. Smart mobility in smart
In Empowering Organizations, pages 13–28.
city.
Springer, 2016.

[Cardona et al., 2017] Mateo Cardona, Juan Zuluga, and
Diego Escobar. An´alisis de la red de ciclo-rutas de man-
izales (colombia) a partir de criterios de accesibilidad ter-
ritorial urbana y cobertura de estratos socioecon´omicos.
Revista Espacios, 38(28), 2017.

[Chui et al., 2019] Michael Chui, Martin Harrysson, James
Manyika, Roger Roberts, Rita Chung, Pieter Nel, and Ash-
ley van Heteren. Applying artiﬁcial intelligence for social
good, Nov 2019.

[Dwork et al., 2011] Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann
Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Rich Zemel. Fairness through
awareness, 2011.

[FFIEC, 2020] FFIEC. 2020 fﬁec census report - summary

census income information, 2020.

[Garcia et al., 2017] Zuluaga Garcia, Juan David, et al.
Propuesta metodologica para el diagnostico y planiﬁca-
cion urbana de una red de ciclorrutas. Caso estudio: Man-
izales. PhD thesis, Universidad Nacional de Colombia-
Sede Manizales, 2017.

[Hardt et al., 2016] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan
Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.
CoRR, abs/1610.02413, 2016.

[HealthyRide, 2020] HealthyRide. Station planning, 2020.
[Jones, 2020] Lynda Jones. Allegheny county poor housing

conditions, 2020.

[Khalil, 2020] Sara Khalil. Healthy ride stations, 2020.
[Lesmana et al., 2019] Nixie S Lesmana, Xuan Zhang, and
Xiaohui Bei. Balancing efﬁciency and fairness in on-
demand ridesourcing. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 5309–5319, 2019.

[Levine, 2020] Ben

aims

Levine.
solve

re-
to
prob-
https://www.govtech.com/transportation/

search
lem.
Data-Driven-Research-Aims-to-Solve-First-Last-Mile-Problem.
html, March 2020.

ﬁrst/last mile

Data-driven

[Luo et al., 2020] Man Luo, Bowen Du, Konstantin Klem-
mer, Hongming Zhu, Hakan Ferhatosmanoglu, and
Hongkai Wen. D3p: Data-driven demand prediction for
fast expanding electric vehicle sharing systems. Proceed-
ings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and
Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(1):1–21, 2020.

[Mooney et al., 2019] Stephen J Mooney, Kate Hosford, Bill
Howe, An Yan, Meghan Winters, Alon Bassok, and Jana A
Hirsch. Freedom from the station: Spatial equity in access
to dockless bike share. Journal of transport geography,
74:91–96, 2019.

