IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.20 No.4, April 2020 

287 

A Chatbot for Information Security 

Sofian Hamad, Taoufik Yeferny 
sofian.hamad@nbu.edu.sa 
Computer Science Department, Northern Border University  Arar Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 

learning  have  enabled 

Abstract 
Advancements  in  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  speech  recognition 
systems  (ASR),  and  machine 
the 
development  of  intelligent  computer  programs  called  chatbots. 
Many chatbots have been proposed to provide different services in 
many  areas  such  as  customer  service,  sales  and  marketing. 
However, the use of chatbot as advisers in the field of information 
security  is  not  yet  considered.  Furthermore,  people,  especially 
normal  users  who  have  no  technical  background,  are  unaware 
about many of aspects in information security. Therefore, in this 
paper we proposed a chatbot that acts as an adviser in information 
security. The proposed adviser uses a knowledge base with json 
file. Having such chatbot provides many features including raising 
the awareness in field of information security by offering accurate 
advice,  based  on  different  opinions  from  information  security 
expertise, for many users on different. Furthermore, this chatbot is 
currently  deployed  through  Telegram  platform,  which  is  one  of 
widely  used  social  network  platforms.  The  deployment  of  the 
proposed  chatbot  over  different  platforms  is  considered  as  the 
future work. 
Keywords 
ChatBot;  Information  Security;  Artificial  Intelligence  Markup 
Language (AIML) 

1. Introduction  

Recent advancements in the technology have supported the 
emerging  and  proliferation  of  ChatBot,  which  is  an 
intelligent  computer  program  that  chats  with  people. 
Chatbots can play a role of virtual adviser that uses concepts 
of  automatic  speech  recognition  systems  (ASR),  machine 
learning  and artificial intelligence  (AI).  Natural  Language 
Processing (NLP) provides a simple interface between users 
and a Chatbot as shown in figure 1 [1]. 

Fig. 1  Chatbot developed by NLP 

Manuscript received April 5, 2020 
Manuscript revised April 20, 2020 

Furthermore, the use of technologies such as NLP, makes 
virtual  advisers  in  any  field  to  efficiently  and  effectively 
(similar to a real adviser) speak with users. From the other 
hand,  reference  [2]  has  presented  a  brief  introduction  on 
cloud-based chatbots technologies along with programming 
of chatbots and challenges of programming in current and 
future  Era  of  chatbot.  Examples  of  cloud  based  Chatbots 
services  include  the  chatbot  sector  such  as  IBM  Watson, 
Microsoft bot, AWS Lambda, Heroku and many others. 
Chatbots (which is also called "digital assistants") can chat 
with  users  in  many  different  ways  including  text-based 
entities, voice user interfaces, and embodied conversational 
entities  [3].  At  the  beginning,  dialog  agents  intended  to 
simulate human conversation.  
To  raise the  awareness  of  normal users,  who  increasingly 
use  technologies,  who  have  no  background  about  the 
necessary 
to  protect 
themselves,  this  paper  introduces  a  chatbot  application 
(text-based entities) to provide information security advice 
for users. In this paper, we will develop a back end interface 
that interact with a knowledge  base. This knowledge  base 
represents  knowledge  of  expertise 
the  field  of 
information security. The chatbot is able to understand users’ 
questions and  enquires.  It is  important  to note  that  in this 
paper,  the  proposed  chatbot  extracts  keywords  and  finds 
matching replies from the knowledge base. In addition, the 
proposed  chatbotis  expected  to  be  deployed  over  one 
platform, which is Telegram. 
In  this  paper,  section  1  presented  general      introduction, 
while section 2 provide the related research. The description 
of the proposed solution is presented in section 3, while the 
conclusion is presented in the last section, section 4. 

security  aspects 

information 

in 

2. Background and related work 

A. Overview 

A  chatbot,  which 
interactive  agent, 
is  known  as 
conversational  interface,  Conversational  AI,  or  artificial 
is  a  computer  program  using 
conversational  entity, 
technology  of  an  artificial  intelligence,  that  makes  a 
conversation  through  different  ways  such  as  text-based 
ways. These computer programs behave similar to humans 
when then involved in a conversation.  
Chatbots can be developed to extract some keywords during 
a dialog with users, search in its database and finally send 

 
 
 
 
 
288 

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.20 No.4, April 2020 

their replies. From the other hand, some Chatbots employ 
natural  language  processing  systems,  which  is  complex 
technology, to interact with users.  
Leading  companies have  also used  Chatbots,  e.g.,  Google 
Assistant and Amazon Alexa, and though many platforms 
including  Facebook  Messenger,  or  applications  and 
websites of individual organizations. 
The ability of a computer program to act as a human during 
live written conversation is examined early since 1950 [5]. 
The  results  (based  on  the  content  of  conversation  only) 
show that a computer program and a human responses are 
similar 
their  conversational  behavior,  cannot  be 
in 
distinguished reliably. 

B. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications 

has 

showed 

processing.  ELIZA 

One  of  the  early  intelligent  computer  programs  is  called 
ELIZA, which is developed in 1960s and has used natural 
that 
language 
communication  between  humans  and  machines  involving 
only the most obvious things.  
Another chatbot inspired by ELIZA program is the artificial 
linguistic  internet  computer  entity  (A.L.I.C.E.),  which  is 
natural language processing chatterbot. 
Providers  of  Platform  as  a  Service  (PaaS)  such  as  Oracle 
Cloud  Platform  offers  many  tools  to  develop,  to  test  and 
deploy intelligent programs (chatbots). This can performed 
support  many 
through  cloud[6].  Cloud  platforms 
technologies  such  artificial  intelligence,  natural  language 
processing, and mobile backend and offer them as a Service. 

C. Similar Chatbot 

In this section, we have discussed the solutions (chatbots) 
that have been developed in many different fields. In each 
of  these  solutions, additional  features  (services)  is needed 
to consider the nature of each field.  
In [7], authors have developed two working chatbots using 
two different programming languages (C++ and AIML), to 
study  their  construction  and  design  practices  thoroughly 
and  to  devise  the  further  possible  improvements  in  such 
kind of programs. They (authors)have discussed Artificial 
Intelligence  via  chat  bots, 
their  framework  design, 
capabilities, utilization and future scope. 
Chatbot  is  utilized  to  provide  counseling  service  in  many 
fields  such  as  education  [8],  insurance  services  [9], 
University admission services[10], ontology [11],  

Fig. 2  MedBot Artitechiture 

information 

Medical  Consultant  System  [12],  psychiatric  counseling 
service[13]  where  authors  use  additional  constrains  to 
generation model for the proper response generation, which 
can  detect  conversational  context,  user  emotion  and 
expected  reaction.  Furthermore,  [14]  investigates  and 
innovates the current interactive kiosk to provide immediate 
incorporating  an 
responses  and  reliable 
intelligent conversational agent (CA). 
The  programming  challenging  of  the  chatbot  has  been 
discussed in [15], authors reviewed the problems that occur 
when designing chatbot using the techniques and concepts 
of  machine  learning  and  natural  processing.  In  [16]  the 
authors proposed a Chatbot for tourism purpose, in which 
the tourist have limited time. Their methodology divided to 
three  phases.  Data  preparing  was  the  first  phase,  which 
include  collecting  the  famous  places  and  their  location  in 
the city. Then mining the collected data and finally use the 
Dialog  Flow.  In  [17]  the  authors  proposed  Chatbot  for 

 
 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.20 No.4, April 2020 

289 

simply CBS, to offer information security advices through 
a  unified  interface.  Having  such  chatbot  (“CBS”)  may 
increase the reliability and offer accurate advices (collected 
from json file in a tree structure). The main architecture is 
depicted on figure3. 

Up on a receive of a user’s request, that is step 1 in figure 3, 
the recipient virtual adviser checks to see if there is cached 
reply for a similar previous request. If so, reply is return to 
the user. If there was no cached reply, the knowledge base 
is  searched  based  on  the  extracted  keywords.  After  that, 
matching  replies  are  returned  to  the  virtual  adviser  that 
conducted  search  operation.  The  virtual  adviser  (which 
received user’s request) formulates (put replies in a certain 
format) a reply, and sends the reply to the user, and finally 
caches  it  (reply)  for  future  similar  request.  For  more 
explanation, these steps are shown in the below flowchart, 
figure4.  

they 

implement 

their 
Medical  consultant  (MedBot), 
Chatbot in IM application using the line application. Figure 
2 presents the system architecture of the MedBot. First, the 
user transfer the message, then the message will be transfer 
to  the  application,  finally  the application  will  forward  the 
received  message  to  the    Dialogflow;  is  the  engine  of  the 
their Chatbot. 
Although  Chatbotis  used  in  many  fields,  to  the  best 
knowledge of the researcher, it is not yet used in the field of 
information  security.  In  the  field  of  information  security, 
prompt, accurate, and secure responses are highly required. 
Therefore,  this  paper  is  devoted  to  study  the  use  of,  and 
development  of  an  elegant  Chatbot  that  efficiently  and 
securely provides suitable advice in the field of information 
security. 

3. The proposed Model 

A. Motivation and Problem Statement 

The  number  of  technologies  users  as  well  as  users  of 
important  and  sensitive  applications,  such  as  banking,  is 
tremendously increasing. Many of those users have limited 
knowledge about and/or lack most of necessary aspects of 
information  security.  Thus,  such  kind  of  users  are  in  a 
dangerous  situation  since  they  are  accessible  for  many  of 
bad  people.  Furthermore,  those  users  are  existing  in  an 
environment  where  cybercrimes  continuously  increase. 
Moreover,  criminal  tools  and  programs  are  advanced  and 
continuously improved, therefore the need for a protection 
is  continuous  and  needs  some  consultation 
from 
information security experts.  
Provision  of  consultancy  services  in  a  vital  field  such  as 
information security is an important and plays main role in 
the raise of awareness about information security for many 
users.  Raising  the  awareness  of  users  in  information 
alleviate security threats that face them, help them to take 
the  right  action  to  protect  themselves,  and  their  society. 
Having  a  good  level  of  security  in  many  parts  can  be 
achieved through the utilization of chatbot.     Therefore, the 
researchers sought to provide intelligent virtual information 
security  adviser  with  efficient  and  accurate  replies  to  the 
customer. 
To  best  of  our  knowledge  and  after  a  wide  read  on  the 
previous published researches work, we found many of the 
chatbots  that  provide  service  in  many  domains  such  as 
medical consultant, airline help, tourism and so many other 
application, but unfortunately we couldn't find any Chatbot 
that help users to get advices in information security. 

B. Proposed solutions 

In  this  paper,  we  proposed  a  Chatbot  that  uses  virtual 
adviser from a json file, which we called “ChatBot Sec” or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290 

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.20 No.4, April 2020 

Fig. 3  Architecture of the proposed Chatbot (CBS 

C. The main advantages of this CBS includes:  

  Raising the awareness in a vital field. 
 

offering advices from a knowledge base that have 
many different parts, part for each different topic, 
e.g.,  part  for  malware,  good  and  recommended 
practice, and selection of strong passwords.  
Increase the ability to offer most updated advice 

 
  Fast response for similar queries 

4. Conclusions and future work 

In  this  paper,  we  have  developed  a  chatbot  that  extracts 
keywords during a chat with users, then uses the keywords 
to  search  a  knowledge  base  (in  a  json  file)    and  sends 
matching  replies  for  users.  Having  such  chatbot,  many 
advantages have been achieved. These advantages include 
raising the awareness in a vital field, which reduces security 
threats  normal  users  face.  In  addition,  provision  of  an 
accurate  and  fast response. This  chatbot  is  intended to  be 
deployed  over  platform  of  telegram at the  beginning.  The 
future  work  will  focus  on  deployment  on  more  platforms 
using Json. 

Acknowledgment  

This project was funded by Deanship of Scientific Research, 
Northern  Border  University  for  their  financial  support 
under  grant  no.  SCI-2019-1-10-F-8309.  The  authors, 
therefore,  acknowledge  with  thanks  DSR  technical  and 
financial support. 

Fig. 4  Actions followed by the proposed Chatbot (CBS) 

StartThe adviser receives user requestThe adviser checks the  cache structureReply in  cache structureNoUse keywords to search in the knowledge baseReplies returned  from the knowledge baseYesThe adviser sends the replies to the userUpdate the cache structureEnd 
 
 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.20 No.4, April 2020 

291 

Prospective,  Region 
Conference (R10-HTC)." (2017): 21-23. 

10  Humanitarian  Technology 

[16]  Sano,  Albert  Verasius  Dian,  et  al.  "The  Application  of 
AGNES  Algorithm  to  Optimize  Knowledge  Base  for 
Tourism  Chatbot." 2018 
International  Conference  on 
Information  Management  and  Technology  (ICIMTech). 
IEEE, 2018. 

[17]  Rosruen,  Nudtaporn,  and  TaweesakSamanchuen.  "Chatbot 
Utilization  for  Medical  Consultant  System." 2018  3rd 
Technology 
Innovation  Management  and  Engineering 
Science  International  Conference  (TIMES-iCON).  IEEE, 
2018. 

References 
[1]  V.  Elupula,"How  do  chatbots  work?  An  overview  of  the 
architecture  of  chatbots"  August  2018,  In  https://bigdata-
madesimple.com/how-do-chatbots-work-an-overview-of-
the-architecture-of-a-chatbot/ 

[2]  A. M. Rahman, A. A. Mamun and A. Islam, "Programming 
challenges of chatbot: Current and future prospective," 2017 
IEEE  Region  10  Humanitarian  Technology  Conference 
(R10-HTC), Dhaka, 2017, pp. 75-78. 

[3]  J.  Harms,  P.  Kucherbaev,  A.  Bozzon  and  G.  Houben, 
"Approaches  for  Dialog  Management  in  Conversational 
Agents," in IEEE Internet Computing. 

[4]  Bray,  Tim. The  javascript  object  notation  (json)  data 

interchange format. No. RFC 8259. 2017. 

[5]  Gentsch P. (2019) Conversational AI: How (Chat)Bots Will 
Reshape the Digital Experience. In: AI in Marketing, Sales 
and Service. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. 

[6]  Yuan, Michael (2018-02-19). Chatbots: Building Intelligent, 
Cross-Platform, Messaging  Bots.  Pearson  Education.  ISBN 
9780134650616. 

[7]  A. Khanna, M. Jain, T. Kumar, D. Singh, B. Pandey and V. 
Jha,  "Anatomy  and  Utilities  of  an  Artificial  Intelligence 
Conversational  Entity,"  2015  International  Conference  on 
Computational  Intelligence  and  Communication  Networks 
(CICN), Jabalpur, 2015, pp. 594-597. 

[8]  G.  Molnár  and  Z.  Szüts,  "The  Role  of  Chatbots  in  Formal 
Education,"  2018  IEEE  16th  International  Symposium  on 
Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY), Subotica, 2018, 
pp. 000197-000202. 

[9]  MikkoRiikkinen, 

Sarlin, 
HannuSaarijärvi, 
IlkkaLähteenmäki,  (2018)  "Using  artificial  intelligence  to 
create  value  in  insurance",  International  Journal  of  Bank 
Marketing,  Vol. 
pp.1145-1168, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJBM-01-2017-0015. 

Issue: 

Peter 

36 

6, 

[10]  H. AgusSantoso et al., "Dinus Intelligent Assistance (DINA) 
Chatbot 
for  University  Admission  Services,"  2018 
International  Seminar  on  Application  for  Technology  of 
Information and Communication, Semarang, 2018, pp. 417-
423. 

[11]  H.  Al-Zubaide  and  A.  A.  Issa,  "OntBot:  Ontology  based 
chatbot,"  International  Symposium  on  Innovations 
in 
Information  and  Communications  Technology,  Amman, 
2011, pp. 7-12. 

[12]  N.  Rosruen  and  T.  Samanchuen,  "Chatbot  Utilization  for 
Medical  Consultant  System,"  2018  3rd  Technology 
and  Engineering  Science 
Innovation  Management 
International  Conference 
(TIMES-iCON),  Bangkok, 
Thailand, 2018, pp. 1-5.  

[13]  Dongkeon  Lee,  Kyo-Joong  Oh  and  Ho-Jin  Choi,  "The 
chatbot  feels  you  -  a  counseling  service  using  emotional 
response  generation,"  2017  IEEE  International  Conference 
on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp), Jeju, 2017, 
pp. 437-440. 

[14]  P.  H.  Leong,  O.  S.  Goh  and  Y.  J.  Kumar,  "MedKiosk:  An 
embodied  conversational  intelligence  via  deep  learning," 
2017 13th International Conference on Natural Computation, 
Fuzzy  Systems  and  Knowledge  Discovery  (ICNC-FSKD), 
Guilin, 2017, pp. 394-399. 

[15]  Rahman,  A.  M.,  Abdullah  Al  Mamun,  and  Alma  Islam. 
"Programming  challenges  of  Chatbot:  Current  and  Future 

 
