0
2
0
2
c
e
D
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
6
3
0
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Symbolic AI for XAI: Evaluating LFIT Inductive Programming
for Fair and Explainable Automatic Recruitment

Alfonso Ortega, Julian Fierrez, Aythami Morales, Zilong Wang
School of Engineering, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid
{alfonso.ortega,julian.fierrez,aythami.morales}@uam.es, zilong.wang@estudiante.uam.es

Tony Ribeiro
Laboratoire des Sciences du Num´erique de Nantes National Institute of Informatics Japan
tony ribeiro@ls2n.fr

Abstract

Machine learning methods are growing in relevance for
biometrics and personal information processing in domains
such as forensics, e-health, recruitment, and e-learning. In
these domains, white-box (human-readable) explanations of
systems built on machine learning methods can become cru-
cial. Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) is a subﬁeld of
symbolic AI aimed to automatically learn declarative the-
ories about the process of data. Learning from Interpreta-
tion Transition (LFIT) is an ILP technique that can learn
a propositional logic theory equivalent to a given black-
box system (under certain conditions). The present work
takes a ﬁrst step to a general methodology to incorporate
accurate declarative explanations to classic machine learn-
ing by checking the viability of LFIT in a speciﬁc AI ap-
plication scenario: fair recruitment based on an automatic
tool generated with machine learning methods for ranking
Curricula Vitae that incorporates soft biometric informa-
tion (gender and ethnicity). We show the expressiveness of
LFIT for this speciﬁc problem and propose a scheme that
can be applicable to other domains.

1. Introduction

Statistical and optimization-based machine learning al-
gorithms have achieved great success in various applica-
tions such as speech recognition [38], image classiﬁcation
[8], machine translation [43], and so on. Among these ap-
proaches, deep neural networks have shown the most re-
markable success, especially in speech and image recog-
nition. Although deep learning methods usually have good
generalization ability on similarly distributed new data, they
have some weaknesses including the lack of explanations
and the poor understandability by humans of the whole

learning process. A deep review about this question can
be found in [2].

Another characteristic of these machine learning algo-
rithms is that they rely on data, and therefore reﬂect those
data. This could be an advantage in general, but in some
particular domains it could be an important drawback. Con-
sider, for example, automatic recruitment systems, or algo-
rithms to authorize ﬁnancial products.
In these domains,
ethic behavior is mandatory and biased data are unaccept-
able. Appropriate measures have to be taken for guaran-
teeing ethical AI behavior sometimes contradictory to the
possibly biased training data. These questions are receiving
increasing interest [1, 9, 25, 39, 40, 20].

On the other hand, logic programming is a declarative
programming paradigm with a high level of abstraction. It
is based on a formal model (ﬁrst order logic) to represent
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
human knowledge.
has been developed for inductively learning logic programs
from examples [22]. Roughly speaking, given a collection
of positive and negative examples and background knowl-
edge, ILP systems learn declarative (symbolic) programs
[24, 6], which could even be noise tolerant [7, 23], that en-
tail all of the positive examples but none of the negative
examples.

One of the ILP most promising approaches for us
is Learning From Interpretation Transition (LFIT) [30].
LFIT learns a logic representation (digital twin) of dy-
namical complex systems by observing their behavior as
a black box under some circumstances. The most general
of LFIT algorithms is GULA (General Usage LFIT Algo-
rithm). PRIDE is an approximation to GULA with poly-
nomial performance. GULA and PRIDE generate a propo-
sitional logic program equivalent to the system under con-
sideration. These approaches will be introduced in depth in
the following sections.

Figure 1 shows the architecture of our proposed ap-

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed approach for generating an explanation of a given black-box Classiﬁer (1) using
PRIDE (2) with a toy example (3). Note that the resulting explanations generated by PRIDE are in propositional logic.

proach for generating white-box explanations using PRIDE
of a given black-box classiﬁer.

The main contributions of this work are:

• We have proposed a method to provide declarative ex-
planations using PRIDE about the classiﬁcation pro-
cess made by an algorithm automatically learnt by a
neural architecture in a typical machine learning sce-
nario. Our approach guarantees the logical equivalence
between the explanations and the algorithm with re-
spect to the data used to feed PRIDE. It does not de-
pend on any particular characteristic of the domain, so
it could be applied to any problem.

• We have checked the expressive power of these ex-
planations by experimenting in a multimodal machine
learning testbed around automatic recruitment includ-
ing different biases (by gender and ethnicity).

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Sec. 2 sum-
marizes the related relevant literature. Sec. 3 describes our
methodology including LFIT, GULA, and PRIDE. Sec. 4
presents the experimental framework including the datasets
and experiments conducted. Sec. 5 presents our results. Fi-
nally Secs. 6, 7 and 8 respectively discuss our work and
describe our conclusions and further research lines.

2. Related Works: Inductive Programming for

XAI

Some meta-heuristics approaches (as genetic algorithms)
have been used to automatically generate programs. Ge-
netic programming (GP) was introduced by Koza [15] for

automatically generating LISP expressions for given tasks
expressed as pairs input/output. This is, in fact, a typical
machine learning scenario. GP was extended by the use of
formal grammars to allow to generate programs in any arbi-
trary language keeping not only syntactic correctness [27]
but also semantic properties [28]. Algorithms expressed
in any language are declarative versions of the concepts
learnt what makes evolutionary automatic programming al-
gorithms machine learners with good explainability.

Declarative programming paradigms (functional, logi-
cal) are as old as computer science and are implemented
in multiple ways, e.g.: LISP [13], Prolog [5], Datalog [11],
Haskell [41], and Answer Set Programs (ASP) [10].

Of particular interest for us within declarative paradigms
is logic programming, and in particular ﬁrst order logic pro-
gramming, which is based on the Robinson’s resolution in-
ference rule that automates the reasoning process of de-
ducing new clauses from a ﬁrst order theory [17].
Intro-
ducing examples and counter examples and combining this
scheme with the ability of extending the initial theory with
new clauses it is possible to automatically induce a new
theory that (logically) entails all of the positive examples
but none of the negative examples. The underlying theory
from which the new one emerges is considered background
knowledge. This is the hypothesis of Inductive Logic Pro-
gramming (ILP, [21, 6]) that has received a great research
effort in the last two decades. Recently, these approaches
have been extended to make them noise tolerant (in order
to overcome one of the main drawbacks of ILP vs statisti-
cal/numerical approaches when facing bad-labeled or noisy
examples [23]).

Output classes(target) = {0,1}Input features(variables)Declarativeexplanation(propositionallogicfragment)𝒱=v1,v2,v3v1binary,v2andv3∈ℕClassifierseenas black-box system(input/outputs)Examples (twoinputs 𝒱𝐴and 𝒱𝐵)𝒱𝐴=v1=0v2=5v3=2𝒱𝐵=v1=1v2=3v3=0Note thattheexplanationrevealsthatthe output only depends on v11Logicalequivalentsystem(White-box Digital Twin of the Black-box Classifier)LFIT (PRIDE)2target(0) :-v10.target(1) :-v11.3Other declarative paradigms are also compatible with
ILP, e.g., MagicHaskeller (that implements [14]) with the
functional programming language Haskell, and Inductive
Learning of Answer Set Programs (ILASP) [16].

It has been previously mentioned that ILP implies some
kind of search in spaces that can become huge. This search
can be eased by hybridising with other techniques, e.g., [26]
introduces GA-Progol that applies evolutive techniques.

Within ILP methods we have identiﬁed LFIT as spe-
cially relevant for explainable AI (XAI). In the next sec-
tion we will describe the fundamentals of LFIT and its
PRIDE implementation, which will be tested experimen-
tally for XAI in the experiments that will follow.

2.1. Learning From Interpretation Transition

(LFIT)

Learning From Interpretation Transition (LFIT) [12] has
been proposed to automatically construct a model of the dy-
namics of a system from the observation of its state transi-
tions. Given some raw data, like time-series data of gene
expression, a discretization of those data in the form of state
transitions is assumed. From those state transitions, accord-
ing to the semantics of the system dynamics, several infer-
ence algorithms modeling the system as a logic program
have been proposed. The semantics of a system’s dynamics
can indeed differ with regard to the synchronism of its vari-
ables, the determinism of its evolution and the inﬂuence of
its history.

The LFIT framework proposes several modeling and
learning algorithms to tackle those different semantics. To
date, the following systems have been tackled: memory-
less deterministic systems [12], systems with memory [35],
probabilistic systems [19] and their multi-valued extensions
[36, 18]. The work [37] proposes a method that allows to
deal with continuous time series data, the abstraction itself
being learned by the algorithm.

In [31, 33], LFIT was extended to learn systems dynam-
ics independently of its update semantics. That extension
relies on a modeling of discrete memory-less multi-valued
systems as logic programs in which each rule represents that
a variable possibly takes some value at the next state, ex-
tending the formalism introduced in [12, 34]. The represen-
tation in [31, 33] is based on annotated logics [4, 3]. Here,
each variable corresponds to a domain of discrete values.
In a rule, a literal is an atom annotated with one of these
values.
It allows to represent annotated atoms simply as
classical atoms and thus to remain at a propositional level.
This modeling allows to characterize optimal programs in-
dependently of the update semantics. It allows to model the
dynamics of a wide range of discrete systems including our
domain of interest in this paper. LFIT can be used to learn
an equivalent propositional logic program that provides ex-
planation for each given observation.

Figure 2: Experimental framework: PRIDE is fed with all
the data available (train + test) for increasing the accuracy
of the equivalence. In our experiments we consider the clas-
siﬁer (see [29] for details) as a black box to perform regres-
sion from input resume attributes (atts.)
to output labels
(recruitment scores labelled by human resources experts).
LFIT gets a digital twin to the neural network providing
explainability (as human-readable white-box rules) to the
neural network classiﬁer.

3. Methods

3.1. General Methodology

Figure 2 graphically describes our proposed approach
to generate explanations using LFIT of a given black-box
classiﬁer. We can see there our purpose to get declarative
explanations in parallel (in a kind of white-blox digital twin)
to a given neural network classiﬁer. In the present work, for
our experiments we have used the same neural network and
datasets described in [29] but excluding the face images as
it is explained in the following sections.

3.2. PRIDE Implementation of LFIT

GULA [31, 33] and PRIDE [32] are particular imple-
mentations of the LFIT framework [12]. In the present sec-
tion we introduce notation and describe the fundamentals of
both methods.

In the following, we denote by N := {0, 1, 2, ...} the set
of natural numbers, and for all k, n ∈ N,
:= {i ∈ N |
k ≤ i ≤ n} is the set of natural numbers between k and n
included. For any set S, the cardinal of S is denoted |S| and
the power set of S is denoted ℘(S).

k; n
(cid:74)

(cid:75)

Let V = {v1, . . . , vn} be a ﬁnite set of n ∈ N vari-
ables, Val the set in which variables take their values and
dom : V → ℘(Val) a function associating a domain to each
variable. The atoms of MVL (multi-valued logic) are of
the form vval where v ∈ V and val ∈ dom(v). The set of
such atoms is denoted by AV
dom = {vval ∈ V × Val | val ∈
dom(v)} for a given set of variables V and a given domain
function dom. In the following, we work on speciﬁc V and
dom that we omit to mention when the context makes no
ambiguity, thus simply writing A for AV

dom.

Example 1 For a system of 3 variables, the typical set
of variables is V = {a, b, c}.
In general, Val =
N so that domains are sets of natural integers, for in-
stance: dom(a) = {0, 1}, dom(b) = {0, 1, 2} and
dom(c) = {0, 1, 2, 3}. Thus,
the set of all atoms is:
A = {a0, a1, b0, b1, b2, c0, c1, c2, c3}.

∧ · · · ∧ vvalm

m

(1)

A MVL rule R is deﬁned by:
R = vval0
0 ← vval1
, vvali
i

1

(cid:74)

(cid:74)

1; m

0; m
(cid:74)

(cid:75)
1; m

where ∀i ∈
∈ A are atoms in MVL so that
every variable is mentioned at most once in the right-hand
part: ∀j, k ∈
, j (cid:54)= k ⇒ vj (cid:54)= vk. Intuitively, the rule
(cid:75)
R has the following meaning: the variable v0 can take the
value val0 in the next dynamical step if for each i ∈
,
(cid:75)
variable vi has value vali in the current dynamical step.
The atom on the left-hand side of the arrow is called the
head of R and is denoted h(R) := vval0
. The notation
var(h(R)) := v0 denotes the variable that occurs in h(R).
The conjunction on the right-hand side of the arrow is called
the body of R, written b(R) and can be assimilated to the
set {vval1
m }; we thus use set operations such as
∈ and ∩ on it. The notation var(b(R)) := {v1, · · · , vm}
denotes the set of variables that occurs in b(R). More gen-
erally, for all set of atoms X ⊆ A, we denote var(X) :=
{v ∈ V | ∃val ∈ dom(v), vval ∈ X} the set of variables
appearing in the atoms of X. A multi-valued logic program
(MVLP) is a set of MVL rules.

, . . . , vvalm

0

1

Deﬁnition 1 introduces a domination relation between
rules that deﬁnes a partial anti-symmetric ordering. Rules
with the most general bodies dominate the other rules. In
practice, these are the rules we are interested in since they
cover the most general cases.

Deﬁnition 1 (Rule Domination) Let R1, R2 be two MVL
rules. The rule R1 dominates R2, written R2 ≤ R1 if
h(R1) = h(R2) and b(R1) ⊆ b(R2).

In [33], the set of variables is divided into two disjoint
subsets: T (for targets) and F (for features). It allows to
deﬁne dynamic MVLP which capture the dynamics of the
problem we tackle in this paper.

Deﬁnition 2 (Dynamic MVLP) Let T ⊂ V and F ⊂ V
such that F = V \ T . A DMVLP P is a MVLP such that
∀R ∈ P, var(h(R)) ∈ T and ∀vval ∈ b(R), v ∈ F.

The dynamical system we want to learn the rules of is
represented by a succession of states as formally given by
Deﬁnition 3. We also deﬁne the “compatibility” of a rule
with a state in Deﬁnition 4.

Deﬁnition 3 (Discrete state) A discrete state s on T (resp.
F) of a DMVLP is a function from T (resp. F) to N, i.e.
it associates an integer value to each variable in T (resp.
F). It can be equivalently represented by the set of atoms
{vs(v) | v ∈ T (resp. F)} and thus we can use classical set
operations on it. We write S T (resp. S F ) to denote the set
of all discrete states of T (resp. F), and a couple of states
(s, s(cid:48)) ∈ S F × S T is called a transition.

Deﬁnition 4 (Rule-state matching) Let s ∈ S F . The
MVL rule R matches s, written R (cid:117) s, if b(R) ⊆ s.

The notion of transition in LFIT correspond to a data
sample in the problem we tackle in this paper: a couple fea-
tures/targets. When a rule match a state it can be considered
as a possible explanation to the corresponding observation.
The ﬁnal program we want to learn should both:

• match the observations in a complete (all observations
are explained) and correct (no spurious explanation)
way;

• represent only minimal necessary interactions (accord-
ing to Occam’s razor: no overly-complex bodies of
rules)

GULA [31, 33] and PRIDE [32] can produce such pro-
grams.

Formally, given a set of observations T , GULA [31, 33]
and PRIDE [32] will learn a set of rules P such that all
observations are explained: ∀(s, s(cid:48)) ∈ T, ∀vval ∈ s(cid:48), ∃R ∈
P, R (cid:117) s, h(R) = vval. All rules of P are correct w.r.t.
T : ∀R ∈ P, ∀(s1, s2) ∈ T, R (cid:117) s1 =⇒ ∃(s1, s3) ∈
T, h(R) ∈ s3 (if T is deterministic, s2 = s3). All rules are
minimal w.r.t. F: ∀R ∈ P, ∀R(cid:48) ∈ MVLP, R(cid:48) correct w.r.t.
T it holds that R ≤ R(cid:48) =⇒ R(cid:48) = R.

The possible explanations of an observation are the rules
that match the feature state of this observation. The body of
the rules gives minimal condition over feature variables to
obtain its conclusions over a target variable. Multiple rules
can match the same feature state, thus multiple explanations
can be possible. Rules can be weighted by the number of
observations they match to assert their level of conﬁdence.
Output programs of GULA and PRIDE can also be used in
order to predict and explain from unseen feature states by
learning additional rules that encode when a target variable
value is not possible as shown in the experiments of [33].

4. Experimental Framework

4.1. Dataset

For testing the capability of PRIDE to generate explana-
tions in machine learning domains we have designed several
experiments using the FairCVdb dataset [29].

FairCVdb comprises 24,000 synthetic resume proﬁles.
Each resume includes 12 features (vi) related to the can-
didate merits, 2 demographic attributes (gender and three
ethnicity groups), and a face photograph.
In our experi-
ments, we discarded the face image for simplicity (unstruc-
tured image data will be explored in future work). Each of
the proﬁles includes three target scores (T ) generated as a
linear combination of the 12 features:

T = β +

12
(cid:88)

i=1

αi · vi,

(2)

where αi is a weighting factor for each of the merits (see
[29] for details): i) unbiased score (β = 0); ii) gender-
biased scores (β = 0.2 for male and β = 0 for female
candidates); and iii) ethnicity-biased scores (β = 0.0, 0.15
and 0.3 for candidates from ethnic groups 1, 2 and 3 respec-
tively). Thus we intentionally introduce bias in the candi-
date scores. From this point on we will simplify the name
of the attributes considering g for gender, e for ethnic group
and i1 to i12 for the rest of input attributes.
In addition
to the bias previously introduced, some other random bias
was introduced relating some attributes and gender to sim-
ulate real social dynamics. The attributes concerned were
i3 and i7. Note that merits were generated without bias, as-
suming an ideal scenario where candidate competencies do
not depend on their gender of ethnic group. For the current
work we have used only discrete values for each attribute
discretizing one attribute (experience to take values from 0
to 5, the higher the better) and the scores (from 0 to 3) that
were real valued in [29].

4.2. Experimental Protocol: Towards Declarative

Explanations

We have experimented with PRIDE on the FairCVdb

dataset described in the previous section.

Figure 3 shows names and explains the scenarios consid-
ered in our experiments. In [29], researchers demonstrate
that an automatic recruitment algorithm based on multi-
modal machine learning reproduces existing biases in the
target functions even if demographic information was not
available as input (see [29] for details). Our purpose in the
experiments is to obtain a declarative explanation capable
of revealing those biases.

Figure 3: Structure of the experimental tests. There are 4
datasets for analysing gender (named g) and ethnicity (e)
bias separately. Apart from gender and ethnicity there are
12 other input attributes (named from i1 to i12). There is a
couple of (biased and unbiased) datasets for each one: gen-
der and ethnicity. We have studied the input attributes by
increasing complexity starting with i1 and i2 and adding
one at each time. So, for each couple we have considered
11 different scenarios (named from s1 to s11). This ﬁg-
ure shows their structure (si is included in all sj for which
i < j).

5. Results

5.1. Example of Declarative Explanation

Listing 1 shows a fragment generated with the proposed
methods for scenario s1 for gender-biased scores. We have
chosen a fragment that fully explains how a CV is scored
with the value 3 for scenario 1. Scenario 1 takes into ac-
count the input attributes gender, education and experience.
The ﬁrst clause (rule), for example, says that if the value of
a CV for the attribute gender is 1 (female), for education is 5
(the highest), and for experience is 3, then this CV receives
the highest score (3).

The resulting explanation is a propositional logic frag-
ment equivalent to the classiﬁer for the data seen. It can
be also understood as a set of rules with the same behav-
ior. From the viewpoint of explainable AI, this resulting
fragment can be understood by an expert in the domain and
used to generate new knowledge about the scoring of CVs.

3

1
2 scores(3) :- gender(1),
education(5),
experience(3).

4
5 scores(3) :- education(4),

6

experience(3).

Listing 1: Fragment of explanation for scoring 3

5.2. Quantitative Results: Identifying Biases

Our quantitative results are divided in two parts. The ﬁrst
part is based on the fact that, in the biased experiments, if

gender(0) appears more frequently than gender(1) in the
rules, then that would lead to higher scores for gender(0).
In the second quantitative experimental part we will show
the inﬂuence of bias in the distribution of attributes.

5.2.1 Biased attributes in rules

1

0

1

0

1

and vvalj

, where vali

1 ∈ val1, deﬁne S = ∀R ∈ P ∧ vvali
(vval0
∈ b(R). Then we have: P W
v

We ﬁrst deﬁne Partial Weight P W as follows. For any pro-
gram P and two atoms vvali
0 ∈ val0
and vali
∈ h(R) ∧
vvalj
more accurate P W could be deﬁned, for example, setting
different weights for rules with different length. But for our
purpose, the frequency is enough. In our analysis, the num-
ber of examples for compared scenarios are consistent.

) = |S|. A

val
1

j
1

0

0

1

0

0

as follows.

Depending on P W , we deﬁne Global Weight GW
For any program P and vvalj
P W
v

val
1
is a weighted addition of all the values of the out-

1
) · vali
0.

, we have:

= (cid:80)

(vvali

0∈val0

The

val
1

vali

j
1

j
1

0

1

0

GW
v
GW
v

j
1

val
1

put, and the weight, in our case, is the value of scores.

Figure 4: Percentage of the absolute increment (comparing
scores with and without bias for ethnicity) of each attribute
for scenarios s1, s2, s3, s4, s5 and s6 (AIPus1−6,ebs1−6).
The graphs link the points corresponding to all the input
attributes considered in each scenario.

This analysis was performed only on scenario s11, com-
paring unbiased and gender- and ethnicity-biased scores.
We have observed a similar behavior of both parameters:
Partial and Global Weights.
In unbiased scenarios the
distributions of the occurrences of each value could be
considered statistically the same (between gender(0) and
gender(1) and among ethnicity(0), ethnicity(1) and ethnic-
ity(2)). Nevertheless in biased datasets the occurrences of
gender(0) and ethnic(0) for higher scores is signiﬁcantly
higher. The maximum difference even triplicates the oc-
currences of the other values.

For the Global Weights, for example, the maximum dif-
ferences in the number of occurrences, without and with
bias respectively, for higher scores expressed as % increases
from 48.8% to 78.1% for gender(0) while for gender(1)
decreases from 51.2% to 21.9%. In the case of ethnicity,
it increases from 33.4% to 65.9% for ethnic(0), but de-
creases from 33.7% to 19.4% for ethnic(1) and from 32.9%
to 14.7% for ethnic(2).

5.2.2 Distribution of biased attributes

We now deﬁne f reqp1(a) as the frequency of attribute a in
P1. The normalized percentage for input a is: N Pp1 (a) =
f reqp1(a)/ (cid:80)
x∈input f reqp1 (x) and the percentage of the
absolute increment for each input from unbiased exper-
iments to its corresponding biased ones is deﬁned as:
AIPp1,p2(a) = (f reqp1(a) − f reqp2(a))/f reqp2(a).

In this approach we have taken into account all the sce-

narios (from s1 to s11) for both gender and ethnicity.

Figure 5: AIPus7−11,ebs7−11

We have observed that for both parameters the only
attributes that consistently increase their values are gen-
der and ethnicity comparing unbiased and gender/ethnicity-
biased scores. Figures 4 and 5 show AIPus1−11,ebs1−11 for
each attribute, that is, their values comparing unbiased and
ethnic-biased scores for all the scenarios from s1 to s11. It
is clear that the highest values correspond to the attribute
ethnicity.

Something similar happens for gender. Figures 6 and
7 show AIPus1−11,gbs1−11 for each attribute when study-
ing gender-biased scores. It is worth mentioning some dif-
ferences in scenarios s9, s10 and s11 regarding attributes
i3 and i7. These apparent anomalies are explained by the
random bias introduced in the datasets in order to relate
these attributes with gender when the score is biased. Fig-
ure 8 shows N Ps11 for all the attributes. It clearly shows
the small relevance of attributes i3 and i7 in the ﬁnal bi-

Figure 6: AIPus1−6,ebs1−6

Figure 8: Normalized percentage of frequency in scenario
s11 of each attribute: g, i1 to i11 (N Ps11). No bias (blue),
Gender-biased scores (red).

• PRIDE can explain what happens in a speciﬁc do-
main. Our experimental results discover these charac-
teristics of the domain:

– Insights into the structure of the datasets. We
have seen (and further conﬁrmed with the au-
thors of the datasets) some characteristics of the
datasets, e.g.: 1) All the attributes are needed
for the score. We have learnt the logical ver-
sion of the system starting from only two in-
put attributes and including one additional at-
tribute at a time and we only reached an accu-
racy of 100 % when taking into account all of
them. This is because removing some attributes
generates indistinguishable CVs (all the remain-
der attributes have the same value) with differ-
ent scores (that correspond to different values in
some of the removed attributes). 2) Gender and
ethnicity are not the most relevant attributes for
scoring: The number of occurrences of these at-
tributes is much smaller than others in the con-
ditions of the clauses of the learnt logical pro-
gram. 3) While trying to catch the biases we have
discovered that some attributes seem to increase
their relevance when the score is biased. For
example, the competence in some speciﬁc lan-
guages (attribute i7) seems to be more relevant
when the score has gender bias. After discussing
with the authors of the datasets, they conﬁrmed a
random perturbation of these languages into the
biases, that explained our observations.

– Biases in the training datasets are detected. We
have analysed the relationship between the scores
and the speciﬁc values of the attributes used to
generated the biased data. We have proposed

Figure 7: AIPus7−11,gbs7−11

ased score. As it is highlighted elsewhere, this capability
of PRIDE to identify this random indirect perturbation of
other attributes in the bias is a relevant achievement of our
proposal.

6. Discussion

After running the experiments described in the previous

sections we can extract the following conclusions.

• PRIDE can explain algorithms learnt by neural net-
works. The theorems that support the characteristics
of PRIDE allow to get a set of propositional clauses
logically equivalent to the systems observed when fac-
ing the input data provided. In addition, each proposi-
tion has a set of conditions that is minimum. So, once
the scorer is learnt, PRIDE translates it into a logical
equivalent program. This program is a list of clauses
like the one shown in Listing 1. Logical programs are
declarative theories that explain the knowledge on a
domain.

a simple mathematical model based on the ef-
fective weights of the attributes that concludes
that higher values of the scores correspond to
the same speciﬁc values of gender (for gender
bias) and ethnic group (for ethnicity bias). On the
other hand, we have performed an exhaustive se-
ries of experiments to analyse the increase of the
presence of the gender and ethnicity in the condi-
tions of the clauses of the learnt logical program
(comparing the unbiased and biased versions).

Our overall conclusion is that LFIT, and in particular
PRIDE, is able to offer explanations to the algorithm learnt
in the domain under consideration. The resulting explana-
tion is, as well, expressive enough to catch training biases
in the models learnt with neural networks.

7. Conclusions

The main goal of this paper was to check if ILP (and
more speciﬁcally LFIT with PRIDE) could be useful to pro-
vide declarative explanations in machine learning by neural
networks.

The domain selected for our experiments in this ﬁrst
entry to the topic is one in which the explanations of the
learned models’ outputs are specially relevant: automatic
recruitment algorithms.
In this domain, ethic behavior is
needed, no spurious biases are allowed. For this purpose,
a pack of synthetically generated datasets has been used.
The datasets contain resumes (CVs) used in [29] for testing
the ability of deep learning approaches to reproduce and re-
move biases present in the training datasets. In the present
work, different input attributes (including the resume owner
merits, gender, and ethnicity) are used to score each CV
automatically using a neural network. Different setups are
considered to introduce artiﬁcial gender- and ethnicity-bias
in the learning process of the neural network. In [29] face
images were also used and the relationship between these
pictures and the biases was studied (it seems clear that from
the face you should be able to deduce the gender and ethnic
group of a person). Here we have removed images because
PRIDE is more efﬁcient with pure discrete information.

Our main goal indicated above translates into these two
questions: Is PRIDE expressive enough to explain how the
program learnt by deep-learning approaches works? Does
PRIDE catch biases in the deep-learning processes? We
have given positive answer to both questions.

8. Further Research Lines

• Increasing understandability.

Two possibilities
could be considered in the future: 1) to ad hoc post-
process the learnt program for translating it into a more
abstract form, or 2) to increase the expressive power of

the formal model that supports the learning engine us-
ing, for example, ILP based on ﬁrst order logic.

• Adding predictive capability. PRIDE is actually
not aimed to predict but to explain (declaratively) by
means of a digital twin of the observed systems. Nev-
ertheless, it is not really complicated to extend PRIDE
functionality to predict.
It should be necessary to
change the way in which the result is interpreted as
a logical program: mainly by adding mechanisms to
chose the most promising rule when more than one is
applicable.

Our plan is to test an extended-to-predict PRIDE ver-
sion to this same domain and compare the result with
the classiﬁer generated by deep learning algorithms.

• Handling numerical inputs. [29] included as input
the images of the faces of the owners of the CVs. Al-
though some variants to PRIDE are able to cope with
numerical signals, the huge amount of information as-
sociated with images implies performance problems.
Images are a typical input format in real deep learn-
ing domains. We would like to add some automatic
pre-processing step for extracting discrete information
(such as semantic labels) from input images. We are
motivated by the success of systems with similar ap-
proaches but different structure like [42].

• Measuring the accuracy and performance of the ex-
planations. As far as the authors know there is no
standard procedure to evaluate and compare different
explainability approaches. We will incorporate in fu-
ture versions some formal metric.

9. Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by projects: PRIMA
TRESPASS-ETN
(H2020-MSCA-ITN-2019-860315),
IDEA-FAST (IMI2-
(H2020-MSCA-ITN-2019-860813),
BIBECA (RTI2018-101248-B-I00
2018-15-853981),
MINECO/FEDER), RTI2018-095232-B-C22 MINECO,
and Accenture.

References

[1] A. Acien, A. Morales, R. Vera-Rodriguez, I. Bartolome, and
J. Fierrez. Measuring the gender and ethnicity bias in deep
In Iberoamerican Congress
models for face recognition.
on Pattern Recognition (IBPRIA), pages 584–593. Springer,
2018.

[2] A. Barredo Arrieta, N. D´ıaz Rodr´ıguez,

J. Del Ser,
A.Bennetot, S. Tabik, A. Barbado, S. Garc´ıa, S. Gil-Lopez,
D. Molina, R. Benjamins, R. Chatila, and F. Herrera. Ex-
plainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI): concepts, taxonomies,
opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Infor-
mation Fusion, 58:82–115, 2020.

[3] H. A Blair and V.S. Subrahmanian. Paraconsistent founda-
tions for logic programming. Journal of Non-classical Logic,
5(2):45–73, 1988.

[4] H. A. Blair and V.S. Subrahmanian. Paraconsistent logic pro-
gramming. Theoretical Computer Science, 68(2):135 – 154,
1989.

[5] I. Bratko. Prolog Programming for Artiﬁcial Intelligence,

4th Edition. Addison-Wesley, 2012.

[6] A. Cropper and S. H. Muggleton. Learning efﬁcient logic
programs. Machine Learning, 108(7):1063–1083, 2019.
[7] W. Z. Dai, S. H. Muggleton, and Z. H. Zhou. Logical vision:
Meta-interpretive learning for simple geometrical concepts.
2015.

[8] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei.
ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
CVPR, 2009.

[9] P. Drozdowski, C. Rathgeb, A. Dantcheva, N. Damer, and
C. Busch. Demographic bias in biometrics: A survey on an
emerging challenge. IEEE Transactions on Technology and
Society, 2020.

[10] M. Gebser, R. Kaminski, B. Kaufmann, and T. Schaub. An-
swer Set Solving in Practice. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence and Machine Learning. Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, 2012.

[11] S. S. Huang, T. Jeffrey Green, and B. T. Loo. Datalog and
emerging applications: an interactive tutorial. In Timos K.
Sellis, Ren´ee J. Miller, Anastasios Kementsietsidis, and Yan-
nis Velegrakis, editors, Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data, pages 1213–1216, June 2011.
[12] K. Inoue, T. Ribeiro, and C. Sakama. Learning from inter-
pretation transition. Machine Learning, 94(1):51–79, 2014.
[13] Guy L. Steele Jr. Common LISP: The Language, 2nd Edition.

Digital Pr., 1990.

[14] S. Katayama. Systematic search for lambda expressions. In
M. C. J. D. van Eekelen, editor, Revised Selected Papers from
the Sixth Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming,
volume 6 of Trends in Functional Programming, pages 111–
126. Intellect, September 2005.

[15] J.R. Koza. Genetic Programming. MIT Press, 1992.
[16] M. Law. Inductive learning of answer set programs., 2018.

PhD. Imperial College London.

[17] J. W. Lloyd. Foundations of Logic Programming, 2nd Edi-

tion. Springer, 1987.

[18] D. Martınez, G. Alenya, C. Torras, T. Ribeiro, and K. Inoue.
Learning relational dynamics of stochastic domains for plan-
ning. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on
Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2016.

[19] D. Mart´ınez Mart´ınez, T. Ribeiro, K. Inoue, G. Aleny`a Ribas,
and C. Torras. Learning probabilistic action models from
In Proceedings of the Technical
interpretation transitions.
Communications of the 31st International Conference on
Logic Programming (ICLP 2015), pages 1–14, 2015.
[20] A. Morales, J. Fierrez, R. Vera-Rodriguez, and R. Tolosana.
Sensitivenets: Learning agnostic representations with appli-
IEEE Transactions on Pattern
cation to face recognition.
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2021.

[21] S. Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. In S. Arikawa,
Sh. Goto, S. Ohsuga, and T. Yokomori, editors, Proc. First
Intl. Workshop on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 42–
62. Springer, October 1990.

[22] S. Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. New Genera-

tion Computing, 8(4):295–318, 1991.

[23] S. Muggleton, W.-Z. Dai, C. Sammut, A. Tamaddoni-
Nezhad, J. Wen, and Z.-H. Zhou. Meta-interpretive learning
from noisy images. Machine Learning, 107(7):1097–1118,
2018.

[24] S. H. Muggleton, D. Lin, N. Pahlavi, and A. Tamaddoni-
Nezhad. Meta-interpretive learning: application to grammat-
ical inference. Machine Learning, 94(1):25–49, 1994.
[25] S. Nagpal, M. Singh, R. Singh, M. Vatsa, and N.i K. Ratha.
Deep learning for face recognition: Pride or prejudiced?
CoRR, abs/1904.01219, 2019.

[26] A. T. Nezhad.

Logic-based machine learning using a
bounded hypothesis space: the lattice structure, reﬁnement
operators and a genetic algorithm approach, August 2013.
PhD, Imperial College London.

[27] M. O’Neill and R. Conor. Grammatical Evolution - Evolu-
tionary Automatic Programming in an Arbitrary Language,
volume 4 of Genetic programming. Kluwer, 2003.

[28] A. Ortega, M. de la Cruz, and M. Alfonseca. Christiansen
grammar evolution: Grammatical evolution with semantics.
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 11(1):77–90, 2007.

[29] A. Pe˜na, I. Serna, A. Morales, and J. Fierrez. Bias in mul-
timodal AI: testbed for fair automatic recruitment. In Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR) Workshops, pages 129–137, June 2020.
[30] T. Ribeiro. Studies on learning dynamics of systems from

state transitions, 2015. PhD.

[31] T. Ribeiro, M. Folschette, M. Magnin, O. Roux, and K. In-
oue. Learning dynamics with synchronous, asynchronous
and general semantics. In International Conference on In-
ductive Logic Programming, pages 118–140. Springer, 2018.
[32] T. Ribeiro, M. Folschette, L. Trilling, N. Glade, K. Inoue, M.
Magnin, and O. Roux. Les enjeux de l’inf´erence de mod`eles
dynamiques des syst`emes biologiques `a partir de s´eries tem-
porelles. In C. Lhoussaine and E. Remy, editors, Approches
symboliques de la mod´elisation et de l’analyse des syst`emes
biologiques. ISTE Editions, 2020. In edition.

[33] T. Ribeiro, M. Folschette, M.and Magnin, and K. Inoue.
Learning any semantics for dynamical systems represented
by logic programs. working paper or preprint, Sept. 2020.

[34] T. Ribeiro and K. Inoue. Learning prime implicant condi-
tions from interpretation transition. In Inductive Logic Pro-
gramming, pages 108–125. Springer, 2015.

[35] T. Ribeiro, M. Magnin, K. Inoue, and C. Sakama. Learning
delayed inﬂuences of biological systems. Frontiers in Bio-
engineering and Biotechnology, 2:81, 2015.

[36] T. Ribeiro, M. Magnin, K. Inoue, and C. Sakama. Learn-
ing multi-valued biological models with delayed inﬂuence
In 2015 IEEE 14th Inter-
from time-series observations.
national Conference on Machine Learning and Applications
(ICMLA), pages 25–31, Dec 2015.

[37] T. Ribeiro, S. Tourret, M. Folschette, M. Magnin, D. Borzac-
chiello, F. Chinesta, O. Roux, and K. Inoue. Inductive learn-
ing from state transitions over continuous domains.
In N.
Lachiche and C. Vrain, editors, Inductive Logic Program-
ming, pages 124–139. Springer, 2018.

[38] A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, and T. Sainath. Deep
neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition.
IEEE Signal Processing magazine, 2012.

[39] I. Serna, A. Morales, J. Fierrez, M. Cebrian, N. Obradovich,
and I. Rahwan. Algorithmic discrimination: Formulation
and exploration in deep learning-based face biometrics. In
AAAI Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Safety (SafeAI),
February 2020.

[40] I. Serna, A. Pe˜na, A.Morales, and J. Fierrez.

InsideBias:
Measuring bias in deep networks and application to face gen-
der biometrics. In IAPR Intl. Conf. on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR), January 2021.

[41] S. J. Thompson. Haskell - The Craft of Functional Program-

ming, 3rd Edition. Addison-Wesley, 2011.

[42] D. Varghese and A. Tamaddoni-Nezhad. One-shot rule learn-
ing for challenging character recognition. In S. Moschoyian-
nis, P. Fodor, J. Vanthienen, D. Inclezan, Ni. Nikolov, F.
Mart´ın-Recuerda, and I. Toma, editors, Proc. of the 14th Intl.
Rule Challenge, volume 2644 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings, pages 10–27, June 2020.

[43] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W.
Macherey, and J Klingner. Google’s neural machine transla-
tion system: Bridging the gap between human and machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.

