The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne

National Laboratory(“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Science labo-

ratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government retains for

itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in

said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform

publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

0
2
0
2

c
e
D
7

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
7
3
0
4
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
High resolution functional imaging through Lorentz transmission electron

microscopy and diﬀerentiable programming

Tao Zhou,1 Mathew Cherukara,2 and Charudatta Phatak3, a)

1)Nanoscience and Technology Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont,

IL 60439.

2)Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont,

IL 60439.

3)Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont,

IL 60439.

(Dated: 9 December 2020)

Lorentz transmission electron microscopy is a unique characterization technique that en-

ables the simultaneous imaging of both the microstructure and functional properties of ma-

terials at high spatial resolution. The quantitative information such as magnetization and

electric potentials is carried by the phase of the electron wave, and is lost during imaging.

In order to understand the local interactions and develop structure-property relationships,

it is necessary to retrieve the complete wavefunction of the electron wave, which requires

solving for the phase shift of the electrons (phase retrieval). Here we have developed a

method based on differentiable programming to solve the inverse problem of phase re-

trieval, using a series of defocused microscope images. We show that our method is robust

and can outperform widely used transport of intensity equation in terms of spatial resolu-

tion and accuracy of the retrieved phase under same electron dose conditions. Furthermore,

our method shares the same basic structure as advanced machine learning algorithms, and

is easily adaptable to various other forms of phase retrieval in electron microscopy.

a)Electronic mail: cd@anl.gov

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

The design and development of new and improved materials requires a fundamental under-

standing of the structure-property relationship at the nanoscale. Vital to this understanding is the

ability to quantify the local functional response of materials under operando conditions. For exam-

ple, imaging of the local magnetization under applied electromagnetic ﬁelds can give insight into
novel magnetic proprieties emerging at the nanoscale1,2. Similarly, quantiﬁcation of the local elec-

trostatic potential in solid electrolyte materials has proven crucial to the prediction of their charge
transport behavior3–5. Last but not least, the precise measurement of local strain is critical in many
condensed matter systems such as semiconductors, ferroelectrics, and quantum materials6,7.

In transmission electron microscopy (TEM), the quantitative information about functional ma-
terial properties is carried in the phase shift of the electrons8. The electron-sample interaction can
be described as perturbations to the electron wavefunction given by ψ(r⊥) = a(r⊥)eiϕ(r⊥), where
r⊥ is a radial vector along the electron propagation direction9. Elastic scattering of the electrons
in the sample gives rise to variations in the amplitude of the wavefunction, a(r⊥), whereas the

presence of electromagnetic potentials and strain ﬁeld give rise to the variations in the phase of the

wavefunction, ϕ(r⊥). The electromagnetic potentials here consist of two components namely (i)

the electrostatic potential which is related to the local charge densities in the sample, and (ii) mag-

netic vector potential which is related to the magnetic spin texture of the sample. Depending on

the imaging resolution, the electrostatic potential can be crystalline lattice potential (high resolu-

tion TEM) or charge accumulation due to electronic effects such as Mott-Schottky or 2D electron
gas10. This phase information is however lost during image acquisition as the recorded intensity is

merely the squared amplitude of the exit wavefunction. Quantitative evaluation of the functional

properties thus necessitates solving for the phase of the electron wave. The process of obtaining

phase information from measured intensities (known as phase retrieval) is the basis for a variety of

coherent imaging techniques in x-ray and electron microscopy. In Lorentz TEM (LTEM), meth-

ods based on transport of intensity equation (TIE) and off-axis electron holography are commonly
used, each having its own merits and limitations11. The TIE approach is experimentally easy to

implement, but the result often suffers from low spatial resolution due to the extent of defocusing

required. Off-axis holography on the other hand has high sensitivity, and high spatial resolution,

but imposes stricter experimental conditions such as the need for a reference electron wave, and

special electron-optical setup.

3

Recent years have seen a tremendous increase in the application of machine-learning meth-

ods to determine the structure-property relationship in materials characterization. For electron

microscopy, the primary focus has been on the analysis of high resolution images to determine

atomic positions, or on the processing of large datasets for electron diffraction such as in 4D
STEM12. There have been relatively fewer efforts in using such methods to obtain quantitative

information about functional properties of materials. In this work, we have developed a method

based on reverse-mode automatic differentiation (AD) to solve the inverse problem of phase re-

trieval in Lorentz transmission electron microscopy. AD has become the de facto means of training
a neural network13 thanks to the ﬂexible interfaces developed and supported by large technology
corporations14,15. Phase retrieval with AD was ﬁrst proposed16 and later demonstrated with X-ray
coherent diffraction imaging17,18. By applying this method to LTEM, we show that we are able to

retrieve phase at a higher spatial resolution and with higher accuracy as compared to conventional

methods.

II. RESULTS

A. Phase retrieval using differentiable programming

The process of applying AD for phase retrieval in LTEM is shown in Fig. 1. The amplitude

a(r⊥) is ﬁxed, and is taken as the square root of the intensity of the in-focus image. The starting

guess ϕ0 for the phase is set to a constant. For each iteration, the calculated data is computed

as the exit wavefunction of the sample, a(r⊥)exp(iϕn), convolved with the microscope transfer

function (TF). The difference between the absolute of the calculated data and the square root of the

measured intensity of the defocus series is used to compute the loss function. The concept of phase

retrieval with AD is analogous to the training of a neural network (NN). In both cases, the gradients

are calculated by back-propagating the loss through the network in what is known as reverse-mode

automatic differentiation. The guess ϕn is then updated iteratively in steps proportional to the

negative of the gradients, and the phase retrieval process is considered complete if the improvement

of the loss function is smaller than a pre-deﬁned tolerance. For more detailed description, the

reader is referred to the Methods section.

4

FIG. 1. Flow chart of phase retrieval in LTEM through differentiable programming. The experimental data

and instrument parameters are color coded in grey. The imaging process that carries the phase information

is color coded in blue while the path for back-propagation is color coded in red.

B. Phase retrieval on image pairs of opposite defocus

State-of-the-art TIE8,19 formalism uses the differentiation of two images of opposite defocus to

approximate the longitudinal intensity derivatives ∂ I/∂ z. The phase is then retrieved by solving

the partial differential equation below using the intensity of the in-focus image, I0,

∇ · [I0∇ϕ] = −

2π
λ

∂ I
∂ z

(1)

The choice of this image pair has signiﬁcant impact on the accuracy and spatial resolution of

the TIE retrieved phase, as is illustrated in the upper part of Fig. 2. Fig. 2a shows the ground

truth phase used for creating the simulated LTEM dataset (Fig. S1). The knowledge of the ground

truth is essential for evaluating the accuracy and spatial resolution of the retrieved phase, which

is described in the Methods section. TIE retrieved phase using moderately defocused image pair

(∆ f ≈ ±0.1 mm) preserves a reasonable spatial resolution (Fig. 2b), but is less accurate and ex-

tremely susceptible to noise (Fig. 2c). TIE retrieved phase using strongly defocused image pair

(|∆ f | > 1mm) is tolerant to noise (Fig. 2d and 2e), but the result is blurry due to the much reduced
spatial resolution20.

We then performed AD phase retrieval on the same datasets. In the case of moderately defo-

cused image pair, AD is not as accurate as TIE (Fig. 2f) under noise free conditions, but is able

to retain the same level of accuracy in the presence of noise (Fig. 2g). In the case of strongly

5

defocused image pair, AD vastly outperformed TIE under noise free conditions by simultaneously

showing an extremely high level of accuracy and high spatial resolution (Fig. 2h). In the presence

of noise, however, AD overﬁts to the noise, resulting in grainy images with low accuracy (Fig. 2i).

Supplemental Figure S2b shows the evolution of the accuracy. It can be seen that AD initially

reached a higher level of accuracy (orange line) than TIE (orange rectangle), but did not converge

to the truth despite a monotonically decreasing loss function (Supplemental Figure S2c).

FIG. 2.

(a) Ground truth for the phase. TIE retrieved phase using image pair with (b) 0% and (c) 10%

of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±0.15 mm. TIE retrieved phase using image pair with (d) 0% and (e) 10%

of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±1.6 mm. AD retrieved phase using image pair with (f) 0% and (g) 10% of

Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±0.15 mm. AD retrieved phase using image pair with (h) 0% and (i) 10% of

Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±1.6 mm. The numbers in the brackets denote the accuracy of retrieved phases.

C. AD phase retrieval on images of hybrid defocus

The high accuracy and high spatial resolution achieved in Fig. 2h exempliﬁes the huge potential

of AD as a viable phase retrieval method for LTEM, but its practical application is hampered by

its instability in the presence of noise (Supplemental Figure S2b). To circumvent this, we explore

a strategy that leverages the ﬂexibility of the AD method to work with multiple images at different

defocus conditions. We choose to show the gradient of the phase to highlight the effectiveness of

our strategy. Compared to the phase itself, the gradient of the phase is sensitive to the direction of

magnetic induction or local electric ﬁelds as well as to the edges of nanostructures due to change

6

in thickness. As a result, the phase gradient gives a better assessment of the spatial resolution and

accuracy of the retrieved phase. Fig. 3a shows the ground truth for the gradient of the phase, with

its direction and its magnitude respectively indicated by false color and grayscale contour. With

10% of Gaussian noise, the magnitude of the TIE retrieved phase gradient at moderate defocus

is severely distorted at the center of the nanostructures (Fig. 3b), which is reﬂective of the low

accuracy of 56.78%. Under strongly defocused conditions, the TIE retrieved phase gradient is

distorted near the edge of the nanostructures (Fig. 3c), as a result of the low spatial resolution.

Next, we demonstrate that high spatial resolution, high accuracy and tolerance to noise can

be simultaneously achieved in the AD formalism. We recall that while AD seems to guarantee

a high spatial resolution regardless of the focusing conditions, extremely high accuracy was only

observed with strongly defocused image pairs while tolerance to noise was only observed with

moderately defocused image pairs. One advantage of the AD phase retrieval process is that it does

not require the images to be pairs of opposite defocus. Indeed, pairing one image of moderate

defocus with one of strong defocus effectively stabilized the accuracy evolution in the presence

of 10% Gaussian noise (Fig.S3b, red line). The best result (Fig. 3d) was obtained by combining

two images of moderate defocus with two images of strong defocus, where an accuracy of 98.56%

was reached (Fig.S3b, blue line), about 10% higher than the best value achievable with the TIE

method. To ensure a fair comparison, the noise level of the four images was raised to 15%. This

is to account for the factor of

2 shot noise variation when the exposure time of each image is

√

halved and the total exposure time remains unchanged. The much improved accuracy in the ﬁnal

retrieved phase is thus understood as due entirely to a stronger numerical constraint. Fig. 3e shows

the line proﬁles of the retrieved phase gradient across multiple nanostructures. It can be seen that

AD with hybrid defocus images is the only method capable of reproducing faithfully the sharp

variation of the phase gradient at the edge of the nanostructures.

D. Application on experimental data

Finally, we demonstrate the viability of the proposed phase retrieval strategy on experimental

LTEM images. The imaging conditions and information about the sample can be found in the

Methods section. We have speciﬁcally chosen, for the purpose of veriﬁcation, nanostructures

with known magnetic conﬁguration. Three different scenarios were tested, with 2, 4 and 20 images

7

FIG. 3. (a) Ground truth for the phase gradient. Its direction is shown in false color as deﬁned by the color

wheel in the inset. Its magnitude is indicated by the gray contour which appears each time the phase wraps

over one tenth of 2π. The scale bar is 500 nm. Gradient of TIE retrieved phase using image pair with 10%

Gaussian noise at (b) ∆ f = ±0.15 mm and (c) ∆ f = ±1.6 mm. (d) Gradient of AD retrieved phase using the

4 defocused images with 15% Gaussian noise at −0.1, −0.2, +1.5 and +1.6 mm. (e) Detailed comparison

with the ground truth respectively for data shown in (b), (c) and (d). The position at which the line proﬁle

was extracted is indicated by the dashed line in (a).

taken at various defocus conditions. The total counting time was 4 s in all three cases, to ensure a

fair comparison under the same electron dose conditions. Similar to what was concluded with the

simulated dataset, the convergence of the AD method improves with increasing number of images,

with the best result obtained for a series of 20 images with hybrid defocus. Fig. 4a and 4b show

respectively the AD retrieved phase and its gradient on the 20 defocus images spanned between

∆ f = ±1.44 mm. The exposure time was 0.2 s per image. Fig. 4c and 4d show in comparison the

TIE retrieved phase and its gradient at ∆ f = ±1.44 mm, with 2 s of exposure time per image. As

expected, AD retrieved phase (Fig. 4a) appears to be sharper than the TIE retrieved one (Fig. 4c)

thanks to its inherent high spatial resolution. Line proﬁles were extracted across the center of the

8

FIG. 4.

(a) AD retrieved phase and (b) its gradient on images at defocus spanned between ∆ f = ±1.44

mm, with 4 s of total exposure time. (c) TIE retrieved phase and (d) its gradient on images at defocus

∆ f = ±1.44 mm, with 4 s of total exposure time. (e) shows line proﬁle of the phase gradient. The position

at which the line proﬁle was extracted is indicated by the dashed line in (b).

square-shaped nanostructure. Once again, AD (Fig. 4e, red line) outperformed TIE (black line) in

retrieving the sharp variations of the phase gradient expected at the edges of the nanostructures.

Elsewhere on the extracted line proﬁles, the two methods agree extremely well with each other,

indicating that the accuracy of the AD method on the experimental data is at least equal to, if not

better than that of TIE, under the same electron dose conditions.

III. DISCUSSION

In this work, we have demonstrated a new method based on automatic differentiation for the

phase retrieval in Lorentz TEM. The strengths and weaknesses of our proposed method against

the conventional TIE approach are summarized in Fig. 5a, based on results presented in Fig. 2 and

Fig. S4. TIE in theory requires a pair of images, moderately defocused in the opposite directions.

9

FIG. 5. (a) Accuracy versus resolution plot for the TIE and the AD methods. The values are calculated from

phase retrieved on the simulated dataset with various noise levels. Moderate defocus refers to ∆ f = ±0.15

mm while strong defocus refers to ∆ f = ±1.6 mm. The hybrid defocus uses 4 defocused images at -0.1,

-0.2, +1.5 and +1.6 mm. (b) Accuracy of the AD retrieved phase using 2 images of hybrid defocus, for

data with 10% of Gaussian noise. The defocus values cover the entire parameter space from ∆ f = +1.6

mm (under-focus) to ∆ f = −1.6 mm (over-focus). The values shown are the ﬁnal accuracy of the retrieved

phase after 500 iterations. (c) Stability of the AD retrieved phase covering the same parameter space as (b).

The more "unstable" an image pair is, the earlier in the iterations does the AD retrieved phase diverges from

the ground truth. The maximum value corresponds to those image pairs that continue to converge to the

ground truth after 500 iterations.

While that works well with ideal data, the accuracy of the retrieved phase drops quickly in the

presence of noise (green symbols). The tolerance to noise can be greatly enhanced by increasing

the defocus distance of the image pair (orange symbols). This can be easily understood by looking

back at Eq. 1, as any statistical ﬂuctuations in the intensity is attenuated by a factor proportional

to the defocus distance. The use of strongly defocused images is not without its problems. TIE

is strictly valid only in the small defocus limit where the microscope transfer function remains
linear for the given spatial frequency resolution21,22. Therefore, the strong defocusing reduces the

achievable spatial resolution, resulting in blurriness in the retrieved phase (Fig. 2d).

We then demonstrated the use of AD phase retrieval on the same set of data. We note that good

spatial resolution is always guaranteed in the AD formalism regardless of the defocus distance of

the image pair. But a new dilemma emerges. The accuracy of the retrieved phase is limited to

about 90% when using moderately defocused images (red symbols). This can be understood by

the fact that the transfer function for moderate defocus values does not have much variations to

carry enough phase information into image intensity. Extremely high accuracy can be obtained by

10

using pairs of strongly defocused images (purple symbols). However, the achieved high accuracy

was limited to ideal data only, as AD tends to overﬁt to the presence of noise, resulting in diver-

gence from the ground truth in noisy images. We solve this dilemma by leveraging the ﬂexibility

of the AD method to work with multiple images of mixed defocus conditions. In the most simple

scenario, this involves pairing two images taken at different defocus distances. We have mapped

out the entire parameter space to determine the achievable accuracy and stability (deﬁned as the

ability to stay converged to the ground truth in the presence of noise) in this scenario. The result is

shown respectively in Fig. 5b and c. It can be seen that while the maximum accuracy is obtained

by pairing one strongly under-focused image with one strongly over-focused one (equivalent to

having a strongly defocused image pair), the stability of the AD approach is not very high under

these conditions. Instead, we can identify a sweet spot for high accuracy and high stability where

a strongly defocused image is paired with a moderately defocused one (referred to as hybrid defo-

cus).

We further demonstrated that, under the same electron dose condition, the accuracy and stabil-

ity of AD phase retrieval improves with the number of images. For simulated data, the accuracy

of the retrieved phase is 72.53% for 2 images of 10% Gaussian noise, and 98.56% for 4 images

of 15% noise (Fig. 5, blue symbols). Additional tests on simulated data shows that the noisier

the data is, the larger the number of images is required to maintain the stability (Fig. S5). The

same was observed in the application of AD phase retrieval on experimental LTEM images, but

for a slightly different reason. The retrieved phase appears to be more accurate when 20 images of

hybrid defocus were used, as compared to 2 or 4 images of equal total exposure time. We believe

that the use of a large number of images averages out the variations introduced by uncertainties

in experimental parameters such as sample misalignment, leading to a highly accurate retrieved

phase in our case.

The most signiﬁcant advantage of our proposed method, as compared to the conventional TIE

approach, is its ability to retrieve phase with simultaneous high spatial resolution and high accu-

racy. This is best illustrated on the line proﬁles of the gradient of the phase in both the simulated

(Fig. 3e) and experimental (Fig. 4e) dataset. Compared to off-axis electron holography, it offers

high resolution phase information over a large ﬁeld of view, without the additional experimen-

tal complications. This is particularly important for applications such as determining interfacial

electrostatic potentials in materials where it is critical to sample a statistically signiﬁcant number

of interfaces. The main limitation of our method is its requirement of a priori knowledge of the

11

microscope transfer function. Some of the parameters in the TF can be accurately determined in

an aberration-corrected Lorentz TEM, such as spherical aberration and defocus distance. Other

parameters like beam coherence are experimentally harder to evaluate, in which case, we recom-

mend extending the AD approach to also retrieve these parameters along with the sample phase.

It is in theory possible to recover the true amplitude as well, provided that sufﬁcient amount of

data is taken to ensure a strong numerical constraint. This would enable the reconstruction of the

complete electron wavefunction, which can be adapted for high-resolution TEM imaging at the

atomic scale. Finally, thanks to the simplicity of its implementation, the method can be easily

incorporated with other iterative reconstruction algorithms such as electron beam tomography to
determine three-dimensional electromagnetic ﬁelds.23–25.

IV. METHODS

A. Gradient descent optimization with automatic differentiation

We use the Adam optimizer26 implemented in Google’s Tensorﬂow package27 for the gradient
descent optimization. The initial learning rate is set to 1. Cyclic learning rate28 has occasionally

been used but does not show additional improvement on the maximum achievable accuracy. Before

computing the amplitude, the in-focus image was denoised with a total variation (TV) ﬁlter. For

simulated data, the weight of the TV ﬁlter is set to the level of the Gaussian noise. For experimental

data, it is set to the standard deviation measured on the background area. No denoising process

was performed on any of the defocus images. The starting guess for the phase is 0.5 everywhere.

Mean Squared Error was used as the loss function. The phase retrieval process is run on a remote

Nvidia Tesla K80 GPU hosted on Google’s Colaboratory. The amount of time per iteration varies

depending on the number of defocus images used, but is typically 2 min per 5000 iterations.

B. Accuracy and spatial resolution of the retrieved phase

The use of the simulated datasets allowed us to evaluate the accuracy of the retrieved phase,

calculated as the correlation between the ground truth phase ϕtru (Fig. 2a) and the retrieved phase

12

ϕret. The sum Σ runs over each pixel of the 2D image.

Σ|ϕretϕtru|/(cid:112)

Σ|ϕretϕret|Σ|ϕtruϕtru|

(2)

The spatial resolution of the retrieved phase is estimated by ﬁtting a Gaussian function to the

sharp variation of the absolute of the phase gradient at the edges of the nanostructures (Fig. 4e).

The spatial resolution is then taken as the FWHM of the Gaussian distribution. Because an error

function can be considered as twice the integral of a normalized Gaussian function. This is equiv-

alent to ﬁtting an error function to the sharp variation of the phase at the same edges (Fig. S2d and

S2e)

C. Simulated and experimental dataset

Simulated LTEM images were computed for magnetic nanostructures using parameters for

Permalloy (Fig. S1). For a given noise level, a total of 65 images were produced with defocus

values spanned evenly between ∆ f = ±1.6 mm. The magnetization of the nanostructures was
determined using OOMMF micromagnetic simulations29, from which the electron phase shift was

calculated using the following equation

(cid:90)

ϕt(r⊥) = σ

V (r⊥, z) dz +

(cid:90)

e
¯h

A(r⊥, z) dz;

(3)

where σ is the interaction constant for a TEM and depends on the accelerating voltage (σ =
0.00728 V.nm−1 for 200 kV electrons), ¯h is the reduced Planck’s constant and the integration is

carried out along the direction of propagation of the electrons. The simulated pattern was a slightly

modiﬁed version of the 1951 USAF resolution test standard. Each LTEM image is composed of

512×512 pixels of 5×5 nm. Gaussian noise was added to the images after they are generated. The

level of the Gaussian noise refers to the standard deviation of the distribution.

Experimental images (512×512 pixels) were taken using an aberration-corrected JEOL 2100F

Lorentz TEM operating at 200 kV. The sample consists of 10 nm thick of Permalloy magnetic

nanostructures, sputter-deposited on a TEM grid and patterned with e-beam lithography. The

pixel size was 6.9 nm.

13

REFERENCES

1K. Chai, Z.-A. Li, W. Huang, G. Richter, R. Liu, B. Zou, J. Caron, A. Kovács, R. E.

Dunin-Borkowski, and J. Li, “Magnetic quantiﬁcation of single-crystalline fe and co nanowires

via off-axis electron holography,” The Journal of Chemical Physics 152, 114202 (2020),

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5145337.
2W. Jiang, S. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Phatak, Q. Wang, W. Zhang, M. B. Jungﬂeisch, J. E. Pearson,

Y. Liu, J. Zang, X. Cheng, A. Petford-Long, A. Hoffmann, and S. G. E. te Velthuis, “Quan-

tifying chiral exchange interaction for Néel-type skyrmions via Lorentz transmission electron

microscopy,” Physical Review B 99, 104402 (2019).
3A. H. Tavabi, Z. Yasenjiang, and T. Tanji, “In situ off-axis electron holography of metal-oxide

hetero-interfaces in oxygen atmosphere,” Journal of Electron Microscopy 60, 307–314 (2011),

https://academic.oup.com/jmicro/article-pdf/60/5/307/11760959/dfr056.pdf.
4M. W. Swift and Y. Qi, “First-principles prediction of potentials and space-charge layers in all-

solid-state batteries,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 167701 (2019).
5X. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Wang, D. Isheim, V. P. Dravid, C. Phatak, and S. M. Haile, “Variability and

origins of grain boundary electric potential detected by electron holography and atom-probe

tomography,” Nature Materials (2020), 10.1038/s41563-020-0656-1.
6S. S. Hong, M. Gu, M. Verma, V. Harbola, B. Y. Wang, D. Lu, A. Vailio-

nis, Y. Hikita, R. Pentcheva,

J. M. Rondinelli, and H. Y. Hwang, “Extreme ten-

sile

strain

states

in

la0.7ca0.3mno3 membranes,” Science

368,

71–76

(2020),

https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6486/71.full.pdf.
7S. J. Whiteley, F. J. Heremans, G. Wolfowicz, D. D. Awschalom, and M. V. Holt, “Correlating

dynamic strain and photoluminescence of solid-state defects with stroboscopic x-ray diffraction

microscopy,” Nature Communications 10, 3386 (2019).
8C. Phatak, A. K. Petford-Long, and M. De Graef, “Recent advances in Lorentz microscopy,”

Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 20, 107–114 (2016).
9M. De Graef, Introduction to Conventional Transmission Electron Microscopy (Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 2003).

10M. J. Hÿtch, F. Houdellier, F. Hüe, and E. Snoeck, “Dark-ﬁeld electron holography for the

measurement of geometric phase.” Ultramicroscopy 111, 1328–37 (2011).

14

11C. T. Koch and A. Lubk, “Off-axis and inline electron holography: A quantitative comparison,”

Ultramicroscopy 110, 460–471 (2010).

12S. R. Spurgeon, C. Ophus, L. Jones, A. Petford-long, S. V. Kalinin, M. J. Olszta, R. E. Dunin-

borkowski, N. Salmon, K. Hattar, W.-c. D. Yang, R. Sharma, Y. Du, A. Chiaramonti, H. Zheng,

E. C. Buck, L. Kovarik, and R. L. Penn, “Towards data-driven next-generation transmission

electron microscopy,” Nature Materials , 1–6 (2020).

13A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, A. A. Radul, and J. M. Siskind, “Automatic differentiation in

machine learning: a survey,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 18, 1–43 (2015).

14M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis,

J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Joze-

fowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Mane, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah,

M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Va-

sudevan, F. Viegas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng,

“TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems,” (2016).
15A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin,

N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Köpf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Te-

jani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch: An Imperative

Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library,” (2019).

16A. S. Jurling and J. R. Fienup, “Applications of algorithmic differentiation to phase retrieval

algorithms,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A 31, 1348 (2014).

17Y. S. Nashed, T. Peterka, J. Deng, and C. Jacobsen, “Distributed Automatic Differentiation for

Ptychography,” Procedia Computer Science 108, 404–414 (2017).

18S. Kandel, S. Maddali, M. Allain, S. O. Hruszkewycz, C. Jacobsen, and Y. S. G. Nashed, “Us-

ing automatic differentiation as a general framework for ptychographic reconstruction,” Optics

Express 27, 18653 (2019).

19C. Zuo, J. Li, J. Sun, Y. Fan, J. Zhang, L. Lu, R. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Huang, and Q. Chen,

“Transport of intensity equation: a tutorial,” Optics and Lasers in Engineering , 106187 (2020).
20S. McVitie and M. Cushley, “Quantitative Fresnel Lorentz microscopy and the transport of in-

tensity equation,” Ultramicroscopy 106, 423–431 (2006).

21S. Bajt, A. Barty, K. Nugent, M. McCartney, M. Wall, and D. Paganin, “Quantitative phase-

sensitive imaging in a transmission electron microscope,” Ultramicroscopy 83, 67 – 73 (2000).

15

22M. De Graef and Y. Zhu, “Quantitative noninterferometric lorentz microscopy,” Journal of Ap-

plied Physics 89, 7177–7179 (2001), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1355337.

23S. Venkatakrishnan, L. F. Drummy, M. Jackson, M. De Graef, J. Simmons, and C. A. Bouman,

“Model-based iterative reconstruction for bright-ﬁeld electron tomography,” IEEE Transactions

on Computational Imaging 1, 1–15 (2014).

24D. Fanelli and O. Öktem, “Electron tomography: a short overview with an emphasis on the

absorption potential model for the forward problem,” Inverse Problems 24, 013001 (2008).
25K. A. Mohan, P. KC, C. Phatak, M. De Graef, and C. A. Bouman, “Model-Based Iterative Re-

construction of Magnetization Using Vector Field Electron Tomography,” IEEE Trans. Comput.

Imaging 4, 432–446 (2018).

26D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in 3rd International

Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings (Interna-

tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2015).

27M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis,

J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia, R. Joze-

fowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Mané, R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah,

M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasude-

van, F. Viégas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “Ten-

sorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems,” (2015), software available

from tensorﬂow.org.

28L. N. Smith, “Cyclical Learning Rates for Training Neural Networks,” Proceedings - 2017

IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, WACV 2017 , 464–472 (2015),

arXiv:1506.01186.

29M. J. Donahue and D. G. Porter, “Oommf user’s guide, version 1.0,” Tech. Rep. (National Insti-

tute of Standards and Technology, Gaitherburg, MD, 1999).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Basic Energy

Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. This work was performed (T.Z, M.C),

in part, at the Center for Nanoscale Materials and the Advanced Photon Source, both U.S. De-

partment of Energy Ofﬁce of Science User Facilities, and supported by the U.S. Department of

16

Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. We acknowledge Martin

V. Holt for the insightful discussions and guidance.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

T.Z and M.C implemented the forward model using differentiable programming in Google’s

Tensorﬂow package. C.P generated the simulated as well as the experimental images. All authors

discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial interests.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding author

upon reasonable request.

17

V. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplemental Figure S1. Simulated LTEM images. Simulated noise-free LTEM images at ∆ f = (a) -1.6

mm, (b) -0.15 mm, (c) 0 mm, (d) +0.15 mm and (e) +1.6 mm. Simulated LTEM images with 10% of

Gaussian noise at ∆ f = (f) -1.6 mm, (g) -0.15 mm, (h) 0 mm, (i) +0.15 mm and (j) +1.6 mm.

18

Supplemental Figure S2. Comparison between TIE and AD retrieved phases. (a) Ground truth for the

phase. (b) Evolution of the accuracy during 5000 iterations of AD phase retrieval (learning rate = 1) in

logarithmic scale. The accuracies for the TIE retrieved phases are also shown for comparison. (c) Evolution

of the loss function during the same AD phase retrieval process. (d) and (e) show respectively line proﬁles

of the TIE and AD retrieved phase. The position at which the line proﬁle was extracted is indicated by the

dashed line in (a).

Supplemental Figure S3. AD retrieved phase with hybrid defocus. (a) AD retrieved phase using the 2

defocused images with 10% Gaussian noise at ∆ f = −0.15 and +1.6 mm. (b) Evolution of the accuracy

during 5000 iterations of AD phase retrieval (learning rate = 1) in logarithmic scale.

19

Supplemental Figure S4.

(a) Ground truth for the phase. (b) Evolution of the loss function during 5000

iterations of AD phase retrieval (learning rate = 1) in logarithmic scale.

(c) Evolution of the accuracy

during the same AD phase retrieval process. The accuracies for the TIE retrieved phases are also shown for

comparison. TIE retrieved phase using image pair with (d) 5% and (e) 20% of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±0.15

mm. TIE retrieved phase using image pair with (f) 5% and (g) 20% of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±1.6 mm.

AD retrieved phase using image pair with (h) 5% and (i) 20% of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±0.15 mm. AD

retrieved phase using image pair with (j) 5% and (k) 20% of Gaussian noise at ∆ f = ±1.6 mm.

20

Supplemental Figure S5.

(a) Ground truth for the phase gradient. Its direction is shown in false color as

deﬁned by the color wheel in the inset. Its magnitude is indicated by the gray contour which appears each

time the phase wraps over one tenth of 2π. The scale bar is 500 nm. (b) Evolution of the accuracy during

5000 iterations of AD phase retrieval (learning rate = 1). The accuracies for the TIE retrieved phases are

also shown for comparison. (c) Detailed comparison with the ground truth respectively for data shown in

(d), (e) and (g). The position at which the line proﬁle was extracted is indicated by the dashed line in (a).

Gradient of TIE retrieved phase using image pair with 20% Gaussian noise at (d) ∆ f = ±0.15 mm and (e)

∆ f = ±1.6 mm. (f) AD retrieved phase using the 2 defocused images with 20% Gaussian noise at −0.15

and +1.6 mm. (g) AD retrieved phase using the 4 defocused images with 30% Gaussian noise at −0.1,

−0.2, +1.5 and +1.6 mm. The increased noise level is to account for the factor of

√

2 shot noise variation

when the exposure time of each image is halved and the total exposure time remains unchanged.

21

