)Draft version March 16, 2021
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

Measuring Young Stars in Space and Time - I. The Photometric Catalog and Extinction Properties of
N44

Victor F. Ksoll
Mario Gennaro ,4, 5 Ralf S. Klessen ,1, 2 Ullrich Koethe

,1, 2 Dimitrios Gouliermis

,1, 3 Elena Sabbi

,4 Jenna E. Ryon,4 Massimo Robberto ,4, 5
,7 C.-H. Rosie Chen ,8

,6 Guido de Marchi

1
2
0
2

r
a

M
5
1

]

A
G
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
1
2
5
0
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Michele Cignoni,9, 10, 11 and Andrew E. Dolphin12, 13

1Universit¨at Heidelberg, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie, Institut f¨ur Theoretische Astrophysik,
Albert-Ueberle-Str. 2, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
2Universit¨at Heidelberg, Interdisziplin¨ares Zentrum f¨ur Wissenschaftliches Rechnen,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
3Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, K¨onigstuhl 17, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
4Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
5Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
6Universit¨at Heidelberg, Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, Visual Learning Lab,
Berliner Str. 43, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
7European Space Research and Technology Centre, Keplerlaan 1, 2200 AG Noordwijk, Netherlands
8Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Radioastronomie, Auf dem H¨ugel 69, D-53121 Bonn, Germany
9Department of Physics - University of Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 Pisa, 56127, Italy
10INFN, Largo B. Pontecorvo 3, 56127, Pisa, Italy
11INAF-Osservatorio di Astroﬁsica e Scienza dello Spazio, Via Gobetti 93/3, 40129, Bologna, Italy
12Raytheon, 1151 E. Hermans Road, Tucson, AZ 85706, USA
13Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, 933 North Cherry Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

(Received tbd; Revised tbd; Accepted tbd)

Submitted to AJ

ABSTRACT

In order to better understand the role of high-mass stellar feedback in regulating star formation
in giant molecular clouds, we carried out a Hubble Space Telescope (HST) Treasury Program
Measuring Young Stars in Space and Time (MYSST) targeting the star-forming complex N44 in the
Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). Using the F555W and F814W broadband ﬁlters of both the ACS
and WFC3/UVIS, we built a photometric catalog of 461,684 stars down to mF555W (cid:39) 29 mag and
mF814W (cid:39) 28 mag, corresponding to the magnitude of an unreddened 1 Myr pre-main-sequence star
of ≈ 0.09 M(cid:12) at the LMC distance. In this ﬁrst paper we describe the observing strategy of MYSST,
the data reduction procedure, and present the photometric catalog. We identify multiple young
stellar populations tracing the gaseous rim of N44’s super bubble, together with various contaminants
belonging to the LMC ﬁeld population. We also determine the reddening properties from the slope of
the elongated red clump feature by applying the machine learning algorithm RANSAC, and we select
a set of Upper Main Sequence (UMS) stars as primary probes to build an extinction map, deriving
a relatively modest median extinction AF555W (cid:39) 0.77 mag. The same procedure applied to the red
clump provides AF555W (cid:39) 0.68 mag.

Corresponding author: Victor F. Ksoll
v.ksoll@stud.uni-heidelberg.de

1. INTRODUCTION

The physical processes leading to star formation (SF)
in the dynamically evolving multi-phase interstellar
medium (ISM) are largely regulated by massive stars. In
a star-forming region, the momentum and energy feed-

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Ksoll et al.

back from the few massive newborn stars is expected
to terminate SF locally, trigger new SF remotely, and
through gas expulsion modulate the gravitational po-
tential and therefore stellar dynamics and cluster sur-
vival (see e.g. the reviews by Mac Low & Klessen 2004;
Zinnecker & Yorke 2007; McKee & Ostriker 2007). Gi-
ant star-forming regions, aggregates of stellar nurseries
spread over the scales of molecular clouds, are thus com-
plex ecosystems where diﬀerent stellar populations are
born and interact with each other and their ambient ISM
(for further discussions of the physical processed inﬂu-
encing ISM dynamics, see e.g. Klessen & Glover 2016
or Girichidis et al. 2020). Recent studies of high-mass
star-forming regions show signiﬁcant sub-structure and
hierarchical SF (Bik et al. 2012; Gouliermis et al. 2014;
Adamo et al. 2015; Sabbi et al. 2016; Cignoni et al. 2016;
Gennaro et al. 2012, 2017; Nayak et al. 2016, 2018; Sun
et al. 2017; Getman et al. 2018; Dib & Henning 2019;
Grasha et al. 2019), with star formation rates (SFR) and
eﬃciencies (SFE) that vary within the same molecular
cloud (Hony et al. 2015). Numerical modeling qualita-
tively reproduces this behavior (e.g. Bonnell et al. 1997,
2001; Klessen et al. 2000; Oﬀner et al. 2009; Girichidis
et al. 2011, 2012; Federrath & Klessen 2012; Federrath
2013; Parker & Wright 2016; Hennebelle 2018; Padoan
et al. 2020), but our current understanding lacks the
quantitative study of two critical measures needed to
parameterize clustered SF: length-scale and time-scale.
Two main theories of SF on molecular cloud scales
have been proposed, where the traditional approach pos-
tulates that stellar birth occurs in a slow quasi-static
manner, with supporting mechanisms prolonging the
cloud lifetime by many tens of dynamical times (e.g.
Shu et al. 1987a; Krumholz & Tan 2007), while the
more modern dynamical theory of star formation ac-
knowledges the complex morphological and kinematic
structure of star-forming clouds and sees stellar birth as
In this
a highly dynamical, albeit ineﬃcient, process.
picture the formation of stars begins while the cloud is
still forming and never reaches an equilibrium state be-
fore dispersing due to feedback (e.g. Hartmann et al.
2001; Ballesteros-Paredes et al. 2007; Clark et al. 2012;
Chevance et al. 2020). These two scenarios can be ob-
servationally tested, both in terms of the morphologi-
cal and kinematic properties of molecular clouds as well
as in possible local variations of the stellar initial mass
function (IMF), which on average exhibits remarkably
uniform behavior (Kroupa 2002; Chabrier 2003; Bastian
et al. 2010; Oﬀner et al. 2014).
In quasi-static mod-
els, molecular clouds are globally gravitationally bound
and well supported, allowing for slow SF, resulting in
large age-spreads (on the order of several dynamical

timescales, Shu et al. 1987b; Tan et al. 2006). In con-
trast, if the clouds are dynamically evolving and not
necessarily globally gravitationally bound or very long
lived, there will be a large variety of physical conditions
including bound and unbound regions which will pro-
duce stars at both high and low eﬃciency, respectively.
Furthermore, the sub-solar IMF can be signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent as a function of the stellar clustering with a deﬁcit
of low-mass stars in the unbound, low SFE regions (Bon-
nell et al. 2011).

To test these models one has to carry out a census
of newly-born stars across a giant star-forming com-
plex to identify and characterize each individual star-
forming region over the whole ﬁeld. In particular, one
would like to analyze the distribution of stellar ages, sub-
solar IMF and SFE, and how these depend on the local
gas properties. While young stellar clusters are typi-
cally dominated by a handful of early-type stars already
on the main-sequence (MS), their main stellar popula-
tion is largely composed by a multitude of intermediate-
and low-mass stars in the pre–main-sequence (PMS),
i.e. stars still in gravitational contraction toward the
MS (e.g. Nota et al. 2006; Sabbi et al. 2008; Cignoni
et al. 2009; Vallenari et al. 2010; Gouliermis et al. 2007,
2011). Due to their relatively slow evolutionary time-
scales (a 1 M(cid:12) star contracts to the main-sequence in
∼ 50 Myr), they can be utilized as chronographs of
the star formation history of the entire region. There-
fore, while high-mass MS stars provide us with the
signposts of ongoing star formation, it is the popula-
tion of intermediate-mass (3 (cid:46) M/M(cid:12) (cid:46) 8) Herbig
Ae/Be and low-mass(M (cid:46) 3M(cid:12)) T Tauri PMS stars
that can provide us a direct measure of its youthfulness.
In particular, by analyzing and comparing the diﬀerent
Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams one can chronologically
sequence the recent star formation events, their dura-
tion, their mutual relations, and the possible diﬀerences
between their stellar populations.

Our neighboring galaxy, the Large Magellanic Cloud
(LMC), provides the ideal environments for this study.
The LMC is a well-established laboratory to study SF
because of its low metal abundance (with a metallicity
Z (cid:39) 1/3 Z(cid:12), the LMC is a proxy of the early universe
conditions at the cosmic noon of SF history, z ∼ 1.5, e.g.
Madau et al. 1996), low interstellar extinction (Gordon
et al. 2003), and high SF activity. We have focused
our attention on the LMC H II complex LHα 120-N44
(Henize 1956, in short N44), with its rich ensemble of
H II regions, bubbles, and young stellar clusters. The
massive stars of the OB association LH 47 (Lucke &
Hodge 1970), located in the central super-bubble of N44,
are the primary drivers of the expansion of the main

MYSST I

3

bubble (Oey & Massey 1995). X-ray observations re-
veal T ∼ 106 K gas heated by fast stellar winds and
supernova explosions (Jaskot et al. 2011). The eﬀects of
stellar energy feedback, in particular along the western
rim of the bubble where star formation may have been
triggered by its expansion, are also evident through its
Hα and Spitzer images (Chen et al. 2009; Carlson et al.
2012). Herschel dust mass maps reveal the complex hi-
erarchical ISM structure of N44 (Hony et al. 2010), and
CO surveys show that star formation activity arises from
one molecular cloud complex (Fukui et al. 2001; Wong
et al. 2011), which can be analyzed for the process of hi-
erarchical star formation. N44 has a total Hα luminosity
that places it between 30 Dor, an exceptional starburst
event also in the LMC, and M42 in Orion, our closest ex-
ample of ongoing massive star formation (30 Dor : N44 :
Orion = 20 : 1 : 0.04; Kennicutt & Hodge 1986). In con-
clusion, with multiple star-forming “hotspots” at diﬀer-
ent evolutionary stages, this complex provides the best
paradigm of a “quiescently active” star-forming ecosys-
tem.

In this paper we present the ﬁrst results from a
new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) Treasury Program
Measuring Young Stars in Space and Time (MYSST,
GO14689, P.I. D. Gouliermis). In Section 2 we summa-
rize the observational parameters of the MYSST survey
and the data processing strategy leading to the con-
struction of the photometric catalog.
In Section 3 we
introduce the diﬀerent stellar populations that can be
isolated in the dataset. In Section 4 we derive the opti-
cal extinction properties of N44 from the MYSST data
by evaluating the slope of the reddened red clump fea-
ture in the colour magnitude diagram (CMD) and our
method to assign a value of extinction to each source.
Lastly, in Section 5 we discuss and summarize our ﬁnd-
ings, concluding with an outlook on our future follow-up
studies.

2. OBSERVATIONS

Complementing the HST Treasury Programs on
30Dor (GO-12939, P.I. E. Sabbi Sabbi et al. 2013,
2016) and M42 (GO-10246, P.I. M. Robberto, Rob-
berto et al. 2013, and GO-12825, P.I. J. Shull (no refs
yet)), MYSST (GO-14689, PI: Gouliermis) is a deep,
high spatial resolution HST survey of the star-forming
complex N44 (Henize 1956) located in the Large Mag-
ellanic Cloud. It covers the large super bubble of N44
as well as the region south of it with a ﬁeld of view
(FoV) of 12.2 × 14.7 arcmin2 that translates to about
180 pc × 215 pc at the distance of the Large Magellanic
cloud assuming (m − M )0 = 18.55 ± 0.05 (Panagia et al.
1991; De Marchi et al. 2016). The survey provides ob-

servations in two broadband ﬁlters, F555W and F814W,
with the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) and Wide
Field Camera 3 (WFC3, UVIS channel) instruments of
the HST.

The N44 region was tiled in a grid pattern of 3 rows
by 4 columns. Observations were taken in parallel, such
that WFC3 covered the northern part of N44 and ACS
the southern part, with a region of overlap in the mid-
dle. Table 1 lists details of the observations we describe
here. Each grid point was visited twice. Each visit
consisted of two orbits, the ﬁrst utilizing F555W and
the second F814W with both cameras reaching down to
29 mag in F555W and 28 mag in F814W. In each or-
bit, four exposures were obtained using a subpixel box
dither pattern. Two short (35s) exposures in each ﬁl-
ter were obtained during the second visit to each grid
point. Two additional ﬁelds to the east of the main
mosaics were obtained by a single pointing with ACS
and WFC3 observing in parallel. This pointing was vis-
ited three times with the same two-orbit, four-exposure
setup. Two short (35s) exposures were obtained in each
ﬁlter in the second visit. The HST two color composite
image of N44 is shown in Figure 1.

2.1. Data Processing

Bias, dark, ﬂat-ﬁeld, and charge transfer ineﬃciency
corrected images, known as FLCs (* flc.fits), were
downloaded from the Mikulski Archive for Space Tele-
scopes (MAST)1. These processing steps were performed
by the standard calibration pipelines CALWF32 version
3.4.1 and CALACS3 version 9.2.0. The images were
aligned to the Gaia reference frame (Gaia Collaboration
et al. 2018) using TweakReg, part of the Drizzlepac soft-
ware package4. The Gaia catalog was queried within
the RA Dec bounds of the combined footprint of the
FLC images, and the resulting sources were provided
as a reference catalog to TweakReg to improve the ab-
solute astrometry of our data. The coordinates of the
Gaia sources span 81.1533 to 80.3041 degrees in RA and
-68.1254 to -67.8355 degrees in Dec. The FLC images
were aligned to better than 0.008” (maximum root mean
squared error).

The long (>400s) FLC images were then combined
using AstroDrizzle (Hack et al. 2012) to create ref-
erence frames for each camera and ﬁlter for photom-

1 http://archive.stsci.edu/
2 https://wfc3tools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/wfc3tools/calwf3.

html

3 https://www.stsci.edu/hst/instrumentation/acs/software-tools/

calibration-tools

4 https://www.stsci.edu/scientiﬁc-community/software/

drizzlepac.html

4

Ksoll et al.

Figure 1. Two color composite image of N44 from the MYSST HST survey with the observations in F555W in blue and F814W
in green. N44’s characteristic super bubble can be seen in the North.

etry. We used resetbits = 4096 to ignore existing
cosmic ray ﬂags, skymethod = localmin for sky sub-
traction, and combine type = imedian to avoid ﬂag-
ging saturated stellar cores as cosmic rays. The ﬁnal
drizzled images are sky subtracted and normalized by
exposure time (units of e−/s). The ﬁnal pixel scales are
native to each instrument, i.e. 0.05×0.05 arcsec2/pixel
and 0.04×0.04 arcsec2/pixel for ACS and WFC3, re-
spectively.
The cosmic ray ﬂagging performed by
AstroDrizzle was propagated back to the data qual-
ity (DQ) extensions of the input FLC images.

Photometry was performed with DOLPHOT (version
2.0, downloaded on March 2, 20185, see Dolphin 2000),
which is capable of running photometry on multiple
images and cameras simultaneously. Because the full
dataset is quite large, we split the visits into seven
groups to maximize the photometric depth while min-
imizing the required computing resources and number
of catalogs to merge. Table 2 lists the visits contained
in each group. The separated ﬁeld visits were grouped
by camera because they do not overlap the main mo-
saics, and were called Field 0 and Field 1. The main
mosaic was divided into horizontal ‘Strips’, called Strip
0 through 4. Strip 2 contains the region of overlap be-
tween the two cameras.

2.2. PSF Photometry

5 http://americano.dolphinsim.com/dolphot/

81.20°81.00°80.80°80.60°80.40°-67.90°-68.00°-68.10°Right AscensionDeclinationNE50 pcMYSST I

5

Table 1. MYSST Observations - Program 14689

Camera

Filter

Tot. EXPTIME Short Exp.? Visit Numbers

WFC3/UVIS F555W

WFC3/UVIS F814W

ACS/WFC

F555W

ACS/WFC

F814W

2715s
2532s
2396s
2643s
2532s
2808s
2040s
2146s

2558s
2522s
2361s
2517s
2522s
2682s
2030s
2020s

No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

01-12
25, 27
13-24
26
01-12
25, 27
13-24
26

01-12
25, 27
13-24
26
01-12
25, 27
13-24
26

Table 2. Photometry Groups

Table 3. DOLPHOT Parameters for PSF Photometry

Group ACS Visits WFC3 Visits

Strip 0
Strip 1
Strip 2
Strip 3
Strip 4
Field 0
Field 1

–
–
09-12, 21-24
05-12, 17-24
01-08, 13-20
–
25-27

05-12, 17-24
01-08, 13-20
01-04, 13-16
–
–
25-27
–

The N44 star-forming region is fairly crowded, requir-
ing PSF ﬁtting photometry with DOLPHOT. TinyTim
PSFs (Krist et al. 2011) included in the DOLPHOT
download were used for both cameras. The simul-
taneous,
iterative ﬁtting and subtraction of stars by
DOLPHOT reﬁnes the PSF model. The parameters
used are given in Table 3.

Prior to running photometry, the SCI extensions of
the drizzled reference frames and FLCs were masked
according to the WHT and DQ extensions, respectively.
The SATURATE header keyword was set to 71,000 e−
for ACS FLCs and 55,000 e− for WFC3 FLCs because
initial DOLPHOT runs were impacted by the presence
of saturated pixels with values below the limits provided
in the pipeline-processed ﬁles from MAST. Sky images
were calculated for each FLC with step = −64, σlow =

DOLPHOT Parameters
FSat = 0.999
PSFPhot = 1
FitSky = 2
SkipSky = 2
SkySig = 2.25

img rchi = 2.0
img raper = 3
img rsky = 15 35
img rsky2 = 4 10
img rpsf = 15
img apsky = 20 35 MaxIT = 25
UseWCS = 2
Align = 2
aligntol = 4
alignstep = 2
Rotate = 1
img shift = 0 0
img xform = 1 0 0
SecondPass = 5
RCentroid = 1
SearchMode = 1
SigFind = 3.0
SigFindMult = 0.85 WFC3UVISpsfType = 0
SigFinal = 3.5
PosStep = 0.1
dPosMax = 2.5
RCombine = 1.415

NoiseMult = 0.10
SigPSF = 3.0
CombineChi = 1
DiagPlotType = PS
ApCor = 1
Force1 = 1
FlagMask = 4
ACSuseCTE = 0
WFC3useCTE = 0
ACSpsfType = 0
WFC3IRpsfType = 0

InterpPSFlib = 1
PSFres = 1
psfoﬀ = 0.0

2.25, and σhigh = 2.0. The F814W drizzled frame from
the appropriate camera was used as the reference image
for DOLPHOT alignment of the images in each Strip

6

Ksoll et al.

are the WFC3 F555W (F814W) magnitudes, and mA555
(mA814) are the ACS F555W (F814W) magnitudes.
Given the WFC3 color,

C = mW555 − mW814,

(1)

the ACS magnitudes are taken as




mW555 − 0.071 − 0.01(C − 1.45)

+ 0.019(C − 1.45)2

mA555 =



mW555 − 0.07

mA814 = mW814 − 0.008.

C < 1.45

C > 1.45

(2)

(3)

For the st catalogs of Strips 0 and 1 and Field 0,
and the full catalog of Strip 2, the WFC3 photometry
was converted to the ACS system. For Strip 2, the con-
verted WFC3 photometry was combined with the ACS
photometry with the same DOLPHOT technique used
to combine multiple photometry blocks from individual
FLCs (CombineChi = 1). The st catalog criteria for ob-
ject type and S/N were then applied to the full Strip 2
catalog. For Strips 3 and 4 and Field 1, the source coor-
dinates in the st catalog were converted from the ACS
reference image coordinate system to the WFC3 system
using astropy.wcs, and corrected for a small residual
oﬀset (−0.13 pixels in x and −0.11 pixels in y).

The st catalogs containing ACS-system photometry
and WFC3-system coordinates were merged by deﬁning
dividing lines between the Strips and Fields. Sources
were retained from an individual st catalog if they fell
in a given region deﬁned by the dividing lines. Within
±5 pixels of each dividing line, stars were matched be-
tween the two catalogs if the distance between their
centers was <1 pixel and both magnitudes were within
0.25 mag. If a match was found, the coordinates were
averaged and the photometry from the Strip appropriate
for the average position was retained. Finally, sharpness
(within ±0.3) and crowding (≤0.25 mag) criteria in both
ﬁlters were applied to the combined st catalog to create
the ﬁnal PSF photometry catalog.

2.3. Aperture Photometry

Finalizing the PSF photometry catalog, we found that
the brightest stars are saturated even in the short ex-
posures. To recover their ﬂux, we performed aperture
photometry with DOLPHOT. Saturated stars exhibit
a ”bleed-out” eﬀect into the neighboring pixels, but in
the HST CCD detectors the photo-generated charges are
conserved and using gain=2 the dynamic range of the
CCDs is fully sampled by the Analog to Digital Convert-
ers. Thus, using a reasonably sized aperture, the total
generated ﬂux can be measured. To take advantage of
the superior astrometry of HST and its well-understood

Figure 2. Optical CMD of the MYSST photometric cat-
alog of N44. To highlight the structure of the CMD a 2D
histogram with square bins of size 0.032 mag is overlaid on
the scatter plot where the number of stars per bin exceeds
10.

and Field; the WFC3 drizzled frame was used for Strip
2. Among all FLCs, the long exposures aligned to within
0.008” and the short exposures to within 0.02”.

Stellar sources, object types 1 and 2 (object type in-
dicates a DOLPHOT internal source classiﬁcation; val-
ues ≥ 3 mark extended or single pixel sources), with
S/N ≥ 5 in both ﬁlters were selected from the full pho-
tometric catalogs to create intermediate so called “st”
catalogs. In DOLPHOT object type 2 denotes ’star too
faint for PSF determination’. This refers only to a posi-
tion reﬁnement procedure, as DOLPHOT uses diﬀerent
methods to measure position and ﬂuxes of the detected
sources. For type 1 the PSF is used to measure both
ﬂux and position, for type 2 the position from the ini-
tial ﬁnding stage is used instead.

The ACS photometric system (VEGAMAG) and the
WFC3 image coordinate system were chosen to be the
survey standards. Well-measured stars in the region of
overlap between the two cameras (Strip 2) were used to
determine an empirical conversion from WFC3 to ACS
magnitudes. In the expressions below mW555 (mW814)

Table 4. DOLPHOT Parameters
Updated for Aperture Photometry

Updated DOLPHOT Parameters

img raper = 6
img rsky2 = 7 12
SecondPass = 1
RCombine = 9
PSFPhot = 0
FlagMask = 0

PSF residuals, PSF photometry was ﬁrst run using iden-
tical parameters as the previous runs, but only on the
short exposures. For the aperture photometry, satura-
tion and cosmic ray ﬂags were ignored during the SCI
extension masking step, and several DOLPHOT param-
eters were changed (listed Table 4). For each Field and
Strip, the PSF photometry catalog from the short ex-
posure run was speciﬁed in the UsePhot option for the
aperture photometry run.

The same st selection criteria, magnitude and coor-
dinate conversions, and catalog merging steps applied
to the PSF photometry were applied to the aperture
photometry. Less stringent sharpness (within ±0.7) and
crowding (≤0.5 mag) criteria in both ﬁlters were applied
to the combined catalog to create the ﬁnal aperture pho-
tometry catalog.

2.4. Combined Photometry Catalog

Lastly, the ﬁnal PSF and aperture photometry cata-
logs were merged together and assigned ﬂags (fpo) as
described in the following steps. These steps were ap-
plied to stars satisfying 13.9 mag ≤ F555W ≤ 18.3 mag
and 12.9 mag ≤ F814W ≤ 18.0 mag. Brighter stars had
saturated pixels extending beyond the 6-pixel aperture
radius and were eliminated from the ﬁnal, merged cat-
alog, while fainter stars were better measured by PSF
photometry (ﬂag 4).

First, magnitude oﬀsets between PSF and aper-
ture photometry were calculated from matching high
S/N stars, and applied to the aperture photometry:
∆mF555W = 0.042 mag, ∆mF814W = 0.035 mag. Then,
blends in the ﬁnal aperture photometry catalog, i.e. mul-
tiple bright stars falling in the aperture, were identiﬁed.
For each star, stars within 6 pixels in the st PSF cat-
alog were found, and the potential aperture photome-
try contribution from neighbors was calculated from the
diﬀerence between the combined brightness of all PSF
photometry stars in the aperture and the brightest PSF

MYSST I

7

magnitude. The star was determined to be a blend if
the following criteria were satisﬁed for either ﬁlter:

1. the potential aperture photometry contribution
from neighbors was more than 0.03 magnitudes,

2. the aperture magnitude is brighter than the PSF
magnitude of the brightest star and fainter than
the brightest star minus twice the potential aper-
ture photometry contribution from neighbors.

This 0.03 mag threshold corresponds approximately to
the apparent broadening of CMD features in the PSF-
ﬁtting photometry, i.e. the error introduced in the PSF
magnitudes by uncertainties in the precise PSF shape.
The rationale of the other criteria is that contamination
is given if the aperture photometry is consistent with
the sum of the brightnesses of multiple objects within
the 6 pixel radius.

Lastly, for the ﬁnal, merged catalog, aperture pho-
tometry was used for stars without matching sources in
the ﬁnal PSF catalog (ﬂag 0) and for stars with a single
match in the ﬁnal PSF catalog (ﬂag 1). PSF photometry
was employed for blended stars in the aperture catalog
(ﬂag 2) and stars with no aperture detection (ﬂag 3).

In total the MYSST photometric catalog consists of
461,684 sources across the observed FoV of N44 as well
as two smaller reference ﬁelds in the LMC. Figure 2
shows the optical CMD of the survey. Due to satura-
tion, the catalog does not include objects brighter than
14 mag in F555W and 13 mag in F814W. Consequently,
some of the most massive O-type stars in the region are
not part of the catalog. The faintest detected objects
in the catalog reach down to about 29 mag in F555W
and 28 mag in F814W. The noticeable broadening of the
upper main-sequence (UMS) and the striking diagonal
elongation of the red clump (RC) indicate that N44 is
subject to a substantial amount of diﬀerential redden-
ing.

The MYSST photometric catalog and the four individ-
ual mosaics (F555W-ACS, F814W-ACS, F555W-WFC3
and F814W-WFC3) are available at the MAST archive
as High Level Science Products via 10.17909//t9-p5vg-
ke506. The catalog (see Table D1 for an excerpt in the
Appendix) lists for each source the survey internal ID
(i.e.
survey name combined with sexagesimal coordi-
nates), pixel coordinates X and Y , celestial coordinates
R.A and Decl., DOLPHOT object type, and magnitude
m, photometric error σ, and the (DOLPHOT) photom-

6 https://archive.stsci.edu/hlsp/mysst

8

Ksoll et al.

etry ﬂag f 7 for both the F555W and F814W ﬁlters.
Also provided are the following DOLPHOT output pa-
rameters: the PSF ﬁt quality parameter χ2, the signal
to noise ratio SNR, sharpness shrp, roundness rnd and
crowding crwd, once for each ﬁlter individually and once
as a combined value over both. In the latter case also
the major axis (if source is not round) mjaxdir is listed.

2.5. Artiﬁcial Star Tests

Artiﬁcial star tests were run with DOLPHOT to mea-
sure completeness in the N44 region. The input artiﬁ-
cial star list generated with fakelist largely matches
the distribution within color-magnitude space of stars
in the ﬁnal PSF photometry catalog. The bounds in
color-magnitude space were 14 mag < F555W < 36 mag
and −2 mag < F555W − F814W < 6 mag. To reach
F555W ∼ 36 mag, the dimmest region of the real color-
magnitude distribution is extended to dimmer magni-
tudes while retaining the same color distribution. Note
that saturation eﬀects are not modeled in DOLPHOT’s
artiﬁcial stars. Spatially, the artiﬁcial stars were ran-
domly placed around the image by fakelist, then man-
ually separated for each Strip and Field according to
the dividing lines described in Section 2.2. ACS coordi-
nates and magnitudes were converted to WFC3 coordi-
nates and magnitudes for Strips 0, 1, and 2, and Field
0. DOLPHOT was run for each Strip and Field with
the original PSF photometry parameters, but with the
additional parameter FakeStars set to the appropriate
input artiﬁcial star list. The output lists (.fake ﬁles)
for Strips 0, 1, and 2 and Field 0 were converted back
to ACS magnitudes.

2.6. Completeness

To measure completeness, we ﬁrst determine which in-
put artiﬁcial stars were recovered by DOLPHOT. Stars
were considered to be recovered if they met the same
criteria in both ﬁlters for object type, S/N, sharpness,
and crowding as the PSF photometry. A further recov-
ery requirement on the artiﬁcial star photometry was
that Input − Measured < 0.75 mag in both ﬁlters. This
ensures that the artiﬁcial star was not co-located with
a real star of equal or brighter magnitude.
In Fig-
ure 3, we plot the diﬀerence between input and mea-
sured magnitudes of the artiﬁcial stars as a function of
measured magnitude. Recovered stars are highlighted
in orange, and the Input − Measured < 0.75 mag re-

7 These are bit ﬂags, relevant for this catalog are 0, ’Star well recov-
ered in the image’; 1, ’photometry aperture extends oﬀ chip’; and
2, ’too many bad or saturated pixels’ (see also DOLPHOT man-
ual, http://americano.dolphinsim.com/dolphot/dolphot.pdf).

Figure 3. Diﬀerence between input and measured magni-
tudes as a function of measured magnitude of artiﬁcial stars
for both F555W and F814W. The blue points are all artiﬁ-
cial stars, and the orange points are those that satisfy our
selection criteria for robust recovery, similar to the criteria
used to accept stars in the data catalog. The horizontal line
shows the Input − Measured < 0.75 mag requirement to pre-
vent co-location of recovered artiﬁcial stars with real stars
of equal or brighter magnitude. The shaded regions indi-
cate the magnitude ranges over which saturation prevents
completeness measurements.

quirement is shown as a horizontal line. The shaded
regions indicate the magnitude ranges over which the
PSF and aperture photometry catalogs were combined
to capture saturated stars. The lower thresholds are
mF555W = 18.3 mag and mF814W = 18.0 mag. Be-
cause saturation eﬀects are not properly modeled in
DOLPHOT’s artiﬁcial stars, we cannot study complete-
ness eﬀects in these regions.

Completeness was measured in 1000×1000 pixel spa-
tial bins containing more than 500 stars across the main
mosaics and oﬀset ﬁelds. Within each spatial bin, we
calculate the fraction of artiﬁcial stars recovered in 1
magnitude-wide bins in measured magnitude for each
ﬁlter. We used linear interpolation of the recovery frac-
tion over a ﬁnely-sampled magnitude range to ﬁnd the
50% and 80% completeness magnitudes for each ﬁlter in
each spatial bin. Figures 4 and 5 show the 50% and 80%
completeness maps of the N44 region, respectively. Spa-
tial bins with brighter completeness limits correspond to
regions of high stellar density, and in a few cases, satu-
rated stars. The oﬀset ﬁeld and portion of the main mo-
saic covered by ACS/WFC show systematically brighter
completeness limits. Over the entire N44 region, the
average 50% completeness is 28.1 mag for F555W and
26.7 mag for F814W, and the average 80% completeness
is 27.3 mag for F555W and 25.7 mag for F814W.

Comparing the completeness in F555W to isochrones
from the PARSEC stellar evolution models (Bressan
et al. 2012) of the appropriate metallicity for the LMC
(Z = 0.008), we ﬁnd that the 50% and 80% limits cor-
respond to the brightness of unreddened 0.14 M(cid:12) and

MYSST I

9

Figure 4. 50% completeness magnitude map for F555W (left) and F814W (right). Completeness magnitudes were measured
in spatial bins of 1000×1000 pixels.

Figure 5. Same as Figure 4 for 80% completeness.

0.18 M(cid:12) 1 Myr old pre-main-sequence stars at the dis-
tance of the LMC. The F555W detection limit of about
29 mag implies even a lowest mass limit of 0.09 M(cid:12). Al-
ternatively, for 10 Gyr8 old, non-extinguished, low-mass
main-sequence objects the 80% and 50% completeness
limit, as well as the detection limit imply, mass thresh-
olds of about 0.55 M(cid:12), 0.5 M(cid:12) and 0.4 M(cid:12), respectively.

8 Note that these low-mass objects evolve so slowly that the mass
limits derived from the 10 Gyr isochrone do not vary signiﬁcantly
from e.g. either the 1 Gyr or 100 Myr isochrone, so are practically
identical to the low-mass ZAMS value.

3. STELLAR POPULATIONS

In this section we shall brieﬂy illustrate the stellar
populations revealed by the MYSST survey. It is, how-
ever, not supposed to provide an exhaustive character-
ization. We further discuss the upper main-sequence
and red clump stars in Section 4 and dedicate a follow-
up study (Ksoll et al. 2020, Paper II) to the pre-main-
sequence population of N44.

The rich CMD of the MYSST catalog (Figure 6, left)
immediately reveals that the survey captures a complex
collection of diﬀerent stellar populations.
In the left
panel of Figure 6 we highlight the loci of the most promi-

10

Ksoll et al.

Figure 6. Optical CMD of the MYSST photometric catalog (left). Highlighted by the colored ellipses are the (rough) locations
of diﬀerent stellar populations found in the survey. For comparison, the grey dashed line indicates a 10 Myr PARSEC isochrone,
corrected for the LMC distance modulus and the median UMS extinction derived in Section 4.2. The black arrow indicates the
reddening vector as derived in Section 4.1.1. Right: Spatial scatter plots of the roughly selected stellar populations shown in
the CMD on the left in comparison to the total MYSST FoV. The population of LMS stars is sub-sampled to 10,000 examples
for the diagram in the top right, as the LMS selection in the CMD contains more than 200,000 stars.

nent stellar types (from an evolutionary standpoint). In
addition, the right panel of this ﬁgure indicates the spa-
tial distributions of these roughly selected stellar popu-
lations across the observed FoV.

The upper main-sequence (UMS) stars are young mas-
sive objects that trace the centers of star formation in
large molecular clouds and rearrange their surrounding
material through their powerful feedback in the form of
winds and radiation (i.e. Elmegreen & Lada 1977; Bisbas
et al. 2011; Dale et al. 2013; Walch et al. 2013). Sev-
eral UMS stars show a color excess, likely being aﬀected
by signiﬁcant reddening, although we cannot exclude
that some of the most massive ones are rotating. In the
latter case it is possible that they exhibit lower eﬀec-
tive temperatures because of the lower internal pressure
with respect to the non-rotating ones (see e.g. Meynet
& Maeder 2000) or appear more luminous and hotter
due to rotation induced internal mixing processes (see
e.g. Brott et al. 2011). In both scenarios rotation will in-
duce an additional broadening of the UMS (and actually
all stars with types earlier than F).

Due to the previously mentioned saturation issues the
MYSST catalog is likely missing the highest-mass O-
type stars, such that our roughly indicated UMS popu-
lation consists of late O, B and early A type objects. As
the spatial distribution indicates, we ﬁnd these sources
predominantly in and around the massive super bubble
of N44 in the northern half of the FoV. Additionally,
there are a few compact clusterings south of the bubble
indicating the presence of additional star-forming group-
ings.

The lower main-sequence (LMS)

sources consist
mostly of old, low-mass stars that belong to the LMC
ﬁeld population, lying either in the fore- or background
of N44, contaminating the FoV of the MYSST survey.
Most of these sources are too old to belong to the young
star-forming centers of N44, but make it diﬃcult to de-
termine the population of still forming stars in the CMD.
As extinction eﬀects can dislocate their CMD position
they may overlap with the CMD regions reserved to ob-
jects in the formation process. Note that diﬀerential
distance eﬀects are negligible for the LMC given its low

MYSST I

11

scale height of 500 pc (van der Marel & Cioni 2001) in
comparison to its distance of more than 50 kpc. There-
fore, even a separation of e.g. about 1 kpc between a star
in front and one behind the LMC results in a magnitude
diﬀerence smaller than 0.05 mag.

If there have been previous star forming events in N44,
before the currently observed star forming activity, it is
also possible that older (e.g. > 50 Myr) low-mass pre-
main-sequence cluster stars, which are close to joining
the MS, fall into the indicated LMS region in the CMD.
Without additional measurements of e.g. the Hα ex-
cess these still forming objects are notoriously diﬃcult
to distinguish from the old ﬁeld LMS stars. The LMS
sources are numerous, our rough selection containing al-
ready more than 200,000 objects, and as expected for
ﬁeld populations they are almost uniformly distributed
(bar completeness and extinction modulation) as the
sub-sampled (to 10,000 examples) spatial scatter plot
reveals.

The red clump (RC) population consists of old stars,
already in their post-main-sequence evolution, that are
in the process of burning helium in their cores. The lu-
minosity of RC stars is almost insensitive to their age
(at least for RC stars older than about 2 Gyr), thus they
have been often used as standard candles to determine
distances (e.g. Stanek et al. 1998; Girardi & Salaris 2001)
and reddening (Udalski et al. 1999a,b; Zaritsky et al.
2004; Haschke et al. 2011; De Marchi & Panagia 2014;
De Marchi et al. 2016). Like the LMS sources these,
too, belong predominantly to the LMC ﬁeld being fore-
and background objects projected into the line of sight of
N44. Under ideal observational circumstances, i.e. in the
absence of reddening, these old post-main-sequence ob-
jects form an almost circular over-density in the CMD.
Given that a fraction of the observed RC sources should
be behind N44 we can infer from the notable elongation
of the red clump feature in the observed CMD that N44
is host to a substantial amount of obscuring gas and dust
that signiﬁcantly reddens background sources and N44’s
constituents (Dalcanton et al. 2015). As the LMS ob-
jects, the RC stars are also mostly uniformly distributed
across the MYSST FoV, conﬁrmed by the spatial scatter
plot in Figure 11.

Lastly, the pre-main-sequence (PMS) population is
composed of very young objects that are still contract-
ing under self-gravity, sometimes still accreting gas from
their circumstellar disks and envelopes (Manara et al.
2012), and not yet dense and hot enough to ignite hy-
drogen burning in their cores. A comparison with the
isochrone traced in the left panel of Figure 6 shows that
our contour selects PMS stars likely younger than ap-
proximately 10 Myr. These actively forming stars make

up the bulk of N44’s young stellar clusters and charac-
terize the star formation environment of this complex.
As the survey title suggests, they are one of the primary
targets of MYSST for recovering N44’s star formation
history. Our rough selection of the PMS population al-
ready highlights that N44 is host to a large number of
young forming stars, that are predominantly located in
and at the edges of the region’s characteristic super bub-
ble. Given that the bubble traces N44’s gas reservoirs
this arrangement is not surprising, but we also ﬁnd addi-
tional compact clustered structures in the southern part
of the survey. Our rough selection of PMS candidates
only represents the most recent star formation activity
in N44 and it is plausible that older (e.g. ∼ 20-50 Myr)
and less luminous PMS objects may be more spatially
diﬀuse and confused with the LMS ﬁeld population. In
the immediate follow-up study to this introductory pa-
per we quantify the young PMS population of N44 and
characterize their clustering behavior (Ksoll et al. 2020).

4. EXTINCTION OF N44

In this section we study the extinction properties of
N44 based on the photometric observations and con-
struct an extinction map for the observed FoV. To
achieve the latter, we estimate the extinction for a selec-
tion of UMS stars by projecting them along the direc-
tion of reddening onto their theoretical zero-age main-
sequence (ZAMS) locus in the CMD. Afterwards, follow-
ing a procedure we have outlined in Ksoll et al. (2018),
we assign a distance weighted average extinction of the
20 nearest UMS sources to the remaining stars in the
catalog (see also De Marchi et al. 2016). For compar-
ison we repeat the same procedure with RC extinction
probes to further characterize the reddening proﬁle of
N44.

4.1. Extinction Properties

One way to constrain the extinction properties from
our photometric observations is utilizing the red clump
feature in the CMD. Under perfect conditions, i.e. with-
out extinction and photometric errors, the red clump
is a well deﬁned and easy to identify CMD feature. It
is an over-density caused by core helium-burning post-
main-sequence stars. Subject to diﬀerential extinction,
however, the red clump appears elongated in the CMD
tracing the reddening vector, i.e.

RF555W−F814W(F) =

A(F)
E(F555W − F814W)

,

(4)

where F indicates one of the two ﬁlters F555W or
F814W.

Therefore, the underlying extinction properties can be
determined by measuring the slope of this CMD feature

12

Ksoll et al.

(see e.g. De Marchi et al. 2014, 2016, 2020). To ac-
curately retrieve this slope the constituents of the red
clump need to be quantiﬁed ﬁrst. Doing so by per-
forming an arbitrary rectangular or elliptic selection
around the red clump has the major drawback of induc-
ing an uncontrolled range of possible solutions. While
this strategy may return a value that is not far oﬀ the
true value, this approach is prone to non-objective se-
lection eﬀects. To circumvent this issue, e.g. De Marchi
et al. (2016) applied unsharp masking to constrain the
red clump feature. In this paper we follow a diﬀerent
approach, ﬁtting the slope of the red clump while ac-
counting for the presence of many outliers using a well
established machine learning algorithm, RANSAC.

4.1.1. RANSAC

The RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus, Fischler
& Bolles 1981) algorithm can perform robust ﬁts to
datasets that suﬀer from outliers. The underlying as-
sumption of this approach is that the data consists pri-
marily of a set of inliers and a few outliers. Furthermore,
this set of inliers is explained by a single model and the
corresponding set of parameters, which we want to ﬁnd
by ﬁtting the model to the data. To derive these param-
eters RANSAC selects a series of random subsets of the
data and ﬁts the model to each of these, deriving multi-
ple sets of ﬁt parameters. The idea is that, as the outliers
are a minority in the data, most of these subsets consist
only of inliers returning the same (or similar) ﬁt param-
eters. In contrast the sets that contain random outliers
will not agree on any given ﬁt parameters. Therefore,
by simply ”counting the votes” for the parameters of
all the random subsets, the underlying data generating
model parameters are revealed.

In practice the algorithm ﬁrst draws a random set of
n points, a minimum required to ﬁt the desired model
(e.g. 2 for a line), and performs a ﬁt to that random
subset. Then it determines the amount of remaining
data that agrees with this ﬁt, the inliers to this speciﬁc
set of model parameters. To do so for every data point a
distance to the ﬁtted model is determined and compared
If there are enough
to a preset acceptance threshold.
inliers to a model it is accepted as a good ﬁt. This
identiﬁed ’consensus’ set is then employed to reﬁne the
ﬁt by using all inlier points to re-estimate the model
parameters. This procedure is repeated a number of
times, k, to determine the best model as given by the
ﬁtting error. The number of random samples k of size
n that have be drawn is chosen such that it has a low
probability p of containing only bad samples (in this
study we use p = 0.01), and is given by the equation

k =

log(p)
log(1 − wn)

,

(5)

where w is the fraction of inliers in the data. The pa-
rameter w is of course often unknown, but by starting
with a low estimate of w the number of samples k can be
iteratively determined by updating the current guess of
w after every random sample with the actual determined
fraction of inliers. This procedure stops when the num-
ber of samples that have been drawn exceeds the latest
estimate of k (Fischler & Bolles 1981; Forsyth & Ponce
2003).

In order to make use of the RANSAC algorithm to
determine the extinction law of N44 we ﬁrst need to
make an initial selection in the CMD of the region where
the elongated red clump is the dominant feature. The
left panel in Figure 7 shows our selected region. We
make this area large enough to be as agnostic as possible
to our prior knowledge of where the red clump is located.
In particular, the axes of the rectangle do not prescribe
a slope. At the same time we make sure that the red
clump is the major feature within the selection while we
exclude a large portion of the red giant branch leading
up to the red clump to facilitate the RANSAC inlier
search.

Since our ultimate goal is to ﬁt a line in the CMD, the
RANSAC algorithm will draw samples with the mini-
mum amount of necessary points, i.e. n = 2 in our ap-
plication. From a series of initial tests we determine
that an acceptance threshold of 0.26 in the absolute er-
ror returns inlier selections and model ﬁts which trace
the elongated red clump as we would expect it. To min-
imize any inﬂuence from the random sampling on the
ﬁnal ﬁt of the slope of the reddening vector, we repeat
the RANSAC algorithm 5,000 times. Note that this is
not the k parameter: each of these 5,000 runs will draw
k random samples, with k automatically determined ac-
cording to Eq. (5).

As ﬁnal value of the slope we take the average of
the predicted slopes of these 5,000 RANSAC runs, and
use their standard deviation as the associated uncer-
tainty. The right panel in Figure 7 presents the result
of this procedure for the slope of the reddening vec-
tor, RF555W−F814W(F555W) = 2.8 ± 0.3. Note that
we color coded every star in this diagram according to
the fraction of times across the 5,000 RANSAC runs
that it was selected as an inlier to the ﬁnal model.The
plot shows that the RANSAC algorithm is able to ac-
curately recognize the constituents of the elongated
red clump feature. In fact, out of 5,000 runs the red-
giant branch (RGB) leading up to the red clump is
never identiﬁed as the dominant feature in our selection
window. Using the same data selection and RANSAC
procedure the corresponding slope in our other ﬁlter
is RF555W−F814W(F814W) = 1.8 ± 0.3. For compari-

MYSST I

13

Figure 7. Zoom-in on the bright end of the optical CMD of the MYSST N44 data (left). Highlighted in red is the region used
to derive the optical extinction law of N44 from the slope of the red clump elongation. Right: Zoom-in on the selected candidate
red clump region from the left panel. The stars are color coded according to the fraction of times they were considered as a red
clump inlier across the 5,000 RANSAC runs. The red line indicates the averaged resulting slope across all RANSAC ﬁts. For
the reddening vector in F555W we ﬁnd a value of RF555W = 2.8 ± 0.3.

and RF555W−F814W(F814W)

son the Cardelli et al. (1989) galactic reddening law,
with RV = 3.1, returns RF555W−F814W(F555W) =
=
2.4
re-
1.4,
(1999) model
spectively, while
2.2
gives
and
RF555W−F814W(F555W)
RF555W−F814W(F814W) = 1.2.
So overall we ﬁnd
slightly larger R values in N44, indicating a more ”gray”
reddening.

the Fitzpatrick

=

4.2. UMS Extinction

With the reddening vector constrained we now mea-
sure extinction in F555W for UMS stars by re-projecting
them along the reddening vector onto their theoretical
optical CMD location, assuming that they should be
on the ZAMS. Note that we derive the ZAMS locus
from PARSEC isochrones (Bressan et al. 2012) with a
metallicity of Z = 0.008 for the LMC and correct the
ZAMS position for Milky Way (MW) foreground extinc-
tion prior to the measurement. Here we adopt a value
of Amw
F555W ≈ 0.223 mag) toward the
LMC (De Marchi & Panagia 2014) and the Cardelli et al.
(1989) Galactic reddening law. The measured value and
the 0.223 mag MW foreground oﬀset are then summed
up to provide the total extinction.

V = 0.22 mag (Amw

For the extinction measurements we make a selection
of the brightest UMS stars in the MYSST photometric
catalog, accounting for the slope of the reddening vector

and ﬁeld contamination. This selection, depicted in the
left panel of Figure 8, consists of 1,291 stars, and rep-
resents a trade-oﬀ between retaining enough sources for
good statistics and minimizing potential contamination
from old ﬁeld sources. Scaling the source density esti-
mated in the reference ﬁelds to our CMD, we ﬁnd that
our selection criterion entails about 15% ﬁeld contam-
ination, i.e. speciﬁcally we expect 194 ± 14 ﬁeld stars
in our sample. For more details on the UMS selection
see Appendix A. As previously mentioned, due to satu-
ration issues our selection of UMS stars is likely missing
some of the most massive objects of N44. A compari-
son with the ZAMS, shifted along the reddening vector,
puts our UMS sources in an approximate mass range
between ∼ 6 and ∼ 30 M(cid:12), indicating late O to early
B-type stars. Note that there are 13 UMS stars in our
selection with a CMD position that falls to the left of
the target, foreground corrected, ZAMS locus. Given
their close proximity to the ZAMS our procedure as-
sumes that these sources have zero LMC extinction, so
they are only subject to the MW foreground.

The middle panel of Figure 8 marks the positions of
our UMS extinction probes in relation to the rest of the
survey. As we can see, we ﬁnd most of our UMS stars
in and around the super bubble of N44 located in the
northern part of the survey. With the fewer available

lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll15.017.520.00.00.51.01.52.0mF555W-mF814W (mag)mF555W (mag)llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllRF555W=2.757–0.2551920210.751.001.251.501.75mF555W-mF814W (mag)mF555W (mag)0.00.20.40.60.81.0pinlier14

Ksoll et al.

Figure 8. Zoom-in on the optical CMD of N44 (left). Highlighted in blue are UMS stars selected to estimate individual
stellar extinctions. The red line indicates the position of the ZAMS, corrected for the LMC distance modulus and MW
foreground extinction, that serves as the target position for the UMS extinction measurement. Spatial distribution of the
MYSST photometric catalog of N44 (center). Highlighted in blue are the positions of our selected UMS extinction probes.
Histogram of the extinction measurements (including the MW foreground) in F555W of the UMS probes (right). The solid red
line indicates the median extinction of 0.77 mag, while the dashed red lines mark the 25% and 75% quantiles.

probes in the middle and southern part of main FoV, as
well as the very few UMS stars within the control ﬁelds,
extinction estimates will be less precise there.

For the extinction measurement and assignment to
the non-UMS stars we use a modiﬁed version of our ap-
proach presented in Ksoll et al. (2018). In order to give
a measurement uncertainty for the UMS extinctions, we
now sample the slope of the reddening vector within its
error and derive the mean and standard deviation of
the so measured extinction values for each UMS star.
Consequently, we now derive the error for the distance
weighted average extinction assigned to the non-UMS
stars by propagation of the uncertainty of the UMS mea-
surements

δAF555W =

(cid:118)
(cid:117)
(cid:117)
(cid:116)

20
(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:0)wiδAUMS

F555W

(cid:1)2

,

(6)

with weights

wi =

1
d2
i + (cid:15)2

1

(cid:80)20

n=1(1/d2

n + (cid:15)2)

,

(7)

where di is the Euclidean distance to the ith nearest
UMS neighbor in pixels and (cid:15) is a smoothing factor (for
more details see Ksoll et al. 2018).

The distribution of the ﬁnal F555W extinction mea-
surements for the UMS stars is summarized in the right
panel in Figure 8. With an overall median extinction
of 0.77+0.42
−0.23 mag it appears that the UMS population of
N44 is for the most part only moderately attenuated.
This is consistent with the fact that a notable fraction
of our UMS selection is located inside of the super bub-
ble of N44, where feedback from the most massive stars

has cleared out substantial amounts of gas. Still there
are about two hundred UMS stars in our sample that
exhibit more than 1.5 mag of extinction up to a maxi-
mum of 2.29 mag indicating the presence of regions that
are subject to substantial reddening.

For the assignment to the non-UMS sources we fol-
low our ﬁndings in Ksoll et al. (2018) and use the dis-
tance weighted average extinction of the 20 nearest UMS
neighbors, employing a smoothing factor of (cid:15) = 500 px
(20”, ∼ 5 pc). Figure 9 displays the CMD of the MYSST
photometric catalog when corrected for the assigned ex-
tinction values in comparison to the ZAMS used to mea-
sure the extinction for the UMS stars. As we have elab-
orated in Ksoll et al. (2018), this method of extinction
estimation is not ideal for all types of stars, since we ﬁnd
some over- and underestimation for, e.g. ﬁeld MS and
RC stars. The main issue here is that these objects are
likely fore- and background objects of the young star-
forming clusters that are the primary target of this sur-
vey. While recent studies (Cignoni et al. 2015) provide
strong evidence that young PMS objects tend to cluster
around young massive UMS stars, so that this form of
extinction estimate works well for young PMS objects
(see also De Marchi et al. 2016), no such tendency for
spatial co-location is given for the ﬁeld contaminants.
Therefore, the UMS extinction probes are less represen-
tative for these objects and the extinction estimate is
less precise (De Marchi et al. 2011, 2017).

There is an additional caveat with our UMS extinction
estimate to mention here. Our core assumption is that
all UMS stars are on the ZAMS. Given the fast evolution
of very massive stars, this might not necessarily be true

MYSST I

15

to be aﬀected. For the UMS stars located in the bub-
ble and western rim we ﬁnd a median absolute error of
only 0.043+0.019
−0.014 mag in extinction. Further details on
this error estimate are provided in Appendix B. With
this caveat in mind, our ZAMS assumption allows the
derivation of a self-consistent (relative to the MYSST
data) extinction estimate that in some cases may just
provide an upper limit to the true value.

Beside the age of the UMS there are other eﬀects,
e.g. unresolved binarity or metallicity gradients, that
can induce a broadening of the UMS in the CMD even
in the absence of extinction. While often not consid-
ered for star clusters, there are ﬁndings that could sup-
port a potential metallicity gradient in N44. As pre-
viously mentioned, N44 has seen at least two known
episodes of SF (Oey & Massey 1995). Additionally, a
supernova remnant, SNR 0523-679 (Chu et al. 1993),
which exhibits characteristics of a core collapse super-
nova (Jaskot et al. 2011) is present within N44. Oey &
Massey (1995) also estimate that up to four supernovae
occurred in the region in the past. Lastly, Jaskot et al.
(2011) ﬁnd some evidence for metallicity enhancement
in N44’s super bubble. Thus, pollution of the forma-
tion environment of the younger population by one or
multiple supernovae from the previous SF event is a pos-
sibility. We investigate the impact of these eﬀects on our
extinction estimation procedure in Appendix C.

As a ﬁnal test we also look into the potential extinc-
tion error induced by neglecting stellar rotation. As
mentioned in Section 3, rotation may induce additional
color excess, in particular for very massive stars. To
evaluate the eﬀect we use the MIST (Dotter 2016; Choi
et al. 2016; Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015) stellar evo-
lution models (with Z = 0.008) to construct two ZAMS
loci, one for the rotating (v/vcrit = 0.4) and one for the
non-rotating case. Here we ﬁnd that both ZAMS loci
(and e.g. the 5 and 10 Myr isochrone, too) are practi-
cally identical, such that the expected extinction error
caused by moderate stellar rotation is negligible for our
approach. Using the SYCLIST9 stellar evolution models
(Georgy et al. 2013) we also investigate the error induced
in our approach for extremely fast rotating stars, i.e.
v/vcrit = 0.95, in comparison to a non-rotating model.
In this test we ﬁnd a median absolute extinction er-
ror between the two models of 0.041+0.022
−0.017 mag. Conse-
quently, the eﬀect of rotation on our extinction estimate
is minimal even for fast rotators. We have to note, how-
ever, that the SYCLIST models for v/vcrit = 0.95 are

9 https://www.unige.ch/sciences/astro/evolution/en/database/

syclist/

Figure 9. Optical CMD of the N44 data corrected for ex-
tinction. Each star is corrected by the distance weighted
averaged extinction of their 20 nearest UMS neighbors. For
visualization purposes the extinction of each UMS star is
sampled within its measurement uncertainty. For reference
the red line indicates the ZAMS, corrected for the LMC dis-
tance and MW foreground extinction, that is used to deter-
mine the extinction of the UMS probes.

and their actual position could be slightly diﬀerent from
the ZAMS, even if they are only a few Myr old. Oey &
Massey (1995) ﬁnd that the UMS stars interior to N44’s
super bubble are likely about 10 Myr old, while the ones
located at the western rim of the bubble are 5 Myr old.
Isochrones corresponding to these ages deviate to colors
redder than the ZAMS in the high mass regime. In these
cases, dereddening to the ZAMS, i.e. extending the vec-
tor beyond the correct isochrone, will overestimate both
extinction and mass. Without additional information
one cannot date the UMS stars more accurately across
the entire MYSST FoV. However, due to the satura-
tion limit of the MYSST survey, the number of stars
where a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the ZAMS and
the actual stellar age might occur is relatively small.
Taking for instance a 10 Myr isochrone instead of the
ZAMS, as appropriate for the bubble interior, only 276
stars out of our 1,291 UMS sources are massive enough

16

Ksoll et al.

Figure 10. Spatial distribution diagram of the MYSST photometric catalog. Each star is color coded according to the
assigned distance weighted average extinction of its 20 nearest UMS neighbors. The UMS extinction probes themselves appear
as distinctly colored points in this diagram as they are not subject to the smoothing eﬀect of our assignment procedure for the
other stars. Additionally, any white spots are simply caused by a lack of sources, as this plot shows every individual star of the
catalog.

only available up to a stellar mass of 15 M(cid:12), such that
the brightest 276 UMS stars in our selection could not
be considered in this test. In addition we had to employ
models with Z = 0.006 as the closest readily available
metallicty to our adapted LMC value of Z = 0.008.

Figure 10 shows the extinction map we derive from
our estimates by color coding each star according to its
assigned value. As we can see the region of the super
bubble is indeed subject to the least amount of redden-
ing, while we ﬁnd the most extinguished areas at the
western edge of the bubble as well as predominantly
in the southern part of the observed FoV. The rather
prominent dark ”ﬁlament”, extending from the southern
bubble edge to the south-west corner of the FoV, does
not have a signiﬁcant counterpart in the longer wave-
length observations of N44 taken with Spitzer. Pointing

to relatively low extinction values, this might suggest
that this feature is actually an artifact of our ZAMS
assumption. We veriﬁed that there are very few UMS
stars in this ”ﬁlament” that would experience a reduc-
tion in extinction measure if they were dereddened to a
10 Myr isochrone instead of the ZAMS (see Figure B1 in
Appendix B). Therefore, a signiﬁcant systematic error
could be justiﬁed only if these UMS stars are even older
than 10 Myr.

It should also be noted that the extinction of the two
control ﬁelds is likely not particularly precise, due to the
limitations of our approach listed above and the fact that
these ﬁeld stars are not likely to be co-located with the
few selected UMS stars within these regions.

4.3. RC extinction

MYSST I

17

Figure 11. Zoom-in on the RC in the optical CMD of the MYSST catalog (left). The blue line represents a 4σ KDE density
contour, marking the tip of the RC and indicating the nominal non-extinguished RC position in the CMD. The red dashed line
marks the reddening vector quantiﬁed with the RANSAC approach. The solid orange line indicates the target true position,
i.e. the tip of the RC, used to determine the extinction of the red clump probes. It is perpendicular to the reddening vector
and anchored to the intersection of reddening vector and the 4σ density contour. For comparison, the pink point indicates the
theoretical RC position for the LMC ﬁeld as determined by De Marchi & Panagia (2014), demonstrating the excellent agreement
with our empirically determined position. Center: Spatial distribution of the RC constituents (red points) identiﬁed with the
RANSAC procedure (i.e. all sources with an inlier probability above 0.5). Right: Histogram of the measured extinction values
in F555W of the RC probes. The solid red line indicates the median extinction of 0.68 mag, while the dashed lines mark the 25
and 75% quantiles.

Figure 12. 2D binned extinction map of the red clump sources (left). Each 41” × 41” (11 pc × 11 pc) bin is colored according
to the average measured extinction of the red clump sources located inside. White tiles indicate bins in which no RC stars are
found. Right: The same 2D bin diagram, but now each bin is colored according to the diﬀerence ∆ ¯AUMS−RC
F555W
of the mean extinction in each bin between the values derived from UMS and RC extinction probes. A positive value indicates
a larger mean extinction derived from the UMS sources, while a negative one implies that the RC sources experience more
extinction on average. The black tiles indicate bins where the diﬀerence ∆ ¯AUMS−RC
F555W cannot be computed because either no
UMS (”u”) or RC (”r”) sources are present.

F555W = ¯AUMS

F555W − ¯ARC

50 pcNE−68.1−68.0−67.980.5080.7581.00Right Ascension (deg)Declination (deg)0.00.51.01.52.0AF555Wuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuurrrrrrrrrr50 pcNE−68.1−68.0−67.980.5080.7581.00Right Ascension (deg)Declination (deg)−1.10.01.01.8DAF555WUMS−RC18

Ksoll et al.

To further characterize the extinction pattern of N44
we also determine extinction measures for the RC stars.
As previously mentioned the non-extinguished RC is
usually a prominent almost circular feature in the CMD,
which is smeared out in the MYSST observation due
to diﬀerential reddening. Still, the tip of this smeared
out feature marks the nominal non-extinguished posi-
tion of the RC. Consequently measuring extinction for
the RC sources is also straight forward. To quantify
the position of the RC tip we use a kernel density esti-
mate (KDE) in the CMD space (using separate band-
widths for magnitude and color, each estimated by Sil-
verman’s rule) and identify the signiﬁcant over-density
in the vicinity of the tip. In particular we ﬁnd a den-
sity contour at 4σ signiﬁcance (above the mean density)
which traces the non-extinguished end of the RC (blue
contour in the left panel of Figure 11). We then deter-
mine the nominal RC position as a line perpendicular to
the reddening vector anchored at the intersection point
between the 4σ contour and the reddening vector going
through its center. In practice, we vary the reddening
slope within its uncertainty, determining a new target
line for each sample slope, but keeping the same an-
chor point, in order to provide measurement errors for
the RC probes. For comparison the left panel of Fig-
ure 11 also indicates the theoretical position of the RC
for the LMC ﬁeld (mF 555W = 19.16, mF 814W = 18.1,
corrected for distance modulus and foreground MW ex-
tinction) as determined by De Marchi & Panagia (2014)
for the HST ﬁlters used in this survey. Here we ﬁnd
an excellent agreement with our empirically determined
nominal RC position. This match allows us to easily
transform these relative RC extinction measurements to
total extinction values by correcting for the Milky Way
extinction contribution of Amw
V = 0.22 mag, translating
to Amw
F555W ≈ 0.223 mag, assumed for the theoretical RC
position in De Marchi & Panagia (2014).

From our RANSAC inlier determination, we select the
bona ﬁde RC constituents as those that reach an inlier
fraction above 50%, i.e. the stars that are chosen as RC
inliers at least half of the time across all 5,000 RANSAC
runs. This returns a sample of 1,737 RC stars, which
appear to be almost uniformly distributed across the
MYSST FoV (see Figure 11, middle panel, red points).
As these objects are most likely fore- and background
ﬁeld sources and not part of the star-forming clusters in
N44 this is to be expected. Note that there are 145 stars
in our RC inlier selection which fall above our target RC
position. Given their close proximity to the target our
measurement approach assumes that these sources are
only subject to the MW foreground extinction.

The right panel of Figure 11 shows the outcome of the
extinction measurements for the RC probes. With a me-
dian total extinction of 0.68+0.52
−0.32 mag RC stars are also
overall only subject to moderate reddening. In compar-
ison to the UMS sources the RC extinction distribution
appears fairly similar being only about 0.1 mag less ex-
tinguished on average. This slight diﬀerence could be
due to the UMS sources being likely embedded within
the star-forming centers of N44 whereas the mostly uni-
formly distributed RC ﬁeld stars are not as obscured by
N44’s gas reservoirs. But with a maximum of 2.1 mag
extinction there are also a few hundred RC sources that
are aﬀected by more severe reddening. Note, however,
that this maximum is certainly aﬀected by our initially
selected CMD region for the RANSAC procedure. It is
possible that a few more heavily extinguished RC ob-
jects were excluded by this selection, so that this upper
extinction limit should not be treated as an absolute
maximum.

To make a direct spatial comparison to the UMS ex-
tinction map we cannot follow the same procedure as
for the UMS stars in Section 4.2. Assigning distance
weighted average values of the nearest RC neighbors to
the other stars has little meaning, since these RC ﬁeld
stars are very unlikely to have a spatial correlation to
the N44 constituents beyond projection eﬀects. Being
predominantly part of the LMC ﬁeld population the RC
sources are, however, more likely to provide a represen-
tative extinction measure for other ﬁeld sources, such as
the many LMS stars captured in the MYSST FoV. To
perform a spatial comparison we instead use a 2D bin-
ning approach, computing the average measured extinc-
tion of the RC sources in square 41”×41” (11 pc×11 pc)
spatial bins. The resulting low resolution RC extinction
map is shown in the left panel in Figure 12. The most
extincted RC stars are located towards the eastern and
northern edge of the super bubble as well as in more
compact regions south of the bubble. The right panel
of Figure 12 provides a direct comparison between the
2D binned RC mean extinction map and a correspond-
ing map derived from the UMS sources, showing the
diﬀerence ∆ ¯AUMS−RC
F555W in each bin.
Positive values in this map indicate where the mean ex-
tinction inferred from the UMS stars is larger, while neg-
ative values imply the opposite. As we can see, the UMS
extinction exceeds that of the RC mostly in the south-
ern half of the FoV. Notable regions where the mean
RC extinction is larger are located at the eastern and
northern edge of the bubble as well as in several com-
pact patches in the south of the FoV. These RC stars
are likely located behind the star-forming gas of N44.
On the other hand, in the regions where the mean UMS

F555W = ¯AUMS

F555W − ¯ARC

MYSST I

19

extinction dominates it is possible that background RC
sources are simply not detected due to the obscuring gas
that the UMS sources are embedded in. Interestingly,
we ﬁnd that the RC and UMS extinction agrees very
well inside N44’s bubble. This provides further conﬁr-
mation that the feedback of the massive stars interior
to the bubble has cleared out almost all of the gas, such
that barely any local obscuration is left. It is necessary
to note though that the diﬀerence between UMS and RC
extinction might be aﬀected by stochastic variability in
the number of RC sources that are in the foreground
and background in a given 2D bin in the right panel of
Figure 12.

5. SUMMARY

In this paper we introduce the new HST Treasury
Program ’Measuring Young Stars in Space and Time’
(MYSST) which captures the active star-forming com-
plex N44 with its rich collection of H II regions, young
stellar clusters and bubbles, located in the Large Mag-
ellanic Cloud. We present the observing strategy of
MYSST, describe our data reduction procedure and con-
struct the photometric catalog of the survey. In addition
we highlight our ﬁrst scientiﬁc results, brieﬂy discussing
the stellar populations found across N44 and determin-
ing the extinction properties of the region. On top of
that, we infer extinction maps for N44 from reddening
measurements of UMS and RC stars.

The MYSST survey observed N44 in the optical wave-
length regime using the F555W and F814W broadband
ﬁlters of both the ACS and WFC3 imagers on board
the HST. Combining PSF ﬁtting and aperture photom-
etry, the latter being needed to recover saturated bright
sources, we compile a photometric catalog that com-
prises 461,684 stars across the MYSST FoV, going down
as deep as 29 mag in F555W and 28 mag in F814W,
probing even the lowest mass stellar population of N44
(e.g. down to 0.09 M(cid:12) for an unreddened 1 Myr pre-
main-sequence star). Due to saturation eﬀects the cat-
alog does not contain sources brighter than 14 mag in
F555W and 13 mag in F814W, likely missing the most
massive O type stars of the region. Due to stellar crowd-
ing, background and saturation the completeness of the
catalog varies across the FoV, but reaches an excellent
average of 26.7 (28.1) mag in F555W and 25.7 (26.7) mag
in F814W at the 80% (50%) level.

The rich photometric catalog reveals many diﬀerent
stellar populations spread across the MYSST FoV. We
identify numerous old lower main-sequence and red gi-
ant branch sources that are almost uniformly distributed
across N44, likely fore- and background contaminants
belonging to the LMC ﬁeld population. We also ﬁnd

young high-mass upper main-sequence and lower mass
pre-main-sequence stars within the survey, which exhibit
clustered spatial distributions, tracing e.g. the gaseous
rim of N44’s characteristic super bubble. These young
stars mark N44’s numerous active star-forming centers.
To constrain the reddening properties of N44 we mea-
sure the slope of the red clump feature that appears elon-
gated in the CMD due to diﬀerential extinction. Here
we present a new approach to jointly establish the con-
stituents of this elongated red clump feature and per-
form the ﬁt of the reddening vector by applying the
well established learning algorithm RANSAC (Fischler
& Bolles 1981). This algorithm is a very robust tool to
ﬁt models to data in the presence of outliers. RANSAC
is an iterative process, where in each iteration ﬁrst a
minimal subset of the data, large enough to ﬁt the given
model, is drawn randomly from the total data. Then
the model ﬁt is performed on that subset and ﬁnally the
amount of data points within the complete data set are
determined that are inliers to the ﬁtted model. These
steps are then repeated until an optimal model is found
at which point a ﬁnal ﬁt to the inliers of this model is
performed for further reﬁnement.

Selecting a window within the optical CMD of the
MYSST data in which the red clump is the predominant
feature, we apply the RANSAC algorithm, repeating it
5,000 times to negate all eﬀects of the random seed, to
determine the red clump constituents and ﬁt a line to the
elongated red clump to derive the slope of the reddening
vector. With this approach we ﬁnd the total to selective
extinction ratios R(F555W−F814W)(F555W) = 2.8 ± 0.3
and R(F555W−F814W)(F814W) = 1.8 ± 0.3 for the slope
of the reddening vector in N44. These results are no-
tably larger than the values for the standard galactic
extinction law with RV = 3.1, returning 2.4 and 1.4
(Cardelli et al. 1989) or 2.2 and 1.2 (Fitzpatrick 1999),
respectively.

With the reddening vector constrained we select a set
of UMS stars as probes and measure their extinction by
re-projecting their position in the CMD back to their
theoretical location, assuming that they should be on
the zero-age main-sequence. Afterwards we assign each
non-UMS star in the MYSST photometric catalog a dis-
tance weighted average extinction of their 20 nearest
UMS neighbors. This procedure has been found to re-
turn reasonable extinction estimates for the constituents
of young star-forming clusters (De Marchi et al. 2016),
such as the ones we are aiming to ﬁnd here, but suf-
fers from occasional extinction over- or underestimation
for ﬁeld constituents. Additionally, this approach might
overestimate extinction for older (> 10 Myr) very mas-
sive UMS sources, as their true position might slightly

20

Ksoll et al.

deviate from the ZAMS, such that at worst the esti-
mate provides only an upper limit to the true extinc-
tion. For a subset of UMS stars with known ages inside
and at the rim of N44’s bubble we ﬁnd, however, only
a median absolute error of 0.043+0.019
−0.014 mag with our ap-
proach compared to using the correct ages. We make the
ZAMS assumption since the UMS ages are not easily re-
covered across the entire FoV and because it allows a
MYSST self-consistent extinction estimate that entails
the same systematic error everywhere. Note that we
plan to provide more precise extinction measures in a
follow-up study that explores synergies with other ob-
servations of N44 (e.g. Gaia).

Following the assignment, we present an extinction
map for N44 based on the measured UMS extinction.
With a median extinction of 0.77+0.42
−0.23 mag in F555W it
appears that the UMS population of N44 is overall only
moderately extincted. With about 200 UMS probes,
though, exceeding 1.5 mag up to a maximum of 2.29 mag
in extinction there is still a notable amount of regions
subject to more severe reddening. Our extinction map
conﬁrms that the reddening of N44 is patchy and highly
diﬀerential across the MYSST FoV.

For comparison we also compile a 2D binned aver-
age extinction map derived from measurements of red
clump stars. Showing an overall median extinction of
0.68+0.52
−0.32 mag the red clump stars across the MYSST
FoV are similarly reddened as the UMS population.
There are a few hundred of our total ∼1,700 RC ex-
tinction probes that also exhibit more severe reddening
up to a maximum of 2.1 mag. This is, however, not an
absolute maximum as our RANSAC approach may have
excluded a few heavily extinguished RC stars. A direct
spatial comparison between a UMS and RC 2D binned
mean extinction map reveals that the UMS sources tend
to be more reddened across most of the southern half
of the FoV. Notable areas where RC extinction exceeds
the UMS values are the eastern and northern edge of
the N44 bubble, as well as a few compact patches south
of the bubble.

In conclusion, the MYSST survey provides an extraor-
dinary view of extragalactic star formation across an en-
tire giant star-forming complex that highlights the com-
plex interplay between high-mass stellar feedback and
star-forming events. With its high resolution and deep
photometry it provides the opportunity to study length
and timescales of the star formation process on the scale
of a giant molecular cloud. In our subsequent study in

Paper II we begin to quantify the star formation history
of N44 by identifying its rich PMS stellar content and
analyze the complex clustering behaviour of the young
still forming PMS stars across N44.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank the anonymous referee for their
thorough and timely review of our manuscript, as well
as the detailed constructive feedback provided, allowing
us to deliver a more complete and concise version of this
study.
The authors would like to thank Varun Bajaj for help
with aligning and drizzling the data.
VFK was funded by the Heidelberg Graduate School of
Mathematical and Computational Methods for the Sci-
ences (HGS MathComp), founded by DFG grant GSC
220 in the German Universities Excellence Initiative.
VFK also acknowledges support from the International
Max Planck Research School for Astronomy and Cosmic
Physics at the University of Heidelberg (IMPRS-HD).
RSK acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG) via the collabora-
tive research center (SFB 881, Project-ID 138713538)
The Milky Way System (subprojects A1, B1, B2, and
B8). He also thanks for funding from the Heidelberg
Cluster of Excellence STRUCTURES in the framework
of Germany’s Excellence Strategy (grant EXC-2181/1,
Project-ID 390900948) and for funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council via the ERC Synergy Grant
ECOGAL (grant 855130) and the ERC Advanced Grant
STARLIGHT (grant 339177).
The project “MYSST: ”Mapping Young Stars in Space
and Time” is supported by the German Ministry
for Education and Research (BMBF) through grant
50OR1801.
Based on observations with the NASA/ESA Hubble
Space Telescope obtained from the Mikulski Archive
for Space Telescopes at the Space Telescope Science In-
stitute, which is operated by the Association of Uni-
versities for Research in Astronomy, Incorporated, un-
der NASA contract NAS5-26555. Support for program
number GO-14689 was provided through a grant from
the STScI under NASA contract NAS5-26555.

Software:

Astrodrizzle

(Hack et al. 2012),
DOLPHOT (v2.0 Dolphin 2000), PARSEC (Bressan
et al. 2012), MIST (Dotter 2016; Choi et al. 2016; Paxton
et al. 2011, 2013, 2015), SYCLIST (Georgy et al. 2013)

Adamo, A., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Bastian, N., Silva-Villa, E.,

& Ryon, J. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 246,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1203

Ballesteros-Paredes, J., Klessen, R. S., Mac Low, M.-M., &
Vazquez-Semadeni, E. 2007, in Protostars and Planets V,
ed. B. Reipurth, D. Jewitt, & K. Keil, 63–80

REFERENCES

MYSST I

21

Bastian, N., Covey, K. R., & Meyer, M. R. 2010, ARA&A,

De Marchi, G., Panagia, N., & Beccari, G. 2017, ApJ, 846,

48, 339, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082708-101642

110, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa85e9

Bik, A., Henning, T., Stolte, A., et al. 2012, ApJ, 744, 87,

De Marchi, G., Panagia, N., & Girardi, L. 2014, MNRAS,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/744/2/87

438, 513, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt2233

Bisbas, T. G., W¨unsch, R., Whitworth, A. P., Hubber,

De Marchi, G., Panagia, N., & Milone, A. P. 2020, ApJ,

D. A., & Walch, S. 2011, ApJ, 736, 142,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/736/2/142

899, 114, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aba834

De Marchi, G., Paresce, F., Panagia, N., et al. 2011, ApJ,

Bonnell, I. A., Bate, M. R., Clarke, C. J., & Pringle, J. E.

739, 27, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/739/1/27

1997, MNRAS, 285, 201

Bonnell, I. A., Clarke, C. J., Bate, M. R., & Pringle, J. E.

2001, MNRAS, 324, 573,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04311.x

De Marchi, G., Panagia, N., Sabbi, E., et al. 2016,
MNRAS, 455, 4373, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2528

Dib, S., & Henning, T. 2019, A&A, 629, A135,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834080

Bonnell, I. A., Smith, R. J., Clark, P. C., & Bate, M. R.

Dolphin, A. E. 2000, PASP, 112, 1383, doi: 10.1086/316630

2011, MNRAS, 410, 2339,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17603.x

Bressan, A., Marigo, P., Girardi, L., et al. 2012, MNRAS,

427, 127, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21948.x

Brott, I., de Mink, S. E., Cantiello, M., et al. 2011, A&A,

530, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201016113

Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C., & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ,

345, 245, doi: 10.1086/167900

Carlson, L. R., Sewi(cid:32)lo, M., Meixner, M., Romita, K. A., &

Lawton, B. 2012, A&A, 542, A66,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118627

Chabrier, G. 2003, PASP, 115, 763, doi: 10.1086/376392
Chen, C. H. R., Chu, Y.-H., Gruendl, R. A., Gordon, K. D.,

& Heitsch, F. 2009, ApJ, 695, 511,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/695/1/511

Chevance, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Vazquez-Semadeni, E.,

et al. 2020, SSRv, 216, 50,
doi: 10.1007/s11214-020-00674-x

Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102,

doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/102

Chu, Y.-H., Mac Low, M.-M., Garcia-Segura, G., Wakker,
B., & Kennicutt, Robert C., J. 1993, ApJ, 414, 213,
doi: 10.1086/173069

Cignoni, M., Sabbi, E., Nota, A., et al. 2009, AJ, 137, 3668,

doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/137/3/3668

Cignoni, M., Sabbi, E., van der Marel, R. P., et al. 2015,

ApJ, 811, 76, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/811/2/76

—. 2016, ApJ, 833, 154, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/154
Clark, P. C., Glover, S. C. O., Klessen, R. S., & Bonnell,

I. A. 2012, MNRAS, 424, 2599,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21259.x

Dotter, A. 2016, ApJS, 222, 8,

doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/8

Elmegreen, B. G., & Lada, C. J. 1977, ApJ, 214, 725,

doi: 10.1086/155302

Federrath, C. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3167,

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1799

Federrath, C., & Klessen, R. S. 2012, ApJ, 761, 156,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/761/2/156

Fischler, M., & Bolles, R. 1981, Random sample consensus

(ACM), 381–395

Fitzpatrick, E. L. 1999, PASP, 111, 63, doi: 10.1086/316293

Forsyth, D., & Ponce, J. 2003, Computer vision, Prentice
Hall series in artiﬁcial intelligence (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall), XXV, 693 S.

Fukui, Y., Mizuno, N., Yamaguchi, R., Mizuno, A., &

Onishi, T. 2001, PASJ, 53, L41,
doi: 10.1093/pasj/53.6.L41

Gaia Collaboration, Brown, A. G. A., Vallenari, A., et al.
2018, A&A, 616, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833051

Gennaro, M., Goodwin, S. P., Parker, R. J., Allison, R. J.,

& Brandner, W. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 1760,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2098

Gennaro, M., Bik, A., Brandner, W., et al. 2012, A&A, 542,

A74, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201218980

Georgy, C., Ekstr¨om, S., Granada, A., et al. 2013, A&A,

553, A24, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220558

Getman, K. V., Feigelson, E. D., Kuhn, M. A., et al. 2018,

MNRAS, 476, 1213, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty302

Girardi, L., & Salaris, M. 2001, MNRAS, 323, 109,

doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04084.x

Dalcanton, J. J., Fouesneau, M., Hogg, D. W., et al. 2015,

Girichidis, P., Federrath, C., Allison, R., Banerjee, R., &

ApJ, 814, 3, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/814/1/3

Dale, J. E., Ercolano, B., & Bonnell, I. A. 2013, MNRAS,

Klessen, R. S. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 3264,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.20250.x

430, 234, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts592

Girichidis, P., Federrath, C., Banerjee, R., & Klessen, R. S.

De Marchi, G., & Panagia, N. 2014, MNRAS, 445, 93,

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu1694

2011, MNRAS, 413, 2741,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18348.x

22

Ksoll et al.

Girichidis, P., Oﬀner, S. S. R., Kritsuk, A. G., et al. 2020,

Ksoll, V. F., Gouliermis, D., Sabbi, E., et al. 2020, arXiv

SSRv, 216, 68, doi: 10.1007/s11214-020-00693-8

Gordon, K. D., Clayton, G. C., Misselt, K. A., Land olt,

e-prints, arXiv:2012.00524.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.00524

A. U., & Wolﬀ, M. J. 2003, ApJ, 594, 279,
doi: 10.1086/376774

Lucke, P. B., & Hodge, P. W. 1970, AJ, 75, 171,

doi: 10.1086/110959

Gouliermis, D. A., Henning, T., Brand ner, W., et al. 2007,

Mac Low, M.-M., & Klessen, R. S. 2004, Rev. Mod. Phys.,

ApJL, 665, L27, doi: 10.1086/521224

76, 125, doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.76.125

Gouliermis, D. A., Schmeja, S., Ossenkopf, V., Klessen,

R. S., & Dolphin, A. E. 2014, in The Labyrinth of Star
Formation, Vol. 36, 447,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03041-8 89

Madau, P., Ferguson, H. C., Dickinson, M. E., et al. 1996,
MNRAS, 283, 1388, doi: 10.1093/mnras/283.4.1388

Manara, C. F., Robberto, M., Da Rio, N., et al. 2012, ApJ,

755, 154, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/755/2/154

Gouliermis, D. A., Dolphin, A. E., Robberto, M., et al.

McKee, C. F., & Ostriker, E. C. 2007, ARA&A, 45, 565,

2011, ApJ, 738, 137, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/738/2/137
Grasha, K., Calzetti, D., Adamo, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS,

doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.45.051806.110602
Meynet, G., & Maeder, A. 2000, A&A, 361, 101.

483, 4707, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3424

https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0006404

Hack, W. J., Dencheva, N., Fruchter, A. S., et al. 2012, in
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol.
220, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts
#220, 135.15

Nayak, O., Meixner, M., Fukui, Y., et al. 2018, ApJ, 854,

154, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaab5f

Nayak, O., Meixner, M., Indebetouw, R., et al. 2016, ApJ,

831, 32, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/831/1/32

Hartmann, L., Ballesteros-Paredes, J., & Bergin, E. A.

Nota, A., Sirianni, M., Sabbi, E., et al. 2006, ApJL, 640,

2001, ApJ, 562, 852, doi: 10.1086/323863

L29, doi: 10.1086/503301

Haschke, R., Grebel, E. K., & Duﬀau, S. 2011, AJ, 141,

Oey, M. S., & Massey, P. 1995, ApJ, 452, 210,

158, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/141/5/158

doi: 10.1086/176292

Henize, K. G. 1956, ApJS, 2, 315, doi: 10.1086/190025
Hennebelle, P. 2018, A&A, 611, A24,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731071

Hony, S., Galliano, F., Madden, S. C., et al. 2010, A&A,

518, L76, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014628

Hony, S., Gouliermis, D. A., Galliano, F., et al. 2015,
MNRAS, 448, 1847, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv107

Jaskot, A. E., Strickland, D. K., Oey, M. S., Chu, Y. H., &

Garc´ıa-Segura, G. 2011, ApJ, 729, 28,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/729/1/28

Kennicutt, R. C., J., & Hodge, P. W. 1986, ApJ, 306, 130,

Oﬀner, S. S. R., Clark, P. C., Hennebelle, P., et al. 2014, in
Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen,
C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 53,
doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816531240-ch003

Oﬀner, S. S. R., Hansen, C. E., & Krumholz, M. R. 2009,
ApJL, 704, L124, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/704/2/L124
Padoan, P., Pan, L., Juvela, M., Haugbølle, T., & Nordlund,
˚A. 2020, ApJ, 900, 82, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abaa47
Panagia, N., Gilmozzi, R., Macchetto, F., Adorf, H. M., &

Kirshner, R. P. 1991, ApJL, 380, L23,
doi: 10.1086/186164

doi: 10.1086/164326

Parker, R. J., & Wright, N. J. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 3430,

Klessen, R. S., & Glover, S. C. O. 2016, Saas-Fee Advanced

doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw087

Course, 43, 85, doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-47890-5 2

Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192,

Klessen, R. S., Heitsch, F., & Mac Low, M.-M. 2000, ApJ,

3, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/3

535, 887, doi: 10.1086/308891

Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208,

Krist, J. E., Hook, R. N., & Stoehr, F. 2011, in Society of

4, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/4

Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Conference Series, Vol. 8127, Optical Modeling and
Performance Predictions V, 81270J,
doi: 10.1117/12.892762

Kroupa, P. 2002, Science, 295, 82,
doi: 10.1126/science.1067524

Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS,

220, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/220/1/15

Robberto, M., Soderblom, D. R., Bergeron, E., et al. 2013,

ApJS, 207, 10, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/207/1/10

Sabbi, E., Sirianni, M., Nota, A., et al. 2008, AJ, 135, 173,

doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/135/1/173

Krumholz, M. R., & Tan, J. C. 2007, ApJ, 654, 304,

Sabbi, E., Anderson, J., Lennon, D. J., et al. 2013, AJ, 146,

doi: 10.1086/509101

53, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/146/3/53

Ksoll, V. F., Gouliermis, D. A., Klessen, R. S., et al. 2018,

Sabbi, E., Lennon, D. J., Anderson, J., et al. 2016, ApJS,

MNRAS, 479, 2389, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1317

222, 11, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/222/1/11

MYSST I

23

Shu, F. H., Adams, F. C., & Lizano, S. 1987a, ARA&A, 25,

—. 1999b, AcA, 49, 437.

23, doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.25.090187.000323

—. 1987b, ARA&A, 25, 23,

doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.25.090187.000323

https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9912096

Vallenari, A., Chiosi, E., & Sordo, R. 2010, A&A, 511, A79,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913053

van der Marel, R. P., & Cioni, M.-R. L. 2001, AJ, 122,

Stanek, K. Z., Zaritsky, D., & Harris, J. 1998, ApJL, 500,

1807, doi: 10.1086/323099

L141, doi: 10.1086/311420

Sun, N.-C., de Grijs, R., Subramanian, S., et al. 2017, ApJ,

Walch, S., Whitworth, A. P., Bisbas, T. G., W¨unsch, R., &

Hubber, D. A. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 917,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1115

835, 171, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/2/171

Wong, T., Hughes, A., Ott, J., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 16,

Tan, J. C., Krumholz, M. R., & McKee, C. F. 2006, ApJL,

641, L121, doi: 10.1086/504150

doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/197/2/16

Zaritsky, D., Harris, J., Thompson, I. B., & Grebel, E. K.

2004, AJ, 128, 1606, doi: 10.1086/423910

Udalski, A., Soszynski, I., Szymanski, M., et al. 1999a,

Zinnecker, H., & Yorke, H. W. 2007, ARA&A, 45, 481,

AcA, 49, 223. https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9908317

doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.44.051905.092549

24

Ksoll et al.

APPENDIX

A. UMS SELECTION AND FIELD

CONTAMINATION

In Section 4.2 we select the brightest UMS sources in
the MYSST FoV to estimate their individual stellar ex-
tinction and derive a reddening map for N44. While the
massive stars in N44’s star forming centers are young,
the LMC ﬁeld stars that contaminate the FoV of the
survey are generally older evolved populations. Conse-
quently, older stars of high enough mass in their post-
main-sequence evolutionary phase can pollute the high
brightness regime of the optical CMD. Therefore, we
have to ensure that our UMS selection avoids as much
ﬁeld contamination as possible.

To do so we ﬁrst limit the candidate UMS stars to
objects bluer than 0.5 mag in mF 555W − mF 814W to
avoid the RGB and RC. As the lower brightness limit
in mF 555W we deﬁne a line parallel to the reddening
vector. As mentioned in Section 2 the MYSST survey
has also observed two LMC ﬁelds close to N44 for ref-
erence. By comparing the ﬁeld CMDs to the main one
we can determine the severity of the ﬁeld contamination
in relation to the chosen line and determine a suitable
mF 555W -axis intercept.

To quantify the contamination of a given UMS se-
lection we ﬁrst sub-sample the main CMD as its FoV
is much larger than the two ﬁelds. The latter have
approximate surface areas of 1,650 pc2 (northern) and
2,530 pc2 (southern), while the main ﬁeld covers about
33,440 pc2. Using the area ratios we randomly sub-
sample the main CMD once to match each ﬁeld individu-
ally and once the combination of both ﬁelds. For a given
UMS selection criterion we then count the selected stars
in the sub-sampled main CMD and the respective ﬁeld
to determine the relative ﬁeld contamination. The top
row in Figure A1 shows examples for the sub-sampled
main CMDs in comparison to the corresponding refer-
ence ﬁelds (bottom row). To account for randomness
we repeat the sub-sampling procedure 5,000 times and
average the results.

We determine a mF 555W -axis intercept of 18.5 mag for
our UMS selection criterion as the best compromise be-
tween selecting enough UMS sources to reasonably cover
the main FoV and avoiding ﬁeld contamination. Sub-
sampling to the area and comparing to the CMD of the
ﬁelds this selection criterion entails a 21.9 ± 2.7 % con-
tamination for the northern, 10.2 ± 1.0 % for the south-
ern and 14.8 ± 1.1 % for both combined. Important to
note here is that the 14 stars selected from the northern

ﬁeld could actually be UMS stars and not just old ﬁeld
contaminants. In the CMD of the northern ﬁeld (bot-
tom left panel, Figure A1), we actually ﬁnd a notable
population of stars in the PMS region, contrary to the
southern ﬁeld CMD (bottom center panel), where this
area is practically empty. Therefore, it is possible that
the northern reference ﬁeld might have captured a small
star forming cluster and its UMS stars.

Out of the 1,291 total sources selected by our criterion
only 24 come from the reference ﬁelds. Given their CMD
positions and the case we have made for the northern
ﬁeld we cannot easily dismiss these as non-UMS stars.
Therefore, we decide to keep them as UMS candidates in
our analysis and also derive (low resolution) extinction
maps for the reference ﬁelds.

B. UMS EXTINCTION ESTIMATE ERROR

In our extinction estimation approach, presented in
Section 4.2, we assume that our selected UMS sources
should theoretically lie on the ZAMS. As already men-
tioned this ZAMS assumption does not necessarily hold
for the rapidly evolving massive stars and their true posi-
tion might actually diﬀer from the ZAMS. Consequently,
our approach may overestimate the extinction of some
UMS stars, at worst providing only an upper extinction
limit. We make the ZAMS assumption because we can-
not easily date all UMS stars in our selection from the
MYSST data alone and want our extinction measure to
make the same systematic error everywhere. For some
UMS stars in our sample, however, ages have been es-
timated in previous studies. E.g. Oey & Massey (1995)
ﬁnd that the massive stars inside N44’s bubble are about
10 Myr old, while the ones at the western bubble rim
are younger at around 5 Myr. In this appendix we will
brieﬂy estimate the error in extinction that our approach
entails for these two populations.

To get a ﬁrst idea of the systematic error of our ex-
tinction estimation approach, we estimate how many of
our 1,291 UMS extinction probes would actually be af-
fected if they were 5 or 10 Myr old instead of falling
on the ZAMS. We do so by approximating the point on
the ZAMS in the CMD where the 5 or 10 Myr PAR-
SEC isochrone starts to signiﬁcantly move away from
the ZAMS track. We then project this point along the
reddening vector to derive a threshold line in the CMD
above which the UMS extinction measurement would
change if the 5 or 10 Myr isochrone was used instead of
the ZAMS track. For the 10 Myr isochrone we identify
this point on the ZAMS at about 16 mag in F555W (in-

MYSST I

25

Figure A1. Optical CMDs of the main FoV of the MYSST survey subsampled to match the surface area of the northern (top
left), southern (top center) and both reference ﬁelds (top right). For comparison the bottom row shows the actual CMDs of the
northern (left), southern (center) and both reference ﬁelds (right). The blue lines indicate the limits of our UMS selection in all
panels, demonstrating that we avoid most of the ﬁeld contamination.

cluding the LMC distance modulus and MW foreground
extinction) and at 14 mag for the 5 Myr one. Note that
the 5 Myr isochrone is fairly irregularly shaped, mov-
ing on and oﬀ the ZAMS, but appears to ﬁnally detach
around 14 mag. The left panel in Figure B1 shows these
threshold lines in the MYSST CMD along with the cor-
responding isochrones and the UMS stars for which the
extinction measurement would be aﬀected by using the
5 or 10 Myr isochrone instead of the ZAMS. Here we
ﬁnd 41 UMS stars that would be aﬀected if they were 5
Myrs old, and 276 in the 10 Myr case in total. Conse-
quently, even if all UMS stars in our selection were 10
Myr old only 276 out of our 1,291 probes would even
show a change in the measured extinction. As their
spatial distribution in the right panel of Figure B1 in
comparison to the UMS extinction map shows, most of
the aﬀected UMS stars are located inside N44’s bubble
and its (western) rim. Particularly interesting in this
diagram is that almost none of the aﬀected UMS stars
fall into the high-extinction ”ﬁlament” extending from

the southern bubble rim to the south-west corner of the
FoV. As mentioned in the main text, this ”ﬁlament”
has no visible nebulous counterpart (i.e. gas/dust) in
long wavelength observations of N44 (e.g. Spitzer), in-
dicating that our approach is overestimating extinction
in this region. If this is indeed the case, then Figure B1
suggests that the UMS stars inside this ”ﬁlament” must
be even older than 10 Myrs.

Lastly, to quantify the error of our approach, we mea-
sure extinction for the UMS stars in the bubble and rim
with the correct 10 and 5 Myr isochrones instead of the
ZAMS. In both cases we include all UMS stars that fall
into the bubble (solid) and western rim (dashed) out-
lines in Figure B1 and compute the median absolute
error with respect to our ZAMS measurement. Here, we
ﬁnd 0.036+0.026
−0.015 mag for the 241 UMS stars in the west-
ern rim and 0.045+0.020
−0.007 mag for the 161 stars inside the
bubble. Averaged across both populations the median
absolute extinction error is 0.043+0.019
−0.014 mag with a max-
imum of 0.27 mag. The extinction error of our approach

26

Ksoll et al.

Figure B1. Zoom-in on the bright part of the MYSST CMD (left). The solid lines signify the ZAMS (red), a 5 Myr (purple)
and a 10 Myr (orange) PARSEC isochrone, all corrected for the LMC distance modulus and MW foreground extinction. The
large colored points mark our UMS selection as in the left panel of Figure 8. The black solid and dashed lines show a projection
of the points, where the 10 and 5 Myr isochrones start to move away from the ZAMS, along the reddening vector. The green
points mark the UMS stars where the extinction measure would change if a 5 Myr isochrone is used instead of the ZAMS. If a 10
Myr isochrone is used instead of the ZAMS then the extinction measurement of the pink (+green) points is aﬀected. The blue
points are the UMS stars that are unaﬀected even in the 10 Myr case. Right: UMS extinction map of the MYSST survey (as in
Figure 10). The large color points mark the position of the three groups of UMS stars identiﬁed in the left panel. Additionally,
the solid and dashed black lines mark the position of the interior of N44’s bubble and its western edge, respectively.

is, thus, overall fairly small inside and at the rim of the
bubble. This does obviously not extend to UMS sources
in our sample that are notably older than 10 Myr but at
least conﬁrms that our approach estimates the extinc-
tion around N44’s super bubble fairly accurately and is
at worst only an upper limit everywhere else.

C. UMS EXTINCTION AND UMS BROADENING

In Appendix B we have discussed the error entailed
in our extinction estimate due to assuming the ZAMS
as the true position for the UMS stars. Beside diﬀer-
ences in stellar age there are, however, other physical
eﬀects that result in a broadening of the UMS even
in the absence of diﬀerential extinction. These include
e.g. unresolved binarity or metallicity gradients in the
observed population. To ascertain the impact of these
phenomena on our extinction estimation procedure we
create two synthetic populations that are not aﬀected
by diﬀerential reddening, such that all broadening of
the UMS is caused by other eﬀects. For both of the
populations we assume an unresolved binarity fraction
of 0.4 with a ﬂat mass ratio distribution. We account
for the LMC distance modulus ((m − M )0 = 18.55) and

include the constant shift due to MW foreground red-
dening (Amw
V = 0.22 mag). Lastly, we consider a metal-
licity spread of [Fe/H] = −0.3 to −0.2, corresponding
to a range of Z = 0.0076 to Z = 0.0096 assuming the
PARSEC solar metallicity of Z(cid:12) = 0.01524.

Our ﬁrst synthetic data set represents an approxi-
mately single age population, formed with a constant
star formation rate between 5 and 5.6 Myr. The sec-
ond one is a more extreme case, emulating a mixed age
population resulting from a constant star formation rate
between 3.2 Myr and 12.6 Gyr. The top panels in Figure
C1 show these synthetic populations in the bright part
of the CMD in comparison to the MYSST data.

We then repeat our UMS selection on these syn-
thetic, intrinsically not reddened, populations and esti-
mate ”extinction” for the selected stars to quantify the
impact of other broadening eﬀects on our estimated ex-
tinction distribution. The results are displayed in the
bottom panels of Figure C1 in comparison to the out-
come on the MYSST data.

In the roughly single age synthetic population case
−0.012 mag or
−0.012 mag when subtracting the MW foreground.

we ﬁnd a median ”extinction” of 0.269+0.032
0.046+0.032

MYSST I

27

Figure C1. Zoom-in on the bright part of the CMD for the data from the MYSST survey (top left) and two synthetic data
sets. One represents a single age population with a star formation episode between 5 and 5.6 Myr (top center), while the other
emulates a mixed population with a constant star formation rate between 3.2 Myr and 12.6 Gyr (top right). Both synthetic
populations are shifted according to the MW foreground reddening, but are intrinsically not aﬀected by any extinction. In all
three panels the blue lines indicate the limits of our UMS selection for the extinction estimation, while the red line marks the
ZAMS, corrected for the LMC distance and MW foreground reddening. Lastly the orange arrow illustrates the shift of synthetic
data and ZAMS due to the MW foreground reddening of Amw
F555W = 0.223 mag). The bottom row shows
the extinction distributions (including MW foreground) estimated by our method for the stars falling in the UMS selection of
the corresponding data set in the top row. In all bottom panels the solid red line indicates the median estimated extinction,
while the dashed red lines mark the 25% and 75% quantiles.

V = 0.22 mag (or Amw

The error in the estimate introduced by non-extinction
broadening eﬀects is, therefore, fairly negligible when
dealing with the ideal case of a single age population.
In the case of the mixed age population, created by
star formation with a constant rate over several tens
of Gyrs, the outcome diﬀers signiﬁcantly. Here we ﬁnd
a median ’extinction’ of 0.77+0.40
−0.23 mag
subtracting Amw
F555W) from the broadening of the UMS
alone without any real diﬀerential extinction. This value
is almost identical to our result on the real MYSST data
and as we can see, comparing the bottom left and right
panels of Figure C1, the derived extinction distributions
are similarly shaped too. While this result at ﬁrst glance
might call our MYSST extinction estimates into ques-
tion, it is important to emphasize here that this syn-

−0.23 mag (or 0.56+0.40

thetic mixed age population is not set up to match the
LMC/N44 but as an extreme case to represent a worst
case scenario. As previous studies (e.g. Oey & Massey
1995) indicate N44 is a region of multiple recent events
of accelerated star formation rather than the outcome
of a constant star formation process over several Gyrs.
Additionally, our comparison with the observed LMC
reference ﬁelds in Appendix A shows clearly that the
background contamination in our UMS selection is fairly
minimal. Consequently, the synthetic mixed age popu-
lation is not likely to be a realistic representation of
N44. Therefore, we conclude that the similarity of the
MYSST extinction distribution and that of the mixed
age synthetic population is a coincidence. Nevertheless,
this experiment indicates that our extinction estimation

28

Ksoll et al.

procedure may be susceptible to larger systematic errors
if applied to certain populations.

D.

29

MYSST I

o
p
f

f

d
w
r
c

d
n
r

p
r
h
s

R
N
S

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

2

2

3

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

2

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

)
g
a
m

(

3
0
.
0

7
0
.
0

3
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

3
0
.
0

8
1
.
0

2
0
.
0

7
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

2
3
0
.
0
-

8
0
0
.
0

7
0
0
.
0
-

6
0
0
.
0
-

7
0
0
.
0
-

2
1
0
.
0

0
1
0
.
0

3
1
0
.
0

9
2
0
.
0
-

2
1
0
.
0

3
3
0
.
0
-

4
2
0
.
0

2
0
0
.
0
-

1
2
0
.
0

0
3
0
.
0
-

5
1
0
.
0

9
0
0
.
0

6
2
0
.
0
-

0
3
0
.
0

1
2
0
.
0
-

2
0
0
.
0
-

7
1
0
.
0

0
1
0
.
0

2
0
0
.
0

9
0
0
.
0
-

4
1
0
.
0

8
0
0
.
0
-

0
1
0
.
0

3
1
0
.
0

7
0
0
.
0

1
2
0
.
0
-

1
0
0
.
0

8
1
0
.
0
-

5
1
0
.
0

9
0
0
.
0

3
1
0
.
0

3
1
0
.
0
-

4
1
0
.
0
-

6
0
0
.
0
-

9
7
3

1
6
4

1
3
4

0
3
4

3
3
3

9
6
2

1
8
2

6
0
2

1
7
3

9
4
1

9
3
3

2
4
2

4
5
2

1
6
6

6
4
2

6
2
2

9
4
2

1
5
2

7
5
3

4
3
2

2
χ

7
4
.
1

7
9
.
0

3
9
.
0

9
0
.
1

7
9
.
0

6
0
.
1

0
9
.
0

7
3
.
1

6
9
.
0

8
7
.
1

9
7
.
0

0
1
.
1

7
7
.
0

6
1
.
1

3
3
.
1

0
0
.
1

1
9
.
0

1
9
.
0

7
1
.
1

0
9
.
0

)
g
a
m

(

)
g
a
m

(

)
g
a
m

(

σ

m

f

d
w
r
c

d
n
r

p
r
h
s

R
N
S

3
0
0
.
0

8
4
1
.
5
1

2
0
0
.
0

2
6
7
.
4
1

3
0
0
.
0

4
6
9
.
4
1

3
0
0
.
0

9
4
7
.
4
1

3
0
0
.
0

9
5
4
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

2
5
8
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

1
9
7
.
5
1

5
0
0
.
0

2
7
8
.
5
1

3
0
0
.
0

1
3
2
.
5
1

7
0
0
.
0

4
3
8
.
5
1

3
0
0
.
0

2
6
4
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

3
0
9
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

3
1
1
.
6
1

2
0
0
.
0

7
6
0
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

8
9
0
.
6
1

5
0
0
.
0

2
1
1
.
6
1

4
0
0
.
0

4
4
1
.
6
1

4
0
0
.
0

9
1
1
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

7
2
7
.
5
1

5
0
0
.
0

3
3
2
.
6
1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

4
0
.
0

0
1
.
0

3
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

8
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

2
2
.
0

2
0
.
0

7
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

3
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

9
2
0
.
0

7
4
0
.
0
-

2
3
0
.
0

9
0
0
.
0

6
0
0
.
0

6
1
0
.
0
-

4
1
0
.
0

7
1
0
.
0
-

2
4
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

9
1
0
.
0
-

4
7
0
.
0

2
2
0
.
0
-

4
0
0
.
0

0
3
0
.
0
-

5
1
0
.
0

4
3
0
.
0

9
0
0
.
0

2
1
0
.
0

5
3
0
.
0

5
1
0
.
0
-

2
4
0
.
0

3
0
0
.
0
-

9
3
0
.
0

1
2
0
.
0
-

0
2
0
.
0

1
2
0
.
0
-

0
1
0
.
0
-

7
2
0
.
0

1
2
0
.
0

4
3
0
.
0
-

3
0
0
.
0

3
2
0
.
0
-

2
1
0
.
0

8
0
0
.
0
-

3
2
0
.
0

8
2
0
.
0
-

7
2
0
.
0

0
2
0
.
0
-

6
2
4

0
2
2

2
4
3

1
9
2

4
3
3

4
3
5

6
3
2

8
6
4

4
8
2

7
6
1

7
8
2

8
9
3

7
2
3

6
0
4

1
2
5

1
2
2

9
0
4

3
0
4

0
6
3

9
0
3

2
χ

4
5
.
1

8
3
.
1

4
8
.
0

2
0
.
1

5
1
.
1

1
9
.
0

1
5
.
1

3
0
.
1

4
9
.
0

3
4
.
2

4
7
.
0

2
2
.
1

1
4
.
1

5
2
.
1

0
2
.
1

2
7
.
1

7
1
.
1

3
1
.
1

3
0
.
1

7
3
.
1

W
4
1
8
F

W
5
5
5
F

)
g
a
m

(

)
g
a
m

(

)
g
e
d
(

)
g
e
d
(

)
l
e
x
i
p
(

)
l
e
x
i
p
(

σ

m

e
p
y
t

.

.

.

.
l
c
e
D

.

A
R

.

Y

X

D

I

3
0
0
.
0

2
6
9
.
5
1

5
0
0
.
0

4
0
8
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

8
2
6
.
6
1

4
0
0
.
0

9
8
8
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

0
0
3
.
6
1

2
0
0
.
0

5
3
7
.
5
1

5
0
0
.
0

8
6
4
.
6
1

2
0
0
.
0

7
2
9
.
5
1

4
0
0
.
0

2
8
9
.
6
1

7
0
0
.
0

0
9
0
.
6
1

4
0
0
.
0

2
8
9
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

2
3
8
.
5
1

3
0
0
.
0

9
4
0
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

8
0
2
.
7
1

2
0
0
.
0

6
4
9
.
5
1

5
0
0
.
0

4
2
2
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

7
8
9
.
5
1

3
0
0
.
0

5
6
0
.
6
1

3
0
0
.
0

0
2
1
.
7
1

4
0
0
.
0

2
5
1
.
6
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4
9
.
7
6
-

5
3
.
0
8

1
.
4
3
9
6
1

8
.
6
0
2
7
2

2
8
.
0
2
6
5
7
6
-
2
3
.
4
2
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

0
9
.
7
6
-

2
4
.
0
8

0
.
2
4
3
0
2

0
.
3
4
9
4
2

3
0
.
5
0
4
5
7
6
-
1
5
.
0
4
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

3
9
.
7
6
-

3
3
.
0
8

0
.
9
4
7
7
1

9
.
5
9
7
7
2

8
0
.
8
4
5
5
7
6
-
7
1
.
0
2
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

1
9
.
7
6
-

3
5
.
0
8

3
.
9
7
8
9
1

5
.
5
8
0
1
2

8
1
.
4
2
4
5
7
6
-
5
8
.
7
0
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

9
8
.
7
6
-

5
7
.
0
8

7
.
8
0
5
1
2

9
.
4
6
6
3
1

1
4
.
9
1
3
5
7
6
-
5
4
.
0
0
3
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

4
9
.
7
6
-

7
4
.
0
8

2
.
1
6
1
7
1

2
.
7
1
2
3
2

8
5
.
2
1
6
5
7
6
-
5
6
.
2
5
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

2
9
.
7
6
-

6
6
.
0
8

8
.
4
6
7
8
1

8
.
4
9
6
6
1

1
1
.
9
0
5
5
7
6
-
7
9
.
8
3
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

4
9
.
7
6
-

9
4
.
0
8

5
.
9
5
1
7
1

9
.
1
4
5
2
2

5
7
.
2
1
6
5
7
6
-
5
4
.
7
5
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

1
9
.
7
6
-

6
3
.
0
8

9
.
8
0
5
9
1

4
.
2
8
7
6
2

4
9
.
7
3
4
5
7
6
-
4
4
.
7
2
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

.

.

.

9
8
.
7
6
-

7
4
.
0
8

2
.
8
6
6
1
2

1
.
6
7
3
3
2

7
2
.
2
1
3
5
7
6
-
6
6
.
1
5
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

2
9
.
7
6
-

4
3
.
0
8

3
.
1
0
3
8
1

7
.
4
8
6
7
2

3
0
.
6
2
5
5
7
6
-
9
9
.
0
2
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

8
8
.
7
6
-

6
4
.
0
8

3
.
6
9
8
1
2

9
.
6
5
4
3
2

2
1
.
3
0
3
5
7
6
-
0
1
.
1
5
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

4
9
.
7
6
-

5
4
.
0
8

8
.
3
6
2
7
1

2
.
2
0
0
4
2

3
3
.
8
0
6
5
7
6
-
8
0
.
7
4
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

2
9
.
7
6
-

6
5
.
0
8

1
.
1
1
8
8
1

8
.
0
7
1
0
2

9
9
.
6
0
5
5
7
6
-
1
3
.
4
1
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

3
9
.
7
6
-

8
4
.
0
8

3
.
7
0
2
8
1

2
.
0
4
7
2
2

1
8
.
0
3
5
5
7
6
-
7
0
.
6
5
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

9
8
.
7
6
-

0
4
.
0
8

1
.
7
9
0
1
2

0
.
1
5
5
5
2

8
6
.
4
3
3
5
7
6
-
3
2
.
6
3
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

9
8
.
7
6
-

3
6
.
0
8

2
.
2
0
3
1
2

2
.
5
7
8
7
1

7
5
.
7
2
3
5
7
6
-
2
6
.
0
3
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

9
8
.
7
6
-

8
5
.
0
8

9
.
6
0
3
1
2

2
.
3
9
5
9
1

4
2
.
7
2
3
5
7
6
-
5
4
.
8
1
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

2
9
.
7
6
-

5
4
.
0
8

9
.
5
2
4
8
1

3
.
3
0
9
3
2

5
8
.
1
2
5
5
7
6
-
2
8
.
7
4
1
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

0
9
.
7
6
-

2
6
.
0
8

9
.
2
2
6
0
2

5
.
3
6
0
8
1

0
7
.
4
5
3
5
7
6
-
8
2
.
9
2
2
2
5
0
T
S
S
Y
M

g
n
i
d
w
o
r
c

,
d
n
r

s
s
e
n
d
n
u
o
r

,
p
r
h
s

s
s
e
n
p
r
a
h
s

,

R
N
S

o
i
t
a
r

e
s
i
o
n

o
t

l
a
n
g
i
s

,

2
χ

y
t
i
l
a
u
q

t
i
f

F
S
P

e
h
t

r
o
f

)
s
r
e
t
l
i
f

o
w
t

e
h
t

r
e
v
o
(

s
e
u
l
a
v

d
e
n
i
b
m
o
c

t
s
i
l

s
n
m
u
l
o
c

)
.

.

.
(

d
e
t
t
i

m
o

e
h
T
—

e
t
o
N

.
r
i
d
x
a
j
m
)
d
n
u
o
r

t
o
n

f
i
(

s
i
x
a

r
o
j
a
m

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

d
n
a

d
w
r
c

g
o
l
a
t
a
c

c
i
r
t
e
m
o
t
o
h
p
T
S
S
Y
M

.

1
D
e
l
b
a
T

