Privacy Protection of Grid Users Data with
Blockchain and Adversarial Machine Learning

Ibrahim Yilmaz∗, Kavish Kapoor†, Ambareen Siraj‡, Mahmoud Abouyoussef§
Department of Computer Science
Tennessee Technological University
Cookeville, USA
iyilmaz42∗, asiraj‡, mabouyous42§@tntech.edu
kavishkapoor97†@gmail.com

1
2
0
2

n
a
J

5
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
0
3
6
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Utilities around the world are reported to invest
few years for
a total of around $30 billion over the next
installation of more than 300 million smart meters, replacing
traditional analog meters [1]. By mid-decade, with full country
wide deployment, there will be almost 1.3 billion smart meters
in place [1]. Collection of ﬁne-grained energy usage data by
these smart meters provides numerous advantages such as energy
savings for customers with use of demand optimization, a billing
system of higher accuracy with dynamic pricing programs,
bidirectional
information exchange ability between end-users
for better consumer-operator interaction, and so on. However,
all these perks associated with ﬁne-grained energy usage data
collection threaten the privacy of users. With this technology,
customers’ personal data such as sleeping cycle, number of
occupants, and even type and number of appliances stream
into the hands of the utility companies and can be subject
to misuse. This research paper addresses privacy violation of
consumers’ energy usage data collected from smart meters and
provides a novel solution for the privacy protection while allowing
beneﬁts of energy data analytics. First, we demonstrate the
successful application of occupancy detection attacks using a
deep neural network method that yields high accuracy results.
We then introduce Adversarial Machine Learning Occupancy
Detection Avoidance with Blockchain (AMLODA-B) framework
as a counter-attack by deploying an algorithm based on the
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) model into the standardized
smart metering infrastructure to prevent leakage of consumer’s
personal information. Our privacy-aware approach protects con-
sumers’ privacy without compromising the correctness of billing
and preserves operational efﬁciency without use of authoritative
intermediaries.

Index Terms—Privacy preserving, neural networks,long short
smart meter,

term memory, adversarial machine learning,
blockchain

I. INTRODUCTION

There are more smart meters being deployed around the
world today than conventional electromechanical/analog ones.
For instance, according to [2], 107 million smart meters
were planned to be installed in the USA by the end of
2020. With traditional analog meters, utility workers manually
report consumers’ energy consumption usage on monthly
basis. However, digital smart electric meters enable automatic
measurement of energy usage and reporting in a timely and
controlled fashion. Such high frequency and time-based con-
sumption data offer a variety of beneﬁts. For example, it helps
customers to consume less energy when demand on the smart

power grid is very high. Also, this technology allows the grid
users to generate their own power, and even sell unused energy
back to the providers. Furthermore, on the utility side, it tracks
the power ﬂows continuously to prevent blackouts, reducing
waste of energy, and so on.

However, all

these perks associated with the collection
of ﬁne-grained energy usage data threaten the privacy of
users. Highly granular smart meter data inevitably pour private
information of inhabitants into the hands of the utility com-
panies. This conﬁdential information can be sold by energy
companies to interested third parties or government agencies
for subsidiary revenue or it can be stolen by adversaries
through unauthorized access or security breaches. Such per-
sonal information extracted from users’ energy consumption
data can disclose details of customers’ daily life and later can
be used for malicious purposes. For example, it can be used
to infer when a homeowner is at home. Therefore, a burglar
can break into a vacation home when the owner is absent.
Even the presence of a home security alarm system or other
appliances can be identiﬁed by analyzing the power signature.
The same can be used by burglars to pre-identify and plan the
home invasion.

The primary goal of this research is to propose a mechanism
to minimize the trade-off between privacy protection and data-
utility. We introduce Adversarial Machine Learning Occu-
pancy Detection Avoidance with Blockchain (AMLODA-B)
framework as a counter-attack against adversarial occupancy
detection by deploying an algorithm based on the Long Short
Term Memory (LSTM) model into the standardized smart me-
tering infrastructure to prevent leakage of consumer’s personal
information. Our privacy-aware approach ensures consumer
privacy without compromising the correctness of billing along
with operational efﬁciency and no requirement of authoritative
intermediaries.

Initially, the proposed AMLODA model uses historical data
to capture subtle and functional patterns of occupancy through
a training process and create a customized pre-trained model.
Then, during testing, the proposed algorithm automatically
generate noisy samples that can conceal time-of-use infor-
mation of consumers. In our earlier work [3], we offered
that the pre-trained models can be developed with help of
a trusted third party in the initialization phase. For this, a

 
 
 
 
 
 
group of consumers with diverse energy load proﬁles can
be recruited by a trusted third party through an incentivized
volunteer program, who would provide access to their energy
usage proﬁles used to pre-train the models. However, there
are two potential challenges with this approach: 1) users may
not want to volunteer to share their consumption informa-
tion due to privacy reasons; 2) the third party’s presence in
the initialization phase poses additional privacy and security
challenges. In addressing these issues, we present the new
AMLODA-B framework with aid of blockchain technology,
which allows us to gather the information of all grid users
in a privacy-preserving manner while eliminating the need
of the trusted third party. The proposed scheme helps utility
companies to create the pre-trained models for users without
releasing their personal information. Furthermore, we evaluate
the AMLODA-B model’s performance under a black-box
setting by implementing and exercising both an attack and
a defense scenario as part of this study.

Our work has the following contributions:
• We demonstrate the viability of occupancy detection
attack using a machine learning technique based on the
neural network model.

• We use blockchain technology to securely collect users’
consumption data to develop pre-trained energy proﬁle
models that are used by the AMLODA-B framework. The
user governs their energy usage data for the purpose of
fulﬁlling their privacy needs with this proposed scheme.
• To demonstrate AMLODA-B model’s effectiveness, we
evaluate the model’s performance under a black-box sce-
nario without knowledge of the occupancy attack models’
inner workings.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The literature
review is discussed in Section II. The preliminaries relevant
to our study is reviewed in Section III. We address the system
models and design goals in Section IV. Section V describes
the implementation of our model along with blockchain. We
evaluate the model’s performance in Section VI. In conclusion,
we ﬁnalize the paper in section VII.

II. RELATED WORK

Researchers have been working on privacy preserving so-
lutions for smart meter users over the past few years. One
proposed solution is aggregation of users’ metering data via
a trusted third party (TTP) [4], [5]. In this approach, the
TTP, who provides trusted billing service for customers as
aggregator, also protects their conﬁdential information from
utility companies as a trade secret. However, such solutions
work under the assumption that
the TTP is fully trusted
by all users and behaves accordingly. This makes the pro-
posed models impractical as trust cannot always be guaran-
teed. To overcome the above-mentioned limitation of privacy-
preserving data aggregation models, M´armol, Sorge, Petrlic,
Ugus, Westhoff, and P´erez [6] proposed a privacy-enhanced
architecture to keep personal information of users secret from
both the utility provider and the TTP itself. This scheme allows
each individual smart meter to encrypt its electricity usage

with its own key and a group key using a ring-based topology.
Once the TTP acquires the aggregated measured data in an
encrypted form, it can decrypt the total electricity consumption
of the consumers. However, this scheme is not efﬁcient for
latency-critical smart grid services because of using homomor-
phic encryption. Furthermore, this approach does not support
non-repudiation because of using asymmetric encryption with
shared secret. In addition to this, reconﬁguration is needed
every time a node/smart meter joins or leaves the network.

Another alternative solution is anonymizing smart meters
from any untrusted entities including the utility provider [7],
[8]. However, such solution is still not sufﬁcient to protect
users’ private information because anonymized data still dis-
closes important auxiliary information about a household such
as the number of occupants, number of school-age children in
a home. Such information can possibly aid to infer a user’s
identity.

Another proposed method offers to use additional hardware
that is referred to as battery-based load hiding to mask users’
sensitive information [9], [10]. Direct manipulation of the
real energy consumption can be achieved by charging or
discharging this external battery and provide privacy protec-
tion for customer. However, battery longevity and cost make
this privacy-preserving solution questionable for adaptation.
Additionally, the success of this solution is largely storage
capacity-dependent and it does not support dynamic pricing.

III. PRELIMINARIES

In this section, the preliminaries related to our research is

presented.

A. Blockchain Technology:

Blockchain is a decentralized and distributed record for
digital assets [11]. The basic building block in a blockchain is
known as a “block”. A “genesis” block acts as a starting point
for the blockchain to which other blocks are added. Blocks in
a blockchain cannot be modiﬁed once added. Chains are built
as records for the data to be stored are added in the digital
ledger. Each block is linked to the chain using cryptography
by containing a cryptographic hash of the previous block, a
timestamp, and transaction data. The hash for each block is
determined using a hash function. A hash function is a function
that takes input data of any size and produces hash of a ﬁxed
size, which is a unique representation of data that can be used
to identify the input. Some commonly used hash functions
are Secure Hashing Algorithm (SHA-2 and SHA-3), RACE
Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest (RIPEMD),
Message Digest Algorithm 5 (MD5), BLAKE2, etc [12].

A blockchain can be used to validate new input blocks and
avoid overwriting of old blocks using some proposed schemes
such as proof of work or proof of stake [13]. Proof of work
is a form of cryptographic zero-knowledge proof wherein a
block is added by a certain individual or party only when
it is proved that a certain amount of computational effort has
been expended for some purpose. Our proposed system makes
use of the proof of work algorithm to validate and add new

blocks. One common example of the proof of work algorithm
is the Hashcash algorithm, which is most commonly used
in bitcoin and some other cryptocurrencies. The process of
placing unconﬁrmed transactions in a block and computing
proof of work is known as block mining. Only after this
validating step using proof of work is executed, a block is
successfully added to the blockchain.

B. Machine Learning models

• Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Model: The
LSTM, a specialized Recurrent Neural Network (RNN),
can work with single data points as well as sequences
of data. LSTM model consists of three gates named
input, output, and forget gates [14]. These three cells
regulate the ﬂow of information through the LSTM unit
and determine which part of the information is important
to be kept or to be discarded.

• Deep Neural Network (DNN): DNN consist of multiple
layers called input, hidden and output layers. Each layer
is made of nodes that are connected to each other [15].
The model learns the most important features in high
dimensional data during backward and forward propaga-
tion using a gradient descent algorithm [16]. Activation
functions are applied after each of the following layers
to make the model capture the nonlinear relationship
between input and output in solving difﬁcult tasks [17].

IV. SYSTEM MODELS AND DESIGN GOALS

In this section, we describe system entities along with the
attack and defense models we used to demonstrate the use and
applicability of our approach. The features of the AMOLDA-B
framework are also articulated.

A. System Entities

• Grid Users (GUs): GUs have smart meters installed in
their households and have agreed to use the AMLODA-B
framework for their smart meter data communication. To
setup the process, GUs initially share their energy usage
data with the utility company using the blockchain tech-
nology associated with AMLODA-B prior to the actual
privacy preserving usage data communication activation.
Important to note that even at this setup stage, the utility
company does not have the ability to associate the smart
metering data with the generating smart meter/customer
apart from collecting them for pre-trained model devel-
opment and thus, maintaining the GUs’ privacy. Once
the customized pre-trained model is developed and the
system is ready to be turned on, a user selects the
desired privacy level from different options provided by
the AMLODA-B framework. To educate GU on such
selection of privacy levels, the system can provide some
helpful information on its implication to users’ privacy
vs energy efﬁciency.

• Utility Company (UC): Using blockchain technology,
the UC collects energy usage data from the smart meters
belonging to volunteer GUs to create the pre-trained

the UC sends the model

model ofﬂine needed for training of the AMOLDA-B
model. Once the pre-trained models are developed for
information back
each GU,
to the smart meters through the blockchain. Since the
blockchain ensures tamper-proof data communication, if
a malicious GU tamper with the measured consumption
readings, it will easily be detected.

• Key Distribution Center (KDC): KDC is the Trusted
Third Party, who is responsible for generating pub-
lic/private key pairs for each GU and UC. KDC has no
access to the blockchain itself in our proposed scheme.

B. Attack Model

• Attacker’s Knowledge: In this attack scenario, we as-
sume that the attacker is able to access the GUs’ actual
smart meter energy consumption data. This can happen
in the real-world scenario when either the UC itself is
the adversary or it colludes with an external adversary
by sharing of GUs’ sensitive information for subsidiary
revenue.

• Attacker’s Goal: Even if the UC behaves more like an
honest-but-curious adversary, meaning that it abides by
the protocol rules and does not provide false information,
it does attempt to learn possible private information of the
grid users in an unauthorized way. In real world scenario,
this private information has lot of market value with
advertising and marketing agencies. For the remaining
of this section, we will refer to the UC as the adversary.

C. Defense model

• Defender’s Knowledge: The defender, who has best
interest of the GU, has full access to GU’s energy con-
sumption data like the attacker. However, the defender has
zero knowledge about the adversary’s pre-trained model.
For example, which algorithm or which parameters are
used in the model are not known by the defender.

• Defender’s Goal: The defender’s aim is to create a black-
box model (AMLODA-B model) to rearranges the GUs’
electricity consumption data by means of noise injection.
The model takes the actual consumption of the GUs and
generates scramble data that the adversary receives. The
adversary is unable to learn any usable information from
new ﬂow patterns.
Note: The defender makes use of the transferability
property of adversarial samples. This means that samples
crafted to mislead the defender’s model are more likely
to mislead the attacker’s model as well because when the
defender’s and attacker’s models are trained with data
that comes from the same distribution, both models learn
similar decision boundaries.

D. AMLODA-B Features:

The proposed AMLODA-B framework fulﬁlls the following

functional and privacy requirements.

1) Functional Requirements:

• Correctness of billing: The proposed method provides
evidence of correctness of the billing invoice along with
compatibility with dynamic pricing. Smart meter reading
data is symmetrically raised and lowered by calculated
noise for every two-second period such that the correct-
ness of total energy consumption of the GU remains pre-
served by end the two-second intervals. Since negligible
changes performed in short time periods, the calculated
optimum noise does not compromise the correctness of
billing and dynamic pricing.

• Preserving demand management functionality: The
demand management program in the advanced metering
infrastructure of the smart grid provides an opportunity
for the GUs to contribute in the operation of the elec-
tric grid by reducing or shifting their electricity usage
during peak periods by closely observing their energy
consumption patterns. Thus, any signiﬁcant changes in
energy usage patterns can hinder this functionality and
cause detrimental
impact on the smart grid demand
management system. However, this study shows that the
proposed framework can provide an adequate level of
privacy with negligible changes on smart meter readings
and thus preserving this crucial functionality of modern
meters.

2) Privacy Requirements:
• Preserving privacy of GUs energy usage data:
AMLODA-B supports privacy-preserving mechanism to
prevent disclosure of GUs private energy consumption
information by integrating a machine learning model with
blockchain technology. Initially, blockchain technology
is used to collect energy usage data by the UC. Then,
pre-trained model of customer energy consumption is
developed using machine learning technique with LSTM.
Finally, the proposed perturbation algorithm runs on the
pre-trained model to reproduce energy consumption data
in a way that ensures integrity of billing but at the same
time, does not give away real consumption data revealing
consumer’s energy proﬁle. In this way, actual information
is kept locally on the user side and no entity, either
internal or external including the UC, is able to see access
consumption readings of the GUs at any reporting period.
It is worthwhile to point out that both blockchain and
machine learning techniques require a long time to
complete execution. However, in our approach, the pre-
trained model is developed ofﬂine before used with the
perturbation algorithm in real-time, which leads to lower
computational complexity. This causes no or negligible
transmission delay in time-critical trafﬁc.

V. MODEL IMPLEMENTATION

A. Dataset

Electricity Consumption and Occupancy (ECO) dataset has
been provided by ETH Zurich for the community in an attempt
to motivate researchers to contribute in the ﬁeld of smart
meter consumers’ privacy protection [18]. The experimental

dataset includes power consumption readings every seconds
in addition to ground-truth occupancy information. Data was
collected during the period between June 2012 to January 2013
by monitoring 5 different residences in Switzerland.

B. Occupancy Detection Attack Implementation

To demonstrate viability of occupancy detection attacks,
we design one such attack based on a DNN in Python
programming language using the Keras library. The reasons
for selecting a DNN model for this task are that a DNN
model usually performs well with a large dataset and we
want to demonstrate the transferability property of the crafted
samples by the AMLODA-B model over different types of
machine learning models. This enables better understanding
of the effectiveness of the AMLODA-B framework under a
realistic scenario.

The experimental dataset is divided into two parts as training
and test where 80% of the dataset is used to train the model
and the remaining is used for evaluation of the model’s
performance. The DNN model consists of four hidden layers
along with the input and output layers. Table I demonstrates
the detailed structure of the occupancy attack model including
number of layers, number of neurons, and activation functions.

TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE OCCUPANCY ATTACK MODEL.

The ﬁne-tuned parameters are discovered by using a learn-
ing rate of 0.001, epoch number of 30000, adam optimization
algorithm [19] along with binary cross entropy loss function
[20].

C. AMLODA-B Model

We implement the AMLODA-B model based on the LSTM
with Python programming language using Pytorch library.
Learning usable information for occupancy detection requires
ability to learn long-term dependencies. In such circumstances,
the LSTM model is a good choice to capture complex time-
series dynamics by avoiding gradient vanishing problem [21].
Initially, the model learns the characteristic behavior of users’
consumption through their historical data. Then, small indis-
cernible perturbations are generated in an adversarial way, a
technique inspired by [22]. These perturbations are added to
the actual meter reading in selected time intervals to mask real

TABLE II
MCC VS. PENETRATION COEFFICIENT FOR FIVE HOUSES DURING SUMMER AND WINTER PERIODS.

electricity consumption patterns for avoiding occupancy detec-
tion. While adding a large amount of noise increases the user’s
privacy to a large extent, such modiﬁcation causes substantial
changes in load patterns which might have a negative impact
on the demand management system. Therefore, the proposed
AMLODA-B model allows users to select appropriate noise
levels (including no noise) that best meets their need of
privacy-preservation and energy efﬁciency. The mathematical
foundation of the proposed scheme along with the model’s
parameters were discussed in detail in [3].

D. Blockchain details

The blockchain plays a pivotal role in masking the grid
user’s identity for pre-train model development and afterwards,
supplying the utility company with the perturbed data from
household smart readings. The blockchain is simulated and
implemented using python 3.7 running on a standard desktop
machine with an Intel Core i7-7700HQ Central Processing
Unit (CPU) operating at 2.80GHz and 16GB of Random
Access Memory (RAM). Each new block that is added to the
blockchain has the following structure:

{’index’: index for the current block in the blockchain,
’transactions’:
list of the energy readings data and occu-
pancy data from one house, ’timestamp’: timestamp for the
current block, ’previous hash’: hash of the previous block,
’nonce’:nonce value, ’hash’:hash value}.

The index represents the index assigned to the current block
in the blockchain. The key ’transactions’, is a list of all the
energy readings from various connection plugs in a house-
hold. The transactions list also contains the information for
household occupancy for each second over a day partitioned
into 2 sessions for ’summer’ and ’winter’. The timestamp key
refers to the time since the epoch of the creation of the block
that is to be added to the blockchain. The ’previous hash’
key refers to the hash of the previous block and is used as a
pointer to the previous block in the blockchain. The next key
is ’nonce’ , which is a number that we can change until we get
a hash that satisﬁes constraints thus serves as proof that some
computation has been performed. It is used in the hashcash
algorithm [23] that is implemented in the blockchain as a proof
of work algorithm. Lastly, the ’hash’ key represents the hash

of the current block that has to be added to the blockchain.
SHA-256 is used as the hashing function in the blockchain’s
implementation.

VI. EVALUATION AND RESULTS

A. Blockchain Performance

The blockchain was used to simulate the collection of
real-time energy usage data from 5 households. Individual
blocks comprised of the energy usage data from one house
on average, took 102.8239 seconds to get validated and added
to the blockchain. The total time taken for the addition of all
the energy usage data from 5 houses took 514.1262 seconds.
The whole blockchain computation used a space of 2.45 GB.

B. AMLODA-B Counter Attack Model Performance

To evaluate the AMLODA-B model’s performance against
a realistic occupancy detection attack based on a deep neu-
ral network, we ﬁrst monitored the neural network model’s
performance with various data perturbations (epsilon values)
using Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient (MCC). MCC ensures
reliable assessment when a dataset is highly imbalanced such
as in this case [24], [25], [26]. MCC indicates model’s
performance in a range of -1 to 1 [27], where -1 signiﬁes
completely incorrect prediction, 0 denotes random guessing
and 1 indicates perfect prediction. MCC value converging to
0 is best for hiding consumers’ sensitive information since in
such instance, inference is no better than random guessing.

Initially the epsilon value was set to zero to show original
data without any manipulation. Then, the calculated noise,
obtained by the AMLODA-B model using different small
epsilon values, was added to data to observe how the perturbed
data samples impact the performance of the attack model for
the ﬁve houses over summer and winter periods. As seen
in Table II, the attack model shows high detection rate for
occupancy with high MCC values without use of the proposed
scheme. With the proposed AMLODA-B model in place, the
epsilon value is scaled up until the MCC value of the attack
model converges to zero. Since perturbed data is no longer
representative of the distribution of the users’ consumption
readings, therefore, the model now mispredicts them. The table
also shows that the AMLODA-B model obscures consumers’

privacy in most cases with epsilon value set to 10−4, which
makes an insigniﬁcant change over actual load pattern [3]
without causing any inefﬁciency in smart grid operations. It
should be noted that this value is not able to sufﬁciently
protect sensitive personal information of grid users for Home-
3 in the winter season. If the value of epsilon is increased
higher, the MCC score converges to zero signifying that the
DNN-based occupancy detection attack becomes equivalent to
random guess. It is worth noting that Home-3 information for
the summer season is not made available to the public and
hence could not be used in the experiment.

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we highlight privacy leakage problem of
smart meter users by implementing an occupancy detection
attack based on a DNN model. Our attack model’s perfor-
mance achieves high accuracy in detecting occupancy. To
preserve privacy and counter occupancy detection, we pre-
sented the AMLODA-B framework using machine learning
and blockchain technology. This novel scheme collects high-
frequency metering data securely through a blockchain algo-
rithm that allows to develop pre-train model without giving
away identity of consumers to utility companies. Then, during
actual energy usage, it hides consumers private information
in real-time through crafted noise computed from observation
in the pre-trained model with the aid of LSTM. While the
AMLODA-B model offers data privacy service, it does not
hinder the utility companies to use smart metering data for
computation of consumer’s bills, demand response manage-
ment, and so on. Since the proposed scheme does not require
any intermediary or any additional hardware components in
addition to computationally intensive software, it makes the
adoption of this privacy-friendly model logistically realistic
and economically feasible.

As a future direction, we are further analyzing the load
proﬁle smart metering data to ﬁnd the best perturbation amount
to meet optimal productivity between privacy protection and
energy efﬁciency. Furthermore, we will evaluate the efﬁciency
of the proposed scheme by extending its functionality to other
beneﬁts of the smart grid such as energy forecasting and
electricity theft detection.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is funded by CESR (Center for Energy Systems
Research) at Tennessee Technological University with resource
support from the Cybersecurity Education Research and Out-
reach Center (CEROC).

REFERENCES

[3] I. Yilmaz and A. Siraj, “Avoiding occupancy detection from smart meter
using adversarial machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12640,
2020.

[4] Z. Erkin, J. R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, R. L. Lagendijk, and F. P´erez-
Gonz´alez, “Privacy-preserving data aggregation in smart metering sys-
tems: An overview,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 75–86, 2013.

[5] V. Ford, A. Siraj, and M. A. Rahman, “Secure and efﬁcient protection
of consumer privacy in advanced metering infrastructure supporting
ﬁne-grained data analysis,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 84–100, 2017.

[6] F. G. M´armol, C. Sorge, R. Petrlic, O. Ugus, D. Westhoff, and G. M.
P´erez, “Privacy-enhanced architecture for smart metering,” International
journal of information security, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 67–82, 2013.

[7] F. Diao, F. Zhang, and X. Cheng, “A privacy-preserving smart metering
scheme using linkable anonymous credential,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 461–467, 2014.

[8] C.-K. Chu, J. K. Liu, J. W. Wong, Y. Zhao, and J. Zhou, “Privacy-
preserving smart metering with regional statistics and personal enquiry
services,” in Proceedings of
the 8th ACM SIGSAC symposium on
Information, computer and communications security. ACM, 2013, pp.
369–380.

[9] O. Tan, D. Gunduz, and H. V. Poor, “Increasing smart meter privacy
through energy harvesting and storage devices,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1331–1341, 2013.
[10] Y. H. Liu, S.-H. Lee, and A. Khisti, “Information-theoretic privacy in
smart metering systems using cascaded rechargeable batteries,” IEEE
Signal Processing Letters, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 314–318, 2017.

[11] D. Drescher, Blockchain basics. Springer, 2017, vol. 276.
[12] R. Sobti and G. Geetha, “Cryptographic hash functions: a review,”
International Journal of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI), vol. 9, no. 2,
p. 461, 2012.

[13] I. Bentov, C. Lee, A. Mizrahi, and M. Rosenfeld, “Proof of activity:
Extending bitcoin’s proof of work via proof of stake [extended abstract]
y,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 42, no. 3,
pp. 34–37, 2014.

[14] J. Woodbridge, H. S. Anderson, A. Ahuja, and D. Grant, “Predicting
domain generation algorithms with long short-term memory networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00791, 2016.

[15] I. Yilmaz and R. Masum, “Expansion of cyber attack data from
unbalanced datasets using generative techniques,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.04549, 2019.

[16] J. A. Anderson, An introduction to neural networks. MIT press, 1995.
[17] I. Yilmaz, “Practical fast gradient sign attack against mammographic

image classiﬁer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09610, 2020.

[18] E. Zurich.
occupancy).
html?what=eco-data

(2014) Eco
and
[Online]. Available: https://www.vs.inf.ethz.ch/res/show.

consumption

(electricity

dataset

[19] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

[20] K. P. Murphy, Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT

press, 2012.

[21] S. Hochreiter, “The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent
neural nets and problem solutions,” International Journal of Uncertainty,
Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 6, no. 02, pp. 107–116,
1998.

[22] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing

adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.

[23] A. Back, “Hashcash-a denial of service counter-measure,” 2002.
[24] I. Yilmaz, R. Masum, and A. Siraj, “Addressing imbalanced data
problem with generative adversarial network for intrusion detection,”
in 2020 IEEE 21st International Conference on Information Reuse and
Integration for Data Science (IRI).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 25–30.

[25] D. Chicco and G. Jurman, “The advantages of the matthews correlation
coefﬁcient (mcc) over f1 score and accuracy in binary classiﬁcation
evaluation,” BMC genomics, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 6, 2020.

[1] G.

(2020,

T. Media.
gusher

$30b
of
[Online]. Available:
wood-mackenzie-world-will-invest-in-smart-meters-through-2025

for
years.
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/

Jan.)
investment

meters
next

Smart
over

set

5

[2] T. World.

(2020,

Jan.) Smart meter deployment projected to
reach 107 million as of year-end 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.tdworld.com/grid-innovations/smart-grid/article/21120206/
smart-meter-deployment-projected-to-reach-107-million-as-of-yearend-2020

[26] I. Yilmaz, A. Siraj, and D. Ulybyshev, “Improving dga-based malicious
domain classiﬁers for malware defense with adversarial machine learn-
ing,” in 2020 IEEE 4th Conference on Information & Communication
Technology (CICT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[27] K. A. Kantardjieff and B. Rupp, “Matthews coefﬁcient probabilities:
improved estimates for unit cell contents of proteins, dna, and protein–
nucleic acid complex crystals,” Protein Science, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 1865–
1871, 2003.

