Challenges and Governance Solutions for Data
Science Services based on Open Data and APIs

Juha-Pekka Joutsenlahti and Timo Lehtonen
Solita Ltd, Finland
ﬁrst.last@solita.ﬁ

Mikko Raatikainen, Elina Kettunen and Tommi Mikkonen
University of Helsinki, Finland
ﬁrst.last@helsinki.ﬁ

1
2
0
2

r
a

M
2
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
9
2
7
0
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Increasingly common open data and open applica-
tion programming interfaces (APIs) together with the progress
of data science – such as artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and especially
machine learning (ML) – create opportunities to build novel
services by combining data from different sources. In this
experience report, we describe our ﬁrsthand experiences on open
data and in the domain of marine trafﬁc in Finland and Sweden
and identiﬁed technological opportunities for novel services. We
enumerate ﬁve challenges that we have encountered with the
application of open data: relevant data, historical data, licensing,
runtime quality, and API evolution. These challenges affect
both business model and technical implementation. We discuss
how these challenges could be alleviated by better governance
practices for provided open APIs and data.

Index Terms—Open data, application programming interface,

API, artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, governance.

I. INTRODUCTION

Especially governmental organizations and agencies provide
different types of open data sources in several countries today.
While not new, open data has not always been available via
convenient Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) as the
data can also be provided only as documents [1]. However,
for example in Finland, this will be resolved because the
recent Finnish legislation demands governmental organizations
to provide APIs for their public data adhering to the European
Union directive [2]. The same legislation, thus, increases the
amount of available open data and open APIs as different data
will be opened. Additionally, this enables more near real-time
data when data will become available automatically through
the APIs.

As the quantity of data and data sources grow massively, a
need and opportunity emerge for data science services that can
process huge amounts of data. Data can be seen as a service
proposal per se, but with open data, the commercial product
is rather the intelligence built on top of the data to solve the
speciﬁc contextual problems of the customers. More and more
often, this takes place in the form of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning (ML) systems.

However, provided APIs essentially deﬁne and control what
operations can be performed on open data, by whom, and
under what conditions. For open data usage, there are chal-
lenges, such as legal or privacy issues and possible changes
in governmental policies [3]. Challenges are also associated
with the creation and evolution of data science services, such

as ensuring adequate efﬁciency in processing large data sets
(data-intensive ﬂows management) [4].

This experience report discusses the following problem:
How to build data science services on top of a set of open
data providers by combining open data sources and carrying
out advanced analyses, such as machine learning so that
the results are valuable for end-customers? Our ﬁrsthand
experiences originate from the development of open data and
APIs for marine trafﬁc. This open data in association with
other open data sources introduce new sustainable data science
service opportunities for end-customers based on various AI
technologies. Towards this end, we enumerate the challenges
we have identiﬁed related to these opportunities and propose
how API governance could alleviate the challenges.

II. CASE: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE FOR THE
FINNISH–SWEDISH WINTER NAVIGATION SYSTEM

A. Background: Marine trafﬁc

We base our ﬁrsthand experiences on marine trafﬁc data in
Finland and Sweden, especially during wintertime when the
Finnish–Swedish Winter Navigation System (FSWNS) [5] is
active. FSWNS maintains safe and efﬁcient year-round navi-
gation with agreements and information systems. The Finnish
public authority (Fintrafﬁc) provides near real-time monitoring
of trafﬁc through public APIs1. This case was selected because
Solita Ltd2, a consultancy company with over 1000 employees,
developed the DigiTrafﬁc API for Fintrafﬁc and two authors of
this paper work full time at Solita. Therefore, we are familiar
with the technologies, application domain, possible business
opportunities, and challenges.

Marine trafﬁc is quintessential for Finland: some 80-90% of
exported and imported goods are carried by sea [6]. In winter
navigation, the changing ice conditions [7] cause relatively
frequently accidents [8] which may trigger, for instance, oil
spills and delays [9]. The ecosystem related to marine trafﬁc is
large as the total number of companies working in the Finnish
maritime cluster3 is almost 3000 [6].

The marine environment of FSWNS is very special and
challenging as it consists of shallow and narrow sea lanes,
dense and rocky archipelago, and icy conditions as especially

1https://www.digitrafﬁc.ﬁ/en/
2http://www.solita.ﬁ
3https://shipowners.ﬁ/en/maritime-cluster/

 
 
 
 
 
 
the Bay of Bothnia freezes during the wintertime [10]. These
conditions do not only require piloting but also ice breaking in
winter when ships may even be guided in a convoy or towed
behind an ice breaker. The icebreakers assist vessels free of
charge to enable ﬂuent foreign trade. However, unexpected
delays of even tens of hours are typical4 due to changing
ice conditions which then affect the inter-modal logistic chain
[6]. Nowadays, the icebreaker captains try to interpret an ice
forecast5, a wind forecast6 and satellite images to predict
which vessels might get stuck into the ice and need assistance.

B. Opportunities

Novel data science service utilizing AI technologies could
provide help for the decision making process for the icebreaker
captains, but also several other parties in the ecosystem
would gain beneﬁts from better information: ports, shipping
companies, cargo forwarding companies, and transport compa-
nies [6] – and their customers. Business-critical opportunities
include how to predict and control the estimated time of
arrival (ETA) or departure more accurately based on ice and
weather conditions. Also,
these opportunities may include
identifying potential future trafﬁc bottlenecks – waiting does
not only mean staying on hold and wasting time at the sea
but also that the speed of the vessel could have been lower
leading to savings if the waiting was anticipated. Respectively,
sudden stop, acceleration, or un-optimized route of a large
vessel is equally costly. All these accumulate CO2 emissions.
Many manufacturing and assembly companies also depend
on predictive just-in-time import and export in their business
processes [6]. The logistics are not limited to marine but
include storage, road, and rail. Finally, there is an opportunity
to enhance safety, such as predict and prevent a collision
in a convoy [11]. Future opportunities lie in technological
advancements. Automation is increasingly important in the
ports and heavily automated ports already exist outside Finland
(e.g., Hamburg and Rotterdam). Also, the ships rely more and
more on automation and autonomous cargo ships are being
developed and tested.

The public authorities have already made several open
data APIs available that are published following the afore-
mentioned legislation. For example, the following APIs are
relevant and available: 1) Digitrafﬁc (Ministry of Trans-
port and Communications) trafﬁc APIs including marine7
and rail8; 2) Finpilot piloting status (government-owned
piloting company)9; 3) Finnish Meteorological
Institute
weather10; 4) many others gathered to the Open data web-
page11

The increasingly popular open data facilitates novel business
opportunities to create data science services for end-customer.

4https://vayla.ﬁ/en/transport-network/waterways/winter-navigation
5http://baltice.org/weather/
6https://www.windy.com
7https://www.digitrafﬁc.ﬁ/en/marine-trafﬁc/
8https://www.digitrafﬁc.ﬁ/en/railway-trafﬁc/
9https://pilotonline.ﬁ/trafﬁc-info/api
10https://en.ilmatieteenlaitos.ﬁ/open-data-manual
11https://www.avoindata.ﬁ/en

That is, AI and especially ML can provide different stakehold-
ers with advanced analytics and predictions based on the open
data of these open APIs. Business-critical challenges include
how to ﬁnd a paying customer for open data and build a
sustainable software ecosystem: The raw data cannot be the
product as basically anyone can access it, so the value for a
customer must come from, for example, user experience and
good analytics in the right place and time. However, rather than
focusing only on the challenges in algorithms and technical
solutions, business models, or ecosystems, there are also more
general software engineering challenges.

III. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING CHALLENGES

In this section, we elaborate software engineering related
challenges that we have encountered whilst considering dif-
ferent data science service opportunities based on intelligence
built on top of open data and APIs for the maritime cluster.

1) Relevant data: REST APIs are today the dominant
design in data APIs. It is customary that full data is provided
through a REST API with no ability to customize what data
is returned. This often leads to fetching a large amount of
unnecessary data. For example, Maritime trafﬁc API contains
very large JSON messages but sometimes only one piece
of data, such as the ETA of a vessel’s portcall, is actually
needed. That is, the data providers have just opened all data
without much considering how data would be best usable.
When multiple APIs are utilized and each provides much
unnecessary data, this makes the development and running of
the system inconvenient and unreliable. There are already be
technologies that could potentially alleviate this. For example,
GraphQL APIs can drastically reduce the sizes of transferred
JSON ﬁles [12].

2) Historical data: Historical data, i.e. the data produced
and collected over the years, is rarely made available. For
example, the Maritime API shows only the current trafﬁc al-
though all data over years has been stored. The data providers
might not have considered that someone could ﬁnd value in the
historical data on marine trafﬁc. Alternatively, the historical
data can be generalized and provided in a more-coarse grained
manner in order not to cause too much load for API, such as
only for limited time intervals or limited locations as appears
to be for some weather data. However, historical data is
required for learning in ML systems. Although a data user can
start to store data in order to form a training dataset, storing is
slow and inconvenient, and brings forward other challenges,
such as licensing below.

3) Licensing: When multiple data sources are involved,
different rights become an issue. Unfortunately, often open
data and API licenses are even more difﬁcult to manage than
those of open source software. For example, common software
licenses, such as GPL, BSD or MIT, or content licenses, such
as Creative Commons (CC), are not necessarily used for data.
Rather, open data providers create their own licenses or do not
explicitly mark any license. The licenses can be even hard to
ﬁnd in the API speciﬁcations, such as for the pilot data above.
Moreover, when data is collected from different sources, it may

be difﬁcult to assess how different licenses are compatible and
how the new combined data or solution inferred from data can
be licensed and commercialized.

complete, and managed. This requires the development of
efﬁcient and automated change-impact analysis techniques that
can determine the potential effects of a proposed change.

4) Runtime quality: A data science service based on multi-
ple sources that need to be accessed near real-time, emphasizes
different runtime quality characteristics, such as reliability and
availability. With governmental open data, sudden changes
to the open data policies are not perhaps as likely as with
other organizations. However, there are no guarantees for de-
pendability or service level agreements (SLAs) at least clearly
stated in the data sources. The beneﬁt of data science services
often lies in near real-time inference and a discontinuity in
source data APIs will immediately affect usefulness. In the
worst case, the results can be incorrect rather than unavailable.
5) API Evolution: APIs evolve over time, and the changes
often break the client developers’ code (e.g. [13]). Generally,
the most common API breaking changes are due to refactor-
ings [14]. With open data APIs, the changes have the potential
to affect several API users and end-customers – likewise when
multiple APIs are used any of them can change and break the
solution. A speciﬁc problem in ML-based solutions is their
lack of fault tolerance if something changes: an ML system can
continue its operations and produce incorrect, drifted results
if some of its data sources have changed. Identifying the most
likely changes in open APIs and preparing for them, e.g., by
a means of fault tolerance, can help to mitigate potential API
evolution problems. In addition, API evolution can also lead
to changes in licensing and technical implementation. This in
turn adds yet another layer of complexity in the development
process.

IV. A NEED FOR GOVERNANCE MODELS

One unifying factor with all the challenges identiﬁed in
the previous section is that they are all related, to a certain
degree, to the governance of the provided APIs and data. API
governance is deﬁned as ”a task mainly applied inside an
organization, typically aiming at achieving a certain harmo-
nization of APIs in terms of their non-functional properties,
best-practices-support, documentation quality or rule com-
pliance in general” [15]. In [16], API governance is seen
encompassing a wide range of activities ”starting with the
API proposal all the way to its adoption, through requirements
gathering, build and deploy, and operations during general
availability”. Data governance, in turn, is associated with
decisions regarding the data, i.e., ”data governance refers to
who holds the decision rights and is held accountable for an
organization’s decision-making about its data assets” [17].
API governance encompasses practices that need to be de-
signed and executed to overcome the challenges of building
intelligent data science services on top of open data APIs. As
a summary, following aspects needs to be considered when
designing API governance [18], [19], [20]:

1) Change Control: When API changes are required, the
effects of the change should be predictable and implemented
in a uniform, consistent way. If changes need to be rolled back,
the return to previous functionality should also be consistent,

2) Impact of Changes: As APIs are created in the context
of business, the impact of changes in API should be carefully
evaluated. Stakeholders of an API, such as consumers and
business owners, should be informed of changes and the
possible impact of those.

3) Policy Speciﬁcation and Analysis: Access control poli-
cies, their analysis, and application should be considered to
only allow authorized clients to access resources. The acces-
sibility to an API should also consider the business context.

4) Consistent Policy Implementation: Policies that control
the use of assets through API should be implemented inde-
pendently of the technologies that are used to implement the
assets. Decoupling API from asset implementation allows for
API integrity to be kept changes to one do not inﬂuence the
other.

5) Life-cycle Alignment: The governance process should be
involved in all the duration of the API life-cycle. A governance
process should exist for the development, deployment, moni-
toring, and deprecation of an API.

6) API Integrity: API should be able to interface on a newer
version of the platform without conﬂicts and without effort.
When planning new features, existing API should not require
extensive refactoring, and backward compatibility should be
ensured over a period of time.

7) Monitoring and Auditing: API governance must
in-
corporate a uniﬁed method of monitoring and auditing API
activity.

Table I summarizes the cross-mapping of API governance
aspects and recognized challenges, which helps to understand
how API governance could be designed in order to tackle the
recognized challenges. To summarize, to guarantee that only
relevant data is published through API, there is a need to
understand the development life-cycle, manage change and
understand how changes impact data consumers. Moreover,
creating an API that provides historical data requires change
control as the data structure behind the API can change, but
API still needs to provide the same data, whereas licensing
requires policies to be designed and implemented to manage

TABLE I
RELATING API GOVERNANCE ASPECTS AND RECOGNIZED CHALLENGES.

API governance aspect \ challenge
Change control
Impact of changes
Policy speciﬁcation and analysis
Consistent policy implementation
Life-cycle alignment
API integrity
Monitoring and auditing

a
t
a
d

t
n
a
v
e
l
e
R

X

X

a
t
a
d

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
H
X

X

g
n
i
s
n
e
c
i
L

X
X

X

y
t
i
l
a
u
q

e
m

i
t
n
u
R
X
X

X
X
X

n
o
i
t
u
l
o
v
E
X
X

X
X
X

access to API. Also, API integrity needs to be considered
with licensing to manage the compatibility and licenses of
different API versions. Runtime quality requires quality from
both data and the API. API integrity, change control, and
acknowledging the impact of changes are major factors to
ensure runtime quality. Runtime quality can also be improved
by API monitoring and auditing. As the need for runtime
quality exists during the whole lifespan of an API,
life-
cycle alignment is required. Finally, successful evolution of
API requires managing changes from technical and business
perspectives, making sure API integrity exists, aligning API
life-cycle, and monitoring and auditing the API.

Moreover, technical API governance and data governance
share some responsibilities when it comes to data quality
management. As traditional APIs, such as REST and SOAP,
is not directly
are usually built on a separate layer that
connected with data [21], most of the data quality dimensions,
e.g. completeness, interpretability, accessibility, and represen-
tational consistency are shared responsibilities between data
and API governance. In addition, as API governance also
contains technical aspects, it needs to be considered as part
of the IT governance as well.

API governance can be seen as part of the broader practise
of API management, that is described as: ”An activity that
enables organizations to design, publish and deploy their
APIs for (external) developers to consume. API Management
capabilities such as controlling API lifecycles, access and
authentication to APIs, monitoring, throttling, and analyzing
API usage, as well as providing security and documentation
are often implemented through an integrated platform, which
is supported by an API gateway.” [22]

API governance can also be seen as a combination of data
and IT governance, and as a part of broader API management.
There is a need for a governance model that describes the
structure of how API governance should be designed and
executed. This structure should take into account the different
aspects of API governance but enable organizational ﬂexibility
that exists because of the heterogeneous nature of business
domains.

V. CONCLUSIONS

Open data and APIs are increasingly important and available
in the future. Many different business opportunities can arise
based on data science services, especially relying on machine
learning built on top of open data and APIs. However, besides
ﬁnding a viable business model and algorithms, there are
several software engineering challenges when combining open
data from several different open APIs for dependable data
science services. We outlined our ﬁrsthand experiences about
the challenges that we have encountered whilst working in
the domain of maritime trafﬁc and its open data and APIs.
The challenges are not all domain-speciﬁc but pertain to data
science services built on top of open data and APIs. As a
solution to challenges, we discussed how better governance
practices at open data and API providers could alleviate these
challenges for those who design and operate data science

services. We aim to carry out more research on data sciences
services built on open data and APIs to gain experiences of
fully exploiting the potential in a fully dependable manner.
Especially, we are interested in different governance practices
in the entire value network.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Gonz´alez-Mora, D. Tom´as, I. Garrig´os, J. J. Zubcoff, and J.-N.
Maz´on, “Model-driven development of web APIs to access integrated
tabular open data,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 202 669–202 686, 2020.
[2] Open data and reuse of public-sector information. [Online]. Available:

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=CELEX%3A32019L1024

[3] S. Martin, M. Foulonneau, S. Turki, and M. Ihadjadene, “Risk analysis
to overcome barriers to open data,” Electronic Journal of e-Government,
vol. 11, no. 1, p. 348, 2013.

[4] A. Abell´o Gamazo, C. P. Ayala Mart´ınez, C. Farr´e Tost,
C. G´omez Seoane, M. Oriol Hilari, and ´O. Romero Moral, “A
data-driven approach to improve the process of data-intensive API
creation and evolution,” in International Conference on Advanced
Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE-Forum-DC), 2017, pp. 1–8.

[5] M. Bergstr¨om and P. Kujala, “Simulation-based assessment of the
operational performance of the Finnish–Swedish Winter Navigation
System,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 19, p. 6747, 2020.

[6] U. Tapaninen, Maritime Transport: Shipping Logistics and Operations.

Kogan Page Publishers, 2020.

[7] O. A. V. Banda, F. Goerlandt, J. Montewka, and P. Kujala, “A risk
analysis of winter navigation in Finnish sea areas,” Accident Analysis &
Prevention, vol. 79, pp. 100–116, 2015.

[8] F. Goerlandt, H. Goite, O. A. V. Banda, A. H¨oglund, P. Ahonen-Rainio,
and M. Lensu, “An analysis of wintertime navigational accidents in the
Northern Baltic Sea,” Safety science, vol. 92, pp. 66–84, 2017.

[9] O. A. V. Banda, F. Goerlandt, V. Kuzmin, P. Kujala, and J. Montewka,
“Risk management model of winter navigation operations,” Marine
pollution bulletin, vol. 108, no. 1-2, pp. 242–262, 2016.

[10] V. Lehtola, J. Montewka, F. Goerlandt, R. Guinness, and M. Lensu,
“Finding safe and efﬁcient shipping routes in ice-covered waters: a
framework and a model,” Cold regions science and technology, vol.
165, p. 102795, 2019.

[11] J. Jussila, T. Lehtonen, J. Laitinen, M. Makkonen, and L. Frank,
“Visualising maritime vessel open data for better situational awareness
in ice conditions,” in Proceedings of the 22nd International Academic
Mindtrek Conference, 2018, pp. 92–99.

[12] G. Brito and M. T. Valente, “REST vs GraphQL: A controlled experi-
ment,” in International Conference on Software Architecture, 2020.
[13] A. Brito, M. T. Valente, L. Xavier, and A. Hora, “You broke my code:
understanding the motivations for breaking changes in APIs,” Empirical
Software Engineering, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1458–1492, 2020.

[14] D. Dig and R. Johnson, “How do APIs evolve? a story of refactoring,”
Journal of software maintenance and evolution: Research and Practice,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 83–107, 2006.

[15] F. Haupt, F. Leymann, and K. Vukojevic-Haupt, “API governance
support through the structural analysis of rest APIs,” Computer Science-
Research and Development, vol. 33, no. 3-4, pp. 291–303, 2018.

[16] B. De, “API governance,” in API Management.

Springer, 2017, pp.

179–188.

[17] V. Khatri and C. V. Brown, “Designing data governance,” Communica-

tions of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 148–152, 2010.

[18] J. Horkoff, J. Lindman, I. Hammouda, and E. Knauss, “Strategic
report,” arXiv preprint

API analysis and planning: APIS technical
arXiv:1911.01235, 2019.

[19] C. Krintz, H. Jayathilaka, S. Dimopoulos, A. Pucher, R. Wolski, and
T. Bultan, “Developing systems for API governance,” ﬁgshare, p.
790746, 2013.

[20] E. Lourenc¸o Marcos and R. Puccinelli de Oliveira, “A framework for
guidance of API governance: A design science approach,” 2019.
[21] A. Soni and V. Ranga, “API features individualizing of web services:
Rest and soap.” International Journal of Innovative Technology and
Exploring Engineering, vol. 8, pp. 664–671, 2019.

[22] M. Mathijssen, M. Overeem, and S. Jansen, “Identiﬁcation of practices
and capabilities in API management: A systematic literature review,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10481, 2020.

