RaspberryPI for mosquito neutralization by power laser 

Rakhmatulin Ildar, PhD 

South Ural State University, Department of Power Plants Networks and Systems 

ildar.o2010@yandex.ru 

Abstract 

More than 700 thousand human deaths from mosquito bites are observed annually in the world. It is 

more than 2 times the number of annual murders in the world. In this regard, the invention of new 

more effective methods of protection against mosquitoes is necessary. In this article for the first time, 

comprehensive studies of mosquito neutralization using machine vision and a 1 W power laser are 

considered. Developed laser installation with Raspberry Pi that changing the direction of the laser 

with a galvanometer. A program for mosquito tracking in real-time has been developed. Given the 

calculations and results of experimental research. The possibility of using deep neural networks, Haar 

cascades, machine learning for mosquito recognition was considered. We considered in detail the 

classification problems of mosquitoes in images. A recommendation is given for the implementation 

of this device based on a microcontroller for subsequent use as part of an unmanned aerial vehicle. 

Any harmful insects in the fields can be used as objects for control. 

Keywords:  laser  for  mosquito  control,  deep  learning  for  mosquito  control,  mosquito  detection, 

mosquito neutralization, pest detection, insect recognition, Raspberry Pi3, Raspberry Pi4 

1. Introduction 

In the next papers used the developed device for remote mosquito control [15], for pest control [16] and for 

weed control [17] 

The relevance of this work is the need to identify the presence of a mosquito in place and determine its 

position for subsequent destruction because mosquitoes carry a great danger because mosquitoes are 

carriers of diseases such as malaria, from which  more than 200 million people in the  world directly 

infect from mosquitoes. The danger and methods necessary to combat mosquitoes are described in the 

following articles [1,2,3,4]. 

In  this  paper,  we  propose  to  use  machine  vision,  neural  networks,  and  a  1-watt  laser  to  neutralize 

mosquitoes. It is a new direction for control mosquitoes. For the first time, the idea of using a laser to 

protect against insects was expressed in the early 1980s by American astrophysicist Lowell Wood. But 

at the same time, due to the complexity of the technical implementation of this project, this idea has not 

yet  found  practical  application.  In  the  last  decade,  the  rapid  development  of  artificial  intelligence 

technology, machine learning, and computer vision has provided an opportunity for the implementation 

of many ideas conceived decades earlier. Including the use of modern technology to combat mosquitoes. 

 
 
The use of traditional methods such as nets, lotions, creams of various kinds, traps is especially popular 

as individual defense. Especially interesting works are [5,6,7,8]. A common disadvantage of all these 

methods that they are not autonomy. 

As methods against mosquitoes, there are hundreds of different creams, devices, and other devices. But 

because of the analysis carried out, given that the problem with mosquitoes from year to year it becomes 

more  and  more  relevant  to  conclude  that  no  effective  solution  has  yet  been  found  to  eliminate  this 

problem. As a result, automating the process of neutralizing mosquitoes gives a favorable forecast for 

the expediency of using the method proposed in this paper. 

In the past decade, the following methods have been proposed for mosquito control. In the article [9], 

the implementation of an acoustic insect flight detector, which was constructed from a noise reduction 

system, is presented, the response error was 6.5%. In our study, this detector can be used as an auxiliary 

method for determining the approximate area for the camera for work with mosquitoes. In the research 

[10], the classification of certain species of flying insects according to the frequency of beating of the 

wings is presented.   

The following study is the most approximate in the topic of our work, where the results of mosquito 

detection  using  the  camera  are  presented  [11].  In  this  case,  only  one  method  was  considered  for 

detecting  absolute  difference  estimation  -  and  the  results  on  determining  the  position  of  z  are  not 

presented.   

It is worth adding that the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation sponsored research on the implementation 

of laser mosquito neutralization technology as a promising method for combating malaria. As a result, 

company Photonic Sentry was created, information about this from the official site of the company was 

used.  For  several  years  of  company  operation,  a  demonstration  video  was  presented  on  the 

neutralization of mosquitoes without a description of the installation.   

The main advantage when using a laser to neutralize mosquitoes over known methods to combat mosquitoes 

are the following: 

- ability to use in open areas, even in the presence of wind; 

- the ability to create a given safe territory, which is protected from  mosquitoes, around houses, or when 

traveling to nature around the camp; 

- potentially - a large area of coverage; 

- in the perspective, to protect a group of moving people who have left a safe territory, by mounting on 

an unmanned aerial vehicle or on the human body. 

2. Materials and method 

The equipment that was used in the research: 

- Raspberry Pi 3 Model B +, Broadcom BCM2837B0 with a 64-bit quad-core processor (ARM Cortex-

A53) with a frequency of 1.4 GHz; 

- The program is written in python3.6, the library of machine vision OpenCV 3.4.1; 

- Pi camera, Sony IMX219 Exmor; 

 
- Galvanometer, speed - 20 kpps; 

- Power laser -1 W, wavelength - 450 nm; 

- From box with mosquitoes to laser system distance - 300 mm. 

The  size  of  a  mosquito  can  vary  from  1  mm  to  5  mm,  this  is  the  main  criterion  for  the  method  of 

detection and retrieval of  mosquito coordinates. When monitoring the position  of the  mosquito  with 

ultrasound, it is necessary to use several sensors in different places and processing their information to 

calculate the location, which theoretically is suitable only for detecting one mosquito, but if there are 

several mosquitoes, the device will not work correctly. The temperature of the body of a mosquito due 

to its cold blood is like the temperature of the environment. With a very high resolution of the thermal 

imager, the mosquito temperature will differ insignificantly against the background - on the order of 0.1 

C. The use of sonar has several difficulties when working in open areas where it is necessary to use 

sonar with a narrow beam and a narrow radiation pattern. 

Following the analysis, in the present study, it was decided to use a camera to detect and determine the 

coordinates of the mosquito. After the camera detects a mosquito, to increase the likelihood of a laser 

being affected it is necessary to predict the position of the mosquito in advance (by more than 0.2 s). 

Therefore, is necessary to research the factors affecting the behavior of the mosquito during flight. 

This paper describes the effect of mosquitoes on odor [12]. In the paper [13], mosquito flight formulas 

are  presented,  which  are  calculated  considering  the  presence  of  CO2. The  speed  of  a  mosquito  was 

determined by a deterministic formula: 

where 

  – the maximum and minimum speed of a mosquito, F is a ramp function that takes 

                                                      (1) 

values between 0 and 1. 

In operation, the flight direction and speed of each mosquito are updated every △T time units. The 

updated position of mosquitoes is calculated by the formula: 

where (xn, yn) - the position of the mosquito at time step n. Number d is a direction vector that varies 

between tracking and tracing. 

  – wind speed. 

                                                    (2) 

Considering the detection of a mosquito with the help of a camera, tracking it and using mathematical 

formulas to predict its further flight, the probability of positive control is increased. 

To  use  a  pre-trained  deep  learning  network  on  the  Raspberry  Pi  for  the  process  of  monitoring 

mosquitoes, initially, deep learning methods were considered to implement. But due to the limited RAM 

on the Raspberry Pi 3 (1 GB) and even the maximum configuration of the Raspberry Pi 4 (4 GB) and 

due  to  the  low  processor  speed  of  1.5  Ghz  it  is  almost  impossible  to  use  the  deep  neural  networks 

(ResNet> 100 MB, VGGNet> 550 MB , AlexNet> 200 MB, GoogLeNet> 30 MB). In an attempt to use 

SqueezeNet, using a new use of convolutions of 1 × 1 and 3 × 3, we managed to obtain a model with a 

                                       
 
                                   
weight of 5 MB, but even in this case, the result of image processing for the presence of the desired 

object was approximately 1 second. 

Real-time detection with R-CNN, Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, Yolo, RetinaNet has the same problem 

with speed  of recognition. The solution  may be to use  - NVIDIA Jetson TX1 and TX2  - the special 

platform for computing neural networks. The main disadvantage, which is the high cost. Therefore, we 

focused  on  methods  that  can  be  implemented  on  the  Raspberry  PI,  which  allows  you  to  create  an 

economical  and  compact  device.One  of  the  most  frequent  ways  to  detect  moving  objects  is  the 

difference of frames, background subtraction, and analysis of the field of optical flow. Details about the 

advantages and disadvantages of these methods are written in paper [14]. 

Using the Hara cascade, you can train a model to track an object, the accuracy is determined largely by 

the number of photographs used to train the model. In the case found, 350 photos with mosquitoes were 

used as positive examples and 500 photos as negative examples. Detect mosquito by color using the 

cv2.cvtColor function. This function takes the  original image and transforms the color space. In our 

case, HSV, RGB color spaces were considered. This method is more convenient for laboratory tests, in 

which  you  can  create  bright  color  contrast  between  the  mosquito  and  the  background,  to  study  the 

dynamics of movement of mosquitoes and test the function of predicting the flight of a mosquito. In 

natural habitat due to the versatility of color, the effectiveness of this method is close to 0. The big focus 

of the camera will not improve the situation, because the mosquito itself does not have a single-color 

gamut, it is mean that for search in the program, it need expand the color ranges. In the end, it increases 

the noise. 

Using optical flow like frame difference at high-resolution cameras can track the flight of a mosquito. 

In this case, since the image of visible movement represents the shift of each point between two images, 

all the color noise and noise present in the Hara cascade, in this case, does not matter. The disadvantage 

of this method is the impossibility of identifying the mosquito since the criteria, in this case, are only 

the size of the mosquito and the displacement of movement and analysis of the static image. In this case, 

one camera should cover a radius of 360 degrees, because of which the constant dynamics of the camera 

makes it impossible to use these methods. 

The definition of an online location of an object in successive frames on a video is called tracking. In 

the  OpenCV  library  through  tracking,  the  following  functions  are  considered:  TrackerCSRT, 

TrackerKCF,  TrackerBoosting,  TrackerMIL,  TrackerTLD,  TrackerMedianFlow,  TrackerMOSSE. 

Description of which are available  on the  website  of the  library developer. We have  checked all the 

parameters. In the best way using - tracker = cv2.TrackerCSRT_create. The advantage of tracking is 

that it runs faster than detection. Since when an object that was detected in the previous frame is tracked, 

the program knows the initial data — the appearance of the object, the location, speed and direction of 

its movement. Fig. 1 shows the tracking of a mosquito with various methods, for mosquitoes size 2-4 

mm. 

                                  a                                                  b                                    c 

                                            d                                        e                                        f 

Fig.1. Using OpenCV for mosquitoes tracking: a – tracking mosquito with function 

cv2.TrackerCSRT_create (), b – Hara cascade, c – color tracking, d – color tracking without success, e 

– optical flow, f – frame difference 

Fig.1.d shows a problematic situation for all the methods of tracking when working with mosquitoes, 

since  with a sharp change  of flight path the speed of the camera is not enough to fix the shape  of a 

mosquito. Therefore, this moment all methods lose the mosquito from the field of view. Fig.1.e for the 

optical method with mosquitoes showed and many noises. 

Using the image preprocessing function can significantly increase the readability of images for machine 

vision. 

In Fig. 2 results in photo processing by Thresholding function-OpencV with different parameters. 

   
 
 
     
 
 
 
                                                                       
 
 
Fig. 2 results in photo processing by Thresholding function-OpencV 

Image  data  can  be  used  in  classification  problems,  the  author  using  convolutional  neural  networks 

obtained  a  classification  accuracy  of  the  order  of-95%.  For  classification,  a  convolutional  neural 

network (CNN) was created. It consists of 8 layers of layers Convolution_2D and MaxPooling2D after 

the  second  and  fourth  convolution.  On  all  layers  except  the  output  fully  connected  layer,  the  ReLU 

activation function is used, the last level uses softmax. To streamline our model, a Dropout layer was 

used after each subsample layer and the first fully linked layer. 

The network was trained on a stationary computer with an AMD Ryzen 5 3600 processor and a 6 GB 

GIGABYTE  GTX1060  graphics  card.  The  result  obtained  allows  us  to  conclude  that,  in  terms  of 

classification, finding a mosquito in the images and calculating its exact coordinates is not difficult, but 

it takes time - more than 1 second. Classification can help in the case of the destruction of mosquitoes, 

which are not in motion since there is enough time in this case. But in this study, the task of neutralizing 

mosquitoes in dynamics is set. 

To determine the distance to the object was used the stereo vision OpenCV function. At the same time, 

the  depth  value  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  displacement  pixel,  and  the  relationship  between 

disparity and display depth of the mosquito, fig.3. 

Fig.3. The layout of the cameras: d - a value called the disparity, Z - the depth or distance to the 

object, T - the distance between cameras, f - the coefficients of the focal length between the cameras. 

The relationship between the camera and the object is described by the following formula: 

(T-d)/(Z-f)=T/Z                                                                        (3) 

3. Experimental research 

For experimental research, the installation was developed, Fig.4. 

 
 
 
 
Fig.4. Laser installation: 1 - cameras, 2 - galvanometer, 3 - Raspberry PI3, 4 - laser rangefinder, 5 - laser, 

6 - power supply, 7 - motor drivers, 8 - electronic signal processing board, 9 – box with mosquitoes 

In the  box 9 are  mosquitoes. The laser and the camera are at a distance  - 300 mm. The principle  of 

operation of the installation is explained by the scheme in fig.5. 

Fig.5. The scheme of the experiment: 1 - box with mosquitoes, 2 - pi cameras, 3 - Raspberry PI3, 4 - 

laser, 5 - galvanometer, 6 - laser beam 

Raspberry PI 3 B + single-board computer, processes the digital signal from video and determines the 

position to the object and transmits a digital signal to  the analog board - 3, where a digital-to-analog 

converter converts the signal to a range of 0-5V. Next, using a board with an operational amplifier, we 

get bipolar voltage - plus and minus 5 V, which feeds boards with a motor driver for a galvanometer - 

4, from where the signal goes to galvanometers -7. The galvanometer with the help of mirrors changes 

the direction of the laser - 6. The system is powered by a power supply unit - 5. Camera 2 to determine 

the distance to the object. 

Boxing with mosquitoes stands at a distance of 300 mm from the laser system. The camera finds the 

mosquito and transmits the data to the galvanometer, which puts the mirrors in the correct position, and 

then the laser is turned on. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The algorithm working installation is shown in fig.6. 

Start 

Turn on 

No 

Feedback from all 

devices 

Mosquito tracking 

Is mosquito detected? 

No 

No 

Calculate X,Y,Z coordinates 

Send X,Y,Z coordinates to 

galvanometer 

Turn on the laser 

Yes 

No 

No 

Was the mosquito 

neutralized? 

Count   

3 times 

Fig.6. The algorithm working installation 

The readings are averaged; the average is taken from 180 readings with different samples from the array 

The results of experimental research using various OpenCV functions are shown in Table 1.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table1. The results of experimental research 

Search method  The 

Average 

Tracking 

Neutralizatio

Neutralization 

Survival 

coordinates 

time 

successful

n with a 

with a 

after hitting a 

of the 

detect, 

, % 

laser, %.   

laser, %.   

laser pulse – 

mosquito, 

sec 

With 

Without 

0,5 s, % 

X,Y, mm 

prediction 

prediction 

formula. 

formula. 

By color 

From 2,15   

0,3   

65 

to 15, 20 

By tracking 

From 0,18 

0,15 

76 

to 10,12 

Cascades of 

From 13,0 

1 

70 

haar 

Frame 

to 10,20 

From 0,18 

0,1 

62 

difference   

to    20,20 

Optical flow 

From 0,0 to   

~ 

~ 

20,20 

13 

15 

8 

3 

0 

10 

13 

8 

5 

0 

55 

56 

50 

75 

~ 

The developed prototype in this paper has a limited range of actions. But at the same time, the results 

of this work proved the possibility of using lasers to destroy mosquitoes. In the future, to increase the 

damaging ability, it is necessary to increase the accuracy of the laser operation. 

To implement tracking in the Python language, various algorithms were written, both with tracking at 

each moment of only one mosquito and using the multithreading function and transmitting data on the 

position  of  mosquitoes  using  an  array  to  the  galvanometer.  The  success  of  the  experiment  can  be 

enhanced  by  using  a  more  powerful  laser,  which  will  make  it  possible  to  neutralize  more  than  2 

mosquitoes in one second. Since considering the speed of the galvanometer, which allows you to change 

the thousandths of a position in seconds, we are limited in speed to neutralizing mosquitoes only by the 

power of the laser and the power of the central processor.    The number of tracking mosquitoes at the 

same time depends on the processing power of the processor.   

4. Discussion and conclusions   

One of the factors limiting the use of laser technology to neutralize mosquitoes is the small allowable 

lesion area. The possibility of using a telephoto lens to monitor the position of mosquitoes was analyzed. 

In fig.7 prototype for remote monitoring of mosquito’s present. 

 
 
Fig.7.  Prototype  for  remote  monitoring  of  mosquitoes:  1  -  telephoto  lens,  2  -  laser  setup,  3  - 

microcontroller esp8266, 4 - servo motor to change the position along the axis-z 5 - three sections with 

mosquitoes and audio sensors. 

The use of a telephoto lens and a servomotor for moving along the axis z as part of a laser installation 

can significantly increase the area of mosquito control. For regulating different distances to mosquito, 

we  used  -  Esp8266,  whereby  WI-FI  with  standard  IEEE  802.11  connection  between  boxes  with 

mosquitoes and audio sensors and with Raspberry pi3 was realized. The distance of mosquito’s flight 

monitoring depends on the resolution of the telephoto lens. 

A  promising  development  direction  for  the  developed  installation  is  the  use  of  STMicroelectronics 

microcontrollers from the STM32 family. Given that in X-CUBE-AI - AI has an expansion pack for 

STM32CubeMX. This expansion can operate with different deep learning frameworks such as Caffe, 

Keras, TensorFlow, Caffe, ConvNetJs, etc. Due to this, the neural network can be trained on a stationary 

computer  with  the  possibility  of  calculations  on  the  GPU. After  the  integration  to  use  an  optimized 

library to a 32-bit microcontroller STM32. 

At  the  same  time,  the  use  of  a  microcontroller  instead  of a  single-board  computer  will  significantly 

reduce power consumption by several watts. It is worth considering various programming languages, 

for example, a program on C will be more efficient, than python language. 

As drivers for motors, it is recommended to use drivers based on SMD components. Like a rechargeable 

battery, for example, Thunder Power Adrenaline Weight not more than 179.69g and capacity 1100mAh 

This will significantly reduce the dimensions of the device and reduce its weight to 450 grams. 

What ultimately increases the efficiency of the device, because it will be possible to use the device using 

an autonomous aircraft. Nowadays many companies specialize in the production of an apart capable of 

bearing the burden and fly significant distance without recharging. 

The results of these works will be fully disclosed in subsequent research.   

In the future necessary to use a laser with focusing. In this research, due to the insignificant distance 

between the laser and the mosquito box, the pre-configured focus of the laser did not play a big role, 

since the box width was 70 mm. The lesion area on the near side of the box  exceeded the  mosquito 

damage area by 2% by the distant side in the view. But it can be of the general error, in this research we 

do not focus on this.   

 
 
It  is  advisable  to  consider  replacing  the  audio  sensors  that  were  used  to  demonstrate  the  ability  to 

neutralize mosquitoes over considerable distances. As a device for determining the distance can be used 

a laser rangefinder with a high data rate, where for an interface to use SPI. Since the mirrors can change 

position within milliseconds, monitoring with a laser rangefinder from technical implementation does 

not carry any difficulties.   

Due to the  mosquito's flight speed, 1 meter per second, with increasing distance from 15 meters the 

rotation  speed  along  the  z-axis  with  a  servomotor  greatly  affects  the  result.  Given  this,  recommend 

using  the  algorithm  is  implemented  in  such  a  way  that after  identification,  mosquitoes  are  assigned 

numbers, if the mosquito has left the camera's observation area, its coordinate is calculated using the 

mathematical model and the laser focus is transferred to the calculated coordinates   

In this case, this will give a significant increase in time. Otherwise since due to the mosquito leaving 

the observation zone, to determine the exact position, it is necessary to process the entire picture from 

the camera once again after turning along the z-axis, which is very expensive from time. 

The  use  of  neural  networks  to  predict  the  position  of  a  mosquito  will  lead  to  the  installation  of  an 

additional  microcontroller,  which  will  lead  to  a  2-fold  increase  in  the  mass  of  equipment  and  the 

consumption of electrical energy. 

In this research the idea of using a galvanometer with a powerful laser to neutralize mosquitoes was 

first realized. The system can neutralize 2  mosquitos per sec and this result can be  easily improved.   

Experimentally proved the feasibility of using a laser for the destruction of mosquitoes. Developed a 

laser unit that changes the direction of the laser with a galvanometer. A program has been developed for 

the monitoring of mosquitoes in real-time. Calculations and results of experimental studies are given. 

Experimental research various techniques for mosquitoes and selected the best option for neutralizing 

mosquitoes with using in Raspberry PI - library OpenCV with function cv2.TrackerCSRT_createm. 

Funding Statement 

The authors received no funding from an external source. 

References 

1.  Fouet,  C.,  Kamdem,  C.  Integrated  Mosquito  Management:  Is  Precision  Control  a  Luxury  or 

Necessity?. Trends in parasitology. Volume 35, Issue 1, January 2019, pp. 85-95 

2. Vijayakumar, V., Malathi, D., Subramaniyaswamy, V., Saravanan, P. and Logesh, R. Fog computing-

based  intelligent  healthcare  system  for  the  detection  and  prevention  of  mosquito-borne  diseases. 

Computers in Human Behavior. Available online 6 December 2018 

3.  N.Fernandes  J.,  K.Moise  I.,  L.Maranto  G.  and  C.Beier  J.  Revamping  Mosquito-borne  Disease 

Control to Tackle Future Threats. Trends in parasitology. Volume 34, Issue 5, May 2018, pp. 359-368 

4. R.Schwab, S., M.Stone, C., M.Fonseca, D. and Fefferman, N. The importance of being urgent: The 

impact of surveillance target and scale on mosquito-borne disease control. Epidemics. Volume 23, June 

2018, pp. 55-63 

  
 
5. Cheng, G., Liu, Y., Wang, P. and Xiao, X. Mosquito Defense Strategies against Viral Infection. Trends 

in parasitology. Volume 32, Issue 3, March 2016, pp. 177-186 

6.  Halbach,  R.,  Junglen  S.,  Pvan  Rij  R.  Mosquito-specific  and  mosquito-borne  viruses:  evolution, 

infection, and host defense. Current Opinion in Insect Science. Volume 22, August 2017, pp. 16-27 

7. Volohonsky, G., Steinert, S. A. Focusing on complement in the antiparasitic defense of mosquitoes. 

Trends in parasitology. Volume 26, Issue 1, January 2010, pp. 1-3 

8. Islam, J., Zaman, K., Tyagi, V. and Duarah S. Protection against mosquito vectors Aedes aegypti, 

Anopheles stephensi and Culex quinquefasciatus using a novel insect repellent, ethyl anthranilate. Acta 

Tropica Volume 174, October 2017, pp. 56-63 

9. D. Raj Raman, Reid R. Gerhardt and John B. Wilkerson. "Detecting Insect Flight Sounds in the Field: 

Implications for Acoustical Counting of Mosquitoes" Transactions of the ASABE Vol. 50 Iss. 4 (2007) 

pp. 1481-1485  

10    A.A.Santos D., J.P.C.Rodrigues J., Furtado S., Saleem S. and Korotaev V. Automated electronic 

approaches for detecting disease vectors mosquitoes through the wing-beat frequency. 20 April 2019, 

pp. 767-775 

11.  Alam,  J.,  Guoqing,  H.  and  Mojahidul,  I..  Study  of  mosquito  detection  and  position  tracking 

algorithm. Academic Journal of Science. 06(01), 2016, pp. 101-108 

12. Syed, Z., Walter, S. Acute olfactory response of Culex mosquitoes to a human- and bird-derived 

attractant. PNAS November 3, 2009, Volume 106 (44). 

13. Cortez, R., Foppa, I. A Spatial Model  of Mosquito Host-Seeking Behavior  PLoS Computational 

Biology May 2012. Volume 8     

14. Barros, P., Bruno, G., Lima,C. and Felipe, C. Crispim. Analyzing Social Network Images with Deep 

Learning Models to Fight Zika Virus. Image Analysis and Recognition, pp. 605-610   

15. Ildar, R. Machine vision for low-cost remote control of mosquitoes by power laser. J Real-Time Image 

Proc (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11554-021-01079-x   

16. Rakhmatulin, I. (2021). Detect caterpillar, grasshopper, aphid and simulation program for neutralizing 

them by laser https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-242641/v1   

17. Rakhmatulin, I., Andreasen, C. (2020). A Concept of a Compact and Inexpensive Device for Controlling 

Weeds with Laser Beams, Agronomy 10, no. 10: 1616. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy10101616 

