Strengthening e-Education in India using 
Machine Learning 

Naheed Khan 
K J Somaiya Institute of Engineering & Information 
Technology, Sion, Mumbai 
University of Mumbai, India 
naheed.khan@somaiya.edu 

Darshan Bhanushali 
K J Somaiya Institute of Engineering & Information 
Technology, Sion, Mumbai 
University of Mumbai, India 
darshan.jb@somaiya.edu 

Shreya Patel 
K J Somaiya Institute of Engineering & Information 
Technology, Sion, Mumbai 
University of Mumbai, India 
shreya.bp@somaiya.edu 

Radhika Kotecha 
K J Somaiya Institute of Engineering & Information 
Technology, Sion, Mumbai 
University of Mumbai, India 
Radhika.kotecha@somaiya.edu 

Abstract- e-Education has developed as one of the most
encouraging territories. The Indian Government
is
investing all amounts of energy to improve education
among the residents of the nation. School and graduate
understudies are focused on, however the stage is being
created for all the residents seeking to learn. Without a
doubt, the objective is to build the quantity of literates
with advanced education. To accomplish the equivalent,
propels in Data and Correspondence innovation are being
utilized in the education division, which has cleared route
for e-Training in India as well. To help educators in
concentrating more on more current viewpoints, their
excess work can be disposed of utilizing Machine
Learning (ML). Difference to programming, ML deals
with information and answers to create rules. In the event
that Machine Learning is tackled effectively, it can setup
the training division and contribute essentially to the
development of the country. Hence, the work presented in
this paper
fortifiews e-Education in India utilizing
Machine Learning. For the most part, three concerns are
focused to be tended to: Personalized recommendation of
course and Customized teaching methodology. The work
proposes
of
hereditary
improving conventional
for
procedures. Implementation and experiments presented in
the paper verify the viability of proposed calculations. 

developmental methodology

utilizing
calculations

Keywords-
Regression, Machine learning 

e-Education, Data mining,
​

e-learning,

I. INTRODUCTION 

There are several sectors where Machine Learning
is playing an important role. Various banks are
[1]
adopting Machine Learning algorithm for
fraud
detection and prevention, financial organizations use

Machine Learning for an observation of customers
behavior, healthcare sector uses different Machine
Learning-based models are used for the purpose of
early prediction of disease and to find their cure,
manufacturing industries are adopting automation
based on Machine Learning, retail
industries use
various Machine Learning technologies to capture,
analyze and use data to personalize the shopping
experience of their customers, etc. [2]. 

One of the major areas where technology
can focus is e-education or e-learning. It
is the
delivery of education or any type of training by
electronic teaching methods. This electronic method
can be a computer or a smartphone where teaching
material is accessed by the use of the internet [3]. 

Currently, there are several issues ranging
from quaint courses,
lack of hands-on practical
experience, lack of quality educators, then forth. This
points out the sad and scary state of India’s education
system and presents the difficulty graduates face
while looking for a job. e-Education is gaining
popularity among people. e-Education is helping
people to learn and get knowledge as per their choice
and need. e-Education also provides the updated
technology course that is currently in demand and
used in the world. It also helps a person to learn with
his speed and time [4]. By using on-line learning
good quality
facilities, students have access to
education courses,
imparted by seasoned and
experienced professors and professionals, on their

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fingertips. While online learning is bringing quality
educational courses to students, it is also making the
entire learning process ‘fun’.e-learning resources,
students will access it at a far lower price through
e-learning 

In the world of

technology e-Education
plays a very important role in educating different
types of people that have different skill sets and
learning speed.The problem with today’s e-Education
is a particular person starts an online course that may
be suggested by his/her friends or teachers. In this
the person  may not be able to catch up with that
course and its way of teaching .This problem is also
known as “One size fits all"Concept” Hence it is
essential to first check that a person should have
basic knowledge of that course.". People often start
an online course and end up quitting in the middle.
This is because the person can not catch up with the
method of teaching or the person does not have
enough knowledge or level for that particular course.  

We have used Simple decision tree classifier
that uses the supervised classification on the static
dataset, for the purpose of course recommendation as
it has given us quite good accuracy as compare to the
remaining two algorithms i.e. Random Forest and
Naive bayes classifier.[5,6] 

We have done a proper study of all the three
algorithms to get the insight about each and every
aspect of it. We chose the Decision tree on the basis
of
its accuracy as well as it can handle high
dimensional data,it can also handle continuous and
categorical data more efficiently which is a difficult
task in remaining two algorithms. We got almost the
same results by SDT and Random Forest but the
accuracy of the decision tree was 75% which is quite
higher than the others. 

A. Contribution of this Work 

e are applying different data mining algorithms
1. W
on the data of the person and suggest which course is
appropriate for him based on his background
knowledge. We will also be able to provide online
teaching based on his learning speed and the
methodology of
teaching he prefers. This will
significantly improve the e-Education system of
learning.  

2. Through e-learning, students will target turning
into ‘employable’ and build their dream career.. This
is simply the start of the revolutionary conception of

the
e-learning that has the potential
education system in India and provide a better way in
learning environment for the students.  

to disrupt

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 1, we
provide a brief description of the basic concepts used
in the paper. Section 2, summarizes the existing work
related to e-Education in India
and Machine
Learning. The proposed algorithm for strengthening
e-Education in India using Machine Learning is
stated in Section 3. Section 4, states the experimental
setup that demonstrates the performance. Section 5,
the
entire proposed system is
demonstrated. Section 6, concludes the work and
gives highlights for future work. 

result of

the

II. RELATED WORK 

This section presents,
in brief, existing literature
related to the use of Machine Learning in
e-education. 

Researchers R. Banu, R.Ravanan [7] have given a
brief knowledge about e-learning and how it can be
used to empower the rural students, the authors have
also given the information about how data mining
algorithm will be helpful to e-learning and how it can
be more useful
it also gives us
in e-learning,
knowledge about KDD that is Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining and how it can be used to
preprocess, sample and project the data prior to the
data mining steps. 

ANN-based,
Instance-based,

In [8], S.Senthil, W. Lin, have implemented and
compared various data mining algorithms such as
Regression-based,
Bayes-based,
SVM-based,
and
Tree-based
Rule-based classification algorithms on the student
the algorithms were compared in terms of
data,
accuracy rate, precision rate, AUC and model
building time.As per author RandomForest is the best
algorithm in terms of accuracy, precision, and AUC
in predicting students’ academic results on their
datasets. 

N. Anh [9], proposed a robust approach for this
inevitable challenging problem. Their work gives the
semantics of
incomplete data in the educational
sector on the application part and the two-phase
characteristics of
the classification task on the
technical side. As a result of this study on real
sets with different parts of
educational data

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
web based portals. It is that teachers make simple
statistical checking and analysis on the results of the
students at the end of a course, and this is useful for
the evaluation of
that course. However a more
powerful use of statistics is used to improve the
methodology of learning.[16] 

Currently there is an e-education system
which will give you content
like videos, online
these systems work either with
lectures etc. All
databases or log files and then use this data to provide
different resources online. There exist many systems
like youtube, udemy etc., which give online videos
for study. During the last few years researchers have
carried out studies to develop some models to
improve these systems which can give support to
teachers as well as students but these systems are not
actually implemented in real time.  

The proposed approach is a web portal where a user
can register and login. Users need to give a
preliminary test based on which the system will
evaluate his/her score in order to suggest him/her
different courses.The website will make use of the
model that we will build using the Machine Learning
algorithms to provide the output.  

As shown in Figure 1, initially on this web
portal
there will be a prerequisite test related to
different subjects like DSA, Java, ML, etc. After
getting answers from students, they will come to
know about his/her area of interest and proficient
area. Based on all the information which we have
collected earlier by giving tests, the system will be
able to suggest students some courses related to
his/her area of interest.   

In the second phase the portal shows them
videos related to their respective course to know their
learning pace whether they understand theory easily
or they need some examples or diagrams etc.After
showing this, there will be some series of questions to
check their performance score in that particular
course. 

incomplete data,
approaches for incomplete data handling. 

they found that

the different

In [10],A. Ahadi et al., introduced an approach that
combines whether or not a student-produced a correct
solution to an online exercise with information on the
number of attempts at the exercise submitted by the
student. They used the data collected from students in
an introductory Java course to assess the value of this
approach.They found that if the number of attempts is
correlated than student performance is better in the
final exams. 

In [11] C. Romero, have introduced EDM and
describes the different groups of users,
types of
educational environments, and the data they provide
and then gives insight how data mining techniques
have solved educational issues. 

M. Santillan et al. [12], have tried to build more
accurate classification models in order to predict the
output, analyzing the interaction in an incremental
way and compare the total interaction models with
incremental interaction models. 

In [13] the authors have elicited knowledge from the
information collected from faculty and students of
two different educational institutes. Also they have
defined Multilevel Hierarchy of training quality. 

A. Pal, S. Pal [14], have described the use of data
mining techniques t.o improve the efficiency of
academic performance in educational
institutions.
The basic techniques used in this paper are ID3, c4.5
and Bagging. 

In [15] B.Namratha, N. Sharma have discussed
educational data mining, its broad application areas,
benefits of educational data mining, challenges and
barriers to successful application of educational data
mining and the new practices that have to be adopted
in order to successfully employ educational data
mining and learning analytics for improving teaching
and learning. 
Based on the above mentioned studies we have
proposed a approach to develop a web portal. 

III. PROPOSED APPROACH 
` 
Although shifting from traditional education to
e-education is a much needed aspect in India, to the
best of our knowledge there is no such real time
system that
e-education. Basically
e-learning is a new way of providing quality of
knowledge and education to people to interact with

analyzes

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the BLA, MLA and HLA we have calculated the
average score. 

B. Baseline methods for comparison 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
algorithm, we compare its performance with three
different methods. Details of
this method are
described in the following section.  

learning

Simple Decision Tree - Decision tree algorithm is a
supervised
tree
representation to solve the problem. In SDT attributes
are represented by internal nodes whereas leaf nodes
represent the class label. 

algorithm.

uses

It

Random Forest -
Random forest is a combination of
several simple decision trees. Each individual tree in
the random forest splits out a class prediction the
class with
the most votes becomes the model
prediction. 

Naive Bayes -
Naive Bayes is a simple classification
algorithm which is used for predictive modeling.
Naive Bayes algorithm gives us a way by which we
can calculate the probability of hypothesis based on
prior knowledge. 

C. Software Details 

In this section we have described different softwares
and the programming languages we have used in
order to develop the web portal.  

for Cross-Platform,
XAMPP stands
XAMPP -
Apache MariaDB PHP Perl.
is a lightweight
It
Apache distribution that makes it very easy for
developers to create a local web server for testing and
deployment purposes.  

Laravel -
Laravel is an open source php framework
which works on a Model View Controller design
pattern. It helps in creating a rich web application by
utilizing the
existing components of different
framework. 

Python is a programming language which is
Python -
used on a server to create web applications. Python
has a very simple syntax and can be used on different
platforms. It can be used in a procedural way, Object
oriented way or a functional way. 

PHP -
PHP stands for Hypertext Preprocessor. It is a
scripting language. These scripts are executed on the

Figure 1: Proposed System 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
algorithm, we performed empirical studies with
different data sets. In this section, we present the
dataset used,
implementation details and report
evaluation results. 

A. Dataset 

Considering the need to address the web application
described in the proposed approach of this paper, we
considered several different attributes with a class
label Course Recommendation along with the level of
course. We have taken approximately five thousand
instances..  
We have considered the subject, Basic level correct
(BLA), Medium level correct answer
answers
(MLA), High level correct answer
(HLA) and
average score of students as a main attributes. Based

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
​
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
server. PHP is used to generate dynamic page
content. 

Weka -
Weka is an open source tool which is used
for data preprocessing, data visualization and
implementation
several Machine Learning
algorithms. It
is basically used to solve different
problems based on data mining or Machine Learning. 

of

V. RESULTS 

In this section we demonstrate the results observed
through different algorithms. We have used a
hold-out method of evaluation where 80% of the data
is used stream for training the classifier and the rest
for testing. 

The Accuracy and F-measure [13] are used for
evaluating performances of algorithms  

Figure 2 & Figure 3 represents the accuracy results of
evaluation as testset and training set respectively. 

Figure 4: F-Measure 

Figure 2: Test Accuracy 

Figure 3: Training Accuracy 

Figure 5: Training Time 

Figure 4 & Figure 5 demonstrate the results of
F-Measure and Training Time. 

For F-Measure, 

           (2 * Precision * Recall) 

F-Measure  =   

           (1) 

               (Precision + Recall) 

For Accuracy, 

                    (TP + TN) 

Accuracy  =    

            (2) 

            (TP + TN + FP + FN) 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where TP, FN, FP and TN represent the number of
true positives, false negatives, false positives and true
negatives, respectively. 

VI. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 

At present, educational data mining is paid
great attention by most of the researchers, since it
evolves in improving the current educational systems.
This report concludes that Data Mining strongly
contributes to the betterment of imparting quality in
higher education by screening several applications in
new dimensions. This work is an effort to enhance
the traditional educational process via strategic
roadmap
functionalities.The
performance, success of students in the examination. 
things which will be
implemented in future such as course videos based on
evaluation of present knowledge of students thereby
inculcating additional knowledge and providing them
a scope to further expand their arsenal of knowledge. 

There are several

data mining

of

Figure 6: Home Page 

VII. REFERENCES 

[1]  Impact of Machine Learning on Various sectors,
https://www.electronicsb2b.com/industry-buzz/i
mpact-of-machine-learning-on-various-sectors/ 
Accessed on: 06 February, 2020. 

[2]  Industries

Learning,
Leveraging Machine
https://blog.nhlearningsolutions.com/blog/7-indu
stries-leveraging-machine-learning Accessed on:
06 February, 2020. 

Figure 7: Q&A Evaluation Page  

[3]  The meaning

India,
https://talentedge.com/articles/meaning-e-educati
on/

 Accessed on: 06 February, 2020.  

e-Education

of

in

[4]  Changing the Indian education system for the
better,
https://yourstory.com/2018/07/e-learning-i
ndian-education/ Accessed on: 06 February,
2020. 

[5]  M. Dunham, “Data Mining: Introductory And
Education

Topics”,Pearson

Advanced
India,pp-75-119,(2006). 

Figure 8: Course Recommendation with Level 

Figure 6, 7 & 8 shows the actual implementation of
web application. Course recommendation and level
of course is based on the score of a student. 

[6]  S. Agarwal, G. Pandey, and M. Tiwari, “Data
Mining in Education: Data Classification and
In International
Decision Tree Approach”
Journal
e-Business,
of
e-Management and e-Learning,, Vol. 2, No. 2,
April 2012. 

e-Education,

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[14]

A. Pal, S. Pal: “Analysis and Mining of
Educational Data for Predicting the Performance
of Students” International Journal of Electronics
Communication and Computer Engineering
Volume 4,India,pp-1560-1565,(2013). 

[15]

Han, Kamber, "Data Mining Concepts and
Techniques",Morgan Kaufmann 3rd Edition,
pp-303-308,(2011). 

[16]

Sameer G & Sachin R, “Educational Data
the Education
Mining –A New Approach to
Systems” In International Journal On Advanced
Computer Theory And Engineering (IJACTE),
IRD India, (2016). 

[7]  R. Banu, R. Ravanan, “Analysis of E-learning in
– A Dreamed Vision for
in
IEEE-International Conference
trends in Information Technology,

Data Mining
Empowering Rural Students
proceedings of
on Recent
India, pp-1265-1270, (2011). 

in India”

[8]  S. Senthil and W. Lin, "Applying classification
techniques to predict students' academic results,"
In 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Current Trends
in Advanced Computing
(ICCTAC), IEEE, pp. 1-6, March 2017. 

[9]  N. Anh, V. Chau, "Towards a robust incomplete
data handling approach to effective educational
data classification in an academic credit system,"
2014 International Conference on Data Mining
and Intelligent Computing (ICDMIC), New
Delhi, 2014, pp. 1-7, November 2014. 

[10]

A. Ahadi and R. Lister, Arto Vihavainen ,“On
the Number of Attempts Students Made on Some
Online Programming Exercises During the
Semester and their Subsequent Performance on
Final Exam Questions”, In ITiCSE proceedings
of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovation and
Technology in Computer Science Education,
pp-218-223, July 2016. 

[11]

the State of

C. Romero, "Educational Data Mining: A
the Art," in IEEE
Review of
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 40, no.
6, pp. 601-618, November 2010. 

[12]

M.Santillan, R.Cerezo, M. Ruiz, J. Carlos,
“Predicting Students, Performance: Incremental
Interaction Classifiers” In L@S 2016: Third
(2016) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale
Edinburgh Scotland UK , April 2016. 

[13] P. Gulerial, M Arora, M. Sood, "Increasing
quality of education using educational data
mining," 2013 2nd International Conference on
in the Knowledge
Information Management
pp.
Economy,
118-122,October 2014. 

Chandigarh,

2013,

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565255

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
