Adiabatic Quantum Computing for Solving the
Weapon Target Assignment Problem

Veit Stooß, Martin Ulmke, Felix Govaers
Sensor Data and Information Fusion
Fraunhofer FKIE
53343 Wachtberg, Germany
Email: veit.stooss@fkie.fraunhofer.de, martin.ulmke@fkie.fraunhofer.de, felix.govaers@fkie.fraunhofer.de

1
2
0
2

y
a
M
5

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
1
1
0
2
0
.
5
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Quantum computing promises signiﬁcant improve-
ments of computation capabilities in various ﬁelds such as
machine learning and complex optimization problems. Recent
technological advancements suggest that the adiabatic quantum
computing ansatz may soon see practical applications. In this
work, we adopt this computation paradigm to develop a quantum
computation based solver of the well–known weapon target
assignment problem, an NP-hard nonlinear integer programming
optimization task. The feasibility of the presented model
is
demonstrated by numerical simulation of the adiabatic evolution
of a system of quantum bits towards the optimal solution encoded
in the model Hamiltonian. Over all, the described method is not
limited to the context of weapon management but is, with slight
modiﬁcations to the model Hamiltonian, applicable to worker-
task allocation optimization in general.

Index Terms—adiabatic quantum computing, weapon-target

assignment, Ising model

I. INTRODUCTION

implementations

and its physical

Quantum computing is considered the next key technology
which will drastically increase computation speed and
scalability in a wide range of optimization tasks including
applications in machine learning [1]. Besides the quantum
gate programming paradigm for general purpose quantum
computers
[3],
signiﬁcant progress is made in the ﬁeld of adiabatic quantum
computing [4]–[6] making commercial devices available for
applications to various optimization problems. However, due
to the underlying physical structure of adiabatic quantum
computation hardware, they are best suited to solve quadratic
unconstrained binary optimization problems or Ising models.
It is thus necessary to reformulate and/or approximate given
optimization objectives in terms of an Ising model, as it is
done for example in [7] for binary clustering.

[2],

The so–called weapon target assignment (WTA) problem
is an optimization task that draws great interest in the ﬁeld
of operations research [8]. It is an optimization task, which
deals with the general
issue of optimized assignment of
m weapons or workers to n targets or tasks, based on the
probabilities of successful task completion and the (threat)
value of the given targets or tasks. It can be characterized as
a non-linear integer programming problem and belongs to the
class of NP-complete computational complexity.

The goal of this paper is to derive a model of the weapon
target assignment problem that can be executed on state of
the art adiabatic quantum processing hardware. The paper
is therefore structured as follows: In Section II, the prob-
lem formulation of target based weapon target assignment
is introduced in more detail. In Section III, we present the
derivation of an equivalent formulation using a spin basis
and Pauli operators on this basis. In Section IV, an Ising-
type Hamiltonian only containing two-spin interaction terms
and self energies is constructed to reﬂect the target function
attributes of the WTA problem. Finally, in Section V, numeric
simulations of a minimal practical example are presented.

II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND NOTATION

interest

The WTA problem draws great

in the ﬁeld of
operations or command and control research in the context
of the so-called OODA (observe, orient, decide, act) loop of
command systems. There exist several formulations of the
optimization objective which are based either on survivability
of defended assets (asset based), destruction of attacking
targets (target based) [9]. Furthermore a single time step (static
WTA) or a dynamically changing scenario (dynamic WTA)
may be considered. Owed to the nature of the optimization
method which basically searches for minimum energies of a
physical system, this work discusses a target based formulation
where the goal is to minimize the value of surviving attackers
and thus the threat value they represent. Furthermore, for sim-
plicity the static weapon target assignment (SWTA) problem
is considered. The target function of this problem formulation
is given by:

n
(cid:88)

Vj

m
(cid:89)

T =

(1 − pij)xij

(1)

j=1

i=1
with i = 1, . . . , m weapons, j = 1, . . . , n targets, Vj the target
threat value (penalty for non-completion of task), and pij ∈
[0, 1] the destruction probability if weapon i engages target j.
The N = mn entries of the xij integer valued decision matrix
indicate which engagements are taken (1: chosen engagement,
0: not chosen engagement). The goal is now to choose from
the solution space G with |G| = 2N possible solutions the
member which minimizes T (1):

S = min
xij ∈G

T (xij)

(2)

 
 
 
 
 
 
under the constraints

n
(cid:88)

j=1

xij ≤ 1 ∀ i

Under the inﬂuence of a time-dependent Hamiltonian H(t)
the behavior of the system described in (8) is determined by
the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation

(3)

assuming that each weapon can be assigned to at most one
target.

In the current

literature [9]–[14] several classical algo-
rithms are developed to solve this assignment problem in
an (approximately) optimal way. Among the methods are
sequential heuristic assignments based on marginal return
values and stochastic methods like genetic algorithms, ant-
colony algorithms and simulated annealing. To our knowledge
however, there are no methods which leverage the emerg-
ing capabilities of quantum computing paradigms. Especially
quantum annealing can yield improved scalability to large
scenarios and signiﬁcant speedups in ﬁnding global optima
of optimization problems if the solution to a given problem is
properly encoded in the ground state of a Hamilton operator.
We therefore aim to reformulate the WTA problem stated in
(1) for computation on current spin based adiabatic quantum
computers, which is presented in the following chapter.

III. QUANTUM FORMULATION OF THE WTA PROBLEM
BASED ON INTERACTING SPINS

The solution which needs to be calculated in WTA opti-
mization is the decision matrix xij. The idea of the adiabatic
quantum computing ansatz to WTA (AQC WTA) is to rep-
resent each entry of xij with the state of a physical 2-level
spin system, denoted as |sij(cid:105) in Dirac notation, as they are
used as qubits in current quantum hardware. |sij(cid:105) is a spin− 1
2
quantum state with basis states

|0(cid:105) =

(cid:19)

(cid:18)1
0

and

|1(cid:105) =

(cid:19)

(cid:18)0
1

which are eigenstates of the Pauli-operator

σz =

(cid:18)1

(cid:19)
0
0 −1

(4)

(5)

with eigenvalues 1 and -1, respectively. Thus, they are also

eigenstates of the operator σs = 1

2 (1 − σz) with

σs |s(cid:105) = s |s(cid:105)

(6)

for s ∈ {0, 1}.

The full quantum state can be expressed as a product state
of N = mn coupled qubits over the Hilbert spaces of each
individual qubit with the correspondence given above:

|S(cid:105) = |s11(cid:105) ⊗ · · · ⊗ |smn(cid:105) ≡ |s11, . . . , smn(cid:105) .

(7)

There exist K = 2N basis states of the systems of N
spins, denoted as |Sk(cid:105) (k = 1, . . . , K), and a general time
dependent state of the coupled qubit system can be written as a
superposition of the basis states with dynamic state coefﬁcients
ck(t):

|ψ(t)(cid:105) =

K
(cid:88)

k=1

ck(t) |Sk(cid:105) .

(8)

∂
∂t

|ψ(t)(cid:105) = −ı(cid:126)H(t) |ψ(t)(cid:105) .

(9)

In adiabatic quantum computation the time dependent
Hamiltonian is constructed such that it moves from a problem
independent Hamilton operator with known ground state to
the Hamilton operator which encodes the solution of the op-
timization problem as its ground state. The adiabatic theorem
[15] states that if the system starts in the ground state and
the time dependent change only happens gradually, then the
system will remain in the ground state of the ﬁnal Hamilton
operator [4], [16], [17]. A state measurement can thus yield the
optimized solution. Following the guidelines in [5], [16], [17],
the target function (1) of the optimization problem is treated
similar to a satisﬁability problem, where the conditions are
not boolean but numeric values, which need to be minimized
simultaneously. Due to the structure of T , each term of the sum
can be treated as its own condition, which has to be optimized.
The Hamiltonian is derived by deﬁning the spin operator σij
s
on the subspace of each qubit as

s = 11,1 ⊗ 11,2 ⊗ · · · ⊗ σij
ˆσij

s ⊗ · · · ⊗ 1nm.

(10)

In the following, we will not discriminate between ˆσij
σij
s if the context is clear.
We can use this to rewrite T to get the target state Hamil-

s and

tonian

n
(cid:88)

Vj

m
(cid:89)

HF =

(1 − pij σij

s ).

j=1

i=1

(11)

Here, the product terms behave exactly like the classical
formulation with the integer decision matrix entries, i.e. the
terms are either 1 for xij = 0 and |sij(cid:105) = |0(cid:105) or (1 − pij)
for xij = 1 and |sij(cid:105) = |1(cid:105). In addition, boundary conditions
such as limitations on weapon assignments (3) can be imposed
using large energy penalties if the condition is not fulﬁlled.

However, for more than two weapons (i.e. m > 2) the
Hamiltonian as stated above can no longer be used on current
quantum hardware as it contains higher order non-linear spin
coupling terms (powers of σs greater than 2). Current hardware
can only process problems that can be cast into the form of
spin Hamiltonians with quadratic interactions, e.g., the widely
used Ising model, which has the form

HI = −

(cid:88)

i,j

Jijσi

zσj

z − µ

hjσj
z,

(cid:88)

j

(12)

where µ represents the magnetic moment of the spin, Jij the
interaction strength between all pairs of sites and hj a local
magnetic ﬁeld on spin at site j. The parameters Jij and hj
of the model can be set on the hardware side, which enables
inputting an optimization problem into a quantum processor if
the problem can be formulated in terms of such an Ising-type
Hamiltonian.

IV. ISING-TYPE REFORMULATION OF THE WTA
HAMILTONIAN WITH SPIN-SPIN INTERACTIONS

In order to calculate solutions to the WTA problem on
adiabatic quantum computing hardware based on spin inter-
actions, HF (11) has to be cast into the form of an Ising-
type Hamiltonian. Because of the higher-order couplings this
cannot be done in an exact way. Therefore, we construct a
second order approximation including boundary conditions in
a heuristic way.

The construction argument is that spins only need to in-
ﬂuence spins in the same row (j = 1, . . . , n) and the same
column (i = 1, . . . , m). This is based on the structure of the
WTA problem and target function T (1). Each weapon can be
used only on one target therefore each row i of xij needs
to be optimized separately and simultaneously, while each
column represents the decision how many weapons should
be used on one target, depending on target value Vj and the
overall destruction probabilities. Thus, decision entries that are
not in the same column or the same row cannot inﬂuence
each other directly. We, therefore, only have to consider spin
interaction terms within the same row or the same column.
The idea is now to set up a WTA Hamiltonian, which is only
of second order in σz but reﬂects the behavior of the full
classical problem formulation.

The building blocks for the overall Hamiltonian are inter-
actions between two spins within a row and within a column.
The ﬁrst block represents the case of a single weapon i and

two targets j, j(cid:48), which gives inserted in HF (see (11)):

Next, the general procedure for the application of adiabatic
evolution of the system discussed in the previous section is
carried out. For the initial state Hamiltonian HB and the initial
ground state |Ψ(0)(cid:105) we use the standard form that is prescribed
in [7], [16].

HB = −

(cid:88)

σij
x with σx =

(cid:19)

(cid:18)0 1
1 0

(18)

|Ψ(0)(cid:105) =

ij

1
(cid:88)

1
(cid:88)

· · ·

s11=0

smn=0

|s11, . . . , smn(cid:105) .

(19)

Following [17], the adiabatic evolution is governed by the

time dependent Hamiltonian:

(cid:18)

H(t) =

1 −

(cid:19)

t
Ta

HB +

t
Ta

˜HF

(20)

with the characteristic duration Ta chosen suitably long such
that during the adiabatic evolution between the two system
states most of the wave function remains in the ground state.
Using this Hamiltonian, the time evolution of the system is
calculated using the QuTiP package [18] in Python, which
solves the time dependent Schr¨odinger equation

|Ψ(t)(cid:105) = −i

(cid:90) t

0

H(t(cid:48)) |Ψ(t(cid:48))(cid:105) dt(cid:48)

(21)

numerically using the Master equation where the states and
operators are given in matrix representations.

Hrow(i; j, j(cid:48)) = Vj(1 − pij σij

s ) + Vj(cid:48)(1 − pij(cid:48) σij(cid:48)

s ).

(13)

V. NUMERIC SIMULATIONS

The boundary conditions (3) can be imposed by the Hamil-

tonian:

s σij(cid:48)
Hbc(i; j, j(cid:48)) = C σij
(cid:16)
1 − σij

=

s

C
4

z − σij(cid:48)

z + σij

z σij(cid:48)

z

(14)

(15)

(cid:17)

.

Hbc punishes each pair of double assignments with an

energy term C.

The second block, representing the case of a single target

and two weapons, gives inserted in HF :

Hcol(j; i, i(cid:48)) = Vj(1 − pij σij

s )(1 − pi(cid:48)j σi(cid:48)j

s ).

(16)

Using these blocks, a problem Hamiltonian of arbitrary size
can be constructed as long as all pairwise interactions within
each row and each column are included and summed over.

m
(cid:88)

n
(cid:88)

˜HF =

Hrow(i; j, j(cid:48)) + Hbc(i; j, j(cid:48))

i=1
n
(cid:88)

+

j(cid:48)<j=1
m
(cid:88)

Hcol(j; i, i(cid:48)).

j=1

i(cid:48)<i=1

(17)

In contrast to the original Hamiltonian (11), ˜HF is of second
order in σij
z . The overall lowest (ground
state) energy of this Hamiltonian encodes the solution of the
assignment problem.

s and, hence, in σij

In order to test the validity of the proposed optimization
model, we consider three systems with a 12-qubit register
each. This number of qubits represents the computational limit
of the hardware given by the amount of RAM needed to
represent the state basis and operators. The systems treat the
cases of (1) 4 weapons and 3 targets, (2) 6 weapons and 2
targets and (3) 2 weapons and 6 targets. The target threat
values are chosen w.o.l.g. on the order of 1. For all examples
the destruction probabilities are chosen such that at
least
one of the randomized values yields a very large destruction
probability. The Hamiltonian operators are constructed for
each system according to (17) and (18).

First we present a balanced engagement in system (1). Fig. 1
shows the evolution of the eigenenergies of H(t) during the
adiabatic transition. Note, that at each time there is a ﬁnite gap
between the ground state and the ﬁrst and higher excited states
guaranteeing that the adiabatic evolution is viable. In Fig. 2
the state amplitude evolution during the adiabatic transition to
the ﬁnal Hamiltonian HF is shown. Starting from a state with
equally distributed state populations the ﬁnal state shows clear
shifts of probabilitiy towards favorable solution states, with the
maximum at the position of the optimal solution. By taking
the position of the maximum, the spin state of the quantum
register can be recovered easily due to the ordering of the
state basis. The basis states are ordered as ascending integers

Fig. 1. Energy eigenvalues over time of the 4x3 system. A ﬁnite gap between
the ground state and all exicted states is present at all times.

Fig. 3. Detailed evaluation of the ﬁnal state amplitudes. The maximum
position transformed to binary representation represents the spin state of the
optimal solution. Insets give the threat values and destruction probabilities of
possible assignments as heat maps (blue: low values, yellow: high values). The
boundary conditions are fullﬁlled and the algorithm selects the engagements
with highest destruction probabilities.

Fig. 2. Time evolution of state population probabilities over the adiabatic
transition process in the 4x3 system. The ﬁnal state shows a distinct maximum
at the position of the optimal solution

in binary representation. Thus, a given spin state translates to
the position ksol of the basis state |Sk(cid:105) according to

ksol =

m
(cid:88)

n
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

sij 2m(j−1)+i−1.

(22)

Consequently, the inverse transformation to binary can con-
struct the solution from the position of the basis state. Looking
at the insets of Fig. 3, which show the threat values Vj and
destruction probabilities pij (blue: low values, yellow: high
values), it can be seen, that the optimization indeed picked the
correct solution of the optimization. The correct convergence
was furthermore validated by a separate calculation using the
cross entropy (CE) statistical optimization method [19] for the
given system, which yields the same result.

Fig. 4. Energy eigenvalues over time of the 6x2 system. A ﬁnite gap between
the ground state and all exicted states is present at all times.

The second system (2) represents an imbalanced engage-
ment with superior numbers of weapons. Here, each weapon
should select the target with highest destruction probability,
which is indeed the case as the evaluation results in ﬁgures
4-6 show.

The last system (3) deals with the reverse case of a superior
number of targets, which tests the accurate adherence of the
optimization to the imposed boundary condition, that each
weapon can only engage one target simultaneously. As Figs. 7-
9 show,
the adiabatic optimization algorithm assigns only
one target per weapon and chooses the targets with highest
destruction propability. The correct convergence was again

Fig. 5. Time evolution of state population probabilities over the adiabatic
transition process in the 6x2 system. The ﬁnal state shows a distinct maximum
at the position of the optimal solution.

Fig. 7. Energy eigenvalues over time of the 2x6 system. A ﬁnite gap between
the ground state and all exicted states is present at all times.

Fig. 6. Same as Fig. 3 but for the 6x2-system.

checked using separate CE optimization calculations, which
agree with the presented results.

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we showed how the target based formulation
of the WTA objective can be reformulated as a second order
approximation of the target function in the form of an Ising
model Hamiltonian. This in turn can be implemented in
adiabatic quantum computation hardware to efﬁciently solve
the WTA problem. We showed the correct convergence of
the proposed algorithm to the optimal solution for different
WTA scenarios. The scenario size was only limited by the
computational capabilities of the available classical hardware.
In future work, it is necessary to mathematically prove that
the approximate formulation indeed converges to the solution
of the full WTA target function. Furthermore, with increasing

Fig. 8. Time evolution of state population probabilities over the adiabatic
transition process in the 2x6 system. The ﬁnal state shows a distinct maximum
at the position of the optimal solution

capabilities of quantum computation hardware the method
could be also applied to solve the dynamic weapon target
assignment problem which will pose a challenge concerning
the implementation of suitable boundary conditions for
in principle only extends the
engagement durations but
solution space xij by an additional
time dimension.
Additionally more complex formulations like asset based
WTA can be considered. In any case AQC WTA promises
fast solution of the assignment optimization with improved
scalability to large problem instances making real
time
applications feasible.

[16] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, S. Gutmann, and M. Sipser, “Quantum
computation by adiabatic evolution,” arXiv: Quantum Physics, 2000.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0001106

[17] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many np problems,” Frontiers in
Physics, vol. 2, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fphy.2014.00005

[18] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, “Qutip 2: A python framework
the dynamics of open quantum systems,” Computer Physics
for
Communications, vol. 184, no. 4, p. 1234–1240, Apr 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.11.019

[19] R. Rubinstein, “The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and contin-
uous optimization,” Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability,
vol. 1, p. 127–190, 1999.

Fig. 9. Same as Fig. 3 but for the 2x6-system.

REFERENCES

[1] I. S. M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, “An introduction to quantum machine

learning,” Contemporary Physics, vol. 56, no. 2, 2014.

[2] F. Jazaeri, A. Beckers, A. Tajalli, and J. Sallese, “A review on quantum
computing: From qubits to front-end electronics and cryogenic MOSFET
physics,” in 2019 MIXDES - 26th International Conference ”Mixed
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems”, 2019, pp. 15–25.

[3] H.-L. Huang, D. Wu, D. Fan, and X. Zhu, “Superconducting
[Online]. Available: https:

quantum computing: A review,” 2020.
//arxiv.org/abs/2006.10433

[4] T. Albash and D. A. Lidar, “Adiabatic quantum computation,” Rev.
[Online]. Available:

Mod. Phys., vol. 90, p. 015002, Jan 2018.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.90.015002

[5] Z. Bian, F. A. Chudak, W. Macready, and G. Rose, “The Ising model:
teaching an old problem new tricks,” D-Wave Systems, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[6] M. Johnson et al., “Quantum annealing with manufactured spins,”

Nature, vol. 473, no. 7346, 2011.

[7] C. Bauckhage, E. Brito, K. Cvejoski, C. Ojeda, R. Sifa, and S. Wrobel,
“Adiabatic quantum computing for binary clustering,” 2017. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05528

[8] A. Kline, D. Ahner, and R. Hill, “The weapon-target assignment
problem,” Computers & Operations Research, vol. 105, pp. 226–236,
2019.

[9] K. Zhang, D. Zhou, Z. Yang, Y. Zhao, and W. Kong, “Efﬁcient decision
approaches for asset-based dynamic weapon target assignment by a
receding horizon and marginal return heuristic,” Electronics, vol. 9,
no. 9, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/
9/1511

[10] P. A. Hosein and M. Athans, “Some analytical results for the dynamic
weapon-target allocation problem,” Defence Technical Information Cen-
ter, Tech. Rep. ADA219281, 1990.

[11] R. K. Ahuja, A. Kumar, K. C. Jha, and J. B. Orlin, “Exact and heuris-
tic algorithms for the weapon-target assignment problem,” Operations
Research, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1136–1146, 2007.

[12] F. Ma, M. Ni, B. Gao, and Z. Yu, “An efﬁcient algorithm for the weapon
target assignment problem,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Information and Automation, Aug 2015, pp. 2093–2097.

[13] Juan Li, J. Chen, B. Xin, and Lu Chen, “Efﬁcient multi-objective evolu-
tionary algorithms for solving the multi-stage weapon target assignment
problem: A comparison study,” in 2017 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation (CEC), 2017, pp. 435–442.

[14] E. Sonuc¸, B. Sen, and S. BAYIR, “A parallel simulated annealing
algorithm for weapon-target assignment problem,” International Journal
of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 8, 04 2017.
[15] M. Born and V. Fock, “Beweis des Adiabatensatzes.” Z. Physik, vol. 51,

pp. 165–180, 08 1928.

