1
2
0
2

y
a
M
5
2

]
E
N
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
1
9
1
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Speed Benchmarking of Genetic Programming Frameworks

Francisco Baeta
University of Coimbra, CISUC, DEI
Coimbra, Portugal
fjrbaeta@student.dei.uc.pt

Tiago Martins
University of Coimbra, CISUC, DEI
Coimbra, Portugal
tiagofm@dei.uc.pt

João Correia
University of Coimbra, CISUC, DEI
Coimbra, Portugal
jncor@dei.uc.pt

Penousal Machado
University of Coimbra, CISUC, DEI
Coimbra, Portugal
machado@dei.uc.pt

ABSTRACT
Genetic Programming (GP) is known to suffer from the burden of
being computationally expensive by design. While, over the years,
many techniques have been developed to mitigate this issue, data
vectorization, in particular, is arguably still the most attractive strat-
egy due to the parallel nature of GP. In this work, we employ a
series of benchmarks meant to compare both the performance and
evolution capabilities of different vectorized and iterative imple-
mentation approaches across several existing frameworks. Namely,
TensorGP, a novel open-source engine written in Python, is shown
to greatly benefit from the TensorFlow library to accelerate the
domain evaluation phase in GP. The presented performance bench-
marks demonstrate that the TensorGP engine manages to pull ahead,
with relative speedups above two orders of magnitude for problems
with a higher number of fitness cases. Additionally, as a conse-
quence of being able to compute larger domains, we argue that
TensorGP performance gains aid the discovery of more accurate
candidate solutions.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Discrete space search; Mas-
sively parallel algorithms;

KEYWORDS
Genetic Programming, Parallelization, Vectorization, TensorFlow,
GPU Computing

ACM Reference Format:
Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado. 2021.
Speed Benchmarking of Genetic Programming Frameworks. In Proceedings
of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2021 (GECCO ’21).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3449639.3459335

1 INTRODUCTION
Genetic Programming (GP) is a subfield of Evolutionary Compu-
tation (EC) that aims to evolve a set of computer programs in a

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8350-9/21/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3449639.3459335

process of continuous stochastic optimization. The fact that the
candidate solutions themselves are represented through code makes
GP an automatic problem-solving tool that does not require infor-
mation about the structure or form of the optimal solution. On the
other hand, GP is historically known for being rather computation-
ally expensive, especially when it comes to the domain evaluation
phase [8].

However, because the expressions to evaluate remains constant
throughout the whole fitness domain, it is possible to vectorize
the set of data points, providing an opportunity for parallelism.
In his work, Keijzer [10] studied the benefits of such vectorized
approach over the standard case-by-case evaluation for symbolic
regressions. As pointed out, such a vectorized method effectively
reduces the asymptotic time complexity of evaluating an individual
to the number of nodes it contains.

A data vectorization approach is oftentimes coupled with the
capabilities of parallel hardware such as Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) [13]. Whereas a Central Processing Unit (CPU) strives to
minimize the latency of operations, a GPU mainly focuses on maxi-
mizing data throughput , i.e. the amount of information that gets
processed in a given time unit. For GP, a higher data throughput
translates to more GP operations per second (GPops) and conse-
quently faster evaluation speeds.

Typically, GPUs operate according to a model called Single Pro-
gram Multiple Data (SPMD), where many processors simultane-
ously run the same program/instruction on different inputs. This
concept applies to domain evaluation in GP, in the sense that in
every generation one must run every program in the population
on the same set of fitness cases. In recent years, we have witnessed
a steady growth in the computing capability of GPUs.

Indeed, even considering that CPUs have seen a throughput in-
crease in recent years, their floating point calculation performance
is still nowhere near that of a standard GPU. In what concerns
GP, a throughput oriented architecture is beneficial in the sense
that we can always increase the amount of evaluated fitness cases,
maximum generations, maximum allowed, etc., in the hopes of
improving the fitness of resulting candidate solutions.

Considering how crucial evaluation speeds are for GP applica-
tions, in this work we aim to provide a comprehensive study on
the performance differences amongst various frameworks using
different iterative and parallel data implementations. In particular,
we analyze TensorGP, a new GP engine written in Python that

 
 
 
 
 
 
GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado

takes advantage of the TensorFlow library to vectorize the evalu-
ation domain and perform fitness caching [3]. Other frameworks
analyzed in this paper include KarooGP, ECJ, TinyGP (Java), DEAP,
Evolving Objects (EO), and GPlearn.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
summarizes the architecture and workflow of TensorGP. Section 3
introduces the remaining frameworks to test, detailing the exper-
imental setup as well as the problems to benchmark. Section 4
analyses and discusses gathered results. Finally, Section 5 compiles
the main conclusions taken from this study while suggesting several
options for future work.

2 TENSORGP
TensorGP was developed to provide a robust system for seamlessly
integrating domain vectorization in GP [3]. Furthermore, taking ad-
vantage of the TensorFlow library, TensorGP manages to heteroge-
neously distribute computational efforts across different processor
types and architectures.

A detailed view of TensorGP’s feature set is documented in [3].
The following list summarizes the current core features of Ten-
sorGP:

(1) Implementation of standard GP hyperparameters and func-

tionalities: initialization methods, elitism, crossover
(2) Ability to stop and restart the evolutionary process;
(3) Support for custom initial populations in addition to ran-

domly generated ones;
(4) Multiple stop criteria;
(5) Support for customized operators;

2.1 Domain Evaluation with Tensors
In TensorGP, the domain of fitness cases to be evaluated is defined
by a tensor. Tensors are widely used in many fields of physics and
mathematics not only as data structures but also to express multi-
linear mappings within a vector space [18]. However, in the context
of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science in general, they are
often simply defined as a multidimensional array of elements. By
this definition, a tensor is nothing more than a generalization of
scalars (i.e. a tensor with 0 dimensions), vectors (a tensor with 1
dimension), matrices (a tensor with 2 dimensions), and so on. There-
fore, for a problem domain containing 𝑛 dimensions, there will be
𝑛 variables in the terminal set that TensorGP creates to represent
its candidate solutions.

The term “variables” is misleading in this scenario, as they in fact
refer to constant tensors in TensorGP. In a serial approach, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, ...
will actually be variables because they change according to which
element of the domain we are evaluating. In a vectorized approach,
however, we evaluate the entire domain in one vector operation
and, as a result, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, ... will be tensors that contain coordinates
within our problem domain. This means that, for instance, every
element in the 𝑥 tensor will hold the coordinate value of a given
fitness case along the 𝑥-axis. These tensors are initialized at the
beginning of the application and remain unchanged throughout
the evolutionary process.

In essence, TensorGP recursively applies tensor operations be-
tween these coordinate “variables” and other tensors of the terminal
set to produce a final output tensor that represents the evaluated

program. The following subsection details the intermediate repre-
sentations used to efficiently calculate this output tensor.

2.2 Representation Overview
Starting with the traditional way of representing a GP individual
as a mathematical expression, there are three translation steps (see
Figure 1) employed by TensorGP to produce the phenotype for that
individual:

(1) Convert the expression to a Tree Graph.
(2) Transform the Tree Graph into a Directed Acyclic Graph

(DAG).

(3) Traverse the obtained graph, recursively performing opera-

tions to produce the phenotype.

The resulting phenotype from step 3 is represented as our result
tensor that will be used in the next phase of fitness assessment.
This resulting phenotype, shown in Figure 1, represents a resulting
tensor of rank-3 relating to the height, width and color channels of
an image.

It should be noted that step 2 is not implemented by TensorGP
itself, but is rather an abstraction provided by TensorFlow to op-
timize the flow of tensor operations based on its execution mode.
TensorFlow has two main modes of execution: eager and graph.
As opposed to graph execution, eager mode does not explicitly
build the intermediate DAG of operations. Although TensorGP was
initially developed under the graph execution model, it was later
upgraded to exploit eager execution as this was shown to yield
better performance results [3].

3 FRAMEWORKS
This section presents the GP frameworks involved in the time com-
parison benchmarks and the necessary steps taken in the standard-
ization of these systems to achieve commensurable results.

Aside from efficiency and wide-spread use, an essential criterion
upon selecting these specific systems lies in the fact that they are
free and open-source.

3.1 Implementations
Seven different frameworks were tested as shown in Table 1.

Table 1: Considered GP frameworks along with their respective im-
plementation languages and device support.

Framework Language Processor
GPU/CPU
Python
TensorGP
GPU/CPU
Python
KarooGP
CPU
Java
ECJ
CPU
C++
EO
CPU
Java
TinyGP
CPU
Python
GPlearn
CPU
Python
DEAP

We start by detailing TensorGP and KarooGP. TensorFlow’s
design philosophy builds upon the principles of heterogeneous
computing [1] and as such, TensorGP also inherits this abstraction
layer for hardware utilization. For this reason, benchmarks for both
CPU and GPU devices will be provided in the next section, regarding

Speed Benchmarking of Genetic Programming Frameworks

GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Figure 1: Genotype to phenotype translation phases in TensorGP.

this framework. Akin to TensorGP, KarooGP resorts to TensorFlow
to vectorize operations over the domain of fitness cases [21], which
makes it a good candidate for direct comparison with TensorGP
running in GPU. Moreover, we chose KarooGP as there already
exist several research projects that use this engine [4, 5, 20].

As far as performance is concerned, the main difference between
TensorGP and KarooGP resides in the TensorFlow model of op-
eration. Even though both engines represent individuals with a
tree-based data structure, KarooGP uses TensorFlow’s graph execu-
tion model, which means that every individual in the population
has to be internally compiled into a DAG before the evaluation
phase can happen. TensorGP, on the other hand, operates in an
eager execution model that evaluates the tensor operations imper-
atively without building intermediate graphs. As a result, eager
execution aims to eliminate the overhead associated with graph
building without sacrificing the benefits provided by graphs [2]. In
the field of EC in general, the individuals of a population tend to
change throughout generations. While many memory and speed
optimizations can be achieved by working with a compiled DAG
structure, the evolutionary process in GP renders the compilation
of an individuals’ representation less useful [3].

Outside the realm of GPU computing, there are other prominent
GP engines worth testing against. In particular, DEAP is a com-
monly used EC framework that represents the standard for iterative
domain evaluation in GP research and literature [7]. Aside from its
popularity, we have chosen to include DEAP as it allows for the
quick prototyping of controlled evolutionary environments with
little implementation efforts. Likewise, GPlearn [22] also capital-
izes on the simplification of building GP models by extending the
scikit-learn Python machine learning library to perform Symbolic
Regression. Additionally, GPlearn supports running the evolution-
ary process in parallel. However, to the best of our knowledge, the
phase that gets parallelized in this framework is the application of
genetic operators themselves, not the evaluation of fitness cases.
Because the experimental setup used is very evaluation intensive,
we did not verify any positive performance gains from running
GPlearn with multithreading and therefore this option was disabled.
Another well-established system for evolutionary computation
is ECJ [14], written in Java. Because most of ECJ’s functionality is
determined by a hierarchy of parameter files provided by the user,
this framework is suited for complex research projects. Despite ECJ
not being primarily designed to run on parallel hardware, its ease

of integration enabled Robilliard et al. [17] to develop and compare
two GP parallelization schemes running on a NVIDIA GPU.

Similarly to ECJ we must consider EO, an object-oriented frame-
work that provides a flexible set of classes to build EC applica-
tions [11]. The object-oriented design philosophy is identical to
ECJ, with EO providing several classes and interfaces to abstract
the evolutionary process. Although the initial learning curve for
these last two frameworks might be steeper compared to other GP-
based engines such as DEAP, their generalization ability, extensive
documentation, and widespread use are the main factors for being
included in this comparative performance study.

Lastly, we include TinyGP, a more minimalistic implementation
of a GP system that uses a form of tree-based GP. This implemen-
tation is based on the Java implementation presented by R. Poli et
al.[16], which in turn is based on the engine originally developed
to meet the requirements set out in the TinyGP competition of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO) 2004.

3.2 Standardization Efforts
In an effort to level the playing field and achieve comparable re-
sults, some modifications were made to the existing frameworks.
Hereafter are presented the features that were the object of modifi-
cations as well as the reasoning behind them. The source code for
all projects used, including modifications, is publicly available. 1

GP, like any field of EC, entails stochastic processes related to
evolution (e.g. primitive and operator selection, population initial-
ization, genetic operators, etc) and as such, every GP framework
needs to employ some form of random number generation. Be-
cause different implementations call their random generators with
different frequencies and at different stages of the evolutionary
pipeline, it is not possible to ensure the replication of a given evo-
lutionary path in different engines using the same random seed
(even if both initial populations are set to be equal). This means that
experimental runs will inevitably follow distinct evolutionary paths
and consequently perform a different number of GP operations,
which can greatly affect both execution times and the evolution of
candidate solutions.

Nevertheless, although a common evolutionary path cannot be
set beforehand, we can make efforts to standardize the set of fea-
tures that the evolutionary process uses, relying upon sufficient
experimental runs to average out the inherent randomness. While

1Repository available at: https://github.com/AwardOfSky/GP-framework-comparison

min(mult(sin(y),sub(x,scalar(-1,0,1))),cos(sub(x,scalar(-1,0,1))))minmultcossubsinxscalar -1,0,1ygenotypegenotypetreedirectedacyclic graphphenotypeminmultcossubsinxscalar -1,0,1xscalar -1,0,1ysubGECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado

it is outside the scope of this work to change existing implemen-
tations, because some frameworks do not provide out of the box
support for all GP features considered in our experimentation, some
implementation efforts were necessary, albeit avoided when possi-
ble.

Many of the implementation struggles faced stemmed from the
nature of our benchmark: we are mainly interested in evolving
domains with a large number of fitness cases (millions in some
instances). The amount of data points to be evaluated made the
approach of passing a file as input for each individual fitness case
unfeasible as such files could easily exceed 1GB for some experi-
ments. Therefore, engines like KarooGP that followed this design
pattern were modified to programmatically evaluate over a linearly
spaced domain of data points, which boundaries and granularity
can be defined beforehand. Furthermore, we opted to implement
Ephemeral Random Constants [12] across the board, either by gen-
erating the values within the tree representation or by having them
pre-computed in the terminal set, as TinyGP does. Another imple-
mentation concern was the support for GP operations of variable
arity, which meant further modifications in some cases.

4 EXPERIMENTATION
In this section, we compare the execution times of various GP sys-
tems within a controlled environment, with all results representing
an average of 30 runs. The employed hardware and software is as
follows:

Table 2: Hardware and software specifications used for all experi-
ments.

Component

Specification

CPU
GPU
RAM
Operative system
Execution environment Command line

Intel Core i7-5930K
NVIDIA GTX TITAN X (12GB)
2 × 16 GB @2.133 Mhz
Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS

Before proceeding with the experimental results, we must ac-
knowledge that GP is not historically known for having a well-
defined set of benchmarking problems and setups. As a result, some
studies analyzed this issue and suggested useful pointers and prob-
lem sets aimed at organizing better benchmarking suites in GP
[6, 15]. This work intends on putting these guidelines to use in the
hopes of achieving a rigorous comparative study.

4.1 Experimental Setup
All tests employed in this section concern the approximation of the
Pagie polynomial function defined by:

𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑦) =

1
1 + 𝑥 −4

+

1
1 + 𝑦−4

(1)

We chose this function as it is considered to be challenging to ap-
proximate and is therefore recommended by several GP benchmark
articles [9, 15].

As mentioned, the main objective is to compare frameworks
directly. In particular, we investigate how increasing the domain

size of a problem impacts running times by employing a series of
test sets that exponentially increase the number of fitness cases to
calculate. Every test set refers to the evaluation of a square two-
dimensional domain of values. In the first test set, each framework
evaluates a grid of 64 by 64 (4,096 data points). Each subsequent
test set then doubles the length of each side of the grid, effectively
quadrupling the total number of evaluations (i.e. the second test
set has a size of 128 by 128 or 16,384 data points, all the way up to
4,096 by 4.096 or over 16 million points).

Because the domain sizes considered in some test sets encompass
a wide range of values, our best bet for graphical representation
is to use a logarithmic scale as it would be otherwise impossible
to distinguish between results. It is also worth noting that because
the logarithmic nature of the scale clutters the visualization of the
standard deviation values, a table is provided with the correspond-
ing average and standard deviation results. Aside from domain size,
the GP parameterization remains unchanged obeying the following
setup:

Table 3: Experimental GP parameters for the framework compari-
son experiment.

Parameter

Value

Runs
Generations
Population size
Elite size
Tournament size
Mutation probability
Mutation probability
Minimum initial depth
Maximum initial depth
Maximum allowed depth
Generation method
Fitness metric
Domain range

30
50
50
1
3
0.1
0.9
1
10
10
RHH (population)
RMSE
[-5, 5]

As pointed out in Table 3, the initial population was generated
with the Ramped Half-and-Half (RHH) method. Typically, there
are two ways of implementing this method: one that works over a
single tree, generating a root node and creating half of the tree with
the grow method using full for the other half, and one that works
over the entire population, dividing it into blocks of different depths
splitting the number of trees in each block to use either the full or
grow method. TensorGP uses the second approach to implement
RHH. However, this is only but an implementation detail, other
frameworks were given the freedom to employ their versions of
the RHH algorithm.

Concerning fitness metrics, the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)

was implemented across all engines.

No evolutionary methods were re-implemented within the ana-
lyzed frameworks to strictly comply with TensorGP’s implemen-
tation. For this reason, we are not comparing the evolution of the
same set of initial populations using the same genetic operator
implementations. However, while it is true that a straightforward
comparison can only be achieved over the same evolutionary path,
as discussed in the last section, such a comparison is unattainable as

Speed Benchmarking of Genetic Programming Frameworks

GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Figure 2: 30 run average of total execution time (measured in seconds) across different approaches evaluating a two-dimensional domain
ranging from 4,096 data points to over 16 million. Values not shown corresponds to test sets that did not finished either due to memory
limitations or by failing to meet the time constraint threshold.

it is impossible to reproduce the same evolutionary stochasticity in
different frameworks. Besides, implementing the same algorithms
across all engines (besides being too daunting of a task) would
still not guarantee reproducibility. As a sidenote, GPlearn and Ka-
rooGP did not employ elitism. As far as we investigated, elitism
is not directly included in the feature set of said frameworks. Still,
we assume the possibility of having missed some implementation
detail.

Disclaimers aside, we should see this comparison in terms of
how much time will it take to execute the same setup across all
frameworks considered.

4.2 Results
For the performance benchmark, a total of 1,230 tests were carried
out. Some approaches that either took too long to finish on average
(maximum of 1 hour per experimental run, on average) or crashed
due to memory limitations were not considered. Because TengorGP
was benchmarked twice on different hardware, we will refer to
each run of the whole array of test sets as relating to an approach
rather than a framework to avoid confusion. Figure 2 shows the
total execution time for all approaches across different domain sizes,
each value corresponding to an arithmetic average of 30 runs.

For larger domains, a clear preference towards data vectoriza-
tion starts to become evident. Besides TensorGP, the only engine
to internally employ data vectorization is KarooGP. Even though
KarooGP is comparatively slower than most approaches for smaller
domains, its running time remains relatively unchanged through-
out the first few test sets, as seen in Table 4. This phenomenon is
easily explained by the internal overhead of building the DAG of
GP operations that KarooGP performs with the TensorFlow graph
execution model. Up until the fourth test set (262,144 points), most
of KarooGP execution is spent building the intermediate graphs
rather than executing GP operations, hence the jump from last (on
the first test set) to third fastest approach.

As demonstrated, the two fastest approaches both used Ten-
sorGP, only on different processors. As the name implies, “Ten-
sorGP (GPU)” was executed on the GPU described in Table 2 and
“Tensor CPU” on the matching CPU. Due to TensorGP resorting to
TensorFlow for domain evaluation, there is always data vectoriza-
tion being exploited as long as the hardware supports it. We eould
be inclined to assume that an approach running on GPU using
TensorFlow such as KarooGP would not be slower than another
running the same environment under the same library but using a
CPU architecture. In reality, aside from the aforementioned graph
building overhead specific to KarooGP, we must not underestimate
the vectorization capabilities of modern CPUs. Indeed, TensorFlow
is able to take advantage of the AVX2 [19] instruction set, avail-
able on the CPU used. Coupled with the absence of graph building
overhead, this explains why TensorGP execution on CPU is the
second-fastest approach according to our results.

Regarding TensorGP running in GPU, we can identify a clear
performance lead throughout all test sets except the first (4,096 data
points), where it is outperformed by its CPU counterpart as well as
EO and ECJ. However, the lack of relative performance at the start
can be easily explained by the fact that, while executing on the GPU,
TensorFlow first needs to move the tensor data from the CPU, where
it is initialized, to the GPU, and then back again. Although this
memory management overhead limits the performance of TensorGP
GPU for smaller domains, the modest performance hit pays off in
the remaining test sets. As a matter of fact, by the second test set
(16,384 points), TensorGP is already almost twice as fast as the
approach running on CPU (see Table 4). TensorGP GPU was the
only approach that made feasible the evaluation of the last test set
containing over 16 million data points, with an average execution
time of just under a minute. Apart from the parallelization power
of our GPU, this would not be possible without a sufficiently large
VRAM to hold all the tensor data.

GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado

Figure 3: 30 run average values regarding the error from the optimal solution of the best individuals across generations for test sets ranging
from 4,096 points to over 16 million points. These results correspond to the TensorGP GPU approach, measured with the RMSE fitness metric.

Moreover, it is shown that, for smaller domains, the overhead
of moving tensor data is so overwhelming when compared with
the time that it takes to execute GP operations, that TensorGP GPU
maintains roughly the same overall engine time up to domains with
more than 1 million fitness cases (fifth test set). After this point,
TensorGP GPU starts to exhibit linear behaviour in proportion to
the domain size, as shown by the last two test sets. This happens
as we meet the throughput and Video Random Access Memory
(VRAM) limitations of the GPU considered, resulting in more data
transfers between processors. TensorGP CPU also shows a similar
tendency, with a somewhat sublinear time behaviour up until the
fourth test set (262,144 data points), a point from which it increases
linearly with an increase in tensor side. In practice, this phenom-
enon of near-constant performance followed by a linear increase
in computation time is characteristic of all approaches that use
vectorization, especially those with higher parallelization potential
such as TensorGP and KarooGP.

As opposed to vectorized approaches, the iterative ones display
a linear-like behaviour from the start. ECJ, written in Java, is a
performance winner when it comes to traditional evaluation, only
giving its place to EO in the second test set (16,384 points) by a
small margin. In turn, EO follows closely behind ECJ, being about
1.5 times slower than this framework for a tensor side of 2,048 (over
4 million data points).

Akin to ECJ, TinyGP is also implemented in Java but falls short
of the evaluation speed achieved by ECJ and EO. Nevertheless, we
must keep in min that TinyGP is mainly an academic exercise meant
to show how easily one can set up a GP system, not necessarily
a full-blown research tool. As a consequence, TinyGP has a more
minimalistic design that compromises some performance for sim-
plicity. We also showcase GPlearn, a framework that reveals similar
execution times compared to TinyGP even though it is implemented
in Python, which is inevitably slower due to the interpretation over-
heads. For this reason, GPLearn fell short of completing the fifth
test case in the allocated time frame, even if by a slight margin.

Lastly, DEAP is the slowest considering evaluation speed alone,
only completing the three first test sets. Still, in the same manner
that TinyGP is not specifically tailored for performance, the main
asset associated with DEAP is its ease of use and prototyping rather
than speed. In fact, and despite being an EC framework, DEAP was
one of the frameworks that required fewer implementation efforts
to integrate our experimental setup, the other Python engines that
are GP specific.

These tests explore populations with different average depths
accentuates the tendency for some values to deviate from the norm,
explaining some atypical behaviour in execution times, as demon-
strated by the standard deviations in Table 4. This was verified in
approaches such as DEAP and TensorGP GPU. In DEAP, the 256
test set took considerably longer than expected following a linear
behaviour. On the contrary, TensorGP GPU saw a marginal reduc-
tion in execution times throughout the first few test sets, mainly
due to large data transfer overheads and negligible tensor execution
times.

Finally, an analysis of our experimental results would not be
complete without looking at performance metrics regarding fitness
evolution. Figure 3 shows the best fitness across generations for
all considered test sets performed with TensorGP running on GPU.
Because we perform elitism of size 1, the best-fitted individuals
will automatically be promoted to the next generation, ensuring
the monotonical decrease of obtained results. As shown, every test
set roughly follows the same behaviour. The first test set displays,
on average, slightly better performance across generations, with
the largest domain size being marginally worst by the end of the
experimental runs.

However, a disclaimer must be made about the direct comparison
between test sets: because each set evaluates domains of increasing
sizes, a lower score on the RMSE fitness metric for a larger domain
does not necessarily mean that a worse solution was found. In fact,
more data points condensed in the same domain range translates
into less granularity, which in turn allows the assessment against a

Speed Benchmarking of Genetic Programming Frameworks

GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Table 4: Execution times, measured in seconds, of 30 run average (AVG) and standard deviation (STD) values across different approaches
evaluating a two-dimensional domain which length ranges from 64 to 4,096 fitness cases. Cells corresponding to the fastest approach are
highlighted for each test set. Values represented with DNF did not finished either due to memory limitations or time constraints.

642
4,096
1282
16,384
2562
65,536
5122
262,144
1, 0242
1,048,576
2, 0482
4,194,304
4, 0962
16,777,216

AVG
STD
AVG
STD
AVG
STD
AVG
STD
AVG
STD
AVG
STD
AVG
STD

TensorGP
(GPU)

TensorGP
(CPU)

KarooGP
(GPU)

ECJ

EO

5.17
2.66
5.44
3.24
5.12
1.87
4.39
1.88
4.77
2.02
14.85
9.82
59.46
24.66

4.58
2.19
10.89
5.38
16.87
8.96
25.16
12.09
91.85
52.81
317.78
134.72
DNF
DNF

3.10
140.16
1.70
47.35
13.45
178.64
8.99
83.56
55.75
183.77
40.18
75.36
210.77
224.22
108.04
51.01
764.34
555.33
430.40
167.24
3244.16
DNF
2058.81
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF stands for “Did Not Finish”.

3.65
4.31
10.36
5.50
77.50
79.32
365.95
612.17
1219.3
1375.67
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF

TinyGP
(Java)
15.25
30.96
102.06
225.68
270.22
407.23
937.06
1513.51
3287.50
4313.04
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF

GPlearn

DEAP

21.41
12.32
69.43
39.21
236.23
84.47
954.02
545.43
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF

133.63
185.49
241.12
144.78
1610.46
3088.09
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF
DNF

target that is closer to the optimal solution. Thereby, the fact that
the fitness results are fairly close together only demonstrates that
the Pagie Polynomial does not necessarily take advantage of the
evaluation over domains with millions of fitness cases (at least not
within the considered range).

5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we carried out a comparative performance study be-
tween an array of GP capable frameworks that are widely used
amongst the research community. Additionally, in our study we in-
clude TensorGP, a recently developed GP engine written in Python
that takes advantage of the TensorFlow library to perform data
vectorization.

The experimental results demonstrate that TensorGP achieves
faster execution times within the same controlled setup when com-
pared to other systems. Specifically, speedups of up to 100 times
were verified when compared to well-established frameworks that
perform iterative evaluation such as ECJ or EO as well as a similar
vectorization boosted framework (KarooGP). The aforementioned
performance gains are shown to be even more pronounced for the
evaluation of domains containing millions of data points and when
executing on throughput oriented architectures where GPUs are
included. This increase in the number of fitness cases to evaluate
provides more information about the optimal solution increasing
the potential for approximation and discovery of more accurate
candidate solutions. However, analyzing fitness evolution across
generations, we conclude that the benchmarked problem does not
significantly benefit from being evaluated on larger domains, as
obtained results are predominantly similar throughout all test sets.
More importantly, we must take these results in perspective, re-
alizing that each framework has certain application specializations
and that no approach is a perfect fit for all scenarios. Overall, the
fast execution times provided by TensorGP reveal great potential

to solve problems with larger domains that require more detailed
solutions.

Regarding future work, several endeavors are to be considered.
Primarily, the current study can be extended to include other prob-
lems, not only pertaining to symbolic regression but also in the areas
of classification, predictive modeling, and other metrics. In partic-
ular, the study of problems with a higher pervasiveness of local
extrema seems compelling as, theoretically, such problems would
reap the benefits furnished by evaluating over high-resolution do-
mains. Likewise, because TensorGP performance makes feasible
the exploitation of GP parameters, investigating the influence of
individuals with higher depths for certain problems is another pos-
sibility to consider. Furthermore, the inclusion of current real-world
GP problems and experimental setups within future testing suites
should not be neglected, as these provide irrefutable arguments to
the usefulness of any GP framework.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is funded by national funds through the FCT - Foun-
dation for Science and Technology, I.P., within the scope of the
project CISUC - UID/CEC/00326/2020 and by European Social Fund,
through the Regional Operational Program Centro 2020 and by the
project grant DSAIPA/DS/0022/2018 (GADgET). We also thank the
NVIDIA Corporation for the hardware granted to this research.

REFERENCES
[1] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen,
Craig Citro, Greg S Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, et al.
2016. Tensorflow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467 (2016).

[2] Akshay Agrawal, Akshay Naresh Modi, Alexandre Passos, Allen Lavoie, Ashish
Agarwal, Asim Shankar, Igor Ganichev, Josh Levenberg, Mingsheng Hong, Rajat
Monga, et al. 2019. TensorFlow Eager: A multi-stage, Python-embedded DSL for
machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.01855 (2019).

[3] Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado. 2021. Ten-
sorGP – Genetic Programming Engine in TensorFlow. In Applications of Evolu-
tionary Computation. Springer International Publishing, 763–778.

GECCO ’21, July 10–14, 2021, Lille, France

Francisco Baeta, João Correia, Tiago Martins, and Penousal Machado

[4] Marco Cavaglià, Sergio Gaudio, Travis Hansen, Kai Staats, M Szczepańczyk, and
Michele Zanolin. 2020. Improving the background of gravitational-wave searches
for core collapse supernovae: A machine learning approach. Machine Learning:
Science and Technology 1, 1 (2020), 015005.

[5] Marco Cavaglia, Kai Staats, and Teerth Gill. 2018. Finding the origin of noise
transients in LIGO data with machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05225
(2018).

[6] Robert Feldt, Michael O’Neill, Conor Rayn, Peter Nordin, and William B Langdon.
2000. GP-beagle: A benchmarking problem repository for the genetic program-
ming community. Late Breaking Papers at GECCO (2000), 1–8.

[7] Félix-Antoine Fortin, François-Michel De Rainville, Marc-André Gardner Gardner,
Marc Parizeau, and Christian Gagné. 2012. DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made
easy. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 13, 1 (2012), 2171–2175.

[8] Mario Giacobini, Marco Tomassini, and Leonardo Vanneschi. 2002. Limiting the
number of fitness cases in genetic programming using statistics. In International
Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature. Springer, 371–380.

[9] Robin Harper. 2012. Spatial co-evolution: quicker, fitter and less bloated. In
Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation.
759–766.

[10] Maarten Keijzer. 2004. Alternatives in subtree caching for genetic programming.

In European Conference on Genetic Programming. Springer, 328–337.

[11] Maarten Keijzer, Juan J Merelo, Gustavo Romero, and Marc Schoenauer. 2001.
Evolving objects: A general purpose evolutionary computation library. In In-
ternational Conference on Artificial Evolution (Evolution Artificielle). Springer,
231–242.

[12] John R Koza and John R Koza. 1992. Genetic programming: on the programming

of computers by means of natural selection. Vol. 1. MIT press.

[13] William B Langdon and Wolfgang Banzhaf. 2008. A SIMD interpreter for ge-
netic programming on GPU graphics cards. In European Conference on Genetic

Programming. Springer, 73–85.

[14] Sean Luke, Liviu Panait, Gabriel Balan, Sean Paus, Zbigniew Skolicki, Jeff Bassett,
Robert Hubley, and A Chircop. 2006. Ecj: A java-based evolutionary computation
research system. Downloadable versions and documentation can be found at the
following url: http://cs. gmu. edu/eclab/projects/ecj 880 (2006).

[15] James McDermott, David R White, Sean Luke, Luca Manzoni, Mauro Castelli,
Leonardo Vanneschi, Wojciech Jaskowski, Krzysztof Krawiec, Robin Harper,
Kenneth De Jong, et al. 2012. Genetic programming needs better benchmarks. In
Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation.
791–798.

[16] Riccardo Poli, William B Langdon, Nicholas F McPhee, and John R Koza. 2008. A

field guide to genetic programming. Lulu. com.

[17] Denis Robilliard, Virginie Marion, and Cyril Fonlupt. 2009. High performance
genetic programming on GPU. In Proceedings of the 2009 workshop on Bio-inspired
algorithms for distributed systems. 85–94.

[18] Todd Rowland and Eric W Weisstein. 2020. Tensor. From MathWorld—A Wolfram

Web Resource. (2020). http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Tensor.html

[19] Daniel Smilkov, Nikhil Thorat, Yannick Assogba, Ann Yuan, Nick Kreeger, Ping Yu,
Kangyi Zhang, Shanqing Cai, Eric Nielsen, David Soergel, et al. 2019. Tensorflow.
js: Machine learning for the web and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05350
(2019).

[20] Kai Staats. 2016. Genetic programming applied to RFI mitigation in radio astronomy.

Master’s thesis. University of Cape Town.

[21] Kai Staats, Edward Pantridge, Marco Cavaglia, Iurii Milovanov, and Arun Aniyan.
2017. TensorFlow enabled genetic programming. In Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion. 1872–1879.

[22] Trevor Stephens. 2019. GPLearn (2015). URL https://gplearn. readthedocs.

io/en/stable/index. html (2019).

