1
2
0
2

n
u
J

1
2

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
8
0
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

1

Affect-driven Engagement Measurement
from Videos

Ali Abedi and Shehroz Khan

Abstract—In education and intervention programs, person’s engagement has been identiﬁed as a major factor in successful program
completion. Automatic measurement of person’s engagement provides useful information for instructors to meet program objectives
and individualize program delivery. In this paper, we present a novel approach for video-based engagement measurement in virtual
learning programs. We propose to use affect states, continuous values of valence and arousal extracted from consecutive video
frames, along with a new latent affective feature vector and behavioral features for engagement measurement. Deep learning-based
temporal, and traditional machine-learning-based non-temporal models are trained and validated on frame-level, and video-level
features, respectively. In addition to the conventional centralized learning, we also implement the proposed method in a decentralized
federated learning setting and study the effect of model personalization in engagement measurement. We evaluated the performance
of the proposed method on the only two publicly available video engagement measurement datasets, DAiSEE and EmotiW, containing
videos of students in online learning programs. Our experiments show a state-of-the-art engagement level classiﬁcation accuracy of
63.3% and correctly classifying disengagement videos in the DAiSEE dataset and a regression mean squared error of 0.0673 on the
EmotiW dataset. Our ablation study shows the effectiveness of incorporating affect states in engagement measurement. We interpret
the ﬁndings from the experimental results based on psychology concepts in the ﬁeld of engagement.

Index Terms—Engagement Measurement, Engagement Detection, Affect States, Temporal Convolutional Network.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

O NLINE services, such as virtual education,

tele-
medicine, and tele-rehabilitation offer many advan-
tages compared to their traditional in-person counterparts;
being more accessible, economical, and personalizable.
These online services make it possible for students to com-
plete their courses [1] and patients to receive the necessary
care and health support [2] remotely. However, they also
bring other types of challenges. For instance, in an online
classroom setting, it becomes very difﬁcult for the tutor to
assess the students’ engagement in the material being taught
[3]. For a clinician, it is important to assess the engagement
of patients in virtual intervention programs, as the lack
of engagement is one of the most inﬂuential barriers to
program completion [4]. Therefore, from the view of the
instructor of an online program, it is important to automat-
ically measure the engagement level of the participants to
provide them real-time feedback and take necessary actions
to engage them to maximize their program’s objectives.

Various modalities have been used for automatic engage-
ment measurement in virtual settings, including person’s
image [5], [6], video [7], audio [8], Electrocardiogram (ECG)
[9], and pressure sensors [10]. Video cameras/webcams are
mostly used in virtual programs; thus, they have been ex-
tensively used in assessing engagement in these programs.
Video cameras/webcams offer a cheaper, ubiquitous and
unobtrusive alternative to other sensing modalities. There-
fore, majority of the recent works on objective engagement
measurement in online programs and human-computer in-
teraction are based on the visual data of participants ac-

• Ali Abedi

is with KITE-Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University

Health Network, Toronto, On, M5G 2A2.
E-mail: ali.abedi@uhn.ca

quired by cameras and using computer-vision techniques
[11], [12].

The computer-vision-based approaches for engagement
measurement are categorized into image-based and video-
based approaches. The former approach measures engage-
ment based on single images [5] or single frames extracted
from videos [6]. A major limitation of this approach is
that it only utilizes spatial information from single frames,
whereas engagement is a spatio-temporal state that takes
place over time [13]. Another challenge with the frame-
based approach is that annotation is needed for each frame
[14], which is an arduous task in practice. The latter ap-
proach is to measure engagement from videos instead of
using single frames. In this case, one label is needed after
each video segment. Fewer annotations are required in this
case; however, the measurement problem is more challeng-
ing due to the coarse labeling.

The video-based engagement measurement approaches
can be categorized into end-to-end and feature-based ap-
proaches. In the end-to-end approaches, consecutive raw
frames of video are fed to variants of Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) (many times followed by temporal neural
networks) to output the level of engagement [15]. In feature-
based approaches, handcrafted features, as indicators of
engagement, are extracted from video frames and analyzed
by temporal neural networks or machine-learning methods
to output the engagement level [16], [17]. Various features
have been used in the previous feature-based approaches
including behavioral features such as eye gaze, head pose,
and body pose. Despite the psychological evidence for
the effectiveness of affect states in person’s engagement
[13], [18], [19], none of the previous computer-vision-based
approaches have utilized these important features for en-
gagement measurement. In this paper, we propose a novel

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

feature-based approach for engagement measurement from
videos using affect states, along with a new latent affective
feature vector based on transfer learning, and behavioral
features. These features are analyzed using different tem-
poral neural networks and machine-learning algorithms to
output person’s engagement in videos. Our main contribu-
tions are as follows:

• We use affect states including continuous values of
person’s valence and arousal, and present a new
latent affective feature using a pre-trained model [20]
on the AffectNet dataset [21], along with behavioral
features for video-based engagement measurement.
We jointly train different models on the above fea-
tures using frame-level, video-level, and clip-level
architectures.

• We conduct extensive experiments on two publicly
available video datasets for engagement level clas-
siﬁcation and regression, focusing on studying the
impact of affect states in engagement measurement.
In these experiments, we compare the proposed
method with several end-to-end and feature-based
engagement measurement approaches.

• We implement the proposed engagement measure-
ment method in a Federated Learning (FL) setting
[22], and study the effect of model personalization
on engagement measurement.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes
what engagement is and which type of engagement will
be explored in this paper. Section 3 describes related works
on video-based engagement measurement. In Section 4, the
proposed pathway for affect-driven video-based engage-
ment measurement is presented. Section 5 describes exper-
imental settings and results on the proposed methodology.
In the end, Section 6 presents our conclusions and directions
for future works.

2 WHAT IS ENGAGEMENT?

In this section, different theoretical, methodological catego-
rizations, and conceptualizations of engagement are brieﬂy
described, followed by brief discussion on the engagement
in virtual learning settings and human-computer interaction
which will be explored in this paper.

Dobrian et al. [23] describe engagement as a proxy for
involvement and interaction. Sinatra et al. deﬁned “grain
size” for engagement, the level at which engagement is
conceptualized, observed, and measured [18]. The grain
size ranges from macro-level to micro-level. The macro-
level engagement is related to groups of people, such as
engagement of employees of an organization in a particular
project, engagement of a group of older adult patients in
a rehabilitation program, and engagement of students in a
classroom, school, or community. The micro-level engage-
ment links with individual’s engagement in the moment,
task, or activity [18]. Measurement at the micro-level may
use physiological and psychological indices of engagement
such as blink rate [24], head pose [16], heart rate [25], and
mind-wandering analysis [26].

The grain size of engagement analysis can also be
considered as a continuum comprising context-oriented,

2

person-in-context, and person-oriented engagement [18].
The macro-level and micro-level engagement are equivalent
to the context-oriented, and person-oriented engagement,
respectively, and the person-in-context lies in between. The
person-in-context engagement can be measured by obser-
vations of person’s interactions with a particular contextual
environment, e.g., reading a web page or participating in
an online classroom. Except for the person-oriented engage-
ment, for measuring the two other parts of the continuum,
knowledge about context is required, e.g., the lesson being
taught to the students in a virtual classroom [27], or the
information about rehabilitation consulting material being
given to a patient and the severity of disease of the patient
in a virtual rehabilitation session [10], or audio and the topic
of conversations in an audio-video communication [8].

In the person-oriented engagement, the focus is on the
behavioral, affective, and cognitive states of the person in
the moment of interaction [13]. It is not stable over time and
best captured with physiological and psychological mea-
sures at ﬁne-grained time scales, from seconds to minutes
[13].

• Behavioral engagement involves general on-task be-
havior and paid attention at the surface level [13],
[18], [19]. The indicators of behavioral engagement,
in the moment of interaction, include eye contact,
blink rate, and body pose.

• Affective engagement is deﬁned as the affective and
emotional reactions of the person to the content [28].
Its indicators are activating versus deactivating and
positive versus negative emotions [29]. Activating
emotions are associated with engagement [18]. While
both positive and negative emotions can facilitate
engagement and attention, research has shown an
advantage for positive emotions over negative ones
in upholding engagement [29].

• Cognitive engagement pertains to the psychologi-
cal investment and effort allocation of the person
to deeply understand the context materials [18].
To measure the cognitive engagement, information
such as person’s speech should be processed to rec-
ognize the level of person’s comprehension of the
context [8]. Contrary to the behavioral and affective
engagements, measuring cognitive engagement re-
quires knowledge about context materials.

Understanding of a person’s engagement in a speciﬁc con-
text depends on the knowledge about the person and the
context. From data analysis perspective, it depends on the
data modalities available to analyze. In this paper, the focus
is on video-based engagement measurement. The only data
modality is video, without audio, and with no knowledge
about the context. Therefore, we propose new methods
for automatic person-oriented engagement measurement by
analyzing behavioral and affective states of the person at the
moment of participation in an online program.

3 LITERATURE REVIEW

Over the recent years, extensive research efforts have been
devoted to automate engagement measurement [11], [12].
Different modalities of data are used to measure the level

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

of engagement [12], including RGB video [15], [17], audio
[8], ECG data [9], pressure sensor data [10], heart rate
data [25], and user-input data [12], [25]. In this section,
we study previous works on RGB video-based engage-
ment measurement. In these approaches, computer-vision,
machine-learning, and deep-learning algorithms are used
to analyze videos and output the engagement level of the
person in the video. Video-based engagement measurement
approaches can be categorized into end-to-end and feature-
based approaches.

3.1 End-to-End Video Engagement Measurement

In end-to-end video engagement measurement approaches,
no hand-crafted features are extracted from videos. The raw
frames of videos are fed to a deep CNN (or its variant) clas-
siﬁer, or regressor to output an ordinal class, or a continuous
value corresponding to the engagement level of the person
in the video.

Gupta et al. [15] introduced the DAiSEE dataset for
video-based engagement measurement (described in Sec-
tion 5) and established benchmark results using different
end-to-end convolutional video-classiﬁcation techniques.
They used the InceptionNet, C3D, and Long-term Recurrent
Convolutional Network (LRCN) [30] and achieved 46.4%,
56.1%, and 57.9% engagement level classiﬁcation accuracy,
respectively. Geng et al. [31] utilized the C3D classiﬁer along
with the focal loss to develop an end-to-end method to
classify the level of engagement in the DAiSEE dataset
and achieved 56.2% accuracy. Zhang et al. [32] proposed
a modiﬁed version of the Inﬂated 3D-CNN (I3D) along
with the weighted cross-entropy loss to classify the level
of engagement in the DAiSEE dataset, and achieved 52.4%
accuracy.

Liao et el. [7] proposed Deep Facial Spatio-Temporal Net-
work (DFSTN) for students’ engagement measurement in
online learning. Their model for engagement measurement
contains two modules, a pre-trained ResNet-50 is used for
extracting spatial features from faces, and a Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) with global attention for generating
an attentional hidden state. They evaluated their method on
the DAiSEE dataset and achieved a classiﬁcation accuracy
of 58.84%. They also evaluated their method on the EmotiW
dataset (described in Section 5) and achieved a regression
Mean Squired Error (MSE) of 0.0736.

Dewan et el. [33], [34], [35] modiﬁed the original four-
level video engagement annotations in the DAiSEE dataset
and deﬁned two and three-level engagement measurement
problems based on the labels of other emotional states in
the DAiSEE dataset (described in Section 5). They also
changed the video engagement measurement problem in
the DAiSEE dataset to an image engagement measurement
problem and performed their experiments on 1800 images
extracted from videos in the DAiSEE dataset. They used 2D-
CNN to classify extracted face regions from images into two
or three levels of engagement. The authors in [33], [34], [35]
have altered the original video engagement measurement to
image engagement measurement problem. Therefore, their
reported accuracy would be hard to verify for generalization
of results and their methods working with images cannot
be compared to other works on the DAiSEE dataset that use
videos.

3

More recently, Abedi and Khan [36] proposed a hy-
brid neural network architecture by combining Resid-
ual Network (ResNet) and Temporal Convolutional Net-
work (TCN) [37] for end-to-end engagement measurement
(ResNet + TCN). The 2D ResNet extracts spatial features
from consecutive video frames, and the TCN analyzes the
temporal changes in video frames to measure the level
of engagement. They improved state-of-the-art engagement
classiﬁcation accuracy on the DAiSEE dataset to 63.9%.

3.2 Feature-based Video Engagement Measurement

Different from the end-to-end approaches, in feature-based
approaches, ﬁrst, multi-modal handcrafted features are ex-
tracted from videos, and then the features are fed to a
classiﬁer or regressor to output engagement [6], [7], [8],
[10], [11], [12], [16], [17], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43],
[44], [45]. Table 1 summarizes the literature of feature-based
video engagement measurement approaches focusing on
their features, machine-learning models, and datasets.

As can be seen in Table 1, in some of the previous
methods, conventional computer-vision features such as box
ﬁlter, Gabor [6], or LBP-TOP [43] are used for engagement
measurement. In some other methods [8], [16], for extracting
facial embedding features, a CNN, containing convolutional
layers, followed by fully-connected layers, is trained on
a face recognition or facial expression recognition dataset.
Then, the output of the convolutional layers in the pre-
trained model is used as the facial embedding features.
In most of the previous methods, facial action units (AU),
eye movement, gaze direction, and head pose features are
extracted using OpenFace [46], or body pose features are
extracted using OpenPose [47]. Using combinations of these
feature extraction techniques, various features are extracted
and concatenated to construct a feature vector for each video
frame.

Two types of models are used for performing classi-
ﬁcation (C) or regression (R), sequential (Seq.) and non-
sequential (Non.). In sequential models, e.g., LSTM, each
feature vector, corresponding to each video frame, is consid-
ered as one time step of the model. The model is trained on
consecutive feature vectors to analyze the temporal changes
in the consecutive frames and output the engagement.
In non-sequential models, e.g., Support Vector Machine
(SVM), after extracting feature vectors from consecutive
video frames, one single feature vector is constructed for
the entire video using different functionals, e.g., mean, and
standard deviation. Then the model is trained on video-level
feature vectors to output the engagement.

Late fusion and early fusion techniques were used in
the previous feature-based engagement measurement ap-
proaches to handle different feature modalities. Late fusion
requires the construction of independent models each being
trained on one feature modality. For instance, Wu et al.
[44] trained four models independently, using face and
gaze features, body pose features, LBP-TOP features, and
C3D features. Then they used weighted summation of the
outputs of four models to output the ﬁnal engagement level.
In the early fusion approach, features of different modalities
are simply concatenated to create a single feature vector
to be fed to a single model to output engagement. For

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

4

TABLE 1
Feature-based video engagement measurement approaches, their features, fusion techniques, classiﬁcation (C) or regression (R), sequential
(Seq.) or non-sequential (Non.) models, and the datasets they used.

Ref.
[6]

Features
box ﬁlter, Gabor, AU

[41]

[8]
[16]

[39]
[40]

[38]
[7]

gaze direction, AU, head pose
gaze direction, eye location, head
pose
gaze direction, head pose, AU
gaze direction, eye location, head
pose, AU
body pose, facial embedding, eye
features, speech features
facial embedding, speech features
gaze direction, blink rate, head pose,
facial embedding
facial landmark, AU, optical ﬂow,
head pose
LBP-TOP
gaze direction, head pose, body
pose, facial embedding, C3D
[50]
gaze direction, head pose, AU, C3D
proposed valence, arousal, latent affective fea-
tures, blink rate, gaze direction, and
head pose

[43]
[44]

[42]

Fusion Model
late

logistic regres-

C/R
C, R

Seq./Non. Dataset
Non.

HBCU [6]

GentleBoost, SVM,
sion
GRU
LSTM

early
early

early
early

TCN
LSTM

early

logistic regression

early
early

late

-
late

late
joint,
early

fully-connected neural network
AdaBoost, SVM, KNN, Random For-
est, RNN
SVM, KNN, Random Forest

fully-connected neural network
LSTM, GRU

neural Turing machine
LSTM, TCN, fully-connected neural
network, SVM, and Random Forest

R
R

R
C

C

R
C

C, R

R
R

C
C, R

Seq.
Seq.

Seq.
Seq.

Non.

Non.
Seq.,
Non.
Seq.,
Non.
Non.
Seq.

Non.
Seq.,
Non.

EmotiW [17]
EmotiW [17]

EmotiW [17]
DAiSEE [15]

EMDC [41]

RECOLA [14]
FaceEngage
[16]
USC [42]

EmotiW [17]
EmotiW [17]

DAiSEE [15]
DAiSEE
EmotiW [17]

[15],

instance, Niu et al. [38], concatenated gaze, AU, and head
pose features to create one feature vector for each video clip
and fed the feature vectors to a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
to output the engagement.

While there is psychological evidence for the big inﬂu-
ence of affect states on engagement [13], [18], [19], [48], [49],
none of the previous methods utilized affect states as the
features in engagement measurement. In the next section,
we will present a new approach for video engagement
measurement using affect states along with latent affective
features, blink rate, eye gaze, and head pose features. We
use sequential and non-sequential models for engagement
level classiﬁcation and regression.

4 AFFECT-DRIVEN PERSON-ORIENTED VIDEO
ENGAGEMENT MEASUREMENT

According to the discussion in Section 2, the focus in the
person-oriented engagement is on the behavioral, affective,
and cognitive states of the person in the moment of inter-
action at ﬁne-grained time scales, from seconds to minutes
[13]. The indicators of affective engagement are activating
versus deactivating and positive versus negative emotions
[29]. While research has shown an advantage for positive
emotions over negative in promoting engagement [29], the-
oretically, both positive and negative emotions can further
lead to the activation of engagement [29]. Therefore, dissim-
ilar to Guhan et al. [8], the engagement cannot directly be
inferred from high values of positive or activating emotions.
Furthermore, it has been shown that, due to their abrupt
changes, six basic emotions, anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness,
and surprise cannot directly be used as reliable indicators of
affective engagement [15].

Woolf et al. [48] discretize the affective and behavioral
states of persons into eight categories, and deﬁned persons’
desirability for learning, based on positivity or negativity of
valence and arousal in the circumplex model of affect [51]

Fig. 1. The circumplex model of affect [51]. The positive, and negative
values of valence correspond to positive, and negative emotions, re-
spectively, and the positive, and negative values of arousal correspond
to activating, and deactivating emotions, respectively.

(see Figure 1), and on-task or off-task behavior. In the cir-
cumplex model of affect, the positive, and negative values of
valence correspond to positive, and negative emotions, and
the positive, and negative values of arousal correspond to
activating, and deactivating emotions. Persons were marked
as being on-task when they are physically involved with
the context, watching instructional material, and answering
questions, while the off-task behavior represents if the per-
sons are not physically active and attentive to the learning
activities. Aslan et al. [19] directly deﬁned binary engage-
ment state, engagement/disengagement, as different combi-
nations of positive/negative values of affective states in the
circumplex model of affect and on-task/off-task behavior.

In this paper, we assume the only available data modal-
ity is a person’s RGB video, and propose a video-based

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

5

Fig. 2. The pre-trained EmoFAN [20] on AffectNet dataset [21] is used to extract affect (continuous values of valence and arousal) and latent affective
features (a 256-deimensional feature vector). The ﬁrst blue rectangle and the ﬁve green rectangles are 2D convolutional layers. The red and light
red rectangles, 2D convolutional layers, constitute two hourglass networks with skip connections. The second hourglass network outputs the facial
landmarks that are used in an attention mechanism, the gray line, for the following 2D convolutions. The output of the last green 2D convolutional
layer in the pre-trained network is considered as the latent affective feature vector. The ﬁnal cyan fully-connected layer output the affect features.

person-oriented engagement measurement approach. We
train neural network models on affect and behavioral fea-
tures extracted from videos to automatically infer the en-
gagement level based on affect and behavioral states of the
person in the video.

4.1 Feature extraction

Toisoul et al. [20] proposed a deep neural network archi-
tecture, EmoFAN, to analyze facial affect in naturalistic
conditions improving state-of-the-art in emotion recogni-
tion, valence and arousal estimation, and facial landmark
detection. Their proposed architecture, depicted in Figure 2,
is comprised of one 2D convolution followed by two hour-
glass networks [52] with skip connections trailed by ﬁve
2D convolutions and two fully-connected layers. The second
hourglass outputs the facial landmarks that are used in an
attention mechanism for the following 2D convolutions.
Affect features: The continuous values of valence and
arousal obtained from the output of the pre-trained Emo-
FAN [20] (Figure 2) on the AffectNet dataset [21] are used
as the affect features.
Latent affective features: The pre-trained EmoFAN [20] on
AffectNet [21] is used for latent affective feature extraction.
The output of the ﬁnal 2D convolution (Figure 2), a 256-
dimensional feature vector, is used as the latent affective
features. This feature vector contains latent information
about facial landmarks and facial emotions.
Behavioral features: The behavioral states of the person in
the video, on-task/off-task behavior, are characterized by
features extracted from person’s eye and head movements.
Ranti et al. [24] demonstrated that blink rate patterns
provide a reliable measure of person’s engagement with
visual content. They implied that eye blinks are withdrawn
at precise moments in time so as to minimize the loss of
visual information that occurs during a blink. Probabilisti-
cally, the more important the visual information is to the

person, the more likely he or she will be to withdraw
blinking. We consider blink rate as the ﬁrst behavioral
feature. The intensity of facial Action AU45 indicates how
closed the eyes are [46]. Therefore, a single blink with the
successive states of opening-closing-opening appears as a
peak in time-series AU45 intensity traces [16]. The intensity
of AU45 in consecutive video frames is considered as the
ﬁrst behavioral features.

It has been shown that a highly engaged person who
is focused on visual content tends to be more static in
his/her eye and head movements and eye gaze direction,
and vice versa [16], [27]. In addition, in the case of high
engagement, the person’s eye gaze direction is towards
visual content. Accordingly, inspired by previous research
[6], [7], [8], [10], [11], [12], [16], [17], [38], [39], [40], [41],
[42], [43], [44], [45], eye location, head pose, and eye gaze
direction in consecutive video frames are considered as
other informative behavioral features.

The features described above are extracted from each
video frame and considered as the frame-level features
including:

•

•

•

2-element affect features (continuous values of va-
lence and arousal),
256-element latent affective features, and
9-element behavioral features (eye-closure intensity,
x and y components of eye gaze direction w.r.t. the
camera, x, y, and z components of head location w.r.t.
the camera; pitch, yaw, and roll as head pose [46]).

4.2 Predictive Modeling

Frame-level modeling: Figure 3 shows the structure of
the proposed architecture for frame-level engagement mea-
surement from video. Latent affective features, followed
by a fully-connected neural network, affect features, and

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

6

Fig. 3. The proposed frame-level architecture for engagement measurement from video. Latent affective features, followed by a fully-connected
neural network, affect features, and behavioral features are concatenated to construct one feature vector for each frame of the input video. The
feature vector extracted from each video frame is considered as one time step of a TCN. The TCN analyzes the sequences of feature vectors, and
a fully-connected layer at the ﬁnal time-step of the TCN outputs the engagement level of the person in the video.

Fig. 4. The proposed video-level architecture for engagement measurement from video. First, affect and behavioral features are extracted from
consecutive video frames. Then, for each video, a single video-level feature vector is constructed by calculating affect and behavioral features
functionals. A fully-connected neural network outputs the engagement level of the person in the video.

behavioral features are concatenated to construct one feature
vector for each video frame. The feature vector extracted
from each video frame is considered as one time step of a di-
lated TCN [37]. The TCN analyzes the sequences of feature
vectors, and the ﬁnal time-step of the TCN, trailed by a fully-
connected layer, outputs the engagement level of the person
in the video. The fully-connected neural network after latent
affective features is jointly trained along with the TCN and
the ﬁnal fully-connected layer. The fully-connected neural
network after latent affective features is trained to reduce
the dimensionality of the latent affective features before
being concatenated with the affect and behavioral features.
Video-level modeling: Figure 4 shows the structure of the
proposed video-level approach for engagement measure-
ment from video. Firstly, affect and behavioral features,
described in Section 4.1, are extracted from consecutive
video frames. Then, for each video, a 37-element video-level
feature vector is created as follows.

•

•

•

4 features: the mean and standard deviation of va-
lence and arousal values over consecutive video
frames,
1 feature: the blink rate, derived by counting the
number of peaks above a certain threshold divided
by the number of frames in the AU45 intensity time
series extracted from the input video,
8 features: the mean and standard deviation of the
velocity and acceleration of x and y components of

•

•

eye gaze direction,
12 features: the mean and standard deviation of the
velocity and acceleration of x, y, and z components
of eye gaze direction, and
12 features: the mean and standard deviation of the
velocity and acceleration of head’s pitch, yaw, and
roll.

According to Figure 4, the 4 affect and 33 behavioral
features are concatenated to create the video-level feature
vector as the input to the fully-connected neural network.
As will be described in Section 5, in addition to the fully-
connected neural network, other machine-learning models
are also experimented.

5 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

In this section, the performance of the proposed engage-
ment measurement approach is evaluated compared to the
previous feature-based and end-to-end methods. The clas-
siﬁcation and regression results on two publicly available
video engagement datasets are reported. The ablation study
of different feature sets is studied, and the effectiveness of
affect states in engagement measurement is investigated.
Finally, the implementation results of the proposed engage-
ment measurement approach in a FL setting and model
personalization is presented.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

TABLE 2
The distribution of samples in different engagement-level classes, and
the number of persons, in train, validation, and test sets in the DAiSEE
dataset [15].

level (class)
0
1
2
3
total
# of persons

train
34
213
2617
2494
2358
70

validation
23
143
813
450
1429
22

test
4
84
882
814
1784
20

TABLE 3
The distribution of samples in different engagement level values in the
train and validation sets of the EmotiW dataset [17].

level
0.00
0.33
0.66
1.00
total

train
6
35
79
28
148

validation
4
10
19
15
48

5.1 Datasets

The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on
the only two publicly available video-only engagement
datasets, DAiSEE [15] and EmotiW [17].
DAiSEE: The DAiSEE dataset [15] contains 9,068 videos
captured from 112 persons in online courses. The videos
were annotated by four states of persons while watching
online courses, boredom, confusion, frustration, and en-
gagement. Each state is in one of the four levels (ordinal
classes), level 0 (very low), 1 (low), 2 (high), and 3 (very
high). In this paper, the focus is only on the engagement
level classiﬁcation. The length, frame rate, and resolution
of the videos are 10 seconds, 30 frames per second (fps),
and 640 × 480 pixels. Table 2 shows the distribution of
samples in different classes, and the number of persons, in
train, validation, and test sets according to the authors of
the DAiSEE dataset. These sets are used in our experiments
to fairly compare the proposed method with the previous
methods. The results are reported on 1784 test videos. As
can be seen in Table 2, the dataset is highly imbalanced.
EmotiW: The EmotiW dataset has been released in the stu-
dent engagement measurement sub-challenge of the Emo-
tion Recognition in the Wild (EmotiW) Challenge [17]. It
contains videos of 78 persons in online classroom setting.
The total number of videos is 262, including 148 training, 48
validation, and 67 test videos. The videos are at a resolution
of 640 × 480 pixels and 30 fps. The lengths of the videos
are around 5 minutes. The engagement levels of each video
are divided into four values 0, 0.33, 0.66, and 1, where 0,
and 1 indicate that the person is completely disengaged,
and highly engaged, respectively. In this sub-challenge, the
engagement measurement has been deﬁned as a regression
problem, and only training and validation sets are publicly
available. We use the training, and validation sets for train-
ing, and validating the proposed method, respectively. The
distribution of samples in this dataset is also imbalanced,
Table 3.

7

5.2 Experimental Setting

The frame-level behavioral features, described in Section
4.1, are extracted by the OpenFace [46]. The OpenFace also
outputs the extracted face regions from video frames. The
extracted face regions of size 256 × 256 are fed to the pre-
trained EmoFAN [20] on AffectNet [21] for extracting affect
and latent affective features (see Section 4.1).

In the frame-level architecture in Figure 3, the fully-
connected neural network after the latent affective features
contains two fully-connected layers with 256 × 128, and
128 × 32 neurons. The output of this fully-connected neural
network, a 32-element reduced dimension latent affective
feature vector, is concatenated with affect and behavioral
features to generate a 43 (32 + 2 + 9)-element feature vec-
tor for each video frame and each time-step of the TCN.
The parameters of the TCN, giving the best results, are
as follows, 8, 128, 16, and 0.25 for the number of levels,
number of hidden units, kernel size, and dropout [37]. At
the ﬁnal time step of the TCN, a fully-connected layer with
4 output neurons is used for 4-class classiﬁcation (in the
DAiSEE dataset). For comparison, in addition to the TCN, a
two-layer unidirectional LSTM with 43 × 128 and 128 × 64
layers, followed by a fully-connected layer at its ﬁnal time
step with 64 × 4 neurons is used for 4-class classiﬁcation.

In the video-level architecture in Figure 4, the video-level
affect and behavioral features are concatenated to create a
37-element feature vector for each video. A fully-connected
neural network with three layers (37 × 128, 128 × 64, and 64
× 4 neurons) is used as the classiﬁcation model. In addition
to the fully-connected neural network, Support Vector Ma-
chine classiﬁer with RBF kernel and Random Forest (RF) are
also used for classiﬁcation.

The EmotiW dataset contains videos of around 5-minute
length. The videos are divided into 10-seond clips with 50%
overlap [39], and video-level features, described above, are
extracted from each clip. The sequence of clip-level features
are analyzed by a two-layer unidirectional LSTM with 37 ×
128 and 128 × 64 layers, followed by a fully-connected layer
at its ﬁnal time step with 64 × 1 neurons for regression in
the EmotiW dataset.

The evaluation metrics are classiﬁcation accuracy and
MSE for the regression task. The experiments were imple-
mented in PyTorch [53] and Scikit-learn [54] on a server with
64 GB of RAM and NVIDIA TeslaP100 PCIe 12 GB GPU.

5.3 Results

Table 4 shows the engagement level classiﬁcation accuracies
on the test set of the DAiSEE dataset for the proposed frame-
level and video-level approaches. As the ablation study, the
results of different classiﬁers are reported using different
feature sets. Table 5 shows the engagement level classiﬁca-
tion accuracies on the test set of the DAiSEE dataset for the
previous approaches [36] (see Section 3). As can be seen in
Table 4 and 5, the proposed frame-level approach, outper-
forms most of the previous approaches in Table 5, better
than our previously published end-to-end ResNet + LSTM
network and slightly worse than ResNet + TCN network
[36] (see Section 3.1). According to Table 4, in the frame-level
approach, using both LSTM and TCN, adding behavioral
and affect features to the latent affective features improves

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

the accuracy. These results show the effectiveness of affect
states in engagement measurement. The TCN, because of
its superiority in modeling sequences of larger length and
retaining memory of history in comparison to the LSTM,
achieves higher accuracies. Correspondingly, in the video-
level approaches in Table 4, adding affect features improves
accuracy for all the classiﬁers, fully-connected neural net-
work, SVM, and RF. In the video-level approaches, the RF
achieves higher accuracies compared to the fully-connected
neural network and SVM. However, video-level approaches
perform worse than the frame-level approaches, highlight-
ing the importance of temporal modelling of affective and
behavioral features at a frame level in videos.

In another experiment, we replace the behavioral fea-
tures in Fig. 3 with a ResNet (to extract 512-element fea-
ture vector from each video frame) followed by a fully-
connected neural network (to reduce the dimensionality
of the extracted feature vector to 32). In this way, a 66-
element feature vector is extracted from each video frame
(32 latent affective features and 32 ResNet features after
dimensionality reduction, and 2 affect features). The ResNet,
two fully-connected neural networks (after ResNet and after
latent affective features), TCN, and the ﬁnal fully-connected
neural networks after TCN are jointly trained to output
the level of engagement. As can be seen in Table 4, the
accuracy of this setting, 60.8%, is lower than the accuracy
of using handcrafted behavioral features along with latent
affective features and affect states, 63.3%. This demonstrates
the effectiveness of the handcrafted behavioral features in
engagement measurement.

TABLE 4
Engagement level classiﬁcation accuracy of the proposed
feature-based frame-level (top half) and video-level (bottom half)
approaches with different feature sets and classiﬁers on the DAiSEE
dataset. LSTM: long short-term memory, TCN: temporal convolutional
network, FC: fully-connected neural network, SVM: support vector
machine, RF: random forest

feature set
latent affective
latent affective + behavioral
latent affective + behavioral + affect
latent affective
latent affective + behavioral
latent affective + behavioral + affect
latent affective + ResNet + affect
behavioral
behavioral + affect
behavioral
behavioral + affect
behavioral
behavioral + affect

model
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
TCN
TCN
TCN
TCN
FC
FC
SVM
SVM
RF
RF

accuracy
60.8
62.1
62.7
60.2
62.5
63.3
60.8
55.1
55.5
53.9
55.2
55.5
58.5

According to Abedi and Khan [36] and Liao et al. [7], due
to highly imbalanced data distribution (see Table 2), none of
the previous approaches on the DAiSEE dataset (outlined in
Table 5) are able to correctly classify samples in the minority
classes (classes 0 and 1). Table 6 shows the confusion matri-
ces of the two previous end-to-end approaches (a)-(b), and
four of the proposed feature-based approaches (c)-(f) with
superior performance on the test of the DAiSEE dataset.
None of the end-to-end approaches are able to correctly clas-
sify samples in the minority classes (classes 0 and 1), Table
6 (a)-(b). However, the proposed feature-based approaches

TABLE 5
Engagement level classiﬁcation accuracy of the previous approaches
on the DAiSEE dataset (see Section 3).

8

method
C3D [15]
I3D [32]
C3D + LSTM [36]
C3D with transfer learning [15]
LRCN [15]
DFSTN [7]
C3D + TCN [36]
ResNet + LSTM [36]
ResNet + TCN [36]
DERN [40]
Neural Turing Machine [50]

accuracy
48.1
52.4
56.6
57.8
57.9
58.8
59.9
61.5
63.9
60.0
61.3

are able to correctly classify a large number of samples
in the minority class 1. While the total accuracy of video-
level approaches is lower than frame-based approaches, the
video-level approaches are more successful in classifying
samples in the minority classes. Comparing Table 6 (c) with
(d), and (e) with (f) indicates that adding affect features
improve the total classiﬁcation accuracy, and speciﬁcally the
classiﬁcation of samples in the minority class 1.

TABLE 6
The confusion matrices of the feature-based and end-to-end
approaches with superior performance on the test of the DAiSEE
dataset, (a) ResNet + TCN [36] (end-to-end), (b) ResNet + LSTM [36]
(end-to-end), (c) (latent affective + behavioral) features + TCN, (d)
(latent affective + behavioral + affect) features + TCN, (e) (behavioral)
features + RF , and (f) (behavioral + affect) features + RF. (c)-(f) are the
proposed methods in this paper.

Figure 5 shows the importance of affect and behavioral
features while using RF (achieving the best results between
the video-level approaches) by checking their out-of-bag
error [16]. This features importance ranking is consistent
with evidence from psychology and physiology. (i) The
ﬁrst, and third indicative features in person-oriented en-
gagement measurement are the mean values of arousal,
and valence, respectively. It aligns with the ﬁndings in [19],
[48] indicating that affect states are highly correlated with
desirability of content, concentration, satisfaction, excite-
ment, and affective engagement. (ii) The second important
feature is blink rate. It aligns with the research by Ranti
et al. [24] showing that blink rate patterns provide a reliable
measure of individual behavioral and cognitive engagement
with visual content. (iii) The least important features are
extracted from eye gaze direction. Research conducted by
Sinatra et al. [18] shows that, to have high impact in engage-

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

9

As can be observed in Figure 6 (d), the behavioral features of
the two videos in classes 2 and 3 are different from the video
in class 1. Therefore, the behavioral features can differentiate
between classes 2 and 3, and class 1. While the values of the
behavioral features for the two videos in classes 2 and 3 are
almost identical, according to Figure 6 (e), the mean values
of valence and arousal are different for these two videos.
According to this example, the confusion matrices, and
the accuracy and MSE results in Tables 4-7, affect features
are necessary to differentiate between different levels of
engagement.

5.5 Federated Engagement Measurement and Person-
alization

All the previous engagement measurement experiments in
this section and in the previous works were performed in
conventional centralized learning requiring sharing videos
of persons from their local computers to a central server.
In FL, model training is performed collaboratively, without
sharing local data of persons to the server [22], Figure 7.
We follow the FL setting presented in [55] to implement
federated engagement measurement. The training set in the
DAiSEE dataset, containing the videos of 70 persons, is
used to train an initial global model using the video-level
behavioral and affect features and fully-connected neural
network, described in Section 4.1 and 4.2. There are 20
persons in the test set of the DAiSEE dataset. 70% of videos
of each person in the test set are used to participate in FL,
while 30% are kept out to test the FL process. These 20
persons are considered as 20 clients participating in FL.

Following Figure 7, (i) the server sends the initialized
global model to all clients. (ii) Each client update the global
model using its local video data using local batches of size 4
and 10 local epochs, and (iii) sends its updated version of the
global model to the server. (iv) The server, using federated
averaging [22], aggregates all the received models to gener-
ate an updated version of the global model. The steps (i)-(iv)
continue until the clients have new data to participate in FL.
Finally, the server performs a ﬁnal aggregation to generate
the ﬁnal aggregated global model as the output of the FL
process. After generating the ﬁnal aggregated global model,
each client receives the FL’s output model, and performs
one round of local training using its 70% data to generate
a personalized model for the person corresponding to the
client.

Figure 8 shows the engagement level classiﬁcation ac-
curacy of each client and totally, when applying the initial
model (trained on the training set of the DAiSEE dataset) to
the videos in the 30% of the test set. It also shows the results
of FL, and the result of FL followed by personalization to
the 30% of the test set. This 30% test set was kept out and
has not participated in FL or personalization. As can be seen
in Figure 8, FL slightly improves the classiﬁcation accuracy
for most of the persons. After personalizing the FL model,
engagement level classiﬁcation accuracies of most of the
persons signiﬁcantly improve. It aligns with the ﬁndings
in [56] indicating that individual characteristics of persons
in expressing engagement, their ages, races, and sexes may
require distinct analysis. In the DAiSEE dataset, all persons
are Indian students of almost the same age but of different

Fig. 5. Features importance ranking of video-level features using Ran-
dom Forest (see Section 5.3).

ment measurement, eye gaze direction features should be
complemented by contextual features that encoded general
information about the changes in visual content.

Table 7 shows the regression MSEs of applying different
methods to the validation set in the EmotiW dataset. All the
outlined methods in Table 7 are feature-based, described in
Section 3.2. In the proposed clip-level method (see Section
5.2), adding the affect features to the behavioral features
reduces MSE (second row of Table 7), showing the effective-
ness of the affect states in engagement level regression. After
adding affect features, the MSE of the proposed method is
very close to [38] and [39].

TABLE 7
Engagement level regression MSE of applying different methods on the
validation set of the EmotiW dataset.

method
clip-level behavioral features + LSTM (proposed)
clip-level (behavioral + affect) features + LSTM
(proposed)
eye and head-pose features + LSTM [17]
DFSTN [7]
body-pose features + LSTM [45]
eye, head-pose, and AUs features + TCN [39]
eye, head-pose, and AUs features + GRU [38]

MSE
0.0708
0.0673

0.1000
0.0736
0.0717
0.0655
0.0671

5.4 An Illustrative Example

Figure 6 shows 5 (of 300) frames of three different videos
of one person in the DAiSEE dataset. The videos in (a), (b),
and (c) are in low (1), high (2), and very high (3) levels of
engagement. Figure 6 (d), and (e) depict the behavioral, and
affect video-level features of these three videos, respectively.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

10

Fig. 6. An illustrative example for showing the importance of affect states in engagement measurement. 5 (of 300) frames of three different videos
of one person in the DAiSEE dataset in classes (a) low, (b) high, and (c) very high levels of engagement, the video-level (d) behavioral features and
(e) affect features of the three videos. In (a), the person does not look at the camera for a moment and behavioral features in (d) are totally different
for this video compared to the videos in (b) and (c). However, the behavioral features for (b) and (c) are almost identical. According to (e), the affect
features are different for (b) and (c) and are effective in differentiation between the videos in (b) and (c).

sexes. Here, model personalization improves engagement
measurement as the global model is personalized for indi-
vidual students with their speciﬁc sexes.

5.6 Discussion

The proposed method achieved superior performance com-
pared to the previous feature-based and end-to-end meth-
ods (except ResNet + TCN [36]) on the DAiSEE dataset,
especially in terms of classifying low levels of engagement.
However, the overall classiﬁcation accuracy on this dataset

is still low. This can be due to the following two reasons. The
ﬁrst reason is the imbalanced data distribution, very small
number of samples in low levels of engagement compared
to the high levels of engagement. During training, with a
conventional shufﬂed dataset, there will be many training
batches containing no samples in low levels of engagement.
We tried to mitigate this problem with a sampling strategy
in which the samples of all classes were included in each
batch. In this way, the model will be trained on the samples
of all classes in each training iteration. The second reason is

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

11

cognitive engagement could not be measured. Therefore,
we were only able to measure affective and behavioral
engagements based on visual indicators.

We used affect sates, continuous values of valence and
arousal extracted from consecutive video frames, along with
a new latent affective feature vector and behavioral features
for engagement measurement. We modeled these features
in different settings and with different types of temporal
and non-temporal models. The temporal (LSTM and TCN),
and non-temporal (fully-connected neural network, SVM,
and RF) models were trained and tested on frame-level,
and video-level features, respectively. In another setting, for
long videos in the EmotiW dataset, temporal models were
trained and tested on clip-level features. The frame-level,
and video-level approaches achieved superior performance
in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy, and correctly classifying
disengaged videos in the DAiSEE dataset, respectively. Also,
clip-level setting achieved very low regression MSE on
the validation set of the EmotiW dataset. As the ablation
study, we reported the results with and without using affect
features. In the experiments in all settings, using affect
features led to improvement in performance. In addition
to centralized setting, we also implemented video-level
approach in a FL setting and observed improvements in
classiﬁcation accuracy of the DAiSEE dataset, after FL and
after model personalization for individuals. We explained
different types of engagement and interpreted the results of
our experiments based on psychology concepts in the ﬁeld
of engagement.

As future work, we plan to collect an audio-video dataset
from patients in virtual rehabilitation sessions. We will ex-
tend the proposed video engagement measurement method
to work in tandem with audio. We will incorporate audio
data, and also context information (progress of patients in
the rehabilitation program and rehabilitation program com-
pletion barriers) to measure engagement in a deeper level,
e.g., cognitive and context-oriented engagement (see Section
2). In addition, we will explore approaches to measure affect
states from audio and use them for engagement measure-
ment. To avoid any mistakes in engagement labeling, as it
was discussed in Section 5.6, we will use psychology-backed
measures of engagement [13], [18], [19]. We will also explore
an optimum time scale choice for labeling engagement in
videos [13]. In all the existing engagement measurement
datasets, disengagement samples are in the minority [14],
[15], [16], [17], [27]. Therefore, in another direction of future
research, we will explore detecting disengagement as an
anomaly detection problem, and use autoencoders and con-
trastive learning [57] techniques to detect disengagement
and the severity of disengagement.

REFERENCES

[1] Mukhtar, Khadijah, et al. ”Advantages, Limitations and Recom-
mendations for online learning during COVID-19 pandemic era.”
Pakistan journal of medical sciences 36.COVID19-S4 (2020): S27.
[2] Nuara, Arturo, et al. ”Telerehabilitation in response to constrained
physical distance: An opportunity to rethink neurorehabilitative
routines.” Journal of neurology (2021): 1-12.

[3] Venton, B. Jill, and Rebecca R. Pompano. ”Strategies for enhancing
remote student engagement through active learning.” (2021): 1-6.
[4] Matamala-Gomez, Marta, et al. ”The role of engagement in teleneu-
rorehabilitation: a systematic review.” Frontiers in Neurology 11
(2020): 354.

Fig. 7. The block diagram of federated learning process for engagement
measurement (see Section 5.5).

Fig. 8. Engagement level classiﬁcation accuracy on the 30% of the
test set of the DAiSEE dataset, using the pre-trained model on the
training set (centralized learning), using output model of FL, and using
the personalized models for individual persons. In this experiment, the
video-level behavioral and affect features and the fully-connected neu-
ral network (described in Section 5.2) are used for classiﬁcation (see
Section 5.5).

the annotation problems in the DAiSEE dataset. According
to our study on the videos in the DAiSEE dataset, there are
annotation mistakes in this dataset. These mistakes are more
obvious when comparing videos and annotations of one
person in different classes, as it is discussed with examples
by Liao et el. [7]. Obviously, the default reason for not
achieving higher classiﬁcation accuracy is the difﬁculty of
this classiﬁcation task, small differences between videos in
different levels of engagement and the lack of any other type
of data other than video.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a novel method for objective
engagement measurement from videos of a person watch-
ing an online course. The experiments were performed on
the only two publicly available engagement measurement
datasets (DAiSEE [15] and EmotiW [17]), containing only
video data. As any complementary information about the
context (e.g., the degree level of the students, the lessons
being taught, their progress in learning, and the speech
of students) was not available, the proposed method is a
person-oriented engagement measurement using only video
data of persons at the moment of interaction. Again, due to
the lack of context (e.g., students’ and tutors’ speech), their

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

12

[5] Nezami, Omid Mohamad, et al. ”Automatic recognition of student
engagement using deep learning and facial expression.” Joint Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
in Databases. Springer, Cham, 2019.

[6] Whitehill, Jacob, et al. ”The faces of engagement: Automatic recog-
nition of student engagementfrom facial expressions.” IEEE Trans-
actions on Affective Computing 5.1 (2014): 86-98.

[7] Liao, Jiacheng, Yan Liang, and Jiahui Pan. ”Deep facial spatiotem-
poral network for engagement prediction in online learning.” Ap-
plied Intelligence (2021): 1-13.

[8] Guhan, Pooja, et al. ”ABC-Net: Semi-Supervised Multimodal GAN-
based Engagement Detection using an Affective, Behavioral and
Cognitive Model.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.08690 (2020).

[9] Belle, Ashwin, Rosalyn Hobson Hargraves, and Kayvan Najarian.
”An automated optimal engagement and attention detection sys-
tem using electrocardiogram.” Computational and mathematical
methods in medicine 2012 (2012).

[10] Rivas, Jesus Joel, et al. ”Multi-label and multimodal classiﬁer for
affective states recognition in virtual rehabilitation.” IEEE Transac-
tions on Affective Computing (2021).

[11] Dewan, M. Ali Akber, Mahbub Murshed, and Fuhua Lin. ”En-
gagement detection in online learning: a review.” Smart Learning
Environments 6.1 (2019): 1-20.

[12] Doherty, Kevin, and Gavin Doherty. ”Engagement in HCI: concep-
tion, theory and measurement.” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
51.5 (2018): 1-39.

[13] D’Mello, Sidney, Ed Dieterle, and Angela Duckworth. ”Advanced,
analytic, automated (AAA) measurement of engagement during
learning.” Educational psychologist 52.2 (2017): 104-123.

[14] Ringeval, Fabien, et al. ”Introducing the RECOLA multimodal
corpus of remote collaborative and affective interactions.” 2013 10th
IEEE international conference and workshops on automatic face
and gesture recognition (FG). IEEE, 2013.

[15] Gupta, Abhay, et al. ”Daisee: Towards user engagement recogni-

tion in the wild.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.01885 (2016).

[16] Chen, Xu, et al. ”FaceEngage: Robust Estimation of Gameplay En-
gagement from User-contributed (YouTube) Videos.” IEEE Transac-
tions on Affective Computing (2019).

[17] Dhall, Abhinav, et al. ”Emotiw 2020: Driver gaze, group emotion,
student engagement and physiological signal based challenges.”
Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction. 2020.

[18] Sinatra, Gale M., Benjamin C. Heddy, and Doug Lombardi. ”The
challenges of deﬁning and measuring student engagement in sci-
ence.” (2015): 1-13.

[19] Aslan, Sinem, et al. ”Human expert labeling process (HELP):
towards a reliable higher-order user state labeling process and tool
to assess student engagement.” Educational Technology (2017): 53-
59.

[20] Toisoul, Antoine, et al. ”Estimation of continuous valence and
arousal levels from faces in naturalistic conditions.” Nature Ma-
chine Intelligence 3.1 (2021): 42-50.

[21] Mollahosseini, Ali, Behzad Hasani, and Mohammad H. Mahoor.
”Affectnet: A database for facial expression, valence, and arousal
computing in the wild.” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing
10.1 (2017): 18-31.

[22] McMahan, Brendan, et al. ”Communication-efﬁcient learning of
deep networks from decentralized data.” Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Statistics. PMLR, 2017.

[23] Dobrian, Florin, et al. ”Understanding the impact of video quality
on user engagement.” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review 41.4 (2011): 362-373.

[24] Ranti, Carolyn, et al. ”Blink Rate patterns provide a Reliable
Measure of individual engagement with Scene content.” Scientiﬁc
reports 10.1 (2020): 1-10.

[25] Monkaresi, Hamed, et al. ”Automated detection of engagement
using video-based estimation of facial expressions and heart rate.”
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 8.1 (2016): 15-28.

[26] Bixler, Robert, and Sidney D’Mello. ”Automatic gaze-based user-
independent detection of mind wandering during computerized
reading.” User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 26.1 (2016):
33-68.

[27] S ¨umer, ¨Omer, et al. ”Multimodal Engagement Analysis from Facial
Videos in the Classroom.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04215 (2021).

[29] Broughton, Suzanne H., Gale M. Sinatra, and Ralph E. Reynolds.
”The nature of the refutation text effect: An investigation of atten-
tion allocation.” The Journal of Educational Research 103.6 (2010):
407-423.

[30] Donahue, Jeffrey, et al. ”Long-term recurrent convolutional net-
works for visual recognition and description.” Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2015.
[31] Geng, Lin, et al. ”Learning Deep Spatiotemporal Feature for En-
gagement Recognition of Online Courses.” 2019 IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, 2019.

[32] Zhang, Hao, et al. ”An Novel End-to-end Network for Automatic
Student Engagement Recognition.” 2019 IEEE 9th International
Conference on Electronics Information and Emergency Communi-
cation (ICEIEC). IEEE, 2019.

[33] Dewan, M. Ali Akber, et al. ”A deep learning approach to de-
tecting engagement of online learners.” 2018 IEEE SmartWorld,
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, Advanced and Trusted
Computing, Scalable Computing and Communications, Cloud and
Big Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Inno-
vation (SmartWorld/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI).
IEEE, 2018.

[34] Dash, Saswat, et al. ”A Two-Stage Algorithm for Engagement
Detection in Online Learning.” 2019 International Conference on
Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI). IEEE, 2019.

[35] Murshed, Mahbub, et al. ”Engagement Detection in e-Learning
Environments using Convolutional Neural Networks.” 2019 IEEE
Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl
Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud
and Big Data Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Tech-
nology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech). IEEE,
2019.

[36] Abedi, Ali, and Shehroz S. Khan. ”Improving state-of-the-art
in Detecting Student Engagement with Resnet and TCN Hybrid
Network.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10122 (2021).

[37] Bai, Shaojie, J. Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. ”An empirical
evaluation of generic convolutional and recurrent networks for
sequence modeling.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01271 (2018).

[38] Niu, Xuesong, et al. ”Automatic engagement prediction with GAP
feature.” Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction. 2018.

[39] Thomas, Chinchu, Nitin Nair, and Dinesh Babu Jayagopi. ”Predict-
ing engagement intensity in the wild using temporal convolutional
network.” Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference
on Multimodal Interaction. 2018.

[40] Huang, Tao, et al. ”Fine-grained engagement recognition in online
learning environment.” 2019 IEEE 9th international conference on
electronics information and emergency communication (ICEIEC).
IEEE, 2019.

[41] Fedotov, Dmitrii, et al. ”Multimodal approach to engagement
and disengagement detection with highly imbalanced in-the-wild
data.” Proceedings of the Workshop on Modeling Cognitive Pro-
cesses from Multimodal Data. 2018.

[42] Booth, Brandon M., et al. ”Toward active and unobtrusive engage-
ment assessment of distance learners.” 2017 Seventh International
Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
(ACII). IEEE, 2017.

[43] Kaur, Amanjot, et al. ”Prediction and localization of student en-
gagement in the wild.” 2018 Digital Image Computing: Techniques
and Applications (DICTA). IEEE, 2018.

[44] Wu, Jianming, et al. ”Advanced Multi-Instance Learning Method
with Multi-features Engineering and Conservative Optimization
for Engagement Intensity Prediction.” Proceedings of the 2020
International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. 2020.

[45] Yang, Jianfei, et al. ”Deep recurrent multi-instance learning with
spatio-temporal features for engagement intensity prediction.” Pro-
ceedings of the 20th ACM international conference on multimodal
interaction. 2018.

[46] Baltrusaitis, Tadas, et al. ”Openface 2.0: Facial behavior analysis
toolkit.” 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic
Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2018). IEEE, 2018.

[47] Cao, Zhe, et al. ”OpenPose: realtime multi-person 2D pose esti-
mation using Part Afﬁnity Fields.” IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence 43.1 (2019): 172-186.

[28] Pekrun, Reinhard, and Lisa Linnenbrink-Garcia. ”Academic emo-
tions and student engagement.” Handbook of research on student
engagement. Springer, Boston, MA, 2012. 259-282.

[48] Woolf, Beverly, et al. ”Affect-aware tutors: recognising and re-
sponding to student affect.” International Journal of Learning Tech-
nology 4.3-4 (2009): 129-164.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. , NO. , JUNE 2021

13

[49] Rudovic, Ognjen, et al. ”Personalized machine learning for robot
perception of affect and engagement in autism therapy.” Science
Robotics 3.19 (2018).

[50] Ma, Xiaoyang, et al. ”Automatic Student Engagement in Online
Learning Environment Based on Neural Turing Machine.” Interna-
tional Journal of Information and Education Technology 11.3 (2021).
[51] Russell, James A. ”A circumplex model of affect.” Journal of

personality and social psychology 39.6 (1980): 1161.

[52] Newell, Alejandro, Kaiyu Yang, and Jia Deng. ”Stacked hourglass
networks for human pose estimation.” European conference on
computer vision. Springer, Cham, 2016.

[53] Paszke, Adam,
high-performance
arXiv:1912.01703 (2019).

et
deep

al.

”Pytorch: An

learning

library.”

imperative
arXiv

style,
preprint

[54] Pedregosa, Fabian, et al. ”Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python.” the Journal of machine Learning research 12 (2011): 2825-
2830.

[55] Chen, Yiqiang, et al. ”Fedhealth: A federated transfer learning
framework for wearable healthcare.” IEEE Intelligent Systems 35.4
(2020): 83-93.

[56] Fredricks, Jennifer A., and Wendy McColskey. ”The measurement
of student engagement: A comparative analysis of various methods
and student self-report instruments.” Handbook of research on
student engagement. Springer, Boston, MA, 2012. 763-782.

[57] Khosla, Prannay, et al. ”Supervised contrastive learning.” arXiv

preprint arXiv:2004.11362 (2020).

